# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2022-thompson-early-theravadin-cambodia.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 13:54:37
# Total Pages: 343
# File Size: 13.74 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 2307.3 chars/page, total chars: 791,413)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
Early Therav¯adin 
Cambodia
Perspectives from  
Art and Archaeology

--- PAGE 2 ---
This page has been intentionally left blank

--- PAGE 3 ---
Early Therav¯adin 
Cambodia
Perspectives from 
Art and Archaeology
Edited by
Ashley Thompson

--- PAGE 4 ---
© 2022 Ashley Thompson 
Published by NUS Press with the Southeast Asian Art Academic Programme, 
SOAS, University of London under the Art and Archaeology of Southeast Asia: 
Hindu-Buddhist Traditions Series.
NUS Press
National University of Singapore
AS3-01-02
3 Arts Link
Singapore 117569
Fax: (65) 6774-0652
E-mail: nusbooks@nus.edu.sg
Website: http://nuspress.nus.edu.sg
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, 
recording or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to be 
invented, without written permission from the Publisher.
ISBN 978-981-325-149-6 (casebound)
National Library Board, Singapore Cataloguing in Publication Data
Name(s): Thompson, Ashley, 1965- editor.
Title: Early Theravādin Cambodia : perspectives from art and archaeology / edited by 
Ashley Thompson.
Other Title(s): Art and archaeology of Southeast Asia : Hindu-Buddhist traditions.
Description: Singapore : published by NUS Press with the Southeast Asian Art Aca-
demic Programme, SOAS, University of London, [2022]
Identifier(s): ISBN 978-981-325-149-6 (casebound) 
Subject(s): LCSH: Cambodia--History. | Buddhism and state--Cambodia. | Bud-
dhism and art--Cambodia.
Classification: DDC 959.6--dc23	
Cover image: Head of Buddha image from Western Prasat Top (Monument 486), 
Angkor Thom, Cambodia. Photograph courtesy Inoue Tadao, 2010.
Concept and typographical design by: H55 
Printed by: Mainland Press Pte Ltd

--- PAGE 5 ---
To the sculptors and scribes who made the work we seek to understand.
To the practitioners who gave and give it meaning.

--- PAGE 6 ---
This page has been intentionally left blank

--- PAGE 7 ---
CONTENTS
List of Figures, Maps and Tables        viii
Technical Notes        xxi
Acknowledgements        xxiv
Maps        xxv
1.  EARLY THERAVĀDIN CAMBODIA: TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
ASHLEY THOMPSON       1
2.  ANGKOR AND THERAVĀDA BUDDHISM: SOME CONSIDERATIONS
HIRAM W. WOODWARD       58
3.  READING AND INTERPRETING JĀTAKA TALES DURING THE ANGKORIAN PERIOD
TUY DANEL       107
4.  THE BUDDHA SCULPTURES OF THAM PHRA (BUDDHA CAVE): IMPLICATIONS FOR 
UNDERSTANDING THE COMPLEX RELIGIOUS ATMOSPHERE OF WESTERN THAILAND DURING 
THE EARLY SECOND MILLENNIUM CE
SAMERCHAI POOLSUWAN       145
5.  A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF KEY THERAVĀDA BUDDHIST STRUCTURES AT CENTRAL ANGKOR 
FROM THE 13TH TO 18TH CENTURIES 
EA DARITH       186
6.  NEW EVIDENCE AT WESTERN PRASAT TOP, ANGKOR THOM
YUNI SATO       203
7.  BACK TO THE FUTURE: THE EMERGENCE OF PAST AND FUTURE  
BUDDHAS IN KHMER BUDDHISM 
NICOLAS REVIRE       231
8.  17TH- AND 18TH-CENTURY IMAGES OF THE BUDDHA FROM  
AYUTTHAYA AND LAN XANG AT ANGKOR WAT 
MARTIN POLKINGHORNE       269
List of Contributors        306
Index        309

--- PAGE 8 ---
viii
LIST OF FIGURES, MAPS AND 
TABLES
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1	
Seated Buddhist figure holding inscribed tablet, 
from Preah Khan of Kompong Svay, Preah Vihear 
province, Cambodia. Sandstone. Mid 13th to 
early 14th centuries. National Museum of 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh. Inventory Number: Ka. 
1697. Photograph courtesy National Museum of 
Cambodia.
Figure 1.2	
Profile of Ka. 1697. Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of Cambodia. 
Figure 1.3	
Back of Ka. 1697. Photograph courtesy National 
Museum of Cambodia. 
Figure 1.4	
Seated adorant with uṣṇīṣa supporting a Buddhist 
Triad, from Preah Khan of Kompong Svay. Late 
12th to 13th century. Sandstone. National 
Museum of Cambodia, Phnom Penh. Inventory 
number: Ka. 1848. Photograph courtesy National 
Museum of Cambodia. 
Figure 1.5	
“Portrait-statue” of King Jayavarman VII. Late 
12th to early 13th century. Sandstone. National 
Museum of Cambodia, Phnom Penh. Inventory 
number: Ka. 1703. Photograph courtesy National 
Museum of Cambodia.
Figure 1.6	
Profile of Ka. 1703. Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of Cambodia.
Figure 1.7	
Back of Ka. 1703. Photograph courtesy National 
Museum of Cambodia.
Figure 1.8	
Preah Chatomukh, Preah Khan of Kompong 
Svay, seen from the east, following restoration in 
2018 by the Angkor Conservation Office. 
Sandstone block assemblage. Photograph 
courtesy Lam Sopheak, 2018.
Figure 1.9	
Colossal Buddha head, Vihear Prampir Lavaeng 
(Buddhist Terrace 1). Sandstone. Guimet – 
Musée national des Arts Asiatiques. Inventory 
22
23
23
27
30
30
31
33

--- PAGE 9 ---
ix
List of Figures, Maps and Tables
number: MG18064. Photograph © RMN-Grand 
Palais (MNAAG, Paris) / Thierry Ollivier.
Figure 2.1	
Leaf band at Prasat Top East. Photograph by 
Hiram W. Woodward.
Figure 2.2	
Leaf scrolls surmounting a niche at Preah Pithu 
U temple. Photograph by Hiram W. Woodward. 
Figure 2.3	
Image of the Buddha, from Beng Vien. National 
Museum of Cambodia, on view at the Angkor 
National Museum, Siem Reap. Photograph 
courtesy Michael Vickery.
Figure 2.4	
Plan of the central temple, Phimai, showing the 
location of three of the lintels in the inner system 
of five lintels. West: standing crowned Buddha. 
South (1): nāga-protected Buddha. South (2): 
Māravijaya Buddha. Photographs courtesy of 
Uab Sanasen (left); plan, after Jean Boisselier, Le 
Cambodge (Paris: Picard, 1966), Fig. 10a, p. 67; 
after Manit Vallibhotama, Guide to Pimai and 
Antiquities (Bangkok: Fine Arts Department, 
1962), Fig. 35 (right); author (lower right).
Figure 2.5	
The central prang, Wat Phra Si Ratana Mahāthāt, 
Lopburi, with the later flanking tower on the left 
(now collapsed). Photograph by the Fine Arts 
Department (FAD) of Thailand, 1920s; courtesy 
FAD 1971.
Figure 2.6	
Altarpiece with the standing crowned Buddha. 
Bronze. Walters Art Museum, Baltimore, gift of 
the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation’s 
Southeast Asian Art Collection, 2002 (54.2999). 
Photograph courtesy The Walters Art Museum, 
Baltimore.
Figure 2.7	
The Bayon, niche with devatā, first level, tower 
15, portico. Photograph courtesy Phoeung Dara, 
2013.
Figure 2.8	
Phra Prang Sam Yot, Lopburi. Photograph by 
Hiram W. Woodward.
Figure 2.9	
Votive tablet with Māravijaya Buddha at the 
Mahābodhi temple, flanked by a pair of Buddhas 
in māravijaya. Terracotta. National 
Museum, Bangkok. Inventory number: Lb25 k4. 
Photograph by Hiram W. Woodward, 1970.
Figure 2.10	
Nāga-protected Buddha, from the Banteay Kdei 
trove, no. 195. Preah Norodom Sihanouk – 
34
58
58
61
63
64
66
68
70
71

--- PAGE 10 ---
x
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Angkor Museum, Siem Reap. New inventory 
number: NSAM 2007.188. Photograph courtesy 
Preah Norodom Sihanouk – Angkor Museum.
Figure 2.11	
Nāga-protected Buddha. King Narai National 
Museum, Lopburi. Inventory number: L.2659. 
Photograph courtesy King Narai National 
Museum.
Figure 2.12	
Antefix with standing Buddha, Banteay Kdei 
trove, no. 258. Preah Norodom Sihanouk – 
Angkor Museum, Siem Reap. New Inventory 
Number: NSAM 2007.249. Photograph courtesy 
Preah Norodom Sihanouk – Angkor Museum.
Figure 2.13	
Antefix with standing Buddha, from an 
architectural model. Bronze. From the crypt of Wat 
Ratchaburana, Ayutthaya. Chao Samphraya 
National Museum, Ayutthaya. Inventory number: 
R. 606. Photograph by Hiram W. Woodward, 1971.
Figure 2.14	
Nāga-protected Buddha from the central 
sanctuary of the Bayon, now venerated at Vihear 
Prampir Lavaeng, where it was moved by the 
authorities in the early 20th century. Photograph 
courtesy Martin Polkinghorne, 2011.
Figure 2.15	
Seated Buddha, on a pediment from Tep Pranam 
temple, Northern Terrace. National Museum of 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh. Inventory number: Ka. 
1715. Photograph courtesy National Museum of 
Cambodia.
Figure 2.16	
Māravijaya Buddha. Leaded bronze. Walters Art 
Museum, bequest of A. B. Griswold, 1992. 
Inventory number: 54.2800. Photograph courtesy 
The Walters Art Museum, Baltimore.
Figure 2.17	
Māravijaya Buddha. Leaded bronze. Walters Art 
Museum, bequest of A. B. Griswold, 1992 
54.2792. Photograph courtesy The Walters Art 
Museum, Baltimore.
Figure 2.18	
Nāga antefix, Prasat Top West. Photograph by 
Hiram W. Woodward.
Figure 2.19	
Stucco ornament at Wat Nakhon Kosa, Lopburi. 
Photograph by Hiram W. Woodward.
Figure 2.20	
Head of the Buddha. King Narai National 
Museum, Lopburi. Inventory number: L.2584. 
Photograph courtesy King Narai National 
Museum, Lopburi.
72
73
74
75
78
79
80
81
82
82
83

--- PAGE 11 ---
xi
List of Figures, Maps and Tables
Figure 2.21	
Terrace of the Leper King, view of the outer wall. 
Photograph by Hiram W. Woodward.
Figure 2.22	
Terrace of the Leper King, view of the inner wall, 
showing nāga on the bottom register. Photograph 
by Hiram W. Woodward.
Figure 2.23	
Guardian figure removed from the terrace in 
1969. Angkor Conservation Depot, Siem Reap. 
Photograph: Cliché EFEO, Fonds Cambodge réf. 
EFEO_Cam19697-3.
Figure 3.1	
Vessantara-jātaka, the gift of the children. 
Thommanon temple, first half of 12th century. 
Photograph by Tuy Danel, 2018.
Figure 3.2	
Vessantara-jātaka, Chau Say Tevoda temple, c. 
third quarter of 12th century. Photograph by Tuy 
Danel, 2018.
Figure 3.3	
Vessantara-jātaka, the gift of the children, 
Banteay Samre temple, c. third quarter of 12th 
century. Photograph by Tuy Danel, 2018.
Figure 3.4	
Sibi-jātaka, Sibi giving his flesh, Banteay Samre 
temple, c. third quarter of 12th century. 
Photograph by Tuy Danel, 2018.
Figure 3.5	
Different episodes of the life of the Buddha and 
jātaka? Sasar Sdam temple, first half of 12th 
century. Photograph courtesy Brice Vincent, 
2018.
Figure 3.6	
Vessantara-jātaka, the gift of the children and the 
gift of the chariot, Ta Prohm temple, third 
quarter of 12th century. Photograph courtesy 
Vicheth Tiev, 2018.
Figure 3.7	
Scene probably illustrating the Vessantara-jātaka, 
the gift of the elephant, Ta Prohm temple, third 
quarter of 12th century. Photograph courtesy 
Vicheth Tiev, 2018.
Figure 3.8	
Vessantara-jātaka, the gift of the elephant and the 
exile of the royal family, Ta Prohm of Tonle Bati, 
third quarter of 12th century. Photograph 
courtesy Brice Vincent, 2018.
Figure 3.9	
Vessantara-jātaka, the three principal gifts, found 
in Angkor Wat temple, National Museum of 
Cambodia, late 12th to early 13th centuries. 
Photograph by Tuy Danel, 2018.
Figure 3.10	
Sibi-jātaka, King Sibi giving his flesh, Ta Prohm 
temple, third quarter of 12th century. 
86
87
90
108
109
110
111
112
115
115
116
116

--- PAGE 12 ---
xii
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Photograph by Tuy Danel, 2018.
Figure 3.11	
Sāma-jātaka, the death of Sāma, the Bayon, late 
12th to early 13th centuries. Photograph courtesy 
Vicheth Tiev, 2018.
Figure 3.12	
Temiya-jātaka? Bayon, late 12th to early 13th 
centuries. Photograph courtesy Vicheth Tiev, 
2018.
Figure 3.13	
Nārada-jātaka? Bayon, late 12th to early 13th 
centuries. Photograph courtesy Vicheth Tiev, 
2018. 
Figure 4.1	
Original stucco decoration of the 17th-century 
style on the bejewelled Buddha sculpture in Tham 
Phra. Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.2	
Mid 20th-century photograph of the Tham Phra 
shrine, showing Buddha images assembled in a 
wooden pavilion (duplicated from the miniature 
photo made as an amulet by the Tham Phra 
monastery during the 1950s, property of 
Samerchai Poolsuwan).
Figure 4.3	
Sculpture 1.1, a bejewelled Māravijaya Buddha of the 
Pāla-related type. Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.4	
Sculpture 1.2, a bejewelled Māravijaya Buddha of the 
Pāla-related type. Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.5	
Sculpture 1.3, a bejewelled Māravijaya Buddha of the 
Pāla-related type. Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.6	
Sculpture 1.4, a bejewelled Māravijaya Buddha of the 
Pāla-related type. Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.7	
Lotus pedestal of Sculpture 1.1. Photograph by 
Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.8 	
Bejewelled Māravijaya Buddha of the Pāla-related 
type, Ananda-gu-hpaya-gyi temple, Pagan. 
Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.9 	
Bejewelled Māravijaya Buddha of the Pāla-related 
type, Shwezayan Pagoda Museum, Thaton. 
Photograph courtesy Donald M. Stadtner.
Figure 4.10	
Sculpture 2.1, a bejewelled standing Buddha of the 
Khmer-related type. Photograph by Samerchai 
Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.11	
Sculpture 2.2, a bejewelled standing Buddha of the 
Khmer-related type. Photograph by Samerchai 
Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.12	
Lotus pedestal of Sculpture 2.2. Photograph by 
Samerchai Poolsuwan.
117
118
119
119
146
149
151
152
152
153
153
154
155
157
158
159

--- PAGE 13 ---
xiii
List of Figures, Maps and Tables
Figure 4.13	
Sculpture 3.1, a standing Buddha image with a 
series of concentric rings supporting the Buddha’s 
radiance, shaped as a lotus bud. Photograph by 
Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.14	
Sculpture 3.2, a standing Buddha image with a 
series of concentric rings supporting the Buddha’s 
radiance, shaped as a lotus bud. Photograph by 
Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.15	
Sculpture 3.3, a standing Buddha image with a 
series of concentric rings supporting the Buddha’s 
radiance, of a shape similar to the Pagan style. 
Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.16	
Sculpture 3.4, a standing Buddha image with a 
series of concentric rings supporting the Buddha’s 
radiance, of a shape similar to the Pagan style. 
Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.17	
Lotus pedestals of Sculptures 3.1 and 3.2. 
Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.18	
Buddha’s big radiance shaped as a lotus bud, 
Dvāravatī relief sculpture of the Buddha in 
leg-pendant seated pose, Tham Ruesi, Ratchaburi. 
Photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.19	
Buddha’s big radiance shaped as a lotus bud, Mon 
relief sculpture of the Buddha in standing pose, 
Shwezayan Pagoda Museum, Thaton, possibly 
early second millennium. Photograph courtesy 
Donald M. Stadtner.
Figure 4.20	
Sculpture 4.1, a Māravijaya Buddha. Photograph 
by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.21	
Sculpture 4.2, a Māravijaya Buddha. Photograph 
by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.22	
Sculpture 4.3, a Māravijaya Buddha. Photograph 
by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.23	
Sculpture 4.4, a Māravijaya Buddha. Photograph 
by Samerchai Poolsuwan.
Figure 4.24	
A 13th-century mural scene at Pagan depicting 
the Māravijaya Buddha wearing a pointed crown 
of the Pāla prototype; he is attended by devotees 
dressed in exotic costume suggesting their foreign 
origin (Pagan monument 1077, photograph by 
Samerchai Poolsuwan).
Figure 4.25	
Being of the Pagan style and dating from the 13th 
century, the mural scene depicts a Māravijaya 
160
160
160
160
161
162
163
164
164
165
165
175

--- PAGE 14 ---
xiv
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Buddha wearing a pointed crown of the Pāla 
prototype; an ink gloss, not totally legible, 
associates the scene with the Buddha and the 
“Mahā Kappina” king (Sale monument 101, 
inscription read by Saya Minbu Aung Kyaing, 
photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan). 
Figure 4.26	
Of the 13th-century Pagan style, the mural 
depicts a Māravijaya Buddha wearing a pointed 
crown of the Pāla prototype; it bears two ink-
glosses: one located below the Buddha describing 
the episode of his admonishing King Kappain, 
and the other explaining a seated devotee, located 
above it, to be the very king, however with his 
name spelt as “Kapain” (Sarle monument 13, 
inscription read by Saya Minbu Aung Kyaing, 
photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan).  
Figure 4.27	
A 13th-century inscribed mural from Pagan 
illustrating a child, King Aśoka in his previous 
existence, donating a handful of dust for alms to 
the Buddha Gotama, probably based on the 
Lokapaññatti account (Pagan monument 585, 
inscription read by Saya Minbu Aung Kyaing, 
photograph by Samerchai Poolsuwan). 
Figure 5.1	
Preah Ang Kok Thlok terrace, Angkor Thom. 
Photograph by Ea Darith, 2017.
Figure 5.2	
Tep Pranam terrace, Angkor Thom. Photograph 
by Ea Darith, 2017.
Figure 5.3	
Preah Vihear Prampir Lavaeng, Angkor Thom, 
with double sīmā. Photograph by Ea Darith, 2017.
Figure 5.4	
Stone coffins at Preah Ang Ngok, Angkor Thom. 
Photograph by Ea Darith, 2020.
Figure 5.5	
Buddha entering nirvāṇa constructed on western 
façade of the Baphuon temple, outlined to better 
show the figure. Photograph and outline courtesy 
Lim Bunhong, 2020.
Figure 5.6	
Buddha entering nirvāṇa, Preah Palilay temple, 
Angkor Thom. Photograph by Ea Darith, 2017. 
Figure 5.7	
Remains of seated Buddha atop Phnom Bakheng, 
Angkor. From Jacques Dumarçay, Phnom 
Bakheng: Etude Archéologique du Temple, 
Mémoires Archéologiques VII, 1971, p. 15. 
Reproduced with the permission of the EFEO.
Figure 5.8.	
Phnom Bakheng seated Buddha. View from the 
176
176
177
188
189
190
191
192
193
195

--- PAGE 15 ---
xv
List of Figures, Maps and Tables
southeast, showing portions of the Buddha body 
re-using stones from the original temple, with 
portion of an original sanctuary tower visible 
within. Photograph: Cliché EFEO, Fonds 
Cambodge réf. EFEO_CAM14118.
Figure 5.9.	
Stūpa in central sanctuary, Preah Khan temple, 
Angkor. Photograph by Ea Darith, 2017.
Figure 5.10	
New vihāra on Middle Period terrace site in 
Angkor Wat temple grounds. Photograph by Ea 
Darith, 2017.
Figure 6.1	
Western Prasat Top (viewed from the east). 
Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2008.
Figure 6.2	
Plan of Western Prasat Top. National Research 
Institute for Cultural Properties, Nara 
(NRICPN) 2012.
Figure 6.3	
Inscription K. 576 (stored at the Angkor 
Conservation Depot). Photograph courtesy 
Inoue Tadao, 2010.
Figure 6.4	
Northeast corner of the inner laterite base of 
Western Prasat Top’s central sanctuary, with 
mouldings visible. Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2016.
Figure 6.5	
Pediment with the motif of Buddha in 
māravijaya seated on a pedestal. Photograph by 
Yuni Sato, 2016.
Figure 6.6	
Pediment with the motif of a crowned supplicant. 
Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2008.
Figure 6.7	
Pediment with kendi imagery. Photograph by 
Yuni Sato, 2016.
Figure 6.8	
Plan of trench in front of pedestal on the terrace. 
NRICPN, 2012.
Figure 6.9	
Buddhist triad. Photograph courtesy Inoue 
Tadao, 2010.
Figure 6.10	
Sculpted niche. Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2011.
Figure 6.11	
Head of Buddha image (with flame-like uṣṇīṣa). 
Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2010.
Figure 6.12	
Head of Buddha image (with simple uṣṇīṣa). 
Photograph courtesy Inoue Tadao, 2010.
Figure 6.13	
Locations of sīmā from N24 southern sanctuary. 
NRICPN, 2014.
Figure 6.14	
Sīmā from N24 southern sanctuary. Photograph 
by Yuni Sato, 2013.
Figure 6.15	
Sīmā at Kok Thlok, Angkor Thom. Photograph 
by Yuni Sato, 2013. 
195
196
198
203
204
205
207
209
210
211
212
214
214
214
214
216
216
218

--- PAGE 16 ---
xvi
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Figure 6.16	
Sīmā at Preah Pithu (lotus bud top missing). 
Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2015.
Figure 6.17	
Sīmā at Tep Pranam. Photograph by Yuni Sato, 
2013.
Figure 6.18	
Sīmā at Western Prasat Top in situ. Photograph 
by Yuni Sato, 2013.
Figure 6.19	
Sīmā at Vihear Prambuon Lavaeng. Photograph 
by Yuni Sato, 2010.
Figure 6.20	
Sīmā at Vihear Prampir Lavaeng. Photograph by 
Yuni Sato, 2012.
Figure 6.21	
Standing (or walking) Buddha on the western 
false door of the northern sanctuary, Western 
Prasat Top. Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2019.
Figure 6.22	
Standing Buddha on the southern false door of 
the northern sanctuary, Western Prasat Top. 
Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2019.
Figure 6.23	
Walking Buddha on the northern false door of the 
northern sanctuary, Western Prasat Top. 
Photograph by Yuni Sato, 2019.
Figure 6.24	
Brick structure at the centre of the foundation of 
the northern sanctuary, Western Prasat Top, 
viewed from the south. Photograph by Yuni Sato, 
2016.
Figure 6.25	
Gold strand excavated from the brick structure at 
the foundation of the northern sanctuary, 
Western Prasat Top. Photograph by Nakamura 
Ichiro, 2017.
Figure 6.26	
Decorative stone with mortise found at the centre 
of the southern side of the laterite enclosure of 
Western Prasat Top. Photograph courtesy Inoue 
Tadao, 2014.
Figure 6.27	
Inscribed face of the decorative stone found at the 
centre of the southern side of the laterite 
enclosure of Western Prasat Top. Photograph 
courtesy Inoue Tadao, 2014.
Figure 6.28	
Rubbing of a Pāli inscription “dakkhinṇe kassapo 
buddho” found at Western Prasat Top. NRICPN, 
2015.
Figure 6.29a	
Rubbing of a fragmentary Pāli inscription, pacca, 
from Western Prasat Top.
Figure 6.29b	
Rubbing of a fragmentary Pāli inscription from 
Western Prasat Top, kyamuni, from Western 
Prasat Top. NRICPN, 2015.
218
218
219
219
219
220
220
220
221
222
224
225
226
227
227

--- PAGE 17 ---
xvii
List of Figures, Maps and Tables
Figure 7.1a	
Lintel representing five standing Buddhas, Phimai 
National Museum. Inventory number: 7/2520, 
Nakhon Ratchasima province, Thailand, 11th to 
12th centuries. Photograph by Nicolas Revire, 2011.
Figure 7.1b	
Lintel representing five seated Buddhas, Preah 
Khan of Kompong Svay, Preah Vihear province, 
Cambodia, 12th to 13th centuries. Photograph 
by Nicolas Revire, 2015.
Figure 7.2a	
Empty niches, presumably for five seated 
Buddhas, Preah Khan of Kompong Svay, Preah 
Vihear province, Cambodia, 13th century. 
Photograph by Nicolas Revire, 2015.
Figure 7.2b	
Defaced niches of five (tantric?) deities, Wat Nokor, 
Kompong Cham province, Cambodia, 13th 
century. Photograph by Nicolas Revire, 2015.
Figure 7.2c	
Lintel with five seated Buddhas, Ta Phrom Kel 
“Hospital” sanctuary, Angkor, Siem Reap 
province, Cambodia, 13th century. 
Photogrammetric image by Olivier Cunin, 2015.
Figure 7.2d	
Same lintel with chiseled-out arms highlighted. 
Photogrammetric image by Olivier Cunin, 2015.
Figures 7.3a–c	
Lintels with rows of seven Buddhas, Phimai 
National Museum. Inventory Numbers: 12/1–
4/2520, 15/2520, 39/2/2529, Nakhon 
Ratchasima province, Thailand, 11th to 12th 
centuries. Photographs by Nicolas Revire, 2011.
Figure 7.4a	
Five-sided miniature caitya, bronze, from 
Lopburi province, National Museum of 
Bangkok. Inventory number: LB 343. 
Photograph courtesy Brice Vincent, 2009.
Figure 7.4b	
Five-sided miniature caitya, stone, found at Bang 
Rachan, Singburi province, Thailand, 12th to 
13th centuries. Photograph by Alexander B. 
Griswold, 1951. Courtesy The Walters Art 
Museum, Baltimore, no. 472.4001, neg. 
51.111.10.
Figure 7.5	
Plan of the Preah Khan Chatomukh. Cliché 
EFEO, Fonds Cambodge, réf. EFEO_
CAM10729_2. 
Figure 7.6	
Eight directional Buddhas on a modern mural 
found on the ceiling of Wat Prei Bang, Kandal 
province, Cambodia, 21st century. Photograph by 
Nicolas Revire, 2016.
234
234
234
234
235
235
236
237
237
238
242

--- PAGE 18 ---
xviii
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Figure 7.7	
Modern mural painting depicting the five 
Buddhas, each being associated with their animals 
and the five syllables NA MO BU DDHĀ YA. 
Wat Prei Bang, Kandal province, Cambodia, 21st 
century. Photograph by Nicolas Revire, 2016. 
Figure 7.8	
Modern mural representing an episode of the 
Dasabodhisatta-uddesa in which King 
Mahāpadāna cuts off his own head in front of 
Buddha Kakusandha who predicts his future 
Buddhahood as Buddha Sumaṅgala, Wat Sithor, 
Kandal province, Cambodia, 21st century. 
Photograph by Nicolas Revire, 2016.
Figure 8.1	
South gallery, Preah Pean, Angkor Wat. Left: 
Photographer unknown, 1906, Kerncollectie 
Fotografie, A319-73, courtesy Museum 
Volkenkunde, Leiden. Right: Photograph by 
Martin Polkinghorne, 2013.
Figure 8.2	
Late Ayutthayan image (cat#1) at south gallery, 
Preah Pean, Angkor Wat, terminus ante quem for 
photograph is 1928, Photographer unknown, Cliché 
EFEO, Fonds Cambodge, réf. EFEO_CAM04249.
Figure 8.3	
Standing Buddhas in abhayamudrā, c. late 17th 
or 18th century, Angkor Wat. Wood, lacquer, 
polychromy, inlay. Left: cat#1, Cliché EFEO, 
Fonds Cambodge, réf. EFEO_CAM19612_1; 
right: cat#2, cliché EFEO, EFEO_CAM19832_3.
Figure 8.4	
Standing Buddhas in abhayamudrā, c. late 17th 
or 18th century, Chantharakasem National 
Museum (Ayutthaya). Wood, lacquer, 
polychromy, gilding, inlay. Photographs by 
Martin Polkinghorne, with the permission of 
Chantharakasem National Museum (Ayutthaya).
Figure 8.5	
Seated Buddha in māravijaya, late 17th or 18th 
century, Angkor Wat. Copper-base alloy. NMC 
Inventory Numbers: Ga.5421 (E.297), Ga.3376.1 
(E.297D), Ga.3376.2 (E.297E), Ga.3376.3 
(E.297C). Photographs courtesy National 
Museum of Cambodia.
Figure 8.6	
Rectangular brick foundation of chedei, find spot 
of Lan Xang Buddha in māravijaya, west of the 
western bas-relief gallery, Angkor Wat. Image by 
Henri Marchal, JFCA, 2, December 1918–
February 1921: 116, image courtesy EFEO.
246
250
270
275
277
277
279
280

--- PAGE 19 ---
xix
List of Figures, Maps and Tables
Figure 8.7	
Seated Buddha in māravijaya, Wat Phra Keo, 
Vientiane, Laos, Copper-base alloy. Buddha no. 12 
(Giteau 1969 enumeration), late 17th to 18th 
centuries. Photograph by Martin Polkinghorne, 
with the permission of Ho Prakeo Museum, 2004.
Figure 8.8	
Seated Buddha in māravijaya, Wat Phra Keo, 
Vientiane, Laos, Copper-base alloy. Buddha no. 7 
(Giteau 1969 enumeration), inscription date: 
1706. Photograph by Martin Polkinghorne, with 
the permission of Ho Prakeo Museum, 2004.
Figure 8.9	
Left: Head of Lan Xang Buddha at Angkor Wat, 
late 17th or 18th century, close-up of Fig. 9.5. 
Copper-base alloy. Cat# 3. NMC Inventory 
Number: Ga.5421 (E.297). Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of Cambodia. Right: Head of 
Buddha no. 12 (Giteau 1969 enumeration), 
close-up of left image in Fig. 8.7, Wat Phra Keo, 
Vientiane, late 17th to early 18th centuries. 
Photograph by Martin Polkinghorne, with the 
permission of Ho Prakeo Museum, 2004.
Figure 8.10	
Left: Ear of Lan Xang Buddha at Angkor Wat, 
late 17th or 18th century, close-up of Fig. 9.5. 
Copper-base alloy. NMC Inventory Number: 
Ga.5421 (E.297). Photograph courtesy National 
Museum of Cambodia. Right: Head of Buddha 
no. 12 (Giteau 1969 enumeration), Wat Phra Keo, 
Vientiane, late 17th to early 18th centuries. 
Photograph by Martin Polkinghorne, with the 
permission of Ho Prakeo Museum, 2004.
LIST OF MAPS
Map 0.1 	
Cambodia, showing places discussed in this 
volume.
Map 0.2 	
Second millennia Southeast Asia in its regional 
setting: A historical palimpsest showing places 
discussed in this volume.
Map 0.3	
Inset map of second millennia Southeast Asia in 
its regional setting.
Map 0.4	
Central Angkor, showing places discussed in this 
volume.
Map 0.5	
Angkor Thom, showing places discussed in this 
volume.
282
283
284
285
xxv
xxvi
xxvii
xxviii
xxix

--- PAGE 20 ---
xx
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Map 4.1	
The location of Tham Phra in relation to ancient 
communities around the Gulf of Thailand during 
the late first and early second millennia. (Based on 
maps and information provided in Trongjai 
Hutangura, “Reconsidering the Palaeo-shoreline 
in the Lower Central Plain of Thailand” and 
https://maps.google.com). Map courtesy 
Issarachai Buranaaj.
LIST OF TABLES
Table 6.1	
Radiocarbon dating results and calendar year 
calibration, Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
Table 6.2	
Estimated calibration age (cal BP), Western  
Prasat Top
Table 7.1	
Diagram of the Five Buddha Families
Table 7.2	
Diagram of the Ten Directional Buddhas
Table 7.3	
Cardinal and Intermediate Directions & Related 
Deities/Buddhas
Table 7.4	
Groups of Five according to the Thai-Khmer 
Kammaṭṭhān Tradition
Table 8.1	
Catalogue of late Ayutthayan and Lan Xang 
Buddhas at Angkor Wat
168
213
223
233
240
244
245
278

--- PAGE 21 ---
xxi
TECHNICAL NOTES
ON LANGUAGE
For the spelling of Khmer proper names and toponyms we use established 
phonetic transcriptions when these exist. This can be cause for confusion 
in particular as some established spellings used in English are derived from 
French usage and do not render Khmer pronunciation. For example, 
“Preah Pean” is the established English-language version of the French 
“Preah Péan” which is a loose French phonetic rendering of late 19th-
century Siem Reap provincial pronunciation of what would appear today 
in transliteration as braḥ bān’, translated as “[Gallery of] a Thousand 
Buddhas”, an area inside Angkor Wat temple. Despite its evident 
disadvantages, our choice to maintain established usage is meant to 
facilitate scholarly connections over time and space. 
Otherwise, we use transliteration to render Khmer written forms. For 
the transliteration of Khmer, we use the relatively simple system set out by 
Saveros Lewitz in 1969 (“Note sur la translittération du cambodgien”, 
BEFEO 55, pp. 163–9). For extensive commentary on relative advantages 
for the many developments on this system used in epigraphic, manuscript 
and print contexts and for different script types, see Michel Antelme, 
“Inventaire provisoire des caractères et divers signes des écritures khmères 
pré-modernes et modernes employés pour la notation du khmer, du 
siamois, des dialectes thaïs méridionaux, du sanskrit et du pāli”, Bulletin 
de l’AEFEK 12, June 2012, pp. 1-81 (https://www.aefek.fr/wa_files/
antelme_bis.pdf); and Trent Walker, “Unfolding Buddhism: Communal 
Scripts, Localized Translations, and the Work of Dying in Cambodian 
Chanted Leporellos”, PhD dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 
vol. 1, pp. xiii–xix. 
Both Sanskrit and Pāli appear in Khmer usage over time. Pāli forms are 
used throughout this volume, with the exception of Sanskrit terms 
adopted in English usage, such as “dharma”, and those required by 
context. This too can lead to confusion, when for example in one text (the 
Introduction) the Sanskrit form “Maitreya” is used to designate the future 
Buddha to best reflect widespread Khmer usage historically and today, 
while in other chapters the Pāli “Metteya” is used with reference to specific 
Pāli texts and to maintain internal chapter consistency. We presume 
nonetheless that any confusion can be overcome through understandings 
of the particular historical Theravādin complex in which both forms can 
maintain. All Sanskrit and Pāli terms appear in transliteration, likewise

--- PAGE 22 ---
xxii
with the exception of common toponyms and other words commonly 
used in English without diacritics – such as the term “Sanskrit” – and/or 
in phonetic transcription. Our usage of the Sanskrit/Pāli terms 
designating funerary or commemorative monuments is exceptional in its 
complexity as we attempt to attend to specificity of usage in multiple 
academic and local Buddhist practitioner milieux. Throughout the 
volume readers will find the Sanskrit stūpa, which is the best known 
designation of the Buddhist funerary monument in English-language 
academic literature broadly defined (although the term is not used in this 
designation in Khmer). The Sanskrit caitya, which has been used in the art 
historical literature of Cambodia to designate a type of monolithic 
sculpture with a stūpa-like form, appears with reference to one exemplar 
of this type (although the type is not known to have ever been called 
caitya in Khmer). The Pali cetiya, used in both Khmer and Thai to 
designate the Buddhist funerary monument, appears in both 
transliteration (cetiya) and phonetic transcription (chedei), as the latter 
form is commonly used in academic literature on Khmer and Thai 
culture.
Cambodian author names generally follow Khmer usage, with the 
surname preceding the first name. There is thus no comma separating the 
two in bibliographical entries, while footnote entries maintain Khmer 
word order. For example, “Ang Choulean” appears as such in both 
footnotes and bibliography. Exceptions to this rule maintain for authors 
who have themselves established Western usage.  Thus “Saveros Pou” 
appears as such in footnotes, but as “Pou, Saveros” in bibliographical 
entries.
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AA: Arts Asiatiques 
ANM: Angkor National Museum
BEFEO: Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
DCA: Dépôt de la Conservation d’Angkor 
EFEO: École française d’Extrême-Orient 
FAD: Fine Arts Department, Thailand
IMA: Inscriptions moderne d’Angkor, Middle Khmer inscription inventory 
number prefix
JA: Journal Asiatique
JFCA: Journal de Fouilles de la Conservation d’Angkor [manuscript, 
unpublished, EFEO Archives]
JSS: Journal of the Siam Society
K.: “Khmer”, inscription inventory number prefix
Ka.: National Museum of Cambodia stone sculpture inventory number 
prefix
Early Theravādin Cambodia

--- PAGE 23 ---
xxiii
Technical Notes
Mod. Kh.: Modern Khmer
Mid. Kh.: Middle Khmer
NMC: National Museum of Cambodia
NRICPN: Nara National Institute for Cultural Properties
PEFEO: Publications de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient
RCA: Rapport de la Conservation d’Angkor [manuscript, unpublished, 
EFEO Archives]
MG: Guimet – Musée national des arts asiatiques object inventory 
number prefix

--- PAGE 24 ---
xxiv
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am grateful to Hiram W. Woodward for his careful review of early drafts 
of each of the essays included here. His life’s work underpins the volume 
in multiple ways. The vast network of colleagues who supported the 
refinement and completion of individual essays with thoughts, sources, 
data, images and enthusiastic care continues to impress me: I add my deep 
thanks to the individual credits to these people appearing throughout the 
volume. I second the authors also in thanking the anonymous peer 
reviewers for their insightful comments. 
I am grateful also to Peter Schoppert of NUS Press for his steady 
support of the volume, and the new series of which it is a part. And finally, 
thanks are due to the SOAS Southeast Asian Art Academic Programme 
and the Alphawood Foundation whose financial support has contributed 
in no small way to making the book and the series possible.

--- PAGE 25 ---
xxv
Map 0.1	Cambodia, showing places discussed in this volume.
MAPS

--- PAGE 26 ---
xxvi
Map 0.2	Second millennia Southeast Asia in its regional setting: A historical palimpsest showing places discussed in this volume.
Early Theravādin Cambodia

--- PAGE 27 ---
xxvii
Map 0.3	Inset map of second millennia Southeast Asia in its regional setting.
Maps

--- PAGE 28 ---
xxviii
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Map 0.4	Central Angkor, showing places discussed in this volume.

--- PAGE 29 ---
xxix
Map 0.5	Angkor Thom, showing places discussed in this volume.
Maps

--- PAGE 30 ---
Chapter 1
EARLY THERAVĀDIN CAMBODIA: 
TERMS OF ENGAGEMENT
Ashley Thompson
The present volume is a response to a growing sense of the need and 
potential for breaking down the national barriers which have long defined 
the bulk of art historical and archaeological research on Cambodia’s 
post-Angkorian or Middle Period (for our initial purposes here, dating 
from the 13th to 18th centuries), and for energising the interpretive 
dimensions of this area of study in methodological and theoretical terms. 
While the significant strides made, largely in empirical terms, in the fields 
of Middle Cambodian art history and archaeology in the past two decades 
are matched by those, largely in interpretive terms, in Theravādin 
Buddhist Studies, little dialogue exists between these two bodies of 
scholarship. One group has been homing in on Cambodia as the other has 
sought to conceive the commonalities of a cosmopolitan religion anchored 
in very local realities differing over space and time; one has focused on 
refining understandings of chronological historical developments in 
Cambodia, while the other has sought to sound the imaginaires borne by 
Theravāda Buddhism more broadly. Conceptual innovations in the field 
of Middle Cambodian history seeking precisely to account for the 
preponderant role of Buddhist imaginaires in the historical developments 
after Angkor have furthermore remained largely beyond the purview of 
both of these groups.
Emblematic of the progress in Buddhist Studies is a 2012 essay by Sven 
Bretfeld, “Resonant Paradigms in the Study of Religions and the 
Emergence of Theravāda Buddhism”.1  In this piece, Bretfeld advances a 
sonic metaphor to encapsulate his complex reading of the “emergence of 
Theravāda Buddhism” in the 19th to 20th centuries through the contact 
developed between Orientalist research and contemporary 
transformations in the Buddhist world of Sri Lanka. He writes,
The stress of this approach lies on the relational  notion of 
religion, which could be described metaphorically as a 
polyphone ‘concert’ of different agencies, interests, ideas and 
power relations. Religion ‘sounds’ different depending on

--- PAGE 31 ---
2
Ashley Thompson
who speaks about or for it, and depending on who is 
observing and who is observed. Nevertheless, all these voices 
are interrelated and ‘resonate’ each other. Focusing on 
resonances, the religious field can be analyzed as a 
polymorph, dynamic formation emerging from the effects of 
contact.2 
With this approach, furthered in other publications detailing the work of 
intra-Buddhist relations in earlier historical moments as these laid the 
ground for this modern “emergence of Theravāda Buddhism”, Bretfeld 
acknowledges the necessity and insights of postcolonial critique of the 
study of “religion” while striving to overcome its critical pitfalls. There is 
not one single origin of Theravāda Buddhism – be it in the veritable words 
of the Buddha as some Buddhist texts suggest, or in those of the 
Orientalist as suggested by some postcolonial critics; instead in Bretfeld’s 
words we hear the term “emergence” chiming with the paradigm of 
“resonance” to encourage us to tune our ears to the “concert” that is 
Theravāda Buddhism.
A preliminary title of the present volume, The Emergence of Theravāda 
Buddhism in Cambodia: Perspectives from the History of Art and 
Archaeology, echoed such concerns. This title was however ultimately 
overridden by other concerns emerging from the specificity of the project 
on early Middle Period Cambodia, probing in particular 12th- to 14th-
century developments. The Emergence of Theravāda Buddhism in 
Cambodia came to suggest to my ears an awkward, imprecise premise that 
the two substantives – Theravāda and Cambodia – could be separated, 
with the dynamic, polyphonous emergence of the one (Theravāda) set 
against the backdrop of the other singular, static, defined entity of the 
other (Cambodia). In modifying the title to Early Theravādin Cambodia: 
Perspectives from the History of Art and Archaeology, I have sought to 
signal something more on the order of a co-emergence, to affirm the 
integral role of Theravāda in defining the Cambodian state after Angkor, 
and to suggest that just as Theravāda was making Cambodia, so was 
Cambodia making Theravāda. Yet another alternative title to our volume 
could have been thus Early Cambodian Theravāda: Perspectives from the 
History of Art and Archaeology.
The pendant to Bretfeld’s work on Theravāda in the field of 
Cambodian history is for me Grégory Mikaelian’s 2012 “Des sources 
lacunaires de l’histoire à l’histoire complexifiée des sources. Éléments pour 
une histoire des renaissances khmères (c. XIV–c. XVIIIe s.)” [From 
lacunary sources of history to the complicated history of sources. 
Elements for a history of Khmer renaissances (c. XIVth–c. XVIIIth 
centuries.)].3 In this essay, Mikaelian throws down the gauntlet to his

--- PAGE 32 ---
3
Early Theravādin Cambodia
peers and successors, challenging us to transcend the tired colonially 
riveted view of Cambodia’s “decline” after Angkor purportedly reflected 
at once in the relative dearth of historical sources and the self-effacing 
piety of Theravāda Buddhism. Mikaelian’s complaint that colonial 
scholars, like those mimicking them in their wake, have seen nothing but 
the absence of historical sources after Angkor resonates with Bretfeld’s 
subtle corrective to conclusions drawn from the postcolonial revelation 
that the term “religion” and its –isms have no term-for-term equivalent in 
many non-Western contexts in which the said “religions” have been 
expounded upon for centuries by Western scholars. The two authors 
point up the same methodological misstep in which scholars seek mirror 
images of Euro-American constructs in their non-Euro-American objects 
of study. Some have sought and purported to have found “exact matches 
of the contingent concepts fashioned in specific European discourse”4; 
others seeking and not finding any such match have refashioned the 
formers’ purported discovery as mere invention. In what I would like to 
call a decolonising approach whereby we seek the multiple disparate 
agencies participating in the construction of any historical matrix – which 
is never short of interpretation – Bretfeld sees neither the presence nor the 
absence of “Buddhism” in premodern Sri Lanka; rather he sees how 
the ‘isms’ of Religious and Buddhist Studies resonate 
reificated conceptualizations of the Teaching of the Buddha 
that have already been used for centuries in Sri Lankan 
differentiations that singled out specific material, cognitive, 
pragmatic and experiential spheres of social and individual 
life, as well as condensed them in a conceptual design that 
we can render as ‘Buddhism’….5 
Likewise, Mikaelian’s critique does not aim to demonstrate the absence or 
the presence of Middle Cambodian historical sources per se. Instead, he 
advocates probing material and textual cultures as forms of historical 
sources embodying local conceptualisations of history and realisations 
thereof. For Mikaelian these barely tapped sources for understanding 
Cambodian history after Angkor are intimately linked to court and 
religious centres and are themselves contingent upon Buddhist 
perceptions of cyclical rebirth – the “renaissances” of his title. They are 
the inland heart whose beat set the historical rhythms of a Cambodia 
evolving integrally with the Southeast Asian region, in what came to be 
known as the age of commerce. To hear the resonance of these sources 
with the accounts of Chinese chronicles or Portuguese missionaries, or 
even with Euro-American “history” derived from or mirrored in modern 
Cambodian chronicles … one must be able to hear them, first, on their 
own Buddhist terms.

--- PAGE 33 ---
4
Ashley Thompson
The present volume aims to go some way towards achieving this 
interpretive goal, and to provide others with materials and pathways for 
going further. In the following I will explore the terms of our title in 
further detail before presenting each of the volume’s chapters with an eye 
on ways in which art historical and archaeological work can contribute to 
these broader conversations in Buddhist studies and Southeast Asian 
history while also evolving themselves through the contact.
“THERAVĀDA”
What is it that scholars have for so long and often blithely called 
“Theravāda” Buddhism? What is it, specifically, in Cambodia after 
Angkor, the ninth- to thirteenth-century Khmer polity dominated by 
Hindu religio-political expression and which dominated mainland 
Southeast Asia in its time? What are its sources? Its ingredients? How did 
it shape the land and the people – physically, socially and conceptually? 
And how was Theravāda shaped by them? The work presented here 
reinforces contemporary Buddhist Studies scholars’ questioning of the 
salience of the term “Theravāda” to characterise apparently dominant 
religious practices across mainland Southeast Asia in the second 
millennium. The revolution in Buddhist studies has been anchored in 
textual analyses producing fresh insight into the modern shaping of a 
general usage of the term itself contrasted with specific and limited usage 
in the relevant historical textual records, and a concomitant frustration 
with the persistent assimilation of the two related but distinct historical 
groupings of “Theravāda” and “Hinayāna” in defining contrast with 
“Mahāyāna”; the authors in this volume, on the other hand, take to the 
ground, revealing the ways in which material evidence can attest to a 
specific cultural complex bearing the hallmarks of Theravāda without, 
however, reinforcing the essentialist stereotypes by which the latter has 
come to be defined.
The volume is effectively a modest and circumscribed sequel to the 
seminal 2012 collective volume How Theravāda is Theravāda?, a title that 
itself boldly pursued the lead of Prapod Assavavirulhakarn in his 2010 The 
Ascendancy of Theravāda Buddhism in Southeast Asia.6 Both publications 
prompt readers from the outset to consider the interpretive balancing act 
required to convey the context in question with adequate nuance. Readers 
will immediately note the unbalanced treatment of the term “Theravāda” 
in Assavavirulhakarn’s monograph: the straightforward usage of the 
volume’s title is retracted on opening in its table of contents, with the 
term appearing in scare quotes in the penultimate chapter title: 
“‘Theravāda Buddhism’ in Southeast Asia”. The oxymoronic logic 
underpinning the title How Theravāda is Theravāda? presents the same

--- PAGE 34 ---
5
Early Theravādin Cambodia
challenge. Maintaining the term while interrogating its authority, this title 
posits Theravāda as an undecidable category: it both is and is not. The 
titles and subtitles in question query Theravāda in ontological terms. This 
is not just a case of correcting inaccurate past scholarship. Nor is it 
reducible to the general conundrum faced by all of us bricoleurs as 
sketched by Jacques Derrida in response to Claude Lévi-Strauss: like any 
other we cannot construct the totality of our language and are instead 
bound to borrowing from “the text of a heritage that is more or less 
coherent or ruined”.7 But insofar as modern scholars of Buddhism are 
largely themselves – and ourselves – responsible for the coining of the 
term as a blanket cover for a range of practices many of which do not 
readily correspond to the defining criteria which we, likewise, have 
attributed to it … we are doubly bound: to developing critical awareness of 
our past and present usage of the term, and to correcting the distortions in 
interpretation induced by more than a century of usage. In privileging 
close analysis of specific material evidence of Theravāda in early Middle 
Cambodia, the present volume is attentive to this ongoing reassessment 
across the Buddhist studies field, and means to inform the same in some 
small way.
A 1997 essay by Peter Skilling entitled “The Advent of Theravāda to 
Mainland Southeast Asia” is a key precursor to these book-length studies.8 
In opening, the essay makes a simple but crucial point in highlighting the 
contrast between the distinct development of a historically conscious 
thera-related collective identification in first-millennium Sri Lankan Pāli 
literature and the lack of like textual production beyond the island in this 
period. The dominant textual evidence of what will come to be called 
Theravāda in first-millennium mainland Southeast Asia is instead in the 
Pāli epigraphic record in which Pāli scriptural extracts and commentarial 
references feature extensively, attesting to liturgical practices and doctrinal 
orientations rather than historiographical ones. Both types of writing 
practice could attest to modes of defining affiliation, though the latter, 
Southeast Asian citational writing, does not convey in any explicit way the 
self-productive institutionalised determination to categorise monastic-
institutional affiliation evidenced in the Sri Lankan chronicular traditions. 
Instead of examining usage of the term “Theravāda” or other associated 
appellations, Skilling’s essay compiles and analyses the epigraphic evidence 
for both the use of the Indic Pāli language and references to the Pāli canon 
and known Pāli extra-canonical works in the first millennium of the 
Common Era. Noting how Buddhist traditions themselves recognised 
dialect as a defining feature of different schools, Pāli and references to Pāli 
literature are taken as “a strong indication of Theravādin activity in the 
region”, in fact suggesting the predominance of Theravādin practices in 
the Irawaddy and Chao Phraya river basins from the fifth century. The

--- PAGE 35 ---
6
Ashley Thompson
essay comprises a concise and cogent guide to Theravāda in the mainland 
at this time, warning all the while, however, that the affirmation of 
Theravāda is not to be assimilated with affirmation of a monolithic 
religious society in any one place or across the region as a whole.
The comprehensive sequel to the above-mentioned work treating 
Theravāda as a heterogeneous whole is Kate Crosby’s 2013 Theravāda 
Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity and Identity.9 Crosby’s volume, a 
monograph-cum-textbook for specialised students, goes a long way 
toward clarifying the unifying factors of Theravāda and highlighting the 
diversity of practice therein. Crosby explicitly distinguishes her approach 
from that of her contemporaries struggling “to untangle the extent to 
which ‘Theravāda’ is thera-vāda”, highlighting in her formulation the 
lingering concern with linking what we call Theravāda to the authentically 
ancient “word” (vāda) of the “Elders” (thera, the Buddha’s early 
disciples). Crosby instead stakes her claim to a critical subject position 
amongst those who positively “identify themselves as Theravāda 
Buddhists now and in recent history” as well as their predecessors, “those 
who contributed to the creation and continuity of the forms and 
manifestations of Buddhism on which ‘Theravāda Buddhists’ have been 
able to draw”.10 The purported shift is a subtle one, privileging 
exploration of the histories and effects of what have come to be known by 
“Theravādins” as “Theravādin” forms while still accounting for the impact 
of modern academic interpretation. Still, Crosby’s Introduction reiterates 
in its own manner Assavavirulhakarn’s varied usage of the term 
“Theravāda”; only with Crosby we begin with the scare quotes and end 
with their removal. Crosby’s first subsection, “Problems with the 
Definition of ‘Theravāda Buddhism’” is paired, thus, with a closing 
subsection entitled “Revisiting Conceptions of Theravāda”, a summary of 
advances the book makes in addressing the previously defined problems.
What, then, is the now abundantly critiqued vision of Theravāda that 
the present volume encounters? At the risk of reducing inordinately the 
reductive characterisation under fire, this vision of “Theravāda” in 
fundamentally flawed ontological terms is: a form of Buddhist doctrine 
and practice characterised by the use of the cosmopolitan Indic Pāli 
language to the exclusion of Sanskrit, and core reference to the Tipiṭaka 
(Pāli canon), specifically including what are considered early Buddhist 
texts, the Vinaya (texts setting out the monastic discipline) and the Sutta 
(discourses attributed to the Buddha), as well as a third, later 
Abhidhamma (systematic elaboration of doctrine) section, along with 
commentaries on the canon; a privileging of the extended life story of the 
Historical Buddha Sākyamuni; a conservative adherence to the Historical 
Buddha’s own words, and so to an originary, pure form of Buddhism; a 
monastic commitment to personal salvation structuring a fundamentally

--- PAGE 36 ---
7
Early Theravādin Cambodia
apolitical orientation of the religious order at large and, paradoxically, a 
democratic opening to ordinary people to participate in core practice. 
In the above well-established – and now well-critiqued – vision of 
Theravāda, each of the above traits is set starkly against the counter-traits 
defining Theravāda’s supposed other, Mahāyāna Buddhism and its 
offshoot, Vajrayāna: the use of the cosmopolitan Indic Sanskrit language; 
reference to the same first two sections of the early Buddhist canon plus a 
large body of other writings including different Abhidharma texts and 
evincing an embrace of notions of revelation by a Buddha continuing to 
disseminate teachings from a heavenly realm;11 investment in the 
simultaneous multiplicity of Buddhas and bodhisattvas (Buddhas-to-be) 
and associated esoteric practices; a monastic commitment to communal 
salvation underpinning the imbrication of religion in politics.12 
Allow me a few comments on the above definitions with reference to 
both Crosby and the focus of the present volume, before directly 
addressing the other two operative terms of our volume title – Cambodia 
and periodisation. The thick contextualisation that preoccupies each 
author in this volume in and of itself challenges the characterisation of 
Theravāda as maintaining a privileged relationship with early Indian 
Buddhism. As Crosby aptly notes, Theravāda is “the process and product 
of over two and a half millennia since the historical person referred to as 
the Buddha began preaching the teachings and institutions from which 
all forms of Buddhism developed”.13 Integral to the ongoing re-evaluation 
of Theravāda Buddhism is an awareness that historically conditioned 
ideological appeals to maintaining a connection to early Buddhism must 
be distinguished from the connection itself. In art, the appeal is perhaps 
best expressed in an emphasis on representations of the so-called 
Historical Buddha. Of course, the connection-cum-divide between the 
actual and the ideological lies at the heart of the long artistic history of 
representation of the Historical Buddha where the factitiousness of 
representation itself is perpetually challenged and obscured through 
ritual processes of image animation. There are myriad ways by which 
images of the “Historical” Buddha have long been made to live in the 
here and now. On a more practical level, the predominance of 
iconographic representation of the Historical Buddha Sākyamuni in early 
Theravādin Cambodia remains hypothetical. In the absence of specific 
narrative context, be it textual, iconographic or compositional, we cannot 
know how Buddha images were identified by their makers and users; 
evidence suggests in fact a discrepancy between, on the one hand, the 
common art historical identification of “the Buddha” which presumes a 
singular historical figure and, on the other hand, local practices by which 
Buddha images embody multiple identities, ranging from other Buddhas 
to local historical or legendary figures. Underpinning this capacity to

--- PAGE 37 ---
8
Ashley Thompson
embody more than one identity is the fact that the “Historical Buddha” 
is himself larger than life. The Buddha is understood to have been a real 
historical figure whose career as a religious practitioner and teacher in the 
fifth century BCE laid the ground for what we now call “Buddhism”. 
Before becoming a “Buddha” or “Enlightened One”, he was a prince 
named Siddhattha Gotama of the Sākya clan. This historical figure is 
sometimes called the Gotama Buddha after his family name, or the 
Sākyamuni Buddha, the “Buddha, Sage of the Sākya Clan”. However, in 
the historical context at hand, nothing would suggest that reference to 
this historical figure is ever devoid of the mythic, supernatural 
dimensions of the same figure’s life story. Beyond the factitiousness of 
representation, we must query to what degree a given image of the 
Sākyamuni Buddha is perceived to be without attributions of divinity 
and attendant soteriological powers, and is in such a reflection of 
“realism” – Crosby’s term for the problematic scholarly investment in the 
Historical Buddha typically taken to define Theravāda up against its 
Buddhist others. Furthermore, when depicted in the absence of textual or 
sculpted narrative context, many Buddha images appearing in milieux 
presumed to be Theravādin cannot be simply or singularly identified as 
representing Sākyamuni; tautological arguments can dominate here, 
where the Buddha presumed to be Sākyamuni confirms the Theravādin 
context underpinning that same presumption. At every step we must 
recall that the term “Buddha” is a title. In Frank Reynolds and Charles 
Hallisey’s analogy, like the term “king”, “buddha denotes not merely the 
individual incumbent but also a larger conceptual framework”. The title 
“buddha” “suggests the otherness and splendour associated with those 
[so] named”.14 Any Buddha is perceived as a transformed historical figure; 
representations of the Buddha are always on some register representations 
of a Buddha. The onus is on the modern viewer to determine if the one 
can be disentangled from the other in distinct contexts.
The splendorous otherness – or divinity – of the Historical Buddha in 
Theravādin representation has often been attributed by modern scholars, 
monastics and layfolk alike to contamination from Mahāyāna. Yet, the 
paradigm of influence, relying as it does on clear distinction between 
contrasting entities, proves insufficient in explaining many common Pāli 
Buddhist contexts in which conceptions of and practitioner relations to 
the Buddha and Buddhahood manifest something other than perception 
of the Buddha within a strictly historical frame. To attend to this 
troubling interpretive situation we find terms such as “Tantric 
Theravada”, a recent scholarly invention seeking to describe widespread 
esoteric practices within Pāli Buddhist contexts.15 Viewed through the 
established interpretive frame, “Tantric Theravāda” appears to be an 
oxymoron explicable only through influence of one tradition on another.

--- PAGE 38 ---
9
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Seeking to privilege evidence in the place of modern categorisation, 
attentive to the historically inaccurate oppositional pairing of a monastic 
lineage (“Theravāda”) and a doctrinal orientation (“Mahāyāna”), and so to 
the porosity historically maintained between them – in short hearing the 
“concert” of Buddhism – the current critical approach posits the 
seemingly oxymoronic phrase as a provisional measure for naming 
“Theravāda” itself in certain contexts. Though the Southeast Asian 
region’s multifaceted religious past no doubt impacted Pāli Buddhist 
developments in Cambodia, the latter must also be understood in light of 
the cultural matrix shared by diverse monastic affiliations and doctrinal 
orientations – a matrix shared from their origins but also cultivated in 
their ongoing developments.
Lastly, any argument for the fundamentally apolitical nature of 
Theravāda has little traction with the material evidence explored here. If, 
for example, the typical spatial arrangements of Theravādin sites of 
worship in Cambodia suggest relatively open access to central icons and 
religious officiants, there is no doubt that associated religious practices 
were integrated into political power structures at and after Angkor. Here 
too essentialist definitions of Theravāda have been formulated through 
contrast with Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna constructs dominating Angkorian 
royal expression on the eve of Theravāda’s rise. This book argues that the 
manifest differences in relations between these different Buddhist 
constructs and political power are to be considered in conjunction with 
their otherwise common heritage characterised by porosity rather than 
opposition. On this political point, too, relations between Theravāda and 
its supposed Buddhist others in Cambodia are far more than sequential.
A last brief word on Pāli. By and large the use of Pāli in Southeast Asia 
can be said to mark Theravāda, with the term now taken in the complexity 
I have evoked above. On one basic level, it can be said that Pāli replaces 
Sanskrit in the wake of Angkor, with the earliest definitively dated Pāli 
composition in Cambodia dated 1309, arriving just in the wake of the last 
known dated Sanskrit inscription, dated 1307–8.16 Yet we cannot affirm 
that all Pāli usage in Cambodia denotes Theravāda in the rigidly 
established terms noted above; nor can we affirm that the presence of 
Sanskrit always attests to non-Theravādin practice; nor, lastly, can we 
affirm that the absence of Pāli attests to the absence of Theravāda. Further 
attention to hybrid usage in the region would strengthen current 
platforms for analyses of these suppositions.
Even more importantly, the contrast between Sanskrit and Pāli usage 
before and after Angkor is to be qualified in multiple ways. This is not a 
case of one language, associated with one religion, replacing another 
language associated with its own religion. In addition to the challenge 
that the Cambodian evidence brings to established notions of such

--- PAGE 39 ---
10
Ashley Thompson
one-to-one correspondence between a discrete religion and a discrete 
language, it is equally crucial to note that Pāli usage in early Theravādin 
Cambodia is in many ways unlike that of Sanskrit in the pre-Angkorian 
and Angkorian periods. Sanskrit was a language of epigraphic 
composition in ancient Cambodia. It was paired with the vernacular 
Khmer language, the two together participating in the consolidation of a 
division of compositional labour, which relegated poetic developments 
to Sanskrit and prosaic documentation to Khmer. Pāli, on the other 
hand, did not come to replace Sanskrit in its literary role in Cambodia. 
Shifts in the quantity and quality of epigraphic composition in the wake 
of Angkor included the rise of Khmer as the dominant medium of 
epigraphic expression. Rather than working predominantly side by side, 
the vernacular came to subsume the vocabulary and literary verve of the 
Indic languages. It is true that the few Pāli (and closely related Prakrit) 
epigraphs of pre-Angkorian Cambodia were, as noted above, citational, 
like those elsewhere in mainland Southeast Asia of the first millennium; 
and that Pāli usage in Cambodia from the early 14th century was, in 
contrast (but like Angkorian Sanskrit)  compositional. Still, Pāli 
composition did not take hold in Cambodia at this time, while Khmer-
language composition did. It is in this sense that it must be said that, 
after Angkor, Khmer, rather than Pāli, came to replace Sanskrit.
An inadequately studied dimension of these developments in 
multilinguality of particular pertinence to this volume is the way in which 
Khmer also came to function as a prestige language. Khmer’s replacement 
of Sanskrit as a language of literary composition in Middle Cambodia is 
one indicator of this prestige role; but it is most sharply apparent in the 
areas at the limits of Angkorian territorial reach, during and after the 
Angkorian period, where we find multiple declensions of bilingual 
epigraphy (for example, Khmer and Pāli; Thai and Khmer; Khmer and 
Sanskrit; Thai and Pāli), but also a notable wielding of the Khmer writing 
system decoupled from the Khmer language. The Khmer writing system 
had, from its origins in pre-Angkorian times, been used to render Sanskrit 
and Pāli; this is exemplary of usage across the “Sanskrit cosmopolis”, the 
vast region of Sanskritic culture stretching from present-day Afghanistan 
in the west to Bali in the east over the first millennium, where a range of 
more or less localised writing systems were used to render the 
cosmopolitan Sanskrit. When, however, the Khmer writing system came 
to render Thai, or, for example, Pāli in a bilingual Thai-Pāli inscription in 
which the Thai language portion was written in Thai script, we see a 
crucial shift. This participates in a new wave of localisation of Indic 
culture in the wake of the demise of the Sanskrit cosmopolis as vernacular 
languages rose to prominence across the vast region; the specific Khmer-
Thai phenomenon represents the ongoing cosmopolitisation of Khmer

--- PAGE 40 ---
11
Early Theravādin Cambodia
also at the heart of the formation of what would become Thai culture. For 
the localisation of a culture indicates its cosmopolitan status: in future 
Thailand, Khmer culture was adapted for specific purposes in the place of 
or as a form of venerable (Indic) culture even while composition also 
developed in both Pāli and Thai. The retention of Sanskritic spellings in 
Indic loanwords in Thai otherwise reflects the Khmer heritage, as do 
“Thai” mantras deploying Sanskrit, Khmer and Pāli.17 If evidence of the 
vernacular Khmer being put to work in critical interpretation of Sanskrit 
has been identified in the Angkorian period, by the 17th century we see 
that the consolidation of the written vernacular has contributed to a 
regional practice of creative translation involving Pāli and Khmer as well as 
neighbouring Thai.18 The place of Pāli and the Pāli canon in defining 
Theravāda in this region must be placed in this hierarchised linguistic 
matrix out of which nation states were ultimately formed.
In short, giving the label “Theravāda” to any material evidence of 
Buddhist practice that appears to bear any or even all of the above-named 
traits risks putting the cart before the horse. The cart we in this volume 
call, according to modern designation, “Theravāda”, is made of myriad 
component parts, none of which on its own renders the cart as a whole, 
and each of which in turn begs the question of its own singular 
unconditioned definition. Some will note that I am staging a rhetorical 
encounter here between the English adage on putting first what should 
logically come second, and the ancient Pāli “Simile of the Chariot”. The 
latter, a short text staging an episode in an ancient encounter between a 
Greek king and a Buddhist monk, speaks well to our conundrum in 
gauging the very existence of something presumed to exist. The textual 
encounter is one of many in which the Indo-Greek King Milinda 
questions the Buddhist monk Nāgasena on specific doctrinal points. This 
one, “The Simile of the Chariot”, concerns Buddhist conceptions of 
personhood. The text challenges any crude conceptual distinction 
between material object and concept: an object, like a human subject and 
like a name, is a construct. Following a bold opening bid in which the 
monk Nāgasena appears to affirm that he himself is nothing but a name, 
he compares the existence of his person to that of a chariot as a means of 
bringing the king to reach an understanding of this particular area of 
Buddhist theorisation of ontology:
“If you, sire, came by chariot, show me the chariot. Is the 
pole the chariot, sire?” 
“O no, revered sir.”
“Is the axle the chariot?” 
“O no, revered sir.”

--- PAGE 41 ---
12
Ashley Thompson
“Are the wheels the chariot?”
“O no, revered sir.”
“Is the body of the chariot the chariot ... is the flag-staff of 
the chariot the chariot ... is the yoke the chariot … are the 
reins the chariot ... is the goad the chariot?” 
“O no, revered sir.”
“But then, sire, is the chariot the pole, the axle, the wheels, 
the body of the chariot, the flag-staff of the chariot, the 
yoke, the reins, the goad?” 
“O no, revered sir.”
“But then, sire, is there a chariot apart from the pole, the 
axle, the wheels, the body of the chariot, the flag-staff of the 
chariot, the yoke, the reins, the goad?” 
“O no, revered sir.”
“Though I, sire, am asking you repeatedly, I do not see the 
chariot. Chariot is only a sound, sire. For what here is the 
chariot? You, sire, are speaking an untruth, a lying word. 
There is no chariot. You, sire, are the chief rājah in the whole 
of India. Of whom are you afraid that you speak a lie?” [...] 
Then King Milinda spoke thus to the venerable Nāgasena: 
“I, revered Nāgasena, am not telling a lie, for it is because of 
the pole, because of the axle, the wheels, the body of a 
chariot, the flag-staff of a chariot, the yoke, the reins, and 
because of the goad that ‘chariot’ exists as a denotation, 
appellation, designation, as a current usage, as a name.”
“It is well; you, sire, understand a chariot. Even so is it for 
me, sire, because of the hair of the head and because of the 
hair of the body … and because of the brain in the head and 
because of material shape and feeling and perception and the 
habitual tendencies and consciousness [i.e. the five 
khandhā] that ‘Nāgasena’ exists as a denotation, appellation, 
designation, as a current usage, merely as a name. But 
according to the highest meaning19 the person is not got at 
here. This, sire, was spoken by the nun Vajīra face to face 
with the Lord: 
Just as when the parts are rightly set 
The word ‘chariot’ is spoken,

--- PAGE 42 ---
13
Early Theravādin Cambodia
So when there are the khandhā
It is the convention to say ‘being’.”20
To turn the “Simile of the Chariot” to our ends: rather than simply being 
ontologically, it – Theravāda – is “because of” its constituent elements. 
On account of all these things, it, Theravāda, “exists as a denotation, 
appellation, designation, as a current usage, merely as a name” – 
“Theravāda”. In naming something “Theravāda”, we must probe its 
constituent parts and the ways these come together while nonetheless 
maintaining a vision of the real factitiousness of the construction at hand. 
In the rest of the present Introduction, I use the term “Theravāda” in 
this conventional manner highlighted by the venerable Nāgasena. Unless 
otherwise noted, the term is taken to designate a form of Buddhist 
practice including expression in Pāli and vernacular Southeast Asian 
languages but not necessarily to the exclusion of Sanskrit; a privileging of 
reference to the Historical Buddha but not to the exclusion of elaborate 
conceptions of Buddhahood and esoteric developments; and communal 
physical and social structures participating variously in the political 
management of territory and human resources.
“CAMBODIA”
The definition of the thing we call “Cambodia” is no less problematic. As 
with Theravāda, the problem cannot be reduced to anachronistic usage. 
The English toponym “Cambodia” derives from kamvuja, “born of” (ja/
jā) a mythical ancestor named “Kamvu”. The term appears in compounds 
with territorial designations in ancient Khmer and Sanskrit epigraphy to 
designate the successive geo-political entities preceding today’s 
Cambodian nation state and dominated by those “born of Kamvu” – the 
Khmer(-speaking) people. From this point of view, the term fits 
“Cambodia” of any time from Angkor on. The linguistic equivalence 
masks, however, important territorial differences. While modern 
Cambodia is clearly demarcated in territorial terms, “early Theravādin 
Cambodia” is not, and the one does not correspond to the other.
In fact, there is a sort of vanishing point where Theravāda and 
Cambodia meet, highlighting the entanglement of politics and religion in 
this space and time. The northern and western land borders of pre-
Theravādin Cambodia – assuming there is one to speak of, an issue that 
will be addressed below – can be defined precisely through the 
identification of Theravāda as a dominant feature in what is now 
Thailand. Pāli Buddhist culture(s) stood for centuries, it would seem, as a 
sort of bulwark against “Cambodia”, as if the former constituted a 
counterbalance to the latter even without anchoring in a strong,

--- PAGE 43 ---
14
Ashley Thompson
structured singular political entity mirroring that of Angkor. The nature 
of exchange and, in an increasingly intensive manner from at least the 
tenth century, veritable patchworked overlap between the Buddhist 
cultures of what is now Central and Northeastern Thailand and 
Angkorian culture is a point of debate raised variously in the present 
volume. A crucial question concerns at what historical moment Khmer 
speakers came to inhabit different parts of these regions, and to what 
degree they, along with related Mon speakers, practiced Pāli-based 
Buddhisms to the exclusion of the types of Sanskritic Brahmanic and 
Buddhist cults prevalent in Angkorian culture. As Khmer speakers spread 
across religious borderlands, their presence served to at once share and 
distinguish between cultures. As noted above, the Khmer language also 
came to be used as a prestige language by those for whom Khmer was not 
the mother tongue. When, in these overlapping or border regions, we see 
Khmer language and/or script paired with Pāli, or with Mon or Thai, we 
cannot be sure what sort of local usage it represents beyond that to which 
it manifestly attests: elite written culture referencing Angkor beyond the 
capital or, at times, as part of Angkor the empire. This begs questions of 
the presumed discrete nature of ethno-linguistic identity and the mapping 
of these onto territory characterising modern historiography. How can we 
envisage premodern “Khmer-Thai” situations without having recourse to 
the modern prism by which nations appear pre-destined as such by the 
apparent natural correlation between ethno-linguistic identity and 
territorial borders? And this question leads to another: Whether or not 
Angkorian expansion across religious borders from the tenth century 
should be considered by any measure a colonisation? And this question 
leads to yet another at the heart of the present volume: Whether 
Theravādin expansion from the late Angkorian period, but especially 
from the 13th century, should itself be considered a sort of cultural 
occupation or colonisation of Cambodia, and ultimately conceived in 
relation to occupations or colonisations of a political order?
Two scholarly œuvre are particularly pertinent in exploring these 
questions. The first is that of art historian Hiram Woodward, whom I will 
more or less let speak for himself in this volume’s second chapter, which, 
along with its extensive bibliography, conveys the pre-13th-century 
evidence in this regard. Here I will briefly discuss historian Michael 
Vickery’s work focused on the textual evidence for the early post-
Angkorian period, from either side of today’s Thai–Cambodian border. 
Through meticulous comparative analyses of epigraphic and chronicular 
evidence, Vickery ultimately understood the two areas, of the Angkor 
plain on the one hand, and, on the other hand, the central Chao Phraya 
basin stretching into Northeast Thailand, from the 13th century, to be 
characterised by similar ethno-linguistic cultures, with relations evolving

--- PAGE 44 ---
15
Early Theravādin Cambodia
through mutual assimilation rather than conquest and subordination.21 
With this, Vickery challenges the dominant historiography anchored in 
modern nation states and pitting ethnic Tai against ethnic Khmer. In his 
words, the relations between Ayutthaya, an early “Siamese” capital and 
precursor to modern Bangkok, and Cambodia, so often anachronistically 
described in terms of international war, become “conflict between rival 
dynasties for control of mutual borderlands, and … of what both 
considered to be their old, traditional capital” – Angkor.22 I insist on the 
qualification of Ayutthaya as “Siamese” rather than “Tai” or “Thai” with 
reference also to Vickery’s interrogations of scholarly suppositions that 
the term syām could have initially referenced Mon speakers, or peoples 
and cultures of the Chao Phraya basin irrespective of ethno-linguistic 
identity, which is to say a mixture of Mon-Khmer and Tai groups drawing 
substantially on the religious and political heritage of Angkor.23
In the first instance, Vickery’s formulation reveals the distorting prism 
by which the historical development of “Cambodia” and “Thailand” or 
“Siam” have been conceived. Just as European nation states were drawing 
national borders between “Cambodia” and “Siam”, so were historians 
tracking the origins and historical limits of these same states, with the one 
process feeding the other in a mutually reproducing loop. The racial 
categorisation figuring in this conjoined political and academic 
demarcation of the region is nowhere more evident than in the art 
historical field, where arts are classified according to national styles 
identified with the physical features of the “races” thought to have 
inhabited the lands in question.24 The racial categorisation brings with it, 
of course, attribution of value-bearing characteristics to whole peoples; 
this serves to establish moral hierarchies between the various so-defined 
groups, which in the contexts in question are distinctly anchored in value 
judgements of religious practices, categorised as they are in the art-
historically bound racialising process. The art becomes more than the 
embodiment of the physical traits of “Khmer” or “Thai”, but also a 
window into the moral rectitude, intellectual capacity and creative flair of 
these so-defined peoples. In our particular early post-Angkorian case 
study, Cambodian art is read as attesting to decadence, while Thai art 
attests to the promise of a dynamic people coalescing into an independent 
Buddhist state. In the process, originating in and then perpetuated well 
beyond the colonial period proper, Southeast Asian nations were drawn in 
the image of modern Europe. Shattering this lens, Vickery pushes us to see 
“Cambodia” and “Thailand” together, variously, as one and yet not the 
same, from the end of Angkor.
Angkor plays a crucial and complex role in the overlaid historical and 
historiographical processes under our lens here. The rival regional powers 
– Southeast Asian and/or European – all laid claim to the ancient capital

--- PAGE 45 ---
16
Ashley Thompson
in assimilated geographic and symbolic terms. As the fraught tracing of 
national borders between the French and the Siamese in the late 19th to 
early 20th centuries centred around possession of Angkor, so were 
premodern relations to Angkor interpreted as integral to a fraught tracing 
of borders between the “Thais” and the “Cambodians” as the post-
Angkorian period evolved.
The rhetorical frame that George Cœdès constructs around his 
impactful 1958 essay on the watershed of the 13th century in Southeast 
Asia is fascinating for the nuance it adds to my rapid characterisation here. 
In a sort of meditative, even despondent, mood, Cœdès proposes an 
analogy between his times – post-World War II which saw the dismantling 
of the European colonial enterprise in Southeast Asia – and 13th-century 
Southeast Asia with its own narratives of (post-)colonisation. 
Anticipating readerly reactions to his dramatic yet banal designation of 
this historical moment in Southeast Asia as a “turning point”, Cœdès 
justifies the characterisation in personal, emotive terms: “From a period in 
which people have the impression there is no reason why anything would 
change (impression that my generation had at the beginning of this 
century) there succeeds a period where everything is put into question, 
where tomorrows are unforeseeable, and where one hears everywhere 
moaning about ‘our filthy times’.”25 This opening bid is mirrored in the 
last paragraph of the essay, where Cœdès reiterates the parallel between 
the two “decadent” historical periods. The summary leading up to this 
finale addressed to “amateurs of comparisons between past and present”,26 
notes the “the sterilisation of art for which Singhalese [i.e. Theravāda] 
Buddhism, hostile to personality cults and hardly favorable to the 
flourishing of the plastic arts, shoulders a good deal of responsibility”.27 
Cœdes’ ambivalence with regards to Theravādin art is hardly obscured by 
the following rapid acknowledgment that “on the ruins of Khmer and 
Burmese art of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, a new art is born, the 
Siamese art of Sukhothai”.28 For, in the next discreetly damning sequence, 
we find our author pondering to what extent those people living through 
the change are conscious of its momentousness. On this point, he cites the 
retrospective epigraphic account of a 14th-century Sukhothai king: “From 
that year on [1218 CE or the death of Angkor’s last great king, 
Jayavarman VII], the nobles, the dignitaries, the brahmans and the rich 
merchants no longer held the highest place in society; from that moment 
on, astrologers and doctors also lost their prestige; from that moment on 
they were no longer valued or respected”.29 Initially, Cœdès recounts, he 
understood the 14th-century Tai king in question to be lamenting the loss 
of the aristocratic Indic world embodied by Angkor; on further reflection 
on this king’s outlook, however, he reinterprets this passage as a 
celebratory expression of satisfaction in the Tai establishment of

--- PAGE 46 ---
17
Early Theravādin Cambodia
independence from that very world. The replacement of the “refined 
aristocracy, guardians of Sanskrit culture” by a “decadence” caused by the 
“adoption of Indian civilisation by a growing number of indigenous 
people who impregnated it little by little with their own particular 
tendencies”30 is clearly not to Cœdès’ liking. That Cœdès’ ambivalence is 
so palpable here, and that the moral judgements regarding cultural 
developments after Angkor are so profoundly felt, can only be 
attributable to his own “parallel” experience of displacement at the advent 
of a new era.
Vickery’s work reminds us, however, that Angkor’s potentiality far 
exceeds any modern European model. Like the Ganges, or Mount Meru of 
Indic geographies, Angkor can be transposed. Vickery highlights research 
demonstrating that Sukhothai, further north, in the 13th century, was 
spatially modelled after Angkor; while Ayutthaya in the Chao Phraya 
basin, appearing in Chinese annals from the late 13th century, was, by the 
14th century, Angkor’s successor state.31 Sukhothai and Ayutthaya 
comprise two iterations of a single phenomenon in which the 
reproduction of Angkor participates in the production of a new polity. 
Modern historiography variously conceives of both as cradles of modern 
Thailand. This might be considered the same phenomenon by which 
Theravādin Cambodia was born. Note, for example, that Srei Santhor, a 
region hosting Cambodian royalty in the early Cambodian Middle Period, 
derives its name from the ancient name for Angkor, Yaśodharapura.32 Or 
that the foundation legend of the enduring Middle Period capital, Phnom 
Penh, recounts the discovery of a four-faced statue found floating 
downstream from the north in a likely reference to Angkorian 
iconographies.33 Material remains – textual, sculptural and architectural 
– demonstrate all of these sites to have been Theravādin, that is they are 
the cores of polities in which sovereign power and territorial dominion 
were predominantly developed through Theravādin Buddhist expression. 
This apparently paradoxical situation in which Theravādin states can be 
said – if somewhat provocatively in some circles – to have emerged out of 
non-Theravādin Angkor has drawn attention to the symbolic power of 
Angkor reigning in the region long after the demise of its political might. 
Yet the nature of this symbolic power shown up by these exemplary 
polities cannot be mapped onto real, demarcated territorial possession, on 
the model of the bordered nation state. Nor is it limited to a discrete 
integration of Angkorian Brahmanic ritual at courts on either side of an 
imagined border – another established interpretation of the place of 
Angkor following the shift of the capital at Angkor from the Angkorian 
plain implicitly challenged by Vickery’s work. The assimilated ethno-
linguistic cultures emphasised by Vickery precede the post-Angkorian 
period, and pervade it.

--- PAGE 47 ---
18
Ashley Thompson
The unique and multifaceted role of Angkor also speaks to the power 
of Theravāda and its others in the region. To be sure, Marxist historian 
Vickery was little concerned with the inner workings, meanings and power 
of religion itself. His interpretation of the historical evidence was oriented 
instead to pinning down the historical facts attesting to “ethno-linguistic 
cultures”. Yet, his formulations go some way to mitigating also against the 
stark contrast established in the scholarly literature between Theravāda 
and Mahāyāna and/or Brahmanism as both religious practice and political 
operator in the region; for the particular vision articulated by Vickery of 
Ayutthaya – if not also Sukhothai – as successor to Angkor also begs 
interrogation of the stark contrast found in modern historiography 
between Brahmanic/Mahāyānist Angkorian and Theravādin post-
Angkorian Cambodia and Siam. Despite himself, then, Vickery makes an 
important contribution to understandings of the workings of religion: in 
addition to understanding the differences between the groupings 
emphasised in modern scholarship, in following Vickery’s lead, we need 
now to examine more closely the common ground – both physical and 
metaphysical – shared by Mon-, Khmer- and then Thai-speaking 
practitioners of this or that religion.
The contributions to this volume show that, beyond any shadow of 
doubt, Angkor must be understood as an organising principle of evolving 
regional Theravādin practice. Much of the material evidence explored – 
sculpture, architecture, ceramics, texts – attests to the travel of practices, 
concepts and ideologies across the region. As a number of chapters 
demonstrate, Angkor-the-site functioned as a veritable reference point 
for mainland Theravādin practices during and after Angkor-the-empire. 
In such, it is, along with Sri Lanka or the Pāli canon, a source of 
mainland Theravāda – which is also to say that Theravāda after Angkor 
also bears witness to Angkor. Note however that the denomination of 
“kambujā” (a variant of kamvujā) in 13th- to 16th-century devotional 
epigraphic texts, at Angkor and beyond, suggests a geo-cultural 
consciousness associated with but not limited to Angkor proper – in 
temporal or territorial terms – to have been embedded in and reproduced 
by Theravādin practice. The quintessential example of this lies in 
16th-century texts inscribed by royalty on the walls of the 12th-century 
Vaishnavite temple of Angkor Wat. The royals record their pious 
Buddhist works at the temple, including the restoration of the temple 
itself, aimed at restoring kambujā to its ancient glory.34 In a text inscribed 
on a temple on the eastern outskirts of the ancient capital, a man is said 
to have ordained before travelling to study at Angkor, where he became a 
scholarly court priest. The epigraph symbolically juxtaposes a series of 
sacred sites consecrated “in the kingdom of Cambodia” (kamvujārāsdhr) 
with the many stūpa which the prototypical Buddhist monarch Aśoka is

--- PAGE 48 ---
19
Early Theravādin Cambodia
said to have founded across India.35 Another set of epigraphs in Khmer 
but seemingly written by Thai speakers from Ayutthaya recount a 
16th-century pilgrimage to Angkor and the southerly royal site of 
Oudong.36 Likewise here, restoration of statues is posited as a powerful, 
pious Buddhist act aiming to ensure the stability of the “country of 
kambujā” (kambūjades, in K. 465 and K. 285). Angkor was not perceived 
as co-terminus with kambujā, but can be said to have acted as a draw in 
defining it; at the same time, that is in the same devotional actions of 
travellers, kambujā was an integral part of an evolving regional 
Theravādin world. 
I am suggesting here that the hermeneutic implications of a body of 
postcolonial research have not been fully digested. The maṇḍala model 
of Southeast Asian statehood developed variously by Stanley Tambiah 
and O. W. Wolters, and which took particular hold in the wake of 
Thongchai Winichakul’s Siam Mapped, has certainly shifted 
understandings of classical Southeast Asian states as comprising shifting 
centres and flexible borders radiating out through expanding and 
contracting movements.37 This shift in scholarly vision seems, however, 
to reach its limits in the historiography of Cambodia from the 13th 
century, as if the classical maṇḍala states were then singularly replaced 
with bordered nation states. Interestingly, Thai historiography does not 
singularly follow this trajectory, as the successors of the “great maṇḍala” 
exemplified by Angkor are often today indeed seen in the maṇḍala of 
post-12th-century future Siam.38 This does not however stop Thai 
historiography from stumbling into the trap of by and large seeing 
Cambodia starkly opposed to (future) Thailand from this moment on. 
Further attention to the perpetuation of the maṇḍala model, along with 
full acknowledgement of the implications of Vickery’s insistence that we 
shed the organisational principle of historiographies pitting Thais against 
Cambodians, opens new interpretive horizons. In this context, what shall 
we make of the established narrative by which Thailand, on the one 
hand, is understood to have been born in the 13th century, beginning 
then centuries of more or less continuous expansion, while, on the other 
hand, Angkor is said to have reached its demise and Cambodia to have 
begun, at the same time, to contract. What, for example, is keeping us 
from seeing, from the 13th century, a certain expansion of Angkor? The 
question is a provocation, of course. But one which pushes us to see the 
continued distortions of our viewing lens crafted in and for the 
consolidation of the modern nation state with its complex investment in 
notions of discrete religions. An expanding Angkor of this order is 
accomplished not through expansion out from a singularly powerful 
centre on the model of empire, but rather through the otherwise 
expansive mode of operation of the maṇḍala: replication.

--- PAGE 49 ---
20
Ashley Thompson
PERIODISATION
The search for beginnings heralding this volume is as much temporal as it 
is geographical. Identifying the first signs of Theravāda in Cambodia has 
long presumed not only that the demarcation of Theravāda and 
Cambodia are themselves self-evident, but also that the absence or 
presence of Theravāda itself has defined Cambodia in distinct historical 
periods. As I have emphasised above, however, the more we attend to 
research in this field, the more we are brought to question the validity of 
the categories upon which we seek to craft our historical narrative.
The purportedly “first Pāli inscription in Cambodia”, K. 754 
documented in the eponymous 1937 article by Cœdès, has long been 
taken as a marker for a period divide between Ancient and Middle 
Cambodia, according to one of the many appellations of the latter which I 
will discuss briefly below.39 Dated 1309, the bilingual Pāli-Khmer 
inscription purportedly from Kok Svay Cek to the west of Central Angkor 
certainly indicates important politico-cultural change otherwise attested 
in the material record. This is the earliest Pāli epigraph to have been found 
in the Angkor region that can be positively and precisely dated. For the 
comparable graphics, another Pāli epigraph, K. 501, found further to the 
west of the core capital, is likely to date from around the late 13th to early 
14th centuries; it is in this same area that, in 1267, a Buddha image was 
consecrated as kamrateṅ jagat śrisugatamāravijita.40 Pre-Angkorian 
materials often taken to demonstrate Theravādin presence within the 
Khmer realm prior to the expansion of Angkorian reach are ambiguous in 
this regard. Peter Skilling has debunked previous interpretation of the 
canonical extract inscribed in pre-Angkorian writing on a pre-Angkorian 
Buddha image from Tuol Preah Theat in Cambodian’s southwestern 
Kompong Speu province as attesting to Theravāda: the inscription is in a 
mixed or Sanskritic Pāli rather than the canonical idiom of Theravāda as 
has been previously understood.41 This refinement of our understandings 
of linguistic evidence, in conjunction with our increasingly refined 
understandings of relations maintaining between monastic lineage and 
doctrinal orientation in premodern contexts, also destabilises established 
assumptions that the stylistic and iconographic resemblances between 
Dvāravatī and pre-Angkorian Buddha images such as this one from Tuol 
Preah Theat necessarily attested to sectarian affiliation. The presence of 
Dvāravatī-style sīmā (Buddhist boundary stones) in the Kulen mountains 
on the northern edge of the Angkor plain, along with what may be 
contemporaneous Buddhist sculpture, may affirm a pre-Angkorian Mon 
Theravādin presence in this site, which would become the cradle of 
Angkorian civilisation. These sculpted stones are common in Dvāravatī 
contexts north of Angkor in what is now Thailand.42 But in the absence of

--- PAGE 50 ---
21
Early Theravādin Cambodia
substantial archaeological research, we cannot affirm the nature or extent 
of the beliefs and practices with which they would have been associated. 
In short, the paucity of Pāli epigraphy prior to the 13th and 14th centuries 
mirroring that of the sort of sculptural and architectural evidence 
variously characterising Theravādin production elsewhere in the mainland 
over the first millennium – stūpa, votive tablets, sculpted wheels of the 
Law, sīmā – speaks volumes. In such, research in the wake of Cœdès’ 
naming of the 13th century as a “turning point” in Southeast Asian 
history has largely served to confirm his dramatic stance.
We seek here however to temper such a reading. Recent research does 
affirm that the steady, intensive non-Theravādin architectural, sculptural 
and epigraphic production characterising the Angkorian state was not 
simply replaced by Theravādin production from the 14th century; by the 
end of the 13th century, material production in stone of any order had 
indeed slowed significantly. Yet, the art and archaeological evidence sheds 
light on transitional processes at hand, combining at once change and 
gradual evolution in and out of the multiple shared heritages developing 
at this time.
The “first [definitively dated] Pāli inscription in Cambodia” gives us 
some sense of these processes. K. 754 is in fact a bilingual inscription on 
the Angkorian model of royal text eulogising a king and recording 
cadastral organisation made in the name of religion. It is, like K. 501, an 
original composition. These texts are a far cry from the extracts of 
canonical scriptures or commentarial references characterising Pāli 
epigraphy in first-millenium mainland Buddhist areas. In both form and 
content K. 754 conveys the very particular parameters of this first firm 
written evidence of Theravāda at Angkor. Territory once under the 
authority of a liṅga is placed, now by the text and in the ritual acts it 
records, under the authority of a Buddha image who is named, in good 
Angkorian fashion, after the king. This naming, however, happens only in 
the Khmer portion of the text, where the king’s name appears in Sanskrit 
– not Pāli. Otherwise quite similar to the Khmer, the Pāli portion of the 
epigraph simply omits this detail. Other proper names which do appear, 
in Pāli, in the Pāli portion of the epigraph, appear in Sanskrit in the 
Khmer portion. The text demonstrates, thus, a critically selective use of 
Pāli to operate and document territorial conversion to Theravāda in the 
Angkor plain on the model, nonetheless, of established Angkorian 
practice.
K.501 is in Pāli verse, and comes from a site, further to the west, Prasat 
Kralanh, which also bears an earlier tenth-century Sanskrit Buddhist 
inscription. K. 501 also recounts conversion to Buddhism but of a 
“favourite” of the king; though this text does not, like K. 754, explicitly 
enumerate borders of the territory associated with the new religious

--- PAGE 51 ---
22
Ashley Thompson
1.1

--- PAGE 52 ---
23
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Fig 1.1	 Seated Buddhist figure 
holding inscribed tablet, from 
Preah Khan of Kompong 
Svay, Preah Vihear province, 
Cambodia. Sandstone. Mid 
13th to early 14th centuries. 
Height: 147 cm; width:  
93 cm; thickness: 53.5 cm. 
National Museum of 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh. 
Inventory Number: Ka. 1697. 
Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.
Fig. 1.2	 Profile of Ka. 1697 featured in 
Fig. 1.1. Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.
Fig. 1.3	 Back of Ka. 1697 featured in 
Fig. 1.1. Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.
construction and its Buddha image, it does record the installation of a 
Buddha image by the king’s “favourite” and celebrates his offering of 
human and land resources to the service of the Buddhist foundation.
K. 241, from Prasat Ta An and dated 1267, likewise commemorates 
the installation of a new Buddha image at an older Buddhist site dating to 
the tenth century. Though this text is not a Pāli composition, in the name 
of the Buddha image, kamrateṅ jagat śrisugatamāravijita, it attests to a 
like process of conversion by which established Angkorian constructs are 
harnessed to Theravādin ones such that the Buddha in his legendary 
Victory over Māra (śrisugatamāravijita) takes the divine place of the 
Angkorian “Lord of the World” (kamrateṅ jagat). In each of these cases 
statuary gave body to the evolution at hand.
This concentration of early Theravādin evidence to the west of Central 
Angkor is notable also in light of an enigma woven into the verse text of 
K. 501 from Prasat Kralanh. The donor of the new Buddhist foundation 
is said to have pronounced it as such: “Sojourn of those who destroy 
caimans, the river […]; making people live with these, the Buddha is 
turned to the west.”43
Divine images, it should be noted, are nearly systematically erected 
facing east in Cambodian contexts. The westerly facing Buddha evoked in 
K. 501 makes a strong statement, akin to that made by the most notable 
exception to the Angkorian rule, Angkor Wat temple, which faces west 
1.2
1.3

--- PAGE 53 ---
24
Ashley Thompson
and whose central image would have done so as well. To the west of Prasat 
Kralanh lies, indeed, a river. In exceptionally facing west, the Buddha 
evoked at Prasat Kralanh would have effectively turned its back to Angkor 
and turned its gaze to the Theravādin west of what we now call Thailand. 
A solution to the enigma that remains to this day may lie in further 
research in this area to the west of Central Angkor.
Early Pāli inscriptions from Angkor are otherwise preceded by a body 
of Pāli written in Khmer script, at times in conjunction with a Khmer-
language text, documented within the outer reaches of ancient Angkorian 
maṇḍala. These can be canonical or extra-canonical extracts, or texts 
praising and documenting Buddhist foundations with or without 
cadastral implications. Each case requires textual and contextual analysis 
to determine, however, if it reflects extension of Angkorian territorial and 
associated politico-cultural dominion, extra-Angkorian practice by Khmer 
speakers inhabiting areas now in Thailand, or an appeal to the prestige of 
Khmer.44 
Crucially, our “first” (post-)Angkorian Pāli inscriptions appear in the 
same liminal period as a bilingual Sanskrit-Khmer Buddhist epigraph 
whose doctrinal orientation remains ambiguous. This text, inventoried as 
K. 888, is, unusually, engraved in convex lettering on an unusual 
monolithic sculpture which, I will argue, represents in a fabulously 
condensed manner the multiple issues at play in defining “early 
Theravādin Cambodia”.
The sculpture, inventoried as Ka. 1697 and held by the National 
Museum of Cambodia, comprises a seated figure holding aloft a stone 
tablet (Figs. 1.1–1.3).45 The engraved text, on the tablet which may 
represent a leporello manuscript, has until recently been understood to be 
in Pāli. However, in a 2018 study, Skilling has shown the text to be a 
Sanskrit liturgical verse followed by a phrase in Khmer.46 The epigraph is 
not dated. Linguist Saveros Pou has, however, highlighted the similarity of 
the script to that of K. 754, and suggested a late 13th- to 14th-century 
attribution.47 As we know, though Pāli Buddhism was expanding under 
elite patronage at this time, Sanskrit remained in use as a language of 
composition in Shaivite contexts into at least the third decade of the 14th 
century. Skilling has demonstrated that the Buddhist Sanskrit text, K. 888, 
is not a case of enduring Sanskritic usage within Khmer or Pāli 
composition; while much of the text’s vocabulary is shared by Pāli and 
Sanskrit, the inflections are distinctly Sanskrit, making this a Sanskrit 
composition. Or, perhaps more accurately, it is a citation of Sanskrit verse 
– on the order of those, predominantly in Pāli, characterising Buddhist 
contexts widespread in mainland Southeast Asia beyond Cambodia in the 
first millennium of the Common Era. Unlike K. 754 – which documents 
an act of territorial conversion from Shaivite to Theravādin authority at a

--- PAGE 54 ---
25
Early Theravādin Cambodia
relatively minor Angkorian site, or K. 241 and K. 501, which also come 
from minor sites – K. 888  was found at a vast Buddhist temple complex, 
Preah Khan in Kompong Svay, some 100 kilometres east of Angkor. 
Ongoing research is demonstrating this Preah Khan complex to have been 
a crucible for Buddhist practice in Cambodia from the late tenth to early 
eleventh centuries for centuries to come, thus bridging what are so often 
thought to be two monolithic, distinct historical periods – the Angkorian 
and the post-Angkorian.48 
Skilling has demonstrated that K. 888 is a verse of homage to the 
“Three Jewels” (the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha or Buddhist 
Order) associated with the ancient Indian poet Mātṛceṭa (c. fourth 
century). Tracking multiple iterations of the verse, from a fourth-century 
poem to contemporary Nepalese liturgy in passing by the Cambodian 
appearance in question, Skilling explores the development of pan-Asian 
intertextuality through movement of people, development of monastic 
lineages, ritual performance, teaching, etc., ultimately suggesting the verse 
represents “common Buddhist property”.49 Different modalities of the 
formula feature in this 13th- to 14th-century Cambodian context and in 
modern Thai and Cambodian contexts. This situation shows a shared 
reference point for a wide range of practices, which in scholarly circles 
have typically been labelled “Mahāyāna” on the one hand and 
“Theravāda” on the other; these include veneration of the Three Jewels; 
the notion of refuge offered by one or all of these three; and an aspiration 
to awakening. Instead of isolating discrete formulas within discrete 
Buddhist schools, Skilling explores how the fundamentals of the verse take 
on their own lives within disparate contexts.
The sculpture incorporating K. 888 is also ambiguous. Published 
dating of the piece to the late 13th to 14th centuries is implicitly queried 
by Skilling – as if scholars had long been led by its presumed Theravādin 
nature, in an example of the circular reasoning mentioned in opening by 
which Theravādin traits (here, mistakenly attributed to Pāli usage) are 
taken to place materials as being from the late 13th century, which date is 
then used to confirm said materials as Theravādin. Notably, Skilling 
explicitly addresses neither the paleographic dating of K. 888 to some 100 
years after the reign of Jayavarman VII, nor art historians’ consistent 
attribution of the sculpture to this same period, and stops short of 
advancing any date range for the text himself.50 He evokes other material 
considerations to emphasise instead an affiliation with the Jayavarman VII 
period, in the late 12th to early 13th centuries, that is at rather than after 
the height of Angkor. This is indeed the dating adopted by the National 
Museum of Cambodia where the sculpture is currently displayed. Skilling 
makes two observations in this regard. First, the piece shares features with 
another unusual sculpture found in the same area of the vast Preah Khan

--- PAGE 55 ---
26
Ashley Thompson
site, Ka. 1848, a fragmented triad of the nāga-protected Buddha-
Prajñāpāramitā(-Lokeśvara) set on a high pedestal encompassing a fourth 
figure in high relief; this piece has itself been dated on iconographic and 
stylistic bases to the late 12th century (Fig. 1.4).51 Second, viewed in 
profile, the tablet-bearing statue distinctly resembles the famous presumed 
portraits of King Jayavarman VII, one of which was found in the same 
temple site of Preah Khan of Kompong Svay (see Fig. 1.2).52 This is to say 
that, if the statue’s morphology, along with the modelling of the facial 
features, associate the unusual tablet-bearing figure with the Bayon-period 
style, or its wake, the specific morphology of the torso makes it one in a 
series of variations on one of the very hallmarks of the Bayon style, the 
Jayavarman VII portrait type (Figs. 1.5–1.7). In this context, let me recall 
that the introduction of a certain brand of realism in the art of the Bayon 
period brings new dimensions to interpretation of style in ancient 
Cambodian art: with Jayavarman VII, the period style can be 
indistinguishable from the relatively naturalistic representation of the king 
himself.53 The similarity of the Ka. 1697 figure with the Bayon-period 
statue-portrait cannot be taken simply to show the former to be a portrait 
of Jayavarman VII or even to date to his reign. In general terms, 
Woodward has kindly reminded me in discussing the present 
Introduction, portraiture rarely escapes style. But my point here is not 
that portraiture in our context is so dominated by period style that it 
melds with it; but rather that, with the Bayon style, we may be seeing 
something of an inversion of the general art historical rule insofar as the 
portrait of the king, or his physical traits, can appear to have themselves 
underpinned the development of the style under his reign. The king’s 
features, like the period style, could inspire enduring sculptural practice as 
well as innovating imitation after the fact.
These basic observations give rise to a series of apparent contradictions 
in the sculptural work, ultimately leading to key questions concerning the 
identification of the figure, as well as that of the possible lineage affiliation 
and/or doctrinal orientations of the sculpture-cum-text. Skilling asks a 
fundamental question that echoes those I raised many years ago in the 
above-cited exploration of style and realism in the art of the Bayon 
period, also with reference to Ka. 1697’s sister sculpture, Ka. 1848: Are 
we looking at a monk, or a king, an ascetic, a brahmin or a lay devotee? 
The morphological allusion to the Jayavarman VII portrait in Ka. 1697 
noted above could suggest a royal identification; yet the figure’s drapery 
suggests a monastic figure. The drapery on Ka. 1697 is nearly identical to 
that of the Buddha figure at the centre of the triad of the top register of 
Ka. 1848. This monastic dress, with right shoulder bared and a folded 
robe over the left shoulder, is in fact “characteristic of … Thai, Lao and 
Khmer Buddhism”; Skilling goes even further to suggest that it may not 
Fig. 1.4	 Seated adorant with uṣṇīṣa 
supporting a Buddhist Triad, 
from Preah Khan of 
Kompong Svay. Late 12th to 
13th century. Sandstone. 
Height: 84 cm; width: 48 
cm; thickness: 19 cm. 
National Museum of 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh. 
Inventory number: Ka. 1848. 
Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.

--- PAGE 56 ---
27
Early Theravādin Cambodia
1.4

--- PAGE 57 ---
28
Ashley Thompson
be “characteristic of early Indian Buddhist art or of non-Theravāda 
fraternities”.54 This is an area requiring further research. In particular, 
there is no sustained critical study of monastic drapery in Cambodian 
sculptural form attentive to François Bizot’s extensive textual and 
ethnographic research on Southeast Asian Theravādin monastic dress, 
which might refine arguments regarding Theravādin identification.55 
Bizot has explored how the different elements of Southeast Asian 
monastic dress, along with different modes of adjusting the dress, reflect 
fundamental differences in practices defining distinct monastic groups. 
Historically, choices in modes of appearance are anchored in questions 
concerning exposure of the monastic body to the lay world, and include 
distinctions between forest- and village-based monks, and modes of 
subsistence ranging from autonomous forest living to wholesale 
dependence on alms-collecting social networks. Through textual analyses 
and observation of contemporary practices, Bizot seeks to link specific 
modes of dress to distinct origins in specific Sri Lankan or Mon groups. 
Further research in this area with a sustained focus on sculptural 
representation could yield important historical data. Of import also for 
our consideration here is the resemblance of the monastic drapery to that 
of the Jayavarman VII portrait-statue in the National Museum of 
Cambodia: though there is no folded robe over the portrait’s left 
shoulder, the upper-body garment of both figures is distinguished by a 
line running diagonally from the upper right waist under the right breast 
and up to the left shoulder touching the left neckline. Indeed, one of the 
astonishing features of this presumed portrait of the king is its very 
absence of regal adornment.
Yet another feature of Ka. 1697 keeps our interpretive pendulum in 
motion. In contradistinction to the sculptural treatment of the drapery, 
the treatment of the hair does not correspond to that of a Theravādin 
monk, nor to that of a Buddha (Fig.1.3). It is not shorn in monastic 
fashion; nor is the shorn head replaced with curls adhering to the head 
topped by an uṣṇīṣa, the cranial protuberance marking Buddhahood. 
From the back, the hair appears to be combed in a blunt cut across the 
neck, not unlike that of the classic Jayavarman VII portrait. It is unclear 
whether the topknot featuring on most versions of the Jayavarman 
portrait also is to be assumed in Ka. 1697, but appears crushed under the 
weight of the tablet. This material evidence troubles distinctions, first, 
between monastics, Buddhas and kings in a context of relatively 
naturalistic representation, and second, between “Mahāyāna” and 
“Theravāda” on the 13th-century Cambodian ground. How can we 
reconcile apparently contradictory elements whereby we have a figure in 
the Mahāyānist Bayon style, if not veritably referencing the Mahāyānist 
King Jayavarman VII, appearing in apparently Theravādin monastic

--- PAGE 58 ---
29
Early Theravādin Cambodia
dress? How does the dress sync with the treatment of the figure’s hair, or 
with the Sanskrit text incorporated into the monolithic piece? If the 
paleographic evidence by which the sculpture’s epigraph, K. 888, syncs 
with art historical assessment of the modelling of the sculptural body, 
how can such dating be reconciled with the Sanskrit Buddhist usage in a 
piece evoking Jayavarman VII? In sum, can this piece be considered 
another iteration of the transitional complex of “early Theravādin 
Cambodia” decipherable in the royal Pāli-Khmer(-Sanskrit) inscription of 
Kok Svay Cek? If the late 13th- to early 14th-century dating is correct, it 
would be the only example of Sanskrit Buddhist usage well after the reign 
of Jayavarman VII and would be embedded in a context of expanding Pāli 
Buddhist practice. If this dating is incorrect, such that the lettering of the 
text and the modelling of the body could be attributed to provincial 
manufacture around the end of the reign of Jayavarman VII or in its 
immediate wake rather than to a much later date, we still must grapple 
with the apparent harmonisation of “Mahāyāna” and “Theravāda” 
elements in the piece itself and in its setting as I will discuss further 
below. Is it testimony to the porosity between lineage and doctrinal 
orientation? Is it a condensation of what might be considered two 
separate portraits of the king in the central axis of the two-tiered Ka. 
1848, the one above in the body of a Buddha to be venerated, the one 
below in the body of a Buddha(-to-be), venerated in a posture of 
meditative devotion?
The lower figure of Ka. 1848 is particularly evocative in the complex 
context at hand. As Woodward has noted, “the adorant seems himself to 
have become deified, as shown by the presence of an uṣṇīṣa”.56 For the 
vase held between its clasped hands, art historian Nadine Dalsheimer 
interprets this adorant with uṣṇīṣa as the future Buddha Maitreya. 
While, for Dalsheimer, the sculpture as a whole is “obviously inspired by 
the Buddhism of the Great Vehicle [Mahāyāna]”, she is troubled by the 
unusual composition comprising a fourth figure underneath the 
common Jayavarman VII Mahāyānist triad; that this ill-fitting figure 
would be Maitreya haunts her interpretation as a confounding 
“Theravadin influence”.57 The regal adornment of the figure in the lower 
register indeed contrasts with that of the Buddha in the upper register – 
as with our comparators in the royal portrait and Ka. 1697. The seeming 
contradiction of a figure simultaneously bearing distinguishing marks of 
Buddhahood (uṣṇīṣa) on the one hand and kingship (adornment) on the 
other is not however unusual in Theravādin contexts – despite the 
supposed emphasis on the life story of the Historical Buddha, which 
hinges upon Prince Siddhattha giving up his princely adornment – 
jewellery, topknot and all – to reach Enlightenment; the pairing of these 
features, which appears paradoxical through a certain Buddhist

--- PAGE 59 ---
30
Ashley Thompson
modernist lens, is in fact a defining feature of Maitreya in modern 
Cambodian religious contexts. As the Buddha-to-come, Maitreya 
embodies the (paradox of) the Buddhist king and thrives on its very 
suggestion of the emergence of Buddhahood in the body of the 
worshipped-and-worshipping figure before the worshipper’s very eyes, 
the political figure ushering in a more perfect future. The bejewelled 
Sākyamuni (or “Historical”) Buddha is itself widespread in mainland 
Southeast Asia from the 11th century, and in Khmer contexts cannot 
always easily be attributed to Mahāyāna orientations.58 This is to say that 
the bejewelled Buddha in a Southeast Asian context is not simply 
evidence of Mahāyāna “influence”; nor, I would argue, is its presence 
here, lifting aloft as it were the Mahāyānist triad, evidence of 
“Theravādin influence”. The unification of the multiple figures through 
the body of the nāga is of further interest here insofar as the Buddha 
protected by the nāga comprises a crossover Mahāyāna-Theravāda image, 
as Woodward has frequently noted. In short, Ka. 1848 nudges us to 
1.6
1.5

--- PAGE 60 ---
31
Early Theravādin Cambodia
reconsider the paradigm of influence as the predominant organising 
principle of art historical and historical interpretation in the Cambodian 
context at hand. So, is the figure in the lower register of Ka. 1848 a monk 
or a Buddha fashioned in the style of the king, or the king-become-
monk-Buddha? Could a genealogical progression be embodied here, 
where the king’s descendant follows the path of the Buddha? What we 
can affirm is that Cambodia’s early Buddhist kings could be sculpturally 
portrayed at once in the body of the Buddha and in that of a devotee – 
and this in a wide variety of ways, drawing from multiple conceptual 
resources in and out of Angkor. There is no reason to believe that this 
practice ceased with the end of Jayavarman VII’s reign; to the contrary, 
evidence suggests it continued in Khmer Pāli Buddhist contexts on and 
beyond the Angkor plain.
As for any Cambodian Hindu-Buddhist statuary, which always 
participates in a localisation of cosmopolitan signs, the provenance of these 
pieces are key to understanding their meaning. Ka. 1697 and  
Ka. 1848 were part of a group of objects found in the vicinity of a colossal 
composite statue known today as “Preah Chatomukh” (August 4 Faces), “Ta 
Fig. 1.5	 “Portrait-statue” of King 
Jayavarman VII. Late 12th to 
early 13th century. 
Sandstone. Height: 138 cm; 
width: 100 cm; thickness:  
93 cm. National Museum of 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh. 
Inventory number: Ka. 1703. 
Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.
Fig. 1.6	 Profile of Ka. 1703. 
Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.
Fig. 1.7	 Back of Ka. 1703. 
Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.
1.7

--- PAGE 61 ---
32
Ashley Thompson
Prohm” (Grandfather Brahma) or “Preah Ang Thom” (Great Buddha) (Fig. 
1.8). This is a towering stone construction of four Buddhas standing back to 
back which has been tentatively dated to the second quarter of the 13th 
century. Like Ka. 1697 and Ka. 1848, it too is unusual in the corpus of 
Khmer statuary of which it is nonetheless an integral part. Preah Chatomukh 
stands at a short distance from another four-faced monument: one of the 
Jayavarman VII hallmark face-towers, called Prasat Steung. In morphological 
terms, the one takes inspiration from the other. The proximity in both time 
and space of these two similar yet different anthropomorphised architectural 
bodies begs the question of relations maintaining between the religious 
practices with which they were both associated.59
Woodward’s art historical research meets Bizot’s textual and 
ethnographic work in this ensemble of sculptural remains at Preah 
Chatomukh. Woodward situates the colossal standing Buddha in the line 
of “18-cubit” Buddhas developed in “the Hinayāna complex of Lopburi” 
perpetuated in Sukhothai and Lamphun.60 Drawing on art historical 
evidence, Woodward posits this Lopburi Hinayāna complex as the 
“dominant Buddhist sect for the greater part of the thirteenth century” in 
both Siam and Cambodia. “Its roots,” he writes, “lay primarily in Burma. 
The sect started to challenge the dominant Mahayana of Cambodia 
toward the end of the twelfth century; it emerged victorious and it 
persisted until the middle decades of the fourteenth century when it was 
finally supplanted as a result of new ties with Sri Lanka.”61 Elsewhere 
Woodward refers to this pre-reform Pāli Buddhism as “Ariya” Buddhism 
according to the designation of a group transmitted through Pegu’s 
15th-century Kalyani inscriptions. For Bizot this is the sect at the origin of 
“heretical” or “tantric” Theravādin traditions known today, and which 
first became manifest in Pāli Buddhism at Angkor from the 12th to 13th 
centuries.62 Links with Lopburi, Sukhothai, Lamphun and Pagan are 
indeed palpable here. Though they are the subject of ongoing research, 
they remain poorly understood.63
What I would like to point out here is the other salient source of early 
Cambodian Theravāda as evidenced at Preah Khan of Kompong Svay: 
Angkor itself and in particular Jayavarman VII’s Mahāyāna Buddhism. It 
is no mistake that a number of the early Cambodian Theravādin sites I 
have mentioned in this chapter comprise reappropriation of earlier 
Angkorian Buddhist temples. Nor should we, in my view, be obstinate in 
attempts to disentangle “Mahāyāna” from “Theravāda” in late Angkorian 
and early Middle Cambodian times. Why, we must ask, in light of 
evidence such as that I have just highlighted from Preah Khan in 
Kompong Svay, can we not imagine “Theravādin” monks in 13th-century 
Cambodia undertaking practices, using spaces and developing beliefs 
associated with “Mahāyāna” Buddhism?
Fig. 1.8	 Preah Chatomukh, Preah 
Khan of Kompong Svay, 
seen from the east, 
following restoration in 2018 
by the Angkor Conservation 
Office. Sandstone block 
assemblage. Height: 9.5 m. 
Photograph courtesy Lam 
Sopheak, 2018.

--- PAGE 62 ---
33
Early Theravādin Cambodia
1.8

--- PAGE 63 ---
34
Ashley Thompson
The consternation of art historians before the evidence of a colossal 
Buddha head found at an early Theravādin site in Angkor Thom is akin to 
these struggles to reconcile the disparate indices of dating and religious 
affiliation in the material remains found at Preah Khan’s Preah 
Chatomukh (Fig. 1.9). The colossal head in question, now in the 
collections of the Musée Guimet in Paris, appears to have originally 
belonged to the central Buddha figure of the find site, Vihear Prampir 
Lavaeng.64 Its siting at this most monumental of Angkor Thom’s 
Buddhist terraces, surrounded by sīmā (indicating that Theravādin 
ordination could have been accomplished here), and its probable 
association with a colossal Buddha worshipped at this site, make a strong 
argument for attributing the piece to early Theravādin practice at Angkor. 
Though only fragments of the central figure were found on site, these, 
along with the monumental head itself, suggest the statue to have been 
like other colossal Buddhas in the Angkor region of this time including 
that of Preah Chatomukh discussed above, composed of large sandstone 
blocks rather than the monolith characterising Angkorian-period 
production. Yet, as art historian Thierry Zéphir writes, the head “displays 
all the characteristics of the art of Jayavarman VII, to such a degree that it 
could appear to be a sort of double of the central image of the Bayon”. 
Holes bored into the headdress, the ears and the neck of the sculpture 
likely indicate that it was once, or periodically, adorned with jewellery, 
which practice, again in Zéphir’s words, “would obviously seem to be in 
discord with an image associated with Buddhism of the Lesser Vehicle 
[Hinayāna]”. For his deep and sensitive knowledge of ancient Khmer 
sculptural style and modelling, coupled with established scholarly 
understandings of Mahāyāna and Theravāda as mutually exclusive, Zéphir 
cannot reconcile the contradiction in a piece which “never ceases to 
astonish because it seems to participate in two worlds: that of Buddhism 
of the Lesser Vehicle ... and that of Buddhism of the Great Vehicle”.65
This head was removed from its find site and sent by the École 
française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO) to France in 1931. In 1933 the French 
Head of the Angkor Conservation Office oversaw the recovery of the 
Bayon’s central divinity from a pit underneath the temple’s central 
sanctuary. In 1935 Cambodian King Sisowath Monivong presided over 
the ceremonial erection of this monumental monolithic nāga-protected 
Buddha in the place of that whose head had been exported to France (see 
Fig. 2.14, p. 78).66 Perhaps the king and his entourage – or the labourers 
who had excavated the Bayon Buddha and lifted it into its new place – 
understood better than we do today the potentiality of mutual 
inclusiveness between “Theravāda” and “Mahāyāna” and the innate 
relations between the “Mahāyānist” Bayon temple and the “Theravādin” 
terraces of Angkor Thom.
Fig. 1.9	 Colossal Buddha head, 
Vihear Prampir Lavaeng 
(Buddhist Terrace 1). 
Sandstone. Height: 100 cm; 
width: 60 cm; thickness:  
60 cm. Guimet – Musée 
national des Arts Asiatiques. 
Inventory number: 
MG18064. Photograph 
© RMN-Grand Palais 
(MNAAG, Paris) / Thierry 
Ollivier.

--- PAGE 64 ---
35
Early Theravādin Cambodia
1.9

--- PAGE 65 ---
36
Ashley Thompson
It should be evident from this brief glimpse into sculptural and 
architectural remains at Preah Khan in Kompong Svay, as in Angkor 
Thom, that integral to the growing perception of porous borders between 
types of religious practice in “early Theravādin Cambodia”, along with 
those between Cambodia and Siam, is a reassessment of periodisation in 
Cambodian historiography. Readers will note that the “early” period 
covered by the chapters in the present volume unabashedly reaches into 
the 12th century.
Yet, the challenge of demarcating the historical period in question 
goes beyond the specific dating and associated definitional issues raised 
thus far. The challenge also arises from the history of the academic 
practice of periodisation anchored in modern Western historiography and 
politics. This is palpable in the varied usage of contributors to the present 
volume, where we find the “post-Angkorian Period”, the “early post-
Angkorian period”, the “post-Bayon Period”, the “Middle Period”, the 
“early Middle Period”, and the “early Modern Period”, all referring to 
more or less the same time. There is a history to the usage of each of these 
terms, attesting to shifts in perception of time over time, and, 
periodically, to conscious attempts on the part of individual scholars or 
scholarly cohorts to engender such shifts within the field. Together they 
attest to ways in which periodisation is “not simply the drawing of an 
arbitrary line through time, but a complex process of conceptualizing 
categories, which are posited as homogeneous and retroactively validated 
by the designation of a period divide”.67 This is a definition given by 
Kathleen Davis in the opening of a book concerning the grounding of 
political order upon periodisation, most specifically, the modern political 
order dominated by the West since the Enlightenment and grounded 
upon a period divide between a “modern” secularised historical 
consciousness and the “Middle Ages” in which theology is seen to 
preclude conceptualisation of historical time. 
In his 2012 essay cited in opening, historian Grégory Mikaelian tracks 
the evolution of terminology designating the Cambodian early Modern/
post-Angkorian/Middle Period in the historiography of Cambodia from 
the early 20th century, highlighting ideologies determining usage. The 
“early modern” designation has its origins in the French colonial pitting 
of classical Angkor against the époque moderne whose roots in the wake 
of Angkor were posited as those of the modern Cambodian people under 
colonial rule and effectively detached from the Angkorian heritage. The 
core reference for this usage is established European historiography which 
sets the époque moderne to begin in the 15th century. Its English 
equivalent, “early modern”, has been revived recently by those seeking to 
interpret Cambodia’s history after Angkor within a context of regional 
and global exchange. The term “post-Bayon”, used in art historical and

--- PAGE 66 ---
37
Early Theravādin Cambodia
archaeological milieu to designate 13th-century materials postdating the 
reign of Jayavarman VII, has not gained traction in broader historical 
usage. The “post-Angkorian” label appears to have been introduced by 
art historian Jean Boisselier, and was made widespread by his disciple, 
Madeleine Giteau with her monograph on “post-Angkorian” art 
published in 1975.68 By and large it can be said that this appellation 
reflected and reinforced a privileging of the Angkorian period as one of 
intellectual, cultural and political achievement over the post-Angkorian 
period itself studiously neglected as one of decline, and then confirmed as 
such in the study of its relatively meagre artistic evidence. Read through 
this modern prism, the local historical records of these two periods were 
seen notably to demonstrate a decline in local historiographical acuity 
over time – a decline redressed only with the advent of colonial 
scholarship. As a riposte to this hermeneutic frame, Cambodian linguist 
Saveros (Lewitz) Pou substantiated the appellation époque moyenne, 
which appears to have been first introduced in Khmer as samăy kaṇtāl by 
court intellectual Mahā Bidūr Krassem in his 1938 introduction to the 
Khmer publication of what are still known – in Khmer, French and 
English – as the IMA, the Middle Period inscriptions of Angkor Wat 
temple inventoried by French officials as the Inscriptions modernes 
d’Angkor.69 Thanks to Pou’s published and pedagogical œuvre developed 
over many decades in the postcolonial era, this appellation has become 
relatively commonplace, including in Khmer-language usage effectively 
retranslated as samӑy kaṇtāl. In Pou’s handling, the term works to 
dismantle the value judgements inherent in previously established usage. 
In heralding a focus on cultural continuity over time, the appellation also 
contributes to that very continuity by raising Cambodian consciousness 
of the cultural means by which heritage can be actively perpetuated. 
Some work born of Pou’s determination, notably that of Mikaelian and 
myself, seeks now to take a further step in probing the modes of 
conceptualisation of historical time operative in Middle Cambodia which 
have been long overlooked, marginalised, demeaned or misunderstood in 
modern historiography.70 My own usage in the present Introduction 
vacillates between the “Middle Period” and the “post-Angkorian Period”. 
With the former, I aim to acknowledge historical developments specific 
to Cambodia as distinct from post-Angkorian developments elsewhere in 
mainland Southeast Asia, and to further Pou’s critique of colonial and 
early postcolonial historiography in its neglect and/or denigration of all 
after Angkor. My usage of “post-Angkorian” aims to highlight the 
importance of Angkor in inflecting subsequent historical developments 
in Cambodia and across the mainland, especially in future Siam. The 
varied usage by the authors in this volume emerges out of this complex 
scholarly context and attests to varying degrees of intentionality.

--- PAGE 67 ---
38
Ashley Thompson
THE CHAPTERS
The present volume is organised in loose chronological order of topic 
treated, with reference to these very questions of periodisation. With 
further reference to the related loose geographic definition of Middle 
Period “Cambodia”, it comprises specialists of Cambodia, Thailand and 
Burma (Myanmar). We open with art historian Hiram Woodward who 
challenges any facile vision of 13th-century rupture in two ways. First, he 
culls evidence that “Theravāda Buddhism had long been looked upon in a 
favourable light” in Cambodia prior to the 13th century, positing the 
cultural shifts under our microscope as representing a “reinvigoration” or 
even a “reformation” rather than any “intrusive” movement. Second, he 
tracks adoptions and adaptations of cultural constructs over time and 
across space, such that we see, like a gestalt image, now Angkor and 
post-Angkor as one, now as distinct, just as we see Cambodia and Siam to 
vacillate between these two apparently mutually exclusive perspectives.
Woodward’s essay is a call to arms for a new art history of post-
Angkor, and means to serve as a model for it. Woodward’s history-to-
come would, on the one hand, do for post-Angkor what art historian 
Philippe Stern did for Angkor, tracking evolution in décor and style as a 
means of establishing a more granular historical account of both post-
Angkorian art and the post-Angkorian period at large. Woodward draws 
on his two monumental publications on Thai art, The Art and 
Architecture of Thailand and The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand, to lay the 
ground for this work, discerning trends, influences and borrowings 
evidenced through “diagnostic motifs”.71 The synthetic study of these 
leads to a picture of stylistic evolution pegged to relative dating of the 
materials. On the other hand, Woodward models future art historical 
work through a daring interdisciplinary analysis comprising the second 
part of the chapter: a comparative reading of a 14th-century vernacular 
Thai oath with an 11th-century Cambodian oath against visual analysis of 
12th-century sculpted reliefs at Angkor Wat temple and the parade of 
structures running north from the Bayon temple inside Angkor Thom. 
Analyses of these apparently disparate textual, sculptural and architectural 
sources lead Woodward to link the reliefs of the southern gallery of 
Angkor Wat with the creative staging of Angkor Thom’s royal plaza as 
veritable illustrations of the said oath of loyalty to the king, or of the 
threats advanced against the disloyal. The study seeks to ground new 
hypotheses on the function of the central plaza of Angkor Thom, 
overriding extant assumptions regarding its funerary orientation, and, 
importantly for our purposes here, linking it to Ayutthayan culture. In 
contending that the face-towers of the Bayon period held nearly the same 
meaning from both Buddhist and Brahmanical points of view, Woodward

--- PAGE 68 ---
39
Early Theravādin Cambodia
also contributes to the breaking down of barriers erected by scholars over 
time, effacing experience of meaning on the ground.
In the volume’s next chapter, Tuy Danel examines Angkorian 
sculptural representation of jātaka tales. The jātaka, stories of the 
Buddha’s past lives that illustrate the bodhisattva’s successive performance 
of good deeds and concomitant progressive attainment of merit, are 
known in both Sanskrit and Pāli textual traditions; certain traits, however, 
can be taken to belie distinct sources. The sheer prevalence of 
representations of scenes from the Vessantara-jātaka, a story particularly 
favoured in Pāli traditions, in and of itself suggests a Pāli reference at 
Angkor from as early as the first half of the 12th century and into the 
reign of Jayavarman VII. But it is the detail in narrative representation 
that confirms the pervasiveness of this presence. Through his microscopic 
lens Tuy identifies scenes and episodes represented sculpturally at Angkor 
but, found only in the one or the other textual tradition, demonstrating 
thus the co-existence of Sanskrit and Pāli sources operating at Angkor. To 
what degree the references are actually textual remains, however, an open 
question; that is, modes of conveyance of this or that episode or tale 
informing or supplementing a given sculptural representation could well 
include the oral, the ritual and, of course, all manner of artistic form.
Tuy’s evidence anticipates that analysed by Samerchai Poolsuwan in 
the following chapter. While in Poolsuwan’s western Thai statuary 
assemblage we will see imitation of Angkorian style, here with Tuy in 
Central Angkor we see the integration of moral tales prevalent in those 
regions at the outer reaches of Angkorian administrative oversight. 
Though it is not Angkor Wat temple itself that attracts Tuy’s attention, 
the author follows in the tracks of others in this volume in demonstrating 
the Angkor Wat style and period to have been pivotal in developing the 
Pāli connection. Tuy’s comparison with Burmese modes of jātaka 
representation is also instructive in this regard. Pagan, he notes, evinces a 
like emphasis on the Vessantara-jātaka; unlike in Angkor, however, where 
we see select scenes repeatedly represented as an eclectic element of 
broader iconographic programmes, such as in the predominantly 
Vaishnavite reliefs of 12th-century Thommanon temple, at Pagan the tale 
is found represented in full, with panels detailing each episode in linear 
progression. Such formal distinctions invite analysis of the status of the 
source, and particularly any purported textual source, in distinct venues. 
While jātaka representations at both Pagan and Angkor may have sources 
in Mon Pāli Buddhism, there is little in the Angkorian record to suggest 
the predominance of a textual transmission above that of a sculptural one. 
In fact, Tuy hypothesises that the Dvāravatī sīmā sculpted with motifs 
including jātaka representations may have been the driver of jātaka 
representations at the heart of Angkor; whereas the detailed sequential

--- PAGE 69 ---
40
Ashley Thompson
mode of sculptural representation at Pagan is akin to that of a written 
narrative account.
In the next chapter of this volume, anthropologist-cum-art historian 
Samerchai Poolsuwan brings us back to the third quarter of the 12th 
century with a collection of wooden Buddha statues from Tham Phra cave 
in Western Thailand’s Ratchaburi province. The chapter speaks 
methodologically and topically to that of Woodward in opening as well as 
to that of Martin Polkinghorne closing the volume. For each of these 
authors, close formal study of artistic style serves to deepen extant 
historical understandings in revealing networks of religious exchange. 
Likewise for all three, 12th-century Angkor Wat is understood to be a 
determining influence in Theravādin cultural production. The stylistic 
features of the unique Tham Phra collection are associated with various 
sources of Buddhist art during the late first and early second millennia 
– late Dvāravatī, Pāla from Northeastern India and the Bengal area, 
Khmer most likely from Lopburi, Pagan from Upper Burma, Mon from 
Lower Burma, and Haripunjaya in Northern Thailand. What we see with 
Poolsuwan, however, is a certain mobility of style rather than of objects 
themselves, for the Tham Phra materials, while evidencing each of the 
above-named cultures, appear to have been produced in local workshops. 
Indeed, the Tham Phra statues evidence a veritable culture of imitation of 
those cultures at some distance from the site itself – Pāla/Pagan and 
Angkor – along with a rather eclectic mixing and matching of select 
elements. Angkor, for example, is conveyed largely through the imitation 
of adornment rather than facial features. For Poolsuwan, stylistic 
imitation does not necessarily correspond to shifts in sectarian belonging 
or to fusion of distinct religious groups. In his eyes, the Tham Phra statues 
convey the survival of a pre-reform Pāli Buddhism (Woodward’s “Ariya” 
Buddhism or Bizot’s “Tantric Theravāda”) beneath a Mahāyāna veneer. 
Importantly, they also suggest ways in which the Buddhism(s) of 12th-
century Angkorian hinterlands came to affect Angkorian sculptural 
production itself as stylistic elements from materials in these areas come to 
appear on late 12th- to early 13th-century Angkorian Buddha statues and 
pedestals in Central Angkor.  
The next two chapters in this volume, by archaeologists Ea Darith and 
Yuni Sato, bring us into the 13th to 14th centuries and shift our focus to 
the architectural structures understood to cater specifically to Theravādin 
practices. If the presence of Pāli Buddhism is steadily evidenced in the art 
historical record at Angkor from the 12th century, these later architectural 
materials appear to represent a notable shift, with whole architectural 
structures renovated or singularly constructed seemingly in the name of 
Theravāda. Ea reviews the unpublished inventory of the “Buddhist 
terraces” of Angkor Thom carried out by the Cambodian governmental

--- PAGE 70 ---
41
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Authority for the Protection and Safeguarding of Angkor and the Region 
of Angkor (APSARA) in 2002 against a survey of published work to date 
on these early Middle Period structures and other prominent Buddhist 
modifications of Angkorian-period temples in Central Angkor in 
subsequent centuries. The “Buddhist terrace” is a rectangular stone 
platform bearing a Buddha statue at its western end, and is surrounded by 
sīmā. These structures appear to be predecessors of the vihāra of modern 
Cambodia. The Cambodian vihāra are halls combining two functions 
that in other Theravādin contexts are relegated to separate architectural 
structures: a space for lay and monastic worship, and a space for monastic 
ordination ritual.72 Following in the steps of his predecessors in this field, 
Ea notes the existence of two types of Buddhist terrace sites. The first is 
systematically integrated into a modified Angkorian temple site; in this 
type, the terrace abuts the eastern entry of an extant sanctuary. The 
second is a new standalone construction. With reference to the APSARA 
inventory, Ea proposes a further typology, comprising five types of 
Buddhist terrace differentiated by size. In the chapter’s second section, Ea 
reviews select highlights of the more monumental modifications of 
Angkorian structures attributed to later periods. The chapter confirms 
the importance of the Angkorian material heritage in subsequent 
Cambodian shaping of Theravādin practice otherwise demonstrated in 
Woodward and Tuy’s texts in particular, where we see Pāli Buddhism at 
Angkor physically and conceptually embedded in extant constructs rather 
than as “intrusive” phenomena.
Next, archaeologist Yuni Sato homes in on what has become, through 
the research of the Japanese-Cambodian team that she leads, the best 
known “Buddhist terrace” of Angkor Thom, that of Western Prasat Top, a 
small temple known in the colonial academic literature as Monument 
486.73 Sato’s meticulous examination of this minor site yields significant 
results for our purposes here. Archaeological work has, first, enabled dating 
of the various stages of construction of this site in the early Middle Period. 
Because of an inscription recovered at Prasat Top, the site has long been 
assumed to have had its origins in an early Angkorian Brahmanic temple; 
Sato’s research shows, rather, an original late 12th- to early 13th-century 
construction likely to have been Buddhist from the moment of inception. 
Major development of the site, including the construction of two lateral 
sanctuaries and a terrace to the east of the original sanctuary, is dated to the 
late 14th to early 15th centuries. The systematic archaeological research 
also brought significant new material finds, including intriguing 
architectural, sculptural and epigraphic evidence. Amongst these are reliefs 
of the walking Buddha found to have been sculpted into false doors of the 
northern sanctuary. Though the walking Buddha, an iconographic 
hallmark of Sukhothai, is quite rare in Angkor, the larger iconographic

--- PAGE 71 ---
42
Ashley Thompson
ensemble found here – a sanctuary sculpted with large standing Buddhas in 
each of its false doors – is known to have been a defining characteristic of 
Cambodian Middle Period art.74 The epigraphic finds are likewise small, 
but of real significance. These are a brief few words carved into decorative 
stones found around the terrace in close proximity to sīmā. The epigraph 
found to the south of the terrace names the Buddha “Kassapa in the 
south”; two fragments found to the west of the terrace are likely to name 
the Buddha “Sākyamuni to the west”. The implications of these particular 
finds are pursued in the following chapter by art historian Nicolas Revire. 
Revire draws from a wide range of evidence, including that unearthed 
by Sato and her team, to track the historical development of the 
veneration of past and future Buddhas in Cambodian culture writ large 
over time and space. The chapter’s interpretive goals exceed however the 
establishment of this particular historical phenomenon insofar as, 
exploring connections between practices of the body, protective chants, 
iconographies and architectural layouts, Revire shapes out of the materials 
a window onto the types of beliefs and practices characterising 
Cambodian Theravāda. In doing so, he additionally highlights both 
interregional connections and overlaps between practices typically deemed 
to be either Mahāyāna or Theravāda. As highlighted in the opening of the 
present Introduction, Mahāyāna and Theravāda are in fact often set 
against each other as such for their supposed different conceptualisations 
of multiple Buddhas. The Buddhas of Theravāda, it is thought on the one 
hand, are relatively limited in number and typically understood to 
embody conceptions of seriality and linear chronological progression; this 
is foundational to the scholarly characterisation of Theravāda as a rational 
religion, attached first and foremost to the Historical Buddha Sākyamuni 
who is conceived both as the Buddha of our present era and one in a line 
of successive Buddhas. The many Buddhas of Mahāyāna, on the other 
hand, are cosmic, embodying notions of infinitely expanding space and 
simultaneity; this in turn is foundational to the opposing characterisation 
of Mahāyāna as relatively esoteric. In positing, in particular, a sustained 
emphasis on directional Buddhas in Cambodian practice, that is multiple 
Buddhas distinctly associated with points in space even as they may appear 
in a series of past Buddhas, Revire’s work lays bare certain esoteric 
dimensions of Cambodian Pāli Buddhist practice, and begs the question 
of the pertinence of established Mahāyāna/Theravāda distinctions in the 
early Cambodian Middle Period. 
The last chapter in our volume is by Martin Polkinghorne, a scholar 
who brings disciplinary expertise in both art history and archaeology to a 
sustained focus on the Cambodian Middle Period. The chapter emerges 
from the author’s inventory of a corpus of 300 sculptures found at 
Angkor Wat whose stylistic features attest to the complexity of politico-

--- PAGE 72 ---
43
Early Theravādin Cambodia
cultural regional networks operating in this period, and to the prominent 
role of this temple as a locus of ritual practice oriented to the conservation 
of both ancient and contemporary materials centuries after its 12th-
century construction. Set against reflections on archaeological work at 
Angkor Wat, Polkinghorne’s study of this sculptural corpus contributes to 
the ongoing development of a more precise historicisation of the often 
homogenously described “Middle Period” at this site where we see 
evidence of 13th- to 14th-century activity followed by renewed activity 
from the 16th century.75 Three select pieces from the Middle Period 
Angkor Wat corpus are shown, through close stylistic analysis, to have 
originated in 17th- to 18th-century Ayutthaya in Central Thailand and 
Lan Xang in Central Laos. In considering the specific historical contexts, 
beyond the evidence at Angkor Wat itself, in which such sculptural 
donations would have been made, Polkinghorne sketches broader critical 
understandings of the Cambodian Middle Period, along with the sources 
available for its study and the disciplinary tools with which we approach 
it. The chapter proposes an understanding of artistic style attentive to the 
temporal and spatial ramifications of copying, and highlights the pitfalls 
of any simple assimilation of stylistic features with geographic and ethnic 
origin of hypothesised artisans. Stylistic analysis of sculpture is embedded 
in reflections on current understandings, arising largely from 
archaeological work concentrated on Greater Angkor, and on regional 
environmental and economic factors leading to shifts in political 
organisation across mainland Southeast Asia from the 13th century. From 
this vantage point, Polkinghorne queries early explanatory models of the 
politico-cultural transition after Angkor, which tended to emphasise the 
role of Theravāda in causing change, to instead posit religion and even 
culture at large as non-deterministic. The cultural dimension of the 
historical complex, embodied in this text by the donation of Buddhist 
sculpture to Angkor Wat, is, in Polkinghorne’s evolving vision, to some 
degree subsumed into the broader regional geo-economic frame, even as 
the author opens up our horizons in imagining a yet-to-be-uncovered 
social and religious world decoupled from royal practices and not bound 
to established historical narratives.
Polkinghorne’s chapter joins each contribution to this volume in 
highlighting the importance of Angkor beyond Angkor in both temporal 
and geographic terms. Together, they also highlight what is missing here: 
new art and archaeological research focused on the Middle Period in 
Cambodia’s more southerly regions. Though Angkor undoubtedly looms 
large in the formation of a range of regional Theravādin cultures and 
polities, materials and practices in Central Angkor can only be expected to 
vary from those at a remove from the ancient capital. We have seen one 
example of this with Poolsuwan’s analysis of imitation in the sculptural

--- PAGE 73 ---
44
Ashley Thompson
assemblage of Tham Phra cave in Western Thailand. At later periods, just 
as Sukhothai or Ayutthaya take Angkor as a guiding reference while also 
differing from Angkor, so too must we expect Cambodia’s Middle Period 
capitals to emerge from Angkor even as Angkor fades from view in ways 
unimaginable on the Angkor plain itself. At the same time, we can expect 
new networks across the Southeast Asian and broader Asian region to 
shift into focus. Ongoing archaeological research on Cambodia’s 
southerly regions in the Middle Period boasts a number of the present 
volume’s authors at its helm. With the appearance of our volume, then, we 
beckon its sequel, and with it further development of the methodological 
and theoretical horizons we have only begun to glimpse here, where 
understandings of Theravādin art of Middle Cambodia are developed 
with particular attention to the visions and experiences of its producer-
users. Reinforcing such interpretive frames will enable the disciplines of 
the history of art and archaeology to transcend the role often attributed 
them as handmaiden to the discipline of history as defined by post-
Enlightenment Euro-American concerns, and to thrive, instead, in 
detecting the many agencies borne by the objects themselves – even as 
these will come to inform new historical narratives.
Notes
1	
Sven Bretfeld, “Resonant Paradigms in the Study of Religions and the 
Emergence of Theravāda Buddhism”, Religion 42, no. 2, pp. 273–97.
2	
Ibid., p. 278.
3	
Grégory Mikaelian, “Des sources lacunaires de l’histoire à l’histoire complexifiée 
des sources. Éléments pour une histoire des renaissances khmères (c. XIV-c. 
XVIIIe s.)”, Péninsule 65, 2012, pp. 259–305. This text elaborates on a short 
piece published online under a title that points out more distinctly the concerns 
shared with Bretfeld: “Écrire l’histoire du Cambodge moyen entre techniques 
occidentales et doctrines orientales” [Writing the History of Middle Cambodia 
between Western Techniques and Eastern Doctrines], Bulletin de l’AEFEK 8 
(http://aefek.free.fr), February 2005.
4	
Bretfeld, “Resonant paradigms”, p. 294.
5	
Ibid., p. 278.
6	
Peter Skilling, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza and Santi Pakdeekham, eds., 
How Theravāda is Theravāda?: Exploring Buddhist Identities, Chiang Mai: 
Silkworm Books, 2012; Prapod Assavavirulhakarn, The Ascendancy of 
Theravāda Buddhism in Southeast Asia, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2010.
7	
Jacques Derrida, “Structure, Sign and Play in the Discourse of the Human 
Sciences”, in Writing and Difference, trans. A. Bass, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1979, p. 285.
8	
Peter Skilling, “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to South-east Asia”, 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 20, no. 1, Summer 
1997, pp. 99–104.
9	
Kate Crosby, Theravāda Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity and Identity, West

--- PAGE 74 ---
45
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.
10	
Ibid., p. 4.
11	
The Sanskrit versions of the Vinaya, Sutta and Abhidhamma are the Vinaya, 
Sūtra and Abhidharma. 
12	
Bretfeld provides a concise critical account of the modern invention of the 
opposition between “Theravāda/Hīnayāna” and “Mahāyāna”. While 
“Theravāda” originally denoted “a monastic lineage affiliation”, “Hīnayāna” and 
“Mahāyāna” denoted “personal aspiration and doxo-practical orientation”. The 
modern intervention was to detach the terms “Theravāda” and “Mahāyāna” 
from their discrete categories to re-fashion them as an opposing pair attached to 
a singular category of variously defined sectarian affiliation, effectively 
comparing apples to oranges as the English expression would have it (Bretfeld, 
“Resonant Paradigms”, p. 291). The impact of this intervention on historical 
interpretation cannot be over-emphasised. Notably, in our early Middle 
Cambodian case study, the art historical tendency to classify this or that artefact 
as evidence of exclusive Theravādin or Mahāyānist beliefs and practices has 
evolved under its influence, neglecting the simple fact that, historically, monastic 
lineages were mainly defined by sets of prescripts on monastic behaviour rather 
than specific doctrinal positions; and that when such positions were held by a 
lineage proper, they were not necessarily binding for its members. As Bretfeld 
notes with regards to early Indic developments (as well as for medieval Sri Lanka 
in subsequent discussions), “A monk could be ordained in a certain Nikāya 
[lineage] but hold the doctrinal views of another. It was even usual that the 
same monastery was a place for both Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna adepts” (p. 287). 
On the possibility of esoteric forms of “Mahāyāna Buddhism” evolving “in 
Theravāda guise” in first-millennium Southeast Asia, see Andrea Acri, 
“Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes, 
7th–13th Century AD” in Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, ed. Andrea Acri, Singapore: ISEAS-Yusof 
Ishak Institute, 2016, esp. pp. 10–13.
13	
Crosby, Theravāda Buddhism, p. 3.
14	
Frank E. Reynolds and Charles Hallisey, “The Buddha”, in Buddhism and 
Asian History: Religion, History and Culture, eds. Joseph M. Kitagawa and Mark 
D. Cummings, New York: MacMillan Publishing and Co., 1989, p. 29.
15	
See Kate Crosby’s detailed review of François Bizot’s œuvre in “Tantric 
Theravada: A Bibliographic Essay on the Writings of François Bizot and Others 
on the Yogāvacara Tradition”, Contemporary Buddhism, vol. 1, issue 2, 2000,  
pp. 141–198. This essay marks the start of what is now an œuvre unto its own 
on the topic, culminating  – thus far – in Crosby’s Esoteric Theravada: The 
Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of Southeast Asia, Boulder: 
Shambhala Publications, 2020.
16	
 K. 754 is the first dated Pāli composition noted above. Another earlier 
inscription (K. 241), in Khmer and dated 1267, records the installation of an 
image of the Buddha called kamrateṅ jagat śrisugatamāravijita; the appellation 
combines the common Angkorian epithet for gods, kamrateṅ jagat, or “Lord of 
the World”, with a Sanskrit or Pāli compound designating the “Buddha, 
Victorious over Māra”, alluding to a pivotal moment in the Historical Buddha’s 
life story, which is frequently depicted in Middle Cambodian Theravādin art in 
the form of a sculpted figure of the Buddha seated in “māravijaya” or “Victory 
over Māra” posture, often within a sculpted representation of the episode in 
question. Though the epigraph is not in Pāli, it incorporates this appellation,

--- PAGE 75 ---
46
Ashley Thompson
which could be Pāli or Sanskrit, and which suggests it was an image of this type 
which was consecrated here in the 13th century. Another undated Pāli 
inscription, K. 501, is likely to date from the late 12th to early 13th centuries.  
K. 567 is the last dated Sanskrit one. The latter in fact contains four dates, with 
the latest given above. Another later Sanskrit inscription, K. 300, does not 
contain a numbered date but refers to a reign known to have begun in 1327. 
Both of these are Shaivite. For recent detailed consideration of the epigraphic 
records of the late 13th to early 14th centuries as a whole, see Ludivine 
Provost-Roche, “Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge 
(env. 1220–env. 1500)”, PhD dissertation, Université de la Sorbonne Nouvelle–
Paris III, 2010, vol. 1, pp. 22–48 and translations of select texts in vol. 2. (Note, 
however, that for unexplained reasons she does not include K. 501 within her 
study group.)
17	
See the second section of Hiram Woodward’s chapter in the present volume, 
and the work from which he draws there: Hiram W. Woodward Jr., “‘The 
Characteristics of Elephants’: A Thai Manuscript and its Context”, in From 
Mulberry Leaves to Silk Scrolls: New Approaches to the Study of Asian 
Manuscript Traditions, eds. Justin McDaniel and Lynn Ransom, Philadelphia: 
Schoenberg Institute, University of Pennsylvania Libraries, 2015, pp. 15–41; 
and “King Sūryavarman II and the Power of Subjugation”, in On Meaning and 
Mantras: Essays in Honor of Frits Staal, eds. George Thompson and Richard K. 
Payne, Berkeley: Institute of Buddhist Studies and BDK America, 2017,  
pp. 483−502.
18	
On the linguistic and literary mechanisms of the Sanskrit cosmopolis and its 
aftermath more broadly, see Sheldon Pollock, The Language of the Gods in the 
World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture and Power in Premodern India, Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2006. Au Chhieng teases out the linguistic and 
intellectual dimensions of Khmer vernacular engagement with Sanskrit in his 
Études de philologie indo-khmère series published in the JA from 1963–74. (See 
“Translation” section on Au Chhieng in Udaya Journal of Khmer Studies 15, 
2020, pp. 127–98.)  Trent Walker has tracked the creative multilingual play at 
the heart of Middle Khmer Buddhist textual production in his doctoral work: 
“Unfolding Buddhism: Communal Scripts, Localized Translations, and the 
Work of the Dying in Cambodian Chanted Leporellos”, PhD dissertation, 
University of California, Berkeley, 2018. For other recent work on bilingualism 
in Khmer epigraphy, see Ashley Thompson, Engendering the Buddhist State: 
Territory, Sovereignty and Sexual Difference in the Inventions of Angkor, 
Routledge Critical Buddhist Studies, 2016; Chhom Kunthea, “Le rôle du 
sanskrit dans le développement de la langue khmère: Une étude épigraphique du 
VIe au XIVe siècle”, PhD dissertation, École Pratique des Hautes Études, 2016. 
Peter Skilling continues to develop meticulous work on the Pāli epigraphy of 
Southeast Asia, shedding light on relations between Pāli and local languages 
across the region. On the state of affairs in Southeast Asian epigraphic study 
more broadly, including Skilling’s useful contribution on the multilingual 
epigraphy from Thailand, see Daniel Perret, ed., Writing for Eternity: A Survey 
of Epigraphy in Southeast Asia, Paris: EFEO, 2018. Many of these studies build 
on the œuvre of Saveros Pou (Lewitz) as well as those of George Cœdès and 
Michael Vickery, whose bibliographies are available at https://www.aefek.fr/
page42.html.
19	
I.e., philosophically speaking, in the ultimate sense, paramattha. (Original 
translator’s note.)

--- PAGE 76 ---
47
Early Theravādin Cambodia
20	
I. B. Horner, trans., Milinda’s Questions, London: Pāli Text Society, 1990 
[1963], vol. 1, pp. 36–8.
21	
For one of his last iterations of this critical position, see Michael Vickery, 
unpublished revised version of “A New Tāmnān About Ayudhya”, p. 5, n. 29. 
The article was originally published in the JSS 67, no. 1, 1979, pp. 123–86. My 
thanks to Geoff Wade for sharing an unpublished collection of revised versions 
of articles on Thai history by Vickery.
22	
Michael Vickery, unpublished revised version of “The 2/k.125 Fragment, a Lost 
Chronicle of Ayutthaya”, originally published in JSS 65, no. 1, 1977, p. 56.
23	
Ibid., pp. 136–7. See also Mikaelian, “Des sources lacunaires”, p. 277.
24	
Maurizo Peleggi has examined dimensions of this question in Thai (art) 
historiography. See especially “The Plot of Thai Art History: Buddhist 
Sculpture and the Myth of National Origins”, in A Sarong for Clio: Essays on the 
Intellectual and Cultural Histories of Thailand – Inspired by Craig J. Reynolds, 
ed. Maurizio Peleggi, Ithaca: Cornell University SEAP Publications, 2015,  
pp. 79–93.
25	
George Cœdès, “Une période critique dans l’Asie du Sud-est: the XIIIè siècle”, 
Bulletin de la Société des Études Indochinoises XXXIII, no. 4, 1958, p. 387. A 
first iteration of this essay was delivered as a talk at the Musée Guimet, Paris, in 
1957.
26	
Ibid., p. 400.
27	
Ibid., p. 398.
28	
Ibid., p. 399.
29	
Ibid., p. 399. On the epigraphic passage in question, see A. B. Griswold and 
Prasert ṇa Nagara, “The epigraphy of Mahādharmarājā I of Sukhodaya: 
Epigraphic and Historical Studies 11/1”, JSS 61, no. 1, 1973, p. 97.
30	
Ibid., p. 400.
31	
The Ayutthaya question pervades Vickery’s œuvre. One example also 
referencing Sukhothai in these terms (with reference to the work of Griswold 
and Prasert) is in Michael Vickery, unpublished revised version of “A New 
Tāmnān About Ayudhya”, p. 44,  n. 300. Recent work by Grégory Mikaelian 
and Éric Bourdonneau on the multiple variations on the Angkorian devarāja, in 
Siam as in Cambodia over time and across religions and social milieux, adds 
significantly to the history sketched here, both in empirical and conceptual 
terms. The multiple objects which the authors demonstrate to be variously 
linked to the Angkorian cult provide a matrix for constructing geo-temporal 
models beyond that of the maṇḍala on the one hand and the binary of 
historical rupture versus continuity on the other. The subtle view of “l’histoire 
longue” proposed by the authors goes further still to challenge the many 
binaries anchored in the established periodisation of Cambodian history. Given 
the timing of our respective publications, the present volume anticipates but 
does not account fully for the authors’ theoretical propositions. See Éric 
Bourdonneau and Grégory Mikaelian, “L’histoire longue du Devarāja: 
Pañcaksetr et figuier à cinq branches dans l’ombre de la danse de Śiva”, in  
Rāja-maṇḍala: le modèle royal en Inde, eds. Emmanuel Francis and Raphaël 
Rousseleau, Collection Puruṣārtha 37, September 2020, pp. 81–129.
32	
Saveros Lewitz, “La toponymie khmère”, BEFEO 53, no. 2, 1967, pp. 377–450.
33	
Ashley Thompson, “Lost and Found: The Stupa, the Four-faced Buddha and 
the Seat of Royal Power in Middle Cambodia”, in Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Berlin, 1998, eds. Marijke J. Klokke and Thomas De Brujin Hull:

--- PAGE 77 ---
48
Ashley Thompson
Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, University of Hull, 2000, pp. 245–63; “The 
Future of Cambodia’s Past: A Messianic Middle-Cambodian Royal Cult”, in 
History, Buddhism and New Religious Movements in Cambodia, eds. Elizabeth 
Guthrie and John Marston, Hawai‘i: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2004,  
pp. 13–39.
34	
IMA 2 and 3 in Saveros Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3”, 
BEFEO 57, 1970, pp. 99–126. See also Ang Chouléan, “ṭūc purāṇ kāl!” [Like 
olden times!], KhmeRenaissance 3, December 2007–8, pp. 75–7.
35	
K. 177 in Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions khmères K. 144 et K. 177”, BEFEO 70, 
1981, pp. 101–20.
36	
K. 465, K. 285 and K. 1006. Khin Sok, “Deux inscriptions tardives du Phnom 
Bàkhèn, K.465 et K.285”, BEFEO 65, no. 1, 1978, pp. 271–80; Michael Vickery, 
“L’inscription K 1006 du Phnom Kulên”, BEFEO 71, 1982, pp. 77–86; Saveros 
Pou, “Inscription de Phnom Bakheng (K. 465)”, in Saveros Pou, Nouvelles 
Inscriptions du Cambodge I, Paris: EFEO, 1989, pp. 20–5; Saveros Pou, 
“Inscription de Phnom Bakheng (K. 285)”, in Saveros Pou, Nouvelles 
Inscriptions du Cambodge I, Paris: EFEO, 1989, pp. 26–7.
37	
Stanley Jeyaraja Tambiah, “The Galactic Polity”, in World Conqueror and 
World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand against a 
Historical Background, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976,  
pp. 102–31; O. W. Wolters, History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian 
Perspectives, Ithaca: Cornell University Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, first 
edition 1982, revised edition 1999; Thongchai Winichakul, Siam Mapped: A 
History of the Geo-body of a Nation, Hawai‘i: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1994. 
38	
For an unapologetic use of the term maṇḍala in the place of “state”, and a 
summary of a succession of Southeast Asian maṇḍala in the longue durée, see 
Prapod Assavavirulhakarn, The Ascendancy of Theravāda Buddhism, esp.  
pp. 18–23.
39	
George Cœdès, “Études cambodgiennes XXXII. La plus ancienne inscription 
en pâli du Cambodge”, BEFEO 36, 1937, pp. 14–21, (republished in Articles sur 
le pays khmer, t. I, Paris: EFEO, 1989, pp. 282–9).
40	
For K. 501 see George Cœdès, Inscriptions du Cambodge III, Paris: EFEO, 1951, 
pp. 85–8. The date provided in the epigraph is difficult to decipher. Cœdès 
notes that it could render 1074 CE, but one syllable key to such an 
interpretation remains enigmatic. For the graphics of the text and presumably 
its Pāli language, Cœdès favours a later date, but still prior to K. 754. K. 241 
records the erection of the “Victory over Māra” Buddha image. See ibid.,  
pp. 76–8. See also note 16 above.
41	
Skilling, “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to South-east Asia”, p. 104. The 
statue on which the image figures is held by the Musée Guimet: MG 18891. 
Skilling has also recently published a study of a seventh- to eighth-century Pāli 
text inscribed on a clay tablet found in Angkor Borei district; the text, K. 1355, 
comprises the earliest appearance of Pāli in Cambodia known to date. It is 
citational, thus confirming the nature of first-millennium Pāli in Cambodia like 
in the Southeast Asian region as noted above. See Peter Skilling, “The 
Theravaṃsa has always been here: K. 1355 from Angkor Borei”, JSS 107, no. 2, 
2019, pp. 43–62.
42	
Stephen Murphy has shown the two closely situated sīmā sites on the Kulen 
to be representative of a culture well developed on the Khorat plateau. As the 
one instance south of the Dangrek mountains that serves otherwise as a 
natural border confining the extensive sīmā distribution to the northerly

--- PAGE 78 ---
49
Early Theravādin Cambodia
plateau, the Kulen example is also anomalous. (Of his many publications on 
and around this topic, see for example Stephen Murphy, “The Distribution of 
Sema Stones throughout the Khorat Plateau during the Dvāravati Period”, in 
Unearthing Southeast Asia’s Past, Vol.1, eds. Marijke J. Klokke and Véronique 
Degroot, Singapore: NUS Press, 2013, pp. 215–33.) Recent unpublished 
archaeological research led by Kyle Latinis (ISEAS, Singapore) and Ea Darith 
(APSARA, Cambodia) suggests that the Kulen sīmā sites were not active after 
the ninth century. See https://www.researchgate.net/profile/David_Latinis/
publication/304353545_Phnom_Kulen_Cambodia_and_Singapore_
Projects_-_Royal_Residence_Palace_Site_Banteay_-_Sema_Stone_Sites_
Don_Meas_and_Peam_Kre_-_Dvāravati_influence_-_Sema_Stone_
quarry_-_Implications/links/576cfa8208ae3c5c932d24a3/
Phnom-Kulen-Cambodia-and-Singapore-Projects-Royal-Residence-Palace-
Site-Banteay-Sema-Stone-Sites-Don-Meas-and-Peam-Kre-Dvāravati-influence-
Sema-Stone-quarry-Implications.pdf (last accessed 24 June 2019). Tun 
Puthpiseth provides an evaluation of the sculptural evidence he considers to 
have been associated with the sīmā – a buddhapāda and a dharmacakra 
sculpted out of the mountain floor. Though he acknowledges the disparate 
dating given by scholars to these different sculptural elements, as well as the 
manifest integration of some of them into subsequent cults, he emphasises the 
affinity of the ensemble with eighth- to ninth-century Dvāravatī materials. See 
Tun Puthpiseth, “Bouddhisme Theravāda et production artistique en pays 
khmer: Étude d’un corpus d’images en ronde-bosse du Buddha (XIIIe–XVIe 
siècles)”, PhD dissertation, Paris, Université de Paris IV-Sorbonne, 2015, pp. 
78–80.
43	
K. 501: st. III, in George Cœdès, Inscriptions du Cambodge III, pp. 87–8. My 
translation.
44	
For an inventory of primary and secondary texts, see the Corpus des inscriptions 
khmères developed by the Cambodian inscription project team of the EFEO: 
https://cik.efeo.fr/inventaire-cik-des-inscriptions-khmeres/; and Peter Skilling, 
“Towards an Epigraphic Bibliography of Thailand”, in Writing for Eternity:  
A Survey of Epigraphy in Southeast Asia, ed. Daniel Perret, Paris: EFEO, 2018, 
pp. 109–22.  A key text for establishing further historical bases for 
understanding Khmer Pāli usage is K. 966, a 12th-century bilingual Pāli-Khmer 
inscription from Dong Mae Nang Meung, Nakhon Sawan, Thailand. The 
comparative study needed to develop sharper critical assessment of these 
“Cambodian” and “Thai” epigraphic bodies would also include consideration 
of the different types of material support on which the texts appear.
45	
For the first systematic documentation of the site including mention of this 
image and the other materials associated with it discussed below, see Henri 
Mauger, “Práḥ Khăn de Kŏṃpoṅ Svày”, BEFEO 39, 1939, pp. 197–220. For 
our purposes, see esp. pp. 211–2.
46	
Peter Skilling, “Namo Buddhāya Gurave (K. 888): Circulation of a Liturgical 
Formula across Asia”, JSS 106, 2018, pp. 109–28. The verse, Skilling notes, 
contains vocabulary shared by Sanskrit and Pāli, but the word inflections are 
clearly Sanskrit. This situation highlights two key factors for the present 
volume: the intimate kinship between the two Indic languages whose 
distinctions rather than similarities are often emphasised in scholarship in 
conjunction with rigid categorisation of religious affiliation; and the still 
rudimentary state of our knowledge in this field.
47	
Saveros Pou, Nouvelles inscriptions du Cambodge I, EFEO, Paris, 1989, pp. 14–5.

--- PAGE 79 ---
50
Ashley Thompson
To compare the scripts of the two inscriptions, see Pl. I of Nouvelles inscriptions 
and p. 14 of Cœdès’ “La plus ancienne”.
48	
In a 1967 thesis Bernard-Philippe Groslier built substantially on the work of 
Mauger cited above. Groslier’s work comprises a detailed study of the 
architectural structure and décor of the core monumental site: Bernard-Philippe 
Groslier, Le Preah Khan de Kompong Svay, thesis, Paris: École du Louvre, 1967. 
“The Buddhist Towers of Preah Khan” research project led by archaeologist 
Mitch Hendrickson is building further on this work to develop also an 
understanding of the site within the broader Angkorian socio-economic fabric 
over time (http://pkks.sscnet.ucla.edu/). While we await the advancement and 
publication of this team’s research my brief comments on the site here should be 
set against the backdrop of the developing understandings of the complexity of 
the site. 
49	
Peter Skilling, “Namo Buddhāya Gurave (K. 888)”, pp. 123–4. Skilling cites 
Jens-Uwe Hartmann on characterisation of the verse as “common Buddhist 
property” (p. 123).
50	
For art historical assessments, see Madeleine Giteau, Guide du musée national de 
Phnom Penh, I: Sculpture, Phnom Penh, Office national du Tourisme, 1960,  
p. 50; Nadine Dalsheimer, L’art du Cambodge ancien: Les collections du Musée 
national de Phnom Penh, Paris: EFEO 2001, pp. 178–9. Dalsheimer firmly 
situates the piece in the 13th to 14th centuries on the basis of the relatively poor 
modelling of the body, but nonetheless qualifies this dating as an “extension of 
the art of the Jayavarman VII period”.
51	
Dalsheimer, L’art du Cambodge ancien, pp. 222–3. Hiram Woodward also 
situates the piece in the Jayavarman VII period; see Hiram W. Woodward, “The 
Jayabuddhamahānātha Images of Cambodia”, Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 
52/53, 1994/95, pp. 108–9.
52	
On the Kompong Svay portrait-statue, along with a figure (Buddha?) in 
meditation with like morphological resemblance to the portrait, see Christophe 
Pottier, “A propos de la statue portrait du Roi Jayavarman VII au temple de 
Preah Khan de Kompong Svay”, AA 55, 2000, pp. 171–2. The notes include a 
useful bibliography of other portrait and portrait-like Buddha finds.
53	
See Ashley Thompson, “Angkor Revisited: The State of Statuary”, in What’s 
the Use of Art?: Asian Visual and Material Culture in Context, eds. Jan Mrazek 
and Morgan Pitelka, Hawai‘i: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2008, pp. 179–213.
54	
 Peter Skilling “Namo Buddhāya Gurave (K. 888)”, p. 109, n. 2. Hiram 
Woodward points out the need to differentiate the saṃghāṭi, as Skilling names 
the outer cloth layer draped over the left shoulder, and what Griswold termed a 
“shoulder-flap” (the turned over robe edge) (Hiram Woodward, personal 
communication, February 2020). See A. B. Griswold, “The Architecture and 
Sculpture of Siam” in Arts of Thailand: A Handbook of the Architecture, 
Sculpture and Painting of Thailand (Siam), ed. Theodore Bowie, Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1960, pp. 25–157; “Prolegomena to the Study of the 
Buddha’s Dress in Chinese Sculpture: With Particular Reference to the Rietberg 
Museum’s Collection”, Artibus Asiae 26, no. 2, 1963, pp. 85–131; 
“Prolegomena to the Study of the Buddha’s Dress in Chinese Sculpture (Part 
II)”, Artibus Asiae 27, no. 4, 1964–5, pp. 335–48; “Imported Images and the 
Nature of Copying in the Art of Siam”, Artibus Asiae 23, 1966, pp.37–73.  For 
a quick description of the two garments and the resemblance of their 
appearance on statuary, see “Prolegomena” I (1963), pp. 86–8, esp. n. 8. 
Theoretically, the two can be distinguished through observation of the back of

--- PAGE 80 ---
51
Early Theravādin Cambodia
sculpted imagery. That there is no visible trace of the saṃghāṭi on the back of 
Ka. 1697 suggests that what we see in front is the shoulder-flap, however given 
that the sculpture is unfinished in places we cannot be certain of this (See Fig. 
1.3). We cannot see the backs of the two central figures in Ka. 1848 as they are 
embedded in the nāga.
55	
François Bizot, Les traditions de la pabbajja en Asie du Sud-Est. Recherches sur le 
Bouddhisme khmer IV, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1988; and for a 
summary presentation: “Bouddhisme d’Asie du Sud-Est”, École pratique des 
Hautes Etudes, Section des sciences religieuses, Annuaire, tome 105, 1996–7, 
pp. 75–86. Tun Puthpiseth’s encyclopaedic doctoral dissertation documents 
variations in sculpted Cambodian “Theravādin” monastic dress including but 
not limited to the covering or exposure of the right shoulder but remains 
ambivalent in attributing any significance in terms of lineage or doctrinal 
orientation to these differences. While asserting that the sculpted dress reflects 
that worn by monks at the time of artistic production, and leaving open the 
possibility that certain elements of the dress such as the belt could indicate 
distinctions in practice, he emphasises that “they [sculpted post-Bayon Buddha 
images] all belong to Theravādin sanctuaries, [and] do not therefore present 
specific drapery corresponding to different sects” (Tun Puthpiseth, 
“Bouddhisme Theravāda et production artistique en pays khmer”, p. 168, my 
translation).
56	
Woodward, “The Jayabuddhamahānātha Images”, p. 108. Note also that Hiram 
W. Woodward has long highlighted the Buddha protected by the nāga as a 
crossover Mahāyāna-Theravāda figure.
57	
Dalsheimer, L’art du Cambodge ancient, p. 222.
58	
See Claudine Bautze-Picron, The Bejewelled Buddha from India to Burma, New 
Delhi: Sanctum Books, 2010, esp. pp. 131–40.
59	
For more on Chatomukh and Prasat Steung, including the reasoning behind the 
tentative dating of the former, see Ashley Thompson, “Revenons, revenants: 
mémoires d’Angkor”, in Temporalités khmères: de près, de loin, entre îles et 
péninsules, eds. Nasir Abdoul-Carime, Grégory Mikaelian and Joseph Thach, 
Berne: Peter Lang, 2021, pp. 345–75. In the following paragraph I draw from 
this essay. See also Chapter 7 in the present volume.
60	
Hiram W. Woodward, “Ram Khamhaeng’s Inscription: The Search for 
Context”, in The Ram Khamhaeng Controversy, ed. J. R. Chamberlain, 
Bangkok, The Siam Society, 1991, p. 427.
61	
Ibid., p. 424.
62	
François Bizot, Le figuier à cinq branches: Recherche sur le bouddhisme khmer, 
Paris: EFEO, PEFEO vol. CVII, 1976, esp. pp. 29–42.
63	
In addition to the research presented in the present volume and my own work 
cited above, see in particular Provost-Roche’s evocation of regional comparators 
throughout her dissertation in analyses of the large Buddha figures in niches on 
the external sanctuary walls of other early Middle Cambodian sites; and Tilman 
Frasch’s ongoing work on a Cambodian monastic presence at Pagan evidenced 
in particular by a Pāli inscription from 1248 CE, and other indicators of 
Cambodia’s place in cosmopolitan Pāli Buddhist networks evidenced in 
particular by another Pagan inscription dated 1270 CE.  See Tilman Frasch, “A 
Pāli Cosmopolis? Sri Lanka and the Theravāda Buddhist Ecumene, c. 500–
1500”, in Sri Lanka at the Crossroads of History, eds. Zoltán Biederman and 
Alan Strathern, London: University College London Press, 2017, pp. 66–76; 
“Kontakte, Konzile, Kontroversen: Begegnungen in der Theravada-Kosmopolis,

--- PAGE 81 ---
52
Ashley Thompson
c. 1000–1300 CE”, in Religionsbegegnung in der asiatischen Religionsgeschichte: 
Kritische Reflexionen über ein etabliertes Konzept, eds. Max Deeg, Oliver 
Freiberger and Christoph Kleine, Gӧttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2018, 
pp. 129–52; and “Pali at Bagan: The Lingua Franca of Theravada Buddhist 
Ecumene”, talk in the Rainy Season Research Seminar Series, Transnational 
Network of Theravada Studies, 25 September 2020, https://theravadastudies.
org/recordings/. I note also the comparison made with Pagan’s Ananda temple 
by Lam Sopheak. For this archaeologist, who led the restoration of Preah 
Chatomukh, the comparison is evoked both by morphological comparison with 
the Ananda’s configuration of four colossal Buddhas around a central core and 
playful linguistic comparison between “Pagan” and “Bakan” (pākān). The latter 
is the common local name for the temple known to international art historians 
and archaeologists as “Preah Khan”, as well as that of the site of another 
important Middle Cambodian colossal four-Buddha ensemble, at the summit of 
Angkor Wat temple. See Lam Sopheak, Rapāy kār(ṇ) juos jul prāsād catumukh, 
[Report on the Restoration of Prasat Chatomukh], 2018, unpublished,  
pp. 47–50.
64	
The first mention of this piece is in Henri Marchal’s study of Angkor Thom’s 
“Buddhist terraces”, a term which he coined to describe the main architectural 
feature of these early Theravādin sites in Angkor Thom: Henri Marchal, 
“Monuments secondaires et terrasses bouddhiques d’Aṅkor Thom”, BEFEO 18, 
no. 8, Hanoi, 1918, p. 13. Thierry Zéphir provides a comprehensive description 
in Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir, L’Art Khmer dans les collections du musée 
Guimet, Paris:Édition de la Réunion des musées nationaux, 2008, pp. 272–3.
65	
Ibid., p. 273.
66	
 For a detailed review of the find of the Bayon Buddha, and consideration of 
other materials found in the Bayon pit as well as at Vihear Prampir Laveang and 
a neighbouring Buddhist terrace, see Martin Polkinghorne, Christophe Pottier 
and Christian Fischer, “Evidence for the 15th-century Ayutthayan Occupation 
of Angkor”, in The Renaissance Princess Lectures: In Honour of Her Royal 
Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn, Siam Society, 2018, p. 98–132. In 
this essay, which is an updated version of an earlier publication by the same 
authors (“One Buddha Can Hide Another”, JA 301, no. 2, 2013, pp. 575–624), 
Vihear Prampir Lavaeng is referred to as “Prasat Prampil Lavaeng”. See also 
reference to this site in Chapters 5 and 6 in the present volume. 
67	
Kathleen Davis, Periodization and Sovereignty: How Ideas of Feudalism and 
Secularization Govern the Politics of Time, Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 2008, p. 11.
68	
Madeleine Giteau, Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien, Paris, EFEO 
1975.
69	
See the second edition: Krassem, Mahā Bidūr, Silācārik Nagar Vatt/Inscriptions 
modernes d’Angkor with a new preface by Saveros Pou, Paris: Cedoreck, 1984,  
p. ga. 
70	
Mikaelian’s latest development on this question is embedded in the above-cited 
work with Eric Bourdonneau, “L’histoire longue”; mine is in the “Revenons, 
revenants” cited above.
71	
Hiram W. Woodward Jr. and Donna K. Strahan, The Sacred Sculpture of 
Thailand: The Alexander B. Griswold Collection, The Walters Art Gallery, 
Baltimore: Walters Art Gallery, 1997; The Art and Architecture of Thailand 
Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2003, 2005.
72	
In addition to Marchal’s 1918 foundational essay noted above, further analysis

--- PAGE 82 ---
53
Early Theravādin Cambodia
of the function and meaning of these spatial configurations can be found in 
Ashley Thompson, “Mémoires du Cambodge”, PhD dissertation, Université de 
Paris VIII, 1999, esp. pp. 40–114; and “The Ancestral Cult in Transition: 
Reflections on Spatial Organization of Cambodia’s early Theravada Complex”, 
in Southeast Asian Archaeology 1996: Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Leiden, 
2–6 September 1996, eds. Marijke J. Klokke and Thomas De Brujin, Centre for 
Southeast Asian Studies, University of Hull, 1998, 273–95.
73	
Madeleine Giteau’s Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien includes close 
study of those sculptural materials of Western Prasat Top which were accessible 
during the period of her research preceding the 1979 publication. As noted 
below, Sato has been able to build on the study of the site’s material evidence, 
including additional sculpture brought to light through new archaeological 
research. Another close examination of the site’s sculpture, preceding Sato’s 
research published here, but usefully set in the context of a near-exhaustive 
inventory of early Cambodian Middle Period Buddhist statuary, is found in 
Tun Puthpiseth, “Bouddhisme Theravāda et production artistique en pays 
khmer”.
74	
See Ashley Thompson, “Mémoires du Cambodge”, pp. 114–253; “Lost and 
Found”; “The Future of Cambodia’s Past”; and “Revenons, revenants”. In her 
dissertation L. Provost-Roche examines this recurrent configuration in relation 
to the development of the Siamese prāṅ(g), a sanctuary-tower more elongated 
than its Angkorian predecessor and with niches on each facade containing large 
sculpted Buddha figures. For a brief summary: Provost-Roche, “Les derniers 
siècles”, p. 210.
75	
For description and analyses of the relevant archaeological record at Angkor 
Wat, see Alison K. Carter, Miriam T. Stark, Seth Quintus, Yijie Zhuang, Hong 
Wang, Piphal Heng and Rachna Chhay, “Temple Occupation and the Tempo of 
Collapse at Angkor Wat, Cambodia”, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 116, no. 25, June 2019, pp. 12226–31.
References
Acri, Andrea. “Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk 
Routes, 7th–13th Century AD”. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime 
Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, ed. Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS-
Yusof Ishak Institute, 2016, pp. 1–25.
Ang Choulean. “ṭūc purāṇ kāl!” [Like olden times!]. KhmeRenaissance 3, December 
2007–8: pp. 75–77.
Assavavirulhakarn, Prapod. The Ascendancy of Theravāda Buddhism in Southeast Asia. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2010.
Baptiste, Pierre and Thierry Zéphir. L’Art Khmer dans les collections du musée Guimet. 
Paris: Edition de la Réunion des musées nationaux, 2008.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. The Bejewelled Buddha from India to Burma. New Delhi: 
Sanctum Books, 2010.
Bizot, François. Le figuier à cinq branches: Recherche sur le bouddhisme khmer. Paris: 
EFEO, PEFEO vol. CVII, 1976.
——— . Les traditions de la pabbajja en Asie du Sud-Est: Recherches sur le Bouddhisme 
khmer IV. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1988.
——— . “Bouddhisme d’Asie du Sud-Est”. In Annuaire, tome 105. Paris: École pratique 
des Hautes Etudes, Section des sciences religieuses, 1996–7.

--- PAGE 83 ---
54
Ashley Thompson
Bourdonneau, Éric and Grégory Mikaelian. “L’histoire longue du Devarāja: 
Pañcaksetr et figuier à cinq branches dans l’ombre de la danse de Śiva”. In 
Rāja-maṇḍala: le modèle royal en Inde, Collection Puruṣārtha 37, eds. 
Emmanuel Francis and Raphaël Rousseleau, September 2020, pp. 81–129.
Bretfeld, Sven. “Resonant Paradigms in the Study of Religions and the Emergence of 
Theravāda Buddhism”. Religion 42, no. 2: pp. 273–97.
Carter, Alison K., Miriam T. Stark, Seth Quintus, Yijie Zhuang, Hong Wang, Piphal 
Heng and Rachna Chhay. “Temple Occupation and the Tempo of Collapse at 
Angkor Wat, Cambodia”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 
no. 25, June 2019: pp. 12226–31.
Chhom Kunthea. “Le rôle du sanskrit dans le développement de la langue khmère: 
Une étude épigraphique du VIe au XIVe siècle”. PhD dissertation, École 
Pratique des Hautes Études, 2016.
Cœdès, George. “Études cambodgiennes XXXII: La plus ancienne inscription en pâli 
du Cambodge”. BEFEO 36, 1937: pp. 14–21 (republished in Articles sur le pays 
khmer, t. I, Paris: EFEO, 1989, pp. 282–9).
——— . Inscriptions du Cambodge III. Paris: EFEO, 1951.
——— . “Une période critique dans l’Asie du Sud-est: le XIIIè siècle”. Bulletin de la 
Société des Études Indochinoises XXXIII, no. 4, 1958: pp. 387–400.
Crosby, Kate. Theravāda Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity and Identity. West Sussex: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.
——— . “Tantric Theravada: A Bibliographic Essay on the Writings of François Bizot 
and Others on the Yogāvacara Tradition”. Contemporary Buddhism 1, no. 2, 
2000: pp. 141–98.
——— . Esoteric Theravada: The Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of 
Southeast Asia. Boulder: Shambhala Publications, 2020.
Dalsheimer, Nadine. L’art du Cambodge ancien: Les collections du Musée national de 
Phnom Penh. Paris: EFEO, 2001.
Davis, Kathleen. Periodization and Sovereignty: How Ideas of Feudalism and 
Secularization Govern the Politics of Time. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 2008.
Derrida, Jacques. “Structure, Sign and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences”. 
In Writing and Difference, trans. Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1979, pp. 278–93.
École française d’extrême-Orient. https://cik.efeo.fr/inventaire-cik-des-inscriptions-
khmeres/.
Frasch, Tilman. “A Pāli Cosmopolis? Sri Lanka and the Theravāda Buddhist Ecumene, 
c. 500–1500”. In Sri Lanka at the Crossroads of History, eds. Zoltán Biederman 
and Alan Strathern, London: University College London Press, 2017,  
pp. 66–76.
——— . “Kontakte, Konzile, Kontroversen: Begegnungen in der Theravada-
Kosmopolis, c. 1000–1300 CE”. In Religionsbegegnung in der asiatischen 
Religionsgeschichte: Kritische Reflexionen über ein etabliertes Konzept, eds. Max 
Deeg, Oliver Freiberger and Christoph Kleine. Gӧttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht, 2018, pp. 129–52.
——— . “Pali at Bagan: The Lingua Franca of Theravada Buddhist Ecumene”. Talk in 
the Rainy Season Research Seminar Series, Transnational Network of Theravada 
Studies, 25 September, 2020. https://theravadastudies.org/recordings/.
Giteau, Madeleine. Guide du musée national de Phnom Penh, 2 vols. Phnom Penh: 
Office national du Tourisme, 1960.
——— . Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien. Paris: EFEO, 1975.

--- PAGE 84 ---
55
Early Theravādin Cambodia
Griswold, A. B. “The Architecture and Sculpture of Siam”. In Arts of Thailand: A 
Handbook of the Architecture, Sculpture and Painting of Thailand (Siam), ed. 
Theodore Bowie. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1960, pp. 25–157.
——— . “Prolegomena to the Study of the Buddha’s Dress in Chinese Sculpture: With 
Particular Reference to the Rietberg Museum’s Collection”. Artibus Asiae 26, 
no. 2, 1963: pp. 85–131.
——— . “Prolegomena to the Study of the Buddha’s Dress in Chinese Sculpture (Part 
II)”. Artibus Asiae 27, no. 4, 1964–5: pp. 335–48.
——— . “Imported Images and the Nature of Copying in the Art of Siam”. Artibus 
Asiae 23, 1966: pp.37–73.
Griswold, A. B. and Prasert ṇa Nagara. “The Epigraphy of Mahādharmarājā I of 
Sukhodaya: Epigraphic and Historical Studies 11/1”. JSS 61, no. 1, 1973:  
pp. 71–178.
Groslier, Bernard-Philippe. Le Preah Khan de Kompong Svay. Thesis, Paris: École du 
Louvre, 1967.
Horner, I. B., trans. Milinda’s Questions, vol. 1. London: Pāli Text Society, 1990. First 
published 1963.
Khin Sok. “Deux inscriptions tardives du Phnom Bàkhèn, K.465 et K.285”. BEFEO 
65, no. 1, 1978: pp. 271–80.
Krassem, Mahā Bidūr. Silācārik Nagar Vatt/Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor, with a 
new preface by Saveros Pou. Paris: Cedoreck, 1984.
Lam Sopheak. Rapāy kār(ṇ) juos jul prāsād catumukh [Report on the Restoration of 
Prasat Chatomukh]. 2018. (Unpublished.)
Latinis, Kyle and Ea Darith. (https://www.researchgate.net/profile/David_Latinis/
publication/304353545_Phnom_Kulen_Cambodia_and_Singapore_
Projects_-_Royal_Residence_Palace_Site_Banteay_-_Sema_Stone_Sites_Don_
Meas_and_Peam_Kre_-_Dvāravati_influence_-_Sema_Stone_quarry_-_
Implications/links/576cfa8208ae3c5c932d24a3/
Phnom-Kulen-Cambodia-and-Singapore-Projects-Royal-Residence-Palace-Site-
Banteay-Sema-Stone-Sites-Don-Meas-and-Peam-Kre-Dvāravati-influence-Sema-
Stone-quarry-Implications.pdf.
Lewitz (aka Pou), Saveros. “La toponymie khmère”. BEFEO 53, no. 2, 1967: pp. 
377–450.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3”. BEFEO 57, 1970: pp. 99–126.
——— . “Inscriptions khmères K. 144 et K. 177”. BEFEO 70, 1981: pp. 101–20.
Marchal, Henri. “Monuments secondaires et terrasses bouddhiques d’Aṅkor Thom”. 
BEFEO 18, no. 8, 1918: pp. 1–40.
Mauger, Henri. “Práḥ Khăn de Kŏṃpoṅ Svày”. BEFEO 39, 1939: pp. 197–220.
Mikaelian, Grégory. “Écrire l’histoire du Cambodge moyen entre techniques 
occidentales et doctrines orientales”. Bulletin de l’AEFEK 8, February 2005. 
https://www.aefek.fr/page33.html#wa-anchor-j9elqu5r6jjf8o (last accessed 1 
December 2020).
——— . “Des sources lacunaires de l’histoire à l’histoire complexifiée des sources. 
Éléments pour une histoire des renaissances khmères (c. XIV–c. XVIIIe s.)”. 
Péninsule 65, 2012: pp. 259–305.
Murphy, Stephen. “The Distribution of Sema Stones throughout the Khorat Plateau 
during the Dvāravati Period”. In Unearthing Southeast Asia’s Past, Vol.1, eds. 
Marijke J. Klokke and Véronique Degroot. Singapore: NUS Press, 2013,  
pp. 215–33.
Peleggi, Maurizo. “The Plot of Thai Art History: Buddhist Sculpture and the Myth of 
National Origins”. In A Sarong for Clio: Essays on the Intellectual and Cultural

--- PAGE 85 ---
56
Ashley Thompson
Histories of Thailand – Inspired by Craig J. Reynolds, ed. Maurizio Peleggi. 
Ithaca: Cornell University SEAP Publications, 2015, pp. 79–93.
Perret, Daniel, ed. Writing for Eternity: A Survey of Epigraphy in Southeast Asia. Paris: 
EFEO, 2018.
Pollock, Sheldon. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture 
and Power in Premodern India. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006.
Polkinghorne, Martin, Christophe Pottier and Christian Fischer. “One Buddha Can 
Hide Another”. JA 301, no. 2, 2013: pp. 575–624.
——— . “Evidence for the 15th-century Ayutthayan Occupation of Angkor”. In The 
Renaissance Princess Lectures: In Honour of Her Royal Highness Princess Maha 
Chakri Sirindhorn. Siam Society, 2018, p. 98–132.
Pottier, Christophe. “A propos de la statue portrait du Roi Jayavarman VII au temple 
de Preah Khan de Kompong Svay”. Arts Asiatiques 55, 2000: pp. 171–2.
Pou, Saveros. Nouvelles Inscriptions du Cambodge I. Paris: EFEO, 1989.
Provost-Roche, Ludivine. “Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge 
(env. 1220–env. 1500)”, 2 vols. PhD dissertation, Université de la Sorbonne 
Nouvelle–Paris III, 2010.
Reynolds, Frank E. and Charles Hallisey. “The Buddha”. In Buddhism and Asian 
History: Religion, History and Culture, eds. Joseph M. Kitigawa and Mark D. 
Cummings. New York: MacMillan Publishing and Co., 1989, pp. 29–49.
Skilling, Peter. “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to South-east Asia”. Journal of 
the International Association of Buddhist Studies 20, no. 1, Summer 1997:  
pp. 99–104.
——— . “Namo Buddhāya Gurave (K. 888): Circulation of a Liturgical Formula across 
Asia”. JSS 106, 2018: pp. 109–28.
——— . “Towards an Epigraphic Bibliography of Thailand”. In Writing for Eternity: A 
Survey of Epigraphy in Southeast Asia, ed. Daniel Perret. Paris: EFEO, 2018, 
109–122.
——— . “The Theravaṃsa has Always been Here: K. 1355 from Angkor Borei”. JSS 
107, no. 2, 2019: pp. 43–62.
Skilling, Peter, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza and Santi Pakdeekham, eds. How 
Theravāda is Theravāda?: Exploring Buddhist Identities. Chiang Mai: Silkworm 
Books, 2012.
Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. “The Galactic Polity”. In World Conqueror and World 
Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand against a Historical 
Background. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976, pp. 102–31.
Thompson, Ashley. “The Ancestral Cult in Transition: Reflections on Spatial 
Organization of Cambodia’s Early Theravada Complex”. In Southeast Asian 
Archaeology 1996: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of the 
European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Leiden, 2–6 September 
1996, eds Marijke J. Klokke and Thomas De Brujin. Hull: Centre for Southeast 
Asian Studies, University of Hull, 1998, pp. 273–95.
——— . “Mémoires du Cambodge”. PhD dissertation. Université de Paris VIII, 1999.
——— . “Lost and Found: The Stupa, the Four-faced Buddha and the Seat of Royal 
Power in Middle Cambodia”. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference 
of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 1998, eds. 
Wibke Lobo and Stephanie Reimann. Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, 
University of Hull, 2000, pp. 245–63.
——— . “The Future of Cambodia’s Past: A Messianic Middle-Cambodian Royal 
Cult”. In History, Buddhism and New Religious Movements in Cambodia, eds. 
Elizabeth Guthrie and John Marston. Hawaiʻi: University of Hawaiʻi Press,

--- PAGE 86 ---
57
Early Theravādin Cambodia
2004, pp. 13–39.
——— . “Angkor Revisited: the State of Statuary”. In What’s the Use of Art?: Asian 
Visual and Material Culture in Context, eds. Jan Mrazek and Morgan Pitelka. 
Hawaiʻi: University of Hawaiʻi Press, 2008, pp. 179–213.
——— . Engendering the Buddhist State: Territory, Sovereignty and Sexual Difference in 
the Inventions of Angkor. Routledge Critical Buddhist Studies, 2016.
——— . “Revenons, revenants: mémoires d’Angkor”. In Temporalités khmères: de près, 
de loin, entre îles et péninsules, eds. Nasir Abdoul-Carime, Grégory Mikaelian 
and Joseph Thach. Berne: Peter Lang, 2021, pp. 345–75.
Tun Puthpiseth. “Bouddhisme Theravāda et production artistique en pays khmer: 
Étude d’un corpus d’images en ronde-bosse du Buddha (XIIIe–XVIe siècles)”. 
PhD dissertation, Paris: Université de Paris IV-Sorbonne, 2015.
“The Two Buddhist Towers of Preah Khan”. http://pkks.sscnet.ucla.edu/.
Vickery, Michael. “The 2/k.125 Fragment, a Lost Chronicle of Ayutthaya”. JSS 65, no. 
1, 1977: pp. 1–80. 
——— . “A New Tāmnān About Ayudhya”. JSS 67, no. 1, July 1979: pp. 123–86.
——— . “L’inscription K 1006 du Phnom Kulên”. BEFEO 71, 1982 : pp. 77–86. 
Walker, Trent. “Unfolding Buddhism: Communal Scripts, Localized Translations, and 
the Work of the Dying in Cambodian Chanted Leporellos”. PhD dissertation, 
University of California, Berkeley, 2018.
Winichakul, Thongchai. Siam Mapped: A History of the Geo-body of a Nation. 
Hawaiʻi: University of Hawaiʻi Press, 1994.
Wolters, O. W. History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 1999. First edition 
1982.
Woodward, Hiram W., Jr. “Ram Khamhaeng’s Inscription: The Search for Context”. 
In The Ram Khamhaeng Controversy, ed. J. R. Chamberlain. Bangkok: The 
Siam Society, 1991, pp. 419–37.
——— . “The Jayabuddhamahānātha Images of Cambodia”. Journal of the Walters Art 
Gallery 52/53, 1994/1995: p. 108.
——— . The Art and Architecture of Thailand. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2005. First 
Published 2003.
——— . “‘The Characteristics of Elephants’: A Thai Manuscript and its Context”. In 
From Mulberry Leaves to Silk Scrolls: New Approaches to the Study of Asian 
Manuscript Traditions, eds. Justin McDaniel and Lynn Ransom. Philadelphia: 
Schoenberg Institute, University of Pennsylvania Libraries, 2015, pp. 15–41.
——— . “King Sūryavarman II and the Power of Subjugation”. In On Meaning and 
Mantras: Essays in Honor of Frits Staal, eds. George Thompson and Richard K. 
Payne. Berkeley: Institute of Buddhist Studies and BDK America, 2017,  
pp. 483–502.
Woodward, Hiram W., Jr. and Donna K. Strahan. The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand: 
The Alexander B. Griswold Collection, The Walters Art Gallery. Baltimore: 
Walters Art Gallery, 1997.

--- PAGE 87 ---
58
Chapter 2
ANGKOR AND THERAVĀDA 
BUDDHISM: SOME 
CONSIDERATIONS
Hiram W. Woodward
Among the crucial monuments dating from the final years of Jayavarman 
VII’s reign to the conventional date for the “fall” of Angkor, 1431, are 
such constructions as the inner gallery of reliefs at the Bayon, the Elephant 
Terraces, the Terrace of the Leper King, and large sections of the Preah 
Pithu temples and the Theravāda Buddhist Preah Palilay. The last two 
sites, where major work was carried out in the decades around 1300, are of 
particular interest because they stand in proximity and face each other, so 
to speak, from opposite sides of the principal north–south artery of the 
city – one complex Brahmanical, the other Buddhist. 
Substantial portions of both temple sites date back to the 12th century, 
and some of the later portions copy 12th-century styles, making for a 
situation of extreme complexity. An intensive study of the architecture of the 
13th and 14th centuries appeared in 2010, but, as an unpublished doctoral 
2.2
2.1
Fig. 2.1	 Leaf band at Prasat Top 
East. Photograph by author.
	
Fig. 2.2	 Leaf scrolls surmounting a 
niche at Preah Pithu U 
temple. Photograph by 
author.

--- PAGE 88 ---
59
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
dissertation, its circulation has been limited, and its conclusions have not 
been digested by scholars of Cambodia.1 Documentary evidence for the 
period exists in the form of one securely dated monument, the small 
Brahmanical Prasat Top East (Monument 487; Maṅgalārtha), established in 
1295 (Fig. 2.1). We can look at a leaf border at Prasat Top East, compare it 
with leaf scrollwork at Preah Pithu U (Fig. 2.2), and observe how difficult it is 
to reach conclusions regarding chronology from the similarities and 
differences. Nevertheless, eventually it will be possible to make the leap to an 
actual history, one chronicling vast shifts in religious preferences and cultural 
practices. Until that time, scholars must resort to turning the issues around in 
their heads, hoping for fresh insights that will provide new understandings of 
motivations, of the relative roles of the monkhood, the court, and 
Brahmanical practitioners, and of the shifting demography of the population. 
This chapter will attempt to advance the study of the issues in various 
ways. After a glance at outdated explanatory theory, I will contend that 
some knowledge of Theravāda Buddhism had been present in Cambodia 
for centuries, and so it is wrong to consider it as entirely an intrusive 
phenomenon. (In this chapter, the term “Theravāda” will be used rather 
loosely.) Perhaps – despite the absence of evidence either positive or 
negative – Theravāda Buddhism had long been looked upon in a 
favourable light. Eventually, of course, a reinvigoration (a reformation?) 
took place, stemming from Burma (Myanmar), and then enveloping both 
Thailand and Cambodia. Subsequent sections of the chapter will focus on 
the reign of Jayavarman VII, on some of the problems involved in 
understanding the 13th and 14th centuries, and on “civic ritual” – an 
attempt to provide a fresh interpretation of the functioning of Angkor’s 
royal square in the period following Jayavarman VII. 
LOUIS FINOT, 1908
In the short book published in 1963, Angkor: An Introduction, which 
originated in lectures given in Hanoi in 1943, George Cœdès quoted 
approvingly a passage from a lecture given by the Sanskrit scholar Louis 
Finot in 1908. It had been directed to an audience of aspiring French 
colonial officials:
… the hardworking population was decimated and spent. 
Surely they did not defend these rapacious gods or these 
slave-drivers and collectors of tithes with much ardour. The 
conqueror on the other hand offered the vanquished a 
precious compensation: he offered them a gentle religion 
whose doctrine of resignation suited this tired and 
discouraged people most appealingly.2

--- PAGE 89 ---
60
Hiram W. Woodward
Finot provided a psychological motivation with which we can empathise, 
and, if we differ from him, he challenges us to put forward an explanation 
that is equally understandable and stark. Still, there is almost nothing in 
the statement that is not open for discussion. Hardworking? Surely. 
Decimated and spent? Quite possibly the labourers who built 
Jayavarman’s temples were better off when employed than after. 
Rapacious gods, slave-drivers, tithe collectors? The data does not exist that 
would enable us to compare the economic conditions of the peasants 
named in inscriptions, who provided support for the temples, with those 
who were not similarly indentured. Conqueror? This suggests that 
invading Thai were responsible for imposing Theravāda Buddhism. There 
is no evidence of warfare until the late 13th century (in the account by 
Zhou Daguan), and it is not easy to determine the ethnic makeup of 
Northeastern Thailand, Lopburi, and Central Thailand in the 13th 
century, and the relative number of Khmer, Mon and Thai speakers. 
(Sukhothai, however, we can say was predominantly Thai.) Vanquished? 
You mean in 1431? Mightn’t that have been more a matter of factional 
disputes?3 Gentle religion? Oh, in what way exactly? Doctrine of 
resignation? As demonstrated in what behavior? 
At the end of this chapter, I shall inquire again about motivations and 
about the characterisation of Theravāda Buddhism.
BUDDHIST TRADITIONS, SEVENTH TO TWELFTH 
CENTURIES
Dvāravatī, a name attested in both Chinese and local sources, was 
evidently centred at Nakhon Pathom, but it is not known how far the 
kingdom extended at the time of its greatest power.4 Used in a cultural 
sense, the name Dvāravatī can also be applied to the civilisation of 
Northeastern Thailand. In both regions, the vernacular language was 
Mon. In Central Thailand, the dominant religion was Theravāda 
Buddhism, as inscriptions with quotations from Pāli-language scriptures 
demonstrate, and this is likely to have been the case in the Northeast (a 
useful if anachronistic and Bangkok-centric place name) as well, despite 
the absence of comparable epigraphic evidence of Pāli.5 The primary icon 
in both regions was the same: a standing Buddha, both hands performing 
a gesture of instruction, a type of image not found in India. But the 
secondary religious artefacts differed, despite some significant instances of 
overlap: Nakhon Pathom was characterised by the presence of Wheels of 
the Law and the Northeast by the ubiquity of Buddhist boundary stones 
(sīmā). While Dvāravatī is a good name for the dominant political entity 
in Central Thailand, there is no satisfactory name for a dominant 
kingdom in the Northeast.6

--- PAGE 90 ---
61
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
The links between Cambodia and central Dvāravatī were extensive and 
have not been completely catalogued.7 A stone example of the Dvāravatī 
double-gestured Buddha found in Kompong Speu province, now in the 
Musée Guimet, bears an inscription with the words of the ye dhammā 
verse.8 Even if monasteries were not maintained, a visible, inscribed 
sculpture could remain as a reminder of past practices. Small bronze 
images have been unearthed elsewhere.9 Boundary stones are a somewhat 
different case. On Phnom Kulen there are two sets of Buddhist sīmā, 
related to those found in Northeastern Thailand, and a giant reclining 
Buddha, quite possibly ancient in date.10 These objects might have been 
the result of the occupation of Phnom Kulen by the kingdom of Wendan 
(centred in Northeastern Thailand) prior to the establishment of the 
Angkorian dynasty in 802. Whether pockets of Buddhists, who may be 
considered Theravādins, remained on Phnom Kulen in subsequent 
centuries will eventually be revealed by archaeological exploration.
The next important moment of intercourse between regions occurred 
in the tenth century. There is inscriptional evidence of a northward 
2.3
Fig. 2.3	 Image of the Buddha, from 
Beng Vien. Height: 46 cm. 
National Museum of 
Cambodia, on view at the 
Angkor National Museum, 
Siem Reap. Photograph 
courtesy Michael Vickery.

--- PAGE 91 ---
62
Hiram W. Woodward
expansion of the Khmer kingdom by the early tenth century. An 
expansion westward, presumably during the reign of King 
Rājendravarman (r. 944–c. 968) in the middle decades of the tenth 
century, is attested by the construction of a brick sanctuary, Prang Khaek, 
in Lopburi. In the Northeast, the local boundary-stone culture persisted, 
and the expansion of imperial power can be traced northward by the 
appearance of Khmer stylistic and inscriptional elements in the boundary 
stones. In Central Thailand, developments are much harder to follow. 
Wheels of the Law had ceased to be carved long before Khmer intrusion, 
and evidence other than hard-to-date stuccos is not easy to come by. In 
Cambodia itself, King Rājendravarman set up an inscription (K. 872) in 
946 at Beng Vien, about 32 kilometres southeast of Angkor, proclaiming 
that he understood Buddhist doctrine and that he had conquered 
Rāmaṇya, that is, Monland. The evidence of both artefacts and 
inscriptions indicate the Buddhism practised in tenth-century Cambodia 
was overwhelmingly Mahāyāna, with a strong Tantric aspect, but at the 
site of Beng Vien a Buddha image was recovered showing the Buddha with 
his left arm hanging at the side, the right hand, though broken, surely 
originally performing the gesture of instruction (Fig. 2.3). This pose is one 
found in late Dvāravatī art, in both Central Thailand and the Northeast. 
It is also found on a caitya now in the Angkor National Museum, where it 
is contrasted with a nāga-protected Buddha.11 The adoption of this pose 
suggests an acknowledgement within Cambodia of a Theravāda icon of 
Gotama.12
It is a jump of about a century and a half to the next moment of 
concern, the time of the construction of the temple of Phimai in 
Northeastern Thailand. Phimai is a Tantric Buddhist temple constructed 
by a provincial Khmer official (or so it seems) at a time of political 
weakness at Angkor. The Buddhist content is found on a system of five 
inner lintels, invisible from the exterior (Fig. 2.4). There is no consensus 
regarding the nature of the overall programme, but it is understood that 
two of the images (on the northern and eastern lintels) are exclusively 
Tantric, and it seems reasonably certain that the other three, as will be seen 
in the discussion that follows, belonged to a pan-Buddhist repertory. Here 
it is argued that the builders of Phimai recognised that these three icons 
– the nāga-protected (or nāga-enthroned) Buddha; the earth-touching, or 
Māravijaya Buddha (that is, the Victory over the devil Māra); and the 
standing crowned Buddha, both hands in the gesture of instruction – 
were cross-over images, having significance for Theravāda as well as for 
Mahāyāna Buddhists. What is not known is whether Theravāda and 
Tantric monks shared a common book of discipline (a Vinaya) and were 
thus able to dwell together – a significant but unresolved matter, as 
important in the 13th century as at Phimai around 1100.

--- PAGE 92 ---
63
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
The main image of the temple, now lost or unidentified, was surely a 
nāga-protected Buddha, like the one that appears on the inner axial lintel. 
This image type was earlier attested in the Northeast, but it is not known 
to what degree it originally depicted – as it generally did in Burma – the 
sheltering of the Buddha during one of the weeks following 
enlightenment.13 At any rate, it had also in tenth-century Khmer art come 
to represent the supreme Buddha of the Mahāyāna, and that is the sense in 
which it should be understood at Phimai. Nevertheless, subsequently, it 
became a widespread image type, worshipped by both Theravāda and 
Mahāyāna Buddhists. Like the nāga-protected Buddha, the Māravijaya 
Buddha, featured on the outer southern lintel, had earlier appeared in the 
Northeast, probably as a result of contacts with Pāla India around the 
ninth century. It too became commonplace, but for both Theravāda and 
Mahāyāna Buddhists, its primary meaning was the Buddha’s 
enlightenment; there is none of the ambiguity inherent in the nāga-
protected Buddha.
2.4
Fig. 2.4	 Plan of the central temple, 
Phimai, showing the location 
of three of the lintels in the 
inner system of five lintels. 
West: standing crowned 
Buddha. South (1): 
nāga-protected Buddha. 
South (2): Māravijaya 
Buddha. Photographs 
courtesy of Uab Sanasen 
(left); plan, after Jean 
Boisselier, Le Cambodge 
(Paris: Picard, 1966), Fig. 
10a, p. 67; after Manit 
Vallibhotama, Guide to Pimai 
and Antiquities (Bangkok: 
Fine Arts Department, 1962), 
Fig. 35 (right); author (lower 
right).

--- PAGE 93 ---
64
Hiram W. Woodward
The third image type is the standing crowned Buddha, which appears 
on the western inner lintel and can be considered the last of a set of four 
images placed on the inner lintels. Here the double gesture must have 
alluded to some famous Dvāravatī-period icon. The crown is an addition, 
historically indebted to Pāla India. I have argued that the four lintels refer 
to the Victory over the four Māra or devils, as mentioned in a local 
inscription and described in Mahāyāna texts: the axial māravijaya lintel 
depicts victory over Māra as he appeared to the Buddha, and the standing 
crowned Buddha stands for victory over the Māra Death.14 The standing 
crowned Buddha is another image type that spread widely, in the 
Northeast and Central Thailand, in the decades following the 
construction of Phimai, but there is no evidence that the conceptual 
framework of the Phimai lintels spread with it. At an unknown point in 
time, a legend was constructed around it, having to do with the magical 
appearance of the Buddha in order to convert a heretic king.15
Once King Sūryavarman II, who supported the Brahmanical 
religions, came to the throne, it is hard to know how much Buddhist art 
was produced, as it is difficult to distinguish nāga-protected Buddhas 
made during his reign from ones that may have been carved following his 
2.5
Fig. 2.5	 The central prang, Wat Phra 
Si Ratana Mahāthāt, 
Lopburi, with the later 
flanking tower on the left 
(now collapsed). Photograph 
by the Fine Arts Department 
(FAD) of Thailand, 1920s; 
courtesy FAD 1971.

--- PAGE 94 ---
65
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
death. One significant but little-studied Theravāda site is Prasat Sasar 
Sdam, adjacent to the tenth-century Beng Vien, mentioned previously.  
A lintel in the Angkor Wat style includes narrative scenes, and a stūpa 
has an upper quadrangular section with a niche containing a defaced 
Buddha on each side.16
Lopburi sent a mission to China in 1155, presumably as a statement of 
independence following the death of Sūryavarman II. A monument that 
has been placed in this period is the Mahāthāt in Lopburi, in its original 
state (Fig. 2.5). Architecturally, the Lopburi Mahāthāt is dependent upon 
Phimai for two reasons: the height of its basement stories, and the number 
of re-entrant angles in the plan of its primary story. This means that the 
Lopburi Buddhists found enough commonality in the Phimai temple, 
despite its Tantric orientation, to take it as a model. Other evidence points 
to the rising importance of new Theravāda trends, stemming largely from 
Burma. An important inscription dating from 1167 was found in Nakhon 
Sawan province at the site of Dong Mae Nang Muang.17 Written in the 
Pāli and Khmer languages, it refers to a king named Dhammāsoka, that is, 
a king named after King Aśoka of India, who was called Dhammāsoka or 
Dharmāśoka in Pāli and Sanskrit texts to reflect his proselytisation of 
Buddhism. The kingdom this 12th-century Dhammāsoka ruled has not 
been identified. These Theravāda Buddhists assigned a non-Hindu name 
to their monarch, one that indicates an awareness of Buddhist history and 
of the fact that they stood at a specific chronological distance from the 
Buddha Gotama. 
The Dong Mae Nang Muang inscription forces us to ask questions 
about whether it presents a Theravāda ideology that stands apart from 
Angkorian Hindu, Mahāyāna or Tantric beliefs. It seems to, yet there are 
considerations that mitigate against maintenance of a doctrinaire position 
on this score.  Naming a king after King Aśoka of India and involving him 
with relics is a recognition of the fact that the Buddha bequeathed his 
relics at a moment in time, and that King Aśoka’s right to rule was 
connected with his discovery and enshrinement of relics. The numinous is 
inherited from the past. Somewhat similarly, in one characterisation of 
Theravāda Buddhism, the numinous lies in a distant though measurable 
future, as numerous lifetimes will pass before we reach nirvāṇa. This 
outlook seems different from one that sees the divine as constantly 
immanent, outside of time, but becoming manifest, say, in an initiation 
ceremony or the liberation of the soul, as we might suppose to be the case 
in Angkorian Hinduism and Mahāyāna and Tantric Buddhism.
On the other hand, the contrast can be softened by interpreting a key 
Pāli text, the Buddhavaṁsa, in a certain way. Well established in Pagan, the 
Buddhavaṁsa relates the names and predictions of the Buddhas who 
preceded Gotama. A bronze image with Buddhas of the Past (Fig. 2.6)

--- PAGE 95 ---
66
Hiram W. Woodward
2.6

--- PAGE 96 ---
67
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
shows a standing crowned Buddha, the hands in a double gesture.18 Here 
the Buddhas appear in leaves attached to the frame of the throne back, in 
an arrangement that became more common in the 13th century. From one 
point of view this sculpture and others dependent on the Buddhavaṁsa 
proclaim, like the use of the proper name Dhammāsoka in the Dong Mae 
Nang Muang inscription, a Theravādin sense of linear time: we stand at a 
certain historical distance from Gotama. Because, however, each of the 
Buddhas of the Past taught the same doctrine and because the nature of 
their Buddhahood was identical, Buddhahood is in fact ever present. 
Perhaps the Buddhas of the Past are not demonstrating historical distance 
but present immanence.19
JAYAVARMAN VII, r. 1182–1218
There was a degree of compatibility, I have suggested, between Khmer 
Tantrism and the Theravāda. Whether this holds as well for Jayavarman’s 
Mahāyāna and the Theravāda is an issue requiring more hesitancy. 
Jayavarman’s Mahāyāna – his triad of the Buddha, Avalokiteśvara and 
Prajñāpāramitā – did in some way develop out of the Tantric traditions of 
Phimai and Preah Khan of Kompong Svay, but anticipation of its social 
crusade, especially the establishment of a hospital network, is hard to find 
in the historical record. It is not possible to engage with all the issues of 
Jayavarman’s reign, and here just a few discrete topics will be addressed. 
At the Bayon perhaps one day it will be possible to integrate what is 
known about the stages of construction with ideological and stylistic 
developments, and more precise guesses will be made about the dates of 
the inner gallery of reliefs (the subject of some observations later in this 
chapter), the covering up of the images of Lokeśvara, the iconoclastic 
effacement of images of the Buddha, and the moment at which the faces 
of the towers became known as Brahma (unless, of course, they were 
called that from the outset).20 At both the Bayon and at other 
monuments, if we see elements that the Theravāda shares, their 
appearance may or may not be an indication of the actual presence of 
Theravāda Buddhists. Cases in point are representations of jātaka, certain 
scenes from the life of the Buddha, depictions of the earth goddess (as at 
Ta Prohm), and cosmological features shared by the Mahāyāna and the 
Theravāda, such as Lake Anavatapta and the four rivers that flow from it, 
embodied at Neak Pean.21
One small detail at the Bayon bears discussion. In relief sculptures of 
devatā attributed by Philippe Stern to the third period of the Bayon style, 
there are small adorants at the feet of the divine beings and wings at the 
sides in which curtains hang (Fig. 2.7).22 The combination of these two 
elements is an indication of the probability of a borrowing (though some 
Fig. 2.6	 Altarpiece with the standing 
crowned Buddha. Bronze. 
Height: 44.5 cm. Walters Art 
Museum, Baltimore, gift of 
the Doris Duke Charitable 
Foundation’s Southeast 
Asian Art Collection, 2002 
(54.2999). Photograph 
courtesy The Walters Art 
Museum, Baltimore.

--- PAGE 97 ---
68
Hiram W. Woodward
2.7

--- PAGE 98 ---
69
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
observers might find it farfetched), namely from a type of votive tablet 
with stylistic sources in Lower Burma or the peninsula, showing the 
Buddha at the Mahābodhi temple, adorants, and banners wrapped around 
columns (a feature, in turn, taken from Pāla sculpture).23 Tied banners 
were transformed into hanging curtains.
The kneeling female adorants can be connected with full-sized adorant 
sculptures, such as the kneeling Perfection of Wisdom (Prajñāpāramitā) in 
the Musée Guimet.24 The arms are broken, but originally the hands were 
placed in adoration or held an offering, and the figure was in fact a portrait 
image. Inscriptions on the walls of the Bayon sanctuary enable us to 
understand the context of this and other adorant images (most of which 
must have been carved from wood): the adorant images are distinguished 
from the images being worshipped by different titles and by the insertion 
of a preceding particle, na.25 The inclusion of adorant images and the 
naming of them in inscriptions are practices found at the Bayon itself but 
not at the other great complexes.
There is another point that can be made. If a Theravāda element is 
recognised in the adorant images, and they are interpreted according to 
the Buddhavaṁsa, they are not merely worshipping. They are listening to 
a prediction concerning when in the distant future they may achieve 
enlightenment. The degree to which this interpretation is valid depends 
on judgements as to when exactly the Buddhavaṁsa was embraced in the 
highest circles at Angkor. At any rate, although there seem to be no 
surviving sets of stone Bayon-period Buddhas of the Past, there is one 
later image – perhaps early 14th century in date – inscribed with the 
name of a past Buddha.26
The scene in Lopburi and Northeastern Thailand was much the 
same. In 1186, Jayavarman proclaimed the establishment of hospitals 
throughout the kingdom; there are vestiges over the Northeast but not 
in Central Thailand.27 The guiding scripture was the Medicine Buddha 
sutra. In 1191, Jayavarman stated that he had distributed images he 
called Jayabuddhamahānātha, some to towns in Central Thailand. 
These have been identified as images of a standing multi-armed 
Avalokiteśvara.28 Around the same time, the Phra Prang Sam Yot was 
constructed in Lopburi, presumably to house images of Jayavarman’s 
triad of Avalokiteśvara, the Buddha and the Perfection of Wisdom (Fig. 
2.8). In Lopburi itself, numerous sculptures of the nāga-protected 
Buddha were carved in stone, but very few images of Avalokiteśvara or 
the Perfection of Wisdom.
The images Jayavarman distributed or commissioned projected his 
compassion. This quality carried into the matter of architectural style, 
which consisted of a rejection of the Phimai/Lopburi Mahāthāt tradition 
and its replacement by sanctuaries that were situated closer to the ground 
Fig. 2.7	 The Bayon, niche with 
devatā, first level, tower 15, 
portico, northeast angle. 
Photograph courtesy 
Phoeung Dara, 2013.

--- PAGE 99 ---
70
Hiram W. Woodward
and built to a more human scale; they may be considered the counterpart 
of the compassion that is the main theme of the cult of Avalokiteśvara. 
Very close to the time Angkorian power was at its peak – say around 1200 
– a new image type appeared at Lopburi. This was the standing Buddha 
with a right hand on the chest. We have no name for this posture and no 
textual justification. It can be understood, however, as standing for a 
Buddha that is simultaneously a Buddha of the Past, a Buddha of the 
Future, and a Buddha produced by Gotama’s miracle of double 
appearances.29 These elements are apparent in a type of votive tablet 
produced in Lamphun, the ancient Haripuñjaya; the setting is the 
Mahābodhi temple at Bodhgaya, and the mirrored gestures allude to the 
miracle.30 The themes can be traced back to Pagan, Burma. 
There are other subjects that became important in the course of the 
13th century: groups of three seated Buddhas and Buddhas with pointed 
crowns of Pāla type. Wanting to assign a name to this cluster of traits, I 
chose “Ariya”, referring to the nikāya or sect dominant before the arrival 
of new ordinations from Sri Lanka at various points in time, perhaps in 
the late 13th century, then around the 1340s, and again in the 1420s. 
Which of these features were already present in Lopburi in the third 
quarter of the 12th century, when the Mahāthāt, I have suggested, was 
founded, and the relative importance of the various geographical sources 
– Pagan, Lower Burma, Haripuñjaya – are issues not yet resolved. The 
nāga-protected Buddha was welcomed into this pantheon, and the stone 
workshops of Lopburi continued production along lines set by the 
Bayon style. 
Fig. 2.8	 Phra Prang Sam Yot, 
Lopburi. Photograph by 
author.
2.8

--- PAGE 100 ---
71
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
But with the waning of imperial power, Lopburi’s religious life 
followed the trajectory set into motion in the pre-Jayavarman period. The 
Mahāthāt became the city’s focus; it received new stucco décor, and north 
and south wings were added, so that it would be able to house a triad of 
Buddhas, exactly like the ones seen in votive tablets of the period (Fig. 
2.9).31 There is very little evidence regarding the ethnic makeup of 
Lopburi in the course of the 13th century: conceivably the elite spoke 
Khmer, and there was a hard-to-determine number of speakers of Mon 
and Thai.
THE 13TH AND 14TH CENTURIES
Almost nothing is known about Jayavarman’s immediate successor 
Indravarman, and until recently it was thought that his reign ended in 
1243, not 1270.32 As readers of the 2007 compilation Bayon: New 
Perspectives know, many disputed matters deserve renewed analysis.33 In 
this book, Vittorio Roveda provided descriptions of the scenes – some 
Brahmanical, most historical – in the inner gallery of reliefs at the 
temple.34 A far more detailed study of these reliefs can be found in the 
2010 dissertation by Ludivine Provost-Roche35, and her conclusions are 
worth summarising here.
The term Philippe Stern applied to the Leper King figures, “Bayon, 
third period, extremely advanced” is entirely apt36 (my translation of the 
French text). David Chandler made a proposal that enables the dating of 
2.9
Fig. 2.9	 Votive tablet with Māravijaya 
Buddha at the Mahābodhi 
temple, flanked by a pair of 
Buddhas in māravijaya. 
Terracotta. Height: 8.5 cm. 
National Museum, Bangkok. 
Inventory number: Lb25 k4. 
Photograph by author, 1970.

--- PAGE 101 ---
72
Hiram W. Woodward
the Leper King Terrace to the post-Jayavarman period to rest on evidence 
other than stylistic. He suggested that the name recorded in the 19th 
century, tilean sdach komlong, means “the terrace of the king who was a 
leper” – namely Indravarman – rather than “the terrace where a statue, now 
called the leper king, has been found”.37 The name preserves, in this 
reading, a genuine historical memory. Still, describing various developments 
is one matter; constructing a plausible linear narrative is another. 
There is agreement that the buried images uncovered at Banteay Kdei 
in 2001 were ritually deposited, but disagreement as to whether the 
damage sustained by so many of the sculptures ought to be connected to 
the iconoclastic movement.38 The position taken here is that the damage 
did occur at the same time that thousands of Buddha images were 
carefully chiseled away at Jayavarman’s temples. The Banteay Kdei 
sculptures surely include works carved after the death of Jayavarman. One 
Fig. 2.10	 Nāga-protected Buddha, 
from the Banteay Kdei 
trove, no. 195. Height: 25.5 
cm. Preah Norodom 
Sihanouk – Angkor 
Museum, Siem Reap. New 
inventory number: NSAM 
2007.188. Photograph 
courtesy Preah Norodom 
Sihanouk – Angkor 
Museum.
2.10

--- PAGE 102 ---
73
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
would think that a comparison with the sequence in Lopburi would make 
it possible to propose a terminal date. For instance, it might seem that the 
curved profile to the uṣṇīṣa in the nāga-protected Buddha BK 195 (Fig. 
2.10) can be compared with a Lopburi sculpture with a similarly designed 
uṣṇīṣa (Fig. 2.11); ordinarily, in Bayon-period sculpture, the tiers of small 
petals have a more stepped structure. Yet this Lopburi image is clearly the 
later of the two, in light of the shape of the face and the pronounced high 
relief of the eyebrows (somewhat like what can be seen at the Terrace of 
the Leper King). One of the criteria for establishing a sequence in Lopburi 
is the design of the lotus medallion at the back; the petals become 
increasingly simplified and finally don’t look like petals at all.39 This 
medallion is far along but not at the end of the sequence. No photographs 
of the backs of the Banteay Kdei sculptures have been published. The 
roots, at least, of BK 195 seem to lie in the Angkorian sculpture from 
Fig. 2.11.	Nāga-protected Buddha.  
Height: 36 cm. King Narai 
National Museum, Lopburi. 
Inventory number: L.2659. 
Photograph courtesy King 
Narai National Museum.
2.11

--- PAGE 103 ---
74
Hiram W. Woodward
around the 1190s.40 These considerations lead to thinking that the 
iconoclastic movement occurred not long after the death of Jayavarman.
The Buddha with hand on chest appears to have arisen in Lopburi 
within the lifetime of Jayavarman, and the fact that it had long seemed 
that there was no evidence of a Cambodian reflection of this iconographic 
type shortly thereafter was a puzzle. The Banteay Kdei evidence indicates 
that there was, both on steles and on antefixes (Fig. 2.12). The evidence of 
the antefixes, a feature unattested in Lopburi in stone but viewable on a 
fragment of a bronze model of a temple superstructure (Fig. 2.13), is 
especially interesting because it suggests that there was some 
understanding of the content conveyed by the pose. That is, if these were 
Fig. 2.12	 Antefix with standing 
Buddha, Banteay Kdei 
trove, no. 258. Height:  
66 cm. Preah Norodom 
Sihanouk – Angkor 
Museum, Siem Reap. New 
Inventory Number: NSAM 
2007.249. Photograph 
courtesy Preah Norodom 
Sihanouk – Angkor 
Museum.
2.12

--- PAGE 104 ---
75
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
produced images, or projections, as I have argued, then we can imagine a 
Buddha in the central sanctuary giving birth to the multiple Buddhas on 
the antefixes above.
The reign of Indravarman, with its dearth of documentary evidence, 
was followed by a timeframe (1270‒after 1327) that could be called the 
period of Sanskritic twilight, marked by an increased number of 
inscriptions and, presumably, building projects. Four monarchs can be 
lumped together in this period: Jayavarman VIII; Śrīndravarman; 
Śrīndrajayavarman; and Jayavarmaparameśvara. From the reign of the last 
of these four, dates an inscription that might provide a clue regarding the 
iconoclastic movement. Bruno Dagens, in a stimulating proposal, blamed 
Fig. 2.13	 Antefix with standing 
Buddha, from an 
architectural model. 
Bronze. Height: 11.2 cm.  
From the crypt of Wat 
Ratchaburana, Ayutthaya. 
Chao Samphraya National 
Museum, Ayutthaya. 
Inventory number:  
R. 606. Photograph by 
author, 1971.
2.13

--- PAGE 105 ---
76
Hiram W. Woodward
an outside agitator, someone like Sarvajñamuni, who travelled from India 
by means of yoga (presumably levitation) and established a lineage of 
priests, according to the Kapilapura inscription (K. 300) found near 
Angkor Wat.41 The second priest in this lineage (only the first part of his 
name, Siddha-, is preserved) was commanded by the lord Shiva to carry 
out a “winnowing” – one possible meaning of pavana (stanza 29) – 
certainly a plausible description of the destruction of Buddha images.42 
Since the third priest in the lineage served Jayavarman VIII, the second 
presumably preceded him. These are slender threads, but they point, as 
does my interpretation of the Banteay Kdei material, to a date prior to c. 
1270 for the iconoclastic movement.
In the period of Sanskritic twilight, only a single monument is securely 
dated, the Brahmanic Prasat Top East of 1295 (K. 488). The thorough 
analyses of Provost-Roche make it possible to arrive at conclusions about 
how much of the Preah Pithu temples and of Preah Palilay consists of new 
construction belonging to this time or somewhat earlier, and how much 
of the fabric dates back to the 12th century.43 Provost-Roche’s analysis of 
the inner gallery reliefs at the Bayon also makes it possible to fill in the 
13th century, but only to a point, because there is an imperfect fit between 
the visual evidence and the chronological scaffolding established by 
inscriptions.
The key motif is the triple chignon, which as an iconographical trait is 
traditionally considered a sign of youth and appears at the Bayon, for 
example, on representations of Krishna’s son Pradyumna and on 
Pradyumna’s previous incarnation Kāma, the god of desire.44 It also 
appears in free-standing sculptures of a variety of deities, primarily of the 
post-Jayavarman period.45 On humans it can be seen once in the outer 
gallery and numerous times in the inner gallery, where Provost-Roche 
believes that variations in the depictions indicate the presence of three 
different monarchs, all post-Jayavarman VII but none allowing specific 
identifications.46 In the outer-gallery reliefs, which are devoted to the 
reign of Jayavarman, a rare caption identifies a figure with a triple chignon 
(western gallery face, northern wing) as a royal entering the forest for the 
Indrābhiṣeka (ceremony).47 Since Jayavarman VII is consistently shown 
with a hair bun at the back of his head, it is possible that this figure is the 
crown prince Śrīndrakumāra known from epigraphy.48 Banteay Chhmar 
inscription K. 227 provides evidence that Śrīndrakumāra was likely as old 
as Jayavarman VII and could not have been his son, nor have ascended the 
throne around 1220 and reigned for 50 years.49 Still, it is possible to 
speculate, Śrīndrakumāra could have played an important role during the 
final decade of Jayavarman’s life, when epigraphy falls silent (except, 
presumably, for the short dedicatory inscriptions at the Bayon and 
elsewhere), and even in the immediate aftermath of Jayavarman’s death.

--- PAGE 106 ---
77
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
In the inner-gallery reliefs the first of Provost-Roche’s three monarchs 
appears in key scenes in the northeast quadrant, including panels 
identified as depictions of the legend of the Leper King.50 Monarch I can 
also be associated with the triple shrine that resembles Phra Prang Sam Yot 
in Lopburi, the images of which have been effaced.51 Contrary to 
traditional views, Provost-Roche maintains that this shrine, because of the 
precision of the recarving, originally housed images of Jayavarman’s triad. 
This means that Monarch I reigned at the very end of the Mahāyāna 
Buddhist period; the Shaivite reaction, according to Provost-Roche, 
occurred during his rulership, or a little after. The Leper King, it was 
suggested above, was Indravarman, and, indeed, it is possible that at the 
beginning of his reign Jayavarman’s Mahāyāna was still embraced. But it is 
also possible to envisage a different scenario – that Monarch I was actually 
Śrīndrakumāra, in the 1210s.52
Monarch II can be distinguished from Monarch I because he has a 
small mustache and his three-pointed coiffe is undecorated.53 A large 
portion of the reliefs must have been executed during the reign of this 
king, except for those on the western side, which may have been carved 
before the death of Jayavarman. If Monarch I is Śrīndrakumāra, then 
Monarch II is Indravarman, with a long reign extending to 1270. If 
Monarch II is Indravarman, on the other hand, then a large portion of the 
work on the reliefs was not carried out until the reign of Jayavarman VIII.
Finally, there is Monarch III (also with three chignons), identifiable in 
panels that fill what can be considered leftover spaces.54 Once again, giving 
credence to Provost-Roche’s analysis, Monarch III would have to be either 
Jayavarman VIII or his successor Śrīndravarman. It is difficult to say what 
kind of evidence will eventually have to come to light in order to 
demonstrate the validity of Provost-Roche’s understanding. One problem 
is whether the small details she relies upon are really indicative of an 
intention to differentiate between different historical figures or merely 
idiosyncrasies due to artistic habit. Another is how much of a time gap 
stood between the actual occurrence of scenes supposed to be historical 
and their depiction in the reliefs.55
The earliest Pāli-language inscription, of 1308–1309, is K. 754, from 
a site southwest of Angkor, Kok Svay Cek.56 Just one little detail will be 
noted: among the donated objects (in the Khmer-language section of the 
inscription) is an ardhaśaṅkha, a bronze conch holder.57 Conch holders 
featuring a depiction of the Tantric Buddhist deity Hevajra were 
common in the time of Jayavarman VII, and in later centuries conchs 
were utilised in royal rituals. Their use in Theravāda worship, however, 
is exceptional. We can say, therefore, that in 1308, a newcomer to the 
Theravāda milieu would have found elements of the ceremonial practice 
in this temple familiar.

--- PAGE 107 ---
78
Hiram W. Woodward
In an important and path-breaking article, “One Buddha Can Hide 
Another”, Martin Polkinghorne, Christophe Pottier and Christian Fischer 
have added a host of new considerations.58 They contend that in the 15th 
century, the original central Buddha of the Bayon (Fig. 2.14) was lifted up 
so that a new, octagonal pedestal could be inserted underneath it, and that 
it was only much later that the Buddha was thrown into the central pit, 
perhaps by treasure seekers in the 18th century. Why the central Buddha 
was not damaged in the iconoclastic movement remains an unresolved 
puzzle, and the Banteay Kdei sculptures do not present pertinent 
Fig. 2.14	 Nāga-protected Buddha 
from the central sanctuary 
of the Bayon, now 
venerated at Vihear 
Prampir Lavaeng, where it 
was moved by the 
authorities in the early 20th 
century. Photograph 
courtesy Martin 
Polkinghorne, 2011.
2.14

--- PAGE 108 ---
79
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
evidence, according to the authors. Here I offer an alternative scenario. 
This is that the original Buddha was destroyed, presumably before 1270, 
and that the surviving Buddha is a replacement installed subsequently, 
complete with an octagonal pedestal. Later, this Buddha was itself 
removed. This would explain certain anomalies in the style of the Buddha, 
especially the design of the uṣṇīṣa, which does not have the stepped profile 
standard on Bayon-period images (compare Fig. 2.15). Octagonal bases 
were known in 13th-century Buddhist architecture, and this feature need 
not have been an indication of a much later date.59 Still, this “alternative 
Fig. 2.15	 Seated Buddha, on a 
pediment from Tep Pranam 
temple, Northern Terrace. 
National Museum of 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh. 
Inventory number: Ka. 
1715. Photograph courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.
2.15

--- PAGE 109 ---
80
Hiram W. Woodward
2.16

--- PAGE 110 ---
81
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
scenario” is not altogether satisfying because of the gaps that remain when 
actual dates are proposed.
Around 1300, at Sukhothai a new image type seems to have become 
prominent: the standing Buddha, the right hand performing a gesture at 
the side, the left arm hanging down. This is the iconographic type seen 
previously in the tenth century (Fig. 2.3), but not in the intervening 
centuries. Perhaps it was carried to Sukhothai from the Northeast. At 
about this time, in Lopburi, the nāga-protected Buddha passed out of 
fashion. Production of Ariya-sect icons also gradually ceased. A new 
Fig. 2.16	 Māravijaya Buddha. Leaded 
bronze. Height: 36.8 cm. 
Walters Art Museum, 
bequest of A. B. Griswold, 
1992. Inventory number: 
54.2800. Photograph 
courtesy The Walters Art 
Museum, Baltimore.
 Fig. 2.17	Māravijaya Buddha. Leaded 
bronze. Height: 58 cm. 
Walters Art Museum, 
bequest of A. B. Griswold, 
1992 (54.2792). Photograph 
courtesy The Walters Art 
Museum, Baltimore.
2.17

--- PAGE 111 ---
82
Hiram W. Woodward
paradigmatic type of Buddha image arose, with an oval face, lowered 
eyelids, planar eye sockets and a flame protuberance, a development that 
could not have occurred without some sort of contact with Sri Lanka.60 
The shift probably occurred at more or less the same time in various 
places, but extended over a period ranging from the late 13th century 
until well into the 14th. As late as the 1420s, but no later, Buddha images 
in Ayutthaya were made in accordance with two distinct modes, one 
oval-faced (Fig. 2.16), the other descending from the Khmer tradition 
(Fig. 2.17). In the 1920s, the Khmer-tradition images were given the 
name “U Thong style”. The pedestals of both types of image follow the 
same design. These two modes must have had names, a conceivable clue 
to which is found in the northern chronicle the Jinakālamālī, which 
states that in 1483 a Buddha image was founded resembling the 
“Lavapaṭimā”, the Lopburi image.61 Whether the modes can be aligned 
with different Buddhist sects is not known. The oval-face type was 
eventually carried to Angkor, possibly but not necessarily because of 
military conquest.62
This chronological survey will close with a glance at Prasat Top West, 
Monument 486, a late 12th- to early 13th-century temple to which wings 
2.18
2.19
Fig. 2.18	 Nāga antefix, Prasat Top 
West. Photograph by 
author.
Fig. 2.19	 Stucco ornament at Wat 
Nakhon Kosa, Lopburi. 
Photograph by author.

--- PAGE 112 ---
83
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
were added in the 14th century.63 These wings are Angkorian versions of 
the wings at Wat Mahāthāt Lopburi and those found on various votive 
tablets (Fig. 2.9), in the scheme I have designated as “Ariya”. The 
ornament no longer follows the classical models – as it still did in the 
buildings of the Sanskritic twilight period – and displays some similarities 
to the ornament seen on such temples in Lopburi as Wat Nakhon Kosa 
(Figs. 2.18 & 2.19). The scrolling hooks may appear at first as debased 
versions of classical ornament, but in fact it may be possible to show that 
they were adaptations of Burmese designs.
2.20
Fig. 2.20	 Head of the Buddha.  
Height: 28 cm. King Narai 
National Museum, Lopburi. 
Inventory number: L.2584. 
Photograph courtesy King 
Narai National Museum, 
Lopburi.

--- PAGE 113 ---
84
Hiram W. Woodward
The standing Buddhas on the wings display the hand-on-chest gesture 
(See Figs. 6.21–6.23, p. 220). The temple configuration and the pose of 
the Buddhas follow the Ariya scheme with one significant difference. In 
the early Lopburi model and on the Banteay Kdei antefixes, the pendant 
left arm is shown with the hand palm forward. Here, the palm faces the 
hip, conforming to the type that was revived in about the late 13th 
century. These Buddha images at Prasat Top West have flame 
protuberances. When we look at an example of the new 14th-century style 
as manifested in Lopburi (Fig. 2.20), we can see that some of the features 
were adopted by the Angkor sculptor: the shape of the eyes, the rounded 
lowered lids and the profile of the eyebrows. The actual modelling of the 
eyebrows, however, displays a continuation of the high-relief treatment 
seen on the Leper King Terrace and elsewhere.64
CIVIC RITUAL
In this section an attempt will be made to describe the significance of 
certain buildings standing in front of the Angkor Thom palace complex 
and facing the royal square.65 The analysis will be generated from a text, 
the ‘Ōngkān chæng nam, the Thai oath of allegiance, a recitation 
accompanied by the drinking of water potentially poisonous to the 
disloyal. The ‘Ōngkān chǣng nam may well have been composed, at least 
in part, prior to the foundation of Ayutthaya in 1351, by Thai-speaking 
people living – possibly – in the Suphanburi region.66 It is written in 
native verse forms, in an archaic Thai that is more Lao-like than the 
inscriptions of Sukhothai, and that has very few Khmer loanwords. It is 
invoked here in the belief that it reflects the Angkorian world view of the 
mid 13th to early 14th centuries and that it can serve as a point of 
reference not only for an earlier text, the Sūryavarman I oath, but also for 
two visual sequences, one the southern gallery of bas-reliefs at Angkor 
Wat, the second the parade of structures running north from the Bayon. 
The key element common to the two sequences and the Thai oath is one 
whose significance has only recently been recognised – a ritual enabling 
the subjugation of enemies, incorporating a mantra originally intended to 
subdue a mad elephant.67
There are 70 verses of varying length in the oath, which in Michael 
Wright’s analysis comprise ten sections: Invocation of the Hindu Trinity 
(stanzas 1–3); Cosmology and Civilisation (4–15); Introduction to the 
Curse Proper (16–17); Calling of Witnesses (18–25); Beginning of the 
Curse Proper (26–33); Additional Calling of Witnesses (34–38); 
Invocation of Local Spirits (39–51); The King’s Right to Root out 
Treason (52–58); Final Curse (59–62); The King and His Munificence 
(63–70).68 The offences are not spelled out in the “curse proper” but

--- PAGE 114 ---
85
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
repeatedly referred to as the state of being un- (bò) faithful (sü), or 
treasonous (“Treasonous, may water cut his throat”, in Wright’s 
translation of one line).69 The punishments are imminent and not 
postponed until rebirth in hell. The character of the text differs 
substantially from the much shorter Khmer oath engraved eight times on 
the pillars of a palace entry hall in 1011, early in the reign of King 
Sūryavarman I (K. 292).70 This text is written as prose, but at least some of 
it has a verse-like character. Here is the first of many sentences beginning 
with the word dah (“if”), appearing here as if it were poetry. (In fact, if 
this is verse, the metrification differs from anything attested later.71) 
Sanskrit loanwords appear in italics; the other words are all Khmer.
Dah mān caṃpāṅ	
If there’s a battle
yeṅ udyoga chpāṅ	
we endeavour to fight
nu sarvvātmaṇā	
and with all our soul 
vvaṃ sṅvan ta āyuḥ	
not to love life
hetu bhakti	
	
because of (our) devotion (to the king),	
vvaṃ rat leṅ caṃpāṅ 	 (and) not to flee from battle.
Because the names of the oath-takers are engraved below the texts, each 
with the name of his county (sruk), approximately 400 names in all, 
perhaps the inscription should be understood as a palace document rather 
than as a transcription of a spoken oath. It may be that the Sanskrit 
elements are merely a way to elevate the tone of a speech act that was 
originally more like the later Thai oath. It is hard to say. At any rate, what 
is owed to the king is devotion (bhakti), just as to a divinity.72 The 
witnesses to the oath are few in number – just the sacred flame (vraḥ vleṅ), 
the sacred gem (vraḥ ratna), and the Brahman instructors 
(vrāhmaṇācāryya). It is not known what the sacred gem was.73 
The Thai oath, on the other hand, constructs a complete worldview, 
one that creates a frame around the oath itself. This frame is revealing 
because it is neither exclusively Brahmanical nor Buddhist. Especially 
worthy of note are the positions of the god Brahmā, the primordial king, 
and the ritual lasso. Stanza 3, in Wright’s translation: 
	
Om! Victory! Victory!
Revealer of the sixteen Brahma realms. 
With faces all about, 
Lord of the full-blown golden lotus,
Flying upon the king of swans,
He created earth and sky.74

--- PAGE 115 ---
86
Hiram W. Woodward
Although the tenor of the passage is Brahmanical, the 16 Brahma realms 
are a feature of Buddhist cosmology – places of rebirth, corresponding to 
the world of pure form. Therefore it can be said that the text considers the 
Brahma realms (or Brahmaloka) belonging to this world indistinguishable 
from the god Brahmā. The beings in Brahmaloka do not perish in the fire 
that ends the kalpa (era), and because they have exhausted their positive 
merit, they are reborn on the newly formed earth as men – an event 
referred to in a subsequent stanza (number 10).75
In stanza 13, on the re-populated earth, an honoured man is chosen king 
and called Sammatirāja: this is the Mahāsammata of the Pāli text the 
Agaññasutta. Then, in stanza 15, there is an invocation of the piled-up rope 
of a lasso (pāśa), called Grandfather Phra Kam, who has flown in and 
established the rites of the spirit egg, incense and candles.76 This Phra Kam 
(Kāṃ) is clearly the predecessor of the Thewakam (= Devakarma) who in 
the elephant rites of the 18th to 19th centuries is the god who supplies to 
humans the mantra that makes it possible to subdue a rampaging elephant.77
Fig. 2.21	 Terrace of the Leper King, 
view of the outer wall. 
Photograph by author.
2.21

--- PAGE 116 ---
87
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
The corresponding visual sequence at Angkor Wat begins near the 
western end of the southern gallery. King Sūryavarman II appears seated 
on a mountain. He holds a snake lasso, a nāgapaśa.78 Reliefs in the 
southwest corner pavilion might illustrate the way the lasso came into 
Sūryavarman’s possession, through divine intervention. The lasso can be 
considered to stand for a mantra, and it is also an emblem of a 
supernatural ability, the power of subjugation (vaśīkaraṇa), not only over 
elephants, but human enemies as well. 
Along this wall, subsequently, appears a royal procession, consisting of 
18 elephant-riding generals and their troops, plus the king himself, as well 
as a palanquin supporting a container for the sacred fire (vraḥ vleṅ). They 
are all headed to a point of judgement, beyond the door that marks the 
central axis, where some may climb up to heaven, others descend to hell, 
according to the decree of the god of death and his secretary. There are 32 
different hells, nearly all labelled, each displaying gruesome punishments. 
If there is a point of review, at which the generals and the troops may be 
supposed to be reciting an oath, it is only implied, and it would have to be 
the axial doorway, through which the power of the image in the central 
sanctuary could be said to radiate. 
In the Thai oath, nearly all the punishments described occur in this 
life. In the Sūryavarman I oath, punishments are invited but not described 
(if we “do not keep this oath…, we ask that His Majesty inflict on us royal 
Fig. 2.22	 Terrace of the Leper King, 
view of the inner wall, 
showing nāga on the 
bottom register. 
Photograph by author.
2.22

--- PAGE 117 ---
88
Hiram W. Woodward
punishment of all sorts”), and if we escape those, “may we be reborn in 
the thirty-second hell as long as the sun and moon shall last”.79 At Angkor 
Wat, all the depicted punishments are posthumous – but surely such 
gruesome tools as tongs for the extraction of tongues reflect reality.
A related visual sequence can be identified at Angkor Thom. The 
central axis of the city runs from the Bayon north and south to the city 
gates. Imagine taking the southern gallery of Angkor Wat, turning it at 
right angles, and placing it upon the artery running north from the Bayon. 
Since the royal square just north of the Bayon remained vibrant in the 
later part of the 13th century and through the 14th century, what we are 
interested in are the ways a broad context sheds light on the experiences of 
the city dweller in this period. Start with a glance south toward the Bayon 
and recall the Thai oath – “Om! Victory! Victory! / Revealer of the sixteen 
Brahma realms / With faces all about!” This Brahmā is both Buddhist and 
Brahmanical; there is no point in distinguishing between the two. A much 
later, Bangkok-period Thai text provides a name for the face towers: 
brahmabaktraprāsāda (Brahma-face temple).80
Moving north, we pass the entrance to the palace complex and then the 
first of the two royal terraces, the Elephant Terrace. Whether this terrace 
was established in the later part of the reign of Jayavarman VII or soon 
thereafter is not easily determined; what is important is its longevity, since 
it remained viable until some sections were reconstructed at the time of 
the establishment of a stūpa, a project that has been dated to the 16th 
century.81 It is not possible to look at the multitude of elephants that 
adorn the base of the Elephant Terrace without thinking that here is a 
proclamation of the king’s mastery over elephants and of his possession of 
a mantra endowing him with the power of subjugation – just as in the 
depiction of Sūryavarman II at Angkor Wat and in the invocation of the 
lasso and of Phra Kam in the Thai oath. 
The Leper King Terrace just north of the Elephant Terrace was also 
long-lived, functioning at least until the time the Leper King statue was 
inscribed, in the 14th or 15th century.82 Just how it relates to the two 
paradigmatic sequences, the southern gallery at Angkor Wat and the Thai 
oath, is more problematic. The Leper King Terrace consists of two 
parallel, zigzagging walls, each with seven registers of reliefs, the same 
subject matter appearing on each wall, the outer wall hiding the inner 
(Fig. 2.21). On the terrace above and behind, the Leper King statue was 
placed. The current interpretations of the terrace tend to combine 
long-standing speculations with opinion based on excavations, and the 
evidence has not always been presented clearly. In Angkor: An 
Introduction, Cœdès wrote, “These interior bas-reliefs, intended to remain 
invisible, almost certainly represented creatures who were supposed to 
haunt the subterranean slopes of Meru.”83 The first part of the statement

--- PAGE 118 ---
89
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
is now considered erroneous because there is evidence that the outer wall 
was constructed when the inner wall, where the reliefs would originally 
have been entirely visible, started to collapse.84 The reliefs on the outer 
wall are of inferior quality (but still likely to have been executed prior to 
1270).85 As for haunting the subterranean slopes, the terminology is 
discouragingly vague. 
It is here proposed that the reliefs accord with standard Buddhist 
cosmology and that what they depict is the realm of the four great kings 
(lokapāla, caturmahārājika).86 This level of the cosmos stands at the 
height of the innermost of the seven mountain ranges (Yugandhara) that 
surround Mount Meru. Among the indications that it is this kingdom 
rather than the realm of the asura that is depicted are the nature of the 
presiding deities, the attributes carried by their attendants (especially 
banners), and, most importantly, the presence of nāga at the very 
bottom of the walls, who correspond to the nāga that dwell in the 
Sīdantara Ocean that separates the rings of mountains (Fig. 2.22).87 The 
asura, on the other hand, dwell under the base of Mount Meru. 
Although it could be considered appropriate for them to be hidden, 
they are not what are shown. Whether the seven registers of reliefs on 
the walls are intended to allude to the seven concentric mountain ranges 
cannot be determined.
Thinking back now to the scenes of heaven and hell at Angkor Wat, 
it would appear that here is something different. There are no 
punishments for the disloyal, nor are there simple heavenly paradises for 
the virtuous. The Realm of the Four Guardian Kings is a paradise, but it 
is one whose main role is to invite the public officials into a divine circle 
and to serve notice that they have a bounden duty, a sacred duty, to 
protect the kingdom. 
The Leper King sculpture was described by all the early visitors to 
Angkor, but it only became clear that it was originally placed at the 
centre of a group of four half-kneeling sword-bearing guardian figures in 
1969, in the course of excavations carried out by Bernard-Philippe 
Groslier (Fig. 2.23).88 These figures, two of which are in the Angkor 
Conservation Depot, are similar in style to figures on the registers of the 
terrace. Although only the production and analysis of an extensive 
inventory of motifs will lead to precise chronological conclusions, the 
free-standing sculptures may date from the time of the construction of 
the inner, earlier wall. The Leper King statue is pre-Angkorian in date 
and so was found elsewhere, thought to be appropriate, and moved.89 It 
bears an inscription dating from the 14th or 15th century. There are, 
therefore, two possibilities, with no clear evidence allowing a choice 
between the two to be made: one is that in the time of Indravarman the 
statue stood here, uninscribed; the other is that another sculpture

--- PAGE 119 ---
90
Hiram W. Woodward
entirely was placed here. Nevertheless, here it will be maintained that the 
inscription offers clues to the identity of the original sculpture, whether 
or not it was the Leper King.
This inscription identifies the figure as Braḥ pāda dharmmādibbatiy 
dhirāja, an expansion of the epithet dharmarāja or dhammarāja, the 
righteous king.90 Cœdès took dharmarāja in a Hindu sense to mean 
Yama, lord of the dead. At Angkor Wat, the scribe Citragupta is shown 
next to “Braḥ Dharmma”. This conforms with the words of the Padma 
Purāṇa, “Chitragupta was placed near Dharmarāj to register the good and 
evil actions of all sentient beings, that he was possessed of supernatural 
wisdom and became the partaker of sacrifices offered to the gods and 
fire”.91 In the Padma Purāṇa, “Dharmarāj” can be considered an epithet 
Fig. 2.23	 Guardian figure removed 
from the terrace in 1969. 
Angkor Conservation 
Depot, Siem Reap. 
Photograph: Cliché EFEO, 
Fonds Cambodge réf. 
EFEO_Cam19697-3.
2.23

--- PAGE 120 ---
91
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
for Yama. But in Buddhist cosmology, Yama’s position is just above the 
hells, far below the Realm of the Guardian Kings. Furthermore, there is 
no need for a judgement call anyway, if the only destiny is in the 
Caturmahārājika.
Fresh interpretations of the identity of the statue can be proposed. A 
possibility is that the inscription has a double reference, first to a reigning 
king, and second to Mahāsammata, the very first king according to Pāli 
scripture, and a figure mentioned in the Thai oath. Linking the sculpture 
to a reigning king is the royal title dharrmikarājādhirāja, which is found 
on one side (nearly completely effaced) of a 14th- to 15th-century 
inscription (K. 489) discovered at the site of a nearby Buddhist terrace.92 
The Thai oath names and praises the reigning monarch (Rāmādhipatī I), 
but does not mention a statue of him, the Phra Thep Bidǭn (devapitra, 
“god-father”), which was probably established posthumously and served 
as a witness to the oath throughout the Ayutthaya period.93 Maybe the 
Leper King was the Khmer counterpart to the Phra Thep Bidǭn. 
Mahāsammata was also a righteous king: according to the Mon 
Dharmasāstra, Law Treatise, “he governed the people with righteousness” 
(janaṃ dhammena rakkhati).94 It might be objected that Mahāsammata 
was born on earth, not in the Realm of the Four Guardian Kings. But 
there is a legend found in the Thai Thammasāt (Dharmasāstra) that 
makes the placement seem justified. A ṛṣi (ascetic with supernatural 
powers) named Bhadra flew to the wall of the universe, where he copied 
down the letters of the treatises of the Vedāṅga and the verses of the Veda, 
which he then taught to King Mahāsammata. Later, Bhadra’s brother 
Manosāra also flew to the wall and copied down the Pāli text of the 
Dharmasāstra, which was written in letters as big as elephants.95 This 
wall, the cakkavāla mountain range, stands beyond the seventh of the 
seven concentric mountain ranges, 42,000 yojana high, the same height as 
the innermost range, therefore, the most practical route crosses the Realm 
of the Four Great Kings. The Vedic verses brought back by Bhadra might 
be considered to include the elephant lasso mantra. So Mahāsammata, and 
his surrogate, the reigning monarch, are supported by two pillars – 
knowledge of magical formulas, on one hand, and the law, on the other.
These considerations do not resolve definitively the possibly complex 
identity of the Leper King statue, its kinship to the Ayutthayan statue or 
the question of the function of the Terrace of the Leper King. It may be 
that an oath was recited here, that it bound the oath-takers to the state, as 
if they were inhabitants of the Realm of the Guardian Kings, and that the 
Leper King statue, once it was installed, was the counterpart of the 
Ayutthayan Phra Thep Bidòn.96 But this remains a hypothesis. What it 
may show is that, contrary to long-standing speculation, there is little 
evidence that the terrace had anything to do with cremations. Nevertheless

--- PAGE 121 ---
92
Hiram W. Woodward
these arguments can be taken a step further, keeping Angkor Wat as a 
template. At Angkor Wat we leave the southern gallery and proceed onto 
the western gallery, where the churning of the sea of milk is illustrated. 
When they co-operate, the gods and the demons (asura) produce the good 
things of the world, including the nectar of immortality. The path 
northward from the Bayon leads to the northern Angkor Thom gate, 
where the gods and demons flank the bridge across the city moat, recalling 
the churning scene. Just north of the royal square, there is also an east-
west division, the newly built structures on the west being Buddhist, the 
ones on the east – the Preah Pithu temples – being Brahmanical. To 
produce the good things of the world, they must co-operate, and the king 
must give equal weight to each faction if he is to rule successfully. A 
concern for harmony between Buddhist and Brahmanical beliefs is evident 
in an inscription of Jayavarman VII (K. 484), in which the roots, trunk 
and branches of the Buddhist Bodhi tree are equated with Brahmā, Shiva 
and Vishnu.97 Some kind of equilibrium was generally maintained 
between Buddhists and Brahmans – except when it wasn’t, such as at the 
time of the iconoclastic movement.
MOTIVATIONS
Here, as a kind of postscript, are a few considerations that differ somewhat 
from those presented by Finot. Firstly, it might be wondered what 
happens if we ask about Buddhist, as opposed to Brahmanical, relations 
with territorial spirits. Buddhist boundary stones, which are explicitly 
described in the Pāli inscription of 1308–1309, have an important place. 
Did the Buddhists have a more effective way than the Brahmans of 
creating an inviolate space, unmenaced by territorial spirits? When this 
space becomes the place for ordinations, the newly reborn monks inherit 
the sanctity of the enclosure. They can be said, therefore, to rank higher 
than hereditary Brahman priests, who may be made priests by their blood 
but who are also tainted by it. 
Secondly, we have no good evidence, so far as I know, as to how 
universal was access into the monkhood, nor do we know in this period 
whether short stays in the monkhood were a feature of the practice. At 
any rate, surely the relative democracy of monastery life was one of its 
attractions, as well as the social interactions brought about by the daily 
rounds with alms bowl.
Thirdly, ethnic mixture must also be a factor in the rise of Theravāda 
Buddhism. There were Khmers who lived in Lopburi and returned to 
Angkor, bringing a different religious outlook with them. In addition, I 
suspect that Jayavarman had resettled prisoners of war in the Angkor area 
to serve as labourers in his building projects, and some of these would have

--- PAGE 122 ---
93
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
been Thai speakers. The mutual influence of the Thai and Khmer 
languages is so deep that only long-standing intermixture of populations 
can explain it.98
Notes
1	
Ludivine Provost-Roche, “Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au 
Cambodge (env. 1220–env. 1500)”, 2 vols., PhD dissertation, Université de la 
Sorbonne Nouvelle–Paris III, 2010. Another important dissertation is Tun 
Puthpiseth, “Bouddhisme Theravāda et production artistique en pays khmer: 
Étude d’un corpus d’images en ronde-bosse du Buddha (XIIe–XVIe siècles)”,  
3 vols., PhD dissertation, Université de la Sorbonne–Paris I, 2015.
2	
George Cœdès, Angkor: An Introduction, Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 
1963, p. 107; Louis Finot, “Les études indochinoises”, BEFEO 8, 1908: p. 224. 
Cœdès added, in his own words, “This religion so aptly described by Louis 
Finot, who knew it well, was Buddhism of the Lesser Vehicle, imported from 
Ceylon to Siam through the Mons and the Burmans. Basically opposed to 
individual personality, this Buddhism without deities, so different from that of 
Jayavarman VII, could not but destroy the cult which was both personal and 
nationalistic, and which forced people to worship the god-king and the deified 
princes.”
3	
In the light of Michael Vickery, “The 2/k. 125 Fragment, a Lost Chronicle of 
Ayutthaya”, JSS 61, pt. 1, Jan. 1973: pp. 1–80.
4	
The greater part of the views expressed in the first section of this chapter 
appeared previously in Hiram Woodward, The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand, Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2003, 2005. 
5	
The inscriptional evidence is thoroughly analysed in Nicolas Revire, “Glimpses 
of Buddhist Practices and Rituals in Dvāravatī and Its Neighboring Cultures”, 
in Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen 
A. Murphy, Bangkok: River Books and the Siam Society, 2014: pp. 240–71.
6	
There are a few known names, like Canāśa (from inscriptions) and Wendan (in 
Chinese sources), but we cannot be sure where they were located or of their 
territorial extent. For Wendan, see Hiram Woodward, “Dvaravati, Si Thep, and 
Wendan”, Bulletin of the Indo–Pacific Prehistory Association 30, 2010:  
pp. 87–97.
7	
Some types of ornament have been carefully studied: Robert L. Brown, The 
Dvāravatī Wheels of the Law and the Indianization of Southeast Asia, Leiden: 
Brill, 1996. Other aspects of the relationship are addressed in Hiram Woodward, 
“Stylistic Trends in Mainland Southeast Asia, 600‒800”, in John Guy, ed., Lost 
Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia, New York: 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2014, pp. 122–9; Nicolas Revire, “Dvāravatī and 
Zhenla in the Seventh to Eighth Centuries: A Transregional Ritual Complex”, 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 47, 2016: pp. 393–417.
8	
Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir, L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée 
Guimet, Paris: Réunion des musées nationaux, 2008, pp. 27–8.
9	
Louise Allison Cort and Paul Jett, eds., Gods of Angkor: Bronzes from the 
National Museum of Cambodia, Washington: Arthur M., Sackler Gallery, 
Smithsonian Institution, 2010.
10	
Woodward, “Dvaravati, Si Thep, and Wendan”.

--- PAGE 123 ---
94
Hiram W. Woodward
11	
Woodward, “Aspects of Buddhism in Tenth-Century Cambodia”, in Buddhist 
Dynamics in Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia, ed. D. Christian 
Lammerts, Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2015, pp. 218–60. 
For the two sculptures, Fig. 7.5, p. 227, and Fig. 7.7, p. 229.
12	
In a later inscription from Angkor (K.887), dating from 983, there is mention 
of a sthavira monk (bhikṣu), who may or may not have been a Theravādin: G. 
Cœdès, Inscriptions du Cambodge, 8 vols., Hanoi and Paris: EFEO, 1937–66, 
vol. 5, pp. 153–5 (st. XV, bhikṣuṃ sthaviran…). Note should also be made of the 
term Mahāyānasthavira, in an 11th-century inscription found in Lopburi: 
George Cœdès, Recueil des inscriptions du Siam Deuxième Partie: inscriptions de 
Dvāravatī, de Çrīvijaya et de Lavo, Bangkok: Siam Society, 1961, pp. 10–12. 
For references to discussions of this term, Hiram Woodward, “Image and Text 
in Eleventh-Century Burma”, in India and Southeast Asia: Cultural Discourses, 
eds. Anna L. Dallapiccola and Anila Verghese, Mumbai: K R Cama Oriental 
Institute, 2017, pp. 101–2, and p. 118, n. 22.
13	
On the Khmer adoption and transformation of the nāga-protected Buddha, 
Jean-Pierre Gaston-Aubert, “Nāga Buddhas in the Dvāravatī Period: A Possible 
Link between Dvāravatī and Angkor”, JSS 98, 2010: pp. 116–50; Peter D. 
Sharrock, “The Nāga-enthroned Buddha of Angkor”, in Khmer Bronzes: New 
Interpretations of the Past, eds. Emma C. Bunker and Douglas Latchford, 
Chicago: Art Media Resources, 2011, pp. 481–92.
14	
Woodward, The Art and Architecture of Thailand, pp. 146–55. A recent 
addition to the literature is Pia Conti, “Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai: 
A New Reading of Its Iconographic Message”, in Before Siam: Essays in Art and 
Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy, Bangkok: River Books 
and the Siam Society, 2014, pp. 374–95. 
15	
Evidence has recently come to light of a depiction of the Kapphina Avadāna in 
a temple in Pagan, thereby strengthening the supposition that the Thai story of 
the crowned Buddha (the Jambupati Sutta) derived from this avadāna.  See 
Samœchai Phunsuwan (Samerchai Poolsuwan), Chittrakam phutthasatsana 
samai Phukam [Buddhist Painting of the Bagan Period], 2 vols., Bangkok: 
Mahawitthayalai Thammmasat, 2016, vol. 2, p. LVII, (in Thai).  
16	
There is also an unread doorjamb inscription, K. 871. “Chronique”, BEFEO 37, 
1937: p. 636; Henri Marchal, Le décor et la sculpture khmers, Paris: Vanoest, 
1951, pl. XXV, no. 89, (lintel); Marchal, “Note sur la forme du stūpa au 
Cambodge”, BEFEO 44, no. 2, 1951: pp. 581–90. See also the remarks by 
Nandana Chutiwongs, The Iconography of Avalokiteśvara in Mainland South 
East Asia, Proefschrift, Rijksuniversiteit, Leiden,1984, n. 97, p. 391. There is 
also material evidence at other sites, such as Beng Mealea (probably post-
Sūryavarman) and Prasat Chrap, Pursat (probably pre-Sūryavarman). For its 
lintel with Phimai connections, Jean Boisselier, La statuaire khmère et son 
évolution, 2 vols., Paris: EFEO, 1955, Planches, pl. 61, (National Museum of 
Cambodia). 
	
	
It is no longer thought that the Theravāda temple of Preah Palilay might 
date from the reign of Sūryavarman II. According to the thorough analysis of 
Ludivine Provost-Roche, both construction methods and elements of the décor 
indicate that it was established in the period between the reigns of Sūryavarman 
II and Javavarman VII (making it a contemporary of the Lopburi Mahāthāt) 
and renovated later, perhaps beginning as early as the decades following the 
death of Jayavarman VII, judging by the composition of certain pediments. In 
the opinion of Tun Puthpiseth, however, a pediment depicting the assault of

--- PAGE 124 ---
95
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
Māra – a key element in Provost-Roche’s argument regarding the date of 
establishment – in fact dates from about the end of the 13th century, as do the 
other pictorial sculptural elements. See Ludivine Provost-Roche, “Les derniers 
siècles ”, pp. 115–31; Tun Puthpiseth, “Bouddhisme Theravāda”, vol. 3,  
p. 40, (caption, Ill. 2.41). For a brief survey of opinion regarding Preah Palilay 
and Woodward, The Art and Architecture of Thailand, pp. 203–4, n. 159. To 
the works cited there can be added Bernard-Philippe Groslier, The Art of 
Indochina, New York: Crown, 1962, p. 166; J. Dumarçay, Documents graphiques 
de la Conservation d’Angkor 1963–1973; Paul Courbin, La fouille de Sras-Srang, 
Paris: EFEO, 1988, caption to pl. LX; Claude Jacques, “The Royal Square of 
Angkor Thom and Jayavarman VII”, in Southeast Asian Archaeology 1998: 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the European Association of 
Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 August–4 September 1998, eds. Wibke 
Lobo and Stefanie Reimann, Hull: Centre for South-East Asian Studies & 
Berlin: Ethnologisches Museum, 2000, pp. 77–83.
17	
K. 966. George Cœdès, “Nouvelles données épigraphiques sur l’histoire de 
l’Indochine centrale”, JA 246, 1958: pp. 125–42. For discussions, David K. 
Wyatt, “Relics, Oaths, and Politics in Thirteenth-Century Siam”, Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies 32, 2001: pp. 3–66; Woodward, The Art and 
Architecture of Thailand, pp. 163–5.
18	
A key 12th-century example, showing the Buddhas of the Past around the 
pedestal, is illustrated in Woodward, The Art and Architecture of Thailand, pl. 
70 (B).
19	
How the presence of an esoteric Theravāda (possibly with links to Ariya 
Buddhism) might bear on these issues remains to be explored. Here are three 
surveys of the literature: L. S. Cousins, “Aspects of Esoteric Southern 
Buddhism”, in Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti: Papers 
from the Annual Spalding Symposium on Indian Religions, eds. Peter Connolly 
and Sue Hamilton, London: Luzac, 1997, pp. 185–207; Kate Crosby, “Tantric 
Theravada: A Bibliographical Essay on the Writings of François Bizot and 
Others on the Yogāvacara Tradition”, Contemporary Buddhism 1, 2000:  
pp. 141–98; Ian Harris, Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice, Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press, 2005, pp. 93–104. 
20	
Issues addressed in one place or another in Joyce Clark, ed., Bayon: New 
Perspectives, Bangkok: River Books, 2007. The chapter by Michael Vickery 
provides a guide to contradictory opinions, supplemented by his more extended 
“Bayon: New Perspectives Reconsidered”, Udaya 7, 2006: pp. 101–58. I shall 
here make two comments concerning the Bayon. One is that it should be 
possible to integrate the construction and destruction of the kuṭi into political 
history. For instance, a bronze replica of the Jayabuddhamahānātha of 
Phetchaburi would only have been installed when Phetchaburi was still part of 
the kingdom (T. S. Maxwell’s transcriptions in Bayon: New Perspectives, p. 123, 
inscription 6(L)2). Perhaps the kuṭi were torn down when the more distant 
territories broke away. Secondly, the face towers might have originally had both 
exoteric and esoteric explanations. If the exoteric identification was “Brahma” 
(that is, the Brahmas of the Buddhist Brahmaloka heavens; see above, p. 86), a 
passage in the Thai text on the crowned Buddha Jambūpati might provide a 
rationale for Zhou Daguan’s identification of them as the Buddha (and also 
legitimise the Kathmandu parallel). This text compares the appearance of the 
crowned Buddha to Brahma. See Woodward, “The Buddha Images of 
Ayutthaya”, in The Kingdom of Siam, ed. Forrest McGill, San Francisco: Asian

--- PAGE 125 ---
96
Hiram W. Woodward
Art Museum, 2004, p. 56.
21	
For a discussion of many of these features, Vittorio Roveda, Images of the Gods, 
Bangkok: River Books, 2005, pp. 226–59. I have been associated with the 
suggestion that Jayavarman himself turned to the Theravāda (see Vickery, 
“Bayon: New Perspectives Reconsidered”, p. 125). There are elements of this 
view in Woodward, “Tantric Buddhism at Angkor Thom”, Ars Orientalis 12, 
1981: pp. 57–67. Vickery proposed that this opens the way to the possibility 
that the destruction of images was carried out by Theravādins opposed to the 
Mahāyāna, a possibility I find unlikely (as does Peter Sharrock: see Bayon: New 
Perspectives, n. 7, p. 233). Provost-Roche expressed the view that there was at 
least Theravāda connivance in the desecration because of the pattern of damage 
(“Les derniers siècles”, vol. 1: p. 82).
	
	
A twist on the role of the Theravāda–Mahāyāna divide is that the 
destruction was the responsibility of Hindus angered at the Theravāda (the 
Mahāyāna being more compatible). For this, William A. Southworth, “The 
Alteration and Destruction of Buddhist Images at Angkor during the 
Thirteenth and Fouteenth Centuries”, in In the Shadow of the Golden Age: Art 
and Identity in Asia from Gandhara to the Modern Age, ed. Julia A. B. 
Hegewald, Berlin: EB–Verlag, 2014, pp. 197–225.
22	
Philippe Stern, Les monuments khmers du style du Bàyon et Jayavarman VII, 
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1965, Figs. 27 & 28. 
23	
Woodward, The Art and Architecture of Thailand, pl. 68 (A). For banners in a 
Pāla prototype, Susan L. Huntington and John C. Huntington, Leaves from the 
Bodhi Tree, Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1990, pl. 19.
24	
Baptiste and Zéphir, L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée Guimet,  
pp. 268–71.
25	
Woodward, “The Jayabuddhamahānātha Images of Cambodia”, Journal of the 
Walters Art Gallery 52/53, 1994/95: pp. 105–11.
26	
“Dharmadarśi”, K.294: Cœdès, Inscriptions du Cambodge, vol. 3, p. 197. For an 
illustration, Tun Puthpiseth, “Bouddhisme Theravāda”, vol. 3: p. 151, (Ill. 
3.26).
27	
For references to publications concerning the hospitals and a discussion of the 
identification of the images installed in them, Hiram Woodward, “Cambodian 
Images of Bhaisajyaguru”, in Bunker and Latchford, Khmer Bronzes: New 
Interpretations of the Past, pp. 497–502, (Appendix 4).
28	
Woodward, “The Jayabuddhamahānātha Images of Cambodia”.
29	
For a discussion of these connections, Woodward, “Image and Text”, pp. 103–4.
30	
Woodward, The Art and Architecture of Thailand, pl. 56.
31	
This path of development was not followed everywhere. At Prasat Muang Sing 
in Kanchanaburi province, for instance, far western Central Thailand, 
Jayavarman’s Mahāyāna persisted. The administrative links between Sukhothai 
and Angkor were strong, and there, as Betty Gosling showed, Sukhothai: Its 
History, Culture, and Art, Singapore: Oxford University Press, 1991, p. 14, the 
addition of a worship hall at Wat Phra Phai Luang has parallels at Angkor (and 
might provide a chronological anchoring point for the middle decades of the 
13th century there). In the Northeast, however, for reasons that have not been 
explained, there is little evidence of new monumental construction, although 
bronze workshops most likely continued production.
32	
The change is a result of the decision that the chronogram antara in K. 567 
(Maṅgalārtha), st. 3, stands for the digit 9 rather than 0.  See Claude Jacques, 
“The Historical Development of Khmer Culture”, in Bayon: New Perspectives,

--- PAGE 126 ---
97
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
ed. Joyce Clark, Bangkok: River Books, 2007, p. 41.
33	
See note 20.
34	
Vittorio Roveda, “Reliefs of the Bayon”, in Bayon: New Perspectives, ed. Clark, 
pp. 286–311.
35	
Provost-Roche, “Les demiers siècles”.
36	
Stern, Les monuments khmers du style du Bàyon, pp. 23–4 and caption, pls. 32 
& 33.
37	
David P. Chandler, “Folk Memories of the Decline of Angkor in Nineteenth-
Century Cambodia: The Legend of the Leper King”, JSS 67, pt. 1, Jan. 1979, 
pp. 56–7.
38	
Yoshiaki Ishizawa, ed., “Special Issue on the Inventory of 274 Buddhist Statues 
and the stone Pillar discovered from Banteay Kdei Temple”, 2 vols, Renaissance 
culturelle du Cambodge 21, 2004.
39	
For some illustrations, Hiram W. Woodward Jr., “Some Buddha Images and the 
Cultural Developments of the Late Angkorian Period”, Artibus Asiae 42, 1980: 
pp. 155–74.
40	
 One early instance of an Ariya-sect triad in Cambodia is a small votive tablet 
that could date from the 1190s. See Boisselier, Le Cambodge, pl. XLIV, 1. 
Compare the Cleveland finial, Woodward, The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand, pl. 70 (A); also, the presence of a gem in the palm.
41	
Bruno Dagens, Les Khmers, Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2003, p. 180. A thorough 
review of the problem is Southworth, “The Alteration and Destruction of 
Buddhist Images at Angkor”. Southworth opts for a date of c. 1327, when King 
Jayavarmaparameśvara erected a liṅga at the Bayon in the first year of his reign 
(K. 470). 
42	
Abel Bergaigne, Inscriptions sanscrites du Campā et du Cambodge, Paris: 
Imprimerie nationale, 1893, pp. 560–86. Stanzas 7–10, which characterise 
Sarvajñamuni, were translated by Alexis Sanderson, “The Śaiva Religion among 
the Khmers (Part 1)”, BEFEO 90, 2003, p. 413. Sanderson apparently 
understood the date of Sarvajñamuni to have been in the distant past.
43	
See note 16. The complete photographic documentation provided in Provost-
Roche, “Les derniers siècles”, makes it possible to draw conclusions. For a 
discussion of the relationship of a Preah Pithu lintel to the Angkor Wat style 
(and providing clues as to why the Preah Pithu monuments were so long 
thought to be 12th century in date) see the entry by Thierry Zéphir in Baptiste 
& Zéphir, L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée Guimet, pp. 384–7.
44	
Bruno Dagens, “Étude sur l’iconographie du Bayon (Frontons et linteaux)”, AA 
19, 1969:  p. 137 and Fig. 16.
45	
Triple-chignon images of note include: (1) MG 18135: Baptiste and Zéphir, 
L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée Guimet, pp. 290–91 (contrary to the 
opinion of the authors, this sculpture postdates Jayavarman VII and is unlikely 
to depict Mañjuśrī). (2) A standing female figure in the National Museum, 
Phnom Penh: Jean Boisselier, Le Cambodge, Manuel d’archéologie d’Extrême-
Orient, 1st part, vol. 1 (Paris: A. & J. Picard, 1966), pl. XXXIX, 1. (3) A Vishnu 
in the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, 1993.134. These three sculptures all 
have backslabs, a 13th-century feature. (4) The attendant (Vishnu) paired with 
Shiva in the pediment from Preah Palilay, National Museum of Cambodia; for a 
discussion, Hiram W. Woodward, Jr., “Thailand and Cambodia: the Thirteenth 
and Fourteenth Centuries”, in  Rūam bot khwām thāng wichākān 72 phansā 
thān āčhān Sâtsatrâčhan Mòm Čhao Suphattradit Ditsakun / Studies & 
Reflections on Asian Art History and Archaeology: Essays in Honour of H. S. H.

--- PAGE 127 ---
98
Hiram W. Woodward
Professor Subhadradis Diskul (Bangkok: Silpakorn University, 1995), 
 pp. 335–42.
46	
Provost-Roche, “Les derniers siècles”, pp. 90–113, especially the summary,  
pp. 111–2.
47	
Roveda, “Reliefs of the Bayon”, p. 315. For a discussion, Peter D. Sharrock, 
“The Mystery of the Face Towers”, in Bayon, ed. Clark, p. 252 n. 85. As 
Sharrock notes, this Indrābhiṣeka might have been Tantric, different from the 
ceremony later performed in Ayutthaya.
48	
Provost-Roche, “Les derniers siècles”, p. 88. 
49	
Claude Jacques, “The History and the Inscriptions,” in Peter D. Sharrock, 
Banteay Chhmar: Garrison-temple of the Khmer Empire, Bangkok: River Books, 
2015, pp. 141–4.
50	
Dufour	
Provost-Roche	
Roveda	
Between towers
	
133–35	
8.43–8.45	
XXVIII	
37 & 22
	
124	
8.4	
XXVIb	
36 & 37
	
119/120	
8.5	
XXIVb	
35 & 36
	
Dufour: Henri Dufour et al., Le Bayon d’Angkor Thom: Bas-reliefs publiées par 
les soins de la Commission Archéologique de l’Indochine, 2 vols., Paris: E. Leroux, 
1910–14. These plates can be viewed on the web site https://bayonrevealed.
wixsite.com/bayon, maintained by Richard Thomas and Rhoda O’Higgins. 
Nearly all Provost-Roche’s illustrations were taken from a 2004 survey. For 
Roveda, his “Reliefs of the Bayon”. The Leper King story appears in Dufour, 
pls. 133–5. For discussions of the Leper King, Ashley Thompson, “The 
Suffering of Kings: Substitute Bodies, Healing, and Justice in Cambodia”, in 
History, Buddhism, and New Religious Movements in Cambodia (Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press, 2004), pp. 99–112, and the references therein.  For 
the international spread of a legend of a leper king, Brice Vincent, “Nouvelle 
étude du Lokeśvara khmer du Musée national de Colombo (Sri Lanka)”, AA 68 
(2013): pp. 27–38.
51	
Dufour	
Provost-Roche	
Roveda	
Between towers
	
113	
8.11, 8.11 ter	
XXIVf	
35 & 36
	
See Provost-Roche, pp. 94–95. According to Roveda the central image was 
originally a liṇga, not the Buddha.
52	
This possibility is raised and then rejected by Provost-Roche, p. 93 n. 298.
53	
Dufour	
Provost-Roche	
Roveda	
Between towers
	
128	
8.2 bis	
XXVIa	
36 & 37
	
118	
8.6	
XXIVc	
35 & 36
	
27	
8.33	
Vb	
24 & 25
	
3	
8.52	
Ib	
22 & 23
	
Roveda identified the man standing on an elephant, pl. 27, as a Cham.
54	
Provost-Roche, “Les derniers siècles”, p. 112.
	
Dufour	
Provost-Roche	
Roveda	
Between towers
	
108	
8.54, 8.54 bis	
XXIIg	
34 & 35
	
44	
8.79	
VIIId	
26 & 27
	
41	
8.82	
VIIIb	
26 & 27
	
40	
8.83	
VIIIa	
26 & 27
55	
Here are two incidental identifications, by-products of this research and of 
correspondence with Richard Thomas of Western Sydney University in 2017. 
Dufour pls. 130 (paying homage to Shiva) and 131 (a boat scene; Provost-
Roche, p. 102; Roveda XXVIc and XXVIIb) are quite probably the same two 
scenes depicted in the southwestern corner pavilion at Angkor Vat: Woodward,

--- PAGE 128 ---
99
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
“King Sūryavarman II and the Power of Subjugation,” in On Meaning and 
Mantras: Essays in Honor of Frits Staal, ed. George Thompson and Richard K. 
Payne (Berkeley: Institute of Buddhist Studies and BDK America, 2017),  
pp. 483−502. Dufour pl. 99 (Roveda XXId) depicts Kāmadeva, having 
responded to Indra’s request to visit Shiva, residing in a pavilion on the 
mountainside, the scenes of nature in the lower part of the relief reflecting the 
descriptions of the environment in the Śiva Purāṇa 2.3.18 (“the vast diffusions 
of Spring caused the display of emotions of love”). Jagadisalala Sastri, trans., The 
Śiva-Purāṇa, 4 vols. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1970); online access http://
dspace.wbpublibnet.gov.in:8080/jspui/handle/ 10689/21319.
56	
Cœdès, “Etudes cambodgiennes XXXII: La plus ancienne inscription en Pāli du 
Cambodge”, BEFEO 36, 1936: pp. 14–21. On the terminology of the 
inscription, Ashley Thompson, “Changing Perspectives: Cambodia after 
Angkor”, in Sculpture of Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory, 
ed. Helen Ibbitson Jessup and Thierry Zéphir, Washington: National Gallery of 
Art, 1997, p. 27.
57	
Dominique Soutif, “Organisation religieuse et profane du temple khmer du 
VIIe au XIIIe siècle”, 3 vols., Thèse de Doctorat, Université Sorbonne nouvelle 
– Paris 3, 2009, vol. 1, pp. 264–5. 
58	
Martin Polkinghorne, Christophe Pottier, and Christian Fischer, “One Buddha 
Can Hide Another”, JA 301, no. 2, 2013: pp. 575–624.
59	
In bronze, Bangkok National Museum Lb 344, illustrated Theodore Bowie, ed., 
The Arts of Thailand, Bloomington: Indiana University, 1960, Fig. 43, p. 78. All 
this requires juggling the dates of the destruction and of the installation of the 
replacement. If the interval lasted any length of time, then it must be asked if a 
Hindu image was installed for a period. Claude Jacques proposed that the 
original central Buddha was replaced by an image of Harihara; he drew on the 
evidence of inscriptions (“Dharaṇī” and “Parvatī) in the adjacent chapels: “The 
Historical Development of Khmer Culture”, p. 48. It is far more likely that the 
name Dharaṇī referred to the Buddhist Earth Goddess, and that the inscriptions 
pre-dated the removal of the central icon (points made in Vickery, “Bayon: New 
Perspectives Reconsidered”). It is hard to know what form these images took, 
but I suspect that they had an additional esoteric meaning, as standing for the 
side channels in Tantric meditation.
60	
These discussions of stylistic development depend on Hiram W. Woodward, Jr. 
et al., The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand, Baltimore: Walters Art Gallery, 1997. 
61	
Jinakālamālī, ed. A. P. Buddhadatta, London: Pāli Text Society, 1962, p. 103 
(lavapaṭimākāraṃ); cf. Hans Penth, Jinakālamālī Index, Oxford: Pāli Text 
Society and Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 1994, p. 152.
62	
Polkinghorne, Pottier and Fischer, “One Buddha”.
63	
On this temple, see Chapter 6 by Yuni Sato in this volume.
64	
Prasat Top West has antefixes that are so like those installed on Phra Prang Sam 
Yot in Lopburi that the Lopburi antefixes could have conceivably been carried 
from Cambodia, as pointed out in Woodward, “Thailand and Cambodia: The 
Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries”. 
65	
Claude Jacques, “The Royal Square of Angkor Thom and Jayavarman VII”.
66	
In accordance with the legendary origins of King U Thong, as found also in the 
analysis of the oath by Jit Phumisak: Čhit Phumisak, ‘Ōngkān chǣng nam læ khǭ 
khit mai nai prawattisāt thai lum nam čhao phrayā [The oath of allegiance and 
new considerations concerning the history of the Thai in the Chao Phraya River 
basin], Bangkok: Duang Kamon, 1981, (in Thai), e.g., pp. 138–40.

--- PAGE 129 ---
100
Hiram W. Woodward
67	
Hiram Woodward, “‘The Characteristics of Elephants’: A Thai Manuscript and 
its Context”, in From Mulberry Leaves to Silk Scrolls: New Approaches to the 
Study of Asian Manuscript Traditions, eds. Justin McDaniel and Lynn Ransom, 
Philadelphia: Schoenberg Institute, University of Pennsylvania Libraries, 2015, 
pp. 15–41, and Woodward, “King Sūryavarman II and the Power of 
Subjugation”, pp. 483−502.
68	
I have used the numbers in Michael Wright, ʻŌngkān chǣng nam [The Curse on 
the Water of Allegiance], Bangkok: Matichon, 2000. No numeration appears in 
the Thai text: Photčhanānukrom sap wannakhadī Thai samai ʻAyutthayā Lilit 
ʻŌngkān chǣng nam [Dictionary of Thai literature, Ayutthaya period: Lilit 
ʻŌngkān Chǣng Nam], Bangkok: Rātchabandittayasathān, 1997. Furthermore 
the verses appear in a different order in this edition, numbers 26–33 appearing 
after the invocation of all the witnesses (p. 49). Wright’s translation was based 
upon a 1986 edition of the text, rather than the 1997 edition. 
69	
Wright, ʻŌngkān, p. 119.
70	
George Cœdès, “Études cambodgiennes IX: Le serment des fonctionnaires de 
Sūryavarman I”, BEFEO 13, no. 6, 1913: pp. 11–7.
71	
Judith M. Jacob, The Traditional Literature of Cambodia: A Preliminary Guide, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996, pp. 53–64.
72	
This is also a Tamil notion. The devotee’s relationship to god is modelled on 
such human relations as master-servant, child-parent, and beloved-lover. “In the 
Tamil context, bhakti is also frequently expressed in the idiom of the 
relationship between king and subject.” See Norman Cutler, Songs of Experience: 
The Poetics of Tamil Devotion, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987,  
p. 1. I thank Phillip Green for providing this reference.
73	
For some discussion, Frank E. Reynolds, “The Holy Emerald Jewel”, in Religion 
and Legitimation of Power in Thailand, Laos, and Burma, ed. Bardwell L. 
Smith, Chambersburg PA: Anima, 1978, pp. 175–93.
74	
Wright, ʻŌngkān, p. 104. Sixteen Brahma realms: soḷasabrahmañāṇa. Soḷasa is 
the Pāli word for sixteen, and ñāṇa (knowledge) is a mistake for jhāna (trance). 
75	
For this rebirth, Frank E. and Mani B. Reynolds, trans., Three Worlds According 
to King Ruang Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1982, pp. 317–8.
76	
This is a difficult stanza, and I have depended as much on the exegesis of the 
Thai editors (pp. 34–6) as on Wright (pp. 110–11).
77	
Woodward, “The Characteristics of Elephants”.  
78	
Woodward, “The Characteristics of Elephants”, esp. p. 33; Woodward, “King 
Sūryavarman II and the Power of Subjugation”.
79	
Abridged English translation of K. 292 in Lawrence Palmer Briggs, The Ancient 
Khmer Empire, Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1951, p. 151.
80	
Thewa pāng [Incarnation of the gods], Bangkok: Krom Sinlapakòn, 1970, p. 21, 
(the same text that contains the account of the subduing of the mad elephant). 
81	
Christophe Pottier, “La quatrième dimension du puzzle”, Seksa Khmer N. S. 1, 
1998: pp. 101–11.
82	
Cœdès, “Études cambodgiennes XIX: La date du Bàyon”, BEFEO 28, 1928:  
pp. 81–112.  In his guidebook, Claude Jacques has written, “The inscription on 
its base is 14th century, or later”: Michael Freeman and Claude Jacques, Ancient 
Angkor, Bangkok: River Books, 2003, p. 110.
83	
Cœdès, Angkor: An Introduction, p. 45.
84	
B.-P. Groslier, “Angkor: Terrace of Leper King”, Nokor Khmer, October/
December 1969, pp. 18–33; Jacques Dumarçay, The Site of Angkor, New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1998, p. 57.

--- PAGE 130 ---
101
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
85	
A diagnostic motif absent on the Leper King Terrace but present on the later 
Preah Pithu pediment in the Musée Guimet and the bronze sitting Shiva in the 
National Museum Bangkok is the cylindrical coiffure mounted by tassels. See 
Baptiste and Zéphir, L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée Guimet, pp. 
388–90; and Woodward, The Art and Architecture of Thailand, pp. 226–7 and 
pl. 85.
86	
As stated (indistinctly), in Groslier, “Angkor: Terrace of Leper King”.
87	
Three Worlds, trans. Reynolds and Reynolds, p. 219. In the Thai illustrated 
Traiphum of 1776, the nāga kingdom is shown in a section that appears 
subsequent to the lokapāla, but the text indicates that it is considered part of 
the realm of the Guardians. See Samut phāp traiphūm krung Thonburī / 
Buddhist Cosmology Thonburi Version, Bangkok: Khana kammakān 
phitčharanā…, 1982, pp. 62–3.
88	
I thank Martin Polkinghorne for sharing with me photographs of the free-
standing sculptures from the Leper King Terrace. Henri Mouhot (1868) did not 
note the presence of surrounding sculptures but exuberantly praised the beauty 
of the Leper King: “the head, a praiseworthy example of nobility, of proportion, 
with fine features, calm in its lordly bearing, the work of the most skillful of the 
sculptors in a period filled with many blessed by rare talent.” (Henri Mouhot, 
Voyage dans les royaumes de Siam de Cambodge, de Laos, Geneva: Editions 
Olizane, 1999, pp. 197–8.) Garnier (1873) published an engraving (p. 70) 
showing two attendant sword-bearing figures and commented on the Leper 
King statue (p. 71), “the inflated praise Mouhot gave to this statue will perhaps 
give rise to disappointment among future viewers” (Francis Garnier, Voyage 
d’exploration en Indo-Chine effectué pendant les années 1866, 1867 et 1868 par 
une Commission française, 2 vols., Paris: Hachette, 1873, vol. 1.) Another 
engraving less successfully includes the two sword-bearers: Louis Delaporte, 
Voyage au Cambodge: l’architecture khmer, Paris: Ch. Delagrave, 1880, p. 100. 
Aymonier (1904) mentioned (p. 124) offerings brought to the Leper King but 
not the guardian figures, the arm and shoulder of one of which appears in his 
photograph, Fig. 18, p. 124. Etienne Aymonier, Le Cambodge, III, Le groupe 
d’Angkor et l’histoire, Paris: E. Leroux, 1904. Lunet de Lajonquière (1911) wrote 
(p. 58), “Some fragments of sculptures have been collected around its base” 
(Etienne Lunet de Lajonquière, Inventaire descriptif des monuments du 
Cambodge, vol. 3, Paris: E. Leroux, 1911) (my translations of the French texts).
89	
The pre-Angkorian date was noted by Henri Parmentier, L’Art khmèr primitif, 
2 vols., Paris: EFEO, 1927, text vol., pp. 269–70 and then forgotten. Hab Touch 
is the first contemporary scholar to re-assess the dating: “Yama”, in Angkor: 
göttliches Erbe, ed. Wibke Lobo, Bonn: Kunst- und Ausstellungshalle, 2006,  
p. 114.
90	
Cœdès, “La date du Bàyon”, pp. 83–4.
91	
Quoted in the Wikipedia entry for Chitragupta.
92	
Cœdès, Inscriptions du Cambodge, vol. 3, pp. 229–30; Michael Vickery, 
Cambodia and Its Neighbors in the 15th Century, Asia Research Institute, 
Working Paper Series, No. 27, National University of Singapore, June 2004,  
p. 19 (Vickery suspects that this king might have been a king of Ayutthaya).
93	
Woodward, “The Buddha Images of Ayutthaya”, p. 58.
94	
E. Forchhammer, The Jardine Prize: An Essay, Rangoon: Government Press, 
1885, p. 94. For more on Mahāsammata, Steven Collins and Andrew Huxley, 
“The Post-canonical Adventures of Mahāsammata”, Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 224, 1996: pp. 623–48; Ashley Thompson, Engendering the

--- PAGE 131 ---
102
Hiram W. Woodward
Buddhist State: Territory, Sovereignty, and Sexual Difference in the Inventions of 
Angkor, London and New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis, 2016, p. 53.
95	
The Palace Law of Ayutthaya and the Thammasat: Law and Kingship in Siam, 
trans. and eds. Chris Baker and Pasuk Phongpaichit, Southeast Asia Program 
Publications, Ithaca: Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University, 2016,  
pp. 37–8. Also Andrew Huxley, “Thai, Mon & Burmese Dhammathats Who 
Influenced Whom?”, in Thai Law: Buddhist Law: Essays on the Legal History of 
Thailand, Laos and Burma, ed. Andrew Huxley, Bangkok: White Orchid, 1996, 
pp. 81–131.
96	
It should be pointed out that the royal procession described by Zhou Daguan 
presumably passed by the Leper King Terrace on its way to one of the Buddhist 
terraces but did not terminate there: Chou Ta-Kuan, The Customs of Cambodia, 
trans. Paul Pelliot and J. Gilman d’Arcy Paul, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 1987, 
chap. 40.
97	
Hiram Woodward, “Foreword”, in Bayon: New Perspectives, ed. Clark, p. 8.
98	
On this topic, Franklin Huffman, “Thai and Cambodian: A Case of Syntactic 
Borrowing?”, Journal of the American Oriental Society 93, 1973: pp. 488–509.
References 
Aymonier, Etienne. Le Cambodge, III, Le groupe d’Angkor et l’histoire. Paris: E. Leroux, 
1904. 
Baker, Chris and Pasuk Phongpaichit, trans. and eds. The Palace Law of Ayutthaya and 
the Thammasat: Law and Kingship in Siam. Southeast Asia Program 
Publications. Ithaca: Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University, 2016.
Baptiste, Pierre and Thierry Zéphir. L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée Guimet. 
Paris: Réunion des musées nationaux, 2008.
Bergaigne, Abel. Inscriptions sanscrites de Campā et du Cambodge. Paris: Imprimerie 
nationale, 1893.
Boisselier, Jean. La statuaire khmère et son évolution, 2 vols. Paris: EFEO, 1955.
——— . Le Cambodge. Manuel d’archéologie d’Extrême-Orient, 1st part, Asivol. 1. 
Paris: A. & J. Picard, 1966.
Bowie, Theodore, ed. The Arts of Thailand. Bloomington: Indiana University, 1960.
Briggs, Lawrence Palmer. The Ancient Khmer Empire. Philadelphia: American 
Philosophical Society, 1951.
Brown, Robert L. The Dvāravatī Wheels of the Law and the Indianization of Southeast 
Asia. Leiden: Brill, 1996.
Chandler, David P. “Folk Memories of the Decline of Angkor in Nineteenth-Century 
Cambodia: The Legend of the Leper King”. JSS 67, pt. 1, January 1979:  
pp. 54–62.
Čhit Phumisak [Jit Phumisak]. ‘Ōngkān chǣng nam læ khò khit mai nai prawattisāt 
thai lum nam čhao phrayā [The oath of allegiance and new considerations 
concerning the history of the Thai in the Chao Phraya River basin]. Bangkok: 
Duang Kamon, 1981.
Chou Ta-Kuan. The Customs of Cambodia, trans. Paul Pelliot and J. Gilman d’Arcy 
Paul. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 1987.
Clark, Joyce, ed. Bayon: New Perspectives. Bangkok: River Books, 2007.
Cœdès, George. Angkor: An Introduction. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1963.
——— . “Etudes cambodgiennes IX.—Le serment des fonctionnaires de Sūryavarman 
I”. BEFEO 13, no. 6, 1913: pp. 11–7.
——— . “Etudes cambodgiennes XIX—La date du Bàyon”. BEFEO 28, 1928:

--- PAGE 132 ---
103
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
pp. 81–112.
——— . “Etudes cambodgiennes XXXII—La plus ancienne inscription en Pāli du 
Cambodge”. BEFEO 36, 1936: pp. 14–21.
——— . Inscriptions du Cambodge, 8 vols. Hanoi and Paris: EFEO, 1937–66.
——— . “Nouvelles données épigraphiques sur l’histoire de l’Indochine centrale”. JA 
246, 1958: pp. 125–42.
——— . Recueil des inscriptions du Siam Deuxième Partie: inscriptions de Dvāravatī, de 
Çrīvijaya et de Lavo. Bangkok: Siam Society, 1961.
Collins, Steven and Andrew Huxley. “The Post-canonical Adventures of 
Mahāsammata”. Journal of Indian Philosophy 224, 1996: pp. 623–48.
Conti, Pia. “Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai: A New Reading of Its 
Iconographic Message”. In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. 
Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: River Books and the Siam 
Society, 2014, pp. 374–95. 
Cort, Louise Allison and Paul Jett, eds. Gods of Angkor: Bronzes from the National 
Museum of Cambodia. Washington: Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, Smithsonian 
Institution, 2010.
Cousins, L. S. “Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism”. In Indian Insights: 
Buddhism, Brahmanism and Bhakti: Papers from the Annual Spalding 
Symposium on Indian Religions, eds. Peter Connolly and Sue Hamilton. 
London: Luzac, 1997, pp. 185–207.
Crosby, Kate. “Tantric Theravada: A Bibliographical Essay on the Writings of François 
Bizot and Others on the Yogāvacara Tradition”. Contemporary Buddhism 1, 
2000: pp. 141–98.
Cutler, Norman. Songs of Experience: The Poetics of Tamil Devotion. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1987.
Dagens, Bruno. “Étude sur l’iconographie du Bàyon (frontons et linteaux)”. AA 19, 
1969: pp. 123–68.
——— . Les Khmers. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2003.
Delaporte, Louis. Voyage au Cambodge: l’architecture khmer. Paris: Ch. Delagrave, 
1880.
Dufour, Henri et al. Le Bayon d’Angkor Thom: Bas-reliefs publiées par les soins de la 
Commission Archéologique de l’Indochine, 2 vols. Paris: E. Leroux, 1910–14.
Dumarçay, Jacques. The Site of Angkor, New York: Oxford University Press, 1998,  
p. 57.
Dumarçay, J. and Paul Corbin. Documents graphiques de la Conservation d’Angkor 
1963–1973 and La fouille de Sras-Srang. Paris: EFEO, 1988.
Finot, Louis. “Les études indochinoises”. BEFEO 8, 1908: pp. 221–33.
Forchhammer, E. The Jardine Prize: An Essay. Rangoon: Government Press, 1885.
Freeman, Michael and Claude Jacques. Ancient Angkor. Bangkok: River Books, 2003.
Garnier, Francis. Voyage d’exploration en Indo-Chine effectué pendant les années 1866, 
1867 et 1868 par une Commission française, 2 vols. Paris: Hachette, 1873.
Gaston-Aubert, Pierre. “Nāga Buddhas in the Dvāravatī Period: A Possible Link 
between Dvāravatī and Angkor”. JSS 98, 2010: pp. 116–50.
Gosling, Betty. Sukhothai: Its History, Culture, and Art. Singapore: Oxford University 
Press, 1991.
Groslier, Bernard-Philippe. “Angkor: Terrace of Leper King”. Nokor Khmer, October–
December 1969, pp. 18–33.
——— . The Art of Indochina. New York: Crown, 1962.
Harris, Ian. Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai‘i Press, 2005.

--- PAGE 133 ---
104
Hiram W. Woodward
Huffman, Franklin. “Thai and Cambodian: A Case of Syntactic Borrowing?”. Journal 
of the American Oriental Society 93, 1973: pp. 488–509.
Huntington, Susan L. and John C. Huntington. Leaves from the Bodhi Tree. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press, 1990.
Huxley, Andrew. “Thai, Mon & Burmese Dhammathats: Who Influenced Whom?”. 
In Thai Law: Buddhist Law: Essays on the Legal History of Thailand, Laos and 
Burma, ed. Andrew Huxley. Bangkok: White Orchid, 1996, pp. 81–131.
Ishizawa, Yoshiaki, ed. “Special Issue on the Inventory of 274 Buddhist Statues and the 
Stone Pillar Discovered from Banteay Kdei Temple”, 2 vols. Renaissance 
culturelle du Cambodge 21, 2004.
Jacob, Judith M. The Traditional Literature of Cambodia: A Preliminary Guide. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Jacques, Claude. “The Historical Development of Khmer Culture”, in Bayon: New 
Perspectives, ed. Joyce Clark, Bangkok: River Books, 2007, pp. 28–49.
——— . “The History and the Inscriptions”, in Peter D. Sharrock, Banteay Chhmar: 
Garrison-temple of the Khmer Empire, Bangkok: River Books, 2015,  
pp. 135–50.
——— . “The Royal Square of Angkor Thom and Jayavarman VII”. In Southeast Asian 
Archaeology 1998: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the 
European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 August–4 
September 1998, eds. Wibke Lobo and Stefanie Reimann. Hull: Centre for 
South-East Asian Studies and Berlin: Ethnologisches Museum, 2000, pp. 77–83.
Jinakālamālī, ed. A. P. Buddhadatta. London: Pāli Text Society, 1962.
Lobo, Wibke, ed. Angkor: göttliches Erbe. Bonn: Kunst- und Ausstellungshalle, 2006. 
Lunet de Lajonquière, Etienne. Inventaire descriptif des monuments du Cambodge, vol. 
3. Paris: E. Leroux, 1911.
Marchal, Henri. Le décor et la sculpture Khmers. Paris: Vanoest, 1951.
——— . “Note sur la forme du stūpa au Cambodge”. BEFEO 44, no. 2, 1951:  
pp. 581–90. 
Mouhot, Henri. Voyage dans les royaumes de Siam de Cambodge, de Laos. Geneva: 
Editions Olizane, 1999.
Nandana Chutiwongs. The Iconography of Avalokiteśvara in Mainland South East 
Asia. Proefschrift, Rijksuniversiteit, Leiden, 1984.
Parmentier, Henri. L’Art khmèr primitif, 2 vols. Paris: EFEO, 1927.
Penth, Hans. Jinakālamālī Index. Oxford: Pāli Text Society and Chiang Mai: 
Silkworm Books, 1994.
Photčhanānukrom sap wannakhadī Thai samai ʻAyutthayā Lilit ʻŌngkān chǣng nam 
[Dictionary of Thai literature, Ayutthaya period: Lilit ʻŌngkān Chǣng Nam]. 
Bangkok: Rātchabandittayasathān, 1997.
Polkinghorne, Martin, Christophe Pottier and Christian Fischer. “One Buddha Can 
Hide Another”. JA 301, no. 2, 2013: pp. 575–624.
Pottier, Christophe. “La quatrième dimension du puzzle”. Seksa Khmer N. S. 1, 1998: 
pp. 101–11.
Provost-Roche, Ludivine. Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge 
[environ 1220–environ 1500], 2 vols. PhD dissertation, Université de Paris 3, 
2010.  
Revire, Nicolas. “Dvāravatī and Zhenla in the Seventh to Eighth Centuries:  
A Transregional Ritual Complex”. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 47, 2016: 
pp. 393–417.
——— . “Glimpses of Buddhist Practices and Rituals in Dvāravatī and Its Neighboring 
Cultures”. In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire

--- PAGE 134 ---
105
Angkor and Theravāda Buddhism
and Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: River Books and the Siam Society, 2014,  
pp. 240–71.
Reynolds, Frank E. “The Holy Emerald Jewel”. In Religion and Legitimation of Power 
in Thailand, Laos, and Burma, ed. Bardwell L. Smith. Chambersburg PA: 
Anima, 1978, pp. 175–93.
Reynolds, Frank E. and Mani B. Reynolds, trans. Three Worlds According to King 
Ruang. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1982.
Roveda, Vittorio. Images of the Gods. Bangkok: River Books, 2005.
——— . “Reliefs of the Bayon”. In Bayon: New Perspectives, ed. Joyce Clark. Bangkok: 
River Books, 2007, pp. 286–311.
Samœchai Phunsuwan (Samerchai Poolsuwan). Chittrakam phutthasatsana samai 
Phukam [Buddhist Painting of the Bagan Period], 2 vols. Bangkok: 
Mahawitthayalai Thammmasat, 2016.
Samut phāp traiphūm krung Thonburī/Buddhist Cosmology Thonburi Version. 
Bangkok: Khana kammakān phičharanā læ Čhatphim ʻĒkkasān thāng 
Prawattisāt, Samnak Nāyok Ratthamontrī, 1982.
Sanderson, Alexis. “The Śaiva Religion among the Khmers (Part 1)”. BEFEO 90, 2003: 
pp. 349–462. 
Sharrock, Peter D. “The Nāga-enthroned Buddha of Angkor”. In Khmer Bronzes: New 
Interpretations of the Past, eds. Emma C. Bunker and Douglas Latchford. 
Chicago: Art Media Resources, 2011, pp. 481–92.
Southworth, William A. “The Alteration and Destruction of Buddhist Images at 
Angkor during the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries”. In In the Shadow of 
the Golden Age: Art and Identity in Asia from Gandhara to the Modern Age, ed. 
Julia A. B. Hegewald. Berlin: EB-Verlag, 2014, pp. 197–225.
Soutif, Dominique. “Organisation religieuse et profane du temple khmer du VIIe au 
XIIIe siècle.” 3 vols. PhD dissertation, Université Sorbonne nouvelle – Paris 3, 
2009.
Stern, Philippe. Les monuments khmers du style du Bàyon et Jayavarman VII. Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1965.
Thewa pāng [Incarnation of the gods]. Bangkok: Krom Sinlapakòn, 1970. 
Thompson, Ashley. “Changing Perspectives: Cambodia after Angkor”. In Sculpture of 
Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory, eds. Helen Ibbitson 
Jessup and Thierry Zéphir. Washington: National Gallery of Art, 1997,  
pp. 22–32.
——— . Engendering the Buddhist State: Territory, Sovereignty, and Sexual Difference 
in the Inventions of Angkor. London and New York: Routledge/Taylor & 
Francis, 2016.
——— . “The Suffering of Kings: Substitute Bodies, Healing, and Justice in 
Cambodia”. In History, Buddhism, and New Religious Movements in 
Cambodia, eds. John A. Marston and Elizabeth Guthrie, Honolulu: University 
of Hawai‘i Press, 2004, pp. 99–112.
Tun Puthpiseth. “Bouddhisme Theravāda et production artistique en pays khmer: 
Étude d’un corpus d’images en ronde-bosse du Buddha (xiiie–xvie siècles)”,  
3 vols. PhD dissertation, Université Paris-Sorbonne, 2015.
Vickery, Michael. “The 2/k. 125 Fragment, a Lost Chronicle of Ayutthaya”. JSS 61,  
pt. 1, January 1973: pp. 1–80.
——— . “Bayon: New Perspectives Reconsidered”. Udaya 7, 2006: pp. 101–58.
——— . Cambodia and Its Neighbors in the 15th Century. Asia Research Institute, 
Working Paper Series, No. 27. Singapore: National University of Singapore, 
June 2004.

--- PAGE 135 ---
106
Hiram W. Woodward
Vincent, Brice. “Nouvelle étude du Lokeśvara khmer du Musée national de Colombo 
(Sri Lanka)”. AA 68, 2013: pp. 27–38.
Woodward, Hiram W., Jr. The Art and Architecture of Thailand From Prehistoric 
Times through the Thirteenth Century. Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2005. First 
published 2003.
——— . “Aspects of Buddhism in Tenth-Century Cambodia”. In Buddhist Dynamics in 
Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia, ed. d. Christian Lammerts. 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2015, pp. 218–60.
——— . “The Buddha Images of Ayutthaya”. In The Kingdom of Siam, ed. Forrest 
McGill. San Francisco: Asian Art Museum, 2004, pp. 47–59.
——— . “Cambodian Images of Bhaisajyaguru”. In Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations 
of the Past, eds. Emma C. Bunker and Douglas Latchford. Chicago: Art Media 
Resources, 2011, pp. 497–502.
——— . “‘The Characteristics of Elephants’: A Thai Manuscript and its Context”. In 
From Mulberry Leaves to Silk Scrolls: New Approaches to the Study of Asian 
Manuscript Traditions, eds. Justin McDaniel and Lynn Ransom. Philadelphia: 
Schoenberg Institute, University of Pennsylvania Libraries, 2015, pp. 15–41.
——— . “Dvaravati, Si Thep, and Wendan,” Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association 30, 2010: pp. 87–97.
——— . “Image and Text in Eleventh-Century Burma”. In India and Southeast Asia: 
Cultural Discourses, eds. Anna L. Dallapiccola and Anila Verghese. Mumbai:  
K R Cama Oriental Institute, 2017, pp. 97–124.
——— . “The Jayabuddhamahānātha Images of Cambodia”. Journal of the Walters Art 
Gallery 52/53, 1994/95: pp. 105–11.
——— . “King Sūryavarman II and the Power of Subjugation”. In On Meaning and 
Mantras: Essays in Honor of Frits Staal, eds. George Thompson and Richard K. 
Payne. Berkeley: Institute of Buddhist Studies and BDK America, 2017,  
pp. 623–42.
——— . “Some Buddha Images and the Cultural Developments of the Late Angkorian 
Period”. Artibus Asiae 42, 1980: pp. 155–74.
——— . “Stylistic Trends in Mainland Southeast Asia, 600‒800”. In Lost Kingdoms: 
Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia, ed. John Guy. New York: 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2014, pp. 122–9.
——— . “Tantric Buddhism at Angkor Thom”. Ars Orientalis 12, 1981: pp. 57–67.
——— . “Thailand and Cambodia: The Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries”. In 
Rūam bot khwām thāng wichākān 72 phansā thān āčhān Sātsatrāčhan Mòm 
Čhao Suphattradit Ditsakun/Studies & Reflections on Asian Art History and 
Archaeology: Essays in Honour of H. S. H. Professor Subhadradis Diskul. 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University, 1995, pp. 335–42.
Woodward, Hiram W., Jr. et al. The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand. Baltimore: Walters 
Art Gallery, 1997.
Wright, Michael. ʻŌngkān chǣng nam [The Curse on the Water of Allegiance]. 
Bangkok: Matichon, 2000.
Wyatt, David K. “Relics, Oaths, and Politics in Thirteenth-Century Siam”. Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies 32, 2001: pp. 3–66.

--- PAGE 136 ---
107
Chapter 3
READING AND INTERPRETING 
JĀTAKA TALES DURING THE 
ANGKORIAN PERIOD
Tuy Danel
INTRODUCTION
Among Buddhists, especially of the Theravāda school, jātaka, or stories of 
the previous lives of the Gotama Buddha, are of primary importance. 
Indeed, besides providing moral edification to Buddhist devotees, jātaka 
constitute a legitimation of the Buddha himself, an undeniable testimony 
of his efforts in his countless existences during which he sought Perfection 
or pāramitā, the indispensable quality that one needs in order to attain 
Buddhahood. First appearing in Indic visual art, jātaka clearly gained 
their greatest popularity in Sri Lanka and in Southeast Asia. In this latter 
part of Asia, early visual representations of jātaka tales date back as far as 
the first millennium of the Common Era, in the kingdom or more 
correctly the so-called culture of Dvāravātī (6th to 11th centuries). Several 
jātaka scenes have been found on terracotta reliefs of stūpa and boundary 
stones or sīmā in different places associated with this culture that had its 
principal political and cultural centres located in what is present-day 
Thailand.1 The popularity of this Buddhist theme also spread to the 
centre of Java, in contemporary Indonesia, where, between the eighth and 
ninth centuries, the Buddhist dynasty of Sailendra erected the massive 
Borobudur, a Buddhist temple containing numerous reliefs related to the 
life of the Śākyamuni Buddha and to his previous existences.2 However, it 
was primarily during the period of Pagan (9th to 13th centuries) that 
extended representations of jātaka tales were attested in the ancient 
capital of present-day Myanmar at several Buddhist temples, in particular 
the Ananda temple.3 
In Cambodia, when jātaka scenes seemingly suddenly, and 
increasingly, appeared on temple reliefs during the Angkorian period (9th 
to 15th centuries) one may, with regard to the context of this volume, ask 
this question: Were these jātaka related to an expansion of practices of

--- PAGE 137 ---
108
Tuy Danel
Theravāda Buddhism during that time? Given the current state of our 
knowledge, it is difficult to find a definitive answer. Since both 
archaeological and epigraphical evidence tend to affirm the fact that 
Mahāyāna Buddhism was for a long time more present and manifest than 
Theravāda Buddhism in ancient Cambodia – this was furthermore 
confirmed with the adoption of Mahāyāna Buddhism as the mainstream 
religious institution by the end of the 12th century – it is tempting to 
consider jātaka representations as part of an iconographic programme 
belonging to a Mahāyāna context. In this chapter, however, my principal 
goal is not to discuss the history of Buddhism and its complex evolution 
in ancient Cambodia, a task that would go beyond my expertise, but, 
rather, to draw the reader’s attention to the importance of 
representations of jātaka as a physically significant source, in other 
words, a possible indicator of religious tendency. 
Like Khmer Buddhism during the Angkorian period more generally, 
studies of visual representations of jātaka in ancient Cambodia have 
been, for a long time, neglected or eclipsed by diversified research 
regarding Brahmanism whose dominating presence is attested in both 
archaeological and literary domains, and which seems to inspire scholarly 
fascination. Nevertheless, a few scholars have been interested in jātaka as 
part of temple iconographic programmes. The 1960s saw the publication 
of the first papers dedicated to reliefs with jātaka scenes, although most 
of these studies remained essentially descriptive.4 Mireille Bénisti was, in 
this generation, the first scholar who raised questions concerning the 
Fig. 3.1	 Vessantara-jātaka, the gift of 
the children. Thommanon 
temple, first half of 12th 
century. Photograph by 
author, 2018.
3.1

--- PAGE 138 ---
109
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
problem of identification of jātaka scenes in the Angkorian period.5 A 
few years later, Bruno Dagens published a detailed study on the 
iconography of the Bayon temple in which he identified several reliefs 
illustrating jātaka tales.6 In studying the iconography of Thommanon 
temple, Lan Sunnary also mentioned a jātaka scene on one of the 
pediments.7 However, it was within the works carried out by Vittorio 
Roveda that a substantial number of jātaka figuring on Khmer temple 
reliefs were revealed.8  
The present chapter is divided into two principal parts. First, I 
undertake the work of identification of jātaka and the chronological 
evolution of their representation during the Angkorian period, from their 
earliest days to the time when they appear to attain their highest point of 
popularity. In doing this, I also wish to demonstrate which stories were 
depicted most frequently and what this choice could have signified. 
Second, in order to find out from where and in what circumstances 
jātaka had arrived in Cambodia, a comparative study with the 
neighbouring states and cultures, where the jātaka illustrations have been 
largely attested in artistic and historical context, will be carried out. 
Seeking the answer to this question will lead us subsequently to further 
understand which Buddhist tradition – either Mahāyāna or Theravāda – 
would have provided the textual narratives of jātaka to the Khmer 
illustrators at Angkor. 
3.2
Fig. 3.2	 Vessantara-jātaka, Chau Say 
Tevoda temple, c. third 
quarter of 12th century. 
Photograph by author, 2018.

--- PAGE 139 ---
110
Tuy Danel
EARLY VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS: THE BUDDHIST 
DYNASTY OF MAHĪDHARAPURA
In Cambodia, since early in its history, Buddhism with both of its 
principal aspects, Mahāyāna and Theravāda, has certainly always been 
practiced simultaneously with Brahmanism, which for centuries was given 
the place of honour by Khmer kings. However, when Buddhist King 
Jayavarman VI (r. 1080/81–1107/08) came to the throne, he founded the 
dynasty of “Mahīdharapura”, and it was under this period that Khmer 
Buddhism, supported by royal family members belonging to this dynasty, 
experienced a new stage of development.9 More interestingly, the first 
visual representations of jātaka in Khmer art are found during this time.  
In the first half of the 12th century, at the beginning of the reign of 
Sūryavarman II (r. 1113/14–c. 1150)10, Thommanon, a temple probably 
dedicated to Vaishnavism, was erected, offering evidence of religious 
coexistence in a Khmer iconographic programme.11 Indeed, among 59 
iconographic themes studied by Lan at Thommanon12, most related to 
Hindu deities, a scene depicts the Vessantara-jātaka, the last existence of 
the Gotama Buddha as a bodhisattva, also the most popular jātaka story 
celebrating the Perfection of generosity, on the northern pediment of the 
Eastern gopura13 (Fig. 3.1). Two episodes of the tale occupy the whole of 
the pediment divided into two separate registers. The gift of the two 
children of Vessantara, seen as the most significant act of generosity of the 
story, is illustrated in the upper register. In a classical way, the two 
children, Jāli and Kaṇhājinā, find themselves in the middle of the scene, 
with their father on the right14 and the brahman, Jūjaka, on the left. The 
3.3
Fig. 3.3	 Vessantara-jātaka, the gift of 
the children, Banteay Samre 
temple, c. third quarter of 
12th century. Photograph by 
author, 2018.

--- PAGE 140 ---
111
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
latter presents both his hands to receive the water poured down by the 
bodhisattva, a sign of his gift being approved. Another chapter of the tale 
is represented on the left side of the lower register. This scene likely tells of 
the moment when Jūjaka, after having taken Jāli and Kaṇhājinā from their 
father, would spend a night in the forest sleeping in a tree, with the 
children tied to the tree trunk. The brahman is seen lying on the top of 
the tree, but the two children are absent. In their place, on the left side, an 
animal is about to attack the sleeping brahman, while two human figures 
of different sizes, on the right, act in two different postures.15 More than 
half of the lower register is filled by the presence of five praying figures, 
two of them totally eroded, who are here to celebrate and to witness the 
great act of generosity of the bodhisattva. 
The following monuments with illustrations of jātaka tales belong to 
the so-called “Angkor Wat style” (c. 1080–1175), although in the absence 
of epigraphic records, their exact dates of foundation remain unknown. In 
the present study, I will consider four such temples: Chau Say Tevoda, 
Banteay Samre, Beng Mealea and Preah Khan of Kampong Svay. Located 
along the eastern road that links Angkor to Preah Khan of Kampong Svay 
(presently Preah Vihear province), these temples might be attributed to 
the reign of Tribhuvanādityavarman (r. 1165/66–c. 1177) who appears to 
be another Buddhist king of the Mahīdharapura dynasty, according to a 
recently discovered inscription K. 1297 in a French private collection.16 
Furthermore, this stele contains a stanza in which the term jātaka is 
evoked.17 Based on this latest evidence, it is, therefore, obvious that jātaka 
Fig. 3.4	 Sibi-jātaka, Sibi giving his 
flesh, Banteay Samre 
temple, c. third quarter of 
12th century. Photograph by 
author, 2018.
3.4

--- PAGE 141 ---
112
Tuy Danel
had gained a certain popularity under the Mahīdharapura dynasty, with 
Tribhuvanādityavarman being one of the first kings of this dynasty whose 
Buddhist faith was marked by the definitive inclusion of new Buddhist 
themes which are, in this case, stories of the Buddha’s previous lives. At 
Chau Say Tevoda, several episodes of the Vessantara-jātaka can be seen on 
the western pediment of the southern library (Fig. 3.2). The narrative 
reliefs are divided into three separate registers. In the upper register is the 
most significant moment of the story, the giving away of the two children, 
identifiable here with the figuration of Jāli and Kaṇhājinā placed between 
Vessantara on the right and Jūjaka on the left, resembling the relief seen at 
Thommanon mentioned earlier. The story continues to the middle 
register with, on the left side, Maddī lying down in the hands of 
Vessantara who would wake her up from her fainting caused by the loss of 
the children. To the right side of the same register, due to the stone 
damage, it is difficult to identify with precision which episode is depicted. 
Nevertheless, by comparing the reliefs from Thommanon, and noting an 
animal grabbing onto a tree, a symbol of the forest, it might be possible 
that this scene is related to the moment when Jūjaka sleeps in a tree inside 
the forest, leaving the children on the ground. This hypothesis is 
strengthened by the figure of a child being comforted by another male 
figure who, in this case, could be related to one of the two deities. The 
following episodes are depicted on the lower register divided into two 
sequences. On the left, Jūjaka meets King Sañjaya, father of Vessantara, to 
whom he returns the children. The reliefs at the right side of the register, 
although damaged, seem to depict the family reunification through 
imagery of Vessantara and Maddī.18 It is interesting to emphasise that 
Chau Say Tevoda is one of only a few monuments where several scenes of 
the Vessantara-jātaka are depicted in one pediment. In the majority of 
cases, as seen below, the story is most commonly represented by the 
episode of the giving away of the children.   
The other three temples located on the eastern road also deliver 
representations of jātaka. At Banteay Samre temple, two illustrations of 
Fig. 3.5	 Different episodes of the life 
of the Buddha and jātaka? 
Sasar Sdam temple, first half 
of 12th century. Photograph 
courtesy Brice Vincent, 2018.
3.5

--- PAGE 142 ---
113
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
the Vessantara-jātaka are seen on the western pediment of the central 
tower and on another pediment left on the ground (Fig. 3.3). Both depict 
the episode of the gift of the children with iconographic aspects close to 
the reliefs described above. In addition to the Vessantara-jātaka, a scene of 
the Sibi-jātaka19 is probably depicted on the northern pediment of the 
first level of the central tower (Fig. 3.4). The story tells of a generous king 
named Sibi, or Sivi,20 who offers his own flesh in order to save a pigeon’s 
life. The episode illustrated at Banteay Samre seems to relate the moment 
when the king, sitting on a pedestal in the middle of a group, put his flesh 
on the scale held by a man. However, the absence of a pigeon in the scene 
is problematic. In another similar version of the story, which is the 
Sivi-jātaka, the god Indra takes the appearance of an old blind man and 
comes to ask Prince Sivi, the bodhisattva incarnation, for his eyes as he 
wishes to test the prince’s generosity. This tale might be associated with 
another group of characters figured on the right side of the pediment, in 
particular a male figure holding a walking stick who probably represents 
Indra from the Sivi-jātaka. Therefore, one question could be asked: Does 
the Banteay Samre pediment depict the two versions of the tale? 
Unfortunately, there are no other similar cases in Khmer temple reliefs 
with which we may make comparisons.21 
Beng Mealea and Preah Khan of Kampong Svay are two important 
temple complexes which, in a poor state of conservation, deliver only a few 
narrative scenes related to either Hinduism or Buddhism.22 Nevertheless, 
at least two scenes illustrating the gift of the children from the Vessantara-
jātaka can be identified at Beng Mealea.23 At Preah Khan of Kampong 
Svay, a temple complex and probably an ancient centre of Buddhism built 
in the tenth century,24 which became an important centre under several 
reigns, including that of Jayavarman VII, a scene of the Sibi-jātaka is 
depicted on the southern pediment of the northern gopura situated in the 
first gallery.25 The principal iconographic element enabling the 
identification of the story relies on the presence of the pigeon placed on a 
scale held by a man at the left side of the bodhisattva whose figure was 
erased. This tale appears to become one of the most popular stories to be 
illustrated on temples built during the reign of Jayavarman VII as I will 
discuss below. In the present chapter, only four principal temples located 
on the eastern road are mentioned. However, in the future, it would be 
worth studying the iconographic programme of the eight “temples 
d’étape” located on this ancient network.26 With identical plans and 
architecture, it is very likely that other scenes from jātaka were 
represented on these temples. 
Another site located in the Greater Angkor region, not far from the 
actual town of Damdaek, Siem Reap province, outside of the group of 
temples associated with the eastern road and with a very particular

--- PAGE 143 ---
114
Tuy Danel
architectural structure, is Prasat Sasar Sdam. Built certainly during the 
first half of the 12th century, perhaps under the reign of Sūryavarman II,27 
this monument has strong Buddhist aspects attested essentially by its 
monolithic stūpa found in the centre of the sanctuary, one of the earliest 
forms, if not the first, of Khmer stūpa. Usually associated with Theravāda 
Buddhism,28 the intriguing stūpa of Prasat Sasar Sdam is reminiscent of 
the stūpa-shrines popular in the traditional Buddhist architecture of Sri 
Lanka.29 This temple also catches our attention for its lintel, once placed 
at the eastern doorway of the sanctuary and now conserved at the Angkor 
Conservation Depot, on which a series of Buddhist reliefs are illustrated 
(Fig. 3.5). The central part undoubtedly depicts the māravijaya30, whereas 
a frieze of characters in miniature occupy the upper level of the lintel. At 
least two episodes, including the Great Departure and the 
mahāparinirvāṇa, of the life of the Buddha can be identified on the right 
side of the frieze. For the left side, given that the reliefs are largely 
damaged, it is difficult to identify with precision which stories were 
illustrated. Nevertheless, it seems possible that a small number of human 
figures remaining intact could be associated with jātaka tales. Indeed, it 
seems that an episode of the Sāma-jātaka related to the death of young 
Sāma, the bodhisattva, caused by the poisoned arrow of King Piliyakkha 
might have been represented. However, though the idea of illustrating 
jātaka in parallel with scenes from the life of the Buddha appears logical,31 
one might ask which jātaka were chosen in this case? For what reason? It 
would be risky, in any case, to see in this frieze an illustration of a series of 
jātaka according to a specific order, that is, for instance, the jātaka from 
the Mahānipāta, a collection of the last ten jātaka of the Pāli version, 
which later became one of the most pre-eminent subject matters in 
Buddhist murals in Cambodia.32 Considering the organisation of the 
reliefs, evidently in separated groups, and the available space, it is likely 
that five scenes from five jātaka were represented. Whatever the case may 
be, this lintel appears to be interestingly unique by the choice of the 
illustrated themes and their spatial organisation. Analysis of the relief 
structure suggests that this frieze might have been added in a later period.33 
If so, such an addition would have been done in a time when Buddhist 
images reached their highest point of popularity, viz. under the reign of 
Jayavarman VII, or perhaps even after.34 
A pediment in the Musée Guimet, in Paris, originating from Preah 
Khan of Kampong Svay and dated to the third quarter of the 12th 
century, depicts a Buddhist narrative with several details alluding, in my 
opinion, to an episode of the Vessantara-jātaka.35 For Pierre Baptiste and 
Thierry Zéphir, the figured subject matter of the pediment was, however, 
from episodes of the life of the Historical Buddha, although a potential 
figuration of a jātaka – the Vessantara-jātaka – remained, for the authors,

--- PAGE 144 ---
115
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
debatable.36 The second assumption appears to be more convincing for 
several reasons. Baptiste and Zéphir associated this scene with the visits of 
Indra as described in the life of the Buddha, which means that the central 
character in the lower register is supposed to represent this Hindu god. 
Yet, as noted by the authors, the presence of the two brahmans cannot be 
associated with any sequence regarding this divine visit.37 Furthermore, the 
god of gods, Indra, is represented here seated on the ground and not on 
his mount, the elephant Airāvata, as generally seen in Khmer art. On the 
other hand, there seem to be reliable arguments to believe that this central 
character was meant to represent Vessantara. Indeed, the bodhisattva 
appears to hold an object in his right hand, which he is about to put onto 
the right hand of one of the two brahmans seated before him. This gesture 
reminds us of one of the principal episodes of the Vessantara-jātaka, the 
gift of the elephant whose figure is seen on the right side of the scene. 
More interestingly, although the text does talk about eight brahmans sent 
by the king of Kāliṅga to ask for the elephant, often only two (or three) of 
them are figured, as seen on the terracotta plaque at the Ananda temple, at 
Pagan,38 but also on the relief at Borobudur,39 in central Java. In 
Cambodia, this episode was depicted on a sculptured stele found at 
Angkor Wat where only two of the eight brahmans were represented. This 
iconographic composition is certainly related either to lack of space in the 
panel or desire for symmetry, or both. Finally, the Khmer sculptor wished 
to draw the attention of the viewer to the remarkable humility of 
Vessantara towards inferior beings, one of the most important Buddhist 
outlooks, by representing him seated on the ground, on the same level as 
the brahmans. This attitude was also expressed, most of the time, in the 
episode of the gift of the children found at numerous temples dated to the 
3.7
3.6
Fig. 3.6	 Vessantara-jātaka, the gift of 
the children and the gift of 
the chariot, Ta Prohm 
temple, third quarter of 12th 
century. Photograph 
courtesy Vicheth Tiev, 2018.
Fig. 3.7	 Scene probably illustrating 
the Vessantara-jātaka, the 
gift of the elephant, Ta 
Prohm temple, third quarter 
of 12th century. Photograph 
courtesy Vicheth Tiev, 2018.

--- PAGE 145 ---
116
Tuy Danel
Angkorian period. As for the erased figure in the upper register, which was 
originally that of the Buddha, it could probably be understood not as in 
any direct link to the storyline of the lower register,40 but rather as the 
prediction of the future existence of Vessantara who, because of the 
perfection of his generosity in his present life, will achieve Buddhahood. 
This iconographic feature can be also seen on a lintel at the Bayon, which 
represents the Sāma-jātaka (see below).
JAYAVARMAN VII AND THE MULTIPLICATION  
OF JĀTAKA IMAGES
The religious iconography under the reign of King Jayavarman VII  
(r. 1182/83–c. 1220) is of remarkable diversity and complexity, reflecting 
the cohabitation of different religious orientations in the ancient Khmer 
kingdom.41 During this period, illustrations of jātaka tales were more 
frequent with a particular concentration found at principal temples 
located in the capital of Yaśodharapura (Angkor). Among these 
monuments, the architectural triad – the Bayon, Ta Prohm (Rājāvihāra) 
and Preah Khan (Jayasrī) – are grouped the majority of jātaka reliefs 
represented during that time. Dedicated respectively to the king himself, 
3.9
3.8
Fig. 3.8	 Vessantara-jātaka, the gift of 
the elephant and the exile of 
the royal family, Ta Prohm of 
Tonle Bati, third quarter of 
12th century. Photograph 
courtesy Brice Vincent, 2018.
Fig. 3.9	 Vessantara-jātaka, the three 
principal gifts, found in 
Angkor Wat temple, National 
Museum of Cambodia, late 
12th to early 13th centuries. 
Photograph by author, 2018.

--- PAGE 146 ---
117
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
to his mother, Jayarājacūḍāmaṇī, and to his father, Dharaṇīndravarman 
(II), these important royal foundations contain representations of jātaka 
(some scenes being still unidentified) on their pediments, semi-pediments 
and lintels. Several provincial foundations of the same reign also provide 
evidence of familiarity with the jātaka far from the Angkor area. Two 
good examples are offered by the temple of Ta Prohm at Tonle Bati, Takeo 
province, and Vat Nokor, Kampong Cham province.42 
The most represented jātaka tale in this period is the Vessantara-
jātaka, a story that had already found it place in the earlier illustrations of 
Buddhist themes in ancient Cambodia. Also, it is the gift of the children 
which was, in general, chosen to evoke the virtue of great generosity, the 
principal message conveyed in the story. The iconographic aspects of this 
sequence remained almost analogous with early representations. However, 
other episodes from the same tale have also been identified. For instance, at 
Ta Prohm temple, on the northern pediment of the Southeastern tower, 
located between the second and the third gallery, two scenes of the 
Vessantara-jātaka were depicted (Fig. 3.6). While the gift of the children 
occupies the upper register of the pediment, the lower register was reserved 
for a scene probably related to an episode of the third chapter recounting 
the moment when four deities, taking the appearance of four stags, replace 
the horses that Prince Vessantara had just donated to a group of brahmans. 
On the left side of the frame, two stags appear to run towards the chariot 
3.10
Fig. 3.10	 Sibi-jātaka, King Sibi giving 
his flesh, Ta Prohm temple, 
third quarter of 12th 
century. Photograph by 
author, 2018.

--- PAGE 147 ---
118
Tuy Danel
pulled by a horse that they will replace. Also at Ta Prohm, another episode 
of the Vessantara-jātaka was probably illustrated on the northern 
pediment of a western gopura located between the second and the third 
gallery (Fig. 3.7). An elephant is depicted below a central male figure 
sitting inside his palace and assisted by two subjects. Given the sacred 
characteristics of the scene, accentuated by a group of praying figures, it is 
likely that this relief renders two principal figures of the story: Vessantara 
himself and the white elephant Peccaya who is thought to bring rain and 
prosperity wherever he goes. Giving away this sacred animal, seen as a 
courageous act of generosity by Buddhists, would provoke great fury from 
the people, who demanded the banishment of Vessantara to the forest, as 
described in the second chapter of the story. Outside the Angkor area, an 
interesting lintel from Ta Prohm at Tonle Bati figures several episodes from 
the story of Vessantara (Fig. 3.8). The narration starts on the left side of the 
composition with the gift of the white elephant; Vessantara, on the ground 
with the elephant behind him, is depicted pouring water into the hands of 
the brahmans to indicate the act of giving. The consequence of this act is 
immediately presented in the middle of the panel with the exile of the 
family. Here, the couple and their two children were represented sitting on 
a chariot drawn by a pair of horses. On the right side, the journey is 
interrupted by a group of brahmans to whom Vessantara would give the 
horses and then the chariot. The great generosity of the bodhisattva is 
celebrated by a frieze of characters holding parasols and flags.43
Exceptionally, a stele found in Angkor Wat temple, currently 
conserved at the National Museum of Phnom Penh, illustrates 
successive episodes of the Vessantara-jātaka which are the three 
principal gifts made by the bodhisattva (Fig. 3.9). On the left side, 
Vessantara, seated on a pedestal, appears to pour water onto a brahman’s 
hand to indicate the gift of the elephant depicted on the right side of the 
3.11
Fig. 3.11	 Sāma-jātaka, the death of 
Sāma, the Bayon, late 12th 
to early 13th centuries. 
Photograph courtesy 
Vicheth Tiev, 2018.

--- PAGE 148 ---
119
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
Fig. 3.12 Temiya-jātaka? Bayon, late 
12th to early 13th centuries. 
Photograph courtesy 
Vicheth Tiev, 2018.
Fig. 3.13 Nārada-jātaka? Bayon, late 
12th to early 13th centuries. 
Photograph courtesy 
Vicheth Tiev, 2018. 
prince. The following scene relates clearly the gift of the children as Jālī 
and Kaṇhājinā are figured seated on each side of their father’s thighs. 
The latter, as in the previous episode, pours the water from his right 
hand onto Jūjaka’s hand to express his consent. This symbolic act of 
giving is repeated in the next panel which illustrates the gift of Maddī 
who appears behind Vessantara before whom is figured the old 
brahman, Indra, in disguise. These episodes of the Vessantara-jātaka 
seem to have originally been part of a series of narrative reliefs as shown 
in the following relief, regrettably in a fragmentary state, which possibly 
depicts another jātaka tale.44 Stylistically, the stele dates between the late 
12th and early 13th centuries,45 viz. during the reign of Jayavarman VII. 
3.13
3.12

--- PAGE 149 ---
120
Tuy Danel
This iconographic theme would later inspire the modern Buddhist 
murals on which 13 panels, representing the 13 chapters of the story, are 
frequently illustrated.
In addition to the Vessantara-jātaka, there are other scenes from the 
previous lives of the Buddha depicted such as the Sibi-jātaka and 
possibly jātaka of the Mahānipāta. The story of King Sibi was 
represented twice at Angkor’s Ta Prohm temple, on the northern 
pediment of the northeastern tower located between the second and the 
third gallery and on the northern pediment of the eastern gopura of the 
first wall (Fig. 3.10). The essential iconographic elements allowing a 
quick identification of the tale were present in both cases: a figure 
holding a scale with a pigeon on it and King Sibi cutting off his flesh 
with a blade. Moreover, the relatively important place of the story in the 
iconographic programme during this period was accentuated by the 
large scale of the pediments divided into two or three registers and a 
great number of worshippers and flying celestial beings. Two sequences 
of the Sāma-jātaka were depicted on the northern pediment of tower 40 
of the Bayon temple (Fig. 3.11). The principal sequence is found in the 
lower register illustrating the death of Sāma. On the left side, the 
bodhisattva is figured lying between his parents who lament the tragic 
death of their child, whereas the huntsman, King Piliyakkha, on the 
other side, appears to have just shot an arrow that will soon run through 
Sāma’s abdomen. Following the textual narration, the sculptor depicted 
in the centre of the group a standing stag towards which the king shot 
an arrow that missed its target. In the upper register, the bodhisattva is 
represented sitting on a pedestal and surrounded by two worshippers, a 
sequence that is probably supposed to illustrate Sāma reborn as the 
bodhisattva in the gods’ realm, after his earthly passage. Also at the 
Bayon, at least two other jātaka of the Mahānipāta are illustrated. On 
the northern pediment of the eastern gopura of tower 35 is a scene of the 
Temiya-jātaka46 related to one of the ordeals experienced by the 
bodhisattva Prince Temiya (Fig. 3.12). Assisted by the usual images of 
praying beings in the lower register, the principal episode takes place in 
the upper register where Temiya, sitting in the centre, appears to be 
threatened by two men who hold a blade or a serpent.47 This scene also 
presents remarkable similitudes with the story of Temiya illustrated in 
later Cambodian Buddhist murals. Perhaps an episode of the Nārada-
jātaka48 could be identified on the northern pediment of tower 48 of 
the Bayon temple (Fig. 3.13).49 The interpretation of this tale is based 
essentially on the presence of two male figures carrying a flail on their 
shoulders, a characteristic feature of the story painted on modern 
Buddhist murals. However, the suggested figure of King Aṅgati in the 
upper register of the pediment is problematic by its dominating size,

--- PAGE 150 ---
121
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
which is not in accordance with the iconographic rules of that time; that 
is the principal characters (the bodhisattva, in this case) generally had to 
be depicted larger than other figures. Several reliefs from different 
temples, for example at Banteay Kdei and Ta Prohm where three 
pediments are concerned, are likely to figure the Bhūridatta-jātaka, one 
of the last ten jātaka that tells the story of the bodhisattva born as a 
nāga. The fundamental features permitting the identification of the 
story rely on the nāga-headed figures, which have been associated with 
the nāgī mentioned in the text, and a garuḍā, all praying towards the 
bodhisattva (none of the images survived the supposed iconoclastic 
reaction in the second half of the 13th century). At Neak Pean temple, 
the previously proposed identification of a narrative scene on the lower 
pediment of the northern false door of the central tower as a 
representation of the Mahājanaka-jātaka is to be rejected.50 If the 
presence of boats could vaguely suggest the sea crossing episode, the 
main figure sitting in a shrine cannot be associated with the bodhisattva, 
or the sea goddess, since this image, even though largely erased, must 
have been originally illustrated with four arms.51 Bruno Dagens has 
suggested a possible representation of the Vidhurapaṇḍita-jātaka52 on a 
semi-pediment of the tower 15 of the Bayon. However, the lack of the 
essential features of this tale make such an assumption difficult. 
In addition to sculptural representations, there is other evidence 
suggesting familiarity with the jātaka during the Angkorian period: an 
inscription dated to the reign of Jayavarman VII.53 The term jātaka is 
evoked in the stele of Phimeanakas (K. 485) written in Sanskrit prose by 
Jayavarman VII’s second spouse, Indradevī. As part of the praśasti of 
Jayavarman VII’s first spouse and Indradevī’s elder sister, Jayarājadevī, a 
stanza of the stele mentions theatrical representations based on jātaka and 
commissioned by the queen. Here is the passage in question: “[…] and her 
vow, having obtained the Buddhist fruit […] she ordered her own dancers 
to perform, to stage shows based on the Jātaka.”54
This interesting citation, as short as it may appear, inscribes Angkorian 
Cambodia into a long tradition of dramatic performances of jātaka 
attested all over Asia.55 According to the text, representations of the jātaka 
were part of a long list of meritorious deeds that the queen accomplished 
in order to express her Buddhist faith. However, it is unknown which 
jātaka stories were chosen to be interpreted here, and whether these 
performances were accessible to audiences of different social ranks, in 
other words, in public open spaces or only exclusively reserved for the 
elite.56 Whatever the case may be, this citation of jātaka brings further 
weight – apart from the temples reliefs – to the argument that the jātaka 
were part of royal occupations.

--- PAGE 151 ---
122
Tuy Danel
THE EMERGENCE OF JĀTAKA IN ANCIENT CAMBODIA:  
A REGIONAL INFLUENCE? 
Dvāravatī
In the fifth century , the Indian monk Nāgasena was sent by Kauṇḍinya 
Jayavarman, the King of Funan, to the Liu Song court. During this visit, 
Nāgasena presented, among other items, a written report of Funan to the 
Chinese Emperor, which contained a passage evoking the praise of the 
bodhisattva who practices meritorious deeds during his numerous lives.57 
Peter Skilling, through this historical account, suggests a “jātaka ideology” 
in Funan.58 However, apart from this thin textual testimony, there is 
practically no archaeological evidence related to jātaka tales in Cambodia 
during this period, viz. the first millennium of the Common Era.  
Therefore, I shall focus my attention on the external relationship 
between ancient Cambodia and its neighbouring states where Buddhism 
occupied a major position, and where jātaka illustrations were of 
considerable importance. In doing so, I firstly, and naturally, start my 
research with the earliest representation of jātaka tales found in the 
context of so-called “Dvāravatī” (6th to 11th centuries), a Theravāda 
Buddhist kingdom or culture of the Mon-speaking people with principal 
centres regrouped in the central and northeastern regions of present-day 
Thailand. Two principal supports belonging to this culture bear several 
jātaka scenes: terracotta and stucco reliefs, and Buddhist boundary stones 
or sīmā. At Chula Pathon Cetiya, in Nakhon Pathom province, numerous 
terracotta and stucco reliefs have been brought to light, some of them 
depicting jātaka tales. According to Krairiksh, certain of these jātaka 
scenes were inspired from the Pāli text, the Jātaka-aṭṭhakathā, and the 
others by Sanskrit sources belonging to the Sarvāstivāda tradition, a 
Hīnāyana sect whose canonical scriptures are written in Sanskrit.59 For 
Chutiwongs, it is, on the other hand, imprudent to consider jātaka at 
Chula Pathon Cetiya as the exclusive work of a specific Buddhist tradition. 
In her critical study focusing on the previous work of Krairiksh, she 
presented the universal characteristic of jātaka in Buddhist worlds; in 
other words, a number of stories are shared by various texts belonging to 
different Buddhist schools.60
Is there any connection between the jātaka found at Dvāravatī sites and 
jātaka at Angkor? No definite answer can be given to this with the current 
state of our knowledge. In fact, although relationships between the Khmer 
and the Mon in Dvāravatī have been proven since an early date, as attested, 
for example, in statuary,61 the religious inclination of the two states during 
the period in question was significantly different. In Cambodia, during the 
pre-Angkorian period, no Buddhist foundations, as seen at Dvāravatī sites, 
have been attested until now; this is not surprising since Brahmanism was

--- PAGE 152 ---
123
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
primarily followed by the Khmer kings at that time. Therefore, the absence 
of jātaka reliefs during this period can be explained by the nonexistence of 
Buddhist temples or stūpa, traditional Buddhist architecture bearing 
Buddhist narrative reliefs – the life of the Buddha and his previous lives as 
principal themes – as seen in India and throughout Southeast Asia. 
However, this does not exclude the possibility that the popularity of 
jātaka strongly proven in Dvāravatī “culture” might have penetrated 
Khmer religious thought over the centuries, especially during the time 
when the Angkorian kingdom spread its political power over the 
previously principal centres of Dvāravatī. One of the earliest evidences of 
this contact may be seen at the Phnom Kulen site or Mahendraparvata, 
cradle of Angkorian civilisation, where numerous Buddhist boundary 
stones have been found.62 Of these sīmā, most of which are decorated with 
Buddhist motifs – principally the stylised dharmacakra or the Wheel of 
the Law63 and kumbha-stūpa images – and probably dated to the eighth 
century,64 one depicts a scene from the Vessantara-jātaka: the gift of 
Maddī.65 A sīmā from Muang Fa Daet (Northeast Thailand) and dated to 
the eighth to ninth centuries,66 presents the same episode with striking 
similarity with the sīmā at Kulen, suggesting a cultural influence from this 
Mon region located in the North of Angkor and marked by the presence of 
Theravāda doctrine. Indeed, it has been suggested that the Buddhist 
boundary stones at Phnom Kulen are evidence of the presence of 
Buddhists originating from Northeast Thailand, more precisely from 
Mueng Fa Daed, a Dvāravatī site.67 At any rate, these sīmā indicate the 
existence of a Buddhist community, apparently of Theravāda tradition and 
likely in relation with those known at Dvāravatī centres in Thailand, who 
might have played a significant role in development of Theravāda 
Buddhism in Cambodia later during the Angkorian period, and, in 
particular, the emergence of jātaka illustrations at that time.  
Several other jātaka tales figured in the earlier Dvāravatī period also 
found their place on Angkorian reliefs of the 12th century. More notably, 
some of these jātaka as seen at numerous sites impregnated by Dvāravatī 
culture, such as Muang Fa Daet, the most important site where a great 
number of Buddhist boundary stones has been discovered,68 present 
artistic influences from the Angkorian sculptural canons. This is related to 
the period when the Khmer empire reached its peak, that is from the 11th 
to 13th centuries, dominating the present territory of Thailand and Laos. 
Numerous sīmā from Northeast Thailand, dated to the 11th century, 
testify clearly to the influence of Khmer art. Indeed, two sīmā illustrating 
an episode of the Vidhurapaṇḍita-jātaka, dated to the 10th to 11th 
centuries,69 are indications of Khmer artistic style. Another sīmā from 
Nong Khai province, in Northeast Thailand, depicting the Sibi-jātaka, 
also attests to this influence. Dated likely to the 11th century, this sīmā

--- PAGE 153 ---
124
Tuy Danel
catches our attention by its central character whose costume is apparently 
inspired by the Baphuon style.70 More interestingly, the visual content of 
this relief – King Sibi who is shown cutting his flesh in order to save the 
pigeon seated on a scale held in his left hand71 – appears to refer to the 
same textual source used by the Khmer illustrators at Angkor. Other 
testimony of the impact of Khmer stylistic elements can be seen on a sīmā 
with a scene from the Sāma-jātaka72 dated to the 11th to 12th centuries73. 
A later lintel in the Bayon temple depicts this story in a more tragic and 
sensitive manner (see Fig. 3.12). 
These sīmā from the northeastern region of Thailand could presumably 
be the sources for the rise of jātaka in reliefs during the Angkorian period. 
However, the precise circumstances of such transmission are uncertain: it is 
unknown whether the stone carvers of the sīmā were also responsible for 
the jātaka reliefs executed at Angkor. The imperial project of constructions 
in Angkor would have naturally required a large number of craftsmen 
coming from different parts of the kingdom. Or it could be that the 
popularity of these Buddhist stories gradually flowed into the capital 
through people in circulation between Angkor and the northern region, 
before being definitively adopted in the iconographic programme from the 
third quarter of the 12th century. Nevertheless, the first hypothesis seems to 
be less convincing given that several significant factors tend to demonstrate 
true divergences between the jātaka on sīmā from Northeast Thailand and 
jātaka from Angkor. In fact, while the jātaka from the Mahānipāta were 
all illustrated on sīmā – except the Nimi-jātaka74 – only a few of this group 
have been, at the present stage of our knowledge, identified at Angkor, with 
the Vessantara-jātaka being the most represented. Moreover, the 
Angkorian sculptors clearly appear to give priority to the episode of the gift 
of the children, regarded as the most important exemplar of renouncement 
in the story, whereas only one example of this scene was found on a sīmā 
from Northeast Thailand.75 The iconographic features also suggest certain 
differences in the manner in which this episode was perceived by the 
inhabitants in these two regions. In fact, on the sīmā in question, one of 
the two children whom Vessantara is about to give to Jūjaka appears to 
show resistance, which is, in this case, in accordance with the textual 
content.76 At Angkor, on the contrary, the children were figured in an 
attitude of unshakeable resignation. In doing so, the sculptors seemed to 
honour the righteousness of the act of the bodhisattva whose extreme 
generosity was also approved by the children themselves. 
For the Sibi-jātaka, this tale seemed to have been more appreciated 
among the Khmer at Angkor and beyond, since several representations of 
this tale were found in separate locations (Banteay Samre, Ta Prohm, Preah 
Khan of Kampong Svay, etc.), the same story being found on one single 
sīmā in Northeast Thailand. Furthermore, the simplicity of the sculptural

--- PAGE 154 ---
125
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
treatment of the latter contrasts with the rich composition of the 
Angkorian examples. In this case, could it be reasonable to suggest that the 
story of Sibi was first known in the Angkor region before being introduced 
later in Northeast Thailand? Such a hypothesis is further supported by the 
fact that the supposedly Buddhist Sibi-jātaka found in both regions also 
exists in the Mahābhārata, the timeless Hindu epic represented 
continuously in Khmer art, with a remarkable example from Angkor Wat. 
In addition to the northeast sites, it is important to mention the centre 
of Thailand, in particular, Lopburi, previously a Dvāravatī town of 
considerable importance, which became an active region under Khmer 
patronage during our period of study. In the artistic field, there is evidence 
of stylistic influence in Buddha images between Lopburi and Angkor.77 
Discussion of this topic would however go beyond the scope of this 
chapter dedicated to jātaka study.  
Pagan
From the beginning of the Pagan period, narratives scenes of jātaka 
became one of the principal elements of the artistic repertoire illustrated 
at Buddhist temples.78 Of these early visual representations are the 
terracotta plaques figuring jātaka tales from both east and west Hpet-leik 
pagodas (c. mid 11th century), inspired by the Sri Lankan recension 
revisited by the Mon from Lower Burma.79 For that matter, it has been 
attested that it was presumably the Mon of Thaton (Lower Burma) who 
introduced jātaka in Pagan, since there is no evidence, either textual or 
visual, prior to the date of Hpet-leik temple, to suggest that jātaka 
narratives were known in this ancient capital of present-day Myanmar.80 
Indeed, like Dvāravatī sites in Thailand, jātaka narratives were depicted 
on Buddhist boundary stones or sīmā found not far from the ancient 
Mon capital of Thaton, some of them dating as early as the 11th century.81 
In sum, in mainland Southeast Asia,82 jātaka ideology was, first of all, one 
of the favourite Buddhist iconographic themes among the Mon 
populations, who included these stories in the decoration of their stūpa, 
dated to the sixth to seventh centuries, and shortly after on the Buddhist 
boundary stones, the earliest of which date to the 9th century.83 As 
discussed above, these carved Buddhist boundary markers, found in great 
number in Northeast Thailand, could probably have been responsible for 
the emergence of jātaka scenes at Angkor. If such is the case, what could 
have been the role of Pagan, where jātaka scenes have had a role of great 
importance, in the rise of jātaka during the Angkorian period? 
Political and religious relations between Angkor and Pagan during the 
12th century need to be taken into consideration in order to answer this 
question. Generally speaking, a few historical events tend to attest the 
relationship between Cambodia and Burma during the late Angkorian

--- PAGE 155 ---
126
Tuy Danel
period. The Burmese Glass Palace Chronicle84 mentioned the ordination 
in Sri Lanka of a group of Buddhist monks originating from Southeast 
Asia in the second half of the 12th century. Among these monks was a 
certain Tāmalinda, who has been thought to be a son of King Jayavarman 
VII.85 Surprisingly, this event of great importance does not exist in any 
Cambodian records, either of contemporary epigraphs dated to the reign 
of Jayavarman VII or later textual sources. This anomaly calls into 
question the reliability of the Burmese record, which was actually written 
as late as in 1829 under the reign of King Bagyidaw of Burma86.  Indeed, 
according to recent studies, the identity of Tāmalinda, as well as that of his 
travel companions associated with the Khmer court, could have been 
invented by the Burmese seeking to draw a religious map representing the 
presence of Theravāda Buddhism in South and Southeast Asia in the late 
12th century.87 Furthermore, Tāmalinda, if he really existed, seems to have 
died in Burma, never returning to Cambodia, so it is unknown whether 
his journey in Sri Lanka, during the great reform of Theravāda Buddhism 
on the island in the second half of the 12th century, provoked any 
consequences in the development of this Buddhist doctrine in his 
homeland.88 Another religious relation between the two kingdoms was 
attested under the reign of Jayavarman VII who is thought to have had a 
court brahman (purohita) from Burma.89 If the latter seemed to have 
brought changes in religious practices at Angkor, it is natural that his 
principal function would have consisted in the preparation of 
Brahmanical rites; a ceremony of consecration called “Indrābhiṣeka”, 
which possibly had Burmese origins was undertaken by the king.90 It is in 
this case unknown whether this Burmese chaplain could have, in parallel, 
contributed to the spread of Theravāda in Cambodia at that time.
What about stylistic grounds? Certain jātaka tales depicted in 
terracotta plaques at Pagan also exist on Angkorian reliefs. Of particular 
interest is the Vessantara-jātaka, the most illustrated jātaka in ancient 
Cambodia. At Pagan, this tale was generally figured in explicit detail by a 
succession of episodes, given its unique status and great prestige 
comparing to other jātaka stories of the Pāli recension. More than 134 
terracotta plaques were dedicated to the Vessantara-jātaka at Ananda 
temple, a privileged position found nowhere else during this period.91 In 
parallel, the story also appeared on stone reliefs in the cross passages at 
Ananda where two sculptures in niches illustrate the episode of the gift of 
the children.92 Besides these two images, there is seemingly no other 
evidence suggesting the pre-eminent place accorded to this scene in Pagan 
art, given that the terracotta plaques depict the Vessantara-jātaka in its 
integrality without according preference to any specific episode. At 
Angkor, on the contrary, this episode was, as seen earlier in this chapter, 
by far the most appreciated moment becoming subsequently an absolute

--- PAGE 156 ---
127
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
icon of the dāna-pāramīta or the Perfection of giving. The popularity of 
this episode is attested by its figuration on diverse architectural elements, 
namely pediments, lintels and pilasters. The desire to prioritise 
illustration of this scene can be seen in early representations of the 
Vessantara-jātaka, at Thommanon and Chau Say Tevoda, where the gift 
of the children, depicted in both cases in the upper register, presides over 
the following sequences. Also, significant divergences in iconographic 
features regarding this episode exist between Angkor and Pagan. At 
Angkor, Vessantara was most of the time represented kneeling down 
before Jūjaka who, in the same position and size, receives the water 
poured by the bodhisattva. This striking attitude of humility from a high 
rank character – Vessantara being a prince and the Buddha-to-be – 
contrasts with the sculptures at Pagan where the figure of the bodhisattva 
was associated with the status of a superior either by his dominant size 
(the cross passages of Ananda), or by his higher position in the scene 
relative to other characters (terracotta plaques at Ananda, for example). 
Apart from the Vessantara-jātaka, there is also a remarkable divergence 
regarding the Sibi-jātaka. This tale was depicted on a terracotta plaque at 
the West Hpet-leik temple where the king is represented offering his eyes 
to the old blind brahman,93 which corresponds to the Pāli version. It was 
another variant of the story that was chosen by the Khmer sculptor, 
apparently the Sanskrit version,94 in which the bodhisattva gives his flesh 
to save a pigeon’s life. Finally, the Valāhassa-jātaka, the story of the flying 
horse who through compassion saves 500 sea merchants from being 
devoured by female demons, was illustrated in the round at Neak Pean 
temple (Jayavarman VII), an intriguing monument representing Lake 
Anavatapta, which is believed to have miraculous curative powers to heal 
human sins.95 Unlike the Ananda temple where the story, figured on a 
simple terracotta plaque, was based on the Pāli version,96 the Khmer 
illustrator undoubtedly drew inspiration from the Sanskrit Mahāyāna 
text, the Kāraṇḍavyūha-sūtra, according to which the bodhisattva 
Avalokiteśvara is born as a flying horse named Balāha.97 At Angkor, this 
jātaka tale was, thus, a strong symbol of the compassion of 
Avalokiteśvara following Mahāyāna ideology, whereas the same story 
illustrated at Pagan was apparently there to complete, first of all, the 
whole collection of the jātaka tales in the Pāli canon.98
JĀTAKA IN ANGKOR: A MANIFESTATION OF  
THERAVĀDA BUDDHISM?
There is a tendency to automatically associate jātaka with Theravāda 
practices. In reality, jātaka have been shared by both Theravāda and 
Mahāyāna traditions. It is difficult to know, in the absence of

--- PAGE 157 ---
128
Tuy Danel
uncontestable indications, whether the illustration of a jātaka tale is to 
be associated with either one of these two principal schools. However, 
certain factors exist and can be used in order to identify which Buddhist 
tradition is at the origin of jātaka representations. First, a specific 
number of jātaka tales depicted in one place can efficiently indicate the 
collection to which the stories belong. In this case, an excellent example 
can be seen at the Ananda temple (early 12th century) at Pagan where 
547 jātaka from the whole Pāli recension of the Tipiṭaka, or the 
fundamental books of Theravāda Buddhism, were illustrated, with a 
special place accorded to the last ten stories, the jātaka of the 
Mahānipāta. Second, identification might also be possible by comparing 
the textual and the visual contents of the depicted story. However, this 
can only work with jātaka scenes offering sufficient details enabling such 
procedure, as is the case of the Borobudur temple on which the complete 
number of jātaka taken from Ārya-Śūra’s Jātakamālā was identified. 
In ancient Cambodia, no such possibilities are available for the 
Angkorian period. Likewise, relative to Pagan or Borobudur, it is 
obvious that jātaka at Angkor occupied only a secondary place. Other 
iconographic themes dominated at that time – images of the Buddha and 
narratives reliefs depicting his final life, the images of bodhisattva 
belonging to the Mahāyāna pantheon,99 and traditional Hindu gods and 
heroes. Also, it seems that the concept of the illustration of the last ten 
jātaka as a set was unknown during this period. Nevertheless, there are a 
few elements that might shed light on our understanding about jātaka as 
an indicator of religious tendency for the period in question. In doing 
this, I will essentially focus my attention on two jātaka tales that were 
frequently figured in temple reliefs and contain interesting visual 
content deserving of closer observations. These are the Vessantara-jātaka 
and the Sibi-jātaka. For the former, two details catch my attention. The 
first observation comes from Thommanon where several scenes of the 
Vessantara-jātaka are seen on a pediment. In the lower register, below 
the gift of the children in the upper register, the relief seems to depict 
the episode in which Jūjaka is told to sleep in a tree. This sequence, 
regarded as one of the moving moments of the tale, does not exist, for 
example, in the Jātakamāla book, one of the most famous jātaka texts 
written in Sanskrit that inspired, inter alia, the sculptors of the 
Mahāyāna Buddhist temple of Borobudur. As far as I know, this 
sequence is only found in the canonical Pāli version which gives the story 
in its longest version. Given that, in general, stories are firstly 
transmitted orally before being fixed in textual form, this Pāli version of 
the story of Vessantara might have been known to the Khmers at that 
time,100 who were supposed to recognise it on temple reliefs without 
great difficulty.101 Another similar case comes from Chau Say Tevoda.

--- PAGE 158 ---
129
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
Here, the Vessantara-jātaka was illustrated in its most explicit manner 
compared to other temples mentioned in this study. Like at 
Thommanon, two episodes figured at Chau Say Tevoda probably 
correspond to the Pāli version. One of them relates the same moment 
mentioned above at Thommanon. The other one tells of the reunion 
between Vessantara and his children and wife. This sequence is also 
not mentioned in the Jātakamāla since, in the Chau Say Tevoda 
version, the story ends with the encounter between Jūjaka and King 
Sañjaya to whom the brahman returns the two children. It is always 
possible that the original textual version was modified by the sculptor 
himself who, following his own imagination, could have added an 
epilogue to generate a greater feeling of a happy ending of the story.  
Let us focus now on the Sibi-jātaka, one of the first jātaka tales to 
be depicted on Khmer temples dated to the Angkorian period. This 
famous story that narrates the extreme generosity of King Sibi can be 
found in both Pāli and Sanskrit texts. In the Angkorian period, it 
appears that the textual sources that might have inspired the sculptural 
representations of this tale were not that of Pāli, but rather of Sanskrit 
tradition. Indeed, according to the Pāli versions, including the Jātaka-
aṭṭhakathā 102 or in the Cariyāpiṭaka,103 both belonging to Theravāda 
tradition, King Sivi is said to donate his own eyes to an old blind 
man,104 while, in Sanskrit sources, the Buddha-carita, for example, he is 
said to give his flesh.105 This version corresponds therefore to the 
Angkorian reliefs as discussed above. However, in this Sanskrit text, the 
generosity of King Sibi is cited only as a brief reference; in other words, 
the story's content is not given, making it impossible for the illustrators 
to use it as a guideline. On the contrary, another textual source 
belonging to the Hindu tradition offers more details that would have 
been beneficial for the artist’s imagination. It is in the Mahābhārata 
where King Sivi is said to cut off his flesh to save a pigeon from being 
eaten by a hawk.106 The two birds are actually Agni and Indra in 
disguise who are desirous to test the goodness and virtue of the king. 
That this textual content has likely inspired Khmer sculptors is 
strengthened by the popularity of the Mahābhārata attested in ancient 
Cambodia. Also, in the Angkorian period context, it appears to be 
unnecessary to determine to which Buddhist school this jātaka could 
have been related since such a story belongs, first of all, to a common 
collection of folklore tales from which both Mahāyāna and Theravāda 
Buddhism drew inspiration.107 
Finally, as discussed above, the stele of Phimeanakas indicates that 
jātaka tales were performed by court dancers, even though it is 
unknown which stories were interpreted and in what circumstances 
these plays were made. Further understanding of the principal modes

--- PAGE 159 ---
130
Tuy Danel
of diffusion of jātaka in ancient Cambodia might help to determine the 
context in which the illustration of this Buddhist theme emerged during 
the Angkorian period. In fact, in Buddhist Southeast Asia, it is undeniable 
that the Vessantara-jātaka appears to be particularly popular within 
Theravādin traditional spheres compared to Mahāyāna tradition because 
of one specific reason. According to the Māleyya-sutta, the story of the 
legendary Buddhist monk named Māleyya who is said to visit heaven and 
hell, one who listens to the recitation of the Vessantara-jātaka may be 
guaranteed rebirth at the time of the next Buddha, Metteyya. The 
recitation of this text, composed by a Sri Lankan monk in the Pāli 
language in 1153,108 followed by the reading of the Vessantara-jātaka, was 
mentioned in an inscription from Pagan dated to 1201.109 Such an 
important practice, the final aim of which is to incite lay people to be 
generous in their lives in general and, also, to make donations of their time 
and properties for the smooth functioning of the saṅgha, could have been 
introduced within the Theravāda Buddhist community in Cambodia 
during the period of study. It is tempting to imagine that such an 
intercourse regarding the diffusion of Buddhist texts and rituals could 
have been assured by the monks sharing the same Buddhist doctrine who 
would have tried to come into contact and exchange writings and 
teachings. The diffusion of the Buddhist scriptures has always been 
regarded as an objective among Buddhist communities.110 However, this 
intercourse appears to be most evident for Sri Lanka and Burma.111 
Therefore, in the future, fully understanding the place of Cambodia 
within this regional Theravāda network during the late Angkorian 
period112 appears to be crucial to determine the dynamic of the 
proliferation of Buddhist scriptures belonging to this school in Khmer 
Buddhist communities. 
It might be interesting to mention that during the Middle Period, 
when Theravāda doctrine became the principal cult of the Khmer, the 
obvious popularity of jātaka is evidenced in the “Inscriptions Modernes 
d’Angkor”, which record numerous reproductions of the texts of the last 
ten jātaka offered to Buddhist monasteries,113 as well as the ceremonial 
reading of these tales among which the recitation of the Vessantara-jātaka 
appears to be the most appreciated.114 In addition, citations related to the 
principal characters of the jātaka, particularly of the last ten lives, are 
found. A dignitary, for instance, compares his children to Jālī and Krisnā, 
the two children of Vessantara who participated in the accomplishment of 
the perfect generosity of their father.115 These practices related to jātaka, 
regarded as highly meritorious by Buddhists, were made on the occasion 
of Buddhist celebrations such as the erection or restoration of Buddha 
images, the construction of new buildings belonging to the monastery 
complex, or the release of slaves.116

--- PAGE 160 ---
131
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
One question might be raised: whether or not the jātaka known in the 
post-Angkorian period are a direct heritage of the jātaka dated to the 
Angkorian period. Such an idea could be worth considering given that 
strong Angkorian artistic sensibilities, in particular the Bayon style, have 
played an important role in the configuration of the art style of the Middle 
Period, at least in its beginning phase.117 However, the absence of any 
surviving artistic productions related to jātaka during the more than three 
centuries following the decline of Angkor challenges the notion of 
continuity. To date, we know only of a set of wooden sculptures 
originating from the region of Babor, Kampong Chhnang province, and 
dated between the 17th and 18th centuries, as the only surviving artefacts 
from this period to illustrate scenes from jātaka tales.118 Later, in modern 
Cambodia, Buddhist murals – the oldest ones dated to the late 19th 
century – have definitively adopted jātaka, in particular the last ten 
jātaka, as one of the principal themes to be represented in vihāra. Here, 
the ten jātaka have been depicted in detail, that is from the beginning of 
the story until the end, according to the Sri Lankan recension which is 
now shared by the Therāvada Buddhist countries of Southeast Asia. 
However, the fascination with the story of Vessantara has always been 
there and this can still be seen in contemporary mural paintings where the 
entirety of this tale is figured in 13 separate panels, whilst a single panel is 
typically used to represent each of the other nine jātaka tales of the 
Mahānipāta.  
CONCLUSION 
In Cambodia, the earliest depiction of jātaka is attested on a sīmā at a 
Phnom Kulen site, dated to the 8th to 9th centuries. Then, there was a 
long period of silence on this Buddhist theme in both epigraphy and art. It 
was then, during the first half of the 12th century, that jātaka reappeared 
again, this time on a pediment of Thommanon temple, probably dated to 
the reign of King Sūryavarman II. This sudden apparition of a jātaka tale 
at a temple apparently dedicated to Vaishnavism concretises the idea of the 
religious syncretism – Brahmanism and Buddhism – established earlier at 
Phimai (Thailand). However, the rarity of jātaka in sacred art reflects 
incontestably a secondary position of this Buddhist ideology in the 
religious conceptions of the Khmer at that time. In the third quarter of the 
12th century, at the time of the ascension of King Tribhuvanādityavarman, 
one of the Buddhist monarchs belonging to the “Mahīdharapura” dynasty, 
jātaka seemed to be definitively adopted in the iconographic repertoire as 
attested by the “temples d’étape” located on the east road that links Angkor 
to Preah Khan of Kampong Svay. Of these early representations of jātaka, 
only two stories have been identified, the Vessantara-jātaka and the

--- PAGE 161 ---
132
Tuy Danel
Sibi-jātaka. The former, by its nature as the most celebrated jātaka among 
Buddhists in general, could be depicted in several episodes, whereas the 
latter was limited to one characteristic episode inspired by the 
iconographic patterns of ancient Buddhist art. When Jayavarman VII came 
to the throne, and established a new principal religious order in favour of 
Mahāyāna Buddhism, there was considerable enrichment of Buddhist 
imagery; here we see the jātaka theme expand. Numerous jātaka, certain 
scenes still unidentified, were illustrated in reliefs at different temples, in 
the capital as well as in the provinces. Still, the Vessantara-jātaka and the 
Sibi-jātaka remained the two most represented tales during this period. 
Also, the valorisation of these jātaka probably had a specific signification. 
One would note that in Buddhism, “generosity” and “self-renouncement” 
are two foremost virtues that have been highly celebrated over centuries, 
especially in Theravāda Buddhism. In fact, the perfection of generosity, 
perfectly embodied by the story of Prince Vessantara, continues to inspire 
Buddhists of different social backgrounds who, by the act of giving, can 
expect in return to gain merits for next lives. In a more socio-economic 
perspective, the saṅgha strongly depends on the generosity of the Buddhist 
community that supplies daily food and material needs to the monks 
prohibited from any lucrative activities. 
In Southeast Asia, with the notable exception of the Mahāyāna 
Buddhist temple of Borobudur in central Java, the development of jātaka 
in the iconographic field are attested in those kingdoms or cultures where 
Theravāda Buddhism prospered. Based on the comparative study with the 
neighbouring Dvāravatī sites, especially those located in the northeast part 
of present-day Thailand, it seems that the Khmer were introduced to 
jātaka tales through the interactions that followed their conquest of these 
centres, which had been inhabited by Mon-speaking people who appeared 
to have particularly appreciated this Buddhist iconographic theme since 
an early date. In fact, this contact dates back as early as the beginning of 
the Angkorian period, as attested by a Buddhist boundary stone or sīmā 
found at the Phnom Kulen site, a stone which presents remarkable 
iconographic similarity with a contemporary sīmā from the Dvāravatī site 
of Muang Fa Daet. However, it was during the peak of the territorial and 
political expansion of the Khmer kingdom, between the 11th and 12th 
centuries, to the centre and the northeast of present-day Thailand, that 
jātaka tales seemed to have largely spread into certain zones occupied by 
the Khmer who, henceforth, would have lived alongside or within native 
communities. During this period of mutual artistic inspiration several 
sīmā marked by Khmer stylistic sensibilities were erected. For instance, in 
Northeast Thailand, two sīmā depict the Vidhurapaṇḍita-jātaka, whereas 
another sīmā illustrates the Sibi-jātaka, all of them presenting influences 
from the Khmer aesthetic canon, which was, therefore, probably the

--- PAGE 162 ---
133
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
consequence of cultural and political interactions between Angkor and 
former Dvāravatī sites. In parallel, a comparative study has revealed that 
there are divergences between the jātaka scenes on the sīmā and those 
depicted in reliefs during the Angkorian period. Indeed, at Angkor, the 
Vessantara-jātaka and the Sibi-jātaka appeared to have occupied an 
important position, whereas the same tales are rarely found on sīmā in 
Thailand. Furthermore, for the Vessantara-jātaka, the episode of the gift 
of the children was the most illustrated at Angkor, while the same 
sequence has been attested on only one single sīmā. 
On the other hand, there is no clear evidence proving that the 
exceptional popularity of the jātaka at Pagan could have had any 
significant influence on the emergence of jātaka at Angkor. There are two 
principal arguments that support this. First, I have insisted on the fact that 
the religious relationship between Angkor and Pagan during the late 
Angkorian period, which would have enabled the introduction in 
Cambodia of the Buddhist scriptures containing jātaka narratives as 
known at Pagan, remains both scantily documented and confused. The 
reliability of the identity of Tāmalinda, the presumed Khmer monk 
thought to have received ordination under Theravāda tradition in Sri 
Lanka some time at the end of the 12th century, remains controversial to 
this day. Second, the jātaka depicted at Angkor did not follow the specific 
rules established at Pagan, that is the illustration of the complete collection 
of jātaka tales as it is known in the Sri Lankan Pāli version and the 
figuration in explicit detail of the last ten jātaka with the Vessantara-
jātaka occupying the most extended space. At Angkor, the Vessantara-
jātaka was generally represented by one evocative scene, which is the 
episode of the gift of the children, although a few more sequences could 
sometimes be added. By choosing this episode, the Khmer seemed to have 
intended to draw the viewer’s particular attention towards the most 
exemplary act of generosity of the bodhisattva in the whole story. 
Humanly speaking, this episode is also known as the most moving and 
tragic moment.119 Other evidence also seems to demonstrate that the 
jātaka at Angkor, at least some of them, were not drawn from the same 
Buddhist textual tradition attested at Pagan. Indeed, the Sibi-jātaka 
depicted at Angkor clearly belongs to the Sanskrit texts, probably the 
Mahābhārata, while the same story at West Hpet-leik temple was inspired 
from the Pāli version of the Sri Lankan recension. Another case concerns 
Neak Pean temple at Angkor where the illustration of the Valāhassa-
jātaka confirmed the access of Khmer illustrators to the Mahāyāna 
Sanskrit text of Kāraṇḍavyūha-sūtra in which the story is given.
As discussed above, due to the lack of reliable historic data and the 
considerable divergences in the iconographic field between the two 
capitals, one can argue that the extended popularity of jātaka at Pagan did

--- PAGE 163 ---
134
Tuy Danel
not have a significant influence on the illustration of jātaka at Angkor. 
In sum, there seem to be, during the late Angkorian period, not one 
but several Buddhist textual traditions that would have provided artistic 
inspirations for the illustration of jātaka tales. While certain stories were 
clearly taken from Sanskrit texts such as the Kāraṇḍavyūha-sūtra 
(Vālahassa-jātaka), a Mahāyāna text, and probably the Māhābhārata 
(Sibi-jātaka), the Vessantara-jātaka as seen at Thommanon and Chau Say 
Thevoda contained the episodes that are developed in the Pāli text of the 
Theravāda tradition. At any rate, these two jātaka tales, the most depicted 
during this period, although apparently belonging to different textual 
traditions, delivered a single message of extreme generosity and the 
renouncement of self, the most celebrated virtue in Buddhism, 
particularly, in Theravāda Buddhism. This may well have reflected the 
politico-religious philosophy of the king who acts as the unifier of his 
nation. Whatever the case may be, this plurality of Buddhist scriptures 
belonging to different traditions seems to reflect the complex and evolutive 
aspects of the religious system established under the reign of Jayavarman 
VII, a king also known for his devotion to the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, 
symbol of compassion in the Mahāyāna context, the virtue of whom was 
represented by the Vālahassa-jātaka at Neak Pean temple.
Notes
1	
For jātaka illustrations from Dvāravatī culture see Pierre Dupont, L’archéologie 
mône de Dvāravatī, 1959, 2 vols.; Jean Boisselier, “Récentes recherches à 
Nakhon Pathom”, JSS 58, no. 2, July 1970, pp. 55–65; Piriya Krairiksh, 
Buddhist Folk Tales Depicted at Chula Pathon Chedi, 1974; “Semas with scenes 
from the Mahānipāta-Jātaka in the National Museum at Khon Kaen”, in Art 
and Archeology in Thailand, Fine Arts Department, 1974, pp. 35–65; and The 
Chula Pathon Cedi: Architecture and sculpture of Dvāravatī, PhD dissertation, 
1975; Nandana Chutiwongs, “Review article on the Jātaka reliefs at Cula 
Pathon Cetiya”, JSS 66, no. 1, 1978, pp. 133–51. 
2	
For jātaka reliefs at Borobudur see Sheila L. Weiner, “Notes on Buddhist Art”, 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 18, 1897, pp. 196–201; Jan Fontein, 
“Notes on the Jātakas and Avadānas of Barabuḍur”, in Barabudur: History and 
Significance of a Buddhist Monument, eds. Louis O. Gomez and Hiram W. 
Woodward, 1981, pp. 85–108; Louis Frédéric, with Jean-Louis Nou, Borobudur, 
1984.  
3	
For jātaka illustrations during the Pagan period see Edouard Huber, “Études 
indochinoises”, BEFEO 11, 1911, pp. 1–5; Charles Duroiselle, “Pictorial 
Representations of Jātakas in Burma”, Archaeological Survey of India 1912–3, pp. 
87–116; and “The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Temple at Pagan”, Epigraphica 
Birmanica being Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Burma 2, pt. 1, 1920; Gordon 
H. Luce, “The 550 Jatakas in Old Burma”, Artibus Asiae 19, no. 3–4, 1956, pp. 
291–307; and (partly repeated) Old Burma-Early Pagan, vol. 1, 1969; Lu Pi Win, 
“The Jātakas in Old Burma”, Artibus Asiae 2, 1966, pp. 94–108.

--- PAGE 164 ---
135
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
4	
Contrary to the artistic context, jātaka tales in Cambodian literature drew the 
attention of French scholars since the end of the 19th century (cf. Auguste 
Pavie, Mission Pavie. Indochine. 1879–1895: Études diverses, I, Recherche sur la 
littérature du Cambodge, du Laos et du Siam, 1898; and Contes du Cambodge, 
1921; Adhémard Leclère, Le livre de Vésandâr: Le roi charitable, 1902; Les livres 
sacrés du Cambodge, 1906; and Cambodge: Contes, légendes et jâtaka, 1912). 
5	
Mireille Bénisti, “Notes d’iconographies khmère: I. Deux scènes 
nautiques”, BEFEO 51, 1963, pp. 95–8.  
6	
Bruno Dagens, “Étude sur l’iconographie du Bayon (frontons et linteaux)”, AA 
19, 1969, pp. 123–67.
7	
Lan Sunnary, “Étude iconographique du temple khmer de Thommanon 
(Dhammānanda)”, AA 25, 1972, pp. 155–98. 	
8	
Vittorio Roveda, Khmer Mythology, 1997; and Images of the Gods: Khmer 
Mythology in Cambodia, Thailand and Laos, 2006. 
9	
For new data concerning the rise of Buddhism during this period, see Arlo 
Griffith and Brice Vincent, “Un vase khmer inscrit de la fin du xie siècle  
(K. 1296)”, AA 69, 2014, pp. 115–28.   
10	
Jean Boisselier, based on his stylistic study, thought that Thommanon was 
possibly erected slightly before Angkor Wat (see Jean Boisselier, “Bĕng Mãlã et la 
chronologie des monuments du style d’Angkor Vat”, BEFEO 46, 1952,  
pp. 187–226). 
11	
Such religious syncretism in Khmer sacred arts was also attested with the 
impressive temple of Phimai in actual Northeast Thailand. Founded during the 
reign of Jayavarman VI, at the end of the 11th century, or at the beginning of 
the 12th century, and dedicated to Buddhism in its Tantric form, the 
monument does not, however, include jātaka tales in its iconographic program 
as noted by Bruno Dagens in his “Autour de l’iconographie de Phimai”, in Actes 
du Premier Symposium franco-thaïlandais: La Thaïlande des origines de son 
histoire au XVème siècle. Bangkok juillet 1988, Bangkok 1995, pp. 17–37.  
12	
Lan Sunnary, “Étude iconographique du temple khmer de Thommanon”, 
BEFEO 25, 1972, pp. 155–98. 
13	
In 2006, Siyonn Sophearith, another Khmer scholar, published a short article in 
which he presents the iconographic feature of the pediment: “Caṃlak rūp tā 
jūjak’ nau prāsād dhammnand” [Jūjak’s relief at Thommanon temple], in 
KhmeRenaissance, vol. 1, December 2005–December 2006, pp. 102–3.
14	
The figure of Vessantara is seriously damaged.
15	
According to the Pāli canon, while Jūjaka falls asleep, two deities, having pity for 
the children, take the appearance of Vessantara and his wife, Maddī, then feed 
and comfort them during that night. It is unlikely that the two figures 
mentioned above can be associated with these gods. Nevertheless, the female 
figure could be related to one of the several gods of the forest who are touched 
by the children’s pain, and are mentioned in the text.  
16	
Arlo Griffiths and Brice Vincent, personal communication.
17	
Ibid.
18	
According to the Pāli version, the family reunion takes place as a procession 
conducted by his father, King Sañjaya, arrives at the exile site of Vessantara. To 
indicate that the sequence happens in the forest, the sculptor shows a female 
figure (Maddī) collecting fruit from a tree.   
19	
Vittorio Roveda (Images of the Gods, 2005, p. 249) mistakenly identified this 
relief as extracted from the Kapota-jātaka (No. 275 in the Pāli version), another 
jātaka tale in which the bodhisattva was born as a pigeon.

--- PAGE 165 ---
136
Tuy Danel
20	
Depending on different versions, the king is sometimes called Sibi, sometimes Sivi. 
21	
But, an example, although far in time and space, comes from the Magao Cave 
275 (fifth century) where the two versions found their place in the same panel 
(Wu Ming-Kuo, The Jataka Tales of the Mago Caves: China in Anthropological 
Perspective, PhD dissertation, 2008, p. 428).
22	
For the iconography of Beng Mealea: George Cœdès, “Note sur l’iconographie 
de Bĕng Mãlã”, BEFEO 13, pp. 23–8; and Jean Boisselier, “Bĕng Mãlã et la 
chronologie des monuments du style d’Angkor Vat”, BEFEO 46, 1952,  
pp. 187–226; from the same author, Le Cambodge, 1966.  
23	
Vittorio Roveda, Images of the Gods, 2005, p. 256, ph. 6.101.
24	
For the different stages of architectural evolution of Preah Khan of Kampong 
Svay see Bernard-Philippe Groslier, Le Preah Khan de Kompong Svay, PhD 
dissertation, 1967. Also, for a discussion of the temple as a new Buddhist centre, 
see Brice Vincent, Saṃrit: Étude de la Métallurgie du Bronze dans le Cambodge 
angkorien (fin du xie–début du xiiie siècle), PhD dissertation, 2012, pp. 57–61.  
25	
Bruno Bruiguier and Juliette Lacroix have mistakenly associated this episode 
with the Kapota-jataka (Preah Khan, Koh Ker et Preah Vihear: les provinces 
septentrionales, 2013, p. 111, ph. 116).   
26	
The eight “temples d’étape” are Chau Say Tevoda, Banteay Samre, Banteay 
Ampil, Beng Mealea, Prasat Chrei, Prasat Pram, Prasat Sup Tiep B, and Prasat 
Chambok (see Mitch Hendrickson, Arteries of Empire: An Operational Study of 
Transport and Communication in Angkorian Southeast Asia (9th to 15th 
centuries CE), PhD dissertation, 2007, Fig. 8.22b). For some iconographic 
aspects of these temples see Bruno Dagens, “Autour de l’iconographie de 
Phimai”, in La Thaïlande des débuts de son histoire jusqu’au XVe siècle: Actes du 
1er symposium franco-thaï, Bangkok, Université de Silpakorn, juillet 1988, p. 27; 
and Bruno Bruguier and Juliette Lacroix, Guide archéologique du Cambodge, 
Vol. V: Preah Khan, Koh Ker et Preah Vihear: Les provinces septentrionales, 2013. 
27	
For brief studies on Prasat Sasar Sdam, see “Chroniques”, BEFEO 37, 1937, p. 
636; Henri Marchal, “Note sur la forme du stūpa au Cambodge”, BEFEO 44, 
1951, pp. 581–90; Jean Boisselier, Le Cambodge, 1966, p. 94. For a recent study, 
see Ludivine Provost-Roche, Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au 
Cambodge (env. 1220–env. 1500), PhD dissertation, 2010, pp. 114–5.
28	
However, Ludivine Roche-Provost associated the temple with Mahāyāna 
Buddhism (ibid., p. 115).  
29	
See Senake Bandaranayake, Sinhalese Monastic Architecture: The Viháras of 
Anurádhapura, 1974, pp. 139–60.  
30	
Cf. “Chroniques”, BEFEO 37, 1937, p. 636. 
31	
The life of the historical Buddha and jātaka tales are two Buddhist principal 
themes that are frequently depicted together in one place since an early age. In 
Cambodia, regarding mural painting in pagodas, it is customary to paint 
episodes from the life the Buddha in the upper register, whereas the lower 
register is occupied by jātaka tales.   
32	
In Southeast Asia, the jātaka of the Mahānipāta were depicted as a whole for 
the first time in the Thaton kingdom of the Mons, located in Lower Burma. For 
this topic, see Gordon H. Luce, “The 550 Jātakas in Old Burma”, Artibus Asiae 
19, no. 3–4, 1956, p. 292.  
33	
“Chroniques”, BEFEO 37, 1937, p. 636; Ludivine Provost-Roche, Les derniers 
siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge (env. 1220–env. 1500), PhD 
dissertation, 2010, p. 115.  
34	
In place of the presumed jātaka scenes, a frieze of erased Buddha images could

--- PAGE 166 ---
137
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
be also evoked. Friezes of erased Buddha images assisted by worshippers are 
known from the same temple (see Ludivine Provost-Roche, 2010, Figs. 103–6).
35	
See Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir, L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée 
Guimet, 2008, cat. 106. 
36	
Ibid.
37	
Ibid. 
38	
Lilian Handlin, “A Man for All Seasons: Three Vessantaras in Premodern 
Myanmar”, in Readings of the Vessantara Jātaka, ed. Steven Collins, 2016,  
Fig. 6.1.
39	
Louis Frédéric with Jean-Louis Nou, Borobudur, p. 313, Fig. 37.  
40	
Baptiste and Zéphir feel that, in the case where the gift of the elephant was 
figured in the lower register, the erased Buddha seated in the upper register 
would have probably been illustrated here as the narrator of his own previous 
life. 
41	
For further understanding of aspects of Buddhism during this period see Hiram 
Woodward, “Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia in the Light of Recent 
Scholarship”, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 35, pp. 329–52 and The Art 
and Architecture of Thailand, 2005, p. 166 sq.; Brice Vincent, Saṃrit: Étude de 
la Métallurgie du Bronze dans le Cambodge angkorien (fin du xie–début du xiiie 
siècle), PhD dissertation, 2012, p. 52 sq.  
42	
For a detailed study of the iconographic programme under Jayavarman VII see 
Christine Hawixbrock, Population divine dans les temples: Religion et Politique 
sous Jayavarman VII, PhD dissertation, 1992. 
43	
This frieze may also have represented the journey of the people of Sivi in the 
direction of the Vaṁka hill, Vessantara’s site of exile, in order to present their 
apologies to the royal family and to ask them to return to the capital, the final 
chapter marking a happy ending of the story. If so, this narrative relief would be 
a sort of summarised version regrouping some symbolic sequences of the story. 
44	
The nautical features of this scene, attested by a fish figure within the ocean, 
catches our attention by the seeming goddess figure whose divine characteristic 
is accentuated by the halo behind her head. The deity appears very close to 
another male character whose fragmentary state makes him difficult to identify. 
However, accepting the idea that another jātaka tale might have been 
represented here, this relief is not without reminding us of one of the most 
famous jātaka included in the Mahānipātaka book, the Mahājanaka-jātaka. 
In Southeast Asia, the most evocative scene of this tale appears to be related to 
the sequence when the bodhisattva is saved, from his wrecked ship, by the sea 
goddess. This episode was, for example, depicted at Hpetleik (Luce, OBEP, pl. 
115.b) and at Ananda temples, Pagan (ibid., pl. 324. d).
45	
See Madeleine Giteau, Guide du musée national de Phnom Penh: I. Sculpture, 
1960, pp. 85–6.
46	
Or Mūgapakkha-jātaka. 
47	
Bruno Dagens, “Étude sur l’iconographie du Bayon (frontons et linteaux)”, AA 
19, 1969, pp. 132, 142; Vittorio Roveda, Images of the Gods, 2005, p. 245, ph. 6. 
85.
48	
Or Mahānāradakassapa-jātaka. 
49	
Bruno Dagens, ibid, pp. 135, 143; Vittorio Roveda, ibid, p. 255. 
50	
Vittorio Roveda, ibid, p. 251, ph. 6. 92.
51	
Ibid. 
52	
Bruno Dagens, ibid, p. 126. 
53	
Another recently discovered inscription, K. 1297, dated to the reign of King

--- PAGE 167 ---
138
Tuy Danel
Tribhuvanādityavarman, also refers to jātaka as the perfection of wisdom that 
possessed one of the disciples of the king (Arlo Griffiths and Brice Vincent, 
personal communication).
54	
George Cœdès, Inscriptions du Cambodge, vol. II, 1942, pp. 170, 178.
55	
Peter Skilling, “Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka in South-East Asia”, Journal of the 
Pāli Text Society 27, 2006, pp. 119–20.
56	
Such an event was not mentioned in the description of the Chinese ambassador 
Zhou Daguan who visited Angkor at the end of the 13th century. See Paul 
Pelliot, “Mémoires sur les Coutumes du Cambodge”, BEFEO 2, 1902, pp. 
123–79 and Mémoires sur les coutumes du Cambodge de Tcheou Ta-kouan, 1951.  
57	
Paul Pelliot, “Le Fou-nan”, BEFEO 3, 1903, p. 260.
58	
Peter Skilling, ibid., p. 123.
59	
Krairiksh, Buddhist Folk Tales Depicted at Chula Pathon Chedi, 1974.  
60	
Nandana Chutiwongs, “Review article on the Jātaka reliefs at Cula Pathon 
Cetiya”, JSS 66, no. 1, 1978, pp. 133–51.   
61	
Artistic influences from Dvāravatī style can be, for example, seen in nāga-
protected Buddha images dated to the Angkorian period. See Jean-Pierre Gaston 
Aubert, “Nāga-Buddha Images of the Dvāravatī Period: A Possible Link 
between Dvāravatī and Angkor”, JSS 98, 2010, pp. 116–50. 
62	
Jean Boulbet and Bruno Dagens, “Les sites archéologiques de la région de 
Bhnaṃ Gūlen (Phnom Kulen)”, AA 27, 1973, pp. 43–7.
63	
However, Jean Boulbet and Bruno Dagens saw in this motif a representation of 
a “royal chariot” (ibid., for example, p. 47, ph. 133: face A).
64	
See Hiram Woodward, “Dvaravati, Si Thep, and Wendan”, Bulletin of the 
Indo-Pacific Prehistory Association 30, 2010, pp. 87–97; The Art and 
Architecture of Thailand, 2005, (1st ed. 2003), pp. 104–5.
65	
See Jean Boulbet and Bruno Dagens, ibid., ph. 134. 
66	
See Krairiksh, “Semas with scenes from the Mahānipāta-Jātaka”, p. 57; see also 
Stephen A. Murphy, The Buddhist Boundary Markers of Northeast Thailand 
and Central Laos, 7th–12th Centuries CE: Towards an Understanding of the 
Archaeological, Religious, and Artistic Landscapes of the Khorat Plateau, PhD 
dissertation, 2010, p. 250 and Fig. 5.47. 
67	
Jean Boulbet and Bruno Dagens, ibid., pp. 51–2.
68	
Stephen A. Murphy, ibid., pp. 157–60. 
69	
Arunsak Kingmanee, “Baisema Paap salak Witon-jaduk jaak Jangwat Nong 
Khai” [A Boundary Marker of the Vidhurapaṇḍita-jātaka from Nong Khai], 
Muang Boran 24, no. 3, 1998, p. 112.
70	
Woodward, H., personal communication. Rungrot Phiromanukun assigns this 
sīmā to the Angkor Wat style (c. 1080–1175): “Bai sema rioeng sibijataka: 
rongroy buddhasasana mahayana nai phak dawan ook chiang nioeo don pan” [A 
Sema of the Sibi-jātaka: Traces of Mahāyāna Buddhism in the Upper Northeast 
Region], Muang Boran 28, no. 3, 2002, pp. 102–7; “Les bornes rituelles du 
nord-est de la Thaïlande”, in Dvāravatī: aux sources du bouddhisme en 
Thaïlande, Musée Guimet, Fig. 3.  
71	
Rungrot, “Les bornes rituelles”, Fig. 3.  
72	
Murphy, The Buddhist Boundary Markers, p. 230, Fig. 5.16.   
73	
Stephen A. Murphy, ibid., p. 230. 
74	
Cf. Stephen A. Murphy, ibid., p. 217.  
75	
Ibid., Fig. 5.49.   
76	
Edward Cowell, The Jātaka, or Stories of the Buddha’s Former Births, Vol. 6, 
1907, pp. 281–2.

--- PAGE 168 ---
139
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
77	
Cf. Hiram Woodward, “Some Buddha Images and the Cultural Developments 
of the Late Angkorian Period”, Artibus Asiae 42, 1980, pp. 155–74. 
78	
Cf. Charlotte Galloway, “Buddhist Narrative Imagery During the Eleventh 
Century at Pagan, Burma: Reviewing Origins and Purpose”, in Rethinking 
Visual Narratives from Asia: Intercultural and Comparative Perspectives, ed. 
Alexandra Green, 2013, pp. 159–74.
79	
See Gordon H. Luce, “The 550 Jātakas in Old Burma”, Artibus Asiae 19,  
no. 3–4, 1956, pp. 291–307. 
80	
Gordon H. Luce, Old Burma-Early Pagan, vol. 1, 1969, p. 241. 
81	
Donald M. Stadtner, Ancient Pagan: Buddhist Plain of Merit, 2005, p. 129.
82	
Scenes of jātaka were also illustrated in relief at the Buddhist temple of 
Borobudur, in central Java, dated to the eighth to ninth centuries.
83	
Jean Boisselier, “Travaux de la mission archéologique française en Thaïlande 
(juillet–novembre 1966)”, AA 25, 1972, p. 50.
84	
Pe Maung Tin and Gordon H. Luce, trans., The Glass Palace Chronicle of the 
Kings of Burma, 1960, (1st ed. 1923).
85	
George Cœdès, Les États hindouisés d’Indochine et d’Indonésie, 1964, p. 323. 
86	
Pe Maung Tin and Gordon H. Luce, The Glass Palace Chronicle, p. ix.  
87	
Tilman Frasch, “Die Welt des Buddhismus im Jahre 1000”, in Asiem im Jahre 
1000, ed. Kulke Hermann, 2000, pp. 104–5.
88	
Ian Harris, Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice, 2005, p. 23. 
89	
George Cœdès, The Indianized States of Southeast Asia, trans. Sue Brown 
Cowing, 1968, p. 173.
90	
Hiram Woodward, “Tantric Buddhism in Angkor Thom”, Ars Orientalis 12, 
1981, pp. 62–3. 
91	
Later, in Southeast Asia (Cambodia, Thailand and Laos), with regards to 
pre-modern and modern Buddhist mural paintings, the artist appears to have 
usually painted this jātaka in 13 sequences referring to the 13 chapters of the 
textual content. On the other hand, the narration of the Vessantara-jātaka on 
the painted scrolls in northeast Thailand and Laos has been mostly composed of 
more than 13 scenes – the tale of Braḥ Mālay, the legendary monk, and the 
dedication panel related to the merit made by the scroll’s donation precede the 
episodes (Leedom Lefferts and Sandra Cate, “Narration in the Vessantara 
Painted Scrolls of Northeast Thailand and Laos”, in Readings of the Vessantara 
Jātaka, ed. Steven Collins, 2016, p. 129). 
92	
Gordon H. Luce, ibid., vol. 3, pl. 322: e, f. Another carving stele, also at the 
cross passages, probably figures Prince Vessantara with his wife and mother 
giving away horses and elephants (ibid., pl. 322: d; Gordon H. Luce, ibid.,  
vol. 2, pp. 147–8). 
93	
Gordon H. Luce, ibid., vol. 3, pl. 110: b. 
94	
As in the discussion above, it might have been in the Mahābhārata text, or in 
Buddhist common folk tales, that the Khmer illustrator extracted this story. 
95	
Louis Finot and Victor Goloubew, “Le symbolisme de Nak Pan”, BEFEO 23, 
1923, pp. 401–5. See also Jean Boisselier, “Pouvoir royal et symbolisme 
architectural: Neak Pean et son importance pour la royauté angkorienne,” AA 
21, 1979, pp. 91–108.
96	
No. 196 (Edward Cowell, The Jātaka or The Jātaka, or Stories of the Buddha’s 
Former Births, vol. 2, pp. 89–91. In the Pāli version, the marvellous horse is the 
Buddha himself in his previous existence. 
97	
Cf. Peter Alan Roberts with Tulku Yeshi, trans., The Basket’s Display: 
Kāraṇḍavyūha, 2013, pp. 46–9, (PDF version).

--- PAGE 169 ---
140
Tuy Danel
98	
It has been attested that one of the principal purposes of the Burmese king 
Kyanzittha in figuring the whole of Pāli jātaka at Ananda temple might have 
been related to his desire of purity and completeness of the Buddhist texts as 
known in the Therāvāda Buddhism of Ceylon (Robert L. Brown, “Narrative as 
Icon: The Jātaka Stories in Ancient Indian and Southeast Asian Architecture”, 
in Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia, ed. 
Juliane Schober, 1997, p. 89). 
99	
During the reign of Jayavarman VII, the figure of Avalokiteśvara, the 
bodhisattva of compassion largely worshipped in Mahāyāna Buddhism, had an 
important role as the king seemed to favour this Buddhist sect, in particular.  
100	
In Southeast Asia, the use of certain Pāli sources in the illustration of jātaka 
tales has been attested since the second half of the first millennium of the 
Common Era, including the so-called Dvāravatī culture and Borobudur. For the 
former, see Piriya Krairiksh, Buddhist Folk Tales Depicted at Chula Pathon 
Chedi, 1974. For the latter, see Padmanabh Jaini, “The Story of Sudhana and 
Manoharā: An Analysis of Texts and the Borobudur Reliefs”, in Collected Papers 
on Buddhist Studies, ed. Padmanabh S. Jaini, 2001, pp. 207–329. 
101	
In the absence of legends inscribed to identify the story, the artist ought to 
ensure that significant details from the oral or textual content can be quickly 
captured by the reader. In Cambodia, the same procedure was largely and 
efficiently developed in modern Buddhist murals which were addressed to a 
mostly illiterate population.
102	
No. 499 (Edward B. Cowell, The Jātaka or Stories of the Buddha’s Former Births, 
vol. 4, 1901, pp. 250–6).
103	
P. S. Dhamarama with André Bareau, “Les récits canoniques du Cariyāpiṭaka et 
les Jātaka pāli”, BEFEO 51, 1963, pp. 335–6.  
104	
But, this same story is also found in the Jātakamālā of Ārya-Śūra (J. S. Speyer, 
Jātakamālā or Garland of Birth-Stories, 1895, pp. 13–27). 
105	
Cf. Charles Willemen, trans., Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts, 2009,  
p. 100.  
106	
Pratap Chandra Roy, The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa, vol. 3, 
1974, pp. 425–6. 
107	
Such an idea might be found, for example, in the context of the so-called 
Dvāravatī culture as Chutiwongs has described regarding the jātaka stories 
figured at Cula Pathon stūpa: “Jātaka stories in general are non-sectarian and 
timeless motifs in Buddhist art, and each and every tale depicted at Cula Pathon 
displays such characteristics” (Nandana Chutiwongs, “Review Article on the 
Jātaka Reliefs at Cula Pathon Cetiya”, JSS 66, no. 1, 1978, pp. 141–2).  
108	
Paul Schweisguth, Étude sur la littérature siamoise, 1951, p. 128. It is also 
important to add the fact that the Pāli version of the Vessantara-jātaka offers the 
longest version of the story (1,000 verses), also the longest comparing with other 
jātaka of the same recension, while the Sanskrit texts, especially the Jātaka-
mālā, do not seem to accord any particular status to this tale.
109	
See Than Tun, “History of Buddhism in Burma A.D. 1000–1300”, Journal of 
the Burma Research Society 61, no. 1–2, 1978, pp. 85–6.
110	
Tilman Frasch, “A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal”, in From the 
Mediterranean to the China Sea: Miscellaneous Notes, eds. Claude Guillot, 
Denys Lombard and Roderich Ptak, 1998, p. 85. 
111	
Ibid. 
112	
The real existence of Tāmalinda, thought to be a son of Jayavarman VII, remains 
contestable.

--- PAGE 170 ---
141
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
113	
Cf. IMA 34 (Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions Modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”, BEFEO 
62, 1975, pp. 284–93). 
114	
Cf. IMA 37 (Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions Modernes d’Angkor 35, 36, 37 et 39”, 
BEFEO 61, 1974, pp. 308–18).  In Buddhist Southeast Asia, the textual 
recitation of the Vessantara-jātaka could last several days and necessitates the 
participation of the whole village. Sometimes this reading could also be 
accompanied by a spectacular theatrical mise-en-scène as seen in Northeast 
Thailand. There, the Thai-Lao community celebrates each year the Festival of 
the Reading of the Vessantara-jātaka, the most important merit-making 
ceremony, during which villagers and monks perform certain episodes of the 
story. For this topic, see cf. Bernard Formoso, “Le bun pha Wet des Lao du 
nord-est de la Thaïlande”, BEFEO 79, 1992, pp. 233–260; Leedom Lefferts, 
“The “Bun Pha Wet” Painted Scrolls of Northeastern Thailand in the Walters 
Art Museum”, The Journal of the Walters Art Museum 64/65, 2006/07, pp. 
149–170; Leedom Lefferts and Sandra Cate, “Constructing Multiple Narratives 
in Theravada Buddhism: The Vessantara Painted Scrolls of Northeast Thailand 
and Lowland Laos”, in Rethinking Visual Narratives from Asia: Intercultural 
and Comparative Perspectives, ed. Alexandra Green, 2013, pp. 229–43. 
115	
IMA 5 (Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions Modernes d’Angkor 4, 5, 6 et 7”, BEFEO 58, 
1971, pp. 105–23). 
116	
Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions Modernes d’Angkor”.
117	
Madeleine Giteau, Iconographie du Cambodge post-angkorien, 1975. 
118	
Ibid., pp. 207–14.
119	
In Cambodia, at the beginning of the 20th century, during recitations of the 
Vessantara-jātaka, sobbing could be heard from women and children in the 
audience (see Adhémard Leclère, Le livre de Vésandâr. Le roi charitable, 1902).
References 
Arunsak Kingmanee. “Baisema Paap salak Witon-jaduk jaak Jangwat Nong Khai” [A 
Boundary Marker of the Vidhurapaṇḍita-jātaka from Nong Khai]. Muang 
Boran 24, no. 3, 1998: pp. 107–12. (In Thai with English summary.)
Bandaranayake, Senake. Sinhalese Monastic Architecture: The Viháras of 
Anurádhapura. Leiden: Brill, 1974. 
Baptiste, Pierre and Thierry Zéphir. L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée Guimet. 
Paris: Éditions de la Réunion des musées nationaux, 2008. 
Bénisti, Mireille. “Notes d’iconographies khmère: I. Deux scènes nautiques”. BEFEO 
51, 1963: pp. 95–8.
Boisselier, Jean. Asie du Sud-Est, I. Le Cambodge. Paris: Picard, Manuel d’Archéologie 
d’Extrême-Orient, 1966.
——— . “Bĕng Mãlã et la chronologie des monuments du style d’Angkor Vat”. BEFEO 
46, no. 1, 1952: pp. 187–226.
——— . “Pouvoir royal et symbolisme architectural. Neak Pean et son importance pour 
la royauté angkorienne”. AA 21, 1979, pp. 91–108. 
——— . “Récentes recherches à Nakhon Pathom”. JSS 58, no. 2, July 1970, pp. 55–65. 
——— . “Travaux de la mission archéologique française en Thaïlande (juillet–novembre 
1966)”. AA 25, 1972: pp. 27–90. 
Boulbet, Jean, and Bruno Dagens. “Les sites archéologiques de la région de Bhnaṃ 
Gūlen (Phnom Kulen)”. AA 27, 1973, numéro spécial. 
Brown, Robert L. “Narrative as Icon: The Jātaka Stories in Ancient Indian and 
Southeast Asian Architecture”. In Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions

--- PAGE 171 ---
142
Tuy Danel
of South and Southeast Asia, ed. Juliane Schober. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai‘i Press, 1977, pp. 64–109.
Bruguier, Bruno and Juliette Lacroix. Guide archéologique du Cambodge, Vol. 5: Preah 
Khan, Koh Ker et Preah Vihear: les provinces septentrionales. Phnom Penh: Japan 
Printing House Co. Ltd., 2013.  
Chutiwongs, Nandana. “Review article on the Jātaka reliefs at Cula Pathon Cetiya”. 
JSS 66, no. 1, 1978: pp. 133–51.
Cowell, Edward B. The Jātaka, or Stories of the Buddha’s Former Births, 6 vols. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895–1907. 
Cœdès, George. Inscriptions du Cambodge, vol. 2. Paris: EFEO, 1942.   
——— . Les États hindouisés d’Indochine et d’Indonésie. Paris: De Boccard, 1964.  
——— . “Note sur l’iconographie de Bĕng Mãlã”. BEFEO 13, 1913: pp. 23–8. 
Dagens, Bruno. “Autour de l’iconographie de Phimai”. In Actes du Premier 
Symposium franco-thaïlandais: La Thaïlande des origines de son histoire au 
XVème siècle. Bangkok juillet 1988. Bangkok, 1995, pp. 17–37. 
——— . “Étude sur l’iconographie du Bayon (frontons et linteaux)”. AA 19, 1969:  
pp. 123–67.
Dhamarama, P. S. and André Bareau. “Les récits canoniques du Cariyāpiṭaka et les 
Jātaka pāli. Traduction du Cariyāpiṭaka”. BEFEO 51, no. 2, 1963: pp. 321–90. 
Dupont, Pierre. L’archéologie mône de Dvāravatī, 2 vols. Paris: EFEO, 1959. 
Duroiselle, Charles. “Pictorial Representations of Jātakas in Burma”. Archaeological 
Survey of India, 1912–13, pp. 87–116.
——— . “The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Temple at Pagan”. Epigraphia Birmanica 
being Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Burma 2, 1920, part 1.
Finot, Louis and Victor Goloubew. “Le symbolisme de Nak Pan”. BEFEO 23, 1923: 
pp. 401–5. 
Fontein, Jan. “Notes on the Jātakas and Avadānas of Barabuḍur”. In Barabudur: 
History and Significance of a Buddhist Monument, eds. Louis O. Gomez and 
Hiram W. Woodward. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1981, pp. 85–108. 
Formoso, Bernard. “Le bun pha We:t des Lao du nord-est de la Thaïlande”. BEFEO 
79, 1992: pp. 233–60. 
Frasch, Tilman. “A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal”. In From the 
Mediterranean to the China Sea: Miscellaneous Notes, eds. Claude Guillot, 
Denys Lombard and Roderich Ptak. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 1998,  
pp. 69–92. 
——— . “Die Welt des Buddhismus im Jahre 1000”. In Asiem im Jahre 1000, ed. Kulke 
Hermann. 2000, pp. 56–72.  
Frédéric, Louis and Jean-Louis Nou. Borobudur. Paris: Imprimerie nationale, 1984.  
Galloway, Charlotte. “Buddhist Narrative Imagery During the Eleventh Century at 
Pagan, Burma. Reviewing origins and purpose”. In Rethinking Visual 
Narratives from Asia: Intercultural and Comparative Perspectives, ed. Alexandra 
Green. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2013, pp. 159–74.
Gaston-Aubert, Jean-Pierre. “Nāga-Buddha Images of the Dvāravatī Period: A Possible 
Link between Dvāravatī and Angkor”. JSS 98, 2010: pp. 116–50.
Giteau, Madeleine. Guide du musée national de Phnom Penh. I. Sculpture. Phnom 
Penh: Office national du tourisme, 1960. 
——— . Iconographie du Cambodge post-angkorien, Paris: EFEO, 1975.  
Griffith, Arlo and Brice Vincent. “Un vase khmer inscrit de la fin du xie siècle  
(K. 1296)”. AA 69, 2014: pp. 115–28.  
Groslier, Bernard-Philippe. Le Preah Khan de Kompong Svay, 3 vols. PhD dissertation, 
Paris: École du Louvre, 1967.

--- PAGE 172 ---
143
Reading and Interpreting Jātaka Tales during the Angkorian Period
Handlin, Lilian. “A Man for All Seasons: Three Vessantaras in Premodern 
Myanmar”. In Readings of the Vessantara Jātaka, ed. Steven Collins. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2016.
Harris, Ian. Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice. Hawai‘i: University of 
Hawai‘i Press, 2005.
Hawixbrock, Christine. Population divine dans les temples. Religion et Politique sous 
Jayavarman VII, 2 vols. PhD dissertation, Paris: Université de la Sorbonne 
Nouvelle-Paris 3, 1994.  
Hendrickson, Mitch. Arteries of Empire: An Operational Study of Transport and 
Communication in Angkorian Southeast Asia (9th to 15th Centuries CE). PhD 
dissertation, Sydney: University of Sydney, 2007. 
Huber, Edouard. “Études indochinoises”. BEFEO 11, 1911: pp. 1–5.
Jaini, Padmanabh S. “The Story of Sudhana and Manoharā: An Analysis of Texts and 
the Borobudur Reliefs”. In Collected Papers on Buddhist Studies, ed. 
Padmanabh S. Jaini. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, 2001, pp. 207–329.
Krairiksh, Piriya. Buddhist Folk Tales Depicted at Chula Pathon Chedi. Bangkok: 
Prachandra Printing Press, 1974a. 
——— . The Chula Pathon Cedi: Architecture and Sculpture of Dvāravatī. PhD 
dissertation, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University, 1975. 
——— . “Semas with scenes from the Mahānipāta-Jātaka in the National Museum at 
Khon Kaen”. In Art and Archeology in Thailand, Fine Arts Department, 
1974b, pp. 35–65. 
Lan Sunnary. “Étude iconographique du temple khmer de Thommanon 
(Dhammānanda)”. AA 25, 1972: pp. 155–98.
Leclère, Adhémard. Le livre de Vésandâr. Le roi charitable. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 
1902. 
Lefferts, Leedom. “The ‘Bun Pha Wet’ Painted Scrolls of Northeastern Thailand in 
the Walters Art Museum”. The Journal of the Walters Art Museum 64/65, 
2006/07: pp. 149–70. 
Lefferts, Leedom and Sandra Cate. “Constructing Multiple Narratives in Theravada 
Buddhism: The Vessantara Painted Scrolls of Northeast Thailand and 
Lowland Laos”. In Rethinking Visual Narratives from Asia: Intercultural and 
Comparative Perspectives, ed. Alexandra Green. 2013, pp. 229–43.
Lu Pi Win. “The Jātakas in Old Burma”. Artibus Asiae 2, 1966: pp. 94–108. 
Luce, Gordon H. “The 550 Jatakas in Old Burma”. Artibus Asiae 19, no. 3–4, 1956: 
pp. 291–307. 
——— . Old Burma-Early Pagan, 3 vols. New York: J. J. Augustin, 1969.  
Marchal, Henri. “Note sur la forme du stūpa au Cambodge”. BEFEO 44, 1951:  
pp. 581–90.
Murphy, Stephen A. The Buddhist Boundary Markers of Northeast Thailand and 
Central Laos, 7th–12th Centuries CE: Towards an Understanding of the 
Archaeological, Religious, and Artistic Landscapes of the Khorat Plateau. PhD 
dissertation, London: SOAS University of London, 2010. 
Pe Maung Tin and Gordon H. Luce. The Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of 
Burma. Rangoon, Rangoon University Press, 1960. First edition, 1923. 
Pelliot, Paul. “Le Fou-nan.” BEFEO 3, 1903. (Extract.)
——— . “Mémoires sur les Coutumes du Cambodge”. BEFEO 2, 1902: pp. 123–79.
——— . Mémoires sur les coutumes du Cambodge de Tcheou Ta-kouan. Paris: Adrien 	
Maisonneuve, 1951. 
Pou (aka Lewitz), Saveros. “Inscriptions Modernes d’Angkor 4, 5, 6 et 7”. BEFEO 58, 
1971: pp. 105–23.

--- PAGE 173 ---
144
Tuy Danel
——— . “Inscriptions Modernes d’Angkor 35, 36, 37 et 39”. BEFEO 61, 1974:  
pp. 301–37.
——— . “Inscriptions Modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”. BEFEO 62, 1975: pp. 283–353. 
Provost-Roche, Ludivine. Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge 
(env. 1220–env. 1500). PhD dissertation, Paris: Université de la Sorbonne 
Nouvelle-Paris 3, 2010. 
Roberts, Peter Alan and Tulku Yeshi. The Basket’s Display: Kāraṇḍavyūha, 84000, 
2013. (PDF version, translated.)
Roveda, Vittorio. Images of the Gods: Khmer Mythology in Cambodia, Thailand and 
Laos. Bangkok: River Books, 2006. 
——— . Khmer Mythology. Bangkok: River Books, 1997.  
Roy, Pratap Chandra. The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa: Translated 
into English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Texts, 3 vol. Calcutta: Oriental 
Publishing Co., 1974.
Rungrot Phiromanukun. “Bai sema rioeng sibijataka: rongroy buddhasasana 
mahayana nai phak dawan ook chiang nioeo don pan” [A Sema of the Sibi-
jātaka: Traces of Mahāyāna Buddhism in the Upper Northeast Region]. Muang 
Boran 28, no. 3, 2002: pp. 102–7. (In Thai.)
——— . “Les bornes rituelles du nord-est de la Thaïlande”. In Dvāravatī: aux sources du 
bouddhisme en Thaïlande. Paris, Réunion des musées nationaux, Musée 
Guimet, 2009, pp. 97–104.
Schweisguth, Paul. Étude sur la littérature siamoise. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1951. 
Siyonn, Sophearith. “Caṃlak rūp tā jūjak’ nau prāsād dhammnand” [Jūjak’s relief at 
Thommanon temple]. In KhmeRenaissance 1, December 2005–6: pp. 102–3. 
(In Khmer.)
Skilling, Peter. “Jātaka and Paññāsa-jātaka in South-East Asia”. Journal of the Pāli Text 
Society 28, 2006: pp. 113–73.  
Speyer, J. S. Jātakamālā or Garland of Birth-Stories. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 
1895.  
Stadtner, Donald M. Ancient Pagan: Buddhist Plain of Merit. Bangkok: River Books, 
2005.     
Than Tun. “History of Buddhism in Burma A.D. 1000–1300”. Journal of the Burma 
Research Society 61, no. 1–2, 1978: pp. 1–266.
Vincent, Brice. Saṃrit: Étude de la Métallurgie du Bronze dans le Cambodge angkorien 
(fin du xie–début du xiiie siècle), 2 vol. PhD dissertation, Paris: Université 
Sorbonne Nouvelle-Paris 3, 2012. 
Weiner, Sheila L. “Notes on Buddhist Art”. Journal of the American Oriental Society 
18, 1897: pp. 196–201. 
Willemen, Charles. Buddhacarita: In Praise of Buddha’s Acts. Berkeley: Numata 
Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, 2009. (Translated.) 
Woodward, Hiram W., Jr. The Art and Architecture of Thailand. Leiden & Boston: 
Brill, 2005. 
——— . “Dvaravati, Si Thep, and Wendan”. Bulletin of the Indo-Pacific Prehistory 
Association 30, 2010: pp. 87–97.  
——— . “Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia in the Light of Recent Scholarship”. 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 35, no. 2, June 2004: pp. 329–54. 
——— . “Some Buddha Images and the Cultural Developments of the Late Angkorian 
Period”. Artibus Asiae 42, 1980: pp. 155–74. 
——— . “Tantric Buddhism in Angkor Thom”. Ars Orientalis 12, 1981: pp. 57–67. 
Wu Ming-Kuo. The Jataka Tales of the Mago Caves: China in Anthropological 
Perspective. PhD dissertation, Washington: Washington State University, 2008.

--- PAGE 174 ---
145
Chapter 4
THE BUDDHA SCULPTURES 
OF THAM PHRA (BUDDHA 
CAVE): IMPLICATIONS FOR 
UNDERSTANDING THE COMPLEX 
RELIGIOUS ATMOSPHERE 
OF WESTERN THAILAND 
DURING THE EARLY SECOND 
MILLENNIUM CE
Samerchai Poolsuwan
INTRODUCTION
Situated about 30 metres above ground level on the eastern slope of a low 
mountain range – lying approximately on the northwest–southeast axis in 
Don-sai sub-district, Pak-tho district, Ratchaburi province, western 
Thailand (N: 13.367; E: 99.800) – is Tham Phra (Buddha Cave), a sacred 
landmark after which the mountain is also named (Map 4.1, p. 168). Now 
easily reached by car, the cave is located only a few kilometres down a side 
road from the main Phetchakasem highway. Enshrined in a wooden 
pavilion situated in the cave’s hall are Buddha sculptures of various sizes 
and ages. For generations, they have been much venerated, and thus 
watched over, by local people in the area. Identified ethnically as “Khmer-
Lao” (a mixture of Khmer and Lao), these locals speak a Lao dialect into 
which a considerable number of Khmer loanwords have been 
incorporated. The ancestors of the group were prisoners of war, forced to 
move from Cambodia to inhabit the Ratchaburi area during the 
Thonburi period (second half of the 18th century).1 The Tham Phra 
shrine would have already been in existence at the time of the arrival of 
these newcomers, thus leaving its history unknown to them. 
The shrine comprises a group of old wooden sculptures, currently 14 
in number, which is a focus of this study, together with several original

--- PAGE 175 ---
146
Samerchai Poolsuwan
4.1

--- PAGE 176 ---
147
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
sandstone sculptures of the seated Buddha dating from the Ayutthaya 
period (c. 15th to 17th centuries). Other Buddha images made of brass 
and wood were added to this cave-shrine at much later times. Located in 
front of the wooden pavilion is a seated sculpture of the bejewelled 
Buddha made in situ of brick and stucco. Although having been much 
renovated in later times, the image still maintains some of its original 
stucco motifs, particularly on the back of the Buddha’s crown and on his 
richly decorated pedestal, which are definitely of the 17th-century 
Ayutthaya style (Fig. 4.1). They provide solid proof for the cave’s function 
as a Buddhist shrine at least since that time.
Although of different sizes and styles, the majority of Tham Phra’s 
wooden sculptures of focus here form a coherent group that share some 
common characteristics: a particular style of lotus pedestal, the unique 
facial characteristics of several images, and the flat unfinished back side – 
implying that they were intended to be viewed mainly from the front. The 
shared characteristics suggest that most, if not all, of the images were 
contemporaneous and probably carved by the same group of sculptors for 
enshrinement with their backs set against a blind wall of the cave. A 
similar degree of weathering observed on the lower part of the sculptures 
suggests their previous placement in a damp place, probably on the cave’s 
earthen or brick floor, for a considerable period of time. Each of these 
images, ranging from slightly less than half to about twice life-size, was 
carved of a single block of teak wood, a material readily available in the 
vicinity of the site. Accumulation in a single place of a considerable 
number of sizeable Buddha sculptures, made of locally available material 
and sharing some outstanding common characteristics, favours 
interpretation of the images’ production by a single local workshop for the 
Tham Phra shrine. 
The wooden sculptures can be classified stylistically in four groups: 
Group I: A set of four sculptures of the bejewelled 
Māravijaya Buddha showing strong affiliation with the 
original Pāla prototype of northeastern India and its 
derivatives widely discovered in Southeast Asia.  
Group II: A pair of standing figures of the bejewelled 
Buddha, both hands raised in abhayamudrā, in close 
association with the 12th-century Khmer Angkor Wat style.  
Group III: A set of four standing Buddha figures, both 
hands raised in abhayamudrā, with their style probably 
inspired by both Khmer and Pagan arts.  
Group IV: A set of four seated figures of the Māravijaya 
Buddha, showing mixed Khmer and Pagan characteristics. 
Fig. 4.1	 Original stucco decoration 
of the 17th-century style on 
the bejewelled Buddha 
sculpture in Tham Phra. 
Photograph by author.

--- PAGE 177 ---
148
Samerchai Poolsuwan
Being puzzled by the unconventional combination of their styles – related 
to various ancient Buddhist arts during the late first and early second 
millennia – one might question the authenticity of these enigmatic 
images. The exact history of the wooden sculptures, now dominating 
Tham Phra’s shrine as its central objects of worship, is practically 
unknown. The shrine itself is an ancient one, with its existence already 
proven to at least since the 17th century. In later history, the wooden 
sculptures of Tham Phra were mentioned in Samut Rātchaburī (a book 
describing Ratchaburi), published in 1925,2 as being of ancient age; they 
had been much venerated, so kept undisturbed, by local people. The 
document certainly confirms that Tham Phra’s wooden images were not 
modern forgeries and had been enshrined there since long before the 20th 
century. 
Whether the images might be a product of a later period, that is, long 
after the early centuries of the second millennium but certainly pre-dating 
the 1900s, is another matter of concern. One can reasonably doubt the 
possibility of anyone in old Siam, before advances in the modern 
disciplines of archaeology and art history, having simultaneous access to 
the much older sculptural prototypes of various schools of Buddhist art in 
order to faithfully reproduce or combine them in a fashion such that is 
found among the Tham Phra wooden images. Included in the cave-shrine 
are also a number of traditional Ayutthaya-period Buddha sculptures of 
styles truly distant from the set of wooden sculptures of concern. 
Comprising several sandstone sculptures, one of a colossal size, and the in 
situ constructed brick-and-stucco bejewelled image already mentioned, 
they confirm that the Ayutthaya sculptors of Tham Phra adopted 
conventional styles of their period, from the 15th to 17th centuries, for 
creation of the sacred sculpture of the group; it is thus unlikely that they 
were also responsible for creation of the wooden images in question.
On these logical bases, Tham Phra’s wooden sculptures could be 
genuinely old, with their date and styles broadly contemporaneous. 
Provided in this chapter is a detailed stylistic analysis of this significant 
group of wooden images. The complex cultural and religious milieus of 
Western Thailand in which they were created, probably during the third 
quarter of the 12th century, are also discussed.  
THAM PHRA BUDDHA SCULPTURES
Siam’s Fine Arts Department announced its first list of the country’s 
registered archaeological sites, categorised by province, in 1935. 
Representing Ratchaburi in the list3 – along with the other three 
significant sites of the province: Wat Mahāthāt,4 Tham Ruesi (Hermit 
Cave)5 and Phong Tuek6 – was Tham Phra. According to local

--- PAGE 178 ---
149
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
informants, Luang Wichitwāthakān, the first director general of the 
department, visited the site, probably shortly after his appointment in 
1934. Guided to the cave-shrine by local people, he was astonished by the 
wooden Buddha sculptures, which he believed to be of great antiquity and 
archaeological significance. However, neither descriptive details nor 
photographs of the site and its Buddha images were found in the 
department’s records from that time. 
A later photograph of the Tham Phra shrine, taken some time during 
the mid 20th century (Fig. 4.2), shows several Buddha images assembled 
together in a tiered-roof pavilion made of wood, with only some of the 
currently known wooden sculptures of our focus shown. The other 
wooden sculptures of the group, as well as several Ayutthaya-style 
sandstone sculptures, could have been placed elsewhere in the cave at that 
time. The bejewelled Buddha sculpture of the late Ayutthaya style seen on 
the pavilion’s front still maintained much of its original form and 
decoration, it would be considerably altered in subsequent renovations. 
According to local informants, the wooden pavilion was constructed for 
the cave’s shrine during the 1950s by Luangpho Son, a senior monk said 
to come from Cambodia. This monk also established a monastery, now 
named Wat Tham Phra Manimongkhon, to be associated with the cave; 
Fig. 4.2	 The mid 20th century 
photograph of the Tham 
Phra shrine, showing 
Buddha images assembled 
in a wooden pavilion 
(duplicated from the 
miniature photo made as an 
amulet by the Tham Phra 
monastery during the 1950s, 
property of the author).
4.2

--- PAGE 179 ---
150
Samerchai Poolsuwan
this was shortly before his renovation of the cave’s shrine and restoration 
of its damaged Buddha sculptures, including the wooden ones. Before 
Luangpho Son’s time, Tham Phra was an isolated place in the jungle. In 
one instance at the site, a nun who was in retreat there for meditation was 
killed by a tiger. The difficult access to the site during the rainy season was 
emphasised in Samut Rātchaburī.   
Shown in the photograph, taken soon after the completion of the 
wooden pavilion, are six of the seated images and the same number of the 
standing ones of the wooden group, together with some Ayutthaya-period 
sandstone sculptures of the Buddha. The standing image to the far left of 
the composition has disappeared and one of a pair of the bejewelled 
Buddha sculptures in standing pose, now placed in the pavilion, is not 
shown. This means Tham Phra’s wooden images in standing posture 
numbered at least seven during the mid 20th century. All the old 
sculptures of the Tham Phra shrine have been, during past decades, 
repaired and repeatedly coated with synthetic gold paint, thus creating the 
modern-looking appearance of the group now.
Group I Sculptures
Tham Phra’s Group I includes sculptures of varying sizes: a colossal one 
that is 1.85 metres high (Fig. 4.3; Sculpture 1.1); two medium-sized 
sculptures approximately 1 metre in height (Figs. 4.4 & 4.5; Sculptures 1.2 
& 1.3); and the smallest one with a height of about 80 centimeters (Fig. 
4.6; Sculpture 1.4). They show stylistic similarities with the Pāla prototype 
from Northeastern India and the Bengal area, dating from the 8th to 12th 
centuries, and also with its derivatives found in Upper Burma at Pagan, 
Lower Burma and Haripunjaya in Northern Thailand, all broadly dating 
from the early second millennium.
The Buddha of this group has angled eyebrows that join over a sharp 
small nose, the tip of which is slightly pointing down. The eyes, mildly 
slanted and protruding, are half-closed and downcast. The Buddha has an 
oval-shaped face, broad forehead, prominent cheekbones, projecting chin 
and elongated earlobes. The mouth, showing a gentle smile, has a much 
fuller lower lip than upper lip. These characteristics yield a facial 
appearance of the Buddha basically similar to the early Pagan type typical 
of the late 11th and early 12th centuries. Comparable early Pagan 
examples can be seen among stone sculptures of the Buddha in high relief 
from the Patho-hta-mya, Ananda, Myinkaba Kubyauk-gyi and Nagayon 
temples, in Pagan.7 A major difference between the Tham Phra and Pagan 
examples concerns the more V-shaped mouth observed in the Pagan 
sculptures.
The Buddha is seated in a typical vajrāsana pose on a tall pedestal 
shaped as a blooming lotus flower. The lotus petals point both upwards 
Fig. 4.3	 Sculpture 1.1 (centre of back 
row), a bejewelled 
Māravijaya Buddha of the 
Pāla-related type. 
Photograph by author.

--- PAGE 180 ---
151
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
4.3

--- PAGE 181 ---
152
Samerchai Poolsuwan
and downwards and are alternately arranged in two laminated rows. 
Contained in each lotus petal is an incised line running parallel to the 
external outline; its top part is curved on both sides to form a V-shape in 
between them. A row of stamens, protruding from the row of upward 
pointing lotus petals, adorns the pedestal’s upper rim. The recessed waist 
of each pedestal in the group is either left plain (Sculpture 1.4) or 
decorated (Sculptures 1.1–1.3). In the latter case, it comprises a single 
prominent V-shaped ring (Sculptures 1.1 & 1.2) or a series of horizontal 
bands symmetrically arranged to highlight the central ring (Sculpture 1.3). 
This type of pedestal, with the exception of its waist decoration, conforms 
to the typical style widely adopted in the Buddhist arts of South and 
Southeast Asia during the late first and early second millennia. Decorating 
the recessed waist of a lotus pedestal with a protruding ring is a 
characteristic also observed in some Khmer bronzes of the late 12th and 
early 13th centuries,8 and in the Haripunjaya votive tablets probably dating 
from the early 13th century.9 Sculpture 1.1’s pedestal shows another 
modification of the style. Its upper part contains three laminated rows of 
upward pointing lotus petals; there is no incised line running parallel to the 
external outline of each petal (Fig. 4.7). The lower part of Sculpture 1.4’s 
pedestal has been partially cut off, probably due to wood decay. 
4.5
4.4
Fig. 4.4	 Sculpture 1.2, a bejewelled 
Māravijaya Buddha of the 
Pāla-related type. 
Photograph by author.
Fig. 4.5	 Sculpture 1.3, a bejewelled 
Māravijaya Buddha of the 
Pāla-related type. 
Photograph by author.

--- PAGE 182 ---
153
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
4.6
Fig. 4.6	 Sculpture 1.4, a bejewelled 
Māravijaya Buddha of the 
Pāla-related type. 
Photograph by author.
Fig. 4.7	 Lotus pedestal of Sculpture 
1.1. Photograph by author.
4.7

--- PAGE 183 ---
154
Samerchai Poolsuwan
4.8

--- PAGE 184 ---
155
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
The Buddha wears a pointed crown of the Indian-Pāla or Burmese-
Pagan type, broadly dating from the late first to early second millennia. 
His diamond rosette earrings also conform to the mentioned prototypes. 
The Buddha’s crown comprises a diadem supporting five wide decorative 
triangles that are symmetrically arranged, three in front and two behind. 
The diadem, with a diamond rosette at its centre, is richly decorated with 
repeated motifs of the type frequently seen on Khmer bronze sculpture of 
the bejewelled Buddha from the 12th and 13th centuries.10 Bordering the 
richly decorated triangular parts of the Buddha’s crown is a row of 
repeated bud-like motifs, which can find its exact parallel, in the same 
decorative context, on the early 12th-century Pagan stone sculpture of the 
bejewelled Māravijaya Buddha now at the Ananda Temple (Fig. 4.8). Tied 
to the Buddha’s crown at its back are ribbon knots, the upper parts of 
which protrude symmetrically behind the Buddha’s temples, while the 
lower parts fall naturally over the shoulders. These ribbon knots are not 
fully shown, however, on Sculpture 1.4. The Buddhas of Sculptures 1.2 
and 1.4 wear necklaces with central bands decorated with repeated motifs 
of the same type as that found on the Buddha’s diadem. Dangling from 
the lower rim of the necklaces is a row of curved conical pendants, which 
are comparable to both the early 12th-century Khmer and the 
contemporary Pagan prototypes. Cruder decoration is observed on the 
Buddhas’ necklaces of Sculptures 1.1 and 1.3. 
Fig. 4.8	 Bejewelled Māravijaya 
Buddha of the Pāla-related 
type, Ananda-gu-hpaya-gyi 
temple, Pagan. Photograph 
by author.
Fig. 4.9	 Bejewelled Māravijaya 
Buddha of the Pāla-related 
type, Shwezayan Pagoda 
Museum, Thaton. 
Photograph courtesy  
Donald M. Stadtner.
4.9

--- PAGE 185 ---
156
Samerchai Poolsuwan
Unlike the Pāla and Pagan examples, in which a crowned Buddha in 
the māravijaya pose usually wears a monastic garment covering the left 
shoulder but leaving the right shoulder bare, Tham Phra’s crowned 
Buddha wears a monastic garment that completely covers both shoulders. 
Lying on the plinth between the Buddha’s crossed legs are the overlapping 
hems of his garments, which create a V-shaped form. The upper edge of 
the Buddha’s lower garment, usually suggested by the depression outlined 
around the Buddha’s waist below a slightly bulging lower abdomen in the 
Pāla and Pagan prototypes, is, in the Tham Phra examples, clearly raised 
without the natural feature of the Buddha’s bulging abdomen. The 
Buddha’s stiffer body and the draped form of his monastic garment, as 
described, suggest the similarity of the Tham Phra sculptures to other 
groups of the Māravijaya Buddha wearing a pointed crown of the Pāla 
type found in Haripunjaya, northern Thailand,11 and the Mon country, 
Lower Burma (Fig. 4.9). The Pāla type has been tentatively dated from the 
early centuries of the second millennium. 
Group II Sculptures
Tham Phra’s Group II comprises two crowned images in standing 
posture, with both hands raised in abhayamudrā (Figs. 4.10 & 4.11; 
Sculptures 2.1 & 2.2). Both images are of approximately the same size, 
about 1.6 metres in height including the pedestal. They show 
characteristics clearly inherited from the Khmer Angkor Wat style, during 
the first half of the 12th century. The Buddha wears a crown with a broad 
diadem splaying around its tall conical top part, protecting the Buddha’s 
uṣṇīṣa. The upper part of the diadem is decorated with tidily arranged 
motifs, each a slender vertical column with pointed tip. A band 
constituting the lower part of the diadem is decorated with three large 
medallions, one at the centre and the other two symmetrically located 
above the Buddha’s temples.12 The Buddha wears bud-like earrings and a 
necklace with pendants (Sculpture 2.1), or pendant-like motifs (Sculpture 
2.2), dangling from its lower rim. However, neither armlets nor bracelets, 
commonly seen in Khmer sculptures of the bejewelled Buddha, are worn 
by the Buddhas of the group. 
Sculptures 2.1 and 2.2 have different facial characteristics. In 
conformity with the 12th-century Khmer style, the Buddha of Sculpture 
2.1 has angled eyebrows that join over the small sharp nose, and wide-
open almond-shaped eyes, each with an incised line above and below. 
Sculpture 2.2’s facial characteristics are less conventional according to the 
typical Khmer style: the Buddha has more arched eyebrows with half-
closed eyes. Cruder decoration is also observed on the diadem and 
necklace of Sculpture 2.2 in comparison with Sculpture 2.1. Some 
common characteristics found to be shared by Group I and Group II 
Fig. 4.10	 Sculpture 2.1, a bejewelled 
standing Buddha of the 
Khmer-related type. 
Photograph by author.

--- PAGE 186 ---
157
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
4.10

--- PAGE 187 ---
158
Samerchai Poolsuwan
4.11

--- PAGE 188 ---
159
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
sculptures – the Buddha’s gently smiling face, prominent cheekbones, 
full lower lip and pointed chin – suggest that both groups could be 
products of the same workshop, albeit intended to represent different 
artistic styles. 
The Buddhas of Sculptures 2.1 and 2.2 wear  monastic robes in the 
covering mode. Adorning the belt and the central pleat of the lower 
garment are repeated motifs serially connected to form a row. The lower 
hems of the outer and inner garments are stylised to be curvilinear with 
the point of the lower hem located between the Buddha’s legs. All these 
characteristics conform to the classic Khmer pattern of the 12th and 13th 
centuries. They are comparable to several Khmer bronzes – representing 
the standing Buddha, probably produced in the Lopburi area, an  
outpost of the Khmer empire – dating from the first half of the 12th 
century.13 The Buddhas’ hands, with elongated fingers of equal length, 
were separately carved and then attached to Sculptures 2.1 and 2.2.  
This construction is more compatible with the late Ayutthaya style than 
the older Khmer style, and they could be a later replacement for the 
originals that were probably lost or damaged. The replacement could 
have taken place during the 17th century, when the shrine was 
refurbished and one seated bejewelled Buddha, already described, was 
sculpted – in situ for the shrine, out of brick and stucco – in conformity 
with the style of the period.
Fig. 4.11	 Sculpture 2.2, a bejewelled 
standing Buddha of the 
Khmer-related type. 
Photograph by author.
Fig. 4.12	 Lotus pedestal of Sculpture 
2.2. Photograph by author.
4.12

--- PAGE 189 ---
160
Samerchai Poolsuwan
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16

--- PAGE 190 ---
161
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
The lotus pedestals of Sculptures 2.1 and 2.2 are basically of the same 
type as those of Group I. The recessed waist of each comprises a 
prominent central V-shaped ring, and a series of lesser bands 
symmetrically and horizontally arranged to highlight the ring (Fig. 4.12). 
The pointed lotus petals observed on the pedestals, with each containing 
an incised line running parallel to its external outline, is of the type only 
rarely encountered in the realm of Khmer art during the Angkor period. 
More frequently found in the Khmer counterpart is a different type in 
which a lotus petal is outlined into trefoil shape. It is likely that 
Sculptures 2.1 and 2.2 were not genuine products of an imperial Khmer 
workshop, but rather were less strict imitations done by local craftsmen 
in Western Thailand. 
Group III Sculptures
Tham Phra’s Group III constitutes four standing sculptures of the 
Buddha with both hands performing abhayamudrā (Figs. 4.13–4.16; 
Sculptures 3.1–3.4). The Buddha’s hands, with fingers of natural length, 
were crudely executed and could possibly be a later replacement made 
during the 1950s restoration of the shrine. The images are of 
approximately the same size as those of Group II. All share similarities 
with Group II in terms of the type of pedestal (Fig. 4.17) and the Khmer-
style decorations on the Buddha’s belt and the central pleat of his lower 
4.17
Fig. 4.13	 Sculpture 3.1, a standing 
Buddha image with a series 
of concentric rings 
supporting the Buddha’s 
radiance, shaped as a lotus 
bud. Photograph by author.
Fig. 4.14	 Sculpture 3.2, a standing 
Buddha image with a series 
of concentric rings 
supporting the Buddha’s 
radiance, shaped as a lotus 
bud. Photograph by author.
Fig. 4.15	 Sculpture 3.3, a standing 
Buddha image with a series 
of concentric rings 
supporting the Buddha’s 
radiance, of a shape similar 
to the Pagan style. 
Photograph by author.
Fig. 4.16	 Sculpture 3.4, a standing 
Buddha image with a series 
of concentric rings 
supporting the Buddha’s 
radiance, of a shape similar 
to the Pagan style. 
Photograph by author.
Fig. 4.17.	Lotus pedestals of 
Sculptures 3.1 (left) and 3.2 
(right). Photograph by 
author.

--- PAGE 191 ---
162
Samerchai Poolsuwan
garment. Also conforming to the Khmer type are the curvilinear rims of 
the Buddha’s outer and inner garments, with the pointed lower hem 
located between the Buddha’s legs. The group shows facial characteristics 
of the Buddha that are common to the Tham Phra wooden sculptures in 
general: angled eyebrows that join over the sharp small nose, the tip of 
which is slightly pointing down; protruding eyes, half-closed and 
downcast; prominent cheekbones and chin; and smiling face with a much 
fuller lower lip. The Buddha’s hair curls are knob-like and tidily arranged 
in rows that run parallel to the hairline. The latter, bordering the 
forehead, is slightly concave at the middle. No clear sign of the uṣṇīṣa 
protruding from the top of the skull can be observed. Instead, there is a 
series of concentric rings supporting the Buddha’s large radiance, shaped 
4.18

--- PAGE 192 ---
163
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
either as a lotus bud (Sculptures 3.1 & 3.2) or as an asymmetric obtuse 
cone with its flat anterior side slightly projecting forwards (Sculptures 3.3 
& 3.4). The latter type of Buddha’s radiance could have been derived from 
the older Pagan prototype, dating from the mid 11th to the early 12th 
centuries. The relatively large lotus-bud-shaped radiance of the Buddha, 
adopted in some images of the group, could have found its immediate root 
in the old “Mon” Buddhist art, evidenced in both western Thailand and 
Lower Burma. Examples can be seen on a Dvāravatī relief of the leg-
pendant seated Buddha from Tham Ruesi, Ratchaburi, dating from the 
late first millennium (Fig. 4.18), and a relief plaque depicting the Buddha 
in standing pose from the Shwezayan Pagoda, Thaton, broadly dating 
from the early second millennium (Fig. 4.19).14 On the other hand, the 
presence of concentric rings supporting the Buddha’s radiance seems to be 
a local characteristic unique to the Tham Phra Buddha sculptures. 
Probably its closest relative is a tiara or decorative concentric ring(s) 
protecting the Buddha’s uṣṇīṣa and supporting his radiance, which are 
occasionally encountered in Khmer sculptures of the Buddha during the 
late 12th and 13th centuries.15
Group IV Sculptures
Group IV contains four images (Figs. 4.20–4.23; Sculptures 4.1–4.4), 
each approximately one metre high. They represent the Māravijaya 
Buddha seated in vajrāsana on a tall lotus pedestal. Sculptures 4.1–4.3 
4.19
Fig. 4.18	 Buddha’s big radiance 
shaped as a lotus bud, 
Dvāravatī relief sculpture of 
the Buddha in leg-pendant 
seated pose, Tham Ruesi, 
Ratchaburi. Photograph by 
author.
Fig. 4.19	 Buddha’s big radiance 
shaped as a lotus bud, Mon 
relief sculpture of the 
Buddha in standing pose, 
Shwezayan Pagoda 
Museum, Thaton, possibly 
early second millennium. 
Photograph courtesy 
Donald M. Stadtner.

--- PAGE 193 ---
164
Samerchai Poolsuwan
share common facial characteristics with the majority of the Tham Phra 
wooden images. Sculpture 4.3 lacks the decorative rings on the pedestal’s 
waist. The lotus petals and stamens are not shown on the pedestal of 
Sculpture 4.2. The Buddhas of Sculptures 4.3 and 4.4 wear earrings of the 
Khmer type. Located above the Buddha’s shaved head, adorned with hair 
curls, is a series of concentric rings or bands supporting his large radiance, 
shaped either as a lotus bud (evident in Sculpture 4.1 and probably the 
damaged Sculpture 4.4) or a slightly obtuse cone with its tip inclining 
forwards (Sculptures 4.2 & 4.3). The sculptures of this group could be 
4.20
4.21
Fig. 4.20	 Sculpture 4.1, a Māravijaya 
Buddha. Photograph by 
author.
Fig. 4.21	 Sculpture 4.2, a Māravijaya 
Buddha. Photograph by 
author.

--- PAGE 194 ---
165
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
recognised as early examples of the Sihing type, where the Māravijaya 
Buddha is seated in vajrāsana. This type became prevalent in various 
parts of Thailand from the 14th or 15th centuries.  
The monastic robe worn on the Buddha’s stiff body leaves the right 
shoulder bare. The upper edge of the lower garment is clearly shown 
around the waist. The overlapping hems of the garments protrude in the 
V-shaped form between the crossed legs. There is no sign of fabric worn 
on the Buddha’s left shoulder, neither in the form of the saṃghāṭī, 
normally encountered in the Khmer prototypes, nor of the outer 
4.22
4.23
Fig. 4.22	 Sculpture 4.3, a Māravijaya 
Buddha. Photograph by 
author.
Fig. 4.23	 Sculpture 4.4, a Māravijaya 
Buddha. Photograph by 
author.

--- PAGE 195 ---
166
Samerchai Poolsuwan
garment’s hem, normally seen in the Pāla prototypes. This type of drapery, 
without a piece of fabric on the left shoulder of the Buddha, is one of the 
ancient characteristics observed in various schools of Buddhist art in 
Southeast Asia during the first and early second millennia: Dvāravatī in 
Central and Northeastern Thailand, Mon in Lower Burma, Pyu in Upper 
Burma, and Haripunjaya in Northern Thailand.    
Sculpture 4.4 shows some unusual characteristics not shared with 
others of the same group, which suggests an intrusive status and probably 
a slightly later date. The Buddha’s nose and mouth are not as well shaped 
as those of the other sculptures in the group. He wears the saṃghāṭī on 
his left shoulder. The lotus pedestal’s (Fig. 4.23) upper and lower parts are 
complete mirror images of each other; the decorative ring(s) between them 
and the row of stamens adorning the pedestal’s upper rim are absent. The 
lotus petals are more elongated without incised-line decorations. Similar 
elongated lotus petals can be seen adorning the pedestal of some Khmer 
Buddha sculptures of the 12th and 13th centuries.16 The Buddha’s uṣṇīṣa 
is subtly suggested by a row of hair curls located immediately below a 
series of concentric rings that support the Buddha’s large radiance.
BROADER GEOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL SETTINGS
Along the middle terrace zone and old alluvial fan bordering the lower 
central plain of Thailand17 on its western fringe, early human settlements 
of the urban type were located, dating from the second half of the first 
millennium. From north to south, the main archaeological sites 
representing these comprise U-Thong, Kamphaeng Saen,18 Phong Tuek,19 
Nakhon Pathom and Khu Bua (see Map 4.1). They normally shared the 
following four characteristics: a typical town plan with earthen works and 
moat that were not strictly geometric in pattern; a likely common faith in 
Buddhism which, based on evidence of Pāli usage, could have been 
somehow related to “old Theravāda” (or “Hinayāna”) belief(s);20 the 
adoption of old Mon language in inscriptions; and the introduction of 
styles and iconographies of the Buddhist art from various sources in South 
Asia (North and South India, and probably Sri Lanka), only to be 
combined and perceived in the local context of aesthetics and meaning. 
All these characteristics coincided well under the broad general term of 
“Dvāravatī”,21 named for an early Indianised culture of Southeast Asia 
prevailing on the elevated border of Central and parts of Northeastern 
Thailand during the first millennium .22
Urban settlement along the elevated border of Central Thailand in the 
first millennium was geographically strategic in that it avoided the marshy 
area of the lower central plain that was prone to seasonal flooding during 
the marine transgressions of the period. 23 It also provided easy access for

--- PAGE 196 ---
167
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
the communities in the area to maritime contact with the outside world. 
The contacts allowed the exchange of goods and the spread of Indic 
cultures and religions into the area, a phenomenon found to be prevalent 
along the entire coastline of mainland Southeast Asia during the first 
millennium.24 Interconnection among these early urban settlements in the 
western zone of Central Thailand was facilitated by their close geographic 
proximity and inland routes frequently running along the elevated border 
of the lower central plain. Ancient passes across the Tenassarim Range, to 
the west of the area, also allowed these Dvāravatī-phase communities to 
access their contemporaneous counterparts in the so-called “Mon land” of 
Lower Burma. 
These “western-zone” Dvāravatī communities would have given rise, 
either directly or indirectly, to several polities that subsequently emerged 
in the area during the early second millennium, that is Suphanburi, 
Śambūkapaṭṭana,25 Ratchaburi and Phetchaburi. As suggested by 
epigraphic and archaeological records these second-phase urban 
communities experienced the political and cultural expansion of the 
Khmer empire, heavily dominated by the religious faiths of Hinduism and 
Mahāyāna Buddhism, and centred at Angkor from the early 9th to early 
14th centuries. Found in Lopburi, to the northeast of the area, is an 
inscription dated 1022 that records an edict of Sūryavarman I, the king of 
Angkor at that time, ordering ascetics and Mahāyāna Sthavira monks 
(supposed to live in Lopburi) to offer the meritorious fruit of their 
meditation (tapas) to him.26 This probably corresponded with the early 
phase of Khmer domination over the northern part of Central Thailand, 
where Lopburi is located.27 The Khmer expansion extended to cover the 
whole area of Central Thailand during the last quarter of the 12th 
century. 
Dated 1191, the Preah Khan inscription of King Jayavarman VII 
provides a list of 23 towns, probably integrated into the imperial Khmer 
network, in which the king had sent images named Jayabuddhamahānātha 
for enshrinement; a special ceremony was held annually at Angkor for the 
assemblage of these sacred images, temporarily transported to the capital 
for the event.28 Among these towns, six have been identified for their 
locations in the northern and western zones of Central Thailand: 
Lavodayapura (Lopburi), Svarṇapura (Suphanburi),29 Śambūkapaṭṭana, 
Jayarājapurī (Ratchaburi), Srī Jayasiṃhapurī (Muang Sing in 
Kanchanaburi), and Srī Jayavajrapurī (Phetchaburi). Khmer-style 
monuments dating from Jayavarman VII’s reign are evident in some of 
these towns – that is Phra Prang Sam Yot in Lopburi, Prasat Muang Sing 
on the Khwae Noi River in Kanchanaburi province, Wat Kampaeng Lang 
in Phetchaburi province, and the old foundation and the Buddha arcade 
on top of the enclosing laterite wall of Wat Mahāthāt Ratchaburi. Also,

--- PAGE 197 ---
168
Samerchai Poolsuwan
an undated inscription from Phimeanakas in Angkor provides 
information that one of Jayavarman VII’s sons was sent to rule 
Lavodayapura (Lopburi).30 Closer geographically to the Khmer’s centre of 
power in lowland Cambodia, the eastern part of Central Thailand, where 
Prachinburi is located, would have long been integrated into the Khmer 
domain before Jayavarman VII’s reign, as confirmed by archaeological 
evidence related to Khmer influence found in situ in the area, dating from 
the late first millennium onwards.31 Combining these pieces of evidence 
brings about a more complete picture of the Khmer dominion in Central 
Thailand for its gradual expansion from the eastern part of the area to 
cover the northern part, at least since the first half of the 11th century, and 
then finally to the western part during the last quarter of the following 
century. 
Remote control by Khmer power from the capital at Angkor over parts 
of Central Thailand would have demanded substantial military and 
diplomatic efforts on the part of the Khmer kings; it, thus, would have 
been far from consistent and stable. According to Chinese sources, there 
was a diplomatic mission sent from Lopburi to China in 1155, separate 
from a mission from Angkor at the same time.32 Since sending an envoy to 
4.1
Map 4.1	The location of Tham Phra in 
relation to ancient 
communities around the 
Gulf of Thailand during the 
late first and early second 
millennia. (Based on maps 
and information provided in 
Trongjai Hutangura, 
“Reconsidering the 
Palaeo-shoreline in the 
Lower Central Plain of 
Thailand” and https://maps.
google.com). Map courtesy 
Issarachai Buranaaj.

--- PAGE 198 ---
169
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
the China court conventionally implied independence of the state, this 
could suggest a period of Lopburi’s liberation, albeit brief, after the city 
had been subordinate to Angkor for most of the preceding century and a 
half. It probably corresponded with weakness of Angkor, during the 
period from Sūryavarman II’s death in 1150 to the beginning of 
Jayavarman VII’s reign in 1181, when the kingdom experienced 
insurgencies and several wars with Champa.33 Khmer sovereignty was 
resumed at Lopburi during the last quarter of the 12th century, following 
consolidation of the Khmer empire by Jayavarman VII who sent one of 
his sons to rule there.34 
Also recorded in Chinese sources is a brief series of diplomatic 
missions sent to the Sung court during the years 1200–1205 from the state 
named Chen-li-fu,35 most likely located near a seaport on the western 
fringe of Central Thailand. Its centre could have been either Ratchaburi 
or Nakhon Chaisi, or even Suphanburi.36 The polities on the western 
fringe of Central Thailand, thus, would have enjoyed a certain degree of 
autonomy even during the peak of Jayavarman VII’s domination. They 
probably had accumulated wealth and power, to the extent that they were 
able to challenge Angkor by controlling trade routes, both overseas up the 
Mae Klong and Tha Chin rivers, to more inland principalities and inland 
across the Tenassarim Range to areas around the Gulf of Martaban.37 
Abundant Chinese ceramics, dating from the Sung and Yuan dynasties, 
recently discovered sunk in the bed of the Mae Klong River, in Ratchaburi 
province, certainly attest to involvement of this riverine route in a network 
of maritime trade, at least with China, during the early centuries of the 
second millennium.38 
Also supported by archaeological evidence is the east–west connection 
between urban communities in the western part of Central Thailand and 
their contemporaneous counterparts in areas around the Gulf of 
Martaban in Lower Burma during the first and early second millennia. 
The main route providing this interconnection could have been the 
“Three Pagodas Pass”, up the Mae Klong and then the Khwae Noi rivers 
from Ratchaburi. Archaeological discoveries during recent years in the 
areas of Lower Burma around the Gulf of Martaban have yielded much 
evidence of urban settlements dating from the first millennium.39 Major 
sites include, for example, Kyaikkatha, Winka, Zothoke and Thaton, all 
located along the eastern coast of the Gulf. Evidence found includes brick 
and laterite religious structures (monasteries and stūpa), artefacts, 
inscriptions and walled cities. A number of characteristics and types of 
artefacts have been found to have been shared between urban 
communities in Lower Burma and those in Central and Northeastern 
Thailand, suggesting their cultural intercourse during the first 
millennium. These include usage of old Mon language in inscriptions, a

--- PAGE 199 ---
170
Samerchai Poolsuwan
particular type of coin not found among Pyu sites in Upper Burma,40 
distribution of certain types of Buddhist votive tablets,41 and probably the 
tradition of erecting carved sīmā.42 
Parallel to the Khmer expansion in Central Thailand during the early 
centuries of the second millennium, contemporaneous Lower Burma, 
inhabited by the ethnically Mon people, also experienced the extension of 
political power of the first Burmese Kingdom, centred at Pagan in the 
Central Dry Zone. Easy communication between Pagan and the Mon 
communities of Lower Burma could be facilitated along the Irrawaddy 
River. 
According to some later chronicles, King Anawratha of Pagan  
(c. 1044–1078) conquered the Mon territory of Lower Burma, with its 
capital located at Thaton, in the mid 11th century.43 The presence of 
Anawratha’s authority in Lower Burma is archaeologically confirmed by 
Buddhist votive tablets, with his signed inscription on their back, found at 
numerous sites in the area.44 Left at Mergui in Lower Burma is an 
inscription of Anawratha’s son, Sawlu, who reigned at Pagan for a short 
period after his father.45 His successor, Kyanzittha, also left two Mon 
inscriptions in Thaton and his votive tablets at numerous places in Lower 
Burma.46 Listed in the Dhammayazika inscription of 1196–1198 are vassal 
states that came under Pagan during Narapatisithu’s reign, some located as 
far south as Tavoy and Thandok (near Mergui) in Lower Burma and Ligor 
(Nakhon Si Thammarat) in Southern Thailand.47
Although, evidence of Pagan’s dominance over Lower Burma is ample 
as stated above, its controlling power over the area would have been far 
from consistent. Proof of this is the attack of Pagan by a rebel troop led by 
the Pegu ruler in the late 11th century, resulting in the death of Sawlu.48  
The rebel troop was soon driven back to Lower Burma by Sawlu’s 
successor, Kyanzittha. Again, several political upheavals occurred in Lower 
Burma during the mid 12th century, associated with a few acts of rebellion 
and a Sinhalese raid that captured two Gulf of Martaban seaports, Bassein 
and Martaban, and one inland site, Ukkama, thought to be located about 
30 kilometres north of Yangon.49
In terms of religious faith, Western Thailand and its interconnecting 
areas west and northwest of the Tenassarim Range in Central and Lower 
Burma would have been, at least since the middle of the first millennium, 
a repository of beliefs in Pāli-based Buddhism.50 Collectively and 
deliberately perceived here as belonging to “old Theravāda”, they shared in 
common Pāli usage and probably the majority of their textual references. 
The term is to be distinguished from the Theravāda-Mahāvihāra 
orthodoxy reformed in Sri Lanka during the third quarter of the 12th 
century and prevailing in Southeast Asia from the 14th century onwards.51 
The continuum of old Theravāda in Western Thailand and its Burma

--- PAGE 200 ---
171
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
counterparts pre-existed expansion of Khmer power in the former area, 
most thoroughly during Jayavarman VII’s reign in the late 12th and early 
13th centuries, and conquest of Pagan over the latter area during the mid 
11th century. The Khmer and Pagan expansions, however, would have 
affected the religious atmospheres of their corresponding areas 
differentially. 
Implantation of the Khmer Vajrayāna Buddhism in an area where old 
Theravāda had long been firmly established and where earlier Khmer 
influence was minimal, that is the western zone compared with the other 
parts of Central Thailand, would have been more or less by force under 
Jayavarman VII. The diffusion of this particular form of Buddhist faith 
and its related artistic style ceased abruptly beyond Jayavarman VII’s 
political sphere, as there has been so far no evidence suggesting its 
presence in Lower Burma, another stronghold of old Theravāda, also 
connected with Western Thailand since long before Jayavarman VII’s 
reign. Since Khmer power waxed and waned in Western Thailand, even 
during the peak of Jayavarman VII’s power, it is probable that old 
Theravāda survived in the area, although its associated art and 
iconography would have been much influenced by that of Jayavarman 
VII’s reign. Another source of Khmer artistic inspiration in the Buddhist 
art of Central Thailand during the 12th century could have come from 
Phimai in Northeastern Thailand, where another form of Khmer 
Vajrayāna Buddhism flourished.52 The surviving “Hinayāna” beliefs 
(perceived here as being included in the array of “old Theravāda”), a 
continuum of the Dvāravatī Buddhist faiths in Central Thailand 
extended well into the period of Khmer domination, between the 11th 
and 13th centuries, has been broadly termed by Hiram Woodward the 
“Ariya sect”, after the name used in the 15th-century Kalyani Inscription 
of King Dhammaceti of Pegu for the pre-Sinhalese Theravāda 
monasticism existing in Burma since long before the mid 11th century.53 
Probably the oldest definite evidence confirming existence of the Ariya 
Buddhism in Central Thailand during the period of concern is an 
important inscription, dated 1168, found in the 1950s at Dong Mae Nang 
Muang, Nakhon Sawan province, on the northern fringe of central 
Thailand.54 This is a site where Dvāravatī tradition was maintained until a 
late period and contact with Haripunjaya is evident.55 On a stone slab, 
using Pāli on one side and Khmer on the other, the inscription essentially 
records an order of mahārājādhirāja (the Great King-of-Kings) named 
Asokamahārājā for the ruler of Dhanyapura to provide donations to the 
holy relics. As suggested by Cœdès and others, this mahārājādhirāja could 
have been the king of Lopburi, at that time enjoying temporary 
independence from Angkor, after the death of Sūryavarman II.56 Either he 
or his predecessor on the throne at Lopburi would have been responsible

--- PAGE 201 ---
172
Samerchai Poolsuwan
for sending a tribute mission to China in 1155. While Khmer influence is 
evident at least in linguistic form in the inscription, the use of Pāli could 
have somehow been affiliated with old Theravāda in the political sphere of 
Lopburi during the mid 12th century. Woodward has identified some 
iconographic characteristics of the Buddhist art found in Central 
Thailand which had come under Khmer influence to be associated with 
his Ariya Buddhism.57 These comprise, for example, Buddha images in the 
earth-touching pose, images with pointed crowns related to the Pāla 
prototype, Buddhas holding a hand in front of the chest, and groups of 
three Buddhas. 
The religious landscape of the areas to the west and northwest of the 
Tenassarim Range, that is Lower and Central Burma, seemed to be far 
less heterogeneous than that already described for Central Thailand, to 
the east of the same mountain range. Archaeological evidence and later 
chronicles suggest that Pāli-based Buddhism, probably belonging to the 
“old Theravāda” array, existed in Lower Burma during the first and 
early second millennia.58 It is also beyond doubt that the Pagan 
kingdom was a stronghold of this Pāli-based Buddhism since its 
inception in the mid 11th century. According to later chronicles, Pagan 
originally received Theravāda Buddhism from the Mons of Lower 
Burma, during the reign of Anawratha in the mid 11th century.59 Soon 
after, in the same century, it established a diplomatic relationship with 
Sri Lanka, through which the introduction of Sinhalese Buddhism into 
the kingdom was expected.60 It is noteworthy that the incident preceded 
the Buddhist reform in Sri Lanka during the third quarter of the 12th 
century, which resulted in hegemony of the strict Mahāvihāra 
orthodoxy on the island. Subsequent contacts between Pagan and Sri 
Lanka were also numerous, until the end of its dynastic period in the 
late 13th century.61
The Buddhist art of Pagan, from the mid 11th to the late 13th 
century, was characterised by stylistic and iconographic affiliations with 
older and contemporaneous Pāla prototypes from Northeastern India 
and the Bengal area, strongly subject to Mahāyāna influence. This is 
partly explicable by close geographic proximity, allowing easy contacts, 
between Upper Burma and Bengal. The other main reason for 
establishment of this relationship could be related to Pagan’s perception 
of the supremacy of Bodhgaya, the place of the Buddha’s enlightenment, 
located in the Pāla realm of Northeastern India. This is attested by the 
generous sponsorship of restorations of Bodhgaya’s main sanctuary 
provided by several Pagan kings. 
However, adoption of Pāla Buddhist iconography at Pagan was truly 
selective, with modifications for compatibility with Pāli texts in the 
Theravāda realm observed in most cases.62 The Pāla-related Buddhist

--- PAGE 202 ---
173
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
iconography and artistic style of Pagan were, therefore, largely 
Theravāda in essence, regardless of their original affixation to the 
Northern Indian Mahāyānism. Pagan could have since then been 
substantially responsible for dissemination of the Theravāda-based 
iconography and art style, under strong Pāla influence, which would 
become widespread within its religious network in Southeast Asia 
during the early second millennium. One obvious example could be the 
bejewelled Buddha wearing a pointed crown found in Haripunjaya, 
Northern Thailand, and the Mon country in Lower Burma, both with 
strong Theravāda affiliations. Other related examples, also subject on 
the other hand to Khmer artistic influence,63 found largely in Central 
Thailand and probably produced there, could be considered in the 
same context. 
CONCLUSION
Tham Phra’s wooden sculptures could have been a local product of 
12th-century Western Thailand, before the extension of Jayavarman VII’s 
political power into the area during the last quarter of the century. None 
of the indisputable characteristics of the yet to come Bayon style of 
Jayavarman VII’s reign is evidenced in this group of images. The wooden 
sculptures are stylised in accordance with forms observed in various 
schools of Buddhist art, whether older than or contemporaneous with the 
proposed date, that is Pāla from Northeastern India and the Bengal area 
most likely through Pagan; Khmer probably from Lopburi; and Mon 
from Lower Burma and Haripunjaya. 
The wide acceptance in Southeast Asia, since the first millennium, of 
the Pāli-based Buddhism, so-called “old Theravāda” (which also included 
Woodward’s Ariya sect), would have given rise to a network of cultural 
relationships among different Buddhist centres sharing the religious 
faith(s), extending well into the early centuries of the second millennium. 
It could have resulted in the combination of artistic styles observed among 
the wooden sculptures of focus. Although the original Buddhist art of the 
Pāla school, in which the iconography of the Buddha wearing a pointed 
crown originated, was affixed to the Mahāyāna belief and cults of 
Northeastern India, its Southeast Asian derivatives, particularly those 
derived from the Pagan prototypes, could have been essentially Theravāda 
in affiliation. 
The meanings of this Buddha imagery could have been amply varied 
in the world of Buddhist art.64 However, they shared a common value 
that cut across Buddhist sects that emphasised the supremacy of the 
Buddha, here symbolised by his manifestation as the Universal King. 
Occasionally depicted in the Pagan-period murals of the 13th century

--- PAGE 203 ---
174
Samerchai Poolsuwan
was the Buddha of this imagery; seated in the māravijaya pose, he is 
normally flanked symmetrically by devotees, sometime dressed in exotic 
costume (Fig. 4.24). Few instances of the case, found in temple no. 101 at 
Sale (about 50 kilometres south of Pagan, in the Chauk township of the 
Magwe Division) (Fig. 4.25) and temple no. 13 at Sarle (at the border 
between Chauk and Yenan-Chaung township in the Magwe Division) 
(Fig. 4.26) dating from the period, are with original epigraphic records 
confirming their representation of the Buddha’s encounter with a king 
named Maha Kappina (temple no. 101, Sale) or Maha Kappain (temple 
no. 13, Sarle), which in one place is spelt as “Kapain”.65 Although the 
story is not further detailed in these mural inscriptions, the iconography 
of the bejewelled Buddha and the king’s name appearing in this case 
could naturally link it to a narrative originating in the old Sanskrit 
source, the Kapphiṇa-avadāna included in the Avadānaśataka series.66 
Although it could have been of Sarvāsativāda origin, the story has been 
proven to be known later in the Mahāyāna context of Northern India 
during the Pāla dynasty.67 It could have been transferred to Pagan from 
there, together with the Buddhist iconography of the bejewelled Buddha 
and others of the Pāla type. 
The Buddha of the story disguised himself as the incomparable 
universal monarch to tame Kapphiṇa, an arrogant king of the southern 
country (Dakṣiṇāpatha).68 For its Sanskrit origin, the depicted story 
stands out in Pagan murals, amidst an abundance of Buddhist 
narratives based on Pāli canonical and commentarial sources. The 
phenomenon could, thus, suggest integration of this Buddha imagery 
and its associated narrative, probably mainly to illuminate the Buddha’s 
supremacy, into the Theravāda norm of Pagan. Although a secondary 
Pāli source of the story, which could have served as an immediate 
reference for the murals, is not yet known, it is worth noting that 
absorption of original Sanskrit narratives into later Pāli-based literature 
might not be unusual at all in the old Theravāda context of Southeast 
Asia. Another prominent example is the integration of a story extracted 
from the Aśokāvadāna, also of the Sanskrit avadāna series, into Pāli 
literature said to be composed in Burma, the Lokapaññatti. Dealing 
with an episode of King Aśoka, in a previous existence, as a child 
donating a handful of dust for alms to the Buddha Gotama, the story 
was also given material form amidst other narratives based primarily on 
the Pāli commentarial sources in the murals of temple no. 585 at Pagan, 
dating from the 13th century (Fig. 4.27).69  
The Māravijaya Buddha wearing a pointed crown of the Pāla type 
found among the Tham Phra wooden sculptures, which shows clear 
stylistic associations with the Pagan prototype on one hand and with 
those from the Mon countries in Lower Burma and Haripunjaya on the

--- PAGE 204 ---
175
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
other, suggests the existence of a network of relationships among these 
Buddhist centres during the course of the 12th century. This type of 
Buddha wearing a pointed crown is among the major characteristics 
suggested by Woodward to demonstrate the survival of the old Hinayāna 
belief(s) in Southeast Asia during the early second millennium.70
Western Thailand during the 11th and 12th centuries saw the rise of 
several polities, developed in situ probably from their late Dvāravatī 
progenitors, that would have actively engaged in maritime trading with 
China and inland exchanges with the Mon communities in Lower Burma. 
A series of envoys sent to China from Deng-lui-mei, a state thought to be 
located in Western Thailand during a period from the late 10th to late 
11th centuries, suggests the presence of an autonomous state in the area at 
that time.71 Another series of tribute missions sent to China from the state 
named Chen-li-fu, located near a seaport in Western Thailand, in the years 
1200–1205, confirms Chen-li-fu’s relative independence even at the 
zenith of Jayavarman VII’s domination in Central Thailand. 
4.24
Fig. 4.24	 A 13th-century mural scene 
at Pagan depicting the 
Māravijaya Buddha wearing 
a pointed crown of the Pāla 
prototype; he is attended 
by devotees dressed in 
exotic costume suggesting 
their foreign origin (Pagan 
monument 1077, 
photograph by author).

--- PAGE 205 ---
176
Samerchai Poolsuwan
It is beyond doubt that, under such circumstances, the principalities in 
Western Thailand could have maintained their old Theravāda beliefs more 
or less continuously, with its supremacy soon resumed after the cessation of 
the Khmer domination under Jayavarman VII. Probably attesting this was 
also the establishment of the main brick sanctuary of Mahāthāt Ratchaburi, 
most likely during the course of the 14th century, to dominate the older 
laterite complex of Jayavarman VII’s Mahāyāna temple.72 
It is important to note that old Theravāda belief(s) had also been 
maintained in the northern sphere of Central Thailand during the early 
centuries of the second millennium, although it was here constrained to a 
certain degree by strong Khmer influence. Major evidence is the Dong 
Mae Nang Muang inscription, dated 1168, in which both Pāli and Khmer 
languages were used to describe the religious affairs of the king, most likely 
from Lopburi. Usage of Pāli language in the inscription could suggest a 
revival of old Theravāda in Lopburi’s dominion during this period, 
probably corresponding with temporary cessation of Khmer power after 
the death of Sūryavarman II, in 1150. Before that time, Lopburi had been 
4.25
4.26

--- PAGE 206 ---
177
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
an outpost of the Khmer empire for almost a century and a half, during 
which its religious belief(s) and artistic style would have been heavily 
dominated by the imperial Khmer ideology and art form. 
Religious contact between Lopburi and Western Thailand during the 
12th century could have resulted in the creation of the two standing 
bejewelled Buddha sculptures found at Tham Phra; they show a strong 
influence of the Khmer Angkor Wat style. To be compatible with the religious 
atmosphere of Western Thailand, dominated by the old Theravāda belief(s) 
until the advent of Jayavarman VII’s power in the area, this could have 
happened during the period of Lopburi’s temporary independence from 
Khmer sovereignty and of the Theravāda revival suggested by the Dong Mae 
Nang Muang inscription, that is the third quarter of the 12th century. 
Observed in this pair of Khmer-style sculptures are several local characteristics, 
also shared with other sculptures of the Tham Phra group, suggesting that the 
pair was locally produced. They were probably among the earliest sculptures 
of the Khmer type ever produced in Western Thailand, however, as imitations 
rather than genuine products of the imperial Khmer workshop. 
4.27
Fig. 4.25	 Being of the Pagan style 
and dating from the 13th 
century, the mural scene 
depicts a Māravijaya 
Buddha wearing a pointed 
crown of the Pāla 
prototype; an ink gloss, not 
totally legible, associates 
the scene with the Buddha 
and the “Mahā Kappina” 
king (Sale monument 101, 
inscription read by Saya 
Minbu Aung Kyaing, 
photograph by author). 
Fig. 4.26	 Of the 13th-century Pagan 
style, the mural depicts a 
Māravijaya Buddha wearing 
a pointed crown of the Pāla 
prototype; it bears two 
ink-glosses: one located 
below the Buddha 
describing his episode of 
admonishing King Kappain, 
and the other explaining a 
seated devotee, located 
above it, to be the very 
king, however with his 
name spelt as “Kapain” 
(Sarle monument 13, 
inscription read by Saya 
Minbu Aung Kyaing, 
photograph by author).  
Fig. 4.27	 A 13th-century inscribed 
mural from Pagan 
illustrating a child, King 
Aśoka in his previous 
existence, donating a 
handful of dust for alms to 
the Buddha Gotama, 
probably based on the 
Lokapaññatti account 
(Pagan monument 585, 
inscription read by Saya 
Minbu Aung Kyaing, 
photograph by author).

--- PAGE 207 ---
178
Samerchai Poolsuwan
The Dvāravatī characteristics observed on some of the Tham Phra 
Buddha sculptures demonstrate a stylistic continuum in the Buddhist art 
of Western Thailand until well into the early centuries of the second 
millennium, probably coinciding with persistence of old Dvāravatī 
Theravāda belief(s) in the area. As a counter-response to Khmer influence, 
some local characteristics observed in the group, that is a series of 
concentric rings supporting the Buddha’s radiance located on the top of 
his skull and the protruding central ring adorning the recessed waist of the 
Buddha’s lotus pedestal, could have served as prototypes for comparable 
characteristics evident in Khmer Buddhist art during the late 12th and 
early 13th centuries; the latter set of Khmer characteristics comprises a 
tiara protecting the Buddha’s uṣṇīṣa and supporting his radiance, and a 
decorative ring on the recessed waist of the Buddha’s pedestal. 
As this chapter has so far suggested, the historical and archaeological 
landscapes of Central Thailand during the early centuries of the second 
millennium were complicated. The area comprised several parts – the 
eastern, northern and western zones, bordering the marshy lower central 
plain – each characterised by its own political and cultural dynamics, 
albeit being culturally tied to each other. The imperial Khmer network 
into which polities in the area were integrated had protracted and 
contracted in a truly dynamic fashion. Being a part of the wider Theravāda 
network, also incorporating other parts of Thailand and both Upper and 
Lower Burma, Central Thailand experienced disturbances with the 
expansions of Khmer Hinduism and Mahāyāna Buddhism. 
Compared with other parts of Central Thailand, that is the northern 
and eastern zones, the western zone had remained on the margins of 
Khmer domination until advancement of Jayavarman VII’s power in the 
last quarter of the 12th century. The wooden sculptures of Tham Phra 
provide us a clue for understanding the religious and cultural atmospheres 
of Western Thailand during the decades immediately preceding his reign. 
On the one hand, Khmer cultural influence, probably diffusing from the 
Lopburi area rather than directly from Angkor, was not at all alien to the 
area and probably started to have its earliest artistic manifestation 
materialised in situ; on the other, the area had not yet been truly 
dominated by Khmer sovereignty. The continuous existence of the old 
Theravāda belief(s) in the area since long before that time would have 
brought Western Thailand into a wider Theravāda network of Southeast 
Asia, into which Pagan in Upper Burma and the Mon communities in 
both Lower Burma and Haripunjaya were also integrated.

--- PAGE 208 ---
179
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
Notes
1	
Chao Phraya Thipākorawong, Phrarātcha-pongsāwadān Krung Rattanakosin, 
Ratchakān Thī Nung [The Royal Chronicle of Bangkok, First Reign], Bangkok: 
Rong-phim Bamrungnukunkit, 1903, pp. 21–2.
2	
Phrayā Kathāthornbodī, Samut Rātchaburī [A Book Describing Ratchaburi], 
published for the occasion of the 1925 CE exhibition “Sayāmrattha­
phiphitthaphan”, Bangkok: Rongphim Nangsuethai, 1925, pp. 161–3.
3	
Rātchakijjānubeksā [Royal Siam Government Gazette], 52, sec. 75, 8 March 
1935, p. 3696.
4	
Presiding over this “Temple of the Great Relic” is a brick tower of the Khmer-
related type, probably erected during the 14th century (for dating the Mahāthāt-
Ratchaburi tower no earlier than the 14th century, see Hiram W. Woodward Jr., 
Studies in the Art of Central Siam, 950–1350 A.D., vol. 2, PhD dissertation, Yale 
University, 1975, pp. 21–3). A recent excavation at the site, however, has 
revealed older complicated foundations of a Khmer Mahāyāna temple dating 
from Jayavarman VII’s reign, in the late 12th or early 13th centuries.
5	
The Dvāravatī cave site where a relief of the leg-pendant seated Buddha in 
preaching gesture is located.
6	
The Phong Tuek sub-district where this Dvāravatī archaeological site is located 
is now under the administration of Kanchanaburi province.   
7	
Gordon H. Luce, Old Burma-Early Pagan, vol. 3, New York: J. J. Augustin 
Publisher, 1969, pp. 278–317.
8	
See the Khmer examples in Hiram W. Woodward Jr., The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand, Leiden: Brill, 2003, plate 80b; Piriya Krairiksh, Rāk Ngao Haeng 
Sinlapa Thai [The Roots of Thai Art], Bangkok: River Books, 2010, pl. 2.250 
& 2.252; Heidi Tan, ed., Enlightened Ways: The Many Streams of Buddhist Art 
in Thailand, Singapore: Asian Civilisations Museum, 2012, p. 94.
9	
See Piriya, Rāk Ngao, pl. 2.395.
10	
For example, the decorative pattern is seen on the belt and central pleat of the 
lower garment of the bejewelled standing Buddha published in Louise Allison 
Cort and Paul Jett, eds., Gods of Angkor: Bronzes from the National Museum of 
Cambodia, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2010, pp. 56–7.
11	
See illustrations of some typical Haripunjaya seated sculptures of the Buddha 
wearing a pointed crown in Carol Stratton, Buddhist Sculpture of Northern 
Thailand, Chicago: Buppha Press, 2004, Figs. 5.70–5.72.
12	
A Khmer example with three medallions adorning the Buddha’s diadem can be 
seen in Piriya, Rāk Ngao, pl. 2.239.
13	
See Cort and Jett, eds., Gods of Angkor, pp. 56–7.
14	
For dating the Shwezayan example see: Luce, Old Burma, vol. 1, pp. 140–1; 
Hiram W. Woodward Jr., “Some Buddha Images and the Cultural 
Developments of the Late Angkorian Period”, Artibus Asiae, 42, no. 2/3, 1980: 
pp. 155–74.
15	
See examples in Woodward, Art and Architecture, pl. 74b, 76, 84, 86a & 86b.
16	
See an example in Piriya, Rāk Ngao, pl. 2.380.
17	
The term “lower central plain of Thailand” refers, in a geological sense, to the 
flooded area, a part of the paleo-gulf of Thailand, during the Holocene 
Maximum Transgression around 6,500–6,400 BCE (Trongjai Hutangkura, 
“Reconsidering the Palaeo-shoreline in the Lower Central Plain of Thailand”, in 
Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. 
Murphy, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 32–67). It had been a wetland 
zone not suitable for human occupation until around the middle of the second

--- PAGE 209 ---
180
Samerchai Poolsuwan
millennium CE.
18	
See a recent account on this archaeological site in Matthew D. Gallon, 
“Monuments and Identity at the Dvāravatī Town of Kamphaeng Saen”, in 
Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. 
Murphy, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 330–51.
19	
For a recent archaeological study on Phong Tuek see Wesley Clarke, “The 
Skeletons of Phong Tuek: Human Remains in Dvāravatī Ritual Contexts”, in 
Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. 
Murphy, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 311–29.
20	
Peter Skilling, “The Advent of Theravada Buddhism to Mainland South-east 
Asia”, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, 20, no. 1, 
1997: pp. 83–107; the term “old Theravāda” is coined here to account for the 
form(s) of Pāli-based Buddhism in existence prior to the major Buddhist 
unification in Sri Lanka during the reign of King Parakramabahu I in the second 
half of the 12th century; based on the Mahāvihāra tradition, the reform set a 
new standard for “Theravāda” orthodoxy in Sri Lanka, to be subsequently 
widespread in Southeast Asia from the 14th century onwards (Samerchai 
Poolsuwan, “Buddhist Murals Illustrating Unusual Features in Temple 36 at 
Sale and Their Cultural Implications”, Journal of Burma Studies, 19, no. 1, 
2015: pp. 145–97).  
21	
See discussions on various aspects of the Dvāravatī culture in: Peter Skilling, 
“Dvāravatī: Recent Revelations and Research”, in Dedications to Her Royal 
Highness Princess Galyani Vadhana Krom Luang Naradhiwas Rajanagarindra 
on Her 80th Birthday, ed. Chris Baker, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2003,  
pp. 87–112; Nicolas Revire, “Glimpses of Buddhist Practices and Rituals in 
Dvāravatī and its Neighboring Cultures”, in Before Siam: Essays in Art and 
Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy, Bangkok: The Siam 
Society, 2014, pp. 240–71.  
22	
See Woodward, Art and Architecture, Chapter 2.
23	
Trongjai, “Reconsidering the Palaeo-shoreline in the Lower Central Plain of 
Thailand”.
24	
See reviews in Donald M. Stadtner, “The Mon of Lower Burma”, JSS 96, 2008, 
pp. 193–215; John Guy, ed., Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early 
Southeast Asia, New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2014.
25	
The name first appeared in the Preah Khan inscription of King Jayavarman VII. 
Its location has been identified as Kosinarai in Ban Pong district, Ratchaburi 
province (Woodward, Art and Architecture, p. 211).
26	
Paul Mus, “George Cœdès: Recueil des Inscriptions du Siam, 2e partie. 
Inscriptions de Dvāravatī, de Çrīvijaya et de Lăvo”, BEFEO, 29, no. 1, 1929:  
pp. 446–50.
27	
Woodward, Art and Architecture, p. 140.
28	
George Cœdès, “La stèle du Práh Khằn d’Ankor”, BEFEO 41, no. 1, 1941:  
pp. 255–302.
29	
Could have been Noen Thang Phra in Sam Chuk district, Suphanburi province 
(Woodward, Art and Architecture, p. 211).
30	
George Cœdės, Inscriptions du Cambodge, vol. 2, Hanoi and Paris: EFEO, 1942, 
p. 161.
31	
See a discussion in Woodward, Art and Architecture, pp. 140–1.
32	
David K. Wyatt, “Relics, Oaths and Politics in Thirteenth-Century Siam”, 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 32, no. 1, 2001: pp. 3–66.
33	
Ibid.

--- PAGE 210 ---
181
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
34	
Ibid.
35	
Ibid.
36	
Ibid.
37	
Ibid.
38	
See a discussion on ancient Chinese ceramics found in the Mae Klong River in 
Piriya, Rāk Ngao, pp. 147–56.
39	
Stadtner, “The Mon of Lower Burma”; Elizabeth Moore and San Win, “The 
Gold Coast: Suvannabhumi? Lower Myanmar Walled Sites of the First 
Millennium A.D.”, Asian Perspectives 46, no. 1, 2007: pp. 202–32; Elizabeth 
Moore, “Sampanago: City of Serpents” and “Muttama (Martaban)”, in Before 
Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. 
Murphy, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 216–37.
40	
Stadtner, “The Mon of Lower Burma”.
41	
For the shared types of Buddhist votive tablets found in both Lower Burma and 
Western Thailand see Stadtner, “Demystifying Mists: The Case for the Mon”, a 
paper presented at the conference Discovery of Ramanya Desa: History, Identity, 
Culture, Language and Performing Arts, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
10–13 October 2007.
42	
Piriya Krairiksh, “Semas with Scenes from the Mahānipāta-Jātakas in the 
National Museum of Khon Kaen”, in Art and Archaeology in Thailand, 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department, 1974, pp. 35–100; for a different view, see 
Stephen A. Murphy, “Sema Stones in Lower Myanmar and Northeast Thailand: 
A Comparison”, in Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas 
Revire and Stephen A. Murphy, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 353–71.
43	
See a discussion in Luce, Old Burma, vol. 1, chapter II.
44	
Ibid.; Than Tun, “Buddhism in Burma, AD 1000–1300”, Journal of the Burma 
Research Society 61, 1978: pp. 1–266; Tilman Frasch, “Coastal Peripheries 
During the Pagan Period”, in The Maritime Frontier of Burma: Exploring 
Political, Cultural and Commercial Interaction in the Indian Ocean World, eds. 
Jos Gommans and Jacques Leider, Leiden: KITLV Press, 2002, pp. 59–78; 
Stadtner, “The Mon of Lower Burma”.
45	
Frasch, “Coastal Peripheries During the Pagan Period”.
46	
Stadtner, “The Mon of Lower Burma”. 
47	
U Tin Htway, “The First Burmese Royal Inscription”, in Vorträge des 18. 
Deutschen Orientalistentages, ed. Wolfgang Voigt, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 
1974, (cited in Frasch, “Coastal peripheries During the Pagan Period”).
48	
Frasch, “Coastal Peripheries During the Pagan Period”.
49	
Ibid.
50	
Nihar-Ranjan Ray, “Early Traces of Buddhism in Burma”, Journal of the Greater 
India Society 6, no. 1, January 1939: pp. 1–52; Gordon H. Luce, “The Advent 
of Buddhism to Burma”, in Buddhist Studies in Honour of I. B. Horner, eds.  
L. Cousins, A. Kunst and K. R. Norman, Boston: P. Reidel Publishing 
Company, 1974, pp. 119–38; Janice Stargardt, “The Oldest Known Pāli Text, 
5th–6th Century: Results of the Cambridge Symposium on the Pyu Golden 
Pāli Text from Śrī Kṣetra, 18–19 April 1995”, Journal of the Pāli Text Society 21, 
1995: pp. 199–213; Skilling, “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to Mainland 
South-east Asia”; a stone inscription recording paṭiccasamuppāda from the Pāli 
Mahāvagga is also known from Pegu (ibid.; Stadtner, “The Mon of Lower 
Burma”).
51	
Poolsuwan, “Buddhist Murals”.
52	
Woodward, Art and Architecture, pp. 146–59.

--- PAGE 211 ---
182
Samerchai Poolsuwan
53	
Hiram W. Woodward Jr., The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand, Bangkok: River 
Books, 1997, pp. 115–16; Woodward, Art and Architecture, pp. 166–71.
54	
George Cœdès, “Nouvelles données épigraphiques sur l’histoire de I’Indochine 
centrale”, JA 246, 1958: pp. 125–42.
55	
Woodward, Art and Architecture, p. 145.
56	
Wyatt, “Relics Oaths and Politics in Thirteenth-Century Siam”; Woodward, Art 
and Architecture, pp. 163–5.  
57	
Woodward, Sacred Sculpture, pp. 115–6; Woodward, Art and Architecture,  
pp. 166–71.
58	
Luce, Old Burma, vol. 1, chapter II; there is also a stone inscription recording 
paṭiccasamuppāda from the Pāli Mahāvagga, probably dating from the mid first 
millennium CE, found in Pegu (Skilling, “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism 
to Mainland South-east Asia”; Stadtner, “The Mon of Lower Burma”).
59	
See a discussion in Luce, Old Burma, vol. 1, chapter II.
60	
Ibid.
61	
W. M. Sirisena, Sri Lanka and South-East Asia, Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1978,  
pp. 58–81; Tilman Frasch, “A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal: 
Relations Between Bodhgaya, Burma and Sri Lanka, c. 300–1300”, in From the 
Mediterranean to the China Sea: Miscellaneous Notes, eds. Claude Guillot, 
Denys Lombard and Rodenrich Ptak, Weisbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 1998, 
pp. 69–92; Tilman Frasch, “The Buddhist Connection: Sinhalese-Burmese 
Intercourse in the Middle Ages”, in Explorations in the History of South Asia: 
Essays in Honour of Dietmar Rothermund, eds. Georg Berkemer, Tilman Frasch, 
Hermanh Kulke and Jurgen Lütt, Delhi: Manohar, 2001, pp. 85–97.
62	
Samerchai Poolsuwan, “After Enlightenment: Scenes of the Buddha’s Retreat in 
the Thirteenth Century Murals at Pagan”, Artibus Asiae 72, no. 2, 2012:  
pp. 377–97; Samerchai Poolsuwan, “The Buddha’s Biography: Its Development 
in the Pagan Murals vs.the Later Vernacular Literature, in the Theravādin 
Buddhist Context of Southeast Asia”, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 27,  
no. 2, 2017: pp. 255–94.
63	
See examples in Woodward, Sacred Sculpture, Figs. 133–5; Woodward, Art and 
Architecture, pl. 82 & 83; Piriya, Rāk Ngao, pl. 2.377–2.380, 2.383 & 2.384.
64	
For a review of the iconographies of the bejewelled Buddha and probably their 
associated meanings in Indian and Kashmir Buddhist arts see Claudine 
Bautze-Picron, The Bejewelled Buddha: From India to Burma, Delhi: Sanctum 
Books, 2010; for the Burmese and Mon examples see Luce, Old Burma, vol. 1, 
chapter X; Pamela Gutman, “A Burmese Origin for the Sukhothai Walking 
Buddha”, in Burma: Art and Archaeology, eds. Alexandra Green and T. Richard 
Blurton, London: The British Museum, 2002, pp. 35–43.
65	
Inscription readings provided to the author by Saya Minbu Aung Kyaing, 
Former Deputy Director General, Department of Archaeology, Myanmar.
66	
P. L. Vaidya, ed., Avadāna-śataka, Dabhanga: The Mithila Institute of 
Post-Graduate Studies and Research in Sanskrit Learning.
67	
Peter Skilling, “Pieces in the Puzzle: Sanskrit Literature in Pre-Modern Siam”, in 
Buddhism and Buddhist Literature of South-East Asia: Selected Papers, ed. 
Claudio Cicuzza, Bangkok and Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation, 
Lumbini International, Research Institute, 2009, pp. 27–45.
68	
P. L. Vaidya, ed., Avadāna-śataka.
69	
Poolsuwan, “Buddha’s Biography”.
70	
Woodward, Sacred Sculpture, pp. 115–6.
71	
Piriya, Rāk Ngao, p. 139.

--- PAGE 212 ---
183
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
72	
See note 4.
References
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. The Bejewelled Buddha: From India to Burma. Delhi: 
Sanctum Books, 2010. 
Chao Phraya Thipakorawong. Phrarātcha-pongsāwadān Krung Rattanakosin, 
Ratchakān Thī Nung [The Royal Chronicle of Bangkok, First Reign]. Bangkok: 
Rong-phim Bamrungnukunkit, 1903.
Clarke, Wesley. “The Skeletons of Phong Tuek Human Remains in Dvāravatī Ritual 
Contexts”. In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire 
and Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 311–29.
Cœdès, George. Inscriptions du Cambodge, vol. 2. Hanoi and Paris: EFEO, 1942. 
——— . “La stèle du Práh Khằn d’Ankor”. BEFEO, 41, no. 1, 1941: pp. 255–302.
Cort, Louise Allison and Paul Jett, eds. Gods of Angkor: Bronzes from the National 
Museum of Cambodia. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2010.
Frasch, Tilman. “A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal: Relations Between 
Bodhgaya, Burma and Sri Lanka, c. 300–1300”. In From the Mediterranean to 
the China Sea: Miscellaneous Notes, eds. Claude Guillot, Denys Lombard and 
Rodenrich Ptak. Weisbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, 1998.
——— . “The Buddhist Connection: Sinhalese-Burmese Intercourse in the Middle 
Ages”. In Explorations in the History of South Asia: Essays in Honour of Dietmar 
Rothermund, eds. Georg Berkemer, Tilman Frasch, Hermann Kulke and Jurgen 
Lütt. Delhi: Manohar, 2001.
——— . “Coastal Peripheries During the Pagan Period”. In The Maritime Frontier of 
Burma: Exploring Political, Cultural and Commercial Interaction in the Indian 
Ocean World, eds. Jos Gommans and Jacques Leider. Leiden: KITLV Press, 
2002.
Gallon, Matthew D. “Monuments and Identity at the Dvāravatī town of Kamphaeng 
Saen”. In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and 
Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 330–51.
Gutman, Pamela. “A Burmese Origin for the Sukhothai Walking Buddha”. In Burma: 
Art and Archaeology, eds. Alexandra Green and T. Richard Blurton. London: 
The British Museum, 2002, pp. 35–43.
Guy, John, ed. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia. New 
York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2014. 
Luce, Gordon H. “The Advent of Buddhism to Burma”. In Buddhist Studies in 
Honour of I. B. Horner, eds. by L. Cousins, A. Kunst and K. R. Norman. 
Boston: P. Reidel Publishing Company, 1974.
——— . Old Burma-Early Pagan, vols. 1 & 3. New York: J. J. Augustin Publisher, 
1969.
Moore, Elizabeth. “Sampanago: ‘City of Serpents’ and Muttama (Martaban)”. In 
Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. 
Murphy. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 216–37.
Moore, Elizabeth, and San Win. “The Gold Coast: Suvannabhumi? Lower Myanmar 
Walled Sites of the First Millennium A.D.”. Asian Perspectives 46, no. 1, 2007: 
pp. 202–32.
Murphy, Stephen A. “Sema Stones in Lower Myanmar and Northeast Thailand: A 
Comparison”. In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas 
Revire and Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 353–71.
Mus, Paul. “George Cœdès: Recueil des Inscriptions du Siam, 2e partie. Inscriptions

--- PAGE 213 ---
184
Samerchai Poolsuwan
de Dvāravatī, de Çrīvijaya et de Lăvo”. BEFEO 29, no. 1, 1929: pp. 446–50.
Phrayā Kathāthornbodī. Samut Rātchaburī [A Book Describing Ratchaburi]. 
Published for the occasion of the 1925 CE Exhibition “Sayāmrattha­
phiphitthaphan”. Bangkok: Rongphim Nangsuethai, 1925. (In Thai.)
Piriya Krairiksh. “Semas with Scenes from the Mahānipāta-Jātakas in the National 
Museum of Khon Kaen”. In Art and Archaeology in Thailand. Bangkok: Fine 
Arts Department, 1974.
Piriya Krairiksh. Rāk Ngao Haeng Sinlapa Thai [The Roots of Thai Art]. Bangkok: 
River Books, 2010.
Rātchakijjānubeksā [Royal Thai Government Gazette], vol. 52, section 75, 8 March 
1935, p. 3696.
Ray, Nihar-Ranjan. “Early Trace of Buddhism in Burma”. Journal of the Greater India 
Society 6, no. 1, January 1939: pp. 1–52.
Revire, Nicolas. “Glimpses of Buddhist Practices and Rituals in Dvāravatī and Its 
Neighboring Cultures”. In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. 
Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014,  
pp. 240–71.
Samerchai Poolsuwan. “After Enlightenment: Scenes of the Buddha’s Retreat in the 
Thirteenth-Century Murals at Pagan”. Artibus Asiae 72, no. 2, 2012: 377–97.
——— . “The Buddha’s Biography: Its Development in the Pagan Murals vs. the Later 
Vernacular Literature, in the Theravādin Buddhist Context of Southeast Asia”. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 27, no. 2, 2017: pp. 255–94. 
——— . “Buddhist Murals Illustrating Unusual Features in Temple 36 at Sale and Their 
Cultural Implications”. Journal of Burma Studies 19, no. 1, 2015: pp. 145–97.
Sirisena, W. M. Sri Lanka and South-East Asia. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1978.
Skilling, Peter. “The Advent of Theravada Buddhism to Mainland South-east Asia”. 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 20, no. 1, 1997:  
pp. 83–107.  
——— . “Dvāravatī: Recent Revelations and Research”. In Dedications to Her Royal 
Highness Princess Galyani Vadhana Krom Luang Naradhiwas Rajanagarindra 
on Her 80th Birthday, ed. Chris Baker. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2003,  
pp. 87–112.
——— . “Pieces in the Puzzle: Sanskrit Literature in Pre-Modern Siam”. In Buddhism 
and Buddhist Literature of South-East Asia: Selected Papers, ed. Claudio 
Cicuzza. Bangkok and Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation, Lumbini 
International, Research Institute, 2009.
Stadtner, Donald M. “Demystifying Mists: The Case for the Mon”. A paper presented 
at the conference Discovery of Ramanya Desa: History, Identity, Culture, 
Language and Performing Arts, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,  
10–13 October 2007.
——— . “The Mon of Lower Burma”. JSS 96, 2008: pp. 193–215.
Stargardt, Janice. “The Oldest Known Pāli Text, 5th–6th Century: Results of the 
Cambridge Symposium on the Pyu Golden Pāli Text from Śrī Kṣetra, 1 
8–19 April 1995”. Journal of the Pāli Text Society 21, 1995: pp. 199–213. 
Stratton, Carol. Buddhist Sculpture of Northern Thailand. Chicago: Buppha Press, 
2004.
Tan, Heidi, ed. Enlightened Ways: The Many Streams of Buddhist Art in Thailand. 
Singapore: Asian Civilisations Museum, 2012.
Than Tun. “Buddhism in Burma, AD 1000–1300”. Journal of the Burma Research 
Society 61, 1978, pp. 1–266.
Trongjai Hutangkura. “Reconsidering the Palaeo-shoreline in the Lower Central Plain

--- PAGE 214 ---
185
The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave)
of Thailand”. In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire 
and Stephen A. Murphy. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2014, pp. 32–67.
U Tin Htway. “The First Burmese Royal Inscription”. In Vorträge des 18. Deutschen 
Orientalistentages, ed. Wolfgang Voigt. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1974. 
Woodward, Hiram W., Jr. The Art and Architecture of Thailand. Leiden: Brill, 2003.
——— . The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand. Bangkok: River Books, 1997.
——— . “Some Buddha Images and the Cultural Developments of the Late Angkorian 
Period”. Artibus Asiae, 42, no. 2/3, 1980: pp. 155–74.
——— . Studies in the Art of Central Siam, 950–1350 A.D., vol. 2. PhD dissertation, 
Yale University, 1975.
Wyatt, David K. “Relics, Oaths and Politics in Thirteenth-Century Siam”. Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies, 32, no. 1, 2001: 3–66.

--- PAGE 215 ---
186
Chapter 5
A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF KEY 
THERAVĀDA BUDDHIST 
STRUCTURES IN CENTRAL 
ANGKOR FROM THE 13TH TO 
18TH CENTURIES
Ea Darith
INTRODUCTION
Two types and periods of Theravādin religious constructions are 
represented in early Middle Period Cambodia. The first type dates to 
approximately the 13th to 14th centuries. These structures are simple 
platforms or “terraces” devoid of massive architectural features or artistic 
embellishments.1 This dramatically contrasts with the dominant, large-
scale and ornate Brahmanic and Mahāyāna structures that preceded them 
(for example, Angkor Wat and Angkor Thom). The platforms likely 
supported a wooden structure housing a single central Buddha image. 
Roofs may have been covered with ceramic tiles. The second type consists 
of reworking Hindu and Mahāyāna structures to accommodate Theravāda 
preferences.2 The scale of the central Buddha image and sacred space is 
much larger than the earlier Brahmanic or Mahāyāna inner sanctum. The 
prominent building period, however, begins in the latter part of the 16th 
century with King Ang Chan. Archaeological, art and architectural 
evidence demonstrate this pattern.
THERAVĀDA BUDDHIST STRUCTURES IDENTIFIED  
IN ANGKOR THOM: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY  
AND EXCAVATION
The stone platforms that once supported wooden structures for Buddhist 
religious practice were known in early scholarship as “Buddhist terraces”. 
Theravāda Buddhism likely existed in a substantial way in the Angkor area 
from approximately the 13th to 14th centuries. The primary evidence 
comes from structures located in the capital city of Angkor, Angkor

--- PAGE 216 ---
187
A Brief Overview of Key Theravāda Buddhist Structures in Central Angkor 
Thom, dating to that period. Also of relevance, the first Pāli inscription 
appeared in the early 14th century.
Through surveying and mapping Angkor Thom, Cambodia’s national 
Authority for the Protection and Safeguarding of Angkor and the Region 
of Angkor (APSARA) has identified 80 Buddhist platforms since 2002.3 
However, only 44 terraces have been recorded in detail (with technical 
descriptions and measurements). The other terraces were not recorded in 
detail because many were heavily looted, damaged and difficult to access. 
Others had not been properly cleared of vegetation and modern deposits, 
which prevented more detailed studies. The terraces were divided into 
four sections within Angkor Thom. There are 12 Buddhist terraces in the 
southeast section, 11 in the northeast section, 10 in the northwest section, 
and 11 in the southwest section. 
There are five types of terraces based on size (planar dimensions):
Type I: 8 x 15–40 metres (9 terraces) 
Type II: 10 x 20–25 metres (14 terraces) 
Type III: 15 x 20–40 metres (8 terraces)  
Type IV: 20 x 30–60 metres (12 terraces) 
Type V: 40 x 60 metres (1 terrace)
Type II is the most common for smaller size structures, while Type IV is 
more common for larger size structures.
Most of the terraces face east. Three terraces in the southeast section 
face other directions: two face south and one faces north. One terrace in 
the northeast section faces west.
The terrace foundations were elevated differently. Artificial elevation is 
approximately one metre above the natural surface. Some simply include 
piled-up soil and fill. Others include arranged laterite or sandstone 
perimeters in a rectangular shape with added soil and fill inside the terrace. 
Three terraces in the northeast section have a second raised floor on the 
southern part of the terrace, about 30–50 centimetres higher than the 
lower floor. The higher floor at the southern section of the terrace was 
probably used by monks during ritual activities.4 Modern ethnographic 
evidence shows that a raised platform at the southern section of the 
building is often reserved as a place for monks to eat. If a floor has only 
one level, a mat is placed at the southern section, enabling the monks to sit 
higher than the laypeople. The Buddha statue is usually placed at the 
western part of the terraces. Occasionally, there is an additional stūpa or 
older prāsād at the western end of the terraces.5  
Two staircases made of sandstone or laterite leading to the eastern edge 
of the terrace are a common feature. However, there are no indications of 
stone pillars or walls. Most likely, wooden pillars were used to support 
superstructures and roofing. Some terrace pavements contain notches in

--- PAGE 217 ---
188
Ea Darith
5.1
Fig. 5.1	 Preah Ang Kok Thlok 
terrace, Angkor Thom. 
Photograph by author, 2017.
the stone or laterite for wooden pillar placement – generally spaced at 
three to four metre intervals. Brown glazed roof tiles are frequently 
scattered on the surface, having accumulated after the organic structures 
collapsed and decomposed.
Most terraces are bordered at the eight cardinal and inter-cardinal 
points by double sīmā. Sīmā have different styles and patterns.6 
Interesting artefacts around the terraces include stone coffins, Buddha 
statues, bricks, brown glazed stoneware roof tiles and other statues 
representing items such as cows, lions and deities. 
Each of these terraces probably dates to approximately the 13th 
century or later. (For more on dating, see Chapter 6 and Chapter 8.) The 
famous 13th-century Chinese envoy, Zhou Daguan, mentioned what 
appear to be Buddhist terraces in Angkor.7 The descriptions seem to align 
with the archaeological remains.
The largest Buddhist terraces were found in close proximity to the 
royal palace compound and the Bayon Temple in Angkor Thom.

--- PAGE 218 ---
189
A Brief Overview of Key Theravāda Buddhist Structures in Central Angkor 
Examples include Preah Palilay, Tep Pranam, Preah Vihear Prampir 
Lavaeng, Wat Tang Tok, Preah Ang Kok Thlok, Preah En Tep, Preah Si 
Ary Metrei and Kong Chhum. The larger Buddhist terraces are located 
near the royal palace. This may have made it more convenient for the king 
and high officials to practice their religion, and it may also have indicated 
status due to proximity to the palace. Many of the terraces are still used by 
local people today for Buddhist practices (Figs. 5.1–5.2).
Around some terraces, eight double sīmā were half buried at the 
cardinal points to define the boundaries of the vihāra (Fig. 5.3). 
Subsequently, a laterite wall was added around the terraces and double 
sīmā.
As noted, some terraces were constructed to the east of Angkorian 
Hindu temples (see images of Western Prasat Top in Chapter 6). This 
Fig. 5.2	 Tep Pranam terrace, Angkor 
Thom. Photograph by 
author, 2017.
5.2

--- PAGE 219 ---
190
Ea Darith
demonstrates that Buddhist structures probably shared borders with 
Hindu temples for a reason. It may relate to re-use or augmentation of 
sacred space and architecture. It could also represent a symbiotic religious 
relationship. The paired nature could relate to complementary sharing 
and use of sacred spaces, but such hypotheses remain speculative. 
However, the larger Hindu spaces and architecture could add to the 
Buddhist terrace for various practices, especially if the Hindu temple was 
defunct at the time the Buddhist terraces were created. In this case, the 
Hindu temple and space would have been transformed to accommodate 
Buddhist practices. These alternative hypotheses need further research and 
exploration. As stated, one hypothesis suggests a symbiotic, amalgamated 
or quasi-fused relation (common in Khmer culture); while the other 
hypothesis suggests re-use of defunct Hindu spaces and architecture for 
Buddhist practices. It cannot be denied, however, that sacred space in 
Khmer traditions may include a plethora of religious representations and 
practices despite being designated as following a specific religious 
doctrine. For example, a modern Theravāda pagoda may include, tolerate 
Fig. 5.3	 Preah Vihear Prampir 
Lavaeng, Angkor Thom, with 
double sīmā. Photograph by 
author, 2017.
5.3

--- PAGE 220 ---
191
A Brief Overview of Key Theravāda Buddhist Structures in Central Angkor 
and even promote elements of traditional beliefs and art and architecture 
(for example, Neak Ta ancestor placation is often deemed to be semi-
animistic), Hindu, Taoist and other beliefs. This type of syncretism is 
evident in historic and archaeological records and infused in many 
traditional practices and ethnographic records. The concept of mutual 
religious exclusion is possibly the exception rather than the norm.
Some terraces were constructed separate from the Angkorian Hindu 
temples. These can also have a structure at their western end, but in this 
case this structure appears to date to the same time as the terrace itself. 
What was the function of the building attached to the western part of the 
Buddhist terraces? These constructions were usually made of laterite. 
Only lower parts remain today. Careful observation around the laterite 
remains at Preah Ang Ngok shows what appear to be stone coffins 
arranged at the western sides of the laterite building8 (Fig. 5.4). The stone 
coffins may have been associated with the building. It is possible the 
building may have served as housing for the coffins of high-level officials or 
kings. The other coffins around the building may belong to lower officials, 
Fig. 5.4 Stone coffins at Preah Ang 
Ngok, Angkor Thom. 
Photograph by author, 2020.
5.4

--- PAGE 221 ---
192
Ea Darith
lower royalty or local people associated with the higher class. There are 14 
stone coffins, all broken, made of sandstone, of different sizes and shapes 
with varying decoration. These coffins require further study. 
If we observe the Hindu and Buddhist temples in the Angkorian 
period (pyramid or pyramid-like in form), some functioned as both a 
temple and tomb of the kings. George Cœdès suggested Angkor Wat was 
both a temple and a tomb. The Bayon temple was constructed for housing 
a large Buddha (a symbol of King Jayavarman VII) in the central tower 
with a maṇḍapa building attached at the eastern section. As previous 
scholars have questioned: Is there any similarity or connection between 
the Hindu and Mahāyāna Buddhist temples with the Buddhist structures 
during the later Theravāda time? The modern pagoda/temple is a place to 
bury or to store the ashes of deceased people, it is also a place to perform 
ceremonies. Now, there are many stūpa for housing ashes constructed 
inside pagoda complexes.
Excavations of a terrace at Western Prasat Top were conducted by the 
APSARA and Japanese Nara National Research Institute for Cultural 
Properties teams in 2004. Results indicated that terrace stones were placed 
along the terrace perimeter. Subsequently, surface soil was used to fill the 
interior. No internal lower terrace pavement, subsurface foundation or 
5.5

--- PAGE 222 ---
193
A Brief Overview of Key Theravāda Buddhist Structures in Central Angkor 
Fig. 5.5	 Buddha entering nirvāṇa 
constructed on western 
façade of the Baphuon 
temple, outlined to better 
show the figure. 
Photograph and outline 
courtesy Lim Bunhong, 
2020.
Fig. 5.6	 Buddha entering nirvāṇa, 
Preah Palilay temple, 
Angkor Thom. Photograph 
by author, 2017. 
5.6

--- PAGE 223 ---
194
Ea Darith
specialised fill was used. Only the upper surface had paved flooring 
(laterite and sandstone). Many types of archaeological objects were 
recovered such as brown glazed roof tiles, Khmer and Chinese ceramics, a 
bronze hook for a palanquin, jewellery, stones used for foundation or 
ritual ceremonies, and statues of Buddhas made of stone. Charcoal was 
also found and subjected to Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) 
radiocarbon analysis.’. The results indicate 13th- to 14th-century dates for 
the construction of the terrace.9 Further research on this site is discussed 
in Chapter 6.
The overall design of these Buddhist terraces is simple. They were not 
intended to support large heavy structures. The design differs significantly 
from Hindu temple architecture – particularly the simplicity and lack of 
ornamentation. Simplicity may have represented Theravāda ideology (for 
example, impermanence in the physical realm and simplicity as opposed 
to ornate display of opulence and power). Also, simplicity may have 
related to economic and demographic factors, such as limited funding, 
support and patronage. Neither possibility is exclusive. The ideology 
coupled with lack of financial, organisational and labour support may 
have been equally important factors.
LARGER SCALE CONSTRUCTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
In addition to Buddhist terraces, the early Middle Period also saw a 
re-emergence of more grandiose structures and representations. However, 
it appears the elite did not command the power, finances or resources to 
launch new megaprojects, such as those realised in previous Angkorian 
kingdoms under kings Sūryvarman II and Jayavarman VII. What is 
apparent is the re-use and reconfiguration of Hindu monuments to 
Buddhist ends – transformations. Interestingly, they did not transform 
the whole monument, only important aspects.
For example, the 11th-century Baphuon temple in Angkor Thom 
(originally Shaivite) was modified by dismantling stones from the galleries 
for the construction of a large reclining Buddha approximately 70 metres 
in length at the back of the temple (Fig. 5.5). The AMS radiocarbon 
dating of the four iron crampons from the head of the reclining Buddha 
at the western part of the Baphuon temple show evidence of the history of 
its foundation and modification. The new dating of the foundation of the 
Baphuon temple situates its main construction period during the reign of 
Sūryavarman I (1010–1050). However, the modifications date to the 
Theravāda Buddhist period related to the Ayutthayan occupation of 
Angkor in the 1430s.10 
Dating the Preah Palilay temple remains difficult.11 Hypotheses range 
from the mid 12th to 13th centuries. Preah Palilay has a cruciform plan

--- PAGE 224 ---
195
A Brief Overview of Key Theravāda Buddhist Structures in Central Angkor 
5.7
Fig. 5.7 Remains of seated Buddha 
atop Phnom Bakheng, 
Angkor. The shaded part of 
the diagram shows a seated 
Buddha incorporating 
elements of the original 
quincunx configuration at 
the mountain-temple 
summit. From Jacques 
Dumarçay, Phnom Bakheng: 
Etude Archéologique du 
Temple, Mémoires 
Archéologiques VII, 1971,  
p. 15. Reproduced with the 
permission of the EFEO.
Fig. 5.8 Phnom Bakheng seated 
Buddha. View from the 
southeast, showing portions 
of the Buddha body re-using 
stones from the original 
temple, with portion of an 
original sanctuary tower 
visible within. Photograph: 
Cliché EFEO, Fonds 
Cambodge réf. EFEO_
CAM14118.
5.8

--- PAGE 225 ---
196
Ea Darith
surrounded by enclosure walls with a single gate on the east wall. From the 
architectural plan and iconographic elements, it seems the main temple 
tower was built earlier, possibly as early as the middle of the 12th century. 
The east gate appears to have been added later during the 13th century.. 
These two distinct phases are evident from the walls ending abruptly 
against the gables of the gate. On the lintel of the east gate is a 
representation of the Buddha entering nirvāṇa, lying on his left side, with 
disciples at his side (Fig. 5.6).
The early 10th-century Bakheng temple (originally Shaivite), located 
on Bakheng Mountain south of Angkor Thom, was later modified to 
form a large seated Buddha (Figs. 5.7–5.8). Stones from several pre-
existing towers were used for construction. The colossal seated Buddha 
was likely built no later than the 16th century.12 
The 12th-century Preah Khan temple located to the north of Angkor 
Thom was later reworked by adding a sandstone stūpa inside the central 
sanctuary, presumably making the whole area accommodate Theravādin 
practice (Fig. 5.9). The stūpa design appears to post-date the Angkor 
period but pre-date the modern period.13
Though possible, it is noted that some of these structural 
modifications and additional structures may not have been initiated in the 
Fig. 5.9	 Stūpa in central sanctuary, 
Preah Khan temple, Angkor. 
Photograph by author, 2017.
5.9

--- PAGE 226 ---
197
A Brief Overview of Key Theravāda Buddhist Structures in Central Angkor 
13th century. Many were probably undertaken in the late Middle Period 
but pre-date the modern period. 
In the Middle Period, Angkor Wat temple appears to have contained 
only one Buddhist terrace in stone, which is located in the northwest 
section of the compound. The terrace was probably constructed in the 
13th century, contemporaneous with the terraces in Angkor Thom – 
Stage 1. The double sīmā can still be seen around the terrace. However, 
the stones forming the terrace are degrading, eroding and falling out. 
Many have been displaced. On 3 October 1992, Buddhist devotees in Siem 
Reap province reconstructed a new vihāra (that they call Vihear Toch, or 
“Small Worship Hall” in Khmer) on the ancient Buddhist terrace by using 
old stones for the foundation (Fig. 5.10). A new platform and Buddha 
statue were erected on top. A wooden structure with a tiled roof was built 
to shelter the image. Although this is a new building, it respects the spirit 
of the ancient structure of the Buddhist terrace.
There were probably more Buddhist terraces inside the Angkor Wat 
complex in the past that did not use stone foundations. They were likely 
constructed of wood above the ground. Photographs of Angkor Wat 
taken in 1867 by John Thomson, a Scotsman who travelled from 
Bangkok, show wooden buildings and a Buddhist flagpole near the Grand 
Terrace (known in Khmer as kdār paen), west of the third enclosure. 
Thomson mentioned that the building on the left, close to the causeway, 
was the house of the head of a Buddhist monastery.14 All these structures 
are now gone. Moreover, during the clearing process of the causeway in 
1909, between the fourth and the third enclosures, two small cone-shaped 
mounds situated on either side (north and south) of the causeway, were 
unearthed just east of the western entrance of the fourth enclosure. Henri 
Marchal excavated the southern mound in June 1919, and found mainly 
built up earth mixed with sandstone chips and bricks that rose 3.9 metres 
above ground level and was limited on all sides by a 1.4-metre-high 
balustrade. He identified it as a recently added Buddhist structure, a 
stūpa.15 The excavation also unearthed several hundred Thai coins that 
were still in use at the time of excavation and also three Japanese swords.16 
Today there are two large pagodas located on either side of the main 
complex of Angkor Wat, to the north and south of the western entry 
causeway. The two pagodas were built approximately 100 years ago.
Within the main structure of Angkor Wat temple itself there are 
Buddhist traces and remains in many places in the form of Buddhist 
statues (see Chapter 8); more than 40 Khmer, Burmese and Thai 
inscriptions; ink inscriptions by Japanese and Chinese visitors or residents; 
a stūpa construction at the east of the third gallery; and some restoration 
works. It is also known that some Hindu bas-reliefs were carved in the 
galleries during the Middle Period. This practice appears to have served to

--- PAGE 227 ---
198
Ea Darith
pay respect to the ancestors by finishing past projects in order to gain 
merit. Even though the carvings were Hindu, the practice itself was 
Buddhist. Combined, this evidence also demonstrates the connection 
between Angkor Wat, Buddhist practices and beliefs, and people from 
both local and foreign locations.17 
Unfortunately, there is no clear, systematic documentation that 
elucidates in a definitive and thorough manner exactly what activities 
occurred in Angkor Wat and when the religion changed from Hinduism 
and Mahāyāna Buddhism to Theravāda Buddhism. For example, when 
were the “thousands” of Buddhist statues erected at the Cruciform 
Gallery (called “Preah Pean” or the Gallery of “A Thousand Buddhas”) 
and the uppermost Bakan level? For how long did these activities take 
place? These questions remain largely unanswered, though the painstaking 
research I have cited has made progress and promises further elucidation 
on these issues. 
We do know that in the 16th century a few Khmer kings, especially 
King Ang Chan, stepped up to strengthen and expand royal power after 
Fig. 5.10	 New vihāra on Middle 
Period terrace site in 
Angkor Wat temple 
grounds. Photograph by 
author, 2017.
5.10

--- PAGE 228 ---
199
A Brief Overview of Key Theravāda Buddhist Structures in Central Angkor 
the shift of the Khmer capital from Angkor. The Khmer capital had 
moved south by then – particularly spanning the Phnom Penh, Phnom 
Udong and Longvek areas on the west side of the Tonle Sap Lake, closer 
to modern-day Kampong Chhnang and Kandal provinces. The expansion 
primarily focused on the Angkorian heartlands rather than more distant 
places. King Ang Chan and his two successors visited Angkor to restore, 
reform and decorate structures and temples. Although it seems that the 
royal court itself never returned permanently to Angkor, royalty 
periodically returned to the area and established temporary residences for 
restoration and symbolic purposes. Angkor still remains the symbolic 
cultural heartland. Even today, there is a royal residence in Siem Reap 
despite the main palace being located in Phnom Penh.
Interestingly, as alluded to earlier, two galleries of the third enclosure 
of Angkor Wat, at the northeast corner, were left incomplete during the 
reign of King Sūryavarman II. An inscription records the context of their 
sculpting in the mid 16th century: “When His Majesty Braḥ Rāja Oṅkār 
Parama Rājādhirāja Rāmādhipatī Parama Cakravartirāja [Ang Chan], rose 
to the throne, he ordered Braḥ Mahīdhara and the royal artisans to 
continue sculpting the narrative panels …”. The new reliefs were made 
between 1546 and 1564.18   
Following the restoration projects, we can assume that there was more 
information flow, knowledge transfer and advertisement about the area as 
an important place for Buddhist pilgrimage, hospitality and opportunity. 
Increased numbers of pilgrims likely visited Angkor. This is evident from 
many of the post-Angkor foreign inscriptions carved at Angkor Wat. 
Angkor became well known as a pilgrim centre for Buddhists, including 
the royal family.19 
In summary, Theravāda Buddhist representations at Angkor appear to 
go through a basic two-stage evolutionary process. We do not yet know if 
there were abrupt changes or gradual changes. We do not fully understand 
the causes (both internal and external). It is unfortunate that there are few 
clues from the 14th and 15th centuries. However, a review of the 
inscriptions and other evidence from the 16th century onwards tells us 
about many practices that had evolved prior to the 16th century, as well as 
signifying important changes and efforts also beginning in the 16th 
century. It is important to increase research attention to this period of 
transformation. This includes further research on the chronology of the 
terraces; an inventory of items found at the terraces; establishment of the 
dating of these objects and of the sīmā; evidence in archaeology or text for 
specific rituals at the terraces; and how the terraces and other changes to 
Angkorian structures accommodated Theravāda in contrast to Mahāyāna 
or Brahmanic ceremonies.

--- PAGE 229 ---
200
Ea Darith
Notes
1	
Henri Marchal, “Monuments secondaires et terrasses bouddhiques d’Ańkor 
Thom”, BEFEO XVIII, no. 8, Hanoi, 1918; Ashley Thompson, “The Ancestral 
Cult in Transition: Reflections on Spatial Organization of Cambodia’s Early 
Theravada Complex”, in Southeast Asian Archaeology 1996. Proceedings of the 
6th International Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Leiden, 2–6 September 1996, eds. M. J. Klokke and T. de Brujin, 
Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, University of Hull, 1998, pp. 273–95; 
Ashley Thompson, Mémoires du Cambodge, PhD dissertation, Université de 
Paris 8, 1999, pp. 40–76. 
2	
Thompson, “The Ancestral Cult” and Mémoires, pp. 40–114.
3	
APSARA, Aṅgar Dhaṃ, 2002. (Khmer-language publication for internal use.)
4	
Marchal, “Monuments secondaires”; Thompson, “The Ancestral Cult” and 
Mémoires, pp. 47–8.
5	
Thompson, “The Ancestral Cult” and Mémoires, pp. 40–114.
6	
The most extensive study to date of Cambodian sīmā is in Madeleine Giteau, Le 
bornage ritual des temples bouddhiques au Cambodge, PEFEO VXVIII, 1969. 
For close consideration of the Middle Period sīmā in Angkor Thom, see 
Chapter 6 in this volume.
7	
Zhou Daguan, A Record of Cambodia: The Land and its People, trans. Peter 
Harris, Silkworm Books, 2007.
8	
George Cœdès, “Études cambodgiennes XXXIII: La destination funéraire des 
monuments khmers”, BEFEO XL, no. 2, 1940, pp. 315–49.
9	
Nara National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, Japan, Western Prasat 
Top Site Survey Report on Joint Research for the Protection of the Angkor Historic 
Site, Digital Advertising, Phnom Penh, 2012.
10	
Stéphanie Leroy, Mitch Hendrickson, Emanuelle Delqué-Kolic, Enrique Vega 
and Philippe Dillmann, “First Direct Dating for the Construction and 
Modification of the Baphuon Temple Mountain in Angkor, Cambodia”, Plos 
ONE 10, no. 11: e0141052. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0141052.
11	
For the most recent detailed reflections on the dating of this site, see Ludivine 
Provost-Roche, Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge (env. 
1220–env. 1500), 2 vols., PhD dissertation, Université de la Sorbonne 
Nouvelle–Paris III, 2010, vol. 1: pp. 115–31; and Chapter 2 in this volume.
12	
Jacques Dumarçay, Phnom Bakheng: Étude architecturale du temple, PEFEO, 
Paris, 1971; Ashley Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor: A Buddhist ‘Cosmopolis’ 
in Southeast Asia?”, Bulletin of the Students of the Department of Archaeology, 
Royal University of Fine Arts, Phnom Penh, 2004, pp. 88–119; Nasir Abdoul-
Carime and Grégory Mikaelian, “Angkor et l’Islam: note sur la stèle arabe du 
Bhnaṃ Pākhaeṅ (K.1081)”, Péninsule 63, no. 2, 2011: pp. 5–59.
13	
On early stūpa forms in Cambodia, including comments on this stūpa, see 
Henri Marchal, “Note sur la forme du stupa au Cambodge”, BEFEO XLIV, no. 
2: pp. 581–90; and Jean Boisselier, Cambodge: Manuel d’archéologie d’Extrême-
Orient, tome I, ed. Picard, Paris, 1966, pp. 97–8.
14	
Ang Choulean, Ashley Thompson and Eric Prenowitz, Angkor: A Manual for 
the Past, Present and Future, Phnom Penh: APSARA, 1995.
15	
Henri Parmentier and Henri Marchal, Angkor Vat: Rapport avril 1919–avril 
1920, Rapport de la Conservation d’Angkor, unpublished manuscript, Paris: 
EFEO, 1920.
16	
See Nasir Abdoul-Carime, “Un vestige japonais au Cambodge: le katana du roi 
Sisowath”, Bulletin de l’AEFEK, no. 22, December 2017, http://www.aefek.fr,

--- PAGE 230 ---
201
A Brief Overview of Key Theravāda Buddhist Structures in Central Angkor 
note 4; Till F. Sonnemann, Angkor Underground: Applying GPR to Analyse the 
Diachronic Structure of a Great Urban Complex, PhD dissertation, University of 
Sydney, 2011, pp. 137–8.
17	
On the collection of Buddha images, see Chapter in this volume. On the 
16th-century transformation of the central sanctuary into a stūpa with four 
colossal Buddha images, see Thompson, Mémoires, pp. 115–253; and Ashley 
Thompson, “Lost and Found: The Stupa, the Four-Faced Buddha and the Seat 
of Royal Power in Middle Cambodia”, in Southeast Asian Archaeology 1998. 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the European Association of 
Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 August to 4 September 1998, eds.  
W. Lobo and S. Reimann, Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, University of 
Hull, 2000, pp. 245–63. On the inscriptions, see especially George Cœdès, “La 
date d’exécution des deux bas-reliefs tardifs d’Angkor Vat”, JA, fasc. 2, 1962: pp. 
235–43; Saveros Lewitz’s corpus of critical editions in the BEFEO from 
1970–75; and Yoshiaki Ishizawa, “Les inscriptions calligraphiques japonaises du 
XVIIe siècle à Angkor Vat et le plan du Jetavana-vihara”, Manuel d’épigraphie 
du Cambodge, vol. I. ed. Yoshiaki Ishizawa, Claude Jacques and Khin Sok, Paris: 
EFEO/UNESCO, 2007, pp. 169–79.
18	
Cœdѐs, “La date d’exécution”; Thompson, Mémoires, vol. I, pp. 172–79, vol. II, 
pp. 407–8; and Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”.
19	
Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”.
References 
Abdoul-Carime, Nasir. “Un vestige japonais au Cambodge: le katana du roi 
Sisowath”. Bulletin de l’AEFEK 22, December 2017. http://www.aefek.fr.
Abdoul-Carime, Nasir and Grégory Mikaelian. “Angkor et l’Islam: note sur la stèle 
arabe du Bhnaṃ Pākhaeṅ (K.1081)”. Péninsule 63, no. 2, 2011: pp. 5–59.
Ang Choulean, Ashley Thompson and Eric Prenowitz. Angkor: A Manual for the 
Past, Present and Future. Phnom Penh: APSARA, 1995.
APSARA. Aṅgar Dhaṃ. Publication for Internal Use, 2002. (In Khmer.)
Boisselier, Jean. Cambodge: Manuel d’archéologie d’Extrême-Orient, tome I. Paris: 
Éditions Picard, 1966.
Cœdès, George. “La date d’exécution des deux bas-reliefs tardifs d’Angkor Vat”. JA, no. 
2, 1962: pp. 235–43.
——— . “Études cambodgiennes XXXIII. La destination funéraire des monuments 
khmers”. BEFEO XL, no. 2, 1940: pp. 315–49.
Dumarçay, Jacques. Phnom Bakheng: Étude architecturale du temple. Paris: PEFEO, 
1971.
Giteau, Madeleine. Le bornage rituel des temples bouddhiques au Cambodge. Paris: 
PEFEO VXVIII, 1969.
Ishizawa, Yoshiaki. “Les inscriptions calligraphiques japonaises du XVIIe siècle à 
Angkor Vat et le plan du Jetavana-vihara”. In Manuel d’épigraphie du 
Cambodge, Volume I, eds. Yoshiaki Ishizawa, Claude Jacques and Khin Sok. 
Paris: EFEO/UNESCO, 2007, pp. 169−79.
Leroy, Stéphanie, Mitch Hendrickson, Emanuelle Delqué-Kolic, Enrique Vega and 
Philippe Dillmann. “First Direct Dating for the Construction and Modification 
of the Baphuon Temple Mountain in Angkor, Cambodia”. Plos ONE 10, no. 
11, 2015: e0141052. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0141052. 
Lewitz (Pou), Saveros. “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3”. BEFEO LVII, 1970: 
pp. 99–126.

--- PAGE 231 ---
202
Ea Darith
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 4, 5, 6 et 7”. BEFEO LVIII, 1971:  
pp. 105–23.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 1, 8 et 9”. BEFEO LIX, 1972: pp. 101–21.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16a, 16b et 
16c”. BEFEO LIX 1972: pp. 221–49.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 et 25”, BEFEO 
LX, 1973: pp. 163–203.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33”. BEFEO LX, 
1973: pp. 205–42.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 35, 37 et 39”. BEFEO LXI, 1974:  
pp. 301–37.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”, BEFEO LXII, 1975:  
pp. 283–353.
Marchal, Henri. “Monuments secondaires et terrasses bouddhiques et monuments 
secondaires d’Ańkor Thom”. BEFEO XVIII, no. 8, 1918.
——— . “Note sur la forme du stupa au Cambodge”. BEFEO XLIV, no. 2, 1944:  
pp. 581–90.
Nara National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, Japan. Western Prasat Top 
Site Survey Report on Joint Research for the Protection of the Angkor Historic Site. 
Phnom Penh: Digital Advertising, 2012.
Parmentier, Henri and Henri Marchal. Angkor Vat: Rapport Avril 1919–Avril 1920, 
Rapport de la Conservation d’Angkor. Paris: EFEO, 1920. (Unpublished 
manuscript.)
Provost-Roche, Ludivine. Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge 
(env. 1220–env. 1500), 2 vols. PhD dissertation, Université de la Sorbonne 
Nouvelle–Paris III, 2010.
Sonnemann, Till F. Angkor Underground: Applying GPR to Analyse the Diachronic 
Structure of a Great Urban Complex. PhD dissertation, University of Sydney, 
2011.
Thompson, Ashley. “The Ancestral Cult in Transition: Reflections on Spatial 
Organization of Cambodia’s Early Theravada Complex”. In Southeast Asian 
Archaeology 1996. Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of the 
European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Leiden, 2–6 September 
1996, eds. Marijke J. Klokke and Thomas de Brujin, Centre for Southeast Asian 
Studies, University of Hull, 1998, pp. 273–95.
——— . “Lost and Found: The Stupa, the Four-Faced Buddha and the Seat of Royal 
Power in Middle Cambodia”. In Southeast Asian Archaeology 1998. Proceedings 
of the 7th International Conference of the European Association of Southeast 
Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 August to 4 September 1998, eds. Wibke Lobo 
and Stefanie Reimann, Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, University of Hull, 
2000, pp. 245–63.
——— . Mémoires du Cambodge. PhD dissertation, Université de Paris 8, 1999.
——— . “Pilgrims to Angkor: A Buddhist ‘Cosmopolis’ in Southeast Asia?”. Bulletin of 
the Students of the Department of Archaeology, Royal University of Fine Arts. 
Phnom Penh, 2004, pp. 88–119.
Zhou Daguan. A Record of Cambodia: The Land and its People, trans. Peter Harris. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2007.

--- PAGE 232 ---
203
Chapter 6
NEW EVIDENCE AT WESTERN 
PRASAT TOP, ANGKOR THOM
Yuni Sato
INTRODUCTION
Western Prasat Top is a temple site located in the southwest quadrant of 
Angkor Thom. Western Prasat Top today consists of a central sanctuary 
flanked by southern and northern sanctuaries, with a “Buddhist terrace” 
to the east of the central sanctuary (Fig. 6.1). A laterite enclosure 
measuring 50 metres by 80 metres and seven double sīmā mark the temple 
grounds as though to enclose the sanctuaries (Fig. 6.2). In past studies, it 
was thought that Western Prasat Top was built in the ninth century, as 
inferred from inscriptions and the trace of modification to the central 
sanctuary1, and remained in use into the post-Angkor period. However, 
no detailed archaeological studies had been made to support this 
Fig. 6.1 Western Prasat Top (viewed 
from the east). Photograph 
by author, 2008.
6.1

--- PAGE 233 ---
204
Yuni Sato
6.2

--- PAGE 234 ---
205
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
understanding. The monument deserves particular attention, as it 
includes buildings and architectural decorations that are associated with 
the 10th-century Banteay Srei style and the 13th- to 14th-century post-
Bayon style. For example, seated Buddha images in māravijaya that are 
displayed on pediments and standing Buddha images depicted on the false 
doors of the northern sanctuary could be regarded as representative icons 
of Western Prasat Top that belong to the post-Bayon period. 
PREVIOUS STUDY ON WESTERN PRASAT TOP
In 1918, Henri Marchal reported on the “Buddhist terraces” found in 
Angkor Thom district in his article “Monuments secondaires et terrasses 
bouddhiques d’Angkor-Thom”.2 Regarding the Western Prasat Top site, 
he discusses each sanctuary from an architectural point of view, and the 
artistic elements of the eastern face of the central sanctuary, concluding 
that the central sanctuary is a product of the Hindu religion that pre-
dated Buddhism at Angkor. He also provides a rough definition of 
terrace remains based on observation of the terrace remains located 
throughout the Angkor Thom district. According to this definition, 
terrace remains are characterised by their relation to Buddhism; being 
Fig. 6.2 Plan of Western Prasat Top. 
National Research Institute 
for Cultural Properties, Nara 
(NRICPN) 2012.
Fig. 6.3 Inscription K. 576 (stored at 
the Angkor Conservation 
Depot). Photograph 
courtesy Inoue Tadao, 2010.
6.3

--- PAGE 235 ---
206
Yuni Sato
long narrow platforms running from east to west; and having 
architectural structures atop them.
In 1925, Marchal published an essay entitled “Notes sur le Monument 
486 d’Angkor Thom” in which he discusses the Western Prasat Top site 
from artistic and architectural standpoints based on his observations in 
the previously mentioned article.3 The 1925 article could be called the first 
full-fledged survey of the Western Prasat Top site. Firstly, Marchal takes 
note of the decorative lintels found in the central sanctuary. The north–
south and east–west decorative lintels and colonettes in the central 
sanctuary resemble those found in the 10th-century Banteay Srei style, 
and some are trimmed down in an unnatural fashion and wedged into the 
central sanctuary, indicating that they may have been transferred there 
from elsewhere. An attempt at deciphering Inscription K. 576 (Fig. 6.3.), 
discovered at the Western Prasat Top site, was made by Louis Finot.4 This 
inscription, on a stone tablet 150 centimetres high, 40 centimetres wide 
and 15 centimetres thick, was discovered at the southeast corner of the 
northern sanctuary base during cleaning of the site. According to Finot, 
there are 23 lines engraved in Sanskrit and Old Khmer. They describe a 
statue of Vishnu offered in order to secure blessings for the ancestral hall, 
built for the maternal uncle of Yaśovarman I, and indicate that the hall 
was built between 889 and 908 for the enthronement of a prince.
After Marchal, from the 1940s through the 1960s, there was little 
scholarly investigation of or research on the Western Prasat Top site, and 
in general reference manuals on the broader Angkor site it was only 
mentioned as one of many ruins in the region. Maurice Glaize, for 
example, mentions the Western Prasat Top site briefly in his Les 
monuments du groupe d’Angkor but his observations do little more than 
reiterate the interpretations of Marchal.5
In the early 1970s, research on the Western Prasat Top site turned a 
corner with the work of Madeleine Giteau. She took an interest in the art 
of the post-Angkor period, and was one of the few experts studying this 
art from an iconographic standpoint. In particular, the iconographic 
analysis of post-Angkor Buddhist art and the decorative elements found at 
archaeological sites in Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien made her 
a well-known pioneering figure in the field.6 Included in this study is an 
examination of Western Prasat Top as a site from the post-Bayon period, 
including an analysis of the Buddhist iconography, particularly of the 
pediments. The iconography of the site is attributed to several different 
periods, with the oldest pediments dating from the late 13th century, and, 
in Giteau’s view, the newest of them not later than the end of the 14th 
century. She points out the resemblance of the uṣṇīṣa (protuberances on 
the heads of Buddha statues) to those of the Haripunjaya culture 
flourishing at the time in northern Thailand. The iconography of statues

--- PAGE 236 ---
207
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
Fig. 6.4 Northeast corner of the 
inner laterite base of 
Western Prasat Top’s central 
sanctuary, with mouldings 
visible. Photograph by 
author, 2016.
at the Western Prasat Top site derives from Theravāda Buddhism, which 
in Giteau’s view places them historically at the transition between Angkor 
and post-Angkor culture. This view has been highly influential on 
archaeological research not only at the Western Prasat Top site, but also 
on wider research relating to the Cambodian Middle Period.
In 1995, Hiram Woodward took note of the links between Thailand 
and Cambodia toward the end of the Angkor period, and delved into the 
formal evolution occasioned by the dissemination of Theravāda Buddhism 
through the study of a wide variety of materials from both countries from 
an architectural and artistic perspective.7 In a 2002 paper, he discussed the 
back-and-forth influence between Thailand and Cambodia during the 
post-Bayon period, which he sees to be particularly notable on Thai art 
and architecture.8 An example is the resemblance between standing 
Buddhist statues in the Western Prasat Top site northern sanctuary and 
the art of the Mon people of the Haripunjaya culture which flourished in 
northern Thailand between the 11th and 14th centuries. In addition, he 
notes the triple tower structure of the Western Prasat Top site, similar to 
temple structures seen in Lopburi, Central Thailand. During the post-
Bayon period, Angkor came under increasing influence from regional 
Thai powers that were formerly under Khmer control, and Woodward 
suggests that these influences are visible in the spatial organisation of 
temples and decorative elements thereof.
6.4

--- PAGE 237 ---
208
Yuni Sato
In 1996, Ashley Thompson conducted a study of early Theravāda 
Buddhist architecture.9 This study discusses the Western Prasat Top site, 
and acknowledges the importance of the site as both the last work of 
Angkor period architecture and the last temple to exhibit the triple tower 
structure. Thompson’s doctoral dissertation of 1999 also refers to the 
Western Prasat Top site, and, while adhering fundamentally to the 
interpretations of Marchal and Giteau, places a strong emphasis on the 
triple tower structure of the site.10 It notes that the triple towers in 
Cambodian Mahāyāna Buddhism generally represent Buddha, 
Avalokiteśvara, and Mahāprajnāpāramitā, while in Hinduism they 
represent Shiva, Vishnu and Brahma. Like Woodward, she describes the 
Western Prasat Top site as representative of the triple tower structure in 
Buddhist architecture, as also seen in Lopburi-period Thailand.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXCAVATIONS AND RESTORATION 
WORKS BY NARA NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR CULTURAL 
PROPERTIES (NRICPN)
History of surveys by NRICPN
In 2001, Nara National Institute for Cultural Properties (NRICPN) 
launched an ongoing study of Western Prasat Top from the perspectives 
of archaeology, architectural history and conservation science.11 Through 
our project new artefacts and evidence have been discovered. 
On 26 May 2008, during the second mid-term phase surveys, about 40 
gable stones on the eastern side of the central sanctuary were dislodged. It 
was learned that trees covering the top of the central sanctuary had been 
cut down two years prior, killing the roots that had held the stones in 
place. The destabilised stones fell as the tree roots decayed. As a 
consequence, all of the stonework on the upper part of the central 
sanctuary became unstable. This experience highlighted the urgent nature 
of the restoration of Western Prasat Top, which had been neglected for so 
long. Through discussions between NRICPN, APSARA (Authority for 
the Protection and Safeguarding of Angkor and the Region of Angkor) 
and other concerned parties, the decision was made to initiate restoration 
work under the third mid-term phase (2011–2015). Preparation for the 
restoration work started in 2011.
Archaeological excavations have been conducted at Western Prasat Top 
since 2003. As the excavation research focus was mainly limited to the 
Buddhist terrace and the periphery of the central sanctuary, it is difficult 
to infer the transformation of the site as a whole directly from the results 
of this research. However, some findings have been obtained through 
analysis of the artefacts’ conditions when they were excavated.

--- PAGE 238 ---
209
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
Central Sanctuary
Previous studies pointed out three main points: an early laterite structure 
sits inside the central sanctuary; the decorative lintels and colonettes were 
adapted for installation in the central sanctuary; and pediments installed 
on the central sanctuary and southern and northern sanctuaries can be 
dated to the post-Bayon period. These three points must be well 
established in order to understand the transition of the central sanctuary.
Firstly, the central sanctuary consists of three major sections, a 
building frame, an upper base and a lower base. The outer tier of the bases 
is made from sandstone and has simple moulding. Due to the collapse of 
the outer sandstone tier, some parts of the inner laterite tier have been 
made visible. As Marchal mentioned, it is believed that the inner laterite 
base could be that of a former structure of Western Prasat Top, as this 
inner laterite base has mouldings.12 During the partial restoration of the 
northeast corner of the upper base of the central sanctuary, we found that 
the inner laterite base retains original moulding (Fig. 6.4). That is, there is 
one laterite base with moulding inside the outer sandstone base of the 
central sanctuary which we can see today.  
Secondly, as Marchal mentioned, the decorative lintels and colonettes 
of the central sanctuary are of the 10th-century Banteay Srei style. It 
became clear in our work however that only the south lintel was kept in its 
original position. The eastern and western lintels are today stored at the 
Angkor Conservation Depot; parts of the northern lintel had 
unfortunately fallen and scattered on the sanctuary floor. 
6.5
Fig. 6.5	 Pediment with the motif of 
Buddha in māravijaya seated 
on a pedestal. Photograph 
by author, 2016.

--- PAGE 239 ---
210
Yuni Sato
Thirdly, we were able to reconstruct some of the pediments and 
identify some of their iconography. Pediments in Western Prasat Top are 
characterised by images of the Buddha and other motifs depicted at the 
centre of the tympanum. These pediment images basically consist of three 
types:
Type One: A single seated Buddha with hands held in māravijaya. 
Type One is further broken down into two categories; Category One is 
made up of those with the Buddha seated on a pedestal decorated with 
lotus petals (Fig. 6.5), and Category Two refers to those without a 
pedestal.
Type Two: A seated Buddha in māravijaya, flanked by supplicants. 
The Type Two pediment images are all without pedestals. However, this 
type also consists of two categories. Category One includes pediment 
images in which the supplicants are wearing crowns (Fig. 6.6), and 
Category Two includes those in which they are not. In both categories, all 
the supplicants have their legs bent and are facing the Buddha with hands 
clasped in prayer. 
Type Three: Flower or kendi imagery (Fig. 6.7). 
For dating the central sanctuary, it is key to identify the unearthed 
ceramic sherds. During the seventh survey in the periphery of the central 
sanctuary, a white porcelain bowl was excavated. Because a sandstone 
masonry door sill of the central sanctuary was placed on this second layer, 
the current sandstone base exterior of the central sanctuary is believed to 
have been installed no earlier than the 14th century.
6.6
Fig. 6.6	 Pediment with the motif of a 
crowned supplicant. 
Photograph by author, 2008.

--- PAGE 240 ---
211
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
6.7
Fig. 6.7	 Pediment with kendi 
imagery. Photograph by 
author, 2016.
Buddhist Terrace
Structures
The survey of the artefacts of the lower layers of the Buddhist terrace 
revealed the transformation of artefacts in front of the pedestal at the 
eastern end of the terrace (Fig. 6.8). The survey discovered the laterite 
pavement. As Chinese ceramics excavated from the fifth layer are 
understood to belong to the 12th century, the first stage of construction 
is considered to date from around or after the 12th century. During a 
second stage, one posthole was dug, and a pillar likely related to the 
terrace was erected. The Carbon-14 date of the carbide, which is 
believed to be from a pillar, is from the late 13th century to the 14th 
century (Table 6.1), enabling us to date the second stage accordingly. 
During the third stage, pillars were abolished, the ground of the third 
and fourth layers was levelled, and the laterite floor was laid. Also, the 
currently conserved sandstone base exterior of the central sanctuary was 
built in this period. The fourth stage was when the second and the first 
layers were built on the laterite floor, and the Buddhist terrace that can 
be seen today was completed. The construction of the third and the 
fourth stages was carried out sequentially in the 14th century. The fifth 
stage, when wooden structures were built, can be identified by the 
production dates of the many roof tiles that were discovered. These roof 
tiles are brown glazed stoneware, the only discovery of the type thus far. 
The production time of the roofs will be studied as more similar case 
reports become available in the future.

--- PAGE 241 ---
212
Yuni Sato
6.8
H=23.00
H=22.00
H=22.50
H=22.80
2m
0
X=1485999.00
X=1485997.00
X=1485995.00
X=1485993.00
Y=375712.00
Y=375713.00
Y=375714.00
Fig. 6.8	 Plan of trench in front of 
pedestal on the terrace. 
NRICPN, 2012.
A small white porcelain jar was unearthed from the third layer during 
the 11th survey, and the head of a sandstone Buddha image, along with 
sandstone featuring Buddhist decoration were discovered in the adjacent 
area. A variety of artefacts made of gold and bronze were found inside the 
bowl and were confirmed to be objects used in ritual ceremonies.
Artefacts
The stone sculptures unearthed during excavations at the Buddhist terrace 
all depict the Buddha or are Buddhist-related. These unearthed artefacts 
do not appear to be stylistically uniform. For example, the Buddhist triad 
(Fig. 6.9) and the Buddha seated on a nāga represent motifs most often 
seen in Bayon-period sculpture. On the other hand, two Buddha heads 
and a niche have characteristics that place them in the post-Bayon period 
(Fig. 6.10). Moreover, the two Buddha heads differ in their treatment of 
different features, such as uṣṇīṣa, type of hair and shape of the face. The 
Buddha head with a flame-like uṣṇīṣa (Fig. 6.11) can be dated later than 
that with a simple uṣṇīṣa (Fig. 6.12).

--- PAGE 242 ---
213
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
However, it must be noted here that while these artefacts display 
characteristics of different periods, they were all unearthed from around 
the same level on top of the eastern terrace. Most of them were found 
around the front of the Buddha pedestal, a point that requires additional 
discussion. We are however able to affirm that these Buddhist images were 
intentionally buried in the Buddhist terrace of Western Prasat Top. 
Considering the results of analysis of the accompanying Chinese ceramics 
and charcoal that were unearthed, the images from the vicinity of the 
pedestal were buried later than the 13th to 14th centuries.
Southern Sanctuary
The southern sanctuary consists of three major sections, a building frame, 
an upper base and a lower base. The upper section of the upper base of the 
southern sanctuary inclines toward the south at an angle of approximately 
19 degrees. Because this incline made it impossible to reposition stones for 
reconstruction following disassembly, it was necessary to disassemble the 
lower base, add and compact soil, and then reconstruct the base. 
Building frame
The building frame which consists of nine layers (N1–N9) is placed on 
the upper base. The roof was assumed to have been a simple arch; 
however, none of it remained. During dismantling, cuboid stones that 
may have been used for the roof were found. With regard to the building 
Measurement
δ13C 
(‰)
Date for calendar year 
calibration (yrBP±1σ)
14C Date
(yrBP±1σ)
Date range that 14C Date is calibrated into calendar year
1σ Calendar year range
2σ Calendar year range
PED-16760 
No.S-1
-4.55±0.18
712±17
710±15
1270AD(68.2%)1290AD
1265AD(95.4%)1295AD
PED-16761 
No.S-2
-4.60±0.15
737±17
735±15
1265AD(68.2%)1280AD
1255AD(95.4%)1290AD
PED-16762 
No.S-3
-25.50±0.20
685±17
685±15
1275AD(68.2%)1300AD
1270AD(76.6%)1310AD 
1360AD(18.8%)1390AD
PED-16763 
No.S-4
-24.16±0.19
668±17
670±15
1285AD(40.6%)1300AD 
1365AD(27.6%)1380AD
1270AD(54.2%)1310AD 
1360AD(41.2%)1390AD
PED-16764 
No.S-5
-24.73±0.25
718±19
720±20
1270AD(68.2%)1290AD
1260AD(95.4%)1295AD
Table 6.1: Radiocarbon dating results and calendar year calibration

--- PAGE 243 ---
214
Yuni Sato
6.9
6.10
6.12
6.11

--- PAGE 244 ---
215
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
frame, on the eastern face, where the majority of the original stones 
remained, the beams under the gables of the roof, and one unit on the 
northern side among the nāga decorations that had been placed in pairs 
on both sides of the gables remained in their original positions; the eastern 
door was originally opened. On the other hand, on the northern, western 
and southern faces, where some parts of the original stones remained, each 
interior side door frame was filled in with stones, making these “false 
doors”, well known in Angkorian architecture. Some of the sandstone 
comprising the building frame are re-used stones. 
Unearthed sīmā at the upper base and lower base
The upper base consists of eight layers (N10–N17); the lower base 
consists equally of eight layers (N18–N25). The top layer of the lower 
base (N18) which is mainly composed of flat stones measuring 
approximately 12 centimetres thick could be the pavement layer of the 
lower base. During dismantlement, 14 sīmā were uncovered from the 
upper and lower bases. From the upper base, three sīmā were uncovered 
from N12, two from N14, two from N15 and five from N16. From the 
lower platform, two were found in N24 (Figs. 6.13 & 6.14). At first 
glance, the sīmā appear to have been stacked randomly, but they also seem 
to be placed mainly in positions that serve as gateways, such as near the 
stairways of platforms. This trend is especially conspicuous in N24. The 
sīmā found in N24 are clearly placed immediately below the bottom-most 
stairway of the lower platform stairways of the southern sanctuary and 
were probably placed in this position intentionally. At the southern 
sanctuary, although there is a diversion from the obvious use of these as 
“sīmā”, that is sacred boundary stones, the sculpted blocks were likely 
placed and incorporated into the southern sanctuary with consideration 
of their ritualistic and religious meaning.
 
Comparative study of sīmā in Angkor Thom
Prior to her 1975 publication on Cambodian Middle Period iconography, 
Giteau published a study on the ritual use of sīmā in Cambodia.13 
Giteau’s research provides the only available classification of sīmā in 
Cambodia, but it focuses mainly on highly decorative sīmā of Theravāda 
Buddhist temples built after the Middle Period, and does not provide a 
detailed classification of sīmā belonging to Buddhist terraces that were 
seen toward the end of the Angkor period and in Angkor Thom. Stephen 
Murphy has done significant work on sīmā not only in the Dvāravatī 
period/area but in other areas.14 His work can support studies on sīmā 
generally, but the sīmā that were discovered in the southern sanctuary 
need to be considered in their specific context. Given this situation, the 
team decided to make a list of sīmā of major Buddhist terraces within 
Fig. 6.9 Buddhist triad. Photograph 
courtesy Inoue Tadao, 2010.
Fig. 6.10	 Sculpted niche. Photograph 
by author, 2011.
Fig. 6.11	 Head of Buddha image 
(with flame-like uṣṇīṣa). 
Photograph by author, 
2010.
Fig. 6.12	 Head of Buddha image 
(with simple uṣṇīṣa). 
Photograph courtesy Inoue 
Tadao, 2010.

--- PAGE 245 ---
216
Yuni Sato
6.13 
1m
0
6.14

--- PAGE 246 ---
217
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
Fig. 6.13 Locations of sīmā from N24 
southern sanctuary. 
NRICPN, 2014.
Fig. 6.14	 Sīmā from N24 southern 
sanctuary. Photograph by 
author, 2013.
Angkor Thom, to compare them with the sīmā of Western Prasat Top. 
This was considered only a preliminary activity, feasible at the present 
stage. Though not all sīmā in Angkor Thom were verified, roughly on the 
whole, it seems they can be classified into two main types, each with their 
own sub-types, according to the shape of the stone exposed above ground. 
For convenience, they shall herein be referred to as Types A1 and A2, and 
Types B1, B2 and B3. 
Type A1 has a tripartite head with no lotus bud; Type A2 has a 
tripartite head with a lotus bud at the top. Type B1 is shaped like a lotus 
petal and is minimally decorated; Type B2 has a lotus bud at the top and 
its body has a straight-edged form; Type B3 also has a lotus bud at the top, 
however, its side body shows a curved-edge form. It is too early yet to 
conclude at the present stage whether the differences between these types 
are due to differences in their year of construction. However, among the 
sīmā found at Western Prasat Top, the 14 stones found in the southern 
sanctuary correspond to Type A1, and those that were found in situ as 
boundary markers of the West Prasat Top Buddhist site correspond to 
Type B1. Among the Buddhist terraces of Angkor Thom we find:
Type A1: Kok Thlok (Fig. 6.15) 
Type A2: Preah Pithu (Fig. 6.16) 
Type B1: Tep Pranam (Figs. 6.17 & 6.18) 
Type B2: Preah In Tep; Vihear Prambuon Lavaeng (Fig. 6.19)  
Type B3: Preah Ang Ngok; Vihear Prampir Lavaeng (Fig. 6.20)
The recent discovery of sīmā in the dismantling of the southern sanctuary 
of Western Prasat Top might provide important clues to revealing the 
process of formation of Theravāda Buddhist temples in Angkor Thom 
and the state of affairs during the transition into the Middle Period over 
the 13th and 14th centuries.
Northern Sanctuary
The northern sanctuary consists of three major sections: a building frame, 
an upper base and a lower base. The upper section of the upper base of the 
northern sanctuary inclines toward the south at an angle of approximately 
14 degrees. The degree of incline is smaller relative to that of the southern 
sanctuary; however, sinkage at the centre of the base is significant, and has 
resulted in greater damage to the building frame. Additionally, the size of 
each sandstone block of the northern sanctuary is smaller than that of 
those used in the southern and central sanctuaries.
False door
According to previous studies and the École française d’Extreme-Orient 
(EFEO) photographic documentation, it has long been known that

--- PAGE 247 ---
218
Yuni Sato
6.15
6.17
6.16
standing Buddhas were sculpted on the western and southern false doors 
of the northern sanctuary. Unfortunately, the building frame collapsed at 
some point in the 20th century and many sandstone blocks have fallen to 
the ground. The northern and eastern doors are entirely collapsed, leaving 
only portions of the western and southern false doors in their original 
positions. Fortunately, the upper part of the standing Buddha on the 
western false door was stored at the Angkor Conservation Depot and has 
now been reconstructed in its original position (Fig. 6.21). When 
restoration work for the northern sanctuary started, the team 
reconstructed the false doors. More than half of the southern false door 
was found as scattered stones, and was reconstructed (Fig. 6.22). 
Furthermore, the team found parts of the northern false door, which had 
never been recorded in previous studies. It is interesting to note the subtle 
differences in posture of these three Buddhas. While in previous studies 
Fig. 6.15	 Sīmā at Kok Thlok, Angkor 
Thom. Photograph by 
author, 2013. (See Fig. 6.14 
for comparator sīmā from 
the southern sanctuary of 
Western Prasat Top.)
Fig. 6.16	 Sīmā at Preah Pithu (lotus 
bud top missing). 
Photograph by author, 
2015.
Fig. 6.17.	Sīmā at Tep Pranam. 
Photograph by author, 
2013.

--- PAGE 248 ---
219
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
the southern and western door figures were interpreted as standing, there 
is a slight but important difference between them. The southern figure is 
fully frontal; the bent proper left knee of the western figure suggests 
walking. The figure on the northern door is shown veritably walking, with 
the whole body twisted in the direction the feet are headed (Fig. 6.23). We 
see here a specific style, like the walking Buddha known in northern Thai 
traditions. While the images on each of the three false doors depict the 
Buddha in a different stance, all show the abhayamudrā, with the right 
hand drawn up to the chest, and the left arm at the side. 
Brick structure
Dismantlement of the building frame began in January 2016. It has 
become clear that while the inner tier of the lower base of the southern 
sanctuary is mainly composed of laterite, that of the northern sanctuary is 
Fig. 6.18	 Sīmā at Western Prasat Top 
in situ. Photograph by 
author, 2013.
Fig. 6.19	 Sīmā at Vihear Prambuon 
Lavaeng. Photograph by 
author, 2010.
Fig. 6.20	 Sīmā at Vihear Prampir 
Lavaeng. Photograph by 
author, 2012.
6.18
6.19
6.20

--- PAGE 249 ---
220
Yuni Sato
Fig. 6.21 Standing (or walking) 
Buddha on the western 
false door of the northern 
sanctuary, Western Prasat 
Top, Angkor Thom. 
Photograph by author, 
2019.
Fig. 6.22	 Standing Buddha on the 
southern false door of the 
northern sanctuary, 
Western Prasat Top, Angkor 
Thom. Photograph by 
author, 2019.
Fig. 6.23	 Walking Buddha on the 
northern false door of the 
northern sanctuary, 
Western Prasat Top, Angkor 
Thom. Photograph by 
author, 2019.
6.21
6.22
6.23

--- PAGE 250 ---
221
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
mainly composed of laterite and brick. Bricks are often used in temples of 
the pre-Angkor period or the early Angkor period; on the other hand, in 
the late Angkor period including the Bayon period, it was rare to use 
bricks for temple structures. From this point of view, it is assumed that 
bricks were used at the Western Prasat Top due to special circumstances.
After dismantlement of the lower base, an archaeological trench was 
set at the foundation in order to confirm the condition of the foundation 
soil and to confirm the soil bearing capacity. During this work a 2.2 metre 
square-shaped brick structure appeared in the centre of the foundation. 
The depth of the brick structure is 1.6 metres and the four walls are all 
lined with bricks (Fig. 6.24). It is particularly notable that the lower part 
of the walls is partially covered in soot. Additionally, a large number of 
valuable artefacts were unearthed from the area immediately above the 
brick-paved floor. All artefacts are broken into small sherds and all are 
burnt. There are 332 pieces in total, broken down into the following 
categories: 174 pieces of gold artefacts; 46 pieces of potash lead glass beads; 
Fig. 6.24 Brick structure at the centre 
of the foundation of the 
northern sanctuary, 
Western Prasat Top, Angkor 
Thom, viewed from the 
south. Photograph by 
author, 2016.
6.24

--- PAGE 251 ---
222
Yuni Sato
19 pieces of soda glass; 42 pieces of quartz; 19 pieces of bronze; 11 pieces 
of bone; and 21 pieces of unknown objects. Non-decorative gold plate 
items are the highest in number but many of these are small fragments. 
Gold balls count for the second highest number; this type is hollow and 
has a small hole through the axis. It seems that this type was used as a kind 
of bead for something like a bracelet or necklace. An unusual piece 
comprises two gold strings twisted into a thin strand (Fig. 6.25). The 
fragments of burnt bone and charcoal were analysed by scientific methods. 
The charcoal samples from the bottom of the brick floor show specific 
data.15 Moreover, the burnt bone fragments were analysed through bone 
histological methods.16 Judging from the charcoal pieces unearthed from 
the same level as these artefacts (Table 6.2), and the sooted walls, it is 
assumed that some form of ritual ceremony using fire was undertaken 
inside this brick structure.
Besides these valuable artefacts, a tiny sherd of ceramics was also 
unearthed from the same level. The ceramic is Chinese blue-and-white 
ware, which can be dated to the 14th century. This demonstrates that after 
ritual ceremonies had been accomplished after the 14th century, the brick 
structure was filled with sandy soil and the northern sanctuary was built 
on top of it. 
It is unusual to find a structure underneath a sanctuary in Angkor. In 
the early 20th century, George Trouvé excavated the underground of the 
central tower of Angkor Wat and the central tower of the Bayon. He 
found shaft pits but there was no evidence of fire. The centre pit of Ak 
Yum was also excavated by Trouvé, however, the pit could be related to the 
liṅga placed inside the sanctuary. Although many archaeological missions 
have been undertaken since Trouvé’s, there has never been mention of 
comparable underground structures in Angkor. It reminds us instead of 
Wat Mahāthāt in Ayutthaya where significant gold and otherwise valuable 
Fig. 6.25 Gold strand excavated from 
the brick structure at the 
foundation of the northern 
sanctuary, Western Prasat 
Top, Angkor Thom. 
Photograph by Nakamura 
Ichiro, 2017.
6.25

--- PAGE 252 ---
223
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
artefacts were unearthed from the space underneath the central tower. 
These may share the context of the ritual pit and valuable items, but 
Western Prasat Top has a decidedly different context with evidence of the 
use of fire. At this stage, two hypotheses can be considered. One 
hypothesis is that this was a part of funerary ceremony such as a cremation 
and the other is that it evidences a ritual fire ceremony in Hinduism and 
Buddhism as represented by homa/havan/goma. It is necessary to keep 
these hypotheses in mind as we continue our research.
DISCOVERY OF A DECORATIVE SANDSTONE BLOCK  
WITH AN INSCRIPTION
On 24 July 2012, a decorative sandstone block with an inscription was 
found while a new alignment marker was being installed in the course of 
restoration work. The decorative block was found in close proximity to 
the sīmā in the centre of the southern side, placed in an approximately  
Measurement
Date range that 14C Date is calibrated 
into calendar year (1SD)
Date range that 14C Date is calibrated 
into calendar year (2SD)
Calibration data
WPT-C1
1315AD(51.7%)1356AD
1389AD(16.5%)1402AD
1299AD(67.9%)1370AD
1380AD(27.5%)1413AD
IntCal13
1394AD(68.2%)1423AD
1322AD(13.8%)1347AD
1387AD(81.6%)1435AD
ShCal13
WPT-C2
1318AD(44.2%)1353AD
1390AD(24.0%)1409AD
1301AD(61.5%)1368AD
1382AD(33.9%)1420AD
IntCal13
1398AD(68.2%)1427AD
1326AD( 5.3%)1341AD
1390AD(90.1%)1442AD
ShCal13
WPT-C3
1329AD(14.0%)1340AD
1396AD(54.2%)1426AD
1316AD(30.9%)1355AD
1388AD(64.5%)1437AD
IntCal13
1412AD(68.2%)1440AD
1400AD(95.4%)1450AD
ShCal13
WPT-C4
1315AD(50.0%)1356AD
1389AD(18.2%)1404AD
1299AD(67.1%)1370AD
1380AD(28.3%)1414AD
IntCal13
1395AD(68.2%)1423AD
1323AD(11.6%)1345AD
1388AD(83.8%)1435AD
ShCal13
WPT-C5
1320AD(38.0%)1350AD
1391AD(30.2%)1414AD
1305AD(54.8%)1364AD
1384AD(40.6%)1425AD
IntCal13
1402AD(68.2%)1430AD
1391AD(95.4%)1446AD
ShCal13
WPT-C6
1319AD(42.9%)1351AD
1391AD(25.3%)1410AD
1304AD(59.8%)1365AD
1383AD(35.6%)1420AD
IntCal13
1400AD(68.2%)1426AD
1327AD( 2.8%)1339AD
1390AD(92.6%)1443AD
ShCal13
Table 6.2: Estimated calibration age (cal BP)

--- PAGE 253 ---
224
Yuni Sato
10-centimetre-deep recess in the ground’s surface. It has a decorative 
contour in the shape of lotus petals, and has a rectangular mortise at its 
centre (Fig. 6.26). When it was carefully picked up so that its opposing 
surface could be examined, a single inscribed line in the Pāli language in 
Khmer script was found (Fig. 6.27). The stone measures 66.3 centimetres 
at its longest point, 45.3 centimetres at its widest, it is 11.5 centimetres 
high and weighs approximately 40 kilograms. There is no consensus 
regarding its purpose, but it might have been an offering made with the 
inscription side facing up, or a pedestal for a wooden or stone object with 
the mortise side facing up. No other examples of similar decorative 
sandstone have been found so far from archaeological sites other than 
Western Prasat Top. The content of the inscription is interpreted as 
shown below.
Transliteration of original inscription: dakkhinṇe kassapo 
buddho  
English translation: The Kassapa Buddha in the south
Judging by the character type, it is presumed to date from between the last 
years of the Angkor period and the Middle Period (Fig. 6.28). Kassapa 
Buddha is the sixth in the sequence of seven past Buddhas. In Buddhist 
traditions, multiple Buddhas appear over time. The first three Buddhas are 
of the alamkarakalpa era and the latter four are called Buddhas of the 
Fig. 6.26 Decorative stone with 
mortise found at the centre 
of the southern side of the 
laterite enclosure of 
Western Prasat Top. 
Photograph courtesy Inoue 
Tadao, 2014.
6.26

--- PAGE 254 ---
225
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
present bhadrakalpa era. The seventh Buddha is Sākyamuni, and an added 
eighth is Maitreya, the Buddha to come. The four past Buddhas of the 
present era, in particular, are frequently associated with the four 
directions and Kassapa Buddha is normally positioned in the south.17 As 
mentioned above, this sandstone artefact was unearthed near sīmā 
situated in the central part of the south laterite enclosure; it might have 
been placed there with a conscious awareness of the south direction. With 
regard to the four past Buddhas, it is known that they were widely 
worshipped in Pagan, Burma (Myanmar). In Cambodia, however, no 
records or examples exist that indicate that the worship of the four past 
Buddhas flourished during the height of the Angkor period, but there is 
the possibility that such worship was widespread in the Cambodian 
Middle Period.18 
The inscription “Kassapa Buddha in the south” found at Western 
Prasat Top might also suggest the possibility that the four-Buddha 
configuration was ingrained in Western Prasat Top. Fragments of 
sandstone with the same decorations as those recently discovered have 
been found (Figs. 6.29a & 6.29b) One of the fragments can be read as 
pacca and the other as kyamuni.19 If additional fragments could be found 
in future surveys, it could lead to further understanding of the content of 
the inscriptions. In this respect, the recent discovery can be said to be an 
invaluable example that provides a vestige of early Theravāda Buddhism in 
6.27
Fig.6.27 Inscribed face of the 
decorative stone found at 
the centre of the southern 
side of the laterite 
enclosure of Western 
Prasat Top. Photograph 
courtesy Inoue Tadao, 2014.

--- PAGE 255 ---
226
Yuni Sato
the early Cambodian Middle Period, and a new step toward an 
understanding of the overall picture of early Theravāda Buddhism in 
Cambodia.20
TRANSITION OF WESTERN PRASAT TOP
There appear to be more than four phases of transition at Western Prasat 
Top. At the first stage, the laterite base that can be seen inside the central 
sanctuary was constructed. As mentioned above, it is clear that the inner 
laterite base could be a former structure of Western Prasat Top because 
the inner laterite base has mouldings. At the second stage, the central 
sanctuary was built and decorated with a pediment featuring the seated 
Buddha in māravijaya, and a Buddha statue pedestal was constructed in 
front of the central sanctuary. However, the main Buddha statue of 
Western Prasat Top has yet to be found. At the third stage, the southern 
sanctuary and northern sanctuary were newly constructed and joined to 
the central sanctuary. During the dismantling process of the southern 
sanctuary, the southern lower stairway of the central sanctuary was 
excavated from the foundation soil of the lower platform of the southern 
sanctuary. This clearly showed that the southern sanctuary was built later 
than the central sanctuary. However, the period of the brick structure 
underneath the northern sanctuary must also be considered. At the fourth 
stage, the Buddhist terrace was constructed and connected with the 
eastern face of the central sanctuary; and the laterite enclosure and sīmā 
stones were arranged so as to enclose the sanctuaries. Regarding the 
sandstone with an inscription naming the Kassapa Buddha, there are two 
possible periods during which it could have been buried: one is the same 
time the sīmā were installed at Prasat Top, and the other is after the sīmā 
were installed.
According to the results of Carbon-14 dating of samples from the 
Buddhist terrace, the construction of the Buddhist terrace, which we can 
see today, can be dated after the 14th century. Also, based on the 
6.28
Fig 6.28 Rubbing of a Pāli inscription 
“dakkhinṇe kassapo buddho” 
found at Western Prasat 
Top, Angkor Thom. NRICPN, 
2015.

--- PAGE 256 ---
227
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
chronology of Chinese ceramics excavated from the southern and 
northern sanctuaries, both sanctuaries were also constructed around or 
after the 14th century to the early 15th century. The iconography of the 
northern false door of the northern sanctuary features a walking Buddha. 
All of this suggests that the major transformation of Western Prasat Top 
could have occurred around the 14th to the early 15th century.
6.29a
6.29b
Figs. 6.29a	 Rubbing of a 
fragmentary Pāli 
inscription, pacca, from 
Western Prasat Top, 
Angkor Thom.
Fig. 6.29b	 Rubbing of a 
fragmentary Pāli 
inscription from Western 
Prasat Top, kyamuni, 
from Western Prasat Top, 
Angkor Thom. NRICPN, 
2015.

--- PAGE 257 ---
228
Yuni Sato
Notes
1	
Henri Marchal, “Monuments secondaires et terrasses bouddhiques d’Ańkor-
Thom”, BEFEO XVIII, 1918, pp. 1–40.
2	
Henri Marchal, “Monuments secondaires”.
3	
Henri Marchal, “Notes sur le monument 486 d’Angkor Thom”, BEFEO XXV, 
1925, pp. 411–6.
4	
Louis Finot, “Inscriptions d’Angkor”, BEFEO XXV, 1925, pp. 307–52.
5	
Maurice Glaize, Les monuments du groupe d’Angkor, pp. 129–30.
6	
Madeleine Giteau, Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien, Paris: PEFEO, 
1975. For an examination of Prasat Top, see pp. 113–6.
7	
Hiram Woodward, “Thailand and Cambodia: The Thirteenth and Fourteenth 
Centuries”, in Ruam bot khwâm thâng 72 phansâ than âčhân Sâstrâčhan Mộm 
Čhao Suphattradit Ditsakun/Studies & Reflections on Asian Art History and 
Archaeology: Essays in Honour of H.S.H. Professor Subhadris Diskul, Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University, 1995, pp. 335–42.
8	
Hiram W. Woodward, The Art and Architecture of Thailand, Leiden/Boston: 
Brill, 2002.
9	
Ashley Thompson, “The Ancestral Cult in Transition: Reflections on Spatial 
Organization in Cambodia’s Early Theravāda Complex”, in eds. Marijke J. 
Klokke and Thomas de Brujin, Southeast Asian Archaeology 1996. Proceedings of 
the 6th International Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Leiden, 2–6 September 1996, Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian 
Studies, University of Hull, 1998, pp. 273–95.
10	
Ashley Thompson, Mémoires du Cambodge, PhD dissertation, Université de 
Paris 8, 1999, pp. 51–3 ; see also Thompson, “The Ancestral Cult”.
11	
National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, Nara (NRICPN), Western 
Prasat Top Site Survey Report on Joint Research for the Protection of the Angkor 
Historic Site.
12	
Marchal, “Notes sur le monument 486”.
13	
Madeleine Giteau, Le bornage rituel des temples bouddhiques au Cambodge. 
Paris: PEFEO, 1969.
14	
Stephen Murphy, The Buddhist Boundary Markers of Northeast Thailand and 
Central Laos, 7th–12th Centuries CE: Towards an Understanding of the 
Archaeological, Religious and Artistic Landscapes of the Khorat Plateau, PhD 
dissertation, SOAS University of London, 2010.
15	
See Table 6.1. The radiocarbon results are shown in Yuzuru Yoneda, Takayuki 
Omori, Harumura Ozaki, Yuni Sato and Hiroshi Sugiyama, “Radiocarbon 
dating”, Survey and Restoration of Western Prasat Top Interim Report 5 Brick 
Structure of Northern Sanctuary, 2018, pp. 22–5. This analysis was conducted 
by the Laboratory of Radiocarbon Dating, The University Museum, Tokyo 
University. (See Table 6.2.)
16	
The histological analysis was conducted by Dr Sawada Junmei of Niigata 
University of Health and Welfare. The results appear in Sawada, Junmei, 
“Species Identification by Bone Histomorphology of Burnt Bone Fragments 
Unearthed from a Brick Structure at Western Prasat Top”, Survey and 
Restoration of Western Prasat Top Interim Report 5 Brick Structure of Northern 
Sanctuary, 2018, pp. 26–33. It shows that the excavated burnt bone fragments 
are of quite similar composition to human bone. However, it is necessary to 
conduct further comparative research on animals in Southeast Asia through the 
histological method.
17	
See Chapter 7 in this volume.

--- PAGE 258 ---
229
New evidence at Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom
18	
See Thompson, Mémoires du Cambodge, pp. 115–253; and Ashley Thompson, 
“Lost and Found: The Stupa, the Four-faced Buddha and the Seat of the Royal 
Power in Middle Cambodia”, in Southeast Asian Archaeology 1998. Proceedings 
of the 7th International Conference of the European Association of Southeast 
Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 August–4 September 1998, eds. W. Lobo and  
S. Reimann, Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, University of Hull, 
2000, pp. 245–63.
19	
Keo Sovannara Sok, “The Western Top Temple’s Stone Blocks (Preliminary 
Introduction to the Inscriptions, Graffiti, Marks and Sketched Designs)”, 
Annual Report on the Research and Restoration Work of the Western Prasat Top 
II: Dismantling Process of the Southern Sanctuary, Nara National Research 
Institute for Cultural Properties, 2015, pp. 49–55.
20	
For further reflections on these issues, see Chapter 7 in this volume.
References 
Finot, Louis. “Inscriptions d’Angkor”. BEFEO XXV, 1925: pp. 307–52.
Giteau, Madeleine. Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien. Paris: PEFEO, 1975.
——— . Le bornage rituel des temples bouddhiques au Cambodge. Paris: PEFEO, 1969.
Glaize, Maurice. Les monuments du groupe d’Angkor. Paris: Librairie d’Amérique et 
d’Orient Adrien Maisonneuve, 1963.
Lunet de Lajonquière, Étienne. Inventaire descriptif des monuments du Cambodge, 
Tome 3. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1911.
Marchal, Henri. “Monuments secondaires et terrasses bouddhiques d’Ańkor-Thom”. 
BEFEO XVIII, 1918: pp. 1–40.
——— . “Notes sur le monument 486 d’Angkor Thom”. BEFEO XXV, 1925: 
 pp. 411–6.
Murphy, Stephen. The Buddhist Boundary Markers of Northeast Thailand and 
Central Laos, 7th–12th Centuries CE: Towards An Understanding of the 
Archaeological, Religious and Artistic Landscapes of the Khorat Plateau. PhD 
dissertation, SOAS University of London, 2010. 
National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, Nara (NRICPN). Western Prasat 
Top Site Survey Report on Joint Research for the Protection of the Angkor Historic 
Site. 2012.
NRICPN. Annual Report on the Research and Restoration Work of the Western Prasat 
Top: Dismantling Process of the Southern Sanctuary. 2014.
Sato, Yuni. “A Perspective on Iconography in Late Angkor: Comparative Study of 
Artefacts from Western Prasat Top and Other Sites”. In A Study on Devaraja 
Cult and its Arts in South Asia and Southeast Asia, ed. Koezuka Takashi. Osaka: 
Graduate School of Letters, Osaka University, 2013, pp. 99–105. (In Japanese.)
Sawada, Junmei. “Species Identification by Bone Histomorphology of Burnt Bone 
Fragments Unearthed from a Brick Structure at Western Prasat Top”. Survey 
and Restoration of Western Prasat Top Interim Report 5 Brick Structure of 
Northern Sanctuary, 2018, pp. 26–33.
Sok, Keo Sovannara. “The Western Top Temple’s Stone Blocks (Preliminary 
Introduction to the Inscriptions, Graffiti, Marks and Sketched Designs)”. 
Annual Report on the Research and Restoration Work of the Western Prasat Top 
II: Dismantling Process of the Southern Sanctuary, Nara National Research 
Institute for Cultural Properties, 2015, pp. 49–55. 
Thompson, Ashley. “The Ancestral Cult in Transition: Reflections on Spatial 
Organization in Cambodia’s Early Theravāda Complex”. In Southeast Asian 
Archaeology 1996. Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of the

--- PAGE 259 ---
230
Yuni Sato
European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Leiden, 2–6 September 
1996, eds. Marijke J. Klokke and Thomas de Brujin. Hull: Centre for Southeast 
Asian Studies, University of Hull, 1998, pp. 273–95.
——— . “Lost and Found: The Stupa, the Four-faced Buddha and the Seat of the Royal 
Power in Middle Cambodia”. In Southeast Asian Archaeology 1998: Proceedings 
of the 7th International Conference of the European Association of Southeast 
Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 August–4 September 1998, eds. Wibke Lobo and 
Stefanie Reimann. Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, University of 
Hull, 2000, pp. 245–63.
——— . Mémoires du Cambodge, PhD dissertation, Université de Paris 8, 1999.
Woodward, Hiram W. “Thailand and Cambodia: The Thirteenth and Fourteenth 
Centuries”. In Ruam bot khwâm thâng 72 phansâ than âčhân Sâstrâčhan Mộm 
Čhao Suphattradit Ditsakun/Studies & Reflections on Asian Art History and 
Archaeology: Essays in Honour of H.S.H. Professor Subhadris Diskul. Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University, 1995, pp. 335–42. 
——— . The Art and Architecture of Thailand. Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2002. 
Yoneda, Yuzuru, Takayuki Omori, Harumura Ozaki, Yuni Sato and Hiroshi Sugiyama. 
“Radiocarbon dating”. Survey and Restoration of Western Prasat Top Interim 
Report 5 Brick Structure of Northern Sanctuary, 2018, pp. 22–5.

--- PAGE 260 ---
231
Chapter 7
BACK TO THE FUTURE:  
THE EMERGENCE OF PAST AND 
FUTURE BUDDHAS IN KHMER 
BUDDHISM
Nicolas Revire
INTRODUCTION
The enumeration of past (atīta) and future (anāgata) Buddhas may go 
back to the origins of Buddhism in India. Even if the number and names 
of Buddhas vary from one list to another in South Asian traditions,1 what 
primarily matters in Pāli Buddhism is the idea of “serialisation”, that is, 
that the Buddhas follow each other sequentially in different time periods 
and never encounter one another. The concept of multiple or infinite 
Buddhas of past and future times is indeed nicely embedded in a metaphor 
of today’s Khmer language and recurrently appears in the Middle Period 
Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor (IMA), that is, braḥ buddh aṁmpāl khsāc 
or “Buddhas as numerous as [grains of] sand”.2
The earliest occurrence of past Buddhas in the Tipiṭaka is found in the 
Mahāpadānasutta (D II 1–54) which lists only the six former Buddhas 
preceding Gotama.3 The seven Buddhas of the past are of course also well 
known and worshipped in other Buddhist traditions preserved, for 
example, in Sanskrit and Tibetan.4 In mainland Southeast Asia, however, 
it is the grouping of the 24 or 27 past Buddhas immediately preceding 
Gotama, according to the Buddhavaṁsa and its commentary,5 and that of 
the five Buddhas of the present age or “good eon” (bhaddakappa) that are 
the most important. These latter five consist of four past Buddhas, that is, 
Kakusandha, Koṇāgamana, Kassapa and Gotama, to which the next 
future Buddha, Metteyya, is added. 
These series of past and future Buddhas are well evidenced in local Pāli 
and vernacular literature. Many ancient painted or sculpted examples, as well 
as architectural forms, also exist. The earliest artistic and epigraphic traces 
appear in Burma (Myanmar) and Siam (Thailand), first at Śrīkṣetra and 
Dvāravatī, as well as, later, in Pagan, Sukhothai and Lanna, from

--- PAGE 261 ---
232
Nicolas Revire
approximately the 6th century up to the present.6 The separate worship of 
Metteyya, often combined with the four past Buddhas seems also to have been 
popular in premodern Cambodia as we shall see. This configuration of four 
or five Buddhas became prominent, for example, at Wat Nokor (Kampong 
Cham province) or Wat Tralaeng Kaeng in Longvek, that is, after the 
development of Theravāda Buddhism as the most widely practised religion in 
the kingdom.7 Later, a rare list of ten future Buddhas, beginning with 
Metteyya, was further elaborated and extolled in the same religious context.   
This chapter aims to chronologically survey the artistic, epigraphic, 
textual and premodern ritual evidence for the emergence of the cult of 
past and future Buddhas in Cambodia proper and its bordering regions. It 
also briefly compares these lists with material from Sri Lanka and other 
neighbouring countries, and examines their importance in understanding 
the advent and uniqueness of Theravāda across the region.
FROM ESOTERIC JINAS TO CANONICAL BUDDHAS  
(11TH TO 13TH CENTURIES)
This question, of the distinction between the five esoteric and the 
canonical Buddhas, is key in understanding the advent of Theravāda in 
Cambodia during the late Angkorian period. One hypothesis is that 
Mahāyānic and tantric conceptions of the five Jinas were rejected and 
indeed anathema to the five Historical Buddhas unequivocally associated 
with the bhaddakappa. But does the material actually demonstrate this? 
To address this question is to look into the possible origins of the so-called 
esoteric Theravāda practices well documented in later periods. 
Possibly the first known Khmer representation of five Buddhas seated 
together is seen on the stone stūpa8 or caitya from Kbal Sre Yeay Yin 
mound (late 10th century;  Musée Guimet inventory no. 17487). In the 
context of this period, they probably represent the five cosmic Buddhas or 
Jinas, not the past Buddhas. Esoteric Jinas are also depicted in the north 
interior lintel at Prasat Hin Phimai (11th to 12th centuries), where they 
are associated with dancing yoginī,9 and may equally be represented in 
another stele from Prasat Phnom Kambot (early 12th century) depicting 
five “serpent-enthroned” Buddhas kept today at the Angkor Conservation 
Depot.10 The earliest epigraphic reference to a similar esoteric pentad is 
from the Sap Bak inscription (K. 1158) from Northeast Thailand, dated 
1066, which states as follows:  
I. śrīpañcasugatā yādau śrīghanānāṁ vibhāvakāḥ
śrīghanāś ca sudebānāṁ śrīpradātr̥̄n namāmi tān  ||
II. bajrasatvas tu ṣaṣṭhaḥ sadvodhisatvaprabhur varaḥ
ādhāraḥ sarvavuddhānāṁ tan namāmi vimuktaye  ||11

--- PAGE 262 ---
233
Back to the Future
1. In the first instance, the glorious five Sugatas are the 
originators of the Śrīghanas, and the Śrīghanas of the 
excellent gods. I bow to them, the givers of glory.
2. But Vajrasattva is the sixth (as) the pre-eminent lord of the 
existing Bodhisattvas, (and) the repository (or foundation) 
of all the Buddhas. I bow to him for the sake of deliverance12
This inscription clearly reflects the growing importance of esoteric 
Buddhism in this area at least around the middle of the 11th century. In 
the same inscription appears the epithet śrīghana and the term 
pañcasugata in reference to the five cosmic Jinas (pañcajina) and to which 
Vajrasattva, the sixth primordial one, is added.13 These five transcendental 
Buddhas or Jinas are a common subject of Vajrayāna maṇḍala and are 
usually identified as Vairocana, Akṣobhya, Ratnasaṁbhava, Amitābha and 
Amoghasiddhi. There are many variant systems and lists known across 
time and space in Buddhist Asia, as well as an expansive number of 
associations with these five Buddhas that has developed over many 
centuries. The most common listing includes the following “five families” 
or pañcakula as arranged in Table 7.1.
In addition to being assigned a direction, an element, a colour, a bīja 
or seed syllable, and an animal throne, each of the five transcendental 
Buddhas represent the purified manifestations of the five aggregates, sense 
organs and sensory perceptions.15 These five Buddhas also correspond to 
the five main cakra of the subtle body, with white Vairocana at the crown, 
red Amitābha at the throat, blue Akṣobhya at the heart, yellow 
Ratnasaṁbhava at the navel, and green Amoghasiddhi at the sexual centre.
Some lintels from Phimai or other Angkorian temples from the Bayon 
period (prominently at Preah Khan of Kompong Svay) represent, or at 
Jina
Family
Direction
Aggregate
Element
Colour
Bīja
Vehicle
Vairocana
Tathāgata
(Buddha)
centre
form
(rūpa)
space
white
OṀ
lion
Akṣobhya
Vajra
(diamond)
east
consciousness
(vijñāna)
air
blue
HŪṀ
elephant
Ratnasaṁbhava
Ratna
(jewel)
south
feeling
(vedanā)
fire
yellow
TRAḤ
horse
Amitābha
Padma
(lotus)
west
perception
(saṁjñā)
water
red
HRĪḤ
peacock
Amoghasiddhi
Karma
(action)
north
formation
(saṁskhāra)
earth
green
AḤ
garuḍa
Table 7.1: Diagram of the Five Buddha Families14

--- PAGE 263 ---
234
Nicolas Revire
Fig. 7.1a 
Lintel representing five 
standing Buddhas, 
Phimai National 
Museum. Inventory 
number: 7/2520, Nakhon 
Ratchasima province, 
Thailand, 11th to 12th 
centuries.
Fig. 7.1b 
Lintel representing five 
seated Buddhas, Preah 
Khan of Kompong Svay, 
Preah Vihear province, 
Cambodia, 12th to 13th 
centuries. Photographs 
by author, 2011 & 2015.
Fig. 7.2a 
Empty niches, 
presumably for five 
seated Buddhas, Preah 
Khan of Kompong Svay, 
Preah Vihear province, 
Cambodia, 13th century.
Fig. 7.2b 
Defaced niches of five 
(tantric?) deities, Wat 
Nokor, Kompong Cham 
province, Cambodia, 13th 
century. Photographs by 
author, 2015.
7.2a
7.2b
7.1a
7.1b

--- PAGE 264 ---
235
Back to the Future
least once represented, five standing or seated Buddhas and may refer to 
these “glorious Sugatas” or “Śrīghanas”, that is, the esoteric Jinas (Figs. 
7.1a & 7.1b).16 Some of these niches are, however, empty or defaced and 
evidently suffered an iconoclastic crisis (Figs. 7.2a & 7.2b). The late Ian 
Harris, following others before him, indeed argued that “the anti-Buddhist 
iconoclasm was rather more selective than has sometimes been thought”. 
The explanation he gives is that “the reaction was directed at images of a 
syncretic or tantric nature representing concepts quite recently imported 
into the country […]. The opposition, then, was to alien ideas and practices 
rather than to long-standing Buddhist traditions […].”17 In other words, 
perhaps it was not so much about an anti-Buddhist iconoclasm at Angkor 
in the 13th century but more correctly an anti-tantric reaction. A lintel 
with five seated Buddhas at Ta Prohm Kel, a Bayon-period “hospital” 
sanctuary in Angkor, may be a good example of this trend since three-
dimensional scanning imagery shows that the five meditating Buddhas we 
see today in situ actually replaced an equal number of four-armed original 
(tantric?) Buddhist deities (Figs. 7.2c & 7.2d).18 
In the same vein, several other lintels with rows of seven Buddhas from 
Phimai, often in royal dress, are equally difficult to interpret depending on 
which kind of Buddhism was practised in the Khmer empire at the time 
(Figs. 7.3a–7.3c). They could represent different groupings of Buddhas, 
Fig. 7.2c 
Lintel with five seated 
Buddhas, Ta Phrom Kel 
“Hospital” sanctuary, 
Angkor, Siem Reap 
province, Cambodia,  
13th century.
Fig. 7.2d	
Same lintel with 
chiseled-out arms 
highlighted. 
Photogrammetric images 
by Olivier Cunin, 2015.
7.2c
7.2d

--- PAGE 265 ---
236
Nicolas Revire
either those of the past and present, the transcendental Jinas, or even 
perhaps the seven emanations of Bhaiṣajyaguru, the “Master of Healing” 
or Buddha of medicine, who is thought to have also had some impact and 
popularity in Cambodia and Northeast Thailand during the Bayon period 
under King Jayavarman VII.19 The Sūtra on the Merits of the Fundamental 
Vows of the Seven Buddhas of Lapis Lazuli Radiance, the Masters of 
Healing (Chinese: Yaoshi liuliguang qifo benyuan gongde jing, T. vol. 14, 
no. 451; Prabhāsasaptabuddhapūrvapraṇidhānasūtra), translated from 
the Sanskrit by Yijing in 707, includes not only the multiple vows of the 
Figs. 7.3a–c Lintels with rows of 
seven Buddhas, Phimai 
National Museum. 
Inventory Numbers: 
12/1–4/2520, 15/2520, 
39/2/2529, Nakhon 
Ratchasima province, 
Thailand, 11th to 12th 
centuries. Photographs 
by author, 2011.
7.3b
7.3c
7.3a

--- PAGE 266 ---
237
Back to the Future
Medicine Buddha, but also those of six other Buddhas who are 
distinguished by the distance their realms lie to the east of our world.20 In 
Tibetan Buddhism, these Buddhas are referred to as “brothers”. In 
Chinese Buddhist art, Bhaiṣajyaguru and the six other Buddhas are 
frequently presented together as a group.21 
Some Khmer bronzes similarly represent a group of four, five, seven or 
eight Buddha images.22 Of particular interest, two miniature stūpa/caitya 
in bronze depicting two rows of four seated Buddhas, one on each side of 
the base, are known from Lopburi.23 Because of the Khmer religious 
transition operating during the 13th to 14th centuries, it is not always 
clear whether these could represent separate groupings of the four past 
Buddhas, plus the future one conceptually embedded inside the stūpa/
caitya, and the esoteric Jinas. However, must we necessarily think that 
Fig. 7.4a Five-sided miniature caitya, 
bronze, from Lopburi 
province, National Museum 
of Bangkok. Inventory 
number: LB 343. 
Photograph courtesy Brice 
Vincent, 2009.
Fig. 7.4b Five-sided miniature caitya, 
stone, found at Bang 
Rachan, Singburi province, 
Thailand, 12th to 13th 
centuries. Photograph by 
Alexander B. Griswold, 
1951. Courtesy The Walters 
Art Museum, Baltimore, no. 
472.4001, neg. 51.111.10.
7.4b
7.4a

--- PAGE 267 ---
238
Nicolas Revire
these two concepts of the five Buddhas – esoteric vs exoteric – ought to be 
conceptually distinguished in the Khmer context? We might as well 
conceive of a new paradigm that emphasises conceptual continuity and 
amalgamation rather than rupture and distinction. Five-sided miniature 
stūpa/caitya, in bronze or stone, are also puzzling in this regard. They have 
been found in Lopburi and Singburi provinces in Thailand and remain 
unpublished (Figs. 7.4a & 7.4b). These examples, where the five Historical 
Buddhas may have mirrored the esoteric concept of the pañcajina already 
well established in the Angkor period, call for direct comparison with 
pentagonal monuments found in Burma during the Pagan period and 
which were similarly interpreted as a cosmic metaphor and an 
architectural manifestation of the five Buddhas.24
DIRECTIONAL BUDDHAS IN THE CAMBODIAN  
MIDDLE PERIOD
Possibly one late Angkorian stūpa/caitya at Preah Khan of Kompong Svay 
where four standing Buddha figures are arranged so that they face out is 
known by some today as Preah Chatomukh (see Fig. 1.8 & Fig. 7.5).25 
This layout may conceptually recall the popular Indian architectural and 
sculptural tradition known as sarvatobhadra or sarvatobhadrikā, that is, 
“all-auspicious” or “auspicious on all sides”. Such depictions of quadruple 
sculptures in India are especially well suited for dedication to one 
particular deity in his four different aspects (caturvyūha), as in the case of 
the Vishnu temple at Deogarh,26 or else to different gods. 
In the context of Theravāda Buddhism, this arrangement may be more 
directly related to the cult of the Historical Buddha Gotama or the four 
Fig. 7.5	
Plan of the Preah Khan 
Chatomukh. Cliché EFEO, 
Fonds Cambodge, réf. 
EFEO_CAM10729_2. (See 
also Fig. 1.8, p. 33.)
7.5

--- PAGE 268 ---
239
Back to the Future
past Buddhas of this eon. Depictions of four Buddhas seated or standing 
back-to-back were indeed also common in Lower Burma and Northern 
Thailand during the 14th to 15th centuries, for example at Kyaik Pun in 
Pegu,27 or Wat Phra Yuen in Lamphun.28 Ashley Thompson29 further 
suggested that the central figure hidden between the other four must be 
Metteyya, the future Buddha, especially worshipped during the Middle 
Period in his princely and messianic capacity. We learn of this cult to 
Metteyya from Pāli inscription K. 82 of Wat Nokor dated 156630 and from 
some Khmer Middle Period inscriptions such as IMA 2 (stanzas 29–41) 
written in Khmer and dated 1577.31
A short Pāli inscription recently discovered on decorative sandstone 
at Western Prasat Top in Angkor Thom (Monument 486), 
paleographically datable to the late 14th or early 15th century,32 during 
the Cambodian Middle Period, provides tantalising new evidence for 
the tradition of directional Buddhas of the past (Figs. 6.27 & 6.28, pp. 
225 & 226). It reads dakkhiṇe kassapo buddho, that is, “Buddha 
Kassapa, in the South”.33 We would expect that, on the same logical 
ground, the other three past canonical Buddhas of this eon, viz. 
Kakusandha, Koṇāgamana, and Gotama, were similarly assigned 
different cardinal directions. Indeed, other fragmentary inscriptions 
found previously at the site, and where only a few akṣara are still 
legible, seem to read pacch […], presumably for pacchime, “in the West”, 
and […] yamuni, probably for Sākyamuni, another name for Buddha 
Gotama.34 A claim could thus legitimately be made that these 
inscriptions refer to only the four past Buddhas placed respectively in 
the east, south, west and north, while the future Buddha Metteyya 
would symbolically occupy the centre. However, I do not think this is 
what we see here; at least no textual basis for this specific arrangement 
is known to my knowledge in Pāli Buddhism. This is assuming, of 
course, that a text, whether in a written form or recited orally, preceded 
ritual and iconographic practice in this context.
Intriguingly, however, one post-canonical collection of Pāli liturgical 
texts refers to the Buddhas of the ten directions representing not only the 
four cardinal points, but also the four intermediate points, the zenith, and 
the nadir. It is known as the Mahādibbamanta, a compendium of paritta 
or protective chants, equally known in Cambodia and Siam since the 
premodern period.35 The earliest epigraphic mention of this family of 
texts in Cambodia appears in IMA 12, dated 1629 (line 13, sūt 
dibbhamun).36 It may also be alluded to in IMA 34, dated 1697 (line 22, 
sūt braḥ dibvamuntr).37 During the late Ayutthaya period in Siam, the 
Mahādibbamanta is said to have been recited by monks when the troops 
set out for the battlefield.38 The relevant verses 21–23 that are also found 
almost verbatim in the Cūlajinapañjara (verses 2b–5a), a short paritta

--- PAGE 269 ---
240
Nicolas Revire
hymn also found in Sri Lanka, read as follows: 
Padumuttaro ca pubbāyaṁ āgaṇeyye ca Revato
dakkhiṇe Kassapo buddho neharatīye Sumaṅgalo,
pacchime Buddhasikkhī ca bāyabbe ca Medhaṅkaro
uttare Sākyamunī[39] c’eva isāne Saraṇaṁkaro,[40]
pathavīyaṁ Kakusandho ākāse ca Dīpaṅkaro[41]
ete dasadisā buddhā rājadhammassa pūjitā42
My translation:
Padumuttara, in the East, and Revata, in the Southeast; 
Buddha Kassapa, in the South; Sumaṅgala, in the 
Southwest; Buddha Sikhī, in the West, and Medhaṅkara, in 
the Northwest;
Sākyamuni, in the North, and Saraṇaṅkara, in the 
Northeast;
Kakusandha, in the Earth, and Dīpaṅkara in the Sky.
These Buddhas of the ten directions are worshipped on the 
part of their royal virtue(s).43
This list of ten Buddhas is best envisioned in Table 7.2.
As we can see, exactly the same verse found inscribed at Western Prasat 
Top (that is, dakkhiṇe kassapo buddho) is found today in the 
Mahādibbamanta and it can thus logically be deduced that at least seven 
other directional Buddhas, if we leave aside the nadir and zenith, were 
conceptually intended to be present as well. Accordingly, the spatial 
arrangement of these eight directional Buddhas at Western Prasat Top, 
originally flanking the set of eight sīmā, which decisively marked the 
temple ground, would have appeared as shown in Fig 6.2 in Chapter 6  
(p. 204).
Medhaṅkara
(northwest)
Sākyamuni
(north)
Saraṇaṅkara
(northeast)
Sikhī
(west)
Dīpaṅkara
(sky = zenith)
Padumuttara
(east)
Kakusandha
(earth = nadir)
Sumaṅgala
(southwest)
Kassapa
(south)
Revata
(southeast)
Table 7.2: Diagram of the Ten Directional Buddhas

--- PAGE 270 ---
241
Back to the Future
This tradition of the Buddhas of the ten directions (Sanskrit: 
daśadigbuddha; Pāli: dasadisabuddha), implicitly positing the existence of 
several world systems, is an old concept already attested in several early 
Mahāyāna sūtra such as the Saddharmapuṇḍarika or Lotus Sūtra,44 
although no names or details are provided for this list. At first glance, the 
existence of several and coeval Buddhas appearing in the world at any 
given time seems to go against Theravāda doctrine. In the above reference 
from the Mahādibbamanta, however, all ten Buddhas are directly 
(randomly?) excerpted from the list of 28 past Buddhas according to the 
Buddhavaṁsa.45 Strictly speaking, this group of ten Buddhas is indeed 
arranged both chronologically and spatially, and thus it does not exactly 
infringe on the basic tenets of the Theravāda school which holds that only 
one such figure can exist at a time and place. How these particular 
successive Buddhas were selected and later attributed a specific cardinal 
direction, however, is not known.
Here, we could tentatively surmise that the likely spatial arrangement 
of these eight Buddhas as a magical diagram in conjunction with the set of 
eight twin sīmā found at Western Prasat Top (see Fig. 6.2, p. 204) 
probably served specific protective and symbolic functions. Admittedly, 
we have to date only one clearly identified epigraph with the name of 
“Kassapa Buddha, in the South” to support this hypothesis; while the two 
other fragments show only the “west” and “[Sāk]yamuni” and may refer 
to two different associations. According to the Mahādibbamanta, indeed, 
the “west” is associated with “Buddha Sikhī” and the “north” with 
“Sākyamuni”. There is no clear inter-cardinal epigraphic evidence 
discovered yet, but future excavations at Western Prasat Top may yield 
more material and confirm this interpretation. At any rate, the sīmā are 
definitely there and using them as indication of the as yet missing or 
fragmentary epigraphic material seems not too far-fetched. 
A strong case can thus be made that the above protective chant 
excerpted today from the Mahādibbamanta, and also known separately 
as the Sabbadisabuddhamaṅgalaparitta, actually circulated earlier and 
independently in Cambodia since an uncertain period;46 it is also 
popular in the Mon-Burmese tradition to this day.47 In addition, in 
contemporary visual art, only eight Buddhas are represented in the 
cardinal and inter-cardinal directions. For obvious reasons, the 
Buddhas of the zenith and nadir, which would make a total of ten, 
cannot be represented when laid out on a two-dimensional plan such as 
at the temple ground of Western Prasat Top or in certain modern 
murals found on temple ceilings (Fig. 7.6). Furthermore, according to 
the Cūlasabbadisabuddhamaṅgala­paritta, drawn today from the same 
liturgical collection,48 an additional eight chief disciples (aggasāvaka) 
also surround the central Buddha and can be similarly arranged in a

--- PAGE 271 ---
242
Nicolas Revire
“magic circle” as a maṇḍala or yantra. This ritual practice is again 
known in modern Burma.49 In the traditional kammaṭṭhān system of 
Khmer Buddhism, the eight Buddhas and eight disciples may likewise 
be related to the practice of the eight moralities or aṭṭhasīla, also 
mentally connected to the eight sīmā, the eight cardinal or inter-
cardinal directions, the eight “boundary vowels” known as 
akkharasīmā (that is, A, Ā, I, Ī, U, Ū, E, O), and a physical part  
of the body.50 
A similar exercise of visualisation that invokes and assigns the past 
Buddhas and the eight chief disciples to a specific bodily portion is found 
embedded as well in the Jinapañjaragāthā, “Verses of the Conqueror’s 
Cage”, possibly first composed in premodern Northern Thailand,51 but 
likewise found in modern Sri Lanka as an expanded pirit or paritta.52 
Some scholars have argued that such rituals may be reminiscent of the 
medieval Hindu and Buddhist tantric practice of imposing mantra on 
the body (nyāsa) in order to transform the ordinary body of the 
practitioner into a subtle body of ultimate reality.53 Whatever the case 
may be, just as in the Khmer texts belonging to the kammaṭṭhān 
tradition, the ritual boundaries (baddhasīmā) of the eight directions are 
also symbolically associated with the eight external orifices or “gates” 
(dvāra) of the human body (viz. the two eyes, the two ears, the two 
nostrils, the mouth, and the anus) in the Saddavimala, another 
Fig. 7.6 
Eight directional Buddhas 
on a modern mural found 
on the ceiling of Wat Prei 
Bang, Kandal province, 
Cambodia, 21st century. 
Photograph by author, 
2016.
7.6

--- PAGE 272 ---
243
Back to the Future
premodern text of a cognate tradition found in Northern Thailand and 
Laos.54 According to this yogic tradition, it is as if the human body with 
its specific inner boundaries (sīmā khluon) was perceived as the true 
“sanctuary” (vihāra). 
Naturally, there are also strong similarities between the concept of the 
Buddhas of the eight or ten directions and that of the Dikpāla(ka)s or 
Lokapālas, the guardian deities who rule the specific directions of space 
and are traditionally invoked in temple consecration rituals since they are 
associated with protective functions.55 According to Corinna Wessels-
Mevissen who did a detailed study of the Dikpālas in ancient India:
These gods, some of whom were also worshipped 
independently, were given the task of guarding particular 
parts of a temple. This protection against external evil forces 
functions within an intricate system of religious beliefs and 
ritual practices. During the early development of stone 
temple architecture in India, c. 5th through 8th centuries 
A.D., the probably already existing invisible, ritually invoked 
presence of directional guardians at building sites was 
complemented by the visual representation of the deities in 
the form of stone panels in high relief. Apart from the 
depiction of dikpālas on temple exteriors, which is largely 
restricted to North India, the directional guardians can also 
be found on ceilings and other parts of the temple 
structure.56
In India, moreover, the installation of these directional guardians in a 
Buddhist context or monument is not uncommon.57 Interestingly, 
Madeleine Giteau also reports the frequent invocation of “devatā” of the 
cardinal and intermediate directions during the modern ceremonies of 
implanting sīmā in Khmer temples.58 Among the various lists of devatā 
she gives, one corresponds exactly to the guardians of the eight directions 
or aṣṭadikpāla.59 She thus logically concludes,
It is quite certain that the Buddhist ceremonies embraced 
old cults rendered to the divinities of the cardinal points. 
These divinities have sometimes even been assimilated. Thus 
at Vatt Braḥ Canda Rājā, the divinities of the cardinal points 
have been replaced by Buddhas. 60
In addition, Giteau refers to the following text in Pāli which must be 
recited three times at the end of the invocation of Kruṅ Bāli, that is, the 
land spirit who is also worshipped during similar consecration rituals,61 
Padumuttaro ca pūribāyaṁ aggaṇiye ca revato dakkhiṇe ca kassapo 
buddho.

--- PAGE 273 ---
244
Nicolas Revire
As we can see, this formula is nearly exactly the same as that found in 
the ancient inscription from Western Prasat Top and embedded today in 
the Mahādibbamanta,62 although it is given here only in partial form. 
Could it be taken as residual evidence for the early circulation of this 
compendium, either in whole or in part, in ancient Cambodia? Be that as 
it may, it is actually possible to find the etymology of all these cardinal and 
intermediate directions given above in pseudo-Pāli in working our way 
back to the original Sanskrit terms. In cases of the intermediate directions, 
we can even associate these spellings with the names of the corresponding 
deities underlying the equivalents found for example in the 
Mahādibbamanta. A summary of the data drawn from these 
correspondences is presented in Table 7.3.
In this light, a strong case can be made that the Mahādibbamanta 
collection with its large astrological and cosmological contents – or at least 
some of its source texts such as the Sabbadisabuddhamaṅgalaparitta 
– was already known in Cambodia to some extent, either in written form 
or orally, and recited there since the early Middle Period. Perhaps it 
became established there soon after Ayutthayan influence began to make 
its presence felt following the fall of Angkor in 1431–1432, as attested by 
other material, epigraphic and textual evidence,63 unless it is the other way 
around. In Siam, we know that the Mahādibbamanta collection in one 
form or another circulated since at least the late Ayutthaya period and 
could have thus been brought earlier from Cambodia. At any rate, it was 
still used in Siamese court rituals and Brahmanical consecration 
ceremonies up to the modern period.64 
Direction 
in English 
Direction in Pāli 
(cf. Mahādibbamanta)
Direction 
in Sanskrit
Directional Deity
Directional Buddha
east
pubbā
pūrva
Indra
Padumuttara
southeast
āgaṇeyya
āgneya
Agni
Revata
south
dakkhiṇa
dakṣiṇa
Yama
Kassapa
southwest
neharatīya
nairr̥ta
Nirr̥ti
Sumaṅgala
west
pacchima
paścima
Varuṇa
Sikhī
northwest
bāyabba
vāyavya
Vāyu
Medhaṅkara
north
uttara
uttara
Kubera
Sākyamuni
northeast
isāna
īśāna
Īśāna
Saraṇaṅkara
Table 7.3: Cardinal and Intermediate Directions & Related Deities/Buddhas

--- PAGE 274 ---
245
Back to the Future
THE FIVE BUDDHAS FROM THE LATE MIDDLE PERIOD  
(C. 17TH CENTURY ONWARDS)
At a point that is difficult to date with precision but which can at present 
hardly be pushed back before the 17th century on textual or epigraphic 
evidence, the five Buddhas (pañcabuddha) of this eon were also equated 
with each of the five syllables (kāra or akkhara) NA MO BU DDHĀ YA 
that comprise the gāthā of “Hommage to the Buddha(s)”. The NAMO 
BUDDHĀYA formula – comparable to the pañcakṣara or five sacred 
syllables of the Śaiva mantra NAMAḤ ŚIVĀYA65 – is a common trope in 
the so-called yogāvacar or kammaṭṭhān meditation tradition and texts of 
Thai-Khmer Buddhism studied by François Bizot, Olivier de Bernon, and 
others.66 The formula is therein broken down into five sacred syllables, 
which are further sanctified by the fact that they are given new 
associations.67 Perhaps one of the earliest pieces of textual evidence for 
such correlations appears in the Aphitham chet khamphi ruam  
Syllable
NA
MO
BU
DDHĀ
YA
Buddha
Kakusandha
Koṇāgamana
Kassapa
Gotama
Metteyya
Location in
Ordinary
Being
right eye
left eye
back70
navel
forehead
Precept
abstention from
taking life
(sīlapāṇā)
abstention from theft
(sīla-adinnā)
abstention
from adultery (sīlakāme
or sīla-abrahma)
abstention from 
falsehood 
(sīlamusā)
abstention from
intoxicants (sīlasurā)
Cyclic Age
“accomplished” 
(kitti)
“triad” (tetā)
“pair” (dvāpara)
“dark”
(kali)
     “granary” (kosa)
Aggregate
form
(rūpakhandha)
feeling
(vedanākhandha)
perception 
(saññākhandha)
formation
(saṅkhara-
khandha)
consciousness
(viññānakhandha)
Element
earth71
(paṭhavīdhātu)
water72
(āpodhātu)
fire
(tejodhātu)
wind
(vāyodhātu)
atmosphere (ākāsadhātu)
Subtle Body’s 
Light
purple73
blue
yellow74
red75
white crystal (transparent)
Location in
Subtle Body
nose
epiglottis 
neck
sternum
Navel
Table 7.4: Groups of Five according to the Thai-Khmer Kammaṭṭhān Tradition76

--- PAGE 275 ---
246
Nicolas Revire
(“A Summary of the Seven Books of the Abhidhamma”), a text composed 
in Northern Thailand.68 In due course, the five “heart syllables” were thus 
also equated in Thai-Khmer Buddhism with the groups of five precepts, 
five elements, five colours and lights, and so on, in a manner that is not 
unlike that of the Vajrayāna concept of the “five Buddha-families” (Table 
7.1),69 as shown in Table 7.4.
A similar homage correlating the five syllables with the five Buddhas of 
this eon can equally be seen in the modern Khmer-Pāli liturgical tradition, 
which reads as follows:
Thvāy paṅgaṁ braḥ buddh 5 braḥ aṅg 
Ukāsa na karo braḥ kukkasandho nāma bhagavā ahaṁ 
vandāmi sabbadā
Ukāsa mo karo braḥ konāgamano nāma bhagavā ahaṁ 
vandāmi sabbadā
Ukāsa bu karo braḥ kasapo buddho nāma bhagavā ahaṁ 
vandāmi sabbadā
Ukāsa ddhā karo braḥ sirī sakyamunī gotamo nāma 
bhagavā ahaṁ vandāmi sabbadā
Ukāsa ya karo braḥ sira-ārya meteyyo nāma bhagavā ahaṁ 
vandāmi sabbadā
Thvāy paṅgaṁ mṭaṅ
Fig. 7.7	
Modern mural painting 
depicting the five Buddhas, 
each being associated with 
their animals and the five 
syllables NA MO BU DDHĀ 
YA. Wat Prei Bang, Kandal 
province, Cambodia, 21st 
century. Photograph by 
author, 2016. 
7.7

--- PAGE 276 ---
247
Back to the Future
My translation: 
Bowing to the Five Buddhas
Please [permit me]. The syllable NA denotes the Blessed 
One  Kakusandha. I salute [him?] at all times.
Please [permit me]. The syllable MO denotes the Blessed 
One Koṇāgamana. I salute [him?] at all times.
Please [permit me]. The syllable BU denotes the Blessed One
Buddha Kassapa. I salute [him?] at all times.
Please [permit me]. The syllable DDHĀ denotes the Blessed 
One Sākyamuni-Gotama. I salute [him?] at all times.
Please [permit me]. The syllable YA denotes the Blessed One  
Metteyya. I salute [him?] at all times.
One bow.77
In addition, the mystical formula NAMO BUDDHĀYA often appears to 
this day as magical diagrams (yantra), generally written in Khom/Khmer 
script,78 although examples written in Tham or Yuan (northern Thai) 
script are also known.79 There are innumerable examples of modern mural 
paintings from Cambodia that depict the five Buddhas, sometimes even 
associated with the five syllables NA MO BU DDHĀ YA (Fig. 7.7). Preah 
Bo (braḥ pat’) or cloth paintings with the five Buddhas and their symbolic 
animals (on which see infra) were also popular in Cambodia up to the 
20th century.80
THE TEN FUTURE BUDDHAS FROM THE MIDDLE PERIOD  
(C. 17TH CENTURY ONWARDS)
We have seen that the separate worship of Metteyya, sometimes combined 
with the four past Buddhas, was somewhat popular in premodern 
Cambodia since the final advent of Theravāda Buddhism, approximately 
in the 14th century onwards. However, since at least the 17th century a 
rare list of ten future Buddhas (dasabodhisatta), beginning with Metteyya, 
emerged in the same religious context. 
A brief Khmer epigraphic reference to this concept appears in a 
Middle Period inscription (IMA 31, stanza 26), dated 1684, where the 
donor wishes to become the 11th Buddha to come.81 But the notion is 
more fully developed in a popular text known as the Dasabodhisatta-
uddesa, found primarily in Siam and to a lesser extent in Cambodia. It is 
known in several vernacular languages, including in Khmer as Dasavaṅs,82 
but for which English translations are still a desideratum even though it 
has already been translated into French from Pāli.83 To my knowledge, no 
complete versions of this text in Pāli are extant in Cambodia, which raises

--- PAGE 277 ---
248
Nicolas Revire
the question of whether it was originally produced or even copied there. 
The oldest Pāli manuscripts are in fact all kept in Thailand at the National 
Library of Bangkok and date from the reign of Rama III (1824–1851). 
These are all written in Khom script and, for this reason, scholars 
generally thought they were of Khmer origin. This is doubtful since, on 
the one hand, this script was widely used in Siam for Pāli scriptures since 
the Ayutthaya period. On the other, the literacy of the canonical Pāli 
language has always been very low in traditional Khmer Buddhism, to the 
point that it literally became an “esoteric” language.84 
The Dasabodhisatta-uddesa was thus probably much in vogue during 
the late Ayutthaya and early Rattanakosin periods (18th century 
onwards) in Siam and, for reasons I develop elsewhere,85 a strong 
argument can be made that the Dasabodhisattuppattikathā, found today 
in Sri Lanka,86 may be a later sanitised version of the former text, possibly 
brought to the island in the course of the 18th-century revival of 
Theravāda Buddhism from Siam. In the same vein, it is also my 
assumption that this Pāli text was only introduced recently into 
Cambodia from Siam, possibly in the 19th or early 20th centuries. 
Interestingly, short-format palm-leaf manuscripts in Pāli paying homage 
to the ten future Buddhas do exist in very low numbers in Cambodia to 
this day.87 In this contracted liturgical text, it is said that a person who 
worships these ten Buddhas will not be reborn in hell for 100,000 eons. 
But two points are worth mentioning here. First, the list of the ten 
bodhisattvas found in these short-format manuscripts differs slightly 
from that given in the main stories of the Dasabodhisatta-uddesa and so 
it cannot be simply considered as an abbreviated version. Yet, exactly the 
same liturgy is found appended in the colophon of the latter text,88 and it 
may be surmised that this is either a later addition or else that it 
represents another variant regional tradition. It is worth giving the text in 
full which reads as follows:
	
Metteyyo Uttaro Rāmo Paseno Kosalo ’bhibhu |
Dīghajaṅghi ca Soṇo ca Subho Todeyyabrāhmaṇo ||
Nālāgirī Pālileyyo bodhisattā ime dasa |
anukkamena sambodhim pāpuṇissanti anāgate ||
Metteyyo Metteyyo nāma Rāmo ca Rāmasambuddho |
Kosalo Dhammarājā ca Mārarājā Dhammasāmi ||
Dīghajaṅghī ca Nārado Soṇo Raṅsimuni tathā |
Subho ca Devadevo ca Todeyyo Narasīhako ||
Tisso nāma Dhanapālo Pālileyyo Sumaṅgalo |
etedasa buddhā nāma bhavissanti anāgate ||

--- PAGE 278 ---
249
Back to the Future
Metteyyo nāgarukkho ca Rāma-buddho pi candanaṁ |
Dhammarājā nāgarukkho sālarukkho Dhammasāmi ||
Nārado candarukkho ca Raṅsīmuni ca pipphali |
Devadevo ca campako pātalī Narasīho ca ||
Nigrodho Tissasambuddho Sumaṅgalo nāgarukkho |
ete dasa rukkhā bodhī bhavissanti anāgate ||
ime dasa ca sambuddhe yo naro pi namassati |
kappasatasahassāni nirayaṁ so na gacchatī—ti ||89 
My translation of which is:
Metteyya, Uttara Rāma, Pasena the Kosalan, Abhibhū, 
Dīghajaṅghi, Soṇa, Subha, Todeyya the Brahmin, Nālāgirī 
and Pālileyya – these are the ten bodhisattvas who will, in 
times yet to come, reach enlightenment.
Metteyya as Metteyya, Rāma as the Perfect Buddha Rāma, 
the Kosalan as Dhammarāja, King Māra as Dhammasāmi, 
Dīghajaṅghi as Nārada, Soṇa as Raṅsimuni, likewise Subha 
as Devadeva, Todeyya as Narasīha, Dhanapāla as Tissa and 
Pālileyya as Sumaṅgala – these are the ten who will, in times 
yet to come, become Buddhas.
Metteyya the nāga-tree, the Buddha Rāma the candana 
[-tree], Dhammarāja the nāga-tree, Dhammasāmi the 
sāla-tree, Nārada the canda-tree, Raṅsīmuni the pipphali 
[-tree], Devadeva the campaka[-tree], Narasīha the pātalī 
[-tree], the Perfect Buddha Tissa the nigrodha[-tree] and 
Sumaṅgala the nāga-tree – these ten will, in times yet to 
come, be the ten Bodhi-trees.
And the man who pays homage to the ten Perfect Buddhas 
will not go to hell for 100,000 eons.90
In contrast to the textual and epigraphic evidence, artistic traces of the ten 
future bodhisattvas are extremely scarce in mainland Southeast Asia, but 
not totally absent. In fact, the earliest examples identified at present are 
still found in Sri Lanka, albeit only in Siamese nikāya-lineage temples, and 
date from the late 18th century onwards.91 In modern Thailand, mural 
paintings including these ten future bodhisattvas have only been recently 
identified at Wat Nai Klang, Phetchaburi province, and are dated to the 
late 19th century.92 As for Cambodia, the scheme of the ten future 
bodhisattvas is virtually unknown. However, I have successfully identified

--- PAGE 279 ---
250
Nicolas Revire
on a recent trip to the Srei Santhor region a unique mural from Wat Sithor 
which represents an episode of the last story of the Dasabodhisatta-
uddesa. In this final chapter, the tenth Buddha of the future named 
Sumaṅgala was previously the Great King Mahāpanāda under the 
dispensation of Buddha Kakusandha. We can see in this panel the past 
Buddha who pronounces a very evocative phrase – mahāpurisa 
nibbānagamanadhammaṁ vicāresī ti, “O Mahāpurisa, you should 
investigate that Dhamma leading to nibbāna” – a sentence that is written 
down as a caption and is also found verbatim in the textual source. Upon 
hearing these powerful words, King Mahāpanāda makes a firm resolution 
Fig. 7.8 
Modern mural representing 
an episode of the 
Dasabodhisatta-uddesa in 
which King Mahāpadāna 
cuts off his own head in 
front of Buddha 
Kakusandha who predicts 
his future Buddhahood as 
Buddha Sumaṅgala, Wat 
Sithor, Kandal province, 
Cambodia, 21st century. 
Photograph by author, 2016. 
7.8

--- PAGE 280 ---
251
Back to the Future
to become a Buddha in the future and to sacrifice his life towards this goal. 
The modern painting depicts the poignant moment immediately after he 
beheaded himself, by means of his own fingernails, and presented his head 
in offering to the sermon of the Buddha (Fig. 7.8).93 Meanwhile, the head 
continues to utter the sacred verse Iti pi so bhagavā arahaṁ.94
ESOTERIC BUDDHISM IN THERAVĀDA GUISE?
From the previous discussion, it appears that the concept of past and 
future Buddhas gradually emerged in the Khmer archaeological record 
rather late in the second millennium, only to become mainstream in the 
later centuries. By this time, the second “wave” of Pāli Buddhism in 
mainland Southeast Asia arrived from Sri Lanka in the wake of the 
Mahāvihāra ascendency. It may well be the case, therefore, that this form 
of Khmer Theravāda may have reinterpreted or assimilated some older 
Mahāyāna or esoteric modes of Buddhist practice that had been 
performed in Cambodia since the Angkor period,95 just like the 
Abhayagiri and the Jetavana (also Theravāda) vihāra did in medieval Sri 
Lanka.96 That is also to say that, for example, the emergence of the 
pañcabuddha in ancient Cambodia was likely the local answer to the 
earlier esoteric pañcajina.
Today, the cult of past and future Buddhas is completely 
appropriated and integrated into local Southeast Asian legends, 
chronicles, and certain rituals, and often plays an integral part in the 
iconography of temple decoration (paintings, sculptures, architecture, 
etc.). Several legends, liturgies, and narratives have been composed, 
expanded, translated and rearranged over many centuries and continue 
to develop to this day. For example, the elaboration of such stories as 
that of the ten future bodhisattvas clearly emphasised the ten 
perfections (dasapāramī) which were identified as part of the path of 
the bodhisattva. It may also be loosely linked to the concept of the ten 
avatars of Vishnu (daśāvatāra), the Hindu god of preservation, who is 
said to descend to earth from time to time to restore cosmic 
order. Incidentally, the second future Buddha after Metteyya is known 
as Rāma in the Dasabodhisatta-uddesa, likely named after the famous 
seventh avatar of Vishnu. Similarly in the Khmer Rāmayāṇa, known as 
the Reamker (Rāmakerti), Rāma’s divine nature, whose mission is to 
lead all creatures to deliverance, is simultaneously perceived as an aspect 
of Vishnu, the Buddha, and a bodhisattva.97 Interestingly, esoteric 
interpretations of the Reamker have also been studied by Bizot98 who 
breaks down the allegory of Rām(a) overcoming obstacles in the way of 
his union with Setā into a number of stages representing the path of 
initiation that leads to full enlightenment.

--- PAGE 281 ---
252
Nicolas Revire
Another popular myth found throughout the region is that of the 
white or albino crow, said to be the “Mother of the Five Bodhisattvas”. 
The folk legend known in Cambodia as rīoeṅ ka-aik sa, the “Legend of 
the White Crow”, attempts to explain the origin of the five Buddhas of 
this eon by going back to a bygone period when the five bodhisattvas were 
still siblings and raised by different kinds of female animals, viz. a hen for 
the future Buddha Kakusandha, a snake for Koṇāgamana, a tortoise for 
Kassapa, a cow for Gotama, and a lion for Metteyya.99 Some modern 
paintings from Cambodia nicely illustrate this folktale, the only minor 
difference being that the lion is generally replaced by a tiger.100 
Could this legend be a faint echo of some older Mahāyāna or Vajrayāna 
beliefs that were firmly established in the Bayon period with the worship 
of the five cosmic Buddhas or Jinas101 and of the Prajñāpāramitā goddess, 
equally referred to as “Mother of all Buddhas”?102 The parallels and 
correspondences I have tentatively drawn in this chapter between the 
emergence of the five esoteric Buddhas during the Angkor period and 
their canonical counterparts found in later Khmer Buddhism (Tables 7.1 
& 7.4), as well as between the Buddhas of the ten directions and the 
Dikpālas (Tables 7.2 & 7.3), are avenues that need to be further explored 
with great caution so as to avoid overgeneralisation. As a prime example, 
the Mahādibbamanta collection – perhaps already attested in Cambodia 
since the early Middle Period at Western Prasat Top,103 and definitely by 
the late Middle Period – was traditionally considered “Mahāyānist” by 
Padmanabh S. Jaini104 and others, in view of the fact that “its obvious 
concern with maṇḍala, mantra, and a highly syncretic pantheon of 
divinities certainly does look rather tantric”.105 Yet, it must be added that 
“the work is not uncharacteristic of the Pali Theravāda literature that had 
circulated in Cambodia for several centuries”.106 At the same time, Prapod 
Assavavirulhakarn has cautiously indicated that many Thai-Buddhist 
contemporary users of such liturgical texts do not see these as derived 
from earlier Mahāyānist or even tantric traditions and that “they fit 
perfectly into the Theravāda context”.107
In this light, the label “Tantric Theravāda” first promoted by Bizot108 
in his various writings on Thai-Khmer Buddhism is probably a misnomer 
since it cannot be established with certainty that the so-called 
kammaṭṭhān tradition that he describes directly derives its practices and 
manuals from an earlier stratum of Indian Buddhist tantra that may or 
may not have once circulated in the region.109 It is true, however, that its 
esoteric character for the practitioner (yogāvacar) can only be properly 
understood through initiation or when provided with the oral guidance of 
a skilled master (grū), often difficult to obtain nowadays in Cambodia.110 
Is it possible, furthermore, as Harris asked, that “we are looking at an 
indigenous Southeast Asian tradition that may have come under ill-

--- PAGE 282 ---
253
Back to the Future
defined external influences in the course of its development”?111 At any 
rate, only further detailed research in these various cultic and liturgical 
expressions, corpora of texts, inscriptions, and artistic manifestations 
throughout the ages in Cambodia and its neighbouring cultures will shed 
more light on their likely sources of inspiration as well as on the 
peculiarities of premodern Khmer Buddhism.
Notes
1	
Vincent Tournier, “Buddhas of the Past: South Asia”, in Brill’s Encyclopedia of 
Buddhism, Vol. II: Lives, eds. Jonathan Silk et al, Leiden: Brill, 2019,  
pp. 95–107.
2	
Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions modernes d’Ankgor 4, 5, 6 et 7”, BEFEO 58, 1971: 
pp. 108, 114; “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 35, 36, 37 et 39”, BEFEO 61, 
1974: pp. 302–3, 310, 315; Olivier de Bernon, “‘Des buddha aussi nombreux 
que les grains de sable’ : Note sur une métaphore figée dans la langue khmère”, 
Institut National des Langues et Civilisations Orientales, 2 vols, Paris, 2001: pp. 
13–7.
3	
Richard Gombrich, “The Significance of Former Buddhas in the Theravādin 
Tradition”, in Buddhist Studies in Honour of Walpola Rahula, eds. Walpola 
Rahula et al, London: Gordon Fraser, 1980, pp. 62–72. 
4	
Leo Both, “The Saptabuddhastotra and the Saptatathāgatastotra, Two Hymns 
Praising the Seven Previous Buddhas”, in Glimpses of the Sanskrit Buddhist 
Literature (Volume 1), ed. Kameshwar Nath Mishra, Sarnath: Central Institute 
of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1997, pp. 57–73.
5	
I. B. Horner, Buddhavaṃsa (Chronicle of Buddhas) and Cariyāpiṭaka (Basket of 
Conduct), London: The Pāli Text Society, 1975; The Clarifier of the Sweet 
Meaning (Madhuratthavilāsinī): Commentaries on the Chronicle of Buddhas 
(Buddhavaṃsa), London: The Pāli Text Society, 1978.
6	
Nicolas Revire, “Buddhas of the Past and of the Future: Southeast Asia”, in 
Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Vol. II: Lives, eds. Silk, Jonathan et al., Leiden: 
Brill, 2019, pp. 109–120.
7	
In this chapter, I use the term “Theravāda” as pure convention in the modern 
and broad sense of a Buddhist “monastic school” (nikāya) that draws its 
scriptural inspiration mainly from the Tipiṭaka or Pāli canon and its 
commentaries, and traces its sectarian lineage back to the “Elders” (Sanskrit: 
sthavira; Pāli: thera) from which the Mahāsāṁghika monks broke away during 
the Second Buddhist council. Evidently, the Theravāda school (and sub-schools) 
was not a monolithic movement and has much evolved in the course of its 
development. As we shall see here, the so-called Theravādins of Southeast Asia 
were also capable of original compositions in both Pāli and vernacular languages 
(usually dubbed by scholars as post- or non-canonical or even “apocryphal”). 
For recent discussions on the artificial category of Theravāda and its complex 
modern history, see Peter Skilling et al, How Theravāda is Theravāda?: 
Exploring Buddhist Identities, Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012; also Grégory 
Kourilsky, “Le ‘bouddhisme theravāda’, cette autre invention de l’Occident”, 
BEFEO 100, 2014: pp. 361–8.
8	
In historical scholarship, the Sanskrit term stūpa generally indicates any in-filled 
structure that is supposed to contain collected material, textual or corporeal

--- PAGE 283 ---
254
Nicolas Revire
relics of the Buddha or other high dignitaries. Other structures generally called 
caitya are simply commemorative monuments having no relics. This distinction 
is blurred, however, in Cambodia where, for modern Khmers, the term stūpa 
designates a non-funerary object, usually a monolith, and vice-versa, a relic-
containing/funerary object a caitya, see Ashley Thompson, “Lost and Found: 
The Stupa, the Four-faced Buddha, and the Seat of Royal Power in Middle 
Cambodia”, in Proceedings of the 7th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 August–4 September 
1998, eds. Wibke Lobo and Stephanie Reimann, 2000, pp. 245–63.
9	
Pia Conti, “Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai: A New Reading of Its 
Iconographic Message”, in Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. 
Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy, Bangkok: River Books & The Siam 
Society, 2014, pp. 386–7, Figs. 12a–b.
10	
Bruno Bruguier et al, Banteay Chhmar et les provinces occidentales. Tome III : 
Guide archéologique du Cambodge, Phnom Penh: Éditions Reyum, 2015,  
pp. 134–5, Fig. 191; Peter D. Sharrock, “Serpent-enthroned Buddha of 
Angkor”, Marg 67, no. 2 [Special Issue Art of Cambodia: Interactions with 
India, ed. Swati Chemburkar], 2016: p. 31, Fig. 9. 
11	
Julia Estève, Étude critique des phénomènes de syncrétisme religieux dans le 
Cambodge angkorien, doctoral dissertation, École Pratique des Hautes Études, 
Paris, 2009.
12	
Conti, “Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai”, appendix 1; translated by 
Skorupski. For two earlier readings and translations, see Chirapat Prapandvidya, 
“The Sab Bāk Inscription. Evidence of an Early Vajrayana Buddhist Presence in 
Thailand”, JSS 78, no. 2, 1990: pp. 11–4; and Claude Jacques, “The Buddhist 
Sect of Śrīghana in Ancient Khmer Lands”, in Buddhist Legacies in Mainland 
Southeast Asia: Mentalities, Interpretations and Practices, eds. François 
Lagirarde and Paritta Chalermpow Koanantakool, Bangkok: Princess Maha 
Chakri Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre, 2006, p. 73.
13	
The Sanskrit terms śrīghana (“dense with glory”), sugata (“one gone to bliss”), 
and jina (“conqueror”) are all epithets and names for a buddha (“awakened 
one”). Only the context will tell us if these epithets refer to transcendental or 
Historical Buddhas.   
14	
Adapted from Alice Getty, The Gods of Northern Buddhism: Their History and 
Iconography, New York: Dover Publications, 1988. 
15	
Benoytosh Bhattacharyya, The Indian Buddhist Iconography, Calcutta: 
Mukhopadhyay, 1968, p. 42ff. 
16	
We should be wary, however, of Jacques’ interpretation (2006) of what he calls 
the “Śrīghana sect” as an esoteric movement in ancient Cambodia. Skilling 
(2004) has written an article refuting this interpretation of the epithet of the 
Buddha “śrīghana” as necessarily tantric. The term decidedly had no special 
school affiliation. See also Pitchaya Soomjinda, “Khamwa ‘srikhana’ nai charuek 
kampucha: ‘nikai’ rue ‘nimankai’ [‘Śrīghana’ in Cambodian Inscriptions: 
‘Buddhist Sect’ or ‘Buddha’s Transformation Body’]”, Thai Khadi Sueksa: The 
Journal of the Thai Khadi Research Institute 11, 2557 BE/2014: pp. 175–217. 
Having said that, it is interesting to note that the spellings in the inscription  
K. 888, a homage to the “Triple Gem” (triratna) written on a bar held above the 
head of a divinity and discovered in the vicinity of the Chatomukh site at Preah 
Khan of Kompong Svay (on which see also infra), are now thought to be all 
Sanskritic, not Pāli as previously published (cf. Pou, Nouvelles inscriptions du 
Cambodge, Vol. 1. Paris: EFEO, 1989: pp. 14–5; Ludivine Provost-Roche, Les

--- PAGE 284 ---
255
Back to the Future
derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge (env. 1220–env. 1500), 
doctoral dissertation, Université Paris 3–Sorbonne Nouvelle, 2010: pp. 42–3, 
304; Skilling, “Namo Buddhāya Gurave (K. 888): Circulation of a Liturgical 
Formula Across Asia”, JSS 106, 2018: pp. 109–28.). In addition, a  textual 
source for the formula in this inscription could have been the 
Kudr̥ṣṭinirghātana, the first text on initiation contained in the collection of 
works known as the Advayavajrasaṅgraha and composed in northern India – 
today’s Nepal – in the 11th century (Teun Goudriaan and Christiaan Hooykaas, 
Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava) of Balinese Brahman Priests, 
Amsterdam & London: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1971: pp. 306–7; 
Glenn Wallis, “Advayavajra’s Instructions on the Adikarma”, Pacific World: 
Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, Third Series, no. 5, 2003: p. 214). An 
English translation of the Pañcākāra, another short text on the five Jinas from 
the same collection, appears in Conze et al. 2007: pp. 249–52. From the 
foregoing, it is possible to infer that the numerous five-Jina panels found at the 
main temple of Preah Khan might possibly have been loosely connected with 
this latter section of the Advayavajrasaṅgraha. At least, the citation of K. 888 
suggests that other portions of the Advayavajrasaṅgraha might have been 
known in the late Angkor period. I would like to acknowledge Hiram 
Woodward and Trent Walker for providing me with helpful bibliographical 
information on this. 
17	
Ian Harris, Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice, Honolulu: University 
of Hawai‘i Press, 2005, p. 24. 
18	
I am grateful to Olivier Cunin for drawing this lintel to my attention and for 
sharing his three-dimensional images.
19	
Rethy Chhem, “Bhaiṣajyaguru and Tantric Medicine in Jayavarman VII 
Hospitals”, Siksacakr 7, 2007: pp. 8–19; Hiram Woodward, “Cambodian 
Images of Bhaiṣajyaguru”, in Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations of the Past, 
eds. Emma Bunker and Douglas Latchford, Chicago: Art Media Resources, 
2011, pp. 497–502; Sharrock, “Berlin’s 1182–86 CE Bodhisattva ‘Sunlight’ or 
‘Moonlight’”, Indo-Asiatische Zeitschrift 15, 2011: pp. 31–40.
20	
Raoul Birnbaum, The Healing Buddha. Boulder: Shambhala, 1979, pp. 69ff, 
173ff.	
21	
Ibid., p. 92ff, pl. 7; Jing Anning, “The Yuan Buddhist Mural of the Paradise of 
Bhaiṣajyaguru”, Metropolitan Museum Journal 26, 1991: pp. 147–66.
22	
Subhadradis Diskul M. C., Sinlapa Samai Lopburi [Lopburi Period Art], 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department, 2510 BE/1967, Figs. 76 & 77. 
23	
Phuthorn Bhumadhon, “Buddhist Artifacts Recently Unearthed in Lopburi”, 
in Interpreting Southeast Asia’s Past: Monument, Image and Text, eds. E. A. 
Bacus, I. C. Glover and P. D. Sharrock, Singapore: NUS Press, 2008,  
pp. 156–64.
24	
Pierre Pichard, The Pentagonal Monuments of Pagan, Bangkok: White Lotus, 
1991.
25	
Recent excavations at Preah Khan of Kompong Svay led by Mitch Hendrickson 
were unable to get a radiocarbon date for the construction of the structure 
known by some today as Preah Chatomukh. A ceramic analysis that might yield 
further dating information for the site is still ongoing (Mitch Hendrickson, 
Pers. Comm.).
26	
Alexander Lubotsky, “The ‘Sarvatobhadra’ Temple of the 
Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa and the Viṣṇu Temple at Deogarh”, in Ritual, State 
and History in South Asia: Essays in Honour of J.C. Heesterman, eds. A. W. van

--- PAGE 285 ---
256
Nicolas Revire
der Hoek et al., Leiden: Brill, 1992, pp. 199–221.
27	
Donald M. Stadtner, Sacred Sites of Burma: Myth and Folklore in an Evolving 
Spiritual Realm, Bangkok: River Books, 2011, pp. 139–40.
28	
Alexander B. Griswold, Wat Pra Yün Reconsidered, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 
1975. An earlier example can be seen at Wat Phra Men in Nakhon Pathom 
where four colossal enthroned Buddhas are each assigned a different cardinal 
direction, see Nicolas Revire, “Iconographical Issues in the Archeology of Wat 
Phra Men, Nakhon Pathom”, JSS 98, 2010: pp. 75–115.
29	
Thompson, “Lost and Found”, pp. 245–63; and “The Future of Cambodia’s 
Past: A Messianic Middle-period Cambodian Royal Cult”, in History, 
Buddhism, and New Religious Movements in Cambodia, eds. John Marston and 
Elizabeth Guthrie. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2006, pp. 13–39.
30	
Jean Filliozat, “Une inscription cambodgienne en pāli et en khmer de 1566  
(K 82 Vatt Nagar)”, Comptes rendus des séances de l’Académie des Inscriptions et 
Belles-Lettres, 113e année, no. 1, 1969: pp. 93–106.
31	
Saveros Pou, “Textes en kmer moyen. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3”, 
BEFEO 57, 1970: pp. 103, 105–6.
32	
Paleographical estimates were provided by U-tain Wongsathit and Santi 
Pakdeekham in private communications. 
33	
Yuni Sato, “New Elements of Theravada Buddhism Found at Western Prasat 
Top”, in Annual Report on the Research and Restoration Work of the Western 
Prasat Top. II: Dismantling Process of the Southern Sanctuary, eds. Hiroshi 
Sugiyama and Yuni Sato, Nara: Nara National Research Institute for Cultural 
Properties, 2015, pp. 62–4; also Chapter 6 in this volume. 
34	
See Sato in this volume and Sok Keo Sovannara, “The Western Top Temple’s 
Stone Blocks”, in Annual Report, eds. Hiroshi Sugiyama and Yuni Sato, p. 51. 
35	
Padmanabh S. Jaini, “Mahādibbamanta: A Paritta Manuscript from 
Cambodia”, BSOAS 28, no. 1, 1965; Prapod Assavavirulhakarn, 
“Mahādibbamanta: A Reflection on Thai Chanting Tradition”, in Jainism and 
Early Buddhism: Essays in Honor of Padmanabh S. Jaini, ed. Olle Qvarnström, 
Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 2003.
36	
Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16a, 16b, 
et 16c”, BEFEO 59, 1972: pp. 226–7.
37	
Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”, BEFEO 62, 1975a: pp. 
285–6. I wish to acknowledge U-tain Wongsathit for drawing this textual source 
to my attention, and Trent Walker for these published references in the IMA. 
38	
Peter Skilling, “King, Saṅgha, and Brahmans: Ideology, ritual, and power in 
pre-modern Siam”, in Buddhism, Power and Political Order, ed. Ian Harris, 
London and New York: Routledge, 2007, pp. 195–203. 
39	
Variant: Piyadassī ca.
40	
Variant: Dīpankaro.
41	
Variant: Saraṇaṁkaro.
42	
Jaini, “Mahādibbamanta”, p. 66.
43	
The grammar of the last sentence is not very obvious. For example, it is not clear 
how rājadhammassa functions here, all the more since the variant 
rājakammassa (“royal deeds”?) also exists in some unpublished Thai 
manuscripts, for example in MS # Or 14526, f. 19r, kept at the British Library 
(www.bl.uk/manuscripts). Could rājadhamma be implicitly understood as the 
“ten royal virtues” (dasavidharājadhamma)? These ten virtues are enumerated 
for example at J III 273f (Jāt no. 385), J III 320  (Jāt no. 396), J III 412 (Jāt no. 
415), and J V 378 (Jāt no. 534) as dāna, sīla, pariccāga, ajjava, maddava, tapa,

--- PAGE 286 ---
257
Back to the Future
akkodha, avihiṅsā, khanti, avirodhana, that is, almsgiving, morality, generosity, 
directness, gentleness, austerity, non-anger, non-harming, forbearance, and 
non-opposition. They are already cited in Sukhothai inscriptions (e.g. Alexander 
B. Griswold and Prasert na Nagara, “The Epigraphy of Mahādharmarājā I of 
Sukhodaya: Epigraphic and Historical Studies No. 11 Part I”, JSS 61, no. 1, 
1973: p. 108, n. 118). For a discussion of these “ten royal virtues”, see also 
Skilling, 2007: pp. 195–6 and Woodward, 2015: pp. 189–93. 
44	
Tsugunari Kubo and Akira Yuyama, The Lotus Sutra (Taishō Volume 9, Number 
262), translated from the Chinese of Kumārajiva, Berkeley: Numata Center for 
Buddhist Translation and Research, 2007, p. 24ff.
45	
The Buddhavaṁsa and its commentary (Horner, Buddhavaṃsa (Chronicle of 
Buddhas) and Cariyāpiṭaka (Basket of Conduct); and The Clarifier of the Sweet 
Meaning (Madhuratthavilāsinī)) only know of a certain Buddha Maṅgala, 
while he is known in the Mahādibbamanta and in the Namo buddhāya 
siddhaṁ, v. 25, as Sumaṅgala (François Bizot and Oskar von Hinüber, eds., La 
guirlande de Joyaux, Paris, Chiang Mai, Phnom Penh, Vientiane: EFEO, 1994: 
p. 201, n. 9). In the “apocryphal” Aṭṭhaparikkhārajātaka, Buddha Sumaṅgala 
predicted Buddhahood to the bodhisattva, that is, the future Sākyamuni 
(Horner and Padmanabh S. Jaini, Apocryphal Birth-Stories (Paññāsa-jātaka), 
Volume I. London: The Pāli Text Society, 1985: p. 222ff.). Sumaṅgala is also the 
name of a Pacceka Buddha (Dictionary of Pali Proper Names, s.v.), and that of 
the tenth future Buddha according to the Dasabodhisatta-uddesa (see infra).
46	
De Bernon, Le manuel des maîtres de kammaṭṭhān : Étude et présentation de 
rituels de méditation dans la tradition du bouddhisme khmer, Institut National 
des Langues et Civilisations Orientales, 2 vols, Paris, 2000, pp. 310–1, 328–30.
47	
Emmanuel Guillon, “À propos d’une version mône inédite de l’épisode de 
Vasundharā”, JA 275, no. 1–2, 1987: pp. 149, 153.  
48	
See Jaini, “Mahādibbamanta”, pp. 66, 73–4 (vv. 18–20).
49	
Maung Htin Aung, Folk Elements in Burmese Buddhism, London: Oxford 
University Press, 1962, pp. 8–11; Guillon, “À propos d’une version mône 
inédite de l’épisode de Vasundharā”, pp. 148–9.
50	
François Bizot, “La grotte de la naissance”, BEFEO 67, 1980: pp. 226, 248, 252, 
256; de Bernon, Le manuel des maîtres de kammaṭṭhān, pp. 307–14.
51	
Justin Thomas McDaniel, The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: 
Practicing Buddhism in Modern Thailand, New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2011, p. 77ff.
52	
Roger R. Jackson, “A Tantric Echo in Sinhalese Theravāda?: Pirit Ritual, the 
Book of Paritta and the Jinapañjaraya”, Dhīḥ 19, 1994: pp. 127–9.
53	
On this practice in South Asia, see André Padoux, “Contributions à l’étude du 
Mantraśāstra. II. nyâsa : l’imposition rituelle des mantra”, BEFEO 67, 1980. 
According to the explanation provided in the Vairocanābhisaṁbodhi, each letter 
of the Sanskrit alphabet has been ascribed to different parts of the body (trans. 
Stephen Hodge, The Mahā-Vairocana-Abhisaṁbodhi Tantra: With 
Buddhaguhya’s Commentary, New York: Routledge Curzon, 2003: pp. 333–4; 
Rolf Giebel, The Vairocanābhisaṁbodhi Sutra, Berkeley: Numata Center for 
Buddhist Translation and Research, 2005: pp. 163–4). Similar practices are also 
attested in the Old Javano-Balinese textual tradition, on which see Andrea Acri, 
“Imposition of the Syllabary (svaravyañjana-nyāsa) in the Old Javano-Balinese 
Tradition in the Light of South Asian Tantric Sources”, in The Materiality and 
Efficacy of Balinese Letters: Situating Scriptural Practices, eds. Richard Fox and 
Annette Hornbacher, Leiden: Brill, 2016, pp. 123–65.

--- PAGE 287 ---
258
Nicolas Revire
54	
François Bizot and François Lagirarde, La pureté par les mots, Paris, Chiang Mai, 
Phnom Penh, Vientiane: EFEO, 1996, pp. 44–5, 220. 
55	
Anna A. Ślączka, Temple Consecration Rituals in Ancient India: Text and 
Archaeology, Leiden: Brill, 2007. No substantial studies of the Dikpālas in 
ancient Cambodia seem to exist. For a brief survey, however, see Kamaleswar 
Bhattacharya, Les religions brahmaniques dans l’ancien Cambodge d’après 
l’épigraphie et l’iconographie, Paris: EFEO, 1961: pp. 138–43; and Vittorio 
Roveda, Images of the Gods: Khmer Mythology in Cambodia, Thailand and 
Laos, Bangkok: River Books, 2005: pp. 191–3, 389 (I thank Thierry Zéphir for 
these references). For an iconographic study of Dikpālas in Campā, see Pierre 
Baptiste, “Le piédestal de Van Trac Hoa : un bali-pīṭha d’un type inédit. Note 
concernant l’iconographie des dikpāla au Champa”, AA 58, 2003: pp. 168–76; 
for the case of ancient Java, see Véronique Degroot, Arlo Griffiths and Baskoro 
Tjahjono, “Les pierres cylindriques inscrites du Candi Gunung Sari (Java 
Centre, Indonésie) et les noms des directions de l’espace en vieux javanais”, 
BEFEO 97–8, 2010–1: pp. 367–90; Andrea Acri and Roy Jordaan, “The 
Dikpālas of Ancient Java Revisited: A New Identification for the Twenty Four 
Directional Deities on the Śiva Temple of the Loro Jonggrang Complex”, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 168, 2012: pp. 274–313.
56	
Corinna Wessels-Mevissen, The Gods of the Directions in Ancient India: Origin 
and Early Development in Art and Literature (until c. l000 A.D.), Berlin: 
Dietrich Reimer Verlag, 2001, p. 1.
57	
Ibid., p. 18ff. They can also be invoked in a Buddhist tantric ritual context, for 
example in the Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra (Tadeusz Skorupski, The 
Sarvadurgatipariśodhana Tantra: Elimination of All Evil Destinies: Sanskrit 
and Tibetan Texts with Introduction, English Translation and Notes, Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1983, 51ff, 95ff.
58	
Madeleine Giteau, Le bornage rituel des temples bouddhiques au Cambodge, 
Paris: EFEO, 1969, pp. 15–8, 25ff. 
59	
Ibid., p. 18.
60	
Ibid., p. 49, (my translation). Certain sīmā of Angkor actually depict images of 
Dikpālas on their face (e.g. ibid.: pl. XIV, Fig. a, photo no. 24).
61	
Ibid., p. 71.
62	
Ibid.
63	
Martin Polkinghorne, Christophe Pottier and Christian Fisher, “Evidence for 
the 15th-Century Ayutthayan Occupation of Angkor”, in The Renaissance 
Princess Lectures: In Honour of Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri 
Sirindhorn on Her Fifth Cycle Anniversary, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2018, 
pp. 99–132.	
64	
Prapod Assavavirulhakarn, “Mahādibbamanta: A Reflection on Thai Chanting 
Tradition”, in Jainism and Early Buddhism: Essays in Honor of Padmanabh S. 
Jaini, ed. Olle Qvarnström, Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 2003, p. 389.
65	
As it occurs for example in the Śaiva Jñānasiddhānta and the Bhuvanasaṁkṣepa 
composed in ancient Indonesia (Haryati Soebadio , Jñānasiddhânta, The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1971: pp. 212–3; Sudarshana Devi Singhal, 
“Bhuvana-saṁkṣepa: Śaiva Cosmology in Indonesia”, in Cultural Horizons of 
India, Vol. 5, ed. Lokesh Chandra, New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan, 1997:  
pp. 122–3). I wish to thank Andrea Acri for these references.
66	
For François Bizot, see: Le figuier à cinq branches, Paris: EFEO, 1976; “La grotte 
de la naissance”, 1980; Le Chemin de Laṅkā, Paris, Chiang Mai, Phnom Penh: 
EFEO, 1992; Bizot and Hinüber, La guirlande de Joyaux, 1994; Bizot and

--- PAGE 288 ---
259
Back to the Future
Lagirarde, La pureté par les mots. For the other authors, see: de Bernon, Le 
manuel des maîtres de kammaṭṭhān; Catherine Becchetti, Le mystère dans les 
lettres: Étude sur les yantra bouddhiques du Cambodge et de la Thaïlande, 
Bangkok: Édition des Cahiers de France, 1991; Kate Crosby, “Tantric 
Theravāda: A Bibliographic Essay on the Writings of François Bizot and Others 
on the Yogāvacara Tradition”, Contemporary Buddhism 1, no. 2, 2000:  
pp. 141–98; Andrew Skilton and Phibul Choompolpaisal, “The Old 
Meditation (boran kammatthan), a Pre-reform Theravāda Meditation System 
from Wat Ratchasittharam: The Piti Section of the Kammatthan matchima 
baep lamdap”, Aséanie 33, 2014: pp. 83–116. The oldest extant manuscript 
related to this tradition is reported to come from Wat Ratchathiwat in Bangkok, 
and is dated 1661 (de Bernon, “Le mũl kămmăṭṭhān du Wat Ratchecathiwat 
daté de 1661 A.D. : présentation et traduction”, JSS 90, no. 1–2, 2002: pp. 
149–60). Interestingly, IMA 38 (dated 1623 śaka = 1701 CE), stanza 10, pays 
homage to the Master, the Triple Gem and the five Buddhas (Pou, “Inscriptions 
modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”, 1975a: pp. 298, 307). 
67	
De Bernon, Le manuel des maîtres de kammaṭṭhān, p. 301ff. 
68	
Donald K. Swearer, “A Summary of the Seven Books of the Abhidhamma”, in 
Buddhism in Practice, ed. Donald S. Lopez Jr., Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1995, pp. 338–40.
69	
A similar quinary association of the five cosmic Jinas with the five colours, five 
aggregates, five elements, five senses, five heart syllables, and so on, as well as 
their related cardinal directions, is also attested in ancient Javano-Balinese 
sources (Louis-Charles Damais, “Études javanaises III. À propos des couleurs 
symboliques des points cardinaux”, BEFEO 56, 1969: p. 87ff; Lokesh Chandra, 
“Śaiva Version of the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan”, in Cultural Horizons of 
India, Vol. 5, ed. Lokesh Chandra, pp. 18–9.
70	
Variant: ears.
71	
Variant: water (āpodhātu).
72	
Variant: earth (paṭhavīdhātu).
73	
Variant: white.
74	
Variant: red.
75	
Variant: yellow.
76	
Adapted from Bizot, Le figuier à cinq branches, pp. 87–91; Le Chemin de 
Laṅkā, pp. 229–31, 257; Bizot and Lagirarde, La pureté par les mots, pp. 212–3.
77	
Transliterated from Nuon Saṁ-ān, Gihippatipatti gharāvāsadhar̥m [Lay 
Practice and Dharma for Home-Dwellers], Phnom Penh: Private Publisher, 
2547 BE/2004, p. 4. I am grateful to Trent Walker for this reference and his 
assistance with the Khmer-Pāli. Related homages to the five Buddhas also appear 
frequently in modern Thai-Mon chanting books.
78	
Bizot, “Notes sur les yantra bouddhiques d’Indochine”, in Tantric and Taoist 
Studies in Honour of R.A. Stein (Volume 1), ed. Michel Strickmann, Brussels: 
Institut belge des Hautes Études chinoises, 1981, pp. 157–8, 171–2; Becchetti, 
Le mystère dans les lettres, 1991, pp. 51 (Fig. 1a), 56, 72.
79	
Susan Conway, Tai Magic: Arts of the Supernatural in the Shan States and Lan 
Na, Bangkok: River Books, 2014, pp. 87–8, Fig. 3.
80	
Vittorio Roveda and Sothon Yem, Preah Bot: Buddhist Painted Scrolls in 
Cambodia, Bangkok: River Books, 2010, p. 49ff. 
81	
Knowledge of the ten bodhisattvas appears earlier in a mid 14th-century Pāli 
inscription of Sukhothai, Face C, l. 12 (George Cœdès, “Documents sur la 
dynastie de Sukhodaya”, BEFEO 17, 1917: pp. 30, 32), a concept that seems to

--- PAGE 289 ---
260
Nicolas Revire
have not been totally understood by Griswold and Prasert, “The Epigraphy of 
Mahādharmarājā I of Sukhodaya”, p. 165, n. 27. See also, Saveros Pou, 
“Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33”, BEFEO 60, 
1973: pp. 220, 224.
82	
See for example MS Code # 023*.III.1-PP.03.03.03, # b.287.III.1, and # b.288.
III.1 (khmermanuscripts.efeo.fr). 
83	
François Martini, “Dasa-bodhisatta-uddesa : texte pâli publié avec une 
traduction et un index grammatical”, BEFEO 36, 1936.
84	
Ian Harris, Cambodian Buddhism, p. 82ff; de Bernon, “The Status of Pāli in 
Cambodia: From Canonical to Esoteric Language”, in Buddhist Legacies in 
Mainland Southeast Asia, eds. François Lagirarde and Paritta Chalermpow 
Koanantakool, pp. 53–66.
85	
Revire, “Buddhas of the Past and of the Future”, in Brill’s Encyclopedia of 
Buddhism, Vol. II: Lives, pp. 109–120.
86	
Hammalawa Saddhatissa, The Birth Stories of the Ten Bodhisattas and the 
Dasabodhisattuppattikathā, London: The Pāli Text Society, 1975.
87	
For example, the vān manuscript from Wat Bahupupharam from Srei Santhor 
district in Kampong Cham. I am grateful to Olivier de Bernon and his assistant 
Kun Sopheap for graciously pointing out this reference to me. Other short 
versions of this liturgical text exist in Cambodia (Trent Walker, Pers. Comm.).
88	
Martini, “Dasa-bodhisatta-uddesa”, p. 367.
89	
Ibid., p. 334. 	
90	
I wish to acknowledge the assistance of the late Peter Masefield in reading this 
text in Pāli. Except for the first paragraph which does not correlate exactly, the 
subsequent verses are totally absent in the colophon of the Sinhalese edition of 
Saddhatissa, The Birth Stories of the Ten Bodhisattas and the 
Dasabodhisattuppattikathā, 1975: pp. 92, 162, or that found as an appendix to 
Martini, “Dasa-bodhisatta-uddesa”, p. 413. 
91	
Nandana Chutiwongs and Leelananda Prematilleke, “The Ten Buddhas of the 
Future”, in Studies & Reflections on Asian Art History and Archaeology: Essays 
in Honour of H.S.H Professor Subhadradis Diskul, eds. Khaisri Sri-Aroon et al, 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University Press, 1997, pp. 351–64.
92	
Suphicha Saengsukiam, “Chitrakam phap phra phothisat nai samai phra 
anakataphut chao 10 phra ong bon phaeng mai kho song sala kan prian langkao 
wat nai klang changwat phetchaburi [Ten Future Bodhisattvas on Panel 
Painting from the Old Sermon Hall of Wat Nai Klang, Phetchaburi Province]”, 
Warasan Sinlapakon/The Journal of Silpakorn University 30, no. 1, 2553 
BE/2010: pp. 69–82. 
93	
For the story, see Martini, “Dasa-bodhisatta-uddesa”, pp. 330ff, 363ff.
94	
I am obliged to Grégory Mikaelian and Michel Antelme for the reading of these 
captions. 
95	
Sūryavarman I’s inscription found in Lopburi, Thailand (K. 410 or LB 2), dated 
944 and 947 śaka (= 1022 and 1025 CE) and written in Old Khmer, refers to 
“those who have been ordained as bhikṣu mahāyānasthavira” and who lived in 
close proximity to non-Buddhist ascetics or tāpasa (Cœdès, Recueil des 
inscriptions du Siam—2. Inscriptions de Dvāravatī, Çrīvijaya et Lăvo, Bangkok: 
Fine Arts Department, 2nd ed., 1961: pp. 10–2, inscription no. XIX, l. 6–7). 
However, I contest Cœdès’ rendition of this compound (mahāyānasthavira) 
that those monks (bhikṣu) belong either to the “Mahāyāna sect” and/or “the 
Sthavira [i.e. Theravāda] sect”. This seems to be technically impossible in the 
context of ancient Buddhist monastic practice, since there was probably no such

--- PAGE 290 ---
261
Back to the Future
thing as a “Mahāyāna Vinaya” in the past and hence no specific Mahāyāna 
monastic order or ordination lineage. Moreover, in canonical texts as well as in 
epigraphy, the Sanskrit term sthavira (Pāli: thera) was used mainly as an epithet 
or a honorific title based on ordination age and not employed in a 
denominational sense, denoting a specific nikāya affiliation (Sthaviravāda or 
Theravāda). Thus, the Sanskrit compound mahāyānasthavira may either refer 
to “Elders [not necessarily Theravādins] who follow the Mahāyāna path” or, less 
likely, “Mahāyanist [monks = bhikṣu] on the Sthavira path”. Put simply, the 
assumption of distinct Mahāyāna and Theravāda “schools” as well as the 
dichotomy made between Mahāyāna and Sthavira/Thera[vāda] Buddhist monks 
is wrong. 
96	
Jonathan S. Walters, “Mahāyāna Theravāda and the Origins of the Mahāvihāra”, 
The Sri Lanka Journal of the Humanities 23, no. 1–2, 1997: pp. 100–19; Lance 
S. Cousins, “The Teachings of the Abhayagiri School”, in How Theravāda is 
Theravāda?, eds. Peter Skilling et al, pp. 66–127. 
97	
Saveros Pou, “Les traits bouddhiques du Rāmakerti”, BEFEO 62, 1975b: pp. 
355–68.
98	
Bizot, Rāmaker ou l’amour symbolique de Rām et Setā, Paris: EFEO, 1989.	
99	
For an English translation of the legend as found in Northern Thailand, see 
Swearer, “Tamnan Kā Phū’ak [The Chronicle of the White Crow]”, in 
Becoming the Buddha: The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004, pp. 197–205. It is also found in 
manuscript form in Cambodia (MS Code # 027.III.1-A.10.10.01; 
khmermanuscripts.efeo.fr), but a detailed and comparative study remains to be 
done. It is to be distinguished with the Pañcabuddhabyākaraṇa or the 
“Prediction concerning the five buddhas”, a unique text composed in Pāli (and 
translated in Thai), perhaps going back to the Sukhothai period. The opening 
paragraph of this text states that, in the past, the five bodhisattvas were 
simultaneously and respectively born as a jungle-fowl, a king of snakes, a 
tortoise, a king of bulls, and a king of lions. The story that follows this 
introduction is localised in the area of Thung Yang, Uttaradit province, in 
Northern Thailand (Ginette Martini, “Pañcabuddhabyākaraṇa”, BEFEO 55, 
no. 1, 1969: pp. 125–44).
100	
Vittorio Roveda and Sothon Yem, Preah Bot, pp. 53, 55, Figs. 55–8.
101	
In the same vein, modern mural paintings from Wat Phathumwan in Bangkok 
show a clear correlation between the five bodhisattvas, the respective animals, 
and the five transcendental Jinas (Pitchaya, “‘Phrachomklao’ kap ‘phra 
thammakai’ nai chitrakam wat pathumwanaram” [King Rama IV and the 
‘Dharma-body’ in the Mural Paintings of Wat Pathumwanaram]”, Sinlapa 
Watthanatham/Art & Culture Magazine 37, 2559 BE/2016: pp. 66–85).
102	
As attested by epigraphic evidence. See in particular K. 111, stanza 44, K. 214, 
stanza 7, K. 225, stanzas 2 and 11, K. 273, stanza 35, and K. 872, stanza 4, cited 
in Hedwige Multzer o’Naghten, “Prajñāpāramitā dans le bouddhisme du 
Cambodge ancien”, AA 71, 2016: pp. 34–5, 43.
103	
Ibid.
104	
Jaini, “Mahādibbamanta”, pp. 61–80.
105	
Harris, Cambodian Buddhism, p. 85.
106	
Ibid.
107	
Prapod, “Mahādibbamanta: A Reflection on Thai Chanting Tradition”, p. 402.
108	
C.f. Crosby, “Tantric Theravāda”.
109	
A case in mind is the non-canonical Uṇhissavijaya which circulates in

--- PAGE 291 ---
262
Nicolas Revire
Cambodia in Pāli and Khmer, in both verses and prose (Trent Walker, “Echoes 
of a Sanskrit Past: Liturgical Curricula and the Pali Uṇhissavijaya in 
Cambodia”, in Katā Me Rakkhā, Katā Me Parittā: Protecting the Protective 
Texts and Manuscripts: Proceedings of the Second International Pali Studies 
Week (Paris 2016), ed. Claudio Cicuzza, Bangkok and Lumbini: Lumbini 
International Research Institute, 2018, pp. 55–134). The frame narrative of this 
powerful ritual text is virtually identical to that given in the Sanskrit 
Uṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇī[-sūtra] but is different from that of the 
Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra, “Elimination of all evil destinies”, which 
highlights a five-Jina system centred on Vairocana. In the latter narrative, Indra/
Śakra and his fellow residents in Trāyastriṁśa are powerless to help their 
deceased colleague Vimalamaṇiprabha, not even knowing into which realm he 
has been reborn. They must therefore seek the aid of Vairocana, first locating 
their fallen cohort in the most tortuous hell (avīci) and, second, setting forth a 
maṇḍala with the proper prescribed death rites for his benefit. Accordingly, 
Indra performs these specifically Buddhist tantric rites through which 
Vimalamaṇiprabha is liberated from hell and reborn in a better destiny 
(Skorupski, The Sarvadurgatipariśodhana Tantra). In the Pāli Uṇhissavijaya, 
however, there is neither trace of the actual dhāraṇī or “spell” that gives its name 
to the text nor is there any presence of the five cosmic Buddhas such as 
Vairocana. Thus, the terminology and doctrinal background of the narrative 
appear to be entirely Theravāda in tenor. Other Thai, Mon, and Lao versions of 
this text also exist which are recited in long-life ceremonies (Skilling, “Pieces in 
the Puzzle: Sanskrit Literature in Pre-modern Siam”, in Buddhism and Buddhist 
Literature of South-East Asia: Selected Papers, ed. Peter Skilling, Bangkok and 
Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation/Lumbini International Research 
Institute, 2009: pp. 32–6, App. 1–5; Kourilsky, “The Uṇhissa-vijaya-sutta in 
Laos and Thailand: A Philological Approach”, in Katā Me Rakkhā, Katā Me 
Parittā, ed. Claudio Cicuzza, pp. 1–54). 
110	
Harris, Cambodian Buddhism, p. 93ff. 
111	
Ibid., p. 94.
References 
Acri, Andrea. “Imposition of the Syllabary (svaravyañjana-nyāsa) in the Old 
Javano-Balinese  Tradition in the Light of South Asian Tantric Sources”. In The 
Materiality and Efficacy of  Balinese Letters: Situating Scriptural Practices, eds. 
Richard Fox and Annette Hornbacher. Leiden: Brill, 2016, pp. 123–65.
Acri, Andrea and Roy Jordaan. “The Dikpālas of Ancient Java Revisited: A New 
Identification for  the Twenty Four Directional Deities on the Śiva Temple of 
the Loro Jonggrang Complex”.  Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 
168, 2012: pp. 274–313.
Baptiste, Pierre. “Le piédestal de Van Trac Hoa: un bali-pīṭha d’un type inédit. Note 
concernant l’iconographie des dikpāla au Champa”. AA 58, 2003: pp. 168–76. 
Becchetti, Catherine. Le mystère dans les lettres: Étude sur les yantra bouddhiques du 
Cambodge et de la Thaïlande. Bangkok: Édition des Cahiers de France, 1991.
Bernon, Olivier de. “‘Des buddha aussi nombreux que les grains de sable’ : Note sur 
une métaphore figée dans la langue khmère”. Aséanie 7, 2001: pp. 13–7.
——— . Le manuel des maîtres de kammaṭṭhān: Étude et présentation de rituels de 
méditation dans la tradition du bouddhisme khmer. Institut National des 
Langues et Civilisations Orientales, 2 vols, Paris, 2000.

--- PAGE 292 ---
263
Back to the Future
——— . “Le mũl kămmăṭṭhān du Wat Ratchathiwat daté de 1661 A.D. : présentation 
et traduction”. JSS 90, no. 1–2, 2002: pp. 149–60.
——— . “The Status of Pāli in Cambodia: From Canonical to Esoteric Language”. In 
Buddhist Legacies in Mainland Southeast Asia: Mentalities, Interpretations and 
Practices, eds. François Lagirarde and Paritta Chalermpow Koanantakool. 
Bangkok: Princess Maha Chakri  Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre, 2006,  
pp. 53–66.
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar. Les religions brahmaniques dans l’ancien Cambodge d’après  
l’épigraphie et l’iconographie. Paris: EFEO, 1961.
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh. The Indian Buddhist Iconography. Calcutta: 
Mukhopadhyay, 1968. (Reprint of 2nd edition.)
Birnbaum, Raoul. The Healing Buddha. Boulder: Shambhala, 1979. 
Bizot, François. Le Chemin de Laṅkā. Paris, Chiang Mai, Phnom Penh: EFEO, 1992.
——— . Le figuier à cinq branches. Paris: EFEO, 1976.
——— . “La grotte de la naissance”. BEFEO 67, 1980: pp. 221–73.
——— . “Notes sur les yantra bouddhiques d’Indochine”. In Tantric and Taoist Studies 
in  Honour of R.A. Stein (Volume 1), ed. Michel Strickmann. Brussels: Institut 
belge des Hautes Études chinoises, 1981, pp. 155–91.
——— . Rāmaker ou l’amour symbolique de Rām et Setā. Paris: EFEO, 1989.
Bizot, François and Oskar von Hinüber. La guirlande de Joyaux. Paris, Chiang Mai, 
Phnom Penh,  Vientiane: EFEO, 1994.
Bizot, François and François Lagirarde. La pureté par les mots. Paris, Chiang Mai, 
Phnom Penh,  Vientiane: EFEO, 1996.
Both, Leo. “The Saptabuddhastotra and the Saptatathāgatastotra, Two Hymns 
Praising the  Seven Previous Buddhas”. In Glimpses of the Sanskrit Buddhist 
Literature (Volume 1), ed.  Kameshwar Nath Mishra. Sarnath: Central Institute 
of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1997, pp. 57–73.
Bruguier, Bruno et al. Banteay Chhmar et les provinces occidentales. Tome III : Guide  
archéologique du Cambodge. Phnom Penh: Éditions Reyum, 2015.
Chhem, Rethy. “Bhaiṣajyaguru and Tantric Medicine in Jayavarman VII Hospitals”. 
Siksacakr 7, 2007: pp. 8–19.
Chirapat Prapandvidya. “The Sab Bāk Inscription: Evidence of an Early Vajrayana 
Buddhist  Presence in Thailand”. JSS 78, no. 2, 1990: pp. 11–4.
Cœdès, George. “Documents sur la dynastie de Sukhodaya”. BEFEO 17, 1917:  
pp. 1–47.
——— . Recueil des inscriptions du Siam—2. Inscriptions de Dvāravatī, Çrīvijaya et 
Lăvo.  Bangkok: Fine Arts Department, 2nd ed., 1961. (First edition 1929.)
Conti, Pia. “Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin Phimai: A New Reading of Its 
Iconographic Message”. In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. 
Nicolas Revire and Stephen A.  Murphy. Bangkok: River Books & The Siam 
Society, 2014, pp. 374–95.
Conway, Susan. Tai Magic: Arts of the Supernatural in the Shan States and Lan Na. 
Bangkok:  River Books, 2014.
Conze, Edward et al. Buddhist Texts Through the Ages. London: One World 
Publications,  reprint, 2007.
Cousins, Lance S. “The Teachings of the Abhayagiri School”. In How Theravāda is 
Theravāda?:  Exploring Buddhist Identities, eds. Peter Skilling et al. Chiang Mai: 
Silkworm Books, 2012, pp. 66–127. 
Crosby, Kate. “Tantric Theravāda: A Bibliographic Essay on the Writings of François 
Bizot and  Others on the Yogāvacara Tradition”. Contemporary Buddhism 1, no. 
2, 2000: pp. 141–98.

--- PAGE 293 ---
264
Nicolas Revire
Damais, Louis-Charles. “Études javanaises III. À propos des couleurs symboliques des 
points  cardinaux”. BEFEO 56, 1969: pp. 75–118.
Degroot, Véronique, Arlo Griffiths and Baskoro Tjahjono. “Les pierres cylindriques 
inscrites du Candi Gunung Sari (Java Centre, Indonésie) et les noms des 
directions de l’espace en vieux  javanais”. BEFEO 97–8, 2010–1: pp. 367–90.
Estève, Julia. Étude critique des phénomènes de syncrétisme religieux dans le Cambodge  
angkorien. Doctoral dissertation, École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris, 2009.
Filliozat, Jean. “Une inscription cambodgienne en pāli et en khmer de 1566 (K 82 Vatt 
Nagar)”. Comptes rendus des séances de l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-
Lettres, 113e année, no. 1, 1969: pp. 93–106.
Getty, Alice. The Gods of Northern Buddhism: Their History and Iconography. New 
York:  Dover Publications, 1988. (Reprint of 2nd edition.)
Giebel, Rolf. The Vairocanābhisaṁbodhi Sutra: Translated from the Chinese (Taishō 
Vol. 18, Nr 848). Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and 
Research, 2005.
Giteau, Madeleine. Le bornage rituel des temples bouddhiques au Cambodge. Paris: 
EFEO, 1969.
Gombrich, Richard. “The Significance of Former Buddhas in the Theravādin 
Tradition”. In Buddhist Studies in Honour of Walpola Rahula, eds. Walpola 
Rahula et al. London: Gordon  Fraser, 1980, pp. 62–72. 
Goudriaan, Teun and Christiaan Hooykaas. Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and 
Vaiṣṇava) of Balinese Brahman Priests. Amsterdam & London: North-Holland 
Publishing Company, 1971. 
Griswold, Alexander B. Wat Pra Yün Reconsidered. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 1975.
Griswold, Alexander B. and Prasert na Nagara. “The Epigraphy of Mahādharmarājā I 
of Sukhodaya. Epigraphic and Historical Studies No. 11 Part I”. JSS 61, no. 1, 
1973: pp. 71–180.
Guillon, Emmanuel. “À propos d’une version mône inédite de l’épisode de 
Vasundharā”.  JA 275, no. 1–2, 1987: pp. 143–62.  
Harris, Ian. Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai‘i Press, 2005.
Hodge, Stephen. The Mahā-Vairocana-Abhisaṁbodhi Tantra: With Buddhaguhya’s 
Commentary. New York: Routledge Curzon, 2003. 
Horner, I. B. Buddhavaṃsa (Chronicle of Buddhas) and Cariyāpiṭaka (Basket of 
Conduct). London: The Pāli Text Society, 1975.
——— . The Clarifier of the Sweet Meaning (Madhuratthavilāsinī): Commentaries on 
the  Chronicle of Buddhas (Buddhavaṃsa). London: The Pāli Text Society, 1978.
Horner, I. B. and Padmanabh S. Jaini. Apocryphal Birth-Stories (Paññāsa-jātaka), 
Volume I. London:  The Pāli Text Society, 1985.
Jackson, Roger R. “A Tantric Echo in Sinhalese Theravāda? Pirit Ritual, the Book of 
Paritta and the Jinapañjaraya”. Dhīḥ 19, 1994: pp. 121–40.
Jacques, Claude. “The Buddhist Sect of Śrīghana in Ancient Khmer Lands”. In 
Buddhist Legacies in Mainland Southeast Asia: Mentalities, Interpretations and 
Practices, eds. François Lagirarde and Paritta Chalermpow Koanantakool. 
Bangkok: Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn  Anthropology Centre, 2006, pp. 
71–7.
Jaini, Padmanabh S. “Mahādibbamanta: A Paritta Manuscript from Cambodia”. 
BSOAS 28, no. 1, 1965: pp. 61–80.
Jing, Anning. “The Yuan Buddhist Mural of the Paradise of Bhaiṣajyaguru”. 
Metropolitan Museum Journal 26, 1991: pp. 147–66.
Kourilsky, Grégory. “Le ‘bouddhisme theravāda’, cette autre invention de l’Occident”.

--- PAGE 294 ---
265
Back to the Future
BEFEO 100, 2014: pp. 361–8.
——— . “The Uṇhissa-vijaya-sutta in Laos and Thailand: A Philological Approach”. In 
Katā Me  Rakkhā, Katā Me Parittā: Protecting the Protective Texts and 
Manuscripts. Proceedings of the Second International Pali Studies Week (Paris 
2016), ed. Claudio Cicuzza. Bangkok and Lumbini: Lumbini International 
Research Institute, 2018, pp. 1–54. 
Kubo, Tsugunari and Akira Yuyama. The Lotus Sutra (Taishō Volume 9, Number 262). 
Translated from the Chinese of Kumārajiva. Berkeley: Numata Center for 
Buddhist Translation and Research, 2007.
Lokesh Chandra. “Śaiva Version of the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan”. In Cultural 
Horizons of  India, Vol. 5, ed. Lokesh Chandra. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan, 
1997, pp. 7–101. 
Lubotsky, Alexander. “The ‘Sarvatobhadra’ Temple of the Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa 
and the  Viṣṇu Temple at Deogarh”. In Ritual, State and History in South Asia: 
Essays in Honour of  J.C. Heesterman, eds. A.W. van der Hoek et al. Leiden: Brill, 
1992, pp. 199–221.
McDaniel, Justin Thomas. The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: Practicing 
Buddhism in  Modern Thailand. New York: Columbia University Press, 2011. 
Martini, François. “Dasa-bodhisatta-uddesa : texte pâli publié avec une traduction et 
un index  grammatical”. BEFEO 36, 1936: pp. 287–413.
Martini, Ginette. “Pañcabuddhabyākaraṇa”. BEFEO 55, no. 1, 1969: 125–44.
Maung Htin Aung. Folk Elements in Burmese Buddhism. London: Oxford University 
Press, 1962.
Multzer o’Naghten, Hedwige. “Prajñāpāramitā dans le bouddhisme du Cambodge 
ancien”. AA 71, 2016: pp. 31–54.
Nandana Chutiwongs and Leelananda Prematilleke. “The Ten Buddhas of the 
Future”. In Studies & Reflections on Asian Art History and Archaeology: Essays 
in Honour of H.S.H Professor  Subhadradis Diskul, eds. Khaisri Sri-Aroon et al. 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University Press, 1997, pp. 351–64.
Nuon Saṁ-ān. Gihippatipatti gharāvāsadhar̥m [Lay Practice and Dharma for 
Home-Dwellers]. Phnom Penh: Private Publisher, 2547 BE/2004. (In Khmer.)
Padoux, André. “Contributions à l’étude du Mantraśāstra. II. nyâsa : l’imposition 
rituelle des mantra”. BEFEO 67, 1980: pp. 59–102.
Phuthorn Bhumadhon. “Buddhist Artifacts Recently Unearthed in Lopburi”. In 
Interpreting Southeast Asia’s Past: Monument, Image and Text, eds. E. A. Bacus, 
I. C. Glover and P. D.  Sharrock. Singapore: NUS Press, 2008, pp. 156–64.
Pichard, Pierre. The Pentagonal Monuments of Pagan. Bangkok: White Lotus, 1991.
Pitchaya Soomjinda. “Khamwa ‘srikhana’ nai charuek kampucha: ‘nikai’ rue 
‘nimankai’ [‘Śrīghana’ in Cambodian Inscriptions: ‘Buddhist Sect’ or ‘Buddha’s 
Transformation Body’]”. Thai Khadi Sueksa/The Journal of the Thai Khadi 
Research Institute 11, 2557 BE/2014: pp. 175–217. (In Thai).
——— . “‘Phrachomklao’ kap ‘phra thammakai’ nai chitrakam wat pathumwanaram” 
[King Rama IV and the ‘Dharma-body’ in the Mural Paintings of Wat 
Pathumwanaram]”. Sinlapa Watthanatham/Art & Culture Magazine 37, 2559 
BE/2016: pp. 66–85. (In Thai.)
Polkinghorne, Martin, Christophe Pottier and Christian Fisher. “Evidence for the 
15th-Century Ayutthayan Occupation of Angkor”. In The Renaissance Princess 
Lectures: In Honour of Her  Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn on 
Her Fifth Cycle Anniversary. Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2018, pp. 99–132.
Pou (aka Lewitz), Saveros. “Textes en kmer moyen. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 
et 3”. BEFEO 57, 1970: pp. 99–126.

--- PAGE 295 ---
266
Nicolas Revire
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Ankgor 4, 5, 6 et 7”. BEFEO 58, 1971: pp. 105–23.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16a, 16b, et 16c”. 
BEFEO 59, 1972: pp. 221–49.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33”. BEFEO 60, 
1973: pp. 205–42.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 35, 36, 37 et 39”. BEFEO 61, 1974:  
pp. 301–37.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”. BEFEO 62, 1975a: pp. 283–353.
——— . “Les traits bouddhiques du Rāmakerti”. BEFEO 62, 1975b: pp. 355–68.
——— . Nouvelles inscriptions du Cambodge, Vol. 1. Paris: EFEO, 1989.
Prapod Assavavirulhakarn. “Mahādibbamanta: A Reflection on Thai Chanting 
Tradition”. In  Jainism and Early Buddhism: Essays in Honor of Padmanabh. S. 
Jaini, ed. Olle Qvarnström.  Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 2003,  
pp. 379–406.
Revire, Nicolas. “Buddhas of the Past and of the Future: Southeast Asia”. In Brill’s 
Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Vol. II: Lives, eds. Silk, Jonathan et al. Leiden: Brill, 
2019, pp. 109–120.
——— . “Iconographical Issues in the Archeology of Wat Phra Men, Nakhon Pathom”. 
JSS 98, 2010: pp. 75–115.
Roche-Provost, Ludivine. Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge 
(env.  1220–env. 1500). PhD dissertation, Université Paris 3–Sorbonne 
Nouvelle, 2010.
Roveda, Vittorio. Images of the Gods: Khmer Mythology in Cambodia, Thailand and 
Laos. Bangkok: River Books, 2005. 
Roveda, Vittorio and Sothon Yem. Preah Bot: Buddhist Painted Scrolls in Cambodia. 
Bangkok: River Books, 2010.
Saddhatissa, Hammalawa. The Birth Stories of the Ten Bodhisattas and the  
Dasabodhisattuppattikathā. London: The Pāli Text Society, 1975.
Sato, Yuni. “New Elements of Theravada Buddhism Found at Western Prasat Top”. In 
Annual  Report on the Research and Restoration Work of the Western Prasat Top. 
II: Dismantling  Process of the Southern Sanctuary, eds. Hiroshi Sugiyama and 
Yuni Sato. Nara: Nara National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, 
2015, pp. 56–64. 
Sharrock, Peter D. “Berlin’s 1182–86 CE Bodhisattva ‘Sunlight’ or ‘Moonlight’”. 
Indo-Asiatische Zeitschrift 15, 2011: pp. 31–40.
——— . “Serpent-enthroned Buddha of Angkor”. Marg 67, no. 2 [Special Issue Art of 
Cambodia:  Interactions with India, ed. by Swati Chemburkar], 2016:  
pp. 20–31.
Singhal, Sudarshana Devi. “Bhuvana-saṁkṣepa: Śaiva Cosmology in Indonesia”. In 
Cultural Horizons of India, Vol. 5, ed. Lokesh Chandra, New Delhi: Aditya 
Prakashan, 1997, pp. 102–61. 
Skilling, Peter. “Random Jottings on Śrīghana: An Epithet of the Buddha”. Annual 
Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 7, 2004: 
pp. 147–58.
——— . “King, Saṅgha, and Brahmans: Ideology, Ritual, and Power in Pre-modern 
Siam”. In  Buddhism, Power and Political Order, ed. Ian Harris. London and 
New York: Routledge, 2007, pp. 182–215. 
——— . “Pieces in the Puzzle: Sanskrit Literature in Pre-modern Siam”. In Buddhism 
and Buddhist Literature of South-East Asia: Selected Papers, ed. Peter Skilling. 
Bangkok and  Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation/Lumbini International 
Research Institute, 2009, pp. 27–45.

--- PAGE 296 ---
267
Back to the Future
——— . “Namo Buddhāya Gurave (K. 888): Circulation of a Liturgical Formula Across 
Asia”. JSS 106, 2018: pp. 109–28.
Skilling, Peter et al. How Theravāda is Theravāda?: Exploring Buddhist Identities. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2012.
Skilton, Andrew and Phibul Choompolpaisal. “The Old Meditation (boran 
kammatthan), a Pre-reform Theravāda Meditation System from Wat 
Ratchasittharam: The Piti Section of the  Kammatthan matchima baep 
lamdap”. Aséanie 33, 2014: pp. 83–116.
Skorupski, Tadeusz. The Sarvadurgatipariśodhana Tantra: Elimination of All Evil 
Destinies. Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts with Introduction, English Translation and 
Notes. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983.
Ślączka, Anna A. Temple Consecration Rituals in Ancient India: Text and Archaeology. 
Leiden:  Brill, 2007.
Soebadio, Haryati. Jñānasiddhânta. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1971.
Sovannara, Sok Keo. “The Western Top Temple’s Stone Blocks”. In Annual Report on 
the  Research and Restoration Work of the Western Prasat Top. II: Dismantling 
Process of the  Southern Sanctuary, eds. Hiroshi Sugiyama and Yuni Sato. Nara: 
Nara National Research  Institute for Cultural Properties, 2015, pp. 49–55. 
Stadtner, Donald M. Sacred Sites of Burma: Myth and Folklore in an Evolving 
Spiritual Realm.  Bangkok: River Books, 2011.
Subhadradis Diskul M. C. Sinlapa Samai Lopburi [Lopburi Period Art]. Bangkok: 
Fine Arts Department, 2510 BE/1967. (In Thai.)
Suphicha Saengsukiam. “Chitrakam phap phra phothisat nai samai phra anakataphut 
chao 10 phra ong bon phaeng mai kho song sala kan prian langkao wat nai klang 
changwat  phetchaburi [Ten Future Bodhisattvas on Panel Painting from the 
Old Sermon Hall of Wat  Nai Klang, Phetchaburi Province]”. Warasan 
Sinlapakon/The Journal of Silpakorn University 30, no. 1, 2553 BE/2010:  
pp. 69–82. (In Thai.)
Swearer, Donald K. “A Summary of the Seven Books of the Abhidhamma”. In 
Buddhism in  Practice, ed. Donald S. Lopez Jr. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1995, pp. 336–42.
——— . “Tamnan Kā Phū’ak [The Chronicle of the White Crow]”. In Becoming the 
Buddha: The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2004, pp. 197–205. 
Thompson, Ashley. “The Future of Cambodia’s Past: A Messianic Middle-period 
Cambodian Royal Cult”. In History, Buddhism, and New Religious  Movements 
in Cambodia, eds. John Marston and Elizabeth Guthrie. Chiang Mai: Silkworm 
Books, 2006, pp. 13–39. 
——— . “Lost and Found: The Stupa, the Four-faced Buddha, and the Seat of Royal 
Power in Middle Cambodia”. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference 
of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Berlin, 31 
August–4 September 1998, eds. Wibke Lobo and Stephanie Reimann, 2000, pp. 
245–63.
Tournier, Vincent. “Buddhas of the Past: South Asia”. In Brill’s Encyclopedia of 
Buddhism, Vol. II: Lives, eds. Jonathan Silk et al. Leiden: Brill, 2019,  
pp. 95–107.
Walker, Trent. “Echoes of a Sanskrit Past: Liturgical Curricula and the Pali 
Uṇhissavijaya in  Cambodia”. In Katā Me Rakkhā, Katā Me Parittā: Protecting 
the Protective Texts and Manuscripts: Proceedings of the Second International 
Pali Studies Week (Paris 2016), ed. Claudio Cicuzza. Bangkok and Lumbini: 
Lumbini International Research Institute, 2018, pp. 55–134.

--- PAGE 297 ---
268
Nicolas Revire
Wallis, Glenn. “Advayavajra’s Instructions on the Adikarma”. Pacific World: Journal of 
the  Institute of Buddhist Studies, Third Series, no. 5, 2003: pp. 203–30.
Walters, Jonathan S. “Mahāyāna Theravāda and the Origins of the Mahāvihāra”. The 
Sri Lanka  Journal of the Humanities 23, no. 1–2, 1997: pp. 100–19.
Wessels-Mevissen, Corinna. The Gods of the Directions in Ancient India: Origin and 
Early  Development in Art and Literature (until c. l000 A.D.). Berlin: Dietrich 
Reimer Verlag, 2001.  
Woodward, Hiram. “Bangkok Kingship: The Role of Sukhothai”. JSS 103, 2015:  
pp. 183–97. 
——— . “Cambodian Images of Bhaiṣajyaguru”. In Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations 
of the Past, eds. Emma Bunker and Douglas Latchford. Chicago: Art Media 
Resources, 2011, pp. 497–502.

--- PAGE 298 ---
269
Chapter 8
17TH- AND 18TH-CENTURY 
IMAGES OF THE BUDDHA FROM 
AYUTTHAYA AND LAN XANG AT 
ANGKOR WAT
Martin Polkinghorne
INTRODUCTION
Accomplished scholarship of Cambodian history after Angkor seeks to 
interrogate the established characterisation of the period as a time of absence, 
defeat, retreat and instability.1 Traits that had defined the great Angkorian 
civilisation: enormous agro-urban cities, monumental stone architecture, 
landscape-scale infrastructure, specialised craft production, and epigraphy 
had diminished to a skerrick of their former significance. It is thought that at 
roughly the same time, members of the saṅgha travelling from the Khorat 
plateau introduced a form of Theravāda Buddhism. While the notion of 
decline at Angkor is contested, a more challenging task is filling the purported 
blank space of the Cambodian early modern period with knowledge about its 
material world.2 New studies on material culture and texts, in addition to new 
themes of investigation, are recasting this period as complex and vibrant, and 
help to define the transformations of Cambodian Theravāda. 
Many sources of knowledge regarding the emergence of Cambodian 
Theravāda in the early modern period remain unstudied. Examining the 
historical sources, which were composed centuries after the events they 
allege to recount and often sire factually unreliable information, has 
necessarily been the first task to appraise the Cambodian early modern 
period,3 but a great deal of information also resides in its material culture. 
Significantly, the known historical narratives do not correspond with the 
material culture of the early modern period, and specifically, the sculptures 
of Angkor Wat. This chapter focuses on 17th- or 18th-century sculptures 
related to the present-day territories of Thailand and Laos found in the 
galleries of Angkor Wat. Historical research of this period is difficult 
because of the paucity and complexity of sources.4 Art historical and 
archaeological studies are equally challenging.

--- PAGE 299 ---
270
Martin Polkinghorne
In this enquiry it might be understandable to seek correspondence 
with known or recorded historical events, and yet this chapter is 
restrained in doing so without decisive evidence.5 Nevertheless, I will 
attempt to elaborate the relevant historical contexts that demonstrate 
the continuous reverence of Angkor Wat as the most important site of 
Theravāda pilgrimage in mainland Southeast Asia. Moreover, the 
presence of 17th- and 18th-century foreign images from territories that 
were at times at war with the Cambodian polity, confirm that Angkor 
Wat operated as a supernatural authority with multifarious relationships 
to political developments. Although the donors cannot be specified, we 
might envisage that the saṅgha, other religious or lay people, or those 
with established regional kinship or political networks coordinated  
these initiatives.
When compared to classic period Angkor, Cambodia of the 17th and 
18th centuries might be appraised as the recent past, but very little is 
known about its material culture. While there are some accomplished 
studies6, the period has been the focus of relatively little cross-disciplinary 
research. Indispensible to new work is Iconographie du Cambodge Post-
Angkorien by Madeleine Giteau7, which remains the only formalist, 
methodical and published study of early modern Cambodian sculpture. 
Giteau was a gifted art historian who lived in Cambodia for nearly 20 
years. When she declared it was “virtually impossible” to place the stylistic 
evolution of the early modern period sculptures on a time scale and 
acknowledged “that dating remains elusive and often tainted with 
8.1
Fig 8.1	 South gallery, Preah Pean, 
Angkor Wat. Left: 
Photographer unknown, 
1906, Kerncollectie 
Fotografie, A319-73, 
courtesy Museum 
Volkenkunde. Right: 
Photograph by author, 2013.

--- PAGE 300 ---
271
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
doubt”8, we can begin to appreciate the difficulty of the task. The 
Buddhist sculptures of Angkor Wat provide a tightly defined sample 
offering new perspectives on Cambodia in the early modern period and of 
Cambodian Theravāda.
In approaching this issue, we need to ask how and why 17th- and 
18th-century images from Ayutthaya or Lan Xang ended up in Angkor. 
Were the images transported from Central Thailand and Central Laos to 
Angkor Wat, or were they made at Angkor by non-local artists trained in 
the traditions of those cultures? On the last question, we might eventually 
apply the methods of material science to provide a definitive answer.9 
WERE SCULPTURES IMPORTED INTO CAMBODIA?
One might propose the sculptures presented in this chapter are 
Cambodian productions inspired by one or a group of imported images 
from Thailand and Laos, or perhaps parallel artistic developments. Despite 
the marked increase in variation of styles that accompanied decentralised 
artistic production in early modern Cambodia, these sculptures are unique 
in iconography, morphology and proportionality when compared to those 
designated as Cambodian of the 17th and 18th centuries.10 
That is not to say Cambodian artists were not influenced by external 
factors, but akin to their Angkorian ancestors, the early modern period 
artists could not faithfully reproduce another tradition without calling on 
their own stylistic traditions. Even when Angkorian artists deliberately 
copied older sculptures they used stylistic elements of their own time.11 
We cannot know the origin of the makers, but their training and artistic 
lineage belong to cultures beyond the borders of Cambodia.
DISCONNECTING THE DEMISE OF THE CAPITAL AT 
ANGKOR AND THE EMERGENCE OF THERAVĀDA
Early interpretations of the demise of the capital at Angkor positioned the 
emergence of Theravāda as an instrumental factor in the fragmentation of 
established socio-political structures. As studies of Cambodian Theravāda 
demonstrate parallel development rather than causal stimulus, 
international pilgrimage to Angkor Wat was not necessarily attached to 
geo-political relations.
Frequently cited syntheses present Theravāda as a grassroots, 
popularist movement. To several writers, Theravāda offered a kind of 
anti-aristocratic message that led to the dissolution of Brahmanical power 
structures and eventually the collapse of the empire.12 Using historic 
examples from Burma, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, Stanley J. 
Tambiah argued that the different categorical levels of Southeast Asian

--- PAGE 301 ---
272
Martin Polkinghorne
societies, for example, politico-economic, territorial, administrative or 
cosmological were not necessarily bound to each other. Rather, the traits 
of centre-orientated and centrifugally fragmenting “galactic polities”, 
sometimes referred to as a maṇḍala, provide the pervasive, but non-
deterministic structure for the operation of premodern Southeast Asian 
civilisations.13 Additionally, Richard A. O’Connor, in examining religious 
change in Thailand, concluded that historically evident transformations 
of religion were internal, and should take precedence over external ones.14 
Correspondingly, in the case of Angkor, there was not a deterministic link 
between socio-political structures and the cosmology of Brahmanism, 
Mahāyāna or Theravāda. Moreover, the emergence of Theravāda can be 
understood as an endogenous development and counterpart to the demise 
of Angkor as the capital, but not a contributing factor. 
At Angkor, Saveros Pou reasoned that, in terms of the epigraphic 
vocabulary, the transition from Mahāyāna to Theravāda was relatively 
smooth.15 The Khmer portion of an early 14th-century inscription 
demonstrates an example of continuity in the royal and religious 
patronage structure. Just as kings and nobles attached their names to 
funding temples and images of the gods during the Angkorian period, the 
inscription of Prasat Kombot tells how the king sponsored the 
construction of a Buddha image and advanced the career of a senior 
member of the saṅgha.16 How this transition was manifested in the 
material world was likely to be different, and Ashley Thompson has 
described the transformation of monumental Brahmanical architecture 
into spaces of Cambodian Theravāda devotion.17 As it is often incorrect to 
attribute architecture, images, epigraphic declarations, or religious 
practices to any single religious orthodoxy, an emerging Cambodian 
Theravāda was not exclusive, and the key to its triumph may well have 
resided in underlying indigenous belief systems.18 
As research about the demise of the capital at Angkor progresses,19 the 
early 15th-century Ayutthayan occupation at the site might be recast as 
epilogue rather than catalyst. Furthermore, evidence of pilgrimage and 
donation possibly from the occupying force illustrate the inextricability of 
political sovereignty and religious veneration at Angkor Wat. Ayutthaya 
occupied Angkor from 1431/32 for a period of between 12 and 15 years.20 
At roughly the same time, the movement of the Angkorian elite evidenced 
in the relevant Cambodian and Thai chronicles might be associated with 
an array of contributing factors: intense monsoons and mega-droughts in 
the 14th and 15th centuries,21 unsustainable modes of habitation and 
subsistence,22 an over commitment to massive infrastructure,23 or 
integration with an emerging China–Southeast Asia trading network.24 
The significance and character of the Ayutthayan occupation is not yet 
fully understood, but accompanying the military force were artists trained

--- PAGE 302 ---
273
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
in the early Ayutthayan tradition who left behind at least 50 characteristic 
Ayutthayan images.25 It is with caution that a finite group of sculptures is 
linked to a contested historical event, however these statues are the first 
extraterritorial images identified at Angkor through the combination of 
archaeology, art history and material science. In this case, the union of 
material culture and the Ayutthayan occupation is feasible and logical. It is 
therefore possible to consider ten images of the Buddha in māravijaya at 
Angkor Wat to have comprised offerings of the famed 1431/32 
conquerors that were also pilgrims of Theravāda.
After disconnecting the demise of Angkor as the capital and 
Theravāda, the many Buddhist images curated by the monastic 
community of Angkor Wat are representative of a social and religious 
world that was not bound to known historical narratives. Within the 
Cambodian early modern period “rhetoric of loss and recovery”,26 the 
theme of international pilgrimage27 can be supplemented with new 
material evidence. We can observe Theravāda at Angkor Wat in the 17th 
and 18th centuries through sculptures donated to the temple and 
produced by artists trained in present-day Laos and Thailand. 
THE ANGKOR WAT BUDDHAS
The colonial narrative proposed that Angkor Wat was lost to the jungle.28 
But we know it remained in continuous use from the moment of its 
inauguration in the 12th century. Perhaps from around the early to mid 
16th century, Angkor Wat became a repository of Cambodian Buddhist 
sculpture without equal, and correspondingly now offers a representative 
record of Cambodian Buddhism from the ninth century until the present 
day. Angkor Wat hosted hundreds of images of the Buddha donated by 
Cambodian and Asian pilgrims. Many were removed; some for safekeeping 
during periods of civil unrest, a selection for display in Cambodian 
museums, and an unknown number were lost to looting. Numerous 
Buddha images retain their sacred importance and are revered today. The 
majority of these images are different combinations of stone, wood, stucco 
and lacquer. Critically, the statues demonstrate that Angkor Wat was the 
focus of pilgrimage and restoration to accumulate merit and authority 
within Cambodian and other Southeast Asian Theravāda belief systems.29
The earliest textual evidence of Angkor Wat as a vehicle for securing 
merit and as sacred repository comes in an inscription dated 
paleographically to the first half of the 16th century.30 However, it may be 
possible to consider that donations to the temple were meritorious from 
the early 15th century, as evidenced by early Ayutthayan images carved at 
Angkor.31 The specific focus of the donations was Preah Pean, or the Hall 
of a Thousand Buddhas, already known by that toponym in the 1600s

--- PAGE 303 ---
274
Martin Polkinghorne
(Figs. 8.1 & 8.2).32 Over 15 inscriptions declare that images of the Buddha 
were donated, commissioned or restored in the temple precinct.33 One text 
tells of six pious commoners who created, commissioned or restored 19 
statues of the Buddha34 The proliferation of images also continued at 
Bakan, the third and highest terrace of the monument. Connecting the 
pious works mentioned in the epigraphy to specific images or temple 
renovations is challenging, and perhaps unachievable. Nevertheless, this 
chapter will outline the relevant historical framework and present known 
events as opportunities for donation of the sculptures.
When colonial savants visited the site for the first time in the 1860s 
they found Angkor Wat, and in particular the southern gallery of the 
second stage occupied by hundreds of Buddha images (Fig. 8.1). It was, 
and continues as, a living monument dedicated to the Buddha, spirits and 
gods embodied in architecture, statues and symbols. Étienne Aymonier, 
visiting the site in the 1870s, reported that sculptures were piled on the 
floor without order.35 The quantity and variety of images were incoherent 
to foreign and uninitiated eyes. However, in a monument as important 
and multifaceted as Angkor Wat, there is little doubt there was some 
pattern to the emplacement of images. Appraising the spatial rationale of 
images is a considerable task, but documenting the number and 
characteristics of each is the first undertaking. 
From the beginning of the École Française d’Extreme-Orient (EFEO) 
interventions, Angkor Wat was the focus of restoration and research and 
the first task of its first conservator was to clear the temple of vegetation.36 
As Angkor Wat emerged onto the tourist route, unknown quantities and 
undocumented sculptures were plundered by souvenir hunters and 
looters.37 Twenty years passed, and in 1928 conservator Henri Marchal 
recognised the need to protect the images by creating an inventory of the 
major pieces and relocating selected images to Bakan (the uppermost 
terrace of Angkor Wat) and the Angkor Conservation Depot in Siem 
Reap.38 Additional sculptures were removed to the Depot for restoration 
and protection in the late 1960s and early 1970s under the direction of the 
EFEO as war descended upon Cambodia.39 
During the civil conflicts of the 20th century many images were sold, 
some were burnt for firewood40, and others buried on the grounds of 
Angkor Wat. A selection was later excavated in the late 1980s and recent 
work by the Authority for the Protection and Safeguarding of Angkor and 
the Region of Angkor (APSARA) discovered more than 100 Buddha 
images thought to have been buried during the 1960s or 1970s,41 though 
rumours persist that many remain under the ground south of the central 
complex.42 Successive photographic images taken between the late 19th 
century and mid 20th century illustrate the diminishing corpus of 
sculptures from this sacred repository. A final inventory was conducted by

--- PAGE 304 ---
275
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
the Angkor Conservation in 1993 to appraise the extent of the wartime 
pillage. Of the many hundreds of images that once called Angkor Wat 
home, only 37 were recorded in situ. Nonetheless, by assembling data 
from EFEO photographic archives, and a UNESCO-sponsored inventory 
of the Angkor Conservation conducted in the early 2000s, we can identify 
over 300 Buddhist sculptures originating from Angkor Wat. Additional 
20th-century photographs and supplementary EFEO and UNESCO 
archives suggest there may be over 100 additional Buddhist sculptures 
attributable to Angkor Wat, but presently they cannot be cross-referenced. 
A small fraction of the Angkor Wat Buddha images were made in 
territories, or by artists trained beyond the borders of Cambodia. Because 
of the relative ease in their identification, three specific images are the 
focus of this chapter, and demonstrate the role of Angkor Wat amongst 
regional Theravāda communities.
PILGRIMAGE AT ANGKOR WAT
With roots in the oldest Pāli text, the Mahāparinibbānasutta of the 
Dīghanikāya, the Buddha sanctified four great biographical sites – his 
birthplace, the site of his enlightenment, the site of his first sermon, and 
the site of his nirvāṇa as places to visit that lead to attainment of 
happiness in heaven. When the Buddha entered parinirvāṇa his relics 
were enshrined within a series of stūpa that also became sites of 
pilgrimage.43 Among the most famed of the pilgrimage sites was 
8.2
Fig. 8.2	 Late Ayutthayan image 
(cat#1) at south gallery, 
Preah Pean, Angkor Wat, 
terminus ante quem for 
photograph is 1928, 
Photographer unknown, 
Cliché EFEO, Fonds 
Cambodge, réf. EFEO_
CAM04249.

--- PAGE 305 ---
276
Martin Polkinghorne
Jetavana, the monastery in Śrāvastī, India, where the Lord Buddha spent 
19 rainy season retreats.
The name Jetavana is used to designate Angkor Wat in a late 16th-
century inscription from Phnom Kulen,44 in a 17th-century Japanese 
diagram of the temple,45 and in the Nong fragment of the Royal 
Cambodian Chronicles.46 Correspondingly, Thompson argued that the 
inscriptions known as satyapranidhāna, or vows of truth, that adorn the 
pillars of Bakan and Preah Pean designate Angkor Wat as an international 
pilgrimage centre, with a spiritual value equal to that of Jetavana.47 
Inscriptions dating between the 16th and 18th centuries establish 
Angkor Wat as the destination for pilgrims who attained Buddhist merit 
by reciting and recording their satyapranidhāna. The epigraphy attests to 
the donation of sculptures, materials for their creation, and dutiful 
maintenance as habitual acts of honouring deities, ancestors and 
royalty.48 Accordingly, I have catalogued over 300 images of the Buddha 
curated in the halls of Bakan and Preah Pean as acts of pilgrimage and 
acquiring merit.
Evidently the significance of Angkor and Angkor Wat was recognised 
throughout the region as an ongoing destination for pilgrims seeking 
merit. In the material sense, Angkor Wat was the terminus for transported, 
commissioned, or donated images of the Buddha. A series of 17th- and 
18th-century images made by artists trained in Thailand and Laos, are 
testament to the international significance of Angkor Wat throughout the 
early modern period (Figs. 8.3 & 8.5, Table 8.1). There is little systematic 
research on the sculpture of mainland Southeast Asian during this period. 
The scarcity of studies on early modern Cambodian sculpture is evident 
across the region.
LATE AYUTTHAYAN IMAGES AT PREAH PEAN
Two nearly complete images of the Buddha in the Ayutthayan style date to 
the late 17th or 18th century (Figs. 8.2 & 8.3, Table 8.1). Three additional 
images may also be of this style, but they are without heads, and with 
significant evidence of restoration, their identification and dating can only 
be tentative.49 One image (Cat. No. 1, Table 8.1) can be placed in the 
southern gallery of Preah Pean as captured in several early EFEO 
photographs (Fig. 8.2).50 This gallery was the focus of worship for 
Theravāda devotees at Angkor Wat. The surfaces of its columns retain 
most of the early modern inscriptions. And logically the space 
accommodated the most revered and important sculptures of the Buddha, 
including a late Ayutthayan Buddha. 
The sculptures depict the Buddha in the pose of double 
abhayamudrā with both hands raised in front of the chest, elbows bent

--- PAGE 306 ---
277
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
and palms facing forward. Etic interpretation suggests this mudrā 
signifies the absence of fear.51 Although the arms no longer survive, the 
mudrā is distinguished from alternative models illustrating arms at the 
sides, or a hand across the chest, by the absence of remnants these 
elements would have left on the sculptures’ robe or body. The sculptures 
are made of wood with various combinations of coverings in lacquer, 
gilding and other polychromatic coatings.
This image type is characterised by an oval face with a protruding and 
arched monobrow. The contours of the semi-closed eyelids are incised. 
The image possesses a short and pointed nose. Fleshy mouths are raised at 
the corners to form smiles. Pierced earlobes are detached from the head 
and are distended with turned-up ends. Where extant, two incised pleats 
appear at the bottom of the neck. Prominent points represent the 
Buddha’s hair. The image was crowned by a long uṣṇīṣa in the form of a 
flame of wisdom. Unfortunately, the uṣṇīṣa disappeared sometime before 
Marchal’s inventory of 1928. The sculpture’s shoulders are straight and 
square, with pectoral muscles in relief, overlaid with marked nipples. The 
waist is slender with a slightly protuberant belly. The uttarā saṅgha (Mod. 
Kh. cībar) covers both shoulders. It is lined with a smooth strip, and flares 
at the bottom to form a curved, distinctive point. The antaravāsa (Mod. 
Kh. spaṅ) is worn tight on the hips, and the central vertical pleats are 
stylised into a narrow band superimposed on a wider strip.
8.3
8.4
Fig. 8.3 Standing Buddhas in 
abhayamudrā, c. late 17th or 
18th century, Angkor Wat. 
Wood, lacquer, polychromy, 
inlay. See Table 8.1. Left: 
cat#1, Cliché EFEO, Fonds 
Cambodge, réf. EFEO_
CAM19612_1, courtesy EFEO; 
right: cat#2, cliché EFEO, 
EFEO_CAM19832_3.
Fig. 8.4 Standing Buddhas in 
abhayamudrā, c. late 17th or 
18th century, 
Chantharakasem National 
Museum (Ayutthaya). Wood, 
lacquer, polychromy, 
gilding, inlay. Photographs 
by author, with the 
permission of 
Chantharakasem National 
Museum (Ayutthaya).

--- PAGE 307 ---
278
Martin Polkinghorne
The combination of iconography, proportional morphology, and 
quality of carving of these images at Angkor Wat are so close to examples 
from Ayutthaya that I propose they are 17th- or 18th-century works made 
by artists trained in the territories of Ayutthaya. Fruitful comparisons can 
be made of the Angkor Wat images with a small corpus of wooden 
sculptures from the Chantharakasem National Museum in Ayutthaya 
(Fig. 8.4). In these images we see austere representations of the Buddha 
that are differentiated from types in the Narai period that are crowned, 
wear royal attire, and have florid and complex decoration.52 The images 
may have a stronger connection with the early Bangkok style and fall into 
a category of late Ayutthayan art tentatively described by Hiram 
Woodward as “an alternative ideal”.
A specific diagnostic aspect of this small corpus of sculptures are their 
belts (Mod. Kh. uttakhut). All belts form points at their centre and are 
composed of a strip of fabric superimposed on a wider strip. This precise 
form of belt is common in the sculpture of Thailand, and is observed in 
Lao sculpture, but is unknown in the sculpture of Cambodia.53 
Woodward recognises the origin of this type of belt on an image of a 
standing Buddha at Wat Song Phi Nong, Chainat province, dating to the 
second half of the 1300s.54 It is likely that this image had stylistic roots in 
the earlier Khmer images of Lopburi.55 We see the characteristic pointed 
Cat#
Description
DCA 
Inventory #
NMC 
Inventory #
Location
Dimensions
Principal 
material
Photo credit
1
Standing Buddha in 
abhayamudrā
2168, 1314
DCA
164 x 58 x 17 cm
wood
cliché EFEO: 
EFEO_
CAM19612_1, 
EFEO_
CAM19612_2; 
cliché UNESCO 
DCA: CL21-210
2
Standing Buddha in 
abhayamudrā
48, 6978(?), 
1341(?)
C.A.131
ANM
104 x 21 x 11 cm
wood
EFEO_
CAM19832_3, 
EFEO_
CAM19832_4
3
Seated Buddha in 
māravijaya
Ga.5421 
(E.297), 
Ga.3376.1 
(E.297D), 
Ga.3376.2 
(E.297E), 
Ga.3376.3 
(E.297C)
NMC
105 x 45 x 35 cm 
(approx)
copper-based 
alloy
cliché NMC
Table 8.1: Catalogue of late Ayutthayan and Lan Xang Buddhas at Angkor Wat

--- PAGE 308 ---
279
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
belt on numerous sculptures from Lopburi that are also decorated56, and 
also Ayutthayan images from the 1300s57, including stucco representations 
at Wat Ratchaburana.58 
In every aesthetic aspect, especially demonstrated by the belt, the 
images from the Chantharakasem National Museum closely parallel those 
at Angkor Wat and make a likely date for pilgrimage and donation to be 
the late 17th or 18th century.
A LAN XANG BUDDHA AND THE SMALL CHEDEI
A mid 17th- to early 18th-century Lao image of the Buddha (Figs. 8.5, 8.8 
[left], & 8.9 [left]) offers another aspect of reverence and memorialisation 
at Angkor Wat, in that it was not donated to Preah Pean or Bakan, but was 
interred as the sacred deposit of a small stūpa abutted next to the temple’s 
famed bas-reliefs.
On 9 December 1919, under the direction of Marchal, excavation of a 
slight elevation of land south of the north staircase of the west gallery of 
8.5
Fig. 8.5	 Seated Buddha in 
māravijaya, late 17th or 18th 
century, Angkor Wat. 
Copper-base alloy. Cat# 3, 
see Table 8.1. NMC 
Inventory Numbers: Ga.5421 
(E.297), Ga.3376.1 (E.297D), 
Ga.3376.2 (E.297E), 
Ga.3376.3 (E.297C). 
Photographs courtesy 
National Museum of 
Cambodia.

--- PAGE 309 ---
280
Martin Polkinghorne
8.6
Fig. 8.6	 Rectangular brick 
foundation of chedei, find 
spot of Lan Xang Buddha in 
māravijaya, west of the 
western bas-relief gallery, 
Angkor Wat. Image by Henri 
Marchal, JFCA, 2, December 
1918–February 1921: 116, 
image courtesy EFEO.
Angkor Wat revealed a square pit (six by six metres) bordered by 
sandstone blocks re-used from the temple (Fig. 8.6). Inside the pit 
Marchal found the sandstone hand of a divinity holding a lotus and a 
small bronze bell. After another two days of excavation debris of a bronze 
Buddha was recovered accompanied by bronze and earthenware bowls, 
pots, vases and fragments of bones. This site and Buddha was of little 
interest to Marchal who recognised it as the former location of a small 
stūpa or chedei as the Pāli term cetiya is pronounced in Khmer.59
The image illustrates the Buddha in māravijaya. Rendered in bronze, 
it survives in five pieces at the National Museum of Cambodia, which 
obtained the image in 1921. The image is replete with monastic robes, and 
an associated scarf (Mod. Kh. saṅghātī) with a flat hemline. The Buddha 
has an oval face, arched eyebrows, semi-closed eyes, a broad, triangular and 
slightly hooked nose resembling a beak, and smiling lips that are all 
incised. Even though the sculpture has been broken at the neck we can 
still observe furrows, typically associated with an ideal of beauty. The hair 
is characterised by many small round and prominent curls, each of which 
come to a point and is separated from the forehead by a narrow band. 
Limbs are fleshy and digits are elongated, with legs in the half-lotus 
position. 
The iconography, morphology and quality of carving distinguish this 
image as made by an artist trained in Laos from the middle of the 17th to 
the beginning of the 18th century. A suite of diagnostic features 
demonstrates a Lao origin and these can be distinguished from other types 
associated with Khmer and Thai influences such as the Prah Bang and 
Walking Buddhas. A regional style concentrated around Vientiane is

--- PAGE 310 ---
281
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
typically rendered in bronze and includes highly stylised uṣṇīṣa, ears, eyes, 
hair curls, appendages and pedestals. Giteau describes these images as 
presenting an “extreme stylisation” of facial features, with rigid bodies, 
straight limbs and exaggerated fingers.60 Similarly, when defining the 
images of Lan Xang, Woodward observes an outward movement of facial 
features resulting in a “kind of angular individuality”.61
It is impossible to know the ethnicity of the artist, though comparative 
materials analysis could eventually determine the location of the 
sculpture’s manufacture. The detachable uṣṇīṣa is characterised by a flame 
of wisdom in the form of elongated lotus petals at its summit. The ears are 
extremely stylised. The helix is marked in relief and curls around to form 
the tragus situated in front of the ear canal.62 According to Giteau this 
characteristic seldom appeared before the 18th century.63 The nipples are 
in strong relief despite being covered by monastic robes. Pedestals of Lao 
Buddhas in the 17th and 18th centuries are unique. Each level or 
gradation of the dais terminates in distinctive stylised lotus petals that 
point and curve outwards.64 The eyes frequently preserve inlays of silver, 
black stone and mother-of-pearl,65 however without additional 
conservation or scientific analysis these materials have not been observed 
in the image from Angkor Wat.
Images with near identical characteristics to those listed above can be 
found in the pagoda collections of Vientiane (Fig. 8.7). We are fortunate 
that some of these images are dated by inscriptions that record their 
donation. For example, Buddha no. 7 from Wat Phra Keo was cast in 1706 
(Fig. 8.7 [right]).66 The image from Angkor Wat is so similar to Buddhas 
no. 8 and no. 12 from Wat Phra Keo67 that one can propose it was 
produced by the same artist or workshop (Figs. 8.7 [left], 8.8 & 8.9). 
Alternatively, Lao artists of the mid 17th to early 18th centuries followed 
prescriptive models on an unparalleled level that rendered standardised 
images almost indistinguishable from each other.
A DONATION TO NAGAR HLUOṄ?
Once we have identified two wooden and lacquered images at Angkor Wat 
as late 17th- or 18th-century products of sculptors trained in Ayutthaya, 
we need to ask how they were donated to the temple. In early modern 
Cambodia Mak Phoeun has demonstrated the symbolic and tangible 
consequences of the creation, movement and destruction of sculptures.68 
The demolition and disappearance of the Braḥ Buddh Tralaeṅ Kaeṅ 
(installed at Wat Trâleng Kèng) and the Braḥ Buddh Kāyasiddhi (installed 
at Wat Preah In Tép), facilitated by two imposter monks who infiltrated 
the Cambodian court, is said to have precipitated the fall of Longvek.69 
Similarly, the capture of another two images and their spirits during the

--- PAGE 311 ---
282
Martin Polkinghorne
8.7
Fig. 8.7	 Seated Buddha in 
māravijaya, Wat Phra Keo, 
Vientiane, Laos, Copper-
base alloy. Buddha no. 12 
(Giteau 1969 enumeration), 
late 17th to 18th centuries. 
Photograph by author, with 
the permission of Ho Prakeo 
Museum, 2004.
same invasion, the brothers Preah Kô and Preah Keo, is thought to explain 
Cambodian cultural rupture at the hands of its neighbours.70
We may never know who offered the late Ayutthayan sculptures to 
Angkor Wat, and cannot ascribe the images to historical events without 
appropriate justification. There are numerous episodes of co-operation 
and conflict between Cambodian and Thai polities in the early modern 
period, but none of them provides sufficient evidence of a donation to 
Angkor Wat. Various historical events may provide the context within 
which the donations were made.
Angkor Wat and Angkor were consistently revered and visited by 
pilgrims from Ayutthaya. It may have hosted Ayutthayan pilgrims as part 
of an occupying force as early as the 15th century.71 Angkor was recorded 
in the Royal Ayutthayan Chronicles as nagar hluoṅ, “the capital”.72 In the 
16th century a pair of inscriptions,73 one attached to an image of the

--- PAGE 312 ---
283
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
8.8
Fig. 8.8	 Seated Buddha in 
māravijaya, Wat Phra Keo, 
Vientiane, Laos, Copper-
base alloy. Buddha no. 7 
(Giteau 1969 enumeration), 
inscription date: 1706.
Photograph by author, with 
the permission of Ho Prakeo 
Museum, 2004.

--- PAGE 313 ---
284
Martin Polkinghorne
Buddha, record the pious deeds accomplished in Cambodia by a monk 
who is presumed to be Ayutthayan. In 1583, after restoring images of the 
Buddha at Oudong, the monk restored 26 statues of the Buddha at 
Phnom Bakheng.74 Without identifying its missing head, an attribution 
remains tentative, but the stylistic features of the Buddha in 
dhyānamudrā of K. 465 suggests it was crafted in Angkor by a 
Cambodian artist.75 Another inscription,76 dated palaeographically to the 
same time, might recall the deeds of the same monk from Ayutthaya, 
visiting Phnom Kulen.77 At the end of the 16th and beginning of the 17th 
centuries, awareness of Angkor’s splendour flourished in the court of 
Ayutthaya where a division of the Khmer royal family were kept hostage 
after the capture of Longvek. A few years later, the instigator of this 
invasion, King Naresuan (r. 1590−1605), sent the Cambodian Prince, 
Soriyopoar (r. 1601−1618) to reign over Cambodia.78 Ayutthayan 
attitudes to Angkor in the 17th century might also be represented by the 
That Phanom chronicle and the sculptures deposited at Phra That 
Phanom, Nakhon Phanom. According to Woodward, in the 
accompanying text, Urāṅganidāna (“Tale of the Breastbone”), the names 
of kings allude to the Angkorian period.79 Although the interment date of 
the deposit is unclear we note at least ten votive tablets of the most 
common Mahāyāna Cambodian images reproduced during the late 12th 
and early 13th centuries at Angkor, that is the nāga-protected Buddha 
flanked by Avalokiteśvara and Prajñāpāramitā.80
The first potential pretender for donation as recorded by historical 
documentation is detailed in an episode of the 19th-century Royal 
Autograph version of the Ayutthayan Chronicles.  In 1631/32, King 
8.9
Fig. 8.9	 Left: Head of Lan Xang 
Buddha at Angkor Wat, late 
17th or 18th century, 
close-up of Fig. 9.5. 
Copper-base alloy. Cat# 3, 
see Table 8.1. NMC 
Inventory Number: Ga.5421 
(E.297). Photograph 
courtesy National Museum 
of Cambodia. Right: Head of 
Buddha no. 12 (Giteau 1969 
enumeration), close-up of 
left image in Fig. 8.7, Wat 
Phra Keo, Vientiane, late 
17th to early 18th centuries, 
Photograph by author, with 
the permission of Ho Prakeo 
Museum, 2004.

--- PAGE 314 ---
285
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
Prasat Thong (r. 1629−1656) purportedly sent architects to make plans of 
Angkor and the capital of Cambodia.81 When Prasat Thong’s architects 
returned to Ayutthaya, they are said to have built Wat Chaiwatthanaram 
and Prasat Nakhon Luang as copies of Angkor Wat. Although the form of 
these monuments may be considered an independent development of 
Thai architectural styles, rather than Angkorian facsimiles,82 we might 
speculate that the reverent pilgrimage of architects from Ayutthaya 
included the donation of Buddhist sculptures.
Interaction between Siam and Cambodia was constant during the 
1700s. During the first half of the 18th century Ayutthaya habitually 
supported Cambodian princes in internal struggles with their rivals who 
depended on Vietnamese support.83 However, a good candidate for the 
donation might be Dhammarājā (r. 1738−1749), who had spent much of 
his life in Ayutthaya because of opposition to another Cambodian prince, 
Ang Em. An inscription dated 1747 at Preah Pean84 recounts the return of 
Dhammarājā from Thailand and also his visit to Angkor Wat. The 
narrator, an official of Dhammarājā, notes the recitation of prayers 
associated with memorial services for the dead.85 The official does not 
specify the donation of sculptures during his pilgrimage, or that of his 
king, but the date accords with the stylistic appraisal of the late Ayutthayan 
Buddhas. Significantly, this inscription demonstrated the continuous 
regional importance of Angkor Wat as an agent for accruing merit. 
In spite of the Burmese defeat in 1767, the post-Ayutthayan Siamese 
state maintained influence in Cambodia. Recorded in the Moura 
chronicle of 1883, the third son of the last Ayutthayan king is thought to 
have sought refuge in Cambodia after fleeing the Burmese invasion.86 The 
8.10
Fig. 8.10	 Left: Ear of Lan Xang 
Buddha at Angkor Wat, late 
17th or 18th century, 
close-up of Fig. 9.5. 
Copper-base alloy. Cat# 3, 
see Table 8.1. NMC 
Inventory Number: Ga.5421 
(E.297). Photograph 
courtesy National Museum 
of Cambodia. Right: Head of 
Buddha no. 12 (Giteau 1969 
enumeration), Wat Phra 
Keo, Vientiane, late 17th to 
early 18th centuries. 
Photograph by author, with 
the permission of Ho 
Prakeo Museum, 2004.

--- PAGE 315 ---
286
Martin Polkinghorne
ascendency of Taksin (r. 1767−1782) in Siam may have also provided 
opportunities for pilgrimage. As Taksin attempted to access the southern 
ports of the mainland through Cambodia and Vietnam, he supported 
prince Ang Non (r. 1775) who eventually became king in Cambodia for a 
very short period.87 There may also be a case for the donation during the 
1790s when the province of Siem Reap, along with Battambang, was 
administered by Viceroy Ben, who owed his allegiance to the Thai court.88 
During this period it is easy to imagine freedom of travel between the 
regions that facilitated the movement of sculptures and artists.
A COMMUNITY OF LAOTIANS: FROM BATI  
TO ANGKOR WAT?
The presence of the Lao Buddha alongside other objects including 
human bone suggests this interment was a chedei dedicated to an 
individual, memorialised in a modest monument terminus post quem 
the mid 1600s. Using the Buddha as a guide, this is the earliest date 
possible for construction of the chedei. A later construction is possible if 
the Buddha was recognised as an antique and correspondingly revered as 
a living image.89 
Numerous examples of stūpa are known in Angkor. However, it is in 
the early modern period that stūpa become a customary feature of the 
architectural landscape. In the conventional monastery configuration, the 
principal stūpa is built behind the vihāra, in the western part of the court. 
Whereas the term stūpa in modern Cambodia designates a monument 
commemorating an event, chedei (cetiya) unequivocally designates 
funerary monuments.90 Less important chedei are built within the 
enclosure of the Wat to shelter and commemorate relics of monks, or 
ashes of family members. Thompson demonstrates that Angkor Wat was 
probably transformed from temple to stūpa in the 16th century.91 Also at 
Angkor Wat, the large laterite, sandstone and stucco chedei at the foot of 
the eastern bas-relief gallery is the most visible symbol of early modern 
period continuity. This structure is likely associated with an inscription92 
in the adjacent eastern gopura, famed as the first known example of 
Cambodian poetry, and dated to the turn of the 18th century.93 
What is the origin of the small chedei precisely on the opposite side of 
the temple and its Lao Buddha? As we might expect, the kingdoms of 
Laos feature prominently in the history of Cambodia. Although the 
legendary foundation of Lan Xang by an individual known as Fa Ngum 
claiming Khmer descent might be interrogated with scepticism94, the 
kingdom’s inaugural palladium known as the Phra Bang Buddha feasibly 
concurs with a mid 14th-century date.95 In the early modern period, Laos 
is said to have attempted an attack on Cambodia in 157196, and after the

--- PAGE 316 ---
287
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
fall of Longvek in 1594, King Satha (r. 1579−1595) and his queen and 
sons sought refuge in Vientiane.97 
Several historical records specify a possible background for the 
exchange of sculptures. In 1641 a representative of the Dutch East India 
Company, noted that Cambodian monks seeking instruction spent ten to 
twelve years in Laos.98 Similarly, in 1668, the first Frenchman likely to have 
visited Angkor Wat, Louis Chevreuil, noted that the temple was famed 
amongst five or six great kingdoms, receiving habitual pilgrims from both 
Laos and Siam, even in times of war.99 
A late 17th- and early 18th-century community of Laotians living in 
Cambodia provides the most promising speculative explanation for the 
Lao Buddha of Angkor Wat. As the Lao kingdoms fragmented at the turn 
of the 18th century, conflict between the polities of Luang Prabang and 
Vientiane led Lao refugees to Cambodia. According to the chronicle 
manuscript P57 (braḥ rāj baṅsāvatar) 2,800 soldiers and their families, 
commanded by the uparāj of the king of Vientiane, were granted 
sanctuary by King Ang Saur (Chey Chettha III) (various r. 1677−1709). 
In his benevolence Ang Saur is said to have offered land and dwellings to 
the Lao in the province of Bati, south of present-day Phnom Penh.100
In the 17th or 18th century, a dedicatory inscription101 at Angkor Wat 
records the pilgrimage of an official and his wife from the village of Srama 
Khmaer Bān of Brai Krapās, Bati province. The pilgrims acquired merit in 
the name of their parents at Angkor Wat by restoring or building nine 
towers, 17 statues of the Buddha, and planting holy trees. Significantly, 
the pilgrims’ parents are declared as being below the earth.102 Does this 
inscription record pilgrims from Bati who interred the Lao Buddha into 
the chedei next to the bas-reliefs of Angkor Wat? 
The term sāṅ, translated as “restore” or “build”, is not clear in the 
context of early modern inscriptions. The word is used in a number of 
inscriptions to describe meritorious restoration and it might be applied to 
all good works including the creation of new Buddhist images, or perhaps 
even the reciting of sacred texts.103 It seems improbable that pilgrims from 
Bati province could command the necessary resources or expertise to 
rebuild the towers of Angkor Wat in the 1700s. Furthermore, there is no 
material evidence of structural amendments to the temple’s towers at this 
time. However, the testimony of the pilgrims’ parents in the earth (Mid. 
Kh. phdaiy kromm), may refer to the interment of bones, and provides a 
hypothetical link to the fragments of bones found within the chedei. 
Perhaps the association of refugees from Vientiane, the Lao Buddha, 
bone fragments in the chedei and pilgrims from Bati is a coincidence. 
While the identity of the donors remains obscure, it is clear this is an 
image made by Lao artists and testament to the ever-unfolding history and 
significance of Angkor Wat.

--- PAGE 317 ---
288
Martin Polkinghorne
IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The Buddhas of Angkor Wat are yet to tell all of their stories. It may be 
ambitious to correlate sculptures with known or recorded historical events 
but archaeology, art history and material science can define the detail and 
magnitude of cultural transformations not known from texts.
While Angkor Wat is purported to have become a beacon of regional 
activity from the early to mid 16th century, this date is based on limited 
information. There are nine inscriptions from the 1500s,104 and perhaps 
only two can be dated to its first half.105 The testimony of the Portuguese 
missionary, Gaspar da Cruz, who links a Cambodian king (probably Ang 
Chan I, r. 1516/17 or 1526–1566) to the site,106 and the inscribed 
completion of the northeast bas-reliefs,107 has arguably weighted the 
emphasis in favour of a 16th-century reoccupation. On the other hand, 
there are 29 inscriptions at Angkor Wat in the 1700s,108 17 of which can 
be dated to the second quarter of that century.109 Recent absolute 
radiocarbon dating of stratified archaeological deposits from mounds in 
Angkor Wat’s southeast quadrant indicate consistent occupation from the 
14th or early 15th centuries to the 17th or 18th centuries.110 Similarly, 
absolute dates and palaeoenvironmental proxies from inside Angkor 
Thom suggest limited forms of occupation there until the 17th century.111 
Nevertheless, with this information alone it is difficult to ascribe a date to 
Angkor Wat’s re-emergence as a regional centre of Theravāda.
New evidence can eventually be extracted from nuanced 
understandings of the so-called Buddhist terraces. A tentative chronology 
would see the emergence of Theravāda and establishment of the terraces in 
the late 13th century evidenced by radiocarbon dating of possible vihāra 
or uposathāgāra pillar remains at Western Prasat Top,112 and the 
construction layers of the Duṃnap Tūc embankment Buddhist terrace.113 
This was followed by continued activity at the Buddhist terraces at least 
until a probable contraction in the mid to late 1400s corresponding with 
the demise of the capital at Angkor (Sato, Chapter 6). Additional 
excavation may be able to date when activity ceased at the terraces. Despite 
the significant 16th-century inscriptions we do not know precisely how 
much of Angkor Wat’s Buddhist statuary comes from the terraces of 
central and greater Angkor, and when such Buddhist sculptures would 
have been collected from the terraces and curated by the residing monastic 
community at Preah Pean and Bakan. 
The continuity and chronology of Cambodian and mainland 
Southeast Asian sculpture from the 16th century requires considerably 
more research. Whereas at Angkor, most artistic production was attached 
to the court,114 during the early modern period artists were not necessarily 
bound by institutional control. Fragmentation of established power

--- PAGE 318 ---
289
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
structures and decentralisation of artistic production led to a greater 
variation in artistic styles. Additionally, when the idea of individual 
Theravāda merit was entangled with artistic production, the commission 
of images was often made on an ad hoc basis.
I have identified over 300 documented images that can be linked to 
Angkor Wat, and future study can refine the spatial distribution or 
curatorial logic of their emplacement. In addition to new art historical 
analyses, collaborations with material scientists can consider the fabric of 
the Angkor Wat Buddhas. For example, lacquer is an unstudied material at 
Angkor, and has considerable potential for new discoveries, including 
absolute radiocarbon dating. A kind of lacquer mentioned in epigraphy as 
early as the tenth century,115 known as khmuk (Mid. Kh. kmuk), was an 
essential material of early modern period merit-making restoration.116 An 
inscription at Angkor Wat117 reiterates the use of khmuk (a mixture of 
oleoresin and ash) in renovation and notes the inclusion of the donor’s 
hair in its manufacture, forever binding herself to the restorative action.118 
Wood, the primary material of early modern period images is also 
insufficiently studied. Whilst anecdotal evidence suggests artists privileged 
a range of high-quality woods including Fagraea fragrans Roxb. (Mod. 
Kh. Tatrav’), Sindora siamensis Miq. (Mod. Kh. Kakoḥ) and Hopea 
odorata Roxb. (Mod. Kh. Koki),119 species identification has not been 
conducted.
Materials analysis might interrogate models of restoration in 
Cambodian Theravāda sculpture. Though conventional interpretations 
suggest merit is acquired by commissioning the restorative act, another 
mode of memorial might be a staged abandonment consistent with the 
Buddhist necessity to realise impermanence. Wilful neglect is observed in 
contemporary Cambodian pagodas as an act of positive 
commemoration120, and may also elucidate early modern Theravāda 
practice at Angkor. To what extent were images at Angkor Wat restored 
and others left to degrade?
In this chapter I have appraised the transcendence of Angkor Wat as a 
pilgrimage destination for Theravāda devotees through donation of 
images from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang. In doing so, I acknowledge the 
complexity of associating sculptures with specific historical events. 
Nevertheless, imported images of the Buddha from beyond the territories 
of Cambodia can clearly be considered agents of international relations. 
Identification of 17th- and 18th-century sculptures continues to recover 
the post-Angkorian history of Angkor Wat from exclusive textual 
interpretations framed in terms of decline, opens a path for research on 
Southeast Asian trans-border material culture, and locates Cambodia 
firmly within the context of regional and global history at the birth of the 
modern world.

--- PAGE 319 ---
290
Martin Polkinghorne
Notes
1	
Ashley Thompson, “The Ancestral Cult in Transition: Reflections on Spatial 
Organization of Cambodia’s early Theravada Complex”, in Southeast Asian 
Archaeology: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 2–6 September, Leiden. eds. 
Marijke J. Klokke and Thomas de Brujin, Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian 
Studies, 1998, pp. 273–95. Ashley Thompson, “Introductory Remarks between 
the Lines: Writing Histories of Middle Cambodia”, in Other Pasts: Women, 
Gender and History in Early Modern Southeast Asia, Honolulu Center for 
Southeast Asian Studies, University of Hawai‘i, 2000, pp. 47–68. Ashley 
Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor: A Buddhist ‘Cosmopolis’ in Southeast Asia?”, 
Bulletin of Students of the Department of Archaeology, Royal University of Fine 
Arts, Phnom Penh 3, 2004: pp. 88–119.
2	
To situate the history of Cambodia in a global context, instead of using the 
designation of the Middle Period for the time between Angkor and colonialism, 
I prefer to use the term early modern period (c. 1450–c. 1850). Inspired by 
scholarship on Europe, some English-language historians of Southeast Asia 
began to actively use the term “early modern” from the late 1980s and early 
1990s to recognise emerging communication and trade patterns that connected 
the globe (on this subject see Leonard Y. Andaya and Barbara Watson Andaya, 
“Southeast Asia in the Early Modern Period; Twenty-Five Years On”, Journal 
of Southeast Asian Studies 26, no. 1, 1995: pp. 92–8. Leonard Y. Andaya and 
Barbara Watson Andaya, A History of Early Modern Southeast Asia, 1400–1830, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015, pp. 5–11). While some of the 
earliest scholarship of Cambodia’s past categorised the period after Angkor as 
“modern times” to echo the imperial trope that rediscovering a lost civilisation 
was a component of “modernity” (see Étienne Aymonier, Le Cambodge, III. Le 
groupe d’Angkor et l’histoire, Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1904, pp. 734–807), for 
analysis see Penny Edwards, Cambodge: The Cultivation of a Nation, 1860–
1945. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2007. Grégory Mikaelian, “Des 
sources lacunaires de l’histoire à l’histoire complexifiée des sources. Éléments 
pour une histoire des renaissances khmères (c. XIVe–c. XVIIIe s.)”, Péninsule, 
65, no. 2, June 2012: pp. 259–304), the appellation of “early modern” is applied 
here without assuming the inevitability of, or other suppositions about, 
“modernity”.  
3	
Michael Theodore Vickery, Cambodia after Angkor: The Chronicular Evidence 
for the Fourteenth to Sixteenth Centuries, PhD dissertation University of 
Michigan, 1977 [annotated 2012]. On contemporary 17th-century sources see 
Grégory Mikaelian, La royauté d’Oudong. Réformes des institutions et crise du 
pouvoir dans le royaume khmer du xviie siècle, Paris: Presses de l’Université 
Paris-Sorbonne, 2009.
4	
Mikaelian, “Des sources lacunaires”.
5	
Cf. Martin Polkinghorne, Christophe Pottier and Christian Fischer, “One 
Buddha can Hide Another”, JA 301, no. 2, 2013: pp. 575–624.
6	
Jean Boisselier, “Note sur deux Buddha parés des Galeries d’Angkor Vat”, 
Bulletin de la Société des études indochinoises 25, no. 3, 1950: pp. 299–306. 
Madeleine Giteau, “Note sur une école cambodgienne de statuaire bouddhique 
inspirée de l’art d’Angkor Vat” AA 13, 1966: pp. 115–26. Les étudiants de la 
Faculté Royale d’Archéologie de Phnom Penh, “Le monastère bouddhique de 
Tep Pranam à Oudong”, BEFEO 56, 1969: pp. 29–57. Madeleine Giteau, “Note 
sur quelques pièces en bronze récemment découvertes à Vatt Deb Pranamy

--- PAGE 320 ---
291
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
d’Oudong”, AA 24, 1971: pp. 149–55. San Sarin, “Quelques chedei du Phnom 
Preah Reach Treap” Bulletin des Étudiants de la Faculté d’Archéologie 3–4, 
November 1971: pp. 67–8. Ham Gim Sun, Rājadhānī Uṭuṅg: Siksā aṃbī 
kanlaeṅ vāṃṅ cās’, [The Royal Capital of Oudong: Study on the Location of 
the Ancient Palace], final year undergraduate thesis, Phnom Penh, Department 
of Archaeology, Royal University of Fine Arts, 1994. Ho Kusal, Dioe Vutthuna 
and Pan Vassa, Rapāy kār stī aṃbī caṃlāk’ sbān’ nau phsār ṭaek nịṅ kaṃbaṅ 
luoṅ, [Report on Bronze Artisanry at Phsar Daek and Kompong Luong], 
Phnom Penh, Department of Archaeology, Royal University of Fine Arts 
1995–6. Ashley Thompson, “Changing Perspectives: Cambodia after Angkor”, 
in Sculpture of Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory, eds. Helen 
I. Jessup and Thierry Zéphir, Washington D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1997, 
pp. 22–32. Thompson, “The Ancestral Cult”. Takako Kitigawa, “Capitals of 
the Post-Angkor Period: Longvêk and Oudong”, Southeast Asia History and 
Culture 27, no. 6, 1998: pp. 48–72. Khun Samen, Post Angkorian Buddha, 
Phnom Penh: Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts, 2000. Men Rath Sambath, Les 
stoupas royaux de la colline d’Oudong, Mémoire de DREA de Cambodgien, 
Spécialité Histoire du Cambodge, INALCO, Département de l’Asie du Sud-Est, 
June 2007. Gabrielle Ewington, Yaśodharapura to Yaśodharapura. Mobility, 
Rupture and Continuity in the Khmer World, unpublished honours thesis, 
Department of Archaeology, University of Sydney, 2008. Grégory Mikaelian, 
“Une ‘révolution militaire’ au pays khmer? note sur l’artillerie post-angkorienne 
(XVI–XIXe siècles)”, Udaya: Journal of Khmer Studies 10, 2009: pp. 57–134. 
Nhim Sotheavin. “Factors that Led to the Change of the Khmer Capitals from 
the 15th to 17th Century”, Renaissance Culturelle du Cambodge 29, 2014–
2016: pp. 33–107. Martin Polkinghorne, “Reconfiguring Kingdoms: The End 
of Angkor and the Emergence of Early Modern Period Cambodia”, in Angkor: 
Exploring Cambodia’s Sacred City, eds. Theresa McCullough, Stephen A. 
Murphy, Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir, Singapore: Asian Civilisations 
Museum, 2018, pp. 252–71. David Brotherson, Commerce, the Capital, & 
Community: Trade Ceramics, Settlement Patterns, & Continuity Throughout the 
Demise of Angkor, PhD dissertation, University of Sydney, 2019. Tegan Hall, 
Dan Penny, Brice Vincent and Martin Polkinghorne, “An Integrated 
Palaeoenvironmental Record of Early Modern Occupancy and Land Use within 
Angkor Thom, Angkor”, Quaternary Science Reviews 251, 2021, doi.
org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2020.106710.
7	
Madeleine Giteau, Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien. Paris: EFEO, 
1975.
8	
Giteau, Iconographie du Cambodge, p. 8.
9	
Cf. Giteau, Iconographie du Cambodge.
10	
Cf. Giteau, Iconographie du Cambodge.
11	
Gilberte de Coral Rémusat, L’art khmer: Les grandes étapes de son évolution, 
Paris: Études d’art et d’ethnologie asiatiques, 1940, p. 47. Martin Polkinghorne, 
Makers and Models: Decorative Lintels of Khmer Temples, 7th to 11th Centuries, 
PhD dissertation, University of Sydney, 2007. Ludivine Provost-Roche, Les 
derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge [environ 1220–environ 
1500], 2 vols., PhD dissertation, Université de Paris 3, 2010. Martin 
Polkinghorne, Janet Douglas and Federico Carò, “Carving at the Capital: A 
Stone Workshop at Hariharālaya, Angkor”, BEFEO 101, 2015: pp. 55–90.
12	
Adhémard Leclère, Le buddhisme au Cambodge, Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1899,  
p. 497.  Louis Finot, “Les études indochinoises”, BEFEO 8, 1908: p. 224.

--- PAGE 321 ---
292
Martin Polkinghorne
Lawrence Palmer Briggs, The Ancient Khmer Empire. Philadelphia: American 
Philosophical Society, 1951, pp. 242−3, 257. George Cœdès, Angkor: An 
Introduction, Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1963, p. 107. Oliver W. 
Wolters. “The Khmer King at Basan (1371–3) and the Restoration of the 
Cambodian Chronology During the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries”, Asia 
Major 12, no. 1, 1966: pp. 86–7. Hermann Kulke, “The Devaràja Cult: 
Legitimation and Apotheosis of the Ruler in the Kingdom of Angkor” in Kings 
and Cults: State Formation and Legitimation in India and Southeast Asia, ed. 
Hermann Kulke, New Delhi: Manohar, 1993, pp. 375−6.
13	
Stanley J. Tambiah, World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of 
Buddhism and Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1976. Stanley J. Tambiah, “The Galactic Polity: 
The Structure of Traditional Kingdoms in Southeast Asia”, Annals of the 
New-York Academy of Sciences 293, July 15, 1977: pp. 69–87.
14	
Richard A. O’Connor, “Interpreting Thai Religious Change: Temples, Sangha 
Reform and Social Change”, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 24, no. 2, 1993: 
pp. 330–9.
15	
Saveros Pou, “Subhāsit and Cpāp’ in Khmer Literature”, in Ludwick Sternbach 
Felicitation Volume, Part One, ed. Jagdamba Prasad Sinha, Lucknow: Akhila 
Bharatiya Sanskrit Parishad, 1979, p. 333.
16	
K.144 in Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions khmères K. 144 et K. 177”, BEFEO 70, 
1981: pp. 101–20.
17	
Thompson, “The Ancestral Cult”.
18	
cf. Paul Mus, India Seen from the East: Indian and Indigenous Cults in 
Champa, trans. Ian W. Mabbett, eds. Ian W. Mabbett and David Chandler, 
Melbourne: Monash Papers on Southeast Asia, 2011 [1933]. Prapod 
Assavavirulhakarn, The Ascendancy of Theravāda Buddhism in Southeast Asia, 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2010.
19	
Dan Penny, Tegan Hall, Damian Evans and Martin Polkinghorne, 
“Geoarchaeological Evidence from Angkor, Cambodia, Reveals a Gradual 
Decline Rather than a Catastrophic 15th-century Collapse”, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 116, no. 11, 2019: 
pp. 4871–6. Hall et al, “An Integrated Palaeoenvironmental Record”.
20	
Vickery, Cambodia After Angkor.
21	
Brendan M. Buckley, Roland J. Fletcher, Shi-Yu Simon Wang, Brian Zottoli and 
Christophe Pottier, “Monsoon Extremes and Society over the Past Millennium 
on Mainland Southeast Asia”, Quaternary Science Reviews 95, 2014: pp. 1–19.
22	
Damian H. Evans, Roland J. Fletcher, Christophe Pottier, Jean-Baptiste 
Chevance, Dominique Soutif, Tan Boun Suy, Im Sokrithy, Ea Darith, Tin Tina, 
Kim Samnang, Christopher Cromarty, Stéphane de Greef, Kaspar Hanus, Pierre 
Bâty, Robert Kuszinger, Ichita Shimoda and Glenn Boornazian, “Uncovering 
Archaeological Landscapes at Angkor using Lidar”, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110, no. 31, 2013:  
pp. 12595–600.
23	
Roland J. Fletcher, Dan Penny, Damian H. Evans, D, Christophe Pottier, Mike 
Barbetti, Matti Kummu, Terry Lustig and APSARA, “The Water Management 
Network of Angkor, Cambodia”, Antiquity 82, 2008: pp. 658–70.
24	
Vickery, Cambodia after Angkor.
25	
Polkinghorne et al., “One Buddha”. Martin Polkinghorne, Christophe Pottier 
and Christian Fischer, “Evidence for the 15th Century Ayutthayan Occupation 
of Angkor”, in The Renaissance Princess Lectures: In Honour of Her Royal

--- PAGE 322 ---
293
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn, Bangkok: Siam Society, 2018,  
pp. 98–132.
26	
Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”, p. 202.
27	
Ibid.
28	
Penny Edwards, Cambodge: The Cultivation of a Nation.
29	
Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”. Ang Choulean, Chhay Rachna, Heng Than, 
Ieng Neang, In Sokretya, Khieu Chan, Khut Vuthyneath, Lim Srou, Uom 
Sineth, Say Sophearin, Tous Somoneath, Ven Sophorn, Kim Samnang, Ros 
Sokhom, Khut Vuthyneath, Tin Tina and Vitou Phirom, Silācārịk Aṅgar Vatt: 
samăy purāṇ , kaṇ ṭāl, thmī [Inscriptions of Angkor Wat: Ancient, Middle and 
Modern Periods], Phnom Penh: APSARA, Center for Khmer Studies, 2013. 
Than Swe, Im Sokrithy and Elizabeth H. Moore, “Myanmar Inscriptions Found 
at Angkor”, in Advancing Southeast Asian Archaeology 2013: Selected Papers 
from the First SEAMEO SPAFA International Conference on Southeast Asian 
Archaeology, ed. Noel Hidalgo Tan, Bangkok: SEAMEO SPAFA Regional 
Centre for Archaeology and Fine Arts, 2015, pp. 15−7. Similarly, Angkor Wat 
and Angkor also hosted non-Theravāda pilgrims who left behind inscriptions 
(Yoshiaki Ishizawa, “Les inscriptions calligraphiques japonaises du XVIIe siècle 
à Angkor Vat et le plan du Jetavana-vihara”, Manuel d’épigraphie du Cambodge, 
vol. I, ed. Yoshiaki Ishizawa, Claude Jacques and Khin Sok, Paris: EFEO/
UNESCO, 2007, pp. 169−79) and stele (Nasir Abdoul-Carime and Grégory 
Mikaelian, “Angkor et l’Islam, note sur la stèle arabe du Bhnaṃ Pākhaeṅ”, 
Péninsule 63, no. 2, 2011: pp. 5−59).
30	
IMA 1, in Saveros Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 1, 8, et 9”, BEFEO 
59, 1972: pp. 101–21. Unless otherwise indicated my readings of the IMA are 
limited to the translations of Pou/Lewitz cited in the text.  
31	
Polkinghorne et al., “One Buddha”. Polkinghorne et al., “Evidence for the 15th 
Century”.
32	
IMA 11, in Étienne Aymonier, “Les inscriptions du Bakan et la grande 
inscription d’Angkor Vat”, JA 15, no. 1, 1900: pp. 150−1, Aymonier Le 
Cambodge, pp. 298–9, Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16a, 16b, et 16c”.
33	
IMA 1 in Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16a, 
16b, et 16c”. IMA 2, IMA 3 in Saveros Lewitz, “Textes en khmer moyen. 
Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3”, BEFEO 57, 1970: pp. 99–126. IMA 4, 
IMA 6 in Saveros Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 4, 5, 6 et 7”, BEFEO 
58, 1971: pp. 105–23. IMA 9 in Saveros Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes 
d’Angkor 1, 8, et 9”, BEFEO 59, 1972: pp. 101–21. IMA 11, IMA 13, IMA 15, 
IMA 16b, IMA 16c in Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16a, 16b, et 16c”. IMA 21, IMA 22 in Saveros Lewitz, “Inscriptions 
modernes d’Angkor 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 et 25”, BEFEO 60, 1973:  
pp. 163–203. IMA 26, IMA 29 in Saveros Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes 
d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33”, BEFEO 60, 1973: pp. 205–42. IMA 36 
in Saveros Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 35, 36, 37 et 39”, BEFEO 
61, 1974: pp. 301–37. IMA 38 in Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions modernes 
d’Angkor 34 et 38”, BEFEO 62, 1975: pp. 283–353.
34	
IMA 16b in Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 
16a, 16b, et 16c”.
35	
Aymonier, Le Cambodge, p. 210.
36	
Jean Commaille, Rapport de la Conservation d’Angkor, 1908, unpublished 
manuscript, Paris: EFEO, 1908, January 1908 ff.

--- PAGE 323 ---
294
Martin Polkinghorne
37	
Edwards, Cambodge: The Cultivation. Pierre Singaravélou, L’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient ou l’institution des marges (1898–1956). Essai d’histoire sociale 
et politique de la science coloniale, Paris: Éditions L’Harmattan, 1999.
38	
Henri Marchal, Journal de Fouilles, Tome VI, September 1926–July 1928, 
unpublished manuscript, Paris: EFEO, 1926–1928, pp. 204−6. The original 
inventory, rediscovered in 2018, resides in the archive of the National Museum 
of Cambodia (Boite n°10 - Conservation d’Angkor -Inventaire des statues du 
Preah Pean).
39	
Christophe Pottier, email message to author, 24 May 2015.
40	
Ang Choulean, Eric Prenowitz and Ashley Thompson, Angkor: A Manual for 
the Past, Present, and Future, Phnom Penh: APSARA, 1996.
41	
Pech Sotheary, “Buddha Statues Unearthed in Siem Reap’s Angkor Wat”, 
Khmer Times, 17 April 2020, retrieved 14 December 2020. https://www.
khmertimeskh.com/714120/buddha-statues-unearthed-in-siem-reaps-angkor-
wat/.
42	
Christophe Pottier email message to author, 24 May 2015, Simon Warrack email 
message to author, 15 June 2015.
43	
Dīghanikāya II: 140−3 in [Dīghanikāya] Dialogues of the Buddha, Part II, 
trans. Thomas William Rhys Davids and Caroline Augusta Foley Rhys Davids, 
London: Oxford University Press, 1910.
44	
K. 1006 in Michael Theodore Vickery, “L’inscription K 1006 du Phnom 
Kulên”, BEFEO 71, 1982: pp. 77−86.
45	
Chuta Ito, “Gion-Shouja no zu and Angkor Wat”, Journal of Architecture and 
Building Science 313, 1913: pp. 10−41, (in Japanese). Nöel Péri, “Un plan 
japonais d’Angkor Vat. Essai sur les relations du Japon et de l’Indochine aux 
XVIè et XVIIè siècles”, BEFEO 23, 1923: pp. 1−104. Yoshiaki Ishizawa, “Les 
inscriptions calligraphiques japonaises du XVIIe siècle à Angkor Vat et le plan 
du Jetavana-vihara”, Manuel d’épigraphie du Cambodge, vol. I, eds. Yoshiaki 
Ishizawa, Claude Jacques and Khin Sok, Paris: EFEO/UNESCO, 2007, pp. 
169−79.
46	
George Cœdès, “Essai de classification des documents historiques conservés à la 
bibliothèque de l’École française d’Extreme-Orient”, BEFEO 18, 1918: pp. 
26−7.
47	
Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”. Also Olivier de Bernon, “Journeys to 
Jetavana: Poetic and Ideological Elaborations of Remembrance of Jetavana in 
Southeast Asia”, in Buddhist Narrative in Asia and Beyond, in Honour of HRH 
Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn on her Fifty-Fifth Birth Anniversary, 
Bangkok: Bangkok Institute of Thai Studies, 2012, p. 178.
48	
E.g. Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 4, 5, 6 et 7”, p. 112.
49	
DCA Inventory numbers: 5501/1410, 5501/1410, 2195/1348.
50	
EFEO photothèque cliché Cambodge photo numbers: EFEO_CAM04249, 
EFEO_CAM04339, EFEO_CAM04792, EFEO_CAM05055.
51	
For the emic name in Thai see Hiram W. Woodward Jr., “The Buddha Images of 
Ayutthaya”, in Kingdom of Siam: Art from Central Thailand (1350–1800 C.E.), 
ed. Forrest McGill, Ghent: Snoeck Publishers; Bangkok: 1 Buppha Press; 
Chicago: Art Media Resources Inc.; San Francisco: The Asian Art Museum of 
San Francisco, 2005, p. 54.
52	
Hiram W. Woodward Jr., The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand, Baltimore: The 
Trustees of the Walters Art Gallery, 1997, pp. 236−8, Fig. 233.
53	
For a description of the monastic robes of Early Modern Cambodian sculptures 
see Khun Samen Post Angkorian Buddha, pp. 7−8. This specific spelling of

--- PAGE 324 ---
295
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
utttakhut is given in the Khmer version of the catalogue, pp. 11, 16.
54	
Woodward, Sacred Sculpture, pp. 124, 139. See also Santi Leksukhum, 
Wiwatthanakān khòng chan pradap luat lāi samai Ayutthayā tòn ton, Bangkok: 
Amarin, 1979.
55	
Woodward, Sacred Sculpture, p. 124.
56	
Ibid., cat. nos. 18, 19, 22, 31.
57	
Forrest McGill, Kingdom of Siam: Art from Central Thailand (1350–1800 
C.E.), ed. Forrest McGill, Ghent: Snoeck Publishers; Bangkok: 1 Buppha Press; 
Chicago: Art Media Resources Inc.; San Francisco: The Asian Art Museum of 
San Francisco, 2005. p. 114, cat. no. 8, Fig. 33. Polkinghorne et al., “One 
Buddha”. Polkinghorne et al., “Evidence for the 15th Century”.
58	
Leksukhum, “Wiwatthanakān khòng chan”.
59	
Henri Marchal, Journal de Fouilles, Tome II, December 1918–February 1921, 
unpublished manuscript, Paris: EFEO, 1918–1921, pp. 116−7.
60	
Madeleine Giteau, Art et archéologie du Laos, Paris: Picard, 2001, p, 156.
61	
Woodward, Sacred Sculpture, p. 215.
62	
Somkiart Lopetcharat, Lao Buddha: The Image and Its History, Bangkok: 
Amarin, 2001, p. 282. Giteau, Art et archéologie du Laos, Figs. 116, 117.
63	
Giteau, Art et archéologie du Laos, p. 156.
64	
Giteau, Art et archéologie du Laos, Figs. 119, 121.
65	
Madeleine Giteau, “Catalogue des pièces déposées au Wat Phra Keo à Vientiane, 
Laos”, in Étude de collections d’art bouddhique, 17 décembre 1968–17 mars 
1969, Paris: UNESCO, 1969, p. 1. Giteau, Art et archéologie du Laos, pp. 154−6.
66	
Giteau, “Catalogue des pièces déposées”, pp. 28−9. Thao Boun Souk, L’image 
du Buddha dans l’art Lao, Vientiane: l’Imprimerie nationale, 1974, p. 17. 
Additional analogous dated images by inscription include those from Wat 
Sisakhet (no. 113: 1635CE, no. 54: 1672, no. 37: 1661, no. 66: 1671, no. 158: 
1672, and no. 92: 1700), see Giteau, Art et archéologie du Laos, p. 155, note 43.
67	
Giteau, “Catalogue des pièces déposées”, pp. 29−30.
68	
Mak Phoeun, “Quelques aspects des croyances religieuses liées aux guerres entre 
le Cambodge et le Siam”, paper presented to the 3rd European-Japanese 
Seminar, Hamburg, September 1998.
69	
Khin Sok, Chroniques royales du Cambodge (de Bañā Yāt jusqu’à la prise de 
Laṅvaek: de 1417 à 1595). Traduction française avec comparaison des différentes 
versions et introduction, Paris: EFEO, 1988, pp. 191−3, 347−54.
70	
Mak Phoeun, Chroniques royales du Cambodge (des origines légendaires jusqu’à 
Paramarājā Ier) I / Traduction française avec comparaison des différentes versions 
et introduction, Paris: EFEO, 1984. Khing Hoc Dy, “La légende de Braḥ Go 
Braḥ Kaev”, Cahiers de l’Asie du Sud-Est 29−30, 1991: pp. 169−90. Grégory 
Mikaelian, “Le passé entre mémoire d’Angkor et déni de Laṅvaek: la conscience 
de l’histoire dans le royaume khmer du XVIIe siècle”, in Le passé des Khmers. 
Langues, textes, rites, eds. Nasir Abdoul-Carime, Grégory Mikaelian and Joseph 
Thach Berne,  Peter Lang, 2016, pp. 167−212. On palladia see also Ang 
Choulean, “Nandin and His Avatars”, in Sculpture of Angkor and Ancient 
Cambodia: Millennium of Glory, eds. Helen I. Jessup and Thiery Zephir, 
Washington: Thames & Hudson, 1997, pp. 62−9.
71	
See above. Polkinghorne et al., “One Buddha”. Polkinghorne et al., “Evidence 
for the 15th Century”.
72	
Various versions see Richard D. Cushman, trans., The Royal Chronicles of 
Ayutthaya, ed. David K. Wyatt, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2000, p. 15. See also 
Vickery, Cambodia after Angkor, p. 517.

--- PAGE 325 ---
296
Martin Polkinghorne
73	
K. 285 in Khin Sok. “Deux inscriptions tardives du Phnom Bàkhèn, K.465 et 
K.285”, BEFEO 60, no. 1, 1978: pp. 271−80. K. 465 in Khin, “Deux 
inscriptions tardives”; and Saveros Pou, “Inscription du Phnom Bakheng 
(K.465) ”, Nouvelles inscriptions du Cambodge I, Paris: EFEO, 1989, pp. 20−5.
74	
Khin, “Deux inscriptions tardives”. Pou, “Inscription du Phnom Bakheng”.
75	
Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”, Fig. 15.
76	
K.1006 in Michael Theodore Vickery, “L’inscription K.1006 du Phnom 
Kulên”, BEFEO 71, 1982: pp. 77−86.
77	
Vickery, “L’inscription K.1006”. Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”.
78	
Mak Phoeun, Histoire du Cambodge de la fin du XVIe siècle au début du XVIIIe 
siècle, Paris: EFEO, 1995, pp. 100ff.
79	
Hiram W. Woodward Jr., “Prologue. What there was before Siam: Traditional 
Views”, in Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and 
Stephen A. Murphy, Bangkok: River Books, 2014, p. 19.
80	
Fine Arts Department, Chotmaihet kanburana patisangkhon  ‘ong Phra That 
Phanom, Bangkok: Fine Arts Department, 2518–22 (1975–1979 CE).
81	
Forrest McGill, “The Art and Architecture of the Reign of King Prasat Thong 
of Ayutthaya (1629–1656)”, PhD dissertation, University of Michigan, 1977,  
p. 170.
82	
McGill, “The Art and Architecture”. Woodward, “The Buddha Images”, p. 118.
83	
Michael Theodore Vickery, “History of Cambodia. Summary of lectures given 
at the Faculty of Archaeology Royal University of Fine Arts”, unpublished 
lecture notes, Phnom Penh, 2001–2, p. 152.
84	
IMA 39 in Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 35, 36, 37 et 39”.
85	
David Porter Chandler, “An Eighteenth-Century Inscription from Angkor 
Wat”, JSS 59, no. 2, 1971: pp. 152–9. Saveros Pou, “Inscriptions khmères K. 39 
et K. 27”, BEFEO 70, 1981: pp. 121–34.
86	
Jean Moura, Le royaume du Cambodge, 2 vols, Paris: Ernest Leroux, vol. II,  
p. 86.
87	
Khin Sok, Le Cambodge entre le Siam et le Viêtnam (de 1775 à 1860), Paris: 
EFEO, 1991, pp. 37ff.
88	
David Porter Chandler, “Cambodia before the French: Politics in a Tributary 
Kingdom. 1794–1848”, PhD dissertation, University of Michigan, 1973,  
pp. 77−9. Khin, Le Cambodge entre, pp. 49ff. Loch Chhanchhai, “Chronique 
des vice-rois de Battambang (XVIIIe–XXIe siècles): du régent Bên de 
Battambang à la famille Aphaiwong du Siam”, Péninsule 68, no. 1, 2014:  
pp. 9–103.
89	
Woodward, “Sacred Sculpture”, pp. 20–1.
90	
Jean Boisselier, Asie du Sud-Est: I. Le Cambodge, Paris: Picard, 1966, p. 98. 
Henri Marchal, “Note sur la forme du stupa au Cambodge”, BEFEO 46, no. 2, 
1951: pp. 581–690. Men Rath Sambath, “Les stoupas et les temples”. Ashley 
Thompson, “Mémoires du Cambodge”, PhD dissertation, Université de Paris 
VIII, 1999.
91	
Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”.
92	
IMA 38 in Pou, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”.
93	
Ibid.
94	
Michel Lorillard, “d’Angkor au Lān Xāng: une révision des jugements”, Aséanie 
7, 2001: pp. 19–33. Cf. George Cœdès, The Indianized States of Southeast Asia, 
trans. Susan Brown Cowing, ed. Walter F. Vella, Canberra: Australian National 
University Press, 1968, p. 224.
95	
Alternatively, Michel Lorillard suggests the Prah Bang Buddha has more stylistic

--- PAGE 326 ---
297
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
affinities with a Mon image from Ban Thalat (see Lorillard, “d’Angkor au Lān 
Xāng”, p. 31).
96	
Vickery, Cambodia after Angkor, pp. 74−6, 254−7.
97	
Vickery, Cambodia after Angkor, p. 205 & passim.
98	
Kersten, 2003: p. 38. Carool Kersten, ed., Strange Events in the Kingdoms of 
Cambodia and Laos (1635–1644), Bangkok: White Lotus, 2003, p. 38.
99	
Bernard-Philippe Groslier, Angkor and Cambodia in the Sixteenth Century: 
According to Portuguese and Spanish Sources, trans. Michael Smithies, Bangkok: 
Orchid Books, 2006 [1958], pp. 100−1.
100	
Mak, Histoire du Cambodge, pp. 396−7. The recension used by Leclère, 
identifies the village in Bati as Phum Baray Kbal Choum. See Adhémard Leclère, 
Histoire du Cambodge depuis le 1er siècle de notre ère, d’après les inscriptions 
lapidaires, les annales chinoises et annamites et les documents européens des six 
derniers siècles, Paris: Paul Geuthner, 1914, p. 369. P57 dates this event to 
around 1691/92. Other royal chronicles place the arrival in 1705/06 (VJ [Braḥ 
rāj baṅsāvatar mahākhsatr khmaer], P63 [Braḥ rāj baṅs sovatā khemmara lek 
oṅkar], B39/12/B [Rapāl khsāt], cited in Mak, Histoire du Cambodge, p. 396.
101	
IMA 29 in Lewitz, “IX. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
32, 33”. The date of this inscription is difficult to decipher and interpret. Billard 
and Eade read 1646, Lewitz reads 1706, See Roger Billard, and Christopher J. 
Eade, “Dates des inscriptions du pays khmer”, BEFEO 93, 2006: pp. 395−428. 
Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33”, p. 214.
102	
Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33”,  
pp. 214−6.
103	
Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Ankgor 4, 5, 6 et 7”, p. 112, note 7. 
Thompson, “Mémoires du Cambodge”, pp. 187−92, “Pilgrims to Angkor”,  
pp. 221−2, note 12, 13. See also Tuy Danel and Martin Polkinghorne, 
“Cambodian Narratives: Transformations of the Vessantara Jataka”, The Asian 
Art Society of Australia Review 24, no. 2, 2015: pp. 7−9.
104	
IMA 1 in Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 1, 8, et 9”. K. 296, K. 297 in 
George Cœdès, “Date d’exécution des deux bas-reliefs tardifs d’Angkor Vat”, JA 
250, no. 2, 1962: pp. 235−43. IMA 2, IMA 3 in Lewitz, “Textes en kmer 
moyen. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3”. IMA 4, IMA 5, IMA 6 in 
Lewitz, “IV. Inscriptions modernes d’Ankgor 4, 5, 6 et 7”. K.1022 in Saveros 
Pou, “Angkor Vat. K.1022”, in Nouvelles inscriptions du Cambodge II & III, 
Paris: EFEO, 2001, p. 270.
105	
IMA 1 in Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 1, 8, et 9”. K. 296 in 
Cœdès, “Date d’exécution”.
106	
Groslier, “Angkor and Cambodia in the Sixteenth”. Jean-Claude Lejosne, 
“Historiographie du Cambodge aux 16e et 17e siècles: les sources portugaises et 
hollandaises”, in Bilan et perspectives des études khmères (langue et culture), ed. 
Pierre L. Lamant, Paris: L’Harmattan, 1998, pp. 179−200.
107	
Jean Boisselier, “Note sur les bas-reliefs tardifs d’Angkor Vat”, JA 250, no. 2, 
1962: pp. 244−8. Cœdès, “Date d’exécution”.
108	
IMA 7 in Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 4, 5, 6 et 7”. IMA 8, IMA 9 
in Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 1, 8, et 9”. IMA 10, IMA 11, IMA 
12, IMA 13, IMA 14, IMA 16A, IMA 15, IMA 16B in Lewitz, “Inscriptions 
modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16a, 16b, et 16c”. IMA 17, IMA 18, 
IMA 19, IMA 20, IMA 21, IMA 23, IMA 24, IMA 25 in Lewitz, “Inscriptions 
modernes d’Angkor 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 et 25”. IMA 26, IMA 27, 
IMA 28, IMA 30, IMA 31, K. 1021, IMA 32, IMA 33 in Lewitz, “Inscriptions

--- PAGE 327 ---
298
Martin Polkinghorne
modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33”. IMA 34 in Pou, 
“Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”. IMA 35 in Lewitz, “Inscriptions 
modernes d’Angkor 35, 36, 37 et 39”.  
109	
IMA 8, IMA 9 in Lewitz, “III. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 1, 8, et 9”. IMA 
10, IMA 11, IMA 12, IMA 13, IMA 14, IMA 16A, IMA 15, IMA 16B in 
Lewitz, “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16a, 16b, et 
16c”, IMA 17, IMA 18, IMA 19, IMA 20, IMA 21, IMA 23, IMA 24 in 
Lewitz “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 et 25”.
110	
Alison Kyra Carter, Miriam T. Stark, Seth Quintus, Yilie Zhuang, Hong Wang, 
Heng Piphal and Chhay Rachna, “Temple Occupation and the Tempo of 
Collapse at Angkor Wat, Cambodia”, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 116, no. 25, 2019, p. 12230.
111	
Hall et al. 2021, “An Integrated Palaeoenvironmental Record”.
112	
Nara National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, Western Prasat Top 
Site Survey Report on Joint Research for the Protection of the Angkor Historic Site, 
Nara: Nara National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, 2012, p. 193.
113	
GT83. Greater Angkor Project, Tumnup Touich Terrace (GT83), unpublished 
report, Siem Reap: Greater Angkor Project, 2014.
114	
Martin Polkinghorne, Brice Vincent, Nicolas Thomas and David Bourgarit, 
“Casting for the King: The Royal Palace Bronze Workshop of Angkor Thom”, 
BEFEO 100, 2014: pp. 327−58. Polkinghorne et al., “Carving at the Capital”, 
2015.
115	
K. 444 in George Cœdès, Inscriptions du Cambodge II, Paris: EFEO, 1942,  
pp. 62−8. Saveros Pou, “Lexicographie vieux-khmère”, Seksa Khmer 7, 1984: 
pp. 67−175.
	
“Lexicographie vieux-khmère”, Seksa Khmer 7 (1984): 67−175.
116	
Cœdès, Inscriptions du Cambodge II, pp. 62−8. Pou, “Lexicographie vieux-
khmère”, p. 117.
117	
IMA 2 in Lewitz, “Textes en kmer moyen. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 
3”.
118	
Lewitz, “Textes en kmer moyen. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3”. 
Thompson, “Pilgrims to Angkor”.
119	
Pauline Dy Phon, Vacanānukram rukkhajāti proe prās’ knuṅ prades kambujā, 
Dictionnaire des plantes utilisées au Cambodge, Dictionary of Plants used in 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh, 2000. Khun, Post Angkorian Buddha. Seng Chantha, 
Conservation of Wooden Buddha. Post-Angkor Period, unpublished Powerpoint 
presentation, Phnom Penh, 2017.
120	
Ashley Thompson, “Forgetting to Remember, Again: On Curatorial Practice” 
and “Cambodian Art in the Wake of Genocide”, diacritics 41, no. 2, 2014:  
pp. 82–109.
Referencees
Abdoul-Carime, Nasir and Grégory Mikaelian. “Angkor et l’Islam: note sur la stèle 
arabe du Bhnaṃ Pākhaeṅ”. Péninsule 63, no. 2, 2011: pp. 5–59.
Ang Choulean. “Nandin and His Avatars”. In Sculpture of Angkor and Ancient 
Cambodia: Millennium of Glory, ed. Helen I. Jessup and Thierry Zéphir. 
Washington: Thames and Hudson, 1997, pp. 62–9.
Ang, Choulean, Eric Prenowitz, and Ashley Thompson. Angkor: A Manual for the 
Past, Present, and Future, Phnom Penh: APSARA, 1996.
Ang Choulean, Chhay Rachna, Heng Than, Ieng Neang, In Sokretya, Khieu Chan,

--- PAGE 328 ---
299
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
Khut Vuthyneath, Lim Srou, Uom Sineth, Say Sophearin, Tous Somoneath, 
Ven Sophorn, Kim Samnang, Ros Sokhom, Khut Vuthyneath, Tin Tina, and 
Vitou Phirom. Silācārịk Aṅgar Vatt : samăy purāṇ , kaṇ ṭāl, thmī [Inscriptions 
of Angkor Wat: Ancient, Middle and Modern Periods]. Phnom Penh: 
APSARA, Center for Khmer Studies, 2013.
Assavavirulhakarn, Prapod. The Ascendancy of Theravāda Buddhism in Southeast Asia. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, 2010.
Aymonier, Étienne. Le Cambodge, III. Le groupe d’Angkor et l’histoire. Paris: Ernest 
Leroux, 1904. 
——— . “Les inscriptions du Bakan et la grande inscription d’Angkor Vat”. JA 15, no. 1, 
1900: pp. 143–75.
De Bernon, Olivier. “Journeys to Jetavana: Poetic and Ideological Elaborations of 
Remembrance of Jetavana in Southeast Asia”. In Buddhist Narrative in Asia 
and Beyond, in Honour of HRH Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn on her 
Fifty-Fifth Birth Anniversary. Bangkok: Bangkok Institute of Thai Studies, 
2012: pp. 167–93. 
Billard, Roger and Christopher J. Eade. “Dates des inscriptions du pays khmer”. 
BEFEO 93, 2006: pp. 395–428.
Boisselier, Jean. Asie du Sud-Est: I. Le Cambodge, Paris: Picard, 1966. 
——— . “Note sur les bas-reliefs tardifs d’Angkor Vat”. JA 250, no. 2, 1962: pp. 244–8. 
——— . “Note sur deux Buddha parés des Galeries d’Angkor Vat”. Bulletin de la Société 
des études indochinoises 25, no. 3, 1950: pp. 299–306. 
Briggs, Lawrence Palmer. The Ancient Khmer Empire. Philadelphia: American 
Philosophical Society, 1951.
Brotherson, David. Commerce, the Capital, & Community: Trade Ceramics, Settlement 
Patterns, & Continuity Throughout the Demise of Angkor. PhD dissertation, 
University of Sydney, 2019. 
Buckley, Brendan M., Roland J. Fletcher, Shi-Yu Simon Wang, Brian Zottoli and 
Christophe Pottier. “Monsoon Extremes and Society over the Past Millennium 
on Mainland Southeast Asia”. Quaternary Science Reviews 95, 2014: pp. 1–19.
Boun Souk, Thao. L’image du Buddha dans l’art Lao. Vientiane: Imprimerie 
nationale, 1974.
Carter, Alison Kyra, Miriam T. Stark, Seth Quintus, Yijie Zhuang, Hong Wang, Piphal 
Heng and Chhay Rachna. “Temple Occupation and the Tempo of Collapse at 
Angkor Wat, Cambodia”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 116, no. 25, 2019: pp. 12226–31.
Chandler, David Porter. “An Eighteenth-Century Inscription from Angkor Wat”. JSS 
59, no. 2, 1971: pp. 152–9. 
——— . Cambodia before the French: Politics in a Tributary Kingdom. 1794–1848. PhD 
dissertation, University of Michigan, 1973.
Coe, Michael and Damian Evans. Angkor and the Khmer Civilization. London: 
Thames & Hudson, 2018.
Cœdès, George. Angkor: An Introduction. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1963. 
——— . “Date d’exécution des deux bas-reliefs tardifs d’Angkor Vat”. JA 250, no. 2, 
1962: pp. 235−43.
——— . “Essai de classification des documents historiques conservés à la bibliothèque 
de l’École Française d’Extreme-Orient”. BEFEO 18, 1918: pp. 15−28.
——— . The Indianized States of Southeast Asia, trans. Susan Brown Cowing, ed. 
Walter F. Vella. Canberra: Australian National University Press, 1968.
——— . Inscriptions du Cambodge II. Paris: EFEO, 1942.
Commaille, Jean. Rapport de la Conservation d’Angkor, 1908. Unpublished

--- PAGE 329 ---
300
Martin Polkinghorne
manuscript, Paris: EFEO, 1908.
De Coral-Rémusat, Gilberte. L’art khmer. Les grandes étapes de son évolution. Paris: 
Études d’art et d’ethnologie asiatiques, 1940.
Cushman, Richard D., trans. The Royal Chronicles of Ayutthaya, ed. David K. Wyatt 
Bangkok: The Siam Society, 2000.
[Dīghanikāya] Dialogues of the Buddha, Part II, trans.Thomas William Rhys Davids 
and Caroline Augusta Foley Rhys Davids, London: Oxford University Press, 
1910.
Dy Phon, Pauline. Vacanānukram rukkhajāti proe prās’ knuṅ prades kambujā, 
Dictionnaire des plantes utilisées au Cambodge, Dictionary of Plants used in 
Cambodia. Phnom Penh, 2000.
Edwards, Penny. Cambodge: The Cultivation of a Nation, 1860–1945. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press, 2007.
Les étudiants de la Faculté Royale d’Archéologie de Phnom Penh. “Le monastère 
bouddhique de Tep Pranam à Oudong”. BEFEO 56, 1969: pp. 29–57. 
Evans, Damian H., Roland J. Fletcher, Christophe Pottier, Jean-Baptiste Chevance, 
Dominique Soutif, Tan Boun Suy, Im Sokrithy, Ea Darith, Tin Tina, Kim 
Samnang, Christopher Cromarty, Stéphane de Greef, Kaspar Hanus, Pierre 
Bâty, Robert Kuszinger, Ichita Shimoda and Glenn Boornazian. “Uncovering 
Archaeological Landscapes at Angkor using Lidar”. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110, no. 31, 2013:  
pp. 12595–600.
Ewington, Gabrielle. Yaśodharapura to Yaśodharapura: Mobility, Rupture and 
Continuity in the Khmer World. Unpublished honours thesis, Department of 
Archaeology, University of Sydney, 2008.
Fine Arts Department. Chotmaihet kanburana patisangkhon ‘ong Phra That Phanom 
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department, 1975–1979, pp. 2518–2522. (In Thai.)
Finot, Louis. “Les études indochinoises”. BEFEO 8, 1908: pp. 221–33.
Fletcher, Roland J., Dan Penny, Damian H. Evans, Christophe Pottier, Mike Barbetti, 
Matti Kummu, Terry Lustig and APSARA. “The Water Management Network 
of Angkor, Cambodia”. Antiquity 82, 2008: pp. 658–70.
Giteau, Madeleine. Art et archéologie du Laos. Paris: Picard, 2001.
——— . “Catalogue des pièces déposées au Wat Phra Keo à Vientiane, Laos”. In Étude 
de collections d’art bouddhique, 17 décembre 1968– 17 mars 1969. Paris: 
UNESCO, 1969.
——— . Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien. Paris: EFEO, 1975.
——— . “Note sur une école cambodgienne de statuaire bouddhique inspirée de l’art 
d’Angkor Vat”. AA 13, 1966: pp. 115–26.
——— . “Note sur quelques pièces en bronze récemment découvertes à Vatt Deb 
Pranamy d’Oudong”. AA 24, 1971: pp. 149–155.
Greater Angkor Project, Tumnup Touich Terrace (GT83). Unpublished report, Siem 
Reap: Greater Angkor Project, 2014.
Groslier, Bernard-Philippe. Angkor and Cambodia in the Sixteenth Century. According 
to Portuguese and Spanish Sources, trans. Michael Smithies. Bangkok: Orchid 
Books, 2006. First Published 1958.
Hall, Tegan, Dan Penny, Brice Vincent and Martin Polkinghorne. “An Integrated 
Palaeoenvironmental Record of Early Modern Occupancy and Land Use within 
Angkor Thom, Angkor”. Quaternary Science Reviews 251, 2021. doi.
org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2020.106710.
Ham Gim Sun, Rājadhānī Uṭuṅg: Siksā aṃbī kanlaeṅ vāṃṅ cās’ [The Royal Capital 
of Oudong: Study on the Location of the Ancient Palace]. Final Year

--- PAGE 330 ---
301
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
undergraduate thesis, Phnom Penh, Department of Archaeology, Royal 
University of Fine Arts, 1994.
Ho Kusal, Dioe Vutthuna and Pan Vassa, Rapāy kār stī aṃbī caṃlāk’ sbān’ nau phsār 
ṭaek nịṅ kaṃbaṅ luoṅ [Report on bronze artisanry at Phsar Daek and Kompong 
Luong]. Phnom Penh, Department of Archaeology, Royal University of Fine 
Arts, 1995–6.
Ishizawa, Yoshiaki. “Les inscriptions calligraphiques japonaises du XVIIe siècle à 
Angkor Vat et le plan du Jetavana-vihara”. Manuel d’épigraphie du Cambodge, 
vol. I, eds. Yoshiaki Ishizawa, Claude Jacques and Khin Sok. Paris: EFEO/
UNESCO, 2007, pp. 169−79.
Ito, Chuta. “Gion-Shouja no zu and Angkor Wat”. Journal of Architecture and 
Building Science 313, 1913: pp. 10−41. (In Japanese.) 
Kersten, Carool, ed. Strange Events in the Kingdoms of Cambodia and Laos (1635–
1644). Bangkok: White Lotus, 2003.
Khin Sok. Le Cambodge entre le Siam et le Viêtnam (de 1775 à 1860). Paris: EFEO, 
1991.
——— . Chroniques royales du Cambodge (de Bañā Yāt jusqu’à la prise de Laṅvaek: de 
1417 à 1595). Traduction française avec comparaison des différentes versions et 
introduction. Paris: EFEO, 1988.
——— . “Deux inscriptions tardives du Phnom Bàkhèn, K.465 et K.285”. BEFEO 60, 
no. 1, 1978: pp. 271−80.
Khing Hoc Dy. “La légende de Braḥ Go Braḥ Kaev”. Cahiers de l’Asie du Sud-Est 
29–30, 1991: pp. 169−90.
Khun Samen. Post Angkorian Buddha. Phnom Penh: Ministry of Culture and Fine 
Arts, 2000. (Khmer version: Buddh paṭimā kroy samăy aṅgar.)
Kitigawa, Takako. “Capitals of the Post-Angkor Period: Longvêk and Oudong”. 
Southeast Asia History and Culture 27, no. 6, 1998: pp. 48–72. 
Kulke, Hermann. “The Devaràja Cult: Legitimation and Apotheosis of the Ruler in 
the Kingdom of Angkor”. In Kings and Cults: State Formation and 
Legitimation in India and Southeast Asia, ed. Hermann Kulke. New Delhi: 
Manohar, 1993, pp. 327–81.
Leclère, Adhémard. Le buddhisme au Cambodge. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1899.
——— . Histoire du Cambodge depuis le 1er siècle de notre ère, d’après les inscriptions 
lapidaires, les annales chinoises et annamites et les documents européens des six 
derniers siècles. Paris: Paul Geuthner, 1914.
Lejosne, Jean-Claude. “Historiographie du Cambodge aux 16e et 17e siècles: les 
sources portugaises et hollandaises”. In Bilan et perspectives des études khmères 
(langue et culture), ed. Pierre L. Lamant. Paris: L’Harmattan, 1998,  
pp. 179−200.
Leksukhum, Santi. Wiwatthanakān khòng chan pradap luat lāi samai Ayutthayā tòn 
ton. Bangkok: Amarin, 1979. (In Thai.)
Lewitz, Saveros. “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 35, 36, 37 et 39”. BEFEO 61, 1974: 
pp. 301–37. 
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 4, 5, 6 et 7”. BEFEO 58, 1971: pp. 105–23.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 1, 8, et 9”. BEFEO 59, 1972: pp. 101–21.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16a, 16b, et 16c”. 
BEFEO 59, 1972: pp. 221–49.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 et 25”. BEFEO 
60, 1973: pp. 163–203.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33”. BEFEO 60, 
1973: pp. 205–42.

--- PAGE 331 ---
302
Martin Polkinghorne
——— . “Textes en khmer moyen. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3”. BEFEO 57, 
1970: pp. 99–126.
Loch Chhanchhai. “Chronique des vice-rois de Battambang (XVIIIe–XXIe siècles): 
du régent Bên de Battambang à la famille Aphaiwong du Siam”. Péninsule 68, 
no. 1, 2014: pp. 9–103.
Lopetcharat, Somkiart. Lao Buddha: The Image and Its History. Bangkok: Amarin, 
2001.
Lorillard, Michel. “d’Angkor au Lān Xāng: une révision des jugements”. Aséanie 7, 
2001: pp. 19–33.
Mak Phoeun. Chroniques royales du Cambodge (des origines légendaires jusqu’à 
Paramarājā Ier) I / Traduction française avec comparaison des différentes versions 
et introduction. Paris: EFEO, 1984.
——— . Histoire du Cambodge de la fin du XVIe siècle au début du XVIIIe siècle. Paris: 
EFEO, 1995.
——— . “Quelques aspects des croyances religieuses liées aux guerres entre le Cambodge 
et le Siam”. Paper presented to the 3rd European-Japanese Seminar, Hamburg, 
September 1998.
Marchal, Henri. Journal de Fouilles, Tome II, December 1918–February 1921. 
Unpublished manuscript, Paris: EFEO, 1918–21.
——— . Journal de Fouilles, Tome VI, September 1926–July 1928. Unpublished 
manuscript, Paris: EFEO, 1926–8.
——— . “Note sur la forme du stupa au Cambodge”. BEFEO 46, no. 2, 1951: pp. 
581–690.
McGill, Forrest. “The Art and Architecture of the reign of King Prasat Thong of 
Ayutthaya (1629–1656)”. PhD dissertation, University of Michigan, 1977.
——— . Kingdom of Siam: Art from Central Thailand (1350–1800 C.E.), ed. Forrest 
McGill. Ghent: Snoeck Publishers; Bangkok: 1 Buppha Press; Chicago: Art 
Media Resources Inc.; San Francisco: The Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, 
2005. 
Men Rath Sambath. “Les stoupas et les temples de la colline d’Oudong”. Mémoire 
pour le diplôme de Master, Institut National des Langues et Civilisations 
Orientales, 2007.
Mikaelian, Grégory. “Des sources lacunaires de l’histoire à l’histoire complexifiée des 
sources. Éléments pour une histoire des renaissances khmères (c. XIVe–c. 
XVIIIe s.)”. Péninsule 65, no. 2, June 2012: pp. 259–304.
——— . “Le passé entre mémoire d’Angkor et déni de Laṅvaek: la conscience de 
l’histoire dans le royaume khmer du XVIIe siècle”. In Le passé des Khmers. 
Langues, textes, rites, ed. Nasir Abdoul-Carime, Grégory Mikaelian and Joseph 
Thach. Berne: Peter Lang, 2016, pp. 167−212. 
——— . La royauté d’Oudong. Réformes des institutions et crise du pouvoir dans le 
royaume khmer du xviie siècle. Paris: Presses de l’Université Paris-Sorbonne, 
2009.
——— . “Une ‘révolution militaire’ au pays khmer? note sur l’artillerie post-angkorienne 
(XVI–XIXe siècles)”. Udaya Journal of Khmer Studies 10, 2009: pp. 57–134.
Moura, Jean. Le royaume du Cambodge, 2 vols. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1883.
Mus, Paul. India seen from the East: Indian and Indigenous Cults in Champa, trans. 
Ian W. Mabbett, eds. Ian W. Mabbett and David Chandler. Melbourne: Monash 
Papers on Southeast Asia, Melbourne, 2011. (First Published 1933.)
Nara National Research Institute for Cultural Properties. Western Prasat Top Site 
Survey Report on Joint Research for the Protection of the Angkor Historic Site. 
Nara: Nara National Research Institute for Cultural Properties, 2012.

--- PAGE 332 ---
303
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
Nhim Sotheavin. “Factors that led to the Change of the Khmer Capitals from the 15th 
to 17th Century”. Renaissance Culturelle du Cambodge 29, 2014–6:  
pp. 33–107. 
O’Connor, Richard A. “Interpreting Thai Religious Change: Temples, Sangha 
Reform and Social Change”. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 24, no. 2, 1993: 
pp. 330–9.
Pech Sotheary. “Buddha Statues Unearthed in Siem Reap’s Angkor Wat”. Khmer 
Times April 17, 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2020, https://www.
khmertimeskh.com/714120/buddha-statues-unearthed-in-siem-reaps-angkor-
wat/.
Péri, Nöel. “Un plan japonais d’Angkor Vat. Essai sur les relations du Japon et de 
l’Indochine aux XVIè et XVIIè siècles”. BEFEO 23, 1923: pp. 1−104.
Penny, Dan, Tegan Hall, Damian Evans and Martin Polkinghorne. “Geoarchaeological 
Evidence from Angkor, Cambodia, Reveals a Gradual Decline Rather than a 
Catastrophic 15th-century Collapse”. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 116, no. 11, 2019: pp. 4871–6.
Polkinghorne, Martin. “Makers and Models: Decorative Lintels of Khmer Temples, 
7th to 11th centuries”. PhD dissertation, University of Sydney, 2007. 
——— .“Reconfiguring Kingdoms: The End of Angkor and the Emergence of Early 
Modern Period Cambodia”. In Angkor: Exploring Cambodia’s Sacred City, eds. 
Theresa McCullough, Stephen A. Murphy, Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir. 
Singapore: Asian Civilisations Museum, 2018, pp. 252–71. 
Polkinghorne, Martin, Janet Douglas and Federico Carò. “Carving at the Capital: A 
Stone Workshop at Hariharālaya, Angkor”. BEFEO 101, 2015: pp. 55–90.
Polkinghorne, Martin, Christophe Pottier and Christian Fischer. “Evidence for the 
15th-Century Ayutthayan Occupation of Angkor”. In The Renaissance Princess 
Lectures: In Honour of Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn. 
Bangkok: Siam Society, pp. 98–132.
——— . “One Buddha can Hide Another”. JA 301, no. 2, 2013: pp. 575–624.
Polkinghorne, Martin, Brice Vincent, Nicolas Thomas and David Bourgarit. “Casting 
for the King: The Royal Palace Bronze Workshop of Angkor Thom”. BEFEO 
100, 2014: pp. 327−58.
Pou, Saveros. “Angkor Vat. K.1022”. In Nouvelles inscriptions du Cambodge II & III 
Paris: EFEO, 2001, p. 270.
——— . “Inscription du Phnom Bakheng (K.465) ”. Nouvelles inscriptions du Cambodge 
I. Paris: EFEO, 1989, pp. 20−5.
——— . “Inscriptions khmères K. 144 et K. 177”. BEFEO 70, 1981: pp. 101–20.
——— . “Inscriptions khmères K. 39 et K. 27”. BEFEO 70, 1981: pp. 121–34.
——— . “Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 34 et 38”. BEFEO 62, 1975: pp. 283–353.
——— . “Lexicographie vieux-khmère”. Seksa Khmer 7, 1984: pp. 67−175.
——— . “Subhāsit and Cpāp’ in Khmer Literature”. In Ludwick Sternbach Felicitation 
Volume, Part One, ed. Jagdamba Prasad Sinha. Lucknow: Akhila Bharatiya 
Sanskrit Parishad, 1979, pp. 331–48. 
Provost-Roche, Ludivine. Les derniers siècles de l’époque angkorienne au Cambodge 
[environ 1220–environ 1500], 2 vols. PhD dissertation, Université de Paris 3, 
2010. 
San Sarin. “Quelques chedei du Phnom Preah Reach Treap”. Bulletin des Étudiants de 
la Faculté d’Archéologie 3-4, November 1971: pp. 67–8. 
Singaravélou, Pierre. L’École française d’Extrême-Orient ou l’institution des marges 
(1898–1956). Essai d’histoire sociale et politique de la science coloniale. Paris: 
Éditions L’Harmattan, 1999.

--- PAGE 333 ---
304
Martin Polkinghorne
Seng Chantha. Conservation of Wooden Buddha: Post-Angkor Period. Unpublished 
Powerpoint presentation, Phnom Penh, 2017.
Tambiah, Stanley J. “The Galactic Polity: The Structure of Traditional Kingdoms in 
Southeast Asia”. Annals of the New-York Academy of Sciences 293, 15 July 1977: 
pp. 69–87. 
——— . World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in 
Thailand against a Historical Background. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1976. 
Than Swe, Im Sokrithy and Elizabeth H. Moore. “Myanmar Inscriptions Found at 
Angkor”. In Advancing Southeast Asian Archaeology 2013: Selected Papers from 
the First SEAMEO SPAFA International Conference on Southeast Asian 
Archaeology, ed. Noel Hidalgo Tan. Bangkok: SEAMEO SPAFA Regional 
Centre for Archaeology and Fine Arts, 2015, pp. 15–7.
Thompson, Ashley. “The Ancestral Cult in Transition: Reflections on Spatial 
Organization of Cambodia’s Early Theravada Complex”. In Southeast Asian 
Archaeology: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference of the European 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, 2–6 September, Leiden, eds. 
Marijke J. Klokke and Thomas de Brujin. Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian 
Studies, 1998, pp. 273–95. 
——— . “Changing Perspectives: Cambodia after Angkor”. In Sculpture of Angkor and 
Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory, eds. Helen I. Jessup and Thierry 
Zéphir. Washington D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1997, pp. 22–32. 
——— . “Forgetting to Remember, Again: On Curatorial Practice and ‘Cambodian 
Art’ in the Wake of Genocide”. diacritics 41, no. 2, 2014: pp. 82–109.
——— . “Introductory Remarks between the Lines: Writing Histories of Middle 
Cambodia”. In Other Pasts: Women, Gender and History in Early Modern 
Southeast Asia. Honolulu Center for Southeast Asian Studies, University of 
Hawai‘i, 2000, pp. 47–68. 
——— . “Mémoires du Cambodge”. PhD dissertation, Université de Paris VIII, 1999.
——— . “Pilgrims to Angkor: A Buddhist ‘Cosmopolis’ in Southeast Asia?”. Bulletin of 
Students of the Department of Archaeology, Royal University of Fine Arts, Phnom 
Penh 3, 2004: pp. 88–119.
Tuy Danel and Martin Polkinghorne. “Cambodian Narratives: Transformations of the 
Vessantara Jataka”. The Asian Art Society of Australia Review 24, no. 2, 2015: 
pp. 7−9.
Vickery, Michael Theodore. Cambodia after Angkor: The Chronicular Evidence for the 
Fourteenth to Sixteenth Centuries. PhD dissertation, University of Michigan, 
1977. (Annotated 2012.)
——— . “L’inscription K.1006 du Phnom Kulên”. BEFEO 71, 1982: pp. 77−86.
——— . “History of Cambodia: Summary of Lectures given at the Faculty of 
Archaeology Royal University of Fine Arts”. Unpublished Lecture Notes, 
Phnom Penh, 2001–2.
Wolters, Oliver William. “The Khmer King at Basan (1371–3) and the Restoration of 
the Cambodian Chronology During the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries”. 
Asia Major 12, no. 1, 1966: pp. 44–89.
Woodward, Hiram W., Jr. “The Buddha images of Ayutthaya”. In Kingdom of Siam: 
Art from Central Thailand (1350–1800 C.E.), ed. Forrest McGill. Ghent: 
Snoeck Publishers; Bangkok: 1 Buppha Press; Chicago: Art Media Resources 
Inc.; San Francisco: The Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, 2005. pp. 47–59. 
——— . “Prologue. What there was before Siam: Traditional Views”. In Before Siam: 
Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy.

--- PAGE 334 ---
305
17th- and 18th-century images of the Buddha from Ayutthaya and Lan Xang
Bangkok: River Books, 2014, pp. 14−29.
——— . The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand. Baltimore: The Trustees of the Walters Art 
Gallery, 1997.

--- PAGE 335 ---
306
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Ea Darith received his Bachelor of Arts from the Royal University of Fine Arts in 
Phnom Penh in 1995, his MA from Kyoto University in 2000, and his PhD 
from Osaka Ohtani University in 2010. Since 2000, he has been working at 
APSARA , and teaching the history of Khmer ceramics at the Royal University 
of Fine Arts. He has long coordinated a spectrum of diverse projects between 
APSARA and numerous international teams. Darith’s main research interests 
focus on Khmer stoneware ceramics from the ninth to fifteenth centuries. He 
has published widely on this subject in particular, and maintains an interest in 
the transition from the Angkorian to the Cambodian Middle Period at Angkor.
Acknowledgements
	
I would like to thank Professor Ashley Thompson for inviting me to participate 
in this book project I would like to thank the APSARA Authority for 
supporting my research projects in Angkor. I would like also to thank Dr. Kyle 
Latinis, the Senior Research Fellow, Nalanda Srivijaya Centre, Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies, Yusof-Ishak Institute for helping to edit this paper.  
Martin Polkinghorne is a Senior Lecturer in Archaeology, Flinders University, 
South Australia, and an Honorary Research Fellow of the University of 
Sydney. Martin completed his PhD at the University of Sydney and has held 
several Australian Research Council grants. He currently leads projects 
conducting the first archaeological investigations of Cambodia’s Early Modern 
Period capitals on the banks of the Mekong and Tonle Sap arterial rivers. 
Polkinghorne is author of numerous articles including contributions to the 
Journal Asiatique, the Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient, and the 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
Acknowledgements
	
This chapter was conceived during a Terrence and Lynette Fern Cité 
Internationale des Arts Residency Fellowship 2015 awarded by the Power 
Institute for Art and Visual Cultures of The University of Sydney. I am 
grateful to the fellowship host institution, EFEO Paris, and in particular its 
photothèque and director Isabelle Poujol who generously provided access to 
their archives. Thanks to David Brotherson, Chhay Rachna, Nandana 
Chutiwongs, Gabrielle Ewington, Forrest McGill, Christophe Pottier, So 
Malay, Nalinthone Phannolath, Phouvieng Phothisane, Suy Pov, Tun 
Puthpiseth, Simon Warrack, the Chantharakasem National Museum 
(Ayutthaya), and the Ho Prakeo Museum for assistance on various aspects of 
the paper. Special thanks to David Chandler, Grégory Mikaelian, Ashley 
Thompson, and Hiram Woodward for discussions and insightful comments on 
a draft of the text. This work was supported by the Australian Research 
Council under Grants DE150100756 and DP170102574.
Samerchai Poolsuwan is professor of anthropology at Thammasat University, 
Thailand, and holds a doctorate degree from the University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor. His current research, focusing on Buddhist iconography in the

--- PAGE 336 ---
307
List of Contributors
Theravādin context of Southeast Asia, has yielded a number of publications 
on exploration of the Pagan-period and the early Thai Buddhist murals (for 
example: Artibus Asiae, 72(2): 377–97 & 76(1): 37–80; Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, 27(2): 255–94; Journal of Burma studies, 19(1): 145–97; 
SUVANNABHUMI, 6(1): 27–65).
Acknowledgements
	
In preparing this manuscript, the author has benefitted from comments by 
Hiram Woodward, Ashley Thompson, Don Stadtner, Nandana Chutiwongs, 
Nicolas Revire and the anonymous reviewers. Saya Minbu Aung Kyaing 
assisted the author on reading inscriptions of the Pagan-period murals. 
Issarachai Buranaaj helped in providing the map used in the article. The work 
is supported by the Thailand Research Fund (TRF) (Grant RTA 5880010). 
Nicolas Revire is assistant professor at Thammasat University, Faculty of Liberal 
Arts, Bangkok, and holds a doctoral degree from the Université Paris 3–
Sorbonne nouvelle in France. He specialises in the Buddhist art and 
archaeology of mainland Southeast Asia with a research focus on pre-modern 
Thailand and Cambodia. He is general editor of a collective volume titled 
Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology (Bangkok, 2014), and is 
conducting a research project on the “Life of the Buddha at Angkor” for the 
Centre of Khmer Studies and the École française d’Extrême-Orient. 
Acknowledgements
	
It is my great pleasure to acknowledge the editor of this volume, Ashley 
Thompson, along with Hiram Woodward, for their close reading and useful 
comments on this essay. I am also grateful to Yuni Sato for providing a copy of 
the excavation report of Western Prasat Top in Angkor, and to many other 
colleagues who generously shared various material, references, and photos, and 
in particular Trent Walker for his decisive assistance regarding Khmer sources. 
As always, I am most obliged to Leedom Lefferts for editing the language. 
Finally, I also wish to acknowledge the gracious support of the Thai Research 
Fund (Grant RTA5880010).
Yuni Sato is a researcher at the Nara National Research Institute for Cultural 
Properties, Japan. She received her MA in Archaeology from Waseda 
University, Tokyo, in 2006. She is currently a PhD candidate in Archaeology 
at Waseda. She has been involved with research and restoration work at 
Western Prasat Top, Angkor Thom, Cambodia, since 2008. She co-leads a 
collaborative research project on the Cambodian Middle Period, and has 
published on cultural objects from late Angkorian to Middle Period 
Cambodia.
Ashley Thompson (BA Harvard, MA Université de Paris 3, PhD Université de 
Paris 8) is Hiram W Woodward Chair of Southeast Asian Art at SOAS 
University of London. Her research focuses on the classical and premodern 
arts and literatures of Southeast Asia, with a particular emphasis on 
Cambodia. Her most recent monograph is Engendering the Buddhist State: 
Territory, Sovereignty and Sexual Difference in the Inventions of Angkor 
(Routledge, Critical Buddhist Studies, 2016). She is co-editor of the Routledge 
Handbook of Theravāda Buddhism (2022).

--- PAGE 337 ---
308
List of Contributors
Tuy Danel graduated in 2007 from the Department of Archaeology, Royal University 
of Fine Arts, Phnom Penh, after completing a BA thesis entitled “Gaṃnūr 
khmaer nau tām vatt knuṅ samǎy ekarājy” [Khmer Mural Painting of the 
Independence Period]. In 2010, with a grant from the French Embassy, he 
completed his MA in Art History at the Paris-Sorbonne University (Paris IV). 
Since 2017, he has been a doctoral student at INALCO in Paris, under the 
supervision of Professors Michel Antelme and Vincent Lefevre. The title of his 
PhD dissertation in progress is “The Ten Jātaka, from Buddhist Literature to 
Mural Paintings in Cambodia”. 
Hiram Woodward, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Quincy Scott Curator of Asian Art 
Emeritus, the Walters Art Museum, is the author of The Art and Architecture of 
Thailand From Prehistoric Times through the Thirteenth Century and the 
principal author of The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand: The Alexander B. Griswold 
Collection, The Walters Art Gallery. He became Asian art curator at the Walters in 
1986, after periods of teaching at the University of Michigan and the University 
of Vermont. His contribution to this volume draws on his dissertation, on the 
Lopburi art of Thailand (Yale University, 1975).

--- PAGE 338 ---
309
Numbers with an “f” indicate a figure (image). Figures with a 
“t” indicate a table.
Abhidhamma, 6, 246. See also Abhidharma
Abhidharma, 7. See also Abhidhamma
Advayavajrasaṅgraha, 255n16
Agaññasutta. 86 
age of commerce, 3
akkharasīmā, 242
Anawratha of Pagan, King, 170
Ang Chan, King, 186, 198–9, 288
Angkor Conservation, 275
Angkor Thom, 38 
Baphuon temple, 193, 194, 200n10
Bayon, 26, 28, 67, 68f, 69, 76–7, 78
Buddhist terraces, 41, 91, 186, 189, 190, 197, 203, 208, 
211–13, 226
Elephant Terraces, 58, 88
Leper King Terrace, 84, 86f, 88
Prasat Top East (Mangalartha/Monument 487), 58f, 59, 
76
Prasat Top West (Monument 486), 41, 53n73, 82, 82f, 
84, 99n64, 192, 203–27, 203f, 204f, 205f, 207f, 
218f, 219f, 220f, 221f, 222f, 224f, 225f, 226f, 227f, 
239–41, 244, 252, 288 
Preah Ang Kok Thlok, 188f
Preah Ang Ngok, 191, 191f, 217
Preah Palilay, 94n16, 193f, 194–5
Preah Pithu, 58–9, 76, 92, 97n43, 101n85 
Tep Pranam, 79f, 218f
Vihear Prambuon Lavaeng, 217, 219f. See also Wat Tang 
Tok 
Vihear Prampir Lavaeng, 34, 189, 190f, 219f
Wat Preah Se Ary Metrei, 189
Angkor Wat temple, 23–4, 38–9, 42–4, 92, 197–9, 270, 270f, 
289
Ayutthayan pilgrims, 282–3
Bakan, 198, 274, 276
Buddha statuary of, 273–5, 280, 282f–4f, 284, 288–9
Laotian community visiting, 286–7
pilgrimage at, 275–6
Preah Pean, 198, 271f, 273, 275f, 276, 285, 288 
stūpa, 197, 286
Sūryavarman II, visual sequence of, 87
ardhasaṅka, 77
Ariya Buddhism, 32, 40, 70, 81, 83–4, 95n19, 171–3
Aśoka of India, King, 65
Asokamahārājā, 171. See also Dhammāsoka
asura, 89, 92
Authority for the Protection and Safeguarding of Angkor 
and the Region of Angkor (APSARA), 41, 187, 208, 
274
Avalokiteśvara, 67, 69–70, 127, 134, 140n98, 208, 284
Ayutthaya, 15, 17–19, 38, 147, 148, 150, 239, 271, 276–9, 
278t,281, 282, 284 
banners, 69, 89
Banteay Kdei sculptures, 72–4, 76, 78, 84, 121
Banteay Samre temple, 110, 111–13, 124, 136n26
Baphuon temple, 193, 194, 200n10
Bati, 286–7
Battambang province, 286
Bayon style, 26, 67
Bayon temple, 26, 28, 67, 68f, 69, 76–7, 78
Beng Mealea temple, 94n16, 111, 113, 136n26
Bénisti, Mireille, 108
Bizot, François, 28, 32, 40, 45n15, 51n55, 95n19, 245, 251, 
257n45, 257n50
Bodhi tree, 92, 249
Borobudur, 107, 115, 128, 132, 139n82
boundary stones, 20, 60, 92, 122, 123, 125, 132. See also sīmā
Brahmanism, 18, 108, 110, 122, 131, 272. See also Hinduism
Bretfeld, Sven, 1–3, 44n1, 45n12
Buddha images, 7–8, 20–1, 22f, 23, 61f, 83f
in abhayamudrā, 147, 156, 161, 161f, 219, 220f, 276–7, 
277f
in Ayutthaya, 82, 275f, 276–9, 278t
bronze, 61, 64–5, 66f, 146f, 147
colossal Buddhas, 34, 35f
crowned Buddha, standing, 66–7
directional Buddhas, 238–44
drapery style, 26, 28, 51n55, 166
five Buddhas (pañcabuddha), 232–8,245–7
kamrateṅ jagat śrisugatamāravijita, 23, 45n16
Kassapa Buddha, 42, 224–6, 231, 239, 241, 252
Lao, 279–80
INDEX

--- PAGE 339 ---
310
Index
at Mahābodhi temple, 69
Māravijaya Buddha, 23, 45n16, 63–4, 81f, 205, 279f, 
282f–3f
nāga-protected Buddha, 26, 30–31, 34, 62–63, 69, 71f, 
73, 78f, 81, 82f, 284 
oval-face type, 82, 277
past (atīta) and future (anāgata) Buddhas, 231–2, 
247–51
at Prasat Kralanh, 21, 23
at Prasat Ta An, 23
at Prasat Top West, 84, 206, 208–10, 212, 218, 220f, 
225–6
at Preah Ang Thom, 32
at Preah Khan of Kompong Svay, 25, 27f
resemblances between Dvāravatī and pre-Angkorian, 20
seated Buddha, 79f–80f
standing Buddha, 32, 33f, 42, 60, 64, 66–7, 84, 277f
three seated Buddhas, 70
treatment of hair, 28
walking Buddha, 41, 219, 220f, 227, 280
westerly facing, 23–4
with pointed crowns of Pāla type, 70
with right hand on the chest, 70, 74, 74f–5f
Buddha-carita, 129
Buddhavaṁsa, 64–5, 67, 69, 231, 241, 257n45
caitya, xxi, 62, 232, 237–8, 254n8. See also cetiya and chedei
Central Thailand, 43, 69, 175, 178. See also Dvāravatī
Buddha images in, 62
Chinese diplomatic missions, 168–9 
east–west connections, 169
Khmer expansion, 167–70
polities in, 169
religious faith, 170–3
urban settlement in, 166–7
cetiya, xxi, 280, 286. See also caitya and chedei
Chandler, David, 71
Chau Say Tevoda temple, 109f, 111–12, 127, 128–9, 
136n26
chedei, xxi, 279, 280, 280f, 286–7. See also caitya and cetiya
Citragupta, 90
Cœdès, George, 16–17, 20–1, 59, 90, 192
Angkor: An Introduction, 88
conch holders, 77
cosmology, 67, 86, 89, 91, 244, 272
Crosby, Kate, 6–8
Cūlajinapañjara, 239
Cūlasabbadisabuddhamaṅgalaparitta, 241
Dagens, Bruno, 75
Dasabodhisatta-uddesa, 247–8, 250
Davis, Kathleen, 36
Dhammarāja, 90, 248–9, 285
Dhammāsoka/Dharmāśoka, 65, 67. See also Asokamahārājā
dharmarājai, 90
Dikpālas in ancient India, 243
aṣṭadikpāla, 243
directional Buddhas, 238–44, 240t, 241, 242f
of ten directions, 239–41, 240t
cardinal and inter-cardinal directions, 241, 244t
eight moralities or aṭṭhasīla, 242
in magic circle arrangement, 242
in vocation of devatā, 243
ritual boundaries (baddhasīmā) of directions, 242
spatial arrangements, 241
Dong Mae Nang Muang, 65, 67, 171, 176, 177
Dvāravatī culture, 60–61, 107, 166–7, 171, 175, 178, 215
Dvāravātī-style sīmā (Buddhist boundary stones), 20
earth goddess, 67
Elephant Terraces, 58, 88
esoteric Buddhism, 7, 13, 42, 45n12, 232, 233, 235, 237, 
248, 251–3. See also Tantric Buddhism and Ariya 
Buddhism
esoteric Jinas, 232–3, 235, 237
Finot, Louis, 59–60
five Buddhas (pañcabuddha), 245–7, 245t, 246f, 252 
Giteau, Madeleine, 37, 243, 270
Gotama Buddha, 8, 62, 65, 70, 107, 110, 238, 239, 245t. See 
also Sākyamuni Buddha
guardian figures, 89, 90f
Haripunjaya, 40, 70, 150, 152, 156, 166, 171, 173, 174, 178, 
206, 207
Hevajra, 77
Hīnayāna Buddhism, 4, 45n12
Historical Buddha, 6–8, 29, 42, 45n16, 114. See also Gotama 
Buddha and Sākyamuni Buddha
divinity of, 8
Indravarman, King, 71–2, 75, 77

--- PAGE 340 ---
311
Index
inscription K. 754, 20, 21, 24, 45n16, 77
Jambupati Sutta, 94n15
jātaka tales, sculptural representation of, 39, 67
at Ananda temple, 107
at Angkor, 108–9, 115–16, 120, 122–31
at Banteay Kdei temple, 121
at Banteay Samre temple, 112–13
at Beng Mealea temple, 113
brahmans, representations of, 115, 118
at Chau Say Tevoda temple, 112, 127–9
in Dvāravātī, 122–5, 132–3, 140n107
encounter between Jūjaka and King Sañjaya, 129
Jāli and Kaṇhājinā, 110–12, 119
during Jayavarman VII era, 116, 121
Mahājanaka-jātaka, 121
from Mahānipāta, 114, 120
of Mahīdharapura dynasty, 110–16
Nārada-jātaka, 119f, 120
at Neak Pean temple, 121
at Pagan, 39, 109, 111, 115, 124–8
at Phnom Kulen, 123
at Prasat Sasar Sdam, 114
at Preah Khan temple, 113
Sāma-jātaka, 114, 116, 118f, 120, 124
Sibi-jātaka, 111f, 113, 117f, 120, 123–5, 128, 132–3
at Ta Prohm temple, 117, 117f, 118, 120–1
Temiya-jātaka, 119f, 120
at Thommanon temple, 109, 112, 127–9
Valāhassa-jātaka, 127, 134
Vessantara-jātaka episodes, 108f–9f, 110–12, 110f, 
113–18, 115f–16f,  
126–7, 130, 133, 141n114
Vidhurapaṇḍita-jātaka, 121, 123–4
at West Hpet-leik temple, 127
Jayabuddhamahānātha, 50n51, 51n56, 69, 95n20, 167
Jayavarman VII, King, 16, 25–6, 28–29, 31, 39, 58–59, 
67–71, 76, 92, 113–14, 121, 126, 167, 171, 175–6
establishment of hospitals, 69
portraits of, 26, 28, 31f
Jayavarman VIII, king, 75–6
Jayavarmaparameśvara, king, 75, 97n41
Jetavana, 251, 276
Jinakālamālī, 82, 99n61
kalpa, 86, 224, 225. See also kappa
kambujā, 18–19
kammaṭṭhān meditation tradition, 245, 252
Kampong Chhnang province, 131, 199
kamrateṅ jagat śrisugatamāravijita, 20, 23, 45n16
Kandal province, 199, 242f, 246f, 250f
kappa, 231, 232, 249. See also kalpa
Kapilapura inscription, 76
Kāraṇḍavyūha-sūtra, 127, 133
khmuk, 289. See also lacquer
Khorat Plateau, 48n42, 269
Kok Svay Cek, 20, 29, 77. See also inscription K. 754
Kompong Cham province, 234f
Kompong Speu province, 20, 61
Krassem, Mahā Bidūr, 37
Kulen, 20, 48n42, 49n42, 123
lacquer, 273, 277, 277f, 282, 289
Lamphun, 32, 70, 239
Lan Xang Buddha, 279–81, 284f, 286, 289
Lao kingdoms, 286–7
Leper King, 77
sculpture, 89–91
terrace, 84, 86f, 88
Longvek, 199, 232, 281, 284, 287
Lopburi, 69–71, 73-5, 82, 84, 168–9, 278
antefixes, 74–75, 74f–75f
architecture , 69–71, 73–5, 82, 84
Hinayāna complex, 32
religious contact with Western Thailand, 177
Lopburi Mahāthāt, 65, 69, 94
Mahābhārata, 125, 129, 133, 134
Mahābodhi temple, 69, 70, 71
Mahādibbamanta, 239–41, 244, 252
Mahāpadānasutta, 231
Mahāparinibbānasutta, 275
mahāparinirvāṇa, 114
Mahāsammata, 86, 91
Mahāthāt, 65, 69–71, 83, 148, 167, 176, 222
Mahāyāna Buddhism, 4, 7–9, 18, 25, 29, 32, 42, 45n12, 63, 
65, 67, 108, 167, 198
Maitreya, xx, 29–30, 225. See also Metteyya
Māleyya-sutta, 130
maṇḍala model, 24, 47n31, 233, 242, 252, 262n109, 272
of Southeast Asian statehood, 19
Mangalartha. See Prasat Top East
Māravijaya Buddha, 23, 45n16, 62–64, 71f, 81f , 147, 150f, 
152f, 153f, 155, 156, 163, 164f, 165, 174, 175f , 177f.

--- PAGE 341 ---
312
Index
See also kamrateṅ jagat śrisugatamāravijita 
Marchal, Henri, 197
Mātṛceṭa, 25
Medicine Buddha sutra, 69 
Metteyya, 130, 231, 232, 239, 245t, 247, 252
Mikaelian, Grégory, 2–3, 36–7, 44n3, 47n31
Milinda, King, 11–12
Monument 486. See Prasat Top West
Monument 487. See Prasat Top East
mural paintings, 131, 136n31, 139n91, 246f, 247, 249, 
261n101
nāga-protected Buddha, 26, 30–31, 34, 62–3, 69, 71f, 73, 
73f, 78f, 81, 82f, 212, 214f, 215, 284
Nāgasena, 11–12
Nakhon Pathom, 60
NAMO BUDDHĀYA formula, 245, 247
National Museum of Cambodia, 23f, 24–25, 28, 31f, 61f, 
79f , 116f, 280, 284f, 285f
nibbāna, 250
nirvāṇa, 49n42, 65, 192f, 193f, 196, 275. See also 
Mahāparinibbānasutta, mahāparinirvāṇa,  nibbāna and 
parinirvāṇa
Northeastern Thailand, 60–1. See also Khorat Plateau
Oudong, 19, 284
Padma Purāṇa, 90
Pagan
dominance over Lower Burma, 170
Pāla Buddhist iconography at, 172–4, 175f, 177f
stone sculptures, 150, 154f, 155, 173
style Buddhist art, 39, 109, 111, 115, 124–8, 172
Pāla Buddhist iconography, 172–3
Pañcabuddhabyākaraṇa, 261n99
parinirvāṇa, 275
personhood, Buddhist conceptions of, 11
Phetchaburi, 95n20, 167, 249, 260n92
Phimai temple, 62, 63f, 64–5, 67
Phnom Bakheng temple, 48n36, 195f, 196, 284
Phong Tuek cave, 148
Phra Kam (Kāṃ), 86, 88
Phra Prang Sam Yot, 69, 70f, 77, 167
Phra Thep Bidǭn (devapitra, “god-father”), 91
Polkinghorne, Martin, 42–3, 101n88
Poolsuwan, Samerchai, 39–40, 43
Pou, Saveros (Lewitz), 24, 37
Prajñāpāramitā, 26, 67, 69, 138n53, 208, 252, 284
prāṅ/prang, 53n74 
Prasat Chambok, 136n26
Prasat Chrap, 94n16
Prasat Chrei, 136n26
Prasat Hin Phimai, 232
Prasat Kralanh, 21, 23, 24
Prasat Kombot, 272
Prasat Muang Sing, 96n31, 167
Prasat Nakhon Luang, 285
Prasat Phnom Kambot, 232
Prasat Pram, 136n26
Prasat Prampil Lavaeng (also Vihear Prampir Lavaeng), 
52n66
Prasat Sasar Sdam, 65, 114, 136n27
Prasat Steung, 32
Prasat Ta An, 24
Prasat Sup Tiep B, 136n26
Prasat Thong, King, 284–5
Prasat Thong, King, 284–5
Prasat Top East (Mangalartha/Monument 487), 58f, 59, 76
Prasat Top West (Monument 486), 41, 53n73, 82, 82f, 84, 
99n64, 192, 203–27, 203f, 204f, 205f, 207f, 218f, 219f, 
220f, 221f, 222f, 224f, 225f, 226f, 227f, 239–41, 244, 
252, 288
Preah Ang Kok Thlok terrace, 188f
Preah Chatomukh (Preah Ang Thom) of Preah Khan of 
Kompong Svay, 31–2, 33f, 34, 49, 238f
Preah Khan of Kompong Svay, 25, 26, 32, 36, 67, 111, 113, 
196, 233, 234f, 238, 255,25
Preah Palilay temple, 94n16, 193f, 194–5
Preah Pithu temples, 58–9, 76, 92, 97n43, 101n85
Preah Si Ary Metrei, 189
Preah Vihear province, 23, 111, 234f
Provost-Roche, Ludivine, 46n16, 51n63, 71, 76–7, 93n1, 
94n16, 95
Pursat province, 94n16
Rājendravarman, King, 62
Rama III, King, 248
Rāmayāṇa/ Rāmakerti/Reamker, 251
Ratchaburi, 40, 145, 148, 163, 167, 169, 176
Realm of the Four Guardian Kings, 89
Roveda, Vittorio, 71, 96n21, 135n19
Sabbadsabuddhamaṅgalaparitta, 241, 244

--- PAGE 342 ---
313
Index
Saddharmapuṇḍarika (Lotus Sūtra), 241
Sākya clan, 8
Sākyamuni Buddha, 6–8, 30, 42, 225, 239, 240t, 241, 244t, 
257n45
samăy kaṇtāl, 37
Śambūkapaṭṭana, 167
Samut Rātchaburī, 148, 150, 179n2
Sanskrit cosmopolis, 10, 46n18
Sarvajñamuni, 76, 97n42
sarvatobhadra (sarvatobhadrikā), 238
Satha, King, 287
Sato, Yuni, 40–2, 53n73
satyapranidhāna, 276
Sawlu, King, 170
Shaivism/Shaivite, 24, 77, 194, 196
Siam Mapped (Winichakul), 19
Siddhattha Gotama, 8. See also Gotama Buddha and 
Sākyamuni Buddha
Siem Reap, 113, 197, 199, 235f, 274, 286
sīmā, 34, 42, 48n42, 61, 123–4, 132–3, 170, 189, 190f, 197, 
199, 215, 223, 225, 241
in Angkor Thom, 215, 217
Simile of the Chariot, 11–13
Sinhalese/Sri Lankan Buddhism, 172
Sisowath Monivong, King, 34 
Skilling, Peter, 5, 20, 24–6, 48n41, 49n44, 50n54
Srei Santhor, 17, 250 
Śrīndrakumāra, 76–7
Śrīndrajayavarman, King, 75
Śrīndravarman, King, 75, 77
Śrīghana sect, 232–233, 235, 254n16
statue-portrait, 26, 67
Stern, Philippe, 67, 71
stone coffins, 191–2, 191f
stūpa, xxi, 18, 21, 65, 88, 108, 114, 123, 125, 169, 187, 192, 
196–7, 196f, 232, 237–8, 254n8, 275, 279, 280, 286. See 
also caitya, cetiya and chedei
Sukhothai, 16–18, 32, 41, 44, 60, 81, 84, 231
Suphanburi, 84, 167, 169
Sūryavarman I, King, 85, 167, 194
Sūryavarman II, King, 64–5, 87, 171, 176, 199
syām, 15
Ta Phrom Kel, 235f
Ta Prohm temple, 30, 32, 67, 115f, 116–18, 120–1, 124
Takeo province, 117
Tāmalinda, 126, 133, 140n112
Tambiah, Stanley, 19
Tantric Buddhism, 8, 32, 40, 62, 65, 67, 77, 96n21, 252
ten future Buddhas (dasabodhisatta), 247–51, 250f
in Pāli scriptures, 248
link with avatars of Viṣṇu (daśāvatāra), 251
mural paintings, 249
Tep Pranam temple, 79f, 189f, 218f
Tham Ruesi (Hermit Cave), 148
Thammasāt (Dharmasāstra), 91 
Thommanon temple, 39, 108f, 109–110, 112, 128–9, 131, 134
Thompson, Ashley, 208, 272
Thomson, John, 197
Three Jewels, 25
tilean sdach komlong, 72. See also Leper King Terrace
Tun Puthpiseth, 49n42, 51n55, 94n16
Tuol Preah Theat, 20
U Thong style, 82, 166
Uṇhissavijaya sutta, 262n109
Urāṅganidāna, 284
uṣṇīṣa, 27f, 28, 29, 73, 79, 156, 162–3, 166, 178, 206, 212, 
214f, 277, 281
Vaishnavism/ Vaishnavite, 18, 39, 110, 131
vihāra, 197, 198f. See also vihear
Vajīra, nun, 12
Vajrayāna Buddhism, 7, 9, 171
concept of the “five Buddha-families,” 246
Vessantara-jātaka, 39, 113, 117, 128, 129, 130, 132, 133, 
134, 139n91, 140n108
Vickery, Michael, 14–15, 17–18, 47n31, 61f, 95n20
Vientiane, 280, 281, 287
Vihear Prambuon Lavaeng, 217, 219f. See also Wat Tang Tok
Vihear Prampir Lavaeng, 34, 35f, 78f, 189, 190f, 217, 219f
Vinaya, 6, 62
walking Buddha, 41, 219, 220f, 227, 280 
Wat Bahupupharam, 260n87
Wat Chaiwatthanaram, 285
Wat Kampaeng Lang, 167
Wat Mahāthāt cave, 148
Wat Nai Klang, 249
Wat Nakhon Kosa, 82f, 83
Wat Nokor, 232, 234f, 239
Wat Phathumwan, 261n101
Wat Phra Keo, 281, 282f, 283f, 284f, 285f
Wat Phra Men, 256n28

--- PAGE 343 ---
314
Index
Wat Phra Phai Luang, 96n31
Wat Phra Si Ratana Mahāthāt, 64f
Wat Phra Yuen, 239 
Wat Preah In Tép, 281
Wat Preah Si Ary Metrei, 189
Wat Prei Bang, 242f, 246f
Wat Ratchaburana, 75f
Wat Ratchathiwat, 259n66
Wat Sisakhet, 295n66
Wat Sithor, 250, 250f
Wat Song Phi Nong, 278
Wat Tang Tok, 189
Wat Trâleng Kèng, 232, 281 
Western Prasat Top. See Prasat Top West
Western Thailand, 40, 44, 145, 148, 161, 163, 170, 171, 175, 
178. See also Chapter 4
Wolters, O. W., 19
Woodward, Hiram, 14, 32, 38, 50n51, 50n54, 51n56, 171, 
172, 207, 278
Wright, Michael, 84–5
Yama, 90–1, 224t
Yaśodharapura, 17, 116
yogāvacar meditation tradition, 45n15, 245, 252
yoginī, 232
Zéphir, Thierry, 34, 52n64, 114–15, 258n55
