--- Page 1 ---
BSRV 39.1 (2022)  1–2	
Buddhist Studies Review  ISSN  (print)    0256-2897
http://www.doi.org/10.1558/bsrv.23615	
Buddhist Studies Review  ISSN  (online)  1747-9681
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2022
Office 415, The Workstation, 15 Paternoster Row, Sheffield, S1 2BX
Editorial
Alice Collett
University of St Andrews
ajc50@st-andrews.ac.uk
We begin this issue of Buddhist Studies Review, once more, with the acknowledge-
ment of a sad loss. In his obituary documenting the life and achievements of David 
Seyfort Ruegg, who passed away in February 2021, Jan Westerhoff charts a life that 
touched many in our international community. Contained within Westerhoff’s 
reflections is a journey through Ruegg’s many outstanding contributions to our 
field, his legacy.
Ruegg, like so many modern scholars, focused his scholar pursuits on one spe-
cific region of the world, Tibet. The first article in this issue continues important 
work on another country that has a long and rich history of Buddhist practice, 
Thailand. Phibul Choompolpaisal and Andrew Skilton examine the Phitsanulok 
inscription. Continuing their interest in pre-reform Buddhist practices in 
Thailand, the authors offer an examination and assessment of this inscription and 
its importance in establishing certain practices in the history of Thai Buddhism. 
The inscription contains a version of the Dhammakāya text, and Choompolpaisal 
and Skilton provide an edition and translation that marries this with manuscript 
editions of Cœdès and Bizot. As the inspiration can be firmly dated to the six-
teenth century, the authors conclude that it offers an “objective chronological 
horizon” that further demonstrates that these boran kammathan (“traditional med-
itation”) practices “can no longer be relegated by serious academic commentators 
to peripheral or incidental significance in the history of Theravāda.”
The second article also concerns issues of reform and revival. In this paper, 
Bhadrajee Hewage focuses on Ceylon. He argues that, in relation to Ceylonese 
Buddhist revivalism in the nineteenth century, it was Anagarika Dharmapala, 
rather than Migettuwatte Gunananda and Henry Steel Olcott, who was the driv-
ing force.  After taking us on his own tour de force through the vicissitudes of the 
revival endeavours of the three men, Hewage concludes that “Gunananda gave 
impetus to a polemical campaign that Olcott helped to institutionalize through his 
support for educational reform and legal redress” whilst Anagarika Dharmapala 
“connected Ceylonese Buddhist revival to a wider vision of Sinhalese social reform 
and industrialization previously unseen on the island during the British colonial 
period.”

--- Page 2 ---
© Equinox Publishing Ltd 2022
2
Alice Collett
Staying with forms of Theravāda, or Theravaṃsa, Buddhism, in the third article 
in this issue Eng Jin Ooi looks at the history of the Milinda-Nāgasena debate. Ooi 
argues that the debate has a richer and more intertwined history within Buddhist 
communities than extant texts lead us to believe. In a meticulous and thorough 
analysis of various versions of the text—focusing on Siamese recensions circulating 
from the seventeenth century—Ooi examines the sections of the text, the “ques-
tions,” in detail, providing useful tables that chart differences. Ooi’s contribution to 
our understanding of the Milinda-Nāgasena tradition, the texts, and its relevance 
in the history of Buddhism helps to round out previous assumptions, and also con-
tributes to research on the nature of textual transmission.  
The final article in this issue also deals with texts. Kam Wei Erich Tam exam-
ines the Pāli metre of the Theragāthā. Advancing study of Pāli metre, Tam focus on 
the less-studied stylistic aspects of metre, namely opening, trimetre break, cae-
sura and cadence. Focusing on four poems in the Dasanipāta of the Theragāthā, Tam 
seeks to demonstrate the interplay of rhythmic uniformity and how that impacts 
on the audience. He argues that rhythmic uniformity can work to demarcate and 
divide sections of the poems to enhance the audience’s ability to engage with both 
the poems and their narratives as well as, ultimately, the teachings of the Buddha 
enclosed within.