# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2022-berkwitz-thompson-routledge-handbook-theravada-buddhism.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 13:54:45
# Total Pages: 395
# File Size: 22.91 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 3606.8 chars/page, total chars: 1,424,668)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz is Professor and Head of the Department of Religious Studies, Missouri 
State University, USA. His research is focused on the literature and cultural history of Sri 
Lankan Buddhism. He has published South Asian Buddhism: A Survey (Routledge 2009) and is 
the editor of the Routledge Critical Studies in Buddhism series.
Ashley Thompson is Hiram W. Woodward Chair in Southeast Asian Art at SOAS, University 
of London, UK. She is a specialist in Southeast Asian Cultural Histories, with particular exper­
tise on premodern Cambodian arts. Her most recent monograph is Engendering the Buddhist 
State: Territory, Sovereignty and Sexual Difference in the Inventions of Angkor (Routledge 2016).
Among one of the older subfields in Buddhist Studies, the study of Theravāda Buddhism is 
undergoing a revival by contemporary scholars who are revising long-held conventional views 
of the tradition while undertaking new approaches and engaging new subject matter. The term 
Theravāda has been refined, and research has expanded beyond the analysis of canonical texts 
to examine contemporary cultural forms, social movements linked with meditation practices, 
material culture, and vernacular language texts. The Routledge Handbook of Theravāda Buddhism 
illustrates the growth and new directions of scholarship in the study of Theravāda Buddhism 
and is structured in four parts:
	•	
Ideas/Ideals
	•	
Practices/Persons
	•	
Texts/Teachings
	•	
Images/Imaginations
Owing largely to the continued vitality of Theravāda Buddhist communities in countries like 
Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Cambodia, and Laos, as well as in diaspora communities across 
the globe, traditions associated with what is commonly (and fairly recently) called Theravāda 
attract considerable attention from scholars and practitioners around the world. An in-depth 
guide to the distinctive features of Theravāda, the Handbook will be an invaluable resource for 
providing structure and guidance for scholars and students of Asian religion, Buddhism, and, 
in particular, Theravāda Buddhism.
ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF THERAVĀDA 
BUDDHISM

--- PAGE 3 ---


--- PAGE 4 ---
ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF 
THERAVĀDA BUDDHISM
Edited by Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson

--- PAGE 5 ---
Cover image: @ Getty Images
First published 2022
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2022 selection and editorial matter, Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley 
Thompson; individual chapters, the contributors
The right of Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson to be identi­
fied as the authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their 
individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 
78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record has been requested for this book
ISBN: 978-1-138-49393-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-18672-6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-351-02666-6 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666
Typeset in Bembo
by SPi Technologies India Pvt Ltd (Straive)

--- PAGE 6 ---
v
List of illustrations	
viii
List of contributors	
x
Acknowledgments	
xiv
List of abbreviations	
xvi
Technical notes	
xviii
Theravāda Civilizations Project	
xix
Introduction	
1
Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson
PART I
Ideas/Ideals
13
  1	 “Theravāda”: sectarianism and diversity in Mahāvihāra historiography	
15
Sven Bretfeld
  2	 Pāli: its place in the Theravāda Buddhist tradition	
43
Alastair Gornall
  3	 Circulations: linked spaces and divergent temporalities in the Pāli world	
58
Anne M. Blackburn
  4	 Statecraft: from Buddhist kingship to modern states	
70
Patrice Ladwig
  5	 Reform: ideas and events in modern Theravāda reformism	
83
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
CONTENTS

--- PAGE 7 ---
Contents
vi
  6	 Tradition: nuns and “Theravāda” in Sri Lanka	
99
Nirmala S. Salgado
Part II
Practices/Persons	
113
  7	 Merit: ritual giving and its cultural mediations	
115
Juliane Schober
  8	 Meditation: techniques and processes of transformation	
127
Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby
  9	 Repetition: Pāli iterations of ritual commitment, commentarial 
refrain, and assiduous practice	
140
Christoph Emmrich
10	 Filial piety: shades of difference across Theravādin traditions	
156
Grégory Kourilsky
11	 Laity: status, role, and practice in Theravāda	
170
Asanga Tilakaratne
12	 Discipline: beyond the Vinaya	
182
Thomas Borchert
13	 Funerals: changing funerary practices	
194
Katherine A. Bowie
Part III
Texts/Teachings	
207
14	 Canons: authoritative texts of the Theravaṃsa	
209
Peter Skilling
15	 Abhidhamma: Theravāda thought in relation to Sarvāstivāda thought	
227
Rupert Gethin
16	 Vaṃsa: history and lineage in the Theravāda	
243
Stephen C. Berkwitz
17	 Merit: Ten ways of making merit in Theravāda exegetical literature and 
contemporary Sri Lanka	
257
Rita Langer

--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents
vii
18	 Bilingualism: Theravāda bitexts across South and Southeast Asia	
271
Trent Walker
Part IV
Images/Imaginations	
285
19	 Visual narratives: Buddha life stories in the “medieval Theravāda” 
of Southeast Asia	
287
Samerchai Poolsuwan
20	 Icons: standing out from the narrative in Theravādin art	
305
Ashley Thompson
21	 Affect: notes from contemporary Southeast Asian visual culture	
327
Chairat Polmuk
22	 Deities: supernatural forces in Theravāda Buddhist religious cultures	
343
John Clifford Holt
23	 Mons: creating a narrative of the origins of   Theravāda	
355
Patrick McCormick
Index
367

--- PAGE 9 ---
viii
Figures
  1.1	 Nikāya genealogy of the D ı̄pavaṃsa, representing the “insider view” of the text
26
  4.1	 Devotees in front of That Luang stūpa, Vientiane, Laos
80
14.1	 Stone bar inscribed with Pāli texts, sixth–seventh century, Nakhon 
Chaisi, Central Thailand
219
14.2	 Estampage of seventh–eighth-century Angkor Borei Pāli inscription, 
National Museum of Cambodia
222
18.1	 Pāli-Siamese manuscript in interphrasal format, Fonds d’édition des 
manuscrits du Cambodge (FEMC) C.77.VII
275
18.2	 Pāli-Siamese manuscript in interlinear format, FEMC D.11.VII
275
19.1	 Mural painting representing the Buddha's meditation during the second 
and third weeks after the enlightenment, eleventh century, Pātho-htā-mya 
temple, Pagan, Burma
291
19.2	 Mural painting representing the “Eight Major Events” of the Buddha, 
twelfth century, Loka-hteik-pan temple, Pagan, Burma
294
19.3	 Symbolic arrangement of cult images and the murals representing 
“Majjhimadesa,” centered at Bodhgaya, modeled after Pagan temple 664
295
19.4	 Mural paintings, Pagan temple 539, thirteenth century: Twin Miracle at 
Sāvatthi (left) vis-à-vis Second Week Meditation at Animisa Cetiya (right)
295
19.5	 Mural painting, Rātchaburana temple crypt, Ayutthaya, Thailand, fifteenth 
century: Buddha footprint on the summit of Sri Lanka’s Sumana Mountain
298
19.6	 Mural Painting, Pagan temple 585, thirteenth century: King As´oka in a 
previous existence as a child donating a handful of dust for alms 
to Buddha Gotama
300
19.7	 Mural painting, temple 69, Sale, Burma, thirteenth century: Gotama in 
his remote existences, probably based on the Sotaṭṭhak ı̄mahānidāna account
301
20.1	 Seventh–eighth-century Buddha statue inscribed with the “dharma relic” 
on its upper back plus rubbing of the inscription. Found in Tambol Lum Din, 
Muang District, Ratchaburi, held in Wat Mahathat, Ratchaburi, Thailand.
307
ILLUSTRATIONS

--- PAGE 10 ---
Illustrations
ix
20.2	 Spread of a late eighteenth–early nineteenth-century leporello manuscript 
held in Wat Khao Yi San, Samut Songkhram Province, Thailand
309
20.3	 Wat Si Chum, Sukhothai, Thailand: mondop preceded by pillared vihāra terrace 
plus one of the one hundred engraved stone jātaka plaques from the 
staired passageway inside the mondop wall
315
20.4	 Angkor Wat, Siem Reap, Cambodia: temple seen from the west; panel 
from sixteenth-century reliefs on the eastern section of the northern third-level 
gallery enclosure; one of the four Buddhas sculpted into sandstone 
blocks filling in the central sanctuary’s doorways
320
21.1	 Screenshots from Phantoms of Nabua by Apichatpong Weerasethakul, 2009: 
projection of light from Buddhist reliquaries
331
21.2	 Screenshots from Fireworks (Archives) Apichatpong Weerasethakul, 2014: 
the Buddhist memento mori as a site of endurance and impermanence
334
21.3	 Screenshot from The Missing Picture by Rithy Panh, 2013: clay sculpting 
and sensory memory
335
21.4	 Screenshot from The Missing Picture by Rithy Panh, 2013: the unending burial
337
Tables
15.1	 The dharma lists of the Theravāda and Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma compared
233
18.1	 Examples of grammatical annotation particles
276

--- PAGE 11 ---
x
Stephen C. Berkwitz is Professor of Religious Studies at Missouri State University (USA). He 
has a PhD in Religious Studies from the University of California, Santa Barbara. His research 
focuses on Sinhala literature and Buddhist culture in Sri Lanka from the medieval up to the 
contemporary periods. He has published books and articles on Buddhist historiography, poetry, 
kingship, colonialism, and modern Buddhism.
Anne M. Blackburn is Professor of South Asia Studies and Buddhist Studies in the Department 
of Asian Studies at Cornell University (USA). Blackburn holds a PhD from the University of 
Chicago. Anne Blackburn studies Buddhism in South and Southeast Asia at the intersection 
of literary studies, intellectual history, trade, and political economy, with a particular interest in 
circulations involving locations now known as Sri Lanka, India, Burma, and Thailand.
Katherine A. Bowie is a Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professor in the Department of 
Anthropology at the University of Wisconsin–Madison (USA). She received her PhD in 
Anthropology from the University of Chicago. She served as president of the Association of 
Asian Studies in 2017–2018. With fieldwork experience in Thailand covering over four decades, 
her research interests include historical anthropology, village politics, nation-state formation, 
gender, and Theravāda Buddhism.
Thomas Borchert is Professor of Religion at the University of Vermont (USA). He has a PhD 
in History of Religions from the University of Chicago. His research focuses on Buddhism and 
secularity, monastic education, and Buddhism, nationalism, and ethnicity within contemporary 
Theravāda communities. He is the author of Educating Monks: Minority Buddhism in Southwest 
China (University of Hawai’i Press 2017), and the editor of Theravada Buddhism in Colonial 
Contexts (Routledge 2018).
Sven Bretfeld is Professor of Religious Studies at NTNU Trondheim (Norway). He has stud­
ied Indology, Tibetology and Religious Studies in Marburg and Göttingen (Germany) and 
holds a Dr. phil. (PhD) in these disciplines from the University of Göttingen. His research 
focuses on Buddhism in India, Tibet, and Sri Lanka. He has published books and articles on Pāli 
CONTRIBUTORS

--- PAGE 12 ---
Contributors
xi
and Sinhala philology, Buddhist historiography in Sri Lanka and Tibet, and Buddhist literature 
and sociology in medieval and modern periods.
Kate Crosby is Professor of Buddhist Studies at King’s College, London (UK). She was edu­
cated at the universities of Oxford, Hamburg, and Kelaniya. Her research focuses on Buddhist 
practice throughout the Theravāda world including pre-reform meditation, and on Pāli and 
Sanskrit literature. Her books include S´āntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra: Buddhist Path to Awakening 
(Oxford University Press 1995); The Mahābhārata: The Dead of Night & the Women (NYU Press 
2009); Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, Identity (Wiley 2014); and Esoteric Theravada: The 
Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of Southeast Asia (Shambala 2020).
Christoph Emmrich is Associate Professor of Buddhist Studies at the University of Toronto. 
He has a PhD in classical Indology from Heidelberg University, Germany. His research focuses 
on Buddhist and Jain rituals, literature, and doctrine in Nepal, Burma, and India between the 
fifth and the twenty-first century. He has published on time, gender, childhood, ritual manuals, 
manuscript culture, and literary history.
Rupert Gethin is Professor of Buddhist Studies at the University of Bristol (UK). He has a 
PhD in Buddhist Studies from the University of Manchester. His research focuses on Indian 
Buddhist thought in Pāli and Sanskrit Nikāya-Āgama and exegetical literature, especially the 
Pāli commentaries. He has published books and articles on the theory of Buddhist meditation 
practice and various other aspects of Buddhist thought.
Alastair Gornall gained his Ph.D. in South Asian Studies from the University of Cambridge in 
2013. He is currently Assistant Professor in South and Southeast Asian Studies at the Singapore 
University of Technology and Design and Research Associate in the School of Language, 
Cultures, and Linguistics at SOAS, University of London. He is the author of Rewriting Buddhism: 
Pali Literature and Monastic Reform in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270 (UCL Press, 2020).
Anne R. Hansen is Professor of Southeast Asian History and Religious Studies in the Department 
of History at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. She received her PhD in Religious Studies 
from Harvard University (USA). Her research focuses on the history and development of 
Theravāda Buddhism in modern Southeast Asia, with recent publications on Buddhist ethics, 
modern reform movements, Cold War Buddhist history, and Buddhism and colonialism.
John Clifford Holt is Visiting Professor of Theravāda Buddhism at the University of Chicago 
where he received his Ph.D. in the history of religions, and William Kenan Jr. Professor Emeritus 
in Religion and Asian Studies at Bowdoin College (Maine, USA). His research and several 
books have focused on Buddhist monastic jurisprudence, Buddhist ritual cultures, deity venera­
tion, and historical and contemporary relations between Buddhists and Muslims, Hindus, and 
Christians in Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Laos, and Thailand.
Anthony Lovenheim Irwin is a scholar of Asian religions who thinks, talks, teaches, and writes 
about the social and ethical resonance of crafting, building, and construction. He has a PhD in 
Asian languages and cultures from the University of Wisconsin–Madison (USA). Dealing pri­
marily with Buddhism in Thailand, his work focuses on the importance of craftspeople as central 
figures in the transmission and definition of religious traditions and communities.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Contributors
xii
Grégory Kourilsky is Associate Professor at the École française d’Extrême-Orient. He received 
his PhD in religious anthropology and the history of religions at the École pratique des hautes 
études, Paris. He not only specializes in Thai-Lao Buddhism but also works on Cambodia, 
Burma, and Southwest China. His research focuses on the ways Buddhist populations in main­
land Southeast Asia have maintained their religious and cultural identity despite the intrusion of 
nonindigenous doctrines, ranging from Indian classical scriptures to modern Western law.
Pyi Phyo Kyaw is Dean of Academic Affairs and Lecturer in Theravāda Studies at Shan State 
Buddhist University, Taunggyi, Myanmar. She holds a BA in economics and management from 
Oxford University; an MA in Buddhist Studies from SOAS, University of London, in 2010; 
and a PhD in Buddhist philosophy from King’s College, London. She has undertaken medita­
tion practice within different traditions in Myanmar over the past fifteen years. She specializes 
in Burmese Buddhism, Abhidhamma, Theravāda meditation, Buddhist business practices, and 
Buddhist ethics.
Patrice Ladwig studied social anthropology and sociology, and he obtained his PhD from 
the University of Cambridge. His work focuses on the anthropology of Buddhism (Laos and 
Thailand), the anthropology of politics, death and funeral cultures, historical anthropology 
(colonialism and the Cold War), and general social theory. He is currently Senior Research 
Fellow at the Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity (Göttingen, 
Germany).
Rita Langer is Senior Lecturer in Buddhist Studies at the University of Bristol (UK). Her 
research focuses on Buddhist ritual and its origin (in South and South East Asia, particularly Sri 
Lanka) and Buddhist material culture and food. Her approach is interdisciplinary combining 
textual studies with fieldwork. She has published books and articles on sermons, funeral chant­
ing, and ritual and produced short documentary films on cosmology and food.
Patrick McCormick has been living in Yangon, Burma for the past sixteen years, where he 
continues his work on the history and languages of the country. He was representative of the 
École française d’Extrême-Orient and was part of a project on language contact funded by the 
Swiss National Science Foundation through the University of Zurich. He is currently one of 
the English-language editors of the Southeast Asian Studies Journal of the Center for Southeast 
Asian Studies at the University of Kyoto.
Chairat Polmuk is Lecturer at the Department of Thai, Chulalongkorn University (Thailand), 
where he teaches Southeast Asian languages and literature, cultural theory, and media stud­
ies. He received a PhD in Asian literature, religion, and culture from Cornell University. His 
research focuses on affective and intermedial aspects of post–Cold War literature and visual 
culture. His recent writing has appeared in the Journal of Letters and Southeast of Now: Directions in 
Contemporary and Modern Art in Asia. He wrote articles on Apichatpong Weerasethakul and Rithy 
Panh for Oxford Bibliographies in Cinema and Media Studies.
Samerchai Poolsuwan is Professor of Anthropology at Thammasat University (Thailand) and 
holds a doctorate degree from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. His current research, 
focusing on the Buddhist iconography in the Theravādin context of Southeast Asia, has yielded

--- PAGE 14 ---
Contributors
xiii
a number of publications on the exploration of the Pagan-period and the early–Thai Buddhist 
murals (e.g., Artibus Asiae, 72(2): 377–97 & 76(1): 37–80; JRAS, 27(2): 255–94; Journal of Burma 
Studies, 19(1): 145–97; SUVANNABHUMI, 6(1): 27–65).
Nirmala S. Salgado is Professor of Religion at Augustana College (USA). She has a PhD in 
religion from Northwestern University, (Illinois) and an MA from SOAS University of London. 
Her research focuses on Buddhist nuns, postcolonialism, and contemporary Buddhist practice 
in Sri Lanka. She is the author of Buddhist Nuns and Gendered Practice: In Search of the Female 
Renunciant (Oxford University Press 2013) and several other publications.
Juliane Schober is Professor of Religious Studies and Director of the Center for Asian Research 
at Arizona State University (USA). She earned her doctorate in anthropology at the University of 
Illinois–Urbana. Her research examines Theravāda Buddhist formations and practices in Myanmar 
and elsewhere in Southeast Asia in colonial and contemporary contexts. She has published books 
and articles on the intersections of Buddhism and the state, relic veneration, Buddhism and con­
flict, and lay Buddhist practices.
Peter Skilling is Special Lecturer at Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok (Thailand). Until his 
retirement in 2017, he was Professor of École française d’Extrême-Orient. He specializes in the 
literary and material history of Buddhism in South and Southeast Asia. He publishes widely 
and has been visiting professor at leading universities worldwide. His latest book, Questioning the 
Buddha (Wisdom Books 2021), introduces and translates twenty-five Buddhist sutras.
Ashley Thompson is Hiram W Woodward Chair of Southeast Asian Art at SOAS University 
of London (UK). Her research focuses on the classical and premodern arts and literature of 
Southeast Asia, with a particular emphasis on Cambodia. Her most recent book is Engendering 
the Buddhist State: Territory, Sovereignty and Sexual Difference in the Inventions of Angkor (Routledge, 
Critical Buddhist Studies Series, 2016).
Asanga Tilakaratne (PhD, University of Hawai’i) is emeritus professor of Buddhist Studies and 
founder head of the Department of Buddhist Studies at the University of Colombo (Sri Lanka). 
He has published substantially on Buddhist Studies in Sinhala and English. Recently (August 
2020), his collected works have been published in eight volumes (03 in Sinhala and 05 in 
English) in Colombo. Currently Professor Tilakaratne serves as the editor in chief of Encyclopedia 
of Buddhism published by the Government of Sri Lanka.
Trent Walker is the Ho Center for Buddhist Studies Postdoctoral Fellow and a lecturer in 
Religious Studies at Stanford University (USA). He has a PhD in Buddhist Studies from the 
University of California, Berkeley, and specializes in ritual, manuscript, and translation cultures 
from mainland Southeast Asia. Recent publications include articles on Cambodian Dharma 
songs, Thai Buddhist literary history, and Theravada translation practices in southern Vietnam.

--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv
We, as co-editors, would like to acknowledge the generous assistance and encouragement of 
many others who like us desired to see a substantial reference work published on Theravāda 
Buddhism. This project originally grew out of our participation in the Theravāda Civilizations 
Project, which was initiated in 2009 by Juliane Schober and the late Steven Collins with fund­
ing from the Henry Luce Foundation’s Asia Responsive Grants and Special Initiatives program. 
Over nearly ten years, we met with up to twenty-one scholars of Theravāda Buddhism in dif­
ferent locations annually to examine and question “Theravāda” in different times and places and 
from different disciplinary perspectives. The conversations that resulted were always stimulating 
and convivial, as we were pushed to consider Theravāda beyond our individual prisms, to allow 
those prisms to themselves be reshaped through the encounters, and to keep an eye, wary or 
not, on the notions of civilization framing our collective work. In the process, we—co-editors 
at least and with a lot of help from our friends—came to glimpse the need to apprehend 
Theravāda as a theoretical object and an analytical category, and to relish the possibilities that 
perception could afford scholarship. Several of the participants in the Theravāda Civilizations 
Project have contributed essays to this volume. We would like to express our thanks to all of 
the Project’s participants for helping to advance the field and to develop our thinking.
Charles Hallisey contributed to this Handbook in a substantial but less tangible way than 
those who authored a contribution. He generously read a draft Introduction and challenged 
us to rethink what we thought we were doing with the volume. We deeply appreciated his 
comments, which helped us finalize the Introduction, but we hasten to add that the shortcom­
ings therein are our sole responsibility. Others helped recruit contributors, shared encouraging 
words, and provided helpful feedback on some of the volume’s essays. The collaborative work 
involved in preparing the Handbook has expanded our experience of a diverse, exceptionally 
warm and supportive community of scholars of Theravāda Buddhism.
We also wish to acknowledge the encouragement and guidance of Dorothea Schaefter at 
Routledge Press, who identified a need for such a Handbook and patiently waited for it to take 
shape. We have received significant help from other people at Routledge, including Alexandra 
de Brauw and Lily Brown, Saraswathy Narayan, and our production editor Saritha Srinivasan 
for their skilled assistance in the organization and publication of the volume. We are grateful 
for the opportunity to work with the excellent staff at Routledge who make publishing a 
rewarding experience.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

--- PAGE 16 ---
Acknowledgments
xv
Most of the illustrations in this volume have been supplied by the respective contributors. 
We wish to acknowledge the generosity of the following additional individuals in facilitating 
the selection and reproduction of images that appear in the Handbook: Kim Samnang, Phoeung 
Dara, Pipad Krajaejun, Udomluck Hoontrakul, Rungroj Bhiromanukul, Prasit Jungsoksomsawat, 
Thanaphat Limhasanaikul, Anna Prenowitz, Bertrand Porte, Trent Walker, Peter Skilling, and 
Rithy Panh.
Finally, it feels as although one can measure Time by the time it takes to complete a major 
book project. We began to conceptualize this volume in the latter part of 2017. We have all 
experienced the COVID-19 pandemic since, with its disruptions, large or small, to all of our 
lives. This led not only to some unavoidable delays in completing the work but also to a sort 
of intensification of commitment to it. The passing of Imali Berkwitz (1970–2018) prior to 
the pandemic was deeply felt and accompanied the development of the volume. We would 
like to dedicate the Handbook to her memory.

--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi
Abh-ṭ	
Abhidhānappad ı̄pikā-t ı̄kā
Abhidh-av	
Abhidhammāvatāra
Abhidh-av-nṭ	
Abhidhammavikāsin ı̄
Abhidh-k-bh	
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam
Abhidh-k-vy	
Abhidharmakośavyākhya
Abhidh-s	
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha
Abhidh-s-mhṭ	
Abhidhammatthavibhāvin ı̄-mahāṭ ı̄kā
Abhidh-s-ṭ	
Abhidhammatthavibhāvin ı̄-ṭ ı̄kā
AN	
Aṅguttara-Nikāya
Ap	
Apadāna
As	
Atthasālin ı̄
B	
Burmese
Dhp	
Dhammapada
Dhs	
Dhammasaṅgaṇ ı̄
Dhs-a	
Dhammasaṅgan ı̄-aṭṭhakathā (= As. Atthasālin ı̄)
Dı̄p	
Dı̄pavaṃsa
DN	
D ı̄gha-Nikāya
DN-a	
D ı̄gha-nikāya-aṭṭhakathā (= Sv. Sumaṅgalavilāsin ı̄)
DP	
A Dictionary of Pāli by Margaret Cone
EB	
Epigraphia Birmanica
EFEO	
École française d’Extrême-Orient
EHS	
Epigraphic and Historical Studies
EPD	
English–Pali Dictionary
EZ	
Epigraphia Zeylanica
FEMC	
Fonds pour Édition des Manuscrits du Cambodge
It	
Itivuttaka
It-a	
Itivuttaka-aṭṭhakathā (= Pd. Paramatthad ı̄pan ı̄)
Ja	
Jātaka
Jinak	
Jinakālamāl ı̄
Kacc	
Kaccāyana and Kaccāyanavutti
ABBREVIATIONS

--- PAGE 18 ---
Abbreviations
xvii
Kh	
Khmer
Khp	
Khuddakapāṭha
KŚēkh	
Kāvyaśēkhara
Kv	
Kathāvatthu
L	
Lao
Maṅg-d	
Maṅgalatthad ı̄pan ı̄
Mil	
Milindapañha
MN	
Majjhima-Nikāya
Mogg	
Moggallāna-vyākaraṇa
Moh	
Mohavicchedan ı̄
Nikāya-s	
Nikāyasan․graha
P	
Pāli
Paṭis	
Paṭisambhidāmagga
Paṭis-a	
Saddhammappakāsin ı̄
Ps	
Papañcasūdan ı̄
PTS	
Pali Text Society
Pv	
Petavatthu
Pv-a	
Petavatthu-aṭṭhakathā
Rūp	
Rūpasiddhi
Saddh	
Saddhammopāyana
Sinh	
Sinhala
Sk	
Sanskrit
Sn	
Suttanipāta
SN	
Saṃyutta-Nikāya
Sp	
Samantapāsādikā
Spk	
Sāratthappakāsin ı̄
Sp-ṭ Be	
Sāratthad ı̄pan ı̄-ṭ ı̄kā (Burmese edition)
Ss	
Sārasaṅgaha
Subodh	
Subodhālaṅkāra
Sv	
Sumaṅgalavilāsin ı̄
Sv-nṭ Be	
Sumaṅgalavilāsin ı̄-navaṭ ı̄kā (Burmese edition)
Sv-ṭ	
Sumaṅgalavilāsin ı̄-ṭ ı̄kā
T	
Taishō Shinshu Daizōkyō
Th	
Thai
TPMA	
Tipiṭaka pāḷi mranmā abhidhān
UK	
Upasampadā-Kammavācā (in context)
Upās	
Upāsakajanālaṅkāra
Vibh	
Vibhaṅga
Vibh-a	
Vibhaṅga-aṭṭhakathā (= Sammohavinodan ı̄)
Vin	
Vinayapiṭaka
Vism	
Visuddhimagga
Vism-mhṭ	
Visuddhimagga-mahāṭ ı̄kā
Vmv Be	
Vimativinodan ı̄-ṭ ı̄kā (Burmese edition)
Vv	
Vimānavatthu
Vv-a	
Vimānavatthu-aṭṭhakathā

--- PAGE 19 ---
xviii
For the spelling of South and Southeast Asian proper names and toponyms, we use established 
phonetic transcriptions when these exist. Likewise, we use established phonetic transcriptions 
for Sanskrit and Pāli terms commonly used in English—such as the term Sanskrit. Otherwise, 
we generally use the International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration to render Sanskrit and 
Pāli terminology. Pāli forms are used throughout the volume, with the occasional exception 
of Sanskrit terms adopted in English usage, such as dharma rather than the Pāli dhamma when 
required by context.  We have nonetheless allowed some variation in usage from contributor to 
contributor (e.g. Asoka or As´oka, Dhamma or Dharma...) in order to respect diverse disciplinary 
practices and authorial preferences.
South and Southeast Asian vernacular terms are also rendered variously, according to indi­
vidual author requirements. Some authors oriented more toward oral usage adopt phonetic 
transcription. Others adopt transliteration systems established for the language in question.
For the most part, references to Pāli texts are to Pali Text Society publications, in which case 
publication details are not included in the chapter’s list of works cited. All Pāli references have 
been assigned a unique abbreviation by the Critical Pali Dictionary (CPD). CPD abbreviations 
used in individual essays in the Handbook are given in the earlier Abbreviations list. In the case 
of a prose Pāli text, the volume number, if any, is followed by the page number(s). For instance, 
a reference to D ı̄gha-Nikāya, volume III, page 167, would be shown as DN III 167. In the case 
of a text in verse, the number of the verse(s) are cited (e.g., Sn 221 for Suttanipāta, verse 221).
TECHNICAL NOTES

--- PAGE 20 ---
xix
THERAVĀDA CIVILIZATIONS 
PROJECT
The project supports collaborative exchanges among scholars based in the United States, 
Canada, the United Kingdom, and Southeast Asia with the aim to undertake a thematic study 
of Theravāda civilizations in South and Southeast Asia.
BUDDHIST CIVILIZATIONS
THERAVADA

--- PAGE 21 ---


--- PAGE 22 ---
1
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-1
INTRODUCTION
Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson
Introduction
We are at a moment in time when the appropriateness of the term Theravāda for many con­
texts in which it is regularly used is under fire, when the distortions its very usage has created 
are being scrutinized. Our moment also affords glimpses into how such distortions and the 
apprehension of these as such can be integral to the topic at hand—a long-evolving dynamic, 
discursive, construction always already heterogeneous to “itself.”  Theravāda Buddhism is not 
one thing, nor is it an accumulation of different but related things. Nor is it simply nothing. But 
its ontological status is anything but given. To roughly cite Pāli scholar Charles Hallisey with 
reference to what the anthropologist James Clifford said about “culture”: Theravāda Buddhism is 
a deeply compromised category that we have not yet learned to do without (cf. Clifford 1988: 
10). As such, in this Introduction, we do not attempt to explain or define what Theravāda really 
is. This Handbook provides instead a window into the current state of affairs in the study of 
Theravāda Buddhism. In providing a wide range of understandings of what comprises Theravāda 
at a given place and time and how, it also aims to trigger thought on the future of the field.
There is an unresolvable tension between, on one hand, the nominalist dimensions of the 
issue (how we define what is worthy of consideration when we study Theravāda Buddhism) 
and, on the other hand, its realist dimensions (the diversity found among the traditions and 
communities brought together with the name “Theravāda”). In editing this volume, we have 
struggled to be both nominalist and realist at once and have kept a wary eye on the inevi­
table inadequacy of the former in relation to the latter. This scholarly context is in some ways 
analogous to that of Buddhists across history in South and Southeast Asian communities, where 
vastly different visions and experiences of Theravāda can share the premise that Theravāda has 
certain features that are discernible and authoritative, worthy of universal recognition, beyond 
any individual iteration—even if they do not necessarily share in the so-defined same features 
themselves. In a scholarly distillation of this shared premise, Theravāda can be said to ground 
itself in a heritage traced to Gotama Buddha and to an interpretation of his legacy shaped by 
the teachers who created the commentaries on the Tipiṭaka, the “Three Baskets” comprising the 
Pāli canon. What features become worthy of focus against this backdrop is infinitely variable, as 
are the means by which such focus is articulated. There is no single Theravāda tradition, and no 
defined canon of salient traits by which any Theravāda worthy of the name can be identified.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson
2
There are rather multiple visions about which forms of practice and thought are derived from 
the Buddha and his earliest disciples. Some forms of   Theravāda, moreover, are not wedded to 
the term itself and may instead define themselves in other ways, for example, through the prisms 
of national citizenship, ethnolinguistic identity, or particular types of meditation. In such con­
texts, the primacy of the shared frame can be lesser, indeed wholly subsumed, by other concerns.
The very idea of Theravāda
In this section, we aim to lay out a few basic issues to assist nonspecialists in using this volume. 
What we say here is developed with greater nuance and precision in the Handbook’s individual 
chapters, which themselves are by and large research-led and, as such, meant also to address 
advanced students and colleagues in the Buddhist Studies field as well as the other disciplinary 
fields in which they engage. In current parlance, the Pāli language term Theravāda refers to a 
distinct school of Buddhism with a relatively conservative orientation toward texts, teaching, 
imagery, and ritual that is predominant in Sri Lanka and the mainland Southeast Asian countries 
of Burma (Myanmar), Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia. Theravāda Buddhist communities, loosely 
defined, are also found in Nepal, Bangladesh, India, Vietnam, Yunnan province in southwest 
China, and in parts of North and South America, Europe, and Africa. Translated variously as 
the “tradition,” “school,” “opinion,” or “decree” (vāda, literally, “the speech”) of the Elders (thera, 
as in more senior and knowledgeable monastics), the Theravāda refers in the first instance to a 
set of texts, teachings, monastic lineages, and associated practices anchored in the Pāli language 
associated with the Buddha himself and other ancient teachers who were among his follow­
ers. The term’s association with a large, extant collection of Pāli texts, including a complete 
Vinaya or monastic disciplinary code, means that for the better part of two thousand years some 
communities of monks (and for some centuries, female renunciants or “nuns”) were ordained 
and taught according to a shared body of Buddhist literature. This canon of Pāli texts possesses 
significance and authority, partly because the texts are ascribed to the Buddha’s own teachings 
said to have been memorized and written down by his disciples a few centuries after his death.
The use of the Pāli language distinguishes what will become known as the Theravāda 
from other early schools that coalesced around a Sanskrit canon. The Pāli canon also forms a 
relatively “closed” canon of texts, compared with other Buddhist schools; this relative closure 
is an effect of the notion that the teachings should comprise, in the main, those the Buddha 
preached while he was alive in the world. There is no allowance, in other words, for an expansive 
canon of texts that were “found” or “revealed” in subsequent centuries by a Buddha who is 
thought to exist in a heavenly realm and may continue to disseminate teachings by revelation, 
as in many Mahāyāna forms of the religion. Core to the Theravāda tradition(s) is nonetheless 
plurivocality. At no place and time, it would seem, has Pāli been used to the exclusion of other 
languages. Theravāda can, in fact, be characterized by its dizzying array of bilingual forms. 
Crucially, while the presence of Pāli can be taken, be it retrospectively, to indicate the presence 
of Theravāda, the opposite does not hold; that is, Theravāda can have a presence in the absence 
of Pāli language usage per se.
As noted earlier, contemporary scholars have raised serious questions about the salience 
of the term Theravāda. It has been pointed out that the term was of only limited use in Pāli 
Buddhist texts in the premodern period and that it was not part of the premodern self-conscious 
identity of Buddhists in South and Southeast Asia (Skilling 2009: 63). In other words, those 
who considered themselves to be devotees of the Buddha in contexts where Pāli was a lan­
guage of reference would, generally speaking, not have thought of themselves as belonging to a 
Theravāda school or community. When the term does appear in premodern Pāli texts—mainly

--- PAGE 24 ---
Introduction
3
commentarial (aṭṭhakathā) or historical (vaṃsa) literature, it does so infrequently and usually 
refers to a tradition of interpretation of the canonical texts developed by Elder Monks (thera) 
who counted themselves within the lineage of the original 500 arahants (beings made worthy 
by their liberation from the fetters of the world) who codified and recorded the Buddha’s 
teachings at a legendary First Council shortly after the Buddha’s demise (Gethin 2012: 14, 55). 
Current consensus among scholarly specialists is that the term Theravāda was not the primary 
label for Buddhists who adhered to Pāli traditions of text and practice before the modern period.
Nevertheless, the idea of Theravāda grew in relevance and currency in the twentieth century. 
Its usage expanded from a largely monastic tradition of textual interpretation associated with 
Pāli canonical and commentarial texts into a broad school of practice comprising monastics 
and laypersons who began to identify themselves with this specific term. This transformation in 
terminology was helped along by a new discourse that Western monks and scholars promoted 
as the label for a coherent school of Buddhism found primarily in South and Southeast Asia 
and that would replace the pejorative “Hīnayāna” (lesser vehicle) label derived from Mahāyāna 
polemics (Perreira 2012: 460–461). The reification of the construct as a “tradition” on the order 
of a school or lineage with singularly uninterrupted continuity is itself a modern phenomenon 
with links rather than roots in an enduring premodern discourse of fidelity to the very words 
of the Buddha.
While the history of the term as outlined by Perreira and others does point to the relative 
recentness of the usage of Theravāda to designate a type of Buddhism, we are hesitant to label it 
as a mere anachronism. Pāli and associated vernacular texts commonly speak of theras as religious 
authorities, and there are in any case few efforts in the premodern period to categorize broad 
Buddhist traditions that could encompass laypersons as well as different orders of monastics, 
esoteric practices as well as public liturgies, merit-making activities as well as political strategies, 
women and girls as well as men and boys, or all sorts of artistic representation. This does not, 
however, mean that the Pāli reference did not both assume and provide a certain coherence 
among practitioners, lay and monastic. In awaiting the advent of a more perfect approach, and 
in the hopes that this volume will contribute to its coming, we see “Theravāda” to retain its 
utility as a category that incorporates a diverse mix of texts, practices, objects, and groups found 
mainly across South and Southeast Asia, and we note that the term has become commonplace 
and is regularly invoked by “Theravāda Buddhists” themselves in the modern period (Skilling 
2012: xxix–xxx). Searching for a different term from premodern traditions to function in the 
same sense that the modern Theravāda does would, in any case, be a futile exercise itself pre­
mised on narrow understandings of language, translation, and scholarship bereft of historicity.
There are several other key terms that help to ground understandings of Theravāda. The Pāli 
term sāsana, often translated as “dispensation,” “tradition,” and even “religion,” figures promi­
nently in the self-definition of what is now frequently called Theravāda Buddhism. Described by 
Steven Collins (1998: 348) as “an historically instantiated and institutionalized body of knowl­
edge” that was discovered by a Buddha and transmitted by his monastic disciples, the sāsana 
serves as the emic concept that approximates the idea of the Buddhist religion. Understood 
to consist of the teachings (dhamma) and the institutions founded by the Buddha, the sāsana 
is attributed with the authority of its enlightened originator, and it functions as the means by 
which people in later eras may encounter that which the Buddha allegedly established to assist 
others in their efforts to reduce suffering, enhance well-being, and ultimately obtain liberation 
(nirvana). It includes doctrinal teachings, as well as the rules and customs associated with the 
Buddhist saṅgha, or monastic community as elaborated in the Vinaya. The sāsana is identifi­
able with the legacy of the Buddha that was taken to have been bestowed directly by him to 
his followers, and importantly, the sāsana is also understood to be subject to historical forces

--- PAGE 25 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson
4
and diminution over time. The Buddhist embrace of impermanence as an irrefutable fact of 
conditional existence has led the tradition to affirm that even the Buddha’s sāsana is subject 
to decay and disappearance. In view of this idea, and despite the widespread acceptance of it, 
Theravāda Buddhists often work to preserve the sāsana in what they nominally hold to be its 
earliest and most authentic form (Crosby 2014: 9).
One of the primary aspects of the sāsana in Theravāda is the Pāli canon, the authoritative 
collection of texts attributed to the Buddha’s very words and preserved in the Pāli language 
for the express purpose of transmission. Theravāda Buddhists have traditionally held that Pāli 
was the language spoken by the Buddha, although linguists and scholars generally maintain that 
as a Middle Indo-Aryan language, Pāli was at best only related to the language in which the 
Buddha actually spoke. In fact, various historical circumstances led to the preservation in Pāli 
of the canonical Three Baskets (Tipiṭaka) of texts. Divided into categories of monastic rules 
(Vinaya), discursive teachings (Sutta), and metaphysical analysis of experience (Abhidhamma), 
the Pāli canon represents the most authoritative version of the Buddha’s teachings. Other non-
Theravāda Buddhist communities recognize different canonical collections of texts preserved in 
Sanskrit, Tibetan, or other languages. Learned sectors of the tradition have embraced, and ulti­
mately underpinned, a popular embrace of a historicist and exclusivist idea of canon. Although 
identified with the Buddha’s own words, the collection of texts that is now the canon was 
circumscribed in the early centuries of the Common Era by a group of Sri Lankan monks who 
sought to define and legitimate their monastic community against other competitors (Collins 
1990: 101–102). This was the community of the Mahāvihāra, which would come to dominate 
the island of Sri Lanka and subsequently impact Pāli Buddhist practice in Southeast Asia in a 
substantial manner. The recurrent reference to Sri Lanka as the cradle of Theravāda Buddhism 
in many Southeast Asian contexts is inseparable from the Mahāvihāra construction as it has 
been reiterated over time. Nevertheless, different ethnolinguistic communities that recognize 
Pāli as authoritative will use different vernacular languages (e.g., Sinhala, Burmese, Thai, Lao, and 
Khmer) while also using Pāli in liturgical and some textual and ritual contexts. Actual relations 
to Sri Lanka differed significantly in different geo-historical contexts such that Theravāda can 
be said in many ways to have developed through networks of exchange in multiple locales in 
parallel rather than through dissemination from a center—be that center located in the Buddha 
before the Common Era or in Sri Lanka at its start.
There are additional genres of Pāli texts that have been otherwise important for the develop­
ment of this form of Buddhism. Specifically, the composition of commentarial texts (aṭṭhakathā) 
and sub-commentaries (ṭı̄kā) in the Pāli language has helped establish a textual tradition that was 
for many centuries almost synonymous with the idea of the “Theravāda” as a body of authori­
tative opinion or decrees that came down from senior monks (Gethin 2012: 29). In particular, 
commentaries such as the famed fifth-century scholar-monk Buddhaghosa’s Samantapāsādikā 
outline the foundation of a coherent monastic lineage that connects the earliest disciples of the 
Buddha with later generations of monks in the Mahāvihāra community. Within this particular 
narrative of origins, it is said that Venerable Mahinda, an Elder Monk who traveled to Sri 
Lanka in order to transmit the sāsana there, had “learnt the complete Tradition of the Elders 
[theravādaṃ] consisting of the works of the Three Piṭakas together with their commentaries 
handed down at the two Convocations” (Jayawickrama 1986: 46). It is important to note 
how this account highlights the commentaries along with the canonical texts as comprising 
the theravāda, which in this early, premodern sense refers to the Pāli textual tradition. In this 
sense, the aṭṭhakathā works effectively functioned, in Maria Heim’s words, as a continuation 
of the transmission and unfolding of the Buddha’s words from the First Council onwards 
(Heim 2018: 220).

--- PAGE 26 ---
Introduction
5
At the same time, Theravāda’s debt to Pāli literature is evidenced in different ways among 
its various adherents in South and Southeast Asia. While all Theravāda groups subscribe to the 
Pāli Tipiṭaka as an authoritative collection of canonical texts derived from the Buddha’s teach­
ings, different communities place different degrees of emphasis on different texts. For instance, 
Abhidhamma texts assume proportionately more importance in formal study in modern Burma 
than in its mainland neighbors today. Likewise, Burmese Buddhists use the aṭṭhakathā com­
mentaries for interpreting the canon more systematically and intensively than their neighbors. 
Such distinctions were brought into relief in the wake of nineteenth- and twentieth-century 
religious reforms in Thailand (Crosby 2014: 85). Many Theravāda Buddhists have also com­
posed and utilized handbooks and summaries (sometimes in Pāli) that give shorthand access 
to the canonical and commentarial literature. Arguably, the most influential and well known of 
such paracanonical texts is Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga (Path of Purification), a fifth-century 
compendium of teachings abstracted from canonical texts on the development of morality 
(sı̄la), meditation (samādhi), and wisdom (paññā). The diversity of Theravāda literature is dra­
matically increased by the long-standing composition of Buddhist texts in literary vernaculars 
such as Sinhala, Burmese, Shan, Mon, Thai, Lao, and Khmer. Crucially, these works reached 
diverse audiences within lay and monastic milieux. Ranging from innovative compositions of 
the Buddha’s life story to narrative inventions of the origins and lives of legendary images and 
relics to monastic ceremonial guides and illustrated meditation manuals, they bear witness to 
elite scholarly, specialist practitioner, and popular culture evolving in dialogue over time.
In conjunction with written texts, both canonical and noncanonical, Pāli and vernacular, 
Theravāda has also been defined and transmitted by other forms of material culture across 
South and Southeast Asia. What we have been calling textual traditions are in fact integral to 
material culture. These include writing on stone, metal, terracotta, palm leaves, and bark, as 
well as on paper. In first millennia mainland Southeast Asia, stone inscriptions predominantly 
bore Pāli liturgical citations, while the second millennia brought a predominance of vernacular 
and Pāli compositions recording merit-making good works such as the donation of a Buddha 
image to a temple or more extensive architectural foundations; these were generally associated 
with eulogies of their (often royal) founders. Such historical records could include accounts 
of legendary feats of Buddhist figures or socioeconomic organizations centered on temple 
foundations. Inscriptions from ancient Sri Lanka were also often tied to donative acts, although 
they increasingly contained eulogistic praise for kings around the turn of the second millennium. 
The Sri Lankan inscriptions differed from those in Southeast Asia by relying mostly on Sinhala 
writing, along with a few Sanskrit works, while largely abstaining from the use of Pāli in the 
island’s epigraphy.
Artistic representation of Gotama Buddha, although depicted with stylistic and iconographic 
variation over space and time, is more or less recognizable to Theravāda Buddhists across the 
board, serving to convey and embody group cohesion on micro and macro scales in both 
synchronic and diachronic terms. At the same time, a given Buddha image often carried dis­
tinctly local meaning, indiscernible to the uninformed naked eye. The widespread practice in 
modern Cambodia, for example, of venerating specific Buddha statues not as Buddhas per se 
but as embodiments of specific male or female historical or legendary figures grew no doubt 
in relation to ancient Angkorian practices by which the elite were posthumously assimilated 
with Hindu or Buddhist divinities embodied in statues. Artistic representations of narratives at 
the core of Theravādin beliefs—the jātaka tales illustrating the Buddha’s achievement of ethical 
perfections over past lives, along with the story of Siddhattha Gotama’s life and death—provide 
another, related mode of communication of history, ethics, and ritual practice key to constituting 
knowledge of Theravāda and experience of   Theravādin community. Here, too, vernacular styles,

--- PAGE 27 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson
6
thematic proclivities, strategies of placement and composition, and use of media (stone, wood, 
brick or stucco sculpture, paint, print) differ significantly over space, time, and given purpose 
comprise a dynamic, heterogeneous Theravāda. Narrative representations can function in a like 
manner to the localized Buddha statues noted above, where telltale features—locally styled 
architecture, the features of a historical king’s face, an iconic local temple setting, a landscape, 
or dress characteristic of home—set the Buddha’s life story in the here and now.
Likewise, characteristic architectural forms simultaneously reflect and provide cohesion to 
the Theravādin community as a whole and to specific communities seen up against others. The 
funerary monument—a stūpa, or a cetiya as it has been widely known under its Pāli designations 
in Southeast Asian usage, and commonly as a stūpa or a dāgäba in Sri Lanka—is literally and 
figuratively the most outstanding of these. The singularity of the form, a more or less closed, 
more or less bulbous symbolic mountain-womb widely understood to comprise an abstract 
form of the Buddha is never lost in its many iterations over Sri Lankan and mainland Southeast 
Asian time and space. Yet each and every stūpa will have its story of who built it when and for 
whose relics—the Buddha’s and/or others’ to be assimilated with those of the Buddha in his 
abstract form. In some places and times, that abstract form is demonstrably venerated as the 
Buddha; in others, such veneration is reserved for the statue alone.
Sı̄mā, or boundary markers are another potent example of dynamic developments of a sin­
gular tradition. “One of the prior conditions for the existence and continuance of the Buddhist 
community is a boundary (sı̄mā) which defines the space within which all members of a single 
local community have to assemble as a complete Saṅgha … at a place appointed for ecclesi­
astical acts” (Kieffer-Pülz 1997: 141). Rules regulating sı̄mā were laid out in the Vinaya; these 
were repeatedly subject to review, explanation, modification, and extension over well more than 
a millennium in the commentarial and sub-commentarial literature. The interpretive process 
developed also in material terms on the ground. Whereas in Sri Lanka, the sı̄mā are ritually 
determined boundaries that can be represented by stone markers buried in the ground or 
designated topographical elements, from the sixth and seventh centuries in areas of mainland 
Southeast Asia, the sı̄mā became systematically figured in sculpted stones planted to be seen 
aboveground, over buried markers. Today such usage in Theravādin Southeast Asia is nearly 
universal and sculpted sı̄mā stones comprise an important element of the region’s archaeologi­
cal, art historical, political, and ethnographic record. Yet where exactly they are used and what 
they can mean differs from one time or one locale to another; in Southeast Asia, such issues 
have also been the subject of extended textual consideration and regulation, from epigraphic 
declarations to consecration manuals to court decisions.
In many contexts, Theravāda is best known by its practitioners not by way of authoritative 
texts but, rather, by way of material culture and associated practices. Acknowledgment of the 
authority of the text as a general category, as of the Pāli canon broadly conceived, nonetheless 
irrevocably inflects the forms and meanings of objects-in-practice; and the distinction the 
present discussion relies on, between text and nontext, does not always maintain insofar as the 
dhamma or teachings is objectified, embodied in objects—books, statues, relics—and venerated 
as such. Notable also is the fact that artistic styles also traveled by way of Buddhist objects 
such that something more than “Buddhism” taken to mean doctrinal tenets or the story of the 
Buddha’s life was also exchanged in the adoption here or there of certain forms. In short, this 
material culture of the dhamma is inseparable from the immaterial in myriad ways, such that the 
knowledge of Theravāda had by Theravādins can pass virtually unnoticed, like perfume in the 
air. That is, the “practitioners” to whom we refer include people evolving in Theravāda milieu 
and contributing to them, although not always intentionally so. In these loose Bourdieusian 
terms, Theravāda names a habitus. The material evidence for Theravāda in Southeast Asia indeed

--- PAGE 28 ---
Introduction
7
attests to a longstanding presence of monastics ordained in the Pāli traditions of the Elder Monks 
(theras) far earlier than many Pāli textual scholars oriented towards Sri Lankan historical and 
literary phenomena would have imagined. Theravāda became what it is also in areas, people, 
practices, and things at a great distance from the origins they nonetheless imagined.
Theravāda Civilizations
The idea of this Handbook arose out of conversations that took place under the umbrella of 
the Theravāda Civilizations Project, which originated in 2011 under the direction of Juliane 
Schober and the late Steven Collins with support from the Luce Foundation. This project 
enabled the collaborative, interdisciplinary work of a group of scholars to reimagine, refine, 
and encourage new scholarship on Theravāda Buddhism. The work was developed through 
conferences, workshops for doctoral and post-doctoral researchers, and the publication of 
edited collections. Collective publications thus far include Theravāda Buddhist Encounters with 
Modernity (Routledge 2018), and a second volume in press, also with Routledge, on the life of 
the Buddha. The project also led to the development of the Theravāda Studies Group, which 
comprises a larger, interdisciplinary group of scholars and is affiliated with the Association for 
Asian Studies. With contributions from many of the Theravāda Civilizations group members, 
including we two editors, the present Handbook is in many ways another product of the original 
Luce-funded initiative.
In resonance with the landmark volume How Theravāda Is Theravāda? (Skilling 2012), the 
Theravāda Civilizations group sought to historicize and contextualize what is meant by 
“Theravāda” by engaging in exchanges explicitly structured to expand disciplinary, period, 
and area-based knowledge of different iterations of Theravāda. The exchanges were meant at 
once to enable further accumulation of knowledge within discrete areas of expertise and, in 
the name of “Theravāda,” to break down barriers between the so-defined bodies of knowledge. 
The latter was consistently the more challenging of our tasks. Marveling at our own incessant 
production of arrays of shared yet different things—ways of burying the dead, words for “saints,” 
modes of regulating sexuality—came far more easily than considering the import of a lofty 
word like civilization. The latter process involved wrestling with the question of Theravāda’s 
alleged coherence rather than, or in addition to building exchanges on an unacknowledged 
assumption that it does cohere. We were made periodically aware that the exciting exchanges 
by which we could cover virtually all geographic and disciplinary grounds flirted with reifying 
Theravāda as a lineage, school, movement, or some other historical entity and, as such, ran the 
risk of participating in configurations of power that make authoritative pronouncements on 
Theravāda’s identity and legitimacy. Our collective consciousness of the hegemonic pretensions 
and violent potentiality of such power structures haunting not only Theravāda but also our 
endeavors in its regard would likewise periodically rise to the surface.
From this perspective, trying to distinguish whether Theravāda is a singular phenomenon 
or a diverse set of multiples does not address the more fundamental questions of who can 
decide what counts for Theravāda and why. Nor does it examine how coherence in tradition 
and identity is constructed and what makes certain features worthy of study and certain argu­
ments for coherence more compelling than others. Therefore, while scholars may continue 
to identify new and relatively unexplored features of Theravāda Buddhism that are ripe for 
study, the challenge of avoiding essentializing pronouncements over what Theravāda is or is 
not, independently and in place of how practitioners themselves have dealt with these issues, 
remains salient for us. The challenge lies in recognizing that any meaningful conceptualization 
of “Theravāda Buddhism” as both a theoretical object and an analytical category must come to

--- PAGE 29 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson
8
terms with the capaciousness, complexity, and even outright contradiction that appears within 
this historical phenomenon that has proceeded from the human engagement with the idea and 
reality of the Buddha’s awakening and teaching (cf. Ahmed 2016: 6).
In those countries where Pāli and vernacular Buddhist traditions of textuality, ritual, and 
material culture have predominated for many centuries—for example, Sri Lanka, Burma, 
Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia—it is possible, we argue still, to speak of Theravāda as civiliza­
tional. By this we mean that Theravāda traditions have generated and shaped many different 
ways that people think and act within a specific cultural setting at the same time that the same 
people have generated and shaped Theravāda. This mutual, dynamic creation approaches the 
notion of habitus mentioned earlier and is never short of the political, economic, and social 
frameworks within which the sāsana functions. Family and social relationships are, in part, 
embodied and enacted in accordance with particular Buddhist ideas and practices just as the 
latter are shaped by specific geo-historical and social circumstances. It is these settings, where 
Theravāda can be said to be in this way “civilizational,” which are the focus of the majority of 
the chapters. As mentioned earlier, Theravāda is also practiced as a minority tradition in other 
countries and regions. It is on the largest scale, encompassing specific Theravādin civilizations 
as well as these other Theravādin groupings, that we speak of “Theravāda civilization.”
Organization of the handbook
The Handbook is organized around thematic rather than geographical or chronological consid­
erations. We made this editorial choice as a means of emphasizing the nominalist dimensions of 
our task, that is, of drawing out what we deem to be important features of   Theravāda Buddhism 
that crossnational and period boundaries and other divides such as urban/rural and monastic/
lay. Specializations—geographic, period, and/or disciplinary—nonetheless underpin individual 
contributions and, as such, tend to make the realist dimensions of the collective work felt. We 
hope that the themes will generate further discussion, including on how this basic editorial 
choice inflects understandings of   Theravāda and on what other key themes we have for one 
reason or another left out. On this note, we can flag the omission of any chapter singularly 
devoted to questions of violence in Theravāda Buddhism. While issues of gender and race are 
addressed within specific contexts, they are not treated as categories in themselves or with sus­
tained consideration of violence in their regard. And we have not included work on Theravāda 
communities outside of Asia. These themes do however pervade the volume. We have sought 
to highlight them instead through the index. 
We have organized the contributions into four parts under broad headings that serve to 
group the diverse aspects of Theravāda into related areas of study. Part I, titled “Ideas/Ideals,” 
serves to set the stage with chapters investigating notions used to collectively define what 
Theravāda is, how it has been organized, and how it has moved through time. Sven Bretfeld’s 
chapter explores the very idea of “Theravāda” by relating this term to a long history of tex­
tual efforts to identify the authentic transmission of the Buddha’s sāsana with the Mahāvihāra 
monastic lineage in Sri Lanka. By examining several key Pāli and Sinhala premodern texts, 
Bretfeld’s chapter shows how an authoritative Theravāda tradition was fashioned out of a 
diversity of other Buddhist “sects.” Next, Alastair Gornall takes up the subject of “Pāli” as a 
defining feature of Theravāda. Eschewing the common gesture of attributing its place and 
power to vague notions of the hegemonic sacred, Gornall proposes a threefold analytical 
framework for better understanding the complexity of the language’s role in constituting what 
Steven Collins has called the “Pāli imaginaire.” Examining how the authority of the language 
emerges as that performatively constituted by claims and counterclaims in its own regard,

--- PAGE 30 ---
Introduction
9
Gornall shows the dynamism of the imaginaire evolving over time. Next, Anne Blackburn’s 
chapter on “Circulations” scrutinizes how Theravāda traditions moved about in what she calls 
the “Pāli world,” or the linked spaces in which Pāli language and texts retained influence. Using 
the premodern polity of Sukhothai as her case study, Blackburn proposes that we can learn 
from looking at the transmission of specific elements such as theories of Buddhist sovereignty, 
styles of Buddhist devotional practice, and cosmological understandings across specific locales 
as integral to circulatory processes that linked diverse communities. Patrice Ladwig’s chapter 
on “Statecraft” examines key dimensions of traditional conceptions of kingship embraced by 
Theravāda communities, before moving on to consider these in relation to political practices 
on the ground in mainland Southeast Asian settings. These systems of political organization 
and statecraft are ultimately then shown to inform modern forms of governance with concerns 
for political legitimation and national integration. The chapter on “Reform,” co-written by 
Anne Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin, looks at how modern Theravāda communities 
have adopted older themes of purifying and reinvigorating what is deemed to be the authentic 
Buddhist tradition. Although based on older models, modern reformist movements are shown 
to have distinctive features. The authors describe mid-twentieth-century movements that might 
be labeled “decolonizing” before the popularization of the name in epistemological terms, 
in which monastics and Buddhist politicians embraced local yet cosmopolitan and distinctly 
non-Western modes of knowledge construction. The last chapter in Part I is Nirmala Salgado’s 
chapter on “Tradition,” in which she analyzes the debates over what constitutes “Theravāda” 
that took place amidst efforts to reestablish the bhikkhunı̄ lineage of Buddhist nuns in modern 
and contemporary Sri Lanka and in dialogue with related initiatives in Thailand and Burma. 
These debates demonstrate how the practices and lineages that constitute Theravāda traditions 
are not self-evident but are rather formed through contestation.
Part II, titled “Practices/Persons,” aims to highlight different modes of embodiment of 
Theravāda. That this section is the largest of the volume is indicative of a current scholarly 
focus on everyday Buddhist life. Juliane Schober’s chapter on “Merit” examines social practices 
of giving in Burma. Her chapter shows that practices of generosity (dāna) have relevance not 
only for understanding Theravāda systems of obtaining rewards for doing good deeds but also 
occupy an important place in ritual economies, political governance, and institution-building 
processes. Next, Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby discuss Theravāda practices of “Meditation.” 
After outlining foundational meditation practices and goals of self-transformation as articulated 
in Pāli texts, the authors home in on techniques elaborated in Abhidhamma texts in particular 
and in pre-reform methods still in active use in multiple Theravāda contexts. Further consider­
ation is given to two living Burmese traditions. Next, Christoph Emmrich offers a theoretical 
examination of the role of “Repetition” in Theravāda practice. The repetition of select utterances 
and phrases comprises aspects of performance that aesthetically enable the coming into being 
of what is said, assist with memorization, facilitate doctrinal explanation in both pedagogical 
and experiential manners, and determine karmic results. Grégory Kourilsky’s chapter on “Filial 
Piety” explores a paradox at the heart of  Theravāda societies: while remarkable value is placed 
on devotion towards one’s parents in explicitly Buddhist terms, the notion of filial piety is not 
highlighted in the authoritative texts of the Mahāvihāra and indeed appears to run counter to 
both the central ethic of karma and the foundational act of renunciation of family ties performed 
by the Buddha and monastics in his wake. The chapter on “Laity” by Asanga Tilakaratne debunks 
categorical distinctions frequently cited in scholarly literature between “nibbanic” and “kam­
matic” Buddhism when these convey the reductive notion that monastics are singularly oriented 
to obtaining nirvana and the laity to improving their destinies in future lives by performing good 
works. He begins by recalling how the early Pāli texts describe the roles of Buddhist laypersons

--- PAGE 31 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz and Ashley Thompson
10
chiefly as donors that support the Buddhist saṅgha, to then expand upon this traditional trope 
of the layperson in discussing how in more modern times, the Buddhist laity of Sri Lanka and 
Burma have become active in meditation, the study of dhamma texts, and practices linked with 
social justice. Next, Thomas Borchert discusses “Discipline” as practiced and negotiated both 
within and beyond the Pāli Vinaya. Focusing on examples from Thailand and Sipsongpannā 
in southwestern China, Borchert explores how discipline and training are accessed through 
formal and informal sources in an effort to make monks who behave and look in appropriate 
ways. The final chapter of this section concerns “Funerals,” wherein Katherine Bowie exam­
ines how this important Theravāda life-cycle ritual has changed over time in different regions 
of Thailand. We learn that funerary practices perform diverse cultural work, expressing social 
divisions and local understandings of death that contribute to an understanding of the complex 
politico-religious histories of Theravāda lands.
Part III, “Texts/Teachings,” is focused on key genres and features of Theravāda texts. Here, 
too, diversity is forefronted, as we glimpse the extent to which Theravāda is not limited to a 
singular text or to a discrete group of texts. Peter Skilling provides a comprehensive overview 
of the notion of “Canons” in the lineage of the theras, or Elder Monks, who are attributed 
with authority over the traditions and texts of Theravāda Buddhism. His chapter outlines the 
different notions, materials, and collections of canonical texts that appear in the Theravāda, 
emphasizing change over time, with different forms and cultural valences appearing in different 
settings. Rupert Gethin then analyzes the Theravāda Abhidhamma, the third basket of canoni­
cal texts which comes to be understood as the ultimate expression of the Buddha’s teaching, 
in relation to the Abhidhamma thought associated with the ancient Sarvāstivāda school from 
northern India. This comparison yields telling similarities and differences found between these 
two Buddhist versions of systematic thought on physical and mental phenomena. The chapter 
on “Vaṃsa” by Stephen Berkwitz examines this important genre of historical writing. Focused 
on recalling the legendary histories of how the Buddha, relics, and the sāsana, traveled to Sri 
Lanka and Southeast Asia, his contribution argues that these texts were instrumental in defining 
notions of Theravāda and authenticating its lineages of transmission to lands outside of India. 
Next, in another chapter on “Merit,” Rita Langer discusses how certain exegetical texts served 
to describe how merit is made and to categorize the different actions for making merit. Her 
focus on the textual sources for understanding merit is complemented by attention to how 
contemporary Sri Lankan Buddhists understand merit-making practices. The last chapter in Part 
III deals with the phenomenon of “bilingualism” in Theravāda writing. Trent Walker offers a 
close analysis of Theravāda “bitexts,” works that stitch together portions of Pāli or other Indic 
prestige language texts and local vernaculars. The chapter details how Theravāda Buddhists have 
developed critical systems for analyzing, transmitting, and performing texts which are virtually 
unique in Buddhist worlds.
Part IV, titled “Images/Imaginations,” groups together chapters addressing processes—mate­
rial, ritual, social, and textual—by which diverse Theravāda identities are imagined. Samerchai 
Poolsuwan discusses “Visual Narratives” in artistic portrayals of the Buddha’s life story in the 
Pagan area of upper Burma. Poolsuwan probes the materials for what they convey of Southeast 
Asia’s “medieval Theravāda,” a term he uses to designate a matrix of inter-related local variet­
ies of Pāli-based Buddhism both preceding twelfth-century Sri Lankan reforms and resisting 
these up until at least the fourteenth century. Next, Ashley Thompson explores the work of 
“Icons,” bolstered as it is by narrative depictions in Theravāda contexts. The chapter points to 
the pertinence of a series of art-historical debates on emic and etic modes of interpretation 
for understanding how perceptions of the Buddha as embodying at once a historically condi­
tioned figure and transcendent ideals can be played out on Southeast Asian ground. Next, in a

--- PAGE 32 ---
Introduction
11
chapter titled “Affect,” Chairat Polmuk explores the sensorial experiences that are produced in 
ritual encounters with relics and in visually mediated forms in contemporary film. Through the 
lens of affect, Polmuk discusses two films in which relics, stūpas, or their cinematic substitutes 
engender interrogations into traumatic twentieth-century histories of Thailand and Cambodia. 
John Clifford Holt turns our attention to “Deities” that appear in Theravāda cultures and 
whose presences, made material or not, structure ritual interactions with the supernatural. 
Moving from the devas of Sri Lanka to the phi of Thai-Lao Buddhist cultures to the neak ta of 
Cambodia and the nats of Myanmar, Holt describes how these figures participate in Theravāda 
cosmologies and play important roles in associated social and political organization. Finally, 
Patrick McCormick examines the “Mons,” an ethnolinguistic community whose coherence as 
such became anchored in imagined origins linked with those of Theravāda itself in mainland 
Southeast Asia. McCormick focuses on how this imagined foundational association of the Mons 
and Theravāda developed within British colonial Burma to become the keystone of modern 
Mon intellectual projects to write and interpret Mon history.
Taken together, the chapters in this Routledge Handbook of Theravāda Buddhism provide a 
detailed picture of Theravāda in different milieu over time and space. As we noted in the 
opening, they also provide a picture of this particular field of Buddhist Studies today. The 
ideas, practices, texts, objects, and people associated with Theravāda appear as historically con­
tingent aspects of a tradition that is pluralistic but strives—be it in multifarious ways—toward 
singularity. Depending on the particular historical, geographical, social, or disciplinary vantage 
points adopted to view Theravāda, one can arrive at distinctively different interpretations of 
what Theravāda is. Readers may use the Handbook to come to terms with the coherence and 
contradiction that make up Theravāda Buddhism, exploring further its histories, as well as its 
use and limits as an analytical category. We hope that the work presented here will inspire new 
research as well as new research methodologies by which the inadequacy of our nominalist to 
our realist ambitions might be lessened and which might thus be better equipped to respond 
to the evolving dynamics of Theravāda and its study.
References
Ahmed, S. 2016. What is Islam?: The Importance of Being Islamic. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Clifford, J. 1988. The Predicament of Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Collins, S. 1990. “On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 15: 89–126.
Collins, S. 1998. Nirvana and other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Crosby, K. 2014. Theravāda Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, and Identity. Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley 
Blackwell.
Gethin, R. 2012. “Was Buddhaghosa a Theravādin? Buddhist Identity in the Pali Commentaries and 
Chronicles.” In How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, eds. P. Skilling, J. Carbine, C. 
Cicuzza, S. Pakdeekham, 1–63. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Heim, M. 2018. Voice of the Buddha: Buddhaghosa on the Immeasurable Words. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Jayawickrama, N.A. 1986. The Inception of Discipline and the Vinaya Nidāna: Being a Translation and Edition 
of the Bāhiranidāna of Buddhaghosa’s Samantapāsādikā, the Vinaya Commentary. London: Pali Text Society.
Kieffer-Pülz, P. 1997. “Rules for the sima Regulation in the Vinaya and its Commentaries and their 
Application in Thailand.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 20(2): 141–153.
Perreira, T.L. 2012. “Whence Theravāda? The Modern Genealogy of an Ancient Term.” In How Theravāda is 
Theravāda?, eds. P. Skilling et al., 443–571. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Skilling, P. 2009. “Theravāda in History.” Pacific World 3rd Series, 11 (Fall): 61–93.
Skilling, P. 2012. “Introduction ‘Whence Theravāda? The Modern Genealogy of an Ancient Term’.” In How 
Theravāda is Theravāda?, eds. P. Skilling et al., xiii–xxxx. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.

--- PAGE 33 ---


--- PAGE 34 ---
PART I
Ideas/Ideals

--- PAGE 35 ---


--- PAGE 36 ---
15
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-3
1
THERAVĀDA
Sectarianism and diversity in Mahāvihāra 
historiography
Sven Bretfeld
Introduction
This chapter investigates how the Buddhist lineages we are accustomed to calling “Theravāda 
Buddhism” today have participated in historical discourses of institutional identity building and 
self-positioning against the backdrop of a Buddhist world increasingly characterized by intra-
religious diversification and sectarianism.
The Pāli literary tradition has never produced a systematic presentation of Buddhist sects 
in the style of Vasumitra’s Samayabhedoparacaṇacakra (second/third centuries?) or Bhavya’s 
Nikāyabhedavyākhyāna (sixth centuries) for Sanskrit traditions. The Pāli commentaries indeed, 
contain plenty of analytical information on individual doctrinal or legal standpoints deemed 
erroneous or straightforwardly “heretical” by the respective authors. Sometimes such a view 
is ascribed to an identifiable group. The Kathāvatthu-Atthakathā is especially rich in this kind 
of information. A systematic interpretation of the world of Buddhist sectarianism in total 
was, however, achieved in a completely different literary form: historical narrative. The vaṃsa 
literature—sometimes called “chronicles” but, better, genealogical literature—does not contain 
much information on the characteristics of individual sects. But we do learn how the authors 
of these texts have organized their vision of the Buddhist world as a disintegrated field of 
intra-religious diversity, how, why, and when they thought the fragmentation of the Buddha’s 
teaching happened; which global and local challenges for the integrity and survival of Buddhism 
they perceived; and how they defined their own role in this situation. As religious texts with 
pedagogical and political impact, the vaṃsas’ ultimate aim is to present role models of good 
Buddhist behavior (Berkwitz 2004)—in the present context, how they expected that people of 
authority should act in order to restore the sāsana (the Buddhist institution or establishment) 
and to preserve it for as long as possible.
I will focus the present essay by discussing the two oldest vaṃsas that have been preserved—
Dı̄pavaṃsa (fourth century) and Mahāvaṃsa (fifth century)—and a late fourteenth-century work 
written in medieval Sinhala—the Nikāyasaṅgraha. The latter presents the world of Buddhist 
sectarianism as a memory of the past, written in a gesture of victory by an author who perceived 
his own period as a time in which the “true” sāsana has prevailed over the heresies of the past.

--- PAGE 37 ---
Sven Bretfeld
16
It is crucial to keep in mind that all three works represent the viewpoint of the Mahāvihāra 
Nikāya, one of Sri Lanka’s ancient Buddhist lineages. Much of their information and conceptual 
antagonisms have to be interpreted against the background of the sectarian agenda of this 
lineage. They were not unrivaled, not even within Anurādhapura, the ancient Sri Lankan 
capital where the Mahāvihāra Nikāya had its original base. Sadly, the alternative perspectives 
of their local rivals have fallen prey to historical contingency almost completely after the 
Mahāvihārins prevailed in the early post-Anurādhapura period. Hence, their point of view 
not only monopolized the cultural memory of the Sri Lankan Buddhists but also shaped the 
paradigms of Buddhist history-making in Southeast Asia since the thirteenth century when the 
Sri Lankan Buddhist “neo-orthodoxy” (see the following discussion) started to expand their 
influence into Burma and Siam. I may add that the antagonistic picture of the Mahāvihāra texts 
may not necessarily be representative of day-to-day interactions among members of different 
sects. We have many historical examples for good intersectarian cooperation and exchange, 
even programmatic curricula for the study of each other’s literature. Close friendships between 
members of different sects may have been as common in historical times as they are today. We 
should also be cautious with the essentialized qualities and characteristics our sources attribute 
to different Buddhist lineages—for example, the strict “anti-Mahāyāna” attitude commonly 
associated with the Mahāvihārins. These may often be idealized images rather than descriptions 
of social realities.
Sect and Nikāya
I use the terms sect and sectarianism reluctantly. They are increasingly challenged in Religious 
Studies due to their historical roots in ancient Christian polemics and their underlying pejora­
tive sense in modern use. In Buddhist Studies, the term sect is still widely used and has been 
stripped of much of its Christian heritage. When Buddhist scholars speak of “sects,” they 
usually mean the Sanskrit/P āli term nikāya. The nikāya concept is complex and has different 
connotations in different contexts. But it always defines an institutionalized group identity 
between the local face-to-face community and the global totality of the “saṃgha of the four 
directions” (caturdiśasaṃgha). I prefer the translation “monastic lineage” to “sect” or “school,” in 
order to highlight the genealogical logic implied in the concept and to avoid an overemphasis 
of a distinguished belief or exegetic system as a defining characteristic. Some points need to 
be sketched in order to clarify the concept:
	•	
The nikāya concept belongs to the field of monasticism. A Buddhist layperson is not a 
member of any nikāya. In this respect, nikāyas resemble more the Catholic monastic orders 
(Franciscan, Dominican, etc.) than Christian denominations or sects (Catholic, Protestant, 
Jehovah’s Witnesses, etc.). Each monk and nun belongs to a nikāya. This affiliation is con­
veyed with the ordination ritual and tied to the nikāya-specific version of the Vinaya 
(monastic legal codex) they are ordained into. Unlike the Christian distinction between 
“the” church (= community of the orthodox) and “a” sect (= community of followers of 
a heresy), the Buddhist nikāya concept is a technical term of monastic collectivization and 
is per se not tied to polemical contexts.1 
	•	
A shared Vinaya recension (and enactment principles2) is constitutive for all members of a 
nikāya. In this respect, a nikāya can be interpreted as the virtual community of monks and 
nuns with ritual and jurisdictional compatibility. Earlier scholarship understood nikāyas 
primarily as dogmatic schools. Some nikāyas had their own literary tradition, starting with 
a specific recension of the Tripiṭaka, commentarial material, and so on. However, given

--- PAGE 38 ---
Theravāda
17
the scarcity of sources, it is unclear to what extent such textual and doctrinal original­
ity was constitutive for the historical nikāyas.3 Moreover, it seems to have been possible 
for a monk or nun to adopt another nikāya’s doctrinal system without abandoning the 
institutional framework of the nikāya in which they were formally ordained (cf. Kieffer-
Pülz 2000: 289). A complete formal “conversion” to another nikāya required more than a 
shift of doctrinal orientation. Such a step would demand a full reordination into another 
Vinaya regime, implying that the number of ordination years of the “convert” would be 
reset to zero—such a relapse of hierarchical rank was surely not chosen often without 
very good reasons. For the same reason, nikāyas are not a characteristic of “Hı̄nayāna 
Buddhism,” as some scholars suggest by using the term “Nikāya Buddhism” as a replace­
ment for “Hı̄nayāna” in efforts to eschew usage of the latter for its historically pejorative 
connotations. The reasons for an individual monastic community to reject or tolerate, 
accept, or impede “Mahāyānist” or “Tantric” practices have to be sought out among the 
factors of communal socialization and politics (group pressure, social expectations, inter­
nal policies, institutional agendas, etc.) rather than its formal nikāya affiliation. As we 
will see, the Theriya Nikāya—or “Theravāda”—was a strong promoter of Mahāyāna and 
Tantric texts and practices for many centuries. 
	•	
For polemical purposes vinaya- and dharma-related issues are often conflated. The schol­
arly sdebate whether nikāyas were primarily doctrinal (dharma) or legal (vinaya) institu­
tions, is fairly obsolete in this context (Bechert 1985, 1993; Walser 2005: 99ff). For the 
sources discussed in this chapter, nikāya schisms are always the result of disrespect for the 
“true” and “authentic” word of the Buddha. Thus, deviance is a matter of an “evil” (pāpa) 
attitude, not so much of concrete issues and open debates.
It is unclear when and how the nikāya concept came into being historically. Scholars 
have widely accepted the Buddhist view that institutional splits of the saṃgha into first two, 
then several nikāyas were the major factor driving the diversification of the early Buddhist 
movement. It is commonly assumed that this process was well underway by the time of 
Aśoka (Lamotte 1988: 292, Hirakawa 1990: 105ff., Sasaki 2002, Bechert 2005b: 25.).4 However, 
considering the decentralized organization and expansion of the Buddhist movement in its 
first centuries, I find this archetype-based, linear bifurcation theory implausible. This model is 
ultimately derived from nikāya genealogies that were written at a much later time5 and that, 
more likely than not, have projected the sectarian antagonisms of their own period into the 
remote past. In the following, I suggest a more dynamic relational emergence theory. I assume 
that religious technologies and contents were not transmitted as fixed sets within well-defined 
sectarian boundaries within the first four or five centuries of Buddhist history. They rather 
circulated freely among the more and more widespread Buddhist communities along cross-
related paths of short-distance diffusion and long-distance transmission (Neelis 2010). Such a 
network of confluent, communicating nodes will sooner or later generate “hubs” governing 
arrays of associated nodes—namely, clusters of monastic communities with close relationships 
(either through dispersion, local proximity, or intense travel connections), and they will start to 
condense and to enter a process of tradition building by thematizing the distinctness of their 
shared religious heritage from others. This process will gradually harden the fluidity of the 
movement and progressively transform it into a structured landscape of mutually distinguished 
virtual communities.
As an early step of this process, some geographical hubs seem to have started to self-identify 
under a toponym by the second or first century bce. This is, for example, the case for the 
term tambapaṇṇika “(those from) Tambapaṇṇi (= Sri Lanka),” an attribute India-visiting monks

--- PAGE 39 ---
Sven Bretfeld
18
from Sri Lanka gave themselves in inscriptions from the first century bce.6 Another probable 
case are the Haimavatas, who seem to have been based somewhere in the Himalaya region 
originally and to have resettled or founded a colony in Sāñchı̄ by the late second century 
bce (Willis 2001). I assume that these early toponyms were not (yet) nikāya names conveying 
the idea of ritual/liturgical exclusivity and institutional autonomy,7 but they may have con­
notated a certain degree of distinctness in the sense of a specific local color of Buddhism. A 
full-fledged nikāya identity, in contrast, requires an institutionalized comparative self-reflection, 
demarcating the respective tradition’s textual and habitual peculiarities (at minimum its vinaya 
code) systematically from others. A nikāya is, thus, more than a more or less self-reliant local 
tradition, even if some like the Tambapaṇṇikas, the Haimavatas, or the Rājagirikas may have 
started as such. The nikāya idea transcends the logic of vernacular tradition building by de-
territorializing the identity of the community, turning it—at least potentially—into a mobile 
and geographically expendable “global player.” Most nikāyas seem to not have tied their 
distinctness to a specific geographical origin but to certain characteristics of their religious 
transmissions and approaches (e.g., Sarvāstivāda, Caityavāda, Sautrāntika, Bahuśrutı̄ya) or to 
the genealogical affiliation to a certain founding figure (e.g., Kāśyapı̄ya, Dharmaguptaka, 
Siddhārthaka, Dhammarucika) or to a blend of all this.8 As far as literary and epigraphical 
evidence allows for conclusions, the development of nikāya identities started not much before 
the first century ce, when we find the first unambiguous nikāya names mentioned in North 
Indian inscriptions.9
The nikāya concept, then, seems to be much younger than commonly believed and must be 
seen not as an outcome of early Buddhist diversification processes but as a product of a later 
paradigmatic shift of Buddhist self-reflection and interaction. While the Buddhist network had 
certainly developed diverse approaches to the teaching of the Buddha and varying transmissions 
of his words virtually right from the beginning, Buddhist authors of the pre-ce period seem to 
have ignored or de-emphasized such differences (Sujato 2007: 7–12). At a certain point, Buddhist 
scholars had to acknowledge that the message of the Buddha (buddhaśāsana) could no longer 
plausibly be described as a single entity homogeneously expanding through time and space. It 
is conceivable that this turning point was less connected to an increase of diversity as such but, 
rather, to a shift of communication conditions that intensified the perception of diversity across 
the global Buddhist network and created new discourses stressing difference, incompatibility, and 
contest.10 It can be assumed that the availability of tradition-specific Tripiṭaka material in written 
form and the development of pilgrimage sites and metropoles like Bodhgayā, Nāgārjunakoṇḍa, 
and so on into centers of intra-religious encounter played essential roles in this process. Thus, I 
assume that most early nikāyas emerged not from a series of formal schisms, as tradition has it, 
but as products of this paradigm shift—that is, when clusters of the Buddhist monastic network 
and local traditions formulated (or reformulated) their group identities in the new language of 
the nikāya discourse by claiming their ritual and doctrinal uniqueness and autonomy with the 
new demarcation technologies accompanying concept. Such an emergence theory is, of course, 
unthinkable from the insider perspective of a Buddhist who believes that Buddhism began as 
a homogeneous and already complete tradition. Under this assumption, diversity can only be 
explained as the result of schismatic events, which is what the narratives about the first split 
between Sthaviras and Mahāsāṃghikas and early nikāya genealogists like Vasumitra do.11 In the 
following, I argue that the Sri Lankan communities came into contact with the nikāya discourse 
rather late. Probably not before the third century ce, they started to write themselves into an 
already existing mainland Indian model of nikāya diversity that the Mahāvihāravāsins transformed 
into a self-confident sectarian self-narration in the course of the following century. In this

--- PAGE 40 ---
Theravāda
19
process, older narratives relating the creation of the Buddhist world as the peaceful conquest 
of a homogeneous dharma spreading across the world became overwritten by a diversification 
account filled with heretics betraying the Buddha’s heritage by splitting the unity of the saṃgha, 
textual forgery, and diluting the dharma with non-Buddhist ideas.
Theravāda as a Buddhist sect
As I have shown elsewhere, the modern concept “Theravāda Buddhism” is an emergent prod­
uct of a dialogue triangle involving (a) modern Buddhist answers to the challenges of the global 
religious field; (b) the historicist agenda, text-centrism, and desire for comparative categories 
of Religious and Buddhist Studies; and (c) the identity politics of classical Pāli-Buddhist vaṃsa 
and commentary literature (Bretfeld 2012b; Bretfeld 2019). The latter had a direct impact on 
the formation of the dehistoricized modern concept of “Theravāda” as a conservative, pristine 
form of Buddhism, usually contrasted with the (likewise problematic) concept of “Mahāyāna 
Buddhism.”
Such essentialist categories mask the historicity of the concepts themselves. The premodern 
term theravāda is a result of Sri Lankan boundary-making activities. To the Indian Buddhist 
traditions, it was completely unknown,12 and its significance before the twentieth century 
was greatly overestimated until recently, even for Sri Lankan and Southeast Asian literature.13 
However, starting with the fourth century ce, the term theravāda was coined within a certain 
stream of Sri Lankan literature production to condense the authenticity claims of a group that 
believed to protect the true sāsana from a world full of “heresies.” In other words, “Theravāda” 
is not a meta-historical entity that predated the inner-Buddhist sectarian debate, but it is a 
product of this very discourse.
For all we know, the Sri Lankan traditions started to claim a specific sectarian identity 
rather late, hardly much before the third century ce. The first nikāya name that is attested 
to have been used by them is not Theravāda but Theriya, the Prakrit equivalent to Sanskrit 
Sthavira or Sthāvirya. Sometime later, from the sixth century onward, Sri Lankan tradi­
tions were regularly addressed under this name by Indian, Chinese, and (still later) Tibetan 
Buddhist authors. Before it appears as a denomination of the Sri Lankan lineage(s), the term 
Theriya/Sthavira already had a history. From around the first or second century ce, the term 
was known to Indian Buddhists as the name of one of the two groups that allegedly had 
formed the first two nikāyas according to the topos of the initial nikāya split. From the fourth 
century onward, the Sri Lankans claimed to be identical to these “original” Sthaviras. Yet later, 
when the Indian traditions started to use the term Sthavira for the Sri Lankan lineages, the 
name seems already to have lost its connotation of originality in mainland India. To compli­
cate matters even more, the related term theravāda was coined by fourth-century Sri Lankans, 
partly as a synonym for this nikāya name but investing it with a peculiar idea of  “original 
Buddhism.” Here, at the latest, the Indian Buddhist traditions would have stopped to follow 
the Sri Lankan argument of authenticity.
This is a complex semantic constellation calling for a terminological convention that can 
be used by scholars to prevent confusions and anachronisms. I use the following nomenclature 
throughout the rest of this chapter:
STHAVIRA  is used for the monastic faction said to have arisen from the assumed first split in 
the saṅgha and as a collective category for the nikāyas that are deemed to have emerged 
from the “original” Sthavira faction.

--- PAGE 41 ---
Sven Bretfeld
20
INDIAN PROTO-THERIYA  denotes the historically obscure Indian tradition which transmit­
ted the ordination tradition and the major bulk of canonical material to Sri Lanka. This 
hypothetical lineage must have used vinaya and abhidhamma material different from other 
Sthavira lineages that ultimately developed into the known Vinaya and Abhidhamma Piṭakas 
of the so-called Pāli Canon. It is likely that this lineage was already using some form of Pāli.
SRI LANKAN PROTO-THERIYA  refers to the Sri Lankan tradition before it started to promote 
itself under a distinct nikāya name.
THERIYA (NIKĀYA)  represents the Sri Lankan tradition after it had started to identify itself as 
a distinct nikāya named Theriya, Theravāda, or Theravaṃsa.
THERIYA SUB-NIKĀYAS  denote the three sub-lineages into which the Sri Lankan tradition had 
eventually split between the first century bce and the fifth century ce. As there is no Pāli 
word for “sub-nikāya,” their individual lineage names will be given here as
	•	 Mahāvihāra(-vāsin) Nikāya,
	•	 Abhayagiri(-vāsin) Nikāya (also known as Dharmaruci Nikāya),
	•	 Jetavana(-vāsin) Nikāya (also known as Sāgaliya Nikāya).
THERAVĀDA  is not used as a category of analytical meta-language but only as an object-
language term to discuss passages of primary literature that explicitly use this word. It 
is unclear whether the term was a specific word creation of Mahāvihāra authors. As a 
synonym for Theriya/Sthavira Nikāya it may also have been used as a self-designation 
by members of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana Nikāyas. That they also used it as a dogmatic 
concept, like the Mahāvihārins did, is unlikely.
THERAVĀDA BUDDHISM  (as a Pāli–English hybrid compound) will be reserved for modern 
religious contexts. The term was coined in the early twentieth century as a comparative 
knowledge concept within the then current “world religions” paradigm, investing the term 
with semantic implications that were foreign to the nikāya paradigm (e.g., the understand­
ing of Theravāda Buddhism as a specific Buddhist “creed” constituting religious communi­
ties of “believers” and encompassing monastics and lay-people alike).14
In this chapter, I follow a “relational” approach to religious history. This means that historical 
objects are not considered to cause (or suffer) historical changes or continuities as pre-discursive 
entities. They are rather understood as knowledge concepts that permanently and mutually 
constitute each other in a discursive field.15 Collins (1990) has shown some impacts of a rela­
tional approach on the “very idea of the Pāli Canon.” As one of the practical methodological 
consequences, we cannot speak of a Theriya lineage or “Theravāda Buddhism” in periods 
before these concepts were discursively carved out, even if we could be sure that certain 
constituents of these concepts—like a specific textual transmission, lineage of teacher/pupil 
succession, or local setting—had a continuity reaching further into the past. It is the specific 
semantic configuration of the knowledge concept that fashions the reality of the historical 
actors. We also have to be aware that knowledge concepts are always contested. To give an 
example, it is a common convention in secondary literature to present the Mahāvihāra lineage 
as the “orthodox school” of Sri Lanka holding on to the “teachings of the Theravāda,” while 
the “heterodox” Abhayagiri lineage embraced “non-Theravāda” forms of Buddhism. From the 
perspective of relational analysis, there is a lot wrong with such a statement.16 Setting aside 
the historical accuracy of this dualistic image, the question what is “orthodox” and what “het­
erodox” is a matter of viewpoint; they are not self-evident categories of historical description. 
Even more important, the statement that the Abhayagiri is not a “Theravāda” tradition is a 
polemical claim of their Mahāvihāra opponents. It is, however, likely that they, too, used this 
term as a self-designation of their lineage. They surely identified as a subgroup of the Theriya

--- PAGE 42 ---
Theravāda
21
Nikāya. We can be quite certain about this because of the testimony of the Indian, Chinese, 
and Tibetan doxographers mentioned earlier. Whether they used the compound Theravāda as 
a synonym is not clear, but it is likely. Furthermore, they will surely have opposed the notion 
that being a Theriya/Theravādin and being a Mahāyāna adept would mutually exclude each 
other. As Walters (1997: 107) puts it,
Thus the Mahāvihāran claim that Theravāda is originally and exclusively a Hı̄nayāna 
school was certainly not universally believed in the ancient Buddhist world, nor prob­
ably was it believed by much of anyone except by the Mahāvihārans themselves. Even 
in Sri Lanka, even at the end of the Anurādhapura Period, this claim must have seemed 
absurd …
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa: early positioning in a multi-sectarian environment
No inscription found on the island states any nikāya identity of the Sri Lankan saṃgha as a 
totality. The first documents in which members of the Sri Lankan Buddhist tradition pro­
claimed a nikāya name are two mid-third-century Prakrit inscriptions found in the South 
Indian Nāgārjunakoṇḍa.17 This is at least three centuries after other nikāyas of mainland India 
had developed the custom to refer to their nikāya names in monastic inscriptions—a first hint 
that the Sri Lankan tradition may have been a newcomer to Buddhist sectarianism and wrote 
themselves into an already established model of Buddhist diversity. It is probably not by chance 
that this happened in the multi-sectarian context of third- and fourth- century Āndhra, where at 
least six other nikāyas held a steady presence: Mahı̄śāsakas, Aparaśailas, Pūrvaśailas, Bahuśrutı̄yas, 
Rājagirikas, and Siddhārthakas. This environment was obviously expecting that local monastic 
settlements give a genealogical “home address,” defining their position within the nikāya model 
of Buddhist plurality.
The first inscription states the institutional affiliation of the Sri Lankan monastic site as 
follows:
[The monastery of] the teachers (belonging to the) Sri Lankan (branch) of the 
Theriyas who had pleased (i.e. converted to Buddhism) the countries of Kashmir, 
Gandhāra, Cı̄na-Cilāta, Tosali, Avaranta, Vaṃsa, Vanavāsi, Yavana, Damila, Palura and 
Tambapaṇṇidı̄pa (= Sri Lanka) …18
The second inscription gives a slightly more differentiated version:
[The monastery of] the teachers (belonging to the) Mahāvihāravāsin (branch) of the 
Vibhajjavāda (faction among the [?]) Theriyas who had pleased Kashmir, Gandhāra …19
This is the oldest known evidence for Sri Lankans identifying as members of the Theriya 
Nikāya. At least this term must have been familiar to the other lineages there as the Prākṛti form 
of the lineage known as Sthavira in Buddhist Sanskrit doxography. As I read the second inscrip­
tion, it defines a genealogical position in three descending abstraction levels, similar to the struc­
ture: tribe, clan, family.  The topmost level classifies them as Sthaviras, probably in opposition to 
the Mahāsāṃghika family of the early nikāya models. The term vibhajjavāda seems to denote a 
subgroup of the Sthaviras. Mahāvihāravāsin, in turn, is a subgroup of the Vibhajjavādins. This 
implies that Mahāvihāravāsin is the concrete nikāya name—namely, the lineage based in and

--- PAGE 43 ---
Sven Bretfeld
22
named after the Mahāvihāra monastery in the Sri Lankan capital Anurādhapura—while other 
terms denote larger groups or families of nikāyas to which the Mahāvihāravāsins claimed to 
be affiliated.20 We will see that this genealogical “home address” is pretty different from the 
nikāya identity that the Sri Lankan vaṃsa literature will start to promote about a century later, 
although the basic elements are already there, including a list of missionized countries which 
is going to play a major role for the well-known Mahinda legend—that is, the standard origin 
myth of Sri Lankan Buddhism—of the vaṃsas.
The use of vibhajavāda in the second inscription is difficult to interpret. It seems to denote 
something different here than it does in later Pāli historiographical and commentarial literature 
where vibhajjavāda is a doctrinal position shared by all Sthaviras. The present phrase, however, 
only makes sense if there was a notion that some Sthaviras were considered Vibhajjavādins while 
others were not. This idea of  Vibhajyavāda as a subgroup of the Sthaviras is confirmed by at 
least two early nikāya genealogies of the Sanskrit tradition.21 Cousins’s (2001) detailed study on 
the problem supports Bareau’s theory (1955: 169) that this term originally denoted a group of 
nikāyas affiliating to the Sthavira family but decidedly demarcating themselves from some other 
members of that family—namely, from those nikāyas affiliated to the Sarvāstivādins and those 
commonly labeled with the generic term Pudgalavāda. Possibly the term Vibhajyavāda originated 
as something like a group of “others,” summarizing those nikāyas not profiled as Mahāsāṃghikas, 
Sarvāstivādins, or Pudgalavādins. According to Cousins, these “Vibhajyavāda nikāyas” comprised 
the Mahı̄śāsakas, the Dharmaguptakas, the Kāśyapı̄yas, and the Sri Lankans (Tambapaṇṇikas).22
If my interpretation is sound, the Nāgārjunakoṇḍa inscriptions testify to an early phase 
in which the Sri Lankan tradition orientated itself within the genealogical models of nikāya 
diversification as they had been developed by Indian Buddhists such as Vasumitra and the 
authors of Bhavya’s sources. In this phase, they seem to have positioned themselves in a wider 
family of nikāyas they apparently accepted as equally authentic lineages—among them the 
Mahı̄śāsakas with whom the Mahāvihārins of Nāgārjunakoṇḍa were neighbors. This conciliatory 
idea of belonging to a wider family of “correct” nikāyas had changed radically by the time the 
Dı̄pavaṃsa was written.
A bold claim of exclusive authenticity: Theravāda 
in the Dīpavaṃsa and the Mahāvaṃsa
The first nikāya genealogy written on Sri Lankan soil was probably the Dı̄pavaṃsa, composed 
approximately in the fourth century ce, about one century after the Nāgārjunakoṇḍa inscriptions. 
The Mahāvaṃsa, written yet a century later, follows the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s account closely. It adds a 
perspective of inner–Sri Lankan sectarianism on which the Dı̄pavaṃsa is suspiciously silent. In 
the present section, I focus on the Dı̄pavaṃsa, mentioning the Mahāvaṃsa only when necessary.
It is obvious that the Mahāvihāra tradition had reflected much on nikāya genealogies and 
changed the view on their own sectarian affiliation profoundly since Nāgārjunakoṇḍa. As a 
result, the Dı̄pavaṃsa and the Mahāvaṃsa formulate a full-fledged sectarian statement with an 
exclusivist attitude that remained seminal for the future literature of the Mahāvihāravāsins. The 
major milestones were
	1	
the term theravāda appeared;
	2	
the concept of vibhajyavāda as a distinct Sthavira sub-lineage was dropped;
	3	
the genealogy gives a similarly “full” overview as their Indian counterparts, mentioning 
twenty-four nikāyas in total, and probably conflating Vasumitra’s genealogy with something 
close to Bhavya’s second list; and

--- PAGE 44 ---
Theravāda
23
	4	
the apparent allegiance with other lineages of the Sthavira branch was replaced by a sole 
claim to authenticity against all other known nikāyas, which were now entirely interpreted 
as “heretical apostates.”
The term theravāda is exclusively used in the fifth chapter of the Dı̄pavaṃsa. The chapter starts 
with the well-known story of the first two rehearsals—that is, the narratives on how the 
Buddhist text corpus was allegedly created by an assembly of five hundred direct disciples of the 
Buddha shortly after his death and how, one century later, this collection was “rescued” from 
being diluted by a group of “wicked Bhikkhus” (pāpabhikkhū). The next fifty-five verses (Dı̄p 
5.30–54) relate that endeavors to protect the Buddha’s words from alteration were not always 
successful subsequently. Soon after the Second Rehearsal, the saṃgha disintegrated into various 
discordant lineages, each transmitting its own self-forged version of the Tripiṭaka.
It is noteworthy that the story of these rehearsals is narrated two times in the Dı̄pavaṃsa. 
Chapter 5 is the second version. The first version, located in Chapter 4, knows nothing of the 
term theravāda and does not refer to any permanent splits in the saṃgha. The two versions are 
an example of the well-known fact that the compilers of the Dı̄pavaṃsa conflated two or three 
different sources, sometimes redoubling or triplicating the same story, when these sources were 
in disagreement (Frauwallner 1955). As it seems, one of their sources for the two rehearsals was 
unaware of nikāya diversification and sectarian tensions. A confirmation for the existence of 
such a “nikāya-unaware” version of the rehearsals is given in the Samantapāsādikā. Like the first 
version of the Dı̄pavaṃsa, this fifth-century text narrates these stories—the first two rehears­
als plus the third—without any mention of nikāyas or permanent splits. The terms theravāda, 
theriya, and so on are also unknown to the text. This surprising lack of sectarian references was 
expressed by Gethin (2012: 30) as follows:
If we only read the Samantapāsādikā account we would learn nothing about a split 
between the Theriyas and Mahāsaṅghikas, nor of any other splits in the ordination 
lineage of the Saṅgha. The narrative does not even present the crisis that led up to the 
third council as involving a split in the Saṅgha, let alone indicate which schools might 
have resulted from that split.
The same could be said for the first account of the Dı̄pavaṃsa. Considering the hypothesis I 
have formulated in the previous section, the conclusion is obvious: the Samantapāsādikā and 
the first version of the Dı̄pavaṃsa reflect an ancient stock narrative of the two (respectively, 
three) rehearsals, while the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s second version represents a younger reformulation 
of this story along the new sectarian paradigm. The source of the Samantapāsādika and the 
Dı̄pavaṃsa’s first version was probably the historical introduction of the lost old-Sinhalese 
Vinaya commentary Mahāṭṭhakathā. The second version was written in a time in which the 
Sri Lankan traditions had started to reflect upon the fragmentation of the Buddhist world as 
a menace to the sāsana’s survival. It may have been the compilers of the Dı̄pavaṃsa themselves 
who had reshaped the story into a claim of their own lineage’s unique superiority. But if 
so, it would be strange that they doubled the story at all. It is more likely that the sectar­
ian version was taken from a source slightly older than the Dı̄pavaṃsa—probably from the 
likewise lost S ı̄haḷaṭṭhakathā-Mahāvaṃsa.23 If this interpretation is sound, we have a second 
indication for the supposition that the Sri Lankan traditions entered the world of nikāya 
diversification as latecomers. Unlike the Nāgārjunakoṇḍa inscriptions, in which they seem to 
have written themselves into a broader family of nikāyas, the fifth chapter of the Dı̄pavaṃsa 
formulates an exclusive statement of sole authenticity, expressed in the new term theravāda.24

--- PAGE 45 ---
Sven Bretfeld
24
In order to fashion the term theravāda as a trope for an exclusive orthodoxy claim, the 
Dı̄pavaṃsa conflates two different meanings of the term vāda. In Dı̄p 5.10 theravāda denotes a 
teaching, namely, the teaching (vāda) of the five hundred elders (thera) who conducted the First 
Rehearsal one year after the Buddha’s death. The implied claim is that there can be nothing 
in the world of Buddhism that could be more true and authentic than what these personal 
pupils of the Buddha had compiled from what they had directly heard from the mouth of the 
master. This claim of authenticity is further emphasized by calling the theravāda the “pristine” 
or “topmost doctrine” (aggavāda, Dı̄p 5.14) and the (textual) “root-corpus” (mūlasaṃgaha, Dı̄p 
5.31). In other passages (Dı̄p 5.16, 45, 49) theravāda is used as a lineage name, a succession of 
teachers from which other vādas broke away. The early Pāli vaṃsas do not use the term nikāya; 
the word for “sect” in Dı̄pavaṃsa and Mahāvaṃsa is vāda—a term that is gradually replaced or 
complemented by the word nikāya in later texts.25 Thus, this second meaning of theravāda is 
pretty much the early Pāli rendering for what is called Sthavira Nikāya in Sanskrit texts.
The Dı̄pavaṃsa deploys a peculiar rhetorical twist in this passage consisting of two logical 
operations:
	1	
The already explained fusion of two distinct concepts into a single trope: Theravāda means 
both a corpus of teachings and an institutional succession of persons transmitting this 
teaching through time and space. With the play on this homonymy, the “original” inventory 
of Buddhist knowledge was claimed as the exclusive property of a demarcated social group.
	2	
A peculiar logic of splitting. The Dı̄pavaṃsa’s nikāya genealogy is not a hereditary family tree 
but an “apostasy model.” Here the implication is that any nikāya bearing a name different 
from Theravāda is by definition not in possession of the “original” doctrine.
The second point has often been misunderstood in Buddhist Studies. Bareau (1955) and 
other scholars read the relevant passages of the Dı̄pavaṃsa (Dı̄p 5.30, 54) as a variant of the 
bipartite pedigree that characterized other early nikāya genealogies. In these genealogies of 
the première époque, the saṃgha is presented as having split into eighteen nikāyas arranged in 
two nikāya families: a Sthavira and a Mahāsāmghika family. Often it is assumed that there 
was at least some degree of mutual acknowledgment among the members of the same 
family, whereas the main thrust of antagonism was directed against the members of the 
other family. In this sense, Gethin argues the main “sectarian” statement of the Dı̄pavaṃsa 
was: “We are Theriyas, and not Mahāsaṅghikas” (2012: 42). This interpretation completely 
overlooks the peculiar “insider perspective” of the Dı̄pavaṃsa. The Dı̄pavaṃsa may rely on 
Vasumitra’s or another première époque nikāya scheme26 but reformulates it with an idiosyn­
cratic twist: The compilers did not understand their own lineage, that is, the “Theravāda,” 
as a member—not even the head member—of any nikāya family. Even more, neither the 
Dı̄pavaṃsa nor any other Pāli text has ever stated that the “original” saṃgha had divided 
into the eighteen nikāyas. They rather understand the logic of division as a sequence of 
breakaways. Hence, for the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s insider perspective there is one authentic tradition. It 
was called “Theravāda” right from the outset and before any break happened. This lineage 
continued “unbroken” ever since its beginning. The other nikāyas came up not by breaking 
the institutional integrity of the lineage, but through individual members turning “apostate,” 
leaving, and starting new lineages.
Hence, the dichotomy of the Dı̄pavaṃsa and all later vaṃsas runs not between “Theravāda” 
versus Mahāsaṃghika, but “Theravāda” against all others. This one-against-many antagonism is 
put in a nutshell by the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s famous banyan tree simile:

--- PAGE 46 ---
Theravāda
25
There are seventeen breakaway-vādas and one unbroken vāda, together with the 
unbroken one they are eighteen altogether. The excellent Theravāda resembles a huge 
banyan tree. It is the complete sāsana of the Jina, with nothing added, nothing removed. 
The remaining vādas are like thorns growing on that tree.27
The seventeen “breakaway vādas”—or “apostate vādas,” to use a term familiar to European 
history adepts—are also collectively labeled ācariyavādā in the Dı̄pavaṃsa and later vaṃsa lit­
erature or ācāryanikāya in Nikāyasaṅgraha and Saddharmaratnākara, “doctrines/lineages of (other) 
teachers”—a phraseology quite close to the Christian polemical idea of a sect (see the earlier 
discussion). Among them are eleven non-Mahāsāṃghika groups. For Indian nikāya genealogies 
of the première époque, these eleven lineages are members of the Sthavira family. The Pāli vaṃsas 
disagree. For them there is no such thing like a Sthavira family. There is only one Sthavira 
Nikāya, called “Theravāda” by them. Nikāyas, like Mahı̄śāsaka, Dharmaguptaka, Sarvāstivāda, 
and so on, are not “Theravādins,” nor are they in any way superior to the Mahāsāṃghikas. They 
simply broke away from the “Theravāda” (pabhinnā theravādato) a little later. Without exception, 
all seventeen ācariyavādas have
split the true meaning of the Doctrine and some portions of the Collection; setting 
aside some portions of difficult passages, they altered them. Forsaking the original rules 
regarding nouns, genders, composition, and the embellishments of style, they changed 
all that.28
The only true lineage has no nikāya name other than “Theravāda.” Consequently, neither the 
Tambapaṇṇikas nor the Mahāvihāravāsins occupy a separate place in the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s or later 
nikāya genealogies (See Figure 1.1). Their compilers/authors identify their own lineage as a 
mere local emplacement of the original “Theravādins.”
In contrast to Bareau’s and other scholars’ reading, the “sectarian” perspective of the 
Dı̄pavaṃsa does not see the history of nikāyas as falling into two branches (Theravāda and 
Mahāsāṃghika) but distinguishes only between Theravāda as the “unbroken” (abhinnavāda) 
“original” (aggavāda) lineage and seventeen “apostate” breakaway lineages (bhinnavāda), also 
collectively called “lineages of (other) teachers” (ācariyavāda). These breakaway lineages fall 
into three families. The Mahāvaṃsa will later add a fourth family of “apostates,” starting 
with the Abhayagiri. The Mahāvihāra Nikāya never appear in these genealogies because 
their authors consider it—that is, their own lineage—to never have broken away from the 
original Theravāda. The six nikāyas on the lower margin are considered to have arisen at a 
later time (aparo uppannā). No affiliation is given for them and the reading of the last one 
seems to be corrupt.
The Dı̄pavaṃsa paints a picture of a Buddhist world in which the prophecy of the “true 
dharma’s decay” (saddharmavipralopa) was already widely fulfilled. The remainders of those car­
rying the “true” dharma were surrounded by a multitude of “heretics” promoting only “coun­
terfeit images” thereof (saddharmapratirūpaka). This brings us to an important question. Did 
the compilers and authors of the Pāli vaṃsas accept any community outside of Sri Lanka as 
legitimate “Theravādins” at all? Or were they presuming that Sri Lanka was meanwhile the 
only place where “the Theravāda” still existed? This question is not answered, or even raised, 
by the text itself or any later one. Hence, we can only tentatively assess the probabilities based 
on indirect evidence.
What would be the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s criteria for the identification of such a group?

--- PAGE 47 ---
Sven Bretfeld
26
	
1	
All twenty-three ācariyavādas mentioned in the Dı̄pavaṃsa—seventeen primary plus the six 
“later” (aparo upannā) lineages (Dı̄p 5.54)—are discarded. This excludes virtually all nikāyas 
known to us from Indian Buddhist literature and epigraphy, including the Mahı̄śāsakas, 
Dharmaguptakas, and Kāśyapı̄yas that Bareau and Cousins allege to have formed a common 
subgroup with the Sri Lankan lineage. They are as much “apostate lineages” (bhinnavāda) as 
all the others. The same holds true for the Haimavatas, who are regarded as the successors 
of the “pristine Sthaviras” (pūrva-Sthavira) by Vasumitra and two of Bhavya’s lists (see the fol­
lowing discussion).
	2	
The Dı̄pavaṃsa expects a true “Theravāda” community to possess a Tripiṭaka exactly 
identical to the one transmitted by its own lineage. The verse quoted earlier does not 
explicitly state that this Tripiṭaka needs to be in Māgadhı̄ (Pāli), but even if it was in 
a different dialect, conformity with the Pāli would be expected, down to the rules of 
grammar and style. This excludes all Sūtra Piṭaka parallels—not to speak of Vinaya and 
Abhidharma material—ever found on the Indian subcontinent, Central Asia, China, or 
Tibet. If we take the fluidity and openness of the Tripiṭaka idea during the early expan­
sion of Buddhism into account, the chances for the existence of an identical parallel to 
the Sri Lankan “Pāli Canon” tend toward zero. The only possibility would be that the 
“Indian Proto-Theriyas” (see earlier discussion) were transmitting an already complete 
and closed “canon” in the third century bce and that both, the Proto-Theriya branches 
of Sri Lanka and India (or elsewhere), had maintained the consistency of that canon until 
the Dı̄pavaṃsa was written down. Disregarding the unlikeliness of this scenario, such a 
“Sri Lanka-independent Pāli Canon” was never found or cited in the Buddhist literature 
of India or elsewhere.29
Figure 1.1  Nikāya genealogy of the Dı̄pavaṃsa, representing the “insider view” of the text.
Buddha
Theravada
¯
Vajjiputtaka
Dhammuttarika
Bhaddayanika
¯
Channagarika
Sammiti
Dhammaguttaka
Kassap¯ıya
Samkantika
.
Suttavada
Gokulika
Bahussutaka
Paññatti
Cetiya
Ekabyohara
Hemavatika
R¯ajagirika
Siddhattha
Pubbaselika
Aparaselika
Apara-R¯ajagirika (?)
inherit
break away
break away
break away
Mahimsasaka
. ¯
.
Mahasamgıtika
¯
¯
¯
Sabbatthivada
¯

--- PAGE 48 ---
Theravāda
27
	3	
For the compilers of the Dı̄pavaṃsa and the authors of later vaṃsas, the Sri Lankan lin­
eage was part of a once widespread group. For them, the “Indian proto-Theriyas,” the “Sri 
Lankan proto-Theriyas,” and the Mahāvihārins are all identical to the pristine Sthaviras. 
The vaṃsas relate the well-known story of how the Sthaviras expanded to the borders of 
the then known world by an organized missionary effort in the time of Aśoka. They might 
have at least assumed that “true Theravādins” may still exist in the regions covered by those 
missionaries. Based on the fact that the Dı̄pavaṃsa still narrates the missionary story, Gethin 
states that the Sri Lankan Theriyas claimed “not so much to be the authentic Theras, but to 
be a branch of the authentic Theras” (2012: 47). We need to remark, however, that the com­
pilers/authors of the vaṃsas have been aware that the so-called Aśoka missions are a story 
about a very remote past. It can hardly have escaped them that the countries mentioned in 
the narrative as well as the Buddhist heartlands in Northeastern India were “meanwhile” 
dominated by nikāyas they deemed heretical. Likely, their own country, Sri Lanka, was the 
only exception known to them.
All in all, the chances are low that the Sri Lankan tradition of the fourth century knew about—
and even were in contact with—an independent community of “Theravādins” that would have 
matched the criteria of the Dı̄pavaṃsa. They surely believed that other emplacements of the 
“pristine Sthaviras” had existed in the remote past, and they might—perhaps—have assumed 
that descendants of them could still exist somewhere in other borderlands. But the thrust of 
the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s argument rests definitely not on the idea of a powerful alliance of geographi­
cally widespread Ur-Sthaviras, but rather on the heroism of Sri Lanka viewed as a small—and 
probably the last—resort of “true Buddhism” against the superiority of “apostates,” ācariyavādas, 
who promote their “broken” and “adulterated” ways in mainland India nowadays.
Of course, when the Dı̄pavaṃsa was compiled, the Sri Lankan Theriyas were already in 
the process of gaining territory beyond Sri Lanka. During the following centuries, the three 
Sri Lankan (sub-)nikāyas became one stream of the Buddhist tradition to reckon with in the 
Buddhist world. They expanded its presence in South and northeastern India and established 
relationships with Southeast Asia, China, Indonesia, and, for a while, with Tibet. Also, the Indian 
nikāya genealogists no longer ignored them. By the sixth century, the Sri Lankans had secured 
a position as one of four “major lineages” (mahānikāya, āryanikāya) constituting the Buddhist 
scene of the day. Indian nikāya genealogies (Vinı̄tadeva, Yijing, and all schemes of Bareau’s 
troisième époche) now collectively call them “the Sthaviras.” Sthaviras different from the three Sri 
Lankan nikāyas were unknown to them. Hence, if non–Sri Lanka–derived Sthaviras had ever 
existed—and I seriously doubt it30—they had vanished into thin air by that time.
Buddhist diversity in a retrospective view: the Nikāyasaṅgraha
From the sixth century onward, the antithetical models of nikāya diversity gradually went out 
of use in India and gave way to a more conciliatory idea of four equally authentic parallel 
transmissions of the Buddha’s teachings manifested in four “main lineages” (caturāryanikāya): 
Sarvāstivāda, Mahāsāṃghika, Sammatı̄ya, and Sthavira, with the latter collectively denoting the 
three Sri Lankan lineages. This concept of equally valid parallel transmissions of the Buddhist 
teaching became the standard approach to history also among later Indian, Chinese, and Tibetan 
Buddhist authors. In Sri Lanka this model was apparently also shared by many from a certain 
time onward.31 Here, it was possibly only Mahāvihārin authors who kept alive the strictly anti­
thetical view, first formulated in Dı̄pavaṃsa and Mahāvaṃsa and rewritten in the late colonial 
period to become one of the basic models of the modern Buddhist organization of diversity.

--- PAGE 49 ---
Sven Bretfeld
28
One of their later works endorsing a rigorous nikāya antagonism is the Nikāyasaṅgraha.32 
Completed in the late fourteenth century by Jayabāhu Dharmakı̄rti, this text can be seen as the 
epitome of the Mahāvihāra tradition’s take on Buddhist sectarianism. It presents history as the 
permanent battle against the “inner enemies” of the sāsana, namely, monastic laxity, disunity, and 
heresy. The work places itself in the tradition of the Pāli vaṃsas, so structure and content follow 
Mahāvaṃsa, Cūḷavaṃsa, and Mahābodhivaṃsa closely, and they are often cited. The Nikāyasaṅgraha 
was written in Classical Sinhala on the occasion of a sāsana purification probably in 1386. The 
author was the head of the Sri Lankan monastic community (saṃgharāja or mahāsvāmı̄) and 
presided over the purification act.33
The text was written after two important historical events that had an influence on its 
presentation of history:
	1	
The saṃgha unification of Pārākramabāhu I, which de jure signified the end of nikāya diver­
sity within Sri Lanka in the twelfth century. In this time, “neoconservative” forces domi­
nated the clerical hierarchy—now under centralized control by a Saṃgharāja/Mahāsvāmı̄ 
and a board of monastic representatives (kāraka-saṃgha). The new leadership understood 
the unified saṃgha as the continuation of the ancient Mahāvihāra Nikāya, its ordination 
lineage, and its textual traditions (though the Mahāvihāra monastery proper had been aban­
doned during the preceding centuries of Sri Lankan/South Indian warfare and though the 
ordination lineage had to be reintroduced from Southeast Asia). The literary wealth of the 
Abhayagiri and Jetavana traditions had mostly—if not completely—vanished by the time 
Jayabāhu Dharmakı̄rti wrote the Nikāyasaṅgraha.34
	2	
The extinction of Buddhism in most parts of mainland India.
Thus, Dharmakı̄rti was writing in a world in which the “heretical ācariyavādas” had vanished, 
not only in Sri Lanka but also in mainland India, while what he regarded to be the “true” 
sāsana—namely, the “Sthaviravāda” as passed down by the Mahāvihāra lineage—had prevailed. 
It is unlikely that he knew very much about the flourishing contemporary Buddhist cultures 
of Tibet and East Asia. His horizon of the Buddhist world must have encompassed an area 
mainly consisting of Sri Lanka and parts of South India, as well as parts of what were to become 
Burma and Siam—only a fraction of what constituted the Buddhist world of yore but a world 
in which the “true” Theriya lineage had finally triumphed over its rivals. Probably Dharmakı̄rti 
would have regarded Sri Lanka as the center of this world, the country that preserved the 
“true” sāsana against all dangers for many centuries and caused it to be spread—or revived—in 
Suvarṇabhūmi (then understood as comprising parts of what were to become Myanmar and 
Thailand) more recently.
But the danger was not over—considering the Buddhist idea of universal decay, it can 
never be. As a recent study has shown, the concern for the saṃgha’s purity was more acute in 
post-reform Sri Lanka than ever before (Gornall 2020: 5). Thus, the dominating appeal of the 
text is the preservation of the sāsana for as long as possible, even if against all odds and even if 
the fight is destined to be ultimately lost. This is the view with which the author looks upon 
his own time: the “heresies” of old may be gone, but the underlying problems are as vital as 
ever. Undisciplined monks can populate the saṃgha and must be excluded by force. Such 
sāsana purifications (sāsanavisodhana)—the removal of “unworthy” monks in a state-enforced 
monastic act—had already been performed five times after Parākramabāhu unified the saṃgha. 
Dharmakı̄rti had witnessed two in his own lifetime and acted as a chairman for one of them. 
The last quarter of the text deals with these purification acts. The earlier three quarters basically

--- PAGE 50 ---
Theravāda
29
show that it was the same form of laxity and disrespectful behavior of monks that caused the 
historical heresies to arise in the first place.
The distinction between disciplined (suśı̄la) and undisciplined (duhśı̄la/pāpa) monks is the 
integrative narrative subject from which the Nikāyasaṅgraha’s plot, value structure, and mes­
sage unfold. According to the text, the whole problem started seven days after the Buddha’s 
parinirvāṇa when a “bad monk” (abhadra mahaṇek) called Subhadra spoke to his fellow brethren 
who bemoaned the Buddha’s death:
Stop grieving, friends. Stop crying. This chief ascetic, who brought us nothing but 
trouble by explaining what is good and what is bad, is now dead, and now we are the 
lords of our own will. Why, then, grieve for something which is cause for joy? From 
now on we do what we want, and we don’t do what we don’t want.35
On hearing this, the great disciple Mahākāśyapa decided it was necessary to stabilize the teach­
ing of the master by bringing it to a fixed form. Thus, the creation of the Sthaviravāda—as an 
institutionalized textual entity—was a reaction to upcoming laxity in the saṃgha that would 
have ruined the Buddha’s message in the long run. This episode sets the stage for the narrative 
to unfold. Its major milestones and turning points—the three rehearsals, the nikāya schisms, 
the arrival of the sāsana in Sri Lanka, the splits of the Sri Lankan lineages—are well known 
and need not be repeated here.
In the ideology of the Nikāyasaṅgraha, the later emergence of “heretical” nikāyas is a logical 
continuation of Subhadra’s destructive “liberalism,” namely, his disrespect for the Buddha and 
his readiness to change the master’s teaching for the sake of his own comfort. The first nikāya 
split is directly connected to the “malicious bhikṣus” who had been expelled in the context of 
the Second Rehearsal—the protagonists of the next attempt to water down the principles of 
the Vinaya. The text states that after being expelled they went to a remote province governed by 
a ruler who was unable to distinguish dharma from non-dharma. Hence, free from the coercive 
control of a competent dharma-king, they settled here and composed all kinds of “weird texts 
nobody had ever heard of before” (abhūtapūrva vū apūrvapāṭha) as well as “commentaries in 
accordance with their own opinions, oblivious to the contradictions to the previous tradition” 
(pūrvāparavirōdha no-balā abhiprāyānukūla vū arthakathā). By this act of “text forgery,” they broke 
away from the Sthaviravāda and formed the Mahāsāṃghika Nikāya.36
The rest of the seventeen ācāryanikāyas are merely enumerated. No genealogy is given for them 
and, again, no value distinction between Sthavira-derived and Mahāsāṃghika-derived nikāyas is 
made. In opposition to the ācāryanikāyas stands not the “Theravāda” but the Sthāviriya Nikāya. 
Unlike Dı̄pavaṃsa and Mahāvaṃsa, the Nikāyasaṅgraha distinguishes clearly between Sthāviriya 
Nikāya and Sthaviravāda—the former is the “original” lineage of the saṃgha and identical to the 
Mahāvihāra Nikāya, the latter denotes the textual corpus of that lineage. Interestingly the manu­
scripts always witness several reading variants whenever the term Sthāviriya occurs in the text, 
while they always agree for the term Sthaviravāda. This suggests that the former term was rather 
unfamiliar to the copyists. According to the text, the Pāli Tripiṭaka is identical to the Sthaviravāda 
and contains every single word the Buddha had uttered in the forty-five years between his 
Awakening and his parinirvāṇa.37 This “sharpened canon formula” excludes the possibility that 
any authentic Buddha-word can have been transmitted aside the monastic mainstream. In other 
words, every text attributed to the Buddha but not included in the Pāli Tripiṭaka as the author 
knew it is a “fake-dharma” (saddharmapratibimba) produced by “evil monks” (pāpabhikṣu) or by 
non-Buddhists disguised as Buddhist monks (bhikṣupratirūpakatı̄rthaka).

--- PAGE 51 ---
Sven Bretfeld
30
For the Nikāyasaṅgraha, most such “fake-dharmas” were produced by the later nikāyas that 
have originated after the Third Rehearsal. Their story is peculiar. The text follows Dı̄pavaṃsa 
and Mahāvaṃsa insofar as to claim that in the time of Aśoka non-Buddhists (tı̄rthaka) had 
infiltrated the saṃgha and proclaimed their wrong beliefs as the teaching of the Buddha. In 
the earlier vaṃsas, the story is over after these tı̄rthakas had been exposed and expelled. The 
Nikāyasaṅgraha expands their story: they attempted to enter the saṃgha again but were rejected 
by all Sthāviriya communities. However, they were accepted into communities of the other 
seventeen nikāyas. Under their protection, they “reversed and messed up the three piṭakas.” 
Finally, they split into nine new nikāyas—the six “later nikāyas” known from Dı̄pavaṃsa and 
Mahāvaṃsa plus Vaitulya, Andhaka, and Anya-Mahāsāṃghika. Each of these nine nikāyas is asso­
ciated with certain “fake-dharmas.” The list given by the Nikāyasaṅgraha contains well-known 
proto-Mahāyāna, Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna texts like the Rāṣṭrapālasūtra, the Ratnakūṭa, the Sarv-
atathāgatatattvasaṅgraha, Māyājālatantra, Guhyasamāja, Cakrasaṃvara, and others. Most interesting 
in this respect is the list of Tantric texts that is attributed to the Vājiriya or Vajraparvata Nikāya 
by the Nikāyasaṅgraha. This list seems to represent a Sri Lankan version of the “18 Tantras topos” 
known from Amoghavajra, Jñānamitra and the Tibetan rÑiṅ-ma-pas.38 This list must go back 
to the period of strong Tantric Buddhist presence in Sri Lanka (seventh through the ninth 
centuries, perhaps still later), it was certainly not created by the author of the Nikāyasaṅgraha. 
On the contrary, we can safely assume that Dharmakı̄rti knew not much more about these 
texts than their mere titles.
In the context of the antithetical constellation of “true” Buddhism versus heresies, the 
Nikāyasaṅgraha’s image of India is peculiar. After the sāsana was brought to Sri Lanka by 
Mahinda, not much good was coming from Jambudvı̄pa (India) anymore.39 Mahinda trans­
formed Sri Lanka into the new home of the “true” Sthaviravāda, carried by the Sthāviriya 
Nikāya, which, in turn, is embodied in the Mahāvihāra. Jambudvı̄pa is almost a counter-image. 
It is a notorious source of “heresies” spilling over to Sri Lanka time and time again. Here they 
were accepted by the Abhayagiri and Jetavana Nikāyas but fiercely rejected by the Mahāvihāra. 
It is interesting to note that “heresies” never originated on Sri Lankan soil. Whatever wrong 
beliefs the Abhayagiri and Jetavana traditions accepted, were always imported from Jambudvı̄pa. 
The text even states that King Sena II (ninth century) set up guards all around the Sri Lankan 
shore to prevent “counterfeit dharmas” from entering the country.
The most notorious “heresy” adopted by Abhayagiri and Jetavana was a teaching called 
Vaitulyavāda. Scholars have generally understood this as some form of Mahāyāna or proto-
Mahāyāna.40 Dharmakı̄rti sees Vaitulyavāda as an independent Indian nikāya. He even speaks of 
the Vaitulyavādins as a fourth Sri Lankan nikāya besides the common three.41 They transmitted a 
corpus of texts called Vaitulyapiṭaka that, according to the Nikāyasaṅgraha, was initially produced 
by those tı̄rthakas who had infiltrated the saṃgha in the time of Aśoka.42 The Nikāyasaṅgraha 
informs us—accurately or not—that this “heresy” (adharmavāda) was suppressed and its books 
burned in Sri Lanka several times since its first appearance in the third century. But it reap­
peared again and again. The third arrival in the time of Mahāsena (3rd/4th cent.) is the dra­
matic nadir of the Nikāyasaṅgraha and signifies the blackest hour for the religious heroes of 
the Mahāvihāra. Due to a conspiracy involving the Abhayagiri monks, the king, and a Vaitulya 
adept from South India, the faithful monks of the Mahāvihāra were blackmailed into either 
adopting the Vaitulyavāda or die. Of course, they refused:
Even if we starve now, if we accept a non-dharma as the dharma, many people will 
assume the same and end up in hell. And all will be our fault. Therefore, we will not 
accept the Vaitulyavāda even if this would mean the end of our lives and chastity.43

--- PAGE 52 ---
Theravāda
31
Instead of dying, the pious monks from several Sthaviravāda-devoted monasteries in and 
around Anurādhapura abandoned their vihāras and fled to the south of the island. In their 
absence, the Abhayagiri rose to dominance, while the Mahāvihāra monastery was destroyed. 
The Mahāvaṃsa adds that the ruins were looted and taken to enlarge and decorate the 
Abhayagiri’s monastic buildings.44 This may have been the end of “true” Buddhism in the 
world. Luckily Mahāvihāra-friendly forces in the palace convinced king Mahāsena to rebuild 
the monastery and to invite the monks to return. A little later, he endangered the Mahāvihāra’s 
integrity again by trying to build the Jetavana monastery in a spot violating the Mahāvihāra’s 
constitutive boundary (sı̄mā).
This episode is obviously key to the antagonism between Mahāvihāra and Abhayagiri, and I 
suspect that the interpretation of these two monasteries as the headquarters of two rival nikāyas 
goes back to tensions that gained momentum during Mahāsena’s rule.45 Sadly we know only 
the Mahāvihāra version of the story, but there are hints suggesting that their version was not 
unrivaled.46 It is more than mere speculation to assume that Abhayagirivāsins did not agree 
with their depiction as the “bogeyman” of Sri Lankan Buddhist history. From indirect evidence, 
we do at least know that some members of the Abhayagiri and Jetavana launched a counter-
accusation, saying that it was the Mahāvihārins, not the Abhayagirivāsins, who corrupted the 
Vinaya (basically implying that the Mahāvihāra was the actual “apostate” faction).47
To my knowledge, scholars have never seriously doubted the historicity of the episode with 
the Mahāvihāra’s temporary abandonment, subsequent destruction, and the attempted ritual 
disintegration of its compound. However, I think there is good reason to at least consider 
that we are dealing with a “sectarian” fiction here. From a slab stone inscription found in the 
Jetavana,48 we know that the saṃgha of Anurādhapura was in turmoil around this time because 
of the introduction of a “Vayatuḍala book.”49 The inscription is very fragmentary, perhaps 
intentionally damaged, but it seems to say that the status of the text was disputed across the 
monasteries of Anurādhapura. There seem to have been advocates as well as opponents in all 
monasteries of the capital, including Mahāvihāra and Abhayagiri.50 The king issuing the inscrip­
tion was clearly in favor of the text in question. He even seems to have ordered (or allowed?) 
it to be studied and copied in all monasteries.51 Obviously, the problem was not solved by this 
verdict, so the status of Vaitulyavāda was still an issue when the Mahāvaṃsa was written two 
centuries later. Strangely, the Dı̄pavaṃsa—probably composed at a time when eyewitnesses 
of whatever happened under Mahāsena were still alive—remains silent on the whole affair. 
Therefore, I suspect that the antithetical picture of Mahāvihāra and Abhayagiri as camps of 
two opposing approaches to Buddhism may have developed gradually—idealized, historically 
deepened by the account of an early schism and narratively expanded by different versions 
of the “Mahāvihāra in danger” topos (i.e., its destruction/resurrection and sı̄mā affair) during 
the intervening period between the composition of Dı̄pavaṃsa and Mahāvaṃsa. The extent to 
which the Mahāvihāra has ever been the decided stronghold of “anti-Vaitulyavāda resistance” 
has to be reevaluated, once scholars systematically scrutinize the dichotomous image painted 
by the Mahāvaṃsa, the Nikāyasaṅgraha, and so on. This picture becomes especially doubtful if 
we understand “Mahāvihāra” not only as a local monastery of Anurādhapura but also as an 
island-wide nikāya network consisting of hundreds of monastic communities.
The Nikāyasaṅgraha reports that the Vaitulyavāda books were again burned after the 
Mahāvihāra was rebuilt, but these heretics returned for a fourth time in the sixth century.52 From 
this time onward, as the text says, the Vaitulyavāda “persisted in this country among the foolish 
folks” (bālajanayan kerehi). Neither the Mahāvaṃsa nor the Nikāyasaṅgraha ever specify which text 
titles the Vaitulyapiṭaka concretely contained, and I doubt that Dharmakı̄rti had more than a 
vague idea. All he has to say of these texts is based on the meager information earlier Mahāvihāra

--- PAGE 53 ---
Sven Bretfeld
32
authors had already given.53 Interestingly, neither Dharmakı̄rti nor these earlier sources saw the 
well-known (proto-)Mahāyāna texts Rāṣṭrapālaparipṛcchā, the Aṅulimālı̄yasūtra, and Ratnakūṭa as 
part of the Vaitulyapiṭaka; they are assumed to be independent texts. Dharmakı̄rti even believed 
them to have been composed by nikāyas different from the Vaitulyavādins.54 We should take 
this as a reminder for not being overhasty in associating the ancient anti-Vaitulya discourse 
with what we may understand as “Mahāyāna Buddhism” today. We cannot know for certain 
which types of texts, ideas, images and practices the fifth- and sixth-century authors of the 
Atthakathās or the Mahāvaṃsa—not to speak of much later authors like Dharmakı̄rti—would 
have classified as “Vaitulyavāda.”
The last big “heresy” that “beset” Sri Lanka was called Vājiriyavāda. According to the 
Nikāyasaṅgraha it was brought to Sri Lanka from Jambudvı̄pa by a “tı̄rthaka in the guise of a 
bhikṣu” belonging to the Vajraparvata Nikāya” (Nikāya-s chapt. 16). The king of this time was 
Sena I (early ninth century). The Nikāyasaṅgraha calls him “Matvaḷa Sen” (“Mad Sena” or “Sena 
the Drunkard”). This shows already the text’s disregard for this king. He “had not associated with 
learned people” (viyatun kerehi no-hasaḷa) and, therefore, accepted the new “heresy” (adharma) 
“like a grasshopper jumping into fire, taking it for gold” (ratranä-yi sitā gini vadanā paḷangak’hu 
seyin). The text gives little information on the content of the Vājiravāda but describes it as a 
“secret instruction” (rahasbaṇa). The list of text titles attributed to the Vājiriya Nikāya in an 
earlier chapter (see the previous discussion) makes it obvious that this story reflects the period 
of Tantric Buddhist activities in Sri Lanka. This suggests a relation of the term Vājiravāda 
to the well-known expression Vajrayāna—although we should be similarly cautious as with 
the Vaitulyavāda = Mahāyāna equation.55 Interestingly, the Nikāyasaṅgraha informs us that the 
Vājiriyavāda, although it was allegedly suppressed immediately by the following king (Sena II, 
second half of the ninth century), “persisted secretly among the foolish, unlearned folks (lāmaka 
vū ajñānayan) in this country.” The text does not explicitly mention that this “undercover cul­
ture” ever vanished, not even in the context of Pārākramabāhu’s reform.
As an addition to the Vājiravāda chapter, the Nikāyasaṅgraha informs us about another “her­
esy” called the “teaching of the Blue Robe” (nı̄lapaṭadarśana). This teaching never made it 
to Sri Lanka,56 but Dharmakı̄rti seems to have considered it related to the Vājiriyavāda and, 
therefore, gives us the story of this tradition in India. According to the text, it was created by 
a member of the Saṃmittı̄ya Nikāya in the time of the Indian king Śrı̄ Harṣa, who ruled in 
the southern Madhurā (Madurai) and was a contemporary of the Sri Lankan king Kumāradāsa 
(early sixth century).57 According to the Nikāyasaṅgraha the Nı̄lapaṭadarśana was based on a book 
proclaiming that the Three Jewels of Buddhism were the whore, booze, and the god of love.58 
In depicting how the Indian king put an end to the group cherishing such an “outrageous 
book” (avyavasthitgrantha), the Nikāyasaṅgraha arrives at its peak level of brutality and sarcasm:
Pretending to be pleased by this teaching, he [the king] sent for the bearers of the 
Nı̄lapaṭadarśana together with their books. Then he put them into a house together 
with their books and performed an Agnipūjā.59
Dharmakı̄rti claims that some followers of the group survived this disaster, so that this teach­
ing has “persisted up to now, like pestilence the root of which is unbroken.”60 In this case he 
definitely means up to his own time, but he is speaking of India, not Sri Lanka.
As already said, the whole trouble produced by the parallelism of different nikāyas in Sri 
Lanka comes to an abrupt end in the 15th year of Parākramabāhu’s reign (1165 CE). At least 
this is so according to the Nikāyasaṅgraha, whether the information is historically accurate 
is a different question.61 The text says that the king heard about the decline of the śāsana

--- PAGE 54 ---
Theravāda
33
due to the nikāya splits and because some “evil monks” had accepted non-dharmas like the 
Vaitulyavāda. Supported by the Thera Mahākāśyapa of Udumbagiri, a forest hermitage of the 
Mahāvihāra Nikāya,
he sent for several hundred ill-disciplined, evil Bhikṣus of the three nikāyas Dharmaruci, 
Sāgalika and Vaitulyavāda who spoil the unstained Śāsana of the Omniscient One with 
their wrong practices. He assembled them in a creeper-bower and, standing there 
through the three watches of the night, he had them all removed from the Śāsana. 
Having (thus) purified the Śāsana of the Buddha he unified the three nikāyas.”62
To “remove someone from the Śāsana” in this context means to exclude them from the saṃgha. 
The king himself is not able to do that. Monks have to perform the required ritual. This is why 
the causative is used. The king has the duty to prevent the excluded ex-monks—now normal 
citizens under his jurisdiction—from taking up the robes again.
Interestingly, the Vaitulyavāda is counted as a nikāya of its own, separate from Dharmaruci 
(Abhayagiri) and Sāgalika (Jetavana). Together with the Mahāvihāra, this would be four nikāyas 
in total. In any case, the same sentence speaks of “three nikāya” having been unified. This is an 
example for the many small inconsistencies which abound in the text.
For the Nikāyasaṅgraha the era of Buddhist nikāya pluralism ends here. For the rest of the 
text, only the Mahāvihāra tradition has prevailed. Still, supervising and censoring the saṃgha 
is as necessary as ever, with the text calling for regular sāsana purifications. We should not 
romanticize a system installed for the maintenance of the saṃgha’s “purity.” Sāsana purifications 
are a political instrument of systemic violence, depriving many people of their livelihoods and 
damaging the social status of the ones expelled from the order as well as their families. These 
measures are surely not welcomed by everybody and must have confounded large parts of soci­
ety whenever they were performed. As the acting Saṃgharāja of the island, the author himself 
held the highest position in this system. As such he needed to be backed by royal force. This 
is why the Nikāyasaṅgraha was written. And this is why it is not addressed to the monks of 
Sri Lanka but to kings and ministers. To plan and execute a sāsana purification the Saṃgharāja 
needs to convince the state authorities of its appropriateness and necessity:
Keeping this word in mind, it is proper for noble people with authority, suitable to 
their time, to make efforts to remove the stains of misconduct, which might have 
appeared in the Śāsana of the Omniscient in their respective area, to make the Śāsana 
of the Buddha, which is to persist for 5,000 years, shine in glory and—as the desirable 
fruit resulting from this act—to attain the fulfillment of everything eligible, namely the 
future attainment of heaven and liberation.63
Conclusion
Reading against the grain of the early vaṃsa literature, we have found no traces for the use of 
sectarian concepts, terminologies or narratives for about five centuries of Sri Lankan Buddhism, 
neither in the context of local conflicts, nor for the sake of “international” self-promotion. 
The oldest known evidence for a Sri Lankan nikāya identity dates to the third century ce and 
is connected to a Sri Lankan monastic settlement in the capital of the South Indian Ikṣvāku 
dynasty. Here they identified as belonging to the lineage family of the Sthaviras, apparently 
expressing proximity to some and remoteness from other nikāyas co-occupying the site. The 
evidence also indicates that local monastic rivalries in the Sri Lankan capital were meanwhile

--- PAGE 55 ---
Sven Bretfeld
34
interpreted as nikāya differences. With the compilation of the Dı̄pavaṃsa a new nikāya identity 
was created such that the Sri Lankans no longer claimed proximity to other nikāyas of India 
but highlighted their uniqueness as heirs of the only true and authentic form of Buddhism. 
A new word was created, theravāda, which simultaneously denotes “original” Buddhism and 
the Sri Lankan lineage. All other nikāyas were declared “apostates” who had lost the original 
heritage of the Buddha. It is not quite clear whether the compilers of the Dı̄pavaṃsa assumed 
still existing old “Theravāda” communities outside of Sri Lanka, although this is unlikely. Once 
the imagination of the Buddhist world as a sectarian battle field was established, ancient origin 
stories, like the accounts of the three rehearsals and the coming of Mahinda, became refor­
mulated as explanations of how Buddhist diversity emerged and how the “correct” Buddhist 
tradition made it to its Sri Lankan refuge.
The Mahāvaṃsa extends the “apostasy” accusation to the traditions of two monasteries of 
Anurādhapura. The lineages of Abhayagiri and Jetavana were now regarded as “heretics” who 
had broken with the true “Theravāda,” like so many Indian groups before. The Mahāvihāra 
lineage, to which the author of the Mahāvaṃsa belonged, claimed to be the sole representatives 
of the Sthaviras, or “Theravādins,” remaining in Sri Lanka (or on earth?). Their rival lineages’ 
own claim to be legitimate successors of the Sthavira lineage was denied by the Mahāvaṃsa 
and all later Mahāvihāra literature. This denial stood in open contradiction to the Indian and 
Chinese apperception of the “sectarian” topography of the Buddhist world which, from the 
sixth century onward, understood Mahāvihāra, Abhayagiri and Jetavana as three equally legiti­
mate representatives of the Sthavira Nikāya. The Abhayagiri’s reputation as a “Mahāyāna” and 
“Tantric” Buddhist center provided no contradiction in this respect. This was only problematic 
for the Mahāvihārins who claimed to always have “protected” the Pāli-based “original” form 
of Buddhism from such “heresies.”
We should beware of adopting the dualistic projection of Mahāvihāra authors—their “we 
against the rest”—as a descriptive model for the history of Buddhism, even in Sri Lanka itself. 
This may obscure more than it explains. The realities of cultural history are often more fluid and 
complex than the stories projected on them—this is especially the case with insider perspectives 
of groups narrativizing their own heroism within a world full of enemies. There is clear evidence 
that the Mahāvihāra’s association of the Theriya Nikāya with a certain doctrinal concept—Pāli 
Tripiṭaka-based Śrāvakayāna—was of limited scope before the Polonnaruva period (eleventh 
century), and perhaps even after. Indian Buddhist scholarship never shared this view. Neither did 
the Sri Lankan Abhayagiri and Jetavana Nikāyas. Even for the Mahāvihāra Nikāya such a “Pāli/
Śrāvakayāna-only approach” may not have been so historically stable and all-encompassing as 
the historiographers would have us believe.
Furthermore, we should not uncritically imagine the Sri Lankan nikāyas of the Anurādhapura 
period as island-wide organizational and doctrinal unities. Indeed, we have no other information 
than that the monks of each monastic community on the island were ordained into one of the 
three Vinaya versions that together constitute the Theriya Nikāya family. Hence, each monastery 
must have belonged to either the Mahāvihāra, Abhayagiri or Jetavana (sub-)Nikāya. But this does 
not mean that they all looked upon the respective monastery in the capital as their doctrinal 
and organizational sovereign. Such a degree of centralization was, at best, achieved in a much 
later time when the monastic landscape was controlled by a Saṃgharāja. In the Anurādhapura 
period, the transregional influence of the three nikāyas must have been much more limited. 
The nikāya identity of some—perhaps many—monasteries, especially outside of Rājaraṭṭha, 
may not have been much more to them than a theoretical idea. The fact that they shared 
the Vinaya infrastructure with one of Anurādhapura’s big monasteries may not have affected 
their autonomy in terms of monastic organization, jurisdiction, economical sustenance—and

--- PAGE 56 ---
Theravāda
35
doctrinal orientation. With this in mind, we should exercise caution in identifying well-known 
Sri Lankan “Mahāyāna” and “Vajrayāna” sites such as Tiriyaya and Buduruvegala as necessarily 
Abhayagiri-related. For all we know, they may well have been established, inhabited, and 
maintained by monks ordained under the Mahāvihāra Vinaya.
The social and historical complexity of the Sri Lankan discourse calls for us to revise our 
understanding of the Theriya lineage as the carrier of a single, homogeneous type or form 
of Buddhism. Special care is demanded in studying the geographically broader scope of the 
lineage after it had spread into Southeast Asia. As several scholars have indicated—the cultures 
of the so-called Theravāda countries (Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Cambodia, etc.) should 
not indiscriminately be understood as adhering to one and the same Buddhist religion.
Regretfully, the Mahāvihāra’s annexation of the term Theravāda with its synthetic design as 
both a nikāya name and a dogmatic concept, has been reproduced by modern research. The 
Mahāvihāra historiography’s dichotomy of later “heresies” versus an authentic, pristine sāsana 
resonated neatly with the twentieth-century approach to the Buddhist world as subdivided into 
two basic dogmatic traditions: Mahāyāna and an older, non-Mahāyāna form. In this context 
the sectarian agenda of Mahāvihāra historiography yielded, perhaps, its strongest effect, when 
modern scholars and Buddhists established the convention of denoting non-Mahāyāna forms 
of Buddhism as “Theravāda Buddhism.”
Notes
	 1	The polemical impact of the Christian concept of “sect” is inbuilt into its etymology. It is a common 
misunderstanding that sect was derived from Latin secare, “to cut,” and meant “section” or “splinter group.” 
The actual etymological root is Latin sequi, “to follow,” and expressed a disapproval for the act of “dangling 
after” a heretic teacher. The modern sociological concept of sect, as coined by Ernst Troelsch and Max 
Weber, is arguably (!) disengaged from its polemical heritage, but still ties a sect to a distinguished belief 
system as the prime cohesive factor of community building. The logic of the Buddhist nikāya concept is 
different.
	 2	In practice, different nikāyas can be based on the same recension of the Vinaya but deviate in its interpreta­
tion or application of the rules. For example, the manner of tying the upper robe around the shoulders 
(both shoulders covered instead of one) is a characteristic of the Amarapura Nikāya of modern Sri Lanka.
	 3	The modern nikāyas of Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, for instance, are all based on the same recension of 
the Tripiṭaka.
	 4	On the different Buddhist traditions on the dating of the first nikāya split, see Kieffer-Pülz 2000: 292–293.
	 5	The earliest extant nikāya genealogies like the already mentioned Samayabhedoparacaṇacakra, the different 
accounts compiled in the Nikāyabhedavyākhyāna, the Śāriputra- and Mañjuśrı̄paripṛcchāsūtras, as well as the 
Dı̄pavaṃsa, are dated to the first half of the first millennium ce. Bareau (1955) has classified them as the 
première époque of nikāya genealogy.
	 6	See, for example, LL from Bodhgayā (first century bce).
	 7	Sujato (2007: 8) has already argued that the term Haimavata was still a toponym, not a nikāya name, at that 
time.
	 8	The Sri Lankan tradition of the third century is a good example for such a blend. The “nikāya statement” 
they left behind in Nāgārjunakoṇḍa is an elaborate taxonomy integrating Kāśyapa as a founding figure 
(Theriya), Vibhajjavāda as a doctrinal approach and Tambapaṇṇika/Mahāvihāravāsin as local anchors. The 
Abhayagiri and Jetavana sub-nikāyas brought further founding figures (Dhammaruci, Sāgala) into the game 
(see the following discussion).
	 9	For a detailed analysis of the nikāya concept in Buddhist literature, see Sujato (2007), who has also argued 
for such a late emergence of the Buddhist nikāyas.
	10	This does not mean, of course, that vinaya- or dharma-related conflicts between individual communities 
were unknown before. The nikāya idea just brings such conflicts from a micro- to a meso-sociological 
level.
	11	I agree with Sujato (2007: 9–12) that these accounts are rather origin myths explaining the “sectarian” 
world of the respective authors than historical memories of actual events.

--- PAGE 57 ---
Sven Bretfeld
36
	12	Indeed, we find the Sanskrit equivalent Sthaviravāda in older secondary literature on Indian Buddhism. 
But this term was invented by modern scholars, reading Sri Lankan Pāli terminology into their Sanskrit 
sources. Skilling (2009: 65) has critically pointed to this momentous terminological inaccuracy of modern 
Buddhist scholarship. However, Skilling is wrong in calling Sthaviravāda a “ghost word.” For Indian Sanskrit 
literature it is. But it often occurs as a “Sinhalized” Sanskritism (or a neologism in lieu of a Sanskrit 
loanword) for Pāli theravāda in the fourteenth- and fifteenth-century Sinhalese works Nikāyasaṅgraha and 
Saddharmaratnākara.
	13	On the rarity of the term in premodern literature, see Gethin 2012.
	14	On the problem of the “belief-centrism” in the Study of Religion see Lopez 1998. See also Bretfeld 2019.
	15	On the methodology of some of these approaches—Transnational History, histoire croisée, and Global 
History—and their impacts on Religious and Buddhist Studies see Bretfeld 2012a.
	16	Examples can be found abundantly. To give a few examples, Paranavitana (1928: passim) qualifies the 
Mahāvihārins as “orthodox.” Also for Holt (1991: 60, 72, 227), the Mahāvihāra and Buddhaghosa represent 
Sri Lanka’s “orthodoxy.” Sujato (2007: 101, n. 1) argues for the Mahāvihārins as “the” Theravādins of Sri 
Lanka. The description of the Abhayagiri tradition as “heterodox Buddhism” is featured in Chandawimala 
(2013, 2016).
	17	On the Nāgārjunakoṇḍa inscriptions, see Vogel 1933, Sircar and Lahiri 1959–1960, and recently Baums 
et al. 2016.
	18	ācarı̄yānaṃKasmira-Gaṃdhāra-Cı̄na-Cilāta-Tosali-Avaraṃta-Vaṃga-Vanavāsi-Yavana-Da[mila-Pa]lura-
Taṃbaṃṇidı̄pa-pas[ā]dakānaṃ theriyānaṃ Taṃbapa[ṃ]ṇakānaṃ (Second Apsidal Temple inscription F, Vogel 
1933: 22).
	19	āchariyānaṃ theriyānaṃ vibhajavādānaṃ Kasmira-Gaṃdhāra-Yavana-Vanavāsa-Taṃbapaṃṇidipa-pasādakanaṃ 
mahāvihāravāsinaṃ (Footprint slab inscription, Sircar and Lahiri 1959–1960: 250).
	20	There is a controversy among scholars as to whether the word mahāvihāravāsinaṃ refers to the well-known 
Sri Lankan sub-nikāya of that name or just states that the community in question inhabited some local 
large monastery (mahāvihāra). The latter was the opinion of Sircar and Lahiri (1959–1960: 249). Walters’s 
(1997) and Cousins’s (2001) understanding of the word as a reference to the Sri Lankan sub-nikāya makes 
more sense.
	21	This is the first and the third list transmitted in the Tarkajvāla attributed to Bhavya (cf. Bareau 1955: 17 and 
22). Bhavya’s second list mentions them too and even separates the Vibhajyavādins completely from the 
Sthaviras/Mahāsāṃghika dichotomy and declares them a third primordial nikāya (Bareau 1955: 23).
	22	On Cousins’s Vibhajyavādins theory, see also Wynne 2018.
	23	That these two historiographic sections of the lost ancient Sinhala commentarial literature 
(Sı̄haḷaṭṭhakathā)—and not, as some other scholars believe, a Mahāvihāra and an Abhayagiri recension of 
the Sı̄haḷaṭṭhakathā—were the main sources of the Dı̄pavaṃsa was convincingly suggested by Perera 1979. 
The Sı̄haḷaṭṭhakathā-Mahāvaṃsa cannot be dated with any certainty. According to Perera (1979: 49–50), it 
had emancipated itself from the historical introduction of the Mahāṭṭhakathā at a certain time and received 
its final form in the time of Mahāsena (third or fourth century).
24		Also Wynne’s recent discussion of Cousins’s Vibhajjavāda theory arrives at the conclusion that the 
Mahāvihāra lineage abandoned their Vibhajjavāda identity around the fourth or fifth century (Wynne 
2018: 255). Both authors have, however, not noticed that this process was accompanied by the formation of 
a new identity that radically denied any family relationship to the extant Indian nikāyas—including those 
(Mahı̄śāsakas, etc.) with which they may have constituted the Vibhajjavāda group earlier.
	25	The Vaṃsatthappakāsinı̄, the commentary on the Mahāvaṃsa of an uncertain date, does not know the term 
nikāya either and uses vāda as a default. The Mahābodhivaṃsa (eleventh century) uses nikāya once (Mhbv 
96.29) and speaks of vādas in other passages. In the Cūlavaṃsa (thirteenth) the word nikāya occurs fre­
quently, usually to denote the “three nikāyas” (nikāyattaya) of Sri Lanka (e.g., Culv 41.97, 44.131, 48.73). 
The Nikāyasaṅgraha (fifteenth century) distinguishes the terms vāda and nikāya rigorously: vāda always 
denotes a teaching, while monastic lineages are called nikāyas. The Sāsanavaṃsa’s (nineteenth century) 
default term for “monastic lineage” is gaṇa (Sas 13–14), but the adjective nikāyika is used for the members 
of modern Sri Lankan faction usually known as Amarapura Nikāya (Sas 142, 159, 163). On the terms vāda 
and kula as equivalents to nikāya, see also Gethin 2012: 11.
	26	Cousins (2001: 151) states that the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s nikāya genealogy “derives ultimately from Vasumitra’s trea­
tise.” Considering the nikāya names known to the Dı̄pavaṃsa but unknown to Vasumitra, I deem it more 
likely that the Dı̄pavaṃsa used a scheme similar to Bhavya’s second list (Bareau 1955: 23), but without 
adopting its tripartite arrangement.

--- PAGE 58 ---
Theravāda
37
	27	Sattarasa bhinnavādā eko vādo abhinnako, sabbev’ aṭṭhārasa honti ’bhinnavādena te saha. Nigrodho va mahārukkho 
theravādānam uttamo anūnam anadhikañ c’ eva kevalam jinasāsanaṃ, kaṇṭakā viya rukkhamhi nibbattā vādasesakā 
(Dı̄p 5.51–52).
	28	Atthaṃ dhammañ ca bhindiṃsu ekadesañ ca saṃgahaṃ gaṇṭhiñ ca ekadesamhi chaḍḍetvāna akaṃsu te. Nāmaṃ 
liṅgaṃ parikkhāram ākappakaraṇāni ca pakatibhāvaṃ vijahetvā tañ ca aññam akaṃsu te. These two verses, that 
can be called the Dı̄pavaṃsa’s “apostasy formula”—occur two times, once after the Mahāsāṃghikas and 
their offsprings are enumerated (Dı̄p 5.43–44) and, again, after the presentation of the Mahiṃsāsakas, 
Vajjiputtakas and their offsprings (Dı̄p 5.49–50).
	29	The Pāli inscriptions of Śrı̄kṣetra (Lower Burma) and Dvāravatı̄ (Thailand), dated between the fifth and the 
eighth centuries, are a possible objection. Their affiliation has been much debated. If they were connected 
to descendants of an ancient settlement of what we have called the “Indian proto-Theriyas” (e.g., of the 
Aśoka period or soon after), we may actually have traces of a Sri Lanka–independent parallel transmission 
of (some version of) the “Pāli Canon.” However, I see no good reason to assume such a scenario, even 
if it may conform to post-Dhammazedi (fifteenth century) origin stories of how Buddhism first arrived 
in Southeast Asia. As architectural and art-historical evidence suggests, an exchange triangle comprising 
Āndhra, Sri Lanka, and Southeast Asia was well established from the fourth century onward (cf. Stargardt 
1990, Assavavirulhakarn 2010; also Frasch 1998). I deem it therefore likely that the Pāli inscriptions of the 
Southeast Asian Mon and Pyu cultures go back to these later culture contacts. In other words, together 
with the Nāgārjunakoṇḍa inscriptions, the earliest of the Southeast Asian Pāli inscriptions seem to witness 
the beginnings of the Sri Lankan Buddhist tradition(s) “going global”—a process that will gain momen­
tum during the subsequent centuries (see below). It further seems that Buddhaghosa (fifth century) was 
well aware of these expansive dynamics of the Sri Lankan traditions in his time. It is not unlikely that he 
had especially “Tambapaṇṇika-related” (and, therefore, Pāli-using) communities like the ones in Āndhra, 
Kāñcipura, Bodhgayā and—as it seems—Southeast Asia in mind, when he states the reason why he trans­
lated the ancient Sinhalese commentaries into Pāli: for the sake of the monks outside the island (dı̄pantare 
bhikkhujanassa) who cannot understand the language of Sı̄haḷadı̄pa (Sp(J) 1.8).
	30	Apart from the fact that there is no epigraphic testimony of a Buddhist group simply calling itself Sthavira, 
already the early Indian nikāya genealogies do not seem to know the Sthaviras “proper” as a (still) living 
and breathing community. They either identify the Ur-Sthaviras (pūrva-Sthavira) with another existing 
nikāya, notably the Haimavatas (Vasumitra, Bhavya I), or they use Sthavira as an umbrella term for (i.e., a 
common ancestor of) a group of existing nikāyas (Bhavya II). Bhavya III is a mix. Was “Sthavira” ever the 
self-designation of a concrete group or rather a projected category of historical construction, signifying the assumed 
original opponent of the Mahāsaṃghikas within early dichotomic models of Buddhist diversification.
	31	A Sanskrit inscription found near the “Twin Ponds” of the Abhayagiri monastery (EZ I 1–9) suggests 
that the Abhayagirivāsins had adopted the idea of the four main nikāyas by the ninth century. They seem 
to even have hosted members of all four within its compound (Gunawardana 1979: 250–254, but see the 
objection to this theory in Bechert 1993: 15).
32		I use the title in the stem form instead of the casus rectus, which adds the suffix -ya at the end of the title. 
The widespread spelling Nikāyasaṅgraha-wa is morphologically wrong and not attested before Fernando 
and Gunawardhana 1908 introduced it for no clear reason.
	33	I have recently edited and translated the text which is now awaiting publication by the Pali Text Society. 
As the following refers to a work in print, I have indicated chapters instead of the not yet finalized page 
and line numbers.
	34	Regarding the rich collection of Tantric material the Abhayagiri was famous for between the seventh and 
ninth century, it is quite obvious that Dharmakı̄rti had no access to any textual remains but knew of it 
only through hearsay and older literary references. Also his idea of what a Vaitulya (~Mahāyāna) text may 
have looked like seems to have been rather vague.
	35	Ävätti śōka no-karava. No-han̆ḍava. Yahapata napura kiyā apaṭa vehesa dena mahaṇu maḷa pasu meviṭa apa kämät­
tak-ma-ya. Esē heyin somnas vuva manā tanhi kumak piṇisa dormanas va han̆ḍavu-da? Metan paṭan apa kämättak 
karamha. No-kämättak no-karamha-yi kı̄ (Nikāya-s chapt. 2).
	36	Nikāya-s chapt. 5.
	37	Nikāya-s chapt. 8.
	38	On the topos of the “18 Tantras,” see Eastman 1981, Giebel 1995, Gray 2009, Almogi 2014. Many of the 
titles have been wrongly emended by modern editors of the Nikāyasaṅgraha, although the manuscripts 
partly contain the correct Sanskrit titles of texts known from Tibetan and Chinese translations. The titles 
seem to have gone through a stage of Pāli transmission before they reached the Nikāyasaṅgraha. After 
the decline of Tantric Buddhism in Sri Lanka, these names seem to have circulated among Mahāvihāra

--- PAGE 59 ---
Sven Bretfeld
38
scholars who probably used them for name-dropping historical examples of “fake-dharmas.” A slightly 
earlier example is a Pāli text called Sārasaṅgaha which quotes a shortened version of the same list (Ss 
45–46).
	39	The only exception mentioned in the text is when Buddhaghosa came to Sri Lanka from Jambudvı̄pa “to 
glorify the Pāli-dharma of the tripiṭaka” (Nikāya-s chapt. 14) and the Indian Mahāthera Jotipāla who came 
in the sixth century “to defeat the Vaitulyavāda on the island in debate” (parājesi vivādena dı̄pe Vaitulyavādino, 
Nikāya-s chapt. 14).
	40	For a detailed discussion of this term, see Skilling 2013.
	41	Nikāya-s chapt. 19.
	42	Nikāya-s chapt. 10.
	43	Api idin sayin vı̄ namut adharmaya “dharmaya ya”-yi gatumō nam bohō denā e-ma gena apāya gata veti. Api häma-
da sāparādha vamha. Ebävin apagē jı̄vitabrahmacariyaṭa antarāya vē namudu Vaitulyavāda no-ganumha-yi (Nikāya-s 
chapt. 12).
	44	Mhv 37.12–13.
	45	I agree with Cousins (2012) that the account of a much earlier nikāya split already in the first century bce 
is probably an anachronistic projection of a much later conflict.
	46	It is not clear what this rivaling version consisted of or who transmitted it. We know that it existed because 
the Mahāvaṃsa-ṭı̄kā̄, commenting on this episode, cites an unknown commentary to the Dı̄pavaṃsa cursing 
anybody who relates the Mahāsena story “wrongly,” that is, differing from how it is told in the Mahāvaṃsa 
(Mhv-ṭ 683). Concretely, there seems to have been a version of the story implying that the sı̄mā of the 
Mahāvihāra was actually disintegrated or shrunk when the Jetavana monastery was built. See also Walters 
1999. On the complex Vinaya jurisdiction this story builds on (and which Geiger has not understood 
when translating the Mahāvaṃsa), see Kieffer-Pülz 1999.
	47	Mhv-ṭ 175–176. It is a Mahāvihāra author who reports this story, of course only in order to refute it as a 
lie (abhūtavacana).
	48	EZ IV 273–285. For a better reading see Ranawella 2005.
	49	The inscription uses the term Vayatuḍala book in the singular. Paranavitana (EZ IV 283) even noted the 
singular of potahi but translated it as plural anyway, probably under the influence of the Nikāyasaṅgraha’s 
term Vaitulyapiṭaka, which suggests a collection of several scriptures.
	50	Walters 1997 and Ranawella 2005 have followed Paranavitana (EZ IV 273–285) in reading the Mahāvaṃsa’s 
conflict constellation—Mahāvihāra versus Abhayagiri—into the inscription. This is, however, not conclu­
sive from the still legible parts of the text. There are rather indicators suggesting that the pro- and contra-
Vayatuḍala groups were not clearly distributed on the map of Anurādhapura’s monasteries (see Nikāya-s 
Introduction).
	51	Walters’s interpretation goes in this direction (Walters 1997: 113). It seems to be based on the inscription’s 
general tone rather than on a preserved text fragment.
	52	Nikāya-s chapt. 14.
	53	 Dharmakı̄rti’s only addition to the non-Tantric “heretical” texts is their attribution to different ācārya-
nikāyas. But this is just the mechanical mapping of the Atthakathās’ text list (see n. 72) with the Mahāvaṃsa’s 
list of nikāyas (see Nikāya-s Introduction).
	54	The Raṭṭhapālagajjita (Rāṣṭrapālaparipṛcchā?) and Aṅgulimālapiṭaka (Aṅgulimālı̄yasūtra?) are mentioned in Sp 
IV 742–743 and Spk II 201–202 alongside the Vetullapiṭaka and other “inauthentic” texts (abuddhavacana).
	55	On the controversy around the terms Vajrayāna, Tantrism, and Mantraṇaya in recent scholarship, see, for 
example, Acri 2016. Pertinent studies show that the Sri Lankans had their own peculiar take on “Esoteric 
Buddhism,” which has not yet been fully explored but contains features differing from north Indian pen­
dants. See, for example, the studies on the Sri Lankan pāṃsukulika traditions (Sundberg 2014), the obscure 
padhānagharas (Sundberg 2004), iron Stūpas (Sundberg 2018), pabbatavihāras (Powell 2018) and the Tantra 
list of the Nikāyasaṅgraha (Nikaya-s Introduction).
	56	Some scholars claim that this teaching arrived in Sri Lanka simultaneously with the Vājiriyavāda 
(Paranavitana 1928: 39, Bechert 2005a: 63) or in the time of Kumāradāsa, even that it was supported by 
this king (Deegalle 2004: 57). This is a misreading of the text.
	57	The “teaching of the Blue Robe” refers to the Nı̄lāmbaras or Nilapaṭadarśanin, an antinomian Śaivaist 
ascetic tradition known from the Āgamaḍambara by Bhaṭṭa Jayanta and the Purāthanprabandhasaṅgraha. 
Philological considerations suggest that the Nikāyasaṅgraha’s chapter goes back to a variant version of the 
story told in the latter (PPS 19, see Nikāya-s chapt. 17). On this group, see also Sundberg 2014: 179–181 
and the literature mentioned there. On their relationship to Buddhism, see Ruegg 1981.
	58	Veśyā ratnaṃ surā ratnaṃ ratnaṃ devo manobhavaḥ. Nikāya-s chapt. 17.

--- PAGE 60 ---
Theravāda
39
	59	Ē darśanayehi pahan ekak’hu men nı̄lapaṭadharayan hā ovungē patpot hā genvā gena patpot hā samaga ovun pāyeka 
ätuḷu koṭa agnipūjā kaḷaha (Nikāya-s chapt. 17). Who would have thought that the titillating sight of burning 
heretical flesh—so often assigned to medieval Christianity—would have so captured the imagination of 
Buddhist authors?
	60	Ekala eyin värada giya śēṣaya mul nusun vyādhiyak men mevak perava pävättē-ma-ya. (Nikāya-s chapt. 17).
	61	See, for example, the dispute on the “afterlife” of the Abhayagiri tradition between Gunawardana (1979) 
and Bechert (1993). Furthermore, the “three nikāyas” are still mentioned in the Dambulla inscription by 
Nissaṅka Malla (1187–1196).
	62	Ikbiti nirmala vū sarvajñaśāsanaya duṣpratipattı̄n kelesana Dharmaruciya Sāgalikaya Vaitulyavādiya yana 
nikāyatrayavāsı̄ vū noyek siya gaṇan duḥśı̄lapāpabhikṣun genvā latāmaṇḍapayehi sannihita karavā tunyam rātriyehi 
siṭipiyehi siṭa ovun hämadena-ma śāsanāpagata karavā buddhaśāsanaya śuddha koṭa tun nikāya samaga karavā 
(Nikāya-s chapt. 19).
	63	Mē pālivacanaya sita tabā tatkālōcita-ājñāpuraḥsarapuruṣōttamayan visin tama tamā avadhiyaṭa sarvajñaśāsanayehi 
pämiṇi duḥśı̄lamala paha kirı̄men pasvādahasak pavatnā lesa budusasun babuḷuvā eyin janita vū iṣṭavipākayan matu 
svargamōkṣasampattisaṃkhyātasakalābhimatārthasiddhiyaṭa utsāha situ va yahapati (Nikāya-s Conclusion).
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016.“Introduction. Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes, 7th–13th 
Century AD.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia. Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, ed. Andrea 
Acri, 1–27. Singapore: ISEAS Yusof Ishak Institute.
Almogi, Orna. 2014. “The Eighteen Mahāyoga Tantric Cycles. A Real Canon or the Mere Notion of One.” 
Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 30: 47–110.
Assavavirulhakarn, Prapod. 2010. The Ascendancy of Theravāda Buddhism in Southeast Asia. Bangkok: Silkworm 
Books.
Bareau, André. 1955. Les sectes bouddhiques du petit véhicule. Publications de l’École Française d’Extrême-
Orient. Saigon: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Baums, Stefan, et al. 2016. “Early Inscriptions of Āndhradeśa. Results of a Fieldwork in January and 
February 2016.” Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 102: 355–398.
Bechert, Heinz. 1985. “Einleitung.” In Zur Schulzugehörigkeit von Werken der Hı̄nayāna- Literatur. Symposien 
zur Buddhismusforschung, III.1, Vol. 1. Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen. ed. 
Heinz Bechert, 20–54. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Bechert, Heinz. 1993. “The Nikāya-s of Mediaeval Sri Lanka and the Unification of the Saṅgha by 
Parākramabāhu I.” In Studies on Buddhism in Honour of Professor A. K. Warder, ed. N.K. Wagle, F. Watanabe, 
11–21. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Bechert, Heinz. 2005a. Eine regionale hochsprachliche Tradition in Südasien. Sanskrit-Literatur bei den buddhist­
ischen Singhalesen. Veröffentlichungen zu den Sprachen und Kulturen Südasiens, Heft 37. Wien: Verlag 
der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Bechert, Heinz. 2005b. “Notes on the Formation of Buddhist Sects and the Origins of Mahāyāna.” In 
Buddhism. Critical Concepts in Religious Studies, Vol. 2, The Early Buddhist Schools and Doctrinal History; 
Theravāda Doctrine, ed. Paul Williams, 23–33. London and New York: Routledge.
Berkwitz, Stephen C. 2004. Buddhist History in the Vernacular. The Power of the Past in Late Medieval Sri Lanka. 
Brill’s Indological Library, 23. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Bretfeld, Sven. 2012a. “Dynamiken der Religionsgeschichte. Lokale und translokale Verflechtungen.” In 
Religionswissenschaft. Ein Studienbuch, ed. Michael Stausberg, 423–433. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Bretfeld, Sven. 2012b. “Resonant Paradigms in the Study of Religion and the Emergence of Theravāda 
Buddhism.” Religion 42 (2): 273–297.
Bretfeld, Sven. 2019. “Theravāda Buddhism.” In Oxford Research Encyclopedia. Religion. URL: https://
oxfordre.com/religion/.
Chandawimala, Rangama. 2013. Buddhist Heterodoxy of Abhayagiri Sect. A Study of the School of Abhayagiri in 
Ancient Sri Lanka. Saarbrücken: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Chandawimala, Rangama. 2016. Heterodox Buddhism. The School of Abhayagiri. Colombo: Rangama 
Chandawimala Thero.
Collins, Steven. 1990. “On the Very Idea of the Pāli Canon.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 15: 89–126.
Cousins, Lance S. 2001. “On the Vibhajjavādins. The Mahiṃsāsaka, Dhammaguttaka, Kassapiya and 
Tambapaṇṇiya Branches of the Ancient Theriyas.” Buddhist Studies Review 18 (2): 131–182.

--- PAGE 61 ---
Sven Bretfeld
40
Cousins, Lance S. 2012. “The Teachings of the Abhayagiri School.” In How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring 
Buddhist Identities, eds. Peter Skilling et al., 67–127. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Cūlv. = Dhammakitti. Cūḷavaṃsa. 1925–1927), ed. Wilhelm Geiger. Cūḷavaṃsa. 2 vols. London: Pali Text 
Society.
Deegalle, Mahinda. 1999. “A Search for Mahāyāna in Sri Lanka.” Journal of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 22: 2.
Deegalle, Mahinda 2004.“Theravāda Pre-understandings in Understanding Mahāyāna.” In Three Mountains 
and Seven Rivers: Prof. Musashi Tachikawa’s Felicitation Volume, ed. Shoun Hino, 43–64. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarasidass.
Desző, Csaba. 2004. Much Ado about Religion. By Bhaṭṭa Jayanta. The Clay Sanskrit Library. New York: New 
York University Press and JJC Foundation.
Dı̄p. = Dı̄pavaṃsa. 1992. ed. Hermann Oldenberg. The Dı̄pavaṃsa. An Ancient Buddhist Historical Record. 
Delhi: Williams & Norgate.
Eastman, Kenneth. May 8, 1981. “The Eighteen Tantras of the Vajraśekhara/Māyājāla”. Presented to the 26th 
International Conference of Orientalists in Japan, Tokyo.
EZ I = Epigraphia Zeylanica. 1904–1912. ed. Don Martino de Zilva Wickremasinghe. Epigraphia Zeylanica. 
Being Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Ceylon. Vol. 2. Archaeological Survey of Ceylon. London: Oxford 
University Press.
EZ IV = Epigraphica Zeylanica. 1934–1941. ed. Senerat Paranavitana. Epigraphica Zeylanica. Being Lithic and 
Other Inscriptions of Ceylon. Vol. 4. London: Oxford University Press.
Fernando, C.M., Gunawardhana, W.F. 1908. The Nikāya Saṅgrahawa. Being a History of Buddhism in India and 
Ceylon. Colombo: H. C. Cottle.
Frasch, Tilman. 1998 “A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal.” In From the Mediterranean to the South 
China Sea. Miscellaneous Notes, ed. Claude Guillot, 69–92. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Frauwallner, Erich. 1955. “Die ceylonesischen Chroniken und die erste buddhistische Mission nach 
Hinterindien.” In Actes du IVe Congrés International des Sciences Anthropologiques et Ethnologiques. Vol. 2, 
192–197. Wien: Holzhausen.
Gethin, Rupert. 2012. “Was Buddhaghosa a Theravādin? Buddhist Identity in the Pali Commentaries and 
Chronicles.” In How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, ed. Peter Skilling et al., 1–66. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Giebel, Rolf W. 1995. “The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shi-pa-hui chih-kuei. An Annotated 
Translation.” Journal of the Naritasan Institute for Buddhist Studies 18: 107–201.
Gornall, Alastair. 2020. Rewriting Buddhism. Pali Literature and Monastic Reform in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270. 
London: UCL Press.
Gray, David B. 2009. “On the Very Idea of a Tantric Canon. Myth, Politics, and the Formation of the 
Bka’gyur.” Journal of the International Association of Tibetan Studies 5: 1–37.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. 1979. Robe and Plough. Monasticism and Economic Interest in Early Medieval Sri Lanka. 
Association of Asian Studies, Monographs and Papers, 35. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Hirakawa, Akira. 1990. A History of Indian Buddhism. From Sakyamuni to Early Mahayana. Asian Studies at 
Hawaii, 36. Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press.
Holt, John. 1991. Buddha in the Crown. Avalokiteśvara in the Buddhist Traditions of Sri Lanka. New York: Oxfort 
University Press.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. 1999. “Ceremonial Boundaries in the Buddhist Monastic Tradition of Sri Lanka.” In 
Wilhelm Geiger and the Study of the History and Culture of Sri Lanka, ed. Ulrich Everding and Asanga 
Tilakaratne, 43–90. Colombo: Goethe Institute, Postgraduate Institute of Pali, and Buddhist Studies.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. 2000. “Die buddhistische Gemeinde.” In Der Buddhismus I. Der Indische Buddhismus 
und seine Verzweigungen, Religionen der Menschheit, 24.1. ed. Heinz Bechert, 281–402. Stuttgart: 
Kohlhammer.
Lamotte, Étienne. 1988. History of Indian Buddhism. From the Origins to the Śaka Era. Louvain-La-Neuve: 
Univ. catholique de Louvain. Inst. orientaliste.
LL = Lüders, Heinrich. 1973. A List of Brāhmı̄ Inscriptions from the Earliest Times to About A. D. 400 With the 
Exeception of those of Asoka. Varanasi and Delhi: Indological Book House.
Lopez, Donald S. 1998. “Belief.” In Critical Terms for Religious Studies, ed. Mark C. Taylor, 21–35. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Mhbv: Upatissa. Mahābodhivaṃsa. 2000. ed. S. Arthur Strong. The Mahābodhivaṃsa. Oxford: The Pali Text 
Society.

--- PAGE 62 ---
Theravāda
41
Mhv-ṭ = Vaṃsatthappakāsinı̄ (Mahāvaṃsa-ṭı̄kā). 1977. ed. G.P. Malalasekera. Vaṃsattha-ppakāsinı̄. 
Commentary on the Mahāvaṃsa. 2 vols. Pali Text Society, Text Series, 58. London, Henley, and Boston: 
The Pali Text Society.
Mhv = Mahānāma. Mahāvaṃsa. 1908. ed. Wilhelm Geiger. The Mahāvaṃsa. London: Pali Text Society.
Nattier, Janice J., Prebish, Charles S. 1976. “Mahāsāṃghika Origins. The Beginnings of Buddhist 
Sectarianism.” History of Religions 16: 237–272.
Neelis, Jason. 2010. Early Buddhist Transmission and Trade Networks. Mobility and Exchange Within and Beyond 
the Northwestern Borderlands of South Asia, 391. Leiden and New York: Brill.
Nikāya-s = Dharmakı̄rti, Jayabāhu. Nikāyasaṅgraha. (Forthcoming). ed. Sven Bretfeld. Nikāyasaṅgraha. A 
Transmission History of the Śāsana by Jayabāhu Dēvaraks .ita Dharmakı̄rti. Critical Edition and English 
Translation. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Nikāyabh-vy = Bhāvaviveka. Nikāyabhedavyākhyāna. 2008. ed. and trans. by Malcolm David Eckel. 
Bhāvaviveka and his Buddhist Opponents. Harvard Oriental Series, 70. Cambridge and London: Harvard 
University Press.
Norman, K.R. 1978. “The Role of Pāli in Early Sinhalese Buddhism.” In Buddhism in Ceylon and Studies 
on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries, ed. Heinz Bechert, 28–47. Goottingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht.
Paranavitana, Senerat. 1928.“Mahāyānism in Ceylon.” Ceylon Journal of Science 2: 35–71.
Perera, Frank. 1979. The Early Historiography of Ceylon. Dissertation zur Erlangung des Doktorgrades. 
Göttingen: Georg-August-Universität Göttingen.
Powell, Kellie Marie. 2018. “Rituals and Ruins. Recovering the History of Vajrayāna Buddhism in Sri 
Lanka”. MA thesis. Berkeley: University of California. https://www.academia.edu/s/ec22581f59/ritu­
als-and-ruins-recovering-the-history-of-vajrayana-buddhism-in-sri-lanka?source=link. online.
PPS = Puratanaprabandhasangraha. 1936. ed. Jinavijaya Muni. Puratanaprabandhasangraha. A Collection of 
Many Old Prabandhas Similar and Analogous to the Matter in the Prabandhacintāmaṇ̣i. Singhi Jaina Series, 2. 
Calcutta: Adhis․t․hātā-Sin∙ghı̄ Jaina Jñānapı̄t․ha.
Ranawella, Sirimal. 2005. “Jētavanārāma Fragmentary Slab Inscription of King Mahāsena (276–303).” 
In Sinhala Inscriptions in the Colombo National Museum, ed. Sirimal Ranawella, 3–5. Spolia Zeylanica: 
Bulletin of the National Museum of Sri Lanka, 42. Colombo: Department of National Museums.
Ruegg, David Seyfort. 1981.  “Deux problèmes d’exégèse et de pratique tantrique selon Dı̄paṃkarasrı̄jñāna 
et le Paiṇḍapātika de Yavadvı̄pa: Suvarṇadvı̄pa.” In Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R. A. Stein, ed. 
Michael Strickman, 212–226. Bruxelles: Institut belge des hautes études chinoises.
Sās = Sāsanavaṃsa. 1897. ed. Mabel Bode. Sāsanavaṃsa. London: Pali Text Society.
Sasaki, Shizuka. 2002. “Methods of Buddhist Sects in the Aśoka Period.” In Buddhist and Indian Studies in 
Honour of Professor Dr. Sodo Mori, ed. Publication Committee for Buddhist and Indian Studies in Honour 
of Professor Dr. Sodo Mori, 311–333. Nagoya: Kokusai Bukkyoto Kyokai.
Silk, Jonathan A. 2002. “What, If Anything, Is Mahāyāna Buddhism. Problems of Definitions and 
Classifications.” Numen 49 (4): 355–405.
Sircar, D.C., Lahiri, A.N. 1959–1960. “Footprint Slab Inscription from Nagarjunikonda.” Epigraphia Indica 
33: 247–250.
Skilling, Peter Fall. 2009. “Theravāda in History.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies. 3rd 
ser. 11: 61–93.
Skilling, Peter. 2013. “Vaidalya, Mahāyāna, and Bodhisatva in India. An Essay towards Historical 
Understanding.” In The Bodhisattva Ideal. Essays on the Emergence of Mahāyāna, ed. Bhikkhu Nyanatusita, 
69–164. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Skilling, Peter, et al., eds. 2012. How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities. Chiang Mai: 
Silkworm Books.
Sp = Buddhaghosa. Samantapāsādikā, Vinaya-aṭṭhakathā. 1924–1947. ed. Junjiro Takakusa and M. Nagai. 
Samantapāsādikā. vol. 8. London: Pali Text Society.
Sp(J) = Buddhaghosa. Samantapāsādikā. 1962. ed. Nicholas Abedheera Jayawickrama. Inception of Discipline 
and Vinaya-Nidāna. Being a Translation and Edition of the Bāhiranidāna of Buddhaghosa’s Samantapāsādikā, the 
Vinaya Commentary. Sacred Books of the Buddhists, 21. Bristol: Pali Text Society.
Spk = Buddhaghosa. Sāratthappakāsinı̄. 1929–1937. ed. Frank Lee Woodward. Sāratthappakāsinı̄. 
Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Saṭyutta-Nikāya. 3 vol. London: Pali Text Society.
Ss = Siddhattha. Sārasaṅgaha. 1992. ed. Genjun H. Sasaki. Sārasaṅgaha. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Stargardt, Janice. 1990.  The Ancient Pyu of Burma. Early Pyu Cities in a Man-Made Landscape, Vol. 1. Cambridge 
and Singapore: Pacsea.

--- PAGE 63 ---
Sven Bretfeld
42
Sujato, Bhikkhu. 2007. Sects and Sectarianism. The Origins of Buddhist Schools. Taiwan: Santipada.
Sundberg, Jeffrey Roger. 2004. “The Wilderness Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra and the Origins of Sino-
Javanese Esoteric Buddhism.” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandisch-Indië 160 (1): 
95–123.
Sundberg, Jeffrey Roger. 2014. “The Abhayagirivihāra’s pāṃśukūlika Monks in Second Lambakaṇṇa Śrı̄ 
Laṅkā and Śailendra Java. The Fluorescence and Fall of Influential Esoteric Buddhist Adepts.” Pacific 
World. Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies. 3rd ser. 16: 49–185.
Sundberg, Jeffrey Roger. 2018. “Appreciation of Relics, Stūpas, and Relic Stūpas in Eighth Century 
Esoteric Buddhism. Taishō Tripit.aka Texts and Archaeological Residues in Guhyā Laṅkā.” Part 2. The 
Indian International Journal of Buddhist Studies 19: 181–458.
Vogel, J.P. 1933. “Prakrit Inscriptions from a Buddhist Site at Nagarjunikonda.” Epigraphia Indica 20: 1–37.
Walser, Joseph. 2005. Nāgārjuna in Context. Mahāyāna Buddhism and Early Indian Culture. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Walters, Jonathan S. 1997. “Mahāyāna Theravāda and the Origins of the Mahāvihāra.” The Sri Lanka Journal 
of the Humanities 23 (1–2): 100–119.
Walters, Jonathan S. 1999. “Mahāsena at the Mahāvihāra. On the Interpretation and Politics of History in 
Pre-Colonial Sri Lanka.” In Invoking the Past. The Uses of History in South Asia, ed. Daud Ali, 322–366. 
Oxford, New York, and New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Willis, Michael 2001. “Buddhist Saints in Ancient Vedisa.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 11 (2): 219–228.
Wynne, Alexander. 2018.  “Theriya Networks and the Circulation of the Pāli Canon in South Asia.” 
Buddhist Studies Review 35 (1–2): 245–259.

--- PAGE 64 ---
43
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-4
2
PĀLI
Its place in the Theravāda Buddhist tradition
Alastair Gornall
The use of Pāli as a sacred language is often identified as a defining feature of the Theravāda 
Buddhist tradition. Steven Collins (2017: 17) recently remarked that “if Pāli is present, in any 
form, then one can, retrospectively and a priori, speak of ‘Theravāda Buddhism.’” If this is the 
case, as I think it is, then the question arises as to how we can define Pāli’s presence in the 
Theravāda tradition in a way that encompasses the diverse array of cultural forms and practices 
that draw on Pāli and its literature. This chapter offers an analytical framework for thinking 
about these various aspects of Pāli that goes beyond blanket definitions about the language’s 
sacred status, which often conceal more than they reveal. I offer a threefold typology of Pāli’s 
presence in Theravāda Buddhism: (1) as a language of authoritative tradition, (2) as a language 
of organization and reform, and (3) as a language of indexical power. While these aspects are 
interdependent, distinguishing between them offers us analytical flexibility in describing how 
Pāli defines Theravāda Buddhism in its full diversity.
Authoritative tradition
When encountering the work of the first European Orientalists and philologists in the early 
nineteenth century, some scholar-monks in Sri Lanka resisted their attempts to describe Pāli 
alongside Sanskrit and the Prakrits as simply one of South Asia’s “classical” languages. George 
Turnour in the introduction to his 1837 edition and translation of the Mahāvaṃsa (Great History) 
noted the monastic opposition to the ideas of philologists and recalled that, in conversation 
about the relative age of Pāli and Sanskrit, scholar-monks would quote the following Pāli verse 
“with an air of triumph” at every opportunity (Turnour 1837: xxii–iii):
sā māgadhı̄ mūlabhāsā narā yāyādikappikā
brahmāno c’ assutālāpā sambuddhā cāpi bhāsare.
(It is Magadhan that is the root language spoken by people of the first eon,
by Brahmas, by those who have never heard speech, and by the perfectly enlightened.)
We first find this verse quoted in a twelfth-century Pāli grammatical handbook, Buddhappiya’s 
Rūpasiddhi (Construction of Word Forms, Rūp on Kacc 2013: 52), and throughout the second

--- PAGE 65 ---
Alastair Gornall
44
millennium variations on it became the go-to definition for scholar-monks seeking to explain 
the qualities of their sacred language. The verse usefully encapsulates the three main aspects of 
Pāli’s status as a prestigious and authoritative textual language. Pāli is above all the only language 
buddhas speak; it is the root language of the cosmos spoken by gods, the first men, and those 
raised without language; and it is also a literary language, the language of Magadha.
The language of Buddhas
Theravāda Buddhist textual history begins with the formation of the Tipiṭaka, the three baskets, 
a collection of the Buddha’s discourses as well as those of some of his immediate followers 
(Skilling, this volume). This Theravāda “canon” is composed entirely in the middle Indic lan­
guage of Pāli and the earliest commentators on the Tipiṭaka were the first to claim that the 
historical Buddha—and all previous buddhas—only taught in Pāli. It was the Pāli language that 
primarily distinguished the Theravāda canon from those of others in South Asia, and since they 
believed that this was the Buddha’s language, scholar-monks of the tradition could claim that 
only they possessed the definitive account of the Buddha’s teachings (Collins 1990). In fact, 
the early commentaries often define the Buddha’s Dhamma or doctrine as a whole principally 
as Pāli scripture (pariyatti) or scriptural texts (pāḷi, tanti; Carter 1976).
And yet, later scholar-monks still debated about how Pāli scripture can be identified with 
the Dhamma. Some argued that it was primarily scripture as a mental language—the Buddha’s 
thoughts rather than words—that defined the Dhamma whereas others claimed that the 
Dhamma was actually the Pāli sounds of the Buddha’s discourses (Sp-ṭ Be i 77; Sv-ṭ i 37–8; 
Vmv Be i 21; Gornall 2020: 106–10). What was at stake here is the question of whether the 
authority of Pāli scripture stems primarily from its physical aspect—its literal wording—or 
from its ideal form as a conceptual object. The eighteenth-century Burmese scholar-monk 
Ñāṇābhivaṃsa summarises this debate in the following verse (Sv-nṭ Be i 104):
saddo dhammo desanā ca icc āhu apare garū dhammo paṇṇatti saddo tu desanā vā ti 
cāpare.
Some teachers say that scriptural wording is both the Dhamma and the teaching. Others say 
though that the Dhamma is a concept and that scriptural wording is only the teaching.
The root language
The claim about the status of Pāli as the Buddha’s only language was accompanied in the 
early commentaries by the belief that Pāli was the unchanging, root language (mūlabhāsā) of 
the cosmos (Vibh-a 387–8, Vsm XIV 25). It is said that Pāli is spoken throughout the cosmos 
by animals, ghosts, humans, and gods alike and that it would be the default language of a child 
brought up without human contact. It is the only language through which one can gain an 
analytical insight (paṭisambhidā) into the Buddha’s teachings and, for the adept, its meaning 
magically manifests “in a thousand ways” upon being heard. Unlike other languages of the 
world which vary over time, the Pāli language was thought to be fixed and unchanging. Pāli is 
referred to also as the sabhāvanirutti or “essence language” due to its intrinsic and natural con­
nection with the cosmos or, as a later scholar-monk explains, because of its capacity to capture 
the essence of dhammas, the ultimate entities of reality (Gornall 2020: 56n19). Elsewhere, the 
Abhidhamma commentaries remark that the Pāli names of some dhammas as well as of other 
major natural phenomena are said to arise spontaneously in each age (As 390–2, Paṭis-a 306–7;

--- PAGE 66 ---
Pāli
45
Collins 1998: 49; Visigalli, forthcoming). From this perspective, Pāli is separated from histori­
cal contingency and becomes an exclusive object of soteriological power for those virtuoso 
scholar-monks who had mastered it.
The language of Magadha
The discourses or Suttas of the Pāli canon rarely reflect on the language of their composition, 
and it is only in the early commentaries that the language was given a name, “the language of 
Magadha” or magadhabhāsā (e.g., Sp 255; Sp 1214; Vibh-a 387–8; von Hinüber 1994a; Crosby 
2004). The formal labeling of the canon’s idiom as an independent language, notionally asso­
ciated with the Buddha’s homeland of Magadha, accompanied the decision in Sri Lanka by 
the fourth- or fifth-century exegete Buddhaghosa to compose Pāli commentaries on the 
Suttapiṭaka in what he refers to in his opening preamble as the “delightful language” (manoramaṃ 
bhāsaṃ) of the canon (Sv 1; Ps 1; Spk 1, etc.).
Buddhaghosa states that in writing his works he was translating older Sinhala commentaries 
and explains that these works were themselves translations from a lost Pāli original that was 
recited at Aśoka’s monastic council and brought to Sri Lanka by his son Mahinda. He claims 
then that by translating these Sinhala works back into Pāli he is restoring the exegetical tradi­
tion to its original, pristine state. This early commentarial use of Pāli allowed scholar-monks 
to bolster their authority by claiming that only they had inherited and recovered the lost 
exegetical tradition of the early Saṅgha. Some later scholars even refer to Pāli commentaries as 
the Buddha’s “miscellaneous teachings” (pakiṇṇakadesanā) in that it was supposedly the Buddha 
who first established the meaning of his discourses (Sp-ṭ Be i 21; Ss 26).
The preamble to the commentary on the Vinaya introduces another reason for writing in 
Pāli, namely, that the Sinhala language was not intelligible to all members of the Saṅgha in 
other lands. The commentator states that he decided to write in Pāli to make his exegetical 
tradition accessible to this transregional Buddhist community (Sp 1). Scholar-monks writing 
in later centuries continue to cite Pāli’s status as a transregional medium as one of the reasons 
for composing or translating works into the language. Pāli commentaries then, rather than 
vernacular exegesis, afforded a frame of reference within which scholar-monks could think of 
themselves as a transregional monastic circle bound by a common scriptural language.
The cultivation of Pāli into a literary language of exegesis further involved differentiating it 
from the other literary languages of the region, most notably Sanskrit. While the early com­
mentators occasionally distinguish Pāli usage from Sanskrit (e.g., Sp 1214) it was in the hands 
of the late medieval grammarians and literary theorists that Pāli’s relationship with Sanskrit was 
fully systematized (Gornall 2020: 63–87; 145–67). These scholar-monks take pains to show that 
Pāli possessed the same literariness and linguistic capabilities as the other literary languages of 
classical India but that unlike these languages, it was not dependent on or derived from Sanskrit. 
It was Pāli’s status as a perfect language independent of Sanskrit that led one scholar-monk 
to refer to it as “pure Magadhan” (suddha-māgadha; Subodh 2000: 2) and another twelfth- or 
thirteenth-century commentator even goes as far as to say that all languages, including Sanskrit, 
actually derive from Pāli (Moh 1961: 186).
A classical language
This late medieval reflection on Pāli’s relationship with Sanskrit and the other literary lan­
guages of classical India provided a foundation for the first Western orientalists and philologists 
to categorize Pāli as one of South Asia’s classical languages. Nineteenth-century orientalists

--- PAGE 67 ---
Alastair Gornall
46
compared Pāli with Sanskrit in India and Latin and Greek in Europe and were preoccupied 
with creating a “natural history” for the language (cf. Ollett 2017, 18–22), in particular by 
determining Pāli’s relative age to Sanskrit. By the late nineteenth century, Western scholars had 
reached a consensus that Pāli was a “younger sister” of Sanskrit, and this opened the way for 
later linguists to classify the language more precisely as an amalgamation of various dialects of 
“Middle Indic” (Oberlies 2019: 9–52). Writing in the preface to the first Pāli dictionary, R. C. 
Childers (1875: xiii) remarked that “if the proud boast that the Magadhese is the one primeval 
language fades in the light of comparative philology, Buddhists may console themselves with 
the thought that the teaching of Gautama confers upon it a greater lustre than it can derive 
from any fancied antiquity.”
The nineteenth-century Sri Lankan monk Vaskaḍuvē Subhūti did not entirely reject the 
opinions of the orientalists and, in the introduction to his new Pāli grammar, accepts the 
genealogical model of the philologists but argues rather that Pāli, Sanskrit, and the Prakrits 
are like “three sons born of the same father who only differ slightly in colour” (Gornall and 
Gunasena 2018: 6). Subhūti perhaps echoes orientalist rhetoric in arguing at the beginning of 
his work that as his society had a tradition of grammatical thought it was not uncivilized (mlec­
chakama) or of low intelligence. There was sometimes an elective affinity between the colonial 
promotion of studying “classical languages” like Pāli and monastic education reforms where 
scholar-monks sought to revive Pāli studies as a means of protecting Buddhism (Turner 2018). 
Today, Pāli’s status as a classical language can be an important factor in governmental funding 
for its academic study. Recently in India, for reasons that are opaque, Pāli was stripped of its 
official status as a classical language, limiting support for research (Singh 2013).
The Pāli imaginaire and the idea of a canon
Steven Collins in Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities argued that the Theravāda tradition’s views 
about Pāli, as described earlier, gave texts in the language an authority that distinguished them as 
a unified and privileged body of thought. Collins argued that this world of Pāli literature, which 
he referred to as the “Pāli imaginaire,” has served traditional Southern Asian societies that have 
supported Theravāda monastic communities as a “cultural system,” that is, as their structuring 
thought and ideology.1 Collins saw this ideological formation as unified not only by language 
but also by the imaginaire’s stable conceptual coherence, which he argues remained essentially 
unchanged over much of the Theravāda tradition’s premodern history. He thus analytically 
separated the world of Pāli texts from the sociocultural life of any particular time and place 
and analyses it as a “cultural system” that has structured the beliefs and practices of Buddhists 
for millennia (Collins 1998: 72–89; 563–74).
In later works, Collins added some granularity to the necessarily macroscopic theories of 
Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities and acknowledged that, while Pāli texts do form an integral 
part of the Theravāda cultural system, they did not do so in isolation from texts in other lan­
guages that the tradition has also treated as authorities (Collins 2017: 17). In fact, the emphasis 
placed on Pāli’s unique sacred status presupposes the existence of other complementary and 
sometimes competing languages. Texts written in other languages have often formed an impor­
tant part of the monastic community’s authoritative textual tradition. Before Buddhaghosa, 
Sinhala was the most authoritative exegetical language in Sri Lanka. The Pāli commentators of 
the first millennium relied on Sanskrit sciences, in particular, grammar, etymology, and lexicog­
raphy, to write their works. And throughout the second millennium in Sri Lanka and Southeast 
Asia scholar-monks embraced a wider range of Sanskrit texts, even other Buddhist literature, 
and began to write independent works in vernacular languages too. From about the sixteenth

--- PAGE 68 ---
Pāli
47
century, the composition of new Pāli works declined considerably, and modern scholarship has 
mainly been conducted in vernaculars and sometimes in English.
It is worthwhile rethinking Collins’s conception of the Pāli imaginaire in light of the debate 
that Collins himself began on the idea of a “canon” in Theravāda Buddhism (Collins 1990), 
for there is a large degree of overlap between textual “canons” and “cultural systems” insofar 
as both terms encompass an authoritative body of traditional thought. Therein Collins argues 
that in practice, the Tipiṭaka has served more as an authoritative idea and that what we find in 
Theravāda communities are “ritual canons,” which he describes as “the texts, canonical or oth­
erwise, which are in actual use in ritual life in the area concerned” (1990: 104). Anne Blackburn 
has similarly distinguished between the ideal formal canon, the Tipiṭaka, as “the ultimate locus 
of interpretative authority” and the practical canon, the “units of text actually employed in 
the practices of collecting manuscripts, copying them, reading them, commenting on them, 
listening to them, and preaching sermons based upon them that are understood by their users 
as part of a tipiṭaka-based tradition’” (1999a: 284). These practical canons include parts of the 
Tipiṭaka and its commentaries alongside Pāli, Sanskrit, and vernacular compositions that may 
or may not relate to texts classified as part of the formal canon.
And yet, as we critically rethink the nature of authoritative textual traditions in Theravāda 
Buddhism, it is important we do not lose the utility of the analytical dualism inherent in 
Collins’s Pāli imaginaire, which distinguishes between a cultural system, that is, structuring tra­
dition, and sociocultural life. For we should not ascribe canonicity to every text found in each 
locality if the idea of a textual “canon,” that is, an authoritative textual tradition, is to continue 
to have analytical worth. Rather, we should determine which religious texts were authoritative 
in a particular time and place and which ones were not (or not yet) so that we can be attentive 
to historical change within local textual traditions and recognize those literary expressions that 
are actually responding to their local canon, whether by expanding, revising, or challenging it. 
This distinction is important since all texts when they are composed are not part of tradition 
and are rather engaged in socio-cultural acts of persuasion and argumentation that later may 
or may not become canonical (cf. Archer 1988: 227–73). Similarly, it should not be taken for 
granted either that simply because a work is in Pāli that it is still or has ever been authorita­
tive. There are Pāli works, such as the Peṭaka and Sumatāvatāra (von Hinüber 1996: 206–7), that 
have not been handed down by the tradition, for instance, and other texts that we might find 
in local textual traditions may have fallen out of use or exist solely due to the ritual copying 
of manuscripts rather than their continued relevance to the local thought world.2
Organization and reform
Thinking about religious authority as only a potential outcome of writing in Pāli shifts the 
analytical focus away from seeing Pāli texts as a priori components of an inherited cultural 
context and rather directs our attention toward Pāli’s often neglected sociocultural role as an 
important language for responding to the Theravāda imaginaire. That is to say, monks wrote 
new works in Pāli to reshape their textual tradition, to add new ideas, and to stress different 
points of emphasis. In fact, rather than seeing Pāli texts as inherently authoritative (cf. Collins 
1998: 80), we can view all Pāli literature as first responding to tradition before sometimes 
becoming part of it in a process of cultural development. In this regard, Pāli was as much a 
language of organization and reform as it was a language of authoritative tradition. In what 
follows, I distinguish two sides to this activity: (1) a process of “elaboration,” in which new texts 
are developed from within an authoritative tradition, and (2) a process of “encompassment,” in 
which knowledge is brought in from outside of tradition and refigured hierarchically within it.3

--- PAGE 69 ---
Alastair Gornall
48
Elaboration
Theravāda scholar-monks often thought of scriptural texts not as passive objects but rather as 
things engaged in an ongoing activity. Some grammarians, in particular, liked to explain that 
scriptural texts were called pāḷi as they were “protecting the meaning” (atthaṃ pāti; Mogg 7.228; 
Abh-ṭ on v. 539–40). The idea that scripture’s meaning required constant care and attention 
underpinned the tradition’s continuous production of exegetical works. This process of cultural 
elaboration was carried out mainly in vernacular languages but in Pāli too, and over time, 
these works introduced confusion and competing ideas, which were also often manifestations 
of social divisions in the monastic community. At certain points, when frictions in the tradi­
tion were perceived to be too much, scholar-monks would initiate a reorganization or reform 
that involved the composition of Pāli texts that synthesized the various strands of thought or 
adjudicated between differences. Pāli, in particular, was the language used to reset these cycles 
of cultural elaboration, although scholar-monks were not always successful and were often 
themselves competing with rival attempts to reshape the imaginaire.
The most striking examples of this process are the monastic reforms that took place in Sri 
Lanka between 1157 and 1270, in particular in the aftermath of Parākramabāhu I’s reform 
council of 1165. The 1165 reforms united the Saṅgha in Sri Lanka, which had previously been 
split into three fraternities, and scholar-monks composed numerous Pāli works to standardize 
the doctrine and discipline that had become disordered due to the accumulated exegetical 
activities of the Saṅgha’s diverse and rival factions. The reorganization of the imaginaire was 
not only restricted to systematic thought but also involved the composition of narratives and 
poems that reworked traditional histories and Buddha biographies in new aesthetic forms 
(Gornall 2020). One of the leading scholars of the reform, Sāriputta, explained in the opening 
of his work the need for him to write a new Pāli sub-commentary on the Vinaya as follows:
I will compose an exposition of the concealed, essential meaning of the Vinaya’s com­
mentary that is easy to understand, is complete, and unconfused. Though predecessors 
explained the hidden meaning, they did not convey that meaning in its entirety to 
monks in all cases. Among the many glossaries, for instance, some in some places are 
written in the Sinhala language, which, by nature, is difficult to understand. Someone 
also wrote a certain glossary mixed with other languages too, even though it was 
undertaken in the Magadhan language. Precisely there, the burden of unessential learn­
ing is often apparent, and confusion is created even when it (the Vinaya commentary) 
is actually easy to understand. How then can those who live in various regions under­
stand its meaning in its entirety with this kind of incomplete glossary? I will compose 
an unconfused, complete exegesis by removing the other languages from it and by 
extracting the essence throughout.
(Gornall 2020: 92)
Sāriputta’s opening is typical of the scholarly rhetoric of this era of reform in Sri Lanka. He 
explains that the proliferation of diverse exegetical thought has led to confusion (ākula) about 
the meaning of the Vinaya. He questions the selective exegesis of his predecessors, the use 
of vernaculars such as Sinhala that are less precise, and the reliance on other languages and 
their texts in composing Pāli commentaries. Concerning the latter, it seems Sāriputta had 
in mind a tenth-century sub-commentary on the Vinaya, the Vajirabuddhiṭı̄kā (Diamond-Mind 
Subcommentary), which sometimes adopts a Sanskritic style and cites a few Sanskrit works in its 
exegesis, albeit in Pāli translation (Kieffer-Pülz 2013: 57–70; 129–31). Sāriputta claims that by

--- PAGE 70 ---
Pāli
49
writing in a pure Pāli his commentary above all others is the most complete, clear, and accessible. 
It is noteworthy that Sāriputta’s attempt to reset the cycle of cultural elaboration and redefine 
his imaginaire was not entirely successful, and soon after, a monk residing in South India, Coḷa 
Kassapa, composed another Vinaya sub-commentary competing with his work.
Pāli was viewed and used as a language of organization in second-millennium Southeast 
Asia too, although never to the same programmatic extent as it was in reform-era Sri Lanka. 
D. C. Lammerts has recently described the rich history of Buddhist law or dhammasattha in 
Burma between the thirteenth and nineteenth centuries. What is interesting is that before the 
mid-seventeenth century this sphere of authoritative knowledge was likely only written in the 
vernacular. This changed in 1651/2 when a scholar-monk Taungbhila Sayadaw Tipiṭakālaṅkāra 
and lay judge Kaingza Manurāja composed a dhammasattha work in Pāli verse, the Manusāra 
dhammasattha to “purify” their legal tradition. From then, on scholar-monks occasionally com­
posed works in Pāli specifically because they viewed the language as “precise, durable and 
efficient” when compared with the vernacular tradition that was regarded as obscure and more 
susceptible to corruption and degeneration (Lammerts 2018: 90–4).
These interventions in tradition were not always written on palm-leaf texts, and in Southeast 
Asia, in particular, we find many epigraphs in Pāli. As discussed in the following, Pāli epigraphy 
in the region for much of the first millennium largely consists of citation inscriptions from the 
Tipiṭaka. From the early second millennium, we find longer, sometimes bilingual, inscriptions, 
such as the 1479 Kalyāṇı̄ inscription of King Dhammaceti (Frasch 2018; Griffiths and Lammerts 
2015; Thompson 2016: 161–8). These lithic works respond to their local imaginaire in several 
ways. Sometimes Pāli is used in the opening of an inscription as a form of aesthetic power (cf. 
Pollock 2006) to eulogize the Buddha and royal lineages. Pāli may also have a documentary 
function and record donations, assert economic rights, or intervene in the monastic discipline. 
In all these inscriptions, Pāli serves as an authoritative voice that is universal in practice in that 
it can speak to a cosmopolitan, transregional audience and rhetorically so in that writing in 
Pāli makes a claim on universal truth and power.
Encompassment
It was not only through cultural elaboration—responding to the imaginaire and working out 
its internal contestations and contradictions—that Pāli served as a force of cultural change. 
Throughout history, scholar-monks have continually incorporated new cultural material from 
outside the tradition too as a result of historical developments in the monastic community’s 
social and political environment. These works in other languages and from other traditions 
could enter authoritative tradition directly. The rich tradition of Buddhist law in Burma, as we 
have seen, was largely a vernacular enterprise and, for the most part, sat side by side with Pāli 
scripture in the local imaginaire. At other times, works and disciplines entering the imaginaire 
had to be refigured and made more congruous with the previous tradition before they could 
claim authority. Pāli was an important medium for refiguring and potentially absorbing and 
lending authority to these new intellectual forms in a process of cultural encompassment.
New knowledge disciplines have long entered into the monastic curriculum through Pāli 
adaptations. From about the seventh century, scholar-monks first in Sri Lanka and then in 
Burma became particularly interested in Sanskrit grammar and poetics. While early commenta­
tors such as Buddhaghosa had directly used Sanskrit grammars to interpret their scriptures (Pind 
1989), scholar-monks now began to compose Pāli grammatical works based on Sanskrit models. 
Many of these works, such as the Kaccāyana and Moggallāna grammars, closely followed and 
translated their Sanskrit sources (Dimitrov 2016: 557–706; Gornall 2020: 63–87; Ruiz-Falqués

--- PAGE 71 ---
Alastair Gornall
50
2017). This process of rendering Sanskrit philological texts into Pāli often involved a conscious 
effort to make these works more Buddhist and aligned with the values of the tradition. Sanskrit 
grammatical examples from Hindu literature, for instance, are swapped for Buddhist versions 
(Gornall 2013: 89–100). The first work of Pāli poetics produced in Sri Lanka, the Subodhālaṅkāra 
(Lucid Poetics), similarly eschews the erotic Sanskrit poetry of its sources and instead replaces it 
exclusively with devotional verses in praise of the Buddha (Gornall 2020: 145–67). Compare, 
for instance, the following verse in the Subodhālaṅkāra with its Sanskrit source in which a 
carefully introduced vocative (O Buddha!) turns the description of a lover’s face into a verse 
praising the Buddha’s complexion:
na jātu śaktir indos te mukhena pratigarjitum.kalaṅkino jaḍasyeti pratiṣedhopamaiva sā.
(Kāvyādarśa 2.34)
The frigid, mottled moon does not have the power to ever rival your face. This is a 
simile through negation.
asamattho mukhen’ indu jina te paṭigajjituṃ jaḷo kalaṅkı̄ ti ayaṃ paṭisedhopamā siyā.
(Subodhālaṅkāra 193)
The frigid, mottled moon, O Buddha, is incapable of rivalling your face. This is a simile 
through negation.
In what is now northern Thailand, Laos, and Burma a process of cultural encompassment 
took place from the twelfth century onwards in connection specifically with cosmological 
thought. For the first time in Buddhist history, scholar-monks composed several Pāli manuals 
dedicated to the topic of cosmology and also astronomy. Some of these Pāli texts have been 
identified as adaptations and refigurations of Sanskrit cosmological works. The earliest Pāli 
cosmological work, the twelfth-century Lokapaññatti (Description of the World), for instance, 
closely follows the Sanskrit Lokaprajñāpti as preserved in its Chinese translation (Denis 1977 
I: xix–xxviii). Pāli manuals on the realms of rebirth, such as the Chagatidı̄panı̄ (Light on the Six 
Destinies) and Pañcagatidı̄panı̄ (Light on the Five Destinies), were similarly composed as close 
translations and adaptations of works originally in Sanskrit (Mus 1939). Other cosmological 
works combine material from the Pāli canon and its commentaries with other Sanskrit source 
material from outside of the tradition. The author of the Candasuriyagatidı̄panı̄ (Light on the 
Movements of the Moon and Sun), for instance, states he brought together works from the Pāli 
canon, the commentaries, and other astrological/astronomical texts (jotisattha, Sk. jyotiśāstra; 
UPT538.3F, fol. 214a).
With a few notable exceptions, it is generally true that in Theravāda Buddhist intellectual 
history Pāli has served as the main vehicle by which knowledge from the Sanskrit tradition 
was subsumed and creatively refigured within the imaginaire.4 In the case of the poetics and 
grammatical traditions, it is clear that Pāli was viewed as the only language that possessed the 
same transcendent capacity for literary and linguistic expression as Sanskrit, stemming ulti­
mately from its role as the root language of the cosmos. These works in their openings also 
often praise the omniscience of the Buddha and, in effect, treat the new knowledge they are 
translating as something the Buddha already knew.5 There may be some connection in this 
regard between describing a “new” aspect of the Buddha’s omniscience and the decision to do 
so in his own language and the language of ultimate truth. This is certainly the case for some 
of the cosmological material, such as the Lokapaññatti and the Mahākappa-lokasaṇṭhāna-paññatti

--- PAGE 72 ---
Pāli
51
(Description of the Great Ages and the State of the World), which present themselves in form and 
style as Suttas spoken by the Buddha.
The two complementary processes of elaboration and encompassment can be hard to dis­
tinguish when it comes to Pāli compendia and literary adaptations due to the diversity of 
their source material, which may or may not have formed a part of the authoritative tradition 
prior to composition. In Pāli historiographical or vaṃsa literature, we find several works, such 
as the Dāṭhāvaṃsa (History of the Tooth), Hatthavanagallavihāra-vaṃsa (History of Hatthavanagalla 
Monastery), and Thūpavaṃsa (History of the Relic Shrine), that rework lost vernacular histories, 
older Pāli sources and even Sanskrit material (Berkwitz 2004: 83–107; Godakumbura 1956: 
ix–xvii). The author of the Dāṭhāvaṃsa, which was composed for a South Indian prince, states 
in his opening that he has translated an old Sinhala history into Pāli so that the history could 
be understood by those from India. The work is composed in an ornate and poetic Pāli mod­
eled on Sanskrit forms deeply associated with political power and court literature. This style 
of Pāli was perhaps preferred to articulate the monastic community’s own brand of aesthetic, 
devotional politics, particularly to a continental audience (Gornall 2020: 168–89). Many of these 
Pāli vaṃsas were later treated as the definitive histories of these relics, and the fact they were 
composed in Pāli must have played a role in the authority they garnered.
Indexical power
In the previous two sections, we have discussed the relationship between Pāli and Theravāda 
Buddhism exclusively in terms of Pāli as a privileged vehicle of Buddhist thought, whether in 
transmitting Buddhist intellectual tradition or in responding to and reshaping it. Pāli’s role in 
ordering the ideas of the Theravāda Buddhist imagination was supported by a complex web 
of cultural associations. We have seen how the use of Pāli has carried with it notions of sacred 
authority, cosmic truth, literary perfection, political power, social and intellectual order, and 
universality, for instance. So far, we have only discussed these associations in terms of Pāli’s 
privileged communicative role within the tradition. And yet, in practice, scholar-monks and 
ritual specialists have often wielded Pāli texts primarily due to their indexical power rather 
than the information they carried.6 In such contexts, it is this power of a Pāli expression—the 
cultural associations manifested by its words and viewed as intrinsic properties of them—that 
primarily determines its transformational force and not the expression’s content.7
From rhetoric to magic
The indexical power of a language and its information-carrying function are rarely independent 
of each other. If we take the Pāli-vernacular bitexts that formed an integral part of Theravāda 
literary culture from the tenth century onwards (Walker, this volume), for instance, the Pāli 
text served both literally as the object to be translated and indexically as a bestower of author­
ity to vernacular elaborations that were often exegetically innovative. Note though that this 
indexical use of Pāli is not derivative of vernacularization or a later development. It has been a 
constant feature of Pāli textuality and could even be the dominant mode of Pāli usage prior to 
the development of a scholarly tradition of Pāli composition, as in the case of first-millennium 
Burma and Thailand. This indexical power can manifest in a variety of ways, whether in the 
purely rhetorical use of Pāli expressions to assert authority or in a more magical guise in which 
Pāli forms are treated as having the creative capacity to bring things into existence.
In the case of the tradition of some vernacular commentaries on Pāli texts, such as the nissaya, 
vohāra, and nāmasadda from Thailand and Laos, for instance, often the vernacular exposition may

--- PAGE 73 ---
Alastair Gornall
52
only invoke the Pāli source text through partial quotations of words and expressions. These Pāli 
fragments that stand in for the source text may not be entirely meaningful in and of themselves 
and serve as triggers reminding the audience of the original Pāli text being explicated as well 
as markers of “reverence, prestige, wisdom, and beauty” (McDaniel 2008: 127). Even vernacular 
narratives based on Pāli works, such as the fourteenth-century Sinhala Saddharmālaṅkāraya and 
the Daḷadāpūjāvaliya, intermittently include parts of the Pāli original work, especially its verse 
material. Since the sense of the Pāli is often already present and creatively expanded on in 
the vernacular elaboration (cf. Berkwitz 2004: 121–34), these interjections serve to invoke the 
prestige, authority, and power of their source and of the Pāli language in general.
This indexical use of Pāli takes on a more magical dimension in the case of benedictory 
formulas and invocations. Nearly all printed works and manuscripts will at least include 
a homage to the Buddha in the form of the Pāli formula, namo tassa bhagavato arahato 
sammā sambuddhassa, for instance. Similar practices are reflected in Southeast Asian vernacu­
lar inscriptions in which Pāli is used in blessings and other invocations (Frasch 2018). It 
is common, too, for vernacular commentaries on Pāli texts, especially Sinhala sannaya and 
Burmese nissaya, to still begin with a homage to the Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha in Pāli 
rather than the vernacular. While these formulas may sometimes be informational (providing 
the name and author of a work, for instance), they primarily serve to generate merit and 
ward off evil. The fact that they must be in Pāli shows that it is not simply the content of 
the benediction that provides this merit and protection but rather also the indexical power 
of the Pāli language. This function is not specific to the role Pāli plays in vernacular works 
but it is simply that Pāli’s ever-present indexical dimension is often clearer to see in such 
contexts. To different degrees, then, both the rhetorical and magical uses of Pāli share this 
indexical creativity in that both conjure up something, whether the authority of a source 
text or a form of protection.
A related magical dimension informs the traditional, ritual use of Pāli citations as devotional 
objects and as sources of merit. From about the fifth century, for instance, in what is now 
Burma and Thailand, we find many inscriptions of Pāli texts paralleling those in the Tipiṭaka 
on stone, brick, clay, and even gold plates (Griffiths and Lammerts 2015). These were likely 
copied and deposited as part of the ritual veneration of the Dhamma. There is evidence from 
the twelfth- and thirteenth-century Sri Lankan tradition that such objects were treated and 
enshrined as relics of the historical Buddha (Gornall 2020: 132–7). In these practices, Pāli frag­
ments have a metonymic connection with the Dhamma as a whole—manifesting its meritori­
ous power—and the Dhamma, in turn, serves as a surviving trace of the Buddha’s omniscience. 
This kind of reasoning also underpins the ritual preservation of scripture in which single Pāli 
texts may be copied to produce merit as a way of caring for and attaining the wisdom of the 
entire Dhamma (Veidlinger 2007: 164–203).
Performative rituals
There is no clear boundary of separation between the indexical power of Pāli in written 
language and its performative role in other rituals in the tradition. Whether in monastic legal 
rites, the recitation of protective texts or paritta, or the intonement of Pāli words in meditation, 
the ritual recitation of Pāli similarly produces transformations based primarily on its indexical 
power (rather than on its capacity to carry information, which still may persist). It is the case, 
however, that in many ritual contexts, the very recitation of Pāli may also constitute the per­
formance of a social act (Austin 1962; Tambiah 1973), such as turning someone from a layman 
into a monk, for instance, whereas this may not always be the case in other instances in which

--- PAGE 74 ---
Pāli
53
Pāli is employed for its indexical power, such as in its rhetorical use (although, of course, there 
are ways of seeing even rhetoric as a form of action; cf. Burke 1966).
The Pāli formulas used in monastic legal rituals are known in the tradition as kammavācā 
(action speech). These formulas enact in their recitation various transformations, such as ordi­
nations and the fixing of monastery boundaries, as long as they are performed in the right 
ritual environment in the presence of the necessary quorum of monks (Kieffer-Pülz 2000: 
360–1). While these formulas are meaningful and may be translated, the monks involved in 
the rituals make a great effort to ensure the formal accuracy of the Pāli recited (von Hinüber 
1994b; Gornall 2014). The incorrect recitation of Pāli formulas, even if the meaning is under­
stood, can invalidate a ritual act. In 1420 some monks of Wat Suandok in Chiang Mai went 
on pilgrimage to Sri Lanka, and the monks there rejected the validity of their ordination on 
the basis that their Pāli pronunciation was incorrect (Bizot 1988: 60–1; Premchit and Swearer 
1977). Concern for correct Pāli ritual speech led to the production in the wider Lanna region 
of manuals of Pāli ritual pronunciation. At the end of one manual, monks are warned that an 
incorrectly pronounced syllable can send them to hell (Bizot 1988: 63–4).
The recitation of Pāli paritta texts for protection, merit generation and other worldly ben­
efits, such as warding off illness or ensuring safe childbirth, represents another form of per­
formative ritual (Crosby 2014: 125–9). These protective works meaningfully teach key aspects 
of the Buddha’s doctrine or describe the Buddha’s position and power in the wider cosmos 
(Blackburn 1999b; Shulman 2019), and monks have long studied them as a fundamental part of 
their education. In practice, however, the ultimate efficacy of paritta recitation in its performa­
tive role does not depend on whether participants in the ritual understand what is being said. 
Pāli serves as a language that is intelligible to the gods and spirits that are being propitiated 
and the recitation of these Pāli texts also indexically manifests the transformative power of the 
truths that these works were thought to contain (Crosby 2014: 128–9). The recitation of paritta 
and other liturgical texts may also have an affective power since merit is also produced by the 
feelings of joy (pı̄ti, pasāda) of those who participate (Cook 2010: 98).
Pāli has an important performative role in traditional meditation practices too. Pāli words 
can serve as an object of meditation or as a support for concentration. In the forest traditions of 
Thailand, in particular, it is common also for meditators to recite certain epithets of the Buddha, 
such as “Buddho” or “Arahaṃ,” as the main focus of their practice (Tiyavanich 1997). The Pāli 
language also plays an integral role in certain meditation traditions developed in Cambodia 
and Thailand in which Pāli syllables are recited to manifest different aspects of the Dhamma. 
The meditator uses the cosmogonic power of the Pāli language to construct “the body of the 
Dhamma” within themselves and to cultivate their own enlightenment (Crosby 2013: 82–4; 
Bizot and von Hinüber 1994). An understanding of the creative agency of Pāli syllables likely 
also informs the tradition of Pāli yantras or magical diagrams in which Pāli letters (often from 
protective formulas or paritta) are arranged in images, such as that of the Buddha, usually for 
protection or to achieve other worldly ends (McDaniel 2011: 77–85).
Conclusion
There are other examples of Pāli usage in the Theravāda tradition that could be described 
here, and I hope this chapter serves as a starting point for further detailed reflections. I have 
suggested that Pāli’s use in the tradition can be analyzed through three interrelated but distinct 
modes, namely, as a language of authoritative tradition, organization and reform, and indexical 
power. These three modes are nearly always interdependent and do not necessarily relate to 
each other in a form of hierarchy. Theravāda cultures in which one mode of Pāli predominates

--- PAGE 75 ---
Alastair Gornall
54
are not more Theravāda than others. And yet, scholarship on Pāli textual cultures, whether by 
philologists, historians, or anthropologists, has tended to emphasize one mode or the other as 
the authentic expression of the Theravāda tradition. Bringing together these different uses of 
Pāli, which are often dealt with in different disciplinary domains, into a single framework affords 
us greater analytical flexibility when describing the diverse local forms of Theravāda Buddhism 
and when thinking critically about how Pāli defines the tradition.
Notes
	 1	While Collins borrowed the term imaginaire from Jacques Le Goff (1988), his analytical model in fact owes 
much more to the sociology of Margaret Archer (1988).
	 2	There are, in fact, many more lost Pali works than those listed in von Hinüber 1996, especially philological 
works (cf. Pind 2012).
	 3	I use the term elaboration here in a similar sense to Archer (1988). On my use of the Dumontian term 
encompassment in this context, cf. Schontal (2018: 194) and Strathern (2019: 77).
	 4	In Sri Lanka, for instance, we first find a Sinhala adaption of Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa (Mirror of Literature), the 
Siyabaslakara (Ornaments for Our Own Language), prior to the creation of the first Pāli manual of poetics, 
the Subodhālaṅkāra (Hallisey 2003).
	 5	In one passage in the Saddanı̄ti, Aggavaṃsa even claims that the Buddha had mastered the literary sciences 
in previous births but that he had sometimes decided to teach using language that did not conform to 
these rules (Gornall and Henry 2017: 84).
	 6	I prefer to use the term indexical here rather than symbolic since, unlike a symbol which is purely repre­
sentational, an index signals the “contextual ‘existence’ of another entity” and can manifest or present that 
entity. In the case of pure indexes that have little referential meaning, the thing signaled and manifested 
can be fairly abstract, such as a powerful value (“truth”) or function (“protection”). See Silverstein (1976); 
also, McDaniel (2011: 103).
	 7	I have been inspired to think about the transformative function of the Pāli language in this context by Kate 
Crosby’s recent reflections on “transformation” in the Theravāda tradition and the role of meditation as a 
“technology of transformation” (Crosby 2014: 7–8).
References
Abh-ṭ Be= 1964. Abhidhānappadı̄pikāṭı̄kā. Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana edition. Yangon: Buddhasāsanasamiti.
Archer, M.S. 1988. Culture and Agency: The Place of Culture in Social Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
As = 1979. Müller, E., ed. The Atthasālinı̄: Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dhammasaṅgaṇi. 1897. Revised 
edition, London: Pali Text Society.
Austin, J.L. 1962. How to Do Things with Words. The William James lectures delivered in Harvard University in 
1955. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Belvalkar, S.K., ed. and trans. 1924. Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin: Sanskrit Text and English translation. Poona: Oriental 
Book-Supplying Agency.
Berkwitz, S.C. 2004. Buddhist History in the Vernacular: The Power of the Past in Late Medieval Sri Lanka. Leiden: 
Brill.
Bizot, F. 1988. Les traditions de la pabbajjā en Asie du Sud-Est. Recherches sur le bouddhisme khmer IV. 
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht.
Bizot, F. and O. von Hinüber. 1994. La guirlande de Joyaux. Textes bouddhiques du Cambodge II. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Blackburn, A.M. 1999a. “Looking for the Vinaya: Monastic Discipline in the Practical Canons of the 
Theravāda.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 22 (2): 281–309.
Blackburn, A.M. 1999b. “Magic in the Monastery: Textual Practice and Monastic Identity in Sri Lanka.” 
History of Religions 38 (4): 354–372.
Burke, K. 1966. Language as Symbolic Action: Essays on Life, Literature, and Method. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Carter, J.R. 1976. “Traditional definitions of the term dhamma.” Philosophy East and West 26 (3): 329–337.
Childers, R.C. 1875. A Dictionary of the Pali Language. London: Trübner.

--- PAGE 76 ---
Pāli
55
Collins, S. 1990. “On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 15: 89–126.
Collins, S. 1998. Nirvana and other Buddhist felicities: Utopias of the Pali imaginaire. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Collins, S. 2017. “Periodizing Theravāda history. Where to start?.” In Theravāda Buddhist Encounters with 
Modernity, eds. J. Schober, S. Collins, 17–27. London: Routledge.
Cook, J. 2010. Meditation in Modern Buddhism: Renunciation and Change in Thai Monastic Life. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Crosby, K. 2004. “The Origin of Pāli as a Language Name in Medieval Theravāda Literature.” Journal of the 
Centre for Buddhist Studies, Sri Lanka 2: 70–116.
Crosby, K. 2013. Traditional Theravada Meditation and Its Modern-Era Suppression. Hong Kong: Buddha 
Dharma Centre of Hong Kong.
Crosby, K. 2014. Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, and Identity. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Denis, E. 1977. La Lokapaññatti et les idées cosmologiques du bouddhisme ancien. Vol. 1. Lille; Paris: Atelier 
Reproduction de thèses, Université de Lille III; Honoré Champion.
Dimitrov, D. 2016. The Legacy of the Jewel Mind: On the Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhalese Works by Ratnamati: 
A Philological Chronicle (Phullalocanavaṃsa). Naples: Università degli studi di Napoli “L’Orientale”, 
Dipartimento Asia Africa e Mediterraneo.
Frasch, T. 2018. “Myanmar Epigraphy – Current State and Future Tasks.” In Writing for Eternity: A Survey 
of Epigraphy in Southeast Asia, ed. D. Perret, 47–71. Études thématiques 30. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Godakumbura, C.E., ed. 1956. Hatthavanagallavihāravaṃsa. London: Pali Text Society.
Gornall, A.M. 2013 “Buddhism and Grammar: The Scholarly Cultivation of Pāli in Medieval Laṅkā.” PhD 
thesis, University of Cambridge.
Gornall, A. 2014. “How Many Sounds are in Pāli? Schisms, Identity and Ritual in the Theravāda Saṅgha.” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 42 (5): 511–550.
Gornall, A. 2020. Rewriting Buddhism: Pali Literature and Monastic Reform in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270. London: 
UCL Press.
Gornall, A., Gunasena, A., trans. 2018. “A History of the Pali Grammatical Tradition of South and Southeast 
Asia by Vaskaḍuvē Subhūti (1876), Part 1.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 33: 1–53.
Gornall, A., Henry, J. 2017. “Beautifully Moral: Cosmopolitan issues in medieval Pāli literary theory.” In Sri 
Lanka at the Crossroads of History, eds. Z. Biedermann, A. Strathern, 77–93. London: UCL Press.
Griffiths, A., Lammerts, D.C. 2015. “Epigraphy: Southeast Asia.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Volume 1: 
Literature and Languages, ed. J. Silk, 988–1009. Leiden: Brill.
Hallisey, C. 2003. “Works and Persons in Sinhala Literary Culture.” In Literary Cultures in History: 
Reconstructions from South Asia, ed. S. Pollock, 689–746. Berkeley: University of California Press.
von Hinüber, O. 1994a. “On the History of the Name of the Pāli Language.” In Selected Papers on Pāli 
Studies, 76–90. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
von Hinüber, O. 1994b. “Buddhist Law and the Phonetics of Pāli.” In Selected Papers on Pāli Studies, 198–232. 
Oxford: Pali Text Society.
von Hinüber, O. 1996. A Handbook of Pāli Literature. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Kacc = 2013. Pind, O.H., ed. Kaccāyana and Kaccāyanavutti. Bristol: Pali Text Society.
Kieffer-Pülz, P. 2000.“Die buddhistische Gemeinde.” In Der Buddhismus I: Der indische Buddhismus und seine 
Verzweigungen, eds. Heinz Bechert et al., 281–402. Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer.
Kieffer-Pülz, P. 2013. Verlorene Gaṇṭhipadas zum buddhistischen Ordensrecht. Untersuchungen zu den in der 
Vajirabuddhiṭı̄kā zitierten Kommentaren Dhammasiris und Vajirabuddhis. Teil 1. Veröffentlichungen der 
Indologischen Kommission 1. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Lammerts, D.C. 2018. Buddhist Law in Burma: A History of Dhammasattha Texts and Jurisprudence, 1250–1850. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Le Goff, J. 1988. The Medieval Imagination. Translated by Arthur Goldhammer. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
McDaniel, J.T. 2008. Gathering Leaves and Lifting Words: Histories of Buddhist Monastic Education in Laos and 
Thailand. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
McDaniel, J.T. 2011. The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: Practicing Buddhism in Modern Thailand. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Mogg = 1999. Moggallānavyākaraṇa. Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana CD-Rom Version 3. Dhammagiri, Igatpuri: 
Vipassana Research Institute.
Moh = 1961. Mohavicchedanı̄ Abhidhamma-mātikattha-vaṇṇanā by Kassapatthera of Coḷa, eds. A.P. Buddhadatta, 
A.K. Warder. London: Pali Text Society.

--- PAGE 77 ---
Alastair Gornall
56
Mus, P. 1939. La Lumière sur les Six Voies. Tableau de la transmigration bouddhique d’après des sources sanskrites, pāli, 
tibétaines et chinoises en majeure partie inédites. Vol. 1. Paris: Institut d’ethnologie.
Oberlies, T. 2019. Pāli Grammar: The language of the canonical texts of Theravāda Buddhism. Vol. 1. Melksham, 
Wilts: Pali Text Society.
Ollett, A. 2017. Language of the Snakes: Prakrit, Sanskrit, and the Language Order of Premodern India. Oakland: 
University of California Press.
Pat.is-a = 1979. Saddhammappakāsinı̄. Commentary on the Paṭisambhidāmagga. Vol. 1. 1933. Reprinted, ed. C.V. 
Joshi. London: Pali Text Society.
Pind, O.H. 1989. “Studies in the Pāli Grammarians I: Buddhaghosa’s Reference to Grammar and 
Grammarians.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 13: 33–82.
Pind, O.H. 2012. “Pali Grammar and Grammarians from Buddhaghosa to Vajirabuddhi: A Survey.” Journal 
of the Pali Text Society 31: 57–124.
Pollock, S. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in Premodern India. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Premchit, S., Swearer, D.K. 1977. “A Translation of Tamnān Mūlasāsanā Wat Pā Daeng: The Chronicle of 
the Founding of Buddhism of the Wat Pā Daeng Tradition.” Journal of the Siam Society 65 (2): 73–110.
Ps = 1977. Papañcasūdanı̄ Majjhimanikāyaṭṭhakathā of Buddhaghosācariya. Part 1, Suttas 1–10. 1922. Reprint. 
eds. J.H. Woods, D. Kosambi. London: Pali Text Society.
Ruiz-Falqués, A. 2017. “The Role of Pāli Grammar in Burmese Buddhism.” Journal of Burma Studies 21 
(1): 1–96.
Rūp =  1936. Maharupasiddhi by Ven. Choliya Buddhapriya Maha Thera, the Head of the Maha Vihara sect in 
Ceylon, with Sandehavighatani, a Sinhalese paraphrase by an ancient great scholar, ed. B.K. Dhammaratana. 
Weligama: Sathmina Press.
Schonthal, B. 2018. “The Tolerations of Theravada Buddhism.” In Tolerations in Comparative Perspective, ed. 
V.A. Spencer, 179–196. Lanham: Lexington Books.
Shulman, E. 2019. “The Protective Buddha: On the Cosmological Logic of Paritta.” Numen 66: 207–242.
Silverstein, M. 1976 .“Shifters, Linguistic Categories, and Cultural Description.” In Meaning in Anthropology, 
eds. K.H. Basso, H.A. Selby, 11–55. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Singh, S. 2013. “Save Pali, ancient classical Indian language of Buddhism in India.” The Buddhist Channel, 
April 16 2013: https://www.buddhistchannel.tv/index.php?id=70,11414,0,0,1,0#.X5kdby8RpBw
Skilling, P. 2022. “Canons: Authoritative Texts of the Theravaṃsa.” In The Routledge Handbook of Theravada 
Buddhism, eds. S. Berkwitz, A. Thompson, 209–226. London: Routledge.
Sp = 1975–81. Samantapāsādikā: Buddhaghosa’s commentary on the Vinaya Piṭaka. Vols. 1–7. 1924–47. 
Reprinted. eds. J. Takakusu, M. Nagai. London: Pali Text Society.
Spk = 1977. Sārattha-ppakāsinı̄: Buddhaghosa’s commentary on the Saṃyutta-Nikāya. Vol. 1, On Sagāthā-vagga. 
1929. Reprint, ed. F.L. Woodward. London: Pali Text Society.
Sp-ṭ Be = 1960. Sāratthadı̄panı̄-ṭı̄kā. Vol. 1. Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana edition. Yangon: Buddhasāsanasamiti.
Ss = 1992 Sārasaṅgaha, ed. G.H. Sasaki. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Strathern, A. 2019. Unearthly Powers: Religions and Political Change in World History. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Subodh = 2000. Subodhālaṅkāra. Porāṇa-ṭı̄kā (Mahāsāmi-ṭı̄kā) by Saṅgharakkhita Mahāsāmi, Abhinava-ṭı̄kā 
(Nissaya) (anonymous), ed. P.S. Jaini. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Sv = 1968. The Sumaṅgala-Vilāsinı̄, Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dı̄gha-Nikāya. Part 1. 1886. Reprint. 
eds. T.W. Rhys Davids, J.E. Carpenter. London: Pali Text Society.
Sv-nṭ   Be    = 1961. Sādhuvilāsinı̄, Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄-navaṭı̄kā, Sı̄lakkhandhavagga-abhinavaṭı̄kā. Vol. 1. 
Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana edition. Yangon: Buddhasāsanasamiti.
Sv-ṭ = 1970 Dı̄ghanikāy-aṭṭhakathāṭı̄kā Lı̄natthavaṇṇanā. Vol. 1. ed. L. De Silva. London: Pali Text Society.
Tambiah, S.J. 1973. “Form and Meaning of Magical Acts: A Point of View.” In Modes of Thought: Essays on 
thinking in Western and non-Western societies, eds. R. Horton, R. Finnegan, 199–229. London: Faber and 
Faber.
Thompson, A. 2016. Engendering the Buddhist State: Territory, Sovereignty and Sexual Difference in the Inventions 
of Angkor. London: Routledge.
Tiyavanich, K. 1997. Forest Recollections: Wandering Monks in Twentieth-Century Thailand. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press.
Turner, A. 2018. “Pali Scholarship “in Its Truest Sense” in Burma: The Multiple Trajectories in Colonial 
Deployments of Religion.” Journal of Asian Studies 77.1: 123–138.

--- PAGE 78 ---
Pāli
57
Turnour, G. 1837. The Mahāvanso in Roman Characters, with the Translation Subjoined; And an Introductory Essay 
on Pali Buddhistical Literature. Vol. 1. Ceylon: Cotta Church Mission Press.
UPT538.3F = (n.d.) Candasuriyagatidı̄panı̄ manuscript from U Po Thi Library, Myanmar, digitized by the 
Myanmar Manuscript Digital Library and hosted by the University of Toronto (https://mmdl.utoronto.
ca).
Veidlinger, D.M. 2007. Spreading the Dhamma: Writing, Orality, and Textual Transmission in Buddhist Northern 
Thailand. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Vibh-a  = 1980. Sammoha-vinodanı̄ Abhidhamma-Piṭake Vibhaṅgaṭṭhakathā. 1923. ed. A.P. Buddhadatta. 
London: Pali Text Society.
Visigalli, P. (Forthcoming) “The classification of nouns (nāma) in Buddhaghosa and Pāli scholastic litera­
ture.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies.
Vmv Be = 1960. Vimativinodanı̄-ṭı̄kā. Vol. 1. Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana edition. Yangon: Buddhasāsanasamiti.
Vsm = 1950. Visuddhimagga of Buddhaghosācariya. Revised by Dharmananda Kosambi. ed. H.C. Warren. 
Harvard Oriental Series 41. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Walker, T. 2022. “Bilingualism: Theravāda Bitexts across South and Southeast Asia’.” In The Routledge 
Handbook of Theravada Buddhism, eds. S. Berkwitz, A. Thompson, 271–284. London: Routledge.

--- PAGE 79 ---
58
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-5
3
CIRCULATIONS
Linked spaces and divergent temporalities 
in the Pāli world
Anne M. Blackburn
Introduction
In the last several decades, the term network has become central within the analytical repertoire 
of many disciplines in the social sciences and the humanities, including sociology, anthropol­
ogy, history, political science, and religious studies. This chapter explores some of the strengths 
and weaknesses of network as an analytical term used by scholars interested in historical studies 
of processes and phenomena related to the Triple Gem (Buddha, Dhamma, Saṅgha) in the 
premodern Pāli world. I use the term Pāli world rather than Theravāda Buddhism in premodern 
contexts. In my usage, the Pāli world is a geographic space: connected and partly unified by Pāli 
language and textual traditions but retaining strong internal local and subregional differentiation; 
multilingual, as Pāli interacts with local and other trans-regional languages; characterized by 
statecraft strongly marked by understandings of buddha-sāsana rooted in Pāli-language textual 
materials but in a nonexclusive fashion; in which trans-regional connections presuming mutual 
intelligibility via Pāli language; and concepts were motivated by local aims. This chapter argues 
that the concept of  “network” has some real but limited utility and proposes that investigat­
ing “circulatory processes” rather than “networks” offers the promise of greater subtlety and 
precision for historical studies of the Pāli world. I draw on materials from thirteenth- and 
fourteenth-century Sukhothai, a polity in northern Tai territories, to exemplify the limitations 
of network analyses and the relative advantage of thinking in terms of  “circulatory processes.”
Sukhothai1
For scholars interested in processes related to the expansion of the Pāli world, and the develop­
ment of new political centers (Blackburn Forthcoming) and textual communities (Blackburn 
2001) that were invested in Pāli-language tipiṭaka-related texts and sāsana histories, the inscrip­
tions of Sukhothai from the first half of the second millennium A.D. are thought-provoking data. 
For the purposes of this chapter, I focus on two significant changes reflected by the Sukhothai 
inscriptional record. No exhaustive treatment of Sukhothai history or epigraphy is intended.2 
Over a period of roughly seventy years in the Sukhothai inscriptions, we find the intensifying 
presence of theories and themes rooted in Pāli-language texts related to buddha-sāsana, as well as 
a developing emphasis on Laṅkā as a privileged geographic location in the Buddhist world to

--- PAGE 80 ---
Circulations
59
which Sukhothai monks and kings sought connection.3 As the following examples make clear, 
the growing presence of theories and themes rooted in Pāli-language texts, and the increasing 
emphasis on connection to Laṅkā, did not entail the eradication of textual and material prac­
tices related to Khmer (and perhaps Mon) cultural spaces or the displacement of śastric ideas 
with an intellectual lineage in Sanskrit textuality. However, the Sukhothai inscriptions valuably 
indicate the early second-millennium expansion of the Pāli world to include the emergent 
Tai polities of Sukhothai and Ayutthaya. Other epigraphic and literary evidence (not addressed 
here) signals a related process occurring at Chiang Mai. The Sukhothai inscriptions provide a 
rich context within which to reflect on the intellectual costs and benefits of using the idea of 
“network” to conceptualize how a particular locale—Sukhothai—came to participate more 
centrally in the Pāli world of the second millennium.
Sukhothai emerged toward the end of the thirteenth century as a Tai city-state (müang) with 
aspirations to control a number of what Chris Baker and Pasuk Pongpaichit (2017) call the 
“Northern Territories” along the Ping River system, which enters the Chao Phraya system and 
thence the Gulf of Siam and the wider Indian Ocean arena. Although earlier historians have 
described the rise of Sukhothai as an overthrow of Khmer imperial domination, Baker and 
Pasuk have recently convincingly built on earlier arguments by Michael Vickery (2010) indi­
cating that substantial Khmer political control did not extend so far to the northeast, although 
there is evidence of Khmer royal engagement with sites near Sukhothai. Certainly, Sukhothai 
and other Northern Territories were part of a wider Khmer cultural sphere, hence the use of 
Khmer language, Khmer influences in the built environment, and the fact that Khmer titles 
persist in Sukhothai inscriptions of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. As indicated further 
later, Khmer practices of expressing sovereignty through interventions in the built environ­
ment likely continued to influence Sukhothai royal practice, even as the rulers of Sukhothai 
began to experiment with expressions of sovereignty informed by Pāli texts. The ongoing 
impact of Khmer ideas and practices was due in part to Sukhothai’s periods of subordination 
to Ayutthaya—a powerful maritime polity in the Indian Ocean economy from the middle of 
the fourteenth century—and Ayutthaya’s complex relationship to Angkor.
Our first royal inscription is the so-called Ramkamhäng Inscription, composed in or near 
1292, during the reign of king Ramkamhäng (r. ?–1292?). After considerable controversy in the 
1990s and early 2000s, this inscription is now accepted by scholars as our earliest Sukhothai 
inscription. I compare it with a cluster of royal and monastic inscriptions from several decades 
later, during the reign of King Mahā Dhammarāja I (1347–?). By the 1290s, the era of our 
first Sukhothai inscription, Buddhist ideas, tipiṭaka passages, and writing in Pāli language all 
had a deep history in parts of the Southeast Asian mainland, dating to the middle of the first 
millennium. Sukhothai Inscription 1 is our first extant inscription in a form of Tai language, 
and it has been the subject of much scholarly discussion as such. In the present context, I use 
it to develop a temporal comparison, indicating changes in the degree and manner in which 
elements drawn from Pāli textual culture appear within the Sukhothai inscriptions during the 
period ranging from the reign of Ramkamhäng to that of Mahā Dharmarāja I, over a period 
of approximately seventy years or two generations, and the degree to which authority and 
prestige are attributed to the island of Laṅkā. Sukhothai Inscription 1 uses a smattering of Pāli 
technical terms. It makes use of common Buddhist terms and titles, for instance. However, it 
does not incorporate substantial narrative content (stories, exemplary characters, etc.) from the 
textual corpus of the Pāli world. Moreover, the Buddhist elements are generic and could be 
drawn from Buddhist materials in any language: Ramkamhäng is said to know the dhamma and 
to follow an appropriate cycle of monastic ritual observances, such as vassa (the rainy season 
retreat for monks) and kathina (an annual robe offering ceremony). Sukhothai Inscription 1 does

--- PAGE 81 ---
Anne M. Blackburn
60
not explicitly attempt to argue for Sukhothai’s place within a larger Buddhist geography; links 
to celebrated buddha-sāsana sites from the Indian mainland and Laṅkā are absent. It is not clear 
whence Ramkamhäng and his court drew these basic ideas and terms related to buddha-sāsana 
and monastic practice. The possibilities are greatly overdetermined, given the possible continued 
influence of Mon Pāli textual forms from the Lopburi area as well as flows into Sukhothai from 
locations further southwest such as Nakhon Si Thammarat indicated by the inscription itself.
While Sukhothai Inscription 1 is very direct, and not particularly graceful, much has changed 
by his grandson’s reign. Mahā Dhammarāja I is referred to in a series of six royal inscriptions 
running from the 1350s into the late 1360s, and another from this later period composed by 
the highest-ranking Buddhist monk at Sukhothai at that time to commemorate the king’s 
temporary ordination as a monk. There are also three inscriptions referring to the travels and 
sāsana-related activities of a high-ranking Sukhothai monastic named Si Sattha (S´rı S´raddhā), 
likely a former rival to the king. By this time, the inscriptional style has changed dramatically 
from that of Sukhothai Inscription 1, incorporating vastly more in the way of narrative and 
technical language from Pāli textual culture, and demonstrating more elaborate literary capabili­
ties indebted to Pāli textual form. We also find royal prowess expressed in terms related to śāstric 
knowledge with roots in Sanskrit knowledge systems (Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1992, 
457–459; Blackburn 2017b). In the later inscriptions concerning Mahā Dhammarāja I and Si 
Sattha from the second half of the 1300s, narrative materials from the Pāli Buddhist corpus are 
deeply evident, including commentarial material and vaṃsa texts composed on Laṅkā, as Michel 
Lorillard has nicely demonstrated (2000). Lankan pilgrimage locations textualized through 
the Pāli vamsas were clearly known at Sukhothai. Other indications that Laṅkā served as one 
source (direct or indirect) for Pāli materials reaching Sukhothai include the fact that these later 
Sukhothai inscriptions reflect predictions that buddha-sāsana would decline over five thousand 
years, presented in a form close to that of Manorāṭṭhapuranı̄, a fifth-century Pāli commentary on 
the Aṅguttara Nikāya composed on the island of Laṅkā (Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1992, 
452–456). Such ideas of decline were incorporated into portrayals of Mahā Dhammarāja I as a 
king equipped to support his subjects’ merit-making in the precious period before sāsana’s end. 
In addition, it is clear that the authors of the later Sukhothai inscriptions shared anticipations 
of the next Buddha Metteyya (Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1992, 456–457), an increas­
ingly popular narrative focus in Lankan Pāli texts composed around the turn of the second 
millennium ce. However, we should not assume that Laṅkā was the sole source of Pāli textual 
materials to the exclusion of other flows, especially given indications in the built environment 
that Sukhothai was connected to Pagan (Blackburn 2017a). Another indication of the grow­
ing presence of Pāli textuality at Sukhothai is the coincidence of images and motifs from the 
jātakas (narratives of Gotama Buddha’s past lives as aspiring Buddha) within later Sukhothai 
inscriptions—including one composed in Pāli by the then highest-ranking monastic of the 
realm—and the jātaka images of Wat Si Chum (Skilling et al. 2008) with Pāli captions. For 
instance, Inscription 6 composed in Pāli sometime in or after 1361 by the then leading monk 
of Sukhothai to celebrate the king’s temporary monastic ordination, compares his monarch 
to jātaka heroes: “like Vessantara in generosity … like King Sı̄lava in morality” (Griswold and 
Prasert na Nagara 1992, 517). Inscriptions praising Si Sattha, likely dating to the 1370s, develop 
an extended comparison between this monk and the Buddha-to-be as Vessantara. For instance, 
Inscription 2 is striking for reporting Si Sattha’s activities in a narrative style indebted to 
biographies of Buddha Gautama and to Gautama’s previous life as Bodhisattva Vessantara; this 
monk is implicitly portrayed as a Buddha-to-be (Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1992, 387–9).
Laṅkā is a strong presence in the inscriptions of this later reign, contrasting strongly with 
Inscription 1’s relative disinterest in the wider geography of buddha-sāsana, two generations earlier.

--- PAGE 82 ---
Circulations
61
Now monks associated with Laṅkā are specifically sought by Sukhothai leaders; Laṅkā is portrayed 
as a prestigious location within the perceived world of buddha-sāsana. Laṅkā is also celebrated 
as a privileged source for Buddha relics used for protection and merit-making. In the Mahā 
Dhammarāja I inscriptions, sovereign authority is strongly linked to the king’s ability to provide his 
subjects access to Buddha-relics. His capacity to do so is a public demonstration of the sovereign’s 
fitness to rule, since—according to theories of sovereignty expressed in Pāli texts—Buddha-relics 
are understood to remain only in the company of those who deserve them (Trainor 1997). The 
installation of Buddha-relics at trade and military frontiers was a potent act. In the inscriptions, 
Sukhothai subjects are exhorted to make haste in offering pūja to the relics provided by the 
king. These relics are explicitly and repeatedly related to Laṅkā, referred to as both Laṅkādvı̄pa 
and as Sı̄haḷa. For instance, Inscription 3 of 1357 discusses the consecration of the king, pres­
ents his royal title, and then describes a relic brought by him to one of the cities he sought to 
include within his kingdom:
This precious relic is not a common one, but it is a real relic brought from far-away 
Laṅkādvı̄pa. Some seeds from the śrı̄mahābodhi tree under which our Lord Buddha 
was sitting when he defeated the army of King Mārādhirāja and attained the omni­
science of Buddhahood have also been brought here and planted behind this reliquary 
monument.
(Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1992, 449)4
Inscriptions describing Si Sattha also stress Lankan connections, emphasizing his pilgrimage trav­
els to sāsana-related sites on Laṅkā and gifts given to maintain Buddha-relic monuments there. 
Thus, a comparison of Sukhothai Inscription 1 with the cluster of inscriptions from the era of 
Mahā Dhammarāja I and Si Sattha show increasing emphasis Laṅkā as a desirable location within 
buddha-sāsana and the impact of Pāli compositions composed on Laṅkā. Although Tai and Khmer 
languages continue to dominate this epigraphic record (only one inscription is composed in Pāli 
from this period), we see that the textual culture of Sukhothai epigraphy rapidly incorporated Pāli 
materials, with an obvious debt to Lankan Pāli compositions, whether brought directly from the 
island or via other locations. The first half of the fourteenth century was clearly a critical period 
for incorporating the Northern Territories within the Pāli world (Blackburn 2018).
At the same time, it is likely that Mahā Dhammarāja I’s choice to install Buddha footprints 
at locations of economic and military importance owed something to the rather recent history 
of Khmer imperial practice in the region and perhaps to understandings of Khmer sovereignty 
present in later fourteenth-century Sukhothai through Ayutthayan connections after Sukhothai 
became an Ayutthayan subordinate.5 For instance, art historical evidence from the Sukhothai 
region addressed by Jean Boisselier (1969)—and more recently by Hiram Woodward (1994/5, 
2005)—indicates the presence of Jayavarman VII-era (that is, late twelfth- and early thirteenth-
century) construction at Sukhothai, not long before Sukhothai’s emergence as an independent 
müang. These appear to have included images associated with the Angkorian king Jayavarman 
VII that yoked royal representation to cosmic Buddha symbols. The technique of making 
imperial territorial claims by installing such objects was not an innovation of Jayavarman VII 
but rather had a deeper history within the Khmer polity. It is not unlikely that the Khmer 
imperial expressive logic of conveying the combined force of royal and cosmological power 
through royally sponsored and strategically placed potent objects continued to shape the way 
Sukhothai soverigns expressed aspirations to expansive authority. Such logics, however, were 
adapted to encompass powerful Buddha-relics authorized by narratives composed on Laṅkā 
and circulated within the expanding Pāli world.

--- PAGE 83 ---
Anne M. Blackburn
62
Networks
The preceding discussion suggests a number of grounds for thinking that thirteenth- and 
fourteenth-century Sukhothai—the era in which the body of inscriptions just discussed was 
produced—could be analyzed fruitfully via a network analysis of some kind. The inscriptional 
corpus indicates that Sukhothai was a locale linked to other locations, that there were knowl­
edge flows among these locations, and that changes in one location (e.g., Laṅkā or Ayutthaya) 
had causal impacts on another location (e.g. Sukhothai). Moreover, the inscriptions indicate the 
movement of various kinds of specialists among locations. When the inscriptions are mapped 
against other evidence from the region in this period, such as Indian Ocean trading practices, 
it becomes clear that the mobility of persons, objects, and ideas associated with the Triple Gem 
coincided with other movements occurring within the trading ecosystem of the Indian Ocean.
Three approaches to network analysis of the Sukhothai materials appear most promising, and 
I introduce them in the following. However, as the subsequent discussion indicates, in my view 
none of these approaches to the Sukhothai data (and other similar evidence from elsewhere 
in the premodern Pāli world) is adequate to the historical complexity we seek to study. Thus, 
the conclusion to this chapter proposes instead an analytical engagement with “circulatory 
processes,” a conceptual framework better suited to our available evidence.
In my view, the three forms of network analysis with the greatest initial promise for the 
study of cases like Sukhothai are examining single networks created through bonds of trust or 
recognition, looking at multiple networks differentiated by function that intersect or overlap 
at hubs or nodes with causal impacts occurring from one network on another, and actor-
network analysis examining the co-presence of animate and inanimate objects that combine 
to generate stable entities or enterprises. Among scholars of religion, historians, and historical 
anthropologists, a form of “network” analysis drawing on conceptions of group trust and rec­
ognition has proved influential. For instance, this usage has shaped scholarship on connectivity 
in the Indian Ocean region by scholars who have explored how shared religious affiliation 
and/or a shared place of origin facilitated the movement of goods and financial instruments 
across long distances.6 Studies of more contemporary contexts have also drawn upon a related 
conception of “network” to analyze the role of religious affiliation in migration, suggesting that 
shared affiliation engenders relationships of mutual support in processes of transit and localiza­
tion (Conermann and Smolarz 2015). Kenneth Dean has adapted the work of Charles Tilly to 
describe institutional connections in the South China Sea arena. He writes, for instance, of a 
“temple trust network” linking southern China and locations within what are now Singapore 
and Malaysia (2018). Dean portrays the institutional connections between Chinese temples 
nested within network relations. My own use of the term network in relation to nineteenth-
century monastic communications between locations in what are now contemporary Sri Lanka, 
Burma/Myanmar, and Thailand did not foreground specifically the relationship between “reli­
gious affiliation” and “trust” (Blackburn 2010). Yet in some sense, I presumed the possibility of 
mutual recognition among those seeking the protection of the Triple Gem, a mutual recognition 
that might facilitate flows of information (e.g., about monastic lineage histories, or strategies 
for combatting Christian missionary activity) and conduce to shared goals (e.g., maintaining 
the vitality of buddha-sāsana).
Scholarly approaches to networks of trust and recognition have potential applicability to the 
Sukhothai inscriptions described earlier. For instance, one might refer to a “monastic network” 
or a “Buddhist network” in discussing the relay of interactions that appear to have played a role 
in the travel of Buddhist monks to and from Sukhothai. One could propose that the monastic 
dignitary from Mottama (Martaban), a coastal polity then located in territory now held within

--- PAGE 84 ---
Circulations
63
Burma/Myanmar, referred to in King Ramkamhäng’s Inscription 1, and the monk Si Sattha, 
who is the protagonist of several later Sukhothai inscriptions, were—as followers of the Triple 
Gem and/or as monastics—able to mobilize trust and recognition sufficient to secure their 
mobility across substantial distances, in times of unpredictable infrastructure for travel. Or, 
with reference to the repertoire drawn from Pāli texts that manifests with growing strength 
in the Sukhothai inscriptions between the era of King Ramkamhäng and that of King Mahā 
Dhammarāja I, one might invoke network in a different way, closer to the usage of Jason Neelis 
in his work on Silk Road Buddhist transmission (2011). Neelis draws centrally on the concept 
of “network” to portray mutually influencing agentive processes understood as affecting the 
transmission of Buddhist ideas and objects. This complex causation is discussed in terms of the 
co-presence and interaction of multiple networks, described as “religious,” “economic,” and 
“political.” Here rather than emphasizing a particular characteristic that might support relations 
of trust and interdependence, Neelis’s use of network appears closer to some form of systems 
theory involving linkages among hubs and nodes.7 Returning to the Sukhothai epigraphic data, 
along these lines one might invoke the idea of a “Buddhist network” transmitting sāsana-related 
texts (oral and/or written) along with their human carriers and explain the viability of this 
network in relation to an “economic network” that characterized the Indian Ocean arena in the 
first half of the second millennium ce.8 On this view the transmission of Buddhist phenomena 
along one networked set of interactions would be understood as enabled by an intersecting or 
overlapping series of trade-related interactions construed as another network. Sukhothai and 
the polities of Mottama and Ayutthaya could be understood as nodes operating simultaneously 
within a “Buddhist network” and a “trade network.”
It would also be possible to approach the idea of “network” in relation to the Sukhothai 
data through a form of network theory articulated by Bruno Latour (1996, 2010). This to my 
knowledge has not been undertaken by any historian of Buddhism. In this view, the phenom­
enon under analysis is understood as the product of conditioning elements that must intercon­
nect in a particular way to create the phenomenon in its stable form. The emphasis here is on 
maintaining a single scale of vision, such that the analysis does not depend on encompassing 
macro-scale concepts that—according to actor-network analysis—hide the immanent agencies 
productive of phenomena in the world. Thus, for instance, any one of our Sukhothai inscrip­
tions would not be analyzed as expressive of a macro-level phenomenon such as “Buddhist 
kingship” but, rather, examined in terms of the co-constitutive elements ranging from build­
ing material to labor flow to Pāli-language ideational elements brought to the royal court by 
monastic literati. Or a public royal act such as the installation of Buddha-relics in a particular 
location could be understood in actor-network terms as comprising a theory of sovereignty 
linking kinship to the public provision of relics, the relics themselves, labor force, royal agent, 
royal clients, building materials, and so on.
Networks reconsidered
A critical question that arises in any analyses involving the concept of “network” is how the 
network is identified and labeled. A “network” is not a natural kind, of course, but a concept 
used for heuristic purposes in order to bring certain aspects of data into sharper visibility and 
to suggest certain relationships of cause or correlation. Although I have myself used the term 
Buddhist network in other published work, the term seems to me increasingly problematic, 
especially in relation to pre-twentieth-century data. In the first place, the term Buddhist network 
suggests an exclusive identity category at odds with historical forms of collective belonging 
related to Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha. There is an abundance of data from locations in the

--- PAGE 85 ---
Anne M. Blackburn
64
Pāli world showing that patrons of the Triple Gem often offered patronage and veneration to 
other ritual foci as well, such as Viṣṇu or the protective deity associated with particular topo­
graphic locations such as a mountain or royal city. Boundaries were sometimes drawn between 
Triple Gem practices and other forms (typically one was not simultaneously a follower of Mahā 
Jina and Gotama Buddha), but these boundaries were drawn less often, and less tightly, than 
modern understandings of discrete confessional religious communities would suggest. In other 
words, although as noted in the examples above one might be tempted to invoke the idea of 
a “Buddhist network,” the cost of doing so arguably outweighs the benefits, since it distorts 
premodern data. For some historians, including myself, one intellectual aim is to identify and 
begin to understand the ways that individuals and groups articulated understandings of col­
lective belonging (Blackburn 2010; see also Hansen 2018). Presuming “Buddhist” as a form of 
collective identification and using it for descriptive and analytical purposes as a modifier of the 
term network will often be at odds with the expressions of groupness (Cooper and Brubaker 
2005) articulated by individuals at specific historical moments in the Pāli world.
The term Buddhist network also masks (although not intentionally) the historical fact that 
travelers looking to the Triple Gem for immediate protection and future security, did so cheek 
by jowl with persons characterized by other ritual and soteriological engagements, and that 
all those on the move were also marked by business, political, and/or familial interests. For 
instance, the ships on which Si Sattha traveled when moving between Sukhothai and Laṅkā 
were not vessels used solely for the movement of a Buddhist monk! As the geographic refer­
ences in the inscriptions concerning him show, Si Sattha’s travel depended on shifting trade 
and military relationships; a traveler like Si Sattha made do with the conveyances available at 
any point in time, and his movement occurred along with the travel of other persons with 
diverse motivations. What we know of trade in the Indian Ocean arena during this era strongly 
suggests that he would have traveled with followers of the Indian theist traditions, along with 
Muslims, in his attempt to undertake a pilgrimage to potent Buddha-relics in Laṅkā.9 It is not 
unlikely that Muslims owned and/or captained one or more of the ships on which he trav­
eled. Describing Si Sattha as moving along a “Buddhist network” would make these aspects of 
premodern Indian Ocean mobility harder to recognize, inadvertently reinforcing a historically 
misleading vision of compartmentalized confessional communities, and a “religious sphere” 
separated from other activities.
A related problem in the labeling of networks is identifying them by function-distinctive 
terms such as religious, trade/economic, and political. As noted earlier in the discussion of work by 
Neelis, such usage may in one sense be helpful toward the conceptualization of interactive pro­
cesses within large and complex geographies. Yet distinguishing between networks in this way 
also brings significant risks of historical distortion. Identifying a distinctive domain as “religion” 
or “religious” is a rather late historical innovation—like “nation” and “ethnicity,” “religion” is a 
modern concept that only became a widely shared “commonsense” term in the course of the 
nineteenth century. Moreover, it has often been conceptualized in ways strongly indebted to 
forms of Protestant Christianity (Masuzawa 2005). On account of its history, the term religion 
is vulnerable to anachronism and ill-suited to characterize many forms of ritual, institutional, 
and philosophical life in premodern contexts. Within the premodern Pāli world—as in other 
premodern contexts—there was no separation of a discrete arena of discourse and practice in 
the manner identified by the modern concept of “religion.” Rather, we find the imbrication 
of forms of statecraft with a variety of protection rituals, as well as the patronage of ritual and 
literate specialists, often through elaborate public performance. Moreover, those involved in 
the transmission of soteriologies and protection rituals could also be carriers of information 
related to statecraft as well as valuable goods. Persons involved in the transportation of goods

--- PAGE 86 ---
Circulations
65
were simultaneously ritual practitioners who venerated one or more potent foci; they might 
also be patrons of ritual institutions.
To return to the Sukhothai examples, if we were to characterize the changing features of 
Sukhothai inscriptions on which I chose to focus earlier—more references to buddha-sāsana 
and sovereigns in ways influenced by Pāli texts and stronger rhetorical connections drawn to 
the island of Laṅkā—as the result of a “Buddhist network” or “religious network” supported 
or enabled by an “economic network” this would make it harder to see the implications of our 
available historical evidence. The data repeatedly shows the co-constitution of social authority, eco­
nomic relationships, and Triple Gem–related practice. For instance, Maha Dhammarāja I erected 
public inscriptions celebrating kingship in sāsana-related terms borrowed from Laṅkā, as well 
as the Indian mainland and Angkor. He did so at geographic locations critical to Sukhothai’s 
military security and commercial routes, likely conjoining notions of kingship related to Buddha 
relics expressed in Pāli texts with Khmer approaches to expressing sovereignty through royally 
sponsored landscape installations. The monk Si Sattha whose monastic status appears to have 
offered him access to multiple locations within the Buddhist world also attempted to leverage 
his position within elite politics at Sukhothai. His departure to Laṅkā from Sukhothai seems to 
have been timed for reasons of political vulnerability as well as merit-making; the pilgrimage 
itinerary responded to transportation opportunities shaped by a dynamic trading arena.
Thus, adapting network analyses rooted in both the trust/recognition framework and the 
multiple networks systems theory framework to the study of the premodern Pāli world entails 
certain risks in historical analysis, risks involving problems of anachronism, and the danger of 
taking too seriously empirically anachronistic heuristic distinctions between forms of activity 
designated as “religious,” “economic,” and so on. In addition to these areas of concern, there 
is another interestingly problematic feature of network analyses. They are ill suited to accom­
modate temporal complexity and causal processes occurring along multiple timescapes. This 
problem is particularly acute for actor-network analysis, but the difficulty also characterizes 
the other forms of network analysis discussed above. A network analysis along trust/recogni­
tion lines has the implicit potential to accommodate some matters related to temporality and 
memory inasmuch as the intragroup grounds for trust may include a historical sensibility that 
the group possesses shared history, and individuals may also gauge one another’s trustworthi­
ness through reflection on lineage, family history, and so on. However, this form of network 
analysis does not help us understand the wider conditions of possibility that have shaped the 
impulse to connect and then taking advantage of enhanced connection possible through trust 
and recognition. In other words, returning to one of the examples above, Si Sattha’s Indian 
Ocean circulations may have been eased by his legibility to others as a Triple Gem follower 
or as a monastic, and interactions achieving this recognition might have included references to 
sāsana history. Yet via a trust/recognition analysis, we would not be well poised to understand 
the intersecting historical processes causing Si Sattha to set forth from Sukhothai (processes 
with shorter and longer temporal durations such as Sukhothai’s changing place in Indian Ocean 
infrastructure or Mahā Dhammarāja I’s accession to the throne). Nor would there be an oppor­
tunity to probe the ways in which past experiences (such as Si Sattha’s experience as an elite 
youth and his family’s military history) and anticipations of the future (including Si Sattha’s 
aspiration to Buddhahood) helped shape Si Sattha’s subjectivity (as best we have partial access 
to it through inscriptional evidence) and his chosen actions. In the systems theory network 
analysis, characterized by multiple networks sharing hubs and nodes, the emphasis is spatial 
rather than temporal. This kind of analysis may help us visualize how persons and phenomena 
come to be co-present in a particular location through intersecting and/or overlapping circuits 
of mobility, albeit at the risk of characterizing these persons and phenomena in misleading

--- PAGE 87 ---
Anne M. Blackburn
66
terms (see the previous discussion). However, focusing on relations occurring through hubs 
and nodes that bring more than one network into connection places the emphasis quite late 
in terms of causal processes. This approach is not well suited to evoking the deeper causal 
temporalities that have shaped the possibilities of intersection and connection. Moreover, the 
focus on network rather than persons participating in movement diverts attention that might 
be productively directed toward understanding how larger-scale historical processes come to 
bear on individuals, as well as how the way a person inhabits spaces of memory and anticipa­
tion shapes their acts in locations that might figure on a network map. Returning to the Si 
Sattha examples mentioned just previously, we again find ourselves with insufficient tools to 
understand his activities or context.
In actor-network analysis in the mode developed by Latour, such analysis is used to create 
a productive redescription of a present-tense phenomenon of some kind, a redescription that 
stresses the interactive agentive components required to create and maintain that phenomenon 
(such as an economic relationship, a technological form, or a theoretical articulation). Such 
redescription is intended to deconstruct larger-order descriptors understood by actor-network 
analysis to mask agentive relations by relying on artificial encompassing analytical categories. 
In undertaking this redescription, there is a strong and explicit emphasis on the temporality of 
the network itself to the exclusion of other temporalities (Law and Mol 1994; Law 2002). In 
such an analysis, our attention is focused on the present moment of the holding together of 
the phenomenon-creating/maintaining network rather than deeper temporal frameworks that 
reveal other causes, precursors, and meanings of the phenomenon in question. When Mahā 
Dhammarāja I installed footprint relics at strategic locations within the realm he aspired to 
control, invoking the forthcoming era of the next Buddha Metteyya, or when Si Sattha (or 
those crafting his inscriptional persona) portrayed himself as comparable to Gotama Buddha 
in pre-enlightenment lives and thus to a future Buddha, an actor-network analysis would 
help us to see the present-tense animate (e.g., the king, laborers, theorists of sovereignty) and 
inanimate (text models, mountains, stone) elements linked together to produce these inscrip­
tions-as-artifacts. However, this perspective is not well suited to show how a such a moment 
of production is rooted in, and depends on, the invocation of the past and the anticipation 
of the future. Mahā Dhammarāja I’s inscriptional projects are characterized by this temporal 
complexity and presume the capacity of subject audiences (readers, listeners) to interpret the 
present-tense artifact of the inscription within this larger temporal context in order for the 
artifact to take effect powerfully on them. This complex temporality is expressed for instance 
by the inscriptions’ invocation of past kings, the deep time of buddha-sāsana, and the king’s 
expressed ability to determine for his subjects where they stand within a timescape of promise 
and danger that extends between the lifetimes of past Gotama Buddha and the next Buddha 
Metteyya. Similarly, the inscriptions attending to Si Sattha invoke the memory of his ances­
tors in a manner that endows this monk with elements of royal prowess, and create for him 
the stature of a Buddha-to-be by describing him in terms taken from the jātakas; he is said to 
mirror the qualities of Gotama Buddha in his progression to Buddhahood.
Circulatory processes
How are we to write histories of the premodern Pāli world’s process of coming-to-be, histories 
of the Pāli world’s geographic expansion? Such work is immensely challenging, requiring a 
substantial understanding of multiple locales; attention to evidence often thought to character­
ize disparate fields (e.g., political economy, intellectual history, history of art, religious studies, 
etc.); and alertness to complex conditions of possibility for experimentation and innovation

--- PAGE 88 ---
Circulations
67
by individuals and collectives at particular conjunctures, and the terms in which such persons 
articulated their aims. Given the limited and challenging evidence at our disposal, it also requires 
a willingness to develop analyses across scales, developing an understanding of materials like the 
Sukhothai inscriptions discussed earlier as both causes and effects, made possible by and con­
tributing to other occurrences within the Pāli world. In order to understand royal Sukhothai’s 
growing investment in Pāli-language textuality, Lankan prestige, and visions of buddha-sāsana 
articulated from Laṅkā, for instance, and the manifestation of these interests in royal practice 
and the built environment, it helps to understand many other factors such as Sukhothai’s rela­
tionships to other political formations, competing factions among Sukhothai elites, precedents 
for landscape intervention by rulers and strongmen at Sukhothai, and continuities or changes 
in trade and communication access between Sukhothai and locations both downriver and 
upriver. Many of these factors would not be caught from a network perspective, because of 
their temporal depth. At the same time, deep and historically sensitive investigation of discrete 
local environments will not suffice. We require also a way to identify and understand the ways 
in which specific combinations of local changes—changes occurring in more than one locale—
alter the conditions of possibility for Triple Gem–related practices at other linked geographic 
locations. For instance, the expansion of Pāli-language technical terms and intertextual refer­
ences connected to buddha-sāsana over a roughly seventy-year period running from the first 
inscription of King Ramkamhäng to those of King Mahā Dhammarāja I—changes that indicate 
innovation and experimentation in the practice of sovereignty at Sukhothai—were the result 
of complex shifts at multiple locations. The rising volume of Indian Ocean trade supported the 
emergence of new political formations at locations such as Mottama, Dambadeṇiya (a polity 
in west-central Laṅkā), and Ayutthaya. The combination of increasing trade connection and 
ambitious new political formations increased the speed with which sāsana-related elements 
traveled to Sukhothai from Laṅkā and coastal Burma. Sāsana-related elements such as theories 
of Buddhist sovereignty, styles of devotional practice, and cosmological arguments changed 
rapidly at Lankan locations owing to a variety of factors such as increasingly complex politi­
cal administration, the growing presence of Sanskrit textual culture, and interactions between 
Indian theist and Triple Gem devotional forms. These new forms then traveled along Indian 
Ocean sea lanes and their linked riverine routes.
The concept of “network” cannot handle such levels of complexity. We need analytical 
language suited to representing dynamic processes at multiple locations that alter conditions of 
possibility at other multiple locations. We must be able to see how the impacts of such dynamic 
processes may be felt at specific locales on distinctive timescapes, without homogenization across 
a trans-regional environment. There must be room to see how new elements arriving at specific 
locales through interactive trans-regional processes interact with other processes (often deeply 
historical)—related to economy, statecraft, aesthetic preferences, cosmological understandings, 
and the like—already underway at those locales. Therefore, I propose that we explore the value 
of conceptualizing the expanding Pāli world in terms of “circulatory processes” rather than 
“networks.” There are, of course, many ways of thinking about “circulation.” Contemplating 
the complex causalities that characterized the premodern Pāli world, one finds considerable 
affinity with discussions of human biological processes: the human circulatory system is char­
acterized by extremely complex local environments that exert dynamic effects on other such 
arenas through multidirectional flows, with both local and systemic effects. Provided that we 
are not tempted to identify and overvalue any one “heart” of the Pāli world, visualizing its 
history in terms of circulatory processes provides greater congruence between the heuristic 
concept used in description and analysis and the complex data available to us in the empirical 
record. Moreover, the fine-grained qualities of this conceptual formulation—drawing attention

--- PAGE 89 ---
Anne M. Blackburn
68
to the complex character of local arenas and far-reaching effects of changes within them—may 
encourage research scholars to seek new data, providing a more adequate understanding of 
many corners of the premodern Pāli world.
Notes
	 1	For fuller historical accounts of the examples discussed in this section, and complete citations, see 
Blackburn (2015) and (Forthcoming).
	 2	For a more complete discussion of my approach to Sukhothai history, see Blackburn (Forthcoming).
	 3	Sukhothai inscriptions are in Khmer and an early form of central Tai. I have thus relied on a series of 
translations, beginning with the work of Georges Cœdès (1924), modified by A.B. Griswold and Prasert 
na Nagara (1992; original publication dates in the 1970s). In addition, I have benefited from substantial 
consultation with Winai Pongsripian and Trongjai Hutangkura, who generously shared their more recent 
work with Sukhothai inscriptions. Dr. Trongjai kindly worked with me for two days in Bangkok to discuss 
translation matters. The more recent Thai translations retain more technical terms from Pāli and Khmer. 
See, for instance, Winai (1991, 2020).
	 4	See Note 3.
	 5	This argument is more fully developed in Blackburn (2017a) and Blackburn (Forthcoming).
	 6	For a critical review of this literature, see Trivellato (2009).
	 7	See also Neelis’s (2011) useful literature review on “network” as a concept used within religious studies.
	 8	On the Indian Ocean trading ecosystem of this era in relation to monastic mobility, see Blackburn (2015).
	 9	A fuller bibliography on this aspect of the Indian Ocean ecosystem is available at Blackburn (2015).
References
Baker, C., Pasuk, P. 2017. A History of Ayutthaya: Siam in the Early Modern World. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Blackburn, A.M. (Forthcoming) Experimental Sovereignties Across the Pali World, 1200–1550.
Blackburn, A.M. 2018. “Pali Up-River: Thinking With Steve About the Work of Pali in Tai Territories.” Steven 
Collins Memorial Symposium, 16 November 2018, University of Chicago.
Blackburn, A.M. 2017a. “Lanka at Sukhothai: Towards an Interpretation of the Buddha Footprint Claims of Maha 
Dhammaraja I.” International Association of Buddhist Studies Conference, University of Toronto.
Blackburn, A.M. 2017b. “Buddhist Technologies of Statecraft and Millennial Moments.” History and Theory 
56 (1): 71–79.
Blackburn, A.M. 2015. “Buddhist Connections in the Indian Ocean.” Journal of the Economic and Social 
History of the Orient 58: 237–266.
Blackburn, A.M. 2010. Locations of Buddhism: Colonialism and Modernity in Sri Lanka. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Blackburn, A.M. 2001. Buddhist Learning and Practice in Eighteenth-Century Lankan Monastic Culture. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Boisselier, Jean. 1969. “Recherches archéologiques en Thaïlande, II. Rapport sommaire de la Mission 
1965.” Arts Asiatiques 20: 47–98.
Cœdès, G. 1924. Recueil des inscriptions du Siam, I. Bangkok: National Library of Thailand.
Conermann, S., Smolarz, E., eds. 2015. Mobilizing Religion: Networks and Mobility. Berlin: EB Verlag.
Cooper, F., Brubaker, R. 2005. “Identity.” In Colonialism in Question: Theory, Knowledge, History, ed. F. Cooper, 
59–90. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dean, K. 2018. “Whose Orders? Chinese Popular God Temple Networks and the Rise of Chinese 
Mahāyāna Buddhist Monasteries in Southeast Asia.” In Buddhist and Islamic Orders in Southern Asia: 
Comparative Perspectives, eds. M. Feener, A.M. Blackburn, 99–124. Honolulu: University of Hawaii 
Press.
Griswold, A.B., Prasert na Nagara. 1992. Epigraphical and Historical Studies. Bangkok: Historical Society.
Hansen, A. 2018. “Buddhist Communities of Belonging in Early Twentieth Century Cambodia.” In 
Theravāda Buddhist Encounters with Modernity, eds. J. Schober, S. Collins, 62–77. London: Routledge. 
Latour, B. 1996. “Visualization and Cognition: Drawing Things Together.” In Knowledge and Society Studies 
in the Sociology of Culture Past and Present, Vol. 6, ed. H. Kuklik. Bingley: JAI Press.

--- PAGE 90 ---
Circulations
69
Latour, B. 2010. “Networks, Societies, Spheres: Reflections of an Actor-network Theorist.” Keynote speech for the 
International Seminar on Network Theory: Network Multidimensionality in the Digital Age. 19th February 
2010, Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism.
Law, J. 2002. “Objects and Spaces.” Theory, Culture and Society 19 (5/6): 91–105.
Law, J., Mol, A.M. 1994. “Networks and Fluids: Anaemia and Social Topology.” Social Studies of Science 24 
(4): 641–671.
Lorillard, M. 2000. “Aux origins du bouddhisme siamois [Le cas des buddhapāda’].” Bulletin de l’École fran­
çaise d’Extrême-Orient 87 (1): 23–56.
Masuzawa, T. 2005. The Invention of world religions, or, How European universalism was preserved in the language 
of pluralism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Neelis, J.E. 2011. Early Buddhist Transmission and Trade Networks: Mobility and Exchange Within and Beyond the 
Central Borderlands of South Asia. Leiden: Brill.
Skilling, P.  ed. 2008. Past Lives of the Buddha: Wat Si Chum: Art, Architecture and Inscriptions. Bangkok: River 
Books.
Trainor, Kevin. 1997. Relics, Ritual and Representation in Buddhism: Rematerializing the Sri Lankan Theravāda 
Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trivellato, Francesca. 2009. The Familiarity of Strangers: the Sephardic diaspora, Livorno, and cross-cultural trade in 
the early-modern period. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Vickery, M. 2010. “Cambodia and Its Neighbors in the 15th Century.” In Southeast Asia in the Fifteenth 
Century: The China Factor, eds. G. Wade, S. Laichen, 271–306. Singapore: National University of 
Singapore Press.
Winai, P. 2020. Sukhōthai khadı̄: prawattisāt, c̄hārơk sơksā, læ nirukti prawat. [Sukhothai Case Studies: History, 
Epigraphic Research, and Etymology]. Bangkok: Publisher unknown.
Winai, P., ed. 1991. Pramūan c̄hārơk thı̄ phop nai Prathēt Thai læ tāngprathēt. [Corpus of Inscriptions, Part 7, 
A Compilation of Inscriptions Found in Thailand and Neighbouring Countries.] Bangkok: Office of 
the Prime Minister.
Woodward, Hiram. 2005. The Art and Architecture of Thailand: From Prehistoric Times through the Thirteenth 
Century. Leiden: Brill.
Woodward, Hiram. 1994/5. “The Jayabuddhamahānātha Images of Cambodia.” Journal of the Walters Art 
Gallery 52/53: 105–111.

--- PAGE 91 ---
70
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-6
4
STATECRAFT
From Buddhist kingship to modern states
Patrice Ladwig
Introduction
We live in an era in which the state has become almost a universal norm. Despite the con­
tinuing existence of failed and fragmented states, from the early nineteenth century onward, 
communities all over the globe became increasingly engulfed by modern (nation-)states defined 
by territoriality, borders, and some sort of hegemonic political sovereignty. Amid the innumer­
able attempts to understand this massive transition, there has been extensive theorization of 
when, why, and how societies have developed into states. In earlier research, the (sometimes 
overdrawn) distinction between stateless societies and states was linked to the development of 
new agricultural technologies and the rise of larger administrative bureaucracies and durable 
institutions through the introduction of script (Goody 1986). The role of religion in early state 
formation has also been a prominent feature of research, and studies on sacred kingship have 
highlighted the evolvement of religious cults and cosmologies enabling that of larger social 
formations (Sahlins and Graeber 2017). This is the case with Theravāda Buddhism, as substantial 
research has been undertaken on the connections among politics, kingship, and statecraft in the 
Buddhist countries of South and Southeast Asia (see, e.g., Bechert 1966–1973; Obeyesekere 
and Reynolds 1972). More recent work has additionally highlighted the continuing relevance 
of Buddhism in modern nation-states (Harris 2001; Kawanami 2016).
This chapter reviews some of these accounts of the state and kingship in the context of 
Theravāda Buddhism in South and Southeast Asia but with an increasingly narrow focus 
on the very notion of statecraft in mainland Southeast Asia. Although addressing an equally 
broad concept such as politics and kingship, to which it is obviously connected, I propose that 
notions of statecraft reach beyond the well-researched topic of the interaction of saṅgha and 
kingship in Theravāda studies. By putting more emphasis on strategies and tactics of governing 
through ritual systems (Hocart 1970), I focus on the creation of ritual and spatial centers that 
acted as what could be called population accumulators and “cosmic systems of governmen­
tality” (Sahlins and Graeber 2017: 24). Although we see rather fragmented processes of state 
building and community formation in the premodern era, I argue that the role of Buddhism 
in population management was crucial in laying the foundations of what would become the 
modern state, yet equally crucial is the fact that this was only possible through the thorough 
localization of Buddhism. In this perspective, the Indianization of Southeast Asia was based on

--- PAGE 92 ---
Statecraft
71
an indigenization of Theravāda Buddhism and certain elements of Brahmanism. Both often 
fed on pre-Buddhist concepts of governance that led to the creation of larger economic and 
religious centers in the lowlands of mainland Southeast Asia.
The first section comprises a general overview of some of the classic works on Theravāda 
Budddhism and its political ideologies. Looking primarily at the circulation of texts and the 
introduction of monastic manuscript culture, we witness the creation of a Pāli and Sanskrit 
cosmopolis (Pollock 2006; Frasch 2017) constituting transregional social and political imagi­
naries based on sacred kingship. Although this emphasis on language and ideology as part of a 
larger Theravāda civilization has attracted a renewed critical interest in recent years (Schober 
and Collins 2017), other trends in research in Buddhist Studies have somewhat moved away 
from grand models of Buddhism, putting more emphasis on its localized forms beyond the 
contested Theravāda classification (ibid.). Therefore, the second section of this chapter takes a 
more detailed look at the localization of Theravāda statecraft in Laos and bordering Tai-speaking 
areas (Thailand, southern Yunnan) from the fourteenth century onward. By moving away from 
the general “two wheels of the dhamma” model of Theravāda kingship whereby a partnership 
between the religious and the political order is seen to turn the wheel of the Law, and by 
exploring indigenous, pre-Buddhist systems of social organization of Tai-speaking groups in 
the area called baan-muang (village—principality), I seek to problematize the “Buddhism-as-
civilization” writing of history from two perspectives. First, I argue that the widely applied 
maṇḍala-model (Wolters 1992: 126; Tambiah 1976) overlooks the heterogeneity of populations 
and the significance of local belief systems and thereby lends itself to an elite and Buddhist-
centered writing of history. Second, I propose that some of the previous research derives from a 
unilinear Buddhist historiography, which presents the rise of states and statecraft as a normative 
and desirable evolution. By referring to what could be labeled the “dark” sides of Buddhist 
statecraft, such as slavery, taxation, and large-scale warfare, I take up James Scott’s (2009) idea 
of a counterhistory from the perspective of state-evading non-Buddhist and partially Buddhist 
ethnic minorities occupying the highlands of mainland Southeast Asia.
The final part briefly discusses the significance of Buddhist statecraft in the modern era. Now 
deeply enmeshed in the ideology of the nation-state and modern forms of governmentality 
(Foucault 2007), and operating in political systems that have largely abolished kingship during 
the colonial era, I not only discuss here some of the ruptures modernity has provoked but also 
point to continuities. I locate the latter in the ritual aspects of Buddhist statecraft. While in the 
Theravāda world Buddhist kings are now often defunct or merely have representative roles, I 
argue that the cosmological manifestations of premodern kingship and statecraft are still very 
much alive. Despite the many transformations and historical ruptures caused by colonialism, 
modern revolutions, and the creation of multiple Buddhist modernities, state rituals that deal, 
for example, with the veneration of relics in contemporary Laos, show that we have not arrived 
in a purely secular Theravāda state. Returning to Hocart’s (1970) theory of ritual as a form of 
sociopolitical organization, I argue that the state and its political workings are still grounded in 
the religious, albeit this connection is at times not directly observable and obvious.
Buddhist kingship and statecraft in the Pāli-Sanskrit cosmopolis
The association of the monk as an ascetic figure, the saṅgha and rulers has been a constant feature 
of the overlap of the religious order (Sk: sāsanacakra) and the “secular” realm (Sk: ānācakra) in 
Theravāda South and Southeast Asia. This orientation is grounded in the constitutive narratives 
of Buddhist kingship: in the Aggañña Sutta—a kind “Buddhist story of creation”—the Buddha 
outlines the evolution of the social and cosmic order, its structure, and the need for having

--- PAGE 93 ---
Patrice Ladwig
72
kingship (Collins 1998: 627–34). This is supplemented by the Cakkavatti-Sῑhanāda Sutta, which 
elaborates on the responsibilities of an ideal ruler (ibid.: 602–15) and can be understood as a 
kind of scriptural primer on kingship in the context of a story of moral, human, and cosmic 
degeneration. Although a plethora of other texts could be listed here, in this context, most 
narratives and histories that deal with Buddhist kingship refer to an ideological blueprint of 
statecraft in the story of the Mauryan king Aśoka, who ruled over large parts of India around 
250 bce. Aśoka is said to have fervently promoted Buddhism, and in this model of statecraft, 
the ruler was considered a wheel-turning-king and universal monarch (P: cakkavatti) standing at 
the apex of social organization. He grants the monastic order protection and supports it, while 
the saṅgha spreads the dhamma, which gives the leader legitimacy for his rule. Strong’s remark 
that “throughout Buddhist Asia, the figure of Asoka has played a major role in concretizing 
conceptions of kingship and general attitudes towards rulers and government” (1983: 39) is 
valid for the kingdoms that developed in South and mainland Southeast Asia, and numerous 
Theravāda chronicles associated with Buddhist relics, temples, and statues refer to him. In early 
Buddhological research, as well as inside various Buddhist traditions itself, there is clearly a 
strong romanticizing tendency when it comes to Aśoka as a rājadhamma or cakkavatti, a king 
who upholds the dhamma and conquers the world by his benevolent righteousness. According 
to Sheldon Pollock, it “is unclear whether the Mauryan emperor even had a religious plan 
to spread the dhamma” (2005: 419). The ideology of the cakkavatti stresses a universal world 
ruler and a universal imperial form, but in reality, these very often remained only aspirations 
of transregional imperial rule. We deal here with very different forms of the early state in a 
continuum of various capacities of governance and administration. Kulke (1993), for example, 
suggests that this process of state formation in premodern India and mainland Southeast Asia 
runs through three phases: the local or chieftain phase, the regional and early kingdom phase, 
and finally the imperial phase, in Southeast Asia represented by superregional empires such as 
Angkor (ninth–fifteenth centuries) or Ayutthaya (1350–1767).
From the macro-perspective of historical sociology, Theravāda societies and their relation to 
politics appear as sharing “social phenomena which are common to several societies, more or 
less related to each other” (Durkheim and Mauss 2007: 61) or as a “family of societies” (ibid. 
62). This has also been emphasized by Steven Collins (1998: 566), who suggests that they are 
characterized by “a shared belief and symbol-system among elites ruling translocal political 
formations, paradigmatically in a maṇḍala of client-kings around a central monarch, which 
naturalized the hierarchy of tribute-givers and tribute-takers.” On a conceptual level of this 
understanding of politics and statecraft then lies the idea of the maṇḍala (circle; circle of states), 
understood by Tambiah (1976: 102f.) as a “galactic polity.” A maṇḍala, as described in the Indian 
manual of statecraft, the Arthaśāstra, implies that these polities do not have fixed boundaries and 
territories like modern states but are fluid and might be involved in plurality of hierarchically 
ordered client relationships with varying degrees of independence and cultural heterogeneity.
However, beyond these larger conceptions of Theravāda kingship and maṇḍala states that 
have been discussed in the literature at length, the association of king, saṅgha, and state took 
on a variety of forms. For the case of northern Thailand, Swearer and Premchit (1978) have 
convincingly shown that over the course of 150 years (1350–1500), a broad variety of relations 
between the religious and political sphere can be discerned, including co-option, adaptation, 
and resistance. Moreover, on a textual level, kingship is not only embraced and glorified as in 
genealogical vaṃsas (see Berkwitz, this volume) but is also viewed critically in some parts of the 
textual universe. In order to secure the cooperation with, and the subordination of the monastic 
order, Theravāda rulers also initiated “purifications” of the saṅgha (Katikāvatas). These have been 
well documented for the case of Sri Lanka (Ratnapāla 1971) and Burma (Mendelson 1975).

--- PAGE 94 ---
Statecraft
73
Further tensions between these “two wheels of the dhamma” (king and saṅgha) could also be 
triggered by the large scale of the landholdings monasteries came to accumulate. According to 
Gunawardana (1979: 344) this led the Sri Lankan saṅgha to stand in “antagonistic symbiosis” 
with kings. In Burma, the latter also initiated purification measures when monastic property 
holdings reached a certain level, leading to veritable oscillating cycles of monastic accumulation 
and disciplining interventions (Aung-Thwin 1979).
Crucial for the at-times conflictual symbiosis of rulers and saṅgha, and new models of 
legitimation and statecraft as a whole, was indeed the introduction of written scripts through 
Buddhism. The adoption of Pāli and Sanskrit as languages implied that Buddhism, its literary 
works, and its technical-ritual treatises connected people to a larger—today one would say 
transnational—cultural and political world. As in South Asia (Pollock 2006: 15), rulers, lords, 
and kings in the Theravāda countries supported an ideological link of language and politics 
and, at their courts, sponsored monks, writers, and astrologers who composed works in Pāli, 
Sanskrit, and vernacular languages. This migration of peoples, ideas, and concepts created 
continuous trans-local patterns and interactions, which according to Steven Collins are based 
in the Pāli imaginaire, which he defines as “a mental universe created by and within Pāli texts, 
which remained remarkably stable in content throughout the traditional period.” (Collins 1998: 
41). This role of Pāli and Sanskrit also laid the basis for the transnational mobility of texts, 
ideas, and people across the Indian Ocean (Blackburn 2015), and enhanced Theravāda’s great 
translocation from Sri Lanka to Southeast Asia between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries. 
Bagan, the first larger kingdom in Burma that flourished between the ninth and thirteenth 
centuries, was marked by a “cosmopolitan cohabitation and interaction of monks” (Frasch 
2017: 72), creating a new center of Buddhism with Pāli becoming a lingua franca mediat­
ing between Mon, Sinhala, Burmese, Khmer, and other languages. The economic trade and 
cultural exchanges between Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia also involved a traffic in important 
relics, which were crucial for the building of cities as ritual centers, because “the protection, 
enhancement, and deployment of relics constituted a core technology of states” in South and 
Southeast Asia (Blackburn 2010: 319). This created a portable imaginary that Buddhicized the 
landscape and its inhabitants, making Hindu-Buddhist cosmology and its vision of kingship 
and governance universally transplantable.
But beyond this legitimizing textual world, relic cults, and royal genealogies that connected 
people in more or less far away places with each other and that contributed to the formation 
of principalities and larger states, was there also a corpus of texts and knowledge that provided 
direct practical knowledge (administration, economics, divisions of political offices etc.) for the 
management of a state and governance? Significantly, Brahmanism gave these rulers the new 
administrative vocabulary and concepts for organizing these kingdoms. Buddhism’s vision of 
the political sphere provided legitimacy via its notions of kingship, but its scriptures con­
tained little of what was of direct practical use for organizing bureaucracies and state institutions. 
Robert Lingat (1989: 152), looking at the organization of Buddhist kingdoms in Sri Lanka, 
mentions that Buddhist rulers and their advisors at the court surely did not have recourse to 
the Buddhist canon for questions of political organization but, rather, consulted independent 
literature, namely, that of technical treatises in Sanskrit such as the Arthaśāstra that explicitly 
dealt with these issues.
Theravāda Buddhism and its numerous forms that spread in Southeast Asia was therefore a 
major force that fueled political centralization and state formation. Important for the spread of 
Buddhism was also trade, and Assavavirulhakarn (2010: 19) remarks on the location of maṇḍalas: 
“The areas that sustained these maṇḍalas can be described as mainly riverine and lowland. They 
were situated at strategic points, mostly at nodes of intra- or extraregional trading centres,

--- PAGE 95 ---
Patrice Ladwig
74
and usually located at the controlling point of a river valley that acted as a gateway to the 
hinterland beyond.” Despite this limited reach, Theravāda Buddhism introduced new forms 
of population management in the lowlands, based on not only more complex divisions of 
labor but also steeper social hierarchies legitimized by the concepts of merit (see Schober 
and Langer, this volume). Paddy growers who settled around larger temple complexes and 
urban settlements could be taxed and drafted for military service (Scott 2009: 64f.). In these 
premodern forms of governance, the creation of trading points and ritual centers was of 
prime importance, and an overwhelming part of inscriptions deal with large donations made 
by kings. Monasteries, relics, land, and workers (“slaves”) were given, and increased the fame 
and standing of kings. In areas where land was abundant but underpopulated (warfare in 
premodern Southeast Asia was usually about people, not land), Buddhism therefore acted 
as a “population concentrator” that allowed for taxation, revenue extraction, the building of 
armies, and the further conquest of other maṇḍalas. One could here develop a kind of politi­
cal economy perspective on monasteries. Hermann Kulke (1993: 292), for example, attests 
for premodern Cambodia and Burma that
monastic institutions … provided imperial kings and their courts with an additional 
infrastructure.… It allowed the imperial courts, perhaps for the first time, a permanent 
and in some cases even a direct access to the sphere of local matters even outside the 
limited nuclear area which was under their direct political control.
However, one should not overestimate the administrative and bureaucratic strength of the 
kingdoms of premodern Southeast Asia, and Chutintaranond (1990: 92) rightly remarks that 
“in the case of Ayudhya, like in medieval South India, the terms ‘centralized’ or ‘bureaucratized’ 
are widely and inappropriately applied.”
What then held these principalities and empires together in terms of governance and 
statecraft? Pollock states that “precious little that can be identified as ‘Buddhist’ can be found 
in their actual practices of governance … if there is any determining religious dimension 
to rulership it seems to have been Brahmanical ritualism” (Pollock 2005: 415). Clifford 
Geertz, reflecting on the “theatre state” in nineteenth-century Bali, has advanced a similar, 
and even more radical, view. Large public rituals did not only support the state, but in his 
understanding, they were the state: “The state, even in its final gasp, was a device for the 
enactment of mass ritual. Power served pomp, not pomp power” (Geertz 1980: 13). Without 
giving any preference to direct economic explanations of the development of the premodern 
state (Buddhism as a religion of trade and urbanity) or the religious-culturalist reasoning of 
Pollock or Geertz, I argue that that these two went hand in hand. Taxable wet-rice growing 
settlements were created around monasteries and can therefore be seen as a simultaneous 
establishment of ritual communities that shared calendrical systems, repertoires of texts and 
narratives, and places of worship. If these were more Brahmanistic, Theravādin, or driven 
by pre-Buddhist beliefs remains another question, but I think that Hocart’s statement that 
“population first condenses round the centre of ritual, not shops” (1970: 251) gives us a 
possible lead here. Like in Fustel de Coulanges’s remarkable study The Ancient City, which 
showed the crucial part played by religion in the political and social evolution of Greece 
and Rome (de Coulanges 1867: 161ff.); maṇḍalas and cities with their temples and relics 
became centers of power, ritual and, worship. It was not only the economic or utilitarian 
that brought people together but also the more or less homogeneous systems of “ritual 
policy” (Kulke 1993: 286) that increasingly came to structure the communities living in 
the polities of the Pāli-Sanskrit cosmopolis.

--- PAGE 96 ---
Statecraft
75
Localizations: Statecraft in premodern Lao and Tai Kingdoms
According to the classic narrative I have just presented, Buddhism and Brahmanism fuelled 
a process of political centralization, brought scripts, a class of religious professionals, and new 
systems of supra-local administration. This narrative is certainly valid to some degree, but it also 
oversimplifies a complex set of longue durée processes that evolved within very diverse social 
and political structures. As Victor Liebermann (2003: 58) points out, Theravāda state formation 
was a hesitant, fragmentary, and slow process in mainland Southeast Asia.
In this section, I want to briefly explore how larger patterns of Buddhist kingship and state­
craft were localized in premodern Laos, and other smaller principalities in northern Thailand, 
and southern Yunnan, populated by groups belonging to the Tai-Kadai language family. The 
case of Laos in general might indeed be well suited for exploring these localizations in more 
depth: the kingdoms that were located in the area that now mark the socialist nation-state 
of Laos, and evolved around the fifteenth-century represent the eastern limit of the expan­
sion of Theravāda Buddhism in mainland Southeast Asia. Compared to larger polities such 
as Ayutthaya (fourteenth–eigtheenth centuries) or Sukhotai (thirteenth–fifteenth centuries), 
extended maṇḍalas covering a large lowland terrain could evolve but were more limited in 
their networks. The area is mainly composed of rugged and hilly terrain, which makes the 
establishment of large-scale cities, and extensive wet-rice cultivation, more difficult. Historical 
information on early Lao history is still rather scarce (Lorillard 2006), but what we can ascertain 
is that Buddhism did not erase previous social and political structures but actually merged with 
and thereby enhanced them. I first briefly outline some Buddhist-Hindu elements of statecraft, 
to then formulate a critique of the widely applied concept of maṇḍala, proposing that it often 
overlooks the interaction with indigenous patterns of political, social, and religious administra­
tion. The latter system, known still today by the term baan-muang in Lao and Thai, complicates 
the writing of a Buddhist history and underpins the multiple sources of early statecraft in areas 
marked by a plethora of ethnic groups and religious-ritual systems.
The early Lao kingdoms display the first clear signs of the Buddhicization of royal power 
around the mid-fourteenth century, when kings were labeled cakkavatti. The first hard evidence, 
however, for the development of Buddhism in Laos and the kingdom of Lan Xang (1354–1707) 
are the steles dating from the second quarter of the sixteenth century. These primarily mark the 
foundation of temples (Lorillard 2006: 392). Commissioned by King Photisarat (1505–1548) 
and King Setthatilat (1534–1571), they bear a strong mark of northern Thai (Lanna) Buddhism. 
A first wave of Buddhism probably coming from Lanna in northern Thailand reached the Luang 
Prabang area in Laos in the fifteenth century and a second in the sixteenth century. With the 
idea of rule linked to the cakkavatti, the first polities began to adopt prefix and suffix terms 
derived from Sanskrit, such as nāgara and purā, to form toponyms denoting centralization and 
urbanity. However, one again has to remark that the direct sphere of influence of the kingdom 
of Lan Xang probably has to be understood to be limited to the Mekong valley and other 
lowland areas. Maps that depict this and other kingdoms as covering a homogenous terrain 
are deeply misleading.
As noted earlier, it was not only Buddhist concepts of kingship and power based on merit and 
charisma that were influential here. It seems that vernacularized forms of the Indian Arthaśāstra 
(treatise on statecraft, economics, rule), the nı̄tiśāstra (general maxims on right conduct), and the 
dharmaśāstra (general legal-religious duties) delivered for the most part the additional concepts 
and vocabulary for administration, politics and law. “Remixed” and transformed parts of these 
Śāstra can be found throughout the Theravādin mainland region of Burma, Thailand, Laos, and 
Cambodia. Louis Finot (1917: 140–146), for example, mentions a Lao manuscript version of the

--- PAGE 97 ---
Patrice Ladwig
76
Rājasavanı̄, probably drawing on the nı̄tiśāstra. The Lao manuscript version is, according to Finot 
(1917: 140), “a political treatise” and shows the influence of Brahmanism in the political sphere. 
It is divided in three sections (king, government, and the duties of the king), and the section 
on the government first lists the rājāparicāraka (attendants, servants) and then seven elements of 
governance, such as ministers, fortresses, treasuries, armies, and diplomacy, among others. The 
latter correspond to the seven prakṛti found in Kautilaya’s Arthaśāstra, and in his saptāṅga theory 
of state power, they appear as the constituent elements of the premodern maṇḍala state. Other 
important textual sources for statecraft are also to be found in Lao Buddhist law: the tham­
masat luang (the great law), a vernacular Lao variant of a dharmaśāstra, depicts the tenfold royal 
code (dasavidha-rājadhamma) by which a king should govern, and thereby ethicizes statecraft 
(Bouasysavat 1993). In a section labeled “laws of the civil hierarchy,” the Thai thammasat—very 
similar in form and content to the Lao one mentioned earlier—also contains sections on the 
king, bureaucracy, administration, and on the mechanisms through which smaller tribute paying 
principalities were supposed to be governed (see Kourilsky and Ladwig 2017–18: 204–207). 
Other manuscripts and their modern transcriptions like ratchasad (Sk. rājasāśtra) contain further 
guidelines for governance and sections on the norms and duties of kings (Bouasysavat 1995). 
We know little about how these concepts were actually implemented on the ground, but they 
attest to the fact that Buddhism and Brahmanism brought new concepts of administration and 
statecraft.
But what does this vocabulary relating to pre-modern state-formation contained in Buddhist 
manuscript culture tell us about the interaction with indigenous patterns of administration and 
statecraft? What Georges Cœdès (1968) has labeled the “Indianized states of Southeast Asia” 
comprises a complex, and even today only partially understood, flow and transformation of 
elements of Brahmanism and Buddhism to mainland and insular Southeast Asia. Discussions 
following Cœdès have taken different turns, but one of the main points of critique has been 
that the Indianization model largely overlooked the receptiveness of certain societies to new 
concepts of rule and statecraft. The cakkavatti- and maṇḍala-model were heavily transformed as 
they were made to work in specific localities.
While we find clear evidence in manuscripts for the influence of Buddhist and Brahmanic 
concepts of statecraft in Lao history and documents, there is also ample evidence for a different, 
but related, system of administration and early statecraft that was in place before the arrival of 
Buddhism. Indeed, most documents and chronicles hardly mention the term monthon (Thai/Lao 
for maṇḍala) but instead refer to kingdoms and their administrative units as baan-muang. The term 
muang appears in different Tai languages to designate political and social units that constitute 
smaller principalities composed of villages (baan). This system of supra-village organization dates 
from the pre-Indianization era and can also be found among (partially nonliterate) Tai groups 
that have not been Buddhicized, such as the Tai Dam and Tai Daeng in northern Laos and the 
highlands of Vietnam as well as in faraway places such as Assam (Raendchen & Raendchen 
1998). Condominas (1990) has called this the hierarchically ordered “system of emboxment” of 
Tai political organization. Significant here is that this socioreligious system at the foundation of 
early pre-Buddhist state building was based on cosmic principles that hierarchized indigenous 
spirits (phi), the latter playing an important role in Laos into the present-day (Holt 2009).
A glance of the pre-Buddhist political organization of baan-muang can be had in a category 
of manuscripts that convey a regulatory code still known today as hit khong (rites and rules). 
These rules were applied to a variety of fields including irrigation, kinship, and property. In 
the sphere of statecraft, the organization of the muang here emerges as a body politic, with Lao 
terms largely deriving from human bodies, houses, and agriculture: a diplomat is the ear of the 
muang (hu muang); the head of ritual affairs is its heart (cai) or seed (kaen), the wise man and

--- PAGE 98 ---
Statecraft
77
counselor is described as its eye (dtaa), border guards as its door (phratu), the military chief as its 
wall ( faa), and so forth (see Raendchen 2004: 409). Depending on author and locality, one finds 
little Sanskrit vocabulary in some of these manuscripts or a mixture of both. Interestingly, the 
Lao term for maṇḍala is hardly ever used, even in documents that show clearer signs of Buddhist 
and Sanskrit influence. However, in most general publications on the history of the region, 
maṇḍala has become the term that describes the premodern form of statecraft. The maṇḍala 
and baan-muang system do show a certain overlap in terms of hierarchy and divisions of labor, 
but few researchers differentiate between muang and maṇḍala with reference to their (initially) 
different cultural backgrounds (for an exception, see Grabowsky 2004: 4–14). Whatever form 
this mixture of Tai and Hindu-Buddhist concepts of statecraft may have taken, I agree with 
Wolters (1992: 10), who remarks that Indianization “brought ancient and persistent indigenous 
beliefs into sharper focus.” Jana Raendchen (2004: 417) congruently comments on the meeting 
of this indigenous Tai social organization and Indian influences:
With their ban-muang system the Lao, like almost all Tai, had developed a special 
“technology of state building” with great continuity in administration and external 
relations that could explain the sudden increase in power when additionally having 
taken over Indian concepts of the centralized state during the 13th/14th century.
This also led to a ritual integration of non-Buddhists living outside, or at the margins of these 
early states. They either had specialized roles in larger rituals in which spirit worship played 
a crucial role (Archaimbault 1973: 152) or were employed as border guardians, especially in 
the north of Laos, where contracts called khong between the Buddhist king of Luang Prabang 
and ethnic minorities were established (see Bouté 2017). As Edmund Leach (1954: 197f.) 
has outlined for northeastern Burma, egalitarian animist minorities often became Buddhists 
and adopted ranked titles but were also able to hold multiple religious and social identities. 
Therefore, with and beyond Buddhism, the baan-muang system was also based on the integra­
tion of non-Tai and non-Buddhist minorities. This has been shown by Volker Grabowsky and 
Wichasin (2007) on the indigenous history of northwestern Laos, and recently by Badenoch 
and Shinsuke (2013: 29) who conceptualize these muang as a “cosmopolitan area in which 
many sources of power, innovation and transformation intersect,” partially with “Buddhist” 
elements, but more often in the context of the indigenous systems of rule and administra­
tion I have outlined earlier.
One also has to add that the power of Lao and Tai kingdoms, and in fact most of the king­
doms of mainland Southeast Asia, was limited to river basins and lowlands, only marginally 
integrating the non-Buddhist populations in the hills. Despite widespread forms of syncretism 
and religious adaptation (see Sprenger 2017, for the Lao case), not all indigenous populations 
adopted Buddhism, and both Buddhological research and modern nationalist writings can over­
look this obvious fact. Buddhism’s civilizational power was not always effective and seductive. 
According to James Scott, many ethnic minorities even rejected it, because they did not want 
to be integrated into the Buddhist paddy-states that were based on the fixation of populations, 
taxation, and warfare. Moreover, Buddhism—with its concepts of merit and power—brought 
steeper social hierarchies, at times at odds with the egalitarian social fabric of numerous ethnic 
highland groups of the region. Therefore, Scott postulates (2009: 10) that “civilization held little 
attraction” for these non-Buddhist minority groups. Pace the self-conscious narratives of the 
civilizing power of Buddhism, he suggests that these ‘dark sides’ of pre-modern Buddhist state­
craft led some minorities to “actively resist incorporation into the state” (ibid., 19). Although 
Scott has been accused of generalizing in his account of zomia, the highland region of mainland

--- PAGE 99 ---
Patrice Ladwig
78
Southeast Asia, I see his work as giving us an interesting antidote to the self-adulation of 
Buddhist historiography and its contemporary nationalist reincarnations.
Theravāda Buddhism and modern statecraft
I started this chapter with the remark that the (nation-)state has become an almost universalized 
norm, and the multiple modernities that arose through colonialism and Western hegemony also 
provoked a rupture in the Theravāda world. The gradual rise of governmentality, to use the 
famous Foucaultian concept (Foucault 2007: 88), led to a deep transformation of the under­
standings and working of statecraft. This new “art of governance,” according to Foucault, has 
its roots in the eighteenth century, when the active management of the state, its population, 
and the economy became a focus of European thinking (Foucault 2007: 108f.). Population and 
health politics, statistics (demography), educational apparatuses, policing, and the productivity-
enhancing disciplining of society became dominant features of modern statecraft and spread 
through colonial rule. Taking this modernization paradigm as an implicit analytical framework, 
Edmund Leach (1973: 40) in an article on the post-colonial fate of Buddhist kingship in Sri 
Lanka and Burma, for example, states: “Fantasy apart, there is in fact very little in the present-
day political organization of either Burma or Ceylon which derives directly from the traditional 
forms of pre-colonial centralized Kingship.”
Is, then, nothing left of these premodern ideas of the Buddhist state and its forms of state­
craft except fantasies of the past? I think that many Foucauldian approaches to governmentality 
and elaborations à la Leach are rather generalizing and represent a Eurocentric view, which 
overlook the complexity and heterogeneity of these processes. Although many of these fea­
tures of statecraft I listed earlier were undoubtedly introduced through Western hegemony and 
colonialism, they obviously did not lead to a homogeneous world of states that has completely 
overwritten premodern forms of Buddhist governance. Although Buddhist institutions and 
systems of knowledge and governance were partially replaced by more secular and “rational” 
ones, this process led to multiple forms beyond the Western model. For the sphere of lawmak­
ing and administration in Laos, Kourilsky and Ladwig (2017–18), for example, have shown that 
traditional Buddhist law was transformed by the French colonial regime but that this lead to 
a complex process of hybridization, in which Lao local elites had an active role and were not 
merely passive recipients of a modernization process. This could for sure be applied to many 
other fields, such as education, health, politics, and so forth, in a variety of countries and regions. 
Thus, although these modernization processes are also apparent when we explore the postcolo­
nial and contemporary workings of statecraft in the Theravāda countries in South and Southeast 
Asia, we must not overemphasize the ruptures caused by modernity, Therefore, a narrative of 
loss and destruction of traditional Buddhist conceptions of the state through governmentality 
and secular powers is not adequate here, but we have to look at their transformative processes 
and their resignifications under the conditions of modernity and postcoloniality.
Then, although Leach’s analysis quoted earlier is undoubtedly right regarding the institu­
tions and figures of kingship in Burma, Sri Lanka, and many other Buddhist countries where it 
disappeared (with Thailand and Cambodia being the exceptions in the Theravāda realm), where 
can we then locate the enduring significance of models of kingship and Buddhist statecraft? 
Buddhism has not disappeared from politics, and propagators of Buddhist nationalism seem to 
postulate a historical continuity between traditional Buddhist states and its modern versions. 
Jonathan Spencer (1997: 9) claims that “indigenous ideas about kingship have continued to 
animate the political imagination in Sri Lanka, but without any kings to do the animating 
since the early nineteenth century.” These political imaginaries have had a crucial influence

--- PAGE 100 ---
Statecraft
79
through various forms of religious nationalism. Buddhism often became a resource of resistance 
to colonialism and then, in the postcolonial era, replicated this model, becoming a foundation 
for nation building. In many Theravāda countries, a new centralized model of Buddhism and 
its institutions was supposed to become a means for national integration. The establishment 
of a hegemonic national Buddhist culture (“To be Burmese is to be Buddhist,” for example) 
often accompanied, and indeed went hand in hand, with the creation of modern forms of 
nation-states.
A good example here is Thailand, where Bangkok’s central control over the nation over 
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries was thoroughly implemented through Buddhism. Local 
Buddhist traditions such as that of northeastern (Isan) and northern Thailand (Lanna) were 
to be homogenized, and millenarian movements broke out in these only partially integrated 
peripheries. The most famous example is here Khru Ba Sriwichai (1878–1938). Still today 
venerated as a “holy man” or “saint” (nak bun or nak ton bun) of Lanna, and associated with 
the revival of northern Thai culture, Bangkok believed that he was a leader of the millenarian 
revolt in the 1920s and 1930s and tried to curtail his influence through modern forms of saṅgha 
purification (see also Bowie and Hansen, this volume). Theravāda’s “civilizing” power has also 
been instrumental for the “integration” of non-Buddhist ethnic minorities into the modern 
state, as, for example, documented in Thailand (Tambiah 1976: 434–435) and Laos (Ladwig 
2016). However, the modern project of the homogeneous nation-state also creates problems, 
and violence and ethnic tensions in Sri Lanka and, more recently, in Myanmar, especially have 
been framed in Buddhist terms.
But given the absence of kingship in most contemporary Theravāda countries, what else 
remains of Buddhist statecraft except for its nationalist ideologies? I argue that a focus on the 
material manifestations of kingship beyond the figure of the king is crucial here. Right from 
the beginning Buddhist concepts of statecraft and rule were linked to the possession and ritual 
patronage of relics and powerful statues. In Lao and Thai history, “the possession of certain 
Buddha statues and relics, rather than kinship, was interpreted as conferring legitimacy and 
power to kings and rulers, because these statues were treated as the palladia of their kingdoms 
and principalities” (Tambiah 1982: 5). Even in countries where the Buddhist kingship was 
abolished by force, such as in Laos after the communist revolution in 1975, the significance of 
powerful palladia has not vanished. Instead of the Buddhist king, in contemporary Laos, the 
head of the state and of the communist party now opens the yearly ritual for the veneration 
of the Buddha’s relic, supposed to be contained in the That Luang stuˉpa (see Figure 4.1) in 
Vientiane (Ladwig 2015).
Whereas in the past, the rite was believed to protect the muang, and increase the fertility of 
the rice fields, these properties have been repurposed. In a country that has undergone massive 
economic modernization in the last twenty years, the That Luang festival has now also become 
a large trade fair, with stalls and booths of companies encircling the central relic shrine. Monks 
I talked to during my numerous visits to the festival often mentioned the terms development 
and prosperity, thereby merging traditional notions of fertility and dhammic governance with 
modern economic aspirations. Thus, despite the discontinuities provoked by the abolishment 
of kingship, the rituals also seem to function without the institutional framework of Buddhist 
kingship, as the continuity of the cosmological underpinnings allows for adaptations. What 
might aid this process of cooption by the current Lao government is the fact that relics and 
statues are understood as having an agency of their own, which can be appropriated outside 
the framework of Buddhist kingship. If our only focus is on the person of the king, we run 
the risk of neglecting the role played by the objects themselves, enabling in some way their 
adoption by those powers having taken over from the kings.

--- PAGE 101 ---
Patrice Ladwig
80
This ritual governing of life and prosperity through relics is reminiscent of Hocart’s work, 
invoked in previous parts of this chapter dealing with premodern Theravāda statecraft. When 
Hocart states that “ritual is a social activity and so requires an organization” (1970: 34), he is 
pointing up the central thesis of his writings: that ritual organization precedes and influences 
the structure of all social or political activities and institutions, and it aims at revitalization. For 
him, in modernity, religion and politics “seem to have parted, but they have not really done 
so; the common origin still operates in men’s minds” (1970: 171). In rational forms of modern 
governmentality, in the Lao case of relic worship in state ritual, we also encounter a form of 
ritual as government. However, this now not only aims at ensuring the fertility of rice fields as 
in the past but also embraces the modern, capitalist economy as represented by the trade fair 
encircling the Buddha’s relic. To conclude, on one hand, the rupture caused through the spread 
of modern, secular notions of statecraft cannot be denied (for Laos, see Ladwig 2011). Secular 
agendas, such as health politics, schooling, and the establishment of productivity-enhancing ide­
ologies through global capitalism, seem, at first sight, to be no longer influenced by Theravāda 
Buddhism and its premodern notions of statecraft. On the other hand, however, the workings of 
the modern state cannot be separated from Buddhist conceptions, and its institutions have not 
become purely secular. One task of contemporary and future research is to uncover the religious 
foundations of seemingly secular forms of power and governance (de Vries and Sullivan 2006). 
Or as Carl Schmitt (1985: 36) famously phrased it, “[a]ll significant concepts of the modern 
theory of the state are secularized theological concepts.” “All” is here a very ambitious claim, 
Figure 4.1  Devotees gather for making offerings in front of the That Luang shrine. The festival has again 
become the most important state ritual in Laos, and high-ranking party politicians also attend 
it. Vientiane, 2015.
Photograph by the author.

--- PAGE 102 ---
Statecraft
81
but perhaps only in this way, the present, but somehow hidden, streams of Theravāda statecraft 
in an only seemingly secular age can be discerned.
References
Archaimbault, Charles. 1973. Structures religieuses lao (rites et mythes). Vientiane: Vithagna.
Assavavirulhakarn, Prapod 2010. The Ascendancy of Theravada Buddhism in Southeast Asia. Chiang Mai: 
Silkworm Books.
Aung-Thwin, Michael 1979. “The Role of Sasana Reform in Burmese History: Economic Dimensions of 
a Religious Purification.” Journal of Asian Studies 38: 671–688.
Badenoch, Nathan and Tomita Shinsuke 2013.“Mountain People in the Muang: Creation and Governance 
of a Tai Polity in Northern Laos.” Southeast Asian Studies 2(1): 29–67.
Bechert, Heinz 1966–1973. Buddhismus, Staat und Gesellschaft in den Ländern des Theravada-Buddhismus (3 
vol). Wiesbaden: Frankfurt a. M.
Blackburn, Anne. 2010. “Buddha-Relics in the Lives of South Asian Polities.” Numen 57: 3–4: 317–340.
Blackburn, Anne. 2015. “Buddhist Connections in the Indian Ocean: Changes in Monastic Mobility 1000–
1500.” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 58: 3: 237–266.
Bouasysavat, Samlit. 1993. Khamphi Pha Thammasat Luang: Kotmay Buhan Lao [The ‘Great Thammasat’: 
Ancient law of Laos]. Vientiane: Project for the Preservation of Palm-leaf Manuscripts.
Bouasysavat, Samlit. 1995. Khamphi Rachasat [‘The Treatise on Royalty’]. Vientiane: Project for the 
Preservation of Palm-leaf Manuscripts.
Bouté, Vanina. 2017. Mirroring Power: Ethnogenesis and Integration among the Phunoy of Northern Laos. Chiang 
Mai: Silkworm Books.
Chutintaranond, Suneth. 1990. Mandala, Segmentary State and Politics of Centralization in Medieval 
Ayudhya. Journal of the Siam Society 78 (1): 89–100.
Cœdès, George. 1968. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia. Honululu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Collins, Steven. 1998. Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Condominas, Georges. 1990. From Lawa to Mon, from Saa’ to Thai: Historical and Anthropological Aspects of 
Southeast Asian Social Spaces. Canberra. Department of Anthropology.
Coulanges, Fustel de. 1867. The ancient city. A study on the religion, laws and institutions of Greece and Rome. 
Boston: Lee & Shephard.
de Vries, Hent, Sullivan, Lawrence E., eds. 2006. Political Theologies. Public Religions in a Post-Secular World. 
New York: Fordham University Press.
Durkheim, Emile, Mauss, Marcel. 2007. “Note on the Concept of Civilisation.” In Techniques, Technology, 
Civilization, ed. Marcel Mauss. New York/Oxford: Berghahn.
Finot, Louis. 1917. “Recherches sur la littérature laotienne.” Bulletin de l’Ecole francaise d’Extrême-Orient 
17(5): 1–219.
Foucault, Michel. 2007. Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France 1977–1978, translated 
by Graham Burchell. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Frasch, Tilman. 2017. “A Pāli cosmopolis? Sri Lanka and the Theravāda Buddhist ecumene, c. 500–1500.” 
In Sri Lanka at the Crossroads of History, eds. Zoltán Biedermann, Alan Strathern. London: UCL Press.
Geertz, Clifford 1980. Negara: The Theatre State in Nineteenth-Century Bali. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Goody, Jack 1986. The Logic of Writing and the Organisation of Society. Cambridge. Cambridge University 
Press.
Grabowsky, Volker, Wichasin, Renoo. 2007. Chronicles Chiang Khaeng: A Tai Lu Principality of the Upper 
Mekong. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Grabowsky, Volker. 2004. Bevoelkerung und Staat in Lanna. Ein Beitrag zur Bevoelkerungsgeschichte in Suedostasien. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Gunawardana, R.A.L.H. 1979. Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in Early Medieval Sri Lanka. 
Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Harris, Ian, ed. 2001. Buddhism and Politics in Twentieth-century Asia. London: Continuum.
Hocart, Arthur M. 1970. Kings and Councilors: An Essay in the Comparative Anatomy of Human Society, 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Holt, John. 2009. Spirits of the Place: Buddhism and Lao Religious Culture. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press.

--- PAGE 103 ---
Patrice Ladwig
82
Kawanami, Hiroko, ed. 2016. Buddhism and the Political Process. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kourilsky, Grégory, Ladwig, Patrice. 2017–18. “Governing the Monastic Order in Laos. Pre-modern 
Buddhist Legal Traditions and Their Transformation Under French Colonialism.” Buddhism, Law & 
Society 3: 191–243.
Kulke, Herrmann. 1993. Kings and Cults. State Formation and Legitimation in India and Southeast Asia. Delhi: 
Manohar Publishers.
Ladwig, Patrice. 2011. “The Genesis and Demarcation of the Religious Field: Monasteries, State Schools, 
and the Secular Sphere in Lao Buddhism (1893–1975).” Sojourn. Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia 
26 (2): 196–222.
Ladwig, Patrice. 2015. “Worshipping Relics and Animating Statues. Transformations of Buddhist statecraft 
in contemporary Laos.” Modern Asian Studies 49 (6): 1875–1902.
Ladwig, Patrice 2016. “Religious Place Making. Civilized Modernity and the Spread of Buddhism Among 
the Cheng, a Mon-Khmer Minority in Southern Laos.” In Religion, Place and Modernity, eds. Michael 
Dickhardt, Andrea Lauser. Leiden: Brill.
Leach, Edmund. 1954. Political Systems of Highland Burma: A Study of Kachin Social Structure. London: London 
School of Economics and Political Science.
Leach, Edmund. 1973. “Buddhism in the post-colonial political order in Burma and Ceylon.” Daedalus 
102 (1): 29–54.
Liebermann, Victor. 2003. Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in Global Context. c. 800–1830, Volume I: Integration 
on the Mainland. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lingat, Robert. 1989. Royautés bouddhiques: Asoka. La fonction royale à Ceylan. Paris: Editions de E.H.E.S.S.
Lorrillard, Michel. 2006. “Lao History Revisited: Paradoxes and Problems in Current Research.” South East 
Asia Research 14 (3): 387–401.
Mendelson, Michael. 1975. Sangha and State in Burma: A Study of Monastic Sectarianism and Leadership. Ithaca 
and New York: Cornell University Press.
Obeyesekere, Gananath, Reynolds, Frank, eds. 1972. Two wheels of dhamma: Essays on the Theravada tradition 
in India and Ceylon. Chambersburg: American Academy of Religion.
Pollock, Sheldon. 2005. “Axialism and Empire.” In Axial Civilizations and World History, eds. Bjoern 
Wittrock, Johan Arnason, Shmuel Eisenstadt. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Pollock, Sheldon. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men. Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in Premodern 
India. Berkeley/Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Raendchen, Jana. 2004. The Socio-Political and Administrative Organisation of Müang in the Light of Lao Historical 
Manuscripts, paper presented at the conference The Literary Heritage of Laos, Vientiane.
Raendchen, Jana, and Raendchen, Oliver. 1998. “Present State, Problems and Purpose of baan-müang 
Studies.” Tai Culture 11(2): 5–11.
Ratnapāla, Nandasēna. 1971. The Katikāvatas: Laws of the Buddhist Order of Ceylon from the 12th century to the 
18th century. München: Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft.
Sahlins, Marshall, Graeber, David. 2017. On Kings. Illinois: HAU/University of Chicago Press.
Schmitt, Carl. 1985. Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Schober, Juliane, Collins, Steven, eds. 2017. Theravāda Buddhist encounters with modernity. London. Routledge.
Scott, James. 2009. On the Art of Not Being Governed. An Anarchist History of Upland Southeast Asia. Yale: Yale 
University Press.
Spencer, Jonathan. 1997. “Post-Colonialism and the Political Imagination.” The Journal of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute 3 (1).
Sprenger, Guido. 2017. “Piglets Are Buffaloes: Buddhification and the Reduction of Sacrifices on the Boloven 
Plateau.” In Changing Lives in Laos: Society, Politics and Culture in a Post-Socialist State, eds. Vatthana 
Pholsena, Vanina Bouté. Singapore: Singapore University Press.
Strong, John. 1983. The Legend of King Asoka. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Swearer, Donald, Premchit, Sommai. 1978. “The Relationship between the Religious and Political Orders 
in Northern Thailand (14th–16th Centuries).” In Religion and Legitimation of Power in Thailand, Laos and 
Burma, ed. Bardwell Smith. Chambersburg: Anima Books.
Tambiah, Stanley. 1976. World Conqueror and World Renouncer. A Study of Buddhism and Polity in Thailand 
against a Historical Background. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tambiah, Stanley. 1982. “Famous Buddha Images and the Legitimation of Kings: The Case of the Sinhala 
Buddha (Phra Sihing) in Thailand.” Res: Anthropology and Aesthetics 4: 5–19.
Wolters, Oliver. 1992. History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives. Singapore: Institute of 
Southeast Asian Studies.

--- PAGE 104 ---
83
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-7
5
REFORM
Ideas and events in modern Theravāda 
reformism
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
Introduction
Reform is such a persistent theme in the Theravāda that it constitutes a defining “idea” within 
the tradition. While pervasive as an idea, the numerous reforms enacted throughout Theravāda 
history are events that have taken widely different shapes and been motivated by reasons par­
ticular to their individual cultural and historical contexts. Our distinction between “events” 
and “ideas” comes from Charles Hallisey’s understanding of the history of Theravādin councils 
(saṅg ı̄ti or saṅgāyanā), assemblies that have been held periodically to reinvigorate, purify, safe­
guard the transmission and teaching of the Buddha’s Dhamma and/or for “decidedly impious” 
reasons, including whatever political and economic benefits religious reform might accrue to 
its sponsors or conveners (Hallisey 1991: 148). Hallisey argues for an approach to Theravāda 
reform—and Theravāda history more generally—that recognizes and takes account of the dif­
ference between “events” and “ideas.” “Events,” for Hallisey, are unique in that they are histori­
cally situated in specific circumstances that can bring about accidental and anomalous actions, 
meanings, and reactions. These events, however, do not occur in an ideological vacuum. Instead, 
they are related to and intertwined with “ideas,” which are persistent patterns of norms and 
meanings that shape the actions of people and groups. While events and ideas are different, “the 
phenomena they refer to are inevitably interrelated,” meaning that the influence and importance 
of “ideas,” which serve as “frameworks of meaning,” can inspire and authorize the emergence 
of “events” (Hallisey 1991: 136–137). Conversely, the historically specific contours of “events” 
keep big formative “ideas” valid and meaningful.
In the Theravāda, reform is a powerful idea that has resulted in a number of significant, but 
historically distinct events that have emerged as milesto   nes throughout the history of the 
tradition. Hallisey argues that the interplay between ideas and events shows the “constructed­
ness” of the Theravāda tradition and that the way ideas and events shape one another over time 
reveals how the Theravāda is a tradition “whose identity is continually being constituted and 
reconstituted” (Hallisey 1991: 137).
Premodern reforms, sometimes referred to by scholars as “purifications,” had been enacted 
periodically since Buddhism became closely associated with the institution of kingship in the 
Aśokan period, often coinciding with the rise of new dynasties or following periods of warfare 
and social turmoil. Some of these reforms were sponsored by new rulers and centered on the

--- PAGE 105 ---
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
84
production of a new redaction of the scriptures or a heightened scrutiny of monastic discipline, 
at times resulting in cases of purging monks seen as too lax or impure from the monkhood. In 
other instances, a new ordination lineage might be imported from elsewhere in the Theravāda 
world to reinvigorate the San∙gha’s purity (Blackburn 2003).1 Anthropologist Stanley Tambiah 
argues that many of these purifications were modeled on the paradigmatic reign of the third-
century bce king Aśoka and that such modeling simultaneously made that reformation the 
paradigmatic model that it came to be. As part of his strategy of political incorporation and 
governance, Aśoka supported the Buddhist San∙gha and mounted religious purifications in 
order to strengthen both the state of religion and his own political position (Tambiah 1976: 
54–72). Tambiah proposes an Aśokan model of elite-enacted Buddhist reform, of which there 
are many examples from the premodern period. In other words, the Aśokan reform was not 
only a seminal historical event, but it also became an idea of what reform might look like and 
what purpose it could serve leaders and states through periodic state-sponsored reforms that 
drew on it for inspiration.
In order to better understand how the very idea of reform might have helped animate 
historically specific reformist events in diverse periods, it is possible to break apart the large 
idea of reform into two main constellations of ideas centered on purity, namely, intertwining 
concerns with orthopraxy (correctness of practice) and scriptural hermeneutics. Attention to 
orthopraxy encompasses such issues as appropriate decorum for monks and laypeople and the 
depth and quality of their emotional, intellectual, and aesthetic situatedness on the Buddhist 
Path; the authenticity of ordination rituals and other types of consecrations; and the regulation 
of praxis through institutional organization and reorganization, the introduction or alteration of 
laws regulating the San∙gha or monastic community, and laws regulating the relationship between 
San∙gha and state. The second closely linked concern of Theravādin reforms has been with the 
authority and validity of scripture with respect to the definition, recitation, collection, preserva­
tion, transmission, correction, discussion, ritual performance, and translation of scripture. As 
Hallisey reminds us, Buddhist descriptions of councils suggest that not all of these concerns were 
enacted to the same extent or in the same ways across every council or other reforming event 
(Hallisey 1991: 144). Furthermore, anyone familiar with Theravāda history will immediately see 
that these two categories of concerns and sub-concerns overlap. Efforts to ensure the purity 
and authenticity of ordination and debates about how best to interpret the Vinaya (the part of 
the Buddhist scripture concerned with monastic regulation) blur into each other. A monk’s or 
nun’s demeanor, reputation for spiritual prowess, and ways of knowing and transmitting scripture 
are hard to separate. These concerns also map onto (but are not completely synonymous with) 
Pāli categories that Theravādins have used over the centuries to describe their central aims for 
reform: reinvigorating paṭipatti and pariyatti. Paṭipatti is the practice of the Dhamma, behavior 
or conduct that aspires to uphold moral or Dhammic teachings and values. Pariyatti refers to 
scripture (also known as Dhamma or Dhamma-Vinaya), scriptural study, and the transmission of 
knowledge contained in the scriptures. Attaining purity is key to these categories. Theravādins 
have multiple terms for referring to purification (including pārisuddhi and visuddhi), which is 
simultaneously an aspiration, outcome, ethos, affect, and aesthetic of paṭipatti and pariyatti.
In this chapter, we examine how the Theravāda was constituted and reconstituted in the 
modern era through a number of reform movements that unfolded in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries. Importantly, this era saw the emergence of reformism as a pan-Asian phe­
nomenon, crossing Buddhist schools, sects, local and state boundaries, and continents within the 
context of modern developments in the realms of politics, ideology, and media. Some of the 
most salient themes and important historical hallmarks of this period included political cen­
tralization and state-making, colonial occupations, decolonization and nation building, shared

--- PAGE 106 ---
Reform
85
conceptions of Buddhist prophetic temporality, the circulation of new scientific, religious and 
political theories, the impacts of state violence, and the emergence of new media forms such as 
print. In our analysis, these modern reforms were “events” conditioned by historically specific 
contexts and preoccupations that reflected and drew on the “idea” (or component ideas) of 
reform in Theravāda history: a framework of concern with the correlated issues of orthopraxy 
and scriptural interpretation. We show how this framework of reform was inflected through 
the modern period early on by new ways of accessing, articulating, and verifying knowledge. 
We also examine how modern Theravādins’ concerns with purity interacted with, reflected, 
and were influenced by political changes that unfolded during the Cold War period, together 
with new developments in media and conceptions of subjecthood. In short, we argue that what 
was “modern” about reform movements in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries was not 
the aspiration to update, reinvigorate, or reinterpret Buddhism but, rather, a historically specific 
and broadly regional Buddhist engagement with modern ways of knowing, new technologies 
of textual production, and new conceptions of subjecthood that characterized reform events 
in this period.
For the purposes of this chapter, we employ modern as an imperfect but useful historical 
marker to designate a period extending roughly from the late eighteenth century through the 
early 1980s in the Theravāda world. The period begins with colonial expansion, the rise of 
print and the decline of manuscript culture, and ends as the regional wars and violence of the 
mid-twentieth century had begun to subside—and before the widespread introduction of the 
internet. We examine two connected waves of reform, a first wave from the late eighteenth 
century to the early twentieth century that coincided with the gradual entrenchment of colo­
nial controls and a second wave emerging in the 1950s that reflected the aims and visions of 
Theravāda Buddhists in newly independent nations. Although our discussion is confined to 
considerations of how these factors played out in modern Theravāda reform movements in 
South and Southeast Asia, it is worth noting that comparable reforms were being instituted 
by Mahāyāna Buddhists in Vietnam, China, Korea, and Japan, in Islamic communities in the 
Southeast Asian archipelago and Buddhist and Hindu groups in India during this same period. 
Furthermore, it should be emphasized that reform itself was by no means an exclusively mod­
ern idea within the Theravāda. While modern reformers had specific concerns and constraints 
within which they operated, their reforms were part and parcel of the long history of reform 
as an idea within the Buddhist world.
New ways of knowing
The ethos of modern Buddhist reform movements in the Theravāda world is aptly conveyed 
in reformers’ promotion of the Kālāma Sutta, a discourse included in the canonical Tipiṭaka. 
The sutta takes the form of a dialogue between the Buddha and a group of people from the 
Kālāma clan. The Kālāmas are confused about the conflicting teachings of various itinerant 
spiritual teachers they have encountered and go to the Buddha for advice on how to distin­
guish between true and false religious doctrines. After a series of questions aimed at helping 
the Kālāmas recognize their own powers of discernment, the Buddha exhorts them:
Come, Kālāmas. Do not go by oral tradition, by lineage of teaching, by hearsay, by a 
collection of scriptures, by logical reasoning, by inferential reasoning, by reflection on 
reasons, by the acceptance of a view after pondering it, by the seeming competence 
of a speaker, or because you think, “The ascetic is our teacher.” But when you know 
for yourselves, “These things are wholesome, these things are blameless; these things

--- PAGE 107 ---
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
86
are praised by the wise; these things, if undertaken and practiced, lead to welfare and 
happiness,” then you should engage in them.
(Nyanaponika and Bodhi 1999: 66)
This sutta was often held up by modern reformist teachers and leaders as an example of the 
inherent rationalism contained in the Buddha’s thought, which was seen as compatible with—
and even anticipatory of—modern modes of reason. The Kālāma Sutta not only provided insight 
about how to evaluate different religions, they argued, but it also sketched out a hermeneutical 
approach to Buddhist scriptures: one should assess the validity of a given doctrine through 
reflection and personal application, remaining alert to the possibility that “tradition” had dis­
torted the true spirit of the meaning. Prominent Buddhist reformer Prince Vajirañāṇavarorasa 
(1869–1921), son of the fourth king of the Chakri dynasty and eventual Supreme Patriarch of 
the Siamese San∙gha, wrote that in reading Buddhist scriptures,
I learned to make up my own mind, to select those passages which were acceptable to 
me and to reject, as if sifting out gold from sand, those which were unacceptable. One 
work which struck me was the Kālāma-sutta which taught one not to believe blindly 
and to depend on one’s own thinking.
(Vajirañāṇavarorasa 1979: 30)
Vajirañāṇavarorasa’s comments emerge from a viewpoint current among elite reform-minded 
Buddhists in late nineteenth-century Bangkok: that the Buddha himself had promoted ratio­
nalism, that later refractors had inserted erroneous or fanciful interpolations and stories in 
the Buddhist scriptures, and that, in general, the Buddha’s ideas had been presciently resonant 
with the discoveries and methods of contemporary science. In “sifting out gold from sand,” 
Vajirañāṇavarorasa was also suggesting that some scriptural texts were more authentic than 
others in their adherence to the enlightened knowledge of Gotama Buddha.
Reference to the Kālāma Sutta was also prominent in the rhetoric of  Theravādin reformers 
in Cambodia and colonial Ceylon. A favorite of reformist monks in Cambodia, the Kālāma Sutta 
was one of the earliest texts selected for translation and print in the first edition of Cambodia’s 
new Buddhist periodical Kambujasuriya in 1925 by two of Cambodia’s most important modern­
ist scholar-monks, Braḥ Grū Vimalapaññā Uṃ-Sūr and Braḥ Mahā Vimaladhamm Thoṅ (1966: 
7). And we can gain some sense of the powerful resonance of the sutta for Theravādin monk-
scholars of the period from American abolitionist and author Moncure Conway’s account 
of hearing the reformist monk Hikkaḍuvē Sumaṅgala Thera preach the sutta in the 1880s at 
Vidyodaya Pirivena, the monastic college he founded in Ceylon:
he read in a clear sweet voice Buddha’s plea for free thought. …At certain parts he was 
moved, his voice tended to intone, and his eyes rose glowing upon us, as if demanding 
homage for sublime ideas.
(Conway 1906: 130–33)
Conway records that after Hikkaḍuvē’s moving recitation, he and his Ceylonese host, Solicitor 
General of Ceylon Ponnambalam Ramanathan, noted the surprising but gratifying paradox 
that an ancient sermon “from a past of seventy generations” could be so in line with modern 
principles of rationalism “summoning man to rest his faith on his own reason” (Conway 1906: 
133; Soma Thera 2008: 5–6).
A related wave of modern reforms took place in the 1950s and early 1960s as decolonizing 
Buddhists sought to regulate national San∙ghas, promulgate Buddhist values, reestablish older

--- PAGE 108 ---
Reform
87
precolonial Theravāda networks, and build new regional and international organizations such 
as the World Fellowship of Buddhists. In this charged context of nation-building and the 
emerging geopolitical tensions among communist, democratic, and nonaligned ideologies and 
alliances, the Kālāma Sutta was again cited—this time for somewhat different reasons. During 
this period, the sutta was offered as evidence of the Buddha’s emphasis on freedom of thought 
and religious freedom as innately Buddhist values.
Publishing the sutta in 1959 as the “Buddha’s charter of free inquiry,” the Sri Lankan mis­
sionary monk (dhammaduta) and scholar Kotahene Soma Mahā Thera wrote that the Kālāma 
Sutta “is justly famous for its encouragement of free inquiry; the spirit of the sutta signifies 
a teaching that is exempt from fanaticism, bigotry, dogmatism, and intolerance” (Soma Thera 
2008: 4). Burmese missionary monk and scholar Sayadaw U Thittila wrote that since “now Asia 
is threatened with Communism … every Buddhist must frankly face the incompatibility of 
the Communist and the Buddhist way of life,” including its attacks on religion and “individual 
liberty of thought or deed” (Thittila 1948: 1–2). Buddhist intellectuals associated with the World 
Fellowship of Buddhists such as Thai princess Pismai Diskul argued that “there is nothing com­
pulsory whatever in the Buddha’s doctrine. The Buddha’s instruction to the Kālāma people may 
be cited as confirmatory evidence” (Poon and Princess 1975: 5). Pronouncements like these 
were especially conspicuous during the Cold War period, when influential Theravāda Buddhists 
in Southeast Asia were being enlisted by the US State Department and other pro-capitalist 
actors to actively oppose regional communist movements. References to the sutta appeared in 
essays and speeches by prominent Southeast Asian politicians of the period. Sisowath Monireth 
in Cambodia wrote that the Buddha’s insistence on “freedom of thought” in the Kālāma Sutta 
was unparalleled in the history of world religions and U Chan Htoon in Burma positioned 
Buddhism as an antiauthoritarian religion that promoted “an individualistic outlook” necessary 
for individual spiritual growth and a rejection of totalitarianism (Sisowath Monireth and Preah 
1966: 32–33, 43–45; Chan Htoon 1958: 9):
Buddhism requires that the freedom of the individual … must never be subordinated 
to group interests which seek to mould him to a standardized pattern and so deprive 
him of the initiative necessary for his spiritual development. …Buddhism is demo­
cratic, but makes no attempt to achieve a classless society, considering this to be an 
impossible condition. …It is thus the antithesis of the totalitarian concept in which the 
individual has only a group-existence subordinate to the needs of the State.
(Chan Htoon 1958: 9)
In his own extensive treatment of the sutta, Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu in Thailand (discussed later) 
used the text as part of his critique of all worldly (lokiya) political ideologies that lacked the 
insights stemming from a Dhammic perspective:
In Buddhism there is no dogmatic system that pressures us to believe without the right 
to examine and decide for ourselves. This is the greatest uniqueness of Buddhism that 
keeps its practitioners from being anybody’s intellectual slave. We Thais should never 
volunteer to follow the West as slavishly as we are doing now. Intellectual and spiritual 
freedom is best.
(Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu 1988)
The widespread attention paid to the Kālāma Sutta by reform-minded monks and intellectuals in 
different Theravāda contexts during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries demonstrates why

--- PAGE 109 ---
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
88
and how Buddhist reform discourses in the modern era have been described as exhibiting a shift 
toward rationalism. While “rationalism” is a concept that has been widely viewed as a prominent 
concern (and sometimes as an outcome) of European modernity, individual Buddhist reform­
ers had their own frameworks for how to evaluate the validity of different ways of knowing, 
thinking, being, and acting. These evaluative frameworks drew on local or indigenous factors 
and inherited wisdom, such as the one we have seen in the Kālāma Sutta. During the reform 
period, they were also—unavoidably—in dialogue with European discourses about rational­
ism, science, historicism, and bureaucratic governance. In nuancing Buddhist understandings 
of reform, it is important to emphasize that for many modern Buddhists, rationalism did not 
necessarily signal a break in their relationship with spirits, gods, ghosts, ancestors, and other 
beings whose existence could be readily observed in the world. This is a notable contrast to 
some parts of the world where the privileging of rationalism as a condition for knowledge 
has been theorized by scholars as a disenchanting, demythologizing, and secularizing impulse.
As a central concern of modern reform movements, “rationalism” should be understood 
in the Dhammic terms in which it was cast by Buddhist thinkers and actors concerned with 
elucidating knowledge, reason, and ethics in the age of modern reforms. Rational thought, 
action, and speech were grounded in knowledge of the Dhamma—the Buddha’s teachings that 
explained his insights into the nature of reality and right ways to live. Through practice and 
understanding of the Dhamma, practitioners would eventually attain enlightenment, which 
meant achieving recognition into the nature of reality and right ways to live.
While lesser examined than other movements of the same period such as nationalism, 
anticolonialism, or Marxism, Buddhist reformism was as much a pan-Asian phenomenon as 
these other movements. Although not all reformist movements and thinkers of the period were 
identical, they tended to share an interest in scripturalism (described in more detail later) and 
to demonstrate that the Buddha’s Dhamma was compatible with modern science. At the same 
time that reform events across the Theravāda world shared these general goals and orientations, 
the different political and social contexts of the states in which reform movements developed 
during the colonial period shaped them in distinctive ways. For example, lay Buddhists became 
more influential in colonial Burma than in colonial Cambodia, where British and French 
colonial governments enacted quite different policies toward Buddhism; Buddhists in colonized 
Ceylon and independent Siam responded differently to challenges from European missionaries; 
Cambodian Buddhists adopted Thai reformist Thammayut practices more readily than Lao and 
Lanna (northern Thai) Buddhists who bristled against Bangkok’s efforts at San∙gha centralization 
and control of Buddhist ritual practice.
Modern religious reforms were also inseparable from the media in which their ideas 
were disseminated: from palm leaf manuscripts to billboards, radio and television broadcasts, 
cassettes and cinema, and even to the specific folds of monastic robes and photographic 
portraits of influential monks and teachers. The intentions and convictions of religious 
reformers were embodied in and promulgated to others through these different sources, and 
the impact and aims of reforms were sometimes a product of changing media technologies. 
For most of Buddhist history, reformation had remained an almost exclusively elite occupa­
tion enacted through the production of textual materials intended for Buddhist royalty and 
monastic literati. But with the advent of the modern period, media technologies changed 
and connected the world in unprecedented ways, opening up and fostering new possibili­
ties for enacting and transmitting ideas of Buddhist reformation. One of the most dramatic 
technological advances tied to reformation in this period was the introduction of print, 
which became accessible to religious scholars in mainland Southeast Asia quite late relative 
to other parts of the world.

--- PAGE 110 ---
Reform
89
Finally, new forms and expressions of knowledge associated with Buddhist rationalism 
required new ways of being and thus new modes of subjectivity. In colonial and postcolonial 
contexts, rapidly changing understandings of the possible roles, rights, and obligations of indi­
viduals and new ways of conceiving of community began to emerge. One of the implications 
of reformist ideas was the notion that individuals had a responsibility to work for the welfare 
of “society.” In colonial Cambodia, for example, this idea manifested as an ethical imperative 
for individuals to purify themselves in order to benefit society as a whole; in colonial Ceylon, 
activists began to argue that individual Buddhists had a responsibility to engage in social work 
for the benefit of others. The development of new bureaucracies and institutions meant that the 
Buddhist San∙gha had to negotiate new relationships with governments and adapt to a climate 
in which there were other avenues for social mobility and prestige besides the monkhood. 
Along with the new forms of government ushered in during the early nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries, the altered ways of life associated with colonization, urbanization, industrialization, 
and mass transportation and communication all changed the ways in which people understood 
themselves, their relationships with each other and the state, and their possibilities for the future. 
Religious reforms both responded to these kinds of changes and helped shape them.
Scripturalism in Siam
In the Theravāda Buddhist areas then known as Siam, Cambodge, Burma, and Ceylon, reform­
ists thinking about what it meant to be Buddhist at this time of change emphasized values 
of authenticity, rationalism, and historicism—priorities that scholars have grouped under the 
rubric of “scripturalism.” Stanley Tambiah has defined the term in relation to the reform­
ist Siamese king Rama IV or Mongkut (r. 1851–1868) as a “concern with finding the true 
canon, of understanding the truth correctly and discarding false beliefs and magical prac­
tices” (Tambiah 1976: 211). While Tambiah seeks to relate Mongkut’s scripturalism to earlier 
Theravādin attempts to clarify orthodoxy and purify the religion, Steven Collins argues that 
scripturalism is a historically distinct modern religious attitude developed by Buddhist literati 
in reaction to a range of phenomena that converged in the mid-nineteenth century. Increased 
pressure from Western missionaries, the cultural prestige and rational practicality of European 
sciences, and the systematic dismantling of the networks of power and influence that made 
up the trans-regional world of elite Theravāda Buddhism by colonial encroachment led to a 
reorientation of how Buddhists conceived the effort to enact purification or reform (Collins 
1990: 115, n. 51). Control of monastic decorum and behavior continued to be important 
to reformism but, in the modern period, was joined by an effort to assert authority over 
the religious actions of the laity, as well as a focus on the ethical and rational applications of 
Buddhist teachings. The teachings of the Buddha found in the early texts were touted as hold­
ing universal truths, as opposed to local meaning, and the elite began to highlight the ethical 
and moral value found within them, downplaying the magical and protective powers that they 
were often used to invoke.
In Siam, major Buddhist reforms reflecting scripturalist aims were initiated by Mongkut 
beginning in the 1830s while he was still a monk, through the introduction of a new Buddhist 
order called the Thammayut. He intended the Thammayut to enforce stricter disciplinary codes 
for its monks as well as to ensure that Thammayut monks had a much better knowledge of 
Pāli, the lingua franca of the Theravādin world in which the canonical scriptures were composed, 
than had been usual for Thai monks. He promoted and developed his scripturalist innova­
tions through concrete means such as standardizing the system of ecclesiastical examinations 
and making them more rigorous. He also founded a printing press for the production and

--- PAGE 111 ---
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
90
dissemination of Pāli works, with the result that they became more widely accessible than had 
been possible through previous manuscript practices.
Throughout, Mongkut was concerned with establishing the authenticity of Buddhist prac­
tices. This quest was based on what we might term a “Buddhist historicism” predicated on 
the proper understanding of and adherence to the Vinaya, the section of the Tipiṭaka that laid 
out the rules of monastic conduct. This historicism, in collaboration with the Vinaya became a 
crucial source of authority for reformers like Mongkut in determining whether local monas­
tic practices, such as ordination ceremonies, robe styles, and ways of carrying alms bowls, 
conformed with early Buddhist prescriptions (Hansen 2007: 77–8; Reynolds 1972: 64–112, 
214–216; Tambiah 1976: 200–219). Mongkut was not, however, obsessively tied to the Vinaya. 
In his quest to distill and ensure what he deemed to be authentic Buddhist practice, he notably 
embraced some monastic ceremonies and decorum unique to the Mon lineage, as well as some 
found within Buddhaghosa’s later commentaries (Irwin forthcoming).
While most of Mongkut’s reformist activities were carried out while he was a monk, his 
royal proclamations illustrate his concern not only for monastic decorum but also for the 
proper religious behavior of the laity. Most notably, a proclamation published in 1858 deals 
directly with the religious actions of the Thai laity in a way that shows Mongkut’s growing 
concern for ethical universalism. The proclamation, often referred to as the “Proclamation on 
Religious Freedom,” decrees that the Reign shall not prohibit individuals from believing in 
religions as they see fit and argues that every religion agrees upon universal ethical codes that 
are beneficial to both the individual and the state. It is notable that Mongkut begins his list of 
universal religious ethics with the five precepts, the ethical foundation of Theravāda Buddhist 
lay decorum. Later in the proclamation, there are echoes of the Kālāma Sutta, as Mongkut 
criticizes individuals who follow unlearned religious teachers, who compel them to perform 
extreme displays of faith. Mongkut specifically calls out a few notable cases of people who, in 
their fervor, “set themselves ablaze as a sacrifice to the triple gem, cut their throats and heads 
off as a sacrifice to the Buddha, or cut their flesh to collect their blood to put in oil lamps as 
a means of sacrifice” (Mongkut 2004: 209; Irwin 2011: 129–130). Chastising both the zealous 
devotees and monks who encouraged them, Mongkut argues that there is no mention of such 
acts in the Pāli scriptures, which proves that they are transgressive to Buddhism and the aims 
of the Reign. (Mongkut 2004: 208–211).2
The scripturalist reforms initiated by Mongkut spread from Bangkok to Cambodia during 
the nineteenth century. Beginning in 1848, the new Khmer monarch Ang Duong (r. 1848–
1860), who had been a hostage prince in the Siamese court, turned to Bangkok for help in 
renovating Khmer Buddhism, importing Tipiṭaka texts as well as Thammayut-educated monks 
to aid his project. Ang Duong’s son Norodom (r. 1864–1904) continued his father’s efforts to 
reorganize and strengthen the Khmer San∙gha by revamping Pāli exams for monks as well as cen­
tralizing San∙gha administration. By the early twentieth century, building on Thai reformist ideas 
and aided by French colonial patronage, young monastic Khmer reformers began to advocate 
for a new approach to Buddhist learning and practice they termed “Modern Dhamma” (Hansen 
2007: 13). This group of monks, including the charismatic Chuon Nath, were self-consciously 
experimenting with new forms of print expression as well as implementing new approaches to 
Buddhist learning. Most important, they wanted to ensure that practitioners—whether monks 
or laypeople—understood the scriptural words and ideas they were chanting and performing. 
While older memorization-based methods of learning resulted in many monks and laypeople 
not understanding what they were saying, the Modern Dhamma movement advocated scrip­
tural study and comprehension that would bring one’s behavior in line with Dhamma teachings. 
Rationalism for these Khmer monks was grounded in the intrinsic truth of the Dhamma. In

--- PAGE 112 ---
Reform
91
translating the Kālāma Sūtta, for example, the monk-scholar Um Sūr wrote that even if one 
followed only the section of the sermon on avoiding harm, one “could not help but attain 
spiritual progress” (Thoṅ 1966: 2). The Dhamma could and should be empirically understood 
through personal observation and experience.
Mid-20th century reformers
The time period of the late eighteenth century through the early decades of the twentieth 
century saw major reforms in Burma and Ceylon as well as Siam and Cambodia. By the 1950s, 
Buddhist intellectuals emerging from the throes of colonialism who had been educated by the 
earlier generations of reformists asserted their own brand of reformist ideologies, institutional 
visions, and other projects that displayed deeply scripturalist values. These later reform discourses 
shared the historicist, rationalist, and demythologizing perspectives of the late nineteenth- to 
early twentieth-century reform movements but tended to rest on the interpretations or particu­
lar “discursive formations” of individual thinkers, were less identifiable as coherent movements, 
and were more contingent on local circumstances such as the development of new forms of 
nationalism and ethnic difference (Berkwitz 2006: 80). While some reformers of this period 
engaged in activities that promoted Buddhism as a means of developing the nation, others were 
critical of the aims and priorities of national religious institutions and their hierarchies. Many 
prominent reformers emphasized the importance of Buddhism as a resource for solving global 
problems, such as the prospect of nuclear war.
These reformers continued to persuade their followers that the study of Buddhist ethics was 
crucial for lay Buddhists as well as members of monastic orders. In many cases, they promoted 
not only the study of Buddhist scriptures in classical and vernacular languages but also medita­
tion, a practice that had been largely confined to monks and nuns in previous periods. Starting 
in Burma and spreading across the region, lay meditation became increasingly popularized in 
parts of the Theravāda world during the twentieth century, a momentum that built on Burmese 
monastic leader Ledi Sayadaw’s conclusion that “Buddha did not spend eons and eons accumu­
lating his pāram ı̄ [perfection leading to enlightenment] to get this ñāṇa [wisdom] just for the 
sake of a handful of monks only. It is meant for all the sentient beings. So why shouldn’t these 
teachings be made available to laypeople?” (Jordt 2007: 22–24). Regionally, the lay meditation 
movement was most influential in Burma, where its growth was supported by independent 
Burma’s first prime minister, U Nu. Forms of lay meditation began to spread globally and, by 
the end of the century, gained currency among urban elites in Thailand. Although lay medita­
tion did not hold the same kind of widespread appeal in Cambodia, small numbers of dedicated 
Cambodians and foreign supporters were introduced to meditative walking techniques by the 
activist monk Mahā Ghosānanda as part of his Dharmayātra (Dhamma walk) movement for 
reconciliation during the second Cambodian civil war (Poethig 2004: 197–212).
In the post-independence period, Theravādin reformists began to dismantle colonial-era 
constraints on Buddhism in the self-conscious sense of recovering and reimagining Buddhism’s 
place in the world, what contemporary theorists have described as the ongoing work of “decol­
onization” (Shepard 2006: 5–10). Part of their efforts involved invigorating South and Southeast 
Asian Buddhist networks that had been curtailed by colonial restrictions on intra-regional 
travel and exchange and promoting the notion of Buddhism as a resource for global peace 
and antidote to Cold War dangers. In 1950, a Sri Lankan Pāli scholar named G. P. Malalasekera 
(1899–1972) founded the World Fellowship of Buddhists (WFB) to bring together Buddhists of 
all schools for fellowship and promulgate Buddhist teachings. Malalasekera was a fellow traveler 
of the Chinese reformer Tai Xu, who had also envisioned a global Buddhist movement (DeVido

--- PAGE 113 ---
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
92
2009: 420). The WFB was, in part, an outgrowth of the post-colonial flurry of preparations 
for the 1956/1957 Buddha Jayanti, the celebration of the twenty-five hundredth anniversary of 
the Buddha’s parinibbāna. In 1954, Burmese Buddhists convened the Sixth Council, a dramatic 
event held in a cave, referencing the First Council in Buddhist history, to recite the Dhamma 
and launch a new redaction of the Buddhist scriptures and commentaries. The council, which 
convened an international group of Buddhist scholars, was timed to conclude as the Jayanti 
began in 1956. Celebrated within individual nations and internationally at a massive festival at 
Bodhgaya in India planned by representatives from different countries, the 2500th anniversary 
was a time of optimism and cosmopolitanism for Buddhists who understood the anniversary 
as a time of regeneration and renewal for spreading the Dhamma. In this post-independence 
moment, it was also an opportunity for countries with majority Buddhist populations to dem­
onstrate their progress as new nations.
Although scripturalist values continued to deeply influence later twentieth-century Buddhist 
reformers, they were more willing than earlier reformers to reinterpret scriptures, reinvent 
practices, and draw on diverse international religious and philosophical influences such as 
Marxism and Gandhian nonviolence. Reformers like Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu in Thailand, U 
Nu in Burma, A. T. Ariyaratna in Sri Lanka, and Mahā Ghosānanda in Cambodia advocated 
humanist visions of the Buddha that cast Buddhism as resonant with scientific ideas, and they 
understood themselves to be revealing the true essence of Buddhism in the process.
Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu (1906–1993) is exemplary of the manner in which individual mid-
century reformers both reflected and diverged from earlier scripturalist reforms. Buddhadāsa 
advocated a rigorous scholarly understanding of Buddhist scriptures and individual practice 
of meditation as a means for achieving individual and societal transformation. Buddhadāsa 
understood himself to be practicing a form of Buddhism close to the original Buddhism 
of early India, which he termed “pristine Buddhism,” focused on nonattachment, non-self, 
paṭicca-samuppāda (the Buddha’s teaching on the interdependence and reality of existence), 
and emptiness (Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu 1989). He differed from earlier Theravādin reformers in 
his incorporation of Mahāyāna ideas of emptiness and analyses of Marxist theories but always 
emphasized the importance of Dhammic values as crucial to the success of any political system. 
He drew on nature for inspiration for meditation and was a longtime advocate of Buddhist 
environmentalism as well as a critic of the San∙gha hierarchy in Thailand and the country’s 
system of monastic education (Swearer 2010: 167–172).
Similarly, individual Buddhists in other postcolonial countries critiqued the condition of 
their societies and advocated activism to address social problems, arguing for the importance 
of individual and collective understanding of the Dhamma as a means for transforming society. 
They recast bhikkhus as active participants in the political life of new nations and laypeople 
as members of civic organizations dedicated to spreading the Dhamma. The Burmese prime 
minister from 1948 to 1962, U Nu (1905–1995), combined politics with Buddhist revival. He 
set up a Buddhist Sāsana Council that initiated the Sixth Council, helped open a state-sponsored 
meditation center in Rangoon, and attempted to implement a Buddhist socialist political agenda 
that was based on the Buddha’s teaching of the Eightfold Path. In Sri Lanka, A.T. Ariyaratne 
(1931–), a science teacher and layperson, founded a grassroots Buddhist organization for rural 
development in 1958 called Sarvōdaya, based on principles of voluntary mutual aid and peace 
activism. He urged monks to leave the confines of the monastery to engage in social work 
and rural development.
Mahā Ghosānanda’s (1929–2007) transnational cosmopolitanism is representative of other 
reformers of this generation. He was educated in monasteries in Cambodia by Chuon Nath and 
other Khmer reformist teachers but came to social activism through the combined influences of

--- PAGE 114 ---
Reform
93
Buddhist reforms, his international education, and the impact of the communist Khmer Rouge 
control of Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 and its chaotic aftermath. He was sent to Burma to 
participate in the Sixth Council and then spent many years in India afterward, studying with 
Nichidatsu Fujii, the Japanese Buddhist follower of Gandhi. In 1965, he moved to Thailand to 
study meditation in Thailand under the Thai monk Ajan Dhammadaro, living as a forest monk 
for nearly fifteen years. After the fall of the Khmer Rouge, he learned about the extent of the 
violence and destruction in Cambodia from Khmer refugees pouring over the Thai border. He 
spent the next two and a half decades as an international spokesperson and advocate for peace 
and reconciliation in Cambodia. Like Ariyaratne, he wanted monks to move out of the temple 
and engage in social activism. And like Buddhadāsa, his Buddhist teachings emphasized paṭicca-
samuppāda as the recognition of the fundamental interdependence of all sentient existence and 
the basis for mutual compassion (Chhath 2012).
Reform and media
It is no accident that modern Buddhist reforms in South and Southeast Asia developed in 
tandem with the growing availability and use of print. In the manuscript culture through 
which Buddhist knowledge was maintained and disseminated before the nineteenth century, 
manuscripts were regarded as sacred objects in themselves, not simply as vehicles for scripture. 
Buddhist texts were generally inscribed on ritually prepared palm leaves by monks or scholars 
adhering to devotional practices. Often they were commissioned by abbots or lay patrons and 
presented to monasteries or royal libraries, where they were kept in protective cloths or boxes 
and rarely consulted in spite of being highly valued. Scriptural stories and sutras were copied 
in fragments or rendered into loose vernacular versions, and canonical texts from the Tipiṭaka 
mingled on monastery shelves with astrology and divination manuals. The rise of print did not 
completely transform the sacrality with which the written word was perceived by Buddhists, 
but it allowed more people to have access to Buddhist texts. Interest in print by Buddhists was 
spurred on in some instances by Christian missionaries, who used printed pamphlets to dis­
seminate their proselytizing messages. But the accessibility of print also coincided with Buddhist 
efforts to edit and disseminate new recensions of texts, especially the Vinaya in Sri Lanka, Siam, 
and Cambodia and the Abhidhamma in Burma.
Initial opposition to printing Buddhist scriptures by reluctant clergy disturbed by the threat 
to manuscript practices seems only to have occurred in Cambodia. But even in Cambodia, 
where printing was embraced relatively late, Buddhist publishing had begun to flourish by 
the 1920s. In addition to new critically edited editions of Buddhist scriptures (such as the 
Kālāma Sutta) Buddhists were printing periodicals that contained scriptural translations and 
commentaries as well as popular magazines, pamphlets of sermons, ritual manuals, and biog­
raphies of important monks. In both Cambodge and Ceylon, new texts referred to as Gihi 
Vinaya, addressed a variety of topics related to lay comportment, including how to eat, how 
children should treat their parents, how to behave in trains and buses, and proper ritual behavior 
(Gombrich and Obeyesekere 1988: 213–14).
Although print was the primary mode of disseminating new reformist values during this 
period, not every Buddhist was literate or had access to print texts and libraries, which were 
concentrated at least initially in urban areas. Some of the most visible late eighteenth- and 
nineteenth-century media communicating scripturalist values were monks’ robes. Across the 
region, as monks sought to bring their practices in line with early Buddhism, a major con­
troversy erupted regarding the proper way for monks to cover themselves. While this may 
not sound like a “modern” problem, in fact, clothing in general—for laypeople as well as

--- PAGE 115 ---
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
94
monks—was a key site for negotiating what it meant to be a modern person in South and 
Southeast Asia during this period. Colonial subjects had to decide how and whether to adopt 
European fashions, including fashions that challenged indigenous notions of modesty or piety. 
Trade laws in some colonies made cloth manufactured in Europe prohibitively expensive and 
further ignited debates about clothing, as with Gandhi’s khadi (homespun cloth) movement to 
protest British taxation policies.
Other visual media included the temples where Buddhists worshiped. As new building 
materials were introduced in the mid to late nineteenth centuries, new conventions concern­
ing monastic architecture and temple decoration lent themselves to communicating new ideas. 
In nineteenth-century Siam, European painting techniques and styles such as multiple-point 
perspective and romantic landscape were first widely used for the creation of Buddhist murals. 
Unsurprisingly, the same royals behind much of Siamese Buddhist reform, Kings Mongkut 
and Chulalongkorn, were also instrumental in creating an identifiably modern Siamese temple 
aesthetic that eventually spread throughout the country (Irwin 2011: 135–191).
With new possibilities for travel and media dissemination, modern Buddhists could broadcast 
their images and messages more widely than ever before. Photographic portraits of famous 
monks became common in Buddhist publications, conveying to readers what a modern monk 
should look like. Dharmapāla’s address to the international World Parliament of Religions in 
Chicago in 1893 was reprinted and widely reported on in US newspapers, as were the Cold 
War–era tours and diplomatic activities of later reformist monks such as Huot Tath from 
Cambodia. Newsreels of important ceremonies, such as the Jayanti, circulated not only within 
the Buddhist world but also in Europe and North America. By the 1950s and 1960s, Buddhist 
magazines and pamphlets were commonplace and often carried stories and photographs from 
the many international Buddhist conferences that were taking place around the world.
Modern Buddhist subjects
Modern Buddhist reforms did not extend their influence evenly over the populations of the 
countries in which they occurred; in the decades after reforms were implemented, many 
rural people in Thailand and Cambodia, for instance, might have felt very little effect from 
reforms intended to make Buddhism more relevant to modern practitioners. Reform move­
ments were initially concentrated in monasteries and temple schools in urban areas until their 
ideas became mainstream. Later, when printed materials were widely accessible and other new 
media, such as architecture, cinema, and photography, were making their way into villages 
that were already undergoing socioeconomic changes, reform movements contributed to 
new visions of Buddhist subjects. By “subject,” we mean the sense that people had of what it 
meant to act, relate, and live as a Buddhist, to have an identity as a Buddhist, whether lay or 
monastic, individual or collective.
Scripturalist thinkers tended to emphasize the historical lifetime of the Buddha as the most 
important source of authenticity and authority for Buddhist ideas about how to be Buddhist 
and what Buddhist subjecthood entailed. Thus, not only did the Buddha’s historical biography 
take on standardized forms during the modern period in printed and visual biographies, but 
it was also “demythologized” to make the Buddha seem more human and more accessible as a 
role model. One example is a biography called the Pathomsompōth in Thai or Paṭhamasambodhi 
in Pāli (The Buddha’s First Enlightenment) that circulated widely in the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries in both Siam and Cambodia; the late nineteenth-century version was based 
on a version from the early part of the century, but in revising it, the Supreme Patriarch of 
the Thai San∙gha, who was a member of the reformist Thammayut sect, deleted some of the

--- PAGE 116 ---
Reform
95
mythical and miraculous elements of the Buddha’s life story that had appeared in the older 
version (Swearer 1996: 320–325).
Within reformist circles, the paradigm of the ideal monk also shifted in this period. In 
Cambodia and Thailand, reformists championed monks who were well educated in the scrip­
tures and who adhered to rigorous interpretations of monastic decorum and purity. Admiration 
for popular local monks who were skilled in acting out or dramatically retelling Buddhist 
stories, for example, was now redirected toward monks who were capable scholars of Pāli and 
who could preach authoritatively about canonical scriptures and commentaries (Bowie 2017). 
While members of local temples had once preferred to elect the most senior monks as abbots, 
monastic leadership and status were now connected to national Pāli exams and other official 
marks of distinction. Granted, not every community or monk embraced this new vision of the 
monk. Monks associated with the forest tradition in Thailand or older esoteric boran (ancient) 
meditation techniques in Cambodia, as well as village monks in some rural communities 
in northern Thailand and Laos, ignored the new norms for monk education (Kamala 1997; 
McDaniel 2008; Bizot 1976; Crosby 2013; Marston 2008; Harris 2005: 62–64). But the broader 
paradigm shift allowed educated young reformist monks such as Chuon Nath in Cambodia to 
rise to positions of authority and further fortify their viewpoints as new standards for ortho­
praxy and scriptural interpretation.
More dramatic than shifts in understandings of ideal monks, however, were the new concep­
tions of the laity. From a reformist viewpoint, individuals needed to purify their behavior, just 
as monks always had; the purity and well-being of the whole “society” (a new term that came 
into use in various Southeast Asian contexts during this period) depended on the moral purity 
of individuals. This conception was made evident in Mahā Ghosānanda’s dictum: “A peaceful 
heart makes a peaceful person. A peaceful person makes a peaceful family. A peaceful family 
makes a peaceful community. A peaceful community makes a peaceful nation” (Chhath 2012: 
60). Thus, in this new conception, the individual bore as much responsibility for the strength 
and well-being of Buddhism in society as the king and san∙gha once held. Perversely, in their 
Buddhist-infused communist worldview, the Khmer Rouge seemed to have adopted the idea 
that individuals must be made “pure” in order to create an effective society and purged those 
who were viewed as contaminated (Harris 2013: 60; Hinton 2002: 79–90, Marston 2002: 
55–56). In each of the majority Theravāda Buddhist nations we have discussed, there was an 
equivalency made over time between “being Buddhist” and being a legitimate citizen of the 
nation. In the later part of the twentieth century, especially in Sri Lanka and Myanmar, the 
widespread acceptance of this equation in some areas contributed to prejudice or even violence 
against non-Buddhist citizens.
Conclusion
We see the modern era of Theravāda reform ending in or about the 1970s. Prior to this, while 
there were always different schools and factions of Buddhist interpretation, many of the reform 
movements of the period had exhibited similar trends. After that, the ways in which Buddhists 
were reinterpreting and developing Buddhism shifted away from the promulgation of the mod­
ern reform values of rationalism, scripturalism, new technologies of expression, and new modes 
of subjecthood examined in this chapter. The excitement of a shared decolonization of Buddhism 
that grew out of reformism in different parts of the Theravāda world—evidenced through the 
records of a plethora of regional exchanges, conferences, collaborative events, and collective 
activism (such as the early 1960s’ WFB campaign to protest the Diem regime’s harsh treatment 
of Buddhists)—came to an end as the local worlds of Theravādins began to diverge sharply.

--- PAGE 117 ---
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
96
By the 1970s, Cambodia, Laos, and the ethnic Khmer Theravāda Buddhist areas of southern 
Vietnam were engulfed in war. When these wars finally ended at different points between 1975 
and the late 1990s (when the Khmer Rouge finally surrendered), war-tired populations were 
preoccupied with basic rebuilding. Rather than “reform,” the revisions to Buddhism in these 
post-conflict areas initially took the form of carefully monitored state regulation, with a more 
extensive rebuilding of religious infrastructures occurring only later, as socialist government 
controls were loosened and economies began to expand (Kobayashi 2008; Thompson 2006: 
137). In Sri Lanka, 1983 brought civil war and the intensification of a Buddhist nationalism, 
marked by ethnic and religious antagonisms between Sinhalese Buddhists and Tamil Hindus, 
that had been intertwined in different ways with reformist discourses since the 1940s (Berkwitz 
2006, 2010: 174–181). While modern reforms of Buddhism, including an emphasis on scrip­
turalism, were key political strategies under both the U Nu and Ne Win governments through 
the 1970s, Burma went through major political upheavals in the 1980s, and many members of 
the San∙gha took to the streets to protest or sheltered dissidents during the uprising of 1988. 
After the fall of the Ne Win government in 1988, the State Law and Order Restoration 
Council (SLORC) took steps to severely repress San∙gha political involvement (Schober 2011: 
87, 107–108). In Thailand, some of the different strands of reformism that had been so important 
throughout much of the twentieth century were catalyzed into activism in the wake of the 
government’s massacre of student demonstrators in October 1976. By the end of the 1970s, 
new modes of Buddhist activism had crystallized in Thailand, apparent, for example, in Sulak 
Sivaraksa’s Thai socially engaged Buddhist network (Baskerville 2019: 236–251).
For all these reasons, the Theravāda Buddhist renovations, reinterpretations, and expressions 
that began to emerge in the 1980s seem to us to signal a new period in the Theravāda world 
shaped by markers of postmodernity, such as the rapid spread of the internet and social media, 
the rise in popularity of visual culture and virtual communication, globalization, the easing 
of economic and religious restrictions in the post-socialist, post-conflict societies, and the rise 
of Chinese political and economic power in the region. It is hard to know yet how best to 
characterize this new historical moment and whether there are reform events emerging in this 
new context that might be correlated to the Theravādin idea of reform.
Notes
	 1	We use Theravāda world here to refer to southern Asian Buddhist polities and communities, although 
Buddhists in southern Asia did not necessarily understand themselves to be “Theravādin” until the twen­
tieth century. See Bretfield’s chapter in this volume for a thorough discussion of the genealogy of this 
term. Most of our essay concerns the modern period when the term increasingly came to be adopted by 
Theravādins in South and Southeast Asia.
	 2	For a full translation of the proclamation, see Irwin (2011: 128–131).
References
Baskerville, J.T. 2019. “Religion for Society”: A Transnational History of Socially Engaged Buddhist Networks in 
Thailand. Madison: University of Wisconsin Madison.
Berkwitz, S.C. 2010. South Asian Buddhism: A Survey. London and New York: Routledge.
Berkwitz, S.C. 2006. “Resisting the Global in Buddhist Nationalism: Venerable Soma’s Discourse of Decline 
and Reform.” Journal of Asian Studies 67 (1): 73–106.
Bizot, François. 1976. Le figuier à cinq branches. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Blackburn, Anne M. 2003. “Localizing Lineage: Importing Higher Ordination in Theravādin South and 
Southeast Asia.” In Constituting Communities: Theravāda Buddhism and the Religious Cultures of South and 
Southeast Asia, eds. J.C. Holt, J.N. Kinnard, J.S. Walters, 131–149. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

--- PAGE 118 ---
Reform
97
Bowie, K.A. 2017. Of Beggars and Buddhas: The Politics of Humor in the Vessantara Jataka in Thailand. Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press.
Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu. 1989. Me and Mine: Selected Essays of Bhikkhu Buddhadāsa, translated and edited by 
Donald K. Swearer. Albany: State University of New York.
Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu. 1988. “Help! The Kalama Sutta, Help!.” translated by Santikaro Bhikkhu. https://
www.dhammatalks.net/Books5/Bhikkhu_Buddhadāsa_Help_The_Kalama_Sutta_Help.htm. 
(Accessed 1/13/20).
Chan Htoon, U (Justice Thado Maha Thray Sithu). 1958. ‘Address to the Sixteenth Congress of the 
International Association for Religious Freedom, Chicago, USA, August 1958.’ Place of publication not 
identified: Union Buddha Sāsana Council Press.
Chhath, Linda. 2012. Seeing the Angles, Step by Step: A Study of Mahā Ghosānanda, a Khmer Monk in Action. 
Madison: University of Wisconsin Madison.
Collins, Steven. 1990. “On the Very Idea of a Pali Canon.” Journal of the Pali Text Society XV: 89–126.
Conway, Moncure Daniel. 1906. My Pilgrimage to the Wise Men of the East. Boston and New York: Houghton, 
Mifflin and Co.
Crosby, Kate. 2013. Traditional Theravāda Meditation and its Modern-Era Suppression. Hong Kong: Buddha 
Dharma Centre of Hong Kong.
DeVido, Elise Anne. 2009. “The Influence of Chinese Master Taixu on Buddhism in Vietnam.” Journal of 
Global Buddhism 10: 413–458.
Gombrich, Richard, Obeyesekere, Gananath. 1988. Buddhism Transformed: Religious Change in Sri Lanka. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hallisey, Charles. 1991. “Councils as Ideas and Events in the Theravāda.” The Buddhist Forum II: 133–148.
Hansen, Anne Ruth. 2007. How to Behave: Buddhism and Modernity in Colonial Cambodia, 1860–1930. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Harris, Ian. 2005. Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Harris, Ian. 2013. Buddhism in a Dark Age: Cambodian Monks under Pol Pot. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press.
Hinton, Alexander. 2002. “Purity and Contamination in the Cambodian Genocide.” In Cambodia Emerges 
from the Past: Eight Essays. ed. J. Ledgerwood, 60–90. DeKalb, Il: Southeast Asia Publications, Center for 
Southeast Asian Studies, Northern Illinois University.
Irwin, Anthony Lovenheim. 2011. ‘Imagining Boundaries: Sı̄mā Space, Lineage Trails, and Trans-Regional 
Theravada Orthodoxy.’ MA Thesis, University of  Wisconsin-Madison.
Irwin, Anthony Lovenheim. (Forthcoming) “Changing Sı̄mā, Changing World.” In Sı̄mās: Foundations of 
Buddhist Religion, ed. J. Carbine, E. Davis.
Jordt, Ingrid. 2007. Burma’s Mass Lay Meditation Movement: Buddhism and the Cultural Construction of Power. 
Athens, OH: Ohio University Press.
Kamala, Tiyavanich. 1997. Forest Recollections: Wandering Monks in Twentieth-Century Thailand. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Kobayashi, Satoru. 2008. “Reconstructing Buddhist Temple Buildings: an Analysis of Village Buddhism 
After the Era of Turmoil.” In People of Virtue: Reconfiguring Religion, Power and Moral Order in Cambodia 
Today, eds. A. Kent, D. Chandler, 169–194. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Marston, John. 2002. “Democratic Kampuchea and the Idea of Modernity.” In Cambodia Emerges from 
the Past: Eight Essays, ed. J. Ledgerwood, 38–59. DeKalb, Il: Southeast Asia Publications, Center for 
Southeast Asian Studies, Northern Illinois University.
Marston, John. 2008. “Reconstructing ‘Ancient’ Cambodian Buddhism.” Contemporary Buddhism 9 (1): 
99–121.
McDaniel, Justin. 2008. Gathering Leaves and Lifting Words: Histories of Buddhist Monastic Education in Laos and 
Thailand. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Mongkut, King. 2004. Prachum Prakaat Nai Rachakaan Tii Sii [Collected Proclamations of King Mongkut]. 
Bangkok: Toyota Foundation.
Nyanaponika, Thera, Bodhi, Bikkhu. 1999. Numerical Discourses of the Buddha: An Anthology of Suttas from the 
Aṅguttara Nikāya. New York: AltaMira Press.
Poethig, Kathryn. 2004. “Locating the Transnational in Cambodia’s Dhammayātra.” In History, Buddhism, 
and New Religious Movements in Cambodia. eds. J. Marston, E. Guthrie, 197–212. Honolulu: University 
of Hawaii’i Press.
Poon, Pismai Diskul, Princess, H.S.H. 1975. Thammai Khon Rao Tōng mı̄ Sātsanā, A Being That is Human. 
Bangkok: World Fellowship of Buddhists.

--- PAGE 119 ---
Anne R. Hansen and Anthony Lovenheim Irwin
98
Reynolds, Craig. 1972. The Buddhist Monkhood in Nineteenth-Century Thailand. Ithaca and London: Cornell 
University.
Shepard, Todd. 2006. The Invention of Decolonization: The Algerian War and the Remaking of France. Ithaca and 
London: Cornell University Press.
Schober, Juliane. 2011. Modern Buddhist Conjectures in Myanmar: Cultural Narratives, Colonial Legacies, and 
Civil Society. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Sisowath Monireth, S.A.R., Preah, Samdech Krom. 1966. “Bouddha Sasana: Essai de Comprehension.” 
Banlȳ Buddhacakr [Illumination of the Buddha-wheel], 26 (January–March): 29–49.
Soma, Thera. 2008. [1959] Kalama Sutta: Buddha’s Charter of Free Inquiry (reprinted from The Wheel 
Publication, Volume 8). Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society. http://www.bps.lk/olib/wh/wh008_
Soma_Buddhas-Charter-of-Free-Inquiry.pdf (accessed January 13, 2020).
Swearer, Donald K. 1996. “Bhikkhu Buddhadāsa’s Interpretation of the Buddha.” Journal of the American 
Academy of Religion 64 (2): 313–336.
Swearer, Donald K. 2010. The Buddhist World of Southeast Asia (2nd ed.). Albany: SUNY Press.
Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. 1976. World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and Polity in 
Thailand against a Historical Background. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Thittila, Sayadaw U. 1948. Buddhism and the Personal Life. London: The Buddhist Society.
Thompson, Ashley. 2006. “Buddhism in Cambodia: Rupture and Continuity.” In Buddhism in World Cultures: 
Comparative Perspectives, ed. S.C. Berkwitz, 129–167. Santa Barbara, Denver and Oxford: ABC CLIO.
Thoṅ, Mahā Vimaladhamm. 1966. Kālāmasūtr niṅ Parābhavasūtr (3rd ed.). Phnom Penh: Buddhist Institute.
Vajirañāṇavarorasa, Somdetch Phra Mahā Samaṇa Chao Krom Phrayā. 1979. Autobiography: The Life of 
Prince-Patriach Vajirañāṇavarorasa of Siam, 1860–1921, translated and edited by C.J. Reynolds. Athens: 
Ohio University Press.

--- PAGE 120 ---
99
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-8
6
TRADITION
Nuns and “Theravāda” in Sri Lanka
Nirmala S. Salgado
Introduction
In December 2018 a large gathering of Buddhist monks and nuns was held in Vihāra Mahādevi 
Park in Colombo, Sri Lanka.1 The park lies opposite the Department of Buddhist Affairs (DBA), 
a government office that oversees the needs of all the country’s Buddhist monastics, excluding 
higher-ordained Buddhist nuns (bhikkhunῑs), whom the state does not officially recognize.2 A 
few hundred bhikkhunῑs from around the country processed in a demonstration around the 
park. They, together with supportive monks, submitted a petition to DBA officials requesting 
that bhikkhunῑs be accorded recognition as bhikkhunῑs on their national identity cards (NICs). 
The government generally issues NICs to Sri Lankan citizens on request. Those cards are nec­
essary to register for state exams, apply for passports, and vote but are not readily available to 
fully ordained nuns. Yet the question of bhikkhunῑs’ legal rights was not the only one at stake 
that day. At another level, the demonstration raised questions about the power of monastics 
vis-à-vis that of the state and how monastics and the state authorized “Theravāda” differently. 
Here I focus on debates in Sri Lanka that have been formative in attempting to authorize 
who can say what about Theravāda. As Asad indicates, authorizing processes are intrinsic to 
the discourse and practice of religion and its representation (1993: 35–43). Sri Lanka is unique 
among so-called Theravāda countries in that it is seen not just as a country - whose supposedly 
pristine Buddhism is purportedly grounded in a continuous Pāli textual tradition, but also as a 
place to which bhikkhunῑ lineages throughout the world might trace their origins through the 
third-century bce bhikkhunῑ San∙ghamittā to the first bhikkhunῑ, Mahāpajāpati Gōtamῑ (ordained 
by the Buddha himself). Although the (Theravāda) bhikkhunῑ lineage was lost in the last mil­
lennium, beginning in the 1980s, Buddhist nuns have become prominent in the Theravāda 
countries of Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Burma (Myanmar), attracting the attention of scholars 
and state authorities alike.3
It is not surprising that a heightened interest in the “status” of women in developing countries 
in the late twentieth century prompted an attentiveness to the higher ordination (upasampadā) of 
Theravāda Buddhist nuns. By the turn of the twenty-first century, procedures were in place in 
Sri Lanka to provide a Theravāda upasampadā for bhikkhunῑs from around the world. However, 
the governments of Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Myanmar (Burma) have denied legal recognition 
to their bhikkhunῑs, doing so at the insistence of Buddhist monks who claim that, in the absence

--- PAGE 121 ---
Nirmala S. Salgado
100
of a quorum of Theravāda bhikkhunῑs for the upasampadā, a Theravāda bhikkhunῑ upasampadā 
is “impossible” (Kawanami 2007: 234–236; Seeger 2008: 160–163). Nevertheless, bhikkhunῑs 
from Theravāda countries have forged ahead in the training and upasampadās of nuns (Ito 
2012: 58 n. 8; Salgado 2013: 149–181). Meanwhile, in Sri Lanka in particular, householders 
who accept nuns as Theravāda bhikkhunῑs have continued to support them regardless of such 
contestation (Mrozik 2014: 86). At the same time, some senior monks, ten-training-precept 
nuns (Sinh: dasa silmātās or silmātās), and state officials, claiming that the new bhikkhunῑs are 
“Mahāyāna” or simply “illegitimate” because their founding ordinations were conducted by 
monastics from Korea and Taiwan, have continued to voice their disapproval of the bhikkhunῑ 
ordinations.4 In Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Burma, the trope of “Mahāyāna difference” pitted 
against “Theravāda purity” has dominated discussions about bhikkhunῑ ordinations since the 
1980s, raising the very notion of Theravāda to a prominence that it perhaps has not been 
accorded since the inaugural conference of the World Federation of Buddhists in 1950, a 
venue at which scholar-practitioners gave the term Theravāda new significance (Perreira 2012: 
450–452). Evocations of a Theravāda tradition have been relatively recent in debates about 
Buddhist nuns, indicating, as Abeysekara points out, that certain claims, like those pertaining 
to an authentic Buddhism, are subject to particular contingent conjunctures or “a period … 
in which competing narratives and debates conjoin … to make centrally visible particular 
authoritative knowledges about what can and cannot count as Buddhism” (2002: 4 n. 10). In 
effect, the higher ordination of nuns in Theravāda Buddhism raises questions not just about 
Theravāda but about tradition itself. As Asad argues, disagreements, which are integral to a 
living tradition, are “not only about the substance of interpretation but also over where exactly 
the limits of a tradition lie” (2015: 169).
I want to consider how the very idea of Theravāda, grounded as it may seem to be in a 
Pāli textual tradition and lineage transmission, is not self-evident. What becomes important 
is how Theravāda is authorized as an authentic form of Buddhism, by whom, and when. My 
work, focusing on research conducted since the 1980s, underscores the contingent circum­
stances in which disputes about ordinations and lineages of Buddhist nuns are imbricated 
in particular relations of power. Sri Lankan Buddhist nuns of the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries initiated a new renunciant practice. Although details of that practice were 
argued over intermittently, the question of nuns’ Theravāda “authenticity,” was not evoked as 
it has been in debates about recent bhikkhunῑ ordinations. Indeed, no question of Theravāda 
was evident in the initiation of the renowned Buddhist nun Sudharmachari (d. 1939), who 
has lineage descendants among silmātās to this day. Yet, Sudharmachari introduced a renunciant 
tradition that not only was unprecedented in Sri Lanka, but also marked a departure from 
the Burmese tradition in which she was first initiated (Bartholomeusz 1994: 93; Bloss 1987: 
9–10; Salgado 2013: 112). The contrast between the reception in Sri Lanka of the initiations 
of Sudharmachari and her lineage descendants and that of the recent ordinations of Sri Lankan 
bhikkhunῑs is telling. As we shall see, lineage descendants of Sudharmachari and other silmātās 
have drawn criticism for lacking a Buddhist (rather than a specifically Theravāda) authentic­
ity.5 However, by the 1970s, with the idea of Theravāda gaining prominence, the specter of 
Theravāda authenticity had assumed a new guise, setting the stage for framing controversies 
about the foundation and lineage tradition for a Theravāda bhikkhunῑ ordination, both in Sri 
Lanka and elsewhere. At the nub of these arguments was the supposed purity of the Theravāda 
tradition, defined in opposition to its Mahāyāna other. Such a use of Theravāda, however, 
depends not on what Theravāda putatively may or may not be (something always subject to 
debate) but, rather, on shifting configurations of power in a contestation for monastic and 
state authority.

--- PAGE 122 ---
Tradition
101
Tradition
Scholars and practitioners often assume that the notion of a continuous Sri Lankan Theravāda 
tradition is traceable to ancient India (Holt 2017: 1; Gombrich 1988: 3). However, as Abeysekara 
points out, such a notion is misleading, given that “tradition” constitutes an ongoing process 
of contestation between less-than-disinterested stakeholders (2002: 74–100; 2018: 334). Today 
proponents and opponents of bhikkhunῑ ordinations seek the coherence and continuity of 
an identity grounded in interpretations of lineage and tradition. As Abeysekara reminds us, 
“[c]oherence is a discursively constructed idea” (2018: 338). In other words, an idea such as 
“Theravāda tradition,” viewed as a coherent and continuous objective reality (whether by 
scholars or by practitioners), should instead be understood as a response to certain questions 
specific to particular contingent conjunctures. Let me begin by focusing on questions about 
nuns’ monastic attire and disciplinary precepts, because they are indicative of a rethinking of 
“tradition.” It is instructive to consider the debates (or lack thereof) about the nuns at the time 
of Sudharmachari (then referred to as female devotees, or Sinh: upāsikās), since their lineage 
descendants (now called [dasa] silmātās), like the Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs of today, can trace their 
practice to an inaugural initiation that was established by non–Sri Lankan monastics.
Monastic attire and training precepts generally serve to differentiate nuns from householders. 
Such differentiation, even as it emerged with the new visibility of upāsikās and silmātās, did 
not per se evoke the question of Theravāda authenticity. Yet monastic attire, bound up as it is 
with perceptions of public appearance and lineage tradition, has proved contentious in debat­
ing the so-called status of nuns as (Theravāda) bhikkhunῑs in Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Burma. 
Bhikkhunῑs, whose attire is relatively new and distinct in these countries, have, like the upāsikās 
and silmātās of Sri Lanka, pushed the limits of tradition by introducing a new attire for nuns. 
But the question of what constitutes “Theravāda”—central for the new bhikkhunῑs—had no 
relevance to earlier debates about upāsikā and silmātā robes. Sudharmachari, who returned to 
Sri Lanka in 1905 after her initiation in Burma, may have worn “a white blouse and a yellow 
robe” (Bloss 1987: 11), although there is some indication that she and her students wore white 
with another color, such as salmon or brown (Salgado 2013: 114). Nuns I interviewed said 
that silmātās did not assume a uniform colored attire of yellow or brown (without white) until 
about the 1950s. Over the years, their monastic attire has attracted attention for its increasing 
resemblance to that of monks. This sparked public opposition as early as the 1890s, and, more 
recently, in the 1980s and 1990s (Bartholomeusz 1994: 36–39; Salgado 2013: 115–116).
Those accusing silmātās of observing an incorrect Buddhism had concerns similar to those of 
critics who faulted certain Sri Lankan monks for appearing to depart from tradition (Carrithers 
1983: 126–127). The seemingly new forms of religious practice among monks and nuns did not 
evoke concerns about Theravāda authenticity, since the category of “Buddhism” (as opposed to 
other religions), rather than “Theravāda” (as opposed to Mahāyāna), was at stake. The founda­
tional Burmese tradition to which Sudharmachari owed her ordination was simply accepted as 
authoritative, as was the provenance of the attire of the early nuns. Of course, one might point 
out that Burmese Buddhism is considered to be self-evidently “Theravāda” and that there is 
precedence for bringing monastic ordinations to Sri Lanka from Burma. But what is important 
to note is that the category of Theravāda as we understand it today was rarely evoked in Sri 
Lanka until after the 1950s (Perreira 2012: 443–457). Previously, disputes about correct monastic 
practice centered on what could count as Buddhism (in contrast to Christianity). As Scott and 
Malalgoda point out, “Buddhism” as a concept referring to a discrete “religion”—indeed, the 
Sinhala term for religion (āgama) itself—did not even arise until the encounter with Christian 
missionaries (Scott 1994: 188). I wish to highlight that even when a dispute purportedly claims

--- PAGE 123 ---
Nirmala S. Salgado
102
to focus on correct Buddhist practice or a pure Theravāda bhikkhunῑ lineage, categories such 
as “Buddhism” and “Theravāda” are evoked in particular circumstances and defined in specific 
ways by individuals and the state in a bid to assert authority and power.
Let us now turn to questions about nuns’ training precepts (Pāli: sikkhāpada), which are 
intrinsically connected to their renunciant (Sinh: pävidi/Pāli: pabbajjā) practice. Renunciant 
practice is generally differentiated from householder (Sinh: gihi) practice on the basis of an 
understanding of sikkhāpada and discipline (vinaya), which may be considered either “renun­
ciant” or “householder.” Here I want to point out that the provenance of silmātās’ discipline and 
training precepts did not come under scrutiny for Theravāda authenticity in the early twentieth 
century the way it has for recent bhikkhunῑs. It is often forgotten today that silmātās participate 
in an ordination ritual that had no known precedent before the initiation of Sudharmachari, to 
whom many of them can trace a direct lineage.6 Sudharmachari received her first ordination 
from nuns in Burma. A lineage descendant of Sudharmachari informed me that Sudharmachari 
received a later ordination, into the ten renunciant precepts, from monks at the Malwatta chap­
ter (Sinh: pārśavaya) in Kandy, Sri Lanka. What is interesting is not just that the Burmese ten 
precepts differ from those currently practiced in Sri Lanka or that the training precepts that 
Sudharmachari’s lineage students continue to practice in Sri Lanka have no known precedent 
among Buddhist nuns, but also that those precepts were affirmed in the early twentieth cen­
tury by monks of the Malwatta chapter of the Tooth Temple (also associated with the Asgiriya 
chapter). Those monks, custodians of the tooth relic of the Buddha, who worked closely with 
the state and other influential senior monks (Sinh: mahānāyakas), authorized a new renunciant 
practice that attracted little or no controversy. Yet, today their lineage students at the same temple 
assert their claims to authority and power in another way: working closely with state officials and 
leading silmātās throughout the country, they are now perhaps the strongest opponents of the 
bhikkhunῑ ordinations, arguing that the ordinations are “Mahāyāna,” as are the new bhikkhunῑs. 
Monks from this temple have rejected the (Theravāda) authenticity of the new bhikkhunῑs even 
though the latter, like Sudharmachari and her students, have departed from tradition. It is tell­
ing that, although the monks of the Tooth Temple chose to ordain Sudharmachari and accept 
the new monastic practice that she introduced, the lineage students of those same monks now 
allege that Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑ ordinations subvert “tradition,” as evidenced by the bhikkhunῑs’ 
new attire and the textual lineage of their vinaya precepts.
Though the growing visibility of the upāsikās/silmātās prompted debates about correct 
Buddhist practice, appeals to their Theravāda authenticity and their place in tradition were only 
invoked recently. In Sri Lanka in 2002, when the debate about the importance of Theravāda 
for bhikkhunῑ ordinations was at its height, a direct student descendant of Sudharmachari who 
opposed the higher ordination of Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs informed me that Sudharmachari took 
the renunciant ten precepts “according to the Theravāda way,” even though the very idea of 
Theravāda had no known currency in Sudharmachari’s time. Here we see a move to authenti­
cate the practice of silmātās in tradition as a means to counter the new bhikkhunῑ ordinations. 
But monastic advocates of those ordinations, while seeking to garner public acceptance of nuns’ 
new disciplinary observances, have responded by construing the notion of tradition differently. 
Affirming the Theravāda authenticity of the recent bhikkhunῑ ordinations (traced through a 
continuing Pāli textual tradition and lineage to the ordination of Mahāpajāpati Gōtamῑ), they 
insist that it is the silmātās, not the Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs, whose practice lacks grounding in 
tradition. Hence, in 2016, one monastic told me, “There is no use of the word silmātā in the 
sāsana [Buddhist dispensation]. The usage in the sāsana includes four words: bhikkhu, bhikkhunῑ, 
upāsakā [male devotee], upāsikā. Silmātā is a word for a householder, not a renunciant.” This 
was an argument I had not heard when the inaugural bhikkhunῑ ordinations occurred. Then

--- PAGE 124 ---
Tradition
103
the dispute had centered on the Theravāda authenticity of the bhikkhunῑs. Now proponents of 
bhikkhunῑ ordinations were turning the argument about tradition on its head, questioning the 
(textual) authenticity of a silmātā tradition. My point here is that it is mistaken to think about 
ideas such as “Theravāda,” “Buddhism,” and “tradition” as self-evident. Rather, they are con­
cepts used in response to particular questions that arise in specific conjunctures. As Abeysekara, 
referencing Nietzsche, indicates, “Concepts have historical uses, with competing definitions and 
sensibilities in a genealogy” (2019: 10).
References to what constitutes Theravāda (and its Mahāyāna other) have become increas­
ingly prevalent in Sri Lanka since the 1970s (Abeysekara 2002: 110–129). Affirming lineage 
continuity (in disciplinary precepts and monastic attire) has become essential to the new 
bhikkhunῑs, whose ordinations were preceded by heated debates about Theravāda authentic­
ity. The 1996 higher ordination of nuns at Sarnath, India, took place after Kusuma Devendra 
(ordained at Sarnath) had studied the Korean lineage tradition and determined that the “Korean 
Dharmagupta Vinaya tradition of Ordination was practically the same as the Theravāda tradition” 
and could be traced back through China and Sri Lanka to India (Kusuma 2012: 135). The 
Sarnath ordination of ten select Sri Lankan nuns was a dual ordination conducted by Korean 
bhikkhus and bhikkhunῑs in the Korean language. The nuns had trained in Sinhala, studying 
Kusuma Devendra’s Sinhala translation of the English translation of the Korean ordination 
procedure. The Sri Lankan ordinands underwent a Korean ordination, which incorporated 
marking their skin with joss sticks, wearing Korean monastic attire, and using the Korean 
language. Immediately after their dual ordination, the nuns were greeted by Sri Lankan monks 
who counseled them on how to observe practices specific to bhikkhunῑs, many of which are 
in the Pāli texts. The senior Sri Lankan monks presented the new bhikkhunῑs with the cut and 
sewn saffron robes of Sri Lankan monastics, thereby welcoming them into their monastic lin­
eage. The Sarnath ordination received some public attention in Sri Lanka: newspaper reports 
included color photos of the Sarnath bhikkhunῑs and their Korean mentors wearing Korean 
monastic attire (“Sasana History;” “The Ordination”). Some Sri Lankan monastics dismissed the 
event, whereas others refused to recognize the newly ordained nuns as Theravāda bhikkhunῑs. 
Meanwhile, monastics under the leadership of Inamaluwe Sumangala, the head monk of the 
Dambulla Temple in Sri Lanka, lost little time in arranging a rival bhikkhunῑ ordination and 
spinning the story about Theravāda authenticity in yet another way.
Given that “Theravāda” has gained currency only since the 1950s, it is not surprising that 
the question of Theravāda authenticity arose with the recent bhikkhunῑ ordinations and not with 
the initiations of Buddhist nuns in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. As we have 
seen, no such question was evoked in debates when Sudharmachari and her descendants first 
established a new practice for Buddhist nuns. However, the introduction of Sri Lankan nuns 
(as bhikkhunῑs) has led to seemingly enduring questions about Theravāda tradition.
Contestation
The idea of a pure Theravāda tradition was used to reject bhikkhunῑ upasampadās in general and 
differentiate between lineages of Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs at the turn of the twenty-first century. 
Since then, Mahānāyakas who oppose the bhikkhunῑ ordinations have collaborated with govern­
ment officials and silmātās to exclude bhikkhunῑs’ access to certain privileges accorded to other 
monastics on the grounds that their ordinations are Mahāyāna and not Theravāda. Let us now 
turn to how some Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs used that line of reasoning to discredit others. Here 
we shall see that opponents and proponents of the bhikkhunῑ upasampadās, in contesting notions 
of Theravāda purity, were also engaged in an assertion of power.

--- PAGE 125 ---
Nirmala S. Salgado
104
In February 1997, barely two months after the Sarnath ordination, which some leading 
silmātās had witnessed, senior silmātās and monks held a nationwide meeting in Sri Lanka to 
discuss the possibility of holding a bhikkhunῑ upasampadā there. A silmātā who had been encour­
aged to attend the meeting told me that “the Indian [Sarnath] ordination was Mahāyāna and 
that it would [now] be possible to establish the Theravāda ordination [instead] in Sri Lanka.” 
Sumangala, upon accepting an invitation to be president of the newly established Sri Lanka 
Bhikkhunῑ Re-awakening Organization (SLBRO), immediately organized a bhikkhunῑ training 
program near Dambulla. Having observed the Sarnath ordination and witnessed two decades 
of dispute about the possibility of a Theravāda bhikkhunῑ upasampadā, senior monastics at the 
training program vociferously affirmed the Theravāda authenticity of their prospective bhikkhunῑ 
ordination. By July 1997, twenty-six silmātās had been ordained as novice nuns (sāmaṇer ı̄s), with 
the intention that they receive the upasampadā in Sri Lanka. One sāmaṇer ı̄ training at the center 
that year buttressed claims to Theravāda authenticity in her upcoming upasampadā by stating, 
“It is the Theravāda upasampadā of Lanka that we are trying to establish, not the Mahāyāna. 
This [Theravāda upasampadā] is found nowhere else in the world.” Evoking a Theravāda ideal 
about rooting the sāsana in the country, Sumangala announced that he planned to hold the 
initial ordination “on Sri Lankan soil.” In doing so, he referenced the textual passage: “When 
a person born of parents who belong to Tambapaṇṇidı̄pa [Sri Lanka], enters pabbajjā [renun­
ciation/ordination] in Tambapaṇṇidı̄pa, learns the Vinaya in Tambapaṇṇidı̄pa and recites the 
same in Tambapaṇṇidı̄pa, then will the sāsana take root in the land” (Adikaram 1953: 56). The 
romantic trope of a patch of virtuous soil grounding a Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑ lineage has since 
(perhaps unwittingly) been adopted in some ordination narratives, reinforcing the Theravāda 
authenticity of the ordinations organized by the Dambulla Temple in Sri Lanka (Cheng 2007: 
19; Chuehmen 2007: 30).
However, that same idea became a point of contestation for the Sarnath bhikkhunῑs who, 
having affirmed to me in 2004 (and more publicly later) the centrality of their inaugural 
ordination, argued that the text in question mandates holding ordinations for bhikkhunῑs not 
on the soil of Sri Lanka but, rather, for those born of that soil (Kusuma 2008: 18). Though 
his plans changed, and he eventually held the ordination in Bodhgaya, Sumangala was keen 
to establish the ordination in Sri Lanka and did so without delay. The bhikkhunῑs ordained 
in Sarnath helped train the twenty Sri Lankan (Dambulla) nuns for what is called the 1998 
“International Full Ordination” in Bodhgaya—a dual ordination conducted by monastics from 
the Foguangshan (FGS) monastery in Taiwan. Unlike the Sarnath nuns, who donned Korean 
robes, the Bodhgaya-Dambulla nuns wore Sri Lankan monastic attire for their ordination. A 
newspaper depiction of them in familiar Sri Lankan robes provides a striking contrast to pho­
tos of the Korean attire worn by the Sarnath bhikkhunῑs that had appeared the previous year 
(“Bak Pasalosvaka”; “The Ordination”). Soon after their international ordination, the Bodhgaya 
bhikkhunῑs traveled to Sarnath, where, led by Sri Lankan monks and the Sarnath bhikkhunῑs, they 
processed to a full-moon house (Sinh: pōyagē) to partake in a subsequent ritual, which some have 
called a second, or “Theravāda,” upsampadā. Both the Sarnath ordination conducted by Koreans 
and the Bodhgaya ordination conducted by Chinese monastics followed the Dharmaguptaka 
Vinaya. Yet monastics ordained at the latter have often insisted on the Theravāda connection 
with China, not Korea, since Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs are recorded as having been the first to 
ordain Chinese nuns, in the fifth century ce. That the Chinese ordination lineage had spread 
to other countries, including Korea, was of little import to them. Opponents of the bhikkhunῑ 
ordinations voiced their criticisms of both the Sarnath and the Bodhgaya ordinations, parroting 
arguments that had been bruited about Sri Lanka over the previous two decades. Whereas some 
arguments reiterated variations of the old debate about the impossibility of resuscitating a lost

--- PAGE 126 ---
Tradition
105
bhikkhunῑ tradition (in creating new Theravāda bhikkhunῑs from no Theravāda bhikkhunῑs), oth­
ers raised objections to an ordination ritual necessitating the bhikkhunῑs’ adoption of Mahāyāna 
robes and disciplinary precepts and the use of a language considered foreign to Theravāda. 
Among some silmātās and monks, the idea of Theravāda had become important as a criterion 
for excluding Sri Lankan nuns as bhikkhunῑs altogether. Among Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics, 
that same idea was used to reject the Sarnath ordination as Mahāyāna and establish their own 
seniority among Theravāda bhikkhunῑs (Salgado 2013: 153–159).
Soon after their ordination, the Sarnath bhikkhunῑs, who had to remain in India for some 
years, drew fire not just from silmātās and oppositional monks but also from Bodhgaya-
Dambulla monastics. Some of the criticisms—such as that all the Sarnath bhikkhunῑs had 
disrobed and had broken a contractual agreement to remain for five years in India before 
returning—were patently untrue. Without a spokesperson for them in Sri Lanka, all kinds 
of rumors swirled about them. My concern here is not to adjudicate the putative “facts” 
of the situation, but rather to highlight that some of the most trenchant criticisms of the 
Sarnath ordination were disseminated by monastics associated with Bodhgaya-Dambulla, 
who sought to establish their bhikkhunῑ lineage as the only authentically Theravāda one. 
Their promotion of the Bodhgaya-Dambulla ordinations circulated through multiple news 
networks in Sri Lanka, as well as through a pamphlet, Higher Ordination and Bhikkhunῑ Order 
in Sri Lanka, written by Bhadra, who had first been ordained at Sarnath but had had to leave 
India prematurely because of health issues. After returning to Sri Lanka, she was accepted for 
training at Dambulla and reordained there. Even though bhikkhunῑ ordinations of Sri Lankan 
nuns outside the Bodhgaya-Dambulla group may be traced to a Chinese ordination lineage, 
Bhadra’s pamphlet, (whose contents have been disseminated well beyond Sri Lanka), empha­
sized the Theravāda authenticity of the Bodhgaya-Dambulla ordinations alone while drawing 
attention to the Mahāyāna character of the other bhikkhunῑ ordinations. Referring to a 1988 
ordination of Sri Lankan nuns in Los Angeles, Bhadra stated that “those nuns were ordained 
by bhikkhunῑs in Taiwan. But they were not accept[ed] as bhikkhunῑs in Sri Lanka because 
Taiwan is a Mahāyāna country” (2001: 25). Furthermore, stating that the Sarnath ordination 
was “according to the Korean tradition,” she drew attention to her own Dambulla ordina­
tion: “When the Bhikkhunῑ Order was re-established according to the Theravāda tradition at 
Dambulla, I … followed the procedure to receive the Higher Ordination in the presence of 
the Sri Lankan bhikkhu[s] [and] bhikkhunῑs according to the Theravāda Tradition” (29). Here 
we see how the use of “Theravāda” has effectively become a standard for validating some 
ordinations and not others.
The Bodhgaya bhikkhunῑs returned to Dambulla within a few weeks of their 1998 ordina­
tion and ordained the sāmaṇerı̄s who had trained with them there. This was the first of three 
higher ordinations held in Dambulla that year. Invitations to apply for the training and the 
ordination, sent to silmātās throughout the country, served to highlight the Dambulla training 
center and its new initiatives (“Meheṇi Sasna”). Subsequent Dambulla upasampadās, held at least 
once a year, helped publicize the establishment of the Bodhgaya-Dambulla bhikkhunῑ lineage 
“on Sri Lankan soil,” thereby affirming it as Theravāda. News of the ordinations appeared in 
the national newspapers and on TV. The 2007 inauguration of a private radio channel oper­
ated by the Dambulla Temple further assisted in spreading the word throughout the country. 
Bhikkhunῑs ordained in Dambulla returned to their home communities in festive processions 
organized by household supporters, thus publicizing their bhikkhunῑ upasampadās in their imme­
diate neighborhoods. The relatively rapid consecration of new pōyagēs at numerous bhikkhunῑ 
hermitages throughout the country facilitated their attendance at rituals considered obligatory 
for fully ordained monastics.7 Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics’ activities left little doubt among

--- PAGE 127 ---
Nirmala S. Salgado
106
prospective bhikkhunῑs and their supportive householders that it was possible for Sri Lankan 
nuns to become Theravāda bhikkhunῑs.
Some senior monks who had officiated at the Bodhgaya ordination and initially participated 
in the Dambulla ordinations began to notice how the exclusivist Theravāda rhetoric coming 
from Dambulla rendered their bhikkhunῑ upasampadās increasingly indigenous (Sinh: dēśῑya) to 
Sri Lanka. In an effort to recognize the international character of bhikkhunῑ ordinations, they 
backed away from participation in the Dambulla ordinations and responded to those ordinations 
by bringing together Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs from the Korean (Sarnath) and Chinese (Bodhgaya) 
ordination lineages. In 2000, after a fifty-three-day training period at the FGS headquarters in 
Taiwan, twenty Sri Lankan nuns wearing Sri Lankan monastic attire received the ordination 
with the assistance of Sarnath bhikkhunῑs (Chuehmen 2007: 30). In doing so, they initiated a 
Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑ lineage of nuns (henceforth the Sarnath-Taiwan-Neugala or S-T-Neugala 
lineage) that was connected to both Korean and Chinese monastics, some of whom continued 
to train and ordain bhikkhunῑs, at the Neugala training center in Sri Lanka. In 2007, bhikkhunῑs 
at Neugala began to hold annual upasampadās, and they have since continued to maintain close 
ties with monastics from both Sarnath and Taiwan (an FGS monastic served as the preceptor 
in their ordination ceremony as recently as 2012). Further consolidation of the Korean and 
Taiwanese bhikkhunῑ lineages in Sri Lanka occurred in 2003, when one ordination including 
bhikkhunῑs from both Korea and Taiwan was held at the temple of  Talalle Dhammaloka (a monk 
who had officiated at the Bodhgaya ordination), and another was held later in Anurādhapura 
by S-T-Neugala and FGS bhikkhunῑs.
Monks and nuns have offered divergent slants on the Sarnath and Bodhgaya bhikkhunῑ 
ordinations. In the early years after the ordinations, when Sumangala had barred Bodhgaya-
Dambulla bhikkhunῑs from participating in certain rituals with the S-T-Neugala bhikkhunῑs 
on the grounds of their Mahāyāna difference, nuns spoke to me of tension among leading 
bhikkhunῑs, inclining them to prefer one ordination lineage to another. More recently, I learned 
that silmātās who had trained with one teacher-monk for decades were admonished not to take 
the Dambulla upasampadā, since, in order to take part, they would have to abandon their men­
tor-monk and acknowledge a new teacher in Sumangala. Criticisms of the Sarnath ordination, 
together with those of the S-T-Neugala lineage, persisted for some time. Bodhgaya-Dambulla 
bhikkhunῑs claimed that the latter ordinations (unlike theirs) were Mahāyāna. Meanwhile, oppos­
ing silmātās and monks refused to recognize any Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑ upasampadās, because of 
such upasampadās’ supposedly Mahāyāna antecedents. They argued that the (Mahāyāna) Sarnath 
ordination was a failure, as it appeared to have generated no lineage and that the Bodhgaya-
Dambulla ordinations (also allegedly Mahāyāna) were led by a suspect and outcaste monk from 
the Asgiriya chapter, whom they accused of money laundering. As a monk I recently inter­
viewed intimated, “Mahāyāna” in Sri Lanka had effectively become a label for any behavior 
that Buddhists there considered immoral or unacceptable.
Today, the notion of Theravāda as a marker that differentiates correct Sri Lankan Buddhist 
practice from the unacceptable Mahāyāna still carries weight among those refusing to 
acknowledge the (Theravāda) bhikkhunῑ ordinations of Sri Lankan nuns. Interestingly, some­
time after their inaugural ordinations, the Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics changed their tune; 
they began to collaborate with S-T-Neugala monastics. When we consider that tradition 
“is a name for an embodied debate in which opposing moral claims about what counts as 
religion, orthodoxy and truth are authoritatively … fought out” (Abeysekara 2002: 175), 
we begin to understand how claims about an authentic Theravāda lineage tradition, though 
made by monastics associated with the early Bodhgaya-Dambulla bhikkhunῑ ordinations, had 
lost currency by 2019.

--- PAGE 128 ---
Tradition
107
Power
Opponents of the bhikkhunῑ ordinations have sought to assert their power by questioning the 
Theravāda “validity” of bhikkhunῑ ordinations. Questions of power, embedded as they are in 
relationships among Buddhist monastics, are intrinsic to the renunciant everyday of nuns as 
well as to a discursive tradition (Salgado 2013: 185–210; Salgado 2017, 2019). I now focus 
more closely on the Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics who had initially planned to articulate an 
exclusive claim to a Theravāda bhikkhunῑ ordination lineage, contrasting their ordinations with 
those of the S-T-Neugala bhikkhunῑs, and on how they reconstructed their initial views about 
“Theravāda” and “Mahāyāna” as they began to confront a more formidable opponent: the 
state. As is well known, no state with a Theravāda Buddhist majority has officially recognized 
Theravāda bhikkhunῑs. In the late 1990s senior scholar-monks in Sri Lanka announced their 
nationwide opposition to the ordinations of Sri Lankan nuns, informing the country’s president 
of their disapproval and arguing that, “in the absence of a Bhikkhunῑ Order in any Theravāda 
Buddhist country, … no woman could be ordained as a Bhikkhunῑ nor a higher ordination … 
given” (“Mahanayake Theras”). The Sri Lankan government has remained consistent in publicly 
rejecting the Sri Lankan (Theravāda) bhikkhunῑs. Nevertheless, government officials have issued 
NICs and passports to some bhikkhunῑs, effectively, if perhaps unwittingly, recognizing nuns as 
bhikkhunῑs. Leading monks and silmātās who insist that a Theravāda bhikkhunῑ ordination is 
impossible have persistently questioned the practice of issuing NICs to bhikkhunῑs. How and 
why the Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics insisted on invoking a Theravāda mandate exclusively 
for their bhikkhunῑ ordinations soon after the inaugural ordinations—and later backed away from 
making such a claim—speaks to the place of “Theravāda” in a discursive tradition.
Monks are generally well positioned to confer the upasampadā on nuns in a single ordi­
nation ceremony and without the presence of bhikkhunῑs (Bodhi 2010: 120; Anālayo 2017: 
264–265). In Sri Lanka the consistent training of sāmaṇerı̄s and their dual ordination began 
at two centers: Dambulla (in 1998) and Neugala (in 2007). Some monks at other monastic 
centers sought the assistance of Bodhgaya-Dambulla bhikkhunῑs and S-T-Neugala bhikkhunῑs 
for the training and dual ordination of nuns at their home temples. Since the early 2000s, 
Sumangala had forbidden Bodhgaya-Dambulla bhikkhunῑs from participating in specific ritu­
als with bhikkhunῑs from another lineage tradition. He hardly expected Bodhgaya-Dambulla 
bhikkhunῑs to begin training sāmaṇerı̄s who had no plans to train and ordain in Dambulla. But 
a few such bhikkhunῑs, either ignoring his misgivings or due to a miscommunication, proceeded 
to do so. In one instance, Bodhgaya-Dambulla bhikkhunῑs who trained and ordained nuns (ini­
tially unbeknownst to Sumangala) were temporarily rejected from the Dambulla organization 
of bhikkhunῑs. Sumangala, displeased that they had not consulted him in advance, was disturbed 
by what he perceived as their participation in an ordination that was supposedly held to accom­
modate the wish of a foreign donor.8 Interestingly, those Dambulla bhikkhunῑs were rebuked 
not for associating with a non-Theravāda or “Mahāyāna” ordination (even though the donor 
came from what might be considered a Mahāyāna country) but, rather, for neglecting to com­
municate with Sumangala and thus not acknowledging his authority and for engaging in what 
he viewed as a mercenary enterprise. Two later events attest to his downplaying of differences 
with the S-T-Neugala monastics—events that were to lead to a rapprochement between the 
Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics and others that might have been inconceivable earlier.
Some years after the establishment of annual bhikkhunῑ ordinations in Dambulla, Bodhgaya-
Dambulla teachers training sāmaṇerı̄s for the annual higher ordination were confronted with 
an unforeseen complication. Just weeks before the scheduled Dambulla upasampadā, they 
observed that some sāmaṇerı̄s had not fulfilled all the qualifications for the ordination.9 Hence,

--- PAGE 129 ---
Nirmala S. Salgado
108
those sāmaṇerı̄s were informed that they were ineligible for the upasampadā. But long-term 
householder-supporters of the sāmaṇerı̄s had already made elaborate arrangements to welcome 
the new bhikkhunῑs back to their hometowns. Withholding the ordination from them would 
have resulted in disastrous consequences, compromising the authority of the venerable nuns 
in question as well as the good repute of the Dambulla bhikkhunῑ training program. As a last 
resort, monastics at Dambulla allowed the assistance of senior nuns from the S-T-Neugala 
lineage who had already trained and ordained their own sāmaṇerı̄s for the upasampadā. With 
the approval of senior Dambulla monastics, those nuns agreed to take the Dambulla sāmaṇerı̄s 
under their wing, and, after a brief training period, proceeded to ordain them. The Bodhgaya-
Dambulla monastics were grateful to the S-T-Neugala bhikkhunῑs for their assistance. Thus, 
the “Theravāda-Mahāyāna” opposition that the Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics had initially 
demarcated to maintain the purity of their lineage vis-à-vis that of the S-T-Neugala nuns 
was conveniently sidestepped to accommodate more immediate concerns and practical needs.
Another important event testifying to a rapprochement between the Bodhgaya-Dambulla 
and S-T-Neugala monastics was an ordination ceremony that took place some years after 
Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics had initiated legal proceedings against the state for its refusal 
to issue NICs to bhikkhunῑs. As a young woman, the ordinand had had close connections with 
Tooth Temple mahānāyakas. Kusuma served as a preceptor for the ordination, which included 
bhikkhunῑs from the S-T-Neugala and Bodhgaya-Dambulla lineages as well as monks from 
Asgiriya and Malwatta. Though the ordination was not conducted at Dambulla, it was graced by 
the presence of Sumangala—in itself a statement of incipient reconciliation between Bodhgaya 
and S-T-Neugala monastics. Consequently, it made waves among bhikkhunῑs from both lineages 
who reported this to me. The new bhikkhunῑ, well positioned to question the senior Tooth 
Temple monks about their opposition to the ordination of Sri Lankan nuns, proceeded to do 
so. It is likely that Sumangala, in attending the ordination of this bhikkhunῑ, sought not just her 
support but also that of the S-T-Neugala nuns in contesting the state’s position on the NIC.
Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs who were ordained in Sarnath, Bodhgaya, and Taiwan were initially 
issued NICs stating their names and bhikkhunῑ titles. When opponents of the bhikkhunῑ ordina­
tions objected, pointing out the discrepancy in issuing government identity cards to bhikkhunῑs 
who were not recognized by the state, DBA officials, under pressure from powerful mahānāyakas, 
stopped including the title of bhikkhunῑ on NICs. Between about 2000 and 2002, bhikkhunῑs 
and their sāmaṇer ı̄s in training were generally issued silmātā titles in lieu of bhikkhunῑ ones. 
Additionally, the procedure for obtaining an NIC was made more difficult for bhikkhunῑs: as 
part of the application process, they now had to submit a written request for approval of their 
NIC to their local silmātā organization. In some cases, that meant bhikkhunῑs had to obtain the 
approval of an unknown, if not hostile, community of silmātās in order to be legitimized by 
the state. At the time of writing this chapter, a bhikkhunῑ or her sāmaṇer ı̄ pupil may receive an 
NIC (bearing a silmātā title) only if she has first obtained a letter of approval from the head 
silmātā of her district, although some bhikkhunῑs have informed me that the NIC was denied 
to them regardless. The state, together with monks who have opposed the bhikkhunῑ ordination 
and, with the assistance of silmātās, has effectively excluded Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs from receiving 
NICs on the grounds that their upasampadā is not Theravāda. That the question of the NIC 
impacts all bhikkhunῑs in the country and has not been resolved satisfactorily is likely one reason 
that Sumangala began working with the S-T-Neugala bhikkhunῑ lineage. He has also begun 
to collaborate with the monk Kirama Wimalajoti, whose bhikkhunῑ training center is led by a 
bhikkhunῑ who trained under Kusuma and received ordination in Taiwan. For Sumangala, the 
question of Theravāda authenticity has begun to focus less on denouncing competing bhikkhunῑ 
lineages and more on what the state will (not) allow. Perreira notes that, at the conference

--- PAGE 130 ---
Tradition
109
of the World Federation of Buddhists in 1950, “the unanimous decision to abandon the use 
of Hῑnayāna in favor of Theravāda … proved to be most far-reaching both as a conceptual 
tool in organizing, unifying, and simplifying the Buddhist world and for its rhetorical power 
in re-centering the very foundations of that world by effectively shifting them from India to 
[Sri] Laṅkā” (2012: 451). The upasampadās of Sri Lankan bhikkhunῑs attest to how the notion 
of Theravāda has become incorporated into the very panoply of the state.
By December 2018, bhikkhunῑs from the Dambulla and S-T-Neugala lineages had begun col­
laborating to make an appeal for the NIC. At a national meeting in March 2019, a new National 
Organization of Bhikkhunῑs was established. Unlike the previous, Dambulla-based national 
organization of bhikkhunῑs, which had included only Bodhgaya-Dambulla monastics, the new 
organization includes bhikkhunῑs who can trace their lineages to founding nuns ordained at 
Sarnath or Taiwan as well as at Bodhgaya or Dambulla. Though they still conduct their higher 
ordinations separately, the bhikkhunῑs of different lineages are slated to meet about every three 
months to discuss common concerns, including the question of the NIC. The idea of a pure 
Theravāda lineage, once a bone of contention in the lineage dispute among bhikkhunῑs, has 
become less relevant to that dispute as monastics have united to confront a state that refuses 
to legally accept their upasampadā.
Concluding remarks
The upasampadās of the late 1990s focused on ordaining Sri Lankan nuns as Theravāda 
bhikkhunῑs. One reason that Sri Lankan monastics initiated procedures for those upasampadās 
was their concern that Sri Lankan women who wished to lead the lives of nuns could not do 
so as bhikkhunῑs unless they were initiated into a Mahāyāna order and its practice. (Some Sri 
Lankan nuns were known to have already taken that route.) That the absence of a Sri Lankan 
bhikkhun ı̄ order would encourage women to “seek refuge in other faiths” was a concern the 
Cultural Affairs Minister shared publicly in 1999 (“State Will Recognize”). That may explain 
why, as one interviewee informed me, the state had issued NICs bearing the title bhikkhun ı̄ 
(until the early 2000s). The idea of what Mahāyāna is—apart from its difference from Theravāda 
and its association with East Asian Buddhism—is not self-evident. Although there have been 
misunderstandings among Sri Lankan monastics about so-called Mahāyāna beliefs and practices 
(Cheng 2007: 176–181; Salgado 2013: 267, n. 42), that has not been my concern here. Rather, 
my focus has been to underscore that the very idea of “Theravāda” and its “Mahāyāna” foil 
relates to assertions of power—and to who may authorize what can or cannot count within a 
tradition in particular contingencies. Over a century ago, without quibbling about the question 
of Theravāda or lineage continuity, the monks of the Tooth Temple authorized the inception of 
a new mode of life for nuns. Today the monks of that same temple affirm their power via the 
state by refusing to recognize bhikkhunῑs for their apparent lack of Theravāda lineage continuity.
Questions about the Theravāda authenticity of the upasampadās of bhikkhunῑs from Sri Lanka 
and other countries, such as Thailand and Myanmar, are inevitably imbricated in the authori­
tative power of monastics and the state. Such questions about power, intrinsic to religion in 
general, test the very limits of tradition while engendering new possibilities in the practice 
of Buddhist nuns. A Sri Lankan monk recently shared with me his thoughts about the use of 
“tradition” in reference to the bhikkhunῑ upasampadā. He explained that, while one could raise 
questions about Theravāda purity in contesting ordination procedures, and lineage continu­
ities, the evocation of tradition (sampradāya) in debates about bhikkhunῑ upasampadās, was but 
a pretext. He saw no point in the scattershot arguments for and against the upasampadā that 
appeal to (Theravāda) tradition. He referred to the Kālāma Sutta stating: “The Buddha said that

--- PAGE 131 ---
Nirmala S. Salgado
110
one should not chase after tradition. What has happened is that we are stuck in ‘tradition.’ … 
There would be no problem [Sinh: gäṭaluwak] if people were to think about what they really 
want, without spinning the tale of tradition. One has to eradicate that [tradition] from one’s 
thinking.” Tradition, as he suggests, is hardly traditional.
Notes
	 1	I am grateful to Paul Westman, Indira Salgado, Carol Anderson, Joseph Walser, Robert Launay, Martie 
Reineke, Stephen Berkwitz, Ashley Thompson, Daya Wickramasinghe, and Robert Green for their 
assistance. A 2014 Robert H. N. Ho Collaborative Research Grant, a 2017 Augustana College Faculty 
Research Grant, and a 2017 David E. Nudd Fund Grant contributed toward funding my research.
	 2	By “monastics” I mean Buddhist monks and nuns with or without the higher ordination. I have not used 
honorifics and titles (e.g., Thera, bhikkhu, bhikkhunῑ etc.) for monastic names. I have also not used diacritics 
for names of individuals. No disrespect is intended.
	 3	When I speak of “Theravāda countries” in general terms, I do so in the conventional sense accepted 
by scholars and practitioners today, even though such nomenclature is imperfect. By “nuns” I refer to 
bhikkhunῑs as well as female renunciants who do not have the upasampadā.
	 4	Silmātās are celibate Buddhist nuns and usually live together in community; however, they differ from 
bhikkhunῑs as they are not fully ordained. Although many bhikkhunῑs today were once silmātās, there are 
significant numbers of silmātās who do not wish to become bhikkhunῑs. For more on why this may be the 
case, see Salgado (2013: 180).
	 5	In such contexts, “Buddhism” may be understood as being opposed to other religions, such as “Christianity,” 
whereas the more recent nomenclature of “Theravāda” is defined by its “Mahāyāna” other.
	 6	Bartholomeusz observes that Sudharmachari was not the first Sri Lankan Buddhist nun. However, the 
initiation and religious practice of Sudharmachari were notably different from those of the earlier nuns.
	 7	The year 2002 saw the completion of nine pōyagēs built throughout the country exclusively for the use of 
Bodhgaya-Dambulla bhikkhunῑs. By 2017, a total of sixteen pōyagēs had been constructed for them, thus 
putting into practice Sumangala’s plans for establishing the ordination “on Sri Lankan soil” within a very 
short time after the initial Bodhgaya ordinations. By 2019 there were eighteen pōyagēs for Bodhgaya-
Dambulla bhikkhunῑs.
	 8	In this instance, the foreign donor had requested an opportunity to observe a bhikkhunῑ ordination while 
visiting Sri Lanka.
	 9	Interviewees informed me that these were minor requirements that may not have been adequately com­
municated to the sāmaṇerı̄s.
References
Abeysekara, A. 2002. Colors of the Robe: Religion, Identity, and Difference. Columbia: University of South 
Carolina Press.
Abeysekara, A. 2018. “Review of Schober, J. and Collins, S. (eds), Theravāda Buddhist Encounters with 
Modernity.” Journal of Buddhist Ethics 25: 333–370.
Abeysekara, A. 2019. “Protestant Buddhism and ‘Influence’: The Temporality of a Concept.” Qui Parle 28 
(1): 1–75.
Adikaram, E.W. 1953. Early History of Buddhism in Ceylon; or, “State” of Buddhism in Ceylon as Revealed by the 
Pāli Commentaries of the 5th Century A.D. Colombo, Sri Lanka: M.D. Gunasena.
Anālayo. 2017. “Bhikkhunı̄ Ordination.” In Vinaya Studies, 221–307. Taipei: Dharma Drum.
Asad, T. 1993. Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and Islam. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Asad, T. 2015. “Thinking about Tradition, Religion, and Politics in Egypt Today.” Critical Inquiry 42 (1): 
166–214.
‘Bak Pasalosvaka Poya: Buddha Gaya Upasampada Ceremony.’ Daily News (Colombo), April 11, 1998, p. 19.
Bartholomeusz, T.J. 1994. Women under the Bō Tree: Buddhist Nuns in Sri Lanka. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bhadra. 2001. Higher Ordination and Bhikkhuni Order in Sri Lanka. Dehiwala, Sri Lanka: Sridevi.
Bloss, L.W. 1987. “The Female Renunciants of Sri Lanka: The Dasasilmattawa.” Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 10 (1): 7–31.

--- PAGE 132 ---
Tradition
111
Bodhi, B. 2010. “The Revival of Bhikkhunı̄ Ordination in the Theravāda Tradition.” In Dignity and 
Discipline: Reviving Full Ordination for Buddhist Nuns, eds. T. Mohr, J. Tsedroen, 99–142. Boston, Wisdom.
Carrithers, M. 1983. The Forest Monks of Sri Lanka. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Cheng, Wei-Yi. 2007. Buddhist Nuns in Taiwan and Sri Lanka: A Critique of the Feminist Perspective. London: 
Routledge.
Chuehmen. 2007. “The Right to Be Ordained as Bhikṣuṇs.” Unpublished Manuscript.
Gombrich, R.F. 1988. Theravāda Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benares to Modern Colombo. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Holt, J.C., 2017. Theravada Traditions: Buddhist Ritual Cultures in Contemporary Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka, 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Ito, Tomomi 2012. “Questions of Ordination Legitimacy for Newly Ordained Theravāda Bhikkhunı̄ in 
Thailand.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 43 (1): 55–76.
Kawanami, H. 2007. “The Bhikkhunı̄ Ordination Debate: Global Aspirations, Local Concerns, with Special 
Emphasis on the Views of the Monastic Community in Burma.” Buddhist Studies Review 24 (2): 226–244.
Kusuma. 2008. “How I Became a Bhikkhunı̄.” Sakyadhita International Association of Buddhist Women 16 (2): 
16–18.
Kusuma. 2012. Braving the Unknown Summit: The Autobiography of Ven. Bhikkhuni Dr. Kolonnawe Kusuma. 
Colombo, Sri Lanka: Akna.
‘Mahanayake Theras Disapprove Bhikkhuni Order.’ Sunday Observer (Colombo), April 12, 1998, p. 12.
‘Meheṇi sasna yaḷi sirilak pihiṭa vῡ vagayi!’ (The Dispensation of Ordained Women Is Established again in 
Sri Lanka!). Dinamiṇa (Colombo), March 12, 1998, p. 15.
Mrozik, S. 2014. ““We Love Our Nuns”: Affective Dimensions of the Sri Lankan Bhikkhunı̄ Revival.” 
Journal of Buddhist Ethics 21: 57–95.
‘The Ordination of Dasa Sil Matas.’ Daily News (Colombo), Jan. 23, 1997, pp. 16–18.
Perreira, T.L. 2012. “Whence Theravāda? The Modern Genealogy of an Ancient Term.” In How Theravāda 
Is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, eds. P. Skilling, J.A. Carbine, C. Cicuzza, S. Pakdeekham, 443–
571. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm.
Salgado, N.S. 2013. Buddhist Nuns and Gendered Practice: In Search of the Female Renunciant. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Salgado, N.S. 2017. “Tradition, Power, and Community among Buddhist Nuns in Sri Lanka.” Journal of 
Buddhist Ethics 24: 369–399.
Salgado, N.S. 2019. “On the Question of “Discipline” (Vinaya) and Nuns in Theravāda Buddhism.” Religions 
10 (98): 1–23.
‘Sasana History Made at Sravasti.’ Daily News (Colombo), Dec. 21, 1996, p. 20.
Scott, D. 1994. Formations of Ritual: Colonial and Anthropological Discourses on the Sinhala Yaktovil. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Seeger, M. 2008. “The Bhikkhunı̄-Ordination Controversy in Thailand.” Journal of the International Association 
of Buddhist Studies 29 (1): 155–183.
‘State Will Recognize Bhikkhuni Order Only If Mahanayakas Approve.’ The Island (Colombo), July 1, 
1999., p. 2.

--- PAGE 133 ---


--- PAGE 134 ---
PART II
Practices/Persons

--- PAGE 135 ---


--- PAGE 136 ---
115
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-10
7
MERIT
Ritual giving and its cultural mediations
Juliane Schober
Among Burmese Buddhists, and indeed throughout the Theravāda world, an invitation to 
participate in rituals is often followed by a common intention, “let’s make merit” (B.: kutho 
ya-aun). Making merit is a central feature in the repertoire of Theravāda Buddhist practices 
that gives expression to the religious agency of laypeople seeking ethical rewards for virtu­
ous deeds in order to ensure prosperity in this and future lives. Especially merit-making that 
accrues from the performance of generosity, a virtue that according to the Vessantara Jataka, the 
future Buddha perfected in his penultimate life, is a constitutive element in the social reality 
of Theravāda Buddhist communities.
This chapter explores the work of merit and the practices of generosity (dāna) in cultural 
contexts of Theravāda civilizations. I argue that merit-making is not merely about good or bad 
ethics. Rather, it is best understood as a social practice, discourse, and cultural mediation about 
ethical conduct and giving. In the Theravāda-dominated countries of Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, 
Cambodia, and Sri Lanka, where Theravadins constitute a majority of the population, merit-
making and the ethics of giving are integral to the production of social capital, authority, and 
hegemony. In historical and traditional contexts, merit-making practices often involve giving 
and produce social hierarchies. Merit-making communities sharing in such ritual performances 
therefore live within a field of merit or social power. As promising career paths beyond the 
saṅgha become increasingly attainable for young people in contemporary Myanmar, merit-
making practices are also changing. Monks (saṅgha) are no longer the sole sources of merit for 
laypeople, as new forms of giving are becoming popular among socially engaged Buddhists 
and others whose religious practice emphasizes the welfare of others (P.: parahita). While the 
emphasis on parahita practices is still quite recent in Myanmar, making merit by serving others 
is a more established practice elsewhere in the Theravāda world where modernity has already 
fundamentally restructured social relationships and mobility.
Yet defining just what merit is has been challenging. In conversations, the Pāli scholar Steven 
Collins declared provocatively that merit (P.: kusala, B.: kutho), despite its frequent mention in 
Pāli and vernacular Buddhist literature, could not be seen, had no material reality, and therefore 
did not exist. My essay concludes with a discussion of previous explanations of merit-making 
to foreground merit’s socially mediated qualities over its material forms. In contrast to earlier 
research on Buddhist altruism and on the material value of the gift and its circulation, this

--- PAGE 137 ---
Juliane Schober
116
chapter looks at merit-making as the performance of ethical discourse practices. Following Talal 
Asad (1993, 35), I argue that merit-making is central to Theravāda societies because its perfor­
mance creates the very conditions for experiencing Buddhist truths. Indeed, merit-making as 
ethical discourse creates social capital and institutions that facilitate the mediation of cultural 
flows through social networks that embody authority and define authenticity.
The perfection of giving in the Vessantara Jātaka
The most prevalent form of merit-making is the performance of generosity through acts of 
giving. Making merit through acts of generosity is a prominent motif in narratives that extol the 
virtue of giving. Perhaps most popular among them is the Vessantara Jātaka in which the future 
Buddha perfects the virtue of generosity (dāna). This story, which is the last of the Ten Great 
Jātakas, tells the penultimate life of the future Buddha as the Prince Vessantara. Well known 
in many versions throughout the Theravāda world, the story is a significant part of Theravāda 
moral knowledge and offers a paradigm for lay Buddhist practice as countless versions of the 
story share important descriptions of the performance of giving. Heir to a prosperous kingdom, 
Vessantara excels in giving away the sources of his power and the people most dear to him: 
the white elephant that ensures the rain and the prosperity of the kingdom, his horses, and 
kingdom and, living as an ascetic in the forest, his wife and his children. The performance of 
extreme generosity caused the hero to lose his royal power, his kingdom, and even his wife and 
children. And yet, all these are restored to him when the villains in the story reveal themselves 
to be not incarnations of evil and avarice they appear to be but, in fact, divine beings whose 
interventions merely enable Vessantara to perfect his quest for generosity. In the end, the hero 
returns from his exile in the forest to regain his family and kingdom.
The Vessantara Jātaka as Buddhist literature offers at once an invitation to contemplate gen­
erosity as moral virtue and as epic, tragedy, comedy, melodrama, and even utopia, all as com­
mentaries on the hero’s quest for ethical perfection. For Steven Collins (2016), the Vessantara 
Jātaka has immense literary value as it offers many ways of reading and recounting the perfection 
of generosity and illustrates the interpretive range narrative harbors for storytellers and audi­
ences alike. Episodes of this jātaka story are performed in public recitations, in entertaining and 
even buffonic theater routines (Bowie 2017), depicted in temple paintings and in manuscripts 
(Handlin 2016), and enacted in rituals and processions (Lefferts and Cate 2016). These examples 
show that cultural understandings of ethical values like merit-making, giving, and generosity not 
only inhabit the religious imaginations of Theravāda Buddhists in significant ways but that they 
also are subject to unending iterations and interpretations in a variety of social contexts. The 
practice of giving is mediated and refracted in all kinds of social, ritual, and narrative contexts.
Making merit
Living an ethical life is the foundation for acquiring merit. While monks should not be 
attached to the rewards merit will bring in the future, for laypeople, the accumulation of merit 
over time ensures one’s rebirth in an abode free of suffering and misfortune; empowers one 
to obtain a prosperous, peaceful life; and ultimately leads to insight into enlightenment. In 
ethnographic terms, individual merit-making is based on the performance of Theravāda ethi­
cal values, such as observing the Eightfold Noble Path that leads to the cessation of suffering 
and requires practicing right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, 
right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. Merit can also be gained by venerating 
icons like images, relics, stūpas, and other material forms that embody the Buddha’s teachings

--- PAGE 138 ---
Merit
117
(Dhamma). In fact, a donor of a Buddha image, stūpa or other object that is a perpetual source 
of merit for others is recognized in Burmese as Owner of Merit (kutho shin), the highest title 
a layperson may achieve.
Merit further accrues from venerating sources of merit like one’s teachers, parents, and 
accomplished, disciplined monks whose virtuous practice has led them to become a source of 
merit for others. In other words, being mindful of one’s social position and acting respectfully 
towards others, in short, being a good person, is in and of itself a meritorious life. Inasmuch 
as Buddhists are encouraged to create sources of merit that reflect their own good deeds and 
offer to others the opportunities for merit-making, people are discouraged from being “greedy” 
about merit-making by resisting to share such deeds with others. Refusing help when cooking 
meals for monks is one example that illustrates such greed. Similarly, making merit for purely 
social or political reasons without some degree of personal sacrifice is also frowned on. Yet, 
no one would deny that true generosity simply engenders and accrues merit for the donor, 
regardless of whether they intended the outcome.
All Buddhist rituals involve acts of communal giving by donors and their communities. 
Ritual giving is a uniquely structured mode of interaction in Theravāda cultures and, in Marcel 
Mauss’s terms (2002), a “social fact” shaped by the flow of donations and their distribution 
to rightful recipients. The forms of merit-making that are socially most prominent center on 
the performance of giving as a demonstration of one’s generosity. Laypeople who provide for 
the needs of a monk, such as the items required for his ordination or for his daily livelihood 
earn the title of “taga” (donor). Frequently, this term designates an ongoing relationship with 
a particular monk whom the donor regularly supports. Such relationships are significant since 
Theravāda monks, unlike monks in other Buddhist traditions, may not provide for their own 
livelihood and thus depend on donations from their lay supporters. In contrast to other Buddhist 
traditions, donations to maintain monastic livelihoods are a central requirement in Theravāda 
practice where monks depend on dāna for their subsistence.
All forms of merit-making rituals, regardless of the scale of performance, involving regular 
donations of food to monks or be they major ritual events, include an official act of giving by 
a donor or group of donors and an acknowledgment of accepting donations by members of the 
saṅgha. The ritual structure of giving underscores the ethical value attached to lay generosity 
and its significance in perpetuating the Buddhist dispensation (sāsana). Monks who practice 
with discipline and in accordance with the Vinaya are a source of merit to lay donors seeking 
to make merit. Donations to monks are given in a proscribed manner and donations are pub­
licly validated by those present. For the ritual exchange to be valid, Burmese lay donors and 
monks must formally acknowledge both the gift and its acceptance. Public validation of the 
gift has important legal ramifications for Theravādin monks who depend, at least in principle, 
entirely on lay support for their livelihoods. Failure to witness the public acts of giving and 
accepting can imply an improper donation that can compromise the status of the donor and of 
the recipient monk who can be accused of having committed theft, a grave infraction (pārājika) 
against Vinaya rules that can lead to expulsion from the saṅgha.
Burmese Buddhists often say that the material value of the gift is less important than the 
future rewards merit-making generates. They mostly focus on indications that the intentions 
of the donor’s generosity are genuine. A gift given with pure intentions will bring the most 
merit to the donor, regardless of its material value. Many considerations shape how much 
merit donors may gain on account of their generosity. For instance, a modest gift by someone 
with little means but pure intentions given to a highly deserving recipient may bring much 
greater rewards in the future than gifts donated by a wealthy person who lacks pure intentions. 
Alternatively, donations given to unworthy monks who do not practice monastic discipline

--- PAGE 139 ---
Juliane Schober
118
(vinaya) do not generate merit for the donor. A wealthy person is expected to give more than a 
poor person. The performance of religious, ethical, and cultural values, rather than the material 
value of the gift, determines the success and social benefit of merit-making.
Sharing one’s merit with others at the conclusion of rituals multiplies its benefits for the 
donor and for those who share in his or her meritorious deed (Schober 1996). Sharing of merit 
ensures a prosperous society in the future and ideally moves donors and their dependents toward 
an eventual transcendence of this world through enlightenment. At the end of such rituals, all 
good deeds are enumerated, along with the lay donors who contributed them. Affirmations 
are recited for all people who have contributed to this deed, all who are present and rejoice 
in this generosity, and finally all sentient beings at all levels of existence, while bells and gongs 
are rung and chants of  “thadu, thadu, thadu” (well done) carry the news of good deeds even to 
those who are not present at the places where merit was made. Those faraway sentient beings 
and, ultimately, all beings at every level of existence will be able to rejoice in the merit made, 
because all rituals end with sharing merit throughout the Buddhist universe so that “all beings 
may attain enlightenment eventually.”
Merit is conceptualized as an immaterial return for performing good deeds that translate 
into blessings and social capital for those who give freely and generously. Selflessness in the 
performance of generosity is important to the recognition of the social capital merit brings 
to donors. Those who are seen to be giving merely because they seek religious and social 
benefits are rumored to be actually selfish and greedy. For that reason, giving freely without 
attachment and sharing with others the labor and benefits of performing meritorious rituals 
are important elements in merit-making rituals. Although giving an anonymous gift is not a 
common practice, “robes falling from the sky” (mo-bo-cha kahtein) is one way of donating robes 
to a monk at the end of the Buddhist lent that exemplifies giving without attachment to the 
rewards of making merit. A donor will seek out a monk—any monk—to present robes to him 
to demonstrate having no attachment to one’s merit.
Merit derived from the practice of generosity will ensure prosperity and well-being in the 
future. Wealth and status are understood as the fruition of meritorious deeds in the past and 
therefore are seen as manifesting status, prestige, and power in the present. Who can engage 
in merit-making is determined by one’s status and power in the present, of past moral action 
and future prosperity. In his essay on freedom and bondage during the Konbaung dynasty in 
seventeenth-century Burma, F. K. Lehman (1984) shows that only “free men” (B.: kun-daw) who 
are taxpaying royal subjects have the agency to make merit, a legal attribute of their status as 
subjects of the king. Indentured people, pagoda slaves, and members of a household cannot make 
merit on their own accord. They cannot sponsor donations to monks, monastic buildings, or 
Buddhist images. They depend on their patrons, heads of households, and “owners of the merit” 
(B.: kutho shin) for opportunities to contribute to merit-making rituals. Because royal subjects 
provide members of their households with opportunities to make merit, household members, 
reminiscent of citizens of the state under the military junta during the 1990s, are perpetually 
indebted and obligated to their “owners of merit” (kutho shin), to whom they owe gratitude 
and allegiance for providing opportunities for merit-making and, with that, opportunities for 
a prosperous future. Hence, participating in another household’s merit-making activities creates 
indebtedness to the owner of that merit, illustrating the hegemonic expressions of merit-making 
rituals and the social hierarchies that inevitably emerge.
Theravādins will perform merit-making rituals on behalf of their departed relatives. Burmese 
laypeople will commemorate anniversaries of departed parents and relatives by making dona­
tions to monks in order to make merit for them now that the departed reside in another 
realm where they may be unable to make merit. Not knowing whether their rebirth led to

--- PAGE 140 ---
Merit
119
realms of suffering, perhaps in the form of hungry ghosts who inhabit liminal spaces, provides 
an added incentive for the surviving family members to make merit in ritual settings. During 
the dedication of merit at the conclusion of the ritual, the donor will state their wish that the 
merit from this ritual will accrue to their departed relatives.
In Laos, such ritual occasions are marked by feeding the dead, especially ghosts who may 
suffer from hunger because they are unable to feed themselves in their new form of rebirth. 
Patrice Ladwig (2012: 119) writes that “Buddhism plays a major role in the upkeep of these 
relationships through ritual exchanges with the dead,” who remain intrinsic to the working of 
society. For many Buddhists, the act of giving to monks is a way to feed the dead for whom 
members of the saṅgha act to transmit and transfer the merit made on their behalf (Keyes 1983; 
Ladwig 2012: 120). “The deceased are a focus of ritual attention ranging from everyday acts 
of food donations to monks to larger festivals,” Ladwig notes (2012: 120) and concludes that 
social relationships permeate the boundary between the living and the dead and that interac­
tions between the living and the deceased are embedded in “a larger ritual economy” (Ladwig 
2012: 137).
Not much can be said about Theravāda Buddhist civilizations without touching on the 
practice of generosity (dāna) as a constitutive element in a ritual economy of merit and the 
cultural hegemonies it creates within and among communities. Making merit is not only an 
ethical practice of individuals or households but figures prominently in the social life of com­
munities. An ideal Theravādin society (pativēda sāsana) envisions social life to be replete with 
countless sources of merit like monks who ideally embody enlightenment, kings who rule 
justly in accordance with the Buddha’s teachings, and ordinary people who live prosperous 
lives free from danger, calamity, war, and misfortune. Such acts of sharing the benefits of ethical 
performance with others create a field of merit where multiple sources of merit are present. 
Such conceptions account for a conceptual hierarchy of place where some locations are deemed 
more auspicious and powerful than others. These sensibilities about the presence of sources of 
merit explain why one finds small pagodas erected in seemingly out-of-the-way places, such 
as the edge of a rice field or along a forest path where people find refuge and seek to make 
merit by reciting incantations or practice meditation. Likely the most culturally persuasive 
form of merit-making is through the performance of rituals that establish communities that 
share in making and benefiting from merit and thus enact visions of an ideal society. Unlike 
other abodes of rebirth where making merit is rare, the dispensation of the Buddha (sāsana) 
affords humans many opportunities for making merit. Fields of merit can also dispel danger. 
For instance, during the Japanese occupation of Burma, residents of Mandalay sought refuge 
at Yanhkin Hill, a range of hills outside the city that is home to forest monks and Buddhist 
wizards. Its name denoted a hill free from danger.
In 1994 and again in 1996, the military junta in Myanmar enjoined the Ministry of Religious 
Affairs to orchestrate nationwide donation drives in support of the journey of the Buddha’s 
Tooth Relic from China to Burma (Schober 1997). This continuous state-sponsored merit-
making ritual was reminiscent of earlier ones performed during U Nu’s celebration of the 
2,5000th-anniversary celebration of the Buddhist dispensation. The extended journey of the 
Tooth Relic through Myanmar created multiple, overlapping, and ultimately coercive com­
munities of merit who were ritually indebted to the military regime for providing access 
for the nation to be in the presence of the Buddha’s physical remains. Crowds of Burmese 
Buddhists sought to make merit by venerating the relic and making donations to support its 
journey throughout the country. After extensive planning and orchestration by the Ministry 
of Religious Affairs and orchestrated implementation of a six-week-long procession of the 
relic and its entourage through the Burmese heartland, dāna flowed in from all sorts of social

--- PAGE 141 ---
Juliane Schober
120
groups, including wealthy individuals and collectives of civil servants and ordinary citizens. It 
financed the perpetuation of the sāsana as a national project, underscoring the religious power 
and authority of a military regime that afforded its citizen subjects the opportunity to make 
unparalleled merit by donating to the Buddha’s Tooth Relic. Even though perhaps somewhat 
hesitant to participate, most Burmese donors had little choice in evading the social pressures 
to contribute as the state newspaper listed daily the amounts and items donated and the names 
or donors. While all meritorious donations are generally publicly recorded, the daily tally 
published in the state-run newspaper revealed the political pressures particularly on people 
of social prominence to contribute to this state ritual. These included not only Burmese 
citizens, but also foreign dignitaries, embassy staff, and international organizations, along with 
non-Buddhist ethnic groups. While this national ritual accomplished several objectives for the 
military regime, it turned the nation and its territory into a field of merit for the benefit of 
its citizens, legitimated its political authority as a protector of the Buddhist religion, and dem­
onstrated the junta’s righteous Buddhist rule. The staging of this series of rituals venerating 
the presence of the Tooth Relic in Myanmar took place during a decade, the 1990s, when the 
military junta in power sought to consolidate and legitimate its power by acting as the patron 
of important Buddhist rituals. Against this coercive background, few dared to voice resistance 
and rare expressions of doubts about the authenticity of the relics were merely whispered.
Merit-making and institution building
The ethical practice of giving is at the core of Theravāda social fabric because making merit 
through ritual giving (dāna) shapes social relations. Ritual donations made to monks, ascetics, 
and other sources of merit can range in scale from local and communal levels to national ones. 
The discursive practices mediated by the performance of ethical virtue and acts of giving create 
cultural flows that lead to the establishment of merit-making communities, produce systems of 
allegiance, and form hegemonies. These flows also lead to building Buddhist institutions like 
monasteries and their networks, amplify the charismatic appeal of monks who are able to raise 
large amounts of money, and even contribute to the construction of pilgrimage sites which 
at times embody power and merit only to be abandoned as donations flow to new sources of 
merit (Schober 2001).
It is common for donations to monks, especially famous ones, to generate a secondary 
exchange in which the flow of donations (dāna) is redistributed within monastic networks. 
For instance, a kaṭhina ceremony, the giving of robes at the end of the Buddhist Lent, might 
generate many more robes than a famous monk, and even the monks in his monastery, will 
be able to use. In such cases, the surplus of donations received are then distributed to less 
wealthy monasteries affiliated with this monk. The sharing of material gifts received by monks 
and their redistribution through monastic networks can form the basis for building monastic 
institutions, for promoting the Dhamma, or for implementing a socially engaged agenda by 
supporting schools, hospitals, civil projects, relief efforts, development initiatives, and educational 
campaigns. This abundant flow of donations, in turn, mediates the charisma of monks who 
use their wealth, influence and power to build monastic institutions, branch monasteries, and 
regional, national, and even global networks of institutions and donors. Charismatic, powerful 
monks thus are significant nodes in the social flows of merit and donations. Redistribution 
of surplus donations can have a profound economic impact not just on local patterns of con­
sumption, assistance for the needy, and strengthening institutions but also on regional and even 
global networks of giving.

--- PAGE 142 ---
Merit
121
Two examples demonstrate how the mediation of merit and its circulation in networks of 
Theravāda communities produce an ethical discourse, institutions, social networks, and commu­
nities through which authority structures and the political aspirations of donors are advanced. 
Ritual donations made to monks, ascetics, and other sources of merit can range in scale from 
local and communal levels to national ones. The Mahasi Meditation Center, a transnational 
institution centered in Yangon, with branches throughout the country and even abroad, was 
established through cultural and material flows of generosity during the second half of the 
twentieth century. Its founding abbot, Bhadanta Sobhana Mahathera (1904–1982), rose to 
prominence during the 1950s with the support of Prime Minister U Nu. Eventually, his monas­
tic network grew to encompass more than three hundred meditation centers that followed his 
meditation method. A national institution, the Mahasi meditation centers came to train mostly 
urban laypeople in insight meditation techniques that certified specific levels of attainment for 
its practitioners in their quest for enlightenment. During its apex in the 1980s, the Mahasi 
meditation center network attracted middle-class meditators, many of whom were civil servants. 
After the passing of its founding abbot, disputes among his successors and rumored financial 
scandals began to undermine the reputation of the Mahasi meditation centers.
The rise to fame and influence of U Nyanissara (b. 1937), abbot of Sitagu Monastery, began 
in the early 1980s when he accepted donations to build a hospital for members of the saṅgha 
and an infrastructural project to supply clean water to hundreds of monasteries and nunneries 
on Sagaing Hill. His charisma was enhanced by his reputation as a venerated preacher who 
was then an outspoken critic of the military regime. The Sitagu Sayadaw went on to build 
a monastic university at his home monastery in Sagaing and eventually agreed to direct the 
International Theravāda Buddhist University in Yangon that previously had been under the 
Ministry of Religious Affairs. In defiance of the military dictatorship, he organized massive relief 
efforts after the Nargis cyclone in 2006 that killed and displaced more than one hundred thou­
sand people in the lower delta region. His many missionizing travels abroad included Austin, 
Texas where he built another monastic complex. More recently, he has been a supporter of 
anti-Muslim sentiments in Myanmar. In 2019, he bemoaned that the UNESCO designation of 
Bagan as a World Heritage Site placed its ancient pagodas under the influence of Muslims who, 
in his mind, had been placed in charge of these UN activities. These stories show that the cul­
tural flows mediated by merit and dāna forge close and complex connections among Buddhist 
monks, politics, and politicians, including conservative hardliners in the Union, Solidarity, and 
Development Party who support policies hostile to Muslims in Myanmar.
The reversal of the flow of donations by refusing to accept donations invokes the implo­
sion of Theravāda social orders. Strikes as the refusal of gifts comprise transgressions of the 
structures of exchange that invalidate the roles of actors within the system. The events of 
September 2007 that led to the protest movement called the “Saffron Revolution” followed an 
abrupt government decision to stop subsidies for natural gas in order to mitigate an impending 
economic crisis. This precipitated a sharp increase in fuel costs and the overall cost of living 
for most Burmese. A major uprising against military rule and these unfair economic policies 
precipitated a reversal of traditional ritual practices between the saṅgha and its lay supporters 
through which Theravāda hegemony is constituted. The effects of the state’s economic policies 
were seen as the failure of the military regime to live up to traditional Buddhist expectations 
of good governance, empowering the monks’ moral position against the government. Sporadic 
confrontations, including labor and civil rights unrests and monks clashing with local police 
escalated into a nationwide ban by monks to accept donations from members of the military 
regime or any of their family members.

--- PAGE 143 ---
Juliane Schober
122
“Turning over one’s alms bowl” (thabei’ mauk) is the Burmese idiom designating the saṅgha’s 
refusal to confer religious, social, and political legitimacy on certain lay supporters. This boycott 
is tantamount to banning from the Buddhist field of merit any lay supporter who acted to the 
detriment of the sāsana. The traditional pattern of giving to monks is disrupted and the flow 
of dāna and merit-making is stopped by a formal act of the saṅgha that is legally binding under 
monastic law (pattam nikkujjana kamma) that mandates the entire saṅgha to refuse donations from 
unworthy donors until they show remorse and apologize to the monks. Some monks stated that 
their protest marches were motivated by their desire to give voice to the economic hardship their 
lay supporters endured. Skyrocketing costs of living jeopardized the welfare of lay supporters 
and placed financial strain on some monasteries by increasing the number of poor already living 
in monastic compounds. The plight of the poor not only limited donations to monasteries but 
also became a growing economic liability for the saṅgha as an institution. Monasteries became 
a refuge for the sick, indigent, and homeless and, by default, functioned as a social safety net in 
many local communities. This traditional function of monasteries has taken on new significance 
in the context of modern, socially engaged Buddhist practices (Schober 2011).
Monks began to organize protest marches in major cities like Yangon and Mandalay and in 
provincial towns like Sittwe and Pakhokku, where influential monasteries are located. Initially, 
the columns of marching monks in Yangon were flanked by laypeople who formed a human 
chain on either side to protect them as they made their way through crowded areas, signal­
ing popular support for the courageous demonstrations of these monks. The largest protests 
occurred in Yangon in the days leading up to September 26, 2007, when close to one hun­
dred thousand people, mostly monks and nuns, marched to protest of the military junta and 
its economic policies. Across the nation, close to three hundred thousand Buddhist monks 
joined their protests and openly contested the secular power of the state over issues of social 
injustice. During the following night, the state asserted its military coercion over the moral 
claims of the saṅgha with a violent crackdown on protesters (Schober 2011). Enacting pattam 
nikkujjana kamma creates extreme social tension which community leaders and senior monks 
usually seek to de-escalate to avert violent confrontations. The power of monks made evident 
in their refusal to accept donations from members of a military regime provoked a social and 
political crisis that only underscores the centrality of giving and merit-making within the 
Theravadin social fabric.
Contemporary flows of merit-making in the service of others
Increasingly popular merit-making practices emphasize service to others (parahita). These com­
munal organizations have their historical antecedents in Myanmar’s mutual aid societies (B.: 
wunthanu) and mobilize support in response to specific humanitarian needs. In doing so, these 
aid organizations redirect the cultural flows of generosity away from traditional or charismatic 
sources of merit and toward people in need. While monks and monasteries continue to have 
a role in organizing donation collection and the distribution of aid, the ultimate recipients of 
the collected donations are laypeople in need, rather than members of the saṅgha. The practice 
of parahita therefore constitutes somewhat of a departure from traditional merit practices. Like 
vipassanā mediation, performing parahita is a distinctly contemporary practice of merit-making 
that empowers laypeople to become benefactors in the welfare of others. The practice of 
parahita approximates generalized forms of exchange that produce egalitarian social relation­
ships. Participants expect to gain merit from their contributions to social welfare, the merit 
they gain is a function of their intentions. In contrast to traditional merit-making, performing 
social welfare does not involve the saṅgha as a recipient of donations.

--- PAGE 144 ---
Merit
123
Over the past decades, Myanmar has experienced a devastating disaster in the cyclone 
Nargis and later opened up to global economic and political networks. Both of these large-
scale events have inspired a new ethic and vision for the future, especially among young people 
in Myanmar. The former has underscored the need to care for the suffering, indigent, and 
poor. The latter has allowed for the pursuit of new careers and achievements to enable people 
to make merit by serving others in need (parahita). Both of these social factors are changing 
the production, circulation, and institutionalization of merit and the ways of consuming the 
labor of merit-making. The contemporary life offers young men new opportunities and pres­
tigious career choices beyond joining traditional institutions like the saṅgha. This new reality 
inevitably threatens traditional forms of monastic authority and charisma while enabling new 
ways of making merit by mobilizing communities to directly alleviate needs of the indigent. 
Contemporary practices of giving therefore increasingly emphasize service to others in need 
(parahita). This shift in popular religious practice has an equalizing effect on the social status and 
capital of donors acting as a collectivity. This change affects fundraising strategies and the flow of 
donations to ethical causes and people in need and, ultimately, away from Buddhist institutions.
Mobilizing laypeople around the notion of selfless service appeals to a broad spectrum of 
Burmese and generates significant flows of material goods and their redistribution through 
various networks. Merit-making in the service of others can have a significant impact on 
communities in need of social welfare. For instance, many Burmese laypeople and monks 
organized donation drives to aid victims of Nargis in the aftermath of the cyclone’s devastation 
of the lower delta region of southern Burma in 2006. Altruistic giving (parahita) also inspires 
and motivates many nongovernmental aid societies that emerged in the years following this 
disaster. The Free Funeral Society began its social work in the 1990s at the initiative of a 
well-known actor, Ko Thu, who offered to provide free funerals to anyone unable to afford 
funerary services (Mulung Hsu 2016). In the years that followed, his organization expanded 
into a nationwide network that provides free funerals as well as other social services. What 
motivates these volunteers is the performance of parahita and the future rewards of merit their 
selfless labor will bring. Other social groups, including the outlawed Ma-Ba-Tha known for 
its racial, nationalist, and anti-Muslim agitations that is now known by a new name, Buddha 
Dhamma Parahita, similarly appeals to people’s desire to serve others in order to gain support 
for their agenda (International Crisis Group 2017: 17). Local chapters organize lay supporters to 
provide all types of social services to other Buddhists in their communities and see themselves 
as advocating especially the rights of women, thus demonstrating love for religion and country 
and dedication to parahita (Walton et al. 2015).
A third example of performing parahita blurs distinctions between monks and reportedly 
2,400 resident lay yogi meditators. Since 2008, Sayadaw U Ottamarasara has developed the 
Thanlyin Thabawa Meditation Centre, a complex of 80 acres located a few miles south of 
Yangon. The abbot is known as a meditation teacher who attracts flows of dāna so that he can 
dedicate his work to social welfare. While few monks reside at the center, the ever-expanding 
complex is home to many different kinds of communities in need of the dāna this institution 
collects. The charisma of its founding abbot stems from his ability to attract donations, rather 
than any traditional forms of monastic practice like preaching, meditation, or scholarship. 
When I visited this monastery in 2019, the abbot was traveling abroad, but some wealthy 
donors from California nonetheless were there to make donations. The dāna collected supports 
several groups of residents, including indigent elderly who had retired there, hospice residents 
including cancer and mental patients, itinerant Western tourists, and a variety of others who 
had flocked to this meditation center because they were in need of meals, housing, or other 
services, all of which they received there freely. As a consequence, a village of fifteen thousand

--- PAGE 145 ---
Juliane Schober
124
residents developed next to the meditation center as the abbot continues to acquire adjacent 
land with the donations he receives. The theme emphasized by the compound’s leaders and 
residents was the abbot’s seemingly limitless ability to attract donations to further his mission 
to perform parahita. His success in attracting dāna has enabled him to establish several subsidiary 
centers in Myanmar and abroad.
Theories of giving in a Theravāda Buddhist context
Anthropological writings on giving in Theravāda societies have focused on the material value 
of the gift, on the “free” gift as an alienated economic commodity, on the gift as sacrifice, and 
on the gift as a bad investment of resources. In the 1950s, studies on economic development 
and national integration (Pfanner and Ingersoll 1962) were critical of the “irrational choices” 
of Burmese Buddhists who invested their disposable incomes in donations to “unproductive” 
monks, expecting rewards in a future life rather than this one. Because of this, Theravādins 
were seen as wasting economic opportunities and lacking a Protestant work ethic. To the 
economist E. F. Schumacher (2011: 56ff.), however, this deferred expectation of Theravādins 
signaled detachment from material things and confirmed to him that “small is beautiful.” Yet, 
as the grandeur and scale of architectural monuments produced throughout Theravāda history 
demonstrate, for Buddhist donors, giving freely and magnificently is beautiful.
Changing religious and ethical practices demand a critical appraisal of theories that expli­
cate Theravāda Buddhist motivations and ask us to assess the degree to which past approaches 
remain compelling or, alternatively, how we might amend our scholarship to encompass new 
trends (Bowie 1998; Brac de la Perrière 2015; Sihlé 2015). Most of these scholars take their 
departure from Marcel Mauss’s classic study on the gift, in which he proposes that giving is 
constitutive of human relationships and, ultimately, of society. He theorized that the manner 
in which gifts are reciprocated reflects the quality of social relationships and networks through 
which these items travel. Most important to Mauss, however, was the “spirit of the gift,” by 
which he meant the mediated value of what is given and received.
Laidlaw (2000) sees the value of the gift as symbolic capital and notes that in Indian reli­
gions immaterial rewards are quintessential to ritual exchange. Yet, he also argues that a “free 
gift” does not create obligations between givers and receivers, a claim that does not hold up in 
Theravādin contexts in which giving creates social difference and obligations. Similarly, Strenski 
(1983) treats dāna as an unreciprocated gift circulating in a network of generalized exchange and 
fails to discern the hegemonic implications of generosity. By contrast, Carrithers (1983) cites 
the account of King Bimbisara’s donation of the Deer Park near Benares as the first parcel of 
land given to the monastic community and recognizes that reciprocal lay–monastic exchanges 
of dāna and merit are necessary for a mendicant saṅgha to transform into a sedentary institution.
Ritual giving and its obligations within an economy of merit create a complex hierarchy 
of social relations, involving not just persons and things but also ideas about ethical virtues in 
the performance of social reciprocity. A great deal of social attention is paid to the disciplined 
performance of Buddhist precepts as a distinguishing marker of ethical virtue and different 
social status of monks and laypeople.
In the traditional Theravāda contexts in Myanmar, giving is restricted to the participation of 
donors and monks and creates reciprocal exchange relations in a stratified social system. This 
form of restricted exchange produces social differences wherein culturally perceived purity of 
the monastic sources of merit and of lay intentions are the significant variables mediating the 
ethical value of the exchange. At the core of this exchange lies the ethical value mediated in 
the ritual performance of generosity that makes merit for the donor, members of his family

--- PAGE 146 ---
Merit
125
and household as well as others who contributed to the donor’s efforts to make merit. The 
exchange between donors and monks is often carefully negotiated, especially when larger 
donations are involved, and more or less follows the steps described earlier to ensure public 
validation of the ethical reward donors receive for their practice of generosity, on one hand, 
and of the material gift received by members of the saṅgha, on the other. The public and ritual 
validation of these “social facts” renders the exchange legal. The central concern for participants 
in these ritual exchanges is not whether the gift is “free” but whether the donor is entitled to 
give it and practices generosity with pure intention and whether the recipient monk practices 
and observes vinaya rules sufficiently to be a proper source of merit.
In contemporary contexts, generalized flows of merit-making through social welfare net­
works foster egalitarian relationships that de-emphasize social difference. In contrast to the 
institution building of traditional merit-making practices, performances of parahita tend to 
address specific and contextually embedded social needs. This specificity enables social welfare 
groups to mobilize quickly and dissolve once urgent needs are met. Dāna is not a free gift as 
it creates expectations among donors of ethical rewards of merit that will lead to prosperity, 
wealth, influence, and power in the future. The material value of donations circulated in merit-
making networks are therefore not alienated commodities. Rather, making merit creates and 
maintains Theravāda institutions, social networks, and civilizations.
References
Asad, T. 1993. Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and Islam. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bowie, K. 1998. “The Alchemy of Charity: Of Class and Buddhism in Northern Thailand.” American 
Anthropologist 100 (2): 469–481.
Bowie, K. 2017. Of Beggars and Buddhas, The Politics of Humor on the Vessantara Jataka in Thailand. Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press.
Brac de la Perrière, B. 2015. “Religious Donations, Ritual Offerings, and Humanitarian Aid: Fields of 
Practice According to Forms of Giving in Burma.” Religion Compass 9 (11): 386–403.
Carrithers, M. 1983. The Forest Monks of Sri Lanka: an anthropological and historical study. Delhi: Oxford 
University Press.
Collins, S. 2016. “Introduction.” In Readings of the Vessantara Jataka, ed. S. Collins, 1–36. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Handlin, L. 2016. “A Man of All Seasons: Three Vessantara in Premodern Myanmar.” In Readings of the 
Vessantara Jataka, ed. S. Collins. 153–182. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hsu, M. 2016. “Making Merit, Making Civil Society: Free Funeral Service Societies and Merit-Making in 
Contemporary Myanmar.” Journal of Burma Studies 23 (1): 1–36.
International Crisis Group. 2017. Buddhism and State Power in Myanmar. Asia Report no. 290. Brussels: 
International Crisis Group, September 5.
Keyes, C.F. 1983. “Merit-Transference in the Kammic Theory of Popular Theravāda Buddhism.” In An 
Anthropological Inquiry, eds. C. Keyes, F. Karma, 261–286. Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Ladwig, P. 2012. “Feeding the Dead: Ghosts, Materiality and Merit in the Lao Festival for the Deceased.” In 
Buddhist Funeral Cultures of Southeast Asia and China, eds. P. Williams, P. Ladwig, 119–141.
Laidlaw, J. 2000. “A Free Gift Makes No Friends.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 6 (4): 617–634.
Lefferts, L., Cate, S. 2016. “Narration in the Vessantara Painted Scrolls of Northeastern Thailand and Laos.” 
In Readings of the Vessantara Jataka, ed. S. Collins. 122–152. New York: Columbia University Press.
Lehman, F. 1984. “Freedom and Bondage in Traditional Burma and Thailand.” Journal of Southeast Asian 
Studies 15 (2): 233–244.
Mauss, M. 2002. The Gift: Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies. London: Routledge.
Pfanner, D.E., Ingersoll, J. 1962. “Theravada Buddhism and village Economic Behavior: A Burmese and 
Thai Comparison.” The Journal of Asian Studies 21 (3): 341–361.
Schober, J. 1996. “Religious Merit and Social Status among Burmese Lay Buddhist Organizations.” In 
Blessing and Merit in Mainland Southeast Asia, eds. N. Tannenbaum, C. Kammerer, 197–211. New Haven: 
Yale Southeast Asia Monographs.

--- PAGE 147 ---
Juliane Schober
126
Schober, J. 1997. “Buddhist Just Rule and Burmese National Culture: State Patronage of the Chinese Tooth 
Relic in Myanmar.” History of Religions 36 (3): 218–243.
Schober, J. 2001. “Venerating the Buddha’s Remains in Burma: From Solitary Practice to the Cultural 
Hegemony of Communities.” Journal of Burma Studies 6: 111–139.
Schober, J. 2011. Modern Buddhist Conjunctures in Myanmar: Cultural Narratives, Colonial Legacies, and Civil 
Society. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Schumacher, E.F., 2010 (1973). Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics As If People Mattered. New York: 
Random House.
Sihlé, N. 2015. “Towards a Comparative Anthropology of the Buddhist Gift (and Other Transfers).” Religion 
Compass 9 (11): 352–385.
Strenski, I. 1983. “On Generalized Exchange and the Domestication of the Sangha.” Man 18 (3): 463–477.
Walton, M., McKay, M., Mar Kyi, Daw Khin Mar. 2015. “Women and Myanmar’s ‘Religious Protection 
Laws’.” The Review of Faith & International Affairs, Religion, Law, and Society 13 (4): 36–49.

--- PAGE 148 ---
127
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-11
8
MEDITATION
Techniques and processes of transformation
Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby
Overview of meditation
Buddhist meditation entails a range of practices aimed to bring about self-transformation 
through the alteration of our responses, attitudes, ways of thinking, and—to varying degrees—
physical makeup. The ultimate purpose of meditation is to free ourselves of defilements (kilesa) 
based in craving and delusion in order to attain nibbāna, freedom from the cycle of rebirth and 
suffering, saṃsāra. The defilements include temporary hindrances (nı̄varaṇa), which obscure our 
mind and capacity to practice in any given moment, and fetters (saṃyojana), which bind us to 
saṃsāra over many lifetimes. Buddhist meditation is broadly divided into two aims, the devel­
opment of the capacity of our mind to overcome the hindrances, samatha, literally “calm,” and 
the unhooking of the deep-seated fetters through increasingly higher levels of insight, vipassanā. 
Different meditation subjects address different aspects of these two aims, their appropriateness 
depending on the character traits and level of development of the practitioner. The most well-
known and universally suitable meditation topics are mindfulness of breath (ānāpāna-ssati), and 
the development of loving kindness (mettā-bhāvanā), but the variety of topics recorded in texts 
and pursued in practice is large, and there is an array of methods for each of them. Meditation 
is practiced at progressive levels from basic to advanced, the latter requiring significant com­
mitment, experience, and expertise. While at the beginner level, meditation usually requires 
repetitive performance, more advanced levels often also entail a sequence.
Meditation can be practiced individually, or in groups, with regular practitioners moving 
between the two modes. As such meditation creates fluid communities, sometimes local but 
also international. While the type of transformation sought is often discussed in relation to 
spiritual values, meditation is also transformative in a broader sense, in terms of improving emo­
tional and physical well-being in the present and ensuring a better state in the future. One of 
the ten wholesome actions, it is a merit-making practice, and short sessions may be integrated 
into the program of religious activities at Buddhist monasteries. The practice of meditation 
has varied in importance at different times historically and between different regions and 
lineages of Theravāda. In recent decades, it has influenced global culture, mainly in the form 
of Mindfulness, infiltrating multiple spheres of private and public life, spawning apps, online 
videos, and classes that reach across nations and religious affiliation.

--- PAGE 149 ---
Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby
128
Meditation is often assumed to be a primary practice for monks, one of their two traditional 
vocations as either meditator (vipassanā-dhura) or textualist (gantha-dhura). Nonetheless, many 
do not meditate, and other occupations have long been part of monastic life. While some 
Theravāda monks, nuns and laypeople pursue meditation as a regular commitment in their daily 
lives, others practise only on certain occasions or at certain periods in their lives; others never 
at all. Today, committed practice is more commonplace in Myanmar, among both monastics 
and laypeople. This is because of the distinctive response there to the threat posed to Buddhist 
practice and infrastructure by European colonialism in the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries. Leading monks taught that everyone had the responsibility to meditate to ensure 
Buddhism’s survival and to make the most of the opportunity for spiritual progress while the 
Buddha’s teaching was still available (Braun 2013; Kyaw 2014; Turner 2014). It has also become 
more popular in other Theravāda countries particularly since the second half of the twentieth 
century, when it began to be practiced among urban laypeople, a trend that has continued to 
increase as part of the global rise of faith-based and secular meditation globally. Meditation has 
also been reemphasized at previous crises in Theravāda history, such as the reforms of Buddhism 
in Sri Lanka in the twelfth and eighteenth centuries. Assessing its importance at such moments 
is challenging, because it is less visible to posterity than the textual revivals and construction or 
refurbishment of religious buildings that took place in the same context. Likewise, the extent 
of meditation practice in Theravāda history at any given moment is difficult to ascertain.
The aspects of meditation that we examine in this chapter are the stages of the path and the 
final goal in relation to the defilements, alongside wider advantages attributed to meditation 
including in global therapeutic contexts; textual sources of information about how to practice 
meditation from the Pāli canon onwards; the Pāli terms used in relation to meditation; medi­
tation topics, particularly as found in the highly influential fifth-century Visuddhimagga; and 
how Abhidhamma provides a detailed map of the different aspects of practice and processes 
of transformation. We expand on the last topic, the relationship between Abhidhamma and 
meditation, to consider the main families of meditation practice of early modern and contem­
porary Theravāda; variation within and between them, in part relating to the use they make of 
Abhidhamma; and why some traditions of practice have survived and thrived in the modern 
period while others have not.1
The goal
To achieve the ultimate goal meditation must lead to radically transformative insights into 
reality in order to “see and understand the way things are” (yathā-bhūta-ñāṇa-dassana). These 
insights relate to understanding the interdependence of the conditioning factors that influence 
our experience. This experience is analyzed into various categories of components. The most 
familiar synchronic analysis of ourselves in a given moment is as the five aggregates (khandha), 
namely, “form” (rūpa), “feelings/sensations” (vedanā), “perception” (saññā), “mental forma­
tion” (saṅkhāra), and “consciousness” (viññāṇa). The most familiar diachronic analysis of how 
one moment and period of life leads to the next is the sequence of causality summed up by 
the twelve chains of “interdependent origination” (paṭiccasamuppāda). Underlying this inter­
dependence are the three fundamental characteristics (ti-lakkhaṇa), of all phenomena, namely, 
“impermanence” (anicca), “suffering/ insecurity” (dukkha), and “no-self” (anattā).
Insights into these doctrinal truths bring about “long-term fundamental changes affecting 
many aspects of the person, such as perceptual, emotional, intellectual, spiritual, or behavioral 
patterns, eventually bringing about the anchoring of the person in more fundamental aspects 
of existence” (Eifring 2016: 9). This deep change in the nature, character, and perception of a

--- PAGE 150 ---
Meditation
129
person in Theravāda entails abandoning unskillful mental states and acquiring “noble” (ariya) 
positive or “beautiful” (sobhana) mental states, culminating in the realization of the truth of 
anattā and the attainment of liberation (nibbāna). Through this transformation, one ceases to be 
an “ordinary person” (puthujjana), stuck in the endless cycle of death and rebirth (saṃsāra), and 
enters the “noble path” (ariya-magga), progressing through four stages. The first is the “stream-
enterer” (sotāpanna) who has gained a first glimpse of nibbāna and abandoned the first three of 
ten “fetters” (saṃyojana): identification with one’s current embodiment (sakkāya-diṭṭhi), “doubt” 
(vicikicchā), and “clinging to precepts and vows” (sı̄la-bbata-parāmāsa). By weakening the next two 
fetters, “sensual desire” (kāma-rāga) and “ill-will” (byāpāda), one becomes the “once-returner” 
(sakadāgāmı̄), reborn as a human being no more than once. The “non-returner” (anāgāmi) has 
completely abandoned these first five fetters so is only reborn above the sense-desire realm of 
Buddhist cosmology, and matures to awakening there. The five remaining fetters are “attach­
ment to the form realm” (rūpa-rāga), “attachment to the formless realm” (arūpa-rāga), “conceit” 
(māna), “restlessness” (uddhacca) and “spiritual ignorance” (avijjā). By abandoning these five one 
becomes an arhat, bringing all rebirths in saṃsāra to an end.
Alongside or even regardless of progress toward this goal, practitioners anticipate a range of 
other types of transformation from meditation, some of which are culturally specific, relating 
to understandings of health, current and future physical and mental well-being, cosmology, and 
the needs of the dead (Crosby 2014: 156–160; Cassaniti 2017). In modern therapeutic settings, 
there is less variety in the type of meditation practice and a narrower range of goals. There, 
mindfulness of the breath is the most common method, used as a simple calming practice to 
relax the body and quieten the mind so that the practitioner might be alert and aware of the 
present moment and their own condition at that moment. By offering an anchor for the mind 
to focus on breath, the practitioner is able to step back from entanglement in their ongoing 
thought processes, an outcome referred to as de-centering. This can be helpful in breaking the 
automatic, often repetitive, negative trains of thought that characterize anxiety and depression. 
Other advantages attributed to meditation include situational awareness, prosocial attitudes, and 
enhanced cognitive reserve in aging. Meditation is also of interest in the reduction of pain and 
symptoms of chronic illness.
The usefulness of meditation in secular, therapeutic contexts has increasingly been assessed 
using medical, cognitive, and social sciences. This means that practices originally aimed at 
transcendental transformation are scrutinized for effects they were not designed to deliver by 
systems of thought that do not subscribe to their original purpose.2 The assessment of the 
validity of meditation is not unique to the modern period, however. Historically, the desired 
outcomes are described in detail in Abhidhamma, the vein of Theravāda learning that focuses 
on the components of reality, causality, and how change happens. Abhidhamma further unpacks 
the interdependence of causality noted earlier. Unlike meditation, Abhidhamma did not make 
the journey to the popular, global stage, although serious practitioners around the world have 
increasingly taken an interest in it because of its relevance to understanding experience and to 
offering a vocabulary for experiences often not encountered elsewhere.
Pāli terms concerning “meditation”
There are a number of Pāli terms used in relation to meditation. The word bhāvanā literally 
means “causing to become” or “cultivation” in the sense of developing skillful mental states 
through practice. The term kammaṭṭhāna literally means “place/object of work,” referring to 
the individual meditation practices or subjects or to the practice of meditation more generally.3 
Many post-canonical Pāli and vernacular treatises on meditation have the name kammaṭṭhāna

--- PAGE 151 ---
Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby
130
in the title. Meditation centers in Myanmar are referred to by the Burmese term ka-ma-htan-
yeik-tha, “a pleasant shade for object of work.”
Two other Pāli terms often associated with meditation are samatha and vipassanā. The term 
samatha means “calming,” that is, the calming of physical and mental agitation and activity, 
particularly the discarding of unskilful mental factors that act as hindrances to progress along 
the path. The term vipassanā, often translated as “insight meditation,” means “seeing through,” 
“investigating,” or “analysis,” referring to the investigation into the true nature of things. The 
versatile nature of these two terms means they can be used in different ways.
Samatha and vipassanā are described in the suttas as the path (magga) to liberation (SN 43), 
the route by which one attains awakening. One can become an arhat by means of (1) vipassanā 
preceded by samatha, (2) samatha preceded by vipassanā, (3) samatha and vipassanā yoked together, 
and (4) the mind being seized by Dhamma excitement but then settling down, unified and 
becoming immersed in samādhi (AN 4.170).4 In the canon, then, both samatha and vipassanā are 
important in the process of transformation, although the order does not matter. This is clear in 
the first three routes. The fourth route is when insight is the main trigger of enlightenment, but 
even so, at the last instance, samatha factors must assist with the full removal of certain defile­
ments. While unskillful mental factors, rooted in greed, hatred, and delusion, can be weakened 
and temporarily suspended through samatha meditation, vipassanā is needed to uproot them. 
As Cousins highlights, only the order of the development of such qualities is variable: “in the 
longer term none can be neglected” (Cousins 1984: 65).
Samatha and vipassanā also refer to two broad techniques, mutually supportive for spiritual 
progress. The semi-canonical texts, the Peṭakopadesa and the Nettipakaraṇa, consider the path 
from the perspective of methods (naya) and see samatha and vipassanā as methods to overcome 
craving and ignorance respectively (Cousins 1984: 62). The primary aim of samatha meditation 
is to strengthen the agility and receptiveness of the mind, freeing it of hindrances, so that it 
becomes calm, unified and concentrated. In this way, one overcomes craving. The concentrated, 
still mind is then applied in vipassanā practice to dispel spiritual ignorance.
We also find samatha and vipassanā used to refer to concentration (samādhi) and wisdom 
(paññā), respectively (Ñāṇamoḷi 1999: 757, 836; Cousins 1984: 59; Kuan 2008: 57–58). While 
the identification of samatha and vipassanā with samādhi and paññā is less frequent in the suttas, 
it is standard in canonical and post-canonical Abhidhamma texts (Cousins 1984: 59). A prac­
titioner still needs to develop samādhi in tandem with paññā, rather than in sequence, as each 
supports the development of the other in samatha or vipassanā meditation (Shaw 2020: 56).
These terms, i.e. samatha and vipassanā, are also now commonly applied to different medita­
tion traditions, especially in relation to systems in or derived from Myanmar. In Myanmar, the 
term samatha has become associated with practices at the more ‘magical’, power-enhancing end 
of the spectrum of Buddhist meditation practices, such as Burmese weikza.5 One purpose of 
weikza is longevity, to ensure that one will be present in the human realm rather than reborn in 
one of the cosmological realms less conducive to spiritual transformation, for the arrival of the 
future Buddha Metteyya. This reflects doubt in the possibility of enlightenment in the present 
day, given the declining state of the sāsana of the Buddha of our current era, Siddhattha Gotama. 
Meanwhile, vipassanā has become associated with the now-mainstream Burmese practices that 
began to emerge during the colonial period. Vipassanā lineages sought to prioritize salvific 
insight to ensure spiritual progress in this life, while the dhamma and spiritual attainments are 
still possible, given the anticipated disappearance of the sāsana.6 The focus on quick results and a 
lack of requirement to become skilled in the calm and focused states (jhāna) developed through 
samatha techniques contributed to the relative accessibility of vipassanā practice, allowing it

--- PAGE 152 ---
Meditation
131
to be adapted to many contexts and environments. Modern Burmese vipassanā is now more 
widespread than other Theravāda techniques within Southeast Asia and globally.
An early and influential list of the qualities to be developed through meditation are “quali­
ties that contribute to awakening” (bodhipakkhiyādhamma). There are thirty-seven of them cat­
egorized into seven sets (Gethin 2001: 21). Several qualities such as “concentration” (samādhi), 
“mindfulness” (sati), and “energy” (viriya) recur under the same or similar names within the 
seven sets. The word samādhi literally means “bringing together,” “focus,” or “concentration” 
and is developed by either focusing on a meditation object or being mindful of the present 
moment. The word sati, cognate with the verb to remember, means “mindfulness” or “awareness,” 
referring to the heightened state of nonjudgmental awareness or seeing things from a detached 
perspective “as they really are.” The word viriya means “effort,” “energy,” or “diligence.” It gives 
one the sticking power to counter the hindrances to meditation and investigate one’s skillful 
and unskilful aspects so that one is able to strive to achieve skillful actions and avoid unskillful 
ones. It therefore goes in tandem with wisdom (paññā). In Theravāda literature, these qualities 
are understood as both means and end (Gethin 2001: 351–352).
The word jhāna in Pāli texts may be translated as “meditative state,” “meditative absorption,” 
or “altered state of consciousness.” It refers to the more refined, focused states of consciousness 
achieved through samatha meditation. There are different levels of jhāna which correspond to 
the mental states (citta) in the different heavenly realms of Buddhist cosmology, four jhāna that 
relate to the realm of form, which is above the realm of desire, then four formless jhāna, that 
relate to the higher, formless realms. Their traditional association with indirect benefits such 
as supernatural and psychic powers and the ability to visit the different realms of the Buddhist 
cosmos (Houtman 1990: 181–182) may be downplayed, ignored, or even explicitly rejected 
in the modern, globalized practice of Buddhist meditation, even when jhāna itself is valued.
Authoritative meditation texts7
While most Buddhist practitioners learn from teachers, the authority of the latter is supported 
by authoritative texts, from the Pāli canon to modern-day compositions in Pāli and vernacular 
languages. The most famous and most drawn-on canonical text is the lengthy Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna-
sutta (DN 22; Great Discourse on Establishing Mindfulness), in the Dı̄ghanikāya of the Sutta Piṭaka, 
a shorter recension of which, the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta, is found in the Majjhimanikāya (MN 10). 
The commentary on the Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna-sutta, ascribed to the fifth-century Indian exegete 
Buddhaghosa, was highly influential in the nineteenth- and early twentieth-century revival of 
meditation in Burma. The Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna-sutta provides details of how to practice mindful­
ness on four meditation objects, namely, “body” (kāya), “sensations/feelings” (vedanā), “states 
of consciousness” (citta), and “objects of consciousness” or “constituents of reality” (dhamma). 
The last category allows for the inclusion of many other meditation subjects found elsewhere 
in the canon that are also developed in Abhidhamma literature. The Karaṇı̄yametta-sutta (SN 
1.8; Discourse on Loving-kindness) is another important canonical text. Widely recited for its 
protective properties, it extols the benefits of extending to the entire universe the feeling of 
love a mother has for an only son. In addition to these suttas, the Ānāpānasati-sutta (MN 118), 
the Sı̄lavanta-sutta (SN 22.122), and the discourses on dependent origination from the Nidāna 
section of the Saṃyutta Nikāya also become the basis for later, often vernacular meditation 
manuals and traditions. The most significant post-canonical compendium of meditation is the 
Visuddhimagga (The Path of Purification), again ascribed to the Indian commentator Buddhaghosa, 
which has been influential throughout Theravāda history and has informed meditation globally.

--- PAGE 153 ---
Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby
132
The Visuddhimagga is divided into three books, the first on correct behavior (sı̄la), the second 
on concentration or meditation technique (samādhi), and the third on liberating insight (paññā). 
The middle section, containing forty primarily samatha-oriented practices, is the most well 
known.
Manuscript libraries throughout the Theravāda world, whether in temples or national 
collections, attest to a wide array of further meditation manuals and descriptive treatizes in 
Pāli and vernacular languages in their hundreds if not thousands. Only a fraction has been 
explored, let alone published, and most are difficult to date. In contemporary Theravāda 
Buddhist societies, works and talks by famous meditation teachers are also regarded as author­
itative texts by their followers. A common feature of such vernacular texts is the way in 
which these meditation teachers draw on different layers of Theravāda literature. They may 
also incorporate an Abhidhamma-orientated understanding of the Dhamma found in the 
later layers of Pāli literature. This tendency to relate practice to such authoritative doctrinal 
texts provides the backdrop for a number of disputes and, in Myanmar, even court cases 
concerning meditation (Ashin and Crosby 2017).
Overview of meditation topics
One of the reasons for the Visuddhimagga’s success is the order it brings to the wide variety 
of meditation topics found in canonical and commentarial texts.8 It reduces and systematizes 
these into forty meditations that lead primarily to samatha, in its Samādhi section.
The forty meditation practices given in the Samādhi section of the Visuddhimagga are grouped 
into seven broad categories. Each is identified as leading to different levels of samādhi and jhāna. 
The first type is the kasiṇa “devices” or “visual objects” of which there are ten: earth, water, 
fire, air or wind, blue, yellow, red, white, space, and light. For earth or one of the colors, the 
practitioner uses a flat, often circular object. For the other objects, the device may be a pot of 
water, fire, the visible or tactile effect of wind, some kind of hole or space, and some kind of 
light. The practitioner gazes at the kasiṇa, quelling discursive thought, while repeating a phrase 
that aids total focus on the object, for example, “bright, bright” in the case of the fire. As he 
continues to focus on the object, his samādhi increases, and he develops the ability to maintain 
a mental image of the “sign” nimitta of the object, increasingly independent of the object. The 
strongest nimitta is the purified essence of the object, which he then learns to manipulate, for 
example, by expanding it. The ability to experience the highest level of nimitta reflects one’s 
attainment of the highest level of samādhi, which is the precursor of the jhāna state of mind.
The second category is the decomposition of a corpse, broken down into ten stages from 
the bloating that occurs from a few days after death to the skeleton once all flesh has been 
consumed or rotted. The practitioner draws comparisons with their own body.
The third category consists of ten “recollections,” anussati, on the Buddha, the Dhamma, the 
Saṅgha, often performed as a set of three; then moral conduct; generosity; gods; and the body, 
which is broken down into thirty-two components, death, the breath and peace. The four 
“divine abidings,” brahmavihāra, are an extension of the love, mettā, taught in the Mettā Sutta, 
noted earlier. Mettā is the first. The other three types of love to be felt for all beings are pity 
or compassion, karuṇā, for those in distress; sympathetic joy, muditā, for those experiencing well-
being or some kind of success, the opposite of jealousy; and upekkhā, equanimous appreciation.
The next set are the four formless jhāna that build on the four form jhāna by turning away 
from the material realm to increasingly unlimited and peaceful states: infinite space, infinite 
consciousness, infinite nothingness, and neither perception nor nonperception.9 The final two 
meditation topics that finish our list of forty are the perception of repulsiveness in relation to

--- PAGE 154 ---
Meditation
133
food, āhāre paṭikūlasaññā, and meditation of the four primary elements: earth, water, fire, air, 
and how these relate to one’s body.
The Paññā section is dedicated to practices aimed to bring the higher levels of transformative 
liberation based on insight into ultimate reality. The Visuddhimagga draws on Abhidhamma’s 
analysis of reality into components or factors, dhamma, which fall into four categories. They 
are “materiality,” rūpa; “states of consciousness,” citta; “aspects of consciousness,” cetasika; and 
“enlightenment,” nibbāna. The Paññā section also discusses in detail the way in which these 
dhammas are interrelated and function in the context of meditation practice. Such discussion of 
the categories of ultimate reality could be seen as a scholastic exercise. However, most traditional 
practitioners would see this as a description of what they may experience at the advanced 
stages of meditation. Some meditation traditions in Myanmar, such as the Mahāsı̄ and Pa-Auk 
traditions, apply it as a set of prescriptive instructions for vipassanā practice.10
Vipassanā meditation often emphasizes the use of a high degree of mindfulness (sati) because 
the practitioner pays attention to each passing sensory or mental object. There are thus many 
different meditation topics in the vipassanā practice, rather than focusing on and mastering of 
a single meditation object in the samatha practice. Other mental qualities such as samādhi, con­
centration, and viriya, energy, are also important to some degree. According to the Paññā section 
of the Visuddhimagga, a vipassanā practitioner, drawing on concentration (samādhi) that one has 
developed using the samatha practices, mindfully observes rūpa, citta, and cetasika in a systematic, 
detailed manner. One contemplates them constantly arising and falling away and analyzes them 
to be unsatisfactory and impersonal processes. In this way, the practitioner observes the nature 
and characteristics of the current bodily and mental experiences, and such discernment leads 
to increasing levels of vipassanā.
Meditation and Abhidhamma
Descriptions of meditation practice in the Sutta section of the Pāli canon primarily give 
instructions on how to begin to practice meditation. They also include standardized descrip­
tive accounts of some significant meditative attainments such as the jhāna. We similarly come 
across instructions on how to meditate in meditation classes and on retreats, whether in a 
Buddhist or a secular Mindfulness context. The value of Abhidhamma in relation to medita­
tion is that it offers a map or blueprint for the progressive and fundamental transformation 
that is being sought. While for Abhidhamma, the focus of the third major collection of texts 
that form the Pāli canon, is often referred to as scholasticism in Western writings on Theravāda, 
this is a misunderstanding. Abhidhamma describes in detail how progress is made on the 
path, particularly through meditative attainments. To support this, it identifies and explains 
the basic components of reality, how they mutually condition one another, and what one 
will experience if one successfully begins to bring about self-transformation. It provides labels 
for experience, explains those experiences, and allows practitioners and teachers to relate the 
early and progressive stages of the path to the ultimate goal. It also explains how materiality 
and consciousness work, which can offer a basis for relating experience to the fundamental 
functioning of one’s body and mind. We can see this use of Abhidhamma in the Visuddhimagga 
which, while giving accessible descriptions of how to do meditation, also explains experience 
and attainments within an Abhidhamma framework. While Abhidhamma contains much tech­
nical vocabulary, often listed for brevity, and is therefore challenging to follow unless one has 
trained in it, it is very much there to support practice, by explaining experience and causality.
Kornfield observes that “there is probably more emphasis and use made of the Abhidhamma 
teachings in Burma [Myanmar] than in any other Buddhist country” (1977: 193). Myanmar’s

--- PAGE 155 ---
Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby
134
emphasis on Abhidhamma, like its widespread promotion of meditation, reflects its unique 
response to the crisis of the European colonial period. In their quest to protect their threatened 
religion Burmese Buddhists emphasized the preservation of Abhidhamma since it is regarded 
as the first part of the canon that will disappear as the religion declines. Abhidhamma was 
also emphasized for its importance in preserving transformative realizations (paṭivedha) since it 
explains the content of such realizations and meditation as the means to achieving them. It was 
this desire to ensure transformative insights while the Buddha’s teaching was still accessible that 
led to the emphasis on those meditation practices leading to vipassanā in the Burmese medita­
tion revival of this period. The two meditation teachers who did most to popularize the lay 
engagement in the first half of the nineteenth century in Myanmar were Ledi Sayadaw Ven. 
Ñāṇa (1846–1923) and Mūla-mingun Jetavana Sayadaw Ven. Nārada (1869–1955). The founder 
of the internationally famous Mahāsı̄ meditation tradition, Sayadaw Ven. Sobhana (1904–1982), 
practiced under the guidance of the latter.
For the majority of Burmese Buddhists, the theoretical teachings as described in the law 
of dependent origination (paṭiccasamuppāda) and the more detailed explanations of causality 
found in the Abhidhamma play a crucial role in vipassanā practices. Meditation masters such as 
Ledi Sayadaw and Mohnyin Sayadaw Ven. Sumana (1873–1964)—whose reputations rested on 
their exceptional expertise in Abhidhamma—advocated that people learn it. For Ledi Sayadaw, 
Abhidhamma categories and concepts provide “the veritable ‘dhamma tools’ (dhamma a chok’ 
a ū) [sic.] that enable a meditator to relate ultimate truth (paramattha) directly to perceptual 
experience as the means to awakening” (Braun 2013: 130–131). Burmese meditation masters 
such as Mohnyin Sayadaw, Saddhammaransı̄ Sayadaw Ven. Kuṇḍalābhivaṃsa (1921–2011), and 
Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw Ven. Āciṇṇa (1934–) discuss the practical application of the Paṭṭhāna. 
The Paṭṭhāna, the seventh canonical Abhidhamma book, dedicated to the complex web of 
conditional relations between the constituents of reality (dhamma), can be used to examine 
the process of causality in vipassanā practice.11 This importance of Abhidhamma for practice 
continues in contemporary Myanmar, with some meditators opining that in order to practice 
vipassanā meditation and develop insight knowledge, one must first have a foundation of theo­
retical knowledge about the dhammas (Khin undated: 90). Another Burmese meditation method 
that is heavily theory-based and informed by Abhidhamma analysis is the Mogok meditation 
tradition, founded by Mogok Sayadaw Ven. Vimala (1899–1962), whose method begins with 
the study of the law of dependent origination. In contrast, the meditation methods taught by 
Sunlun Sayadaw Ven. Kavi (1878–1952) and Theinngu Sayadaw Ven. Ukkaṭṭha (1913–1973) have 
practical approaches as one’s starting point and prioritize experience and practice over theory.
In the past two decades, there has been an increasing interest in Abhidhamma among prac­
titioners in other parts of Southeast and East Asia as well as Western countries. This is partly 
because of the increasing exchange of knowledge that occurred between Abhidhamma experts 
from Myanmar such as Ven. Dr. Nandamālābhivaṃsa (b. 1940) and practitioners from Asia and 
Europe. Moreover, the global outreach of some of the meditation traditions stemming from 
Myanmar such as that of the Mahāsi method, of the Goenka practice established by S. N. 
Goenka (1924–2013), Indian student of U Ba Khin, and of the Pa-Auk method has become 
more widespread, attracting both novice and experienced practitioners. Aided by Asian practi­
tioners with expertise in Abhidhamma, connected through the network of fluid transnational 
communities that meditation creates, such practitioners have contributed to an opening up of 
what is otherwise an inaccessible, often abstruse topic. Members of the Samatha Trust set up 
in the United Kingdom in 1973, initially on the basis of the meditation teachings of former 
monk Nai Boonman (b.1932) from Thailand, have also taken a keen interest in Abhidhamma 
and contributed to its study and accessibility (Shaw 2019).

--- PAGE 156 ---
Meditation
135
As in Myanmar, so in Thailand, practitioners sought to ensure that Buddhism would continue 
to survive in the face of the aggressive interests of Britain and France in the territories and com­
modities of the region. Buddhism was harnessed in the struggle for ongoing sovereignty. This 
contributed to the incremental reform of Buddhist education around a centralized monastic syl­
labus focusing on the Sutta and Vinaya Piṭaka from Mongkut (1804–1868) onward. Until there 
was a rekindled interest in the 1950s under Burmese influence, Abhidhamma was downplayed 
or ignored. The validity of meditation was increasingly assessed primarily against sutta texts.
An increased emphasis on administration in the Saṅgha also marginalized meditation practice 
for several generations. Nonetheless, in the northeast, the practice of living in the forests and 
pursuing an itinerant lifestyle dedicated to meditation died out only with the closures of the 
forests in the latter half of the twentieth century (Tiyavanich 1997). Only one teaching lineage 
is known to have survived, its history relatively well recorded after it spread both nationally 
and, from the 1970s, globally. It was founded by Ajan Sao (1861–1941), who had ordained 
within the reform branch of the Saṅgha established by Mongkut. Ajan Sao’s student Ajan Mun 
(1870–1949), and his student in turn, Ajan Mahabua (1913–2011), popularized the Thai forest 
tradition both within Thailand and abroad. Particularly inspirational in the establishment of 
Thai forest monasteries internationally was their charismatic student Ajan Chah (1918–1992), 
who attracted large numbers of Western followers.12
While the meditation practitioners who received royal sanction in Thailand from the late nine­
teenth century de-emphasized Abhidhamma, the pre-reform systems of meditation for which we 
have evidence closely followed the map of transformation Abhidhamma had set out. Mongkut, 
while still a monk, studied this type of pre-reform meditation under his teacher, the supreme patri­
arch of the Saṅgha, but rejected it as too complicated and inconsistent with the parts of the canon 
familiar to him (Skilton 2019: 48). The modernization of Buddhist education and practice under 
Mongkut’s successors had such an effect that by the early twentieth-century, pre-reform medita­
tion had started to disappear to such an extent that publications of the 1930s, which sought to 
document it, labeled it boran kammathan (Thai, Pāli: purāṇa kammaṭṭhāna), “old meditation method.”
This old method is only preserved in simplified and modernized forms in a few temple 
networks of Cambodia and Thailand today. Yet it is the only system of Theravāda meditation 
that we can trace back beyond the nineteenth century. We can follow it to the turn of the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, when it was practiced by the supreme patriarchs of Laos, a 
tradition that continued until the eve of the Marxist revolution in 1974 (Choompolpaisal 2019: 
156–157). It largely disappeared from Cambodia during the same decade under the Khmer 
Rouge, having already been marginalized under Thai and French colonial influence earlier 
in the century. In previous centuries, it was a different story. In the eighteenth century, for 
example, the king of Thailand sent a mission of monks to Sri Lanka to teach boran kammathan 
as part of the revival of Buddhism there. Cave temples were refurbished and redecorated with 
magnificent wall paintings for the students of boran kammathan. While its practice by a few 
seems to have continued into the twentieth century, new revivals of meditation in Sri Lanka 
were inspired mainly by Burmese vipassanā or by a return to such texts as the Visuddhimagga.
The relationship between boran kammathan and Abhidhamma is best documented in the 
manuals left behind by the Sri Lankan monks of the eighteenth-century revival. From their 
accounts, we see that changing one’s consciousness from the unskillful to beautiful states is 
pursued step by step, in a process following each change in citta and cetasika set out in the care­
ful analysis of causality detailed in Abhidhamma texts. The complexity of those processes of 
change is reflected in the complexity of the meditation, which requires thousands of different 
steps to reach its culmination. Particularly distinctive of boran methods is that they explicitly aim 
to transform not just the consciousness of the practitioner but their body, both nāma and rūpa.

--- PAGE 157 ---
Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby
136
The method for doing this involves drawing the citta and cetasika into the body through the 
nasal cavity and binding them with the elements that make up the body. The techniques for 
this process of internalization relate to other systems of bringing about physical change found in 
the broader culture, such as medicine and the premodern chemistry applied to the purification 
of metal. The loss of boran meditation in its fullest forms therefore probably owes as much to 
changes in the physical sciences during the modern period as it does to the marginalization 
of Abhidhamma: it disappeared with the loss of understanding of the processes of causality on 
which it was based.13 The most widespread legacy of these practices is the modernized system 
developed by Candasaro Sot (1896–1956), abbot of Wat Paknam in Greater Bangkok, and 
taken up by the global network of Dhammakāya temples with its headquarters at Wat Phra 
Dhammakāya in Pathumthani outside Bangkok.
Conclusion
Our approach in this chapter has focused on how meditation offers mechanisms for self-
transformation, and how these mechanisms relate to the main goal of Buddhism, to realize 
things as they really are. We have explained some of the key terms and concepts that express 
the Theravāda understanding of this reality and the relevant changes its realization entails. We 
have also identified the texts considered authoritative sources for the meditation techniques 
and stages that the practitioner should pursue.14
Progress toward the goal entails the step-by-step removal of defilements in the form of 
hindrances and fetters. The broader account of the path found in sutta texts provides the key 
goals, such as samatha, samādhi, vipassanā, and paññā, that one must develop in order to loosen the 
hold of the fetters that tie one to saṃsāra and reach the four stages of awakening. The processes 
of how the transformation of one’s body and mind occur are detailed in Abhidhamma texts, 
which offer a more analytical consideration of causality and how to harness causal mechanisms 
to one’s spiritual advantage. Abhidhamma provides the blueprint for the transformative pro­
cesses, describes the experience and content of meditative attainments, and a offers a map for 
progress on the path. It both prescribes and accounts for stages of the practice and attainments. 
Providing examples of a range of practice families and lineages, looking at three main groups, 
Burmese vipassanā, the Thai forest tradition and pre-reform boran practice, has enabled us to 
see considerable variation in the use that different traditions make of the relationship between 
meditative experience and Abhidhamma.
Meditation as a lived tradition can only be traced back to the very end of the fifteenth 
century. Most contemporary practice traditions emerged in response to colonialism and moder­
nity from the end of the nineteenth century or with the global interest that blossomed from 
the second half of the twentieth century. The extent to which these revivals were formed 
entirely on the basis of texts or linked to remaining traces of practice is as yet unclear. What 
we do know is that in Theravāda circles, close attention to the authoritative texts has shaped 
their current form and ensured that they are strongly rooted in the tradition. This does not 
mean that Theravāda meditation is rigid and unadaptable. Rather, it has an ability to adapt and 
transform itself to suit the social, political, and technological climate of the time. This continues 
to transform the way meditation practices are taught and transmitted as well as the narrative 
that frames meditation and its relevance to modernity. We can see this adaptability with the 
Burmese vipassanā movement in Myanmar and beyond, as well as the survival of the pre-form 
practices in modernized, more accessible forms.
The extent to which Abhidhamma has traveled with meditation varies considerably, falling 
out of favor as it did in Theravāda regions more influenced by the responses to modernity found

--- PAGE 158 ---
Meditation
137
in Thailand than those in Myanmar. Even in those traditions inspired by Burmese vipassanā, 
the significance of Abhidhamma has sometimes been de-emphasized and even lost, particularly 
when applied primarily to therapeutic contexts and performance-enhancement. This situation 
is changing as global meditation matures, with an increased consideration of Abhidhamma as a 
way of understanding and supporting meditative experience. We anticipate that this trend will 
continue as a consequence of the enhanced use of technology for linking people and groups 
internationally in response to the COVID-19 pandemic that began to restrict group medita­
tion and retreats from early 2020. This has led to a wider availability and uptake of live and 
recorded talks about meditation and Abhidhamma, as well as to people pursuing retreats in 
their own homes linked to teachers and practice communities through online platforms, with 
some retreats attracting thousands of participants from all over the world.
Notes
	 1	See Crosby (2014, chap. 6), for an overview of meditation practices, techniques, and the historical contexts 
in which meditation is practiced in Theravāda Buddhism, as well as its modern application of secular 
contexts.
	 2	See McMahan (2017) for a comparison of the goals of Buddhist meditation traditionally in the monastic 
context and in the modern, secularized context.
	 3	On the development of the term kammaṭṭhāna, see Skilton (2019).
	 4	See Cousins (1984) on the four paths.
	 5	Weikza is the Burmese of Pāli vijjā, “knowledge,” and its practitioners are referred to as weikza-do, (Pāli 
vijjā-dhara) “bearers of knowledge,” a term translated into English as “wizard” or shortened to weikza. 
On multiple aspects of this subject, which remains relatively unfamiliar to students of Theravāda, see 
Rozenberg, Brac de la Perrière and Turner (eds.) 2014.
	 6	On the shared concerns that informed the development of radically contrasting approaches to meditation 
and Buddhism, from the ultra-traditional to the ultra-secular, see Crosby (2021).
	 7	See Shaw (2006) for an overview of the various kinds of meditations described in the Pāli canon.
	 8	For a useful summary and explanation of different meditation topics found in Pāli sources, see Shaw 
(2016).
	 9	For accessible accounts of the different jhāna, how to attain and recognize them, see Brasington (2015).
	10	For the distinction between samatha and vipassanā meditation and the varied ways in which the details of 
Abhidhamma are related to meditation by different practice lineages, see Crosby and Kyaw (2021).
	11	For examples of the ways in which the teachings in the Paṭṭhāna are related to vipassanā meditation, see 
Kyaw (2012).
	12	For meditation teachers in the Thai forest lineage and sources about them, see Access to Insight (2013).
	13	On the practice, history, and the disappearance of boran kammathan, as well as its relationship to other tech­
nologies, see Crosby (2020). On the varieties of practice and evidence for different lineages in Laos and 
Thailand, see Choompolpaisal (2019). On its enactment of Abhidhamma, see Crosby (2019).
	14	On different varieties of Theravāda techniques and a discussion of changing attitudes to meditation in 
scholarship, see Kate Crosby, Andrew Skilton and Pyi Phyo Kyaw (eds.) 2019.
References
Access to Insight, ed. 2013. “Thai Forest Traditions: selected teachers.” Access to Insight (BCBS Edition), 
http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/thai/index.html. Retrieved 20 January 2021.
Āciṇṇa, Ven, Sayadaw, Pa-Auk Tawya. 2008. Knowing and Seeing: Talks and Questions & Answers at a Meditation 
Retreat in Taiwan by the Pa-Auk Tawya Sayadaw. 4th edition.
Anālayo, Bhikkhu. 2012. “The Dynamics of Theravāda Insight Meditation.” In 佛教禪坐傳統國際學術研討 
會論文集, [Buddhist Meditation Traditions: An International Symposium], Kuo-pin Chuang (ed.), Taiwan: 
Dharma Drum Publishing Corporation, pp. 23–56.
Ashin, Janaka, Crosby, Kate. 2017. “Heresy and Monastic Malpractice in the Buddhist Court Cases 
(Vinicchaya) of Modern Burma (Myanmar).” Contemporary Buddhism 18 (1): 199–261.

--- PAGE 159 ---
Pyi Phyo Kyaw and Kate Crosby
138
Bodhi, Bhikkhu, ed. 2000. Abhidhammattha Sangaha: A Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma. Pali text origi­
nally edited and translated by Mahāthera Narada. Canada: BPS Pariyatti Edition.
Brasington, Leigh. 2015. Right Concentration: A Practical Guide to the Jhānas. Boston & London: Shambala.
Braun, Erik C. 2013. The Birth of Insight. Meditation, Modern Buddhism, and the Burmese Monk Ledi Sayadaw. 
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Cassaniti, J.L. 2017. “‘Wherever You Go, There You Aren’t?’: Non-Self, Spirits, and the Concept of the 
Person in Thai Buddhist Mindfulness.” In Meditation, Buddhism and Science, eds. D.L. McMahan, E. Braun, 
133–151. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Choompolpaisal, Phibul. 2019. “Nimitta and Visual Methods in Siamese and Lao Meditation Traditions 
from the 17th Century to the Present Day.” In Kate Crosby, Andrew Skilton and Pyi Phyo Kyaw (eds.) 
Contemporary Buddhism: Variety in Theravada Meditation 20(1–2): 152–183.
Cousins, L.S. 1984. “Samatha-yāna and Vipassanā-yāna.” In Buddhist Studies in Honour of Hammalava 
Saddhatissa, eds. D. Dhammapala et al., pp. 56–68. Sri Lanka: Nugegoda.
Crosby, Kate. 2013. Traditional Theravada meditation and its modern-era suppression. Hong Kong: Buddha-
Dharma Centre of Hong Kong.
Crosby, Kate. 2014. Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, Identity. Oxford: Blackwell-Wiley.
Crosby, Kate. 2019. “Abhidhamma and Nimitta in 18th-Century Meditation Manuscripts from Sri Lanka: 
A Consideration of Orthodoxy and Heteropraxy in Boran Kammaṭṭḥāna.” Contemporary Buddhism: Variety 
in Theravada Meditation 20 (1–2): 111–151.
Crosby, Kate. 2020. Esoteric Theravada: The Story of the Forgotten Tradition of Southeast Asia. Boulder, Colorado: 
Shambala.
Crosby, Kate. 2021. “The Shared Origins of Traditionalism and Secularist Tendencies in Theravāda 
Buddhism.” In Secularizing Buddhism. New Perspectives on a Dynamic Tradition, ed. Richard Payne, 135–
161. Boulder, Colorado: Shambala Publications.
Crosby, Kate, Kyaw, Pyi Phyo. 2021. “Transformation and Abhidhamma in Three Theravada Meditation 
Traditions.” In Illuminating the Dharma: Buddhist Studies in Honour of Venerable Professor KL Dhammajoti, 
eds. Toschiichi Endo, Mingyuan, 29–50. Hong Kong: Buddha-Dharma Centre of Hong Kong.
Eifring, Halvor, ed. 2016. Asian Traditions of Meditation. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Gethin, Rupert. 2001. The Buddhist Path to Awakening. Oxford: Oneworld. First Published 1992.
Gethin, Rupert. 2011. “On Some Definitions of Mindfulness.” Contemporary Buddhism: An Interdisciplinary 
Journal 12 (1): 263–279.
Houtman, Gustaaf. 1990. “Traditions of Buddhist Practice in Burma.” PhD Thesis. SOAS, University of 
London.
Jordt, Ingrid. 2006. “Defining a True Buddhist: Meditation and Knowledge Formation in Burma.” Ethnology 
45 (3): 193–207.
Karunadasa, Y. 2010. The Theravāda Abhidhamma: Its Inquiry into the Nature of Conditioned Reality. Hong 
Kong: Centre of Buddhist Studies, The University of Hong Kong.
Khin, Ohn. (Undated). Datehti’-that Tanha-that (Killing Views and Craving).
Kornfield, Jack. 1977. reprint 2007. Modern Buddhist Masters. Kandy: Buddhist Publications Society.
Kuan, Tse-fu. 2008. Mindfulness in Early Buddhism: new approaches through psychology and textual analysis of 
Pali, Chinese and Sanskrit sources. London and New York: Routledge.
Kyaw, Pyi Phyo. 2012. “The Paṭṭhāna (Conditional Relations) and Buddhist meditation: application of the teach­
ings in the Paṭṭhāna in Insight (Vipassanā) Meditation Practice,” Conference Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Association of Buddhist University Conference: Buddhist Philosophy & Praxis. http://www.undv.org/
vesak2012/iabudoc/07PyiPhyoKyawFINAL.pdf.
Kyaw, Pyi Phyo. 2014. “Paṭṭhāna (Conditional Relations) in Burmese Buddhism.” PhD thesis, King’s 
College, London.
Kyaw, Pyi Phyo. 2019. “The Sound of the Breath: Sunlun and Theinngu Meditation Traditions of Myanmar.” 
In Kate Crosby, Andrew Skilton and Pyi Phyo Kyaw (eds.) Contemporary Buddhism: Variety in Theravada 
Meditation 20 (1–2): 247–291.
Mahāsi Sayadaw. 2016. Manual of Insight. Translated by Vipassanā Mettā Foundation Translation Committee. 
Somerville: Wisdom Publications.
McMahan, D.L. 2017. “How Meditation Works: Theorizing the Role of Cultural Context in Buddhist 
Contemplative Practices.” In Meditation, Buddhism and Science, eds. D.L. McMahan, E. Braun. New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press, pp. 21–46.

--- PAGE 160 ---
Meditation
139
Nagasena, Bhikkhu. 2012. “The Monastic Boundary (Sı̄mā) in Burmese Buddhism: Authority, Purity and 
Validity in Historical and Modern Contexts.” Ph.D. thesis, School of Oriental and African Studies, 
London.
Ñāṇamoḷi, Bhikkhu. (tran.) 1999. The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) by Bhadantācariya Buddhaghosa. 
Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society. 5th edition. First published 1956.
Rozenberg, Guillaume, de la Perrière, Bénédicte Brac, Turner, Alicia, eds. 2014. Champions of Buddhism. 
Weikza Cults in Contemporary Burma. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Sharf, Robert H. 1995. “Buddhist Modernism and the Rhetoric of Meditative Experience.” Numen 42: 
228–283.
Shaw, Sarah. 2006. Buddhist Meditation: An Anthology of Texts. London: Routledge.
Shaw, Sarah. 2016. “Meditation Objects in Pāli Buddhist Texts.” In Asian Traditions of Meditation, ed. Halvor 
Eifrig,  pp. 122–144. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Shaw, Sarah. 2019. “Tradition and Experimentation: The Samatha Trust.” In Kate Crosby, Andrew Skilton 
and Pyi Phyo Kyaw (eds.) Contemporary Buddhism: Variety in Theravada Meditation 20 (1–2): 346–371.
Shaw, Sarah. 2020. Mindfulness: Where It Comes From and What It Means. Buddhist Foundations Series. 
Boulder: Shambhala.
Skilton, Andrew. 2019. “Meditation and its subjects: tracing kammaṭṭhāna from the early canon to the boran 
kammathan traditions of Southeast Asia.” in Kate Crosby, Andrew Skilton and Pyi Phyo Kyaw (eds.) 
Contemporary Buddhism: Variety in Theravada Meditation 20 (1–2): 36–72.
Skilton, Andrew, Choompolpaisal, Phibul. 2014. “The Old Meditation (boran kammatthan), a pre-reform 
Theravāda meditation system from Wat Ratchasittharam: The pı̄ti section of the kammatthan matchima 
baeb lamdub.” Aséanie 33: 83–116.
Skilton, Andrew, Choompolpaisal, Phibul. 2017. “How to Deal with Wind Illnesses: Two Short Meditation 
Texts from Buddhist Southeast Asia.” In Buddhism and Medicine: An Anthology of Premodern Sources, ed. 
C. Pierce Salguero. New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 425–430.
Turner, Alicia. 2014. Saving Buddhism: Moral Community and the Impermanence of Colonial Religion. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Tiyavanich, Kamala. 1997. Forest Recollections: Wandering Monks in Twentieth-Century Thailand. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.

--- PAGE 161 ---
140
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-12
9
REPETITION
Pāli iterations of ritual commitment, 
commentarial refrain, and assiduous practice
Christoph Emmrich
Repetition has emerged as a critical term in modern European philosophy, aesthetics, gender 
studies, and theology, from its early utilization in the critique of teleological models of memory 
(Søren Kierkegaard), history (Friedrich Nietzsche, Karl Marx), and the self (Sigmund Freud); 
its role in experimental modernist writing (Charles Péguy, Raymond Roussel, Gertrude 
Stein); and its centrality for critiques of authorship (Jacques Derrida) and representation 
(Gilles Deleuze) right up to helping conceptualize the order of music (Adam Ockelford), 
sexual difference (Judith Butler), and a theological ontology based on insistence (Catherine 
Pickstock). European and North American academic interest in Buddhist iterative forms of 
cosmology and time, particularly those inherent in concepts of rebirth and world renewal, 
has confined itself to the largely representational paradigm of the cyclical and the linear, at 
best using repetition to distinguish between the two (Collins 1998: 250–256). One of the 
aims of this chapter is to contribute, with the help of select passages from Theravāda texts, 
toward a shift from a geometrical and typological way of thinking about time to an event- and 
language-oriented one, involving speaker participation and linguistic self-reflexivity, repeating, 
so to speak, the insights of some of the authors mentioned earlier. The term repetition will 
allow us to think about time, not from a place outside of time from which types of time 
appear in lines and circles but from a time within time, the time between one repetition 
and the other, where time could be made explicit or may remain implied. It is a time that 
is thoroughly mediated by the linguistic practices, including translation, of Pāli, English, and 
other idioms, a mediation out of which, among many other things, the discourses of time, 
line, and circle have emerged.
In the study of Asian religions and literature outside of Buddhism, the interest in repeti­
tion in its literal sense has been modest, but longstanding. Maurice Bloomfield’s early study 
on repetitions in the Ṛgveda (1916) was extended to Vedic literature by Jan Gonda (1959), 
to Śvetāmbara narrative literature by Klaus Bruhn (1983), and to the Mahābhārata by A. K. 
Ramanujan (1991) and has, more recently, led to multiple studies of “adaptive reuse” of textual 
material in Brahmanical literature (Freschi & Maas 2017). What all this research has in com­
mon is that it has relied on forms of repetition to explore the compositional principles behind 
the creation of religious texts. It has also helped develop our sensitivity toward the formal and

--- PAGE 162 ---
Repetition
141
performative aspects of these texts and has allowed us to think more broadly about the how 
and why of saying and doing things again. What does it mean to say or do something again, 
how does it affect the meaning of what is said or done, and how does it, more generally, affect 
our understanding of meaning? What does it not just mean for, but do to the listener, the 
reader, or the reciter when they perform a repetition? What is achieved when someone does 
something again? These are questions particularly relevant in the repetitive world of religious 
practice, be the practice ritual, poetic, or philosophical.
Ritual
Every time someone pays obeisance to the Buddha chanting, whispering, or thinking namo tassa 
bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa, “homage to the blessed, the worthy, the fully enlightened 
one,” they are expected to do so not once but again—and one more time, in exactly the same 
wording. It is customary to subsequently ritually proclaim saraṇaṃ gacchāmi, “I take refuge,” first 
to the Buddha, then, again, to the Dhamma, and, in a third declaration, to the Saṅgha. This set 
of utterances is then repeated two more times, adding, as one repeats, that one is doing so “also 
a second time,” dutiyaṃ pi, and “also a third time,” tatiyaṃ pi. The whole set is known as the 
tisaraṇam, the threefold taking of refuge, or the tiratana vandanā, the worship of the Three Jewels. 
Sets of thrice-recurring, more or less identical ritual utterances such as these, are, of course, a 
hallmark of ritual language not only across Buddhist communities but, indeed, around the globe 
and throughout history. The Upaniṣadic oṃ śāntiḥ śāntiḥ śāntiḥ, the Vaiṣṇava rāma rāma rāmeti, 
the Islamic triple talāq, and the Anglophone juridical Oyez! Oyez! Oyez! are only some of the 
best known. A devotee uttering a set of repetitions at the very beginning of a ritual event is 
particularly visible in Pāli liturgy. Moreover, it is striking that the last set of utterances is not 
merely made again twice, but the awareness of its recurrent nature is made explicit by count­
ing the times it is repeated. The utterances are usually accompanied by the thrice-performed 
gesture of submission that has the devotees clasp their hands, kneel, and touch the ground with 
palms and forehead. What stands at the very beginning of what Theravāda Buddhists think, say, 
and do when they begin to act as such is self-reflexive repetition.
An early version of the Pāli refuge formula, bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ saraṇaṃ gacchāmi dhammañ ca 
bhikkhusaṇghañ ca (e.g. DN I 85,12-15), uttered by prominent legendary convertees, but only 
once, is elaborated on in the commentaries (DN-a I 229,18-234,22, MN-a I 130,35-135,22, 
AN-a II 107,7-112,29, and Khp-a 16-17). The exegesis unfolds “refuge” (saraṇaṃ) as referring 
to four things: (1) the surrender of self (attasanniyyātanā), (2) the condition of having ‘”that” 
(i.e., the Three Jewels) as one’s main object (tapparāyaṇatā), (3) the acceptance of discipleship 
(sissabhāvūpāgamana), and (4) (homage by) prostration (paṇipāta). The commentaries list the four 
items, adding to each (e.g., DN-a I 231,17-31) the opening formula “From today onward, hav­
ing performed the …” (ajja ādiṃ katvā …, as well as adding, only to (2) through (4) however, 
the concluding formula “with these words may you know me” (iti maṃ dhāretha). Although it 
is doubtful whether this version of the multiple refuge formula is anything more than com­
mentarial hermeneutics (Bond 1982: 25), it still contains the element of iteration not contained 
in the root text and reminds one of the partial iterations found in the formula used during 
the taking of the precepts (pañcası̄la, upavāsa, and dasası̄la) by laypeople. In his reading of MN-a 
I 130,35-135,22 the modernist scholar and reformer Nyanaponika takes the commentary to 
record a more authentic version of the contemporary liturgical formula. His intention is to 
recover what he believes is the original meaning of the tisaraṇa formula being, representing “a 
vow,” “perhaps a kind of initiation,” a “venerable ancient practice” of which the current, thrice-
repeated “thoughtless recital of the formula is a degradation” (Nyanaponika 1965: 17–18).

--- PAGE 163 ---
Christoph Emmrich
142
John Ross Carter, in contrast, points at the possible functions of repetition, addressing issues of 
cognition, formality, control, and affect:
The recitation of the triple refuge is ritually structured in a threefold repetition to 
develop reflective alertness. This repetitive pattern sets the expression apart from rou­
tine patterns in normal discourse, serves to check a participant from running rough­
shod through a communal affirmation that has echoed through history, and tends to 
engender a sense of thoroughness in personal involvement.
(Carter 1982: 4)
Carter’s observation, while stressing the regulatory character of the mode of utterance, is still 
in line with Nyanaponika’s reading of the tisaraṇa as a vow, which echoes the novitiation 
(pabbajjā) and ordination (upasampadā) rite where the intersubjective effect of triple recitation 
is even more explicit.
The threefold refuge formula as recited by laypeople already appears in the Theravāda Vinaya, 
in which the monks are instructed to make the candidates worship the feet of the monks, to 
raise their hands, and to thrice recite the prescribed words (Vin I 22,14-22). The Sri Lankan 
Upasampadā-kammavācā (UK) prescribes the same procedure, embedded in a series of further 
threefold repetitions (shared with the Kammavācanā of the Mūlasarvāstivādins, evaṃ dvir api 
tṛr api, Shōno 2019: 83). In fact, at the beginning of the ceremony, after kneeling down, the 
candidate asks thrice to be admitted as a novice (dutiyam … tatiyam pi aham bhante pabbajjaṃ 
yācāmi), requests the ordaining monk thrice (tatiyavāraṃ) to accept the robes for the novice 
candidate shall receive, and then asks thrice (tatiyavāraṃ) to receive the robes back. He obtains 
them and then asks thrice to be imparted the refuges and the precepts. The refuges are then, 
sentence by sentence, recited to him by the ordaining monk, with the candidate repeating 
each of them, one by one, starting with the threefold repetition of the tisaraṇa. In this specific 
context of ritual authorization, it is not only the text in itself that repeats. The repeated text 
needs to be repeated (once), with the utterance made by the senior monk echoing in the voice 
of the emerging novice and thus confirming commitment, submission, reliability, and the most 
basic degree of competence. At this point in the liturgy repetition as a form of interaction 
stops. The ten precepts, in fact, are prescribed to be requested and recited only once, as are the 
confirmation of receipt of novitiation, the asking for permission to rise, paying obeisance to his 
senior, asking for forgiveness, and the sharing of merit. The repetition of the formula returns 
only once with the twofold (or threefold) exclamation of sadhu (UK 3–9). Repetition appears 
as a framing device that opens and closes by heightening attention and demanding interaction.
This also applies to the prominent repetition featuring in the Theravāda Pātimokkha (Pāt 
4,8-6,2 = Vin I 102,33-103,11; Pāt 6,4-6), which states that each question directed at the 
monks during the fortnightly purificatory ritual of the saṃgha concerning their current state 
of purity, namely, kacci ‘ttha parisuddhā (“Are you pure in this?”), is asked thrice by the speaker 
(tatthāyasmante pucchāmi … dutiyampi pucchāmi … tatiyampi pucchāmi) and that the monastic 
remaining silent each time signifies that no offense has been committed while not revealing 
a committed offense right up to the third time (yāvatatiyaṃ) the question is asked qualifies 
as a conscious lie (saṃpajānomusāvādo). The repetition of the question, here, is instrumental 
in establishing whether the act of purposefully withholding information is performed by the 
monastic “who remembers” (saramānena, Pāt 6,1) their deeds, as the commentary adds, due to 
inactivity (akiriyā) regarding “the door of speech” (Pāt-a 26,4-5). Here, asking the monk about 
his status thrice is not about giving the possible perpetrator the time to come up with a confes­
sion but rather to ensure the level of consciousness, which involves memory, so that a possible

--- PAGE 164 ---
Repetition
143
infringement may not be dismissed as due to a mere lack of attention. Repetition here, as in 
many comparable cases also in the Prātimokṣa of other schools, where monastics are “requested 
and reminded two to three times” to desist from an action before it is called a transgression 
(e.g., Prebish 1996: 58, 60, 68–69, 85), cannot be simply an encore or potentially open-ended, 
but an iteration that is delimited by a prescribed set of times that need to be completed to 
firmly establish a potential breaching of the law and to validate an action. Repetition in the 
tisaraṇa and in the pātimokkha, performed either by the “candidate” or by the “examiner,” either 
as a promise or as a prompt, thus functions in diverse ways within comparable contexts of 
recurring ritual confirmation.
The threefold repetition, however, also occurs outside the ritual-juridical performative con­
text in the pericopes of the hagiographical passages of the canon, with a person, as if ritually, 
addressing another three times before the narrative carries on, usually leading to the exposition 
of a sermon by the Buddha. That involves mostly visitors requesting the Buddha to answer a 
question and the Buddha accepting an invitation only at the third request (e.g., MN II 103–104) 
or either initially rejecting the question (e.g. MN I 387; SN IV 306,16-307,2) or addressing 
the question more fully (e.g. DN I 211,6-212,9) only at the third exhortation. More often and 
more strikingly in narrative texts, however, the threefold repetition fails to have the desired 
effect and thus leads to a turn of events. That includes such prominent passages as Subaddha’s 
request to speak to the Buddha before his parinibbāna, thrice refused by Ānanda before the 
Buddha overrules his disciple (DN II 149–150); Raṭṭhapāla requesting his parents thrice to 
consent to him going forth and being denied it as many times (MN II 56–57); the people 
warning the Buddha thrice, to no avail, about Aṅgulimāla (MN II 98); the Buddha, unsuccess­
fully, admonishing the unruly monks of Kosambi, thrice (MN III 153); and the Buddha thrice 
rejecting Mahāpajāpatı̄’s request to personally accept her donation (MN III 253), to give only 
a few prominent examples. Mark Allon has shown that in the canon plot elements involving 
the display of respect are particularly heavy on repetition (Allon 1997: 79–80). The depictions 
of rituals of hospitality, including establishing the right timing, demonstrating determination 
and submission, and receiving permission for an encounter involving instruction, paralleling 
what is prescribed in the kammavācā, fall into the same category. The other cases too may be 
understood this way, with the threefold repetition being the form of ritualized address that 
defines the formally faultless request. The request may either succeed or fail and by its very 
iteration implies that there are strong reasons for it being rejected but would still be considered 
as having been adequately delivered. The thrice-repeated address would thus appear to be a 
feature of rule-driven behavior, similar to the contexts of worship and monastic law, but also 
as a narrative device that builds, maintains, and releases narrative tension, just as it slows down, 
stretches, and articulates the flow of the recited text.
Textual composition
Repetition extends beyond Theravāda liturgy and the framing of specific forms of discourse 
to textual composition in Pāli more generally. Large sections of the Pāli scriptures consist, 
famously, just as does much of the older Buddhist literature more generally, of passages of vary­
ing length that are repeated with no or minimal, if often crucial variations within one and the 
same text. In the history of the study of Theravāda literature, this feature has attracted both 
scholarly interest and censure. T. W. Rhys Davids was one of the first scholars to point at 
“the use of stock phrases” in the Tipiṭaka, as well as at “the habit of repeating whole sentences 
or even paragraphs, which in our modern books would be understood or inferred, instead 
of being expressed” (Rhys Davids 1881: xxiii). The pioneer of Pāli Studies was keenly aware

--- PAGE 165 ---
Christoph Emmrich
144
of the importance of these repetitions, warning that any “curtailing destroys at least the form 
and the emphasis of the originals,” pleading with the reader not to let “the wearisome form 
… shut out the very striking ideas which these suttas contain,” and recommending instead “a 
little judicious skipping” (Rhys Davids 1881: xxiv–xxxv). Léon Féer, in contrast, held the view 
regarding the Saṃyuttanikāya, next to the Aṅguttaranikāya and the Abhidhamma, the collection 
in which this phenomenon recurs most often, that “[t]he tiresome repetitions … form so great 
a proportion … that important abridgements are required.” (SN V, v–vi). This particular kind 
of concern is likely to be as old as the putting into writing of a previously oral corpus. It led 
the early redactors of the text to deploy the particles pe, pa, and la, variant Pāli abbreviations 
of the formulaic peyyāla, which may derive either from Ved. paryāya, “going round”; or from 
peya-alaṃ, “suitable to be filled”; or from pātum-alaṃ, “worthy to be preserved” (Levman 2020: 
113). In Pāli manuscripts, the term denotes passages that have occurred previously in the text, 
which those familiar with the relevant textual compositional principles may be able to sup­
ply and vary as required, even if sometimes it remains unclear what exactly is to be repeated 
(Gethin 2007: 366). Early European editors relied on this convention, sometimes intervening to 
a higher degree than Sinhalese scholars were comfortable with, or not always, stating whether 
the abbreviation was in the text or whether it was made by the editor (Norman 2006: 113–114). 
In contrast to Rhys Davids’s early appreciation of repetition or the translations by I.B. Horner, 
who, in Kenneth R. Norman’s words, “makes the stories … even more repetitive than the 
Pāli justifies” (Norman 2006: 70), in more contemporary Pāli translation practice, repetition 
is perceived as something that needs to be avoided, if not to say repressed, at all cost. Richard 
Gombrich records himself proposing, to Walpola Rahula’s great consternation, “that it would 
be sensible to print the Canon in far shorter form” (Gombrich 2018: 62). Translators like 
Maurice Walshe and Bhikkhu Bodhi make ample use of ellipsis points, the latter showing an 
understanding for the fact that “[r]eaders of the Pāli suttas are invariably irked and sometimes 
dismayed by the ponderous repetitiveness of the texts” (SN-transl. Bodhi 41). While Bhikkhu 
Bodhi consciously eliminates repetitions through rephrasing in narrative contexts but is more 
conservative in doctrinal ones (SN-transl. Bodhi: 42), Walshe goes so far as to resort to content 
summaries set in italics (e.g. DN-transl. Walshe: 301–304). It is a peculiar disinterest in form 
and the expectation that the translator should take care of Rhys Davids’s “judicious skipping” 
on behalf of the reader may explain why late twentieth- to early twenty-first-century transla­
tions earn considerable praise for their abridgments on popular online book distribution sites.
Norman (2006: 70–73) himself retains some ironic ambivalence when he confesses that 
“[r]epetition reaches its highest (or lowest, depending on how you look at it) level in Pāli, 
in my experience, in the Alagaddūpamasutta” (MN I 130–142), in which an erroneous view 
is repeated twelve times while, at the same time, indicating that the study of repetition may 
be critical for our understanding of the formation and functioning of Pāli texts. The interest 
of Buddhist Studies scholars in repetition springs from the puzzlement that Buddhist texts 
rely so much more on this feature than comparable Brahmanical ones (Gombrich 1990a: 7). 
Rather than seeing it as a form of “primitive speech” (Gonda 1959: 347), Richard Gombrich 
(1990b: 24) sees the origins of repetition in Buddhist texts in their supposed stress on content 
at the expense of sound, while Georg von Simson maintains that textual repetition mirrors the 
Buddhist attention to cyclical cosmological patterns (von Simson 1977: 148, quoted in Allon 
1997: 361). Other authors (Rhys Davids xxiii; Norman 1881: 65; Allon 1997) have tried to build 
their arguments on function. With the consensus being that repetition in canonical Pāli texts is 
connected to their oral beginnings, the most persistent opinion is that it functions as a tool for 
accurate textual preservation. In his groundbreaking study of formal aspects of canonical sutta 
prose passages, Mark Allon (1997: 363) proposes repetition to be a mnemonic tool suited for

--- PAGE 166 ---
Repetition
145
senior reciters with little prior textual training who did not profit from the professionalization 
of the high-performance Brahmin reciters acquired early in life. Bhikkhu Anālayo (2007: 9) goes 
so far as to assume a lack of training of the early reciters to explain the uneven transmission of 
some of the pericopal repetitions. Diverging from this line of thought, Gethin points out that 
the variations contained in the repetitions pose a different and not necessarily lesser challenge 
to those who memorize these texts. He takes up three more possible functions referred to by 
Allon: “getting the message across,” “cultivating mindfulness,” and “enhancing the aesthetic 
appeal of the texts” (2007: 382). Gethin concedes that repetitions may be intended to highlight 
key doctrinal concepts, maintaining that the minute variations require “a certain mental alert­
ness and agility” as “a practice for developing the Buddhist meditative virtues of mindfulness 
and concentration” (Gethin 2007: 382; Gethin 1992: 167; cp. Kwella 1978: 173). On the other 
hand, Gethin seems to want to dismiss the functionalist approach altogether, when he writes: 
“What is driving the repetitions seems to be the very requirement to repeat” (2007: 382), in 
other words, “repetition for its own sake” (2007: 383). By gesturing at repetitions involved 
in praying the rosary, Gethin makes the important point that “broader religious practices can 
help us understand the possible functions of repetition in early Buddhist texts” (2007: 383), 
suggesting that these other contexts may open up different modalities of function shared by 
very diverse texts. Repetition, particularly of those passages marked by pe or la and in need of 
being supplemented by the reciter may be understood, Gethin suggests, as “a religious exercise” 
(2007: 384; cp. Gethin 1992: 156). It is Gethin’s intuition that in the case of repetition purely 
functionalist models may yield limited results and that repetition may be a more general and 
more differentiated way of doing things. Resistance to functionalism is something rites share 
with texts that are meant to be beautiful or otherwise formally appealing and it is the aesthetic 
quality of repetition (following Hermann Oldenberg, Gonda, and von Simson quoted in Allon 
1997: 362; Levman 2020: 209, 215), that we pursue next.
Possibly the most well-known case of repetition in which beauty and ritual outweigh the 
legal or the mnemonic is the refrain maṅgalam uttamaṃ that concludes every single verse of 
the Mahāmaṅgalasutta (Sn 258–269 = Khp 2,23-3,26). The word maṅgalaṃ, which in its utter­
ance designates, announces, and performs auspiciousness, is in this form repeated 12 times. Its 
qualification with uttamaṃ (“utmost”) identifies it as on a different level than that of more 
common carriers of good fortune. In fact, its association with the diverse practices it modifies 
marks it as qualifying all that pertains to “a comprehensive vision of the Buddhist religious 
life” (Hallisey 1995: 414). Just as in the introduction of the Sinhalese commentary the humans’ 
and deities’ repeated naming of the most diverse things as auspicious covers the entire cosmos 
of the mundane (Hallisey 1995: 416–417), so the repetition in the verses helps enunciate one 
after the other the many acts and states that lead to well-being conceived in the Buddhist way. 
Repetition helps list, assemble, and complete all that is good, calling out every item and both 
recommending and adorning each with the same recurring powerful ring. The performance 
of this text in purificatory and protective rites (De Silva 1980: 111–115) speaks of the effect its 
most persistent lines are expected to have. If we take one step further into poetic territory while 
remaining in the Suttanipāta, repetition recurs in a very different form in the genre of dialogues 
in verse that are so characteristic for canonical poetry. When Sabhiya approaches the Buddha 
for advice, his address in the first stanza is echoed in the response he receives in the second:
‘I am the one who has come from far away, anxious and full of doubt,’ / said Sabhiya 
/ ‘and who is anxious to ask questions. / You be the one who takes care of them for 
me. You are the one who has been asked: / answer my questions, gradually and being 
faithful to the dhamma.’ //

--- PAGE 167 ---
Christoph Emmrich
146
‘You are the one who has come from far away’ / said the Lord, ‘and who is anxious 
to ask questions. / I am one who takes care of them for you. I am the one who has been 
asked: / I will answer your questions, gradually and being faithful to the dhamma.’ //
kaṃkhı̄ vecikicchı̄ āgamaṃ / iti Sabhiyo / pañhe pucchituṃ abhikaṃkhamāno / tes’ antakaro 
bhavāhi me pañhe me puṭṭho / anupubbaṃ anudhammaṃ vyākarohi me // Sn 510
dūrato āgato si Sabhiyā / ti Bhagavā / pañhe pucchituṃ abhikaṃkhamāno / tes’ antakaro 
bhavāmi ti pañhe te puṭṭho / anupubbaṃ anudhammaṃ vyākatomi te // Sn 511.
Here the ritualized thrice-repeated and finally granted request of the prose passages discussed 
regarding ritual is replaced by a play of reprise between requester and bestower of metrically 
repeated syllables in which the Buddha grants, in fact promises to comply, by rephrasing the 
request. The request is repeated to formulate agreement, while the difference repetition allows 
the poet to make, enunciates both asymmetry and opportunity, turns requesting into bestowing, 
and reminds the surprised listener of how intimately he who requests and he who bestows 
are connected.
The potential of repetition for the articulation of difference is more prominent in another 
poetic form that appears also in the Suttanipāta but finds its richest representation in the 
Saṃyuttanikāya’s Sagāthāvagga. The long duet of Dhaniya, the cattle baron, and the Buddha (Sn 
18–33) consists of alternating stanzas in which, analogous to the Mahāmaṅgalasutta, the refrain 
remains the same, but similar to the verses involving Sabhiya, the Buddha reprises what Dhaniya 
has sung, keeping the lyric’s structure and syntactic units unchanged, replacing key elements, 
and turning the words of the householder into the world of the mendicant:
‘I am the one whose rice is cooked, whose cow is milked,’ / said the cattle herd 
Dhaniya, / ‘I live on the bank of the Mahı̄ with my kin. / The hut is covered. The fire 
is stacked. / So, rain, god, if you please.’ //
‘I am the one whose wrath is no more, whose stiffness is gone,’ / said the Lord. / ‘I 
spend one night on the bank of the Mahı̄ / The hut is uncovered. The fire is out. / So, 
rain, god, if you please.’ //
pakkodano duddhakhı̄ro ‘ham asmi / iti Dhaniyo gopo / anutı̄re Mahiyā samānavāso / channā 
kuṭi āhito gini / atha ce patthayası̄ pavassa deva // Sn 18
akkodhano vigatakhı̄lo ‘ham asmi / iti Bhagavā / anutı̄re Mahiy’ekarattivāso / vivaṭā kuṭ̣i 
nibbuto gini / atha ce patthayası̄ pavassa deva // Sn 19
Heinrich Lüders identified pakkodano/akkodhano and duddhakhı̄ro/vigatakhı̄lo as puns (Lüders 
1954: §85), and Norman pointed out that °-khı̄lo would work better metrically and semantically 
but may have been assimilated to °-khı̄ro, strengthening the repetitive effect (Sn transl. Norman 
154). Norman also remarks that samānavāso may be the corrupt form of samāsavāso (staying 
for six months), which would echo ekarattivāso (staying for one night) much more accurately. 
In Sn 22–23 “my attentive cowherd wife” (gopı̄ mama assavā) recurs as “my attentive mind” 
(cittaṃ mama assavaṃ), in Sn 33–34 “enjoys” (nandati) is turned into “grieves” (socati), and in 
Sn 26–27 the stanza would repeat verbatim were it not for the negative particles that make 
“cattle” return as “no-cattle.” In Sn 33–34 (= SN I 240,17-241,7), the role of the prompter is 
transferred from Dhaniya to Māra, requiring a rejoinder that not only projects the other, better 
life but one that also contradicts and defeats Māra, the ultimate distorter. Contradiction is the 
aim of the many verses (gāthās) of the Mārasaṃyutta and the Devatāsaṃyutta that feature various

--- PAGE 168 ---
Repetition
147
unnamed godlings, Māra, the Buddha, and several mendicants; that cover not only conduct but 
also matters of cosmology and eschatology; and that are composed in the same duet form. Here 
we find an inverted refrain, with the first two half-verses (pādas) repeated almost verbatim and 
the divergences getting more pronounced as the poem progresses:
Nights and days never run out. / Life does not come to an end. / The life force of 
mortals circles onward, / like the rim of the wheel around the hub. //
Nights and days do run out. / Life does come to an end. / The life force of mortals 
is wanting, / like the water of a stream that’s merely a trickle. //
nāccayanti ahorattā / jı̄vitaṃ nūparujjhati / āyu anupariyāti maccānaṃ / nemı̄va rathakubbaran 
ti //
accayanti ahorattā / jı̄vitaṃ uparuhhati / āyu khı̄yati maccānaṃ / kunnadı̄naṃ va odakan 
ti // SN I 242,18-243,4.
In this example, as in many others collected in the two initial chapters (vaggas) of the 
Saṃyuttanikāya, we find a somewhat more subtle form of repetition at work than in the mere 
negation of cattle as an impediment toward the holy life. When the stanzas contrast “Night 
and days never run out” with “Nights and days do run out,” we must assume that there is 
more to the repetition than someone merely contradicting someone who got his facts wrong. 
Māra’s lines are not about showing that Māra simply doesn’t know better, but that his thinking 
is wrong because of his erroneous conception of the world and his resistance to the liberatory 
power of renunciation and that he does not mean well. The better way to read these verses 
is to assume that Māra and the mendicant are referring to the same thing in different ways. 
For stanza one, there will always be, and one will always live to see, another day. One could 
even say that the series of days and nights is one that never ends. On the other hand, every 
night and every day ends, as does the sum of days and nights of a human life, suggesting a 
sense of urgency, which is what stanza two is about. This deployment of double entendre 
is even more obvious in those poems in which there is no negation to signal the difference 
the repetition provokes. In one poem, both the deity (devatā) and the Buddha begin their 
respective stanzas with
Life leads to the close, the life force is weak. / For the person who has been lead unto 
old age there are no defenses. / The person who perceives the horror that is dying /
upanı̄yatı̄ jı̄vitam appam āyu / jarūpanitassa na santi tāṇā / etaṃ bhayaṃ maraṇe pekkhamāno 
/ SN I 4,8-11,14-16
But while the deity concludes:
should perform meritorious acts that lead to happiness.’ //
puññāni kayirātha sukhāvahānı̄ ti // SN I 4,12, 
the Buddha’s coda is:
and who is looking for peace should avoid the ruse that is the world.’ //
lokāmisaṃ pajahe santipekkho ti // SN I 4,17.

--- PAGE 169 ---
Christoph Emmrich
148
Here, the awareness of “the horror that is dying” is shared by the two speakers and, as such, 
is worth repeating. This means, at the very least, that the speakers have diverging views as to 
what to do about a situation they seem to agree upon. But one could also argue that the devatā’s 
advice is based on a misreading of the world which only the Buddha’s verse identifies cor­
rectly as representing the ultimate trap. In fact, the commentary (SN-a 23,14-15) explains that 
the deity says these words with, in its mind, the many eons of life in heaven brought forth by 
meditation and has the Buddha remark that “[t]his deity is presenting a discourse on liberation 
that does not qualify as real liberation” (ayaṃ devatā aniyānikaṃ [Burm. aniyyānikaṃ] vaṭṭa-kathaṃ 
kathethı̄ ti), “pointing out to him [or her] the undoing of becoming” (vivattaṃ assa dessento).
If one were to understand repetition as an alaṅkāra, that is, as something that is an “improve­
ment” intended to both beautify and fortify a text, “a magical-religious expedient” that “applies 
to a sacred state” (Gonda 1975: 265) rather than an “ornamentation” in the common sense of 
the word, as it is frequently translated, the closest poetic form these repetitions come to is the 
yamaka, or “doubling.” In poetics, at the most basic level, it refers to the repetition of identical 
syllables within a verse or over a certain amount of verses. Its formal aspects are theorized as 
early as in Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra, where yamaka is listed as one of the four alaṅkāras, as well as 
in Daṇḍin’s seventh- and eighth-century Kāvyādarśa and in the Pāli Subodhālaṃkāra, in which, 
as if prefiguring the ambivalence of modern editors and translators of Pāli, yamaka is uneasily 
located somewhere between an alaṅkāra and a defect (dośa; Wright 2002: 324, 332). In its most 
elaborate and popular form, prominent in Sanskrit citrakāvya, or “flashy poetry” (Tubb 2014: 
151), a yamaka requires an identical sequence of syllables to be repeated as a whole that allows 
for more than one parallel meaning depending on how the words are broken up. Gary Tubb 
points out that one of the functions of this kind of yamaka is to “provide a somehow more 
intense opportunity to examine a particular word or group of words.” “[T]he repetition of the 
word,” Tubb writes, “forces us to think twice about its significance”; in fact, “in every instance 
of yamaka we are compelled to find a distinct meaning to go with the second utterance of the 
sounds” (2014: 161). While the yamaka had been denied any value for the production of the 
main emotionally effective aesthetic flavors, or rasas, particularly involving the erotic, by theorists 
such as Ānandavardhana (Pollock 2016, 74–75), Tubb shows that its echolike, hypnotic quality, 
similar to poetic forms based on sound (śabdālaṅkāra), may indeed be accepted to support the 
adbhuta, or miraculous, rasa, to present “something striking, something spectacular” (Tubb 2014: 
188; cp. Stainton 224–225). The verbatim or close to verbatim repetitions of the Sagāthāvagga 
quoted earlier neither qualify as examples of internal rhyme nor do they display the virtuosity 
expected from a citrakāvya. They also do not appear, as in the poems (mahākāvyas) studied by 
Tubb, as the occasional flash that startles the connoisseur. Yet, we find in the Pāli verses both 
the subliminal ring of the refrain and the rhetorical device that forces the listeners or the read­
ers to repeat, to pause, and to think again, to realize, to their surprise, that the same turns out 
to be different and that the effect and message of the poem lies in recognizing that difference.
Doctrine
Our exploration of repetition so far has closely followed the form of texts and their practice, 
observing from outside the text, so to speak, what these texts are made to do. That has meant 
that repetition so far has been considered predominantly in its performative and textual embodi­
ment, in other words, as what the text does, not as what it tells us texts or humans are doing. 
To better understand what it is that drives repetition it is imperative that we take a closer look 
at what the Theravāda texts themselves tell us about repetition. In introductory verses of the 
Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ the commentator of the Dı̄ghanikāya states what he sets out to do:

--- PAGE 170 ---
Repetition
149
Without diverging from the consensus held by the seniors, who are the luminaries in 
the lineage of the seniors, / who are well-versed in explaining and who reside at the 
Mahāvihāra, / I, leaving aside the variously repeated meaning, I shall clarify the mean­
ing for the sake of the happiness of the good folks and the longevity of the dhamma. /
samayaṃ 
avilomento 
therānaṃ 
theravaṃsappadı̄pānaṃ 
/ 
sunipuṇavinicchayānaṃ 
mahāvihārādhivāsı̄naṃ // hitvā punappunāgataṃ atthaṃ atthaṃ pakāsayissāmi / sujanassa ca 
tuṭṭ̣hatthaṃ ciraṭṭhittatthañ ca dhammassa // DN-a I 1,21-24
With all the repetition we have run through so far, it may come as a surprise to encounter, 
on the part of a writer of Pāli, a critical attitude toward repeating. The commentator, in fact, 
seems to build his very enterprise on “leaving behind” (hitvā) elaborations of meaning (atthaṃ) 
that have been repeated (literally “arrived at,” °-āgataṃ), “again and again” (punappuna-). The 
verses seem to say that the exegetical process consists in separating what has been repeated 
from what still needs to be clarified. It also implies that distinguishing the two involves “not 
diverging” (avilomento) from the normative consensus (samayaṃ) regarding the text’s meaning. 
In other words, the commentator need not repeat to be faithful, just as it is a requirement of 
a commentary to say things that have not been said yet. That agrees with a verse in another 
commentarial opening which says that the commentator is “commenting according to meaning 
not previously [commented on] (atthaṃ apubbam anuvaṇṇayanto, Paṭis-a 1,22). It is also clear, 
however, that the commentarial work is seen as more complex than dismissing the repeated 
and just adding the new. A passage in the Visuddhimagga brings back repetition by claiming that 
the good commentator should proceed “by apprehending the meaning and, having returned 
again to that meaning, by explaining it in many alternative ways” (atthaṃ sangāhantena tam ev’ 
atthaṃ punarāvattetvā aparehi pi pariyāyantarehi niddisantena ca; Vism 522,23-24). Commenting, 
thus, involves a kind of repetition different from repeating the already known and, rather, one 
that returns to the same word and each time produces an ulterior meaning. Our previous read­
ing of the verse hitvā punappunāgataṃ atthaṃ atthaṃ pakāsayissāmi (DN-a I 1,23) was based on 
the Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyana’s editorial intervention that places a comma after punappunāgataṃ, thus 
distinguishing between the repeated meaning, on one hand, and the to-be-clarified mean­
ing, on the other. That is in agreement with the variant in the passage in verses opening the 
Aṭṭhasālinı̄ which has the same phrase atthaṃ pakāyissāmi (Dhs-a 2,5). The density of stylistic 
repetitions in the verses in question (therānaṃ theravaṃsa-, punappuna-, tuṭṭhatthaṃ ciraṭṭ̣hittatthaṃ) 
and -āgataṃ concluding the eight syllables of a double pāda, however, suggests that the repeti­
tion atthaṃ atthaṃ may be also, at least rhetorically, read together as “meaning by meaning,” as 
in the phrase taṃ pana tattha tattha pakāsayissāma (commenting on the first saṅgı̄ti; Vin-ṭ Vajir 4) 
and in the sense of “I will give the commentary on meaning in the order of [the individual] 
words (padānukkamato eva karissām’atthavaṇṇanaṃ; Dhs-a 2,10).
The phrase tattha tattha, which echoes in the alternative reading atthaṃ atthaṃ, falls, like 
punappunaṃ, into the category of expressions where the repetition of the word itself denotes an 
event repeated over time, just as in divase divase (“day by day,” e.g., Thı̄ 437) or suve suve (“tomor­
row and after-tomorrow,” e.g., Dhp 229a) but also like thokathokaṃ and khaṇe khaṇe in the verse
Gradually the wise man may, bit by bit, from instant to instant / polish away his own 
fault, like a smith the tarnish [that appears] on sterling silver. //
anupubbena medhavı̄ thokathokaṃ khaṇe khaṇe / kammāro rajatasseva niddhane malam attano 
// Dhp 239,

--- PAGE 171 ---
Christoph Emmrich
150
where Dhp-a III 340,13–14 explains khaṇe khaṇe as okāse okāse, “from one opportunity to the 
next.” These examples help illustrate the way the commentary is intended to repeatedly deal 
with meaning as it proceeds to elucidate the Buddha’s word: repetition means not a return of 
the whole, such as required in recitation, but a distinct, successive, persistent, ongoing, selective, 
yet comprehensive exegetical coverage of the material, word by word, meaning by meaning. 
What emerges here is another aspect of repetition: that involving a forward movement in which 
the cumulative effect repetition has on those participating in it is crucial, because it is only thus 
that the projected illumination can be achieved.
To clarify this further we need to look at the repetition of words the commentaries and 
manuals resort to when referring to repetitive performances. In the Visuddhimagga, anupassanā, 
or contemplation, is explained as being purimañāṇaṃ anu-anupassanato (Vism 290,34), which 
Ñāṇamoli translates as “because of … re-seeing successively (anu anu passanā) each preced­
ing kind of knowledge” (Vism transl. Ñāṇamoli 283). In another explanation of anupassati 
as anu-anupassati, we find it glossed further, reminding one of the sequence of meanings in 
commentarial discourse, as anekehi ākārehi punappunaṃ passatı̄ ti, “one sees again and again 
due to multiple signs” (Vism 642,13–14). Here Ñāṇamoli simplifies his earlier translation of 
anu-anupassati to “he sees always accordingly” (Vism transl. Ñāṇamoli 665). The exegesis of 
anu extends to more terms that carry the same prefix. When talking about the ten recollec­
tions (dasasu anussatisu), the Visuddhimagga states “Awareness [or memory] (sati) is re-collection 
because it arises again and again” (punappunaṃ uppajjanato sati yeva anussati, Vism 197,4–5), and 
the commentary adds: anu anu sati anussatı̄ ti, literally, “‘[r]ecollection’ (anussati) is awareness [or 
memory] (sati) [understood as operating] along (anu) and along (anu)” (Vism-mhṭ 123). The 
commentary’s use of anu anu extends to explaining concurrent occurrence (anu anu pavattana, 
Vism-mhṭ 268) in breathing meditation or the piecemeal fashioning (anu anu byañjana, Vism-
mhṭ 15) of stipulating an erroneous whole out of parts in the perception process. The prefix 
anu- denotes consistent placement or movement along, or close to, an extended area, usually 
an imagined line of progression, or more abstractly, a rule or norm. That would mean that 
anu bears not only the meaning of “strongly, persistently, completely” (Sazaki 1986: 15–18) 
but already in itself, as Julian Pas has pointed out, “some degree of intensity, or methodical 
order, or repetition” (Pas 1995: 255). The commentarial analysis of verbal forms denoting key 
mental practices reveals that their very functioning is premised on repetition, that one cannot 
perceive or remember properly without doing it again and again at different times and with 
different mental objects and maintaining the same orientation and thus building the intensity 
and quality of the performance.
The assumption that these formulations are based on an understanding of repetition requires 
us to make one more crucial step. So far, this study has assumed, maybe naively, that the English 
term repetition does indeed capture something that is going on in Pāli texts and, even more 
consequentially, that Theravāda texts are in fact concerned with. In order to raise our termi­
nological self-awareness, however, we should bear in mind that there is no single word in Pāli 
that adequately translates as the English repetition (EPD s.v. repetition). The terms punarutti (or 
-utta) or punakaraṇa refer to concrete cases of repeated speech (even tautology) and repeated 
action, and there is a range of compounds beginning with puna- that refer to specific events 
that can repeat, such as, in the eschatological context, puna(b)bhāva, “renewed existence,” or 
pun’āvāsa, “repeating living,” or refer to a recurring unit of time, such as punadivase, “on the fol­
lowing day,” or punavāre, “another time,” or specific actions such as punapavāraṇa, “a repeated or 
renewed offer” (DP s.v. pun(ar)-). Even the word punarāvatti, a variant of which punarāvartanaya, 
mediated through Sanskrit, is used in modern Sinhala for English repetition, in Pāli merely

--- PAGE 172 ---
Repetition
151
denotes return, usually to a place. There is, however, a Pāli term that has been translated with 
repetition, and that is āsevana (or āsevanā). The Pali–English Dictionary (PED s.v. āsevana) sees rea­
son to differentiate between “practice, pursuit, indulgence,” on the one hand, and “succession, 
repetition,” on the other, while the Dictionary of Pāli (DP s.v. āsevanā) proposes to consolidate 
the meaning of āsevana as “assiduous practice; habitual cultivation.” Strikingly, the influential 
translations of the Visuddhimagga (Vism transls. Pe Maung, Ñāṇatiloka, Ñāṇamoli, Maës) and 
of the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (Abhidh-s & Abhidh-s-ṭ transl. Wijeratne & Gethin), two texts 
in which this term figures prominently, all feature repetition, Wiederholung, or répétition. This 
divergence from the DP entry may give pause, as in most of the passages in question it may be 
debatable whether repetition or habitual cultivation would make for the more compelling choice.
As early as in the Visuddhimagga āsevana appears to denote a certain mode of practice that 
leads to a specific sought-for state. Satisfaction in the sense of āsevana (āsevana āsevanaṭṭhena 
sampahaṃsanā pariyosānaṃ; Vism 148,14–16) is what is implied in the first of the four meditative 
states (jhāna), for the jhāna’s āsevanā takes place in that moment (yā c’assa tasmiṃ khaṇe pavattā 
āsevanā; Vism 149,20–21) in which the meditator experiences the jhāna. This reads as if āsevana 
refers to maintaining that state, not necessarily to its repetition. The term is also used when 
explaining how the performance of a certain mental mode called “conformity and change-of-
lineage” (anulomagotrabhūnaṃ) in a single cognitive series occurs through āsevana, which leads 
to the required change. That mental performance is compared to that of a person who pole-
vaults across a stream and who may land staggering if he is lacking in āsevana (aladdhāsevanatāya) 
regarding that specific feat (Vism 673,30–32). Here again assiduous practice may be more adequate 
than repetition, with repetitive action being merely one requirement of exercising. This render­
ing of āsevana would even work well in the stock phrase in which the term recurs ever so 
often as the first element of the triad, it forms together with development (bhāvana) and cultiva­
tion (bahulı̄kamma), or variants thereof, in sentences such as “‘Virtues of such kind lead to the 
absence of remorse for the mind, … to āsevana, to development, to cultivation, to fortification 
(evarūpāni sı̄lāni cittassa avippaṭisārāya saṃvattanti … āsevanāya …, bhāvanāya …, bahulı̄kammāya …, 
alankārāya …; Vism 50,26–30). However, already the bahulı̄- in the term bahulı̄kamma may refer 
both to volume and to frequency. That the texts do address the repetitive nature of āsevana 
becomes clear in descriptions such as the following regarding recollection: “Thus, though he 
has recollected by any of these eight signs, [his] consciousness obtains āsevana due to attention 
[paid] again and again (iti imesaṃ aṭṭhannaṃ ākārānaṃ aññataraññatarena anussarato pi punappunaṃ 
manasikāravasena cittaṃ āsevanaṃ labhati; Vism 238,29–31). Here, āsevana is not identical with, but 
is obtained through, repeated action.
As Caroline A. F. Rhys Davids in her 1900 translation of Dhammasaṅgaṇı̄ 1354 (Dhs transl. 
CAF Rhys Davids 329) still renders āsevana as “the pursuing,” we probably owe to Shwe 
Zan Aung to have introduced repetition in his and C. A. F. Rhys Davids’s 1915 translation of 
Kathāvatthu 509,35–510,20. In a footnote to their translation he notes:
Āsevanā, from āsevati, to serve over and over again … is a difficult term to translate. In 
the Compendium (p. 192, § 12) we used “succession,” but repetition or even retention, 
is in some ways better. The Burmese translators render by “repetition so as to form a 
habit”; hence habitual repetition. (Kv transl. Shwe Zan Aung & CAF Rhys Davids 294)
However, as Shwe Zan Aung points out, his translation of Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha 41,14, renders 
āsevanapaccayo with “[the relation of] succession,” in the footnote he already adds: “More lit. 
‘repetition of an action.’ It is used for ‘recurrence [sic]” (ADS transl. Shwe Zan Aung 192, fn. 3).

--- PAGE 173 ---
Christoph Emmrich
152
The Burmese genealogy of the translation is confirmed by the Tipiṭaka pāḷi mranmā abhidhān, 
which reflects the vernacular commentarial, or nissaya, tradition. It not only gives (TPMA s.v. 
āsevana) “remaining in effect,” “subsisting” (mhı̄ vai khraṅ) as the main meaning but also includes, 
at the very bottom of a six-item list, “adding” (thap kā thap kā, literally “piling-on, piling-on”), 
“acting upon repeatedly” (pru lup khraṅḥ), and “repeating” (thui mvamḥ khraṅḥ).
The āsevanapaccaya, the twelfth of the 24 paccayas, or causal conditions, which Shwe Zan 
Aung refers to, is explained in the Visuddhmagga to be “like the effort [made] on various 
past occasions (purima-purima-) regarding [the memorization of] books etc.” (ganthādisu puri­
mapurimabhiyogo viya, Vism 538,4-5), with purimapurima- echoing the use of the duplicated 
prefix anu anu discussed earlier. The commentary on the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha is even 
more specific:
Āsevana is [a process by which] something is pervaded by something similar, which 
[in contrast] is [already] excellent on the account of it being strong due to [previously 
acquired] mastery [and so the thing that is pervaded] becomes of the same kind [i.e. 
also excellent],—like the [recitation of] a book that has been constantly studied on 
various past occasions [affects] the [recitation of] the book on various future occasions. 
(purimapurimaparicitagantho viya uttaruttaraganthassa kusalādibhāvena attasadisassa paguṇa
balavabhāvavisiṭṭattasamānajātiyatāgāhaṇam āsevanaṃ; Abhi-s-ṭ 186,23–25)
Nyāṇatiloka when explaining the “repetition-condition” (āsevanapaccaya) refers expressly 
to “just as in learning by heart, th[r]ough constant repetition, the later recitation becomes 
gradually easier and easier” (Nyāṇatiloka 1980: 143). Past repetition is the condition for the 
successful repetition of actions in the future. These passages identify neither anu anu or purima 
purima, nor the achieved habitual mastery with āsevana. Rather, āsevana understood as causal 
condition seems to be the power produced by repeated practice that explains how doing 
things again leads to mastery. In other words, if we were to translate āsevana with repetition, 
repetition would need to mean more than just “doing something again.” One of the conditions 
of mastery is to do something again, but only after having already done it many times, which 
is why the commentary on the Abhidhammaṭṭhasaṅgaha also speaks of the mental impulsions 
of karmic volitions (javana) “acquiring āsevana again and again” (punappunaṃ laddhāsevanāni; 
Abhi-s-ṭ 147,3), in this case in the process of relinking (paṭisandhi) in the karmic flow from 
one birth to the next. In order to do things again drawing from one’s mastery, āsevana, the 
power to repeat, can and needs to be reactivated again and again. This passage further shows 
that āsevana is also used on a much more basic level than just to explain competence. In 
fact, it is meant to explain aspects of the very functioning of kamma. The repetitive power 
of āsevana does not just lie in doing something again, but in the recurrence of the units of 
mental activity: “[I]t is only through two instances of conforming consciousness and not one 
alone that one achieves the causal condition of āsevana (dvı̄hi anulomacittehi bhavitabbaṃ; na hi 
ekaṃ āsevanapaccayaṃ labhati, Vism 675,22–24). Āsevana becomes relevant for explaining the 
emergence of possible causal events, or dhammas, based on the diverse powers inherent in 
the past of which āsevana is one (Abhi-s-ṭ 193,10). The serial arrangement of the smallest 
elements that constitute the mental karmic flow lends itself to an understanding of causation 
in which repetition plays a key role.
The Theravāda assumption that things can and must repeat on this most basic ontological 
level for karma to function has not remained unchallenged, as one reply to a heretic view in 
the Kathāvatthu proves. There the Theravādin has to contend with the challenge by certain

--- PAGE 174 ---
Repetition
153
heretics, vaguely called “Those of the Northern Path” (Uttarapāthakas), that “[a]s all dhammas 
are momentary and as, after something has been there only for an instant, [there is] nothing, 
that in fact performs āsevana (āsevati) as a causal condition of repetition, there exists no such 
thing as the causal condition of āsevana” (tattha yasmā sabbe dhammā khaṇikā, na koci muhuttaṃ 
pi ṭhatvā āsevanapaccayaṃ āsevati nāma, tasmā natthi kiñci āsevanapaccayatā, Kv-a 197,23–198,2). 
In other words, how can anything repeat, if what is expected to repeat is no longer there 
after enduring only for a single moment in time? Would not repetition through that which 
links the identical and the different across time imply the duration of something that is 
more extended than the singular momentary? The Kathāvatthu (Kv 618,18–620,3) responds 
by abandoning the level of dhammas, returning to the level of conventional practice, and 
presenting a canonical passage (AN IV 247,8–248,13). The passage states that, if “repeated, 
developed, practiced frequently” (āsevito bhāvito bahulı̄kato) correct views, correct purpose, and 
so on lead to the deathless state, whereas killing, stealing, and so on lead to terrible births. 
The bad things, if done “very lightly” (sabbalahu, meaning, maybe, if repeated “less often” 
or done “just once”), lead to birth as a human whose life is bound to be short. Repetition 
happens and it matters, because living beings owe their future experiences to having done 
certain things more than once.
The place that we find ourselves in at the end of this study, the textual environment 
of Theravāda scholastic debate surrounding what may come closest to the English term 
repetition, is by no means intended to serve as a privileged place from which to review 
and reread the texts and practices previously discussed. There is no indication whatsoever 
that what the scholastic texts say about āsevana and the workings of the mind may in any 
way function as a master key to our understanding of what is going on in the commenta­
tors’ exegetical method that resists repeating only to progress from word to word, in the 
yamaka-like verses of the Suttanipāta or the Sagāthāvagga that playfully allow the same to 
surprise us by becoming different, in the Mahāmaṅgalasutta that needs to repeat in order to 
name all that is auspicious, in the massive iterations that have helped build the corpus of 
the suttas, or in the seasonal or daily, lay or monastic scansions of confirmation and control 
or submission and devotion. On the contrary, as the example of the re-reading of books 
in the explanation of āsevana shows, it may be all these other practices that give meaning 
to rationalizations of how the mind works and, beyond that, meaning to each other. The 
beauty of an unexpected divergence may be hidden in rituals and texts that look all the 
same. Discipline and dedication may emerge out of a couplet varied ever so slightly. And 
the scholastic problem of the similar versus the same in mental repetition may allow us to 
think differently about how a good yamaka is composed or what makes for a successful ritual. 
Still, we need to also keep in mind that the rules for acting ritually, composing poetry, and 
explaining the mind are distinct and are kept distinct by the texts we study. Just as the English 
time may be a word too clunky or too overdetermined to be useful for exploring what 
is going on between doing something and doing something again and may itself become 
filled with new meaning when repetition asks us to think again, so repetition itself may be 
equally inadequate to capture the differences it claims to contain. And yet it has allowed 
us to collect and precariously assemble a range of practices that may do more than just be 
different from or reducible to the other. In fact, rather than using one to explain the other 
by positing either the synchronic regimentation of bodies or the momentary authority of 
the beautiful or the recursive agenda of mental cultivation as primary for this peculiar form 
of doing things, it may be more appropriate to understand each of these various instances 
of repetition as repetitions of the other.

--- PAGE 175 ---
Christoph Emmrich
154
References
Abhidh, S., Abhidh, S.T. 1989. The Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha of Bhadantācariya Anuruddha and the 
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinı̄-ṭı̄kā of Bhadantācariya Sumaṅgalasāmi, ed. Hammalawa Saddhatissa. Oxford: The 
Pali Text Society.
Abhidh, S. transl. Shwe Zan Aung = 1967. Compendium of Philosophy, translated by Shwe Zan Aung. London: 
The Pali Text Society.
Abhidh, S., Abhidh, S.T. transl. Wijeratne & Gethin = 2007. Summary of the Topics of Abhidhamma 
(Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha) by Anuruddha. Exposition of the Topics of Abhidhamma (Abhidhammatthavibhāvinı̄) 
by Sumaṅgala, translated by R.P. Wijeratne, Rupert Gethin. Lancaster: The Pali Text Society.
Allon, Mark. 1997. Style and Function. A study of the dominant stylistic features of the prose portions of Pāli canoni­
cal sutta texts and their mnemonic function. Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist Studies.
AN = The Aṅguttara-Nikāya, edited by Richard Morris, E. Hardy, & Mabel Hunt. 2nd ed. [1961] 1999.
Anālayo, Bhikkhu. 2007. “Oral Dimensions of Pali Discourses: Pericopes, other mnemonic techniques and 
the oral performance context.” Canadian Journal of Buddhist Studies 3: 5–33.
Bloomfield, Maurice. 1916. Rig-Veda Repetitions. The repeated verses and distichs and stanzas of the Rig-Veda in 
systematic presentation and with critical discussion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bond, George Doherty. 1982. “The Buddha as Refuge in the Theravāda Buddhist Tradition.” In The Threefold 
Refuge in the Theravāda Buddhist Tradition, eds. John Ross Carter, George Doherty Bond, Edmund F. Perry, 
Shanta Ratnayaka, 16–32. Chambersburg, PA: Anima Books.
Bruhn, Klaus. 1983. “Repetition in Jaina Narrative Literature.” Indologica Taurinensia 11: 27–75.
Carter, John Ross. 1982. “The Notion of Refuge (Saraṇa) in the Theravāda Tradition.” In The Threefold 
Refuge in the Theravāda Buddhist Tradition, eds. John Ross Carter, Bond George Doherty, Edmund F. Perry, 
Shanta Ratnayaka, 1–15. Chambersburg, PA: Anima Books.
Collins, Steven. 1998. Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities. Utopias of the Pali imaginaire. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
De Silva, Lynn. 1980. Buddhism: Beliefs and Practices in Sri Lanka (2nd ed.). Colombo: Ecumenical Institute.
Dhs transl. CAF Rhys Davids = A Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics, translated by Caroline A. F. Rhys 
Davids. 3rd ed. Oxford: The Pali Text Society, [1900] 2004.
Dhs-a = The Atthasālinı̄. Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dhammasaṅgaṇi, edited by Edward Müller. Bristol: 
Pali Text Society, [1897] 2011.
DN-a = The Sumaṅgala-vilāsinı̄, Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on the Dı̄gha Nikāya, edited by T. W. Rhys 
Davids and J. Estlin Carpenter. 3 vols. 2nd ed. London: The Pali Text Society, 1968–1971.
DN transl. Walshe = Thus I Have Heard. 1987. The Long Discourses of the Buddha, translated by Maurice 
Walshe. London: Wisdom.
DP = A Dictionary of Pāli, compiled by Margaret Cone. Vol. 3. Bristol: The Pali Text Society, 2020.
EPD = Buddhadatta Mahāthera. 1979. English – Pali Dictionary. London: The Pali Text Society.
Freschi, Elisa, Maas, Philipp A., eds. 2017. Adaptive Reuse. Aspects of creativity in South Asian cultural history. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Gethin, Rupert M.L. 1992. “The Mātikās: Memorization, Mindfulness, and the List.” In the Mirror of Memory. 
Reflections on mindfulness and remembrance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism, ed. Janet Gyatso, pp. 149–172. 
Albany: SUNY Press.
Gethin, Rupert M.L. 2008. “What’s in a Repetition? On counting the suttas of the Saṃyutta-nikāya.” 
Journal of the Pali Text Society 29: 365–387.
Gombrich, Richard. 1990a. “Recovering the Buddha’s Message.” In The Buddhist Forum, I, eds. Tadeusz 
Skorupski, pp. 5–20. London: SOAS University of London.
Gombrich, Richard. 1990b. “How Mahāyāna Began.” The Buddhist Forum, I, ed. Tadeusz Korupski, 21–30. 
London: SOAS University of London.
Gonda, Jan. 1959. Stylistic Repetition in the Veda. Amsterdam: N.V. Noord-Hollandsche Uitgevers 
Maatschappij.
Gonda, Jan. 1975. Selected Studies. Vol. II. Sanskrit Word Studies. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Kv transl. Shwe Zan Aung & CAF Rhys Davids = Points of Controversy or Subjects of Discourse, being a transla­
tion of the Kathā-Vatthu from the Abhidhamma-Piṭaka by Shwe Zan Aung and Rhys Davids. Oxford: The 
Pali Text Society [1915] 1993.
Kwella, Peter. 1978. “Some Remarks on Style in Some Buddhist Sanskrit Texts.” Indologica Taurinensia 6: 
169–175.

--- PAGE 176 ---
Repetition
155
Levman, Bryan G. 2020. Pāli, the Language. The medium and message. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing.
Lüders, Heinrich. 1954. Beobachtungen über die Sprache des buddhistischen Urkanons. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
MN = The Majjhima-Nikāya, edited by V. Trenckner. 4 vol. Oxford: The Pali Text Society, [1888] 1993.
Ñāṇatiloka. [1952] 1980. Buddhist Dictionary. Manual of Buddhist terms and doctrines. Kandy: Buddhist 
Publication Society.
Nyanaponika. 1965. The Threefold Refuge. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Oldenberg, Hermann. 1917. Zur Geschichte der altindischen Prosa: Mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der prosaisch-
poetischen Erzählung. Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung.
Pas, Julian F. 1995. Visions of Sukhāvatı̄. Shan-tao’s commentary on the Kuan wu-liang-shou-Fo ching. Albany: 
SUNY.
Pollock, Sheldon. A Rasa Reader. Classical Indian Aesthetics. New York: Columbia University Press, 2016.
Prebish, Charles S. [1996] 2002. Buddhist Monastic Discipline. The Sanskrit Prātimokṣa Sūtras of the 
Mahāsāṃghikas and the Mūlasarvāstivādins. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Ramanujan, A.K. 1991. “Repetition on the Mahābhārata.” In Essays in the Mahābhārata, ed. Arvind Sharma, 
419–443. Leiden: Brill.
Rhys Davids, T.W. transl. 1881. Buddhist Suttas. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sazaki, Genjun H. [1986], 1992. Linguistic Approach to Buddhist Thought. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
von Simson, Georg. 1977. “Zur Phrase yena … tenopajagāma / upetya und ihren Varianten im buddhist­
ischen Sanskrit.” In Beiträge zur Indienforschung. Ernst Waldschmidt zum 80. Geburtstag gewidmet, ed. Heinz 
Bechert, 479–488. Berlin: Museum für Indische Kunst.
Sn = Suttanipāta, edited by Dines Andersen and Helmer Smith. Oxford: The Pali Text Society, [1913] 2017.
Sn-transl. Norman = The Group of Discourses (Sutta-Nipāta), translated by K. R. Norman. 2nd ed. Bristol: 
The Pali Text Society, [1992] 2015.
SN = Saṃyutta-Nikāya edited by M. Leon Féer. 5 vols; vol. 1 edited by G.A. Somaratne. Oxford: The Pali 
Text Society, 1888–1998.
SN-transl. = The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: 2000. A translation of the Saṃyutta Nikāya, transl. by 
Bhikkhu Bodhi. Somerville: Wisdom.
Shōno, Masanori. 2019. “How to Become a Buddhist Monk. A Re-edition of the Gilgit Karmavācanā 
Texts.” Bulletin of the International Institute for Buddhist Studies 2: 57–106.
Stainton, Hamsa. 2019. Poetry as Prayer in the Sanskrit Hymns of Kashmir. New York: Oxford University Press.
TPMA = Tipiṭaka pāḷi mranmā abhidhān. 22 vols. Rankun: Sāsanā reḥ ūḥ cı̄ḥ ṭhāna puṃ nhip tuik, 1964–2017.
Tubb, Gary. 2014. “Kāvya with Bells On: Yamaka in the Śiṣupālavadha; Or, ‘What’s a flashy verse like you 
doing in a great poem like this?’” In Innovations and Turning Points: Toward a History of Kāvya Literature, 
eds. Yigal Bronner, David Shulman, Gary Tubb, 142–194. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
UK = J. F. Dickson 1875. “The Upasampadá-Kammavácá Being the Buddhist Manual of the Form and 
Manner of Ordering of Priests and Deacons. The Páli Text, with a Translation and Notes.” The Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 7 (NS), 1: 1–16.
Vism = The Visuddhi-Magga of Buddhaghosa, edited by C. A. F. Rhys Davids. London: The Pali Text Society, 
[1920] 1975.
Vism-mhṭ = Visuddhimaggamahāṭı̄kā. Chaṭṭha Saṅgāyanā CD-ROM Edition, Version 4. Igatpuri: Vipassana 
Research Institue, 1995.
Vism transl. Maës = Buddhaghosa. Visuddhimagga. Le chemin de la pureté, translated by Christian Maës. Paris: 
Fayard, 2002.
Vism transl. Ñāṇamoli = The Path of Purification. Visuddhimagga, translated by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli. 
Onalaska, WA [Kandy, 1975a] 1999.
Vism transl. Ñyāṇatiloka = Visuddhi-magga oder der Weg zur Reinheit: die grösste und älteste systematische 
Darstellung des Buddhismus, translated by Ñyāṇatiloka. 3rd ed. Konstanz: Christiani [München, 1931] 
1975b.
Vism transl. Pe Maung Tin = The Path of Purity: being a translation of Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga, translated 
by Pe Maung Tin. London: Luzac, [1923–1931] 1971.
Wright, J.C. 2002. “The Pali Subodhālaṅkāra and Daṇḍin’s Kāvyādarśa.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 65 (2): 323–341.

--- PAGE 177 ---
156
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-13
10
FILIAL PIETY
Shades of difference across Theravādin 
traditions
Grégory Kourilsky
Introduction
If matricide and parricide are at the top of the list of the “five irremissible sins” (P. anan­
tariyakamma), which make salvation impossible for the one who commits them (Sp II 444), 
Buddhist teachings as articulated in the Pāli canonical sources of the Mahāvihāra, in prin­
ciple the authoritative texts of the tradition of Buddhism labeled as “Theravāda,” are not 
normally seen as demonstrating much concern about filial piety. Although mentioned in 
places, devotion to parents does not count, for example, among the “perfections” (P. pāramitā) 
illustrated by the last ten lives (P. jātaka) of the Bodhisatta (Durt 2006: 239). This is hardly 
surprising for a religion that rests on the ethic of karma (P. kamma)—according to which the 
fate of a being remains strictly individual, resulting only from their actions in this or previ­
ous existences—and recommends, at least in its founding texts, the renunciation of filial and 
familial ties, often regarded as an obstacle on the path to liberation. One needs only recall 
the Dhammapada comparing the maternal bond to a tie that must be severed (Dhp 80), or the 
episode of Prince Siddhattha’s “great renunciation” (P. mahābhinikkhamana) in which he aban­
dons his kingdom, his parents, his wife and his son to follow his own path to Enlightenment. 
What little is known of other Indian Buddhist schools does not allow us to say that it was 
any different for their followers.
Yet Buddhism as practiced in Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Burma, and Sri Lanka places—to 
varying extents—great value in filial piety (understood as to support and respect one’s liv­
ing parents or forebears, as well as to worship them after their death). Admittedly, Theravāda 
Buddhism is not unique in that respect. Both historically and in other Buddhist cultures the 
question of the relationship between the Buddhist ascetic ideal and the aspirations of ordinary 
society has manifested in a variety of ways. However, the fact that the Pāli canon is commonly 
perceived as the repository of the original doctrine taught by the Buddha certainly makes it 
more challenging to consider the value of filial piety and the ideal of Buddhist renunciation as 
anything other than in tension. The purpose of this chapter is thus to consider the place occu­
pied by parents and ancestors in these Buddhist societies and to understand how, and to what 
extent, the latter have been able to harmonize social and familial accounts with the “Teaching 
of the Buddha” (P. Buddhasāsana), on which spirituality is understood to rest.

--- PAGE 178 ---
Filial piety
157
Filial piety in the Pāli scriptures
Although canonical writings in Pāli or in Sanskrit may present filial and family ties as obstacles 
for the faithful on the road to deliverance, Indian Buddhist practice does not require the faith­
ful to renounce a sense of filial piety: if the Buddha intended to free himself from the values 
and constraints of a prevalent Brahmanism, he had to take into account the concerns of his 
fellow men, if only to better convert them to his teaching. Brahmanic society, today as in the 
time of the historical Gotama, places great value on the relationship between the faithful and 
their parents. In this connection, rites performed for the benefit of ancestors held an important 
place in India and they have been, in part, integrated into Buddhist practices, albeit in different 
forms according to place and time. Moreover, Brahmanism also requires the faithful to manifest 
devotion toward parents during their lifetime and to fulfill a certain number of duties toward 
them. The first of these duties is for a son to ensure his descent, thus guaranteeing filiation and 
the transmission of goods within the lineage, as well as freeing one’s father from the congenital 
debt owed to his own ascendants, which his son then takes over on his own account (Dumont 
1980: 16). The Buddha himself did not depart from this rule: he was married and the father of 
a young boy, Rāhula, when he left his palace to embrace the life of an ascetic. By this particular, 
potent example, no doubt, the writers of the Buddhist texts intended to show that Gotama’s 
doctrine was not indifferent to the fundamental values of the Indian world.
Generally speaking, with the Tipiṭaka and its exegesis, Buddhist writers have tried to answer 
the questions that the individual was entitled to ask regarding the obligations imposed on 
them by traditional society. This led Buddhist texts to sometimes encourage a certain form 
of devotion to parents. In such instances, the Buddha ensures, however, the reappropriation of 
notions or customs already in use among the communities—primarily Brahmins. These were 
to be converted, in order to make them conform to his doctrine. An example of this process 
is a passage of the Itivuttaka, in which the Buddha takes over the notion of Brahma-cariya 
(conduct consistent with Brahman) but gives it a new definition. In the following extract, he 
considers respect for father and mother as one of the conditions for the “virtuous conduct” 
of an individual:
Father and mother, O monks, are called ‘Brahma’; they are called, O monks, ‘pre-
eminent deities’ (pubba-devatā); they are also called, O monks, ‘pre-eminent masters’ 
(pubbācāriyā), and finally, monks, ‘worthy of offerings’ (āhuneyyā). What is the reason 
for this? Because, O monks, parents cover their children with blessings, they nourish 
them and are for them like a guide in this world.
(It 110, AN I 62)
In an example from the Aṅguttara-nikāya, the Buddha answers the questions of a Brahmin about 
sacrifice. Keeping the Brahmanical terminology used by his interlocutor, he enumerates “three 
types of fire” (P. tayo aggı̄), which are parents, relatives, and recluses (AN IV 44). In the Sigālovāda-
sutta (or Siṅgāla-sutta), the Buddha, or the Blessed One (P. Bhagavant) as he is regularly called 
in the Pāli canon, also analogously reinterprets the Brahmanic rite that consists in venerating 
the cardinal points and thereby encourages filial piety:
In five ways, as a son of a house, a child must venerate his parents, towards the East 
[thinking]: “Having supported me, I must support them, I must carry out their tasks, 
I must maintain the lineage, I must take over the patrimony, I must, finally, make offer­
ings for the benefit of my deceased parents (petānaṃ).”
(DN III 189)

--- PAGE 179 ---
Grégory Kourilsky
158
Canonical texts can also approach the subject of filial piety in a more direct way. The Samacitta-
sutta (or Kataññu-sutta), for example, insists on the necessity, and the difficulty, of paying back 
the benefits received from one’s parents:
Monks, there are two [people] who cannot be paid back. What are they? His mother 
and father. Even if you carried your mother on one shoulder and your father on the 
other, and if you had to live like that for a hundred years, taking care of them, anoint­
ing them with ointment, massaging them, bathing them and rubbing their limbs, and 
even if they came to drop their excrement on you, you couldn’t pay your parents back. 
Moreover, O monks, even if one establishes one’s parents in supreme authority, reign­
ing over the earth abundant in the Seven Treasures, one could not pay one’s parents 
back. What is the reason for this? Because, O monks, parents grant many benefits (P. 
bahukārā) to their children: they bring them up, feed them and are a guide for them 
in this world.
(AN I 62)
The sutta then takes a subtly proselytizing turn by explaining that only the parents’ conversion 
to the Buddha’s doctrine will enable the child to repay their debt. Here again the Buddha set 
an example, first by returning to Kapilavatthu to convert his father and then ascending to the 
heaven of Tāvatiṃsa to preach to his mother, Mahā-Māyā, who died seven days after giving 
birth.1 In this connection, several canonical and paracanonical texts allude to the suffering 
endured by the mother during gestation and childbirth:
Thus, monks, it is with great anxiety for her heavy burden that the mother, for nine or 
ten months, carries the foetus in the womb. Thus, monks, it is with great anxiety for 
her heavy burden that after nine or ten months, the mother gives birth [to the child]. 
When [the child] is born, she feeds it with her own blood; it is for this reason that 
the mother’s milk is called, in the Ariya discipline, “the blood of life” (P. lohitañhetaṃ). 
(MN I 266)2
The subject of filial piety is further discussed in the Mātuposaka-sutta, in which the Buddha states 
that a monk can support his parents by sharing with them the fruits of almsgiving (Strong 1983: 
175), or in the Cı̄varakkhandhaka (Vin I), which contains a brief allusion to the question of a 
monk’s duty toward his parents (Schopen 2007: 117–118). Mention should also be made of the 
Petavatthu and Vimānavatthu collections and their commentaries (Pv-a, Vv-a), in which several 
accounts relate how a sāvaka or fervent devotee comes, driven by a sense of filial piety, to the 
aid of their parents—from this life or a previous one—who were reborn in the state of “hungry 
ghost” (P. peta, < Sk. preta, Pv 17–19, 39, for example). The Tirokuḍḍapetavatthu Commentary 
(Pv-a 31f) is undoubtedly the most representative account of this theme. Bimbisāra, the pious 
king of Rājagaha, finds himself annoyed by a group of hungry peta who turn out to be deceased 
members of his relatives. He tries to comfort them with oblations, but his efforts are in vain: 
water and food disappear at the very moment the peta try to eat them. Bimbisāra reports to 
the Buddha, who explains to him that it is impossible to make offerings to the dead by direct 
means; on the other hand, if these are presented to the community of monks, the deceased 
will receive the fruit of the merit produced by this pious act and will thus be able to gain a 
new life under better auspices.
Also worthy of consideration are later Pāli works composed in mainland Southeast Asia, 
especially in the Lanna kingdom (in present-day northern Thailand) in the fifteenth and

--- PAGE 180 ---
Filial piety
159
sixteenth centuries. Although it makes use mainly of the Pāli corpus of the Mahāvihāra, locally 
composed religious literature has from its beginning shown a predilection for the theme of 
filial piety. The Jinakālamālı̄, a Lanna chronicle composed in Pāli by Ratanapañña in 1516, for 
example, tells that the Bodhisatta went to Suvannabhūmi (i.e., the Indochinese peninsula) with 
the aim to bring gold from there to wait on his mother in comfort. As the ship was wrecked 
along their journey, the chronicle goes on, he carried his mother on his shoulders across the 
ocean, a deed sufficent for Brahma to recognize him as a future Enlightened One (Jinak 2). 
The story of the Bodhisatta saving his mother from a shipwreck is also found in other Pāli texts 
originating from or widespread in Southeast Asia, such as Sotatthakı̄-mahānidāna, Tathāgatuppatti, 
Sambhāravipāka, and Mahāsampiṇḍa-nidāna.3
The Maṅgalatthadı̄panı̄ of Sirimaṅgala, composed in Chiang Mai in 1524, dedicates five chap­
ters—out of a total of 38—to filial piety and devotion toward one’s forebears. Among them the 
most extensive is Chapter 11, the “Discourse on Supporting One’s Parents” (Mātapitu-upaṭṭhāna-
kathā). It begins by recalling the suffering of the mother, from the throes of gestation to the 
education of the child—here relying on the Soṇananda-Jātaka (Ja II no. 532). The text goes on to 
say that parents, through their efforts and sacrifices for the welfare of their child, are their “first 
benefactors” (P. pubbakārı̄-jana, “those who have done [the good] first”). Conversely, children 
are “[those] who must show them gratitude” (P. kataññū-katavedı̄no). Mātāpitu-upaṭṭhānakathā 
then lists the four types of “virtues” (P. upakāra-guṇa) that parents are endowed with and that 
must be recognized by their children, namely, the virtue of being “Brahma,” “the first deities” 
(pubba-devatā), “the first masters” (pubbācāriya), and “worthy of offerings” (P. āhuneyya; It 110, 
see the earlier discussion). In return for the blessings received from one’s parents, the prac­
titioner must support them and looking after them (P. upaṭṭhāna), both during their lifetime 
and after death. Filial duty is also illustrated through the story of Bimbisāra and the peta from 
the Petavatthu aforementioned, and an additional argument drawing on the Sabhramaka-sutta 
and Siṅgalasutta. Sirimaṅgala finally insists on the difficulty to pay back one’s parents’, quoting 
widely the Samacitta-sutta (or Kataññu-sutta; AN II 62): even if one covers his father and his 
mother with tributes, the text says, even if one provides them with water and food, nappies and 
clothes, even if one anoints them with ointments, bathes them, washes their feet for a hundred 
years, the son (or the daughter) would not manage to repay their debt to them. Following the 
sutta, the commentator goes on to explain that only by converting the parents to the Buddha’s 
doctrine will the child be able to repay the debt they have contracted toward them. The four 
other chapters of Maṅg-d dealing with the issue of filial piety are in the same vein, focusing 
on the related issues of “devotion” (viz. Pūjā-kathā, chapter 3), “kindness toward children” 
(viz. Puttadārasaṅgaha-kathā, chapter 12), “kindness toward relatives” (viz. Ñātakasaṅgaha-kathā, 
chapter 17), and “gratitude” (viz. Katañññutā-kathā, chapter 25).
A number of Buddhist writings in Pāli therefore encourage devotion toward one’s parents, 
during their lifetime as well as after their death. These remain, however, in a limited number 
compared to the Pāli corpus as a whole. One might see them as pledges given to those who 
might have been put off by an overly demanding doctrine and who hesitated to convert. Other 
sources, on the other hand, are more clearly reflective of lived Buddhism, showing a greater 
concern for filial piety in Theravādin societies.
“Sharing merit”: Filial piety in Buddhist practice
Buddhism was not born in a vacuum. Despite obvious changes and evolution, Buddhist prac­
tice, as well as underlying conceptions and beliefs, appear to be a continuity of religious tradi­
tions that prevailed before the advent of Gotama’s doctrine. In the Indic world as in Southeast

--- PAGE 181 ---
Grégory Kourilsky
160
Asia,4 Buddhism appears to have developed within the framework of Vedic, Brahmanical, and 
autochthonous systems of thought and representations. Contrary to what might be assumed, the 
relationship between these different religious traditions shows more continuities that ruptures, 
at least in terms of beliefs, conceptions, and practice. The notion of karma, for instance, was 
obviously not born with Buddhism but is an integral part of Indian thought as manifested in 
Hinduism and Brahmanism. Similarly, the question of the “sharing” of karma—understood here 
as a consequence of the act and not as the act itself—with a third person is already present in 
these religious currents.5 This practice is connected to the idea, shared in both Brahmanical and 
Buddhist societies, that one’s karma is connected to the karma of one’s lineage—which obviously 
challenges the perception of karma as something stricly individual that comes through in canoni­
cal Buddhist scriptures. This conception of a collective and family karma considerably reinforces 
the weight of the merit and the faults accomplished, because an individual takes responsibility 
not only for their own condition but also for that of their ascendants and, eventually, descendants.
Therefore, it comes as no surprise that the production, sharing, or transmission of the results 
of meritorious acts to dead relatives is attested in the most ancient Buddhist practices. A large 
number of inscribed stelae on the Indian continent (in Barhut, Sarnath, Mathura, Bodhgaya, 
etc.) attest to the custom of offering merit in favor of parents, in particular the inscriptions of 
Ajaṇṭa, almost all of which (nineteen out of twenty-one) mention the father and mother of 
the donor as the beneficiaries of the gift (Schopen 1984: 116–8). Early Sinhalese epigraphy 
(ca. 200 bc) also mentions offering merit, sometimes specifically directed to the parents of 
the donor (Langer 2007: 180). The custom of dedicating merit to deceased members of one’s 
family also appears very early in Southeast Asian epigraphy, both Brahmanic and Buddhist. For 
instance, a pre-Angkorian Sanskrit inscription by Bhavavarman II (639 ce) states that a donor 
had a statue erected “for the deliverance of his parents” (Sk. pı̄tāmātror vvimuktaye; Cœdès 1904: 
695–696). The inscription on the stele of Văt Prei Val (K 49, 664 ce), one of the oldest traces 
of the existence of Buddhism in Cambodia and even in the Indochinese peninsula, also men­
tions the acquisition of merit by ascendants of the donor of a pious deed.
Many later lapidary texts show that their patrons were often eager to share the fruits of 
meritorious deeds with their deceased relatives, whatever religious allegiance they claimed to 
have. This is the case, for example, of Angkorian king Yaśovarman, who established a cult “for 
the increase of the merits of one’s parents” (K 323), or of later Angkorian king Rājendravarman, 
who intended pious works to “increase the merit” (Sk. dharma vr̥ddha) of his parents (K806; see 
Dumarçay, Groslier 1973: 207). Later, the Sanskrit inscription of Phimeanakas (K 484) shows that 
the definitive adoption of Buddhism at Angkor did not alter this dynamic by mentioning that the 
cult of bodhivr̥ksa was intended to enable devotees to gain merit on behalf of others. The exercise 
of filial piety through the sharing of merit is also attested in the Mon culture known as Dvāravatı̄ 
(sixth–eleventh centuries), which is one of the earliest centers of Buddhism in the peninsula. For 
example, an inscription in Mon language dating back to the sixth century mentions the wish of 
a ruler to transfer merit to the living and the dead (Prapod Assavavirulhakarn 2010: 87). Another 
Mon inscription written in Sanskrit, found in Yasothon (northeastern Thailand) indicates that 
in the eighth century a dignitary offered jewelery and a forest to provide merit to his father.6
The later inscriptions of the Buddhist kingdoms of Sukhothai, Lanna, and Lan Xang attest to 
the persistence of this practice in the Theravādin context from the fourteenth century onward. 
Most have the function of commemorating a pious act, be it the foundation of a monastery, the 
installation of a Buddha image, or a religious building (cetiya, monastic cells, etc.) undertaken 
by a devotee who is often of princely rank. It is common for the donor to express the wish 
to share the merit of a pious deed with one or more ascendants. This offering of merit was 
almost systematic in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and local Buddhism was already

--- PAGE 182 ---
Filial piety
161
in harmony with the “animist” beliefs that prevailed in the region, as illustrated by the Thai 
language inscription of Văt Jāṅ2 Làm2 (EHS, 8),7 dated 1384, in which a dignitary shares the 
fruits of his meritorious deeds with the “spirits” (Th. phı̄) of his deceased relatives. In the 
same vein, mention should be made of the two inscriptions—one in Thai, one in Pāli—of the 
Aśokārāma of Mahā-Dhammarājā II (1399 ce) in which the donor—here the widow of the 
late king—offers merit to her father, grandparents, and relatives (EHS, 2, I 36–142, II 66–81). 
The Văt Khemā inscription (1536 ce) similarily reports that a dignitary dedicated merit to his 
“masters, parents, ascendants and all members of [his] kin,” especially those reborn in hell, as 
a preta, or as an animal in the hope of saving them from their sad fate (EHS, 15, II 13–18). 
Examples of this type abound throughout the Thai–Lao principalities.
The epigraphy of Middle Period Angkor, a time when Pāli Buddhism had become very 
influential in Cambodia, also contains numerous allusions to merit “offered” (Kh. ta oy phala) 
or “addressed” (Kh. jūn or uddis puṇy) to ancestors with the aim of delivering them from hell 
(Lewitz 1971: 94). Even in Burma, where orthodox Theravāda is supposedly more established, 
epigraphy bears witness to some similar cases. A lapidary text from Kyaukse mentions a temple 
erected jointly by a monk and his parents, obviously for them to get merit (EB III, 1, 70f ),8 
while another, found in Pagan, mentions the dedication of a woman’s merit to her grandparents 
and several of her relatives (Ray 2002 [1946]: 162).
Death rituals are of course the preferred occasion for offering or dedicating merit to one’s 
parents and forebears. In all Buddhist societies, including those reputed to follow the doctrine 
of Theravāda more strictly (Sri Lanka, Burma), funerals and post-funeral ceremonies aim to 
ensure a better life for the relative in the afterlife (P. paraloka) while preventing his or her 
return among the living (Spiro 1967: 69; Langer 2007: 126–127). This may at first appear as 
contradicting Buddhist doctrine, according to which the fate of the deceased depends only on 
their own actions and not upon the performance of rites. On the other hand, these practices 
are in some respects similar to those of Brahmanic India. As a matter of fact, Buddhism in Sri 
Lanka, as well as in mainland Southeast Asia, has partly taken over the Brahmanical terminology, 
together with the entailed conceptions of death. The deceased is, for example, often described 
as preta (lit. deceased). In the Brahmanic context, this term refers to a recently deceased person, 
and as such contrasts with pitr̥ (lit. father), which is used to qualify a relative who has acquired 
ancestor status. This is accomplished through the performance of Brahmanical funeral rites 
called śrāddha. In Pāli scriptures, however, peta does not refer to deceased in general but only 
to those who are reborn in the realm of the “hungry ghosts” (Langer 2007: 188). Yet funerals 
in Theravādin Buddhist societies, just as in Brahmanical India, aim to transform preta, which 
are possibly malevolent spirits, into strong and friendly ancestors (Renou, Filliozat 1985 [1947]: 
367). Here the presence of the monks replaces that of the Brahmins. The offerings made 
to them on such occasions produce merit that can be “passed on” to the deceased relative 
through the recitation of dedicated Pāli chanting—some of which is based on the stanzas of 
the Tirokuḍḍa-Petavatthu (Langer 2007: 64; Kourilsky 2015: 205–206):
May this be for my relatives! May the relatives be happy!
Just as the rivers full of water fill the ocean full,
even so does what is given here benefit the dead.
(Pv 4)
In ancient sources as well as in contemporary religious life, the term uddissa—whose ortho­
graphic forms may vary—appears to be at the centre of expressions designating the offering 
or the sharing of merit with others, especially with deceased relatives. This term derives from

--- PAGE 183 ---
Grégory Kourilsky
162
the Sanskrit term uddiśati (to designate, to indicate, to prescribe), which was used in this sense 
very early in India, as can be seen from epigraphic sources (e.g., the inscriptions of Ajaṇṭā, see 
Schopen 1984: 118) or the corpus of Dharmaśāstras (see Wezler 1997: 574). The term can be 
found in Pāli in the form uddissa, a gerund of the verb uddissati, itself presumably derived from 
the verb disati (to grant [something to someone], < p. ud-disati). In canonical and postcanonical 
literature, disati is declined in various ways, such as [dakkhiṇam] ādisa, uddassayı̄, ādiseyya, and 
so on. As the form uddissa, it appears in particular in the Pāṭikasutta (DN III 1f.) and in the 
Paramatthadı̄panı̄ (Pv-a). We see the term employed frequently in Southeast Asian texts, as in 
the Middle Khmer epigraphic expression noted earlier, uddis puṇy.
Another word is pattidāna (giving [of merit]), which is actually the term used in the 
Commentaries to refer to the gift of merit (Langer 2007: 166). This term is also found in 
later Pāli literature, such as the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (ca. 11th c.; Abhidh-s 34) and the 
Maṅgalatthadı̄panı̄ of Sirimaṅgala. The Sabbapattidāna-gāthā is chanted by Thai and Cambodian 
monks during ceremonies dedicating merit to the dead (Kourilsky 2015: 162).
Generally speaking, the corpus of Mahāvihāra is far from being unequivocal about the sharing 
or dedication of merit, especially for the benefit of deceased parents. On one hand, it is explicitly 
denied in some texts, such as the Kathāvatthu, which considers it to be heresy (Premasiri 2001: 
157). On the other hand, a number of canonical and paracanonical texts give it some legitimacy. 
In the Mahāparinibbāna-sutta (DN II 72f), for instance, the Buddha himself asserts that it is pos­
sible to share merits with deities, while its commentary (Sv II 542) suggests that this sharing is 
also possible with deceased relatives (Gombrich 1971: 207). Another example is the Petānaṃ-
nikāya (AN III 43), which twice mentions the fulfillment of merit for the benefit of parents 
(petānaṃ kālakatānaṃ dakkhiṇaṃ anuppadassati, he will dedicate the merit of his offerings to those 
[of his parents] who have died and are in a state of peta). In similar terms, the Siṅgala-sutta (or 
Sigālovāda°) considers offerings to deceased parents as one of the five duties that a child has to 
fulfill toward their parents (see the previous discussion). The Dhammapada Commentary also 
contains a story in which an ogress (yakkhinī) received merit because her son in a previous life 
had recited the Dhamma on her behalf (Langer 2007: 172). But it is undoubtedly the Petavatthu 
and its commentary that contain the most explicit allusions to the offering of merit. In most 
stories of this collection, the Buddha not only confirms but also prescribes to the faithful the 
production of merit on behalf of deceased relatives—on the condition, however, that they live 
in the world of the peta (Pv-a 27). Obviously the aim of this collection is to promote the lib­
erality of the faithful toward the Saṅgha by arguing that, without its intercession, the offerings 
addressed to the dead will not reach their goal. In short, the community of monks is the nodal 
point of a circuit of exchange between the living and the dead. Although it seems to differ 
from orthodoxy on this point, Buddhists in Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, Burma, and Sri Lanka 
have mainly relied on this collection to legitimize the practice of uddissa.
Filial piety as a Buddhist virtue
If the paying of debts to ancestors is indeed a duty in the Indian traditions and is not absent 
from canonical Pāli scriptures, filial piety holds a particularly important place in Buddhism of 
mainland Southeast Asia.
Regional epigraphy, which for a greater part celebrates the foundation of a religious build­
ing (temple, reliquary, monastic repository, etc.), suggests that honoring one’s parents with filial 
piety has been the main motivation of their initiators over the centuries, regardless of place and 
time. In Brahmanic temples, the god is honored by the faithful, who, in return, expect protec­
tion for their deceased relatives and an improvement in their lot in the afterlife (Dumarçay,

--- PAGE 184 ---
Filial piety
163
Groslier 1973: 206). In Buddhist monuments, if the terms have changed and the statues of 
deities have been replaced by those of the Buddha or bodhisattvas, the ideology remains, and it 
is a rebirth in good conditions—if not nirvāna—that one wishes for one’s ancestors. Not only 
are Buddhist monasteries memorials built in honor of deceased relatives, but their aim is also 
to provide a home for them or even to maintain their cult. In the Thai kingdom of Ayutthaya, 
for instance, monasteries were traditionally erected on the site of a princely cremation or the 
royal residence of a deceased king (Cœdès 1940: 336). The same is true in the northern Thai 
kingdom of Lanna, where, according to chronicles, several Buddhist buildings were built around 
a mortuary complex or on the site of cremation (see Jinak 141–142). Similarly, Lao chronicles 
tell us that, in many cases, monasteries were established to preserve the remains of a deceased 
member of the royal lineage (Lorrillard 2003: 188). Later inscriptions, as well as vernacular 
religious literature, suggest that this practice was not limited to the aristocracy but was also 
shared with commoners.
Erecting or commissioning the manufacture of a Buddha statue can also be an act of filial 
piety. The ideology that emerges from many inscriptions found on Buddha pedestals is straight­
forward: it is about producing merit, hoping to gain a favorable rebirth for oneself and one’s 
family while manifesting liberality toward one’s deceased ancestors. In certain cases, a statue of 
the Buddha or of one of his disciples is installed on a receptacle housing the ashes of the dead, 
which illustrates the connection existing between religious images and the cult of parents or 
ancestors (Kourilsky 2015: 223f).
More generally, parents and ancestors hold a central place in the religious life of Buddhists 
in mainland Southeast Asia, especially in that of the Khmer, the Thai and the Lao. This is vis­
ible even in the most common religious events, such as the daily offerings made to the monks 
during their morning alms round (piṇḍapāta). The main purpose of giving alms to monks is, 
indeed, to provide merit to one’s dead relatives, who are believed to reside beneath the sur­
face of the earth. Accordingly, donors pour lustrous water on the ground while monks recite 
appropriate Pāli verses (Kourilsky 2015: 187f).
The regional cycle of “Twelve Month Ceremonies,” which are generally celebrated on each 
full moon day, provides other opportunities to give merit to dead relatives. In this regard, the 
most significant is the “Festival for the Dead” (Kh. bhjuṃ piṇḍ, L, puñ khao2 pratăp tin, Th. jiṅ 
prēt), which is celebrated in Cambodia, Laos, and some parts of Thailand, during the month 
following the entering of the Buddhist lent. Whereas this festival is unknown in the Buddhist 
traditions of Sri Lanka and Burma, it does have a counterpart in the Chinese Buddhist tradition, 
namely, the Yúlánpén festival (Sk. Ullambana). On these occasions, the public reading of homiletic 
texts (Kh.-Th. Ānisaṅs9) is particularly significant, telling the story of Mahā-Moggallāna—a 
main disciple of the Buddha—going to hell to save the departed that have been reborn as 
preta (P. peta, Th.-L. phı̄ phēt, Kh. prēt). The latter beg Mahā-Moggallāna to exhort their living 
descendants to perform meritorious acts for their benefit. It is after Mahā-Moggallāna’s report 
that the Buddha, according to this legend, instituted this very festival. This echoes the Chinese 
legend of Mùlián (Sk. Maudgalyāyana) saving his mother from hell—a feature that also appears 
in some Southeast Asian narratives—which is likewise at the core of the Yúlánpén festival.10
A number of other Ānisaṅs texts related to death and funerals have as their specific subject 
the duty of gratitude toward parents. Some Ānisaṅs take over the story of Bimbı̄sāra questioning 
the Buddha as to the means of paying tribute to his dead parents, drawn from the Petavatthu. 
Examples are the Lao “Advantage of Offering Rice by Lot” (Ānisaṅs khao2 salāk), which is 
related to another annual festival, and the Khmer “Advantage of Saving the Hungry Ghosts” 
(Ānisaṅs prēt). There is also the “Advantage of Repaying the Kindness of Parents” (Ānisŏṅ guṇ 
marḍā piḍā), widespread in Laos and Northeast Thailand (Kourilsky 2015: 491f),11 whose Khmer

--- PAGE 185 ---
Grégory Kourilsky
164
counterpart is ‘The Advantage of [Reflecting on] Virtues and Wrongdoings” (Ānisaṅs guṇ niṅ 
dos; Bernon 2008: 13). Both extensively depict the good deeds parents do toward their children 
and exalt the virtue of repaying their kindness.
Vernacular Buddhist literature likes to recall that the Buddha himself did not depart from 
this obligation, as can be seen in various narratives relating the Blessed One’s journey to the 
heaven of the “thirty-three deities” (P. Tāvatiṃsa), which he undertook in order to pay back 
the “price of rice and milk” received in early childhood. Narratives like Paṭhamasambodhi 
(a Southeast Asian biography of the Buddha written in Pāli) or the Mālālaṃkāra-vatthu (the 
Burmese version of the Tathāgata-udāna), as the Lao vernacular Dḕn nāṃ nŏm mḕ (lit, to pay in 
return for mother’s milk) and the Khmer Mātā-guṇa-sūtr (lit. the sūtra on the mother’s lega­
cies), rely on commentarial and later Pāli works relating the ascension episode to Tāvatiṃsa, 
but they give it a particular depth and flavor. The Master’s descent from the Heaven of the 
Thirty-Three is often represented in Southeast Asian Buddhist art, such as on the walls of the 
temple of Ānanda in Pagan (12th c.), and on countless numbers of murals inside and outside 
temples in Thailand and Laos. Some scholars have recognized in the towers of the Bayon, in 
Cambodia, a representation of the great miracle fr this be for my relatives om Śrāvastı̄, when 
the Buddha, immediately after his return, appeared everywhere at once, whirling like many 
sparkling suns (Dumarçay, Groslier 1973: 289). In Thailand and Burma, after the rainy season, 
there is a festival celebrating the return of the Blessed One from Tāvatiṃsa after three months 
of absence and the supreme virtue of repaying his mother’s kindness. In Cambodia, the “Ghost 
Festival” (Kh. bhjuṃ piṇḍ, see the previous discussion) ends with the recitation by monks of 
verses recalling the Buddha’s teaching of the Abhidhamma to his mother out of gratitude and 
to pay the price of the milk he had suckled (Fuchs 1991: 72).
Indeed, Southeast Asian traditions emphasize the fact the Buddha shows his gratitude to 
Māyā by preaching the “Seven Books of Abhidhamma,” a feature that is only briefly mentioned 
in Pāli commentarial literature. For example, The Seven Books of the Abhidhamma, a compen­
dium of the Abhidhamma known in Thai, Lao, and Khmer, starts with the Buddha’s ascent 
to Tāvatiṃsa, as does the Aṭṭhasālinı̄, Buddhaghosa’s commentary on the Dhammasaṅgaṇı̄—the 
first book of the Abhidhamma. The vernacular text emphasizes the Buddha’s determination 
to fulfill his filial duty toward his mother and to “save” her by teaching her the Abhidhamma, 
a feature absent in Buddhaghosa’s work.
This episode very likely explains how the Abhidhamma came to be conceived in local 
Buddhism as an allegory of filial piety. Indeed, copying or ordering a copy of the Abhidhamma 
is particularly recommended to produce merit for relatives, living or dead. This is explicitly 
indicated in the colophons of some manuscripts pertaining to vernacular Abhidhamma texts, 
where donors express the wish to repay their mother’s or father’s kindness or to help them 
escape from hell (Kourilsky 2015: 588f). The use of reciting the Abhidhamma in order to save 
one’s parent is also attested in epigraphic sources (e.g., K. 264, at Pre Rup temple, Angkor, 
17th c.; Pou 1994: 39). Likewise, tradition requires to “recite the Abhidhamma”—in fact, just the 
mātikā (tables of content)—during mortuary ceremonies. This singular virtue assigned to the 
mātikā is linked to the tradition that attributes to each book of the Abhidhamma the creation 
of a part of the human body so that reciting Dhammasaṃgaṇı̄ makes it possible to erase the 
faults committed by the eyes, Vibhaṅga those committed by the ears, and so on (Finot 1917: 78).
Although tradition specifically links the Abhidhamma to filial piety, it is locally assumed that 
ordering the copy of any Buddhist manuscript can help saving one’s parent from a bad rebirth, 
and it is customary to have a manuscript copied as part of funeral ceremonies for the benefit 
of the dead. It is then wrapped with the piece of cloth previously placed on the coffin of the 
deceased and which was previously used in the death rituals called paṃsukūl (Philavong 1967:

--- PAGE 186 ---
Filial piety
165
195). In Cambodia, manuscripts can be burnt during cremations, or enshrined in reliquaries 
with the remains of the deceased (Becchetti 1994: 52). In Burma, a tradition in the families 
of dignitaries burning the clothes of relatives to make ink for writing Buddhist texts was con­
sidered a mark of filial piety (Veidlinger 2006: 96). Again, the Buddhist custom in Laos and 
Thailand of printing and distributing “volumes of cremation souvenirs” (Th. hnăṅ sịị anusạn 
ṅān śab) is intended to produce merit for the deceased.
But the most effective way—for a boy or man—to manifest filial piety is to ordain as a 
bhikkhu or a novice. Khmer, Thai, and Lao Buddhists accept that the primary motivation for 
one to become a monk is to give merit to one’s parents. This idea is foreign to the classical 
texts of the Mahāvihāra tradition, in which the Buddha may certainly at times praise respect 
for parents but never equates the ordination with an act of filial piety. Even in China, where 
filial piety is an exalted virtue, ordination is not, in itself, considered as such. Rather, it is in spite 
of his status as a monk—which theoretically precludes him from his family duties—that the 
Chinese bhikṣu can possibly continue to exercise filial piety, because he could convert them or 
cleanse their sins as he receives clothing and food from their hand (Granet 1998[1922]: 211). 
In mainland Southeast Asia, however, ordination is unambiguously seen as an act of filial piety. 
Ordination is usually not left to the initiative of the applicant but to that of his parents, which 
explains that the merit is theirs. A number of Ānisaṅs texts praise the advantages and merits of 
“having ordained” (Th., L. hai2 pvaj, Kh. paṃpuos) their child, as well as the Paramatthamaṅgala, 
a Pāli work composed in Thailand (Cicuzza 2012: 361–366). The Maṅgalatthadı̄panı̄ also sup­
ports this idea, arguing that “in becoming a monk (pabbajita), one is freed from the debt” (api 
ca pabbajantena nāma anaṇena bhavitabbaṃ) owed to one’s mother and father.
The idea that the worshipper has incurred a “debt” to their parents is fundamental to 
Buddhism in much of the Theravāda world. Within Khmer, Thai, and Lao Buddhist com­
munities, this notion is widely expressed through the term guṇ (P., Sk. guṇa) which, although 
borrowed from the vocabulary of ancient India, has been subject to local reinterpretations. In 
Pāli texts, the common meaning of the word guṇa is “virtue,” “benefit,” or “merit.”12 This term 
has locally been given an additional meaning, as it also refers to the “body components”—also 
referred to with the Pāli word ākāra—that progenitors pass on to their offspring during gesta­
tion. Here the term guṇ takes, by extrapolation, the meaning of “legacy” or “debt” held by 
parents toward their child:
Kesā hair, lomā body hair, nakhā nails, dantā teeth, taco skin, maṃsaṃ flesh, nhāru 
nerves‚ aṭṭhi bones‚ aṭṭhimiñjaṃ marrow, vakkaṃ kidneys, hadayaṃ heart, yakanaṃ liver, 
kilomakaṃ pleura, pihakaṃ spleen, papphāsaṃ lungs, antaṃ intestine, antaguṇaṃ mes­
entery, udariyaṃ undigested food, karı̄saṃ, food residues, matthake head, matthaluṅgam 
brain. These twenty-one components are the “Father’s legacies” (pitu-guṇa) and con­
stitute the Earth-element (paṭhavı̄-dhātu). Pittaṃ bile, semhaṃ phlegm, pubbo pus, lohitaṃ 
blood, sedo sweat, medo grease, assu tears, vasā sebum, kheḷo saliva, siṅghāṇikā nasal mucus, 
lasikā synovia, muttaṃ urine. These twelve components are the “Mother’s legacies” 
(mātā-guṇa) and constitute the Water-element (āpo-dhātu).13
These “components” actually correspond to the stereotypical lists found in canonical and post­
canonical texts when describing the human body parts, referred to as of the dvattiṃsākāra (the 
32 components; (Khp 2, MN III 90, AN III 323, AN V 109, Vibh 82, 193–4, DN II 293, DN 
III 104–105, Vism 242f). In the Mahāvihāra tradition, however, dvattiṃsākāra are not linked to 
parents but are only meant to emphasize the composed and perishable nature of the human 
body, thereby illustrating the notion of “non-self” (P. anatta).

--- PAGE 187 ---
Grégory Kourilsky
166
The Southeast Asian conception, moreover, covers a symbolic dimension, linking the num­
ber of “components” inherited respectively from the father (21) and the mother (12), with the 
duty to ordain as a novice (P. sāmaṇera) at twelve years old, and then as a bhikkhu at the age 
of twenty-one.14 Indeed receiving the pabbajjā (i.e., to ordain as a sāmanera, or novice) enables 
the faults of one’s mother to be redeemed, and the upasampadā (i.e., the higher ordination as 
a bhikkhu, or monk) the ones of one’s father (Finot 1917: 81). Esoteric readings also connect 
the mother’s and father’s “legacies” with consonants of the Pāli alphabet, or with the first syl­
lables of the mantra namo buddhāya (homage to the Buddha)—namely, na = mātāguṇa; mo = 
pituguṇa (Lagirarde 1994: 68).
To “recollect parents legacies” (ranịk/raṃḷk guṇa pitā mātā) is actually part of the monk’s religious 
life. First, monks recite the dvattiṃsākāra in the assembly hall during the morning prayers, while 
reflecting on the “legacies” (guṇa) of the mother and father. The ancient tradition required the 
monk to do so also in the early morning as he put on the different parts of his monastic cloth 
(P. cı̄vara). This was a meditation exercise that reproduced the elementary gestures during intra­
uterine gestation, in particular the march of the breath. To symbolically reproduce, by a series 
of ascetic practices, the sufferings of the mother during the period of gestation and childbirth is 
actually at the core of the local meditation tradition that some scholars refer to as the “kammaṭṭhān 
tradition.”15 Sleeping only in the sitting position represents the discomfort experienced when the 
mother was pregnant; not sheltering from the sun represents the pain endured when “being in the 
fire” after giving birth, and so on. Such penitential trials could be done in the solitude of meditation 
sessions or in collective rituals such as the Great Probation festival (P. mahāparivāsakamma), which 
takes place at the end of the rainy retreat (Bernon 2000: 475–6; Zago 1972: 285).
The theme of a mother’s concern for her child and the torments of pregnancy and child­
birth that she undergoes, as well as the vicissitudes of education, although already present in 
canonical scriptures (viz. Soṇananda-jātaka, Mahātaṇhāsaṅkhayasutta), has undergone a specific 
development in Southeast Asian Buddhist traditions. It is included in a number of vernacular 
treatises and narratives such as the Mūl braḥ kammaṭṭhān, Dhammatrai (or Braḥ Dhămm Sām Trai), 
Pavarabandha and Gavampatti-sutta (Lagirarde 1994: 73f).
Finally, not only the torments of the mother but also those of the father still appear in certain 
formulas to “recall vital spirits” (sū1 khvăn) in Laos and Thailand (Kourilsky 2015: 485–486). 
These incantatory formulas can be considered as the ultimate stage in the process of the local­
ization of canonical writings, as they are removed from their original purpose.
Conclusion
It has been shown earlier that the notion of filial piety is not absent from the Buddhist teachings 
of the Theravāda, as they are recorded in the Pāli canon, and especially in commentaries and 
later works. Moreover, Indian traditions have left evidence that this notion was part of religious 
concerns over centuries, especially for lay followers. The act of dedicating merit to parents was 
accepted in the practices of the oldest Buddhist schools (Mahāsaṅgika, Sarvāstivāda, etc.), as 
well as in Vedic and Brahminic India, and should not be attributed to a later development in 
Mahāyāna. It would be a bridge too far, however, to state that devotion toward one’s parents 
or the cult of giving to dead relatives was ever considered to be at the forefront of Buddhist 
teachings. Rather, it seems that admitting filial piety into the religious life of Buddhist societies 
was a precondition for the Doctrine to be accepted among the population. It is well known 
that proponents of the Doctrine in China had to show ingenuity and flexibility in order for it 
to be accepted by a Confucian society that saw in Gotama a “barbaric man” precisely because 
he disregarded filial feelings and duties (Étiemble 1986 [1956]: 194). In contrast, many Buddhist

--- PAGE 188 ---
Filial piety
167
communities in the Theravāda world consider devotion toward parents, forebears, and ancestors 
to be at the core of religious life and undoubtedly belonging within the teaching of the Buddha. 
Giving alms, building a monastery, casting an image of the Master or a saint, commissioning 
a copy of a manuscript, receiving ordination, practicing meditation, participating in annual 
festivals—all kinds of pious deeds—are opportunities to pay homage or provide assistance to 
parents and ancestral spirits, with whom the fruits of these actions will be shared. In Thailand, 
Laos, and Cambodia, as well as in Burma and Sri Lanka, filial piety and ancestor worship were 
hardly seen as an issue regarding the Buddhist doctrine. While Indian and Chinese Buddhist 
scholars had to demonstrate that it was possible to be a pious child despite being a Buddhist, 
it has always been widely assumed, within Theravāda societies, that a good Buddhist must be a 
pious child. This shade of difference is significant.
Notes
	 1	This episode appears in several Pāli texts, including the Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā, Jātaka, Aṭṭhasālinı̄, 
Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄, and Buddhavaṃsa.
	 2	Also worthy of mention is the episode where the Buddha expresses his filial piety toward Gotamı̄ 
Mahāpajāpatı̄, his foster mother (Ap II 529). Nevertheless, the Buddha’s sense of filial piety is quickly 
overturned so that at the end of the story, Gotamı̄ prostrates herself before the Buddha, for it is she who is 
ultimately indebted to her son.
	 3	Javier Schnake, personal communication.
	 4	Although the orientalist tradition tends to include Southeast Asia in the “Indic world,” there are grounds 
for distinguishing these two cultural areas. The process of “Indianization” that characterizes most parts of 
Southeast Asia was not a process of acculturation per se. Rather, Indian cultural traits have mainly been 
adopted at a formal level. Their visibility (in terms of material evidence as well as in vocabulary and 
conception) has certainly concealed but not erased autochthonous cultural substrata, as well as Chinese 
imprint.
	 5	This notion is, for instance, present in the Mahābhārata, the Purāṇas, the Upaniṣads, as well as in the 
Dharmaśāstras. It is also the subject of lengthy argumentative discussions in the Indian school of philosophy 
of Mı̄māṃsā (Shastri 1963: 340).
	 6	http://www.sac.or.th/databases/inscriptions/inscribe_detail.php?id=330.
	 7	Epigraphic and Historical Studies (A. B. Griswold and Prasert na Nagara, cf. bibliography).
	 8	Epigraphia Birmanica (C. Duroiselle and C. O. Blagden, cf. bibliography).
	 9	P. Ānisaṃsa, “advantage,” here referring to rewards in terms of merit. Also known in Laos and Northeast 
Thailand as Slaṅ (celebration).
	10	For an in-depth comparative study on “death festivals” in Southeast Asia, and regarding Chinese Yúlánpén, 
see Kourilsky (2015: 199–444).
	11	For a French translation of this text, see Kourilsky (2007: 43–70).
	12	The term comes from Sanskrit where it first means “rope,” “thread,” and, by extension, “subdivision,” 
“component,” and “constituent.”
	13	Extract from a Lao version of the Mūl Braḥ kammaṭṭhān.
	14	The Indochinese tradition enumerates twenty-one solid components, instead of twenty in the Mahāvihāra 
tradition. This is because it breaks down the last element of the canonical list, that is, matthake matthaluṅgaṃ 
(lit. the brain in the skull), into two distinct “components” (viz. brain and skull).
	15	On this tradition, see Lagirarde (1994), Bernon (2000), Crosby (2013), and, above all, François Bizot’s 
works (1976–2000). See also chapter by Crosby and Kyaw in the present volume.
References
Becchetti, Catherine. 1994. “Une ancienne tradition de manuscrits au Cambodge.” In Recherches nouvelles 
sur le Cambodge, ed. F. Bizot, 47–62. Paris: EFEO.
Bernon, Olivier de. 2008. “La littérature des ‘avantages’ (ānisaṅs) dans les bibliothèques monastiques du 
Cambodge,” unpublished draft, 18 p.
Bernon, Olivier de. 2000. “Le rituel de la ‘grande probation annuelle’ des religieux du Cambodge.” Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 87 (2): 473–510.

--- PAGE 189 ---
Grégory Kourilsky
168
Cicuzza, Claudio. 2012. “The Benefits of Ordination according to the Paramatthamaṅgala.” In How Theravāda 
is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, eds. P. Skilling, J.A. Carbine, C. Cicuzza, S. Pakdeekham, 335–
369. Bangkok: Silkworm Books.
Cœdès, George. 1904. “Inscription de Bhavavarman II, Roi du Cambodge (561 śaka).” Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 4: 691–697.
Cœdès, George. 1940. “Études cambodgiennes. II.” Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 40 (2): 
315–349.
Crosby, Kate. 2013. Traditional Theravada meditation and its modern-era suppression. Hong Kong: Buddhist 
Dharma Centre of Hong Kong.
Dumarçay, Jacques, Groslier, Bernard-Philippe 1973. Le Bayon. Histoire architecturale du temple. Inscriptions du 
Bayon. Paris: EFEO.
Dumont, Louis. 1980. “La dette vis-à-vis des ancêtres et la catégorie de sapiṇḍa.” Puruṣārtha 4: 15–37.
Duroiselle, Charles, C. O. Blagden. 1928. Epigraphia Birmanica, being lithic and other inscriptions of Burma, 
Volume III, part I. Rangoon: Government Printing.
Durt, Hubert. 2006. “On Gratitude in Japanese Buddhism.” Japan Mission Journal 60 (4): 238–242.
Étiemble, René. 1986. Confucius. Paris: Gallimard (Fifth edition 1956).
Finot, Louis. 1917. “Recherches sur la littérature laotienne.” Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 17: 
1–218.
Fuchs, Paul. 1991. Fêtes et cérémonies royales au Cambodge d’hier. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Gombrich, Richard. 1971. Precept and Practice. Traditional Buddhism in the Rural Highlands of Ceylon. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Granet, Marcel. 1998. La religion des Chinois. Paris: Albin Michel (first edition 1922).
Griswold, A.B., na Nagara, Prasert 1992. Epigraphic and Historical Studies. Bangkok: The Historical Society.
Khamphun Philavong 1967. Gū1 mịị bāṃ bĕn pun kusŏn khạṅ Buda pạrisăḍ (Manual for Buddhists to Accomplish 
Merit). Vientiane: Phone Phra Nao Monastery (in Lao).
Kourilsky, Gregory. 2007. “Note sur la piété filiale en Asie du Sud-Est theravādin: la notion de guṇ.” Aséanie 
20: 27–54.
Kourilsky, Gregory. 2015. “La place des ascendants familiaux dans le bouddhisme des Lao,” PhD disserta­
tion. Paris: École Pratique des Hautes Études.
Lagirarde, François. 1994. “Textes bouddhiques du pays khmer et du Lanna: un exemple de parenté.” 
Nouvelles Recherches sur le Cambodge, ed. F. Bizot, 63–77. Paris: EFEO.
Langer, Rita. 2007. Buddhist Rituals of Death and Rebirth. Contemporary Sri Lankan Practice and its Origins. 
London and New York: Routledge.
Lewitz, Saveros. 1971. “L’inscription de Phimeanakas (K. 484). Étude linguistique.” Bulletin de l’École fran­
çaise d’Extrême-Orient 58: 91–103.
Lorrillard, Michel. 2003. “The Earliest Lao Buddhist Monasteries According to Philological and Epigraphical 
Sources.” In The Buddhist Monastery. A cross-cultural survey, eds. P. Pichard, François Lagirarde, 187–198. 
Paris: EFEO.
Pou, Saveros. 1994. “L’offrande des mérites dans la tradition khmère.” Journal asiatique 282: 391–408.
Assavavirulhakarn, Prapod 2010. The Ascendency of Theravada Buddhism in Southeast Asia. Bangkok: Silkworm 
Books.
Premasiri, P.D. 2001. “Significance of the ritual concerning offerings to ancestors in Theravāda Buddhism.” 
In Buddhist Thought and Ritual, ed. D.K. Kalupahana, 151–158. Dehli: Motilal Banarsidas Publishers.
Ray, Niharranjan 2002. An Introduction to the Study of Theravada Buddhism in Burma. A Study in Indo-Burmese 
Historical and Cultural Relations from the earliest Times to the British Conquest. Bangkok: Orchid Press (first 
edition 1946).
Renou, Louis, Filliozat, Jean. 1985. L’Inde classique. Manuel des études indiennes, tome 1. Paris: Adrien 
Maisonneuve (first edition 1947).
Schopen, Gregory. 1984. “Filial Piety and the Monk in the Practice of Indian Buddhism: A question of 
‘Sinization’ viewed from the other side.” T’oung Pao 70: 110–126.
Schopen, Gregory. 2007. “The Buddhist Bhikṣu’s Obligation to Support His Parents.” Journal of Pali Text 
Society 29: 107–136.
Shastri, Dakshinaranjan. 1963. Origin and Development of the Rituals of Ancestor Worship in India. Calcutta, 
Allahbad, Patna: Bookland Private Limited.
Spiro, Melford E. 1967. Burmese Supernaturalism. A Study in the Explanation and Reduction of Suffering. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

--- PAGE 190 ---
Filial piety
169
Strong, John. 1983. “Filial Piety and Buddhism: the Indian antecedents to a Chinese problem.” In Traditions 
in Contact and Change, eds. P. Slater, Donald Wiebe, 171–186. Waterloo (Ontario): Canadian Corporation 
for Studies in Religion.
Veidlinger, Daniel M. 2006. Spreading the Dhamma: Writing, Orality, and Textual Transmission in Buddhist 
Northern Thailand. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Wezler, A. 1997. “On the gaining of merit and the incurring of demerit through the agency of ­others: 
I.  Deeds by proxy.” In Lex and Litterae: Studies in Honour of Professor Oscar Botto, eds. S. Lienhard, 
I. Piovano, 567–589. Alessandria: Edizioni dell’Orso.
Zago, Marcel. 1972. Rites et cérémonies en milieu bouddhiste lao. Roma: Università Gregoriana.

--- PAGE 191 ---
170
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-14
11
LAITY
Status, role, and practice in Theravāda
Asanga Tilakaratne
Introduction
The fact that there is a discussion on the laity and the nature of their religious practice assumes 
that there is another group against the practice of whom their practice has to be understood. 
Theravāda Buddhism has been considered as predominantly a monastic tradition as a result 
of which the subordinate position of the laity has been recognized from its early stages. The 
beginning of Mahāyāna as a new school in the history of Buddhism has, at least partly and 
likely erroneously, been attributed to this character of the early Buddhist tradition.
This historical aspect of the evolution of the laity in Buddhism has been studied by a 
number of scholars, and hence, I do not revisit the same (Warder 2000: 175–194). Instead, 
what I do in this chapter is to study the contemporary Theravāda lay practice, with reference 
to Sri Lanka and Myanmar in particular. In the course of this discussion, I also make brief 
comments on “diaspora” Theravāda practice of the Theravāda Buddhists who live outside the 
traditional Theravāda countries and the Theravāda practice of its new Western adherents and 
the “Navayāna” (New Vehicle, Ambedkarian) Buddhists in India.
Recent academic constructions of the laity in Theravāda
Modern scholars of Theravāda often make a sharp distinction between the laity and the 
monastics. Max Weber, whose influence on the subsequent sociologists and anthropologists of 
Theravāda Buddhism is beyond doubt, perceives the earliest form of Buddhism as constituting 
individual seekers of nirvana for whom “salvation is an absolutely personal performance of the 
self-reliant individual” (Weber 1960, 213). Such a salvation is gained only by those who have 
given up household life and the social aspects associated with it. The laity did not belong in 
this salvation scheme, and they had only a limited role. According to Weber (1960),
[i]n the parish doctrine the status group of “house-dwelling people” in a manner 
somewhat similar to the tolerated infidels in Islam, existed only for the purpose of 
sustaining by alms the Buddhist disciple who aspires to the state of grace until he has 
reached it. …Material support of the holy seekers fell on the laity and ultimately this 
alone constituted the highest merit and honor available to the upasaka (adorer).
(214)

--- PAGE 192 ---
Laity
171
Weber’s characterization has been developed in Spiro (1982), in which two forms of Buddhism, 
“nirvanic Buddhism,” which is a religion of radical salvation, and “kammatic Buddhism,” which 
constitutes “proximate” salvation, are developed along with what he calls “apotropaic” and eso­
teric forms. In the course of his detailed study of Buddhism in Burma, Spiro develops these 
two categories as exclusively applicable to the monastic community and the laity respectively.
What is problematic is not necessarily the two categories of Buddhism but attributing 
them exclusively to the two groups, nibbanic to the monastics and the kammatic to the laity. 
The early Buddhist discourses (e.g., AN I 69, DN III 167) refer to the broad classification of 
householders and renouncers—gihi (or gahṭṭha) and pabbajita. Householders did not mean only 
those who followed the Buddha. It is a generic term used to refer to all householders, or all 
nonmonastics in general, whether they were the followers of the Buddha or not. Apart from 
these two types, there are yet another two found in the discourses referring exclusively to 
those who were committed to following the Buddha, namely, upāsaka, the male followers, and 
upāsikā, the female followers. They formed two parts of the four groups of the followers of 
the Buddha (also including monks and nuns) who, at least technically, were considered to be 
equal partners in the Buddhist community. The two terms seem to have been used to single 
out the particular Buddhist identity among many householders.1 Upāsaka, by definition, is one 
who “takes refuge” in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Saṅgha (AN IV 220).
When it comes to the realization of the ultimate goal of nirvana, however, the preference was 
always for the monastic group whose mode of life was “open [unhindered] like sky” relative to 
the householder life which was perceived as “full of obstacles” (DN I 63, SN II 219). According 
to a statement found in the Suttanipāta (verse 221), a text belonging to the earliest phase of 
the Pāli canon, a layperson, like a colorful peacock that cannot match the speed of a simple-
looking swan, cannot be compared to a sage who leads a life of contemplation in the forest.
Although the relative disadvantages of the household life were clearly recognized, this did 
not mean that the nirvanic goal was totally beyond them. There is evidence to support that 
the Buddha treated all the four groups as soteriologically equal.2 Furthermore, there are reports 
of a number of laymen and -women who reached higher states in the path and who also mas­
tered or even taught the Dhamma to monastic members.3 This demonstrates that the exclusive 
attribution of kammatic Buddhism to the laity and nibbanic to the monastics, in all probability, 
is not correct at any stage of the historical existence of Buddhism. However, as we will see in 
the course of this discussion, in contemporary practice, lay Buddhist behavior has taken a turn 
toward “nibbanic Buddhism,” challenging the popular characterization of Buddhist religious 
behavior through distinctions such as lay/monastic and kammatic/nibbanic.
The lay Buddhist as donor
In ancient Indian society, it was quite normal for “s´raman․as and brāhman․as” to rely on the laity 
for their daily existence. While it is recorded that there were preferences among people for 
particular religious groups, the general tendency appears to have been that people gave alms to 
religious mendicants without discrimination. There is abundant evidence that the Buddha and 
his disciples too made use of this readily available system for their survival. What is considered 
in this context, however, is not this general religious practice but how within Buddhism the 
role of the laity as donor developed. It is understandable that all could not choose the monas­
tic life by giving up their household and social obligations. Those who opted to remain as 
householders were naturally expected to support those who left household life. King Bimbisara 
of Magadha is reported to have made the first donation to the Buddha and his monastic fol­
lowers by dedicating a Bamboo Grow (Veluvana) for them to stay in (Vin I 39). Gradually, as

--- PAGE 193 ---
Asanga Tilakaratne
172
discourses and the Vinaya record, there were rich donors such as Anathapindika, and Visakha, 
who donated dwellings to the Buddha, and his disciples and became lifelong supporters of the 
sāsana.4 The three people mentioned here were upāsakas and upāsikās who had attained the 
first stage of the path, namely, stream-entrance, nevertheless remained lay, meaning that while 
Bimbisara continued to be the ruler of Magadha, Anathapindika, and Visakha continued to be 
a successful businessperson and a rich housewife respectively.
“The Advice to Sigala” (Sigālovāda-sutta, DN III 180–183) contains material to determine 
how the role of the laity was perceived within the Buddhist tradition. In this discourse, the 
Buddha teaches Sigala, a young householder, what later came to be known as “lay disci­
pline” (gihi-vinaya) which includes, among many other matters, the proper behavior toward six 
social groups, among which is “ascetics and brahmins” (meaning dedicated religious people). 
According to the discourse, a householder should minister to religious people in five ways, 
among which is providing them with their worldly needs. The reciprocal duty of the monks 
toward the laity is to provide ethical guidance to them, in particular, to reveal the path to 
heaven, which is the more realistic goal for those who have household obligations to fulfill.
What modern scholars starting from Weber described as lay religious practice in Buddhism, 
namely, the accumulation of merits aiming at better rebirth in the next life, has remained gener­
ally true for lay practice within Theravāda from the ancient times to the present. Of the three or 
ten types of meritorious acts, donation (dāna), virtue (sı̄la), and meditation (bhāvanā), the first is 
most practiced and most loved. Also it is the first among the virtues that enable one to become 
a Buddha. The discourses have many references to people inviting the Buddha and the Saṅgha 
for meals. In the medieval Pāli literature of Sri Lanka, such works as Sahassavatthu-pakaraṇa and 
Rasavāhini are dedicated to elaborating on this lay practice of giving alms. The overall emphasis 
of the works of this genre is how people gained much in return after their death by giving the 
Saṅgha even a small thing or by giving during difficult circumstances such as famine.
It is not an exaggeration to say that donation (of meals to the Saṅgha) is the main religious 
act of the laity in Theravāda today. In Sri Lanka, where the monks usually do not go for alms 
from house to house, people undertake to provide the resident monks of the village or nearby 
monastery with meals on a monthly basis, once in three months, or annually. In countries like 
Myanmar and Thailand, where thousands of monks collect alms daily, the donation of meals 
and other requisites (such as toothbrushes, soap, etc.) to these daily alms-seekers constitute a 
key element of the daily religious life of those people.
The kaṭhina ceremony (marking the conclusion of the rainy season observance), usually 
falling in October–November, is an occasion in which the laity’s donor role appears in its 
highest degree. In all traditional Theravāda countries this occasion is celebrated with colorful 
processions amid many festivities with singing and dancing. This is perhaps the most precious 
meritorious act in which the laity try their best to supply the monks and the particular mon­
astery with every imaginable article needed for daily existence. In Myanmar, it is common 
during this period to see people traveling to monasteries in rows of vehicles with these various 
articles to be donated hanging all over the vehicle so that all those onlookers may rejoice in 
their meritorious act.
Dāna is practiced by diasporic Theravāda Buddhists in very much the same manner as 
they practiced at home. They provide meals to the monastery of their choice wherever they 
happened to be. It is interesting to see how they have adjusted themselves to practicing their 
religion in new situations with new lifestyles. In a big city like Los Angeles, where everyone 
is busy working or studying away from their homes on weekdays, they bring the midday meal 
of the resident monks a day earlier and keep it overnight in the refrigerator to be taken out 
and consumed by the monks the next day. Although this is not strictly in accordance with

--- PAGE 194 ---
Laity
173
the monastic rules concerning stocking cooked food, both monks and laypeople have adjusted 
themselves to the new situations.
Giving meals and other requisites is not the only kind of donation practiced by Theravāda 
Buddhists. They donate money for various activities of the monastery and for the needs of the 
monks, such as the construction of new buildings and new pagodas, renovation of old buildings, 
and medicine and other requisites of the monks. In addition, diaspora Buddhists also give money 
for the monthly rent or the mortgage of the buildings where they house their monasteries 
until they collect enough funds to purchase or build their own place. Offering money to paint 
pagodas in gold color or offering actual gold to gild pagodas is a popular form of donation of 
the Buddhist laity in Myanmar. Once at Shwedagon pagoda in Yangon I saw a group of people, 
apparently simple villagers, going around the pagoda holding some flags and chanting. I was 
told that they were announcing their donation of some amount of gold to the pagoda and 
were asking others to rejoice in their meritorious deed, which, in itself, is a meritorious deed 
in Theravāda belief. Another form of donation unique to Myanmar, although not unknown 
in other Theravāda countries, is to sponsor a young monk or a nun5 in their education (which 
is discussed in more detail later). Among many other forms of donation, organized events of 
donation of blood are quite commonplace in Sri Lanka and well patronized, and in addition, 
newspapers often report instances of organ donation by the survivors of the deceased.
Spiro who did his field research in Myanmar (then Burma) in the early 1960s has discussed 
the generosity of the Myanmar Buddhists. He refers to Crawfurd, who wrote in 1834 that the 
prosperity of any section of Burma is to be judged “not by the comforts or luxuries of the 
inhabitants or the reputable appearance of their habitations, but by the number, magnitude, 
splendor and actual conditions of its temples and monasteries” and says that “Crawfurd’s obser­
vation is as true today as a hundred and fifty years ago” (Spiro 1982: 401). In fact, what was 
true when Crawfurd wrote in 1834 and when Spiro did his field research in early the 1960s 
remains substantially true even today.
The lay Buddhist meditation practice
In his study of kammatic and nibbanic Buddhism Spiro (1982) has shown how ordinary 
(Theravāda) Buddhists in Myanmar show preference to dāna over sı̄la and bhāvanā (103ff.). 
According to him, “meditation is found only infrequently in Burma, and even less frequently 
in other Buddhist societies” (54). This observation is corroborated in more recent research 
on Ledi Sayadaw and the popularization of Vipassana meditation in Myanmar by Erik Braun 
(2013). Spiro’s remark that meditation is found even less frequently in other Buddhist countries 
is substantiated by Sri Lankan experience, studied by George Bond (1992), in which a larger 
majority of both monks and laypeople sit for meditation only sporadically.
It is on this background that the phenomenon discussed in this section, the current lay 
Buddhist meditation practice, becomes interesting. In traditional Buddhist societies, the general 
belief was that meditation is to be practiced by monks alone. This does mean that at least 
some laypeople did not practice meditation. What is new in lay meditation is that the laity 
who only occasionally practiced meditation, adopted it as an important part of their religious 
life. The new attitude to religious life within which this shift of emphasis took place, in the 
context of Sri Lanka, has been described by Gananath Obeyesekere as “Protestant Buddhism.”6 
The following account captures the basic import of this concept:
The utility of the label “protestant Buddhism” lies in its double meaning. It originated 
as a protest against the British in general and against Protestant Christian missionaries

--- PAGE 195 ---
Asanga Tilakaratne
174
in particular. At the same time, however, it assumed salient characteristics of that 
Protestantism. We shall further explore the Protestant character below. Here it suffices 
to say that Protestant Buddhism undercuts the importance of the religious professional, 
the monk, by holding that it is the responsibility of every Buddhist both to care for 
the welfare of Buddhism and to strive himself for salvation. The traditional monastic 
monopoly in withdrawal from the world is called into question, while those monks 
(the majority) who do not become meditating hermits are criticized for lack of social 
involvement. The distinction between Saṅgha and laity is thus blurred, for religious 
rights and duties are the same for all.
(Gombrich and Obeyesekere 1990: 7)
What is significant in this analysis for the present purpose is the new responsibility assumed 
by the laity, namely, striving for one’s own salvation without the involvement of the monk. In 
both Myanmar and Sri Lanka this happened as a response to colonialism, but how it happened 
and the specific local conditions under which it happened are not the same.
It is in Myanmar that the modern vipassanā meditation movement started and from where it 
went to the rest of the Theravāda countries and to the world at large. According to Erik Braun, 
who studied the Burmese beginning of this movement extensively (2013, 2014), it is very closely 
connected to the loss of hope and frustration felt by the Burmese people when their last king 
Thibaw was dethroned and the kingdom was captured by the British on November 25, 1885. 
People took this event as marking the beginning of the deterioration and the ultimate demise of the 
Buddha-sāsana. It is to arrest this pending disaster that Ledi Sayadaw (1846–1923), the main architect 
of the movement, started popularizing the practice of meditation and the studies of Abhidhamma, 
not only among the monks but, more specifically, among the laity as well (Bechert 1984: 154). 
Meditation and the study of Dhamma by both monks and the laity, and Dhamma-preaching by 
the monks were the means of this revolution of the religiosity of the people. In Braun’s words,
[i]n less than 75 years, from 1886 to the mid-1950s, meditation had grown from a 
pursuit of the barest sliver of the population to a duty of the ideal citizen.
(2014)
In Myanmar, although this happened as a protest against colonialism, it was not protestant in 
its other sense, in the sense of rejecting the authority and guidance of the monks, as it was 
the case in Sri Lanka. As we will see shortly, in Sri Lanka, the meditation introduced by the 
Burmese monks was opposed by some segments of Sri Lanka monks.7 In Myanmar, the practice 
was adopted by both monks and the laity.
The new vipassanā meditation was introduced to Sri Lanka in the mid-1950s, along with 
Buddha Jayanti8 celebrations by a group of Burmese monks who were invited to the country by 
a group of powerful lay Buddhists with the blessing of the then Prime Minister of the country, 
John Kotalawela. Lanka Vipassana Bhavana Samithiya (Lanka Insight Meditation Society) was 
formed for this purpose, and a center for meditation was established in Colombo. A salient 
feature of the new meditation movement was that it was sponsored by an English-educated 
elite group of Sinhala Buddhist people. In addition to the Burmese monks, there were a few 
Sri Lankan monks who had received training in Burma to continue the work. A leading monk 
associated with the movement from its inception was Kahatapitiye Sumathipala who established 
a center at Kanduboda, close to Colombo. With the increasing popularity of the movement, 
more centers were established in many parts of the island. A larger majority of the practitioners 
at these centers are still laypeople even though the instructor is usually a monk.

--- PAGE 196 ---
Laity
175
Another lay meditation movement still flourishing was started by some laypeople who 
received training under two eminent monks, Kadawadduwa Jinavamsa (1907–2003) and Matara 
Sri Nanarama (1901–1992), who were the pioneers of Kalyani Yogashrama Sansthava mentioned 
earlier and much revered meditation teachers. A leading lay meditation teacher associated 
with this group, a pupil of Matara Sri Nanarama, was Mitra Vettimuni (1951–2019), an elite 
businessman turned meditator who popularized vipassanā meditation among the urban pro­
fessionals. Godwin Samararatne (1931–2000) was another lay meditation master who taught 
at Nilambe Meditation Centre and had a considerable lay following both local and foreign. 
Gamini Priyantha (b. 1966), who has a significant lay follower base, is influenced by the practice 
of Matara Sri Nanarama and teaches at Colombo and its suburbs.
Since the phenomenon of new Theravāda lay meditation has been studied in detail by many 
scholars, I do not repeat their discussions (Bond 1992: 130–176; Swearer 1970; Gombrich 
1983). What is highlighted in all these discussions is how this phenomenon was started as lay 
movements and has remained so. Today, the number of lay meditators has increased from its 
early phase in the 1950s, and the Protestant Buddhist outlook, which made the phenomenon 
of lay meditation possible, remains the same, not as an active criticism of the monks but as 
something tacitly accepted. It is true that the laity criticize the monks for their lack of discipline, 
involvement in party politics, and growing worldliness. But these criticisms do not amount to 
a rejection of the monks. It is interesting to note that the Vinaya Vardhana Movement, which 
Kemper (1978) described as “Buddhism without Bhikkhus,” had a sizable following several 
decades ago but is now no longer visible.
Meditation discussed so far as a characteristic of the Theravāda lay practice, however, has not 
been able to change the overall picture of the religious behavior of the laity, which is character­
ized by the accumulation of merit for which the reliance on monks is essential. With such new 
developments as lay meditation practice, the advancements in knowledge, the rise of secularism, 
and the advancement in communication, one might have expected the traditional and popular 
religious practice to recede. Paradoxically, not only has this not happened, but the appeal for 
ritualistic Buddhism also has increased. In Sri Lanka, one can see large-scale meritorious deeds 
such as offering hundreds of thousands of flowers to the Buddha, lighting eighty-four thou­
sand oil lamps, all guided by the Buddhist monks, taking place practically every full moon day.
This general picture remains equally true for the Southeast Asian Theravāda. In particular, in 
Myanmar, as noted by writers such as Spiro some six decades ago, the accumulation of merits 
by such means as giving meals and requisites to the monks and nuns, offering flowers to the 
Buddha, going on pilgrimages to sacred places, and building monasteries remain the main reli­
gious preoccupations of the laity. The status of the monks remains unchallenged. Even though 
occasionally one may hear an elder complaining about the deterioration of the spirituality 
of the society, an outsider is bound to be amazed by the religiosity of the laity of Myanmar.
In Sri Lanka, as well as Myanmar, Buddhist modernism was started as a reaction/response 
to the Protestant religion introduced by the British. However, unlike in Sri Lanka, Myanmar 
Buddhists do not seem to have absorbed the features of Protestant Christianity. The vipassanā 
meditation movement, as we noted earlier, was started by monks who have remained medita­
tion teachers. It is a fact that Myanmar produced some well-known lay meditation teachers 
such as U Po Thet (Saya Thatgyi; 1873–1945), his pupil U Ba Khin (1889–1971), and his 
pupil S. N. Goenka (1924–2013). But all these lay teachers were trained and inspired by the 
great monastic meditation masters to whom they always remained respectful. At the same 
time, however, by teaching meditation while remaining within family life, the last two, in 
particular, brought vipassanā meditation down to earth, paving the way for vipassanā to become 
a world practice.

--- PAGE 197 ---
Asanga Tilakaratne
176
Study of the Dhamma by the laity
A phenomenon associated with meditation is the need for Dhamma knowledge in one who 
practices it. This does not mean that no knowledge is involved in giving dana or performing 
other kinds of meritorious deeds. But usually dāna, which has a ritualistic element, is performed 
under the guidance of one’s elders or simply under those who know better. The practice of 
meditation, however, is different. Although meditation is usually practiced under the guid­
ance of an expert meditation teacher, the very fact that one makes a decision to embark on 
practicing meditation, and continuing with it is a result of one’s knowledge about one’s own 
life, the nature of saṁsāra, and knowing and feeling the need to practice meditation in order 
to realize the goal. This explains why mostly the lay vipassanā practitioners came from urban 
educated backgrounds who simply transported their habit of reading for knowledge to their 
religious practice.
In modern Theravāda societies, people usually get knowledge of the Dhamma by listening to 
Dhamma sermons and reading books on Dhamma. In the early modern period (and to some 
extent even now), the Dhamma sermons were highly ritualistic acts that would usually last for 
the whole night.9 With the arrival of radio first and television next, today, Dhamma sermons 
are frequent occurrences and have become much shorter, usually lasting only for one hour or 
even less. As a means of getting knowledge, however, listening to Dhamma sermons cannot 
be said to be very effective because in traditional Theravāda societies people would listen to 
Dhamma mainly to accumulate merit and not to gain knowledge.10
Reading Dhamma books by the laity is a modernist development. But mastering the 
Dhamma by means of reciting has been integral to the Buddhist tradition from the very 
beginning. This is because the very nature of the Buddhist practice required the practitioner 
to have the necessary knowledge. Since knowledge (pariyatti) preceded practice (paṭipatti), both 
the monks and the laity had to have knowledge. In the ancient times, when the learning was 
transmitted orally, naturally the monks who preserved the texts orally had knowledge and the 
laity had to depend on them for their Dhamma knowledge.
If in the premodern period the laity did not have much knowledge in the Dhamma and 
if they had to rely on the monks for their Dhamma knowledge, this was not because there 
was any prohibition against the laity mastering the texts but rather due to circumstances that 
made textual knowledge not easily available for the laity. The Canon clearly seeks to demon­
strate that the Buddha had a very open attitude toward his teaching. In a society in which the 
Upaniṣadic esoterism was very powerful, the Buddha is said to have clearly rejected “inner and 
outer” associated with religion and remarked that he did not keep the “teacher’s [closed] fist” 
when he taught (Mahaparinibbāna-sutta, DN II 100). It is noted that he not only said that the 
Dhamma shines when it is open and not when it is hidden (AN III 283) but also encouraged 
disciples to ask questions about the Dhamma (Mahaparinibbāna-sutta, DN II 155).
All these suggest that there is in principle not any opposition in Theravāda to the learning 
of the Dhamma by the laity. It is only a result of historical circumstances that in Theravāda 
the laity was less learned than the monks. We must not forget in this context that, according 
to the Mahāvaṁsa (33: 102, 103), the ancient chronicle of Sinhala Buddhism, at a very early 
stage of its history, Theravāda tradition committed the word of the Buddha to writing, which 
speaks for its openness toward the texts. This openness can be contrasted with the Brāhmanic 
attitude toward their sacred texts: the Brahmins never allowed their texts to go outside their 
own caste and were never enthusiastic about committing the texts into writing.
This classical Theravāda attitude to textual knowledge notwithstanding, it appears that dur­
ing the early modern era, there were some monks who seemed to have thought that the

--- PAGE 198 ---
Laity
177
Buddhist canonical texts should not be printed and published. One significant example is 
Yatramulle Dharmarama, who taught Pāli to T. W. Rhys Davids (1843–1922), the founder 
of the Pali Text Society that published the Pāli canon in Roman characters. When the latter 
proposed this idea, it is said that the learned monk did not approve. But interestingly there 
were other Buddhist monks who thought differently, and it is they who encouraged Rhys 
Davids to go ahead in his project and even supported him financially to carry on his work 
(Wickremeratne 1985: 151–152).
More recent efforts in Theravāda Buddhist countries to translate the Pāli Canon into local 
languages are partly a result of recognizing the need for laypeople to have access to the Dhamma. 
In Sri Lanka, it started in the mid-1950s and was completed in the early 1980s. Due to the 
archaic character of the language of this translation now, there is a government-sponsored proj­
ect to translate the Pāli Canon into simple Sinhala. One A. P. de Soysa, a Buddhist layman with 
a legal background, translated the entire Pāli Canon into Simple Sinhala marking a milestone 
in the Dhamma knowledge of the laity, for the laity (and monks as well). Commenting on the 
situation in Myanmar, however, Dhammasami has pointed out that “the Burmese themselves 
… see no need for such a translation, as they have always turned to the Saṅgha for an under­
standing of the canonical texts” (Dhammasami 2018: 188).
In addition, we must mention here numerous Dhamma and Abhidhamma classes and sutra 
discussions conducted by monks at their monasteries, as well as at lay Buddhist organizations, 
for the dissemination of Dhamma knowledge among the laity. Such acts indicate a major shift 
of the monastic attitude toward the Dhamma knowledge of the laity. Laypersons, for their part, 
have been even more enthusiastic about learning the Dhamma ever since the Buddhists started 
owning printing presses in the latter part of the nineteenth century. The first Sunday Dhamma 
school was started at Vijayananda Pirivena, Weliwatta, Galle (Sri Lanka) in 1895. Subsequently, 
Young Men’s Buddhist Association started in 1898 undertook to run Sunday schools for 
Buddhist children where they could receive formal knowledge in the Dhamma.11 Today in 
Sri Lanka during daylong programs run for the laity who observe eight or ten precepts on 
full-moon (poya) days, usually a learned Buddhist layman is invited to give a Dhamma talk in 
addition to several Dhamma sermons by monks. Laypersons with a high Dhamma knowledge 
are becoming a regular feature in Theravāda Buddhism.
In Myanmar, as we saw earlier in the discussion, monks have been teaching Abhidhamma 
to laypeople for a long time. It is quite typical for many Burmese laymen and -women to sit 
various Dhamma examinations conducted by the government as well as by various lay and 
monastic organizations. Still, this number, contrasted with the number of monks who sit these 
examinations, represents a minority. Undoubtedly young monks, as well as nuns (Thila Shin), 
constitute a larger majority of the educated of the society. In Myanmar, the laity, who usually 
do not have much time or opportunities to acquire deep knowledge in the Dhamma, have 
found a way to compensate for this. It is by supporting materially the education of young 
monks (and nuns). Although this can happen in any Buddhist country, the Myanmar practice 
stands out by its widespread popularity. The support of the laity comes in many ways: by way 
of providing textbooks for study, by bearing all costs related to education including travel within 
and outside the country, and so on. Usually a young monk has one or more lay benefactors to 
provide this support. These laymen and -women are very often father and mother substitutes 
for these monks who have left their parents and relatives to live in places far away from their 
own native places.
While the overall system is undoubtedly beneficial for both the donor (by accumulating mer­
its) and the receiver (by gaining knowledge), there can be unhealthy effects too. Dhammasami 
(2018: 180–183) highlights two such developments. The donors push monks to pass as many

--- PAGE 199 ---
Asanga Tilakaratne
178
examinations as possible to derive a sense of pride that the monk they support is doing really 
well. On the part of educational institutes, they have much competition among themselves to 
recruit as many students as possible and produce top results in examinations so that they can 
win wealthy supporters:
The two teaching monasteries in Burma with most students, the Mahagandhayon, 
Amarapura, founded by Ashin Janakabhivamsa and the New Ma-Soe-Yein, founded 
by Ashin Sirindabhivamsa in Mandalay, share between them more than 4000 resident 
monks and novices. The huge numbers of students and consequent high rates of 
examination success have drawn many wealthy donors to these two monasteries.
(Dhammasami 2018: 181)
According to the same source, there are twenty-one Buddhist colleges and universities in 
Myanmar out of which only three get support from the state and the remaining eighteen 
centers are sponsored by the laity for whom the support for monastic education, among other 
things, is a means of acquiring merits.
To conclude this part of the discussion on the Dhamma knowledge of the laity, we must 
refer to the Navayāna (New Vehicle) Buddhism, based on Theravāda, initiated by Bhim Rao 
Ambedkar in the middle of the last century in India. Ambedkar’s decision to embrace Buddhism 
along with several hundreds of thousands of his fellow Dalits was carefully thought out.12 He 
wrote his The Buddha and His Dhamma to serve as the manifesto of the new Buddhism he 
envisaged. This book presents Buddhism from both modernist and socialist points of view 
informed by a strong sense of social justice. In this sense, Navayāna marks the beginning of a 
form of rationalist Buddhism in which the distinction, as well as equality between monks and 
laymen, is maintained, the distinction insofar as their ways of life and the mutually beneficial 
existence is concerned, and equality due to the fact that both share the same Dhamma (455). 
In Book III, part I, discussing “His Place in His Dhamma,” Ambedkar begins by saying that 
“the Buddha claimed no place for Himself in His Own Dhamma” (213). Hence, it would be 
unimaginable for Ambedkar to envisage the Buddhist laity depending on the monks.
Since a larger majority of the followers of Navayāna Buddhism remain illiterate and materi­
ally poor, the rationalist reading of Buddhism developed by Ambedkar could still be considered 
a far cry. Nevertheless, with a fast-growing community of educated and professional Navayāna, 
Buddhists in many parts of India, including Maharashtra, where there are several millions of 
them, Ambedkar’s new Buddhism is responding to new challenges. A relatively new develop­
ment among these educated Navayāna Buddhists is their interest in the study of Pāli language. In 
places like Mumbai, Pune, Aurangabad, and Nashik (in Maharashtra), there are Pāli classes, some 
conducted by the academic staff of the regional universities. This move seems to be resulting 
from two reasons: one is political, namely, that Pāli is reckoned as the language of Buddhists, 
and hence, it is held that Buddhists should focus on Pāli, not on Brahmanic Sanskrit. This 
Pāli language factor has become an important aspect of developing a Buddhist identity among 
these new followers of Buddhism. The other reason seems to be “Protestant,” namely, learning 
Pāli as a means of accessing the original discourses of the Buddha, including the Abhidhamma 
texts, the study of which has gained popularity among these groups lately.
Concluding remarks
As a part of concluding remarks, it is necessary to determine the place and the role of women 
in what is discussed in this chapter. What is said in this discussion on laity is basically applicable

--- PAGE 200 ---
Laity
179
to both men and women. However, In Theravāda lay Buddhist practice, including meditation, 
as perhaps in religious practice in general, women appear to outnumber men. As Gombrich 
and Obeyesekere (1990: 234) have noticed, in almost all monasteries (in Sri Lanka), there are 
women’s societies the main function of which is to look after the sustenance of the monks 
whereas men’s societies look after things like the construction of buildings and organizing 
public events. In Myanmar practices associated with Nat (spirit) beliefs, which are shared by 
a larger majority of Buddhists, are usually attended by women, namely, by the mother of the 
family (Bechert 1984: 155). Although the overall social and educational standards of women 
in Buddhist societies remain relatively higher still there are certain restrictions. For instance, in 
Sri Lanka, although the historical legend is that the Buddha’s Tooth Relic was brought to the 
country by a woman—Princess Hemamala—by hiding it in her hair, the prevalent practice is 
that women are not allowed to enter the inner chamber where the relic is housed. In Myanmar, 
the space closest to the object of worship is reserved for the monks and the males. Such tradi­
tions coming from the past, by far, seem to be tolerated tacitly.
A prominent feature in Buddhist modernism started toward the end of the nineteenth cen­
tury was the reduction of the traditional gap between the monks and the laity. The following 
statement occurring in a Memorial of the Saṅgha of Ceylon to King Edward VII of 1904 suggests 
that the Saṅgha during this period was quite concerned about the new development:
The Buddhist Saṅgha … form an integral part of the religion itself and are entitled 
to equal adoration with the Buddha and the Dhamma. The religion of the Buddha 
consists of only three elements of Buddha, the Dhamma and the Saṅgha, and nothing 
more. By the laws of the Buddha the laity form no part of religion. The Saṅgha are the 
only living representatives of Buddhism on earth.13
This emphatic assertion of the monks notwithstanding, the gap between monks and laypeople 
has become narrowed. Nevertheless, the latter, all over the traditional Theravāda world, appear 
to be heavily dependent on the former for their religious rites and rituals. Although the laity 
has criticisms of the Saṅgha about their weakened morality, the former is not prepared to fol­
low religion without the latter. The Vinaya Vardhana movement in Sri Lanka, which strived 
to get rid of the Saṅgha whom they claimed to be corrupt, died down not because it “has 
fallen a victim to its own success” as Gombrich and Obeyesekere think, but, most probably, 
because the laity settled down to accept the Saṅgha as they were because the former felt that 
they could not do without the latter.
The Vesak greeting cards, which came as a result of Protestant Buddhism and once very 
popular in Sri Lanka, have disappeared almost completely with the popularity of social media. 
Although the lay practice of meditation was then a new development indicating the reduced 
role of the monk in the life of the laity, today, with the vast popularity of vipassanā meditation 
as a therapeutic measure, many laypeople practice meditation not to realize liberation from 
saṃsāra but to live happily in the saṃsāra.
Gods have been brought back to the sociopolitical scene with a new vigor, and it is quite com­
monplace today for people to smash coconuts before gods—a practice found in Sri Lanka—as a 
means of redressing injustice. Reading horoscopes, announcing the direction where Mara is on a 
particular day (so as to avoid that direction when leaving home for work or on an important mis­
sion), determining auspicious and inauspicious moments are some routine services provided in the 
early morning by many local TV and radio stations (in Sri Lanka) for their viewers and listeners. 
Examples of this nature seem to suggest that the laity in Theravāda today cannot be understood 
with reference to such categories as Buddhist modernism or Protestant Buddhism alone.

--- PAGE 201 ---
Asanga Tilakaratne
180
Notes
	 1	Gombrich (1983, 380) has noticed that “upāsaka” is used in contemporary Sri Lanka not to refer to any 
and every lay Buddhist but to one who is more religiously dedicated.
	 2	In the Mahāparinibbāna-sutta (DN II 104–106), the Buddha says to Mara that he will not pass away until 
all four groups of his followers master and practice the Dhamma equally well.
	 3	Among such people mentioned in the discourses are householder Citta, highest among the well-versed 
upāsakas in the Dhamma (AN I 26; SN IV 281–304), Siha, the army commander (AN IV 180–82) and 
Ugga (AN IV 208–212), and Khujjuttara, the highest among the well-versed upāsikās in the Dhamma 
(AN I 26).
	 4	Literally meaning the message or the teaching of the Buddha but referring to his religious organization.
	 5	In Myanmar, there are an estimated sixty thousand Thila Shin or Buddhist nuns (who are lower in status 
than bhikkhunis who do not exist in Myanmar) who also depend on the generosity of the Buddhist laity 
for their existence and education.
	 6	See Gombrich and Obeyesekere (1990: 6 note 7 and 202–240) for a detailed discussion of this concept.
	 7	Read Tilakaratne (2012a) for a comprehensive discussion on the nature and content of the debate resulted 
from this introduction.
	 8	Twenty-five hundredth anniversary of the Buddha’s passing away celebrated during 1955–1956.
	 9	For a comparative study of new and old methods of Dhamma preaching, refer to Seneviratne (1999: 
42–55). For Vessantara-jātaka recital among the Burmese Buddhists, which lasts for several days, refer to 
Tilakaratne (2012b: 101–104).
	10	Listening to Dhamma is one of the ten meritorious deeds.
	11	Presently these schools come under the Buddha Sasana Ministry of the government. Similarly, well-
organized Dhamma school systems are not found in the other Theravāda countries.
	12	Refer to Tartakov (2003) for an insightful discussion on this new form of Buddhism.
	13	Cited in Bechert (1966: 67).
References
Bechert, Heinz. 1966. Buddhismus, Staat und Gesellsschaft in den Landern des Theravada Buddhismus, vol. I. 
Frankfurt and Berlin: Alfred Metzner.
Bechert, Heinz. 1984. “To be a Burmese is to be a Buddhist: Buddhism in Burma.” In Buddhism: Buddhist 
Monks and Nuns in Society and Culture, ed. Heinz Bechert, 147–158. London: Thames and Hudson Ltd.
Bond, George E. 1992. The Buddhist Revival in Sri Lanka: Religious Tradition, Reinterpretation and Response. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Braun, Erik. 2013. The Birth of Insight: Meditation, Modern Buddhism and the Burmese Monk Ledi Sayadaw. 
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Braun, Erik. 2014. “Meditation en Masse: How Colonialism sparked the global Vipassana movement.” 
Tricycle (Spring 2014).
Dhammasami, Khammai. 2018. Buddhism, Education and Politics in Burma and Thailand: From the Seventeenth 
Century to the Present. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Gombrich, Richard. 1983.. “From Monastery to the Meditation Centre: Lay Meditation in Modern Sri 
Lanka.” In Buddhist Studies: Ancient and Modern, ed. P. Denwood, A. Piatagorsky, 20–34. London: Curzon 
Press.
Gombrich, Richard, Obeyesekere, Gananath. 1990. Buddhism Transformed: Religious Change in Sri Lanka. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Kemper, Steven. 1978. “Buddhism without Bhikkhus: The Sri Lanka Vinaya Vardhana Society.” In Religion 
and the Legitimization of Power in Sri Lanka, ed. Bardwell L. Smith, 212–235. Chambersburg: Anima 
Publishers.
Seneviratne, H.L. 1999. The Work of Kings: The New Buddhism in Sri Lanka. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Spiro, Melford E. 1982. Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and Its Burmese Vicissitudes (Second Expanded 
Edition). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Swearer, Donald K. 1970. “Lay Buddhism and the Buddhist Revival in Ceylon.” Journal of the American 
Academy of Religion 38 (3): 255–275.
Tartakov, Gary. 2003. “B.R. Ambedkar and the Navayana Diksa.” In Religious Conversion in India: Modes, 
Motivations and Meanings, ed. Rowena Robinson, Sathianandan Clarke, 192–215. New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press.

--- PAGE 202 ---
Laity
181
Tilakaratne, Asanga. 2012a. Theravada: The View of the Elders. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Tilakaratne, Asanga. 2012b. “The Mahasi Sayadaw Method of Vipassana Meditation: An Abbreviated Path 
or a Misunderstanding?” In Buddhist Meditation: Text, Tradition and Practice, ed. Khammai Dhammasami, 
Charles Willeman, 55–78. Mumbai: Somaiya Publications Pvt. Ltd.
Warder, A.K. 2000. Indian Buddhism. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.
Weber, Max. 1960. The Religion of India: The Sociology of Hinduism and Buddhism. Glencoe, Illinois: The Free 
Press.
Wickremeratne, Ananda. 1985. The Genesis of an Orientalist: Thomas William Rhys Davids in Sri Lanka. 
Columbia, Missouri: South Asia Books.

--- PAGE 203 ---
182
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-15
12
DISCIPLINE
Beyond the Vinaya
Thomas Borchert
Normally, when thinking about Theravāda Buddhist monastics and discipline, scholars turn 
immediately to the Vinaya, the portion of the teachings of the Buddha focused on the rules 
that monastics are supposed to follow. There are three different Vinayas currently in use in the 
contemporary world, and saṅghas of the Theravāda world follow the Pāli Vinaya. This version of 
the Vinaya is composed of two parts, the Suttavibhaṅga and the Khandaka. The former contains 
the list of rules the monks and nuns are to follow (the Patimokkha), as well as commentaries and 
narratives about these rules, while the latter contains discussions of various matters of monastic 
life. In the Pāli Vinaya, monks are responsible for following 227 rules, while nuns are to fol­
low 311 rules. Novices are responsible for ten, and female renunciants, such as the mae chi of 
Thailand or the dasa sil matā of Sri Lanka, normally follow either eight or ten precepts. When 
they ordain, either as a novice or taking the “higher ordination” (upasampadā) monastics agree 
to follow these rules, and they form the core of what is meant to guide and shape monastic 
lives, a “yardstick for determining monastic etiquette and behavior” (Kusa 2007: 196).
Moreover, Vinaya texts have themselves become invaluable resources for understanding 
the complexity of Buddhist lives and communities. For the last three decades, scholars such as 
Gregory Schopen (2004), Shayne Clarke (2014), Petra Kieffer-­Pülz (2014), and others have been 
mining different Vinayas in an effort to open up the worlds that Buddhist monastics lived in. In 
doing so, they have helped us see that Buddhist monks and nuns held and bequeathed property, 
that they engaged in businesses practices, and that they had families. Using the Vinayas, these 
scholars have shown that the worlds of Buddhist monasticism were far more complex than 
either scholars or the general public have imagined. More than heroic renunciants who were 
required to follow hundreds of rules, explorations of the Vinayas have shown that Buddhist 
monastics were fully formed humans, with all the complex emotions that this entails.
Yet, while scholarship has done invaluable work in opening up our understanding of the 
worlds of Buddhist monastics, it has only gone part way toward helping us understand how it 
is that monks and nuns are disciplined. By disciplining, I am referring to the process or set of 
processes wherein monastics learn not just the content of what it means to be a nun, monk, 
or novice but also where and how a monastic subjectivity is formed. To be a monastic is to 
have a certain position in a society, and to fully inhabit that position, the practices and habits 
of monastic life need to be instilled and naturalized. Even as the rules of the Vinaya provide

--- PAGE 204 ---
Discipline
183
central and important tools for communicating to monastics how they should act, there are 
limits to them. First, while it may seem obvious, they are only texts. They do not in and of 
themselves create agents that live according to their rules. Thus, it is necessary to understand 
the way they are learned and enforced, which parts are enforced, and how. Second, while clearly 
important for creating guidelines for the behavior of monastics, the Vinaya exists in specific 
contexts, along with other discourses, about religion and Buddhism, nationalism, and gender 
that also shape the ways that monastics should act. In this chapter, I argue that to understand 
how monastics are disciplined, we need to look at a much broader range of materials and 
contexts. While the Vinaya is certainly a part of this, we must also consider, the institutional, 
political, and communal contexts in which monastics not only learn the Vinaya, but they learn 
and ideally naturalize, what it means to be a proper nun or monk.
How to wear the robes
In order to show why this is necessary, I want to consider a poster I encountered in 2013 
on the Chiang Mai campus of Mahā Chulālongkornrājavidyālaya University, one of the two 
Buddhist universities in Thailand. The poster shows a monk dressed in a neat fashion, standing 
straight and tall, his robe wrapped around one shoulder. A monk’s bag hangs from his crooked 
arm, and a student badge is pinned to the outer robe draped over his single shoulder. The 
monk is standing in front of a tree and plants, perhaps to make it seem as if he was in a “forest” 
(although he was also standing on concrete circles common in urban gardens as places to walk 
in Thailand). The top of the poster states that its purpose is to remind monks and novices about 
“dressing properly according to the rules of the School of Pāli Studies” at the university, and it 
lists eight different rules about the way that monks should dress on the school’s environs. They 
include commands that monks or novices should wear their robes “draped over one arm, with 
saffron robes,” that the “end of the robe is five inches above the ankle,” and that the belt and 
shoulder sash should be saffron.” Other rules include a command to keep the head, mustache, 
and eyebrows shaved and the nails cut.
On the surface, there is little remarkable about this poster. These rules are reflective of the 
sekhiya, the training rules that are a part of the Patimokkha (Thanissaro 1994: 19). Indeed, in 
the Entrance to the Vinaya, an introduction to disciplinary rules written by the early twentieth-­
century supreme patriarch and prince of Thailand, Vajirañānarorasa, the first and second rules 
refer to the need for the under robe and the upper robe to be worn correctly. The prince-­
patriarch then explains that “to wear correctly means to wear the under-­robe neatly, covering 
the navel at the upper edge but not reaching the chest; while the lower edge covers the knees 
to halfway down the calves but not reaching the ankle” (Vajirañānarorasa 1969: 204). In other 
words, the poster might be read as quoting a commonly used textbook that also reminds the 
students (all novices or young monks) that they should be neat and tidy when they are on 
campus. Although it does not say it explicitly on the poster, the implication is that neat robes 
are reflective of strong and vital discipline.
The robes are perhaps among the most identifiable aspects of Buddhist monastics, in Thailand 
and elsewhere in the Theravāda world. While a variety of institutions and communities such as 
the military, shave their heads either by regulation or standard practice the robes of monastics 
mark them clearly as set apart from the rest of society. The robes are so important that, in 
Thailand and Sri Lanka at least, when a monk is arrested for committing a crime, they must 
disrobe before going to prison (perhaps wearing white) because it is understood that the robes 
cannot be in jail (Reynolds 1994; Schonthal 2019a). The robes in other words represent both 
purity and the fundamentally set apart status of monastics.

--- PAGE 205 ---
Thomas Borchert
184
Yet both this poster and Buddhist history suggest that neat robes are reflective of more 
complicated processes than simply remembering rules of proper action. In addition to harkening 
back to the Entrance to the Vinaya, the poster also distinguishes between insiders and outsiders. 
Monastic students are reminded to identify themselves with the university, by using a shoulder 
bag with a school logo and the school ID badge. Posters like these are common practice on 
Thai university campuses, where students are regularly reminded of the need to wear uni­
forms and to look “neat” (Thai: riap roy). This “neatness” is tied up with identification with 
the institution, saying in ways both implicit and explicit, that you are one of us. This is not all 
that different from moments in Buddhist history when monks debated over the proper way 
to wear their robes. While these debates, such as the one in Sri Lanka in the late nineteenth 
century over whether monks should wear their robes over one shoulder or two, were framed 
in terms of proper religious action, they were often also about group identity. In this context, 
Anne Blackburn has noted that
[t]hrough the elements of dress, monks did (and do) identify their fellows and those 
with whom they might presume to find distance or disagreement. In response to ele­
ments of dress, lay patrons identify the monks with whom they are likely to find com­
mon cause on the basis of caste and/or perceived attainments of discipline.” 
(Blackburn 2010: 92)
In other words, while on the surface the way to wear the robes is simply about knowing how 
to act as a monastic, I suggest that there is often if not always an institutional and thus political 
context to the way that monastics are trained to act, even if the interests of those politics are 
hidden in religious discourse (Lincoln 2012).
Monks behaving badly
The problem of undisciplined monastics is one that seems to be quite common. For 
example, in April 2019, there was a story in the Bangkok Post about a monk and a nun/mae 
chi who were arrested for possessing drugs that should not be in the possession of a monk 
(Methee 2019). The story did not give many details, nor did it need to. It is a well-­worn 
tale that shows up in the Thai press (both English and Thai language), which might be 
categorized as “monks behaving badly.” There are stories that are about monks who have 
been arrested for drunk driving (or public drunkenness), being caught in a sex ring or 
having sex (with either men or women), or embezzlement of some sort. Most notorious 
in recent years has been the story of Phra Nen Kham, a monk who came to prominence 
a half-­dozen years ago when videos of him surfaced on YouTube with a Gucci handbag, 
Ray-­Bans, and a private jet. There was much outrage at all of this: a monk should not act 
like this, that it was “inappropriate” (Thai: may somkhuan). This narrative of indiscipline and 
impropriety has become common in Thailand, but it is not limited to that country (see, 
e.g., Colombo Telegraph 2012).
What is useful about these stories is not the events themselves but the way that they por­
tray monastics and the assumptions behind them. In Thailand, they are often accompanied by 
hand-­wringing about the state of the Saṅgha, how monks don’t act like they ought to (or used 
to), and the inability of the Supreme Saṅgha Council to govern monks. Significantly, they also 
assume that there is a standard for how monks should behave—according to the Vinaya—and 
their failure to do so is a failure of discipline. This failure of discipline is a crisis in and for the 
Saṅgha and, implicitly at least, a potential sign of the decline of the sāsanā.

--- PAGE 206 ---
Discipline
185
These narratives tend to reinforce an image of what “real” Buddhism is, but in doing so, 
they also render invisible some aspects of Theravāda Buddhism in the twenty-­first century. First, 
Buddhism (lay and monastic) across the Theravāda world, as well as within specific countries, 
is far more diverse than is normally portrayed within these narratives (if less commonly in 
academic scholarship). There are monastics who study, who meditate, who believe in magic, 
who don’t believe in magic, who tell fortunes, who do office work, who teach, who believe 
that their vocations are in social work or organic farming, who believe their vocations are 
in performing rituals, who believe their vocations lie in communicating with the laity, who 
believe monastics should have a political voice, and who believe they should not. Official forms 
of Buddhism and quasi-­official images (reinforced through the narrative of monks behaving 
badly) do not exhaust the way that monastics act in the world, how they think about it, or the 
way they view how monastics should attend to the teachings of the Buddha (Buddhavacanam), 
beyond a generalized veneration.1
Second, these articles are emerging at a particular historical moment (i.e., a contingent 
conjuncture) that has a clear impact on the way that Buddhism is understood or perhaps what 
is defined as legitimate forms of Buddhism. Within Thailand, the last two decades have been 
marked by conflict between different factions of elites. This conflict has manifested in mass 
mobilizations of the Thai populace, two coups (2006 and 2014), and years of military rule 
until the restoration of an elected government in 2019 (albeit one in which the military has 
an oversized influence; see Askew [2010] for discussion of the early years of these events). For 
the most part, Thai monks have sought to avoid overt participation in these politics. However, 
since 2014 the Thai state has increasingly made portions of the Saṅgha a target of its efforts to 
sanitize the nation, including the arrest of members of the Supreme Saṅgha Council in 2018. 
Ostensibly, the actions of the state are to rid the Saṅgha of corruption, yet it is also clear that 
the Thai state’s surveillance is directed at monks that it sees as aligned with its enemies (Larsson 
2019). There is a similar specificity to conditions in Sri Lanka and Myanmar, where the last 
half-­dozen years have seen not only the end of a civil war and military rule, respectively, but also 
the emergence of an intense Buddhist nationalism wherein monks have fostered Islamophobic 
actions in each country.2
These politics intersect in an interesting way with what we might think of as the gover­
nance of monks within the “Theravāda secular.” If we understand secularities in terms of an 
understanding of what counts as the proper space of religion in society, as well as the line 
between “religion” and “not-­religion,” then to follow the formulation of Mandair and Dressler 
(2011), “religion-­making” from above is where the state establishes the rules for what counts 
as “religion.” How actors respond to the state’s formulations (actively or passively) is referred 
to as “religion-­making from below.” The specific conditions of religion and politics across the 
Theravāda world will impact what “religion-­making from above” looks like in each nation-­
state and the formations of secularity. However, there are also important commonalities, such 
as the constitutional status of Theravāda Buddhism as the first among equals in Sri Lanka and 
Myanmar, the adherence to Theravāda Buddhism by the majority race or ethnicity, and a strong 
anxiety about the decline of the religion in the second half of the dispensation of the Buddha. 
Theravāda secularities shape the context in which monastics are disciplined, whether through 
external forces or self-­disciplining practices.3
Understanding the context of Theravāda secularities allows (indeed requires) us to ask dif­
ferent kinds of questions about Buddhist formations. Over the last century, there has been a 
tendency to locate monastics, and particularly monks, as being at the heart of Buddhism. If 
you want to know about Buddhism in places like Laos or Myanmar, then you would need 
to know about monks. For example, when Julia Cassaniti, in a discussion of the formation of

--- PAGE 207 ---
Thomas Borchert
186
ethical selves in northern Thailand, asked villagers about Buddhism, they told her they knew 
nothing and that she should talk to the monks. In a telling moment of irony, these monks said 
that they did not know much about Buddhism and that she should go ask the monks in large 
urban temples (Cassaniti 2015). One might imagine that the urban monks would tell her to 
go to another set of monks, such as the ones who had official titles. The confusion between 
Cassaniti (who was interested in understanding what villagers knew and thought) and the vil­
lagers (who thought she wanted to know what “real” Buddhism was) reflects the assumption 
that monastics are the ones that matter. I suggest we need to be thinking about this differently.
Jessica Starling (2019) has shown the necessity of recalibrating our attention away from 
the front stage to the backstage of Japanese temple Buddhism. Doing so allows us to see that 
temple wives are not marginal to the practice of Buddhism but central to it, and that Japanese 
Buddhism should be really understood as functioning within a set of relationships (Starling 
2019). Recalibrating our attention to see temple wives has the added benefit of allowing us 
to understand male priests more clearly, both who they are within the temple communi­
ties and how they rely on the labor of their wives in the construction of their authority. 
Following this, I suggest we need to similarly recenter the way we see Theravāda monastics. 
They are not the center of Buddhism, but they are a particular type of social actor that is at 
least partly separated from the rest of society by modern legal structures (see, e.g., Borchert 
and Darlington 2017/2018: 131–136; Schonthal 2016; Larsson 2016). While official forms of 
Theravāda Buddhism normally place monks at the heart of the religion, this has tended to 
obscure the fact that monastics are people (men within the majority of the Theravāda world) 
who have taken on a very particular type of profession. This profession provides them with 
some privileges (such as high status, access to education, and free food in most of the Theravāda 
world) and disadvantages (constraints on their activities as well as the ability to accumulate 
goods). Moreover, they are subject to training and disciplining and gendered and national dis­
courses that overlap in some ways from those of lay Buddhists and are distinct from them in 
other ways. It is this sense of monastics as a particular type of actor within a larger whole that 
I suggest we need to understand more clearly.
Religious ideologies and practices within educational contexts
Monastics are disciplined within schools. In December 2002, I was visiting a group of monks 
in Sipsongpannā, who were doing a weeklong retreat. There were about fifteen monks, who 
were accompanied by two or three novices each, and they were all camped out in the worship 
hall (Dai: wihān) of a village temple a few miles outside of the capital of the region. There 
was not much to do during the afternoons of the retreat and on the afternoon that I was 
there, several senior monks decided to take the opportunity to work with some of the novices 
who were not students at their school. Their goal that day was to show the novices how to 
address monks they did not know in a polite fashion. In order to do this, they had a senior 
novice walk by them, making sure he bent his body in such a way that his head was lower 
than the monk’s head. The senior novice then pretended to be a senior monk, and the junior 
novices practiced walking by him. When they were not low enough, one of the monks would 
tell him to go lower, or even physically push him down, until the novice’s head and body 
were positioned “appropriately” below those of the senior novice. The retreat had become an 
impromptu school.
The first and most obvious way that men and boys are disciplined is in schools and other 
pedagogical contexts, such as the retreat. There are two different things taking place within 
these schools: first, novices and young monks are learning models of how to be a proper monk;

--- PAGE 208 ---
Discipline
187
second, they are being physically trained in the subjectivity of what being a monk entails. This 
training may take place in a variety of contexts: informal village temples, formal schools, and 
even camps during school vacations (Borchert 2017: 8–9; Chladek 2017). Monasteries were 
the primary location of education in Buddhism and other fields of knowledge prior to the 
twentieth century, but since then, systems of monastic schools have emerged in relation to 
secular schools throughout South and Southeast Asia, sometimes as an additional form of public 
education, sometimes in competition with it (Chessman 2003; Samuels 2010; Dhammasami 
2018; Borchert 2017).
While this is both intellectual and physical training, it is particularly the latter that I highlight 
here. Although the young men in these schools do learn about the life of the Buddha and the 
rules of the Vinaya, the material that they learn is often secondary to the physical ways that 
they are trained, and the bodily dispositions that they are asked to internalize. For example, 
Jeffrey Samuels (2004) suggests that novices in contemporary Sri Lanka learn proper monastic 
behavior not through the study of the teachings of the Buddha but through physical actions, 
of sweeping and cleaning the temple, and by worshipping the Buddha each day. The novices 
that Samuels talks to highlight that it was not what they studied but by internalizing “the way 
they were supposed to act” when they cleaned, walked, or talked to the teacher (964). As he 
says, “action functioned to mold the bodies of the novices within the monastic environment 
by restructuring the bodies and minds of the novices” through an “action-­oriented pedagogy” 
(966). The physical and the cognitive often work together. Joanna Cook has suggested that in 
meditation retreats of female renunciants in Thailand (referred to as mae chi), the “ethical ideals 
of monasticism are actualized through the practice of meditation” (Cook 2010: 94). But it is 
also a concern with showing young men how to act properly and internalize the acts of get­
ting dressed or walking like a monk (or novice) “should” act until this is naturalized (Borchert 
2017: 110–112). Indeed, for new novices, or novices at Dhamma camp, making sure that they 
are neat and tidy (riap roy) in their bodily dispositions is a regular challenge (Chladek 2017: 66).
While this is a general process across the Theravāda world, it is also specific to different 
countries and Buddhist cultures. Some of the vectors of variation have to do with the state’s role 
in the development of the education, local practices and concerns with Vinaya and the different 
actors that are involved in education. For example, in Sipsongpannā, the Chinese government 
has very little to do with the development of the educational system that the Dai-­lue monks 
have developed, while in Thailand, the state has been involved in the educational system since 
the start of the twentieth century. In terms of local practices, adherence to Vinaya rules varies 
and this affects educational practices. In Sipsongpannā and northern Thailand, eating solids 
after noon is not uncommon for novices. Monks who are also teachers have told me that it is 
more important for students who are novices to have sufficient food for their studies.4 Finally, 
the educational practices of Sipsongpannā often include former monks (khanān) as important 
supplementary pedagogical resources. In Thailand, monastic school teachers are a combina­
tion of laity and monks, and the funding for monastic high schools comes out of the national 
government budget. These local variations affect the ways in which novices and young monks 
are encouraged (or forced) to be one kind of monk or another.
Policing monastic bodies and appropriate activity
Since at least the middle of 2018, the state of monastic bodies has become a concern of the 
public in Thailand. First, around the middle of 2018, there was a whole series of stories that 
focused on an obesity “crisis” within the Thai Saṅgha. The articles pointed to statistics that 
suggested that as much as 40 percent of Thai monks were obese but that neither monks nor

--- PAGE 209 ---
Thomas Borchert
188
lay supporters noticed because monastic robes are not formfitting. The culprits identified were 
both a sedentary lifestyle, high-­caloric foods, and especially sugary drinks. Monks apparently 
take in fewer calories than the average Thai man, but they also do less with those calories; 
specifically, they rarely exercise. Ironically, however, around the same time, a story circulated in 
both Thai and English language media about a monk who was too fit. This monk was incred­
ibly buff, with prominent six-­pack abs, and comments about this monk’s social media posts 
ranged widely. Among the negative comments were that it was “inappropriate” (may somkhuan) 
for a monk to post these (or to exercise this way) because it displayed or inspired desire or that 
it would shake the faith of the people in the Saṅgha. The Thai National Office of Buddhism 
was concerned enough that it directed Buddhist protection groups to investigate the photos 
and find this monk (Khaosod 2018).
These stories suggest there is a lot of free-­floating anxiety about the bodies of Thai monks. 
They are too fat or too thin. They act inappropriately in ways that are visible, and this is seen 
as a problem. When the monks at the Dhamma Summer Camps are working with the novices, 
they are highly concerned with making sure that the novices’ robes are neat and in the right 
length. This is reasonable to the extent that these monks are responsible for the novices, but 
at the same time, I want to suggest that they are acting on a standard that can be ambiguous. 
People (lay and monastic, state and local community) have a vision of what a monk should look 
like and how he should act even if they do not always know where this aesthetic comes from. 
They find this aesthetic attractive (Samuels 2010: 34), but little understand how the aesthetic 
can vary across the Theravāda world.
It is worth asking where the aesthetics of a “proper” monastic body comes from. The people 
who are concerned about proper monastic behavior would no doubt claim that they are basing 
their complaints not on politics or anything mundane like that but on an understanding of 
how a monk should act that is from the sāsanā, the teachings of the Buddha. Yet there is very 
little within the Vinaya precluding for example exercise. When we look at something like the 
Entrance to the Vinaya from the early part of the twentieth century, which is the basis for many 
of the textbooks that are used in monastic high school, there are a number of statements out of 
which an aesthetic of bodily comportment could be extracted. It should be neat, the nails are to 
be cut, and hair neat (not unlike the poster from Mahā Chulālongkornrājavidyālaya). Moreover, 
in the section discussing the training rules, the prince-­patriarch elaborates how monastics are 
to enter towns with “downcast eyes” or “laughing loudly.” Indeed, he should go with “little 
sound,” “not go fidgeting,” or have “arms akimbo” (Vajirañānarorasa 1969: 206–208). There 
is attention to how one goes to the toilet, for example, walks in public, and interacts with 
laypeople. But the vision of well-­mannered monks that can be extracted from the Entrance to 
the Vinaya is only part of the story about what proper action looks like for monks. It does not, 
for example, talk about exercise.
The relative absence of concepts of exercise from the Vinaya makes it difficult for monas­
tics to know what is and is not appropriate in this aspect of physical activity. The accounts of 
monastic bodies being overweight or too fit suggest a desire for wellness for the Saṅgha but not 
a completely clear path to get there. This lack of clarity is born out in ethnographic materi­
als from Thailand and Sipsongpannā. Monks and novices in these places participate in physical 
exercise, but they do so in ways that are constrained by varying views on the propriety of these 
activities. Casas (2017), for example, writes of Dai-­lue novices in Sipsongpannā participating in 
basketball and soccer leagues but also that this is seen as a degradation of monastic norms (a 
point he argues against). In particular, he highlights anxiety that Thai monks who are patrons 
of the Chinese Theravāda Saṅgha ought not to see novices playing basketball (Casas 2017: 52). 
Dai-­lue monks have told me that they shelved plans to construct athletic facilities for novices

--- PAGE 210 ---
Discipline
189
because they feared that Thai lay patrons would find it unseemly (personal communication, in 
Jing Hong, China, 2007). At the same time, however, Thai monks also clearly participate in 
exercise. In northern Thailand, it is not uncommon for wats to have fields in the back where 
monastics (primarily probably not solely novices5) have fields tucked away in the back for play­
ing soccer, badminton, or other games (Chladek 2017/18: 56). That these fields are hidden 
suggests that there is tension between what activities are not appropriate and which are allowed 
but should not be seen.
Part of what this means is that the question of what a “proper” monastic body looks like, 
or what proper action looks like can vary across Theravāda communities, and so the effort to 
discipline these bodies will also vary. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to fully address the 
dynamic of propriety for Theravāda monastics, but there are two points worth highlighting 
as the site for future research. First, there is a complex dynamic between local and translocal 
conceptions of propriety. The Vinaya provides a key source for the latter, and images of how 
monks “should” act move freely across the Theravāda world electronically. Yet, the issue of 
exercise points to local rules and values having an important impact on standards to which 
monastics are held (Schonthal 2019b). I suggest we need to think more fully and comparatively 
about the interplay between the formal and informal, the local and translocal in understanding 
what is deemed as appropriate for Theravāda monastics.
Second, and relatedly, recent scholarship (Makely 2007; Chladek 2017; Casas 2017; Keeler 
2017) has begun to consider the masculinities of monks. While on the surface the status of 
monks is because of their dedication to the Dhamma, it is also tied up with their renuncia­
tion of sex (Keyes 2007; Makely 2007; Keeler 2017). At the same time, significant parts of the 
Theravāda world practice temporary ordination; in these regions, time in robes may be less, 
or not only, about learning the teachings of the Buddha but also how to become a proper 
member of society (“cooked,” according to my informants in Sipsongpannā)—really how to 
become a proper man. Yet like with exercise, there are both local and translocal ideals of 
the masculine that monks and novices may be subject to. For example, Creak (2011: 18) has 
demonstrated a “muscular Buddhis[t]” ideal in colonial and post-­colonial Laos that is con­
sistent with the monastic basketball players that Casas discusses (Casas 2017). On the other 
hand, Chladek (2017a: 135) has argued that Thai monastics are subject to much more com­
plex notions of “proper” masculinity, and that the Saṅgha is a place where heteronormative 
masculinity is both reinforced and challenged. Even as it is clear that notions and aesthetics 
of monastic propriety are entangled with questions of masculinities, how these intersect in 
the disciplining process of male monastics within and across Theravāda societies remains to 
be fully researched.
Laity and monastic discipline
The third idea that we need to consider in understanding the disciplining process for Theravāda 
monastics is the role of the laity. We do not yet have a very robust understanding of how 
monastics interact with their lay supporters. Ethnographic accounts (including my own) tend 
to emphasize the distinctions between laity and monastics rather than their interactions. And 
yet, in places like Bangkok or other urban centers in Thailand, wats are located in the middle 
of neighborhoods, and novices and monks regularly interact with laypeople in both formal 
and informal ways. Many monks I have interviewed in Bangkok since 2014 have told me that 
the Saṅgha comes out of the lay community and holds many, if not most, of the same views 
as the laity. This suggests that the laity play an important role in the disciplining of monks in 
two different ways: first as an imagined other, and second as enforcers of particular standards.

--- PAGE 211 ---
Thomas Borchert
190
Michael Chladek (2017b) has argued for a concept he refers to as the “imagined laity.” He 
notes that when training novices as at summer Dhamma camps, monks will often encourage 
the young men to act in certain ways with reference to the laity, to their faith (saddhā), and 
their disappointment if the young men act out of line. That is, it is not a real, actual layperson’s 
feelings but the vision of the laity and their imagined attitudes that matter. The “imagined laity” 
is a tool that monks use to train and discipline novices, but I have encountered monks who 
also use this idea. In the late 1990s, I was traveling with my wife in Thailand, and we visited a 
monk who was a friend of mine. When we said our farewells, my wife tried to shake his hand, 
which he ignored, but it clearly bothered him. Later he mentioned it to me, saying that “the 
people” do not like seeing monks with women. “It makes them feel bad. It is not attractive 
[may suay].” At the time, I took him literally, even though there were no laypeople around and 
interacting with us. Chladek’s point, however, encourages a different interpretation. My friend 
was not referring to actual humans but rather to his imagination of them and what they might 
think about that interaction. In this reading, “the people” become a tool of self-­discipline that 
the monk uses to remind himself of how he should (or thinks he should) act.
At the same time, however, laypeople also have a direct impact on communicating to 
monks (either explicitly or implicitly) about what kinds of things are okay or not okay. I have 
argued elsewhere (Borchert 2020) in giving monks some things and not others, lay support­
ers communicate directly what they see as appropriate or not. For example, several years ago, 
I witnessed a lay family give a monk in Bangkok a set of power tools as dāna. This was not 
a standard gift of course, but the monk later told me that he sponsored the construction of a 
temple in Northeast Thailand that a group of monks were building, and they needed the tools 
to continue their construction. The family was supporting the work of these monks, even if 
the idea of Theravāda monks with power tools is at least incongruous. Similarly, if we think 
about the trope identified earlier of monks behaving badly, there is a clear lay component to 
them. When monks drink at restaurants or drive cars under the influence, this often happens 
in semipublic spaces like restaurants. This means that there are lay Buddhists who support 
this, providing the monks with alcohol. In other words, they are neither critiquing the monks 
(at least to their faces) nor refusing to serve them but instead allowing/permitting monastic 
standards to be breached. This, in turn, creates new local standards for how a monk should act.
Conclusion: monks and smoking
I have suggested so far that in thinking about disciplining monks, we should look to schools, 
aesthetic visions of a “proper monk” monk, and lay articulation of communal standards in addi­
tion to the Vinaya. There are a number of ways that this analysis could and should be expanded. 
For example, there is a strong and important differentiation between public and private (inside 
the wat and outside) for monks—not least of which is that they do not have to wear their 
outer robe in the wat. Moreover, it is likely that the three mechanisms I have described are not 
equivalent across time and space. We could think about strong and weak forces of disciplining, 
the impact that mass and social media have on the images of monks that become hegemonic, 
the specific dynamics of state–civil society interactions across the Theravāda world, the history 
of the local Saṅgha and lay-Saṅgha relationships, as well as an individual monk’s personal his­
tory. The point, however, is that monks are disciplined by wider social forces, whether this is 
done to them, or they are taught to do it to themselves. We see some of the issues coming 
together when we consider the tobacco-­smoking habits of  Thai monks.
In the first decade of the century, there was an effort to get monks to stop smoking ciga­
rettes in Thailand. The campaign began with the annual birthday address given by the late king

--- PAGE 212 ---
Discipline
191
Rama IX in 2003 in which he talked about the problem of smoking more generally. While 
the number of monks who smoked at the time is a bit unclear, studies suggested that between 
25% and 45% of the monastic population smoked tobacco (AFP 2005; Chaveepojnkamjorn and 
Pichainarong 2005). After the king’s address, the Supreme Saṅgha Council and the National 
Office of Buddhism established a committee to consider ways to reduce smoking with the 
Saṅgha. Among the actions taken were efforts to restrict smoking within temple grounds by 
both monks and laity, nicotine candies handed out at the Buddhist universities, and media 
campaigns directed to the Saṅgha to encourage monks to stop smoking and to the laity to 
encourage them to no longer give monks cigarettes as dāna. Monks I have interviewed about the 
campaign have described two different rationales for the campaign. First, because monks receive 
health care through the government, eliminating tobacco use is a public health problem. Second, 
smoking tobacco is a sign of addiction, even if it is not illegal, and it is more difficult for monks 
to be models for laity if they are themselves addicted to tobacco. These monks also described 
smoking as something that was discouraged by Saṅgha authorities but not actually proscribed.
The campaign entails many of the dynamics referred to earlier. Smoking tobacco is not 
an issue covered in the Vinaya because it is not an intoxicant. This means that the desire to 
limit monks smoking tobacco, as well as the tools used to encourage this type of disciplined 
behavior come from outside the Vinaya. The government is involved, as are the institutions that 
govern the Saṅgha, such as the Supreme Saṅgha Council and the National Office of Buddhism. 
Moreover, the reasons why monks should not smoke is entangled with the aesthetics of monastic 
bodies and propriety. While monks have told me that they should not smoke, because it makes 
them less effective moral exemplars, the language they use points to other issues. They describe 
monks smoking not as an “infraction” (phit) but as “unattractive” (may suay) as well as “inap­
propriate” (may somkhuan). This suggests that the visual of monks smoking matters, not just the 
act itself. Finally, laity are involved with this issue in at least two ways. First, monks refer to the 
laity as the reason for why they should not smoke, just as Chladek suggests when talking about 
the “imagined laity.” Second, the fact that laypeople continue to provide monks with cigarettes 
(according to my monastic informants) suggests that many lay folk do not see this as a problem.
It should be stressed that the question of monastic smokers is at this point suggestive rather 
than conclusive. There has been very little research done on antismoking campaigns within the 
Thai (or any other) Saṅgha, and most of the energy within the Saṅgha itself seemed to have 
been expended in the first decade of this century. Yet what this relatively minor campaign 
points to are the complex ways that monks in Thailand are disciplined. The Vinaya is important 
of course, but only one of the factors that need to be considered if we want to understand how 
it is that monastics in Theravāda communities become disciplined. I have suggested here that it 
is also necessary to consider a broader range of materials in addition to the Vinaya. Disciplining 
is pedagogical process that entails rules, models of proper behavior, institutions for developing 
and fostering these models, and mechanisms for enforcement.
Notes
	 1	The implicit notion of “real” Buddhism is part of a universalist project that has naturalized notions of 
what religions should look like. Indeed, the emergence of Buddhism as a unified religion was a central 
part of that (Masuzawa 2005; King 1999). Instead of a universal object, I would argue that we should see 
Buddhism as an umbrella term housing a number of resources that individuals can draw on as they see fit, 
according to what appeals to them, or is seen as culturally legitimate.
	 2	For discussion of the wider politics of Thailand, see the essays in Pavin 2019; on the resurgence of 
Buddhism and ethnonationalism in Sri Lanka in the wake of the Civil War, see the essays in Holt 2016; and 
for a comparison of the emergence of Buddhist nationalisms in Myanmar and Sri Lanka, see Schonthal 
and Walton 2016.

--- PAGE 213 ---
Thomas Borchert
192
	 3	The study of the forms of the secular within Buddhism as a whole remains understudied, especially in 
relation to the work of scholars of Islam. For a concise statement of how to think about secularism see 
Mahmood (2016: 5–6). Schonthal provides an invaluable discussion of the place of Buddhism in the Sri 
Lankan constitution (2016). See also Turner 2019 on Myanmar and Larsson 2019 on Thailand.
	 4	This contravenes one of the basic, and well-­known, rules for novices (and fully ordained monastics as well). 
Precisely how common this is in the Tai world or beyond is unclear. In Sipsongpannā, this is sometimes 
seen as a sign of degradation of the discipline (Casas 2017). However, based on interviews with monks 
and novices in Bangkok and Chiang Mai, I suspect that it is simply more open in Sipsongpannā (see also 
Chladek 2017/2018: 55–56; Pannapadipo 2001: 56).
	 5	It is perhaps an obvious point, but novices are not subject to the same set of rules that fully ordained monks 
are. There is overlap between the ten precepts that novices are to adhere to and the 227 that fully ordained 
Theravāda monks must follow, but they are not the same. This means that what is appropriate for novices 
and fully ordained monks varies as well, although I would argue not as completely as we sometimes think.
References
AFP. 2005. “Buddhist Monks Find It Hard to Quit.” ABC Science, 31 May. https://www.abc.net.au/sci­
ence/articles/2005/05/31/1380995.htm, accessed January 3, 2020.
Askew, Marc, ed. 2010. Legitimacy Crisis in Thailand. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
Blackburn, Anne M. 2010. Locations of Buddhism: Colonialism and Modernity in Sri Lanka. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Borchert, Thomas. 2017. Educating Monks: Minority Buddhism on China’s Southwest Border. Honolulu, HI: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Borchert, Thomas. 2020. “Bad Gifts, Community Standards and the Disciplining of Theravāda Monks.” 
Journal of Contemporary Religion 35: 53–70
Borchert, Thomas, Darlington, Susan M. 2017/2018. “Political Disrobing in Thailand.” Buddhism, Law, and 
Society 3: 113–156.
Cassaniti, Julia. 2015. Living Buddhism: Mind, Self, and Emotion in a Thai Community. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
Clarke, Shayne. 2014. Family Matters in Indian Buddhist Monasticisms. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i 
Press.
Cook, Joanna. 2010. Meditation in Modern Buddhism: Renunciation and Change in Thai Monastic Life. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Casas, Roger. 2017. “The Buddhist Basketball Association: Sport Practice and Cultivation of the Body 
among Tai Lue Monastics.” Asia Pacific Journal of Sport and Social Science 6 (1): 46–60.
Chessman, Nick. 2003. “School, State, and Saṅgha in Burma.” Comparative Education 39 (1): 45–63.
Chladek, Michael Ross. 2017a. Making Monks, Making Men: the Role of Buddhist Monasticism in Shaping 
Northern Thai Identities. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Chicago.
Chladek, Michael Ross. 2017b. “Imagined Laity and the Performance of Monasticism in Northern 
Thailand.” Buddhism, Law and Society 3: 45–78.
Chaveepojnkamjorn, W., Pichainarong N. 2005. “Cigarette Smoking among Thai Buddhist monks, central 
and eastern Thailand.” Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public Health 36 (2): 505–511.
Colombo Telegraph. 2012. “Drunken Chief Buddhist Monk: Bitter Truth Revealed with Wild Boar.” 
Columbo Telegraph, 28 February. https://www.colombotelegraph.com/index.php/drunken-­chief-­
buddhist-­monk-­bitter-­truth-­revealed-­with-­wild-­boar/, accessed July 20, 2019.
Creak, Simon. 2011. “Muscular Buddhism for a Modernizing Laos.” The Journal of Lao Studies 2 (2): 1–22.
Dhammasami, Khammai. 2018. Buddhism, Education and Politics in Burma and Thailand: from the Seventeenth 
Century to the Present. London: Bloomsbury.
Holt, John Clifford, ed. 2016. Buddhist Extremists and Muslim Minorities: Religious Conflict in Sri Lanka. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Keeler, Ward. 2017. The Traffic in Hierarchy: Masculinity and its Others in Buddhist Burma. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i.
Keyes, Charles. 2007. “Sexy Monks: Sexual Scandals Involving Buddhist Monks in Thailand,” paper pre­
sented at EUROSEAS 2007, Naples Italy, September 2007.
Khaosod. 2018. “Rong Pho. Phot. Sangthuk cangwat wa tua phra jo chik phaet, chi ben khwaam phit, 
‘loka-­vajja’.” 29 December. https://www.khaosod.co.th/special-­stories/news_1889333, accessed April 
10, 2019.

--- PAGE 214 ---
Discipline
193
King, Richard. 1999. Orientalism and Religion: Postcolonial Theory, India, and the ‘Mystic East’. London 
Routledge.
Kusa, Julian. 2007. Crisis Discourse, Response and Structural Contradictions in Thai Buddhism 1990–2003. Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Australian National University.
Kieffer-­Pülz, Petra. 2014. “What the Vinayas Can Tell Us About Law.” In Buddhism and Law: an Introduction, 
eds. Rebecca French, Mark Nathan, 46–62. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Larsson, Tomas. 2016. “Buddha or the Ballot: The Buddhist Exception to Universal Suffrage in 
Contemporary Asia.” In Buddhism and the Political Process, eds. Hiroko Kawanami, 78–96. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Larsson, Tomas. 2019. “Secularisation, Secularism, and the Thai State.” In Routledge Handbook of Contemporary 
Thailand, ed. Pavin Chachavalpongpun, 278–290. London: Routledge.
Lincoln, Bruce. 2012. Gods and Demons, Priests and Scholars: Critical Explorations in the History of Religions. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Mahmood, Saba. 2016. Religious Difference in a Secular Age: a Minority Report. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Makely, Charlene. 2007. The Violence of Liberation: Gender and Tibetan Buddhist Revival in Post-­Mao China. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Mandair, Arvind-­Pal S., Markus Dressler. 2011. “Introduction: Modernity, Religion-­Making and the 
Postsecular.” In Secularism and Religion-­Making. edited by Markus Dressler and Arvind Mandair, 3-36. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Masuzawa, Tomoko. 2005. The Invention of World Religions; or, How European Universalism was Preserved in the 
Language of Pluralism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Methee Muangkaew. 2019. “Monk, Nun Arrested, Speed Pill Seized At Temple in Trang.” Bangkok Post, 
Apri 1. https://www.bangkokpost.com/thailand/general/1659072/monk-­nun-­arrested-­speed-­pills-­
seized-­at-­temple-­in-­trang#cxrecs_s, accessed April 15, 2019.
Pannapadipo, Phra Peter. 2001. Little Angels: the Real Life Stories of Thai Novice Monks. Bangkok: Post Books.
Pavin, Chachavalpongpun, ed. 2019 Routledge Handbook of Contemporary Thailand. Oxon: Routledge.
Reynolds, Frank. 1994. “Dhamma in Dispute: the Interactions of Religion and Law in Thailand.” Law & 
Society Review 28 (3): 433–452.
Samuels, Jeffrey. 2004. “Toward an Action-­oriented Pedagogy: Buddhist Texts and Monastic Education in 
Contemporary Sri Lanka.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 72 (4): 955–971.
Samuels, Jeffrey. 2010. Attracting the Heart: Social Relations and the Aesthetics of Emotion in Sri Lankan Monastic 
Culture. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i Press.
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2016. Buddhism, Politics, and the Limits of Law: The Pyrrhic Constitutionalism of Sri Lanka. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2019a. “Buddhist Law Against the State? Thinking Again About Religion, Law, and 
Conflict.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion. 87 (3): 662–692.
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2019b. “The Monastery Rules, Lankan Style: A New Look at (not that) old Katikāvata-­s.” 
Delivered at Second International Conference on Buddhism and Law, University of Buffalo. September 26, 
2019.
Schonthal, Benjamin, Walton, Matthew J. 2016. “The (New) Buddhist Nationalisms? Symmetries and 
Specificities in Sri Lanka and Myanmar.” Contemporary Buddhism 17: 1–35. doi:10.100/14639947.2016.
1162419.
Schopen, Gregory. 2004. Buddhist Monks and Business Matters: Still More Papers on Monastic Buddhism in India. 
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i Press.
Starling, Jessica. 2019. Guardians of the Buddha’s Home: Domestic Religion in the Contemporary Jodo Shinshu. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Thanissaro, Bhikkhu (Geoff DeGraff). 1994. The Buddhist Monastic Code, vol. 1.
Turner, Alicia. 2019. “Colonial Secularism, Buddhism and the Continuing Violence of Burmese Women’s ‘Freedom’.” 
Presented at Duke University, February 2019.
Vajirañānarorasa, Somdetch Phra Mahā Somana Chao Krom Phrayā. 1969 [2512]. The Entrance to the Vinaya 
(Vinayamukha), Vol. 1. Bangkok: Mahāmakutarājavidyālaya.

--- PAGE 215 ---
194
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-16
13
FUNERALS
Changing funerary practices
Katherine A. Bowie
Across the Theravāda Buddhist world, funerals are often described as the most important of 
the life cycle rituals.1 Within the philosophical canon of Theravāda Buddhism, death serves as 
a reminder of the Buddha’s teachings on impermanence. Despite the canonical emphasis on 
non-self (anatta), most Theravāda Buddhists believe in rebirth, be it as humans, animals, deities 
or ghosts. Accordingly, both by listening to monks recite sacred texts and by offering gifts to 
them, funerals provide the living with opportunities to make merit to assist the deceased with 
a better rebirth. The ceremonies typically last several days but can extend across months and 
even years. As Bryan Cuevas and Jacqueline Stone note, “The performance of funerary and 
memorial ritual represents a chief social role of Buddhist clerics and strengthens ties between 
saṅgha and laity” (2007: 2). Nonetheless, even as late as 2007, Cuevas and Stone observe that, 
despite its centrality to Buddhist traditions, “until recently death has received surprisingly little 
attention in the field of Buddhist Studies” (2007: 3).2
Although rituals have been defined as “acts regularly repeated in a set precise manner,” 
a historical perspective reveals that rituals change over time.3 Like other rituals, Theravāda 
Buddhist funerary practices have undergone change.4 A sixth-century Chinese account of the 
early Southeast Asian kingdom of Funan describes four methods of disposal of the dead: “(a) 
throwing the dead body into a flowing stream, (b) burning it to ashes, (c) burying it in the 
ground, (d) exposing it to the birds” (Wales 1992 [1931]: 159). However, today cremation is 
increasingly coming to typify Theravāda funerals in Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and 
urban Sri Lanka.
Recognizing such variations invites a consideration of the broader historical processes 
leading to changes in Theravāda Buddhist funerary practices. These processes will vary in 
each country. This essay provides one such example by describing changes in funerary prac­
tices in central and northern Thailand over the course of the twentieth century. During the 
early decades of the twentieth century, the Bangkok court began expanding its administrative 
control, bringing once quasi-independent regions under its jurisdiction to form the modern 
nation-state of Thailand. Historically monks played important roles in education and other 
aspects of village life. Working through the Saṅgha Act of 1902 the court began to centralize 
control over monastic practice. However, notwithstanding earlier efforts, the Thai state did not 
gain political control over the northern Saṅgha until April 1936, when northern Thailand’s

--- PAGE 216 ---
Funerals
195
most famous monk, Khruba Srivichai, was compelled to sign a document agreeing to abide 
by the 1902 Saṅgha Act. Srivichai had been detained under temple arrest in Bangkok since 
November 1935, during which time 340 of his disciples were forcibly disrobed.5 Many of 
the disrobed abbots of northern temples were replaced by monks trained in Bangkok who 
began introducing changes in northern religious beliefs, many of which became manifest in 
funerary practices. These changes generated considerable controversy among northerners in 
subsequent years.
This chapter is divided into three sections. In the first section, I present an overview of 
shifting funerary practices in the central region over the nineteenth century that resulted in 
a standardized pattern of cremations by the early twentieth century. In the second section, I 
describe the pre–World War II funerary practices in the northern region that prevailed during 
Srivichai’s lifetime, highlighting the very different positionality of temples. In the third section, 
I describe the changes that took place as Bangkok-trained monks gained influence. Although 
there are many possible elements of comparison, in each section I focus on four elements: the 
overall disposition of the deceased, the location, the timing, and the treatment of final remains. 
The essay draws on evidence from archival sources, the accounts of early explorers, and the 
work of fellow anthropologists, as well as my own interviews, oral histories, and participant 
observation over the course of four decades of research in Thailand. Because northern Thailand 
has long had particularly close relations with Burma, especially the Shan States, I also draw 
upon accounts of Burmese funerary rites.
Although I am focusing this essay on differences, the two regions shared some overall pat­
terns that characterized the broader Theravāda Buddhist world. Overall, funerary practices 
reflected the major historical social divisions, differentiating funerary rites for monks, royalty, 
and commoners. Cremation typified monastic and royal funerals. Funerary practices also varied 
according to the manner of death, deaths by accident or in childbirth considered to be par­
ticularly inauspicious and even dangerous.6 Today the division between auspicious and inauspi­
cious deaths is becoming less relevant in determining the type of funeral held. Furthermore, 
patterned on royal and monastic funerals, today cremation is becoming increasingly the norm 
for commoner funerals as well. However, as this essay will show in the case of Thailand, con­
temporary practice in each country of the Theravāda Buddhist world emerges from a more 
complex religio-political history.
Central Thailand
In central Thailand, a region once known as Siam, cremation became normative by the early 
decades of the twentieth century. As H. G. Quaritch Wales writes in 1931, cremation
is the means by which the vast majority of the Siamese people dispose of their dead, 
the exceptions being criminals, victims of cholera and smallpox, people who have 
been struck by lightning, and women who have died in childbirth, whose corpses are 
buried.
(Wales 1992 [1931]: 137)
He adds, “Cremation is the only means of disposal of the remains of deceased royalty in Siam” 
(1992 [1931]: 137); the same was true for clergy. However, as this section shows, even as late 
as the turn of the twentieth century, commoners not only cremated their dead but also buried 
them or offered them to wild birds (typically vultures).

--- PAGE 217 ---
Katherine A. Bowie
196
Of cremations, burials and bird-offerings
The earliest account of Siamese (Central Thai) funerary practice suggests that burial may once 
have been the norm among elites and bird offerings among the poor.7 Ma Huan visited Siam 
at the beginning of the fifteenth century and left the following account, noting “whenever a 
man of wealth and standing dies, they take quicksilver and pour it inside of the abdomen (of 
the corpse) and bury it” (Ma 1970[1433]: 105). Ma (1970[1433]) continues:
[W]hen one of the poorer classes dies, they carry the corpse to the wilds by the sea-
side, and place it on the edge of the sand; subsequently golden-coloured birds as large 
as geese–more than thirty, or fifty, of them–gather in flight in the sky; they descent [sic], 
take the flesh of the corpse, devour it completely, and fly away; [and] the people of the 
[dead man’s] family weep over the bones which remain, then cast them away in the 
water and return home. They call this “bird-burial”. They also invite a Buddhist priest 
to celebrate a mass, chant liturgies, and worship Buddha, and that is all.
(105)
By the seventeenth century, it appears the elites had begun to prefer cremation. Simon de la 
Loubère (1969[1693]), who visited Siam in 1687, provides a detailed description of cremations, 
noting that someone who could not afford cremation at first buries the dead but later “causes 
the body of his Father to be digged up again, though a long time dead, to make him a pompous 
Funeral” (124). However, he adds that the poor “inter their Parents without burning them,” or 
“expose them in the Field on an eminent place; that is to say on a Scaffold, where the Vulturs 
and the Crows devour them” (Loubère 1969[1693]: 125; for further details see 123–125).
In the early nineteenth century, British diplomat John Crawfurd (1987[1828]) records of 
his 1821 mission to Siam, “The only honourable funeral amongst the Siamese consists in 
burning the body, and the practice is very general” (321). If someone could not cremate the 
body, “either from poverty, or from the party dying at a distance,” the body is “first buried, 
and afterwards, as soon as convenient or practicable, disinhumed, and consigned to the funeral 
pile” (1987[1828]: 321). Nonetheless, offering one’s body to vultures appears to have become 
more popular among all the classes, linked not with poverty but with religiosity (e.g., Crawfurd 
1987[1828]: 321; Pallegoix 2000 [1854]: 124–125). Wales explains,
It used to be the custom in Siam at some time before cremation to cut off part of the 
flesh of the corpse immediately after death and offer it to the temple dogs and vultures 
on gold or silver dishes. This was only done by the wish of the deceased. …It was 
given a Buddhist significance, and considered an act of great merit.
(Wales 1992 [1931]: 160; see also Crawfurd 1987[1828]: 321)8
If in the early nineteenth century, offering oneself as charity to dogs and birds was a cross-class 
option, it seems by the turn of the twentieth century, it was limited to the poor and criminal 
class. As Ernest Young, a schoolmaster in Bangkok in the late nineteenth century, writes:
Paupers and criminals are disposed of in a barbarous and revolting manner. At one of 
the city temples a flock of vultures, numbering over a hundred, is kept.9 The vultures 
are repulsive dirty-looking birds who sit stolidly hour by hour upon the roof or walls 
of the temple, apparently without life or motion except when a body is brought for 
their repast. They become keenly excited at the prospect of the coming feast, for 
which, however, they must first do battle with the crowd of pariahs that also haunt the

--- PAGE 218 ---
Funerals
197
vicinity of the same temple. They flock down with noisy croaking and great flapping 
of wings, but are beaten off by the attendants, who first prepare the body for the feast 
by cutting it open in different place with large sharp knives. They cast a few pieces of 
flesh to the dogs and then retire. In a second the body is hidden by the birds.…
The meal over, the feathered cannibals return to their perches upon roof and wall. 
The relatives gather up the clean white bones, put them loosely in a wooden cof­
fin, light wax tapers, and bearing the coffin with them, march three times round the 
funeral pyre. They then light the fire, place the coffin on the burning fuel, and scatter 
sweetly smelling incense in the leaping flames.
(Young 1982[1898]: 247–248; Younghusband 1888: 132–133;
 Dekeyser 1908: 127–129)
By 1924 the practice had ended, W. A. Graham writing that the custom “has been done away 
with and all such bodies are now cremated” (1924 Vol 1: 166). Similarly, Wales confirms that 
bird-offerings “long ago ceased to be the custom of royalty, and has now been prohibited by 
law in the case of commoners” (1992[1931]: 160).
Cremation at Mt. Meru on temple grounds
In Central Thailand, for commoners, as Sharp and Hanks write, “cremation always takes place 
at a temple” (1978: 164). The French Catholic bishop Pallegoix has provided one of the 
most complete accounts of a mid-nineteenth-century funeral typical of a commoner; both 
bird-offering and cremation were combined on temple grounds. After describing the initial 
preparations, he writes:
Then, to lugubrious sounds of clarinets, the coffin is placed in a big boat on a platform 
over which there is a dais. The relatives and friends accompany the convoy in several 
small ballons, bringing the deceased in procession to the temple where he must be 
cremated. Then, the relatives uncover the coffin and place the body in the hands of 
those who, by occupation, are charged with burning it for the price of a tical which 
they take care of placing in the mouth of the deceased. First, the burner washes the face 
with coconut milk and if the deceased has ordered before his death that he wanted to 
be eaten by vultures and crows, he dismembers it and throws the flesh to these birds 
of prey who do not leave the temples. When the corpse has been placed on the pyre, 
the fire is lit, the nerves being contracted the dead person appears to move and to roll 
to the middle of the flames. It is a horrible spectacle to watch.
(2000 [1854]: 124–125)
More specifically, the cremation takes place at “one of the temples which possesses a public 
‘Pramane [Phra Meru]’” (Young 1982[1898]: 246–247).10 As the noted Thai scholar Anuman 
Rajadhon explains, “Meru is the name of the cosmic mountain where the gods of the Buddhists 
dwell. It forms the center of the universe,” adding that “Indra, the King of the gods of Buddhism, 
lives in his glittering, golden mansion right on the top of the golden mountain, surrounded by 
similar golden mansions, smaller in size and grandeur, of the lesser gods” (1957: 65). In royal and 
monastic cremations, the deceased “does not die in the ordinary sense of the word but trans­
lates himself to the heavens” (Anuman 1957: 66; see also Crawfurd 1987[1828]: 318, 315–320). 
Although temporary Merus were specially built for monks and royalty to accommodate large 
crowds, permanent Merus were increasingly being built in temples across the central regions.

--- PAGE 219 ---
Katherine A. Bowie
198
Delaying cremations, temple storage
With the increasingly popularity of cremations, delays became more common since crema­
tions often involved considerable expense.11 As Graham writes, “it sometimes happens that the 
whole of man’s estate is dissipated by his heirs in their endeavours to gratify his spirit with 
a sumptuous burning” (1924: 165). Consequently, “as many as four or five years may elapse 
between the time of death and the actual cremation” (Kaufman 1960: 157). As a result, indi­
vidual cremations in the central region were not staggered throughout the year but occurred 
typically “about April or May” (Graham 1924: 165), a time when “[t]he paddy has been sold, 
and relatively large sums of money are on hand” (Kaufman 1960: 159).
Although in the past bodies awaiting cremation were buried, it became more common to 
store them at the temples. Younghusband notes “hundreds of boxes “full of corpses in various 
states of decomposition” at one of the Bangkok temples he visited (1888: 132). According to 
Kaufman, bodies were typically kept at home for seven days, with friends visiting and monks 
invited to chant. “At the end of the seven days, the coffin is brought to the wat and kept in a 
special building called the thikebsob” (Kaufman 1960: 159).12
Cremains: kept in homes, chedi, or temples
After cremation, there were a variety of ways in which the cremains were handled.13 Joost 
Schouten, writing of his trip in 1636 to Ayutthaya, notes that after the deceased is “burnt 
with fire, their collected ashes are afterwards anointed and buried near the Temples, a Pyramid 
rich and magnificent being erected over them; so that funerals are extremely expensive to 
the survivors, as well as honorable for the deceased” (1986[1636]: 143). Interestingly, Loubère 
noted these pyramidal structures or chedi were “Without any Epitaph” (1969[1693]: 124; see 
also Crawfurd 1987[1828]: 321).
In addition to the elite practice of constructing chedi, Central Thai also took cremains 
home.14 In 1688, Loubère already noted the practice of bringing funerary urns (kod) home, 
writing, “Those that have neither Temple nor Pyramid, do sometimes keep at their house the 
ill burnt remains of their Parents” (1969[1693]: 124). Crawfurd suggests bringing urns home 
may once have been an elite practice for “persons of distinction” (1987[1828]: 321). However, 
by the mid-nineteenth century, the practice of keeping relic urns in homes appears to have 
been widespread. Pallegoix notes this practice in the mid-nineteenth century, writing, “When 
the combustion has ended, the relatives come to collect the main bones to place them in 
an urn kept at their house” (2000 [1854]: 124–125). Graham writes that these urns “may be 
seen in almost every house” (1924: 166; see also Young 1982 [1898]: 246–247; Plion-Bernier 
1973[1937]: 41). Furthermore, “[o]n very particular occasions these remains are brought out 
and distributed about the rooms” (Young 1982[1898]: 246–247). This practice of keeping and 
reverencing funerary relics continued well into the twentieth century (e.g. Kaufman 1960: 161; 
Sharp and Hanks 1978: 166).15
Northern funerary rites
Unlike Central Thailand—where, by the early twentieth century, the deceased were cremated, 
their bodies stored in temples, and their cremains taken home or interred in temples—northern 
Thai kept death rites away from temples. Like Central Thailand, northern monks and royalty 
were “regarded as high-class persons by the people. When they died, it was believed they would

--- PAGE 220 ---
Funerals
199
be reborn in a better world or as a deva at different levels of heaven on Mount Meru” (Sommai 
and Dore 1992: 159). Thus, cremations were typical for the funerals of northern royalty and 
clergy. However, all cremations—for northern royalty, monks, and commoners—took place out­
side of temples. Only the bodies and cremains of monks were allowed inside northern temples.
Burial versus cremation
Despite the few existing nineteenth-century travel accounts suggesting northerners “cremate 
their dead except in cases of violent death” (Younghusband 1888: 130; Bock 1986 [1884]: 261), 
considerable evidence suggests a widespread practice of burials. The British explorer Holt 
Hallett, while noting cremations among the “Ping Shans,” comments that “[b]urial, however, is 
still observed by the British Shans” (Hallett 1890: 49). The Lanna region was under Burmese 
rule for some two hundred years, from 1558 to 1774. Furthermore, northern Thailand was 
resettled over the course of the nineteenth century by war captives, taken primarily from the 
Shan States area of Burma (see Bowie 1996). In Burma, with the exception of monks and 
royalty, burials were customary (Graham 1924 Vol. 2: 259; Shway Yoe 1963: 589–596; Nash 
1965: 156; Spiro 1970: 251).16 As Milne summarizes, “Shans do not cremate their dead, only 
the bodies of monks are burnt” (1910: 86–97). Scott 1900: 326). Villagers I have interviewed 
in both Chiangmai and Lamphun Provinces confirm that they buried their dead as late as the 
1970s. In the area where I conducted fieldwork, I personally attended both village burials and 
cremations in the 1970s.17
Charnel forest (paa chaa), not temple Meru
Temples in northern Thailand have traditionally been considered as sacred grounds, as “khuang 
kaew thang saam” or “the area of the triple gems (i.e. the Buddha, the Dharma and the Saṅgha).” 
Corpses were seen as fundamentally polluted, inauspicious, or spiritually dangerous, and there­
fore inappropriate to bring into temple grounds. Furthermore, it is widely believed that phii 
(ghosts) cannot enter temple grounds; indeed it is a trope in Thai horror films that victims 
attacked by ghosts flee into temples for refuge.18
Accordingly, both burials and cremations took place, not in temples but rather outside the 
community in the “charnel forest” (paa chaa or paa hio), a practice that continues to the present 
day. The charnel forest is typically a forested area located to the west of the village boundary 
or at the “tail” of the village (hang muubaan).19 Cityfolk removed their dead through a special 
gate, often located in the southwest corner of the city wall, for cremation or burial at the paa 
chaa outside the city. In Chiang Mai City, commoners who died in the city were taken out by 
Haiyaa Gate (the southwest gate today is called Suan Prung). Burmese shared these practices 
(e.g., Shway Yoe 1963: 593; Brown 1916: 22–23).
The same taboo also applied to royalty. Unlike in Bangkok, where the royal cremations were 
held inside the city walls, the cremations of northern rulers (chao) were held outside the city. 
However, royalty were not cremated in the same location as commoners, but at a separate area 
known as “Khuang Men (Meru),” typically located either to the north or east of the city (both 
were considered auspicious directions, north believed to be the direction of Meru and east 
associated with the rising sun). This field in Chiang Mai was located east of the city wall.20 
Monastic cremations were also not carried out in temples grounds but typically at special tem­
porary Meru’s built on a nearby open field given that these rites typically attract large crowds.21 
Monks could also be cremated at the community’s paa chaa, albeit often at a separate part.

--- PAGE 221 ---
Katherine A. Bowie
200
Corpses in homes, not temples
Northern funerals typically took place one to seven days after death, with the bodies kept at 
home until the final burial or cremation.22 A monk from Srivichai’s village said that in Srivichai’s 
day funerals were very simple; the deceased was sprinkled with sacral water (nam sompoi) that 
had been blessed by the monks and removed to the paa chaa, often on the very same day with 
no further direct monastic involvement. Most villagers appeared to keep the corpses an aver­
age of three days. As Keyes summarizes, “[i]t is not common (in northern Thailand) to keep 
the corpse in the house for as long as (is done) in central (Thailand). At most it will be kept 
only for seven days” (1980: 8). Corpses of royalty were kept longer, but they were kept in their 
palaces of residence and not in the temples.
A mark of their high status, the only bodies that were kept in temples were those of monks 
(typically not in the central viharn but in the side salabatr hall). I have visited several temples in 
the north where the deceased abbot’s body is being kept.23 Although monks have been known 
to die in their temples and be kept there until their cremation, Srivichai insisted on being car­
ried out from the temple to die in order to maintain the temple’s purity.
Treatment of cremains
Unlike Central Thailand, northerners did not take cremains home or build commoner chedi on 
temple grounds. Bodies which were buried in the cemetery remained in unmarked graves. In 
cases of cremations, the bones were collected and put into a pot, which was then buried in the 
paa chaa.24 Elsewhere in the north, villagers collected the bones and floated them down a river, yet 
others made sand chedi by the riverbanks. Some placed the cremains into firecrackers (this prac­
tice ended in Chiangmai City when shopkeepers objected to cremains landing on their roofs).
Indeed, far from wanting the ghosts (phii) of the dead to return home with them, upon 
leaving the charnel forest, funeral-goers dip their hands into a bowl of sacral water set out at 
the edge of the cemetery and wipe their heads. The reasons villagers gave me included concern 
about purifying oneself from the pollution of death or to keeping the spirit of the deceased 
or any of the other many ghosts there from following one home. Phii were seen as having the 
potential to cause harm to the living.
Unlike commoners whose cremains were buried in the charnel forest, royal cremains were 
interred not at a temple but in chedi built on the royal cremation grounds (Khuang Men, 
“Meru”). The ashes of Lamphun’s ruling families (chao) remain to the present day in chedi 
located not in a temple but a gated area outside the city walls. The cremains of Chiangmai’s 
chao were similarly interred at the Khuang Men east of the city wall. However, in 1908, when 
Chao Dara Rasmi, one of the wives of King Chulalongkorn (Rama V) and daughter of the 
Lanna king Inthawichayanon, returned after many years in Bangkok for a visit to Chiangmai, 
she relocated her forebearers’ chedi from Khuang Men to Wat Suan Dok. Although Wat Suan 
Dok was then a deserted temple that lay outside the city walls, this decision and the decision 
to process the relics through the city, rather than around the outside, caused considerable con­
troversy (Woodhouse 2009: 194–196).
Unlike commoners whose ashes were kept at a remove from one’s home and community, 
the cremains of monks were considered sacred and the only ashes northerners considered 
appropriately kept within temples, typically located in the center of their villages. Thus, in 
addition to the enormous chedi (phra that) at northern temples believed to house the relics of 
the Buddha, many temples have much smaller chedi built to house the cremains of their abbots.25

--- PAGE 222 ---
Funerals
201
Post–World War II changes
Funerary practices in Central and northern Thailand differed significantly prior to World War 
II, notably regarding the overall disposition of the deceased, the location, the timing, and the 
treatment of final remains. The 1902 Saṅgha Act centralized administrative control over the 
monastic order first in the central region, bringing an end to bird-offerings and burials in favor 
of temple cremations. Although the Saṅgha Act went into effect in the northern region in 
1924, its implementation met with active resistance from northern monks. This resistance was 
finally overcome when the 340 monks and novices in Srivichai’s lineage were disrobed and 
Srivichai was placed under temple arrest to compel his agreement to submit to the regulations 
of the Bangkok Saṅgha. As more and more monks trained in Bangkok or holding ecclesiastical 
positions within the national Saṅgha hierarchy took charge of northern temples, funerary prac­
tices began to change. Although urban temples led by Bangkok-trained abbots and patronized 
by government officials began the process, changes in funerary practices intensified across the 
northern region following World War II. As Sommai and Dore summarize northern practice, 
“[f]unerals today seem to be much influenced by the standardized patterns observed by Central 
Thai Buddhists, especially among urban people and government officials” (1992: 148).
In the central region, the primary change was the growth in crematoria and the commercial­
ization of funerary rites. Tracing their rise to the decade after World War II in central Thailand 
(Wong 1998: 124), Deborah Wong writes, “Most temples now have crematoriums, which are 
tall stately buildings with ovens discreetly concealed inside a small room. Bangkok’s landscape 
is punctuated by their tall, slender chimneys; even in the Thai countryside, nearly every temple 
has a small crematorium” (Wong 1998: 103). She notes that funerals “have become big business 
in Bangkok, and the customs surrounding death ritual are quite commercialized” (Wong 1998: 
102–103). Temples that have made a business of funerals can have “anywhere from five to over 
thirty such halls surrounding the crematorium,” and “it is not unusual for several funerals to 
be going on at once (Wong 1998: 112).26
The decades following the mass disrobings of Srivichai’s disciples have seen major changes in 
northern funerary practice. The first important change is that cremation has become the norm. 
Furthermore, cremations are being increasingly elaborated and more expensive, from simple 
coffins once made from mats or scooped out logs (hang muu) to the addition of a simple deco­
rative frame (hang chang) to incredibly ornate prasat (palaces). Bodies are now routinely being 
injected with preservatives. Villagers no longer serve local moonshine but increasingly more 
expensive store-bought alcohol such as beer. Growing numbers of monks are being invited. 
Funerary attendees now throw sandalwood on the pyre. Funerary wreaths are becoming more 
common and increasingly hosts provide mementos as gifts to attendees.27 Northerners are also 
adding fifty-day and one-hundred-day post-cremation rites.
A second change has been the growing appearance of funerary chedi (called kuu in northern 
Thai) at temples and charnel forests.28 Although many are unmarked, an increasing number now 
include the name, birth date, and death date; some even include photographs of the deceased. 
Initially the idea of commoner cremains being located within sacred temple grounds created 
controversy. The first funerary chedi appeared in urban temples with close ties to both Bangkok 
officials and monks who had studied at temples in Bangkok or who had received monas­
tic titles through the monastic hierarchy centered in Bangkok. Temples aligned with Kruba 
Srivichai were resolutely opposed to cremains of any person other than their own abbot or 
other respected clergy; to this day, temples that maintained their lineages from Kruba Srivichai 
are far less likely to have any funerary chedi other than those of their abbots on their temple

--- PAGE 223 ---
Katherine A. Bowie
202
compounds. However, the practice of bringing cremains home never became routinized as part 
of northern rites and seems to be declining in the central region as well.29
A third major change is the growth of a funeral industry within northern temples, primarily 
those in urban and town centers. Unlike in the past when monks were invited to the home of 
the deceased, today, more coffins are brought to the urban temple for the formal rites prior to 
being removed for cremation. For many villagers, this too is an anathema since in their view, 
the deceased is not yet aware that they have died and wants to share the company of family 
and friends. Village rites entail villagers sleeping over, cooking for large crowds, and throngs 
of people eating, drinking, and gambling the nights through; in urban temples, the deceased 
is left alone in the funerary salas. Furthermore, this formalization of funerary rites has led to 
the demise of the northern tradition of bawdy sermons by “joking monks,” in favor of monks 
chanting more somber texts (Bowie 2017). In sum, in the eyes of many villagers, such funerals 
are seen as more formal and hardly festive.
Nonetheless, for urban populations, this new service is greatly appreciated since they often 
do not have much space for large numbers of relatives and friends, to say nothing of the 
problem of parking cars and motorcycles. Furthermore, such temple rites are far less expen­
sive. The monks typically chant for a couple hours in the evening, so the hosts do not need 
to be providing food beyond simple snacks and drinks. Because it is occurring at the temple, 
no alcohol is served. A basic service of three days, including renting the funeral sala and the 
subsequent cremation, costs about 10,000 baht (about US$330); the three-day funeral for a 
former village school principal cost about 300,000 baht (about US$9,930; the prasat and coffin 
alone cost about 50,000 baht or about US$1,650).
However, one element has remained resistant to change, namely, the Central Thai practice of 
holding cremations within temple grounds, and accordingly the idea of building crematoria on 
temple grounds. To this day, there is only one temple with a crematorium in Amphur Muang, 
Chiang Mai, namely, Wat BaPhaeng; its three crematoria were built after World War II and 
its monks are very quick to note that the land on which they are located is separate from the 
temple land (baeng khaet).30 One temple in Amphur Mae Rim in Chiangmai Province has a 
newly created crematorium as part of its unique feature of accepting the bodies of those who 
have willed themselves as cadavers for the provincial hospital located there. More and more 
villages are discussing building Merus, however, not in the temples that are typically located in 
the center of the village community, but outside at their charnel forests.
As this comparison of Central and northern Thailand has shown, funerary rites have under­
gone different patterns of change. In the central region, in the early decades of the twentieth 
century, the practices of burial and bird-offerings ended and cremation at temple Merus had 
become the norm across classes. Because of the expense of cremations, corpses were increas­
ingly stored in temples. Cremains were brought home or interred at temples. During this same 
period, northern Thai held both burials and cremations at charnel forests outside their villages. 
Northerners did not bring cremains home, and only monastic ashes were interred at temples. 
With the consolidation of Bangkok control over the northern region following the disrobing 
of Srivichai’s lineage of monks, northern Thai funerary practices underwent significant changes. 
Although northerners adopted cremation voluntarily, the internment of commoner cremains 
on their temple grounds generated controversy. Today, although northern villagers continue to 
hold funerary rites at home, northern urbanites no longer observe the taboo against commoner 
corpses being housed at temples and are holding their funeral rites at temples. Nonetheless, the 
taboo against holding cremations on temple grounds has still largely been maintained across 
the northern region. The evidence of concrete differences in funeral practices described in this

--- PAGE 224 ---
Funerals
203
chapter provides tantalizing hints of further historical differences in interpretations of appropri­
ate Buddhist practice across these two regions that await further study.
Today cremation is the norm across Thailand and most of the Theravāda Buddhist world. 
However, as this comparison of central and northern Thai funerary practice suggests, such a 
simple generalization about contemporary “Theravāda Buddhist” funerary practices belies the 
fact that each country has had its own complex political history of changing religious beliefs 
and funerary practices. Further comparative microhistorical studies of funerary rites are mer­
ited and may lead to further insights into the interrelationship between political and religious 
change across the Theravāda Buddhist world.
Notes
	 1	For example, Kaufman 1960: 156; Sharp and Hanks 1978: 164; DeYoung 1966: 69, 74; Tambiah 1970: 179.
	 2	Recent exceptions include Klima 2002; Williams and Ladwig eds. 2012; Davis 2016. Cuevas and Stone 
suggest that an important contributing factor “may lie in a perceived incompatibility of many Buddhist 
death-related practices with the doctrine of ‘not-self’ (Skt. anatman; Pāli anatta), the denial of any perma­
nent essence, such as a soul” (2007: 5). Fundamental to the paradox of non-self is the belief in constant 
rearising or rebirth, prior to the attainment of nirvana. Given the veneration of his relics, the status of the 
Buddha himself is ambiguous.
	 3	https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ritual. Accessed August 13, 2019.
	 4	See Terweil 1979 for a pioneering comparative historical exploration of pre-Buddhist Thai funerary 
practices.
	 5	Srivichai died in 1939. For further details, see Keyes 1982; Bowie 2014a, 2014b; Cohen 2017.
	 6	Such unfortunate deaths typically involve burial (e.g., Crawfurd 1987[1828]: 321; Bowring 1969 [1857]: 
141–142; Loubère 1969 [1693]: 125; Bock 1986 [1884]: 261; Young 1982[1898]: 247; Terwiel Barend 2012: 
258–259).
	 7	Burials are described in Sri Lanka (Langer 2007: 62–69) and Laos (e.g., LeBar and Suddard eds 1960: 56).
	 8	Apparently a time of particularly intense religiosity, Crawfurd also notes self-immolation as a “solemn 
religious sacrifice of the highest order,” hands “raised before his face, in an attitude of devotion,” resulting 
in their relations “for ever after taken under the special protection of the sovereign” (1987[1828]: 322). In 
1859, Cambodian king Ang Duong also had his body dismembered “as a final Buddhist act of generos­
ity to animals” (Davis 2016: 50; see also Wales 1992 [1931]: 160). The Chinese traveler Cheou Ta-kouan 
believed that the “chief method of disposal of the dead in Cambodia was to expose them to the dogs and 
vultures,” but Aymonier states that this practice was “always more common in Siam than in Cambodia” 
(Wales 1992 [1931]: 160).
	 9	This temple is likely Wat Saket (see also discussion in Bastian 2005 [1867]: 176).
	10	The only exceptions are royal and monastic funerals for which special temporary Merus are constructed. 
Members of the Chakri dynasty have traditionally been cremated in Merus built in front of the Grand 
Palace (an area once called Thung Phra AdMeru). Following the 1932 overthrow of the absolute monar­
chy, royal cremations took place in temples but resumed with the death of King Ananda in 1946 (Plion-
Bernier 1973: 50–51). For further accounts, see Pallegoix 2000 [1854]: 124–125; Bowring 1969[1857]: 
99–100, 121–123, 142; Crawfurd 1987[1828]: 315–320; Bastian 2005 [1867]: 176–180; Graham 1924 Vol. 
1: 164–166; Hallett 1890: 248; Bock 1986[1884]: 73–77; Wales 1992 [1931]: 137–168).
	11	See also Plion-Bernier (1973[1937]: 31–42; Sharp and Hanks 1978: 165). By far the longest delays occurred 
with royal rituals, involving logs being sent down from northern Thailand (Pallegoix 2000 [1854]: 125–126). 
Because royal rituals were so costly, cremations for lesser royals were often held conjointly (Graham 1924: 165).
	12	Poorer families did not conduct the fiftieth- and one-hundredth-day rituals and only invited monks for 
one or two nights only before storing the body (Kaufman1960: 159). Families with larger houses some­
times kept bodies at homes. As Plion-Bernier explains, “[l]ife continues around the corpse which is not an 
object of fear but of respect and before which one does not pass without making a wai, the hands joined” 
(Plion-Bernier 1973[1937]: 36).
	13	The bones (relics) of the deceased are often treated separately from the ashes.
	14	Writing over two centuries later, Bastian provides a fuller array of options, writing, “Following a crema­
tion, the residual ashes are mixed with lime water and used to wash temple walls, or they are kneaded into 
a Buddha statue and buried under a pagoda, or they are preserved in a funeral urn” (2005 [1867]: 176).

--- PAGE 225 ---
Katherine A. Bowie
204
	15	In royal cremations, “[t]he bones not consumed by the fire are collected and reduced to powder. They 
are mixed with a little clay and of it small statues are formed and placed in a temple destined for this” 
(Pallegoix 2000 [1854]: 125–126). On royal cremains, see also Plion-Bernier 1973[1937]: 50; Wales 1992 
[1931]: 171.
	16	At his request, King Mindon was buried in 1878 (Shway Yoe 1963: 597–600). For accounts of a Shan 
ruler’s funeral, see Adams 2000: 40; a monk’s funeral in Burma see Shway Yoe 1963: 583–588; a monk’s 
funeral in Kengtung, see Dodd 1923: 302. For accounts of northern royal funerals, see Bock 1986 [1884]: 
261; Dodd 1923: 303–304.
	17	Chinese (Hill 1992) and other ethnic minorities also buried their dead (e.g., Scott 1900; 528–529, 557, 
588, 593, 604; Hallett 1890: 49, 175).
	18	Northern villagers have often told me that to make merit for the dead, one must pour blessing waters 
(yaat nam) outside of temple walls. Shans and other northerners make offerings to monks for those with 
inauspicious deaths outside the temple because they “cannot enter the temple to collect the merit being 
made for them” (Eberhardt 2006: 65; Tannenbaum 1995: 151).
	19	This pattern is also widespread outside of the central region (for northeastern Thailand, see Kickert 1960; 
Hayashi 2003: 164–189; Tambiah 1970: 183; Lefferts 1993: 117, 121).
	20	This practice continued until 1908 when Chao Dara Rasmi relocated the royal cremains to Wat Suan Dok; 
thereafter, the cremations of northern aristocracy and its abbots have been held there (e.g., Sommai and 
Dore 1992: 152). Temporary Merus are built because Wat Suan Dok does not have a crematorium.
	21	Ironically, despite Srivichai’s beliefs, his cremation in 1946 took place at Wat Chamathevi, with high-
ranking Bangkok officials in charge.
	22	Those with accidental deaths were not brought home but buried without delay.
	23	For a parallel development in Cambodia, see Marston 2006.
	24	Cremation pot also buried in the Northeast (Tambiah 1970: 187).
	25	In some cases, they mold the cremains into Buddha images.
	26	Other changes are also occurring, for example, in music (Wong 1998), in religious texts (Terweil 2012: 
251), in ordination (Kingkeo 1967: 118), and mourning customs (Pallegoix 2000[1854]: 125; Bastian 
2005[1867]: 179; Bock 1986 [1884]: 73; Kingkeo 1967: 119; DeYoung 1966: 73).
	27	Sharp and Hanks noted gifts for guests such as “a handkerchief, a bouquets of flowers, sometimes a book” 
(1978: 165–166); see also Olson 1992.
	28	In northeastern Thailand, Hayashi also dates the practice of “making stupa-style tombs and interring the 
bones in temples” to about 1940 (2003: 168).
	29	DeYoung writes that “this custom has been discontinued, for the modern Buddhist abbots do not approve 
of the family keeping the ashes of the deceased in the home” (1966: 72).
	30	Earlier locals here also buried their dead.
References
Adams, Nel. 2000. My Vanished World: The True Story of a Shan Princess. Cheshire: Horseshoe Publications.
Anusaranasasanakiarti, Phra Khruu, Keyes, Charles. 1980. “Funerary Rites and the Buddhist Meaning of 
Death: An Interpretive Text from Northern Thailand.” Journal of Siam Society 68 (1): 1–28.
Anuman, Rajadhon. 1957. “The Golden Meru.” Journal of the Siam Society 45 (2): 65–73.
Bastian, Adolf. 2005 [1867]. A Journey in Siam (1863). Translated by Walter Tips. Bangkok: White Lotus 
Press.
Bock, Carl. 1986 [1884]. Temples and Elephants: Travels in Siam in 1881–1882. Singapore: Oxford University 
Press.
Bowie, Katherine. 2017. Of Beggars and Buddhas: The Politics of Humor in the Vessantara Jataka in Thailand. 
Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.
Bowie, Katherine. 2014a. “Buddhism and Militarism in Northern Thailand: Solving the Puzzle of the Saint 
Khruubaa Srivichai.” Journal of Asian Studies 73 (3): 711–732.
Bowie, Katherine. 2014b. “The Saint with Indra’s Sword: Kruubaa Srivichai and Buddhist Millenarianism 
in Northern Thailand.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 56 (3): 681–713.
Bowie, Katherine. 1996. “Slavery in Nineteenth Century Northern Thailand: Archival Anecdotes 
and Village Voices.” In State Power and Culture in Thailand, ed. E. Paul Durrenberger, 100–138. Yale 
University Southeast Asia Monograph #44.
Brown, R. Grant. 1916. “Death Customs in Burma.” Man 16: 22–23.

--- PAGE 226 ---
Funerals
205
Cohen, Paul, ed. 2017. Charismatic Monks of Lanna Buddhism. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Crawfurd, John. 1987 [1828]. Journal of an Embassy to the Courts of Siam and Cochin China. Introduction by 
David Wyatt. Singapore: Oxford University Press.
Davis, Erik W. 2016. Deathpower: Buddhism’s Ritual Imagination in Cambodia. Columbia: Columbia University 
Press.
Dekeyser, Leon. 1908. Notes de voyage, Japon, Iles Hawai, Chine, Siam. Bruxelles: Severeyns.
DeYoung, John. 1966. Village Life in Modern Thailand. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dodd, William Clifton. 1923. The Tai Race: Elder Brother of the Chinese. Cedar Rapids, Iowa: The Torch Press.
Eberhardt, Nancy. 2006. Imagining the Course of Life: Self-Transformation in a Shan Buddhist Community. 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Graham, W.A. 1924. Siam. London: Alexander Moring Limited, De La More Press.
Hallett, Holt Samuel. 1890. A Thousand Miles on an Elephant in the Shan States. Edinburgh: William 
Blackwood and Sons.
Hayashi, Yukio. 2003. Practical Buddhism among the Thai-Lao. Kyoto: Kyoto University Press.
Hill, Ann. 1992. “Chinese Funerals and Chinese Ethnicity in Chiang Mai, Thailand.” Ethnology 31 (4): 
315–330.
Kaufman, Howard Keva. 1960. Bangkhuad: A Community Study in Thailand. New York: J.J. Augustin 
Incorporated.
Keyes, Charles F. 1982. “Death of Two Buddhist Saints in Thailand.” Journal of the American Academy of 
Religion, Thematic Series 48 (3–4): 149–180.
Kickert, Robert. 1960. “A Funeral in Yang Terng, Changwat Ubol Northeast Thailand.” Journal of the Siam 
Society 48 (2): 73–83.
Klima, Alan. 2002. The Funeral Casino: Meditation, Massacre, and Exchange with the Dead in Thailand. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Langer, Rita. 2007. Buddhist Rituals of Death and Rebirth: Contemporary Sri Lankan Practice and Its Origins. 
London: Routledge.
LeBar, Frank, Suddard, Adrieene, eds. 1960. Laos: Its People, its Society, its Culture. New Haven: HRAF Press.
Lefferts, Leedom. 1993. “The Power of Women’s Decisions: Textiles in Tai Dam and Thai-Lao Theravāda 
Buddhist Funerals.” Southeast Asian Journal of Social Science 21 (2): 111–129.
Loubère, Simon de la. 1969 [1693]. The Kingdom of Siam. Introduction by David K. Wyatt. Kuala Lumpur: 
Oxford University Press.
Ma, Huan. 1970 [1433]. Ying-yai sheng-lan: The Overall Survey of the Ocean’s Shores’ [1433]. Translated from 
the Chinese text edited by Feng Ch’eng-Chun; with introd. notes and appendices by J.V.G. Mills. 
Cambridge: Published for the Hakluyt Society at the University Press.
Milne, Leslie. 1910. Shans at Home. With two chapters on Shan history by Rev Wilbur Wilis Cochrane. 
London: John Murray, Albemarle Street, W.
Nash, Manning. 1965. The Golden Road to Modernity: Village Life in Contemporary Burma. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Olson, Grant A. 1992. “Thai Cremation Volumes: A Brief History of a Unique Genre of Literature.” Asian 
Folklore Studies 51 (2): 279–294.
Pallegoix, Jean-Baptiste. 2000 [1854]. Description of the Thai Kingdom or Siam. Translated by Walter Tips. 
Bangkok: White Lotus Press.
Plion-Bernier, Raymond. 1973 [1937]. Festivals and Ceremonies of  Thailand. Translated by Joann Elizabeth 
Soulier. Bangkok: Assumption Press.
Kingkeo, Attagara. 1967. “The Folk Religion of Ban Nai: A Hamlet in Central Thailand.” PhD Diss, 
Indiana University.
Schouten, Joost. 1986 [1636]. “A Description of the Government, Might, Religion, Customes, Traffick and 
other remarkable Affairs in the Kingdom of Siam.” In A True Description of the Mighty Kingdoms of Japan 
and Siam, eds. Francois Caron, Joost Schouten. Bangkok: Siam Society.
Scott, J. George, with assistance by J. P. Hardiman. 1900. Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States. 5 vol. 
Rangoon: Government Printing Press.
Sharp, Lauriston and Lucien M. Hanks. 1978. Bang Chan: A Social History of a Rural Community in Thailand. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Shway, Yoe. 1963. The Burman: His Life and Notions. New York: Norton Library.
Sommai, Premchit, Dore, Amphay. 1992. The Lan Na Twelve-Month Traditions. Chiang Mai: So Sap Kan Pim.
Spiro, Melford E. 1970. Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and its Burmese Vicissitudes. New York: Harper 
& Row.

--- PAGE 227 ---
Katherine A. Bowie
206
Tambiah, Stanley J. 1970. Buddhism and the Spirit Cults in North-east Thailand. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Tannenbaum, Nicola. 1995. Who Can Compete Against the World?: Power-protection And Buddhism in Shan 
Worldview. Ann Arbor: Association for Asian Studies.
Terweil, Barend. 1979. “Tai Funeral Customs: Towards a Reconstruction of Archaic-Tai Ceremonies.” 
Anthropos 74 (3/4): 393–432.
Terweil, Barend. 2012. Monks and Magic: Revisiting a Classic Study of Religious Ceremonies in Thailand. 
Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Wales, H.G. Quaritch. 1992 [1931]. Siamese State Ceremonies: Their History and Function with Supplementary 
Notes. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press.
Williams, Paul, Ladwig, Patrice, eds. 2012. Buddhist Funeral Cultures of Southeast Asia and China. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Wong, Deborah. 1998. “Mon Music for Thai Deaths: Ethnicity and Status in Thai Urban Funerals.” Asian 
Folklore Studies 57(1): 99–130.
Woodhouse, Leslie. 2009. “A ‘Foreign’ Princess in the Siamese Court: Princess Dara Rasami, the 
Politics of Gender and Ethnic Difference in Nineteenth-Century Siam.” PhD Diss., University of 
California-Berkeley.
Young, Ernest. 1982 [1898]. The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press.
Younghusband, Lt. G. J. 1888. Eighteen Hundred Miles on a Burmese Tat. London: W.H. Allen & Co.

--- PAGE 228 ---
PART III
Texts/Teachings

--- PAGE 229 ---


--- PAGE 230 ---
209
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-18
14
CANONS
Authoritative texts of the Theravaṃsa
Peter Skilling
Texts have many lives and their value(s) depend on how we frame them and how we “canonize” 
them. This chapter examines the concepts of canon and Pāli canon and then broadens the scope 
to discuss the many canons that have coexisted within the Theravāda traditions, highlighting 
their fluidity and functionality with a focus on central Thai traditions. Canons are not static: 
they are flexible, living collections.
The idea of “canon”
A canon is an authoritative collection of socially and historically contingent texts.1 A canon is 
“not a closed, absolute system … but a dynamic, evolving entity that can be reopened, rein­
terpreted, and reshaped” (Mitchell 2005: 20–21). There are religious canons, there are literary 
canons, and there are canons of the arts and many other fields. In education, canons are the 
mainstay of the curricula. They set the standards and determine the parameters of study and 
research. Their variety and complexity call for comparative, interdisciplinary approaches.
Heine and Wright cite two Western authorities to clarify the question of the Zen canon: 
“Zen does not have a canon in the formal sense of the term … [but it] recognizes a core of 
writings in the various genres as seminal resources for the expression of doctrine. As Harold 
Bloom shows in The Western Canon, the term canonicity does not necessarily refer to a fixed 
body of writings that assert a dogmatic sense of authority, but rather indicates the role of texts 
that express a compellingly creative and powerful message. Robert Alter points out in Canon 
and Creativity, ‘A canon is above all a trans-historical textual community. Knowledge of the 
received texts and recourse to them constitute the community, but the texts do not have a single 
authoritative meaning, however many the established spokesmen for the canon at any given 
moment may claim that it is the case.’ Alter goes on to show that ‘although univocal meaning 
may be claimed, in the various traditions of canonical interpreters we find a tremendous diver­
sity and range of viewpoints that are supported by the canon.’” (Heine and Wright 2004: 4–5)
Pāli Tripiṭaka and Pāli canon
Unlike Zen, the Theravāda tradition does have a formal canon, and Theravāda might be defined 
as a transhistorical and translocal textual community centered on the Pāli canon. Traditional

--- PAGE 231 ---
Peter Skilling
210
commentators discuss alternate meanings but favor authoritative single interpretations. The 
Pāli canon is one of several transmissions of the Buddha’s teachings, and interpreters belonging 
to the eighteen (according to a traditional count) Buddhist schools tend to claim authority 
for their own school’s versions against the others. This means that the mainstream Buddhist 
tradition is not univocal regarding the Buddha’s teachings: the canons support a diversity and 
range of interpretations.
The scriptural heritage of the Buddhist schools evolved across South Asia for centuries, 
and each of the eighteen schools had its own scriptural collections. This produced a plurality 
of canons. The classical idea of canon became the Tripitaka: three (tri–) “baskets” (piṭaka) or 
collections of scriptures, one each for monastic discipline (Vinaya), discourses and dialogues of 
the Buddha (Sūtra), and systematized scholasticism (Abhidharma). These were redacted in early 
Middle Indic languages like Pāli and, with the increasing use of Sanskrit in Indian culture, the 
so-called Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit-s. Only incomplete records of these canons survive, either 
as manuscript fragments in the original Indic languages or as partial translations into Chinese, 
Tibetan, and other languages.
It has long been a widespread assumption that the Pāli canon is not one among equals, 
not one of the several Buddhist canons of South Asian Buddhism but the canon, the one and 
only true canon. Through a concatenation of historical circumstances, including the British 
“discovery of Buddhism” in nineteenth-century Sri Lanka and the revival and development 
of transregional Buddhism, this collection has been privileged as the measure of all Buddhist 
literature, as the authentic canon of Buddhism as a whole. Here the Pāli collection wins by 
default because there is no competition: it is the only South Asian Tripiṭaka to survive. This 
chapter does not attempt to deal with the wide spectrum of Buddhist canons and restricts itself 
to the canons of the “Theravaṃsa” world.2
Canon formation
How was the Theravāda canon formed? The Theravāda and other Buddhist canons began orally 
and were only recorded in writing after several centuries. After the Master’s passing, his monas­
tic followers gathered to recite, collate, and redact his teachings. This was called a saṃgı̄ti or 
saṃgāyanā (literally, chanting or singing together, here called a convocation or convocation-recitation). 
Pāli sources call this the original or root redaction (mūlasaṅgaha) while Indian thinkers like 
Vasubandhu (fourth century) and Bhāviveka (sixth century) call it the original or root recitation 
(mūlasaṅgı̄ti). If there ever was a Buddhist canon, this would have been it: the canon agreed on 
at the first convocation. Nine centuries later, Vasubandhu lamented that by his time the root 
recitation was lost or at best fragmented (mūlasaṃgı̄ti-bhraṃśa: Skilling 2010: 19 and 22). The 
Theravāda of Sri Lanka presents a radically opposite position. The Pāli Chronicle of the Island 
(Dı̄pavaṃsa) describes how the “schismatics” (i.e., the eighteen schools) “broke up the original 
redaction and made another redaction” (Skilling 2010: 22, 29) and maintains that the Theravāda 
was the sole non-schismatic school. This idea that is echoed by contemporary representatives 
of the tradition: “The Pāli Canon of Theravāda Buddhism, after two and a half millennia and 
six major rehearsals, has been generally recognised as the oldest, most original, most complete, 
and most accurate record of the Buddha’s teachings still available today” (Payutto 2003: 1).
About a century after the first convocation, a second one was held at Vaiśālı̄ to resolve 
differences that had arisen among the monastic orders. The two convocations constitute the 
foundations of monastic Buddhism and its scriptures. In the centuries to follow, new schools 
and orders developed, but for all of them, including the Great Vehicle, Buddhist history begins 
with the first two convocations. From that point on, each school held its own convocations

--- PAGE 232 ---
Canons
211
and redacted its own canon and the traditions diverged. The history of the Theravādin canon 
is recounted in Pāli works like the Manual of Buddhist Historical Traditions (Saddhammma-saṅgaha, 
trans. B.C. Law). By the end of the eighteenth century, the learned Thai monk Somdet Phra 
Vanarat composed the History of the Recitations (Saṃgı̄tivaṃsa) on the occasion of King Rāma 
I’s ninth convocation, adding two Siamese redactions to the seven Indian and Sri Lankan 
councils of the Pāli sources to count nine. The Burmese enumeration differs. King Mindon 
(1808–1878, reigned 1853–1878) convened a fifth recitation, the last of the royal period, at 
Mandalay, where he had the whole Tripiṭaka engraved on marble slabs. After Burma became 
independent from Britain, Prime Minister U Nu (1907–1995) convened a sixth recitation in 
Rangoon, the capital of the newly formed Union of Burma, and published the Sixth Council 
edition of the Tripiṭaka. This edition was produced by the deliberations of learned monastics 
from international Saṅghas. Highly regarded, it is available electronically.
In this way, national Buddhist histories diverge. The Sri Lankan tradition counts four convo­
cations. The Thai count is nine—seven Indian and Sri Lankan convocations plus two Siamese. 
The Burmese count is six, four Indian redactions plus two Burmese.
Materiality
Material canons are physical manuscripts and books. For several hundred years the Buddha’s 
teachings were memorized and transmitted orally until they began to be written down in 
Sri Lanka, Gandhara, and elsewhere (the historical record is very sketchy: few contemporary 
documents survive except for the Gandharan manuscripts, some of which date to four or five 
centuries after the Buddha [first century bce]). Gandhari manuscripts in the Northwest were 
written on birch-bark scrolls; in Sri Lanka, the Pāli canon was written down in manuscripts 
made from the long leaves of a species of the palm-tree family. Writing materials included 
brushes, styluses, pens, ink, and lampblack. Sri Lankan histories relate that the Tripiṭaka was writ­
ten down on the island in the first century bce. This means that scriptures were written down 
about the same period in Gandhara in the far northwest and Sri Lanka in the far south—and 
most probably at centers of Buddhist activity in between.
Manuscripts are sacred or holy objects because they enshrine the word of the Buddha. 
They are treated with respect and reverence according to codes and etiquettes of proper 
behavior; these are the same as those for images or relics of the Buddha or other sacred figures. 
Manuscripts are wrapped in fine cloth; they should be stored in a clean place, high up—above 
head level, if possible—and should not be laid on the ground or placed on a seat. A genre of 
literature extols the blessings and merits gained through the production of manuscripts, from 
gilding and embellishing them to protecting them with wooden covers, cloth wrappers, woven 
cords, boxes, or cabinets (Skilling 2017a). Everything connected with manuscripts is infused 
with an aesthetics of merit that ensures that manuscripts are things of beauty.
Writing systems
Which script was used to write down the first Pāli manuscripts? There is no record, but it is 
likely to have been a form of early Brāhmı̄, the script used for the earliest Sri Lankan stone 
inscriptions. No early Pāli manuscripts survive (with the anomalous exception of four circa 
eighth- and ninth-century Vinaya folios written in a north-Indian script found in Nepal). 
From the first centuries ce the use of writing took off in India and different cultures and areas 
developed their own scripts. Buddhist monastic communities established themselves across 
India and began to write their scriptures in contemporary local scripts. This included the

--- PAGE 233 ---
Peter Skilling
212
Theravāda Saṅghas who wrote Pāli in different scripts. As a result, there is no such thing as a 
Pāli script or a Pāli system of writing. Pāli was written in the letters of different regions of South 
and Southeast Asia and latterly in the roman script. Up to the nineteenth century, it was nor­
mal for an educated person to know several scripts and speak several languages. The various 
Indic scripts follow the same principles but the letters are pronounced differently. As a result, 
Pāli is pronounced differently in different cultures. For example, the simple formula of hom­
age namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa—“homage to that one, the fortunate one, 
the worthy arhat, the truly and fully awakened Buddha”—sounds different in Sinhala, Mon, 
Khmer, Thai, or Burmese.
The Pāli canon was transmitted in manuscript form for two thousand years; it was only trans­
ferred into book format in the late nineteenth century when King Rāma V of Siam published 
a Thai-script Pāli Tripiṭaka. This, the first Pāli Tripiṭaka to be printed in book format, was soon 
followed by a Mon-script version printed in Thailand and by editions in the Burmese, Sinhala, 
Khmer, Devanagari, and other scripts. After one hundred years in book format, computer 
experts converted the Tripiṭakas to digital formats which have become increasingly popular.
Problems with canons
The collection of texts that make up the Theravaṃsa canon was codified in Sri Lanka by 
the early centuries ce. It is redacted in a Middle Indo-Aryan language that the tradition calls 
Māgadhı̄, the language of the land of Magadha in North-Central India, but today is known 
internationally by another traditional designation, “Pāli,” the “language of the scriptures.” 
Generally regarded as closed and fixed, it is the only Indic language scriptural collection to 
survive in a complete state, at least in the shape defined a thousand years after the Buddha by 
the Theravādin master Buddhaghosa. By default, this became known as “the Pāli Canon” (or 
“canon”—both uppercase and lowercase are used with nuances in emphasis), “the Tipiṭaka 
(Pāli) or Tripiṭaka (Sanskrit),” “the Canon” (uppercase), or “the Buddhist Canon.”
The notion of a canon is problematic in the study of Buddhism. The problem is not that 
there were no canons—we have seen that there was a plurality. The problem is the assump­
tion that there has ever been an orthodox, pan-Buddhist canon, a single master collection of 
the Buddha’s teaching—and that this is the Pāli canon. On the surface, this might seem fair 
enough: for Theravāda Buddhists and for scholars of all stripes, the well-preserved and widely 
accessible Pāli collection is a rich and nearly inexhaustible resource. One of the greatest records 
of the Buddha’s teachings, it is an indispensable reference work—a referential or working canon.
The Theravāda canon: closed or open?
Was the Theravāda canon closed or open? Collins calls the Pāli canon a “closed list of scriptures” 
and goes on to state, “When compared with other extant collections of scriptures in Buddhism, 
I think the Pāli Canon is unique in being an exclusive, closed list” (1990: 89–91). This is a 
complex issue for which we have little ancient evidence. The notion of closure is, in fact, seen 
in the Sarvāstivāda literature, for example, in the complex system of tables of contents (uddāna) 
that mapped the structure of the school’s Tripiṭaka and safeguarded against interpolation.
It is sometimes stated that the Theravāda canon was closed earlier than some of the other 
mainstream collections, like those of the Mahāsāṃghika or Sarvāstivāda schools, invoking 
Buddhaghosa’s fifth-century list of the texts that constitute the Pāli Tripiṭaka as evidence. If 
we stop at the list, the Theravāda canon is indeed closed, but the list did not inhibit the devel­
opment of nonclassical literature and practical canons (and likely was not meant to do so).

--- PAGE 234 ---
Canons
213
The question of closure is complicated by the fact that there are very few ancient records of 
the reception of canons or scriptures. The evidence that we have is late, from the premodern 
and modern periods, and it is socially stratified. To produce or sponsor a Tripiṭaka was a huge 
and expensive project and naturally enough the evidence bespeaks elite and court sponsorship. 
Lists of titles, royal orders, and royal questions reflect canons as conceived by the court.
Conceptual proliferation
The idea of canonicity spawns a plethora of linked concepts and terms like pre-, post-, extra-, 
and non-canonical. The idea of canonicity is exclusionist in that it divides textual products into 
“ours” and “theirs,” “ours” and “others.” This leads to judgmental labels like non-canonical, 
unorthodox, and apocryphal, spurious, and counterfeit and the exclusion, rejection, or mar­
ginalization of texts that do not meet the school’s criteria. For the study of Pāli literature, it is 
more useful to regard these texts as didactic tools rather than forgeries. Noncanonical literature 
was produced to suit changing social needs and changing appetites of the literary imagination, 
leading to shifts in the patterns of production and reception.
The scope of the Theravāda canons includes a wealth of translated or vernacular canons. 
To treat the Theravāda canon as “Pāli-only” risks creating an artificial narrative—as if Pāli lit­
erature was created in a social and historical vacuum—that it was written and read by native 
speakers of Pāli living in “Pāli-land.” Pāli literature was in fact created by people from many 
language backgrounds who lived in diverse societies across the map of South and Southeast 
Asia and interacted with other Buddhist and non-Buddhist traditions and languages. Pāli was 
the criterion of linguistic correctness, but it was not a national or state language. Like any cul­
ture or religion, Theravāda is a hybrid. This gives it vitality and interest, and it confirms the 
importance of Pāli for understanding the religious and cultural heritage of Theravāda through 
its many canons.
An overemphasis on canonicity masks the variety, diversity, and vitality of regional and 
vernacular cultures and conceals the degree of transcultural exchange and translation. It 
sidelines the continuous production of literature within the Theravāda traditions, a creative 
endeavor that has not been adequately recognized in modern studies. Pāli literature has no 
cut-off date. It flourished in Sri Lanka through the Polonnaruva period (eleventh to early 
fourteenth centuries); the Pyu, Mon, and Burmese used Pāli in Burma from an early date 
and from the Sukhothai to the Ayutthaya and Bangkok periods (approximately thirteenth to 
nineteenth centuries) Siam produced a vibrant Pāli literature in the shape of jātakas, sūtras, 
lives, and final liberations of Sākyamuni’s disciples (sāvaka-nibbāṇa), biographies of Buddha 
images, chronicles, riddles, liturgies, panegyrics, and more. Vernacular or bilingual counter­
parts prove the functional popularity of some of these texts, such as sermon versions and 
the stories and rituals surrounding the thaumaturge Māleyya Thera (Phra Malai) and the 
arhat Upagupta, significant figures in the collective imaginations. These texts are confident 
in their authority as Pāli texts. The Siamese canon interacted with the narrative canons of 
northern and northeastern India. The texts are social documents, produced by communities 
with a shared imaginaire.
The Pāli texts did not develop in a closed or circumscribed world that was off-limits to out­
side ideas. The Pāli subcommentaries paraphrase and sometimes adopt the ideas of the influ­
ential Vaibhāṣika school of North India. The Pāli Sārasaṅgaha and the Sinhala Nikāyasaṅgraha 
list the titles of identifiable Mahāyāna texts. The riddles of the Vidaddhamukhamaṇḍana, 
moral maxims of the Nı̄ti texts, and many of the narratives and are cultural translations of 
Indian works.

--- PAGE 235 ---
Peter Skilling
214
Modernity
In South and Southeast Asia, the colonial period brought changes in knowledge, cosmology, and 
technology. The introduction of the printing press brought new ways to present the Dharma 
stimulating new modes of study, lexicography, and edition. Most important, the translation of 
canonical texts into English began in earnest, conveying the teachings of the Buddha to new 
readerships worldwide.
The Pāli canon has enjoyed over a century of attention by modern scholarship; almost all 
of its contents have been edited in the roman script and translated into the English language. 
There are also modern printed editions and translations into the scripts and languages of South 
and Southeast Asia. The editions and translations are of varying quality and many would benefit 
from being done over again. The roman-script editions of the Pali Text Society, an organization 
that was founded in 1881, have become the canon for the study of Theravāda Buddhism in the 
west and (with reservations) worldwide. It is important to bear in mind, however, that before 
the modern period, the Pāli canon circulated largely in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia and, to a 
limited degree, in South India. There is no evidence that it was widely known in South Asia 
as a whole, where other canons, particularly those of the Mahāsāṃghika, the Sarvāstivāda, and 
the Sāṃmitı̄ya schools, were better known, or in the Northwest, where scriptures circulated in 
Gandhari Prakrit, written in a Semitic alphabet, Kharoṣṭhı̄. The canons of these schools were 
all authoritative in their own circles. The ideas, narratives, and practices recorded in the Pāli 
canon are those of the Theravaṃsa; they had a limited circulation in the premodern period. 
Only in the modern period, through the intellectual encounter with the vast British and French 
colonial enterprises, was the Pāli canon “upgraded” to a universal or “pan-Buddhist” status. At 
first, the Chinese Āgamas were left out of the picture, but in the last few decades, they have 
begun to take their rightful place.
Many canons: function and practice
The Pāli canon is the mainstay of Theravaṃsa practice, philosophy, and instruction. However, 
other canons developed within the school in response to changing social, religious, and ritual 
needs. These canons both draw on and supplement or complement the Pāli canon, and they 
even replace it in the sense that the extra- or supra-canonical texts are the ones that have been 
known and used by san∙gha and public in particular periods or in particular places. In this sense, 
they are functional or practical canons.
Canons can be local or regional or transregional, but given Buddhism’s diversity, I doubt 
whether any single historical canon can be universal. The assorted canons may express universal 
ideas or mainstream thoughts of Buddhism, but there is no reason to suggest that any particular 
version of these is universal. Mapping the diverse types of canon socially, intellectually, historically, 
or literarily is no easy task because of their heterogeneity across the spectrums of time and space. 
They have developed in different Buddhist societies in South and Southeast Asia. Notions of 
canonicity depend on context; on place, period, and circulation; and on the choices made by 
educators and ritualists. In conceptual terms, the many canons include ideal/practical/functional, 
inclusive/exclusive, authentic/apocryphal, orthodox/unorthodox. There are canons of mental 
and spiritual cultivation (bhāvanā, kammaṭṭhāna), canons of philosophy (the interactive system of 
ideas laid down in the Abhidhamma), canons of art and aesthetics, and canons of medical lore. 
Ritual canons are the texts recited in ceremonies and rituals for blessing and protection, as well 
as the visual media of talismanic calligraphy. Curricular canons are the textbooks and manuals of 
monastic and lay education. Scholastic canons are the standard and definitive texts that authorities

--- PAGE 236 ---
Canons
215
cite to support and illustrate their ideas. All of these canons interweave with the Pāli canon itself 
and with each other, as in the cases of the ancient and canonical Collection of Miscellaneous Pāli 
Readings (Khuddakapāṭha) or the Four Recitation Sessions (Catubhāṇavāra). The active use of the 
texts is their context, and this usage and this context determine their canonical status. Canons 
are more than lists of the major works of a literary or cultural tradition. To understand a canon 
is not simply to be able to recite a list of titles, just as to recite the titles of the great European 
novels does not mean to understand the European literary canon. It means to study the context, 
the whys and hows and the social, political, and historical change.
Canons change over time. The Pāli canon may seem fixed: Buddhaghosa’s list does not 
change. But the collection and the texts are multifunctional, and they can serve many ends. 
Canons are perpetually contested, but that is another question. One may wonder whether the 
urge to fit everything into the right box is not a modern academic obsession, but in any religion 
questions of scriptural classification, of inclusion and exclusion, are never simple and are often 
disputed. One person’s orthodoxy is another’s heresy. The extent and contents of the Tripiṭaka 
were always a question, and Southeast Asian kings periodically asked learned monks to clarify 
the matter. Evidence of ideas of canonicity is found in inscriptions and scripture catalogues 
but the questions are never settled.
The inclusive Tripiṭaka
When a central Siamese king sponsored a Tripiṭaka, he had everything that was known to exist 
in Pāli copied. The project was divided into four groups: the traditional three Tripiṭaka divisions 
plus language and grammar. It included commentaries, subcommentaries, manuals, narratives, 
apocrypha—everything. A comprehensive scriptural collection like this is an inclusive Tripiṭaka; 
it was the rule in old Siam until the end of the nineteenth century. Only the book-format 
edition sponsored by King Rāma V (1853–1910) in the 1890s was, for the first time, a Tripiṭaka 
project trimmed down to thirty-nine volumes—a fraction of the texts of the inclusive Tripiṭakas. 
Later, in the reign of King Rāma VII (Prajadhipok, r. 1925–1935), the Thai Tripiṭaka was fixed 
at forty-five volumes (Syāmaraṭṭha edition, 1925–1928).
In premodern Burmese practice as well, the Tripiṭaka seems to have been an inclusive 
rather than an exclusive compilation. Inscriptions from Pagan in upper Burma dated 1223 
and 1442 ce itemize donations of a wide range of texts that modern scholars would classify as 
canonical, paracanonical, extracanonical, and outside the known Pāli system entirely (titles that 
appear to be non-Theravaṃsa texts from North India; Than Tun 1998; Luce and Tin Htway 
1976). The status of certain texts seems to be perennially uncertain or contested; these include 
the Suttasaṅgaha, Nettipakaraṇa, Peṭakopadesa, and Milindapañha. Similar conceptions were held 
in Cambodia. In 1857, near Angkor Wat in Cambodia, donors had a set of texts copied and 
donated to a local monastery. The titles are recorded in an inscription as “the sacred Tripiṭaka” 
(in Khmer, phra traipidok). Most of them do not belong to the Pāli Tripiṭaka; those that do are 
jātakas (which are equivocal in terms of canonicity), and the others are extracanonical and 
apocryphal. de Bernon notes that
[t]he expression “holy Tripiṭaka” … is used here to designate the sum total of texts 
mentioned on the stele, even though it is evident that the titles do not belong to the 
Tripiṭaka properly speaking. In fact, for Khmer Buddhists the notion of “Trai-piṭak,” 
the “Three Baskets,” embraces (Buddhist) religious literature in general, whether it is 
canonical, extra-canonical, apocryphal, or cosmological.
(2012: 379)

--- PAGE 237 ---
Peter Skilling
216
Sponsorship
The societies of Southeast Asia were highly stratified, not by caste divisions as in India but 
by local hierarchies of power and influence. Only rulers and the nobility had the resources 
to sponsor such huge and costly projects as producing the Tripiṭaka. The description of the 
ninth (according to the Thai enumeration) recitation convoked by King Rāma I in Bangkok in 
1788 illustrates how the production of a canon was an elaborate and high-profile ritual event 
(abridged citation from the First Reign Chronicle, trans. Flood I: 160–161):
The monks gathered in the ubosot [uposatha] confessional hall of the Phra 
Sisanphetchayadaram Temple [known today as Wat Mahathat], according to the sched­
ule set by the king. Both the king and the heir apparent went from the Grand Palace 
to the Temple in a procession, complete with their royal paraphernalia and fanfares of 
flutes and victory drums. They entered the confessional hall and rendered obeisance to 
the Three Gems. They then asked Phra Phimonlatham to call upon the deities in the 
midst of the assembly of Buddhist monks. The power of all the deities was convoked 
to support the success of the project of the great council.The monks were divided into 
four groups … [to revise the Suttanta, Vinaya, and Paramattha (Abhidhamma) Piṭakas 
and the Grammatical Treatises]. …The king and his younger brother, the heir apparent, 
went to the temple twice every day. In the morning they presented food to the monks 
at the temple’s galleries. In the late afternoon they came out again to present drinking 
water, incense sticks, and candles.
Ritual canons of Siam
How does the Buddhavacana (the Buddha’s words) function in society? The canon has the 
authority of the Buddha’s word and interacts with daily life through ceremonies and sermons. 
We see this in expressions of homage, in the formulas of going for refuge to the Three Gems, 
and in the taking of precepts: all these use adaptations of canonical formulas. Verses of blessing 
and protection, texts recited at funerals: all draw their power from the Buddhavacana through 
the medium of recitation by the Buddhist order.
In the premodern Siamese kingdoms of Ayutthaya, Thonburi, and Bangkok, from the six­
teenth to early nineteenth centuries, on the evidence of chanting manuals the received ritual 
canon—a canon by custom, a canon by convention—included inter alia the following:
The 7 Tamnan 
and the 12 
Tamnan
Collections of blessings and protective chants also known as the 
Cularājaparitra or Lesser Royal Protection and the Mahārājaparitra or 
Greater Royal Protection
Tripiṭaka
The abridged, symbolic, or emblematic Tripiṭaka (Skilling 2016)
Abhidharma
The abridged, symbolic, or emblematic Abhidharma, also known as the 
Seven Books of the Abhidharma. Recitations of the highly condensed 
abridged Tripiṭaka and Abhidharma are symbolically or emblematically 
equal to recitations of the entire Tripiṭaka and Abhidharma
Sahassanaya
The Thousandfold Method, an excerpt of a long section of 
Dhammasaṅgaṇı̄, first book of the Pāli Abhidharma
Buddhaguṇa
A compilation of virtues of a Buddha (in Pāli)

--- PAGE 238 ---
Canons
217
This collection was not a consciously constructed canon. It would have evolved natu­
rally: texts that enjoyed ritual and social popularity became the texts of choice for recitation. 
Canon formation is not so much the result of reflection and selection than of functional 
weight. This active and functional canon would not have replaced or erased the Tripiṭaka. 
At any time, there would be scholars who were experts in the Tripiṭaka, like Dhammakitti, 
who, in fourteenth-century Ayutthaya, composed the Saddhamma-saṅgaha (Law 1963), like the 
unknown author(s) who compiled the Handbook of the Tripiṭaka preserved in South Thailand 
(Santi Pakdeekham 2017) and the Garland of the Piṭaka catalogues (Piṭakamālā) in North 
Thailand (Santi Pakdeekham 2011).
The culture of Lanna (present-day North Thailand) offers a range of examples of functional 
or ritual canons. One of these might be described as a calendrical or birth-year canon. A specific 
text is assigned to each year of the twelve-year animal cycle so that the individual’s relation 
to significant texts is defined by their year of birth, and the devotee offers their text to make 
merit on appropriate occasions. The twelve-year calendar interacts with texts in other ways; 
for example, the animal years are associated with the thirteen chapters (kaṇḍa) of the Great Life 
(Vessantara-jātaka), and when it is recited, people sponsor their own specific chapter. There is 
a weekday canon, in which each day of the (eight-day) week has a text assigned to it, and on 
one’s birthday, one may offer one’s text to the temple. In one system, the seven texts are the 
seven books of the Abhidharma. There are also gāthā, verses, to be recited according to one’s 
day of birth; each day has a numerical power and a color. These practices personalize the 
canonical texts by bringing devotees into a personal relationship with them through donation 
and recitation (Skilling 2013a: 229).
Sermons
The body of sermons is a canon in itself, and the individual sermons are often built around 
a canonical citation, such as pithy statements, verses, or promises of benefit and blessing. The 
canonical Dhammapada is a familiar source cited in tandem with the stories related in the fifth-
century commentary: canon and commentary merge and have equal value. Sermons intersperse 
Pāli words or phrases to confer authority to the vernacular language.
Sermons seem to have been largely ignored in Western scholarship until recently, but it was 
through the medium of the sermon that sūtras circulated. In preliterate societies or cultures in 
which literacy was not developed, the sermon and oral instruction were the staples of education, 
and the learned were called “well-heard” or well-versed (bahussuta). Literacy and the circulation 
of the scriptures as printed books brought private reading and autonomous study. The canons 
of literate societies developed organically through sales, literary criticism, and deliberations of 
academies. Religious canons may be steered by the saṅgha, but they develop organically.
Mahājāti
The Great Rebirth Story or Vessantara-jātaka (in Pāli and Thai)
Phra Malai
Story of the thaumaturge Mālaya Thera (in Thai), which connects the 
assembly to the next Buddha, Maitreya
Jambūpati-sūtra
Sūtra on King Jambūpati (in Pāli and Thai: Skilling 2009b: 30–32 and 
Skilling 2014a: 360–361)
Uṇhissavijaya
The Victorious Crown (in Pāli: Skilling 2009b: 32–36)

--- PAGE 239 ---
Peter Skilling
218
Vernacular canons
The numerous vernacular canons of the Theravādin tradition should not be counted in terms 
of the national or majority languages of modern nation-states. They are not national like the 
canons of German literature or Italian opera (which themselves are artificial and contested). The 
“state” traditions are not unitary or monolithic: different Vinaya lineages or different cultures 
had different concepts of canonicity and developed their own practical canons. They privileged 
different texts or introduced new texts to their curricular canons, for example, the Mahānikāya 
or Dhammayuttika in Siam or the different lineages of Sri Lanka, Arakan, or Burma. Periodic 
reforms of the education and examination systems and of liturgical practices led to changes in 
emphasis on different clusters of texts.
Burmese Buddhism is the interacting complex of the practices of Burmese, Mon, Karen, 
Shan, and other Tai groups. The map of Buddhist communities and cultures is the heritage of 
the precolonial royal periods in what are now Burma, Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia. The many 
Shan kingdoms have been merged in the Shan State (singular) and adjacent areas of Thailand, 
Laos and Yunnan. Many of the cultural and linguistic groups spill across modern borders. Thai 
Buddhist communities are found in the northern states of Malaysia, there are Tai groups in 
Assam in India, and there are Khmer communities throughout the Mekong delta region of 
southern Vietnam. These communities predate, often by centuries, the colonial-period map­
pings of Southeast Asia which gave rise to the present-day borders. Buddhism has always been 
porous, allowing and encouraging space for different linguistic and ethnic traditions. When 
King Rāma I (r. 1782–1809) of Siam held a recitation-convocation to restore the Pāli Tipiṭaka, 
he called on Thai, Mon, and Lao monks to participate. The scriptural heritage of present-day 
Thai Buddhism is written in the Central Thai, Mon, Lanna Thai, Northeastern Tai, and a variety 
of other scripts and languages.
Model canons
Canons are human and social products, made up of exemplary texts that have been chosen 
as models of ethics, conduct, and philosophy. They are also models for literary production. 
Nonclassical birth stories are modeled on the classical Jātaka collection, including the Fifty 
Jātakas of the Thai tradition. Apocryphal suttas like the Jambūpati—or Nibbāna-sūtras—are mod­
eled on the canonical suttas, opening with the classical “This is what I heard” (evaṃ me sutaṃ).
Carved in stone: epigraphic canons
The earliest surviving Pāli manuscripts date at best to the fourteenth or fifteenth centuries ce; 
the vast majority belong to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Although, as von Hinüber 
(Handbook, p. 4) notes, “the age of the manuscripts has little to do with the age of the texts 
they contain,” for historical evidence of the use of Pāli, we have to turn to the epigraphic 
record. No early Pāli inscriptions have been found in Sri Lanka, but a number of (generally 
short) inscriptions are known from lower Burma, central Siam, and neighboring regions. In 
the ancient polity of Śrı̄kṣetra in lower Burma, a remarkable complete manuscript in silver was 
excavated from a stūpa, while inscribed slabs from central Siam and southern Cambodia also 
imitate the palm-leaf format (see Figure 14.1).
None of the inscribed texts bears a date; their age is determined palaeographically to the 
broad parameters of the fifth to eighth centuries ce. All of them are excerpts or citations from 
Pāli scriptures rather than original compositions. The Siamese corpus highlights the four truths

--- PAGE 240 ---
Canons
219
of the noble ones, especially the turning of the wheel of the Dharma, and conditioned arising, 
as well as the inspired utterances of the Buddha (buddha-udāna; Skilling, “Advent of Theravāda”; 
idem., “Theravaṃsa”). The ye dhammā stanza, an epitome of both the truths and conditioned 
arising, is common throughout the region, in Pāli, Sanskrit, and (in a few cases) Prakrit. It is 
the presence of these Pāli inscriptions that leads to the conclusion that the Theravaṃsa has 
always been present in the region—“always” meaning here from the early or even the earliest 
introduction of Buddhism to the region (Skilling 2019b). Later inscriptions from the reign of 
King Rāma IV (Mongkut 1804–1868, r. 1851–1868) on the wall that encircles the giant Phra 
Pathom Chedi in Nakhon Pathom include the full Dhammapada and Suttanipāta.
Inscriptions and narrative art help us to assess the circulation of texts and attitudes toward 
their canonicity. All traditions highlight the Jātakas, the previous lives of Gotama. This may 
be seen in the stone reliefs, terra cottas, and mural and cloth paintings in Pagan in Burma, in 
Sri Lanka and Thailand of varying periods, in the Pagan inscriptions referred to earlier, or in 
an inscription from Siem Reap Province, Cambodia, which enumerates twenty-seven texts 
donated by a monk to a monastery library in 1857 ce (de Bernon 2012: 391). The inscription 
states that the donor “had the sacred Tripiṭaka copied as recorded in this stone inscription” and 
goes on to list the titles of Jātakas, Abhidharma, Jambūpati, the Three Worlds, King Milinda and 
Nāgasena, and other texts, almost all vernacular Khmer compilations.
Early Buddhisms
The origins of the notion of early Buddhism lie in the age of imperialism, with the modern­
ist and reformist thought of the end of the nineteenth century, and “rationalist” ideas about 
human progress and the evolution and decline of religions. The concept was influenced by 
contemporaneous currents in the study of Christianity that were concerned to separate out 
Figure 14.1  Stone bar inscribed on all four sides with Pāli texts, sixth to seventh century, from Nakhon 
Chaisi, Central Thailand; further details of provenance unknown.
Photograph courtesy Fragile Palm Leaves.

--- PAGE 241 ---
Peter Skilling
220
early Christianity from later forms with the idea that the early form was more authentic. By the 
early nineteenth century, European scholars developed a chronological view of the authenticity 
of forms of Buddhism. At first loosely called “early Buddhism”—or “primitive,” “original,” 
“pre-Asokan,” or “presectarian” Buddhism—the notion took on increasing force as a frame for 
the study of Buddhism through the twentieth century.
Chronological theories were part of a historicist package in the earlier period of the study of 
religion. Early Buddhism has developed into an academic field and is now a keyword in an age 
that expects keywords. It has two aspects, one academic, the other ideological or quasi-religious, 
although the two are not easily disentangled. Whatever the case, some scholars and Buddhists 
took up early Buddhism as an attractive form of practice, a guideline for self-cultivation, that 
went beyond the historical and contemporary forms of the Theravāda, and early Buddhism has 
flourished under globalization to the point that it now stands out as an autonomous stream of 
thought and practice within modern and contemporary Buddhism. The term early Buddhism is 
frequently invoked without any serious attempt to define it, and it is not entirely clear exactly 
what it is. It is certainly not a religion, a sect, or a unified or centralized movement. It is not 
centered on a san∙gha or a leader, and it is nonregional, nonnational, and nonethnic. More often 
than not it is secular and demythologized. It might be described as a type of Buddhist thought 
and practice in progress, a loose association of groups who share modernist ideas, a no-frills 
movement that defines the Dharma as simple, practical, and reasonable.
The texts favored by its advocates amount to a “canon within the Pāli canon”—a selec­
tive or exclusivist reading of sources deemed to represent the Buddha’s “true” or “authen­
tic” teachings. Early Buddhism draws on two Piṭakas, the Vinaya and the Sutta, and usually 
does not regard the Abhidhamma as the word of the Buddha. Endorsed choices from the 
Suttapiṭaka include the four Nikāyas, certain texts of the Khuddaka-nikāya like the Suttanipāta 
(especially the Aṭṭhakavagga and the Pārāyaṇa), Dhammapada, Udāna, Itivuttaka, Theragāthā, 
and Therı̄gāthā (with an assortment of qualifications and reservations). In the earliest and still 
perhaps most common paradigm, early Buddhism is represented or defined by texts in the 
Pāli langauge; later developments show increasing historical maturity and include the Āgamas 
and the Gandhari texts.
In an article published in 1990, the late Steven Collins rejected the equation “the Pāli Canon 
= Early Buddhism” (Collins 1990: 89). What he calls a “realistic historical perspective” is this:
Rather than pre-existing the Theravāda school, as the textual basis from which it arose 
and which it sought to preserve, the Pāli Canon—by which I mean the closed list of 
scriptures with a special and specific authority as the avowed historical record of the 
Buddha’s teaching—should be seen as a product of that school, as part of a strategy of 
legitimation by the monks of the Mahāvihāra lineage in Ceylon in the early centuries 
of the first millennium A.D.
This is an important insight: the Pāli canon did not come first, but it was the product of edito­
rial practices undertaken by the Theravāda school. This is equally true for all Buddhist schools 
for which we have any information: from the early period of oral transmission, canons were 
the products of group endeavors by teams of reciters. Rapid developments that took place 
in both Āgama and Gandhari studies since the 1990s have brought a sea change in Buddhist 
studies, expanding and deepening the very idea of early Buddhism (Allon 2018; Salomon 
1999, 2018). The study of the ideological and scriptural development of Buddhism has had to 
adapt to more complex paradigms. It is no longer a simple question of “Theravāda—or early 
Buddhism—and the others.”

--- PAGE 242 ---
Canons
221
The idea of a historicist or chronologically determined “early Buddhism” is absent in the 
literature of the Theravāda and other Buddhist schools; the closest idea might be that of the 
original or root redaction/recitation mentioned earlier. The origins of all eighteen schools lie 
in the same first convocation. We do not have much, or even any, information regarding how 
this fact was presented by most of the schools, but the information that we do have shows that 
the Sarvāstivāda and Vaibhāṣika streams of thought and those of the Theravāda tradition inter­
pret the canonical development of Buddhism very differently. For the one, the root recitation 
is lost, fragmented, and incomplete, and this led to divisions in the Buddhist tradition. For the 
other, despite the attempts of other schools to falsify and impair the root collection, the root 
collection still survives as the canon of the Theravāda.
Traditional and modern scholars also have different views of the Pāli canon. Although 
the Jātakas were the mainstay of Theravāda Buddhism of Southeast Asia, modern scholarship, 
Eastern and Western, was unwilling or reluctant to accept them as authentic or early. It was the 
same for some other texts. The canonical credentials of the Mahāsamaya- and the Āṭāṇātı̄ya-
suttas (translated by Rhys Davids as the Great Concourse and the Ward-rune of Āṭānāṭa) might 
seem impeccable: they both belong to the Long Collection. Both contain lists of deities, mostly 
in verse, and both are regularly recited in the living Theravāda traditions. In the introduction 
to his translation of the former, T. W. Rhys Davids (1843–1922) writes, “The poem is almost 
unreadable now. The long list of strange names awakes no interest. And it is somewhat pathetic 
to notice the hopeless struggle of the author to enliven his unmanageable material with a little 
poetry. It remains, save here and there, only doggerel still” (Rhys Davids 1977: 282). The great 
and pioneering scholar’s lack of enthusiasm is an example of how reception is never neutral—
how Western scholars judged the canon by their own standards. The suttas are two of the most 
potent protections of Pāli literature, and to this day, they are chanted in Theravāda societies for 
protection and blessing—and, in the case of at least the latter, as an exorcism. The versions of 
other schools, such as that of the Sarvāstivāda, were also accorded high status. But once again, 
with its lists of supernormal beings and deities, its connection with exorcism and “superstition,” 
it does not suit the palate of English Buddhists and is not high on the reading lists.
Liturgical collections are the functional canons of day-to-day Theravāda, and liturgical and 
ritual texts are those most familiar to both monastic and lay Buddhists. Intonation, melody, and 
rhythm are integral elements of liturgical canons that are transmitted orally by example and 
imitation. They remind us that the Buddhist scriptures were transmitted orally for three or 
more centuries before being written down. For several centuries, the transmission of Buddhism 
depended on the human memory and the human voice; it did not need any outside imple­
ments or technologies. The decision to use manuscripts brought the need for writing supports 
and instruments like ink, stylus, and brush, which, in turn, opened new avenues for making 
merit—the donation of writing materials and the copying of manuscripts.
The power of liturgy lies in its status as Buddhavacana, the Buddha’s words, but Buddhavacana 
does not simply mean literal quotations from the Pāli canon. Glosses, summaries, paraphrases, 
and rewritings of canonical texts gain the status of Buddhavacana, a flexible category which 
according to the Vinaya includes what has been spoken by the Buddhas, by autonomous 
Buddhas, by auditors of the Buddha, by gods, and by sages—indeed, all that the Buddha says 
is well spoken, and all that is well spoken is the speech of the Buddha. The ye dhammā stanza, 
ubiquitous in the epigraphy of South and Southeast Asia, is not spoken by the Buddha but by 
one of his auditors (see Figure 14.2).
The chant called Protection of the Aids to Wakening (Bojjhaṅgaparitta) consists of verse summa­
ries of three suttas from the Connected Discourses. The 271 stanzas of the Pacification of Calamities 
(Uppātasanti) draw on the power of canonical names—of Buddhas, realized monks and nuns,

--- PAGE 243 ---
Peter Skilling
222
and a range of deities. The origins of the chant are uncertain—a Burmese tradition relates that 
it was recited in Chiang Mai in the fourteenth century to drive away the invading Mongols. 
It was selected for inclusion in a book of chants by Prime Minister U Nu of Burma in the 
1950s, and an Uppātasanti Pagoda was erected when the army moved the capital to Naypyidaw 
in the first decade of the 2000s. Known in English as the Peace Pagoda, it was consecrated 
in 2009; 99 meters in height, it is only slightly lower than the grand Shwedagon Pagoda that 
graces the former capital of Rangoon. The chant, with some variants, was transmitted in the 
manuscripts of Lanna and central Siam (the latter as Mahāsanti), and it is recited today in some 
of Bangkok’s temples. In this text, we see a transmutation of canonical elements into a Pāli 
verse and into architecture. The Pāli, liturgical, and architectural canons overlap as sources of 
power and protection.
The Ayutthaya canon (fifteenth to eighteenth centuries) included the Vessantara-jātaka, 
the Nandopananda-sūtra, the Jambūpati-sūtra, the Phra Malai, and the Great Divine Mantra 
(Mahādibbamanta). Only the first is canonical, or at least quasi-canonical. The Taming of the 
Nāgas Nandopananda is one of the eight events in Gotama’s life summarized in the verses of the 
Bāhūṃ, one of the most popular auspicious and protective texts. All are victories or successes 
which bring good fortune—some from the canon and some from the commentaries—but each 
becomes canonical until the verses become a potent micro-canon packed with protective power. 
Protection comes through the power of what was perceived as Buddhavacana.
Figure 14.2  Estampage of Angkor Borei Pāli inscription.
© NMC (National Museum of Cambodia)—EFEO.

--- PAGE 244 ---
Canons
223
Canon and authority
There is a disjuncture between what modern scholars deemed or deem canonical and worth­
while and the texts that were and are actually used. A roman-script edition of the Anthology 
of Suttas (Suttasaṅgaha: HPL § 157), which may date to the twelfth century or earlier, was 
published in 1957, not in the United Kingdom by the Pali Text Society but in Calcutta by the 
Asiatic Society. It cites canonical suttas from four main collections (the four Nikāyas) includ­
ing the Great Assembly from the Long Discourses. The Miscellaneous Collection is well represented 
by excerpts from the Khuddakapāṭha, the Itivuttaka, and the Suttanipāta. Citations from the 
Dhammapada and the Vimānavatthu are presented with their commentaries. There are three 
excerpts from the Vinaya and one from the Book of Analysis (Vibhaṅga) of the Abhidhamma. 
The subject matter and the source texts, with some significant exceptions, are not those on the 
standard reading lists of  “early” or “original” Buddhism. Perhaps because of this the Anthology 
has not been translated into English and has been largely ignored. Cognate versions of some 
of the short sutras are, however, well known in the collections or treatises of other schools. 
Examples include the parable of the four mountains crushing down and the mountain of bones 
that are summarized in the verses of Nāgārjuna’s Friendly Letter (Suhṛllekha).
The culture of the book
The written book was not exclusively associated with the Buddhist Dharma. There were also 
law codes, royal documents, medical treatises and recipes, poems and narratives, but the rela­
tionship with Buddhism was strong. Books were sacred. The Legend of the Creation of the World, 
a manuscript from southern Thailand, opens with homages to the Buddha and an invocation, 
and then states,
If any woman or man wants to read or study this, they should first set up an altar and 
offer puffed rice, flowers, candles, incense, betel leaf and areca nuts, then place the book 
on the altar and then treat this book with respect. Success and well-being will follow.3
That to copy Dharma manuscripts was a highly meritorious act is emphasized in countless texts 
on the benefits of good deeds, most specifically those on “producing the Tripiṭaka” (anisong sang 
phra traipidok). This is exemplified in a verse found in the Saddhamma-saṅgaha and frequently 
placed at the end of manuscripts:
Every single letter [in the Tripiṭaka] may equal an image of the Buddha:
For this reason an intelligent person should write out the Tripitaka.
As many as 84,000 Sambuddhas are there
When the three Piṭakas are there.
Each and every letter in the teaching of the world saviour [counts]
Letter and Buddha image may have the same fruit.
For this reason, an intelligent person who desires the three accomplishments
Should write out, or have written out, the words of the Three Piṭakas as shrines of the 
Dhamma.

--- PAGE 245 ---
Peter Skilling
224
This powerful incentive to copy the scriptures is repeated in vernacular texts. For example,
A person who offers palm leaves to the san∙gha so they can write down the Dharma 
gets the blessings of [rebirth for] six aeons [in heaven]. …When a person writes out 
the Dharma and offers it to the monks: each letter equals a Buddha image and nothing 
can come anywhere near the blessing that each letter brings.4
Dharma was interpreted in the broad sense of Pāli and vernacular texts on the wide range of 
subjects of the “inclusive Tripiṭaka” and included nonclassical narratives, grammar and linguistics, 
and so on. The production of manuscripts contributed to the long life of the Dhamma and 
perpetuated the Buddha Sakyamuni’s teachings.
On the other hand, to copy a manuscript for financial gain, in order to sell it, was considered 
a grave sin: “Anyone who writes the Dharma and sells [the book] suffers the result of this bad 
deed (pāpa) for 50,000 aeons. …Anyone who writes the Dharma and sells it, creates evil that 
cannot be measured.”5
^^^^^^
In the early Buddhism of India, the Theravādin Tripiṭaka was a canon among equals, one 
canon out of eighteen or more. The historical product of redaction by a single monastic and 
scholastic tradition, that of the Great Monastery of Sri Lanka, it is the precious record of the 
complete canon of one school in the original Indian language. It has been the foundation of 
Buddhism in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia for over two thousand years and a rich resource for 
the study of Buddhist thought and practice. However, to treat it as the Buddhist canon reduces 
the diverse scriptural heritage of Buddhism to that redacted by a single school. This does not 
in the least mean that the canonical and post-canonical Pāli literature should be sidelined or 
displaced but, rather, that it should be seen in a broader context as a particular historical and 
literary instance of a Buddhist canon through balanced and critical assessments of early Buddhist 
canonical developments.
Freeing the “Theravāda canon” from the moorings of the “Pāli canon” opens space for 
appreciation of social and historical change and at the same time complicates the idea of canon 
immensely. Theravāda is not a monolithic tradition with a single and static canon and its head 
office in Sri Lanka. Letting the canonical cat out of the bag in which it has been confined 
by tradition and scholarship allows for the plurality of voices that is Theravaṃsa to speak up.
Acknowledgments
I thank Olivier de Bernon, Donald Lopez, and Trent Walker for their comments and for send­
ing materials.
Notes
	 1	For reflections on canon, see Allon, “Formation of Canons;” Assmann, Cultural Memory, p. 102; Cabezón, 
“Scripture;” Collins “The Very Idea;” Crosby, Theravāda Buddhism (esp. Chap. 3); Harrison, “Canon;” 
Gethin, Sayings of the Buddha; Salomon, “Unwieldy Canon.”
	 2	Theravaṃsa refers here to the broad mainstream of the Theriya or Sthāvira tradition; Theravāda, more 
specifically to the schools that developed in Sri Lanka, especially the tradition of the Great Monastery 
as codified by the fifth-century authority Buddhaghosa. I use the plural form Theravādas to signify 
the social, cultural, and linguistic plurality of the Theravaṃsa that developed historically in South and 
Southeast Asia.

--- PAGE 246 ---
Canons
225
	 3	Tamnan sang lok: chabab ban pa lam, from Pattani Province, southern Thailand: see Wannakam thaksin wan­
nakam khatsan, Vol. 1, pp. 1–46. Citation from p. 7.
	 4	Traiphum chabap ban krabi noi, from Krabi Province, southern Thailand: Wannakam taksin wannakam khatsan, 
Vol. 1, pp. 47–97. Citations from pp. 94.26, 95.11.
	 5	Traiphum chabap ban krabi noi, pp. 94.7, 94.14.
References
Wannakam thaksin wannakam khatsan [Selected literature of the South]. 2005. Bangkok: Thailand Research 
Fund/Mahawithayalai Ratchaphat Surat Thani, 2548 [2005].
Allon, Mark. 2018. “The Formation of Canons in the Early Indian Nikāyas or Schools in the Light of 
the New Gāndhārı̄ Manuscript Finds.” Buddhist Studies Review 35 (1–2): 225–244. Reprt. in Buddhist 
Path, Buddhist Teachings: Studies in Memory of L.S. Cousins, edited by Naomi Appleton and Peter Harvey. 
Sheffield: Equinox, 2019.
Assmann, Jan. 2011. Cultural Memory and Early Civilization: Writing, Remembrance, and Political Imagination. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
de Bernon, Olivier. 2006. “The Status of Pāli in Cambodia: from Canonical to Esoteric Language.” In 
Buddhist Legacies in Mainland Southeast Asia, ed. François Lagirarde, 53–66. Partis: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
de Bernon, Olivier. 2012. “Circulation of Texts in Mid-Nineteenth Century Cambodia: A new read­
ing of Inscription K. 892 (Vatt Tā Tok, CE 1857).” In How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist 
Identities, eds. Skilling, Peter, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza, Santi Pakdeekham, 371–399. Chiang 
Mai: Silkworm Books.
Cabezón, José Ignacio. 2004. “Scripture.” In Encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 2, ed. Robert E. Buswell, Jr., 
755–758. New York: Macmillan Reference USA.
Collins, Steven. 1990. “On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon.” Journal of the Pali Text Society XV: 89–126. Rept. 
in Buddhism: Critical Concepts in Religious Studies, edited by Paul Williams, vol. I, London: Routledge, 
2005, pp. 72–95. References are to the first edition.
Crosby, Kate. 2014. Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, and Identity. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Flood, Thadeus, Flood, Chadin, trans. 1978, 1990. The Dynastic Chronicles, Bangkok Era, The First Reign. 
Chaophraya Thiiphakorawong Edition. 2 vol. Tokyo: The Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies.
Gethin, Rupert. 2008. Sayings of the Buddha: A selection of suttas from the Pali Nikāyas. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Harrison, Paul. 2004. “Canon.” In Encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, ed. Robert E. Buswell Jr., 111–115. New 
York: Macmillan Reference USA.
Heine, Steven, Wright, Dale S., eds. 2004. The Zen Canon: Understanding the Classic Texts. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Law, B.C. 1999. A Manual of Buddhist Historical Traditions (Saddhamma-sangaha). [1941] repr. New Delhi: 
Asian Educational Services.
Luce, G.H., Htway, Tin. 1976. “A 15th Century Inscription and Library at Pagan, Burma.” In Malalasekera 
Commemoration Volume, 203–256. Colombo.
Mitchell, W.J.T. 2005. “Canon.” In New Keywords, A Revised Vocabulary of Culture and Society, eds. Tony 
Bennett, Lawrence Grossberg, Meaghan Morris, 20–22. Hoboken: Blackwell Publishing.
Payutto, P.A. 2003. The Pali Canon: What a Buddhist Must Know, trans. Somseen Chanawangsa. Bangkok: n.p.
Rhys Davids, T.W., C.A.F., trans. 1977. Dialogues of the Buddha. Part II [1910]. 4th ed. London: The Pali 
Text Society.
Salomon, Richard. 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhāra: The British Library Kharoṣṭhī Fragments. 
Seattle: The University of Washington Press.
Salomon, Richard. 2011. “An Unwieldy Canon: Observations on Some Distinctive Features of Canon 
Formation in Buddhism.” In Kanonisierung und Kanonbildung in der asiatischen Religionsgeschichte, eds. 
Oliver Freiberger, Christoph Kleine, Max Deeg, 161–207. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press.
Salomon, Richard. 2018. The Buddhist Literature of Ancient Gandhāra: An Introduction with Selected Translations. 
Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications.
Santi, Pakdeekham. 2011. Garland of the Piṭaka (Piṭakamālā). Bangkok and Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves 
Foundation/Lumbini International Research Foundation.
Santi, Pakdeekham, ed. 2009. Jambūpati-sūtra: A synoptic romanized edition. Bangkok and Lumbini: Fragile 
Palm Leaves (Materials for the Study of the Tripiṭaka, Vol. 4).

--- PAGE 247 ---
Peter Skilling
226
Santi, Pakdeekham. 2017. Tamra Traipitaka: A Handbook of the Tipiṭaka. (Materials for the Study of the 
Tripiṭaka, Vol. 13), Bangkok: Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation/Lumbini: Lumbini International 
Research Institute.
Skilling, Peter. 1997. “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to Mainland South-east Asia.” Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 20 (1): 93–107.
Skilling, Peter. 2009a. “Redaction, Recitation, and Writing: Transmission of the Buddha’s Teachings in 
India in the Early Period.” In Buddhist Manuscript Cultures: Knowledge, Ritual, and Art, eds. Stephen C. 
Berkwitz, Juliane Schober, Claudia Brown, 53–75. London: Routledge.
Skilling, Peter. 2009b. Buddhism and Buddhist Literature of South-East Asia: Selected Papers by Peter Skilling, ed. 
Claudio Cicuzza. Bangkok and Lumbini: Fragile Palm Leaves (Materials for the Study of the Tripiṭaka, 
Vol. 5).
Skilling, Peter. 2009c. “Theravāda in History.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, Third 
Series, Number 11 (Fall): 61–93.
Skilling, Peter. 2010. “Scriptural Authenticity and the Śrāvaka Schools: An Essay towards an Indian 
Perspective.” The Eastern Buddhist 41 (2): 1–47.
Skilling, Peter, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza, Santi Pakdeekham, eds. 2012. How Theravāda is Theravāda? 
Exploring Buddhist Identities. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Skilling, Peter. 2012. “At the Heart of Letters: Aksara and Akkhara in Thai Tradition.” In 80 that Mom 
Rajawong Suphawat Kasemsri [Felicitation volume for MR Suphawat Kasemsri on his 80th Birthday], 
ed. Weerawan Ngamsantikul, 433–441. Bangkok: Rongphim Deuan Tula.
Skilling, Peter. 2014a. “Reflections on the Pāli Literature of Siam.” In From Birch Bark to Digital Data: Recent 
Advances in Buddhist Manuscript Research, eds. Paul Harrison, Jens-Uwe Hartmann, 347–366. Vienna: 
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Skilling, Peter. 2014b. “Birchbark, Bodhisatvas, and Bhāṇakas: Writing materials in Buddhist North India.” 
In Eurasian Studies XII: Lecteurs et copistes dans les traditions manuscrites iraniennes, indiennes, et centrasiatiques/
Scribes and Readers in Iranian, Indian and Central Asian Manuscript Traditions, eds. Nalini Balbir, Maria 
Szuppe, 499–521. (Istituto per l’Oriente-Roma – Orientalisches Institut der Martin-Luther-Universität 
Halle-Wittenberg, Journal for Balkan, Eastern Mediterranean, Anatolian, Caucasian, Middle Eastern, 
Iranian and Central Asian Studies).
Skilling, Peter. 2015. ‘Foreword’ to The Ten Great Birth Stories of the Buddha: the Mahanipata of the 
Jatakatthavannana, a book dedicated to H.R.H. Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn, trans. Naomi Appleton, 
Sarah Shaw, xix–xxvi. Vol. I. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books/Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University Press.
Skilling, Peter. 2016. “Chanting and Inscribing: The “Condensed Tripiṭaka” in Thai Ritual.” In ‘Guiding 
Lights’ for the ‘Perfect Nature’: Studies on the Nature and the Development of Abhidharma Buddhism. A 
Commemorative Volume in Honor of Prof. Dr. Kenyo Mitomo for his 70th Birthday. Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin, 
(1)–(35) = pp. 928–962.
Skilling, Peter. 2017a. “Ānisaṃsa: Merit, Motivation and Material Culture.” Journal of Buddhist Studies Sri 
Lanka XIV: 1–56.
Skilling, Peter 2017b. “The Many Lives of Texts: The Pancatraya and the Mayajala Sutras.” In Research on the 
Madhyama-agama, ed. Dhammadinna. 269–326. Taipei: Dharma Drum Institute of Liberal Arts.
Skilling, Peter. 2017c. “Romance and Riddle: Buddhist narratives of Siam.” In Imagination and Narrative: 
Lexical and Cultural Translation in Buddhist Asia, eds. Peter Skilling, Justin Thomas McDaniel, 161–186. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Skilling, Peter. 2019a. “Calligraphic Magic: Abhidhamma Inscriptions from Sukhodaya.” In Buddhist Studies 
Review, ed. Lance Cousins. Reprint. In Buddhist Path, Buddhist Teachings: Studies in Memory of L.S. Cousins, 
edited by Naomi Appleton and Peter Harvey.
Skilling, Peter. 2019b. “The Theravaṃsa Has Always Been Here: K. 1355 from Angkor Borei.” Journal of the 
Siam Society 117: 2.
Than, Tun. 1998. “An Original Inscription dated 10 September 1223, that King Badon Copied on 27 
October 1785.” In Études birmanes en homage à Denise Bernot, eds. Pierre Pichard, François Robinne, 
37–55. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.

--- PAGE 248 ---
227
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-19
15
ABHIDHAMMA
Theravāda thought in relation to Sarvāstivāda 
thought
Rupert Gethin
The nature of Abhidhamma
The term abhidhamma appears to have its origin in an expression found in the Vinaya and 
Suttas, “relating to the teaching” (abhi dhamme). The Abhidhamma can thus be understood as 
essentially a second-order exercise in presenting what the Buddha taught: historically it repre­
sents the attempts of the early generations of the Buddha’s followers to draw out the system of 
thought implicit in the received discourses (sutta) of the Buddha. This enterprise resulted in 
the formation of a third division or basket of canonical texts, the Abhidhamma/Abhidharma 
Piṭaka. With reference to this collection of texts, the Theravāda tradition comes to understand 
abhidhamma as meaning the ultimate expression of the Buddha’s teaching, directly expressing 
the truth understood by the Buddha’s profound wisdom.
As such, Abhidhamma has been closely studied in the lands of Theravāda Buddhism from 
ancient times down to the present day. In part, this study has been sustained by the particular 
reverence shown to the Abhidhamma as the profoundest expression of the Buddha’s teaching. 
This has manifested in the use of Abhidhamma texts in ritual, meditation and for protection. In 
Thailand, Cambodia, and Laos, the recitation of Abhidhamma is integral to funeral rites (Langer 
2012); in Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, and Sri Lanka syllabic formulas encapsulating the essence 
of the Abhidhamma have been used for protection and in meditation practice (Swearer 1995; 
Cousins 1997; Crosby 2013); in Burma, the twenty-four causal relations of the Paṭṭhāna, the 
final book of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka, are recited for protection (Kyaw 2014: 22–24).
The initial development of Abhidhamma
While the Abhidhamma texts form a distinct class of early Buddhist literature, their production 
built on developments already found in the Sutta literature: (1) digests of lists and categories 
(the Saṃgı̄ti—and Dasuttara-suttas); (2) the fundamental matrix (mātikā) or set of categories 
comprising basic Buddhist teachings, which informs the structure of the Saṃyutta-nikāya and 
includes dependent origination, the bundles, sense spheres, applications of mindfulness, right 
efforts, the bases of successful meditation, five spiritual faculties, the constituents of awakening 
and the eightfold path, and the four truths; (3) the refining and defining of technical terminol­
ogy, exemplified in suttas dubbed “analysis” (vibhaṅga or vedalla).1

--- PAGE 249 ---
Rupert Gethin
228
The production of the canonical Abhidhamma texts corresponds with the period of the 
emergence of the ancient Buddhist schools, of which the Sri Lankan Theriya (Sk: Sthāvira) 
or Theravāda was one. Tracing its roots to one of eight missions sent out from the Mauryan 
capital in Pāṭaliputra Pātiliputra to different regions of India by the monk Moggaliputta Tissa 
in the middle of the third century bce, by the early centuries ce, the school flourished in Sri 
Lanka and southern India.
Buddhist tradition routinely talks of eighteen ancient schools, but this number is likely 
to be ideal: the ancient lists of schools do not agree in detail, while the status of some 
schools is unclear. In principle, each ancient school would have preserved its own character­
istic version of the Tripiṭaka. What survives today, in an Indian language or in Chinese or 
Tibetan translation, is in broad terms the Vinaya Piṭaka of six schools (Theravāda, Mahı̄śāsaka, 
Dharmaguptaka, Sarvāstivāda, Mūlasarvāstivāda, and Mahāsāṃghika), the Sūtra Piṭaka of one 
school (Theravāda) along with significant portions of two other schools (Mūlasarvāstivāda and 
Dharmaguptaka), and the Abhidharma Piṭaka of three schools (Theravāda, Sarvāstivāda, and, 
probably, Dharmaguptaka).
A comparison of these texts reveals a substantial agreement among the ancient Buddhist 
schools with regard to the core contents of the Vinaya and Sūtra material. Regarding the latter, 
the great Belgian scholar of Buddhism, Étienne Lamotte, has observed that although preserved 
and transmitted by different schools, the Sūtra collections are not sectarian documents but the 
common heritage of the various schools (Lamotte 1988: 156). The same cannot be said of the 
Abhidharma texts. Here, although there is still much that is common in the general approach 
and underlying principles, we are clearly dealing with the different ways of drawing out the 
details of Buddhist thought developed by different schools. How many distinct Abhidharma 
systems existed in ancient times is unclear. Today we have substantial knowledge of only two: 
the Theravāda Abhidhamma, whose origins must lie in the north but which developed and 
flourished in the south of India and Sri Lanka, and the Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma, which set 
the Buddhist intellectual agenda in the north of India, directly influencing the development 
of schools of Mahāyāna Buddhist thought such as the Yogācāra, and became widely studied 
in China and Tibet. A comparison of these two systems allows us to discern the distinctive 
features of specifically Theravāda Buddhist thought.
Canonical Abhidhamma literature
The Abhidhamma Piṭaka of the Theravāda school survives complete in Pāli and comprises seven 
works, one of which, the fifth, is traditionally given an author other than the Buddha. The 
traditional order given in a fifth-century Abhidhamma commentary, the Atthasālinı̄ (Exposition 
of the Meaning) is as follows (Tin 1920–1921 5): (1) Dhammasaṅgaṇi (Enumeration of Dharmas), (2) 
Vibhaṅga (Analysis), (3) Dhātukathā (Discussion of the Elements), (4) Puggalapaññatti (The Conception 
of Persons), (5) Kathāvatthu (Points of Discussion) by Moggaliputta Tissa, (6) Yamaka (Pairs), (7) 
Paṭṭhāna (Causal Relationship).
The Abhidharma Piṭaka of the Sarvāstivāda school comprises a quite different set of seven 
works which survive only in Chinese translation (with some Sanskrit fragments and one 
work in Tibetan translation).2 Each work is associated with a particular immediate or later 
follower of the Buddha (Lamotte 1988: 184): (1) Jñānaprasthāna (Foundation of Knowledge) 
by Kātyāyanı̄putra, (2) Prakaraṇapāda (The Treatise) by Vasumitra, (3) Vijñānakāya (Types of 
Consciousness) by Devaśarman, (4) Dharmaskandha (Compendium of Teachings) by Śāriputra, (5) 
Prajñaptiśāstra (Manual of Conceptions) by Maudgalyāyana, (6) Dhātukāya (Types of Element) by 
Pūrṇa, (7) Saṃgı̄tiparyāya (The Comprehensive Recitation) by Mahākauṣṭhila.

--- PAGE 250 ---
Abhidhamma
229
At first glance, surviving Abhidharma Piṭakas appear to have little in common. Closer 
scrutiny reveals some common ground. Thus the Vibhaṅga and Dharmaskandha are struc­
tured around a common set of topics: the five bundles (khandha/skandha), twelve sense-spheres 
(āyatana), eighteen elements (dhātu), dependent origination (paṭiccasamutpāda/pratı̄tyasamutpāda), 
twenty-two faculties (indriya), four applications of mindfulness (satipaṭṭhāna), four right efforts 
(sammappadhāna/samyakpradhāna), four bases of success (iddhipāda/ṛddhipāda), four absorp­
tions (jhāna), seven constituents of awakening (bojjhaṅga/bodhyaṅga), and the eightfold path 
(magga/mārga). Both the Kathāvatthu and the Vijñānakāya include sections concerned with the 
Abhidharma controversies of the issue of existence of dharmas in the past, present, and future 
and of the question of the status of the “person” (puggala/pudgala). In setting out lists of dharmas 
and types of consciousness, the Dhātukāya bears some comparison with the Dhammasaṅgaṇi.
What is striking is the wish, despite some opposition, to include these Abhidharma works 
in the category of “word of the Buddha” at the same time as acknowledging the role of 
both immediate and later followers in their production. Thus, according to the Theravāda 
account, the Buddha himself thought out all seven works of the Abhidhamma while seated 
in meditation in the fourth week after his awakening. For seven years, he kept them to him­
self but then taught them to his reborn mother and assembled gods in the Heaven of the 
Thirty-Three. At that time, he also taught them to Sāriputta, who, in turn, taught them to 
his pupils. Yet one work, the Kathāvatthu, is acknowledged only to have been expounded in 
full by the monk Moggaliputtatissa during the reign of the emperor Aśoka, some 150 years 
after the death of the Buddha. Similarly, Sarvāstivāda tradition associates three of its seven 
canonical Abhidharma works with certain of the Buddha’s prominent and immediate disciples 
(Mahākauṣṭhila, Śāriputra, Maudgalyāyana); the remaining four works are associated with dis­
ciples who tradition suggests lived sometime after the Buddha, between the third and first 
centuries bce.3 Both the Theravādins and Sarvāstivādins counter the obvious objection that the 
attribution of Abhidharma works to disciples undermines their status as “word of the Buddha” 
by suggesting that the substance of the material comes from the Buddha himself and that the 
disciples in question only expanded on that or arranged it (Tin, 1920–1921: 4–7; Willemen, 
Dessein and Cox 1998: 221).
Precise dating of the canonical Abhidharma texts is not possible. It seems likely that they 
evolved and were developed over several centuries, from the mid-third century bce to the mid 
mid-first century ce (Frauwallner 1995: 124–125; Cousins 2015: 132–133).
The development of Abhidhamma literature
From the early centuries ce, we see the production of various commentaries and manuals 
that complement the canonical works and act as aids to the study of their demanding systems 
of thought. In the south, on the island of Sri Lanka, various commentaries on the works of 
the Theravāda canon circulated in Sinhala Prakrit. In the late fourth or early fifth century, 
Buddhaghosa, a monk from, probably, southern India, initiated a project at the Mahāvihāra (Great 
Monastery) in Anurādhapura, the island’s capital, to edit, collate, and render these commentar­
ies into Pāli, in accordance with the consensus and traditions of the elders of the Mahāvihāra, 
giving us the Theravāda commentaries that survive today. These commentaries are substantially 
informed by Theravāda Abhidhamma theory. At the invitation of Buddhaghosa, an unnamed 
monk produced substantial commentaries on the first and second books of the Theravāda 
Abhidhamma, the Atthasālinı̄ (Exposition of the Meaning) and Sammohavinodanı̄ (Dispeller of 
Delusion), as well as the Pañcappakaraṇaṭṭhakathā (Commentary on the Five Treatises) on the remain­
ing five books (von Hinüber 1996: 151). Buddhaghosa himself produced the Visuddhimagga

--- PAGE 251 ---
Rupert Gethin
230
(Path of Purification), a comprehensive and, for the Theravādins, extremely influential digest of 
Theravāda understanding of the Buddhist path that includes a substantial section (Chapters 
14–17) titled “The Foundations of Understanding” (paññābhūmi), which summarizes Theravāda 
Abhidhamma theory. In composing his Visuddhimagga, Buddhaghosa seems, in part, to have 
followed the format of an earlier work, the Vimuttimagga (Path of Freedom), a work that today 
survives only in Chinese and partial Tibetan translation. Its author was a monk named Upatissa, 
who probably belonged to a rival monastic lineage in Anurādhapura, the Abhayagirivihāra. 
Demonstrably Theravāda in its general Abhidhamma outlook, the Vimuttimagga nonetheless 
disagrees with Mahāvihāra positions on a number of issues, giving us a glimpse of an alterna­
tive Theravāda tradition of exegesis (Cousins 2012).
In the sixth and seventh centuries, important subcommentaries on the commentaries 
of the Abhidhamma Piṭaka were produced: Ānanda’s Mūlaṭı̄kā (Primary Subcommentary) and 
Dhammapāla’s (or Jotipāla’s) Anuṭı̄kā (Secondary Subcommentary).
Besides these long and often difficult works, shorter “dexterous manuals” (lakkhaṇa-gantha) 
were composed. The earliest of these (fifth century) appear to be the Abhidhammāvatāra 
(Introduction to Abhidhamma) and Rūpārūpavibhāga (Classification of the Material and Immaterial), 
written in southern India by a monk named Buddhadatta. But the work that eventually came 
to supersede all others and is still used today as the preferred introduction to Abhidhamma in 
Theravāda countries is Anuruddha’s (tenth-century) Abhidhammattha-saṅgaha (Summary of the 
Meaning of Abhidhamma), which in the space of some fifty pages covers the essential elements 
of Theravāda systematic thought.
Such manuals were designed to be memorized by the student, who would then receive 
further instruction from a teacher. The manuals thus acquired explanatory commen­
taries that summarized controversial and potentially contradictory points found in the 
voluminous and daunting Abhidhamma literature. In the twelfth century, Sumaṅgala, 
working in the capital of Laṅkā, now Polonnaruva, wrote commentaries to both 
Buddhadatta’s Abhidhammāvatāra and Anuruddha’s Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha. The first, the 
Abhidhammavikāsinı̄ (Elucidation of Abhidhamma), at some 700 pages, is an exhaustive expo­
sition of the issues discussed in the Theravāda exegesis of Abhidhamma. The latter, the 
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinı̄ (Exposition of the Meaning of Abhidhamma), a mere 150 pages, is 
based on his teacher’s earlier Sinhala summary, having in mind, it seems, “those who are 
frightened of books” (Wijeratne and Gethin 2002: 51). Another important summary of 
the Theravāda Abhidhamma is Kassapa’s Mohavicchedanı̄ (Destroyer of Delusion), written in 
southern India in Coḷa in the thirteenth century.
The production of Theravāda Abhidhamma literature continued in the kingdoms of Southeast 
Asia. The Burmese tradition of Abhidhamma studies dates back to at least the fifteenth cen­
tury with the works of Saddhammajotipāla, a monk from Pagan who visited Sri Lanka, and 
Ariyavaṃsa, who wrote subcommentaries on the Atthasālini and Abhidhammāvatara. The six­
teenth century saw the beginning of the production of Burmese vernacular Abhidhamma 
primers known as ayakauk. The particular Burmese fascination with the seventh book of the 
Abhidhamma, the Paṭṭhāna, seems also to date back to the seventeenth century (Kyaw 2014, 
161–65). The Burmese tradition of learned Abhidhamma commentary continued into the 
twentieth century when the Burmese monk Ledi Sayadaw published his Paramatthadı̄panı̄ 
(Explanation of the Ultimate), an influential critique of positions advocated by Sumaṅgala’s 
twelfth-century commentary on the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha. In the sixteenth century in the 
Lanna kingdom (in what is now northern Thailand), the scholar-monk Ratanapañña composed 
the Vajirasāratthasaṅgaha (Compendium of the Meaning of the Diamond Core), an innovative work, 
combining riddle with Abhidhamma and other topics (Schnake 2021). His contemporary,

--- PAGE 252 ---
Abhidhamma
231
Ñāṇakitti, also composed a series of commentaries on the canonical Abhidhamma works and 
the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (von Hinüber 2000).
In the north of India in Kashmir, the Sarvāstivāda school also produced a series of important 
Abhidharma treatises with reference to their distinctive canonical Abhidharma texts. In the early 
centuries ce, the Theravāda Buddhist authors in the south seem unaware of the specific works 
being produced in the north, and vice versa, although there does seem to have been some 
familiarity with some of each other’s characteristic doctrines and positions. However, it is clear 
that by perhaps the seventh century, works composed in North India, such as Vasubandhu’s 
Abhidharmakośa (Sheath of Abhidharma), written in Kashmir in the fourth century, were also 
familiar to Theravāda scholar monks in the south, for the author of the Abhidhamma-anuṭı̄kā 
provides a lengthy counter to Vasubandhu’s attempted refutation of the doctrine of immediate 
rebirth (see the following section).
The Abhidharma theory of dharmas
The Buddhist systematic thought of the Abhidharma rests on a basic distinction between two 
types of discourse. The discourses (sutta/sūtra) of the Buddha are regarded as his teaching applied 
to a particular situation, using terms figuratively and in accordance with everyday usage. The 
Abhidharma, in contrast, presents the Buddha’s teachings without concession to time, place or 
audience, and in technical terms that are precisely defined to ensure analytical exactitude (As 
21). The contrast between these two approaches coincides, in part, with other distinctions made 
in the texts between types of teachings. Some teachings are said to be expressed in terms whose 
meaning must be determined (neyyattha/ñeyārtha), while others are expressed in terms whose 
meaning is already determined (nı̄tattha/nı̄tārtha). Some teachings are expressed in conventional 
terms (sammuti); others are expressed in ultimate terms (paramattha/paramārtha). Underlying 
this is the basic Buddhist premise that the failure to see the world as it really is (yathābhūtaṃ) 
is what causes suffering. In principle, Abhidhamma is an attempt to use language exactly in 
an attempt to give a precise and full account of how the world is in order to assist the direct 
realization of the nature of things and so bring freedom from suffering.
Abhidharma can be seen as having three main areas of concern:
	1	
The reduction of the world to a set of fundamental mental and physical dhammas or “quali­
ties,” understood as the basic events or forces that combine to construct the world we expe­
rience. This exercise in reduction results in a kind of phenomenology of mind and body.
	2	
An account of how these fundamental dhammas or events interact according to different 
types of causal relationship. This includes the operation of kamma—how acts motivated 
by greed, aversion, and delusion and their positive counterparts (nonattachment, kindness, 
and wisdom) have pleasant and unpleasant results (vipāka)—as well as the analysis of the 
processes of perception and death and rebirth in different types of existence.
	3	
An analysis of the stages of the Buddhist path culminating in awakening
In the present context, there is only the space to say something about the first two.
The Abhidharma analysis of the world in terms of dhammas is a development from the 
analysis of the world in terms of five “bundles” (khandha) and six “sense spheres” (āyatana) found 
in the suttas. The sense spheres are understood as encompassing the totality of experience in 
terms of the six senses (sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, mind), their corresponding objects 
(visible forms, sounds, smells, tastes, bodily sensations, ideas), and the types of cognition (viññāṇa/
vijñāna) associated with each sense (cognition by way of sight, etc.), which gives a list known as

--- PAGE 253 ---
Rupert Gethin
232
the eighteen “elements” (dhātu). In the suttas, the five bundles refer to an analysis of the world 
in terms of (1) physical phenomena (rūpa), (2) feeling (vedanā), (3) recognition (saññā/saṃjñā), 
(4) volitional forces (saṃskāra), and (5) cognition. Thus in response to sense data, pleasant or 
unpleasant feelings arise, followed by a recognition of what has been perceived, which is the 
occasion for certain volitional responses leading to acts of body and speech; all this is framed 
by “cognition,” that is, the sense of a subject experiencing an object. On the basis of indications 
given in the sūtras the Abhidharma texts of both Theravādins and Sarvāstivādins aim to give a 
full list of all possible types of dharma encompassed by the bundles. This involved in particular 
specifying the types of volitional forces in detail.
The overall concern is to give an account of the world without reference to a substantial 
“self” (attan/ātman), understood as an underlying, unchanging subject of experience. Thus 
instead of describing the world in terms of a self that now experiences greed, now anger, and 
so on, the world is described in terms merely of the succession of the qualities greed, anger, 
and so on. These qualities are connected not by an underlying substantial self but by different 
kinds of causal relationship.
Looking at the Theravāda and Sarvāstivāda lists of dharmas (see Table 15.1), we see that 
the starting point is a fundamental division between that which constitutes the “conditioned” 
(saṃskṛta) world that we ordinarily know and that which is outside and apart from this and 
therefore “unconditioned” (asaṃskṛta).
The unconditioned refers first and foremost to nirvana, which for both the Theravādins 
and Sarvāstivādins is a positive reality that eradicates all the defilements of the minds of those 
who reach the end of the Buddhist path. Theravādins refer to this reality as the “uncon­
ditioned element” (asaṃkhata-dhātu), the Sarvāstivādins as “cessation through understanding” 
(pratisaṃkhya-nirodha). The Sarvāstivādins posit two further unconditioned dharmas, cessation 
without understanding (apratisaṃkhya-nirodha) and absolute space (ākāśa). The former is a force 
that prevents the arising of dharmas that might arise but for the absence of causal conditions. 
The Theravādins and other critics regarded these two dharmas as unnecessarily concretizing 
what is merely conceptual.
Within the category of conditioned dharmas, there is a primary division between mind and 
body, between dharmas that are nonphysical (arūpa) and dharmas that are physical (rūpa). If pressed 
on the metaphysical question, the Theravāda and Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma systems are thus 
certainly dualist. Yet it is in good measure that phenomenological, not ontological, concerns 
inform much of their dharma analysis. Within the category of mental dharmas an important 
distinction is made between the bare sense of awareness (cognizing an object), termed citta, and 
associated mental activities, termed cetasika (Skt caitasika). The bare awareness that is citta is an 
abstraction that cannot by itself be aware of an object; to accomplish perception it needs the 
assistance of a minimum number of cetasikas, seven according to the Theravādins, ten accord­
ing to the Sarvāstivādins. In addition to the basic divisions between body and mind, and citta 
and cetasika, the Sarvāstivādins introduce a class of dharmas termed “forces disassociated from 
mind” (citta-viprayukta-saṃskāra). The dhammas of this class the Theravādins either pass over or 
conceive of in different ways. In sum, the Theravādins present dhammas in terms of four ultimate 
categories (paramattha-dhamma), namely, mind, mentalities, matter, and nibbāna; the Sarvāstivādins 
in terms of five fundamental categories (vastuka), namely, matter, mind, mentalities, disassociated 
forces, and the unconditioned.
The dharma lists of both the Theravāda and Sarvāstivāda traditions are clearly the product of 
a process of discussion and debate about what to classify as a basic irreducible category. The 
early lists of both schools were open. The Mahāvihāra Theravādins eventually agreed on a list

--- PAGE 254 ---
Abhidhamma
233
Table 15.1  The dharma lists of the Theravāda and Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma compared. (Note that the traditional order has been adapted to facilitate comparison.)
Matter
Mind
Mental Activities (unwholesome)
Theravāda (28)
Sarvāstivāda (14)
Theravāda (1)
Sarvāstivāda (1)
Theravāda (14)
Sarvāstivāda (22)
earth
water
fire
wind
eye
ear
nose
tongue
body
visible form
sound
smell
taste
life
femaleness
maleness
heart base
food
space
bodily information
speech information
lightness
softness
readiness
accumulation
continuity
decay
impermanence
earth
water
fire
wind
eye
ear
nose
tongue
body
visible form
sound
smell
taste
noninformative matter
[disassovciated force]
[unconditioned]
[disassociated force]
[disassociated force]
[disassociated force]
[disassociated force]
consciousness
consciousness
universal (4)
delusion
shamelessness
recklessness
restlessness
[occasional]
occasional (10)
greed
view
conceit
hatred
envy
stinginess
anxiety
sluggishness
sleepiness
doubt
[unwholesome 
occasional]
[unwholesome 
occasional]
universal (8)
ignorance
shamelessness
recklessness
restlessness
inattentiveness
lethargy
faithlessness
sluggishness
occasional (4)
greed
[= understanding]
conceit
aversion
[secondary defilement]
[secondary defilement]
[variable occasional]
[unwholesome universal]
[variable occasional]
doubt
secondary (10)
anger
disparagement
stinginess
envy
obstinacy
cruelty
deceit
deviousness
arrogance
enmity
Mental Activities (ethically variable)
Theravāda (13)
Sarvāstivāda (14)
universal (7)
contact
feeling
recognition
volition
concentration
attention
life
[neutral occasional]
[wholesome]
[wholesome]
[neutral occasional]
occasional (6)
thinking
examining
decision
vigor
joy
wish to act
[unwholesome]
[unwholesome]
universal (10)
contact
feeling
recognition
volition
concentration
attention
[disassociated force]
wish to act
understanding
mindfulness
decision
occasional (4)
thinking
examining
[variable universal]
[wholesome]
[= feeling]
[variable universal]
anxiety
sleepiness
(Continued)

--- PAGE 255 ---
Rupert Gethin
234
Matter
Mind
Mental Activities (unwholesome)
Mental Activities (wholesome)
Disassociated Forces
Unconditioned
Theravāda (25)
Sarvāstivāda (10)
Theravāda (0)
Sarvāstivāda (14)
Theravāda (1)
Sarvāstivāda (3)
universal (19)
faith
mindfulness
[neutral occasional]
balance
shame
regard for consequence
nonattachment
kindness
[wholesome occasional]
tranquility of body and 
mind (2)
lightness of body and 
mind (2)
softness of body and 
mind (2)
readiness of body and 
mind (2)
adaptability of body and 
mind (2)
straightness of body and 
mind (2)
occasional (6)
right speech
right action
right livelihood
compassion
sympathetic joy
understanding
universal (10)
faith
[variable universal]
vigor
equanimity
shame
regard for consequence
nonattachment
kindness
compassion
tranquility
attentiveness
[= volition]
[= volition]
[= volition]
[wholesome universal]
[= feeling]
[variable universal]
[matter/universal]
[matter]
[matter]
[matter]
[matter]
possession
nonpossession
similarity of class
unconsciousness
attainment of 
unconsciousness
attainment of cessation
life
birth
continuity
decay
impermanence
name
sentence
syllable
[matter]
nirvana
space
cessation by 
understanding
cessation without 
understanding
Table 15.1  (Continued)

--- PAGE 256 ---
Abhidhamma
235
of seventy-two fundamental natural qualities (sabhāva). The Sarvāstivadins’ list seems never to 
have been finally fixed, varying between seventy-nine and eighty-one.4
In so far as the Abhidharma taxonomies aim to provide a set of categories that allow for 
the description of all possible types of experience, they are simply descriptive of what there 
is. But at the same time they are normative insofar as certain dharmas are considered ethically 
wholesome (kusala/kuśala), certain unwholesome (akusala/akuśala), and others indeterminate 
(avyākata/avyākṛta).
Both the Theravādins and Sarvāstivādins conceive of the material world in terms of four pri­
mary elements that constitute its basic irreducible qualities: resistance (earth), cohesion (water), 
heat (fire), and motion (wind). Dependent on the four elements there occur secondary instances 
of matter with additional physical qualities: the physical bases of the five senses have the capacity 
to be sensitive to their respective objects; other instances of matter have the capacity to be seen, 
heard, tasted, or smelled. The elements themselves (either just three apart from water, according 
to the Theravāda, or all four, according to the Sarvāstivāda) are considered to constitute the 
sphere of touch in the form of the sensation of resistance, temperature, and movement. The 
additional items in the Theravāda list of material qualities are in part accommodated by the 
Sarvāstivādins under the category of disassociated forces or, in the case of space, the uncondi­
tioned. The Sarvāstivādins introduce a special type of matter that is “uninformative” (avijñapti), 
referring to the way significant acts of speech and body are carried invisibly in the body. This 
is rejected by the Theravādins as substantializing something that is purely conceptual.
Turning to the lists of mental activities (cetasikas) associated with episodes of consciousness, 
these are divided into dharmas that are ethically variable, unwholesome, and wholesome. There 
is a basic agreement on six of the universal activities that are the prerequisites of any instance 
of consciousness. The most striking difference is that the Sarvāstivādins include in this category 
“understanding” (prajñā) and “memory” (smṛti). For the Sarvāstivādins the former represents a 
fundamental disposition of the mind to form a view of the world, whether appropriate or not; 
for the Theravādins, it is an exclusively wholesome disposition to understand the world in terms 
of the four truths, namely, suffering, its cause, its cessation, and the way to its cessation. Similarly, 
the Sarvāstivādins take “mindfulness” (sati/smṛti) as a basic capacity of the mind to remember its 
object, while the Theravādins again see it as a distinctively wholesome attentiveness, that remains 
mindful of an object’s nature. Nevertheless, both schools agree that when associated with the 
other qualities that arise in wholesome consciousness, mindfulness, and understanding become 
closely linked and play a special role in coming to a realization of the true nature of things.
In principle, the two schools are agreed that ignorance (avijjā/avidyā), shamelessness (ahirika/ 
āhrı̄kya), recklessness (anottappa/ anapatrāpya), and restlessness (uddhacca/audhatya) are generally 
characteristic of unwholesome consciousness, which may then on occasion involve addition­
ally either greed (rāga) or aversion (dosa), which each, in turn, may be associated with further 
unwholesome dharmas. However, the Sarvāstivādin overlay this conception with a scheme of 
six primary defilements—greed (rāga), ignorance (avidyā), aversion (pratigha), conceit (māna), 
views (dṛṣṭi), and doubt (vicikitsā)—and an extended list of secondary defilements (Gethin 2017).
Turning to the category of wholesome dharmas, most striking is the Theravāda list of six 
pairs (tranquillity, lightness, softness, readiness, adaptability, straightness of body and mind) where 
the Sarvāstivādins have only tranquillity. While the Sarvāstivādins do discuss these other quali­
ties without distinguishing them as dharmas in their own right, their status as dhammas in the 
Theravāda system highlights a distinctive emphasis on the phenomenology of mind and body 
in the process of meditation.
In fact, disagreement on which qualities to recognize as dharmas in their own right accounts 
for many of the differences between the two lists. Thus, for the Theravādins, “happiness” (sukha)

--- PAGE 257 ---
Rupert Gethin
236
and “joy” (pı̄ti/prı̄ti) are two distinct dharmas, whereas for the Sarvāstivādins, they are simply 
two different aspects of pleasant feeling. On other hand, the Sarvāstivādins see “anger” (krodha) 
as distinct from “hatred” (dosa/dveṣa), while the Theravādins see it as a particular manifestation 
of hatred. Such considerations also apply to other items in the Sarvāstivādin list of secondary 
defilements.
Other differences reflect particular positions taken in Abhidharma discussions. Thus, “sleepi­
nesss” (middha) is for the Mahāvihāra Theravādins always unwholesome; for the Abhayagiri 
Theravādins, it is physical; but for the Sarvāstivādins, it may be unwholesome or wholesome. 
This difference seems to reflect disagreement about how to accommodate types of sleepiness 
induced by natural tiredness (Gethin 2017). For the Theravādins, since “anxiety” (kukkucca/
kaukṛtya), which takes the form of regret directed toward past actions, is associated with unhappy 
feeling, it must involve aversion and therefore always be unwholesome. The Sarvāstivādins, 
on the other hand, while agreeing that anxiety involved unhappy feeling, allow that when it 
takes the form of regret for an unwholesome past action it should be regarded as wholesome.
The exercise of drawing up a list of dharmas understood as the basic elements out of 
which reality is constructed raised questions about what a dharma really is. In the first place 
dharmas are conceived as things that happen, that is, as momentary events. Lists of dharmas are 
attempts to identify the basic types of events that can occur. A dharma category comprises all 
instances that share a particular defining quality (svabhāva) or characteristic (svalakṣaṇa), such 
as the activity of being greedy or of hating (La Vallée Poussin 1988–1990: 57; Tin 1920–1921: 
50; Karunadasa 2010: 12, 35). As what we find when we examine the subject and object of 
awareness closely, dharmas are conceived as in some sense the irreducible phenomena of experi­
ence. The Sarvāstivādins expressed the irreducibility of dharmas with reference to a distinction 
between two types of existence: nominal (prajñapti-sat) and real (dravya-sat), corresponding to 
conventional truth and ultimate truth. Similarly, the Theravādins make a distinction between 
concepts of things which are existent (vijjamāna-paññatti) and non-existent (avijjamāna-paññatti). 
Persons, men, women, trees, mountains, and so on exist nominally; they are concepts of things 
that ultimately do not exist; they are projected onto the truly existing dharmas. Greed, hatred 
and delusion, on the other hand, may be concepts (that is, conceptual names), but they are 
concepts that refer to things that truly exist.
The Sarvāstivāda use of the term dravya in the sense of “real entity,” tended to undermine 
the conception of dharmas as fleeting events, and bring out a latent sense of the term svabhāva 
as “inherent existence.” Such a conception of the ontology of dharmas was famously criti­
cized by Nāgārjuna (second century ce) and followers of the Mādhyamika school of Buddhist 
thought, who suggested that it was incoherent to conceive of something that comes into 
existence dependent on conditions as having inherent existence. The term dravya is not used 
by the Theravādins in connection with the ontology of dharmas. This means that although the 
Theravāda ontology of a dharma must certainly be judged realist, it remained less explicitly so. It 
seems clear that the Theravāda Abhidhamma was not the main target of Mādhyamika critiques 
(Walser 2005, 226–28, 268–69).
Dharmas in action: causation, processes, and rebirth
In beginning to provide an account of the separate dharmas in action, Abhidhamma sets out 
a theory of possible classes of “consciousness” (citta), understood as basic momentary episodes 
of cognition, each consisting of bare consciousness (i.e., the sense of a subject who is aware of 
an object) associated with a set of mental activities (cetasika) that arise simultaneously directed 
toward the same object of awareness. These episodes of cognition are constituted by a minimum

--- PAGE 258 ---
Abhidhamma
237
of eight dhammas according to the Theravādins or eleven according to the Sarvāstivādins; 
more complex episodes of cognition are constituted by upwards of twenty or thirty dhammas. 
Since it is possible to apply various principles to distinguish classes, different lists of the types 
of episodes of cognition are, in part, simply the result of a decision as to how fine to make 
the analysis. The two basic principles involve distinguishing episodes of consciousness as (1) 
wholesome (motivated by greed, aversion, and delusion), unwholesome (motivated by nonat­
tachment, kindness, and wisdom), or indeterminate, and (2) belonging to the sense-sphere (the 
realm of ordinary experience), or the form or formless spheres (the realms of deep states of 
meditative concentration).
The developed Theravāda works with a system of eighty-nine classes of consciousness-
episodes: eight types of sense-sphere wholesome, five types of form-sphere wholesome, four 
types of formless sphere wholesome, four types of transcendent wholesome, twelve types of 
sense-sphere unwholesome, thirty-four types of sense-sphere indeterminate, ten types of form-
sphere indeterminate, eight types of formless spheres indeterminate, four types of transcendent 
indeterminate. The Sarvāstivāda texts seem not to provide such a full list, although a comparable 
list can, in part, be inferred. In discussing the basic combination of mentalities, Vasubandhu 
talks in terms of one broad class of sense-sphere wholesome episodes of consciousness, two broad 
classes of sense-sphere unwholesome, two broad classes of sense-sphere indeterminate, five 
types of form-sphere, and four types of formless spheres (La Vallée Poussin 1988–1990: 196–99).
The Abhidharma systems go on to analyze the different types of causal relationship that 
can operate between dharmas. On the basis of the Paṭṭhāna, the seventh book of the canonical 
Abhidhamma and “one of the most amazing productions of the human mind” (Warder 1980: 
309), Theravādins elaborate an intricate web of causal connections through a system of twenty-
four types of causal condition (paccaya), while the Sarvāstivādins have a system of six causes (hetu) 
and four conditions (pratyaya). Essentially, these sets of causal relations highlight how dharmas 
are conditions for other dharmas that arise either at the same time or subsequently. Thus the 
dharmas that make up a particular moment of awareness act as mutual conditions for each other, 
called “mutuality condition” (aññamañña-paccaya) by the Theravādins and coexistence cause 
(sahabhū-hetu) by the Sarvāstivādins. By way of “object condition” (ārammaṇa-paccaya, ālambana-
pratyaya), these dharmas are also, in part, conditioned by the object of awareness. Furthermore, 
in the role of “contiguity condition” (samanantara-paccaya, -pratyaya), these dharmas are among 
the conditions necessary for the arising of another set of dharmas in the immediately following 
moment. If the instance of awareness constituted by the dharmas is wholesome (motivated by 
kindness, say) or unwholesome (motivated by hatred, say) it also has the potential to act as the 
“karma condition” (kamma-paccaya) or “cause of a karmic fruit” (vipāka-hetu) for dharmas that 
will arise sometime in the future. In this way, the Abhidharma elaborates one of its basic axioms, 
that nothing arises from a single cause, and no cause has a single effect (Ñāṇamoli 1964: 623; 
Willemen, Dessein, and Cox 1998: 28; T 28.885b).
Both the Theravāda and Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma also provide systematic expositions of the 
theory of “dependent origination” (paṭiccasamuppāda/pratı̄ṭyasamutpāda). The twelve links can 
be seen as circumscribing three lives: actions conditioned by ignorance in the previous life 
condition consciousness, mind and body, sense faculties, sense contact, feeling, craving, grasp­
ing, and becoming in the present life; these, in turn, condition birth, old age, and death in the 
next. Alternatively, all twelve links are seen as operating from moment to moment: in each 
moment, we are born, live, and die.
This is closely related in the Theravādin Abhidharma to its account of the way the mind 
perceives and responds to objects of awareness, a distinctive feature which seems already assumed 
by the Dhammasaṅgaṇi’s system of eighty-nine classes of consciousness. It is common to both the

--- PAGE 259 ---
Rupert Gethin
238
Mahāvihāra and the Abhayagirivihāra Theravāda traditions (Ehara 255–57). Two basic modes 
of the mind are distinguished: the mind that is active (vı̄thi-citta) in perceiving and responding 
to objects of consciousness and the mind that is inactive and at rest (vı̄thi-mutta), typically in 
deep, dreamless sleep. The inactive is termed subconscious continuum (bhavaṅga). Significantly, 
even when active the mind is said to momentarily rest in this inactive mode between each 
process of perception. When an object comes into the range of one of the senses, the mind 
stirs and turns its attention to the particular sense in question; it perceives the object and then 
begins to process and examine what it has perceived, before determining its nature; on the 
basis of this determination, the mind actively responds to the object in either a wholesome or 
unwholesome way; at the end of the process, the mind momentarily holds on to the object of 
experience before returning to its inactive state until the next object disturbs one of the senses. 
This is illustrated by various similes. To give one: A man sleeps beneath a mango tree; the 
wind disturbs the branches; a mango falls; he is disturbed, opens his eyes, and sees the mango; 
he grasps it, presses it, and smells it: “It is ripe for eating.” He eats the mango; he swallows 
the last morsels, licks his lips, and goes back to sleep. The simile perhaps belies the fact that 
the processing of an object is understood to be rapid and a largely automatic and involuntary 
response. Nonetheless, each full process of perception is of moral significance.
The initial perception and apprehension of an object are said to occur in the form of epi­
sodes of consciousness that are the results (vipāka) of past action or karma. That is, at the initial 
moment of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, or touching something that is by nature “desir­
able” (iṭṭha), we experience a result of some previous wholesome act; at the moment of seeing, 
hearing, smelling, tasting, or touching something that is by nature “undesirable” (aniṭṭha), we 
experience a result of some previous unwholesome act. Our basic sense experiences thus come 
to us as the results of our previous karma and are beyond our immediate control. But in each 
process of perception the mind, having perceived and taking in an object, makes a decision as 
to how it will respond to the object experienced. It may decide to savor the object with greed, 
hatred, or delusion, or it may decide to do so with nonattachment, kindness, and understand­
ing. At this point, a series of actively unwholesome or wholesome episodes of consciousness, 
termed running (javana), sow the seeds of karma that will bear future results (Cousins 1981). Our 
lives are seen as made up of countless numbers of these cognitive processes, which collectively 
determine the course of our rebirth.
The theory of bhavaṅga forms part of the Theravāda account of the process of death and 
rebirth. The bhavaṅga consciousness is essentially the state of mind that arises as the first episode 
of consciousness in any lifetime (in the case of human beings at the moment of conception 
in the womb), constituting the relinking (paṭisandhi) of mind and body at the beginning of a 
new life. This relinking is established as the immediate karmic result of the state of mind in 
the moment before death in the immediately preceding life. What is understood is that close 
to death significant acts performed during a lifetime come before the mind. Certain kinds of 
action—for example, certain types of murder—are regarded as so “weighty” that they cannot 
but come to mind at the time of death. In the absence of these, what tends to come to mind 
are habitual actions or actions done close to the actual time of death, but actions done in distant 
past lives may also come to mind. What in effect happens is that the dying person then relives 
this action in the last moments before death. The state of mind at the moment of relinking 
in the new life has this action as its immediate cause. The bhavaṅga state of a human being is 
understood to be the result of previous wholesome karma and is rooted in nonattachment, 
kindness, and sometimes also wisdom. Beings born as animals or in the hells, on the other hand, 
have as their bhavaṅga a much more basic type of consciousness that is considered the result of 
unwholesome action and is lacking in the wholesome roots (Gethin 1994).

--- PAGE 260 ---
Abhidhamma
239
For Theravādins and others (Mahı̄śāsakas, Dharmaguptakas, and Mahāsāṃghikas), rebirth is 
immediate. The last moment of consciousness in one life is followed in the next moment by 
relinking (paṭisandhi/pratisandhi), constituting the first moment of consciousness in the new life. 
The causal connection between the last moment of consciousness in one life and the first in 
the next life is illustrated by an echo or reflection (Ñāṇamoli 1964: 639). For the Sarvāstivādins 
and others (the Pūrvaśailas and Vātsı̄pūtrı̄yas), such an account of rebirth was problematic. How 
can a being’s death in one moment in one place be causally connected to a being’s conception 
in a quite different, perhaps far distant, place in the next moment? Rejecting the example of 
the causal connection between an object and its reflection, Vasubandhu argued at length in his 
Abhidharmakośa that there must be an intermediate being (antarābhava) which links the two lives. 
After death a being assumes a subtle form that is intangible and translucent but nevertheless 
prefigures the type of existence to which it is heading. A being remains in this intermediate 
state waiting for conditions to arise that are appropriate to its karmic destiny (La Vallée Poussin 
1988–1990: 383–97). Some centuries later, the author of the Abhidhamma-anuṭı̄kā attempted to 
answer Vasubandhu’s criticisms and defend a reflection as a valid example of causality operating 
across an apparent gap (Kv-anuṭ (Be 1960) 120–24).
The Abhidharma analysis of the mind and body in terms of a series of causally intercon­
nected dharmas arising and ceasing from moment to moment presented Buddhist thinkers 
with various theoretical problems associated with how to account for the continuity and 
reemergence of traits, tendencies, and habits when they are not constantly present. If, for 
example, anger and greed are not present in our minds what determines whether they will 
arise again? To arise again, surely they must remain somewhere in some latent state; otherwise, 
they would appear to arise again randomly. The different schools of Buddhism proposed vari­
ous ways of explaining such issues, which there is not the space to discuss here in detail. But 
the Sarvāstivādins proposed in the first place that dharmas of the past and future should not 
be said not to exist; rather, they exist always, in the past and future as well as in the present; 
present existence is characterized, however, by activity. The Sarvāstivādins next proposed that 
two dharmas, “possession” (prāpti) and “nonpossession” (aprāpti) govern, which dharmas have 
the potentiality to become active or not in a given continuum of dharmas. When one experi­
ences, say, anger, there is a “possession” (prāpti) of present anger; but when it is past, although 
there is no longer “possession” of present anger, there is still “possession” of past anger and the 
potentiality for it to become active again in the future given the appropriate conditions; if one 
were then to become a buddha, one would gain “nonpossession” of anger. Both “possession” 
and “nonpossession” are themselves dharmas included in the flow of dharmas that arise and cease 
from moment to moment and constitute a person.
For their part, the Theravādins seem to have referred such problems of personal continu­
ity and karma and their results to their theory of the process of perception outlined earlier 
and, in particular, to the notion of the “subconscious continuum” (bhavaṅga). Between each 
active consciousness process the mind momentarily lapses into bhavaṅga, a basic state of 
consciousness that recurs throughout a being’s life, defining a being’s basic nature and influ­
encing the nature of the flow of dharmas that constitute the lifetime of a given being. Thus, 
instead of understanding the continuity of character traits with reference to the presence 
of “possession” in the stream of dharmas, the Theravādins appear to appeal to a continually 
intervening state of mind. Such an approach bypasses the philosophical abstraction of the 
Sarvāstivādins and appears to have some affinity with the theory of the “store conscious­
ness” (ālayavijñāna) developed by the Yogācārā school of Mahāyāna thought. Significantly, 
in trying to justify their theory, early Yogācāra thinkers cited the Theravāda notion of 
bhavaṅga (Gethin 1994: 31).

--- PAGE 261 ---
Rupert Gethin
240
Conclusion
How should we characterize the Theravāda Abhidhamma in relation to the Sarvāstivāda sys­
tem? First, there is a greater simplicity in its listing of dharmas. The category of forces dissoci­
ated from mind is rejected in favor of the basic categories of mind, mental activities, material 
form, and “the unconditioned.” The list of unwholesome mental activities is more clearly 
related to the basic defilements of greed, hatred, and delusion. The single simplicity of the 
unconditioned element or nibbāna is related to the notion that knowledge of the Four Noble 
Truths is achieved in a single momentary flash of insight (ekābhisamaya), contrasting with 
the Sarvāstivādin notion that the four truths are known in a progressive series of cognitions 
(anupūrvābhisamaya). Thus, according to the Theravādin view, the suffering of saṃsāra (the first 
truth) is seen in the same moment as its cessation (the third truth), implying that nirvana is 
not to be thought of as existing in some other realm or at some other time from the here 
and now of saṃsāra (Cousins 1984).
The second broad distinctive feature of the Theravāda Abhidhamma is its theory of the 
process of perception, which is bound up with the scheme of eighty-nine categories of con­
sciousness and the notion of the subconsciousness continuum (bhavaṅga). This systematically 
and comprehensively maps how dhammas combine and interact in a stream of episodes of 
cognition; complemented by the system of twenty-four causal relations, the theory attempts 
to show how the processes of perception from moment to moment relate to the unfolding of 
actions and their results from life to life.
The overall effect of these two broad distinctive features of the Theravāda Abhidhamma is, 
I think, to render it less intellectually abstract than the Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma, which is more 
concerned with defending and elaborating its doctrinal positions on the ontology of dharmas 
in response to the criticisms of other Indian schools of thought, Buddhist and non-Buddhist. 
While it would be a mistake to suggest that Theravāda Abhidhamma thinkers consciously 
reject metaphysical positions in favor of a pure phenomenology, they remain less preoccupied 
with questions of ontology. In comparison with the Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma, the Theravāda 
Abhidhamma thus continues throughout its formative period (second century bce–fifth century 
ce) to function more directly as a practical map for following and reaching the goal of the 
path to awakening (Cousins 1984: 104–107). This serves as a reminder that the Abhidharma 
generally—whether Sarvāstivāda or Theravāda—was always about something more than the 
ontology of dharmas.
Notes
	 1	On the formation of early Buddhist literature, see Gethin 1998: 35–58; Gethin 2008: xiii–xxvi.
	 2	 Of the Abhidharma Piṭakas of other schools we have limited knowledge. A work that seems likely to 
constitute the Abhidharma Piṭaka of the Dharmaguptaka school survives in Chinese translation with the 
title Abhidharma of Śāriputra (Shelifu apitan; T 1548); it is relatively unstudied in modern scholarship. A 
Vinaya summary of the Haimavata school suggests that it had an Abhidharma consisting of five sections 
(T 24.818a); a work by the Chinese monk Jizang (549–643 ce) relates that the Vātsı̄putrı̄ya school, which 
advocated the reality of the person (pudgalavāda), had an Abhidharma in nine sections, the Abhidharma of the 
Characteristics of Dharmas (Faxiang pitan) also associated with Śāriputra (T 45.9c). An Abhidharma-piṭaka of 
the Mahāsāṃghikas is also mentioned in ancient sources (Przyluski 1927, 210–212, 217; Bareau 1951, 9).
	 3	Chinese tradition lists the authors slightly differently, but the same principle holds true (Lamotte 1988: 
156).
	 4	Chinese tradition fixed the Sarvāstivāda list as comprising seventy-five dharmas, but this is to, somewhat 
misleadingly, take the sphere of tangible objects as more fundamental than the four primary elements of 
earth, fire, water, and wind that constitute it.

--- PAGE 262 ---
Abhidhamma
241
References
Bodhi, Bhikkhu. 2007. A Comprehensive Manual of Abhidhamma: The Abhidhammattha Saṅgaha of Ācariya 
Anuruddha. (3rd ed.). Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Cousins, L.S. 1981. “The Paṭṭhāna and the Development of the Theravādin Abhidhamma.” Journal of the 
Pali Text Society 9: 22–46.
Cousins, L.S. 1984. “Nibbāna and Abhidhamma.” Buddhist Studies Review 1: 95–109.
Cousins, L.S. 1997. “Aspects of Esoteric Southern Buddhism.” In Indian Insights: Buddhism, Brahmanism and 
Bhakti, eds. Peter Connolly, Susan Hamilton, 185–207. London: Luzac Oriental.
Cousins, L. S. 2012. “The Teachings of the Abhayagiri School,” in How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring 
Buddhist Identities, ed. Peter Skilling and others, 67–127. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books. 
Cousins, L. S. 2015.  “Abhidhamma Studies III: Origins of the Canonical Abhidha(r)mma Literature.” 
Journal of the Oxford Centre for Buddhist Studies 8: 96–145.
Cox, Collett. 1995. Disputed Dharmas: Early Buddhist Theories on Existence: An Annotated Translation of the 
Section on Factors Dissociated from Thought from Saṅghabhadra’s Nyāyānusāra. Tokyo: The International 
Institute for Buddhist Studies.
Cox, Collett. 2004. “From Category to Ontology: The Evolution of Dharma in Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma.” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 32: 543–597.
Crosby, Kate. 2013. Traditional Theravāda Meditation and Its Modern-Era Suppression. Hong Kong: Buddha 
Dharma Centre of Hong Kong.
Dhammajoti, Kuala Lumpur. 2007. Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma (3rd ed.). Hong Kong: Centre for Buddhist 
Studies, University of Hong Kong.
Frauwallner, E. 1995. Studies in Abhidharma Literature and the Origins of Buddhist Philosophical Systems. (Sophie 
Francis Kidd, Trans.) (original work published 1964–1973). Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Press.
Gethin, Rupert. 1994. “Bhavaṅga and Rebirth According to the Abhidhamma.” In The Buddhist Forum, 
Vol. III, eds. Tadeusz Skorupski, Ulrich Pagel, 11–35. London: School of Oriental and African Studies.
Gethin, Rupert. 1998. The Foundations of Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gethin, Rupert. 2004a. “Wrong View (Micchā-Diṭṭhi) and Right View (Sammā-Diṭṭhi) in the Theravāda 
Abhidhamma.” Contemporary Buddhism: An Interdisciplinary Journal 5: 15–28.
Gethin, Rupert. 2004b. “Can Killing a Living Being Ever Be an Act of Compassion? The Analysis of the 
Act of Killing in the Abhidhamma and Pali Commentaries.” Journal of Buddhist Ethics 11: 167–202.
Gethin, Rupert. 2005. “On the Nature of Dhammas: A Review Article.” Buddhist Studies Review 22: 
175–194.
Gethin, Rupert. 2008. Sayings of the Buddha: A Selection of Suttas From the Pali Nikāyas. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Gethin, Rupert. 2017. “Body, Mind and Sleepiness: On the Abhidharma Understanding of Styāna and 
Middha.” Journal of the International College for Postgraduate Buddhist Studies 21: 254–216.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 1996. A Handbook of Pāli Literature. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Hinüber, Oskar von 2000. “Lān2 Nā as a Centre of Pāli Literature During the Late 15th Century.” Journal 
of the Pali Text Society 26: 119-137.
Jaini, Padmanabh S. 2002. Collected Papers on Buddhist Studies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Karunadasa, Y. 1967. The Buddhist Analysis of Matter. Colombo: Department of Cultural Affairs.
Karunadasa, Y. 2010. The Theravāda Abhidhamma: Its Inquiry into the Nature of Conditioned Reality. Hong 
Kong: Centre of Buddhist Studies, University of Hong Kong.
Kyaw, Pyi Phyo. 2014. “Paṭṭhāna (Conditional Relations) in Burmese Buddhism.” (PhD, King’s College, 
London)   https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/en/theses/pahna-conditional-relations-in-burmese-
buddhism(978ff34f-788d-468c-8292-d28b6cac0952).html.>
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de. 1988–1990. Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam (Leo M. Pruden, Trans.). (original work 
published 1923–1931). 4 vols. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Lamotte, Étienne. 1988. History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Śaka Era. (Sara Webb-Boin Trans.). 
(original work published 1956). Louvain: Institut Orientaliste.
Langer, Rita. 2012. “Chanting as ‘Bricolage Technique”: A Comparison of South and Southeast Asian 
Funeral Recitation.’ In Buddhist Funeral Cultures of Southeast Asia and China, eds. P. Williams, P. Ladwig, 
21–58. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ñāṇamoli. 1964. The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga) by Bhadantācariya Buddhaghosa. Colombo: Semage.
Ñāṇamoli. 1987–1990. The Dispeller of Delusion (Sammohavinodanı̄). 2 vols. London: Pali Text Society.

--- PAGE 263 ---
Rupert Gethin
242
Ronkin, Noa. 2005. Early Buddhist Metaphysics: The Making of a Philosophical Tradition (1st ed.). London; New 
York: RoutledgeCurzon.
Rospatt, Alexander von. 1995. The Buddhist Doctrine of Momentariness: A Survey of the Origins and the Early 
Phase of This Doctrine up to Vasubandhu. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Schnake, Javier, ed. 2021. Ratanapaññā’s Vajirasāratthasaṅgaha and its Ṭīkā. Bristol: Pali Text Society.
Swearer, Donald. 1995. “A Summary of the Seven Books of the Abhidhamma.” In Buddhism in Practice, ed. 
Donald S. Lopez, 336–342. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tin, Pe Maung. 1920–1921. The Expositor (Atthasālinı̄). 2 vols. London: Pali Text Society.
Walser, Joseph. 2005. Nāgārjuna in Context: Mahāyāna Buddhism and Early Indian Culture. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Wijeratne, R.P., Gethin, Rupert. 2002. Summary of the Topics of Abhidhamma and Exposition of the Topics of 
Abhidhamma. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Willemen, Charles, Dessein, Bart, Cox, Collett. 1998. Sarvāstivāda Buddhist Scholasticism. Leiden; New York: 
Brill.

--- PAGE 264 ---
243
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-20
16
VAṂSA
History and lineage in the Theravāda
Stephen C. Berkwitz
Vaṃsa, frequently translated as “chronicle,” actually encompasses a broad range of historiographi­
cal texts found across Buddhist communities in southern Asia that identify with Theravāda 
monastic and literary traditions. The Pāli term vaṃsa carries the meanings of “bamboo” and 
“lineage,” with the implication that the narratives of vaṃsa texts center around genealogies that 
relate a succession of influential actors and powerful objects that “made history” in those lands. 
It is important, moreover, to indicate that these Buddhist histories are made instead of “found.” 
Historical narratives that forge connections between the Buddha and places in his native home 
of Jambudvı̄pa (or, roughly speaking, “India”) with peoples and places outside of that ancient 
land engage in the imaginative and ideological work of imposing a sequence of selected events 
(chosen from an impossibly longer list of events) within a narrative structure that imposes 
coherence and meaning to those events as a whole. The historian Hayden White alerted us to 
the literary features of historical writing, how the author imposes the structure of a given story 
type upon certain events from the past so as to endow those events with the kinds of mean­
ing that literary narratives render possible and understandable (White 1987: 44–45). Phrased 
differently, Buddhist vaṃsas act to fashion narratives out of otherwise isolated historical events 
and, in doing so, lend broader and deeper significance to the past in relation to contemporary 
communities of Buddhists. Furthermore, it should be noted that some of these events are the 
fictive products of authors, crafted to serve the narrative work of historical storytelling and 
sometimes far removed from any putatively true or actual occurrence.
As a technical term that signifies Theravāda Buddhist narratives about the past, vaṃsa can be 
seen as a textual genre for Buddhist historiography distinctive to communities where Theravāda 
traditions predominate. Steven Collins has noted how vaṃsa was part of the literary genre of 
the purāṇa in India, texts fashioned out of genealogical lists and subsequently rendered by 
Buddhists to outline the genealogy and deeds of the lineage of the Buddha and his heritage 
(Collins 1998: 254–255). He argues further that vaṃsas were texts that worked to interweave 
the timeless condition of Buddhahood with the chronological texture of the past, present, and 
future (Collins 1998: 256). Whereas Collins’s interests were in the philosophizing about time 
contained in the canonical Buddhavaṃsa (Chronicle of the Buddhas) and the early sixth-century 
Mahāvaṃsa (Great Chronicle), the vaṃsa genre represents an even broader collection of interests 
and iterations.1 It is necessary to recognize a diversity of forms and contents in Theravāda

--- PAGE 265 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz
244
Buddhist historiography, including the various languages utilized and the titles given to these 
types of works (Berkwitz 2004: 7). Many of the works with vaṃsa in their titles were composed 
in the Pāli language, but these were sometimes translated and adapted into vernacular language 
versions, while other works with or without the term vaṃsa in their titles were wholly original 
compositions in Sinhala, Burmese, Thai, and other languages.
Texts that can be included under the category of vaṃsa comprise historiographical works 
that emphasize the roles of the Buddha and his sāsana (“dispensation”) in the development 
of culture and civilization in lands where the Theravāda monastic lineage and textual tra­
ditions held sway. Pāli and vernacular language histories were composed and located the 
Buddha’s career, relics, and institutions throughout an expansive territory that coincides with 
the modern nation-states of Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia. Some of 
the Pāli vaṃsas, such as the fifth-century Dı̄pavaṃsa (History of the Island), the tenth-century 
Mahābodhivaṃsa (History of the Bodhi Tree), and the thirteenth-century Thūpavaṃsa (History 
of the Relic Shrine) appear to have been based on ancient commentarial works (aṭṭhakathā) 
that are no longer extant (Berkwitz 2007: 5). In this view, early oral and written traditions 
about the establishment of the sāsana—especially relics—were incorporated into early com­
mentarial texts, which, in turn, formed the basis for composing detailed narratives about the 
introduction of Buddhism into Sri Lanka. Other works from Sri Lanka include the twelfth-
century Dāṭhāvaṃsa (History of the Tooth Relic), and a large number of Sinhala works composed 
between the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, including the Sinhala Thūpavaṃsa, Sinhala 
Bōdhivaṃsa, Daḷadā Sirita (Account of the Tooth Relic), and Sinhala Dhātuvaṃsa (History of the 
[Forehead-bone] Relic).
Importantly, several of the Pāli works, including the Mahāvaṃsa, Thūpavaṃsa, and Dhātuvaṃsa 
are shown to have been transmitted to Southeast Asian lands, causing the Sri Lankan narra­
tives to be modeled and adopted and remodeled by some local Buddhist histories. These lat­
ter Southeast Asian vaṃsa texts include the fifteenth-century Cāmadevı̄vaṃsa (History of Queen 
Cāmadevı̄), the sixteenth-century Jinakālamālı̄ (Sheafs of the Garlands of the Epochs of the Conqueror), 
and the nineteenth-century Saṅgı̄tiyavaṃsa (History of the Recitals [of Pāli Scriptures]) from pre­
modern and modern Thailand, as well as the eighteenth-century Vaṃsadı̄panı̄ (Explanatory 
Work of the Lineage) and the nineteenth-century Sāsanavaṃsa (History of the Dispensation) from 
Myanmar. Despite the commonality of the term vaṃsa in many titles, the singularity of this 
textual genre can be overstated, and it has been more important rhetorically speaking to Sri 
Lankan authors than those in Southeast Asia. Other vernacular histories that can be formally 
included in the vaṃsa genre, although lacking the term, include works with the labels of āvaliya 
in Sinhala, tamnan in Thai, and thathanawin in Burmese.
Generally speaking, the vaṃsas and related historiographical texts comprise narratives 
that describe how the Buddha used his psychic powers (iddhis) to visit other lands and 
to resolve that his relics would one day be established in those places for local people to 
venerate and obtain blessings. Importantly, the spread of vaṃsa texts coincides more or less 
with the spread of Theravāda traditions. It may thus be argued that vaṃsas were among 
the instruments used to define and propagate the Theravāda across southern Asia. Their 
historical narratives tell the story of how textual and ritual traditions associated with the 
Buddha’s original disciples were transmitted and established outside of Jambudvı̄pa. They 
narrate the careers of Buddhist kings and Buddha relics, showing how they contributed 
to the founding of religious sites and the practice of religious worship in their respective 
lands. In other words, vaṃsas deal with space as well as time, charting out when and where 
the Buddha’s dispensation was preserved and transmitted by monastics in the Theravāda 
lineage with the assistance of royal supporters.

--- PAGE 266 ---
Vaṁsa
245
Expanding the Theravāda
The vaṃsa and related texts from southern Asia convey what could be called “Buddhist his­
tory,” since they present narratives about past events that revolve around the transmission of 
the Buddha’s sāsana in the form of teachings, monastic lineages, and sacred relics and images 
into new lands. The implied coherence and uniformity of this sāsana in literature belies what 
was surely a more heterogeneous network of loosely related monastic and lay communities 
(see Bretfeld, this volume). Over time, the dominant forms of Buddhism in Sri Lanka and 
peninsular Southeast Asia came to be known as “Theravāda” (Decrees of the Elder-Monks), 
although this designation came from the imagined associations of later monastic communi­
ties that made use of Pāli language texts and liturgies associated with the 500 arahant-monks 
who allegedly assembled and codified the Buddha’s Word into the Pāli Canon shortly after the 
Buddha’s demise (Skilling 2009: 64–65). As such, this notion of the Theravāda as a particular 
and privileged monastic lineage was originally fairly circumscribed in designation, only becom­
ing expanded to characterize a broad-based Buddhist identity that includes laypersons around 
the twentieth century. Despite this fact, the idea of a Buddhist tradition linked to senior monks 
(theras) like Ven. Moggaliputta-tissa, the monk who led the formal purification of the Saṅgha 
under King Aśoka, and Ven. Mahinda, the monk who mastered and brought the Buddha’s 
teachings to Sri Lanka, and that was traced down to the monks of the Mahāvihāra sect in Sri 
Lanka does seem to have been in operation since the early centuries of the Common Era 
(Gethin 2012: 55). Whatever the ways in which premodern Buddhists who affiliated with this 
tradition described and labeled it, it seems reasonable to conclude that one or more notions 
of a Buddhist tradition rooted in the teachings and lineage of renowned theras were fashioned 
and made available for people to identify with. Over the centuries, the vaṃsa literature played 
key roles in offering ways of conceptualizing monastic collectivities and the sense of belonging 
to a distinctive Theravāda lineage (Blackburn 2012: 276–277).
This idea of a singular monastic lineage and textual transmission that derives from the 
Buddha’s original disciples was developed and disseminated by way of some Pāli commentar­
ies and vaṃsa texts—literature that Peter Skilling (2009: 63) rightly notes was concerned with 
school formation and legitimation. The “origin story” of the Samantapāsādikā (All Pleasing), the 
Pāli commentary on the Vinaya books of monastic discipline and attributed to the fifth-century 
scholar-monk Buddhaghosa, contains a lengthy narrative that recounts how the Buddha’s teach­
ings were standardized by theras in three convocations or “councils,” before being transmitted 
by an authoritative lineage of monks to Sri Lanka. The aim of this text is to demonstrate the 
continuity of the traditions of these monks and, in doing so, validate the Mahāvihāra monastic 
lineage that was currently in Sri Lanka (Jayawickrama 1986: xvi–xvii). This effort was expanded 
upon by the author of the Mahāvaṃsa, and both of these texts helped to guide a corpus of 
historical narratives that established these traditions of the theras as authentic and orthodox for 
later Buddhists in southern Asia. The Sri Lankan vaṃsa texts in particular assumed the role of 
developing and spreading this notion of a “proto-Theravāda” form of Buddhism encompassing 
the teachings and traditions passed down from the Buddha to his disciples and subsequently 
transmitted to other lands via the island.2
Accounts of the expansion of the Theravāda Saṅgha comprise important elements of 
Buddhist historiographical traditions. Sri Lankan vaṃsas often give attention to the journey of 
the arahant Mahinda to Sri Lanka, whereby he is credited with preaching the Dharma, convert­
ing the king, and establishing the proper sites for relics to be enshrined. The ordination of Sri 
Lankan monks and nuns by Mahinda and his sister Ven. Saṅghamittā is depicted by these texts as 
having extended an authoritative monastic lineage into Sri Lanka. These events are recounted,

--- PAGE 267 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz
246
for example, in the Sinhala Thūpavaṃsaya, in which hundreds of members of the court and 
the royal harem are said to have been ordained and attained the state of arahants (those who 
have attained nirvāṇa) after only a few days (Berkwitz 2007: 157). In later centuries, texts in 
Southeast Asia sought to accomplish a similar goal and validate their own ordination traditions 
of monks and nuns within a lineage that derives from the Buddha’s own disciples. For example, 
in northern Thailand, the fifteenth-century Tamnān Mūlasāsanā Wat Pā Daeng (Chronicle of the 
Founding of Buddhism of the Pā Daeng Temple) describes in detail how a Thai monk who went 
to study in Sri Lanka returned to Thailand and traveled around reordaining local monks in 
the linguistic and ritual traditions associated with the island. Not only did Ven. Ñāṇagambhı̄ra 
bring back Buddha images, a Bodhi Tree branch, and Pāli texts to Thailand, he also reordained 
numerous local monks into what became known as the Sinhala order of monks (Premchit and 
Swearer 1977: 93–94). Despite the widespread influence of such narratives, other vaṃsa works 
composed in Southeast Asia disputed the claims of Sri Lankan traditions and asserted that an 
“unbroken” Theravāda lineage was introduced directly into their lands by journeys undertaken 
by the Buddha and his immediate disciples long ago (Pranke 2004: 138).
Whether the lineage was traced through Sri Lanka or not, the vaṃsas as a genre of Buddhist 
writing became key instruments in defining and expanding what would later be called 
“Theravāda Buddhism.” Their narratives often include accounts of how the Buddha, his relics, 
and his teachings spread across southern Asia. In speaking of Buddha relics, John Strong (2004: 
7) has described them as “extensions of the Buddha’s biography,” bringing his life story forward 
after his parinirvāṇa to include the travels and miraculous events of his sacred bodily remains. 
Likewise, vaṃsa texts can be said to be a means for extending the sphere of the Buddha’s influ­
ence further in time and space. The spread of relics and images associated with the Buddha 
was facilitated by historiographical narratives that served to establish the affinities between those 
special objects and the Buddha himself (Berkwitz 2019: 7). These objects acquired significance 
by the narratives that ascribed them with the status of a “relic,” often noting how they appeared 
in the world and their journeys before being established at a contemporary site of worship. 
The texts supplied accounts of how particular relics and images are related to the Buddha, 
providing testimony to their pedigrees as authentic and authoritative objects worthy of venera­
tion (Trainor 1997: 78). When, for example, the Mahābodhivaṃsa describes how a branch from 
the Bodhi Tree Relic detached itself by the resolution of King Aśoka, was brought with great 
ceremony over the sea to Sri Lanka, conveyed by chariot to the capital city of Anurādhapura, 
and finally established in a shrine on the grounds of the Mahāvihāra monastery, the narrative 
serves to fix the relic in both time and space (Strong 1891: 158–161).
These relic journeys as conveyed by vaṃsa texts mirror in many ways the legendary accounts 
of how the Buddha traveled by air to certain locations in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia. 
Theravāda textual traditions attribute extraordinary psychic powers (iddhis) to Fully Awakened 
Buddhas and arahants, including an ability to fly, and this enabled authors of vaṃsas to describe 
miraculous visits made by the Buddha to Sri Lanka and various kingdoms in Southeast Asia. 
The first chapter in the Mahāvaṃsa relates how the Buddha made three visits to the island 
of Sri Lanka, each time marking out places which would later become sites for relic shrines 
after his passing from the world (Geiger 2001: 3–9). Buddhist histories from Southeast Asia 
repeated the trope of the Buddha visit to describe how his sāsana was first introduced by him 
to local kingdoms. Many Northern Thai tamnan texts narrate visits that the Buddha paid to 
particular sites around the Lanna region to lay or deposit his own relics or footprints in places 
where previous Buddhas visited long ago (Lagirarde 2013: 85–86). Likewise, Burmese thamaing 
works describe how the Buddha visited various places in Myanmar, specifically in Arakan and 
the Mon country, to leave relics such as his hair for local devotees and to establish the roots

--- PAGE 268 ---
Vaṁsa
247
of Buddhism in these lands (Leider 2009: 341). These Buddhist histories share an interest in 
showing how their local traditions and communities were connected with the Buddha and his 
sāsana. By depicting the Buddha as having traveled to distant lands to spread the Dharma and 
his relics, many vaṃsa texts worked to give the impression of a trans-local Theravāda tradition 
that was portrayed and authenticated by historical narratives. Even when the distinctiveness and 
singularity of such a Theravāda tradition could be questioned by competing orders (nikāyas) 
and regional variations in narrative accounts, the desire to acknowledge an unbroken lineage 
from the Buddha to contemporary monastic communities remained constant.
Another important feature of efforts by history writers to expand the boundaries of the 
Theravāda through time and space was to portray the spread of relics, images, and teachings 
of the Buddha in terms of predictions made by the Buddha or other awakened humans. A 
defining feature of Theravāda Buddhist histories is their tendency to assert that the establish­
ment of sacred relics and images, as well as the sāsana more generally, in certain lands had been 
preordained. The Buddha and arahants are ascribed with the superhuman ability to see into the 
past and future, and thus they can predict which relics and images will be established where 
(Berkwitz 2019: 8). These predictions make it seem as if the vaṃsa accounts of how traces of 
the Buddha became established in distant lands were simply fulfilling what was destined to 
occur. Oftentimes, these predictions are attributed to the Buddha himself, and they reflect either 
his will or his intention to follow what previous Buddhas had done. At other times, awakened 
arahants like Ven. Mahinda are portrayed as guiding history by indicating what present and 
future kings should or should not do with relics and images.
Efforts to expand the Buddha’s sāsana, and, by extension, the Theravāda that is charged with 
preserving and promoting it, are portrayed in many vaṃsas as the result of the Buddha’s will as 
expressed in earlier eras. Works like the Sinhala Thūpavaṃsaya ascribe the spread of relics to a 
resolution of the Buddha to make his remains available for later generations to venerate and, as 
a result, attain the fruits of greater comforts in the present life and better rebirths in the future.
Because our Buddha did not remain [in the world] for much time, desiring the wel­
fare of the world and thinking, “My Dispensation has not been spread everywhere. 
Taking the relics that measure even a mustard seed from me when I have passed away 
in parinirvāṇa, making relic shrines in the places where people dwell, and enshrining 
the relics in caskets, the many beings who make offerings will enjoy the happiness of 
the divine world, the brahmā world, and the human world,” he thus made a resolution 
for the dispersal of the relics.
(Berkwitz 2007: 119)
Such narratives reinforce the idea that it was ultimately the Buddha who by the force of his 
will determined that his relics would be spread and established in the same lands where the 
Theravāda would be established—and also where, the vaṃsas claim, the Buddha himself may 
have visited in the past. Predictions in this way are said to guide human history according to 
the intentions of the Buddha (along with those of previous Buddhas held to exist in eras long 
ago), contributing to a sense that the Buddha had been compassionately concerned with the 
welfare of all beings and thus arranged the means through which later devotees could flourish 
and attain felicities after he was gone. An important effect of this historiographical stance is to 
make the readers and listeners of Buddhist histories feel grateful for being the beneficiaries of 
deeds done previously by those who penetrated the Dharma and spread the dispensation for 
their sake (Berkwitz 2004: 252). Some vaṃsas then display clear interests in fostering devotion 
and greater ethical awareness in their audiences.

--- PAGE 269 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz
248
Predictions made by Buddhas and arahants in vaṃsa texts make the course of historical 
events seem more intentional and coherent. These works fashion stories of the past in such a 
way as to make Buddhas appear to be directly responsible for the establishment of the Dharma, 
relics, images, and the Theravāda monastic lineage in kingdoms and countries across southern 
Asia. Examples abound of how earlier predictions set in motion a chain of events that brought 
people in premodern (and modern) Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia within 
the sphere of the Buddha’s sāsana. The fourteenth-century Sinhala Bōdhivaṃsaya, for instance, 
relates at length how Ven. Mahinda tells a king how the four previous Buddhas—Kakusandha, 
Konagamana, Kassapa, and Gotama—all visited the island called “Laṅkādvı̄pa” and predicted 
that the great southern branch of the Bodhi Tree under which they attained their Awakening 
would in the future be established in the same place (albeit during different eons) in the future 
(Senadhira 1965: 189–197). Thus, not only has the most recent Buddha preordained that the 
Bodhi Tree Relic would be established on the grounds of the Mahāvihāra monastery for people 
to venerate, but the three preceding Buddhas made similar predictions, which indicates that 
a Bodhi Tree has been brought and established in the island of Sri Lanka numerous times. 
The allegedly predestined establishment of relics like the Bodhi Tree in places and by persons 
associated with the Mahāvihāra lineage would have reinforced the notion that the Mahāvihāra 
ethos and ideology were consistent with the Buddha’s sāsana.
Southeast Asian vaṃsa texts contain similar predictions that describe how the establish­
ment of relics and images in various kingdoms were frequently the results of the Buddha’s 
will. The sixteenth-century Tamnan Phra Chao Ton Luang (Chronicle of the Grand Lord) 
relates how while the Buddha Gotama and an entourage of arahants were traveling around 
the Lanna kingdom in northern Thailand, he came across a spot where previous Buddhas had 
drunk some water, and he then predicted that in the future a large image of himself would be 
constructed and enshrined at that spot (Chiu 2017: 75–76). This particular tamnan thus con­
nects the renowned Phra Chao Ton Luang image in Phayao with a prediction made by the 
Buddha much earlier, effectively consecrating the area as a future site for venerating a large 
Buddha image. Likewise, in the Vaṃsadı̄panı̄, the arahant Gavaṃpati is said to have been given 
a prediction by the Buddha whereby after his own cremation, the monk will carry his thirty-
three teeth as relics to Suvaṇṇabhūmi in lower Myanmar and reside there to help establish the 
sāsana (Pranke 2004: 131–132). This Burmese text reiterates the tropes of previous Theravāda 
vaṃsas by connecting the expansion of the sāsana in the forms of relics and monastic lineages 
to predictions the Buddha made previously.
Materiality and Theravāda
The descriptions of vaṃsa texts about how the Buddha and his sāsana were spread far beyond 
the land of his birth also gave material form to the traditions associated with the Theravāda. 
The expansion of the Theravāda relied on textual accounts of localized material expressions 
of the Buddha’s sphere of influence in various parts of southern Asia. In other words, Gotama 
Buddha’s dispensation was given tangible form in relics, images, shrines, and monasteries, all of 
which were often identified and located by vaṃsa narratives. Descriptions of these objects and 
the accounts of how they were found or built made it possible to encounter and recognize the 
sāsana in different lands. As material signs of an allegedly coherent Theravāda tradition that is 
fashioned by historical narratives in vaṃsa texts, the various relics, images, shrines, and monas­
teries mentioned therein collectively work to represent tangible expressions of an authoritative 
Buddhist tradition. These local and translocal histories used these sacred objects to constitute 
cultural landscapes oriented around Buddhist sites and to promote cultural hegemonies that set

--- PAGE 270 ---
Vaṁsa
249
up hierarchies for ranking relics, images, monasteries, and their affiliated devotees (Schober 2003: 
19). Buddhist vaṃsas are thus frequently concerned with highlighting the special and extraor­
dinary features of powerful objects that locate the Buddha’s sāsana in particular places, places 
where devotees may venerate the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha with the sense of encountering 
and inhabiting a present that is connected to a revered past (Abeysekara 2019: 2–4).
Buddha relics and images are among the most important objects discussed by the authors of 
vaṃsa texts. The Theravāda tradition had established a threefold classification of relics by around 
the fifth century ce, consisting of corporeal relics, relics of use (such as the Bodhi Tree), and 
commemorative relics (such as Buddha images) that are supposed to receive devotion and that 
have their own kinds of shrines (Trainor 1997: 89). The vaṃsa narratives not only identify these 
special objects and relate their distinctive pedigrees, but they often also describe their beautiful 
appearances and miraculous natures. These historical texts in this way reinforce the perceived 
authenticity of these objects, supplying the narratives that make them seem more genuine and 
powerful. The power of these objects is derived from the accounts of how they can display 
the power of locomotion to travel on their own, the power to generate miraculous visions to 
devotees, and the power to confer great benefits on the devotees that worship them (Berkwitz 
2019: 2). The relics’ ability to move independently is confirmed by accounts that describe how 
they ascended into the sky and began to radiate six-colored rays of light in imitation of the 
living Buddha. This type of mobility and miraculous display is associated with the Bodhi Tree 
in the Sinhala Bōdhivaṃśaya, the Tooth Relic in the twelfth-century Dāṭhāvaṃsa, the Buddha’s 
collarbone relic in the Thūpavaṃsa, and the frontal bone relic in the fourteenth-century Sinhala 
Dhātuvaṃsa, among other works (Berkwitz 2019: 12). By attributing relics with the ability to 
move and exhibit miraculous visions, the vaṃsas suggest that these material objects can resemble 
and even substitute for a living Buddha.
Southeast Asian histories often feature sacred Buddha images that are empowered to control 
its movements and dazzle onlookers. These narrative descriptions of “image relics” include 
accounts of how images were carried to various locations by agents of kings for the sake of 
enhancing the reigns of the latter. Yet their mobility is also ascribed to their own intention, 
or as a factor of the resolutions of the Buddha or other awakened individuals at an earlier 
point in time. A fifteenth-century Thai work relates how the Sı̄haḷa Buddha image “possesses 
supreme powers” and at one instance “got out of His seat and placed Himself in the air, and 
from Him sixfold rays were emanating in all directions” (Notton 1933: 27, 38). Meanwhile, in 
a sixteenth-century Pāli text, the renowned Emerald Buddha image in Thailand is also credited 
with miraculous power, having been enlivened as it were by the insertion of seven corporeal 
relics into the image, and subsequently making itself extremely heavy so as not to be carried 
away from a large city but instead allowing itself to be brought to a different city (Jayawickrama 
1968: 142, 145). These narratives, although dealing with different relics, share an emphasis on 
relating their travels and miraculous powers. The Southeast Asian vaṃsa texts often focus more 
on Buddha images, although they can also reference bodily relics. In contrast, the Sri Lanka 
vaṃsas concentrate on corporeal relics and bodhi trees, while giving relatively scant attention 
to image relics. In both cases, however, these Buddhist histories reveal the interests to glorify 
powerful relics that reinforce the coherence of a Theravāda tradition that connects peoples and 
lands with the Buddha and his sāsana.
The vaṃsa texts employ other strategies to circumscribe the Theravāda tradition with a mate­
rial basis. These include narrating accounts in which relics, images, and texts become duplicated 
or multiplied, effectively working to spread their presence and influence to more places. The 
multiplication of sacred objects, either by miraculous or human means, represents a different 
model of relic distribution than that of division, whereby a collection of relics is apportioned

--- PAGE 271 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz
250
into smaller amounts to be taken away and enshrined in different locations (Strong 2004: 156). 
Sri Lankan vaṃsas relate how a branch of the Bodhi Tree established in Anurādhapura suddenly 
generates five fruits, each of which then produces eight saplings that result in the quick appear­
ance of forty bodhi trees that become planted at important sites around the island (Geiger 2001: 
132–133). These ones are said to have been planted at monasteries at a distance of a league 
(yojana) apart throughout the island—an assertion that the Mahābodhivaṃsa suggests was “for 
the welfare and the happiness of the island’s inhabitants everywhere” (Strong 1891: 162). The 
Sinhala Bodhivaṁśaya elaborates on this episode even further by specifying the places where 
the thirty-two additional saplings were planted on the island (Senadhira 1965: 235–236). By 
identifying the specific locations where Bodhi saplings were planted, the text depicts an island­
wide sacred geography, where people may venerate the Bodhi Tree Relic in multiple locations.
Buddhist histories from Southeast Asia employ the trope of the multiplication of sacred 
objects by narrating how copies of revered Buddha images were made and then distributed 
to different locations to spread the good fortune and authority that they are held to bring to 
their surroundings. Stories of Budha images were very popular in Thailand from the fifteenth 
century to the late eighteenth century, whether translated from a Pāli original or composed 
in a vernacular language (Lagirarde 2015: 797). The account of the Sihiṅga Buddha image in 
the Jinakālamālı̄pakaraṇaṁ relates how multiple copies of the revered image were made during 
King Mahābrahma’s reign, each one apparently just as worthy of veneration as the original 
image (Jayawickrama 1968: 125–126). The multiplication of this image allowed multiple kings 
and cities to possess it, lessening the perceived need to seize it in conquest like kings did with 
the Emerald Buddha. Analogous to the duplication and spread of Buddha images in certain 
vaṃsas, one also finds narrative references to the production of texts as a practice for defining 
and expanding an authoritative Theravāda tradition. While relating the history of the Emerald 
Buddha, the fifteenth-century Ratanabimbavaṇṇanā describes how the Pāli Tipiṭaka was brought 
to Southeast Asia with the jeweled image and then “spread out far and wide” across the conti­
nent (Notton 1932: 26). Furthermore, the Tamnān Mūlasāsanā Wat Pā Daeng concludes its nar­
rative by calling on virtuous and wise ones to write down and practice the “root dispensation” 
that was brought from Sri Lanka to Lanna, further asserting that this particular tamnan text 
should be placed in every temple so that everyone will know the Buddha’s teaching (Premchit 
and Swearer 1977: 110). The creation of duplicate copies of Buddha images and Dharma texts 
worked in similar ways to give rise to a more extensive geography of sacred objects.
In the process of describing the origins and journeys of the relics, images, and texts of the 
Buddha, vaṃsas also substantiate the Theravāda tradition by narrating the building of vari­
ous religious monuments to house sacred objects and the monks who were ordained in the 
monastic lineage that purportedly derives from the Buddha’s disciples. This duty to provide 
suitable homes for relics, images, and monastics often fell to kings. The accounts of kings who 
arranged for the building of such monuments became common features in the vaṃsas, and this 
type of royal deed became a key characteristic of a righteous king (dhammarāja) deserving of 
loyalty and support. The paradigmatic dhammarāja for the Theravāda was King Aśoka, whom 
the vaṃsas credit with having built eighty-four thousand relic shrines across his large empire. 
Subsequently, other Buddhist kings attempted to imitate this ideal, and the vaṃsas relate how 
their building projects gave a tangible presence to the Theravāda sāsana. The Pāli and Sinhala 
Thūpavaṃsas, for instance, include similar accounts that describe the building of the Great 
Copper-Roofed Mansion (lōvāmahāpāya) as a monastic residence and the construction of the 
Great Relic Shrine (mahāthūpa) in Anurādhapura (Jayawickrama 1971: 91–93, 136; Berkwitz 
2007: 194–197, 245–246). These sites are treated as Buddhist landmarks in the vaṃsas, and 
they feature in these narratives as material instantiations of the sāsana in Sri Lanka. Likewise,

--- PAGE 272 ---
Vaṁsa
251
the construction of relic shrines, image houses, and monastic residences by Buddhist kings in 
Thailand feature in the Jinakālamālı̄pakaraṇaṁ (Jayawickrama 1968: 147–149). When vaṃsa texts 
identify and locate shrines and monasteries within their historical narratives, their accounts 
of the establishment of the Theravāda across southern Asia become grounded in the physical 
landscapes of local Buddhist cultures.
Authority and Theravāda
The popularity of the vaṃsa genre in many Theravāda cultures may be deduced from the vari­
ous purposes that such texts have served. The vaṃsas worked to establish affinities between the 
Buddha and later generations of monastics and devotees, expanding the theoretical sāsana and 
its physical embodiments across southern Asian kingdoms outside of India. In this way, Buddhist 
historical narratives formed the basis for imagining oneself and one’s community as being the 
beneficiaries of meritorious deeds done by the Buddha and other virtuous persons long ago. 
Vaṃsas thus served to establish relationships with past actors that were held to generate favorable 
futures. At the same time, Buddhist vaṃsas could also work to authorize royal and monastic lin­
eages, making it seem as though the patrons and representatives of the Theravāda were directly 
affiliated with the Buddha and his early disciples. Some scholars have likened this function of 
the vaṃsas with efforts to legitimate certain monastic orders and polities within hierarchies of 
their own making (Walters 2000: 152). While there is some merit to this argument, interpre­
tations of vaṃsas that reduce these texts to political tools are liable to overlook other uses of 
Buddhist histories in fashioning ethical relationships with past actors and devotional attitudes 
in the present. In other words, vaṃsas should not be seen merely as instruments to legitimate 
various kings and monastic lineages as if they needed to secure the assent of their subjects and 
supporters by writing histories to bolster their power (cf. Pollock 2006: 522–523). One may 
instead choose to see these texts as involved with efforts to reaffirm an existing authority and 
to make the power and influence of the Theravāda and its royal patrons more widely known.
As noted earlier, a prominent theme in the vaṃsa genre is the alleged continuity between the 
Buddha’s first disciples and the monks who preserve and disseminate the Dharma in southern 
Asian lands. These works posit the existence of authentic monastic lineages of elder monks 
(theras) in Sri Lanka and in Southeast Asian kingdoms deriving ultimately from the arahants at 
the First Council through Ven. Moggaliputta Tissa, the famed Elder-Monk who guided Aśoka 
in purging the Saṅgha of illegitimate monks (Gethin 2012: 30–31). This authoritative lineage 
becomes primarily associated with the Mahāvihāra order in the extant Sri Lankan vaṃsas and 
many (but not all) Southeast Asian ones. By tracing this monastic lineage in an exclusive, coher­
ent fashion down to Ven. Mahinda, the monk credited with introducing Buddhism into Sri 
Lanka in the third century bce, vaṃsa texts confidently assert that the authentic Dharma and 
sāsana of the Buddha have been established correctly in the island.3 To be sure, such a claim is 
better seen as a rhetorical rather than historical one, but it undergirds much of the self-image of 
Theravāda Buddhists as the proponents and preservers of the the Buddha’s Dhamma. This asser­
tion further enabled Southeast Asian Buddhists to link their own traditions to the Theravāda 
of Sri Lanka by receiving ordination lineages, Dharma manuscripts, relics, and images from the 
island. For instance, the Sihiṅga Buddha image that has served as one of the most important 
images in northern Thailand is said to have been crafted and worshipped in Sri Lanka before 
later being sent to Lanna at the request of a local king (Chiu 2017: 26–27). Similarly, Ven. 
Ñāṇagambhı̄ra is credited in the Tamnān Mūlasāsanā Wat Pā Daeng with having gone to study 
the language and texts in Sri Lanka before returning to Thailand to establish the correct form 
of the religion there (Premchit and Swearer 1977: 91–92). Even among those Southeast Asian

--- PAGE 273 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz
252
vaṃsa texts that claimed a direct transmission of the sāsana from Jambudı̄pa (i.e., India), the 
construction of a lineage of monks and pedigrees of relics that testify to an authentic Theravāda 
tradition was modeled after the historiographical conventions of Sri Lankan vaṃsas.
There are similar moves to establish the authority of local traditions in certain vaṃsas 
from Myanmar. The nineteenth-century Sāsanavaṃsa (History of the Dispensation), for instance, 
describes how a king in the Rāmañña country of lower Myanmar resolved to bring the “stain­
less” sāsana over from Sri Lanka by sending monks to the island for training in order to establish 
an authoritative lineage of monks (Law 1952: 50). The Burmese Vaṃsadı̄panı̄ describes how 
both monks and relics were received from Sri Lanka, and its author connects the flourishing of 
the sāsana in premodern Myanmar with its establishment in Sri Lanka. Significantly, the text also 
constructs its own independent lineage through the Elder-Monks Soṇa and Uttara, who were 
said to have traveled to Suvaṇṇabhūmi (identified by the Burmese with Myanmar) and estab­
lished a unified lineage of Vinaya masters and teachers of the Dharma who never broke from 
the Theravāda (Pranke 2004: 133). And although this lineage is equated with the Mahāvihāra 
in Sri Lanka, the author of the text claims that it was actually established in Myanmar first. 
Whereas the sāsana became established in Sri Lanka after the Buddha passed away in parinirvāṇa, 
the Vaṃsadı̄panı̄ asserts that it was during the lifetime of the Buddha and his travels to Myanmar 
that the sāsana was established there (Pranke 2004: 138). Even though this narrative attempts to 
supplant the one that holds that Sri Lanka had become the center of Buddhism in the centuries 
after the Buddha passed away, it still accepts the premise that an authentic Theravāda tradition 
was established by monks, texts, and relics brought to other lands. In this way, this and many 
other historical texts accept the account of the Mahāvaṃsa that narrates how the Dharma was 
laid down at the First Council, heretical monks were removed from the Saṅgha at the Second 
and Third Councils, and the authentic texts and traditions of the Theravāda became transmitted 
during the time of Aśoka to Sri Lanka and other lands (Geiger 2001: 18, 26, 82).
In addition to authorizing a particular lineage of monks, the vaṃsas work to enhance the 
authority of certain kings by associating them with ancient royal genealogies and models of 
virtuous Buddhist kings (dhammarāja). Again, the Mahāvaṃsa outlines a list of kings in the 
genealogy of the legendary Mahāsaṃmata, the first king who established human civilization 
according to Indian Buddhist texts. The fourth-century Dı̄pavaṃsa (Chronicle of the Island) 
includes a lengthy list of kings, which includes that of Suddhodana, the father of Gotama 
Buddha, implying that the Buddha came from royal stock (Oldenberg 1992: 132). This vaṃsa 
goes further by portraying Sri Lankan kings as the descendants of the royal Okkāka genealogy 
that links them to the Śākya clan and makes them appear to be the kinsmen of the Buddha 
(Walters 2000: 117–118). When recent and contemporary kings who reign outside of India 
become linked to the Buddha and an authoritative royal lineage, Buddhist vaṃsas work to 
promote the authority of those monarchs by virtue of their direct and indirect associations 
with leading ancient kings.
While royal genealogies represented one way to enhance the authority of kings, the allu­
sions made to righteous dhammarājas was another way to celebrate more local and sometimes 
recent kings mentioned in vaṃsa texts. Using the paradigmatic model of King Aśoka, who is 
depicted in Buddhist texts as a powerful and pious supporter of the Buddha’s religion, the 
vaṃsas likewise celebrate certain kings in southern Asian lands for building relic shrines, image 
houses, and monasteries, as well as for embodying Buddhist virtues of generosity and morality 
by making generous donations to the Saṅgha and the poor. Sri Lankan vaṃsas often glorify 
kings such as Devānampiya-tissa (third century bce) for welcoming Buddhist monks to the 
island and building monastic dwellings and shrines for the Bodhi Tree and other relics. King

--- PAGE 274 ---
Vaṁsa
253
Duṭṭhagāmaṇı̄ (second century bce) is another popular figure who is credited not only with 
dispelling foreign invaders but also with building more sites to promote the sāsana, including 
the Great Relic Shrine (Mahāthūpa). Works such as the Thūpavaṃsa praise the acts of merit 
performed by these kings, and in doing so promote a notion of kingship that later kings could 
imitate to enhance their own authority. Far from only serving to legitimate reigns, these nar­
ratives can also portray kings as ideal lay devotees who seek to venerate the Buddha by found­
ing sites of worship, making extraordinary offerings to relics, and arousing morally productive 
emotions that give rise to meritorious deeds (Berkwitz 2004: 264–267).
The narratives about Southeast Asian kings in vaṃsa texts similarly praise the deeds and char­
acters of Buddhist kings who are patterned after the dhammarāja ideal. The Jinakālamālı̄pakaraṇaṁ 
highlights the virtuous acts of King Tilaka in northern Thailand, who conducted ceremonies for 
dedicating the sı̄mā, or boundaries for monastic ordination, who listened to Dhamma sermons, 
who planted Bodhi Tree relics, who built monasteries, and who arranged for the establish­
ment of relics such as the Emerald Buddha in his realm (Jayawickrama 1968: 136–140). The 
Sāsanavaṃsa likewise celebrates a large number of Buddhist kings in Myanmar for actively 
promoting the sāsana by building monasteries and relic shrines, as well as faulting other kings 
who neglected or harmed Buddhist monks (Law 1952: 106–109). The Saṅgı̄tiyavaṃsa praises 
Thai kings who obtained the Pāli scriptures of the Buddha and who arranged for them to 
be edited, removing the corruptions that had accrued to these texts over time (Pakdeekham 
2020: xxx–xxxi). Those kings who display their devotion to the Buddha and his sāsana are 
generously acknowledged and praised in the vaṃsas. Texts that authorize the Theravāda also 
authorize the reigns of kings who promote this lineage of monks and the texts that are deemed 
to transmit what the Buddha himself founded. Such works thus provide models of action for 
current and future rulers, recording and augmenting a repertoire for the performance of king­
ship (Blackburn 2010: 320). By acting as sponsors of the Theravāda, Buddhist kings could earn 
recognition and esteem for their acts of merit that were held to strengthen the sāsana in their 
respective kingdoms.
Conclusion
The vaṃsa texts as composed in Pāli and literary vernaculars across southern Asia played a major 
role in constituting and spreading the idea of Theravāda Buddhism. This important genre of 
Buddhist literature supplied people with narrative accounts of how the teachings (dharma) and 
institutions (sāsana) founded by the Buddha came to be established in places far removed from 
the land of his birth. In the process of relating how the religion of the Buddha was introduced 
into Sri Lanka and peninsular Southeast Asia, the vaṃsas and related texts provided seemingly 
historical evidence for the expansion of the Saṅgha, the Tipiṭaka, Buddha relics, and Buddha 
images from sources that are authentic and authoritative. It is the vaṃsas, after all, that devel­
oped and codified the narratives from commentaries that trace the descent of monastic and 
textual traditions originating with the Buddha’s disciples at the legendary First Council, relate 
the acquisition and enshrinement of relics, and praise leading kings and monks who were 
responsible for preserving and promoting the Theravāda.
One could argue, therefore, that those Buddhist traditions that come to be called “Theravāda” 
acquired their sense of coherence and authority from the vaṃsas that narrated their origins and 
expansions across time and space. An illustration of how such a narrative worked to generate a 
sense of the Theravāda is found in the Mahābodhivaṃsa, wherein different Buddhist orders are 
identified, and the authentic lineage is distinguished from heretical ones.

--- PAGE 275 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz
254
Among them, the Theravāda, starting out from the Meritorious [Buddha], being pure 
like a stream of water from the Heavenly River, being stainless like a crystal gem, and 
being unmixed among the monastic orders like a water drop from the leaves of a lotus 
flower, while pleasing the world of humans together with the deities, like the full 
moon to the flow of ambrosial liquid, came down to the present day.
(Strong 1891: 97–98)
This assertion of the singularity and authority of the Theravāda goes far to demonstrate how 
vaṃsa texts were instrumental to efforts to identify the legacy of the Buddha and associate it 
with a particular and idealized transmission of monastic and textual traditions across southern 
Asian lands. Such an approach to retelling the history of Buddhism could also be used to reject 
allegedly unorthodox observances and the orders that practiced them while highlighting the 
purity of one’s own traditions (Lieberman 1976: 141).
This idealized Theravāda form becomes associated with the Mahāvihāra lineage that took 
root, according to many of the vaṃsas, in ancient Sri Lanka with the arrival of Ven. Mahinda 
and his monastic colleagues. It must be said, however, that the Mahāvihāra tradition—in both 
its values and ideology—does not represent all forms of Theravāda Buddhism. Khmer forms 
of Buddhism, which possessed more tenuous ties to Sri Lankan traditions and did not produce 
or copy vaṃsa texts to the same degree as the people in Myanmar and Thailand, offered up a 
different model of the Theravāda. Indeed, Khmer forms of Theravāda with their Brahmanical 
and Tantric influences as seen in the appropriation of the Rāmāyana story and the esoteric 
meditative practices involving Pāli mantras and embryological visualizations depart in significant 
ways from the traditional Mahāvihāra forms contained in vaṃsa texts (Harris 2005: 91–95).
Nevertheless, across much of the premodern Theravāda world, the notions of predestined 
relics and images being brought to the kingdoms of pious kings by awakened monks were made 
widespread thanks to the circulation of vaṃsa texts and narratives. Similarly, their accounts of 
how the Buddha miraculously traveled to local sites in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, some­
times along well-worn paths traveled eons ago by previous Buddhas, served to deposit relics 
and sacralize lands distant from Buddhism’s place of origins (Lagirarde 2013: 86). These vaṃsa 
texts taught people to recognize that they had been given access to authentic teachings, sacred 
objects, and institutions by the will of the Buddha and the efforts of other awakened monks. 
These works presented narratives that set up ways of being in the world that are relational 
in nature and historical in context. In this sense, the vaṃsas collectively shaped a vision of 
Buddhist history that connected present generations with past actors, and affirmed that Buddhist 
devotees could obtain good fortune and take steps toward liberation (nirvāṇa) as a result of 
deeds undertaken earlier by others and the effects of their own encounters with historical 
narratives (Berkwitz 2004: 64). Furthermore, the coherence and similarities found in the vaṃsa 
narratives as a whole would have surely contributed to a persuasive account of the prestigious 
and authoritative nature of the Theravāda lineage, variously understood and framed by their 
historical narratives. In the Theravāda, it may thus be said, history confers identity, and one’s 
story up to now and in the future is held to be inseparable from the stories of what buddhas, 
monks, and kings have done long ago.
Notes
	 1	The use of the term chronicle for vaṃsa in these works is meant to illustrate how they are exceptional 
in comparison with vaṃsas that more closely resemble the genre of “history.” According to White, the 
chronicle genre aspires to but falls short of full narrativity, since it fails to achieve narrative closure and 
simply ends without resolution in a story-like way (1987: 4–5).

--- PAGE 276 ---
Vaṁsa
255
	 2	It should be noted that the vaṃsa texts composed in Southeast Asia express varying opinions on how cru­
cial the Sri Lankan Buddhist traditions were for the transmission of the Theravāda to Burmese, Mon, and 
Thai lands. In some cases, such as the eighteenth-century Burmese Vaṃsadı̄panı̄, authors asserted that the 
Buddha’s sāsana was imported directly from India (see Pranke: 2004).
	 3	See Bretfeld in this volume for a detailed discussion on Mahāvihāra claims of their exclusive connection 
with the Buddha’s original sāsana.
References
Abeysekara, A. 2019. “Protestant Buddhism and ‘Influence’: The Temporality of a Concept.” Qui Parle 28 
(1): 1–75.
Berkwitz, S.C. 2004. Buddhist History in the Vernacular: The Power of the Past in Late Medieval Sri Lanka. Leiden: 
Brill.
Berkwitz, S.C. 2007. The History of the Buddha’s Relic Shrine: A Translation of the Sinhala Thūpavaṃsa. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Berkwitz, S.C. 2019. “Narratives of Buddhist Relics and Images.” In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of 
Religion, ed. J. Barton. New York: Oxford University Press/Online Publication May 2019. doi:10.1093/
acrefore/9780199340378.013.587.
Blackburn, A.M. 2010. “Buddha-Relics in the Lives of Southern Asian Polities.” Numen 57: 317–340.
Blackburn, A.M. 2012. “Lineage, Inheritance, and Belonging: Expressions of Monastic Affiliation from 
Laṅkā.” In How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, ed. Peter Skilling, et al., 275–294. 
Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
Chiu, A.S. 2017. The Buddha in Lanna: Art, Lineage, Power, and Place in Northern Thailand. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Collins, S. 1998. Nirvana and other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Geiger, W. 2001. The Mahāvaṃsa: Or the Great Chronicle of Ceylon. (reprint, 1912). Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Gethin, R. 2012. “Was Buddhaghosa a Theravādin? Buddhist Identity in the Pali Commentaries and 
Chronicles.” In How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, eds. Peter Skilling, et al., 1–63. 
Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
Harris, I. 2005. Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Jayawickrama, N.A. 1968. The Sheaf of the Garlands of the Epochs of the Conqueror: Being a Translation of 
Jinakālamālīpakaraṇaṁ of Ratannapañña Thera of Thailand. London: Pali Text Society.
Jayawickrama, N.A. 1971. The Chronicle of the Thūpa and the Thūpavaṃsa: Being a Translation and Edition of the 
Vācissaratthera’s Thūpavaṃsa. London: Pali Text Society.
Jayawickrama, N.A. 1986. The Inception of the Discipline and the Vinaya Nidāna: Being a Translation and Edition 
of the Bāhiranidāna of Buddhaghosa’s Samantapāsādikā, the Vinaya Commentary. London: Pali Text Society.
Lagirarde, F. 2013. “Narratives as Ritual Histories: The Case of the Northern-Thai Buddhist Chronicles.” In 
Buddhist Narrative in Asia and Beyond, Vol. 1, eds. P. Skilling, J. McDaniel, 81–92. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn 
University.
Lagirarde, F. 2015. “Historiography: Thailand.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Vol. 1: Literature and 
Languages, ed. Jonathan A. Silk, 792–799. Leiden: Brill.
Law, B.C., trans. 1952. The History of the Buddha’s Religion (Sāsanvaṃsa). London: Luzac & Co.
Leider, J.P. 2009. “Relics, Statues, and Predictions: Interpreting an Apocryphal Sermon of Lord Buddha in 
Arakan.” Asian Ethnology 68 (2): 333–364.
Lieberman, V.B. 1976. “A New Look at the ‘Sāsanavamsa’.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 39 (1): 137–149.
Notton, C., trans. 1932. The Chronicle of the Emerald Buddha. Bangkok: Bangkok Time Press.
Notton, C., trans. 1933. P’ra Buddha Sihiṅga. Bangkok: Bangkok Time Press.
Oldenberg, H. 1992. The Dipavamsa: An Ancient Buddhist Historical Record. (reprint, 1879). New Delhi: Asian 
Educational Services.
Pakdeekham, S., ed. 2020. History of the Pali Scriptures: Saṅgı̄tiyavaṃsa by Somdet Phra Phonnarat. Bangkok: 
Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation.
Pollock, S. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in Premodern India. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Pranke, P.A. 2004. The Treatise on the Lineage of the Elders (Vaṃsadı̄panı̄): Monastic Reform and the Writing of 
Buddhist History in Eighteenth-Century Burma. PhD Dissertation. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.

--- PAGE 277 ---
Stephen C. Berkwitz
256
Premchit, S., Swearer, D.K. 1977. “A Translation of Tamnān Mūlasāsanā Wat Pā Daeng: The Chronicle of the 
Founding of Buddhism of the Wat Pā Daeng Tradition.” The Journal of the Siam Society 65 (2): 73–110.
Schober, J. 2003. “Mapping the Sacred in Theravada Buddhist Southeast Asia.” In Sacred Places and Modern 
Landscapes: Sacred Geography and Social-Religious Transformations in South and Southeast Asia, ed. R.A. 
Lukens-Bull, 1–27. Tempe, AZ: Program for Southeast Asian Studies, Arizona State University.
Senadhira, G. 1965. Sinhala Bōdhivaṃśaya (2nd ed.). Colombo: Abhaya Prakāśakayō.
Skilling, P. 2009. “Theravāda in History.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies Third Series, 
no. 11 (Fall): 61–93.
Strong, A.A., ed. 1891. Mahābodhi-Vamsa. London: Pali Text Society.
Strong, J.S. 2004. Relics of the Buddha. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Trainor, K. 1997. Relics, Ritual, and Representation in Buddhism: Rematerializing the Sri Lankan Theravāda 
Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Walters, J.S. 2000. “Buddhist History: The Sri Lankan Pāli Vaṃsas and Their Commentary.” In Querying the 
Medieval: Texts and the History of Practices in South Asia, eds. R. Inden, J. Walters, D. Ali, 99–164. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
White, H. 1987. The Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical Representation. Baltimore: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press.

--- PAGE 278 ---
257
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-21
17
MERIT
Ten ways of making merit in Theravāda 
exegetical literature and contemporary 
Sri Lanka1
Rita Langer
Introduction
The list of Buddhist precepts, which define behavior that is to be avoided, is well known and 
much written about. The commentarial list of ten ways of making merit (puññakiriyavatthu), 
which define recommended religious and ethical behavior for Buddhists in positive terms, on 
the other hand, has received little comment in the scholarly literature.2 Yet, as I shall discuss, 
the list is well documented in post-canonical Pāli texts and vernacular texts from South and 
Southeast Asia and today features prominently in Buddhist handbooks and sermons in Sri 
Lanka, Thailand, and Laos; it is also known in Myanmar and Cambodia.
This chapter examines how different texts and text genres understand the ways of making 
merit and what they reveal about the Buddhist practice past and present in Sri Lanka. The 
fifth-century Pāli commentaries and systematic Buddhist literature expanded the three canoni­
cal (DN III 218 et al) “primary” ways of making merit—generosity (dāna), morality (sı̄la), and 
contemplation (bhāvanā)—into a list of ten. A well-known verse in Sri Lanka lists them:
dānaṃ sı̄lañ ca bhāvanā, pattipattānumodanā
veyyāvaccāpacāyañ ca, desanā sutti diṭṭhiju
(Generosity, morality and contemplation, [sharing of] and rejoicing in merit
service and respect, teaching, listening and straightening [one’s] views)
Poetic works (the tenth-century Pāli Saddhamopāyana and fifteenth-century Sinhala 
Kāvyaśēkharaya) expanded the list further to twelve ways of making merit. Other manuals 
such as the twelfth-century Upāsakajanālaṅkāra from South India and the sixteenth-century 
Maṅgalatthadı̄panı̄ from northern Thailand are content with the list of ten ways of making merit. 
Contemporary Sri Lankan handbooks, Dhamma schoolbooks, and fieldwork data reveal how 
the list of ten ways of making merit is received in Sri Lanka. What emerges from these sources 
is a formalization of the moral dimension that is characteristic of Theravāda developments in 
Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia.

--- PAGE 279 ---
Rita Langer
258
Commentarial literature and systematic 
exegetical Abhidhamma texts
Three commentaries discuss the ten ways of making merit: the Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ (Sv III 999–
1000), Buddhaghosa’s fifth-century commentary to the Dı̄ghanikāya; the Atthasālinı̄ (As 157–59), 
a commentary to the Dhammasaṅganı̄ by an anonymous contemporary of Buddhaghosa, and 
the Paramatthadı̄panı̄, the commentary to the Itivuttaka (It-a vol II 23–26) compiled in the late 
sixth or early seventh century by Dhammapāla (von Hinüber 1996, 136f). I summarize the 
definitions of the ten ways of making merit as presented in the Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄, which is likely 
to be the oldest of the three commentaries. I then explore the rationale behind the expansion 
from three to ten ways of making merit, drawing on the other two commentaries:
	1	
Generosity (dāna) is defined (Sv 998) as volition (cetanā) occurring prior to giving, at the 
time of giving, and after. It is the recollecting with a happy mind which arises for someone 
who gives either the four requisites (robes, etc.) or the six sense objects (visible form, etc.) 
or the ten suitable offerings for ascetics and brahmins (food, etc.).3
	2	
Morality (sı̄la) is defined as volition that occurs in someone who goes to the temple think­
ing, “I shall go forth for the sake of fulfilling morality”; in someone at the time of going 
forth; in someone who has gone forth having fulfilled his wish; in someone reflecting on 
this thinking, “Good, good”; in someone taking on the restraint of the monastic code; in 
someone who contemplates the requisites, such as robes and the like; in someone who is 
restrained regarding the senses; or in someone who purifies their livelihood.
	3	
Contemplation (bhāvanā) is explained as volition that occurred in someone contemplating 
sense organs (eye, etc.), sense objects (visible form, etc.), and corresponding conscious­
nesses and feelings based on contact with the senses, recognition of the objects and so on, 
and old age and death as impermanent, suffering and not-self.4 The explanation of the 
Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ stops here with what is essentially vipassanā meditation.5
Under the heading of “ways of making merit” the Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ looks at generosity, moral­
ity, and contemplation together and provides an explanation of how an act of giving can be 
understood in three different ways. The meritorious deed of giving is classified as “consisting of 
generosity” (dānamaya) when it is accompanied by either the reflection “I am giving food, etc.” 
or by a more general contemplation on the perfection of generosity. The same act of giving can 
also be classed as consisting of morality (sı̄lamaya) when it is associated with the act of “making 
service a priority,” which the subcommentary (ṭı̄kā) (Sv-ṭ III 267) explains as remembering that 
giving is a custom and practice of one’s family. And again, it could be classed as consisting of 
contemplation (bhāvanāmaya), “having established knowledge of the way things perish and disap­
pear” (khayato vayato sammasanaṃ paṭṭhapetvā). Other meritorious deeds, too, could presumably be 
classified in different ways depending on the mental frame at the time, but this is not spelled out.
	4	
Paying respect (apaciti) is illustrated with the example of someone who sees someone 
elderly, goes to meet them, takes their robe and bowl, and steps aside for them. The men­
tion of robe and bowl indicates that the respect is being paid to a monastic but presumably 
the prescribed behavior would be culturally expected toward any elderly person.
	5	
Service (veyyāvacca), too, appears to be directed at monastics and the first example to illus­
trate this meritorious deed is someone collecting alms in a village for a senior monk. The 
second example is of someone reacting swiftly when asked to bring the monks’ bowls. Both 
acts could presumably be done by either a layperson or a junior monk.

--- PAGE 280 ---
Merit
259
	  6	 Sharing of merit (pattanuppadāna) is done simply by thinking, “May the merit be for all 
beings,” after having done a meritorious deed of offering the four requisites.
	  7	 Rejoicing in merit (abbhanumodanā) is done by expressing “joy in merit given by others” 
and saying, “Good, good!” The phrasing suggests that giving merit and rejoicing in merit 
are two connected events.
	  8	 Teaching (desanā) done out of a desire to become a famous preacher and for personal gain 
does not result in great merit, but when done without desiring any reward is meritorious.6
	  9	 Listening (to the teaching; savaṇa) should not be done out of desire to be regarded as faith­
ful. It will, however, result in great merit when done by someone suffused with kindness 
and of a sensitive or gentle mind and with the view that “[i]t will be of great fruit for me.”
	10	 Straightening one’s views (diṭṭh’ ujjugata) is explained (Sv 1000) simply as relevant to all 
three principal ways of making merit.7
The Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ concludes the discussion by explaining that the ten ways of making merit 
are an expansion of the canonical set of three in so far as service and respect are included in 
morality and sharing and rejoicing in merit are included in generosity and teaching and listen­
ing are included in contemplation. When it comes to straightening one’s view, the opinions 
are divided. The Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ (followed by the Itivuttaka commentary) regards it as linked 
to all ways of making merit rather than as a way of making merit in its own right, but the 
Atthasālinī includes it in contemplation.
Abhidhamma works quote and build on the commentaries and are in style and content 
very similar. I briefly present some new perspectives and examples which these works provide 
concentrating on the seven additional ways of making merit. The Abhidhammāvatāra (Abhidh-av 
3, v. 21–26), Buddhadatta’s fifth-century work, presents the ten ways of making merit in the 
form of a verse (v. 21) which accounts for variation in terminology:
Generosity, morality, contemplation, sharing of merit, service, teaching and rejoicing [in 
merit];
straightening one’s views, listening and respect—thus should the division of the ways of 
making merit be known.
(dānaṃ sı̄laṃ bhāvanā pattidānaṃ, veyyāvaccaṃ desanā cānumodo
diṭṭhujjutaṃ saṃsutı̄ cāpacāyo, ñeyyo evaṃ puññavatthuppabhedo.)
Verses 22–23 explain the ten ways of making merit as an expansion of the first three and 
like the Atthasālinı̄ subsume straightening one’s views under contemplation. Verse 24 explains 
that recollection (anussati), praise (pasaṃsā), and taking refuge (saraṇattaya) are included in 
straightening views.8
Anuruddha’s Abhidhammatthasangaha (Abhidh-s 134ff), which is tentatively dated by Norman 
(1983, 151) to the end of the eleventh or beginning of the twelfth century but according to 
Gethin (2007, xiv) could possibly be as early as late sixth or early seventh century, is often 
described as superseding the Abhidhammāvatāra. The text does not go much beyond nam­
ing the ten ways of making merit, but its twelfth-century commentary by Sumaṅgala, the 
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinı̄-mahāṭı̄kā (Abhidh-s-mhṭ 134ff.), provides some interesting additional 
details. Respect should be done without expecting rewards such as robes, which indicates that 
monastics, as well as laypeople, are envisaged as paying respect. Rejoicing in merit should be 
practiced with a mind free of the stain of miserliness. The text also states that listening to the 
dhamma might inspire one to put into practice what one has heard and even to teach others.

--- PAGE 281 ---
Rita Langer
260
Interestingly, the text also includes the study and teaching of blameless, ordinary subjects in 
the categories of listening and teaching respectively which is reminiscent of the inclusion of 
paying attention to ordinary, worldly jobs in the definition of contemplation (It-a 24). The 
Abhidhammatthavibhāvinı̄-mahāṭı̄kā provides a rationale for the groupings and explains that 
sharing of merit and rejoicing in merit are to be grouped with generosity, as all three have 
in common that they oppose envy and miserliness. Respect and service belong with morality 
as they have good conduct in common. The text quotes Dhammapāla’s view that teaching, 
listening, straightening one’s views, and contemplation form one category either because all 
four involve the practice of wholesome dhammas or, because they all bring insight. The text 
also reports an alternative view that subsumes teaching under generosity, as the gift of dhamma 
surpass all gifts (Dhp 354) and reiterates that straightening one’s views is relevant to all ways 
of making merit.
From three to ten ways of merit
The commentarial and Abhidhamma literature is not prescriptive in nature, but it reflects and 
reacts to existing practices and in turn influences and shapes them. The question is what does 
the expansion of the original three ways of making merit into ten reveal about Theravāda 
Buddhist practice?
There are many instances that suggest that the compilers of these texts broadened the defi­
nition of merit to include ordinary and common good behavior. The Itivuttaka commentary 
defines generosity not just as the giving of a suitable offering but also as giving help (anuggaha) 
and worship (pūjā). The commentaries take generosity beyond the narrow realm of asceticism 
and monasticism by including any offerings that are pleasing to the senses. The Itivuttaka com­
mentary (It-a 24) included under the heading of bhāvanā “paying attention to ordinary, worldly 
jobs and crafts which are blameless,” which goes beyond the definition of the Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ 
and Atthasālinı̄. Some items in the expanded list such as listening (savaṇa) and teaching (desanā), 
too, represent everyday religious activities of ordinary people (laypeople and monastics) rather 
than a religious elite. The Abhidhamma texts broadened the definition to include the study 
and teaching of blameless subjects, thereby elevating the status of education in the process. 
The examples quoted to illustrate respect and service seem to be simply examples of everyday 
polite behavior. The exegetical literature fleshes out the definitions with more examples allow­
ing glimpses into Buddhist everyday practice at the time. These texts, which were most likely 
compiled for and used by monastics, appear to be quite inclusivist by nature and sympathetic to 
laypeople who might not have the means to engage in lavish displays of generosity or the time 
or energy for sophisticated meditation practices. Simple good manners and mindful behavior 
are given the status of meritorious deeds
Some practices such as transference of merit (as it is often referred to in secondary literature) 
are not easily integrated into the Buddhist framework as they seem to go against the concept 
of personal responsibility. To be sure practice and doctrine do not have to be consistent, as 
Schmithausen (1986, 214) points out:
In popular religious practice and doctrine, the notion of individual responsibility and 
the notion of merit transference could thus be alternatively emphasized according to 
the situation, without any conflict being felt.
Compilers of the early Buddhist texts opted to engage with the “transfer of merit” and inte­
grated the widespread practice into the doctrinal framework.9 The commentaries provide a

--- PAGE 282 ---
Merit
261
rationale and solve the doctrinal issue of personal responsibility by introducing a two-way 
process: sharing of merit and rejoicing in merit. As both activities are defined as meritorious 
deeds in their own right both parties benefit without any merit actually “changing hands.” 
While the Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ had presented rejoicing only in the context of rejoicing of merit 
shared with all beings, the other two commentaries defined rejoicing more broadly to mean 
rejoicing in any meritorious deeds (As 158, It-a 25). The Atthasālinı̄ adds two important aspects: 
the possibility of sharing merit with a specific person and the explanation that sharing merit 
increases it just as lighting a thousand oil lamps from one lamp increases the brightness of the 
first lamp. The prime occasions for sharing of merit with an individual are funerals or post-
funerary rites such as the almsgiving on behalf of the dead (matakadāna). Sharing merit with 
the dead is still at the heart of the contemporary funeral rites in Theravāda countries today 
(Langer 2007, 156ff., Langer 2012) which might partially be due to the fact that it was given 
a doctrinal explanation in these early scholastic texts.
Poetic works and a lay manual
Unlike the commentarial and exegetical literature, the poetic works and the Upāsakajanālaṅkāra 
are more prescriptive in nature and extol the fruits (phala) and advantages (ānisaṃsa) of each 
of the individual ways of making merit in great detail.
The Saddhammopāyana, a Pāli poetic work in the style of a letter addressed to a fellow 
monk, is dated by Saddhātissa (1965, 33) to the tenth century, but von Hinüber (1996, 203) 
just states that its date is uncertain.10 The later commentarial tradition attributed the work to 
Abhayagirikavicakravarti Ānanda Mahāthera and suggested its content was “diverging from the 
Mahāvihāra orthodoxy” (Von Hinüber 1996, 203). The text replaces (10) straightening one’s 
views with three other elements (10–12) and comes up with a list of twelve ways of making merit:
Dānaṃ sı̄lañ ca bhāvanā pattipattānumodanā
desanā savaṇaṃ pūjā veyyāvaccaṃ pasaṃsanā
saraṇam anussati c’eva puññavatthūni bārasa. //213//
(Generosity, morality, contemplation, [sharing of] merit, rejoicing in merit;
teaching, listening, respect, service, praise;
taking refuge and recollection are the twelve ways of making merit.)
Apaciti/apacāyana is replaced with the term pūjā, which is defined (v. 221) as paying reverence 
and homage to persons of quality. The semantic fields of apaciti/apacāyana and pūjā overlap, and 
using them synonymously is not unusual. The Mohavicchedanı̄, Kassapa’s twelfth- or thirteenth-
century commentary on the mātikās of all seven canonical Abhidhamma texts, for example, 
illustrates physical expressions of respect (apaciti) with the examples of flower pūjā and worship 
and vocal expression of respect as pūjā consisting of praise (Moh 23).11
	10	 Praise is explained as creating gladness and strength in those doing meritorious deeds (v. 
223).
	11	 Taking refuge is defined as going for refuge with a sense of shelter in the Buddha, Dhamma 
and Saṅgha and reverence of good qualities (v. 224).
	12	 Recollection (v. 225), which is usually defined as keeping in mind six objects (i.e., Buddha, 
Dhamma, Saṅgha, [one’s own] morality, [one’s own] generosity (cāga) and deities),12 is 
extended in the Saddhammopāyana to include other wholesome deeds.

--- PAGE 283 ---
Rita Langer
262
The Saddhammopāyana (Chapter VI, verses 211–262 and Chapter VII—XVIII, verses 263–587) 
devotes much space to the ways of making merit, but only sixteen verses are to do with their 
definition while the rest is devoted to the fruits (thirty-four verses) and the advantages (325 
verses) of practicing these. The fruits come in three grades: least fruitful and pertaining to 
rebirth in kāmaloka (e.g., being popular, beautiful, and prosperous), middling and resulting in 
brahmaloka (e.g., rebirth in various higher realms), and best and leading to liberation (mokkha) 
(verses 260–261). As for the advantages, the amount of merit increases because the advantages 
of morality are inclusive of the advantages of generosity and the advantages of contemplation 
are inclusive of the advantages of generosity and morality.
The Upāsakajanālaṅkāra, Ananda’s twelfth-century introduction to Buddhism composed in 
South India for the benefit of recently converted Buddhists (Agostini 2015, xii), is not a poetic 
work but is considered here as it draws heavily on the Saddhammopāyana. The text brings 
together interesting material from a great range of sources including the systematic Buddhists 
texts discussed above. The text devotes only nine pages (§§ 1–24) to the analysis of the ten 
ways of making merit but follows this with eighteen pages (§§ 25–66) on the advantages accru­
ing from practicing them. The advantages of generosity which are at the lower end (wealth, 
harmony, joy, heaven) are included in the advantages of morality, which is described as the 
stairway to heaven and the door to nibbāna. The advantages of both generosity and morality 
are included in the advantages of contemplation which can lead to higher achievements such 
as higher knowledges, brahmaloka, and other heavens, and even Buddhahood. Examples of 
advantages of the remaining ways of making merit include rebirth in a wealthy family result­
ing from showing respect, having friends and retinue and achieving goals resulting from doing 
service, and happiness resulting from listening.
The Kāvyaśēkharaya is a sermon composed in Sinhala verse by Toṭagamuwe Rāhula in 1449 
at the request of Queen Ulakuḍaya (v. 22). The text devotes only sixteen verses (of 887) to 
the ways of making merit and the reason might be the very broad scope of the Kāvyaśēkharaya 
(Holt 1991, 237):
The Kavyasēkharaya is regarded by many as almost encyclopedic with regard to not 
only religious matters per se but with the problems of lay secular life. It articulates 
a medieval worldview on how the religious life is to be lived in the secular context.
The sixteen verses are part of a chapter in which the paṇḍit-minister Senaka (previous incarna­
tion of the Buddha) advises the king on such matters as honoring gods, friends, and relatives; 
treating women and poor people well; not imposing heavy taxation; and more generally avoid­
ing any of the eleven “unwholesome courses of action” (akusalakammapatha).13 And at this point, 
the text turns to the same twelve ways of making merit that the Saddhammopāyana had listed.14 
It explains praise as to encouraging and energizing someone doing a meritorious deed and 
make them happy. The text (v. 53) defines taking refuge as a “royal wholesome act” but does 
not add much to the corresponding verse in the Saddhammopāyana. Recollection is explained 
as thinking of the advantages of wholesome deeds one has done. Rather than exploring the 
advantages accruing from the practice of the ways of making merit, the text then gives detailed 
advice on how to lead an ethical life more generally before returning briefly to a discussion 
of generosity, morality, and contemplation.
From ten to twelve ways of making merit
The three further ways of making merit to replace straightening one’s views seem to have been 
prompted by the discussion as to whether straightening one’s views was a way of making merit

--- PAGE 284 ---
Merit
263
in its own right or an underlying condition to all ways of making merit—a view which the 
earlier commentaries (Sv1000, As 159, It-a 26) had quoted as an alternative. Furthermore, the 
Abhidhammāvatāra (v. 24) mentions, almost as an afterthought, that without doubt praise, refuge, 
and recollection are included in straightening one’s view.15 The Abhidhammavikāsinı̄ (Abhidh-
av-nṭ I 199 Be) attributes the list of twelve to the Mahāsāṅghikas and the Abhayagirivāsins and 
explains that it was created by eliminating straightening one’s views and by incorporating the 
three additional items (Agostini 2015, 239). Ananda, the author of the Upāsakajanālaṅkāra who 
affiliates himself with the Mahāvihāra tradition (Upās Chapter X), explicitly rejects the list of 
twelve that was associated with the Abhayagirivihāra but treats praise, refuge, and recollection as 
aspects of straightening one’s views. The twelve ways of making merit appear to be merely a dif­
ferent way of counting and presenting the ways of making merit but one that had a lasting impact.
In the process of establishing taking refuge and recollecting the six objects, great emphasis 
was given to the cultivation of faith. Taking the refuges and precepts is the starting point of 
every Buddhist ceremony in Sri Lanka. Making it a meritorious deed in its own right gives 
credit to the common act of placing faith in the Triple Gem. The six recollections are culti­
vating that initial faith by strengthening trust in the teachers and teaching (by recollection of 
Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha), trust in oneself (by recollection of one’s morality and generos­
ity), and finally trust in the system that one can reach higher places (by recollecting the various 
classes of deities who achieved their existence through faith, morality, learning, and generosity 
(Vism VII, 6; 225). The deities correspond to the mind in various meditational stages (Gethin 
1997) and are living examples of possible achievements. Recollection also has a practical appli­
cation in the form of deathbed practices. The last object that comes to mind at the time of 
death is instrumental in determining the next rebirth, and the Abhidhamma texts explain three 
categories of objects (Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoḷi 1987, I 191f; Vibh-a 155f.)
A well-known example of recollecting one’s own meritorious deeds on the deathbed is 
recorded in the Mahāvaṃsa (Mv 32.25–55), in which King Duṭṭhagāmaṇı̄ (ca. 101–177 bc) 
summoned his scribe to his deathbed to read to him from his “merit book” (Langer 2007, 41f.). 
Even today, every effort is made by friends and relatives to assure that the mind of the dying 
person is directed toward the dhamma and positive thoughts including those of meritorious 
deeds, and there is evidence that keeping a merit book was still encouraged in the 1970s at 
least in some places (Langer 2007, 11). In the Saddhamopāyana, a large section under the head­
ing of advantages of generosity (v. 278–304) deals with the impact that meritorious deeds can 
have on the death moment. The Kāvyaśēkharaya (v. 54) explains that anussati is to think of the 
advantages of wholesome deeds one has done, the commentary elaborates that this is effective 
in counteracting negative thoughts, an obvious advantage at the time of death. Defining taking 
refuge and recollection as ways of making merit gave weight to the cultivation of faith while 
broadening the definition of recollection to include recollection of one’s own good deeds might 
have endorsed a common deathbed practice.
Another important aspect of the extended list is that it strengthens the link between merit 
and happiness. Joy and happiness feature highly in the description of Buddhist achievements—
the first stages of jhāna meditation are accompanied by joy (pı̄ti) and happiness (sukha)—and 
texts such as the Sāmaññaphala Sutta (DN I 47–86) emphasize happiness. As Gethin (2008, 6) 
remarks in the introduction to his translation of the Sāmaññaphala Sutta:
The sutta sets this account of the path in a framework which presents it as an answer 
to the basic question (here posed by Ajātasattu): why embark on the difficult and 
demanding life of an ascetic? The answer the sutta seeks to give is, in short, not because 
it promises rewards after death, but because, more surely than any other way of life, it

--- PAGE 285 ---
Rita Langer
264
brings with it a secure happiness here and now: the freedom of the life of a religious 
wanderer (samaṇa); the happiness of a guilt-free conscience (anavajja-sukha) that comes 
with a life lived in accordance with moral precepts; the happiness of the composed 
mind (avyāseka-sukha) of one who is mindful in all he does; the joy, happiness, and 
peace of the jhānas.…
By listing rejoicing and praise as ways of making merit our texts go one step further than the sut­
tas. They do not just claim that doing meritorious deeds will make you happy, they make being 
happy and generating happiness meritorious deeds in their own right. The Saddhammopāyana’s 
definition of praise in terms of generating joy and happiness in someone doing meritorious 
deeds is close to rejoicing, which is defined as an act of giving joy to those who appreciate 
someone else’s meritorious deeds (Saddh v. 229). Presumably both can occur together as observ­
ing someone doing a meritorious deed might first make the observer happy (by way of rejoic­
ing) and then prompt them to praise the deed that, in turn, makes the doer of the meritorious 
deed happy. It is therefore not surprising that the text (Saddh v. 563) states that the advantages 
of praise are the same as those accruing from rejoicing. Defining happiness as a meritorious 
act is in line with a canonical passage (AN IV 88f; It 14f), which encourages monks not to be 
afraid of merit (puñña) as it is just another name for happiness (sukha).
Contemporary sources
The transmission of Buddhism in Sri Lanka has always been very oral in nature and looking 
at ancient and medieval texts does not tell us with any certainty what was actually transmit­
ted. For the contemporary period, we have sources that are not only aimed at but also readily 
available to laypeople and the choice of topics and hands-on style reflect that. Most modern 
works start the discussion of the ten ways of making merit with the verse that I quoted at the 
beginning of the chapter. The earliest occurrence I could find of this verse was in an article 
published in 1884 in London by the Royal Asiatic Society (Ceylon Branch) by J. F. Dickson. 
Dickson, who worked for the Ceylon Civil Service from 1859 to 1885, starts his exploration 
of the “daily religion of the Buddhists of Ceylon” with a discussion of the ten ways of making 
merit (203–207), and his article picks up many of the explanations from earlier literature though 
without citing one; there are also some interesting ethnographic observations. I concentrate 
on the seven additional ways of making merit. Dickson (1884, 205) illustrates sharing of merit 
with the example of someone going on pilgrimage calling together his friends to share in his 
merit. Dickson also observes that sharing in the merits of another does not require an invita­
tion. His examples of showing respect—offering flowers, incense, and food to the bodhi tree, 
stūpa, and Buddha image—would be equally fitting as illustrations for pūjā. In the context of 
straightening one’s views, he makes reference to unwavering faith in the Triple Gem, which 
possibly harks back to an early understanding of the term diṭṭhi as akin to faith (Gethin 1992, 
221). The rest of the article (207–236) is devoted to the description of four occasions for 
making merit (at the beginning of the rainy season, before death, after death, and in the form 
of offerings to the saṅgha or caitya).
Rērukānē Candavimala’s (1949) Bauddhayāgē Atpota, translated into English by Silva (2014), 
was composed for a Sri Lankan Buddhist lay and monastic audience. Like the Upāsakajanālaṅkāra, 
it quotes Pāli verses and passages and retells stories from the commentaries. More than a third 
of the book (88 of 229 pages, pp. 93–181) is devoted to the ten ways of making merit that are 
presented as the positive counterpart to the ten akusalakammapatha (and other acts to avoid). 
There is also a separate chapter (fourteen pages, pp. 24–38) providing a definition and outlining

--- PAGE 286 ---
Merit
265
the advantages of taking the refuges. The examples quoted for service include a story from 
the Milindapañha (Mil 3) about a novice and a monk at the time of the Buddha Kassapa. The 
monk had asked the novice repeatedly to clear away the rubbish. When he eventually did so, 
the novice evoked the merit of his service by making earnest wishes to always be reborn as a 
powerful being until his Nibbana and saying the right thing and being prompt in answering. 
The monk, in turn, was inspired to make an earnest wish to always be prompt in answering. 
They were reborn as King Milinda and Ven Nāgasena, respectively. Under the heading of 
respect, the text states that those of virtue are more deserving of respect than those of age and 
quotes the familiar Dhammapada verse (Dhp 109) listing advantages of respect. The section on 
sharing of merit provides the appropriate wording to use when giving merit to the dead, to 
gods, and to all beings and comments on the use of water pouring which symbolizes the act. 
Rejoicing is defined as the opposite of jealousy, and its result is minor or major depending on 
the nature of the original meritorious deed and the faith of the rejoicer. The section on listen­
ing points out that it is beneficial even without intellectual understanding retelling as examples 
well-known animal stories from commentaries and quotes A III 248 on the five advantages 
of listening which include straightening one’s views. The section of straightening one’s views 
warns against putting one’s faith into auspicious sights and overemphasizing the effect of past 
karma on this life. The chapter on the ways of making merit concludes with reference to the 
above-mentioned canonical equation of merit with happiness.
Attuḍāvē Śrı̄ Rāhula’s (2000) Bauddha Ädahilla is one of many contemporary handbooks 
by that name or a similar name. The book is widely available and includes photographs of 
famous stūpas and illustrations and provides the reader with contemplative verses in the section 
on meditation. This text is interesting as it contains only a very short, perfunctory subchapter 
(two pages out of a total of 307, pp. 213–215) on the ways of making merit. The chapter 
starts with the verse found in Dickson followed by the briefest of explanations of the three 
principal ways of making merit. For the remaining seven ways of making merit, the text merely 
provides a Sinhala translation of the Pali terms. There are, however, rather substantial individual 
chapters for generosity (Chapter X, 217–233), morality (Chapter IV, 25–58), and contemplation 
(Chapter XIII, 275–307), as well as chapters on veneration (vandanā, Chapter V, 59–118), wor­
ship (pūjā, Chapter VI, 119–150), and taking refuge (saraṇagamana, Chapter III, 13–24). There 
are no separate chapters on service, sharing of and rejoicing in merit, listening, and teaching. 
Clearly emphasis has shifted from the list of ten to only a few select ways of making merit 
while others did not receive much attention.
Finally, I want to explore how the ways of making merit are taught in the Dhamma schools 
that were founded in reaction to and modeled after Christian Sunday schools in modern Sri 
Lanka (Gombrich and Obeyesekere 1988, 205). The Dhamma schools are today an important 
feature in Sri Lankan Buddhist education, and according to Dhanapala (no year, 165), there are 
“9582 registered Dhamma schools throughout the island and 122084 volunteer Dhamma teach­
ers. Over 1968093 Buddhist children attend the Dhamma schools” (Department of Buddhist 
Affairs: 2013). Students take classes on Sunday mornings and sit regular exams to test their 
knowledge of Buddhism. The relevant book which contains the chapter on the ten ways of 
making merit, Daham Pāsala grade 8 (2017), is aimed at thirteen-year-olds and has forty short 
chapters.16 Topics range from explanations of Dhammapada verses and the Noble Truths to basic 
Pāli lessons and simple Abhidhamma explanations. The chapter on the ways of making merit 
takes up eight pages (out of 177, pp. 117–124), and I was told by a Dhamma schoolteacher 
that he spends about one hour on the topic. The chapter starts with the familiar verse and a 
brief rendering of the Pāli terms into Sinhala before the ten ways of making merit are dis­
cussed one by one. The sharing of merit with the dead and the gods is described as an ancient

--- PAGE 287 ---
Rita Langer
266
custom and rejoicing in merit is how the class of “ghosts living off what is given by others” 
(paradattūpajı̄vin) obtain merit; it is not just beneficial for the dead but for anyone alive as well.17 
Under the heading of service the usual activities are listed (services to the Triple Gem, elderly, 
sick, teachers) and paying respect to venerable persons, places and objects are defined as dif­
ferent “according to country, nation and religion.” This is followed by the Dhammapada verse 
(Dhp 109) listing the advantages accruing from its practice. Teaching is explained as the best 
of all gifts and in the context of listening the text lists the Sinhala equivalent of the canonical 
list of the five advantages (A III 248). The explanation of straightening one’s views points to 
right (sammādiṭṭhi) and wrong (micchādiṭṭhi) views. At the end of the chapter, there are five 
questions listed and question three asks students to name three ways of making merit that can 
be performed at the Dhamma school and to perform one of them.
In September 2018, I conducted semistructured interviews with participants from Colombo 
and a small village in the Gampaha district.18 I asked the interviewees whether they were 
familiar with the ways of making merit and to give examples. All interviewees had heard 
about the list of ten ways of making merit either in Dhamma School or through sermons and 
some knew the verse (Dānaṃ sı̄lañ ca bhāvanā …) as well. The three principal ways of making 
merit drew the liveliest responses and participants were far less certain of the remaining seven. 
Most participants knew that merit can be given to the dead, gods, and all beings (a very com­
mon practice in Theravāda countries), but the related practices of giving merit and rejoicing 
in merit also attracted speculations such as “merit can only be transferred by monks,” “only 
about 50% of the dead can benefit from the merit,” and “99% of the invisible beings who 
benefit from merit are of a particular class of hungry ghosts.” The discussion of the next pair 
did not attract any unusual examples: service was defined by some as looking after and help­
ing the elderly, sick, and poor (it was pointed out that monks, too, collect food for the poor). 
Others emphasized that service is not simply helping out a friend, but service is directed as 
those deserving respect such as monastics and teachers and bodhi trees and sacred monuments 
that house relics (Sk: caitya, Sinh: sāya).
The next pair, teaching and listening, prompted two elderly participants to reflect on 
how the practice of preaching has changed over the decades since the introduction of radio 
sermons. One participant pointed out that listening to the dhamma can be beneficial even for 
animals who lack intellectual understanding, and another suggested that reading, too, should 
be included in listening. Finally, most laypeople struggled finding examples for straightening 
one’s views but maintained that Buddhists and non-Buddhists alike are capable of knowing 
good from bad. The monastic participants gave examples for right views such as accepting 
teachings regarding karma, cause and effect, and not-self. Examples of individual practice 
included giving alms to monastics, giving merit, listening to sermons, and feeding animals. 
It was striking that the laypeople all ranked the three principal ways of making merit first 
while the monastics unanimously ranked straightening one’s views first. The monks also said 
they used the ten ways of making merit as a topic for sermons but not necessarily all of them 
together. One younger monk explained that the ten ways of making merit is a suitable topic 
for sermons on full-moon observance days (poya) but not for funerals but did not elaborate 
why this would be the case.
A characteristic Theravāda way of looking at merit
The list of ten and twelve ways of making merit discussed above appears to be unique to 
Theravāda sources. The Indian sources that have influenced the development of Mahāyāna 
Buddhism in China and Tibet reflect a different interpretation of the expression “ways of

--- PAGE 288 ---
Merit
267
making merit” (puṇyakriyāvastu). Vasubandhu’s fourth-century Abhidharmakośa and bhāṣya 
(vi.4ab and iv.11 ab) refers to seven material (aupadhika) and seven immaterial (niraupadhika) 
ways of making merit. Yaśomitra’s sixth-century commentary (Abhidharmakośavyākhya 352–54) 
quotes a Sanskrit sutra, which lists the seven material ways of making merit: (1) a park for the 
Saṅgha, (2) a monastery in the park, (3) places to sit and sleep in the monastery, (4) permanent 
alms, (5) offering to a guest or someone who leaves, (6) offering to a someone who is sick or 
someone who attends to the sick, and (7) offering food to those who are cold and wet in bad 
weather and making sure they are comfortable after they have eaten.19 The seven immaterial 
ways of making merit are: intense joy at hearing (1) that “the thus gone/come” (tathāgata) or 
a disciple is dwelling in some village, (2) that the tathāgata or a disciple is ready to come, (3) 
that the tathāgata or a disciple has reached the main road, (4) that the tathāgata or a disciple 
has reached this village road, as well as intense joy (5) at approaching to see the tathāgata or a 
disciple and (6) at hearing the dharma. And the final immaterial way of making merit is (7) 
taking refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha and taking the precepts.20
The Mahāprajñāparāmitāśāstra (v pp. 2258–2260) mentions a different list of material ways 
of making merit that shows some overlap with the list of the ten items suitable as offerings 
to ascetics and brahmins (mentioned earlier). The Mahāvyutpatti (1699–1704), a glossary of 
Tibetan and Sanskrit terms compiled in the late eighth or early ninth century, lists five ways of 
making merit: the principal three, material ways of making merit, and a fifth category, guṇya-
puṇyakriyāvastu, whose interpretation remains obscure.21
In talking of joy, hearing the dhamma, and taking refuge, these non-Theravādin extended 
lists of ways of making merit overlap in some respects with the Theravādin list. Nevertheless, it 
is clear, as I have illustrated here, that the list of ten ways of making merit is a formalization of 
the moral dimension of the way of making merit that is characteristic of Theravāda develop­
ments in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia.
Conclusion
The list of ten ways of making merit has been widely known and referenced since the fifth 
century ce, yet it has attracted little scholarly attention. The earlier texts mentioning the list, 
the commentaries and Abhidhamma literature, were preoccupied with working out the mecha­
nism of kamma. The technical nature of these texts indicates that they were likely compiled 
by and aimed at scholarly monastics. Nevertheless, by expanding the three principal ways of 
making merit into the list of ten, they show a remarkable understanding, accommodation, and 
recognition of everyday religious practices (such as “transfer of merit”), good manners (such as 
respecting elders), and even ordinary professions (the learning and teaching of blameless crafts 
and skills). In the kāvya literature and Upāsakajanālaṅkāra preoccupation with technical details 
gave way to elaborate lists of the various advantages of each of the ways of making merit. 
Again, the texts acknowledge everyday practices and furthermore lay great emphasis on cul­
tivating faith and generating happiness. Finally, contemporary practical handbooks move away 
from emphasizing the advantages resulting from the ways of making merit to more practical 
advice on how to give gifts and so on. More recent handbooks give less space to the group of 
ten ways of making merit as a whole yet still devote separate chapters to some of them. My 
interviews reveal that not everyone may agree that good manners are of equal value to other 
meritorious deeds, yet the interpretation of merit as happiness seems to have truly caught on. 
The expansion of the three principal ways of making merit thus provides significant insights 
into the specifically Theravāda approach to merit.

--- PAGE 289 ---
Rita Langer
268
Notes
	 1	I would like to thank Aindralal Balasuriya, Ven Hyo Eun, Mahinda Fernando, Rupert Gethin, Hiroko 
Kawanami, Gregory Kourilsky, Ven Wetara Mahinda, Mudagamuwe Maithrimurthi, Jasmin Mangalika, 
Nanda Senanayake, Arthid Sheravanichkul, Peter Skilling, Nimal Sriyaratne, Ashley Thompson, Trent 
Walker, and many others for their time and help in various ways. Any mistakes or inaccuracies are, of 
course, mine.
	 2	Gombrich (1991, 87) refers to a well-known verse listing ten ways of making merit (see the following 
discussion), and Crosby (2014, 119f.) provides her own examples for each of the ten ways of making merit 
from modern Theravāda countries; neither explores the history and background of this influential list.
	 3	Cullaniddesa 233 (§ 523), A IV 239, Mahāniddesa 273 for the ten suitable gifts.
	 4	The Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ makes reference to the Paṭisambhidāmagga (Paṭis 236ff.).
	 5	The Atthasālinı̄ (As 158) makes the point that the samatha meditation of the thirty-eight objects 
(kammaṭṭhāna) with the aim of achieving the jhānas should also be included here in the definition of con­
templation as way of making merit.
	 6	The Atthasālinı̄ adds that the good preacher makes freedom his priority, and the Itivuttaka commentary 
adds that he is intent on the welfare of others.
	 7	The Itivuttaka commentary makes reference to the canonical (MN I 403 et al) set of wholesome views 
(offerings exist, etc.).
	 8	See also Sumaṅgala’s twelfth-century commentary (Abhidh-av-nṭ Be I 194–203 especially Be I 198).
	 9	Mil 294ff. allows giving merit but not demerit.
	10	See also Saddhātissa 1965, 59–64 for a comparison of the Saddhammopāyana and the Upāsakajanalaṅkāra
	11	The later works quote in the context of respect (apacāyana) the same well-known verse from the 
Dhammapada (Dhp 109) on the advantages of showing respect that the Saddhammopāyana (v. 549) quotes 
here in the context of pūjā.
	12	Vism Chapter VIII adds a further four recollections (maraṇasati, kāyagatāsati, ānāpānasati, upasamānussati).
	13	The standard lists of ten kusalakammapatha and akusalakammapatha are based on the five precepts, but the 
fifth precept regarding intoxicants is not represented (MN iii 46–50). Saddhammopāyana and Kāvyaśēkharaya 
extend the usual list of the ten by adding the consumption of intoxicants.
	14	Dan, sil, bāvanā / pindenu, anumodanā / baṇasanu, desanā / pidiyayuttan pudanu samanā // 40 // Karanu da 
vatāvat / pinkaru guṇa vȁnı̄mat / saraṇa, sihivı̄mat / dolos pin dȁna karava yāpat // 41 //.
	15	See also It-a 26.
	16	The Dhamma school books are compiled by a committee and distributed to the temples directly. I 
am grateful to Ven. Wetara Mahinda, chief incumbent of the Kollupitiya Polwatte Pansala, and Dr. A. 
Balasuriya, who teaches in the Dhamma school, for providing me with a copy of the book.
	17	Mil 294, see also Langer 2007, 164.
	18	I conducted eleven interviews in English and Sinhala with participants (including four monks) ranging in 
age from thirty to eighty years and from the Colombo and Gampaha areas.
	19	See Silk 2008, 213–217.
	20	Chinese T26, k.2, p. 427c25–428c5, see also Bingenheimer 2013, pp. 38–41. This sūtra is also found in the 
Madhyamāgama (but not in the Pāli Canon) and is quoted or alluded to in various contexts, versions, or 
translations.
	21	See also Lamotte (1980, p 2246) on a similar list of the five ways of making merit (again the fifth is unclear) 
in the Mahāprajñāpāramitāsūtra.
References
Primary sources and list of abbreviations
Abhidh-av = Abhidhammāvatāra. Edited by A.P. Buddhadatta, London, PTS, 1915–1928.
Abhidh-av-nṭ = Abhidhammāvatāranavaṭı̄kā = Abhidhammavikāsinı̄. Ed. by Aggamahāpaṇḍita Polvattē 
Buddhadatta, Ambalangoda 1961.
Abhidh-k-bh = Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam Ed. Pradhan 1967.
Abhidh-k-vy = Sphuṭārthā Abhidharmakośavyākhya. Ed. By Unrai Wogihara. Tokyo: Sankibo Buddhist 
Book Store. Abhidh-s = Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha; see Abhidh-s-mhṭ.
Abhidh-s-mhṭ = Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha-mahāṭı̄kā = Abhidhamatthavibhāvinı̄ (Sumaṅgala). Edited by H. 
Saddhātissa, Oxford, PTS, 1989.

--- PAGE 290 ---
Merit
269
AN = Aṅguttara-nikāya. Edited by R. Morris and E. Hardy, London, PTS, 1885–1900.
As = Atthasālinı̄. Edited by E. Müller, London, 1979. PTS. For translation see: Pe Maung Tin 1976.
Bauddha Ädahilla. Edited by Attuḍāvē Śrı̄ Rāhula, Nädimāla: Bauddha Saṃskṛtika Madhyasthānaya, 2000.
Bauddhayāgē Atpota (Rērukānē Candavimala 1949). Translated by D.J. Percy Silva, Handbook of the 
Buddhist, (Pokuṇuviṭa: Sri Chandawimala DhammaTreatises Preservation Board, 2014).
Cullaniddesa. Ed by W. Stede, London: PTS 1918, 1988.
Dhp = Dhammapada. Edited by K.R. Norman and O. von Hinüber, Oxford: PTS, 1994.
Dhs = Dhammasaṅginı̄. Edited by Müller, London 1978. For translation see Rhys Davids 1900.
Dhs-a = Dhammasaṅganı̄-aṭṭhakathā see As.
It = Itivuttaka. Edited by Windisch, London, 1975. PTS. For translation see Masefield, P. 2000.
It-a = Itivuttaka-aṭṭhakathā = Paramatthadı̄panı̄ II. Edited by M.M. Bose, London, PTS, 1934–1936.
KŚēkh = Kāvyaśēkhara mahā kāvyaya (Toṭagamuwē Śrı̄ Rāhula, 1449). Edited R. A., Liyanārachchi, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka 2007.
MN = Majjhima-nikāya. Edited by V. Trenckner and R. Chalmers, London, PTS, 1888–1902.
Mahāniddesa. Ed. by L. de La Vallée Poussin and E.J. Thomas, London, PTS, 1916, 1917.
Moh = Mohavicchedanı̄. Ed. Ven. A.P. Buddhadatta and A.K. Warder, Oxford, PTS 1961. Paramatthadı̄panı̄ 
II see It-a.
Paṭis = Paṭisambhidāmagga. Ed. A.C. Taylor, London, PTS, 1905, 1907.
Saddh = Saddhammopāyana. Edited by Dr Morris. JPTS 1887, 35–169.
Sv = Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄. Edited by T.W. Rhys Davids, London, PTS, 1886–1932.
Sv-ṭ = Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄-ṭı̄kā. Dı̄ghanikāyaṭṭhakathāṭı̄kā Lı̄natthavaṇṇanā ed. By Lily de Silva, London, PTS 
1970.
Upās = Upāsakajanālaṅkāra. Edited by Hammalawa Saddhātissa, London, PTS, 1965.
Vibh-a = Vibhaṅga-aṭṭhakathā (= Sammohavinodanı̄). Edited by A.P. Buddhadatta, PTS, London, 1923.
Secondary literature and translations
Assaji, Ven Gantunē, et al. 2017. Daham pāsala, 8 vana śrēṇiya. Colombo: Department of Buddhist Affairs.
Bingenheimer, M., ed. 2013. The Madhyama Āgama (Middle-length Discourses), Vol. I (Taisho Volume 1, 
Number 26).
Candavimala, R. 1949. Bauddhayāgē atpota. Boraläsgamuva, Sri Lanka: Śrı̄ Candavimala Dhampustaka 
Samrakṣaṇa Maṇḍalaya.
Crosby, K. 2014. Theravāda Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, and Identity. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons.
Dhanapala, W.N. (n.d.) “A study of the role of Buddhist Dhamma school education in dealing with 
the issues of achieving millennium development goals in Sri Lanka,” no place, p165f. http://www.
icdv.net/2014paper/ws5_11_en__A_study_of_the_role_of_Buddhist_Dhamma_school_educa­
tion_193629359.pdf.
Dickson, J.F. 1884. “Notes Illustrative of Buddhism as the Daily Religion of the Buddhists of Ceylon and 
Some Account of their Ceremonies before and after Death.” J.R.A.S. (Ceylon Branch) 8: 203–236.
Gethin, R. 2008. Sayings of the Buddha: new Translations by Rupert Gethin from the Pali Canon. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Gethin, R. 1997. “Cosmology and Meditation: From the Aggañña-Sutta to the Mahāyāna.” History of 
Religions 36: 183–217.
Gethin, R. 1992. The Buddhist Path to Awakening: a Study of the Bodhi-Pakkhiyā Dhammā. Leiden: Brill.
Gombrich, R. 1991. Buddhist Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural Highlands of Ceylon. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Gombrich R., Obeyesekere, G. 1988. Buddhism Transformed: Religious Change in Sri Lanka. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Guruge, A. 1991 [1965]. Return to Righteousness: a Collection of Speeches, Essays and Letters of the Anagarika 
Dharmapala. Colombo: Ministry of Cultural Affairs & Information.
von Hinüber, O. 1996. A Handbook of Pali Literature. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Holt, J.C. 1991. The Buddha in the Crown: Avalokiteśvara in the Buddhist Traditions of Sri Lanka. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Langer, R. 2007. Buddhist Rituals of Death and Rebirth: A study of contemporary Sri Lankan practice and its origins. 
Abingdon, UK: RoutledgeCurzon.

--- PAGE 291 ---
Rita Langer
270
Langer, R. 2012. “Chanting as ‘bricolage technique’ a comparison of South and Southeast Asian funeral 
recitation.” In Buddhist funeral cultures of Southeast Asia and China, eds. P. Williams, P. Ladwig, 21–58. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lamotte, E. 1980. Le traité de la grande vertu de sagesse. Vol. Tom. 5, Chapitres XLIX–LII, Et Chapitre XX 
(2e Série). Louvain: Université de Louvain, Institut orientaliste.
Masefield, P. 2000. The Itivuttaka. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Ñaṇamoḷi, Bhikkhu (trans.) 1991. The Dispeller of Delusion (Sammohavinodanı̄). London: Pali Text Society.
Norman, K.R. 1983. Pāli Literature: Including the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and Sanskrit of all the Hı̄nayāna 
Schools of Buddhism. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Pe Maung, Tin. 1976. The Expositor (reprinted as one volume). London: PTS.
Rhys Davids, C.A.F. 1900. A Buddhist Manual of Psychological Ethics of the Fourth Century B.C. Being a 
Translation now Made for the First Time from the Original Pali of the First Book in the Abhidhamma Pitaka 
Entitled Dhamma-Sangaṇi (Compendium of States or Phenomena). London: Royal Asiatic Society.
Saddhātissa, H., ed. 1965. “Introduction.” In Upāsakajanālaṅkāra, ed. H. Saddhātissa, 1–122. London: PTS.
Schmithausen, L. 1986. “Critical Response.” In Karma and Rebirth: Post Classical Developments, ed. R.W. 
Neufeldt, 203–230. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Silk, J. 2008. Managing Monks: Administrators and Administrative Roles in Indian Buddhist Monasticism, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Silva, D.J.P. 2014. Handbook of the Buddhist (Bauddhayāge atpota). Pokunuwita, Sri Lanka: Sri Chandawimala 
Dhamma Treatises Preservation Board.
Wijeratne, R.P., R. Gethin, (trans.) 2002. Summary of the Topics of Abhidhamma. Oxford: Pali Text Society.

--- PAGE 292 ---
271
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-22
18
BILINGUALISM
Theravāda bitexts across South and 
Southeast Asia
Trent Walker
Introduction
The geographic areas where Theravāda Buddhism thrives today—Sri Lanka and greater main­
land Southeast Asia—have long been host to multilingual societies. The ritual, literary, and intel­
lectual cultures of Theravāda Buddhism continue this polyglot heritage. Traditional learning 
is defined by skill in both Indic languages and local vernaculars. Itinerant ascetics, particularly 
on the Southeast Asian massif, master the borderlands between multiple dialects, cultures, and 
political spheres. Theravāda liturgies are rarely conducted in only one language; Pāli and local 
languages are deftly interwoven into a complex aural fabric.
The bilingual character of Theravāda Buddhism is no accident. It emerges from deliberate 
cultivation by Buddhist intellectuals in these regions over the past two millennia. The Theravāda 
transmission of texts is notably bilingual; scriptures in Pāli are often accompanied by vernacular 
translations and Pāli-vernacular bilingual texts, or “bitexts.” A typical Theravāda manuscript 
library therefore contains Pāli scriptures and commentaries, bilingual Pāli-vernacular versions 
of those same texts, and texts composed in the vernacular that contain Pāli words and phrases. 
Some libraries may have a few titles in Sanskrit as well. What we call “Theravāda Buddhism” 
or “Pāli Buddhism” is not a monolingual heritage—it springs from a long encounter between 
classical Indic and local vernacular texts.
Yet this direct exchange between Indic scriptural languages and local vernaculars is rare 
elsewhere in the contemporary Buddhist world. Only among the Newar do Sanskrit and a local 
dialect (Newari) regularly appear side by side in the same manuscript, although the vernacular 
portions tend to transmit ritual instructions rather than translate the Indic liturgy (Gutschow 
and Michaels 2005: 153–175). There are limited examples of wholly bilingual Sanskrit-Tibetan 
manuscripts (Verhagen 2013: 325–327) and Nepalese-Sanskrit manuscripts with Tibetan glosses 
(Dimitrov 2006: 5). Bilingual Sanskrit-vernacular texts were also produced by other Buddhist 
cultures in the past, including the Khotanese (Maggi 2015: 863) and the Tocharian (Peyrot 2008: 
83). But these are exceptions to the rule; most non-Theravāda parts of the Buddhist world no 
longer use bilingual Indic-vernacular texts.
How and why, then, did Theravāda Buddhists, especially during the second millennium, 
develop bilingual conventions for the transmission and performance of Buddhist texts? One 
might look north towards East Asia for comparison, where Literary Sinitic translations effectively

--- PAGE 293 ---
Trent Walker
272
replaced Indic scriptures, but bilingual Sinitic-vernacular reading techniques flourished. Similar 
to the Tibetan canon, Chinese scriptural translations retain Indic words only in phonetic tran­
scriptions of certain titles, spells, technical terms, and proper names. In China, Japan, Korea, and 
Vietnam, the Literary Sinitic of the translated canon became the accepted standard for exegetical 
and ritual purposes. On the other hand, bitextual presentations of Literary Sinitic, particularly in 
Japan (kundoku) and Korea (sŏktok kugyŏl), as well as new compositions in vernacular languages, 
accompanied the Chinese Buddhist canon throughout its history (Kornicki 2018: 157–186).
Indic scriptures, vernacular compositions, and Indic-vernacular bilingual texts comprise a 
roughly analogous mode of scriptural transmission in the Theravāda world. This chapter builds 
on scholarship about multilingual Buddhist texts in East Asia to consider different forms of 
bilingualism in Theravāda manuscript cultures, with a particular emphasis on what I call “Indic-
vernacular bitexts.” A “bitext,” in the context of contemporary linguistics, comprises both a 
source text in one language and its translation into another. For the purposes of this chapter, 
an Indic-vernacular bitext is a bilingual text that stitches together portions in an Indic prestige 
language (usually Pāli but also Sanskrit in rare cases) and a local South or Southeast Asian 
vernacular, such as Arakanese, Burmese, Khmer, Mon, Sinhala, Tamil, Vietnamese, or various 
Southwestern Tai languages (Khün, Lanna, Lao, Lü, Siamese, etc.), typically in an interphrasal 
or interlinear arrangement.
In the first half of this chapter, I give an overview of the three primary steps—selection, 
analysis, and presentation—in the creation of Theravāda bitexts, based on a comparative study 
of bilingual compositions across South and Southeast Asia. The technical dimensions of these 
bitexts have previously been studied in isolation; I provide the first comprehensive view of what 
makes Indic-vernacular bitexts tick. This practical foundation serves as the basis for the second 
half of the chapter, in which I outline how these techniques gradually developed into a range 
of bitextual genres in first- and second-millennium Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia. Theravāda 
bitexts are much more interconnected across space and time than is commonly assumed. Their 
shared techniques and historical trajectories bring to life the currents of intellectual and lin­
guistic exchange that have shaped this essentially bilingual religious tradition.
Creating bitexts: primary steps and techniques
Not all bilingual Theravāda books and manuscripts are bitexts in a strict sense. Most bilingual 
printed books with Pāli and vernacular texts in a parallel arrangement—including modern 
chanting guides, Tipiṭaka editions, and academic tomes—are not bitextual in the sense of com­
bining Pāli and vernacular phrases. Other Theravāda books and manuscripts, including many in 
folded-paper (leporello) and short palm-leaf format, contain brief Pāli texts interspersed with 
vernacular ritual instructions. These, too, are bilingual rather than bitextual, since the Indic and 
vernacular portions do not purport to be grammatically linked.
Indic-vernacular bitexts, by contrast, bind together Pāli and vernacular portions into a single 
composition. Traditional Theravāda manuscripts, particularly those preserved on long-format 
palm leaf, are dominated by Pāli-vernacular bitexts that combine Pāli and vernacular portions 
in a phrase-by-phrase, sentence-by-sentence, or line-by-line arrangement. These bitexts are 
created through the three primary steps of selection, analysis, and presentation, each of which 
may include multiple possible techniques:
	1	
Selection
	1a	 Citation
	1b	 Invention

--- PAGE 294 ---
Bilingualism
273
	2	
Analysis
	2a	 Parsing
	2b	 Amplification
	2c	 Rearrangement
	2d	 Annotation
	2e	 Gloss
	3	
Presentation
	3a	 Philological
	3b	 Exegetical
	3c	 Homiletic
	3d	 Poetic
The order of the steps and their attendant techniques reveals the logical method by which 
bitexts are created. All Indic-vernacular bitexts necessarily use all three primary steps, but 
which of the various techniques are employed depends on the linguistic background, cultural 
conventions, and intended audience of the author.
Selection
The initial step in creating a bitext is selecting and sometimes also directly quoting a par­
ticular passage in an Indic text. This passage may be a citation (1a) of an existing Indic text 
or an invention (1b) of an Indic text composed expressly for use in a bitext. Whether the 
selected passage is a citation or an invention, in nearly all cases, the Indic portion comes first 
and is thus treated as the source text. Although individual words and phrases may later be 
rearranged, Theravāda bitexts almost always proceed passage by passage through the existing 
or invented Indic source.
Citation
In the case of citation, selection entails choosing a passage that starts at the beginning of the 
existing source text, whether a single phrase or several paragraphs. Prior to this Pāli passage 
being analyzed and translated into the vernacular, it might be quoted in full. If complete quota­
tions are not used, it is common to provide just the beginning and end of a given quotation, 
with the middle abbreviated by means of a peyyāla mark, typically pa, pe, or la (Gethin 2007: 
383–384). During the third step of presentation, these quotations may be reduced or excised 
completely depending on the intended audience of the bitext.
Invention
When the source is invented rather than cited, the Indic and vernacular portions are penned by 
the same author. In some cases, the newly composed Pāli portions form a complete text that 
may be studied in and of itself. In most instances, however, an abbreviated style of presenta­
tion is adopted and the Pāli portions do not form a coherent text; the “missing” portions of 
the Pāli were not excised by the author but simply never existed in the first place. Invented 
bitexts signal to their audience that the authoritative diction of Pāli—perhaps even the words 
of the Buddha himself—form the basis for the composition at hand, even if no such Pāli source 
text exists. Such bitexts are widespread in Khmer- and Southwestern Tai–speaking cultures. A 
few bilingual works in Burma even invert the usual structure by applying normative bitextual

--- PAGE 295 ---
Trent Walker
274
techniques to create Burmese-Pāli bitexts, rather than Pāli-Burmese bitexts, in which the root 
text is the vernacular and its translation is in Pāli (Lammerts 2018: 93).
Analysis
The second step in crafting a bitext entails performing a reading and/or translation of the 
selected Pāli or Sanskrit passage. The techniques of analysis may be performed silently and 
invisibly (“reading”) or in ways that are aurally or visually apparent (“translation”) to a listener 
or reader. Analysis may include parsing the selected passage into its component parts (2a), 
amplifying implied or contracted Indic words (2b), annotating grammatical features of those 
words (2c), rearranging those words to fit vernacular syntax (2d), and providing Indic and/or 
vernacular glosses (2e).
Parsing
Since the cited passage typically contains many individual Pāli words, the sentence must first be 
“read” or dissected into its constituent components prior to subsequent stages of analysis. The 
author of the bitext must parse the passage into intelligible semantic units. In some manuscripts, 
the division of words is accomplished by the insertion of punctuation marks, including spaces. 
In other cases, Pāli words joined by the process of euphonic conjunction known as sandhi may 
be resolved into their basic components (e.g., namatthu becomes namo atthu). Parsing transforms 
the Indic passage from a sequence of phonetic syllables into a meaningful series of lexical items.
Amplification
Since Indic texts may contain many implied or contracted words and phrases, these need to 
be amplified or fleshed out during the process of analysis. Shortened clitic forms may be con­
verted to full words (va to eva or iva; ti to iti, me to mama or mayā, etc.). Abbreviated or implied 
relative-correlative structures may be specified in their complete form (tathā … becomes yathā 
… tathā …, etc.). Implied subjects, objects, and verbs are frequently added as appropriate. For 
instance, the opening evam me sutaṃ (Thus I have heard) of the Maṅgala-sutta might become 
evaṃ ekenākārena [or ekena ākārena] me [or mayā] bhagavato samukhā sutaṃ idaṃ suttaṃ maṅgala-
suttaṃ (Thus, in this one way, I, in the Blessed One’s presence, have heard this sutta called the 
Maṅgala-sutta). These amplifications all serve to make the grammatical structure of the Pāli as 
transparent as possible.
Rearrangement
The sequence of Pāli words and phrases may be rearranged to match vernacular syntax. None 
of the vernacular languages of Theravāda Buddhism cultures share the same word order as Pāli. 
Some, such as Burmese or Sinhala, are relatively close, while others, such as Khmer or Siamese, 
are significantly different. Moreover, the syntax of Pāli verse is quite free; even Pāli-Pāli commen­
taries on verse texts change the word order for exegetical purposes. Most, although not all, Pāli-
vernacular bitexts engage in syntactical rearrangement to produce coherent vernacular readings.
Rearrangement may be marked in several different ways. The most common option is for 
the amplified version of the original Pāli passage to simply be written out in the vernacular 
word order. One Pāli-Siamese manuscript, shown in Figure 18.1, rearranges the amplified 
opening of the Maṅgala-sutta cited earlier as follows: idaṃ sut[t]aṃ maṅgala-s[utt]aṃ me s[u]taṃ

--- PAGE 296 ---
Bilingualism
275
bhagavato sumukhā evaṃ ekenākārena (This sutta, called the Maṅgala-sutta, I have heard in the 
Blessed One’s presence thus, in this one way).
An alternative method of rearrangement uses interlinear annotations, usually in the form 
of numbers or letters, to indicate the proper sequence (see Figure 18.2). This new sequence 
structures both reading and translation: It is a perfectly legitimate way to read the Pāli passage, 
despite being tuned to the native syntax of a Sinhalese or Southeast Asian student of Pāli. It 
also matches the sequence by which each individual Pāli word needs to be glossed in order to 
create a fluent vernacular translation. With respect to the same example from the Maṅgala-sutta, 
the amplified passage would be numbered as follows to produce a Siamese reading: [6] evaṃ 
ekenākārena [3] me [5] bhagavato samukhā [4] sutaṃ [1] idaṃ suttaṃ [2] maṅgala-suttaṃ.
Annotation
Before glossing (2e) or translation proper may begin, there is often a crucial intermediate step. 
Annotation entails marking case, number, mood, tense, and other grammatical features of the 
Pāli with vernacular particles. Among major vernacular languages in Theravāda cultures, only 
Sinhala, an Indo-Aryan language like Pāli, has a morphological system for marking such gram­
matical features. Pāli-Sinhala bitexts therefore skip this step and move immediately to creating 
vernacular lexical glosses.
For Southeast Asian Pāli-vernacular bitexts, however, the annotation step is essential and sets 
them apart from ordinary vernacular texts. None of these vernacular languages has a comparable 
system of case; the function of nouns must be derived primarily from syntax (Enfield 2019: 
18). Some Southeast Asian written languages have developed particles that mimic case-marking 
in Pāli. In Burmese, these particles are affixes that follow the noun; in Khmer, Khün, Mon, 
Lanna, Lao, and Lü, they mostly precede the nouns they modify. Selected examples are shown 
in Table 18.1. In Pāli-vernacular bitexts, such particles may be rigorously applied to mark Pāli 
cases; similar sets of particles can also be applied to mark grammatical number, mood, and tense 
(Walker 2018a: 337).
Figure 18.1  Pāli-Siamese manuscript in interphrasal format, with alternating Pāli and Siamese phrases 
(Sattaparitta, FEMC C.77.VII, detail of folio kı̄ verso, line 5 and folio ku recto, line 1).
Photograph by the author.
Figure 18.2  Pāli-Siamese manuscript in interlinear format, with alphanumeric rearrangement, Pāli ampli­
fication, and vernacular gloss (Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā, FEMC D.11.VII, detail of folio ṭhu 
verso, lines 3–5).
Photograph by the author.

--- PAGE 297 ---
Trent Walker
276
The extent to which such markers are truly part of the vernacular language or are artificial 
technical particles is subject to debate (Okell 1965: 191–195; Khin 1999: 461–465). They tend 
to be more common in the literary registers of Southeast Asian languages, most notably that of 
Burmese (Okell 1965: 189–190). In Khmer and Southwestern Tai languages, for instance, there 
is normally no need to mark the subject or direct object of a given sentence with any special 
particle. However, Pāli-Khmer and Pāli-Tai bitexts will often meticulously mark Pāli nouns 
in the nominative (subject) and accusative (object) cases with specific technical particles. The 
formal or literary registers of all languages in Southeast Asian Theravāda cultures bear similar 
imprints of the Pāli-vernacular bitextual style.
Gloss
Glossing involves defining Pāli words and phrases with Pāli and/or vernacular glosses. Although 
less common, Pāli glosses nevertheless contribute to the distinctive aesthetic of bitexts. In 
Khmer, Khün, Lanna, Lao, and Lü manuscript cultures, a special vernacular particle is used to 
set off these Pāli glosses from the cited Pāli text (Khmer moḥ; Tai moḥ vā₁ or măk vā₁; translitera­
tion throughout this chapter follows Walker 2018a xiii–xvii). Such Pāli glosses are then typically 
followed by vernacular glosses, which are not marked by a special particle. Returning to the 
Maṅgala-sutta example, evaṃ is glossed as evaṃ moḥ ekenākarena ḍvay°₂ ākār ăn° nịṅ° grị̄ 
ḍai₂ savanā kār b́ăṅ (thus, that is to say, in this one way, in this one way, namely, the 
act of having listened; FEMC C.77.VII, kı̄ verso 5). The complexity of vernacular glosses 
varies depending on the term glossed and the intended audience of the bitext. The default is 
a simple translation of the Pāli word or phrase. As the next step reveals, however, such glosses 
may subsequently be abbreviated, expounded on, vividly elaborated, or set in ornate verse.
Presentation
After completing the analytical processes outline a reading and translation of the selected 
Indic passage, the author of a bitext then must choose how to present the analyzed passage 
for its intended audience. Some bitexts are written with monastic training in mind, others for 
elite patrons, still others for public recitation; each audience may have different practical and 
aesthetic concerns that shape the required presentation. I outline four techniques or modes 
of presentation here: philological (3a), exegetical (3b), homiletic (3c), and poetic (3d). These 
Table 18.1  Examples of grammatical annotation particles
Language
Subject
Abbreviated 
Form
Plural
Abbreviated 
Form
Direct Object
Khmer
rı̄ + NOUN
rı̄/rị̄-like 
symbol
NOUN + dāṃṅ
da
nūv + NOUN
ḷāy/dāṃṅ° hlāy°
Siamese
ăn vā₁ + NOUN
rı̄/rị̄-like 
symbol
NOUN + dăṅ₂ 
hlāy
da
j́ịṅ₁ + NOUN
Lao
ăn vā₁ + NOUN
rı̄/rị̄-like 
symbol
NOUN + dăṅ 
hlāy
dă°lā
yăṅ + NOUN
Burmese
NOUN + saññ
su/sañ
NOUN + tui’/
tuiv’/tuiv
kui + NOUN

--- PAGE 298 ---
Bilingualism
277
are not airtight categories; the modes may overlap for particular bitexts. Some passages in a 
particular bitext may receive a philological or exegetical treatment, while others may move in 
a homiletic or poetic direction.
Philological
Creating a bitext for the efficient linguistic study of a particular Indic source often relies 
on extensive abbreviation. A philological presentation may adopt special symbols for certain 
particles or glosses as well as elide some vernacular glosses entirely. Most such presentations 
are reserved for texts used for training in Pāli grammar and Pāli-vernacular translation. The 
bitext serves as an aid to the study of Pāli, and the intended audience is therefore either a 
private monastic reader or teacher. An abbreviated bitext for philological purposes may end 
up being less than a third vernacular material; in some cases, only scattered vernacular anno­
tations are visible between the lines. Not all Theravāda cultures engage in such abbreviation 
in their written bitexts. Pāli-Sinhala bitexts do not appear to elide self-evident vernacular 
glosses; all Pāli words are translated into Sinhala. Moreover, since Sri Lankan bitexts do not 
use technical particles to mark grammatical features, there is little in the way of symbolic 
abbreviations.
By contrast, in philological presentations of bitexts in Laos and Thailand, elision of vernacular 
glosses for common Pāli words is widespread. In addition, a few common technical particles, 
including those for marking the nominative case and the plural number, are frequently notated 
through abbreviated forms (see Figure 18.1). This process soars towards its logical extreme in 
certain genres of Pāli-Burmese bitexts; William Pruitt documents nearly two hundred different 
forms of abbreviation in a single Pātimokkha bitext (Pruitt 1994: 235–241). In Khmer and Tai 
contexts, extensive abbreviation is generally restricted to treatises for monastic study rather than 
sermons for reading aloud to lay audiences. Philological treatments of bitexts typically occur 
with cited rather than invented Indic sources and are the only form of Theravāda bitext to 
favor an interlinear as opposed to interphrasal arrangement.
Exegetical
In contrast with philological presentations, a bitext tuned for exegetical purposes focuses not 
on linguistic acquisition or grammatical analysis but rather doctrinal exposition. This mode 
of presentation focuses on expounding Indic terms in accordance with scholastic conventions 
of the Pāli commentarial tradition, such as etymological reflections, rhetorical questions, cita­
tions of other texts, and refutation of competing viewpoints. Most exegetical bitexts feature 
extensive intertextual engagement with existing Pāli commentaries, explicitly demonstrating 
their fidelity to the Buddhist scholastic heritage. Like the monolingual Pāli commentaries 
they build on, many exegetical bitexts provide multiple contrasting interpretations of a single 
Pāli passage. In Tai bitexts, such alternative readings are marked with a local form of the 
Pāli naya, typically năiy° nịṅ° (“One interpretation states …”). While bitexts are typically 
not a radical departure from monolingual Pāli commentaries, they may offer new lines of 
inquiry or emphasis (Walker 2018a: 351–361; cf. McDaniel 2008: 143; 153–154). In particular, 
Pāli-Burmese exegetical bitexts may feature an extended vernacular explanation (adhippāya) 
after the initial steps of introduction, citation, and analysis (Lammerts 2018: 95). Some Pāli-
Sinhala bitexts may also quote at length from Pāli commentaries to elucidate their arguments 
(Blackburn 2001: 124–125).

--- PAGE 299 ---
Trent Walker
278
Homiletic
Bitexts intended to be read aloud as prose sermons to laypeople often include far more 
vernacular than Pāli material. In the case of bitexts that cite existing Indic texts, much of 
the Pāli may be redacted in a homiletic presentation to make the sermon more accessible 
to lay audiences. If no existing source is present, an author of a bitext might choose to 
only compose enough Pāli needed for a particular audience. For sermons based on invented 
sources, the amount of Pāli included may be quite small beyond the first few passages. 
Whether based on extant or newly composed Indic sources, such sermons still retain the 
distinctive analytical techniques proper to bitexts. If the source is a known Pāli text, the 
vernacular portions tend to adhere to the norms of scholastic commentaries; authors of 
such bitexts generally do not insert idiosyncratic Pāli phrases or add details that veer from 
commentarial conventions (Walker 2018a: 370–373; cf. McDaniel 2008: 140–142). Authors 
of these homiletic bitexts nevertheless draw on the vernacular language to craft elaborate, 
engaging prose narratives and expositions that engage lay listeners while maintaining an 
explicit connection to Pāli scriptures.
Poetic
While most Theravāda bitexts are created to serve scholastic or didactic ends, a subset empha­
sizes their aesthetic qualities. Such bitexts focus on a poetic presentation, often as sermons 
for court or other elite lay audiences. These literary bitexts expand the vernacular glosses in 
accordance with the conventions found in both Indic and vernacular belles lettres. The poetic 
conventions employed in these extended vernacular glosses vary widely. In some cases, only 
the vernacular portions are crafted into verse, typically with established syllabic or rhyme con­
straints. In other cases, the Indic and vernacular portions may be merged into a single metrical 
structure. Like ordinary prose bitexts produced for sermons, poetic bitexts may elaborate on 
narrative and descriptive details for literary effect.
The steps and techniques outlined above are shared by the broader Indic commentarial 
tradition, especially monolingual Pāli commentaries. Aṭṭhakathā and ṭı̄kā select, analyze, and 
present Pāli passages anew. They frequently amplify implied or contracted Pāli words and 
provide scholastic exegesis or narrative elaboration. Yojanā, most of which were composed in 
second-millennium Southeast Asia, share a special emphasis on rearranging the syntax of Pāli 
texts and annotating their grammatical features (Kieffer-Pülz 2015: 432). Pada-anvaya (pada-
änuma), found only in Sri Lanka, are exclusively devoted to syntactic rearrangement, namely, 
changing the sequence of Pāli words to match the order for reading and translation in Sinhala 
(Bechert 2005: 28; cf. Godakumbura 1955: 352).
The techniques witnessed in Indic-vernacular bitexts thus reflect their close relation­
ship with monolingual Pāli commentaries. Since these commentaries predate the earliest 
extant Pāli-vernacular bitexts, the Pāli aṭṭhakathā tradition and related Sanskrit scholastic 
practices are among the most important ancestors of Theravāda bitexts. But this model 
may not capture the complete historical picture. Since the now-lost Pāli-Sinhala Prakrit 
commentaries on the Pāli scriptures—the so-called Sı̄halaṭṭhakathā—were the basis for the 
Pāli aṭṭhakathā commentaries, Pāli-vernacular bitexts were not necessarily a later develop­
ment. This deeply intertwined relationship between monolingual and bitextual exegetical 
traditions brings us to a consideration of their historical development and diffusion across 
the Theravāda world.

--- PAGE 300 ---
Bilingualism
279
Spreading bitexts: the diffusion of bilingual compositions
The three primary steps and multiple techniques shared across Pāli-vernacular bitexts demon­
strate one dimension of their interconnected heritage. The historical processes by which these 
methods spread throughout South and Southeast Asia showcase another. Both dimensions point 
to the bilingualism at the core of Theravāda textual life.
The historical precedents for the bitextual genres witnessed in contemporary manuscript 
collections include Pāli, Sanskrit, and Sinhala Prakrit commentarial traditions as well as Indic-
vernacular translation practices among the Khmer, the Mon, the Pyu, and other early civiliza­
tions of mainland Southeast Asia. As Sanskrit commentarial traditions fall outside the scope of 
this chapter, I focus on the earliest evidence for bitexts in each of the regions that now comprise 
the Theravāda world. I begin with the earliest surviving Sri Lankan examples (ca. 900–1200) 
before providing a survey of the major developments in mainland Southeast Asia from the first 
millennium to the present, including Old Khmer and Pyu proto-bitexts (ca. 500–1200) and 
early Mon and Burmese examples (ca. 1100–1500). These developments paved the way for the 
oldest extant Tai bitexts (ca. 1300–1700) and later variations among the Khmer, Tai Khün, Tai, 
Lü, and Vietnamese (ca. 1700–1950). This outline highlights the process of mutual influence 
and diffusion that shaped Theravāda bitexts up to the present.
Early Sri Lankan Bitexts, ca. 900–1200
Setting aside the lost Sı̄halaṭṭhakathā commentaries, the earliest surviving Pāli-Sinhala bitexts 
were composed in the tenth century ce. These include both bilingual gaṇṭhipada (Sinhala: 
gäṭapadaya) and sannaya (also known as sanna, sannē, or sometimes padārtha). Although there is 
considerable overlap between the two genres, the former generally focus on “knotty” (gaṇṭhi) 
words, whereas the latter provide interphrasal glosses of entire texts. Both may engage in a 
range of exegetical commentary that goes beyond mere gloss (Blackburn 2001: 68). Sannaya 
generally reorders the syntax of the original to match the Sinhala order, such that the glosses 
form fluent sentences.
Examples of Sanskrit-Sinhala and Pāli-Sinhalese bitexts that may date from the tenth century 
include the Kāvyādarśasannaya (an interphrasal bitext of Daṇḍin’s Sanskrit work on poetics, the 
Kāvyādarśa), the Dhampiyā-aṭuvā-gäṭapadaya, the Jātaka-aṭuvā-gäṭapadaya, and the Mahābodhivaṃsa-
gäṭapadaya (bilingual exegeses of the Pāli Jātaka-aṭṭhavaṇṇanā, Dhammapadaṭṭhakathā, and 
Mahābodhivaṃsa, respectively; Dimitrov 2016: 144–145; 160–161; 454–455; Gornall 2017: 485). 
The Siyabaslakara, a ninth- or tenth-century Sinhalese adaptation of the Kāvyādarśa that includes 
a Sinhala-Sinhala sannaya, exhibits the same primary techniques of citation, analysis via rear­
rangement and gloss, and an exegetical presentation.
By the twelfth century, Pāli-Sinhala bitexts developed increasingly sophisticated forms 
of exegesis. Some of these followed in the footsteps of Vimalabuddhi’s commentary on the 
Kaccāyana-vyākaraṇa, the Mukhamattadı̄panı̄. Burmese recensions of this commentary enumer­
ate a sixfold exegetical method (sambandha, pada, padattha, padaviggaha, codanā, and parihāra; 
Ruiz-Falqués 2015: 116). We could link pada (or padaccheda, following the Pāli-Lao reading of 
PLMP 08040102007_04, ka recto 5) to “parsing,” sambandha to “rearrangement,” padattha to 
“gloss,” and padaviggaha (word analysis), codanā (objection), and parihāra (refutation) to various 
exegetical procedures. These techniques were instrumental in the “grammaticization” of both 
Pāli and Sinhala commentaries during this period, including the Abhidharmārthasaṅgrahasannaya, 
Sāriputta’s bitextual version of the Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha (Gornall 2020). The spread of Sri

--- PAGE 301 ---
Trent Walker
280
Lankan Buddhist texts to Southeast Asia during the early centuries of the second millennium 
assured that the exegetical approach of Pāli and Pāli-Sinhala commentaries influenced new 
compositions across the Indian Ocean as well.
Pyu and Old Khmer Proto-Bitexts, ca. 500–1200
In mainland Southeast Asia, many inscriptions, particularly during the second half of the first 
millennium, include portions in two or more languages, usually a classical Indic language 
(Sanskrit or Pāli) and a local tongue (Cham, Khmer, Mon, Pyu). However, in most cases, the 
classical and vernacular sections diverge: the Indic section may praise a deity in verse, while the 
vernacular prose documents what was donated to that deity. The Indic passage comes first, usu­
ally on the top portion of the inscription, while the vernacular lies below or on a different face.
One possible exception to this pattern is the Kan Wet Khaung Mound inscription, an 
unusual bilingual Sanskrit-Pyu text carved on the pedestal of a Buddha image found in central 
Myanmar, dated to the sixth century (Griffiths et al. 2017: 100–101). Unlike almost all other 
first-millennium bilingual Indic-vernacular texts, the Sanskrit and Pyu portions are arranged 
interphrasally, with a word or phrase in Sanskrit followed by a word or phrase in Pyu. Although 
many of the Pyu portions appear to be glosses, a recent study suggests that these glosses do 
not replicate the grammatical structure of the Sanskrit. Grammatical annotation is absent, with 
the possible exception of a particle for the plural number (Griffiths et al. 2017: 141–142). No 
amplification or rearrangement is attested, though it is likely that the Pyu portions contain 
various elaborations.
Hundreds of seventh- to fourteenth-century inscriptions containing both Sanskrit and Old 
Khmer portions appear in and around what is now Cambodia. In most cases, however, the two 
languages differ in both arrangement and substance. In the few cases in which they overlap 
in content, they are not arranged interphrasally and, as such, were not necessarily meant to 
be read in an explicitly dialogical relationship. Nevertheless, beginning in the tenth century, a 
handful of inscriptions feature close Khmer prose translations of Sanskrit verses (Chhom 2016: 
319–340). The Khmer translations not only match the lexical structure of the Sanskrit but also 
echo the grammar. These Sanskrit-Khmer inscriptions engage in both vernacular gloss and 
grammatical annotation, including particles to express vocative, accusative, genitive, and plural 
attributes (hai, nu, ta, and phoṅ, respectively). Variations of these same particles are included 
in the more systematic techniques for grammatical notation that appear in Cambodia in the 
earliest known Pāli-Khmer bitexts hundreds of years later (Walker 2018a: 337).
Early Mon and Burmese Bitexts, ca. 1100–1500
Early Sanskrit-Pyu and Sanskrit-Old Khmer inscriptions hint at the existence of bitexts in 
both parallel and interphrasal arrangements, along with some of the techniques found in later 
compositions. However, it is not until the late eleventh or early twelfth century that unambigu­
ous evidence appears for Pāli-vernacular bitexts in Southeast Asia. The earliest known example 
is the Pāli-Mon inscription from the pillars of the Shwezigon temple in Pagan, carved during 
the reign of Kyanzittha (r. 1084–1113; Luce and Shin 1969: 50–57). While the bulk of this 
massive inscription is solely in Mon, the first twelve lines contain a short Pāli verse followed by 
a rearrangement of the same passage into an interphrasal Pāli-Mon bitext (Blagden 1960: 93).
This passage displays the three primary steps and many of their attendant techniques. It 
begins with a selection of an invented Pāli verse. The verse is then analyzed through parsing, 
amplification, rearrangement, annotation, and gloss. The nominative case and aorist tense are

--- PAGE 302 ---
Bilingualism
281
marked with the technical particles yaṅ (Halliday 1923: 33) and cin (i.e., cón; Duroiselle 1913: 
122). The presentation technique is largely exegetical, adding key details and explanations 
through rhetorical questions. Other presentation modes surface in Pāli-Mon bitexts (known 
as naṃ or trāai) from later eras (Griffiths et al. 2017: 104n118). By the twelfth century at the 
latest, it seems that nearly all the technical conventions for Pāli-vernacular bitexts in mainland 
Southeast Asia were already in place.
These bitextual techniques likely spread from Mon speakers to other linguistic groups in 
mainland Southeast Asia in the eleventh through thirteenth centuries. The earliest epigraphic 
evidence for a portion of a Pāli-Burmese bitext, known locally as a nissaya (Pāli nissaya; Sanskrit 
niśraya, “dependence” or “support,” as in a crutch for reading an Indic text), dates to the late 
thirteenth century (Griffiths et al. 2017: 104n117). An inscription from 1442 lists a number of 
texts thought to be Sanskrit-Burmese nissaya (Lammerts 2018: 28–31).
Early Modern Siamese, Lao, and Lanna Bitexts, ca. 1300–1700
Bitexts were likely adopted by Tai-speaking groups from some combination of Mon, Khmer, 
Burmese, and Sinhala influences. By the middle of the second millennium, the core techniques 
had spread from the Mon and the Burmese to most Tai and Khmer groups, including those in 
Siam, Lanna, Laos, and Cambodia. The earliest surviving complete Pāli-Siamese bitext, a poetic 
version of the Vessantara-jātaka in several kinds of vernacular verse, was supposedly composed 
in 1482 (Walker 2018a: 364–367). The earliest securely dated Pāli-Lanna bitext was copied in 
1552 (DLNTM 011903027_00), the oldest extant Sanskrit-Lanna bitext in 1578 (DLNTM 
011318001_01), and the first known Pāli-Lao bitext in 1586 (PLMP 08040102007_04); the 
compositions themselves are presumably somewhat older.
Many of the earliest Lanna and Lao examples bear the term nāmasăp° or săp° in their title. 
Nāmasăp° may be related to Sanskrit *nāmaśabda/Pāli *nāmasadda, of uncertain meaning, but 
in all manuscripts known to me the final syllable is spelled săp°, meaning “to cut into pieces”; 
whether this is more apt than śabda (phoneme) is hard to say. Early Pāli-Tai bitexts sporting 
this term are based on canonical or commentarial Vinaya and Abhidhamma texts, use all five 
analytical techniques, and are presented in philological and/or exegetical modes. It seems rea­
sonable to suppose that nāmasăp° bitexts were used exclusively for monastic study. Another 
large group of early Lanna and Lao bitexts adopt the term nisrai or nissay, comparable to nissaya 
in Burmese usage. Lao and Lanna nissaya are quite close to nāmasăp° in style (McDaniel 2008: 
135). However, the term nissaya has a broader application, appearing in a wide range of bitexts 
copied prior to the eighteenth century, including Jātaka narratives, grammatical treatises, and 
aṭṭhakathā commentaries.
Starting from the early seventeenth century, the manuscript record provides evidence of 
Pāli-Tai homiletic bitexts that redact most of the Pāli portions or whose limited Pāli portions 
are invented. These include bitexts bearing the genre terms vohān°/vohār° (Pāli vohāra, “expres­
sion”) and ānisa͡ṅ° (Pāli ānisaṃsa, “benefit”; i.e., sermons on the karmic boons of various pious 
acts); the oldest known manuscript examples of each date to 1666 (DLNTM 070710018_00; 
PNTMP 030306004_05). The term vohāra seems largely limited to Lanna; Pāli-Lao bitexts in 
a similar style are generally labeled nissaya instead. Early vohāra bitexts draw exclusively from 
known Pāli texts but use extensive redaction of the Pāli and elaboration of the vernacular to 
make them appropriate for sermons to lay audiences. Indeed, most vohāra, after a citation of 
the opening Pāli passage, insert the Pāli phrase bho sādhavo (All you good people!), followed by 
its vernacular translation, as an explicit nod to their audience. Pāli-vernacular ānisaṃsa texts, 
many of which predate later monolingual Pāli versions, use a similar style to vohāra. The crucial

--- PAGE 303 ---
Trent Walker
282
difference is that ānisaṃsa are not typically based on an existing Pāli text; the Pāli portions were 
apparently composed, or at least borrowed, by the author of the bitext. The bitextual format, 
including all of its technical conventions, allows ānisaṃsa to work as vernacular sermons that 
draw on the scriptural authority of the Pāli language.
Around this same period in Siam we find the earliest surviving evidence for philological 
Pāli-vernacular bitexts in an interlinear format. These take the form of inked or carved annota­
tions in extremely small script, known as khaam hvăt or tvă ksien in modern Thai, that provide 
Pāli glosses and amplifications; vernacular glosses, grammatical annotations, and brief interpre­
tive comments; and numbers or letters to denote exactly how the syntax is to be rearranged 
for a vernacular reading and translation (Walker 2018a: 373–377). Most of the texts annotated 
in this way are those emphasized in Siamese monastic examinations, including the Kaccāyana-
vyākaraṇa, the Dhammapada-aṭṭhakathā, and the Maṅgalaṭṭhadı̄panı̄. Hence, the annotations reveal 
how monks of the time actually studied Pāli texts. Similar annotations in both Siamese and 
Khmer are found in manuscripts in Cambodian collections copied as late as the early twentieth 
century (Walker 2018b: civ–cvi).
We also find seventeenth-century evidence for legal codes adopting aspects of Pāli-vernacular 
bitexts. The earliest available manuscript example is probably the Garubhaṇḍa, a Lao monastic 
law code copied in 1683 (PLMP 06018515002_02), of which certain parts are structured as a 
Pāli-Lao bitext. There is a Pāli or Pāli-Lanna manuscript on twenty-five types of monastic theft 
(avahāra) that was purportedly inscribed in 1472, though I was unable to verify this date (SRI 
80.046.03.052–052). In Burma, the oldest extant Burmese legal code (dhammasatttha), known 
as the Dhammavilāsa and likely composed no later than 1637 or 1638, contains bitextual nis­
saya passages (Lammerts 2018: 56–59). In Siam, some legal codes thought to be adapted from 
Mon sources likewise contain Pāli-Siamese bitextual portions, including the Dhaṕmasātr, likely 
composed sometime before 1805 (Baker and Phongpaichit 2016: 17–19).
Modern Khmer, Tai Khün, Tai Lü, and 
Vietnamese Bitexts, ca. 1700–1950
Pāli-vernacular bitexts, in both sacred and secular guises, eventually reached nearly all corners 
of the Theravāda world. Tai Lü (Dai Lue) and Tai Khün bitexts follow a similar pattern to the 
Lao and Lanna examples cited above. Even less is known about the precise nature of Pāli-Tai 
Nuea, Pāli-Shan, and other bitexts from Southwestern Tai–speaking Buddhist communities 
in the region, though bilingual manuscripts for rituals, medicine, and magic are abundant in 
these cultures. No Khmer-language manuscript survives in Cambodia from before the 1830s. 
Nevertheless, more recent manuscripts may transmit older Pāli-Khmer bitexts, generally in 
a redacted presentation, many of them dating from the eighteenth century or even earlier. 
During the incipient decades of Vietnamese Theravāda Buddhism in the mid-twentieth century, 
some translations were made of Pāli-Khmer bitexts, with limited Pāli phrases retained in the 
Vietnamese (Hộ Tông 1965: 8).
Theravāda bitexts today
Bitexts remain alive and well today as tools for monastic study, exegetical commentary, and 
public sermons. Contemporary Thai scholars distinguish between the fixed translation style 
associated with bitexts, ṕlè toy byañjanaḥ (translating the letters), and a more natural style, ṕlè 
toy aṕthaḥ (translating the meaning; Assanee 2012: 7). The term ṕlè yak śăb(d) (translating by 
citing words) implies a bitext in which the vernacular portions match the ṕlè toy byañjanaḥ

--- PAGE 304 ---
Bilingualism
283
style. A opening verse presented first in Pāli and then in a dissected and rearranged bitextual 
style may also be known in Thai as cuṇṇı̄yapad (Pāli *cuṇṇı̄yapada, perhaps “words to be cut 
into pieces”). Contemporary Khmer terms equivalent to Thai ṕlè yak śăb(d) include prè ṭoy lök 
săbd (translating by citing words) and prè lot prayog (translating by jumping phrases), the latter of 
which explicitly invokes the distinctive technique of syntactical rearrangement (Walker 2018a: 
319). Samrāy is a more general term for Khmer translations from Pāli, whether in monolingual 
or bilingual format.
The introduction of new Pāli pedagogies in the twentieth century, alongside the rise of 
novel vernacular literary genres, lowered the prominence of bitexts in some Theravāda soci­
eties, although their aesthetic prestige remains current. New intellectual endeavors provided 
alternative modes of erudition, exegesis, and eloquence, ideals long rendered by the produc­
tion and performance of bitexts. Yet the legacy of bilingual composition still binds together 
much of the written heritage of Theravāda Buddhism and challenges us to view Pāli scriptures 
and commentaries as dependent on a specific set of shared bitextual techniques for successful 
transmission and performance.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank the editors as well as Anne Blackburn, Chenxing Han, and D. 
Christian Lammerts for their detailed feedback. Assanee Poolrak, Alastair Gornall, Santi 
Pakdeekham, Peter Skilling, Tossaphon Sripum, Hunter Watson, and David Wharton patiently 
answered a range of questions. Research for this chapter was supported by a postdoctoral fel­
lowship from the Khyentse Foundation.
Manuscripts cited
DLNTM 011318001_01 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/4475)
DLNTM 011903027_00 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/3700)
DLNTM 070710018_00 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/5982)
FEMC C.77.VII (https://www.tbrc.org/#!rid=W1FEMC021140)
FEMC D.11.VII (https://www.tbrc.org/#!rid=W1FEMC021193)
PLMP 06018515002_02 (http://www.laomanuscripts.net/en/texts/930)
PLMP 08040102007_04 (http://laomanuscripts.net/en/texts/6166)
PNTMP 030306004_05 (http://lannamanuscripts.net/en/manuscripts/4990)
SRI 80.046.03.052-052 (http://www.sri.cmu.ac.th/~elanna/Microfilm/index/index2e.html)
References
Assanee, Poolrak. 2012. Năndoṕanăndasūt́r gāṃ hlvaṅ: kār vigroḥ(h) śilṕaḥ kār ṕlè lèḥ kalavidhī dāṅ vaṕṇaśil(ṕ). 
MA thesis. Chulalongkorn University.
Baker, C., Phongpaichit, Pasuk. 2016. The Palace Law of Ayutthaya and the Thammasat: Law and Kinship in 
Siam. Ithaca: Southeast Asia Program Publications, Cornell University.
Bechert, H. 2005. Eine regionale hochsprachliche Tradition in Südasien: Sanskrit-Literatur bei den buddhistischen 
Singhalesen. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Blackburn, A. 2001. Buddhist Learning and Textual Practice in 18th-Century Lankan Monastic Culture. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Blagden, C.O. 1960. Epigraphia Birmanica: Being Lithic and Other Inscriptions of Burma, ed. Charles Duroiselle, 
Vol. 1, Part II. Rangoon: Superintendent, Government Printing and Stationery, Union of Burma.
Chhom, Kunthea. 2016. Le rôle du sanskrit dans le développement de la langue khmère: Une étude épigraphique du 
VIe au XIVe siècle. PhD thesis. École Pratique des Hautes Études.

--- PAGE 305 ---
Trent Walker
284
Dimitrov, D. 2006. “Bilingual Sanskrit-Tibetan Glosses in a Nepalese MS of the Ratnaśrı¯ṭı¯kā.” Newsletter 
of the Nepalese-German Manuscript Cataloguing Project 2: 4–7.
Dimitrov, D. 2016. The Legacy of the Jewel Mind. On the Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhalese Works by Ratnamati. 
Naples: Università degli studi di Napoli ‘L’Orientale’.
Duroiselle, C. 1913. “Talaing Nissayas.” Journal of the Burma Research Society 3 (2): 103–145.
Enfield, N.J. 2019. Mainland Southeast Asian Languages: A Concise Typological Introduction. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gethin, R. 2007. “What’s in a Repetition: On Counting the Suttas of the Saṃyutta-nikāya.” Journal of the 
Pali Text Society 29: 365–387.
Godakumbura, C.E. 1955. Sinhalese Literature. Colombo: Colombo Apothecaries.
Gornall, A. 2017. “Ratnamati et ses oeuvres.” Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 103: 475–491.
Gornall, A. 2020. Rewriting Buddhism: Pali Literature and Monastic Reform in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270. London: 
University College London Press.
Griffiths, A., Hudson, B., Miyake, M., Wheatley, J. 2017. “Studies in Pyu Epigraphy, I: State of the Field, 
Edition and Analysis of the Kan Wet Khaung Mound Inscription, and Inventory of the Corpus.” Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 103: 43–205.
Gutschow, N., Michaels, A. 2005. Handling Death: The Dynamics of Death and Ancestor Rituals Among the 
Newars of Bhaktapur, Nepal. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Halliday, R. 1923. “Slapat Rājāwaṅ Datow Smiṅ roṅ—a History of Kings. With Text, Translation, and 
Notes.” Journal of the Burma Research Society 13: 5–67.
Hộ Tông. 1965. Quỉ-vơơng vân-đạo. Saigon: Theravada phât-giáo nguyên-thuy̛.
Khin, Sok. 1999. La grammaire du khmer moderne. Paris: Éditions You-Feng.
Kieffer-Pülz, P. 2015. “Vinaya Commentarial Literature in Pali.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Vol. I, 
eds. J. Silk, et al., 430–441. Leiden: Brill.
Kornicki, P. 2018. Languages, Scripts, and Chinese Texts in East Asia. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lammerts, D.C. 2018. Buddhist Law in Burma: A History of Dhammasattha Texts and Jurisprudence, 1250–1850. 
Honololu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Luce, G.H., Shin, B.B. 1969. “Old Burma: Early Pagán. Volume One: Text.” Artibus Asiae, Supplementum 
25: 1–422.
Maggi, M. 2015. “Local Literatures: Khotanese.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Vol. I, eds. J. Silk, et al., 
860–870. Leiden: Brill.
McDaniel, J.T. 2008. Gathering Leaves and Lifting Words: Histories of Buddhist Monastic Education in Laos and 
Thailand. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Okell, J. 1965. “Nissaya Burmese.” Lingua 15: 186–227.
Peyrot, M. 2008. “More Sanskrit – Tocharian B bilingual Udānavarga fragments.” Indogermanische Forschungen 
113: 83–125.
Pruitt, W. 1994. Étude linguistique de nissaya birmans. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Ruiz-Falqués, A. 2015. A Firefly in the Bamboo Reed: The Suttaniddesa of Saddhammajotipāla and the Grammatical 
Foundations of Theravāda Buddhism in Burma. PhD thesis. Cambridge.
Verhagen, P. 2013. “Notes Apropos to the Oeuvre of Si tu paṇ chen chos kyi ’byung gnas (1699?–1774) 
(4): A Tibetan Sanskritist in Nepal.” Journal of the International Association of Tibetan Studies 7: 316–339.
Walker, T.T. 2018a. Unfolding Buddhism: Communal Scripts, Localized Translations, and the Work of the Dying in 
Cambodian Chanted Leporellos. PhD thesis. University of California, Berkeley.
Walker, T.T. 2018b. “Siamese Manuscripts in Cambodian Collections.” In Inventaire provisoire des manu­
scrits du Cambodge, deuxième partie, eds. O. de Bernon, et al., xcv–cvi. Bangkok and Lumbini: Lumbini 
International Research Institute and Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation.

--- PAGE 306 ---
PART IV
Images/Imaginations

--- PAGE 307 ---


--- PAGE 308 ---
287
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-24
19
VISUAL NARRATIVES
Buddha life stories in the “medieval Theravāda” 
of Southeast Asia
Samerchai Poolsuwan
Introduction
Characterizing the cultural landscape of Southeast Asia during the second half of the first 
millennium ce, as attested archaeologically and palaeographically, was the dissemination of the 
type(s) of Buddhism, strictly Pāli-based in terms of scriptural citations, over the western and 
central spheres of its mainland, that is, including the Pyu and Mon civilizations in central and 
Lower Burma as well as the Dvārāvati cultural domain in central Thailand (Stargardt 1995: 
199–213; Skilling 1997a: 83–107; Skilling 1997b: 123–157; Skilling 2003: 87–112; Revire 2014: 
216–237). Although suggested to be somehow associated with Theravāda, the Buddhism of 
this case remains enigmatic in terms of its origin(s) as well as affiliation(s) with any of the 
variety of schools existing in the so-called Theravāda domain during the period of concern 
(Ray 1939: 1–52; Luce 1974: 119–138; Skilling 1997a: 83–107; Stadtner 2008: 193–215). Also, 
it could not be simply equated or directly linked—beside the common adoption of Pāli as the 
designated religious language, in terms of ecclesiastic genealogy, canonical, and commentarial 
basis as well as observance of the vinaya rules by monks and nuns—with the “Theravāda” made 
familiar nowadays. The latter, rather monolithic in all the aspects mentioned, is more or less 
a product of the major religious reform conducted in Sri Lanka around 1165 ce, during the 
reign of Parākramabāhu I of Polonnāruva; the reform orchestrated a scriptural purification and 
the unification of all the Buddhist fraternities of the island, bringing them to adhere strictly 
to the one, Mahāvihāra tradition (Bechert 1993: 11–21). The latter is believed by its follow­
ers to be the purest form of Buddhism—that is, descended directly from the Third Buddhist 
Council, sponsored by the Mauryan king As´oka of India during the third century bce—and 
this is confirmed in the two famous chronicles of the School, the D ı̄pavaṃsa and Mahāvaṃsa 
(Sirisena 1978, Chapter 3). Set as a “new normal” for the Buddhist definition of Dhamma and 
conduct, the reformed Sı̄haḷa Theravāda has become cosmopolitan by means of attracting fol­
lowers widely and more or less continuously for almost a millennium in the Theravāda realm, 
mainly encompassing Sri Lanka and the major part of mainland Southeast Asia (Sirisena 1978: 
58–81; Frasch 1998: 69–92; Frasch 2001: 85–97).
Later Mon and Pāli records, the fifteenth-century Kalyānı̄ inscriptions of Dhammaceti, king 
of Pegu (Bago), in what is now Lower Burma, suggest that the reformed Theravāda could have 
been introduced into Southeast Asia for establishing its monastic lineage and communities at

--- PAGE 309 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
288
Pagan, shortly after its revival in Sri Lanka, during the second half of the twelfth century. This 
reformed Theravāda movement was spearheaded by a missionary team of senior monks from Sri 
Lanka—led by Chapata, a Mon native originally from Lower Burma—who later either passed 
away, left the Saṅgha, or was in disputes with the other members of the team over observance 
of some vinaya rules. The phenomenon suggests that the reformed Sı̄haḷa Theravāda, newly 
introduced to Pagan, did not survive for long. Prior to the period of concern, Pagan, with its 
civilization flourishing in Central Burma from around the mid-eleventh century, could have 
received its Pāli-based Buddhism first, as suggested by some later Burmese records, from the 
Mon center in Lower Burma, along with the latter’s orthographic legacy, and perhaps also 
from Pyu progenitors (Luce 1969: vol. I, Chapters II–IV; Than Tun 1988: 23–45); the latter’s 
knowledge of the Pāli sources is attested archaeologically (Stargardt 1995: 199–213; Skilling 
1997a: 83–107). There was also, shortly afterward in the same century, as recorded in the 
Cūḷavaṃsa, an allied contact which could have allowed direct scriptural transmission from Sri 
Lanka to Pagan (Luce 1969: vol. I, 38–43). Propagation of the reformed Theravāda at Pagan 
during the second half of the twelfth century hints that the older Theravāda existing there 
might have been perceived, at least in the eyes of the Mahāvihāra reformists, as corrupt or far 
from uniform; from this perspective, the introduction of the “purer” form of the Buddhism 
was really a call to action.
The nature of the old Theravāda flourishing at Pagan prior to the coming of the reformed 
Sı̄haḷa tradition during the second half of the twelfth century remains unclear. Being probably 
derived from the Mon and Pyu progenitors, on one hand, it could have been affiliated with the 
older Pāli-based Buddhism prevailing in the western sphere of mainland Southeast Asia during 
the first millennium ce.1 On the other hand, a new influx of Buddhist tradition(s) through 
direct contact with Sri Lanka toward the end of the eleventh century could have added to 
the Theravāda variation or amalgamation characterizing the early Buddhist culture of Pagan.
There appears to have existed in Upper Burma a derivative of this old Theravāda that 
gained in popularity and royal patronage at Pagan during the thirteenth century. A number of 
epigraphic records of the period describe its ecclesiastic members as the monks of “taw kloṅ” 
(forest monastery); occasionally, the name “Arañ,” most likely derived from araññaka, meaning 
“forest dwellers,” was applied to them (Than Tun 1988: 85–100). The existence of bhikkhun ı̄s 
and the laxity in the observance of some vinaya rules, in contrast to the reformed Sı̄haḷa standard, 
was allowed in this Buddhist order. Also characterizing their establishment was the accumula­
tion of wealth in terms of land estates, received either by donation or purchase. The rising 
and flourishing of the Arañ Buddhist nikāya in central Burma was the background to several 
attempts of reintroducing the reformed Sı̄haḷa tradition of Buddhism to Pagan by successive 
groups of missionary monks (Frasch 1998: 69–97; Frasch 2001: 85–97; Gornall 2020: Chapter 
10). However, none of them seemed to achieve enduring success over the Arañ. Deviation 
of the latter from the reformed Sı̄haḷa orthodoxy is also confirmed by another, external but 
contemporaneous, piece of evidence contained in the Mahānāgakula-sandesa, a Pāli work com­
posed in Sri Lanka during the mid-thirteenth century. It is a message from Thera Nāgasena 
of Rohana, in the south of Sri Lanka, sent to Thera Mahākassapa of Arimaddanapura (Pagan) 
inviting the latter, who was most likely the elder of the Arañ ecclesiastic lineage known under 
that very same name in inscriptions of the period, to initiate purification of the religion by 
following the reformed orthodoxy established in Sri Lanka during the reign of Parākramabāhu 
I (Sirisena 1978: 72–73; Gornall 2020: 215–20). The Sı̄haḷa proposal of reform, however, may 
have failed given the fact that the Arañ maintained its prosperity and conventions at Pagan and 
elsewhere in central Burma until well after 1500, far beyond the Pagan period, as confirmed 
by a number of contemporaneous records (Than Tun 1988: 85–100).

--- PAGE 310 ---
Visual narratives
289
Art historical evidence suggests that the Pagan-type of Buddhism could have been dis­
seminated in the Buddhist network of Southeast Asia to cover the western and central spheres 
of its mainland, that is, Central and Lower Burma as well as northern and Central Thailand, 
prior to wide spreading of the post-reform Sı̄haḷa orthodoxy newly introduced into the area 
from around the early fourteenth century onward (Samerchai Poolsuwan n.d.). In particular, 
the area of central Burma dominated by the Arañ seems to have staved off for more than a 
century the advance of the new Sı̄haḷa orthodoxy. A major obstacle to the dissemination of the 
reformed Theravāda in Southeast Asia—from its inception in Sri Lanka around 1165 ce until 
the fourteenth century and well after, amid several reintroductions of the Buddhist tradition 
into the region—could have been the persistence of the matrix of interrelated local varieties 
of Pāli-based Buddhism. It is this matrix that I call here the “medieval Theravāda” of Southeast 
Asia. Probably most influential among these Pāli Buddhist traditions was that at Pagan, given 
its association with this major civilization that dominated the western sphere of the region, 
and probably, although to a lesser extent, its central sphere as well, from the mid-eleventh to 
the late thirteenth century.
This chapter attempts to understand the Buddhism of Pagan by exploring its mural tradi­
tions; these are seen as material manifestations of textual foundations as deployed within a 
specific cultural context. It will give particular focus to the illustration of the Buddha’s life, 
which forms the most prominent narrative theme of the murals. Adorning the brick monu­
ment of the gu-hpaya (cave-temple) type, with hundreds of examples surviving in the Pagan 
area and as well the isolated clusters located in the middle Irrawaddy zone, the murals of the 
Pagan tradition, dating from the late eleventh to the late thirteenth century, constitute one of 
the largest and most complex bodies of Buddhist sacred art in existence. One of the major 
characteristics of the murals of the period, and in a broader sense of the Buddhist art of Pagan 
in general, is their strong affiliation, in iconographic and stylistic terms, with the postclassical 
center of Sanskrit Buddhism flourishing in northeastern India during the Pāla dynasty (from the 
eighth to the twelfth century), outside the Theravāda-dominated cultural realm (Luce 1969: vol. 
I, part B; Bautze-Picron 2003). At the same time, they show a strong connection, particularly 
in terms of visual narratives, with Pāli Buddhist literature (Luce 1969: Vol. I, Chapters XV–
XIX; Ba Shin and Bohmu 1962; Samerchai Poolsuwan 2017: 255–294). The combination of 
these two major characteristics—which are not in concert conceptually and, as such, give the 
murals of Pagan their unique status—is puzzling in itself and requires a causative explanation 
in both cultural and political terms. The conceptual framing of my investigation seeks both to 
provide the murals with their appropriate textual background and to uncover their structural 
organization and associated symbolism. The broader aim is to enhance our understanding of 
the nature of the “medieval Theravāda,” with Pagan providing one of its best-known examples. 
The present study shall also examine the downfall of Pagan Buddhism from the shadow cast 
on the art historical ground, particularly the decline of its mural tradition. This could have 
corresponded with the new influx of post-reform Theravāda from Sri Lanka into Southeast 
Asia from the early fourteenth century onward.
Visualization of the “Buddha’s life” in early Pagan
Aside from being engrossed in the Dhamma and its associated philosophy expounded volu­
minously in early Pāli Buddhist literature, devoted followers of Buddhism could have found 
themselves to learn only little and fragmentarily about the personal life of the present Buddha 
Gotama, who had laid down the foundation of the teachings (Pande 1975; Rhys Davids 1975: 
56; Winternitz 1977: 186). The narration of the Buddha’s life has, however, played a major role

--- PAGE 311 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
290
in Buddhist art since its inception.2 The only parallel to be found is in the subsequent stratum 
of Buddhist literature with its praise texts elaborately celebrating the Buddha’s accumulation 
of pāram ı̄ (perfections) during his previous lives and episodes of his last existence leading to 
the most important episode of all, the Buddha’s enlightenment. The Lalitavistara and, in a less 
orderly manner, the Mahāvastu comprise the major Sanskrit or hybrid Buddhist Sanskrit exam­
ples in this respect. Their Pāli counterpart could be found in Nidānakathā, the beginning part 
of the Jātaka commentary (Jātakaṭṭhakathā; for an English translation, see Jayawickrama 1990).
The latter Pāli source presents Gotama’s story in three successive sections: the Dūrenidāna, 
the Avidūrenidāna, and the Santikenidāna. Contained in the first are stories of Gotama’s previ­
ous existences in the course of four asaṅkheyya (incalculable number of eons) and a hundred 
thousand eons, during which he received the prediction of his future enlightenment from 
the twenty-four Buddhas of the past, that is, Dı̄paṅkara and those subsequent Buddhas in 
chronological order; the future Buddha was afterward reborn as a chief deva of Tusitā Heaven. 
The Avidūrenidāna extends the Buddha’s story to cover the early episodes of his last rebirth, as 
Prince Siddhattha, up to the moment of his enlightenment. As indicated in the text itself, the 
Santikenidāna is supposed to include episodes, taking place at various specific localities, from 
immediately after enlightenment to the moment of final departure, the mahāparinibbāna; in 
the Nidānakathā, however, it covers chronologically only from the seven weeks of meditation 
immediately following enlightenment to the Buddha’s reception of the Jetavana Monastery 
donated by the rich man of Savatthi, Anāthapiṇḍika, in the third year after the enlightenment.
It is interesting to note that the Nidānakathā recognizes the core content of the text to 
which it belongs, that is, the account of the selected 547 stories of the Buddha’s past lives, to 
also constitute another narrative theme of the Santikenidāna (a collection of the Buddha’s stories 
after the enlightenment). This could be made logical given the notion clearly stated in the text 
that all these jātaka stories were individually told by the Buddha himself in a number of his 
preaching occasions, taking place at various specific localities, after the enlightenment. Since all 
the jātaka stories are grouped on the basis of their length, with the number of canonical stanza(s) 
describing each jātaka story, their organization in the text is not necessarily chronological.
Visualized in the earliest surviving murals at Pagan—those found adorning the interior of 
the Pātho-htā-mya Temple (monument 1605), dating probably from the last quarter of the 
eleventh century (Luce 1969: vol. 1, 302–303)—are complicated themes of the Buddha stories 
combined to account for a complete biography of Gotama in his last existence. The east-facing 
temple is a large and complicated brick structure with a square sanctum surrounded by a dark 
ambulatory corridor, housing a triad of colossal Buddha images made of brick and stucco. 
Access to the shrine could be made from the temple’s entrance hall only through the passage 
cutting across the sanctum’s corridor on its eastern side (for the architecture and layout of the 
temple see Pichard, Vol. VI 1995: 244–248). The murals of focus embellish the whole inte­
rior of the temple’s sanctum and its surrounding corridor. Successfully identified by Professor 
Gordon H. Luce, the doyen of Pagan studies, is the series of narrative murals on the corridor’s 
outer wall, with ink captions in Old Mon surviving to identify some of the narrative scenes; 
most likely based on the Nidānakathā account, the mural series, comprising twenty-four panels, 
proceeds clockwise from its start located in the east wall’s southern section to chronologically 
accommodate narration of the early episodes of the Gotama’s last existence up to the moment 
before his enlightenment, when the bodhisatta is approaching the Bodhi tree (Luce 1969: vol. I, 
304–305). To complement Luce’s study, I have reinvestigated the series of narrative murals of 
the corridor’s inner wall, of which previous studies have led to confusion (Luce 1969: vol. I, 
305; Bautze-Picron 2003: 158), to confirm that they are programmed to continue the outer-wall 
series; the inner-wall series, comprising twenty-eight panels (Figure 19.1), presents Gotama’s

--- PAGE 312 ---
Visual narratives
291
biography chronologically from the very moment of his enlightenment to his mahāparinibbāna, 
depicted as the last episode of the series (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2017: 258–266).
In total, the Pātho-htā-mya’s corridor murals thus account for the stories belonging to the 
Avidūrenidāna and Santikenidāna sections of Gotama’s biography, based on the Nidānakathā’s 
narrative categorization, however, with substantial extension (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2017: 258–
266). It is unfortunate that the murals of the first three panels of the outer wall series—located 
on the corridor’s eastern side, immediately after the entrance passage—are too damaged to 
allow any precise episodic identification. Located just before the episode of Gotama’s birth, 
the three panels likely included the depiction of (1) “the first prophecy,” when the bodhisatta 
as Hermit Sumedha receives the prediction for his enlightenment to come from the Buddha 
Dı̄paṅkara; (2) the bodhisatta reborn as a chief deva of the Tusitā Heaven; and (3) the conception 
of the bodhisatta in the womb of Queen Māyā. If this interpretation is correct, the narrative 
murals of the Pātho-htā-mya’s corridor series would have also accounted for the Dūrenidāna, 
although only briefly so in representation of the first two narrative panels of the mural series.
There are several series of complicated murals narrating the after-enlightenment life of the 
Buddha in the Pātho-htā-mya’s sanctum. The mural scenes, each contained in a rectangular 
Figure 19.1  The Buddha’s meditation (from right to left) during the second and third weeks after the 
enlightenment, second panel, inner wall series of the Buddha’s life, Pātho-htā-mya.
All photographs included in this essay are by the author.

--- PAGE 313 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
292
frame, are all inscribed; and the majority of them, however, are made repetitive in terms of 
their iconographic composition, with the Buddha in a seated posture flanked on both sides 
by his disciples. Based on Luce’s systematic reading of the ink glosses accompanying the mural 
scenes, we can identify the narrative organization to comprise the following themes: (1) a 
series of selected episodes, probably based on the Nidānakathā, from the first sermon up to 
the Buddha’s visit to the city of his father, Kapilavatthu (panels nos. 25–35 in Luce 1969: 
vol. I, 306); (2) miscellaneous post-enlightenment episodes that are not accounted for in the 
Nidānakathā, with only some of them arranged chronologically (scenes (i)—(xi) in Luce 1969: 
vol. I, 306–307); (3) a voluminous series of the Buddha’s sermons grouped according to the 
D ı̄ghanikāya and Majjhimanikāya of the Pāli Suttapiṭaka (Luce 1969: vol. I, 307–308); and (4) a 
series of incidents leading the Buddha to lay down the Vinaya rules for the saṅgha categorized 
according to the Mahāvibhaṅga account of the Pāli Vinayapiṭaka, to include the latter’s follow­
ing sections: Saṅghādisesa, Aniyata, Nissaggiya, Pācittiya, and probably Pārājikā (Luce 1969: vol. I, 
308–309). The surviving ink glosses include a description of the event in question as well as 
the name of the specific locality where the event took place. Given the unarbitrary provision 
of such information, the mural series must be understood to logically follow the Nidānakathā’s 
tradition of creating the Santikenidāna narration of the Buddha’s life. As guided by the text 
itself, the narration aims at selecting the episodes of the Buddha, of which the localities are all 
specified, to thematically constitute a variety of narrative collections all aimed at representing 
his life after enlightenment.
Another pertinent example is found at the Kubyauk-gyı̄ Temple in Myinkaba (monument 
1323), the construction of which is epigraphically attributed to Rājakumār during the first 
quarter of the twelfth century (Luce, Ba Shin, and Bohmu 1961: 277–284). Here, a complete 
series of the 547 stories of the Jātakā, largely in agreement with the Sı̄haḷa recension, is depicted 
on the outer wall of the temple’s ambulatory corridor (Luce and Ba Shin 1961: 331–362); since 
the depiction is presented as narrating the Jātakā itself—with an accompanying ink gloss giv­
ing the Pāli name and the bodhisatta of the story but not noting the occasion upon which the 
Buddha is telling the story—the narration may have represented the Dūrenidāna instead of the 
Santikenidāna. Arranged along the topmost row of the corridor’s outer wall is the illustrative 
series comprising an elaborate narration of the whole Nidānakathā series of the Avidūrenidāna 
and Santikenidāna (Luce and Ba Shin 1961: 363–366). The Nidānakathā’s criterion for the 
Santikenidāna, thematically presenting the episodes that took place at various specific localities 
after enlightenment, was also probably adopted for the Buddha’s preaching of the Vinaya rules, 
which took place in the seven chief cities, grouped and serially narrated in the murals of the 
upper register of the panels on the corridor’s inner wall (Luce and Ba Shin 1961: 377–379).
The Buddha’s realm created
The cult and iconography associated with the “Eight Major Episodes” of the Buddha’s life were 
gradually developed in the Mahāyāna context of northeastern India during the Gupta and Pāla 
dynasties (Perimoo 1982; Huntington 1985: 46–61; Huntington 1987a: 55–63; Huntington 
1987b: 56–68). They comprise (1) Nativity at Lumbinı̄; (2) Enlightenment at the Bodhi-tree, 
in now Bodhgaya; (3) First Sermon to the Pañcavaggiyā at the Isipatana Forest, near Varanasi; 
(4) Taming of Nālāgiri at Rājagaha; (5) Twin Miracles in Sāvatthi; (6) Descent from Tāvatiṃsa 
at Saṅkassa; (7) Monkey’s Donation of Honey, probably in Vesāli (Huen Tsiang 1884: 68); and 
(8) Mahāparinibbāna in Kusinārā. Forming a coherent series, these episodes that took place 
at different localities showcase the complete biography of Gotama during his last existence,

--- PAGE 314 ---
Visual narratives
293
although in abbreviated form. Viewed from the context of sacred Buddhist geography, they 
were also linked with the establishment of the memorial sites for pilgrimage (Huntington 1987a: 
55–63). Based on the standard iconography established during the Pāla dynasty, the “Eight 
Major Events” series of the Buddha is portrayed sculpturally with the central Buddha icon—
normally made seated in the earth-touching pose under the Bodhi-tree, to signify enlighten­
ment—flanked vertically on both sides, in a more or less symmetric fashion, and capped with 
smaller icons illustrating the other episodes of the series (Huntington 1987b: 56–68). The 
events are likewise depicted as a series in the period palm-leaf manuscripts of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā 
Prajñāpāramitā, the core text of Mahāyāna Buddhism (see examples in Saraswati 1977).
The Indian prototype of the Buddha’s “Eight Major Events” eventually proved its popularity 
at Pagan by being prolifically, and almost faithfully, reproduced in both sculptural and mural 
forms. One major difference between the early Pagan examples and the Indian prototype 
concerns the iconography of the “Monkey’s Donation” scene in which an elephant is addi­
tionally incorporated; this is most likely to allow its narrative compatibility with the Pārileyya 
episode, which took place near Kosambı̄, as described in the Pāli Dhammapada commentary. 
Given that all the other episodes of the series, apart from the “Monkey’s Donation,” could 
conveniently reference Pāli canonical and commentarial sources, it seems likely that Pagan’s 
“Eight Major Events” series, although modeled after the Indian precursor, was perceived in the 
Theravādin literary context (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2017: 255–294). Early examples of Pagan 
murals illustrating the “Eight Major Events” of the Buddha under such iconographic and 
literary prescription are seen in the background of principal Buddha images representing the 
Buddha’s enlightenment episode in Pagan temples 1580 (Loka-hteik-pan), 2103, and 2157, all 
dating probably from the first half of the twelfth century (Figure 19.2).3
One of the novel characteristics observed in the Buddhist art of Pagan is the combina­
tion of the Buddha’s “Eight Major Events” series, as already described, with the other set of 
his serial episodes most likely derived from the Jātakanidāna account of his meditation during 
the “Seven Weeks” immediately following enlightenment. In its standard sculptural form, the 
earth-touching Buddha centering the composition represents simultaneously his enlightenment 
and first-week meditation; he is then vertically flanked in the inner circle of the composition 
with the other six-week meditation episodes—three on each side, in a more or less symmetric 
fashion (see examples in Luce 1969: vol. III, plates 401, 402b, 403 and 405). The iconographic 
arrangement thus suggests symbolization of the Buddha geography, a kind of Theravāda man­
dala, with the Bodhi-tree for together the Buddha’s enlightenment and first-week meditation 
centering the two sacred geographic spheres: the inner sphere encompassing all the meditation 
stations, including the Bodhi-tree and its neighborhoods; and the outer containing the localities 
of his “Eight Major Events,” all included within the Middle Country (Majjhimadesa) of the 
Great Southern Continent (Jambudı̄pa).
Associated with the previously described geographic symbolism, the “Eight Major Events” 
are juxtaposed with the “Seven Weeks” meditation series in the temple murals prevalent at 
Pagan during the thirteenth century (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2012: 377–397). The colossal 
sculpture presiding over a temple shrine—normally seated in the earth-touching pose, with 
the Bodhi-tree always depicted in the background—could symbolically represent the Buddha’s 
enlightenment and his meditation in the following week. Portrayed in the temple murals to 
spatially encircle this cult image are, in the inner circle, the other episodes of the “Seven Weeks” 
series and, in the outer circle, the other “Eight Major Events” (Figures 19.3 and 19.4).
It is thus natural to find the enlightenment and first-week meditation of the Buddha 
always absent in mural representations. The depictions of the “Seven Stations” are always spa­
tially arranged in the temple’s shrine in such a fashion to best represent their directions from

--- PAGE 315 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
294
the Bodhi-tree, symbolized at the center of the temple’s shrine. This could be based on the 
geographic descriptions of the “Seven Stations” contained in two commentarial sources: the 
Nidānakathā and the Samantapāsādikā. Numerous examples of the mural pattern could be found 
in Pagan, with one large cluster of them also located in Minnanthu,4 the headquarters of the 
Arañ nikāya during the period of concern.
Also novel to Pagan during the thirteenth century, and truly extraordinary in its own way, is 
another mural program designed to serve the same symbolic function of creating the Buddha’s 
realm. This second case, however, illustrates the Buddha’s life more lavishly, with varieties of 
the other Buddha’s episodes also incorporated. Only three representatives of the mural program 
have survived, in Pagan temples 85 (Thein-mazi temple), 658, and 659 (Winido temple);5 the 
execution of the murals in these three sites is nearly identical, suggesting that they were made 
by the same group of designer(s) and craftsmen. Decorating the temple’s square shrine that 
houses the principal Buddha image(s) in the earth-touching pose, the murals of focus occupy 
the wall space of the shrine, all gridded, only vertically along the lower half of its four corners; 
this is to leave most of the wall space to accommodate repetitive depiction of the past Buddhas, 
Figure 19.2  “Eight Major Events” of the Buddha, Loka-hteik-pan temple (from top to bottom and left 
to right): Mahāparinibbāna (1st tier, damaged); coming versus departure of Māra, for the 
Enlightenment of the Buddha, also represented by the cult image itself (second tier); Taming of 
Nālāgiri versus Descent from Tavatiṃsa (third tier); First Sermon versus Twin Miracle (fourth 
tier); and Pārileyya versus Nativity (5th tier).

--- PAGE 316 ---
Visual narratives
295
Figure 19.3  Symbolic arrangement of the cult images and the murals to represent “Majjhimadesa,” centered 
at Bodhgaya, modeled after Pagan temple 664: “Seven Stations” in the inner circle and “Eight 
Stations” in the outer circle.
Figure 19.4  Twin Miracle at Sāvatthi (left) vis-à-vis Second Week Meditation at Animisa Cetiya (right), east 
wall of the north vestibule, Pagan temple 539.

--- PAGE 317 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
296
each contained in a grid cell. There are eight mural panels, each with two or three columns 
of grid cells, illustrating Gotama’s life. Based on the surviving ink glosses and iconographic 
composition, most of the mural scenes could be definitively identified (Samerchai Poolsuwan 
2017: 255–294).
There are all together eighty mural cells to accommodate the narrative depiction of the 
Buddha’s life; only some of them are arranged to depict the chronological events of the Buddha, 
while others contain independent episodes. Overall, the episodes are grouped according to 
locality. We see6 twelve independent episodes at Rājagaha (E-wall, NE-corner), twelve serial 
episodes before the enlightenment at Uruvela (E-wall, SE-corner), eight serial episodes of Sujata 
preparing the cow-milk rice also at Uruvela (S-wall, SW-corner), eight serial episodes after the 
enlightenment at the residence of the Uruvela-Kassapa hermit (W-wall, SW-corner), eight serial 
episodes related to the Twin Miracle at Sāvatthi (W-wall, NW-corner), eight episodes before and 
after the enlightenment at Kapilavatthu (N-wall, NW-corner), and two independent episodes 
after the enlightenment at Vesāli (N-wall, NE-corner). The “Seven Weeks” serial episodes are 
separated into two groups: (1) the second to fourth weeks—at the stations to the northeast, 
north, and northwest of the Bodhi-tree—located on the N-wall of the shrine’s NE-corner, 
and (2) the fifth to seventh weeks—at the stations to the east, southeast, and south of the 
Bodhi-tree—located on the S-wall of the shrine’s NE-corner. This arrangement of the “Seven 
Weeks” stations likely represents the various sites’ geographic directions with respect to the 
Bodhi-tree, based on indications in the Jātakanidāna and Samantapāsādikā. The “Eight Major 
Events” are dispersed here, in the shrine according to their locality, as described above, or in 
the temple vestibules. As usual, the Buddha’s enlightenment and first-week meditation, repre­
sented by the shrine’s central cult image, is omitted in the mural representation
The rise of the new Sīhaḷa order
It was toward the end of the thirteenth century that the Pagan dynasty practically lost its 
political hold over central Burma, due to the Mongol attack and subsequent internal discord 
(Than Tun 1988: 103–114). A century of war and political unrest followed, badly affecting 
religious activities, construction, and artistic creation that had formerly been prolific in the 
area. Epigraphic evidence shows that the Arañ Buddhist nikāya endured through this difficult 
time to resume its prosperity toward the end of the fourteenth century. Historian Than Tun 
has proposed that the monks of this Buddhist order—led by generations of strong successive 
leaders (after Mahākassapa), also making themselves suitable for royal patronage during the Pinya 
and Ava periods—played a pivotal role in revitalizing the farming activities of the area (Than 
Tun 1988: 103–114). This was based on recultivation of the land estates on a large scale—land 
either previously belonging to or newly acquired by them. The resource basis may have suf­
ficiently supported the establishment and thus enhanced the continuity in central Burma of the 
Arañ Buddhist tradition. Affiliation of probably the later Arañ with the older art of Pagan is 
detectable in the persistence of several of the latter’s elements and characteristics in the murals 
of Pagan monument 225 (an old brick monastery, currently named “Mya-daung-ok-kyaung,” 
located in the Nyaung-U area to the north of the Old Pagan City), dated epigraphically to 
1442 ce, as well those of Pagan monument 65 (a man-made meditation cave, currently named 
“Kyanzittha Umin,” also located in Nyaung-U) stylistically dated to be a contemporary of 
monument 225 (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2015: 145–197).
Marking a watershed in the history of Theravāda in Southeast Asia was the rapid expan­
sion, during the course of the fourteenth century, of the post-reform Sı̄haḷa orthodoxy, freshly 
introduced from Sri Lanka into the region (Sirisena 1978: Chapters III–IV). This was to launch

--- PAGE 318 ---
Visual narratives
297
a firm establishment of the Theravāda orthodoxy, standardized after the reformed Sı̄haḷa model, 
to be continuously preserved and transmitted in the geographic region up to our present time. 
Probably spearheading this religious movement—as recorded in the two northern Thai chron­
icles, Mūlasāsanā and Jinakālamāl ı̄—was the establishment, in 1331 ce, of the post-reform Sı̄haḷa 
monastic center in Martaban, located in the Mon Country of Lower Burma. This center was 
founded by Udumbarapupphā Mahāsāmı̄, a senior Thera from the well-known Udumbaragiri 
Forest Monastery, a Mahāvihāra branch located south of Poḷonnāruva in Sri Lanka (Griswold 
and Prasert na Nagara 1972: 21–152). The tradition was later introduced—by a missionary team 
led by his disciples, Anomadassı̄ and Sumana—to Sukhothai, probably from around 1341–1342 
ce, and then Lanna from about 1369 ce onward. Sukhothai Inscription 2 also gives a lengthy 
account of another charismatic monk, S´rıs̄r´addhārājacūḷamuni, who might have played a semi­
nal role in germinating the new Sı̄haḷa Buddhist tradition in the soil of Sukhothai. This was 
to happen after his long journey, first via Martaban and India to obtain reordination and fol­
low a long course of study in a post-reform Mahāvihāra establishment in Sri Lanka. Around 
1343–1344 ce, he returned to Sukhothai via Tenasserim, Phetchaburı̄, Rātchaburı̄, Nakhon 
Chaisri, and Ayodhyā (Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1972: 21–152; see also Blackburn and 
Thompson in this volume, including on dating). His complicated routes reflect networks of 
communication between several Buddhist centers, including those located in Central Thailand.
Also recorded in the Jinakālamāl ı̄ was the arrival, during the mid-1420s, of a missionary team 
of monks to launch the upasampadā (ordination) of the new Sı̄haḷa order at Ayutthaya in central 
Thailand, in which Mahāthera Sı̄lavisuddhi, the tutor of the chief queen of king Boromarājā 
II of Ayutthayā (1424–1448 ce), and another Thera named Saddhammakōvida, received higher 
ordination (Ratanapaññā Thera 1968). This very king was the founder of Wat Rātchaburana 
established in the same decade (Khamhaikān Chāo-Krung-Kao 1967: 446). I describe in the 
following an important set of murals of the Buddha’s life commissioned during the king’s reign 
to adorn the interior of the crypt inside Wat Rātchaburana’s main tower. Showing strong affili­
ation with the tradition and style of Sri Lankan Buddhist art, as opposed to Pagan’s preexisting 
in the region, these murals appear to be a product of direct religious contact between Ayutthaya 
and the motherland of the new Sı̄haḷa order during this decade.
Sunk deep in the mass of brick and laterite foundation of Wat Rātchaburana’s main tower 
is a series of crypt chambers vertically arranged to house the relic(s) of the Buddha and various 
other sacred and auspicious objects. While most of these objects were looted in the twentieth 
century, the crypt’s murals survive almost intact. At the most basic level, the symbolic murals 
representing the Buddha’s life story adorning the crypt meant to house Buddha relics have 
their roots in the Sı̄haḷa Buddhist tradition; this basic association of representing the Buddha’s 
life story and relics is confirmed scripturally in the Mahāvaṃsa account (Geiger 1912: Chapter 
XXX), as well as archaeologically (Bandaranayake 2006: 73–79). On stylistic grounds, the 
Rātchaburana murals can also be perceived as closely related to Sri Lanka’s long-standing 
traditions (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2014: 27–65). This is opposed to the Pagan example that, 
although adopting principally Pāli textual reference also most likely from Sri Lanka, is affiliated 
on stylistic and iconographic grounds with older Indian prototypes.
Three main narrative themes are found in these crypt murals: (1) a number of jātaka stories—
although most likely selected from the Pāli Jātakaṭṭhakathā, with no accompanying inscriptional 
records—most could not be precisely identified; (2) a chronological series of the twenty-four 
past Buddhas, with their names all inscribed in conformity with the Pāli Buddhavaṃsa text; and 
(3) a detailed biography of Gotama in his last existence, most likely based on the Jātakanidāna 
and other Pāli texts (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2014: 27–65). Identifiable on iconographic grounds 
are the murals belonging to the last narrative theme, illustrating the following Gotama’s episodes:

--- PAGE 319 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
298
conception in the womb of Queen Maya; Nativity (probably—scene much eroded); the four 
treasure troops to miraculously come into existence at the time of the Gotama’s birth; horse 
Kanthaka and his driver, Channa, in sorrow after leaving the bodhisatta; the Buddha’s enlight­
enment and first-week meditation, represented by the same mural scene; the following six 
weeks of meditation scenes, each individually depicted; first sermon at Isipatana; taming of the 
Nālāgiri elephant; Pārileyya episode, with only the elephant present, probably based on the 
Pāli Vinaya-Mahāvagga; the mahāparinibbāna; and one out-group, a depiction of the Buddha’s 
footprint enshrined on top of Sumana Mountain in Sri Lanka (Figure 19.5).
Although there are a number of scenes depicting the Buddha’s activities that could not be 
precisely identified on iconographic grounds, none is compatible with the illustration of the 
Buddha descending from Tāvatiṃsa, normally executed in an easily recognizable composition. 
Thus, the murals are not intended to incorporate the complete “Eight Major Events” of the 
Buddha, the highly popular series seen in Pagan. In general, the Rātchaburana crypt-murals 
could be considered to represent a separate mural tradition, which, apart from sharing the same 
source of Pāli textual reference, has only a trivial connection with its preceding counterpart 
evidenced at Pagan (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2014: 27–65).
Figure 19.5  Buddha footprint on the summit of the Sumana Mountain in Sri Lanka, Rātchaburana’s crypt 
murals.

--- PAGE 320 ---
Visual narratives
299
Discussion
Thus far, I have demonstrated that the Pagan tradition of narrating the Buddha’s life, as illus­
trated in the murals of the period, was primarily based on the standard Pāli canonical and com­
mentarial sources. Although the Pāla iconographic elements—arisen in the Mahāyāna realm 
of northeastern India, centered spiritually at Bodhgaya—are noticeable in the murals of the 
period, likely they were also reinterpreted to suit Pagan’s Theravādin context. That the murals 
of Pagan, and in the wider context, Pagan’s art in general, take a strongly Pāla-inspired form 
is remarkable in itself, and it could have been somehow associated with Pagan’s perception 
of the supremacy of Bodhgaya, the very spot of the Buddha’s enlightenment. The symbolism 
evidenced in the structural organization of the Pagan murals, particularly during the thirteenth 
century, as detailed above, demonstrates this point. The phenomenon could be associated with a 
symbolic transposition of Buddhist spirituality from Bodhgaya—at that time entering a period 
of total decline due to severe Muslim attacks—to Pagan, then perceived as a new spiritual 
center reaching its supremacy in the Buddhist World.7
What seems to be extraordinary in textual terms at Pagan—also evidenced in the murals 
of the period, particularly during the thirteenth century—is the narration of stories that 
are not contained in any standard canonical or commentarial Pāli sources. Included in the 
murals of Pagan temple 585, located in Minnanthu, is an inscribed depiction of a young 
child, king Aśoka in his previous existence, donating a handful of dust for alms to the Gotama 
Buddha (Figure 19.6);8 while the story could find a remote origin in an older Sanskrit text, 
the Aśokāvadāna, the mural narration might be derived from the more immediate source of 
the Lokapaññatti, an old Pāli work believed to be composed either in Burma or Sri Lanka 
(Saddhammaghosa Thera 1985: 96–97).
Depicted in the thirteenth-century murals of the Pagan tradition in temple number 69 in 
Sale is a serial narrative of three remote existences of Gotama: as a hermit teacher, jumping off 
the cliff to sacrifice his body to a tigress who was starving enough to swallow her own cubs; 
as a ship captain saving his mother from a shipwreck by carrying her on his shoulder while 
swimming in the ocean; and as a princess bodhisatta encountering Buddha Dı̄paṅkara in his 
previous existence (Figure 19.7).
Although the first narrative could find its corresponding source in the Sanskrit Jātakamālā text 
(Āryaśūra 1971: 3–8), its inclusion in the series together with the other two jataka stories, both 
too remote to be accounted for in the standard Pāli Jātaka narration, more likely suggests the 
immediate source of the series to be derived from an old Pāli work, the Sotaṭṭhak ı̄mahānidāna.9 
Being neither canonical nor commentarial in its own right, the latter text was composed by 
a Thera named Buddhaghosa at an unknown date, presumably in Sri Lanka; the text is, how­
ever, stated in the Gandhavaṃsa, a seventeenth-century Pāli work composed in Burma, to be 
authored by Cullabuddhaghosa, with a prefix used probably to distinguish him from the famous 
Buddhaghosa of the fifth century ce (Cullabuddhaghosa 1983: [14]–[37]; Minayef 1886: 63). 
The latter text provides a chronological narration of Gotama’s previous and last existences—
perceived in the text’s own temporal framework, in contrast to the Jātakanidāna’s—to span the 
period of twenty asaṅkheyya and a hundred thousand eons, during which the bodhisatta had 
encountered in successive order the innumerable past Buddhas (see also Skilling 1996: 151–183; 
Derris 2000). With such temporal extension added to the narration of the bodhisatta’s path, the 
text is not strictly made to conform to the Pāli canonical-commentarial sources, that is, the 
Jātaka-Jātakaṭṭhakathā and the Buddhavaṃsa-Madhuratthavilāsin ı̄.
Also evidenced in the murals of Pagan temple 447 (Le-myet-hna)—established in 1223 ce 
in Minnanthu, the Arañ’s headquarters—is an inscriptional record providing some biographic

--- PAGE 321 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
300
details on the first three Buddhas (Taṇhaṅkara, Medhaṅkara and Saraṇaṅkara) of the Buddhavaṃsa 
series, details not accounted for in the Buddhavaṃsa text itself, but found recorded instead in 
the Sotaṭṭhak ı̄ (Ba Shin and Bohmu 1962: 159–160). In the inscription of 1388 ce—located in 
Kyaukyit, Central Burma—we find a legendary account of Mahākassapa, the elder of the Arañ 
Buddhist nikāya during the thirteenth century, to contain the story, most likely derived from 
Sotaṭṭhak ı̄, of the ten bodhisattas who shall become the future Buddhas after Gotama, of which 
one is equated with the previous existence of Mahākassapa himself (Than Tun 1988: 98). The 
text is also included in a 1442 ce epigraphic list of Buddhist scriptures donated to a monastery 
Figure 19.6  A young child Piyadassı̄, King Aśoka in his previous existence, donating a handful of dust for 
alms to Buddha Gotama, Pagan temple 585.

--- PAGE 322 ---
Visual narratives
301
library in Pagan (Tun Nyein 1899: 37–47). These later pieces of evidence confirm continuity of 
the Sotaṭṭhak ı̄ knowledge, in the Buddhist context of Pagan until well after its dynastic period.
Approval in the Buddhist context of central Burma of some “unconventional” Pāli texts—
bearing Buddhist narratives deviating from or not contained in the established canonical and 
commentarial Pāli sources constituting the core scriptures of the reformed Theravāda—could 
be logically considered another characteristic of the “medieval Theravāda” prevailing in the 
area, with the Arañ as its major known representative. In the broader context, the phenomenon 
might also provide a glimpse of the literary atmosphere of pre-reform Theravāda in Sri Lanka 
prior to the mid-twelfth century, even within the domain of Mahāvihāra orthodoxy. Based on 
accounts thus far provided of Central Burma’s Arañ, we can suggest that Central Burma’s Arañ 
comprised the following: (1) a Buddhist community truly well versed in Pāli literature, both 
“conventional” serving for the establishment of the reformed Theravāda and “unconventional” 
as could be a part of the older Theravāda; (2) as previously noted by historian Than Tun, a lax 
observance of some vinaya rules; (3) also based on Than Tun’s investigation, a foundation in 
Central Burma dependent on the accumulation of wealth, particularly in the form of produc­
tive land estates; and (4) in the material sense, an association with the Pagan style of Buddhist 
art, widespread in central Burma and its neighboring regions.
Being a powerful kingdom, Pagan, during its dynastic period from the mid-eleventh to the 
late thirteenth centuries, could have exercised sovereignty over the whole of Lower Burma and 
probably other parts of Southeast Asia as well, although its power over these areas could have 
waxed and waned (Frasch 2002: 59–78). Religious transmission and exchanges likely accompa­
nied its spread of power, allowing dissemination on an extensive scale of Pagan Buddhism, an 
old Theravāda represented materially by the form of the Buddhist art developed on the model 
Figure 19.7  Gotama in his remote existences, probably based on the Sotaṭṭhak ı̄mahānidāna account (temple 
number 69 at Sale; from left to right): a hermit teacher sacrificing himself for a starving 
tigress; encounter of the ship’s captain, who is saving his mother in the shipwreck, with the 
Mahābrahma God; encounter of the princess bodhisatta with Dı̄paṅkara in his previous exis­
tence, a disciple of Buddha Purāna Dı̄paṅkara; and Dı̄paṅkara (in the same existence) obtaining 
a prediction for his enlightenment to come from Purāna Dı̄paṅkara.

--- PAGE 323 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
302
of Pāla prototypes. The most notable image type on this model is the iconic representation 
of the Buddha wearing a pointed crown prevalent in Lower Burma, Haripunjaya in northern 
Thailand, and Central Thailand, all dating tentatively from the early centuries of the second 
millennium ce (Samerchai Poolsuwan n.d.). The Pāla characteristic is also included among 
those recognized by art historian Hiram Woodward as a signature of the old Hinayāna prevalent 
in central Thailand (Woodward 1997: 115–116; Woodward 2003: 166–171); Woodward per­
ceives the latter, which he calls the “Ariya” Buddhist nikāya, as a continuum of the Dvāravatı̄ 
Buddhist faith to be well extended into the period of Khmer domination over the area, also 
with Pagan contacts, between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries. Woodward’s Ariya and the 
Pagan Buddhism explored in this chapter, with the “Arañ” serving as its major representative, 
constitute the currently best-known material components of the many variants of the “medieval 
Theravāda” of Southeast Asia.
To mark an end to the medieval phase of Theravāda in Southeast Asia could have been a 
series of heavy blows from the post-reform Theravāda orthodoxy from Sri Lanka in the area, 
to start its firm establishment in Lower Burma and then in the central and northern parts of 
Thailand from the early fourteenth century onward. To accompany the hegemony of the new 
Sı̄haḷa order in the area was also the influx of the Sı̄haḷa artistic and iconographic instruments, 
with obvious evidence in the Buddhist art and architecture of Sukhothai, Lanna, and Ayutthaya; 
the present chapter shows such influence in the murals of Wat Ratchaburana, Ayutthaya, dating 
from the first half of the fifteenth century. It is interesting to note that Central Burma could 
have been left as a backwater for spreading the new Sı̄haḷa order until well after the fifteenth 
century; this could have been largely due to the relatively long-lasting success of the Arañ 
establishment (Samerchai Poolsuwan 2015: 145–197).
Acknowledgments
The author is grateful to the late U Aung Kyaing for his generous assistance with reading the 
mural inscriptions of Pagan and to Paritta Chalermpow Koanantakool, Donald M. Stadtner, and 
Nicolas Revire for their valuable comments on earlier drafts of this manuscript. This study was 
supported by Thammasat University Research Fund, Contract No. TUFT 2/2565.
Notes
	 1	One piece of evidence recognized by Luce as possibly representing the old Mon Theravāda is the presence 
at Pagan of a series of extra jātaka stories (Velāma 497, Mahāgovinda 498 and Sumedhapandita 499), material­
ized in art at the two Hpetleik pagodas; these tales come in addition to the known 547 stories accounted 
for in the standard (Sı̄haḷa) version of the canonical Jātaka text (Luce 1956: 291–307; Luce, Ba Shin and 
Bohmu 1961: 277–417 (321–330)).
	 2	Starting from about the third century bce, with the Buddha represented through symbols in narrative 
depictions of his life; the Buddha started to appear in anthropomorphic form in the Indian Buddhist art 
during the first few centuries ce, in association with the two major Buddhist civilizations: Gandhara in 
northwestern India, as well parts of the present-day Pakistan and Afghanistan, and Mathura, in now Uttar 
Pradesh, North India.
	 3	For dating the Loka-hteik-pan temple and its murals, see Ba Shin and Bohmu (1962): Chapter I.
	 4	To name a few of the major examples in the area are the Pagan temples 447 (Le-myet-hna), 534 (Sa-pwe-
tin), 539 (Tayok-pyi), 663 (Mala-phyi) and 676 (So-hla-wun).
	 5	For the architectural details and layouts of the temples: Pichard (1992: vol. I, 159) (monument 85); Pichard 
(1994: vol. III, 152–155) (monument 658) and 156–160 (monument 659).
	 6	For details and systematic illustration of the mural panels, see Samerchai Poolsuwan (2017: 255–294); for 
complete illustration see Samerchai Poolsuwan (2016: 140–149).

--- PAGE 324 ---
Visual narratives
303
	 7	For discussions on the significance of Bodhgaya in the Pagan context see also: Frasch 1998: 69–92; Brown 
1988: 101–124.
	 8	Inscriptional identification provided to the author by the late U Aung Kyaing, former deputy director 
general, Myanmar Department of Archaeology.
	 9	While the Pāli Jātaka text accounts for the selected existences of Gotama during the past four asaṅkheyya 
and a hundred thousand eons, the three Sotaṭṭhak ı̄’s jātakas of concern are to set forth the bodhisatta’s career 
to cover a period of twenty asaṅkheyya and a hundred thousand eons.
References
Āryaśūra. 1971. The Jātakamālā (Garland of Birth-Stories), trans., J.S. Speyer. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Ba Shin, Bohmu. 1962. The Lokahteikpan. Rangoon: The Burma Historical Commission.
Bandaranayake, Senake. 2006. The Rock and Wall Paintings of Sri Lanka. Colombo: Stamford Lake (Pvt) Ltd.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 2003. The Buddhist Murals of Pagan. Bangkok: Orchid Press.
Bechert, Heinz. 1993. “The Nikāyas of Mediaeval Sri Lanka and the Unification of the Sangha by 
Parākramabāhu I.” In Studies on Buddhism in Honour of Professor A.K. Warder, eds. N.K. Wagle, F. 
Watanabe, 11–21. Toronto: University of Toronto, Centre for South Asian Studies.
Brown, R.L. 1988. “Bodhgaya and South-east Asia.” In Bodhgaya: The Site of Enlightenment, ed. Janice 
Leoshko, 101–124. Bombay: Marg Publications.
Cullabuddhaghosa. 1983. Sotaṭṭhakı̄mahānidāna, trans., Banjob Bannaruji. Bangkok: Wat Suthatthepvararam. 
[In Thai].
Derris, Karen. 2000. Virtue and Relationship in a Theravādin Biography of the Bodhisatta: A study of the 
Sotaṭṭhakı̄mahānidāna, Ph.D. thesis. Massachusetts: Harvard University.
Frasch, Tilman. 1998. “A Buddhist Network in the Bay of Bengal: Relations Between Bodhgaya, Burma 
and Sri Lanka, c. 300–1300.” In From the Mediterranean to the China Sea: Miscellaneous Notes, eds. Claude 
Guillot, Denys Lombard, Rodenrich Ptak, 69–92. Weisbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Frasch, Tilman. 2001. “The Buddhist Connection: Sinhalese-Burmese Intercourse in the Middle Ages.” In 
Explorations in the History of South Asia: Essays in Honour of Dietmar Rothermund, eds. Georg Berkemer, 
Tilman Frasch, Hermann Kulke, Jurgen Lütt, 85–97. Delhi: Manohar.
Frasch, Tilman. 2002. “Coastal Peripheries During the Pagan Period.” In The Maritime Frontier of Burma. 
Exploring Political, Cultural and Commercial Interaction in the Indian Ocean World, 1200–1800, eds. Jos 
Gommans, Jacques Leider, 59–78. Amsterdam: KITLV Press.
Geiger, Wilhelm, trans. 1912. The Mahāvaṃsa or the Great Chronicle of Ceylon. London: Pali Text Society.
Gornall, Alastair. 2020. Rewriting Buddhism: Pali Literature and Monastic Reform in Sri Lanka, 1157–1270. 
London: UCL Press.
Griswold, Alexander B., Prasert na Nagara. 1972. “King Lödaiya of Sukhodaya and His Contemporaries, 
Epigraphic and Historical Studies, No. 10.” Journal of the Siam Society 60 (1): 21–152.
Huen Tsiang. 1884. Si-Yu-Ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World, vol. 2, trans., Samuel Beal. London: 
Trubner & Co.
Huntington, John C. 1985. “Sowing the Seed of the Lotus: A Journey to the Great Pilgrimage Sites of 
Buddhism, Part I.” Orientations 16 (11): 46–61.
Huntington, John C. 1987a. “Pilgrimage as Images: The Cult of the Aṣṭamahāprātihāryā,” Part I. Orientations 
18 (4): 55–63.
Huntington, John C. 1987b. “Pilgrimage as Images: The Cult of the Aṣṭamahāprātihāryā, Part II.” Orientations 
18 (8): 56–68.
Jayawickrama, N. A., trans. 1990. The Story of Gotama Buddha: The Nidāna-kathā of the Jātakaṭṭhakathā. Oxford: 
Pali Text Society.
Khamhaikān Chāo-Krung-Kao. 1967. Khamhaikān Khunluang-Hāwat lae Phrarātchaphongsāwadān Krung-
Kao Chabap Luangprasōetaksōrnniti (Testimonies of the inhabitants of Ayutthayā and its former king, 
Khunluang-Hāwat, and the Ayutthayā Chronicle of the Luangprasōetaksōrnniti version). Bangkok: 
Klangphittaya. [In Thai].
Luce, Gordon H. 1956. “The 550 Jātaka in Old Burma.” Artibus Asiae XIX (3/4): 291–307.
Luce, Gordon H. 1969. Old Burma-Early Pagan, vol. I & III. New York: J.J. Augustin Publisher.
Luce, Gordon H. 1974. “The Advent of Buddhism to Burma.” In Buddhist Studies in Honour of I. B. Horner, 
eds. L. Cousins, A. Kunst, K.R. Norman, 119–138. Boston: P. Reidel Publishing Company.
Luce, Gordon H., Ba Shin, Bohmu. 1961. “Pagan Myinkaba Kubyauk-gyi Temple of Rājakumār (1113 
A.D.).” Bulletin of the Burma Historical Commission II: 277–417 (321–30).

--- PAGE 325 ---
Samerchai Poolsuwan
304
Minayeff, J.P. 1886. “Gandha-Vamsa.” In Journal of the Pali Text Society, ed. T.W. Rhys Davids, 54–80. London: 
Pali Text Society.
Pande, G.C. 1975. Studies in the Origin of Buddhism. Delhi: Mortilal Banarsidass.
Perimoo, Ratan. 1982. Life of Buddha in Indian Sculpture (Ashta-maha-pratiharya): An Iconological Analysis. New 
Delhi: Kanak.
Pichard, Pierre. 1992–1995. The Inventory of Monuments at Pagan, vols. I, III and VI. Paris: UNESCO.
Ratanapaññā Thera. 1968. The Sheaf of Garlands of the Epochs of the Conquerer, Being a translation of Jinakāla
mālı̄pakaraṇaṁ, trans., N.A. Jayawickrama, Pali Text Society Translation Series No. 36. London: Pali text 
Society.
Ray, Nihar-Ranjan. 1939. “Early Traces of Buddhism in Burma.” Journal of the Greater India Society 6 (1): 
1–52.
Revire, Nicolas. 2014. “Glimpse of the Buddhist Practices and Rituals in Dvāravatı̄ and Its Neighbouring 
Cultures.” In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, eds. Nicolas Revire, Stephen A. Murphy, 216–
237. Bangkok: The Siam Society.
Rhys Davids, T.W. 1975. The History and Literature of Buddhism. Delhi: New Era Offset Printers.
Saddhammaghosa Thera. 1985. Lokapaññatti. Bangkok: Department of Fine Arts. [In Thai].
Samerchai Poolsuwan. 2012. “After Enlightenment: Scenes of the Buddha’s Retreat in the Thirteenth 
Century Murals at Pagan.” Artibus Asiae 72 (2): 377–397.
Samerchai Poolsuwan. 2014. “The Pagan-Period and the Early-Thai Buddhist Murals: Were They Related?.” 
SUVANNABHUMI 6 (1): 27–65.
Samerchai Poolsuwan. 2015. “Buddhist Murals Illustrating Unusual Features in Temple 36 at Sale and Their 
Cultural Implications.” Journal of Burma Studies 19 (1): 145–197.
Samerchai Poolsuwan. 2016. Chittakam Phutthasatsana Samai Phukam: Rupbaeb Lae Khwammai Khong Sinlapa 
Haeng Sattha (The Buddhist Murals of Pagan: Form and meaning of the Devotional Art), Vol. II. 
Bangkok: Thammasat University Press. [In Thai].
Samerchai Poolsuwan. 2017. “The Buddha’s Biography: Its Development in the Pagan Murals vs. the later 
Vernacular Literature, in the Theravādin Buddhist Context of Southeast Asia.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society 27 (2): 255–294.
Samerchai Poolsuwan. (Forthcoming) “The Buddha Sculptures of Tham Phra (Buddha Cave): Implications 
on understanding the Complex Religious Atmosphere of Western Thailand During the Early Second 
Millennium CE.” In The Emergence of Theravada in Cambodia, eds. Hiram W. Woodward, Jr., Ashley 
Thompson. Singapore: NUS Press.
Saraswati, S.K. 1977. Tantrayāna Art: An Album. Calcutta: The Asiatic Society.
Sirisena, W.M. 1978. Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia: Political, Religious and Cultural Relations from A.D. c. 1000 
to c. 1500. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Skilling, Peter. 1996. “The Sambuddhe Verses and Later Theravādin Buddhology.” Journal of the Pali Text 
Society 22: 151–183.
Skilling, Peter. 1997a. “The Advent of Theravāda Buddhism to Mainland South-east Asia.” Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 20 (1): 83–107.
Skilling, Peter. 1997b. “New Pāli Inscriptions from Southeast Asia.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 23: 123–157.
Skilling, Peter. 2003. “Dvāravatı̄: Recent Revelations and Research.” In Dedications to Her Royal Highness 
Princess Galyani Vadhana Krom Luang Naradhiwas Rajanagarindra on Her 80th Birthday, ed. Chris Baker, 
87–112. Bangkok: The Siam Society.
Stadtner, Donald M. 2008. “The Mon of Lower Burma.” Journal of the Siam Society 96: 193–215.
Stargardt, Janice. 1995. “The Oldest Known Pāli Text, 5th-6th Century: Results of the Cambridge 
Symposium on the Pyu Golden Pāli Text from Śrı̄ Kṣetra, 18–19 Apr. 1995.” Journal of the Pali Text 
Society 21: 199–213.
Than Tun. 1988. Essays on the History and Buddhism of Burma, ed. Paul Strachan. Arran, Scotland: Kiscadale 
Publications.
Tun Nyein. 1899. Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava. Rangoon: Superintendent, Government Printing.
Winternitz, M. 1977. History of Indian Literature, Vol. I, trans., Jha Subhadra. New Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal.
Woodward, Hiram W. 1997. The Sacred Sculpture of Thailand. Bangkok: River Books.
Woodward, Hiram W. 2003. The Art and Architecture of Thailand. Leiden: Brill.

--- PAGE 326 ---
305
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-25
20
ICONS
Standing out from the narrative in 
Theravādin art
Ashley Thompson
Setting the scene
“The term icon is loaded with implications,” writes art historian Robert Brown toward the 
end of a thought-provoking essay examining the iconic function of jātaka, narratives of the 
Buddha’s achievement of perfections over his past lives, painted and sculpted on and in South 
and Southeast Asian monuments (Brown 1997: 98). In Brown’s simple sentence, I read discreet 
acknowledgment of the Christian heritage borne both by the term icon and by the many 
academic fields in which it operates, and glimpse a particular nod to the ever-extending body 
of work in the field of art history grappling with the term’s pertinence in the interpretation 
of theory and practice in Buddhist worlds. To gaze intently at the “icon” in this field would 
be to open oneself and one’s readers to the infinite, where, strictly speaking, nothing is seen, 
to reference Jean-Luc Marion’s definition of the “icon” in opposition to the “idol” as cited in 
Jacob Kinnard’s detailed discussion of a selection of the many extant discussions in primary and 
secondary sources on the “question of the presence of the Buddha in physical objects” (Kinnard 
1999: 25–44). I can afford no more than a glimpse into Brown’s glimpse here, as readers can by 
now, I hope, imagine and will follow Brown’s lead in circumscribing discussions as he closes the 
essay in looping back around to his opening critique of what has proved to be, for scholars of 
Buddhist art of South and Southeast Asia, an impactful reading of early artistic representations 
of Buddhist narratives by art historian Vidya Dehejia (Dehejia 1990).1
Dehejia’s reading is faulted by Brown precisely for its reading, that is to say for its presump­
tion of a sort of equivalence between written text and pictorial representation, where the one 
(pictorial) effectively translates the original other (written) representation. In Dehejia’s work, the 
different forms are seen to share semantic content and to engender a like process of accessing 
that meaning: reading. This vision of linear development, from the written to the pictorial, 
nonetheless posits a certain hierarchy of value in which the written serves as a point of origin 
and reference for the therefore derivative other. If the typology proposed by Dehejia for deci­
phering, describing, and organizing dominant early artistic modes of rendering Buddhist nar­
ratives makes, in Brown’s words, “an important contribution” to art-historical analysis, Brown 
challenges Dehejia’s qualification of the discerning subject as a “viewer.” In Brown’s reading, 
Dehejia’s “viewer” shares more with the art historian-cum-museum-goer than it does with the

--- PAGE 327 ---
Ashley Thompson
306
early Buddhist worshiper as apprehended by many modern scholars attempting to traverse time 
and space to see from within local eyes.2 While noting that, on one level, Dehejia masterfully 
discerns the logics of composition, Brown calls for further attention to jātaka pictorial function 
in its inseparability from the processes by which meaning is had within ancient Buddhist milieu.
“I intend it [i.e., the term icon],” Brown (1997: 98) continues, “in a specifically Indic religious 
sense, simply as a form of the deity that is the focus of reverence and worship.” Replacing the 
“viewer” with the “worshiper” triggers a gestalt shift whereby what scholars are first made 
to see as narrative becomes instead iconic. The jātaka representations that Brown studies are 
integral to monumental architecture. They are stories of the Buddha’s past lives, but, Brown 
demonstrates, their very physical emplacement within the monumental space precludes “read­
ing” by a “viewer.” Instead, they are parts of a whole schema by which the Buddha is made 
present (re-presented) in the here and now to worshipers. Brown’s analyses make evident that 
it is this sort of active re-presentation of the Buddha that is at work in the “specifically Indic” 
reverence for a form of the deity and that makes that form an “icon.” Likewise, it is this rela­
tively simple formulation of “icon,” which deconstructs the opposition, and so the hierarchy, 
between copy and original, such that a representation of X is a re-presentation of X, that is at 
the core of my own usage throughout this chapter.
The “icon” in this sense maintains an existential relation with its original manifestation—in 
our case, the Buddha. This relation can be on the order of the Veronica, the quintessential 
Christian relic in which the image of Christ’s face derives its potency from its supposed material 
contact with his actual face, and the existential relation between original and copy is manifest in 
their shared physical form. In many ways, with the help of relics and ritual, and as a type of relic 
itself, the anthropomorphic image of the Buddha can be likened to the Veronica. The relation 
can also be considered along the lines of the Peircean index, where the one physical form—take, 
for example, a footprint—depends on another—in this example, a foot—for its very existence. 
The Buddha’s footprint contains in the here and now his past presence. From an art-historical 
point of view, the one (the present footprint) wills the other (the past-present Buddha) into 
existence. From a worshiper’s point of view, the active willing agent is the walking Buddha 
making his presence manifest in the footprint. This particular form of the Buddha’s presence 
is variously manifest today across South and Southeast Asian landscapes, repeatedly attesting at 
once to a singular historical event of object consecration itself attesting to a singular legendary 
event, when the Buddha is understood to have been then and there. Among the region’s most 
famous footprints today are that of Sri Lanka’s Śrı̄ Pāda (Adam’s Peak), Cambodia’s Phnom 
Bakheng, Thailand’s Phu Phra Bat, Luang Prabang’s Phu Si, and Burma’s Shwesettaw. These 
forms range from the amorphous (natural stone formations in the land) to the metonymically 
anthropomorphic (detailed sculptures in the round variously “impressed” into the land); each 
has been framed by architectural, legendary, ritual and often iconographic structures to appear 
as the enduring mark the Buddha has left on the land. The worshiper’s perspective turns the 
art-historical analysis on its head of course, without, however, transforming the fundamental 
function of the index. But let me reiterate that the existential relation I am describing cannot 
be reduced to an impoverished understanding of representation as a conventional, pragmatic 
mode of rendering which underestimates the complexity of both “original” and “copy,” as well 
as their relation in the contexts that concern us. The existential relation between the “original” 
manifestation (which is to say the “original” is itself always already a manifestation) and its 
re-presentation can be had in both the more or less mimetic anthropomorphic form of the 
Buddha mentioned earlier and in the abstract form of the stūpa. Just as relics can be embedded 
in both statue and stūpa, so, too, can stories of the Buddha’s past lives be narrated around them 
to make or animate the relation. My doubling of representation and re-presentation is meant to

--- PAGE 328 ---
Icons
307
emphasize what Kinnard identifies as a productive tension between the realm of representation 
per se and the realm of ontology at the heart of Buddhist art.3
On image–text relations
That the interpretive processes at work here, in ancient Buddhist contexts as in the modern 
day, are anything but simple is illustrated in Brown’s closing analogy between the “iconized 
dharma” and the jātaka as “iconized word texts.” The “iconized dharma” is the crystallization 
of a foundational Buddhist tenet, the prat ı̄tyasamutpāda (in Pāli, paṭiccasamupāda) or “dependent 
origination,” into a four-line verse, the prat ı̄tyasamutpādagāthā, which becomes objectified in 
medieval India (ca. 600–1200 ce)—literally made into an object on the order of the funerary 
stūpa, or of the relic within the stūpa, or of the image which is like the relic assimilated with 
the funerary monument.4 Just like Brown’s jātaka-as-icon, the “iconized dharma” does not refer­
ence a pictorial translation of a text, a secondary derivative of an original, a mere illustration; 
instead, it names apprehension of the verse-tenet as icon, that is as an image whose veneration 
makes the Dharma present in the here and now. In Pāli traditions, the paṭiccasamupāda can be 
identified with the Dharma as a whole (Boucher 1991: 2 and 17, n. 4), the Buddha’s teachings 
that stand in for the Buddha, notably during his absence from this or that place, and, irrevocably, 
after his entry into nirvana (Figure 20.1)
When inscribed on a statue of the Buddha, a practice well established in first-millennium 
Southeast Asia as seen in a corpus of statues from what is now Thailand, Cambodia, and 
Vietnam, the verse cannot be reduced to a text to be read but functions rather like the jātaka 
Figure 20.1  Buddha statue inscribed with the “iconized dharma” or the “dharma relic” on its upper back 
and rubbing of the inscription. The statue was found around 1952 by Phra Dhammasenani, 
then abbot of Wat Mahathat, Ratchaburi, Thailand, at an abandoned temple in Tambol Lum 
Din, Muang District, Ratchaburi. The abbot had the statue transferred to Ratchaburi’s Wat 
Mahathat, where it is still held. The statue no longer has its head. Seventh to eighth century. 
Present height (without head, feet, or base: 127 cm, maximum width 57 cm, maximum depth 
21 cm; Skilling 2003: 274). Images after Prachum silacharuk, Part 3 2508 [1965]: figs. 2 ka and 
2 kha. Another image of the statue with head in place and with other statuary moved to 
Wat Mahathat from the same site features on a Ratchaburi heritage website: http://rb-old.
blogspot.com/2010/04/blog-post_4310.html.

--- PAGE 329 ---
Ashley Thompson
308
on a stūpa, endowing the larger image with its very life.5 As Peter Skilling (2003: abstract) 
notes, the paṭiccasamupāda verse is the “dharma-relic” par excellence. The apparent distillation 
of a fundamental teaching, which takes diverse, more or less elaborate discursive form across 
all Buddhist traditions, into the four-line verse is analogous with the apparent distillation of a 
scene or an episode or a sequence of episodes or even an entire jātaka tale to its bare essence. 
The hierarchized values implied in art-historical analyses that presume images to have been 
derived from texts meet a powerful challenge in this interpretive context that sees images and 
iconized word texts rather as embryonic, containing and maintaining the vital potentiality of 
Buddhahood.6 There is a manifest equivalence between text and image at work here, but it is 
radically different from the model of translation with which we began in following Brown’s 
critique of Dehejia’s readerly viewer.
Skilling effectively extends Brown’s reflections anchored in select sites in South and Southeast 
Asia to make a more general point about the jātaka function in relation to the Buddha image 
broadly defined—including the “aniconic” form of the stūpa as it will be discussed later. Skilling 
insists on the importance of understanding the jātaka as not just tales of the Buddha’s past lives 
but, more precisely, as tales of the future Buddha’s attainment of ethical “perfections” (pāramitā) 
over these many lives leading to his Awakening as the Gotama Buddha, or, as he is often called 
in scholarship on Theravāda Buddhism, the “Historical Buddha.” The stūpa, Skilling (2008: 
61–63) writes, is
the repository of the Buddha’s power and virtues, from his career as a bodhisattva [a 
being on the path to Awakening] over many lives, to his teaching career as an awak­
ened Buddha in his final life, up to his death, embodied in the relics installed within 
the stupa.
The anthropomorphic image of the Buddha is no different from the stūpa in this regard as 
Skilling explicates it, nor, I would add, is it different from the Buddha himself:
[the] physical form of the Buddha is the product of ethics, the product of merit. Since 
the image of the Buddha is meant to represent the idealized form of the Buddha, there 
is an intimate relation between jātakas and Buddha image. The jātakas have, in a sense, 
culminated in the image.
(Skilling 2008: 68)
To see the image strictly as something to be seen is, in Skilling’s Buddhologist eyes, nothing less 
than to manifest ignorance in the “history and function of Buddhist art” (2008: 80). That the 
narrative imagery can be made to be unseen must be itself seen in light of its function as integral 
to the body of the Buddha as such, which is to say to its iconicity as an object of veneration.
The manifest relation between image and text in Theravāda manuscript traditions points 
up another dimension of this critical paradigm. Images in manuscripts frequently do not serve 
to illustrate the texts which they nonetheless accompany; nor are they simply abstract décor.
Figure 20.2 exemplifies one telling mode of visual-cum-textual composition. This accor­
dion-style, or leporello, manuscript is from Wat Khao Yi San, Samut Songkhram Province, 
western-central Thailand. Its use of a particular Khom script, a type of decorative writing 
derived from Old Khmer script and used in central and southern Thai sacred contexts, allows 
for dating the manuscript to the late eighteenth–early nineteenth century. The Pāli text is from 
the abbreviated mātikā of the seven books of the Abhidhamma, with the spread pictured here 
displaying the Dhātukathā mātikā. The flanking images are of the Suvaṇṇasāma Jātaka.7 Skilling’s

--- PAGE 330 ---
Icons
309
comments on this type of eighteenth- to nineteenth-century Thai leporello with jātaka imagery is 
illustrated in the 2008 volume cited earlier with a manuscript now held in the Asian Art Museum 
of San Francisco; they apply equally to the more modest manuscript of Figure 20.2, still held 
in a monastery setting. The jātaka paintings appear “in two vertical bands that flank the text. 
…The accompanying text is not however that of the jātakas” (Skilling 2008: 72; see also image 
p. 73). For Skilling (2008: p. 72), this presentation of the jātaka demonstrates that the paintings 
“exist in their own right, as amplifications of the power and perfections of the Buddha.” This is 
a somewhat strange formulation: they exist in their own right, yet they do so as amplifications of 
something else. The first clause distinguishes the painted jātaka scenes from mere illustrations of 
a text; the second affirms that they are nonetheless integral to something greater than themselves. 
In this description, the manuscript is thoroughly analogous to the monumental stūpa and the 
anthropomorphic Buddha statue in which the jātaka participate in the iconization of the Dharma.
I would amplify Skilling’s analysis in noting the gestalt effect produced by the composition. 
The two painted panels on either side of the text on a given page (the spread composed of two 
pages, unfolded) are framed by decorative borders, with the framing enhancing the iconicity 
of each scene. The inner decorative border of each painted panel separates the flanking jātaka 
paintings from the central text, serving thus as borders also to the text. The two inner decorative 
borders are identical to each other but differ from the two outer borders, which are, in turn, 
identical with each other. When seen together, that is as belonging to the text rather than to 
their respective paintings, these “inner” borders of the paintings become outer borders of the 
text. That is, they frame the central text, enhancing its iconicity. Gazing at an unfolded page, 
we can see at once a singular framed image and a triptych. Variations on this particular com­
positional and framing practice, in which image and text become interchangeable via a logic 
radically different to that of illustration, by which I mean translation, can be readily observed 
in the British Library Discovering Sacred Texts online resource. See, for example, the eighteenth-
century leporello from Central Thailand that contains a collection of Pāli extracts from the 
Vinaya and the Abhidhamma, along with a Pāli composition on the Buddha’s virtues derived 
from a famous fifth-century Pāli commentary on the Abhidhamma by Buddhaghosa in Sri 
Lanka, the Visuddhimagga (British Library Oriental Manuscript Or 14068: https://www.bl.uk/
Figure 20.2  Spread of a late eighteenth–early nineteenth-century leporello manuscript held in Wat Khao 
Yi San, Samut Songkhram province, Thailand. (Wat Museum run jointly with Silpakorn 
University.) The text displayed here is the Dhātukathā mātikā; the flanking images are of the 
Suvaṇṇasāma Jātaka. Photograph by Somneuk Hongprayoon, courtesy Fragile Palm Leaves 
Foundation.

--- PAGE 331 ---
Ashley Thompson
310
collection-items/animal-tales-mahabuddhaguna-birds-buddhist-texts). The paintings flanking 
the manuscript are of the last ten jātaka. The framing technique used in this manuscript, in 
which the inner borders are most prominent, singles out the text as image over the images 
themselves while also presenting the whole of an unfolded page as a triptych.
I note, finally, that the view of “reading” shared by both Dehejia and Brown is itself circum­
scribed within an academic discourse which risks stripping the practice of (1) its metaphysical—
or shall I say meditative—dimensions to leave us readers as it were with a rather impoverished 
understanding of what it is that we do when our eyes move across the traces on a surface and 
(2) any contextual dimensions inflecting what a given reader at a given time in a given context 
is doing when they “read.” In short, I am not sure that I know what reading is—no more or 
less than I know what it means to worship a Buddha image. To pursue reflections on what it 
is to read would bring us to further nuance distinctions Brown is evoking in this essay and to 
highlight also relations, for example, between the secular and the sacred; it would also, however, 
bring me further from my present circumscribed task to examine the icon in Theravādin art, 
even as this task presumes that, in giving body to transcendence of the material world, “art” 
itself—not unlike the Buddha—challenges such distinctions.
The aniconic and the anthropomorphic: ongoing issues 
in Buddhist art history
The term aniconic gained currency in early twentieth-century art-historical studies of the earliest 
instances of Buddhist art.8 It is a misnomer insofar as what it names is not an-iconic, that is, a 
negation of the iconic, but rather an investment in it. Early “aniconic” Buddhist art includes a 
range of forms that index the Buddha without representing him anthropomorphically. These 
forms range from relatively simple signs, such as the footprint or the stūpa, to complex narra­
tive scenes interpreted as presenting events in the Buddha’s life story in which the Buddha is 
distinctly not represented in human form and this anthropomorphic absence is made evident 
by a variety of means, from symbolic stand-ins to empty spaces staged as such. This “aniconic” 
art is generally associated with monumental stūpa. If, to requote Brown, an icon, “in a specifi­
cally Indic religious sense” is “a form of the deity that is the focus of reverence and worship,” 
“aniconic” Buddhist art is truly iconic, whether it comprises a singular emblem, a setting of that 
emblem within a narrative construct, or a narrative sequence in which the anthropomorphic 
figure of the Buddha is made conspicuously absent. The “aniconic” can be a distinct focus of 
worship and/or participate in the iconization of the monument of which it is a part. The “ani­
conic” in this early scholarly context was set in opposition to anthropomorphic representations 
of the Buddha. The interpretive focus has been twofold. On one hand, we see a predominantly 
historical investment, with scholars intent on identifying the earliest of early Buddhist art and 
establishing a chronological sequence from the aniconic to the anthropomorphic; on the other, 
we see a more interpretive investment in uncovering the causes behind both “aniconic” repre­
sentation of the Buddha and the emergence of its perceived opposite in human form, be these 
causes geo-historical, sociocultural, ritual, or doctrinal. A more apt term for the “aniconic” in 
this context might simply be the non-anthropomorphic. Note, however, that insofar as it is only 
the “Historical” Buddha, who is not represented in human form in early “aniconic” Buddhist 
art, the term non-anthropomorphic does not adequately describe this category of art as a whole, 
which is fully figurative and often teaming with anthropomorphic figures, a context that, in fact, 
enhances the conspicuousness of the absence of the anthropomorphic figure of the Buddha. 
For this reason, also, the term aniconic as it can be used in art-historical writing more gener­
ally to designate nonfigurative art must be considered a misnomer for our specific topic here.

--- PAGE 332 ---
Icons
311
More than a century of debate on the topic has led to robust understandings of the geo-
historical development of early Buddhist art, and to a widespread acceptance of the absence 
of any formal prohibition on anthropomorphic representation of the Buddha underpinning 
early practice. It has produced sophisticated understandings of the historical and conceptual 
dimensions of the evolution of early Buddhist art production, notably with work on funer­
ary portraiture (DeCaroli 2015) and detailed accounts of the role of Buddhist narrative in 
integrating a pool of Indic auspicious signs, with the representation of the auspicious figure 
of the anthropomorphic Buddha as one outcome of this process (Karlsson 2000, 2006). The 
aniconic–anthropomorphic paradigm has in many ways been superseded with more complex, 
historically grounded frameworks for understanding early Buddhist art. Yet the paradigm 
haunts Buddhist art history still and not only in writing on early India. Brown, for example, is 
compelled to distance his usage with reference to first- and early second-millennia South and 
Southeast Asian jātaka representation from that embedded in the debates summarized earlier, 
adding a footnote to his simple definition of icon. “My use of icon,” he writes, “is not intended 
to relate to this dialectic” (between “iconic” and aniconic” in writing about the early Buddhist 
art of India) (Brown 1997: 107, n. 86). The reasons for this haunting are no doubt multiple. 
In the following, I probe a few of these, in pointing up how Brown’s usage might relate after 
all to this dialectic at the foundation of Buddhist art history insofar as his South and much 
later Southeast Asian materials render the dialectic in themselves and, in doing so, challenge 
established narratives of the simplicity of Theravāda and its art in its supposed singular focus 
on the “Historical” Buddha.
The stūpa and the anthropomorphic figure of the Gotama Buddha can be said to stand out 
as the principal mainstays of Theravāda artistic production over time and space. As the earlier 
discussion on jātaka tales, sculpted or painted as well as written, has, I trust, demonstrated, the 
stūpa and the Buddha image do not stand alone, but they are made to stand out. The stūpa 
is aniconic in the established usage of the term in Buddhist art history; that is, it renders the 
Sakyamuni Buddha in non-anthropomorphic form. In my view, all of Brown’s case stud­
ies provide fine examples of the dialectic maintaining between the two forms, including 
in Theravāda settings. I will draw out a few salient points in this regard at one of Brown’s 
chosen sites, Wat Si Chum of Sukhothai, to then consider Cambodia’s Angkor Wat temple 
as transformed in the sixteenth century in light of these discussions. With these specific his­
torical examples, I aim also to give some sense of how what might appear to be an abstruse 
theoretical construct of the icon—involving lofty ideas of presence and absence apparently 
far from the minds and experiences of average worshipers—actually takes mundane material 
form. In making the connection between debates on early Buddhist art and second-millennia 
Southeast Asian constructs, I do not mean to suggest that Theravāda maintains a privileged 
relationship to early Buddhist art in any straightforward historical sense. The relations are 
thoroughly ideological insofar as the stūpa and the image of the Historical Buddha can be said 
to evoke, in embodying, existential relations with the Buddha himself. It strikes me in fact 
that the work of these icons is more in tune with the complexities frequently attributed to 
Mahāyāna developments on visualizations and embodiments of the divine in contrast with the 
thus-perceived simple Theravāda. Kinnard’s “quite tentative” contrasting characterization of the 
two is indicative in this regard, as it recognizes the reductive nature of the vision of Theravāda 
on which it nonetheless relies. Short of adequate interpretive frames, this is what Kinnard says:
The Theravādin position, on its face at any rate, is relatively straightforward: the Buddha 
was an extraordinary man who lived in the sixth century BCE; he was endowed with 
certain extra-human powers, but was nonetheless a mortal who was born, lived and

--- PAGE 333 ---
Ashley Thompson
312
died. …Therefore, to look for the presence of the Buddha in stones, relics, sculptures, 
etc., is to look in vain. These are merely reminders of the Buddha, and they thus serve 
to signify the Buddha who is himself no longer present, but whose life and teachings 
serve as both, to use Geertz’ well known terms, a model of and a model for the ideal life. 
The Mahāyāna position is more difficult to summarize briefly.
(Kinnard 1999: 26)
The “face” of Theravāda is of real import in this affair. It appeals to a certain historicity, an 
investment in an understanding of linear time by which a man lived and died, and whose life 
and death is commemorated by adherents centuries on. Theravāda, in this sense, embodies 
an investment in history as a linear, teleological narrative: as Siddhattha Gotama progressed 
to Awakening, so, too, do adherents progress in their lives commemorating his. The face of 
Theravāda is more than a façade covering up something else, something more complicated 
or illicit even, something heterodox akin to Mahāyāna as this sort of hesitant characteriza­
tion of Theravāda tends to suggest. With a nod to Kinnard’s own theorization of Mahāyāna 
constructs in this same chapter, I suggest rather that the tensions maintained in that very face 
are what make Theravāda and its icons. The “Historical Buddha” is as much a supernatural 
as a natural phenomenon. The perfections he legendarily achieved over many past lives led 
to the life of Siddhattha Gotama and his Awakening. Each of the characteristic marks the 
Buddha bears—uṣṇ ı̄ṣa (cranial protuberance) on the head, cakra (wheels) on the palms, and 
so on—is linked to a “perfection” (Skilling 2008: 67–8). The latest in a line of Buddhas, 
he becomes an idealized figure, an exemplar, which is to say at once bearing and bereft of 
singular identity—an “icon” in and of himself to be venerated. The stūpa embodies another 
iteration of this tension between the historical and the ahistorical. The monument represents 
the end of the narrative, the Buddha’s death, the disappearance of the natural figure. At the 
same time, however, it gives body and supernatural, ahistorical life to that figure. Relative to 
the spectacular artistic developments of Mahāyāna or Vajrayāna the figure of the Buddha and 
stūpa are simple indeed. Yet, as the following historical examples should demonstrate, they 
are, like Mahāyāna, not easy to summarize briefly. They too are “metapractical” objects on 
the order of the Mahāyāna materials described by Kinnard, “involving and invoking a range 
of strategies with which Buddhists could work through the incongruities and complexities” 
at hand (Kinnard 1999: 43–44).
The broader Theravāda narrative I will sketch out, linking Sukhothai’s Wat Si Chum and 
Cambodia’s Angkor Wat, aims to point up how ensembles of imagery—aniconic, iconic, and 
narrative not only in the conventional sense each of these terms has carried in Buddhist art his­
tory but also in their relations I have attempted to outline—embody remarkably coherent strate­
gies. In turn, these strategies lend a certain physical and conceptual coherence to a vast region 
otherwise characterized by heterogeneous language use and topographies as well as political and 
cultural histories. I am not speaking directly to exchange networks by which people, objects, 
and ideas circulated, though these underpin to a degree my concerns which linger rather on 
aesthetic questions concerning the work that art does. On the surface, the image ensembles, at 
Wat Si Chum and Angkor Wat, are quite dissimilar. They differ markedly in architectural and 
artistic form, style, and manifest content. Each ensemble is thoroughly historically contingent, 
produced as a result of specific local historical events and contributing to the commemora­
tion of these. They stand at a great distance from each other in time and space, north-central 
Thailand in the fourteenth century and northern Cambodia in the sixteenth century. To my 
mind, they point to two major inflections of premodern Theravāda on the mainland. The one, 
Wat Si Chum, can be said to be largely shaped through an orchestrated orientation to Sri

--- PAGE 334 ---
Icons
313
Lankan Buddhism, building on Angkorian constructs while nonetheless distancing itself from 
them; this comes with a pronounced investment in the Buddha’s life stories. The other, Angkor 
Wat, is predominantly shaped by the Angkorian heritage of which the temple is an exemplary 
part; the sixteenth-century transformation of the temple evinces a pronounced investment in 
the Hindu god Viṣṇu’s life stories, now serving to endow the temple-as-Buddhist-icon with 
new life. Still their different modes of expression share in a visual projection of Buddhist icons 
made to stand out as such by epic narratives in which the Buddha and Viṣṇu are, in varying 
ways, assimilated, a shared projection that makes each ensemble also stand out from local his­
torical narratives to participate in what might be termed a Theravāda civilization transgressing 
contingencies of time and space.
Readers are encouraged to read the following in conjunction with Anne Blackburn’s 
essay in the present volume examining how Sukhothai came to participate in the Pāli world 
of the second millennium. In a forthcoming monograph on Theravādin Buddhist kingdoms, 
Blackburn expands on this work tracking a shift from the discrete state-building focus of King 
Ramkhamhaeng’s Buddhist expression in early Sukhothai to subsequent Sukhothai reigns 
characterized by sustained campaigns to emplot traces of the Buddha in Tai territories and 
a noted immersion in Pāli texts composed in Sri Lanka, to a subsequent predominant con­
cern for monastic lineage in developments in Lanna (northern Thailand) and Bago (Burma). 
While Blackburn sounds the fine distinctions between these polities and their Buddhisms as 
they develop in time and space, she tracks a singular arc of development. In the following, 
I seek to add another piece to the larger premodern Pāli world in which Cambodia is also 
integral, though otherwise. Sukhothai might be seen as a sort of pivot linking and foreshad­
owing what will become, in one inflection, the Sri Lanka–Bago–Lanna arc traced by Anne 
Blackburn and, in another, the Cambodia–Central Thailand arc that we might be tempted 
to name Ramayanic Buddhism in ways that should become evident in the next section. The 
developments I examine follow on,  in both historical and art historical terms, from those at 
Pagan described by Samerchai Poolsuwan in the present volume; they intersect with those 
he describes at Ayutthaya.
Re-presenting the Buddha: two historical examples
Wat Si Chum is a fourteenth-century Theravāda monastery outside the city walls of Sukhothai, 
one of three urban centers comprising the backbone of an eponymous premodern polity in 
what is now north-central Thailand. Sukhothai emerged in the thirteenth century as a Tai 
Buddhist power with a developing cosmopolitan outlook and regional prominence; this rise 
came in the wake of Angkor, the Khmer polity centered on the Angkor plain in what is now 
northern Cambodia from the ninth to thirteenth centuries. Angkor had expanded its reach 
into the area that would become the independent realm of Sukhothai by the late twelfth–
early thirteenth centuries and ultimately contributed to its foundation, such that Sukhothai 
can be considered one of multiple inheritors of Angkor. Angkor had thrived on a largely 
Hindu political structure in which the gods S´iva and Viṣṇu figured prominently in royal cults 
and associated administrative structures. Buddhism was present over much of this period but 
came to prominence at court only in the late Angkorian reign of Jayavarman VII, which saw 
a flourishing of Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna expression underpinning political consolidation and 
expansion into what is now Thailand and Laos. Theravāda Buddhism became dominant at 
Angkor and elsewhere in Cambodia in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, developing 
at this time also in exchange with Sukhothai, Pagan, and other regional polities in ways that 
remain relatively obscure today.9

--- PAGE 335 ---
Ashley Thompson
314
Wat Si Chum has been the subject of extensive research. This is in part for the unique 
configuration of the site’s dominant architectural feature, what is referred to in the scholarly 
literature as a mondop according to Thai pronunciation of the Pāli maṇḍapa. The mondop is 
thought to have been built in the late fourteenth century around a preexisting colossal Buddha 
image. A narrow tunnel-like passageway was built into the mondop’s monumental walls, spiral­
ing through a system of staircases from the floor level around the building up to its top. Stone 
etchings of one hundred jātaka tales, numbered and with legends, are fit into the ceilings and 
other select components of this passageway effectively encircling the Buddha image. Scholars 
were long misled in the interpretation of these jātaka plaques, and so of the site as a whole, by 
a conviction perfectly articulated by epigraphist–art historian team Griswold and Prasert na 
Nagara (1972: 77) in their seminal work on the architectural complex:
Representations of Jātakas, more than any other category of Buddhist art, are intended 
for the edification of the general public; so it is certain that these were not made to 
be installed in a dark stairway where they could only be seen with the aid of a candle.
This widely held conviction led to interpretive acrobatics on the part of multiple scholars posit­
ing that the jātaka etchings were originally mounted on the exterior of Sukothai’s Mahādhātu, 
the majestic city centre stūpa, only to be moved later to the eccentric mondop of   Wat Si Chum. 
This interpretation has been discredited, both for the way in which the stone slabs have been 
shown to have been custom-made during the original construction of Wat Si Chum and for 
its premise that the very raison d’être of jātakas lies in being read—a premise convincingly 
challenged by Brown and Skilling as discussed previously. A massive, lengthy stone inscrip­
tion in Thai language and script was found in Wat Si Chum’s inner-wall passageway entrance; 
once thought, in conjunction with the jātaka hypothesis, to have belonged to Sukhothai’s Wat 
Mahādhātu, it is now generally understood that the epigraph was found just where it belonged, 
at Wat Si Chum.
The mondop and jātaka of Wat Si Chum comprised one of the case studies presented by 
Robert Brown in his 1997 essay. Brown is most interested in the placement of the jātaka at 
Wat Si Chum, encircling the Buddha/monument yet out of easy sight in ways he shows to 
be comparable to the placement of jātaka at other Buddhist sites including the early twelfth-
century Ananda temple at Pagan. The 2008 collective volume edited by Peter Skilling presents 
a comprehensive interdisciplinary review of the extant research on Wat Si Chum while also 
contributing new findings and interpretations of multiple dimensions of the site. I draw primar­
ily from the work of Skilling, architectural historian Pierre Pichard, and art historian Pattaratorn 
Chirapravati in this 2008 volume to make a few further points (Skilling: 2008: 59–109; Pichard 
2008: 41–57; Chirapravati 2008: 13–39).
The photograph in Figure 20.3 shows a view of the mondop today following multiple res­
toration campaigns in the twentieth century. It is a large stuccoed square brick structure on a 
massive stepped base aligned to the west of a brick terrace. The terrace is understood to be 
the remains of a vihāra (pronounced wihan in Thai) or worship hall, containing at its western 
end a pedestal for a Buddha image facing east, like the Buddha inside the mondop behind it. 
The alignment of a vihāra and mondop is common at Sukhothai, with variations including the 
addition of a stūpa behind the mondop, or a stūpa in the place of the mondop. The Wat Si Chum 
configuration is unusual in the Sukhothai context for the fact that the vihāra appears to have 
been closed at its western end such that the colossal figure of the Buddha visible through the 
peaked doorway of the mondop today would not have been readily visible as the configura­
tion was originally conceived. A narrow space between the vihāra and the mondop nonetheless

--- PAGE 336 ---
Icons
315
allowed access into the latter. The Wat Si Chum mondop is unusual in the context of other 
mondop structures at Sukhothai for a number of other reasons including its massive size and 
relatively unadorned exterior.
Pierre Pichard’s detailed study of the structure makes a tentative but strong argument that 
Wat Si Chum’s mondop was conceived as a sort of stūpa. Pichard reminds readers that it is unlikely 
that the term maṇḍapa was used during the Sukhothai period to refer to this structure or to 
like structures today called mondop in other period temple sites. The interchangeability between 
stūpa and mondop evidenced in the period site configurations described above itself comprises 
a first suggestion that this structure could have been a stūpa or at least associated with, if not 
veritably assimilated with, the stūpa concept.10 The upper part of the inner walls of the mondop 
are tapered inwards. To Pichard, this indicates that the structure was originally conceived as a 
tall tower with a high corbeled inner structure but was left incomplete. Pichard cites possible 
local architectural models in the late twelfth- and early thirteenth-century Khmer sanctuary 
towers of Sukhothai’s nearby Wat Phra Phai Luang and the square tower-shaped Lanna stupas 
some 300 kilometers to the north such as the famed Chedi Ku Kut at Wat Chamathewi in 
Lamphun first constructed in the mid-twelfth century. He additionally evokes the Satmahal 
Prāsāda in Sri Lanka’s twelfth-century capital of Polonnaruva as a possible inspiration to monks 
returning to Sukhothai from the island. Whatever the specific inspiration might have been, 
assuming there was one, for this architectural historian the overriding image of Wat Si Chum’s 
mondop is that of a stupa: “If, as generally believed, the large … Buddha image was there before 
Figure 20.3  Wat Si Chum, Sukhothai, Thailand: mondop preceded by pillared vihāra terrace and one of the 
one hundred engraved stone jātaka plaques from the staired passageway inside the mondop wall 
spiraling around the colossal Buddha image. This plaque represents in condensed form the 
Maghadeva Jātaka; it is pictured here in situ on the ceiling of the passageway inside the mondop’s 
southern wall; the next plaque can be seen above. Mondop photograph by author. Jātaka plaque 
photograph courtesy Thanaphat Limhasanaikul.

--- PAGE 337 ---
Ashley Thompson
316
the mondop’s construction, a solid stupa would have been out of the question since an interior 
space was necessary around the image, but the general profile could be adopted nonetheless” 
(Pichard 2008: 53). The especially tight fit between the colossal Buddha and the monument 
enveloping it, along with the placement of the ensemble directly behind the enclosed vihāra, 
certainly renders the stūpa effect, in which the Buddha relic inside is more or less inaccessible. 
There is scant space for worship inside the mondop. The spatial relation between image and 
monument creates a dazzling effect for the worshiper on the ground who, once inside can 
behold the image little better than from the outside, that is to say they cannot behold the image 
per se, as a whole, but can only be impressed in a nearly literal manner by the monumentality 
of the Buddha’s presence.
Inscription 2, from Wat Si Chum, datable to the latter half of the fourteenth century, is a 
remarkable text recounting the exploits of prince-become-monk Śrı̄ Śraddhā.11 The text opens 
and closes with a sort of précis of Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s good Buddhist works, including a focused refer­
ence to his construction and veneration of a stūpa housing a tooth relic and another housing a 
famous hair and neckbone relic in a forest monastery. Alternating between the first and third 
person, the text then tells us of the heroic acts of ancestors, whose sovereign titles were origi­
nally bestowed on them by Angkor at the foundation of Sukhothai and then of Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s 
own military prowess before leaving the princely world behind for the monastic order. The 
ebullient prose then records one pious work after the next, including multiple temple, bodhi 
tree, stūpa, and statue foundation and restoration campaigns, and culminating in an extraordinary, 
long account of relics performing miracles like fireworks in the sky, evidencing Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s 
extraordinary devout power. Throughout the text, Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s acts are associated with “acts 
of truth” (Pāli: saccakiriyā) by which the good works done, including that done in the recording 
of the vow, are explicitly formulated as building the meritorious path by which Śrı̄ Śraddhā 
will become a Buddha. Chirapravati judiciously summarises convincing historical arguments 
for positing Wat Si Chum as the forest monastery named in the inscription and built by Śrı̄ 
Śraddhā on a preexistent Theravādin site to house a newly introduced forest-dwelling Sinhalese 
monastic lineage (Chirapravati 2008: 19). The mondop with its jātaka engravings is assumed to 
have been among his many good works.
The text weaves in and out of Sukhothai and the neighboring Si Sajjanalai, Mottama 
(Martaban, a Mon polity on the Andaman coast), India and Sri Lanka, where Śrı̄ Śraddhā 
appears to have been reordained, in ways that make it often impossible for the reader to discern 
exactly where this or that event is said to have occurred, and whether it occurred in fact or 
fiction. Griswold and Prasert na Nagara’s (1972: 84–85) comments in this regard are informa­
tive on multiple levels:
the author of inscription 2 is gushing, hyperbolic, at times long-winded and repetitive, 
at times hurried and elliptical to the point of obscurity. He jumps from one subject 
to another in a very confusing way, so that painstaking study is sometimes required to 
decide whether we are in Siam or in Ceylon or in India. …Despite the oddities of the 
composition … when we take the trouble to disentangle the succession of events and 
straighten out the topography it is one of the most informative we possess.
The authors skillfully do just this by reading Inscription 2 up against another epigraph in 
which the same Śrı̄ Śraddhā recounts his travels with a slightly greater degree of chronological 
and topographical clarity. Other scholars have continued the quest to trace Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s exact 
trajectory, pinning down times and places to build a picture of monastic practices and regional 
exchange networks operating at the time.12

--- PAGE 338 ---
Icons
317
These are vital historical points, to which I would like to add reflections on the histori­
cal vision had by the text and its author as evinced in the text’s very form. The interpretive 
acrobatics required to set Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s record straight is strikingly reminiscent of those long 
undertaken to explain the “hidden” jātakas of Wat Si Chum: they belie a process by which the 
logic of the interpreter prevails over the logic of the text. What if, then, the form of the text, 
with its tangled temporalities and twisted topographies, were to be taken on its own terms? 
The question pulsates throughout Griswold and Prasert’s meticulous critical translation but 
remains unarticulated as such and so unanswered. Instead, following on from their authoritative 
depiction of the oddities cited earlier, we hear them go further to characterize the author as 
irrational (Ibid: 89); we hear them ask, in repeating and expanding on their initial depiction, 
“What of the author’s hyperbolic style of writing, his repetitions and ellipses, his jumping 
about from one subject to another, his dream-like chronology and topography and his general 
absent-mindedness?” (Ibid: 90) As they attempt to pin down a series of acts recounted in the 
text to specific times and places we hear them preempt anticipated readerly objections with 
the argument that “order and continuity are not [the author’s] strong points” (Griswold and 
Prasert na Nagara 1972: 127–128, n. 149). Yet, the shadow of a doubt in their own convic­
tions of the authors’ illogic emerges as they qualify their recurrent argument in this regard: 
“We believe this to be true; but the train of thought may be more complex” (Griswold and 
Prasert na Nagara 1972: 128, n. 49).
Here in this tiny footnote to a footnote, and as I will show, in like supplementary com­
mentary, Griswold and Prasert are onto something essential to the understanding of Theravāda 
icons, something that adds another dimension to the historical interpretation that has thus far 
dominated critical work on the Wat Si Chum text. These are linguistic turns that themselves 
embody the condensation of time and space by which an icon embodies the powerful presence 
of the Buddha. The indiscrimination between times, present or past, and places, here or there, 
which has challenged translators for nearly a century is not only a result of an irrational author. 
It is rather structurally embedded in the Buddhist practices recorded as in the Buddhist practice 
of recording. Griswold and Prasert note, for example, the ambivalence embedded in the usage 
of Tai and Sanskrit verbs that can mean at once “to construct” and “to reconstruct”;13 in the 
usage of a Tai demonstrative meaning “that” or “there” (d ı̄ nann) to also or instead mean “this” 
or “here,” an ambivalence which contributes to that of the positioning of the text’s enunciating 
subject vis-à-vis the objects and events he describes in time and space;14 and in the spectacular 
capacity for relics to self-reproduce such that duplicates, found, seen, deposited or venerated here 
and now, are indistinguishable from their “originals.” Such questions of linguistic ambivalence 
bring the translators to concede to footnote a particularly thorny passage as “most likely” … 
“a kind of religious double-talk” in which a single phrase would reference at once stūpas in 
Sukhothai and Sri Lanka, as if the one were “magically identified” with the other (Griswold 
and Prasert na Nagara 1972: 128, n. 149). Call it what you like—condensation, dreamlike or 
double-talk, the formal dimensions of the text, like those of the jātaka–Buddha–stūpa ensemble 
of Wat Si Chum, allow us to think how Buddhist art writ large, that is, text, image, and monu­
ment, itself thinks history, in conjunction with how modern scholars might seek to understand 
history with reference to it.
What is crystal clear from the inscription is that Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s life story is that of a bodhisattva, 
a being destined to become a Buddha who accomplishes good works, enabling the fulfillment 
of that destiny, and that “Sri Lankan” Buddhism comprises the model by which Buddhahood 
is to be achieved. In the life recorded in stone, Śrı̄ Śraddhā effectively reincarnates the past 
Buddha in his past lives. As Blackburn has noted in the wake of the text’s translators, the 
account of the transition from domestic to ascetic life mimics first that of Siddhattha leaving

--- PAGE 339 ---
Ashley Thompson
318
the princely fold for the ascetic life at the sight of pains and sorrows of the mundane life and 
then the Vessantara Jātaka, a tale of the past life of the Buddha as Prince Vessantara who gives 
away fortune, kingdom, and family in accomplishing the perfection of generosity (Blackburn: 
forthcoming). Here it is the technique of literary allusion which accomplishes the condensation 
of time and space, such that the tales of the accomplishment of perfection give Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s 
own present person the power of the Buddha-to-be.
This vision of Śrı̄ Śraddhā as a bodhisattva is reiterated in a multitude of spectacular ways 
throughout the text. Early on we learn that his good works are explicitly channeled to pro­
mote the Sri Lankan model and intended to forge his predestined path to Buddhahood. 
The relic miracles are both caused by his devotion to Sri Lankan Buddhism and proof of 
his future Buddhahood. The two core elements of his formal name, Śrı̄śraddhārājacūḷamuni 
Śrı̄ratanalaṅkadı̄pa, encapsulate his Buddhist person as it appears at the end of the text. The first 
can be literally rendered August (Śr ı̄) Faith (śraddhā) Royal (rāja) Lock of hair left on crest of the 
head after shaving, mark of royal distinction (cūḷa) Ascetic (muni, also spelled muṇi in the text); 
as Griswold and Prasert note, the end compound cūḷamuṇi recalls cūḷamaṇi, the legendary “Hair-
crest Jewel” of the Buddha encased in an eponymous heavenly stūpa.15 The royal monk literally 
appears to merit this name when in the finale of the spectacular relic miracle performance, 
after Śrı̄ Śraddhā has thrown himself “on the ground and offered [his] life as an irrevocable gift, 
vowing to uphold the religion of Laṅkādı̄pa [Sri Lanka],” two relics are physically embedded in 
him (Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1972: 131). The first, a golden relic, circles his head in a 
propitious manner before landing on it to then install itself in his forehead; the second, a hair 
plucked from the Buddha’s own head when living, lands and stays atop Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s own head. 
At this sight, the Sri Lankan onlookers and artisans Śrı̄ Śraddhā had brought back to Sukhothai 
with him for the express purpose of building the Sri Lankan model on Tai land exclaim him to 
be a buddhāṅga, a Buddha element or seed or essence, which is to say embodying the remains 
and the potential of Buddhahood (Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1972: 104 [Thai text Part 
II, l. 73]). “The reason they [the relics] performed such miracles,” the text tells us, “was to show 
themselves to all the people, to cause them to help uplift the Dharma of Laṅkā[dı̄pā] as a great 
source of merit, and to make the Buddhist religion manifest.”16 The second core element of 
the epigraphic hero’s formal name emphasizes this dimension of his person: he is the August 
(Śr ı̄) Jewel (ratana) [of the] Island (d ı̄pa) of Lanka.
The Khmer figure periodically in the text, in a sort of apposition, in contrast to the recurrent 
figuring of Sri Lanka in the position of inspiration and source. Ancestral political relations to 
the Khmer recorded in the opening of the biographical account are complemented by ances­
tral cultural relations evidenced throughout the text in its use of Khmer terminology.17 When 
recording Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s efforts to “save the August Great Royal Reliquary” (loek hai ka tāṃ braḥ 
mahādhātu hlvaṅ) in a phrase combining Khmer, Thai, and Pāli terms, the text adds that “[t]
he Khmer call it ‘Great Buddha’” (Khmer: braḥ dhaṃ) (Griswold and Prasert, Tai text, Part I, 
ll.20–23). To my mind, it is not entirely clear to which monument this passage refers; and it 
is of note that the Khmer appellation braḥ dhaṃ is common (in modern usage and in Middle 
Khmer as we understand it) for Buddha images but not for stūpas themselves. Chirapravati 
and Skilling aim to close the long debates on this question in identifying the braḥ mahādhātu 
hlvaṅ / braḥ dhaṃ with the Dhanyakataka in Amaravati (in Andhra Pradesh, India) subsequently 
named in the text. Chirapravati makes a convincing argument in this regard, notably pointing to 
ongoing activity in the fourteenth century at this majestic stūpa first built in the third century 
bce and to the concomitant reference in the Wat Si Chum text to the monument in ques­
tion having once boasted “stone carvings of the five hundred … jātakas.” (Chirapravati 2008: 
19–20). The Dhanyakataka did indeed once boast hundreds of scenes of the life of the Buddha

--- PAGE 340 ---
Icons
319
and jātaka tales sculpted on stone slabs on the inner face of its surrounding railing. Reviewing 
the epigraphic and art-historical evidence, Chirapravati argues that Śrı̄ Śraddhā could well 
have visited the site (Chirapravati 2008: 19–20). I argue simply that this convincing historical 
identification might further serve to inform understandings of the overarching logic of the 
text and of the practices it records, including the practice of recording it performs, whereby 
what happens in the South Asian sites reputed for their ancient association with the Buddha 
is virtually inseparable from what happens in Sukhothai through Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s person. Indeed, 
though Wat Si Chum boasted stone carvings of only one hundred jātakas, Pichard calculates 
that the apparent conception of a tall tower could have well included an intended installation 
of another four hundred jātaka plaques in a passageway continuing to spiral up the monument.
An ancillary point to my point here is that while the text is overarchingly concerned 
with the Sukhothai-Sri Lankan/Indian relation, the Khmer somehow mattered. Why does 
Śrı̄ Śraddhā take the time to tell us how the Khmer called the site “saved” from ruin by Śrı̄ 
Śraddhā? Were Khmer-speaking pilgrims working alongside Śrı̄ Śraddhā in Amaravati, restor­
ing the stone carvings of jātaka tales before Śrı̄ Śraddhā would return to Sukhothai to recreate 
his experiences there—including naming the Khmer name for an early Indian site there in 
the Wat Si Chum inscription? The possibility is intriguing. In any case it is of note that this 
late fourteenth-century Tai text discreetly tells us that the Khmer (name) mattered even as the 
people and the name were statedly, textually pulled into Sukhothai’s Sri Lankan orbit.
A last note on Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s own dynamic identity will introduce us to our closing con­
sideration of royal Cambodian Theravāda expression. The overarching identification of Śrı̄ 
Śraddhā as a future Buddha is underpinned by periodic mention of his past Vaishnava lives. 
As a princely youth he makes a vow to become Rāma, an avatar of Viṣṇu.18 Later, as a royal 
monk-bodhisattva he is called “Lord Kṛṣṇa,” the very “person of Rāma and the god Nārāya(ṇa) 
who descended from heaven to be reborn and travel through the round of last transmigrations, 
wandering back and forth from birth to birth” (Ibid: 124). This identification of the bodhisattva 
Śrı̄ Śraddhā as Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, avatars of the god Viṣṇu, also known as Nārāya(ṇa), is followed 
immediately by an enigmatic and fragmentary quotation: “‘Mettaiyo … Gotamo’,” an appeal to 
Maitreya the future Buddha and Gotama the present Buddha in the singular Theravāda line. In 
other words, Rāma lingers in and is, in fact, reborn in the person of this (once princely now 
future) Buddha. It was not unusual for Buddhist kings to be seen in such a Vaishnava light, and 
the figure endures in the titulature and pageantry of Southeast Asia’s remaining Cambodian 
and Thai monarchies. What interests me here are Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s parallel evocations, at Wat Si 
Chum, of his own (re)incarnation of the many lives of Viṣṇu and the Buddha as he works 
his way along the path to Awakening. Whether or not his relics are deposited in the jātaka–
Buddha–stūpa ensemble of Wat Si Chum, we cannot be sure. The inscription does, however, 
ensure his ongoing life (Figure 20.4).
Angkor Wat temple was built on the Angkor plain in what is now northern Cambodia in 
the twelfth century under the reign of King Sūryavarman II. The prāsād (Hindu temple) was 
dedicated to the god Viṣṇu in association with the founder king for whom it would serve as 
a posthumous abode. No foundation stele has been found for Angkor Wat, nor do we know 
what statue originally served as the temple’s central icon. The information just conveyed has 
instead come to us through the temple’s twelfth-century sculpted reliefs which are predomi­
nantly Vaishnava, and short legends inscribed among these identifying representations of the 
founder king by his posthumous name, “Paramaviṣṇulok,” “He who has gone to Viṣṇu’s realm.”
Significant transformations were made to Angkor Wat in the sixteenth century. The major 
components of this transformation were, first, the completion of Vaishnava bas-reliefs in the 
northeastern wings of the temple’s third enclosure galleries. Associated short inscriptions tell

--- PAGE 341 ---
Ashley Thompson
320
us that these reliefs were sculpted between 1546 and 1564 under the commission of braḥ pād 
stac braḥ rāja oṅkār parama rājādhirāja rāmādhipat ı̄ parama cakravartirāja to complete the “narrative 
panels” “left unfinished” by braḥ pād mahāviṣṇulok. The former title is notable in the present 
context for its Vaishnava orientation naming Rāma and his attribute as a wheel-turning mon­
arch, the cakra disc; the latter serves to prove that the temple’s founder king was remembered 
by his posthumous Vaishnava name some four centuries after the fact (Cœdès 1962). The dates 
correspond to the reign of a king more often known as Ang Chan, notably celebrated in the 
broader contemporary historical record and later local historiography for leading a Buddhist 
renewal of the Cambodian kingdom at the time (Groslier 1958; Vickery 1977: esp. 226–228). 
The twelfth-century reliefs of Angkor Wat’s third enclosure include multiple stories of Viṣṇu 
and his avatars, as well as a historical depiction of King Sūryavarman II and his entourage in 
procession, and a depiction of beings transmigrating through heavens and hells, their destinies 
made to be seen as depending on actions committed in past lives. Representing narrative 
sequences highlighting the heroic actions of Viṣṇu and his avatar Kṛṣṇa, the sixteenth-century 
reliefs do indeed complete the twelfth-century narrative schema. Art historians have hypoth­
esized, in fact, that at least portions of these later narrative compositions were sketched into 
the stone in the twelfth century such that Ang Chan’s artisans had only to follow their lead 
(Boisselier 1962: 244; Giteau 1975: 93–111; Roveda 2002: 57).
The second major sixteenth-century transformation of Angkor Wat consisted in the clos­
ing off of the originally open central sanctuary: each of the four doorways was filled in with 
large sandstone blocks sculpted into a colossal standing Buddha. Seen in conjunction with two 
Khmer language inscriptions at the temple, this modification appears to have comprised the 
conversion of the central sanctuary into a stūpa in the late 1570s to contain the relics of King 
Figure 20.4  Angkor Wat, Siem Reap, Cambodia: temple seen from the west and panel from sixteenth-
century reliefs on the eastern section of the northern third-level gallery enclosure plus one 
of the four Buddhas sculpted into sandstone blocks filling in the central sanctuary’s doorways. 
Photograph of temple courtesy Kim Samnang. Photographs of Buddha in western entrance­
way and gallery bas-relief panel courtesy Phoeung Dara.

--- PAGE 342 ---
Icons
321
Ang Chan’s son under the commission of the latter’s spouse and their son, now king in his 
father’s stead, whose lengthy title also included Rāma; in the process, the four Buddhas of the 
central sanctuary-stūpa were assimilated with royal ancestors (Lewitz 1970; Thompson 1998). 
The works accomplished at the temple summit, along with the vows recording them, were 
explicitly designed to participate in the renewal of ancient Cambodian political power, now 
under the Buddhist banner. Written respectively in the first-person voice of the queen mother 
and in a third-person narration of her son, the king, these inscriptions declare themselves to 
be “vows of truth” (Sanskrit: satyapraṇidhān) in the same genre repeatedly cited by Śrı̄ Śraddhā 
at Wat Si Chum. The operative vocabulary of “saving” (loek) an ancient temple in restoring 
it and in doing so “saving” the Buddhist religion, along with the interchangeability of “con­
structing” and “reconstructing” (here with the Khmer verb sāṅ) seen at Wat Si Chum (with 
the terms phlūk and pratiṣṭhā), likewise situate these sixteenth-century Cambodian works in a 
broad Theravādin politico-cultural complex. The good works in sixteenth-century Cambodia 
are conceived as enabling Maitreya’s coming, but the emphasis is nonetheless on channeling 
them and the salvation of Buddhism to save the Cambodian kingdom as a whole. In contrast 
with the fourteenth-century Sukhothai materials discussed earlier, there is no overarching 
reference to Sri Lanka and no harping insistence on the bodhisattva nature of the royal actors.
For their apparently distinct religious orientations, the one Vaishnava and the other Buddhist, 
as for their asynchronous commissions, these two transformations to Angkor Wat have been 
consistently interpreted in more or less discrete terms—including by myself in a number of 
publications. The third enclosure’s northeastern Vaishnava reliefs are understood to be the 
demonstration of a post-Angkorian Cambodian Buddhist king’s respect for tradition. The later 
transformation of the central sanctuary into a stūpa with four Buddhas, on the other hand, is 
understood to comprise an expression of the transformed state of the kingdom in the name 
of Theravāda Buddhism. The two are presented as discrete if harmonious in the Cambodian 
context as an example of syncretism by which religious heritage is valued and incorporated 
into a specifically historically conditioned cultural complex. Art historian Madeleine Giteau’s 
comments in the one monograph to date on post-Angkorian art are telling in this regard: “It 
is Braḥ Biṣṇulok or Vishnu and the Brahmanic gods who reign on [Angkor Wat’s] lower level, 
while the higher levels are dedicated to the Buddha” (Giteau 1975: 89). This is a perfect picture 
of syncretism as it has often been conceived in Cambodia, where one discrete religion is layered 
atop another. This is not entirely false, nor, however, is it the whole truth.
What I wish to suggest here, in closing, is that Wat Si Chum, along with its many avatars 
studied by Robert Brown et al., allows us to see late sixteenth-century Angkor Wat in more 
holistic terms. The Vaishnava narratives encircling the temple are, I believe, analogous, in six­
teenth-century Cambodian terms, with the jātaka encircling other sites, working to endow the 
temple’s central icon with its own life and effectively iconize the temple as a whole. As they tell 
the story of Viṣṇu’s accomplishments over many lives, they endow the Viṣṇu-Buddha-King(s) 
in the body of the stūpa-prāsād that is Angkor Wat with its own powerful presence. This is 
akin to what George Cœdès (1992 [1936]: 267) said nearly a century ago with reference to 
the Angkorian-period mythological and historical narrative reliefs at Angkor Wat as well as at 
the Mahāyāna Buddhist Bayon temple:
[the] presence of [narrative reliefs] on the walls of the temple animate him [the god 
understood to reside in the temple]. …Just as a statue made according to the fixed 
rules and duly consecrated according to established rites, is the god himself, a bas-relief 
representing him in this or that episode of his legend contributes greatly to animating 
the temple with his real presence.19

--- PAGE 343 ---
Ashley Thompson
322
In the late sixteenth century at Angkor Wat, there is no distinction between “Buddhism” 
and “Vaishnavism,” let alone between “Theravāda” and its others; these are modern terms on 
which the paradigm of syncretism is built. On one critical register, the four-Buddha-stūpa 
ensemble at the summit of Angkor Wat is unmistakeably Theravādin, set as it is within a Pāli 
context anchored with reference to the Gotama Buddha and the future Maitreya and integral 
to a broader Theravāda world. But the Theravāda which emerges at Angkor Wat encompasses, 
amongst many other things, the so-called Historical Buddha as Rāma, and this Buddha-Rāma 
is also the Cambodian king and his avatars—past and future. This is to say that Cœdès’s reading 
of relations among the narrative, central statue, and temple at Angkor Wat must be extended in 
terms of both theory and content to debunk once and for all any lingering notions that Theravāda 
is “relatively straightforward” (Kinnard 1999: 26). That the classical Cambodian version of the 
Rāmāyaṇa, whose composition dates to around this time, consistently refers to Rāma as a bod­
hisattva, proves my point. Without skipping a beat, Rāma is, like Śrı̄ Śraddhā in his own account 
of others’ exclamations before his miraculous relic-animating feats at Wat Si Chum, called the 
buddhaṅkur, a Buddha element or seed or essence, which is to say embodying the remains and the 
potential of Buddhahood. The Khmer Rāma is explicitly described in the Khmer Rā māyaṇa as 
being “in the lineage of the Buddha” (aṃpūr tatha ̄gat / baṅs bodhisambha ̄r), or, further telescoping 
temporalities, he is at times called the Buddha himself (Pou 1977: 87). In Angkor Wat, I mean to 
say, we have another iteration of the jā taka–Buddha–stūpa ensemble, where the life stories make 
the Buddha–stūpa anthropomorphic–aniconic ensemble the icon that it is.
Recent research by art historian Eric Bourdonneau and historian Grégory Mikaelian has 
highlighted another key element of sixteenth-century developments at Angkor Wat that link 
the temple at once to the ancient Angkorian devarāja cult, to Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s fourteenth-century 
Sukhothai and to the modern Phnom Penh and Bangkok courts while also demonstrating rela­
tions between the temple’s sixteenth-century Vaishnava lower-level gallery reliefs and its summit. 
In short, the Brahmanic royal tutelary divinities of Angkor had found new embodiment in the 
devālayamahākset, “residence of the gods of the great sacrificial field,” a temple set outside of 
Sukhothai’s city walls within a monastery built on royal commission to host a leading visiting 
monk and his entourage from Mottama, who had himself resided in Sri Lanka—a monastery 
minutes away from Wat Si Chum. The sixteenth-century epigraphic record at Angkor Wat 
noted earlier tells us that the stūpa-prāsād’s upper terrace served as the assembly site of these 
same Brahmanic divinities who effectively oversaw royal initiation ritual; they also appear in 
the sixteenth-century lower-gallery bas-reliefs. And they have an enduring place in Cambodian 
and Thai court ritual today (Bourdonneau and Mikaelian 2020).
What we see at Angkor Wat is not a corruption of Theravāda or a syncretic outcome that 
can only be understood as “Cambodian Theravāda,” in which the qualifier implies both the 
existence of a nonqualified, pure original thing that this one is not and a unique nationally 
bound thing known nowhere else. Even if what we see at Angkor Wat may be called Ramayanic 
Theravāda, it is important to remember that this is Theravāda just as much as what we see at 
Wat Si Chum is Theravāda—if Theravāda is anything at all. That is to say: Theravāda is only 
ever localized, even as it makes its place in broader worlds.
Notes
	 1	See also the 1997 monograph in which Dehejia develops on this 1990 article, along with Brown’s 2001 
review of the book in Artibus Asiae in which he reiterates both praise for Dehejia’s work and a critique 
of that dimension of her approach which “treats the art as if it were on the walls of a museum or on the 
screen in a classroom” (Brown 2001: 357).

--- PAGE 344 ---
Icons
323
	 2	In addition to the synthetic critical work of Kinnard cited earlier, see Huntington 1990, 1992, and 2015, 
whose critique is also directed at Dehejia on bases shared with Brown to the degree that both seek a more 
distinctly emic perspective; Schopen 1987, 1991; DeCaroli 2015; and, for the now-classical studies of the 
very closely related question of Hindu vision: Eck 1981 and Babb 1981. I examine in further detail later 
Peter Skilling’s insightful consideration of this question with specific reference to interpretation of jātaka 
tales but set within a broader critique of art-historical practice (Skilling 2008, esp. p. 80).
	 3	Kinnard 1999: 25–44. For the specific reference here to the Buddha made present “indexically” in “texts, 
images and relics and other icons and indices,” see Tambiah 1984, ch. 14, p. 202, also cited in Kinnard. I have 
also grappled with these questions in other contexts: Thompson 2011, 2013, 2020.
	 4	Brown 1997: 99, reading Boucher 1991. A common rendering of the verse:
ye dhammā hetuppabhabvā tesāṃ hetuṃ tathāgato
āha tesāñ ca yo nirodho evaṃvād ı̄ mahāsamaṇo ‘ti
(Those dhammas which arise from a cause
The Tathāgata has declared their cause
And that which is the cessation of them.
Thus the great renunciant has taught.)
(Translation from Boucher ibid., p. 6, cited by Brown 1997: p. 108, n. 89.)
	 5	On the image pictured here, held by Wat Mahathat, Ratchaburi, Thailand, see Skilling 2003: 274–5. A well-
studied contemporaneous image is from Tuol Preah Theat in Cambodia’s Kompong Speu Province and is 
now held by the Musée national des arts asiatiques Guimet, Paris, inventory no. MG 18891. See Baptiste and 
Zéphir, 2008: 20–21 and 27–28. The copious bibliography provided in this catalogue entry highlights the 
piece for its inscription, effectively making it “iconic” also in the more popular sense of the word. See also 
Skilling 2019, who likewise notes that the “usual function” of the ye dhammā verse is “to be installed in a 
stūpa, the foundation of a building, or a Buddha image” (Skilling 2019: 44). In his veritable corpus of studies 
on the verse, Skilling brings to light the remarkable corpus of first-millennium Buddha statues bearing ye 
dhammā inscriptions in Pāli, Sanskrit, and Prakrit to which I refer earlier. While this research demonstrates the 
participation of the verse in creating a common Buddhist culture across mainland Southeast Asia in the first 
millennium, the use of diverse languages likewise points up a diversity in monastic affiliations at this time.
	 6	For examination of dimensions of these questions in linguistic realms, see Gethin 1992, in which the truly 
interminable lists in Buddhist literature are considered for their matricial function: “Translators of Buddhist 
texts have often taken the word (mātikā/mātṛkā) to mean something like ‘summary’ or ‘condensed content.’ 
Although one would hesitate to say that this is incorrect, it is, strictly speaking, to put things the wrong 
way round, for it is the underlying meaning of ‘mother’ that seems to inform the use of the term here. A 
mātikā is seen not so much as a condensed summary, as the seed from which something grows. A mātikā 
is something creative—something out of which something further evolves. It is, as it were, pregnant with 
the Dhamma and able to generate it in all its fullness” (Gethin 1992: 161); and Crosby 2020, esp. ch. 4, who 
considers how Theravādin meditation practices treat language as a veritably bodily creative principle.
	 7	Thanks to Trent Walker for initially sharing this image and the details noted previously with me. On the 
Khom script, in an excellent introduction to the Khmer-Tai Buddhist manuscript culture of which this 
leporello is a part, see Walker 2018: 1–46, esp. pp. 20–21.
	 8	A number of the key texts reconsidering the early scholarship on early Buddhist art I summarize here are 
those by Dehejia, Huntington, and DeCaroli cited earlier. See also Karlsson 2000, 2006.
	 9	For more on the spread of Theravāda in Cambodia after Angkor, see Thompson forthcoming; and Walker 
forthcoming.
	10	Early Theravādin architectural configurations at Angkor are strikingly similar in this regard, evincing the 
interchangeability of ancient sanctuary towers or prāsād with stūpa and, in limited cases, what has been 
referred to as a “treasury,” which most resembles the Sukhothai mondop in physical terms. More extensive 
comparative work than that accomplished to date would no doubt be productive. See in particular Marchal 
1918; Gosling 1996; Thompson 1998.
	11	For a critical review of the extant scholarly work on dating the text and a reasoned hypothesis that the text 
dates no earlier than the late 1350s, see Blackburn forthcoming.
	12	In addition to Skilling’s 2008 edited volume, see Chapter 2 of Anne Blackburn’s forthcoming monograph 
on Theravāda kingdoms.
	13	Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1972: 119, n. 109 (Part II, line 9 of inscription): Tai phlūk, where the term 
is actually used twice in a single passage associating the construction of a stūpa with the planting of flower­
ing trees; and p. 127, n. 149 (Part II, line 27 or inscription): Sanskrit pratiṣṭhā.

--- PAGE 345 ---
Ashley Thompson
324
	14	The issues arise repeatedly throughout the text. See especially comments in Griswold and Prasert na 
Nagara 1972: 26, n. 146.
	15	The titles appear with a range of small variations on a Pāli-Sanskrit mix of component terms in both Pāli 
and Sanskrit. I have given the Sanskrit spellings as regularized by Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1972, p. 
75 and note 2.
	16	Ibid.: 133. This passage is somewhat ambiguous. Cœdès gives: “The reason for these miracles was to inspire 
all the people to go to Laṅkādvipa to contribute to making the religion prosper, which is a great and 
manifest source of merit in the religion of the Buddha” (my translation of Cœdès 1924: 74).
	17	One example of the textual positioning of the Khmer in contrast with the Sinhalese comes in a passage 
which Cœdès translates as “He [Śrı̄ Śraddhā] enjoys observing the prohibitions and meditating in the 
middle of forests and woods, losing himself there and without food (reduced to content himself with) 
fruits and roots, behaving in all manners according to the model of the Siṅhala (monks). The people of 
Kameradesa [the Khmer country] come (to Sukhothai) in search of higher learning” (Cœdès 1924: 64); 
and which Griswold and Prasert translate as “He [Śrı̄ Śraddhā] likes to observe the precepts and meditate 
in the depths of woods and forests, absorbed in thought, forgetting to eat. [His usual food is only?] fruits 
and the roots of plants. His daily routine is [that of] Siṅhala in every way. He likes to wander about the 
country in search of wisdom” (Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1972: 113, and note 58). The divergent 
interpretations hinge on the reading of one consonant as either k (in “the Khmer country,” kameradesa) 
or th (in “wander about the country,” tameradesa). The latter, while not naming the Khmer as coming to 
Sukhothai, nonetheless names Śrı̄ Śraddhā’s Sinhalese-like quest for wisdom in Sukhothai with the ancient 
Khmer term tmer, from ter, “to walk, travel.”
	18	The passage in question is slightly effaced, giving Harı̄ḥr …, which is very likely Harı̄ḥrakksa—Hariraksa, an 
epithet of Rama used in the Siamese Ramayana. See Griswold and Prasert na Nagara 1972: 166 and n. 89.
	19	My translation. Cœdès’s comments are explicitly meant to counter European aestheticization of Angkorian 
art as “art for art’s sake,” and in such they might be construed as foreshadowing Robert Brown’s critique 
of Dehejia’s interpretive paradigm discussed in the opening of the present essay. We are not however 
reinventing the wheel already perfected by Cœdès. First, Dehejia’s reading does in many ways take into 
account local Buddhist modes of pictorial composition. And, crucially, the contemporary commentators 
I have elected to work with throughout this chapter advocate significant reconsideration of relations 
between text and image as perceived in much colonial scholarship. While Cœdès laments the supposed 
loss of master manuscripts thought to have dictated Angkorian sculpture to a T, from Brown to Skilling, as 
we have seen, Buddhist art can call for examination in its own right in the absence of any appeal to art for 
art’s sake.
References
Primary Sources
British Library. (n.d.) Discovering Sacred Texts online resource, Buddhism. https://www.bl.uk/sacred-texts/
collection-items?related_themes=buddhism.
Prachum silacharuk, Part 3. 2508 BE [1965]. Bangkok: Samnak Nayok.
Secondary Sources and Translations
Babb, L.A. 1981. “Glancing: Visual Interaction in Hinduism.” Journal of Anthropological Research 37 (4): 
387–401.
Baptiste, Pierre, Zéphir, Thierry. 2008. L’Art khmer dans les collections du musée Guimet. Paris: Édition de la 
Réunion des musées nationaux.
Blackburn, A. (Forthcoming) Experimental Sovereignties Across the Pali World, 1200–1550.
Boucher, Daniel. 1991. “The Pratītyasamutpādagāthā and Its Role in the Medieval Cult of the Relics.” 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 14 (1): 1–27.
Brown, R. 1997. “Narrative as Icon: The Jātaka Stories in Ancient Indian and Southeast Asian Architecture.” 
In Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia, ed. J. Schober, 64-109. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Brown, R. 2001. “Review of V. Dehejia.” Discourse in Early Buddhist Art: Visual Narratives of India. Artibus 
Asiae 61 (2): 355–358.

--- PAGE 346 ---
Icons
325
Boisselier, J. 1962. “Note sur les bas-reliefs tardifs d’Angkor Vat.” Journal Asiatique 250 (2): 244–248.
Bourdonneau, É., Mikaelian, G. 2020. “L’histoire longue du Devarāja: Pañcaksetr et figuier à cinq branches 
dans l’ombre de la danse de Śiva.” In Rāja-maṇḍala: le Modèle royal en Inde, eds. E. Francis, R. Rousseleau, 
vol. 37, 81–130. Puruṣārtha, École des hautes études en sciences sociales.
Chirapravati, P. 2008. “Illustrating the lives of the Bodhisatta at Wat Si Chum.” In Past Lives of the Buddha. 
Wat Si Chum: Art, Architecture and Inscriptions, ed. P. Skilling, 13–39. Bangkok: River Books.
Cœdès, G., ed. and trans. 1924. Recueil des inscriptions du Siam. Première partie: Inscriptions de Sukhodaya. 
Bangkok: Bangkok Times Press.
Cœdès, G. 1992 [1936]. “Légendes indiennes illustrées par les imagiers du Cambodge.” In Articles sur le 
pays khmer 2, 267–270. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient. (Re-edition from Cahiers de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 6, :24–39).
Cœdès, G. 1962. “La date d’exécution des deux bas-reliefs tardifs d’Angkor Vat.” Journal Asiatique 2: 235–248.
Crosby, K. 2020. Esoteric Theravada: The Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of Southeast Asia. Boulder: 
Shambhala Press.
DeCaroli, R. 2015. Image Problems: The Origin and Development of the Buddha’s Image in South Asia. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press.
Dehejia, V. 1990. “On Modes of Visual Narration in Early Buddhist Art.” The Art Bulletin 72 (3): 374–392.
Dehejia, V. 1997. Discourse in Early Buddhist Art: Visual Narratives of India. New Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal.
Eck, D. 1981. Darśan: Seeing the Divine Image in India. Chambersburg, Pennsylvania: Anima Books.
Gethin, R. 1992. “The Mātikās: Memorization, Mindfulness and the List.” In In the Mirror of Memory: 
Reflections on Mindfulness and Remembrance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism, ed. J. Gyatso, 149–172. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Giteau, M. 1975. Iconographie du Cambodge Post-Angkorien. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Gosling, B. 1996. A Chronology of Religious Architecture at Sukhothai, late thirteenth to early fifteenth century. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Griswold, A.B., Prasert na Nagara. 1972. “King Lödaiya of Sukhodaya and his Contemporaries. Epigraphic 
and Historical Studies no. 10” Journal of the Siam Society 60 (1): 21–152.
Groslier, B.-P. 1958. Angkor et le Cambodge au XVIe siècle d’après les sources portugaises et espagnoles. Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France.
Huntington, S.L. 1990. “Early Buddhist Art and the Theory of Aniconism.” Art Journal 49 (4): 401–408.
Huntington, S.L. 1992. “Aniconism and the Multivalence of Emblems: Another Look.” Ars Orientalis 22: 
111–156.
Huntington, S.L. 2015. “Shifting the Paradigm: The Aniconic Theory and its Terminology.” South Asian 
Studies 31 (2): 163–186.
Karlsson, K. 2000. Face to Face with the Absent Buddha: The Formation of Buddhist Aniconic Art. PhD diss, 
Uppsala University.
Karlsson, K. 2006. “The Formation of Early Buddhist Visual Culture.” Material Religion: the Journal of Objects, 
Art and Belief 2 (1): 68–95.
Kinnard, J.N. 1999. Imaging Wisdom: Seeing and Knowing in the Art of Indian Buddhism. Oxon and New York: 
Routledge.
Lewitz, S. 1970. “Textes en khmer moyen. Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor 2 et 3.” Bulletin de l’École fran­
çaise d’Extrême-Orient 57: 99–126.
Marchal, H. 1918. “Monuments secondaires et terrasses bouddhiques d’Aṅkor Thom.” Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 18 (8): 1–40.
Pichard, P. 2008. “The Mondop at Wat Si Chum: New perspectives.” In Past Lives of the Buddha. Wat Si 
Chum: Art, Architecture and Inscriptions, ed. P. Skilling, 41–57. Bangkok: River Books.
Pou, S. 1977. Études sur le Rāmakerti (XVIe-XVIIe siècles). Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Schopen, G. 1987. “Burial Ad Sanctos and the Physical Presence of the Buddha in Early Indian Buddhism: a 
Study in the Archaeology of Religions.” Religion 17: 193–225. [Reprinted in G. Schopen, Bones, Stones 
and Buddhist Monks. Collected Papers on the Archaeology, Epigraphy and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in India, 
Honolulu, University of Hawai’i Press, 1997, pp. 114–147.]
Schopen, G. 1991. “Monks and the Relic Cult in the Mahaparinibbana-sutta: an Old Misunderstanding in 
Regard to Monastic Buddhism.” In From Benares to Beijing: Essays on Buddhism in Chinese Religion, ed. K. 
Shinohara and G. Schopen, 187–201. Oakville, Ontario: Mosaic Press. [Reprinted in G. Schopen, Bones, 
Stones and Buddhist Monks. Collected Papers on the Archaeology, Epigraphy and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in 
India, Honolulu, University of Hawai‘i Press, 1997, pp. 99–113.]

--- PAGE 347 ---
Ashley Thompson
326
Skilling, P. 2002. “Some Citation Inscriptions from Southeast Asia.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 27: 159–175.
Skilling, P. 2003. “Traces of the Dharma: Preliminary Reports on some ye dhammā and ye dharmā inscrip­
tions in Mainland South-East Asia.” Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 90–91: 273–287.
Skilling, P. 2008. “Narrative, art and ideology: Jātakas from India to Sukhothai.” In Past Lives of the Buddha. 
Wat Si Chum: Art, Architecture and Inscriptions, ed. P. Skilling, 59–109. Bangkok: River Books.
Skilling, P. 2019. “The Theravaṃsa has always been here: K. 1355 from Angkor Borei.” The Journal of the 
Siam Society 107 (2): 43–62.
Tambiah, S.J. 1984. The Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Thompson, A. 1998. “The Ancestral Cult in Transition: Reflections on Spatial Organization of Cambodia’s 
early Theravada Complex.” In Southeast Asian Archaeology 1996. Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Leiden, 2–6 September 1996, eds. M.J. 
Klokke, T. De Brujin, 273–295. Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian Studies, University of Hull.
Thompson, A. 2011. “In the Absence of the Buddha: “Aniconism” and the Contentions of Buddhist Art 
History.” In A Companion to Asian Art and Architecture, eds. R. Brown, D. Hutton, 398–420. Hoboken: 
Blackwell.
Thompson, A. 2013. “Forgetting to Remember, Again: on Curatorial Practice and “Cambodian” Art in the 
Wake of Genocide.” Diacritics, Review of Contemporary Criticism 41 (2): 82–109.
Thompson, A. 2020. “Anybody: Diasporic Subjectivities and the Figure of the “Historical” Buddha.” In 
Interlaced Journeys: Diaspora and the Contemporary in Southeast Asian Art, eds. P. Flores, L. Paracciani, 113–
127. Hong Kong: Osage Art Foundation.
Thompson, A., ed. (Forthcoming) Early Theravadin Cambodia: Perspectives from Art and Archaeology. Singapore: 
NUS Press.
Vickery, M. 1977. “Cambodia after Angkor: The Chronicular Evidence for the Fourteenth to Sixteenth 
Centuries.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Walker, Trent. 2018. Unfolding Buddhism: Communal Scripts, Localized Translations, and the Work of the Dying in 
Cambodian Chanted Leporellos. Ph.D. dissertation. University of California, Berkeley.
Walker, Trent. (Forthcoming) “Buddhism in Cambodia: 14–19th centuries.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of 
Buddhism, vol. IV. Leiden: Brill.

--- PAGE 348 ---
327
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-26
21
AFFECT
Notes from contemporary Southeast 
Asian visual culture
Chairat Polmuk
Visualizations of the body and bodily remains are instrumental in Buddhist pedagogical thought, 
whether to impart its central doctrine of impermanence (anicca) or to arouse a sensorial experi­
ence of faith (pasāda—also translated as “serene joy”) that enables acts of devotion and merit-
making.1 In this chapter, I draw on phenomenological accounts of the body––especially its 
material aspect––from both canonical sources and vernacular practices to explore the Buddhist 
notion of affect. Particularly, I find narratives of the Buddha’s relics in the Theravāda Buddhist 
corpus extremely instructive for theoretical reflections on the significance of affective experi­
ences in Buddhist thought. As physical traces of the Buddha, the relics capture Buddhism’s 
pedagogical preoccupations with death, grief, and attachment. In practices such as stūpa worship 
or funerary ritual, the religious function of relics can extend beyond a soteriological domain—
a realization of impermanence and a cessation of attachment––to an affective entanglement 
between the living and the dead, between the body and inanimate objects.
In examining these accounts on relics through the lens of affect, I propose to bring scholar­
ship in Buddhist Studies into conversation with affect theory. Set in motion in the late 1990s, 
the field of affect studies presented a shared attempt to circumvent the privileging of language, 
representation, and structure during the heyday of the “linguistic turn” that shaped disciplinary 
trajectories of structuralism and poststructuralism since the early 1960s (Clough and Halley 
2007; Gregg and Seigworth 2010). Affect studies scholars’ critiques of discursive constructivism 
and their renewed attention to nonsignifying and embodied intensities are generally indebted 
to philosophical works of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari and of their predecessors such 
as Baruch Spinoza and Henri Bergson (Massumi 2002). Deleuze and Guattari are often cited 
to define and distinguish the term affect from a more individuated and cultural designation 
such as emotion. Affect, according to the French philosophers, is a desubjectivized feeling that 
challenges the binary opposition between mind and body, subject and object, interiority and 
exteriority, the psychic and the social.2
In Buddhist accounts of relics I examine in this chapter, the evocative power of such mate­
rial objects to forge sensorial experiences and a kind of attachment across time and space is in 
line with current theoretical expounding of affect. The power of relics to produce an affec­
tive relationship between human bodies and their nonhuman, material milieu, for example, 
can be understood through what cultural geographer Ben Anderson (2009: 80) calls “affective 
atmospheres,” as he writes that

--- PAGE 349 ---
Chairat Polmuk
328
[a]tmospheres are generated by bodies––of multiple types––affecting one another as 
some form of “envelopment” is produced. …Affective qualities emanate from the 
assembling of the human bodies, discursive bodies, nonhuman bodies, and all the other 
bodies that make up everyday situations.
Looking at contemporary Southeast Asian visual culture, I stress that affective relations are not 
purely visceral but aesthetically mediated and historically grounded. My analysis of references 
to––and representations of––relics in film and video installation by filmmakers Apichatpong 
Weerasethakul (Thailand) and Rithy Panh (Cambodia) proposes to delineate the ways in which 
Buddhist exegeses on relics of the Buddha provide a conceptual tool for understanding specific 
mechanisms and modalities through which the affective transmissions between the body and its 
material milieu are evoked and how such evocation enables us to attune our sensory experience 
to historical memory in its hazy and ethereal conditions.
Relics: temporal dialectics and affective attachments
Relics, by embodying the Buddha and his teachings (dhamma) in his absence, occupy a privi­
leged place in the Buddhist temporal conceptions of impermanence. In his comprehensive 
study of relics in relation to the Buddha’s biographic process, John Strong (2004: 11) writes,
Buddhist eschatology thus tends to be a dialectic between themes of continuity and 
termination, and it is perhaps not surprising that relics, which similarly hold in ten­
sion themes of the disappearance of a Buddha and of his ongoing presence, should be 
featured in some of these scenarios.
This temporal dialectics of the relics, as we shall see, is integral to Buddhist accounts of escha­
tology and soteriology as much as of affective attachments.
In an account of the “final extinction” of the Buddha’s bodily remains––an event known 
as dhatu-parinibbāna, the dialectic of impermanence and continuity is formalized in the context 
of eschatological transition. Referencing a Pāli commentary composed by the fifth-century 
Buddhist scholar Buddhaghosa titled Commentary on the Anguttara Nikāya, Strong outlines four 
successive periods of decline––each marked by the disappearance of Buddhist knowledges, 
practices, or objects––which finally leads to the extinction of the Buddha’s relics. This includes 
the decline of people’s ability to attain enlightenment, the loss of people’s observance of moral 
precepts, the disappearance of knowledge of scriptures, and the vanishing of Buddhism’s physi­
cal emblems, such as the monastic robe and the begging bowl (Ibid.: 222–223). In the final 
stage, the Buddha’s corporeal remains, here specifically referred to as dhātu-sārira (a body of 
relics), will be consumed by fire until the last relic reaches “the state beyond conceptualization 
(appaññattika-bhāva)” (Collins 2010: 116). John Strong and other scholars, such as Steven Collins, 
understand this event as a marker of the transition between the “present” Gotama Buddha 
to the succeeding Metteyya Buddha. The destruction of the relics makes possible a sense of 
closure in the highly repetitive time of Buddhist cosmology. This idea of closure, however, is 
not completely unambiguous in other versions of the event in which the total destruction of 
the relics is omitted.3 Reflecting on this ambiguity, Strong offers a concluding remark worth 
quoting at length:
Almost by nature, relics toy with the opposition between “gone” and “not gone.” On 
the one hand, they are, themselves, living entities: they can grow, they can emit rays of

--- PAGE 350 ---
Affect
329
light, they can fly up into the air and perform miracles. …On the other hand, they are 
also reminders of impermanence, of the death of the Buddha, of the end and destruc­
tion of his body, of the fact that it was split up into grains the size of mustard seeds 
and spread throughout the world, or buried beneath huge stupas, sealed into cham­
bers, never to be opened again…until, of course, the end of the Buddha age, when 
Śākyamuni’s relics will reemerge and all come alive once more. Only to “die” and 
disappear again. Only to make way for the next buddha and his relics. Put all together, 
then, the sides of this dialectical paradox make relics the powerful embodiment of the 
process of arising and cessation that characterizes all buddhas and all things.
(Strong, 2004: 239)
While Strong first delineates the dialectic of continuity and discontinuity in the context of 
Buddhist eschatology, his conclusion that the relics embody “the process of arising and cessation” 
inherent in all animate and inanimate objects points toward a more generalized understanding 
of relics. I take this generalization as the basis for examining Buddhist affect and materiality in 
a more mundane setting. We might say, for instance, that our temporal and affective relations to 
objects can be viewed through a Buddhist lens in order to gesture toward an interplay between 
impermanence and continuity. The relics specifically elucidate these affective entanglements in 
the context of loss. In other words, the affective transaction between the body and the objects 
in Buddhist thought is expressed most explicitly and intensely when we witness the decay of 
desired or venerated objects, when an act of mourning or devotion delays the soteriological 
realization of impermanence and prolongs our attachments to such objects.
Scholars in Buddhist Studies have focused on relics and other related objects such as stūpas, 
Buddha images, and amulets as media that powerfully bind the past with present, the dead and 
the living, persons and things. In his analysis of Theravāda historical writing from thirteenth-
century Sri Lanka in the Sinhala Thūpavaṃsa, Stephen C. Berkwitz posits that the text recounts 
a series of events related to the arrival of the Buddha’s relics in Sri Lanka to evoke generalized 
emotions of serene joy (pasāda) and gratitude. In his attempt to reevaluate a conventional reading 
of the genre of vaṃsas as carriers of historical truth, Berkwitz highlights an emotive force of 
textual representations of relic veneration in transforming audiences into ethical subjects and 
thus constructing “a connection between remembering the past and performing ritualized pūjā, 
or devotional offerings, in the present” (2001: 155–173). Focusing also on an affective aspect of 
Buddhist textual and material practices, Andy Rotman (2003) applies Catherine MacKinnon’s 
theoretical framework on pornography to examine the erotic power of objects such as rel­
ics, stūpas, and Buddha images in early Sanskrit Buddhist Avadāna texts that impel viewers to 
perform meritorious acts. Placing emphasis on the sensory response of viewers as they come 
into contact with such objects, the erotics of relics refers to affective intensities that animate 
social and ethical relations between persons and things.
The evocative power of relic media to forge affective attachments across space and time 
can also be found in Stanley Tambiah’s pioneering work on amulets in modern Thailand in 
which he employs the Peircean notion of indexicality to conceptualize material, social, and 
economic exchanges enabled by such cultic objects. Regarded by Tambiah as the “sedimenta­
tion of power in objects,” amulets embody the Buddha’s or Buddhist monks’ mystical power 
(saksit in Thai, from Pali/Sanskrit saktisiddhi) and perfections (barami in Thai, from Pali pāram ı̄) 
before transferring them to devotees through existential contact as they circulate across the 
realm of material life and the marketplace. The indexical traces of important religious as well 
as historical figures, amulets work like archives as they make possible an intimate access to 
“condensed and objectified bits of the past” in the present (Tambiah 1984). Extending Tambiah’s

--- PAGE 351 ---
Chairat Polmuk
330
study of amulets as indexical symbols, Malcolm Eckel borrows Mikhail Bakhtin’s concept of the 
“chronotope” (literally “space-time”) to describe the way in which relics and other signs of the 
Buddha create a “place where space and time intersect to give a particular interpretive structure 
to a series of events” (Eckel 1992: 62). The interplay between the presence and absence of the 
Buddha inherent in his relics allows Eckel to parse the concept of emptiness (śūnyatā) in the 
Mahāyāna tradition, arguing that emptiness requires a locus (āśraya, also translated as “place,” 
“standpoint,” and “substratum”) around which the Buddhist community shares interpretive as 
well as affective knowledge about the Buddha’s absence.
While relics are essentially objects of vision (a passage from the Mahāvaṃsa reads, “when 
one sees the relics, one sees the Buddha”), the indexical qualities of such bodily remains also 
evokes a sense of touch. Or, to use the term by film studies scholar Laura Marks in a differ­
ent context, relics provide a kind of haptic visuality from worshippers who come into contact 
with these objects whether through ritual practices or through textually and visually mediated 
forms.4 As the Buddhist Studies scholars discussed earlier have shown, when the temporal 
dialectic of relics is no longer bound up with nibbanic time or epochal transition but unfolds 
in an ordinary time of material practice, affective attachments are prolonged and reinforced 
through veneration practices that evoke haptic experiences in audiences.
In what follows, I further expand this nondoctrinal approach by examining cinematic 
experimentations with the temporal features and affective potentiality of relics in the works 
of Apichatpong Weerasethakul and Rithy Panh. The filmmakers represent emergent voices 
of Southeast Asian artists whose works reckon with violent episodes of the Cold War that 
range from anticommunist killings to genocide. Art historian David Teh (2017) contends that 
these artists who by no means belong to a singular, unified movement share a commitment 
to take into account the “transnational revenants” that speak to the political violence and 
historical injustices. In his survey of contemporary cinematic reckonings with such revenants, 
Teh includes Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s Primitive project (2009–2010) and Rithy Panh’s The 
Missing Picture (2013), among other films and video art, as examples of the hauntological archive 
of the post–Cold War era. “The spectral moving images surveyed above,” Teh concludes, “are 
haunted at every turn by the Cold War, both in their narratives and immanently, in their very 
media, the electronic vectors of an ideological contagion that drew the region together as such 
into a shared, regional present” (Ibid.: 195). Through the lens of Buddhist affect, I examine 
Apichatpong’s and Panh’s subtle deployments of Buddhist elements to interrogate a traumatic 
history of the Cold War in Thailand and Cambodia. More specifically, I pay close attention to 
their aesthetic remediations of relics and other related objects ranging from physical remains 
to archival images, from funerary objects to ruined landscapes, that shed light on Buddhism as 
comprising modes of affective memorialization of Cold War atrocities.
Remediating relics in Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s affective history 
of the Cold War
Apichatpong Weerasethakul (b. 1970) is an independent Thai filmmaker well known for weav­
ing Buddhist and other vernacular constructs with his critical mediations on modernity, national 
history, and sexual politics.5 To elucidate how Buddhist notions of relics inform Apichatpong’s 
depiction of an affective history of the Cold War, I turn to his short film, Phantoms of Nabua 
(Phi Haeng Ban Nabua, 2009), an inaugural piece of the Primitive project which revisits a history 
of anticommunist killings in a small village called Nabua in Northeast Thailand. The project 
was initially inspired by a text titled A Man Who Can Recall His Past Lives (Khon raluek chat 
dai), written by Phra Sripariyattiweti, a monk from Apichatpong’s hometown in Khon Kaen

--- PAGE 352 ---
Affect
331
Province. In the book, the monk recounts the story of a man named Boonmee, who claims to 
have the supernatural ability to recollect his past lives as a water buffalo, a cow, a hunter, and 
a hungry ghost (phi pret in Thai, from Pali peta). This text belongs to a loosely defined genre 
of Buddhist literature; its narrative structure would not be unfamiliar to readers from other 
Southeast Asian Theravādin Buddhist countries.6 The trope of rebirth figures significantly in 
the Primitive project’s centerpiece and a Palme d’Or–winning feature, Uncle Boonmee Who Can 
Recall His Past Lives (Lung Boonmee Raluek Chat, 2010).
In Phantoms of Nabua, Apichatpong Weerasethakul transforms a mundane landscape––the 
rice field of Nabua––into a space of affective encounter and contingency through the remedia­
tion of relics. The film’s establishing shot depicts a projection screen that has been set up in 
an open rice field at night. At one level, this mise-en-scène is reminiscent of open-air cinema 
(nang klang plaeng) made popular during the Cold War with the pervasive use of lightweight 
16mm film and a mobile projector.7 Far from being nostalgic, however, the invocation of this 
Cold War cultural relic is intimately linked to the haunting memory of political atrocity. The 
medium shot that follows reveals projected images on the screen: the stūpa-shaped charnel 
houses where cremated remains of the dead are kept for Buddhist mourning rituals (Figures 
21.1a and 21.1b). Surrounded by flashing streams of lightning, the relic shrines appear as a 
turbulent interplay of light and shadow that intensifies the uncanny sense of a ghostly expo­
sure. Framed by references to Buddhist modes of memorialization, the film thus rematerializes 
persistent memories of the Cold War as ambient phenomena and ephemeral affective relations.
(a)
Figure 21.1 a and b  Projection of light from Buddhist reliquaries.
Screenshots from Phantoms of Nabua. Courtesy of Kick the Machine Films.
(b)

--- PAGE 353 ---
Chairat Polmuk
332
Apichatpong’s remediation of funerary objects in Phantoms of Nabua resonates with these 
discussions of the temporal and affective dimensions of the Buddha’s relics discussed earlier. 
The projection of light from the Buddhist reliquaries, for example, visually and materially 
foregrounds an affective relationship between the living and the dead made possible through 
ritualized or imaginative treatments of bodily remains. Through this cinematic experimenta­
tion with the vernacular practice of relic veneration, the film dislodges what will prove to 
be its central issue, embodied perception, an issue shared with Buddhist formal and informal 
theorization of relics, from questions of soteriology and moral economy to enact new pos­
sibilities for historical reconfiguration. By invoking an experience of haptic visuality, the film 
uses material remains to create a sense of nonlinear temporal entanglement between past and 
present rather than to convey any doctrinal lesson on impermanence or attachment. In this 
sense, the film rearticulates a melancholic attachment to remnants of the Cold War in a new 
manner by acknowledging and allowing this affective Buddhist relation to trauma and fore­
grounding it in the film’s opening.
Emphasis on mediation, reflexivity, and playful performativity further marks Apichatpong’s 
nondoctrinal Buddhist approach to relics. In the film, the haptic experience enabled by relics 
is filtered through a screen in a way that reflexively reveals a process of mediation. The screen 
positions an act of witnessing as a kind of visual engagement but not simply in representational 
terms. Immediately after we see projected images of the relic stūpas on the open-air screen, a 
group of male teenagers, the descendants of Nabua farmer communists, emerges onto the rice 
field and begins to kick a blazing football. Through simultaneous movements of light and of bod­
ies, the film creates, for these nonprofessional actors and for audiences, a sensorial experience of 
witnessing that is embedded in the Buddhist practice of tactile visuality. Literalizing the Buddhist 
teaching about how we can be “touched” by objects and images through seeing, the film uses 
the technique of projection and embodied movement to create this kind of (visual) contact.8
Near the end of Phantoms of Nabua, the group of teenagers burns down the screen with the 
flaming football, and the projector behind the screen is revealed, shining directly onto us, the 
audience. This final scene simultaneously positions the teenagers of Nabua, and the audience as 
witnesses of an affective history that the film evokes through Buddhist memorial objects as well 
as Buddhist-infused spatiotemporal configurations. The incineration of the screen speaks to the 
precarious condition of Cold War memories and what it means to bear witness to ephemeral 
remains of the haunting past in the present.
In Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s 2014 short video titled Fireworks (Archives), the temporal 
dialectics and affective attachments central to Buddhist notions of relics are invoked through 
the remediation of archival images and Buddhist ruined landscapes. As suggested by its title, the 
video dramatizes the temporal dialectic of the ephemeral and the collectible and of destruc­
tion and commemoration through the use of the atmospheric matter of light and fire. This 
six-minute-long, single-channel video opens with a grainy black-and-white photograph of 
a man greeting his audience while surrounded by a group of uniformed officers. Although 
unidentified in the video, the photograph is quite well known to Thai audiences; it is an 
iconic photograph of a local leader of the communist movement in the Lao-speaking region 
in Northeast Thailand, Krong Chandawong, who was publicly executed without trial under a 
right-wing military regime in 1961. This redeployment of the photograph of the revolutionary 
leader offers us a glimpse of the marginalized history of the Cold War.
Reflecting further on the photographic archive as a “writing of light,” to borrow from 
Eduardo Cadava (1997), the video then illuminates the screen with the exploding sparks of 
fireworks, transforming it into a surface for a luminous inscription. The flickering sparks of 
the fireworks foreground the materiality and movement of light, creating traces of time in

--- PAGE 354 ---
Affect
333
space. The atmospheric quality of such luminous, flaming matter figures memories as flashes 
that, while threatening to disappear forever, leave mental impressions. The blazing fireworks 
contain a destructive force but also convey a kind of commemoration. As we will see, this 
commemorative atmosphere transforms the ruined space of a Buddhist temple into a site of 
haunting memory while the fireworks’ illumination seems to bring the temple’s bizarre animal 
sculptures drawn from Buddhist fables and local folktales to life.
In his account of a journey to Sala Keoku, a Buddhist temple near the Thai–Lao border 
where those animal sculptures are located, Apichatpong recounts the story of the local religious 
leader who commissioned the construction of the site during the Cold War. According to oral 
histories, the man was accused of being communist and was imprisoned by the military govern­
ment. Some of the sculptures were searched and destroyed by the Thai army on the suspicion 
that he hid weapons inside those lifeless animals. Apichatpong remarks,
The northeast is a region with a long history of revolts against the government. For 
me, Sala Keoku represents another kind of rebellion. It’s rebellion to religious expres­
sion, to beliefs. The state doesn’t recognize other religions, so Sala Keoku is like an 
outcast because it mixes all of these religions together. For me, the place is like an act 
of protest.9
By invoking Sala Keoku as an act of protest, Apichatpong posits the sculptural remnants as 
nonhuman witnesses to the violent past.
In light of this extradiegetic account, we might understand light and fire in relation to 
the archive on another level. By rekindling the remnants of destruction, the video constitutes 
an archive of ashes that enacts the possibility for belated mourning and witnessing.10 Ash, as 
the relic of time and the texture of memory, thus evokes not only the visual experience of 
a dwindling light but also the tactile experience of diminishing heat. This haptic quality of 
media indicates a nonmonumental and noneventful configuration of memory that hinges on 
the theoretical Buddhist temporal dialectic of ephemerality and continuity figured prominently 
in accounts on relics.
If the self-annihilating image of ash already indicates the ephemeral and incomplete nature of 
the archive, Apichatpong further emphasizes this by explicitly and playfully invoking the Buddhist 
doctrine of impermanence. The video features a wandering couple who navigate and immerse 
themselves among those lifeless animals. The woman is taking a photograph of the sculptures, 
casting on them a red light from her camera flash. The illumination of light here reveals a process 
of documentation, recording, and archivization through the writing of light. Later on, we witness 
them mimicking the sculpture of a skeleton couple that depicts the Buddhist meditative practice 
known as asubha kammaṭṭhāna, the practice of meditating on corpses or images of corpses to 
discern the illusoriness and impermanence of flesh (Figures 21.2a and 21.2b).
This direct reference to Buddhist teachings of impermanence should not be understood in 
a didactic way. Rather, it should be linked to Apichatpong’s experiment with the atmospheric 
medium of light and fire to meditate on the relics of history. In line with Apichatpong’s con­
figuration of the relic-archive as ephemeral and fragmentary, we might read this imagery of 
decay as a nonlinear temporal conception of history and a reflective meditation on the loss of 
the Thai political left which has gone unmourned in an official rite of public commemoration. 
Mobilizing the Buddhist temporal dialectic of endurance and impermanence to meditate on 
post–Cold War affective histories, Apichatpong, introduces a unique form of attachment to 
the wounded past––an attachment that resists both the fetishization of trauma and the blissful 
foreclosure of historical injury.

--- PAGE 355 ---
Chairat Polmuk
334
Relics that bind: Rithy Panh’s The Missing Picture and 
the affective trace of the Cambodian genocide
A Khmer Rouge survivor who spent eleven years as a refugee in France (where he attended a 
film school), Rithy Panh returned to Cambodia in 1990 and began to excavate the country’s 
wounded history through filmmaking. Panh’s The Missing Picture (2013), a winner of Cannes’s 
Un Certain Regard and an Academy Award nomination in the Best Foreign Language Film 
category, showcases the director’s continuing commitment to personal and collective experi­
ences of the genocide.11 Panh’s aesthetic investment in the history of the Cambodian geno­
cide can be situated within a broader context of cultural restoration, psychological reparation, 
social reconciliation, and transitional justice in the aftermath of the war. At the same time, 
his cinematic rematerialization of the genocidal past is also informed by Buddhist beliefs and 
practices, especially his evocation of bodily remains through the elemental medium of clay in 
The Missing Picture and his allusion to the rag robe or dustheap robe (paṃsukūla) in his 2017 
operatic co-production, Bangsokol (from Pali paṃsukūla), to denote death, mourning, and rebirth 
in the wake of the genocide.
Rithy Panh’s The Missing Picture opens with images of cinematic detritus: scattered piles of 
corroded film canisters and discolored celluloid strips housed in a shabby, dusty room. Uncoiled, 
the old film strips reveal recorded images of a Cambodian classical dance performance that speak 
to a parallel history of Cambodian cultural restoration and film production in the pre–Khmer 
Rouge period of the 1950s and 1960s.12 Shifting from this “missing picture” of a Cambodian 
cultural history, the film depicts the making of a clay figurine representing Panh’s father that 
Figure 21.2 a and b  The Buddhist memento mori as a site of endurance and impermanence.
Screenshots from Fireworks (Archive)s. Courtesy of Kick the Machine Films.
(b)
(a)

--- PAGE 356 ---
Affect
335
evokes a keen sense of touch. “I want to hold him close,” narrates the voiceover as those anony­
mous hands tenderly paint the clay figure––an ordinary act of creation in the aftermath of mass 
destruction that poignantly links an individual’s grief with collective loss (Figure 21.3). Through 
the invocation of decaying cultural artifacts and ephemeral recollection objects, the film creates 
what the Holocaust historian James Young (1993) calls “the texture of memory.” Nonetheless, 
whereas Young’s inquiry into the material aspect of memory pivots on monumental forms of 
remembrance (i.e., Holocaust memorials in Europe, Israel, and the United States), Panh’s film 
dramatizes the fragility of memory in post-genocide Cambodia through a Buddhist-inflected 
reconstruction of the past in a strikingly nonmonumental and impermanent form.
Writing on contemporary art in Cambodia in the early 2000s, Ashley Thompson (2013) 
demonstrates how the overarching emphasis on the Khmer Rouge in curatorial practice and 
artistic production has raised concerns about the perpetuation of a Western fantasy of Cambodia 
as a site of loss and trauma. In her critique of this fantasy promoted by Western media and 
museum discourses, Thompson turns to Buddhist commemoration as a culturally specific 
response to the Khmer Rouge tragedy. Reflecting further on Buddhist spirit shrines in Roka 
Kaong temple in which scattered remains of Khmer Rouge victims are gathered for Buddhist 
memorialization, Thompson notes,
This spontaneous assimilation of the Khmer Rouge dead with the Buddha-image-as-
reliquary, facilitated by the artistic staging, gave the dead new life as they were symboli­
cally reincorporated into the samsara, the cycle of life, death, and rebirth from which 
the unburied dead are excluded and so condemned to forever wander the world as 
famished, unclothed ghosts.
(Ibid.: 89)
Figure 21.3  Clay sculpting and sensory memory.
Screenshot from The Missing Picture. Courtesy of Rithy Panh and Catherine Dussart Production.

--- PAGE 357 ---
Chairat Polmuk
336
Proposing a middle path between a complete erasure and an evidentiary display of the remnants 
of war, Thompson identifies Buddhist material culture as a vernacular mode of commemoration 
and as an affective form of artistic remediation of the genocidal history. In his essay, Rithy Panh 
(1999: 30) shows his attentiveness to this Buddhist belief as he writes: “In Cambodia, they say 
people who’ve died a violent death can’t be reincarnated, that the souls of dead people who 
haven’t had a religious funeral and burial wander the earth forever, haunting the living.” How, 
then, does the Buddhist notion of relics inform Panh’s use of clay figurines to represent death 
and to stage the work of mourning?
Panh’s poetic deployment of clay figurines can be considered a subtle invocation of relics 
in the Buddhist material culture Thompson describes. The film’s inaugural mise en abyme, 
which depicts a figurine of the dead father, vehemently evokes a temporal trope of rebirth: 
“With clay and with water, with the dead, with rice fields, with living hands, a man is made.” 
In this way, the elemental medium of clay embodies a cycle of death and rebirth, the dis­
solution of the flesh into dust, and the reconfiguration of life through the earthly material. 
The materiality of clay itself allows for the meditation on the passage of time in relation to 
an affective experience of mourning. In its fragility and malleability, clay captures a cyclical 
sense of time and temporal duration. A mixture of the elements of earth, water, air, and fire, 
clay often represents the human body––its creation and decomposition––in various myths of 
origin.13 This is evident in a burial scene toward the end of the film. A clay figurine is placed 
in a freshly dug hole in the ground before grains of soil start covering his body and face. 
Once the whole body is totally covered and under the earth, the same clay corpse reemerges 
and the burial continues (Figure 21.4a and 21.4b). His visual uncanniness is accompanied by 
the voice-over: “Mourning is difficult; there is no end to the burial.” The unending burial 
here denotes the mass destruction during the Khmer Rouge regime that makes mourning a 
daunting task. It also suggests the temporal duration of mourning that enables us to navigate 
the ruined landscape of loss, to sense the texture of memory, and to forge an affective engage­
ment with fragmented remains of the past.
Panh’s reference to Buddhist narrative and practice can also be found in the film’s harrow­
ing depiction of the Khmer Rouge’s evacuation of Phnom Penh in which he cites lines from 
an oft-cited Khmer text in verse, the Buddh Daṃnāy (The Predictions of the Buddha). As archival 
footage of the desolate capital takes us through debris of urban ruination, a lyrical voice-over 
narration begins to reiterate the Khmer Rouge’s legitimating discourse: “The city is impure. 
The city is corrupt. It is emptied within hours. Two million people are thrown onto the roads.” 
This is ironically juxtaposed with the Khmer Rouge’s utopian vision of pre-capitalist society 
which ultimately leads to a tragic history. An enigmatic passage from the Buddh Daṃnāy is cited 
to reframe political atrocities, linking the Khmer Rouge’s mass destruction to the Buddhist 
epoch’s eventual devastation. The film’s voice-over comments:
The revolution is pure.
No room for humans.
Now Phnom Penh can be filmed,
Like in the prophecy of Puth Tumneay [Buddh Daṃnāy]:
“Houses with no occupants,
Streets with no pedestrians,
Stairs no one will climb,
Flowing rivers of blood.”
Loosely based on a Pāli sutra, the Buddh Daṃnāy is structured by a Buddhist temporal con­
ception of cosmic epochs or kalpa, “a vast cycle of temporality associated with cycles of the

--- PAGE 358 ---
Affect
337
dissemination, practice, and decline of the Dhamma, the teachings of the buddhas on ‘what is 
right’ and also with the generation, degeneration, destruction, and rebirth of the universe itself” 
(Hansen 2008: 57). In Cambodia, the text has become an enduring framework through which 
Khmer Buddhists interpret collective experiences of violence, suffering, and injustice. During 
the Pol Pot period, variegated versions of the Buddh Daṃnāy reemerged as an explanation for 
the downfall of Cambodian society, especially regarding the eradication of Buddhist institu­
tions and practices, which resonates strongly with the prophecy concerning the destruction 
of Buddhism by tamil (transcribed as tmil in Hansen’s work, from the ethnonym “Tamil” and 
designating “enemy” in Khmer, in this case “enemies of Buddhism” or nonbelievers) at the end 
of a cosmic epoch (Ibid.: 56–62).
While the Buddhist framing of the Khmer Rouge atrocity is hardly Rithy Panh’s inven­
tion—it is rather a citation of popular religious discourse surrounding the historical event—
the visual reiteration of the lines of the Buddhist prophesy in The Missing Picture reanimates 
Buddhist-framed interpretations of the genocide in a new aesthetic context. By invoking the 
Buddh Daṃnāy, Panh provocatively relates the Buddhist conception of temporal corruptibility 
to the film’s aesthetic of decay, the mobilization of material corruption to pollute the Khmer 
Rouge’s ideological underpinnings. The film’s invocation of Buddhist narratives of epochal 
devastation powerfully and satirically figures the destructive force of the Khmer Rouge’s dog­
matic notions of revolutionary purity and spatiotemporal cleansing. In contrast with violent 
Figure 21.4 a and b  The unending burial.
Screenshot from The Missing Picture. Courtesy of Rithy Panh and Catherine Dussart Production.
(b)
(a)

--- PAGE 359 ---
Chairat Polmuk
338
forms of temporal purification, The Missing Picture evokes the Buddhist-informed topos of the 
relics of time that testify to past terror and its affective residues.
In 2017, Rithy Panh collaborated with the composer Him Sophy in the production of an 
opera titled Bangsokol, a reference to a monastic robe made from the shrouds of abandoned 
corpses. According to a Pāli text on merit attained in relation to the “dustheap” robe, the 
Paṃsukūlanisaṃsaṃ (The Account of the Advantages of the Dustheap Robe), the Buddha originally 
obtained his robe from a piece of cloth used to wrap the body of the unborn fetus of a deceased 
young mother. As the Buddha collected the cloth, the putrefying fetus and placenta fell to 
the ground. In this vivid account, the dustheap robe recalls an amniotic sac and a shroud at 
the same time and thus “concretizes the rite of passage from the death of one buddha to the 
birth of the next” (Strong, 2004: 218–220). In everyday practice, this story of the origins of 
the monastic robe may serve as a reminder to Buddhist monks of impermanence and of the 
suffering of death and rebirth.
This temporal and affective dimension of the paṃsukūla relic is discussed in the study of 
Cambodian Buddhism by the French ethnologist François Bizot, well known for his memoir 
as a Khmer Rouge survivor. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Bizot conducted research on 
Buddhist practices in Cambodia and wrote a sustained analysis on the paṃsukūla. In it, Bizot 
suggests that the paṃsukūla represents a “symbolic womb” and that a ritual centering on this 
object––especially the healing ritual in which a patient is covered with a shroud while the 
paṃsukūla chant is intoned––can be understood as a process of revivification. While sequences 
concerning the paṃsukūla figure in funerary ritual, they can also constitute healing and life-
prolongation ceremonies. In studying the ritual practice and associated texts in Khmer, Thai, 
and Lao, Bizot underscores a distinction between esoteric practices and “orthodox” traditions 
that diminish the death/rebirth symbolism to instead highlight the merit-making dimensions 
of the practice in which robes are offered to monks.14Along these lines, I understand this 
vernacular practice as an extension of the canonical account of the Buddha’s dustheap robe in 
which the temporal dialectics and affective attachments of the relic are central to the convey­
ance of Buddhist soteriology.
Bangsokol, a libretto composed by Buddhist Studies scholar Trent Walker, references 
the paṃsukūla to convey the realization of impermanence that leads to a blissful state of 
enlightenment:
The white bangsokol shroud
lays upon everyone’s body.
A person of virtue may roll it up
To make it into a robe, intoning thus:
“How transient the elements of life!
Their nature is just to arise and pass away.
Having emerged, they soon disappear.
Their complete cessation is peace.”
Once this skin is shed, bliss arises,
relieving all pain, and pollution,
taking you far away from misfortune
to tread the path towards happiness.15
Drawing on the death/rebirth symbolism of the paṃsukūla, the libretto continues, “Alas, my 
souls, stop your wandering! / Let go of this sadness and strife / Walk forward, come here, follow 
the sounds, the sounds of music, to take rebirth.”16 Instead of putting an end to saṃsāra, this

--- PAGE 360 ---
Affect
339
operatic rendition of the Cambodian genocide is concerned with samsaric, repetitive time—the 
possibility of rebirth—that speaks to the generative dialectic between destruction and survival, 
between attachment and letting go, and which already lies at the center of scriptural and ritual 
exegeses concerning the sartorial relic of the Buddha.
In Bangsokol, as in The Missing Picture, Rithy Panh posits relics as the ties that bind the liv­
ing with the dead, the past with the present. Relics are the traces of time and the matter of 
mourning, providing a unique aesthetic mode for activating and sensing the past—tangible yet 
ephemeral, intimate yet unfamiliar, belated but also becoming. Panh’s poetic take on mundane 
materials through implicit and explicit references to Buddhist accounts of relics creates the 
texture of memory and foregrounds the affective experience of touch in the process of mourn­
ing that ultimately gestures toward a renewed pathway toward reinhabiting the ruined space 
of post-genocide Cambodia.
Conclusion
Through the notion of relics, I have delineated how visual materials from Southeast Asia 
enable a kind of affective transaction between the body and its material milieu across space 
and time. These affective engagements are crucial to artistic interventions in post–Cold War 
Southeast Asia in which remnants of the violent past continue to haunt the present. As can 
be seen from the work of Apichatpong Weerasethakul and Rithy Panh, filmic remediations 
of Cold War relics––be it of the bodily remains, the deteriorated photographs, or the ruined 
landscape––stage our encounters with those objects, intensify their affective pull, and attune 
our senses to their mundane yet haunting qualities. Their works exemplify the vital new 
strain of aesthetic and political interventions among contemporary artists and filmmakers who 
mobilize Buddhist modes of affective memorialization to address the urgency for historical 
accountability and justice regarding political violence during the 1950s and the 1970s. This 
includes, for instance, Lao filmmaker Xaisongkham Induangchanthy, whose short film Those 
Below (Tok Khang, 2016) remediates debris of war such as unexploded ordnances to recount 
the continuing impacts of the American secret war from the 1960s to 1970s, and Cambodian 
artist Vandy Rattana, who documents the lingering effects—and affects—of the same event 
in Cambodia through a series of videos and photographs of scarred landscapes in his exhibi­
tion, Bomb Ponds (2009). In his 2015 short, Monologue, Rattana meditates on the death of his 
sister, a victim of the Khmer Rouge regime, through his imagined dialogue with her at the 
ground under which five thousand people were buried during the Pol Pot era. Dwelling on 
the space and time of decay, these post–Cold War media archives deploy Buddhist temporal 
features to yield a unique account of endurance that allows for an embodied experience of 
belated witnessing.
In bringing the field of Buddhist Studies into conversation with theories of affect, this 
chapter has demonstrated how Buddhist concepts of relics offer a sustained exegesis and a 
culturally specific framework for probing affective potentialities of material objects. Taking its 
cues from scholars who look beyond pedagogical instrumentalization of affect and the body, my 
analysis of contemporary Southeast Asian visual culture further extends this nondoctrinal aspect 
of Buddhism to an investigation of history and politics. Films and video art discussed in the 
chapter instantiate the way in which contemporary artists incorporate nondoctrinal elements 
of Buddhism to interrogate a history of oppression rather than to convey Buddhist pedagogy. 
The incorporation of Buddhist elements into artistic practices reveals how the Buddhist-
inflected temporal dialectics of impermanence and continuity open up possibilities for ethical

--- PAGE 361 ---
Chairat Polmuk
340
and affective engagements with historical trauma and for articulations of novel forms of aes­
thetic and political imaginings.
Notes
	 1	For a discussion on textual representations of the female body to deplore sexual desire and to convey the 
tenet of impermanence, see Liz Wilson, Charming Cadavers: Horrific Figurations of the Feminine in Indian 
Buddhist Hagiographic Literature (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). For a discussion on visual 
practice and faith, see Andy Rotman, Thus Have I Seen: Visualizing Faith in Early Indian Buddhism (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2009).
	 2	As Deleuze and Guattari write, “[p]ure affects imply an enterprise of desubjectification” and “[s]imilarly, 
feelings become uprooted from the interiority of the ‘subject,’ to be projected violently outward into a 
milieu of pure exteriority that lends them an incredible velocity, a catapulting force: love or hate, they are 
no longer feelings but affects. See Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia (London: Continuum, 2004), 392–393.
	 3	Strong cites the Nandimitrāvadāna, a non-Theravādin text translated by the Chinese monk Xuanzang in 
which the Buddha’s relics are depicted as gradually disappearing into the earth instead of being completely 
destroyed by fire. See Strong, Relics of the Buddha, 225–226.
	 4	Laura Marks uses the term haptic visuality to describe the ways in which the affective potentiality of 
images should not be limited to the optical since visual media such as film produce bodily sensations 
beyond vision. Marks specifically looks at films by diasporic directors in which objects and images in 
the films possess a kind of fetishistic power to recall memories of home and displacement. See Laura 
Marks, The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment, and the Senses (Durham: Duke University 
Press, 2000).
	 5	See, for example, Arnika Fuhrmann, Ghostly Desires: Queer Sexuality and Vernacular Buddhism in 
Contemporary Thai Cinema (Durham: Duke University Press, 2016); May Adadol Ingawanij, “Animism and 
the Performative Realist Cinema of Apichatpong Weerasethakul,” in Screening Nature: Cinema Beyond the 
Human, eds. Anat Pick and Guinevere Narraway (New York: Berghahn Books, 2013), 101–105; and Anders 
Bergstrom, “Cinematic Past Lives: Memory, Modernity, and Cinematic Reincarnation in Apichatpong 
Weerasethakul’s Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives,” Mosaic: A Journal for the Interdisciplinary Study 
of Literature 48,4 (2015): 1–16.
	 6	For example, in his essay on rebirth memory in Cambodia, Erik Davis traces this literary and cultural 
phenomenon in canonical Buddhist texts in which the Buddha’s recollection of past lives is instrumental 
to understandings of suffering and ultimately spiritual liberation. In popular cultural imagination and 
practice, the lived experience of past life recollection significantly diverges from the Buddhist peda­
gogical paradigm and performs different social functions, especially with regard to the reconstruction 
of social fabrics beyond death. See Erik W. Davis, “Kinship Beyond Death: Ambiguous Relations and 
Autonomous Children in Cambodia,” Contemporary Buddhism 16, 1 (2015): 127–128; and Erik W. Davis, 
“Between Forests and Families: A Remembered Past Life,” People of Virtue: Reconfiguring Religion, Power, 
and Morality in Cambodia Today, eds. David Chandler and Alexandra Kent (Copenhagen: NIAS Press, 
2009), 128–144.
	 7	The popularity of the 16mm film between the 1950s and 1970s (often periodized by film scholars 
as the “16mm era”) was a result of the shortage of the 35mm film in the aftermath of World War II. 
The more mobile and lightweight projecting equipment made the 16mm film widely accessible in the 
countryside and gave rise to provincial spectatorship. See May Adadol Ingawanij, “Figures of Plebeian 
Modernity: Film Projection as Performance in Siam/Thailand,” Southeast Asia Program at Cornell Bulletin 
(Fall 2014): 10–16.
	 8	Citing a well-known dictum, “seeing the relics is seeing the Conquerer (i.e. the Buddha),” Steven Collins 
succinctly notes that “so long as relics exist, so long can the Buddha be seen; but when the relics disappear, 
such sight (dassana, another term with an extensive psycho-theology in Hinduism, as Sanskrit darsana, but 
with no systematic counterpart in Pali) comes to an end; the Buddha finally nirvanizes, this time for ever, 
when his relics become invisible, by going to the state beyond conceptualization.” See Collins, Nirvana, 
115–117.
	 9	Paul Dallas, “Apichatpong Weerasethakul by Paul Dallas,” Bomb Magazine (October 2015), http://bomb­
magazine.org/article/8429107/apichatpong-weerasethakul, accessed April 29, 2016.

--- PAGE 362 ---
Affect
341
	10	See Jacques Derrida, “Poetics and Politics of Witnessing,” in Sovereignties in Question: The Poetics of Paul 
Celan (New York: Fordham University Press, 2005), 68. Derrida writes, “Ash, this is also the name of what 
annihilates or threatens to destroy even the possibility of bearing witness to annihilation. Ash is the figure 
of annihilation without remainder, without memory, or without a readable or decipherable archive.”
	11	Panh has extensively explored the subject in his previous films such as Bophana: A Cambodian Tragedy 
(Bophana, une tragédie cambodgienne, 1996), One Evening After the War (Un soir après la guerre, 1998), and S-21: 
The Khmer Rouge Killing Machine (S-21, la machine de mort khmère rouge, 2003). In 2006, Panh co-founded 
the Bophana Center in Phnom Penh, an archive of visual materials and a training center for a new genera­
tion of Cambodian filmmakers.
	12	See Ingrid Muan and Ly Daravuth, eds., Cultures of Independence: An Introduction to Cambodian Arts and 
Culture in the 1950s and 1960s (Phnom Penh: Reyum, 2001). More recently, the topic of cultural loss has 
been taken up in independent films such as Davy Chou’s Golden Slumbers (2012) and John Pirozzi’s Don’t 
Think I’ve Forgotten: Cambodia’s Lost Rock and Roll (2015).
	13	The famous line from Genesis reads, “Then the Lord formed a man from the dust of the ground 
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.” A Buddhist myth of origin can be found in the 
Aggañña-Sutta (Discourse on What Is Primary), which recounts a story about luminous beings who con­
sume the earth-essence and become human beings. See Steven Collins, “The Discourse on What 
Is Primary (Aggañña- Sutta): An Annotated Translation,” Journal of Indian Philosophy 21, 4 (December 
1993), 301–393.
	14	François Bizot, Le don de soi-même: recherches sur le bouddhisme khmer III (Paris: École française d’Extrême-
Orient, 1981). See also Erik Davis, “Binding Mighty Death: The Craft and Authority of the Rag Robe 
in Cambodian Ritual Technology,” in Deathpower: Buddhism’s Ritual Imagination in Cambodia (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 2016), 149–151.
	15	Bangsokol: A Requiem for Cambodia, BAM Howard Opera House and Cambodian Living Arts, December 
15–16, 2017. It should be noted that at the theater, this verse was printed and placed on each audience’s 
seat, together with a white cloth representing the bangsokol shroud. During the performance, audiences 
were asked to cover their shoulders with the white cloth.
	16	This formulaic summoning of the souls draws from a traditional Khmer ritual text known as “calling the 
souls” or hau pralung. See Ashley Thompson, Calling the Souls: A Khmer Ritual Text (Phnom Penh: Reyum, 
2004).
References
Anderson, Ben. 2009. “Affective Atmospheres.” Emotion, Space, and Society 2: 77–81.
Bergstrom, Anders. 2015. “Cinematic Past Lives: Memory, Modernity, and Cinematic Reincarnation 
Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives.” Mosaic: A Journal for 
Interdisciplinary Study of Literature 48 (4): 1–16.
Berkwitz, Stephen C. 2001. “Emotions and Ethics in Buddhist History: The Sinhala Thūpavaṃsa and the 
Work of Virtue.” Religion 31 (2): 155–173.
Bizot, François. 1981. Le don de soi-même: recherches sur le bouddhisme khmer III. Paris: École française d’ 
Extrême-Orient.
Bruno, Giuliana. 2002. Atlas of Emotion: Journeys in Art, Architecture, and Film. London: Verso.
Cadava, Eduardo. 1997. Words of Light: Theses on the Photography of History. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press.
Clough, Patricia, Halley, Jean, eds. 2007. The Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social. Durham: Duke University 
Press.
Collins, Steven. 2010. Nirvana: Concept, Imagery, Narrative. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Collins, Steven. 1993. “The Discourse on What Is Primary (Aggañña-Sutta): An Annotated Translation,” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 21 (4): 301–393.
Dallas, Paul. “Apichatpong Weerasethakul by Paul Dallas.” Bomb Magazine (October 2015), http://bomb­
magazine.org/article/8429107/apichatpong-weerasethakul. Accessed April 29, 2016.
Davis, Erik. 2009. “Between Forests and Families: A Remembered Past Life.” In People of Virtue: Reconfiguring 
Religion, Power, and Morality in Cambodia Today. eds. David Chandler, Alexandra Kent, 128–144. 
Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Davis, Erik. 2016.  Deathpower: Buddhism’s Ritual Imagination in Cambodia. New York: Columbia University 
Press.

--- PAGE 363 ---
Chairat Polmuk
342
Davis, Erik. 2015. “Kinship Beyond Death: Ambiguous Relations and Autonomous Children in Cambodia.” 
Contemporary Buddhism 16 (1): 125–140.
Deleuze, Gilles, Félix Guattari. 2004. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. London: Continuum.
Derrida, Jacques. 2005. “Poetics and Politics of Witnessing.” In Sovereignties in Question: The Poetics of Paul 
Celan, eds. Thomas Dutoit, Outi Pasanen,  65-96. New York: Fordham University Press.
Eckel, Malcolm. 1992. To See the Buddha: A Philosopher’s Quest for the Meaning of Nothingness. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Fuhrmann, Arnika. 2016. Ghostly Desires: Queer Sexuality and Vernacular Buddhism in Contemporary Thai 
Cinema. Durham: Duke University Press.
Gregg, Melissa, Gregory J. Seigworth, eds. 2010. The Affect Theory Reader. Durham: Duke University Press.
Hansen, Anne. 2008. “Gaps in the World: Harm and Violence in Khmer Buddhist Narrative.” In At the Edge 
of the Forest: Essays on Cambodia, History, and Narrative in Honor of David Chandler. eds. Anne Hansen, 
Judy Ledgerwood, 47-70. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Southeast Asia Program.
Massumi, Brian. 2002. Parables for the Virtual: Movement, Affect, Sensation. Durham: Duke University Pres.
May Adadol, Ingawanij. 2013. “Animism and the Performative Realist Cinema of Apichatpong 
Weerasethakul.” In Screening Nature: Cinema Beyond the Human. eds. Anat Pick, Guinevere Narraway, 
91–109. New York: Berghahn Books.
May Adadol, Ingawanij. 2014. “Figures of Plebeian Modernity: Film Projection as Performance in Siam/
Thailand.” Southeast Asia Program at Cornell Bulletin Fall: 10–16.
Muan, Ingrid, Ly Daravuth, eds. 2001. Cultures of Independence: An Introduction to Cambodian Arts and Culture 
in the 1950s and 1960s. Phnom Penh: Reyum.
Panh, Rithy. 1999. “Cambodia: A Wound That Will Not Heal.” Unesco Courier 52 (12): 56–65.
Rotman, Andy. 2003. “The Erotics of Practice: Objects and Agency in Buddhist Avadana Literature.” 
American Academy of Religion 71 (3): 555–578.
Rotman, Andy. 2009. Thus Have I Seen: Visualizing Faith in Early Indian Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Strong, John. 2004. Relics of the Buddha. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tambiah, Stanley. 1984. The Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets: A Study in Charisma, 
Hagiography, Sectarianism, and Millennial Buddhism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Teh, David. 2017. Thai Art: Currencies of the Contemporary. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Thompson, Ashley. 2013. “Forgetting to Remember, Again: On Curatorial Practice and ‘Cambodian Art’ 
in the Wake of Genocide.” Diacritics 41 (2): 82–109.
Thompson, Ashley. 1996. The Calling of the Souls: A Study of the Khmer Ritual Hau Bralin. Clayton, Australia: 
Monash Asia Institute.
Wilson, Liz. 1996. Charming Cadavers: Horrific Figurations of the Feminine in Indian Buddhist Hagiographic 
Literature. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Young, James. 1993. The Texture of Memory: Holocaust Memorials and Meaning. New Haven: Yale University 
Press.

--- PAGE 364 ---
343
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-27
22
DEITIES
Supernatural forces in Theravāda Buddhist 
religious cultures
John Clifford Holt
Before addressing the specific nature of deities and supernatural forces in Theravāda Buddhist 
religious cultures, there are important preliminary discussions to address, the first of which 
concerns the term or category of “deity” itself and its suitability for understanding the nature 
of the divine or supernatural within Theravāda Buddhist religious cultures. The English term 
deity is etymologically related to Latin deus and Greek theos, but also to Sanskrit and Pāli deva 
or devatā, from which the Sinhalese in Sri Lanka derive dēviyō, and the Thai-Lao thewada. These 
terms actually signify various types of exalted deities, but none of them equates with the nature 
and function of Judeo-Christian, Islamic, or Hindu radically transcendent conceptions of the 
divine, such as Yahweh, Allah, Viṣṇu or Śiva. In some Theravāda contexts, the power of the 
Buddha may be appealed to directly to help assuage conditions of suffering in this world, or 
faith in the advent of the future Buddha Maitreya can provide a hope for an auspicious rebirth 
in the distant future, but unlike the Judeo-Christian, Muslim, and Hindu conceptions of high 
gods, the Buddha is not an omnipotent creator deity standing outside of and in judgment of 
human history. Perhaps because of this crucial difference, some commentators, especially early 
nineteenth-century European armchair scholars, have sometimes labeled Buddhism as “an athe­
istic creed.” This is hardly the case.
Second, in each of the Theravāda religious cultures under consideration, there are other 
forms of supernatural forces that are to some degree either disembodied in nature or non-
anthropomorphically envisaged. These include the phi of Thailand and Laos, some neak ta in 
Cambodia, and various forms of nats in Myanmar. These supernatural figures are qualitatively 
not devas or deities in the same definitive sense, especially because they do not always exert 
their powers benevolently within the Buddhist understanding of moral economy, but they 
are, nevertheless, powerful supernatural forces in their own right and, at times, can function 
positively in response to the entreaties of Buddhist devotees.
Third, the nature, degrees of relative importance, and extent of assimilation of deities, par­
ticularly of Brahmanical or Hindu origins, varies considerably from one national or ethnic 
Theravāda Buddhist context to another. What can be identified as Theravāda Buddhist religious 
culture is unique wherever it is found on the ground.1 Monolithic constructions of the reli­
gion need serious qualifications or should be avoided entirely. The same is true in this specific 
instance regarding the relative importance of deities in different cultural contexts.

--- PAGE 365 ---
John Clifford Holt
344
Fourth, in Pāli canonical literature, a host of Brahmanic deities are present or alluded to in 
various textual moments, but in general, they are usually seen as bystanders to the central nar­
rative events and doctrinal or ritual explications with which these texts are more concerned. 
Perhaps the most visible of these deities often present in the background is Indra, or Sakka, 
who as the devarāja (king of the gods) is featured prominently in a number of Jātaka stories as 
making sure that the Buddha’s trajectory of spiritual perfection unfolds in a progressive man­
ner. Important and conspicuous as he is, his function, as with all deities, is always subsidiary 
to the Buddha.
In the various national Theravāda contexts, devas of Hindu or even Mahāyāna origins seem 
to appear more prominently in Sinhala, Thai, and Khmer constructions of Buddhist religious 
culture than in, say, the Lao or Burmese. While their presence in the Thai and Khmer contexts 
is undoubtedly derived from their ubiquity and centrality to ninth- through thirteenth-century 
Angkor civilization, whose conceptuality of kingship and polity, not to mention written lan­
guage and ritual, became in many ways paradigmatic for the Lao and central Thai,2 the assimi­
lation of Hindu devas has been, perhaps, most completely rendered in the Sinhala Sri Lankan 
context. It is this instance of a historical longue durée that is now addressed.
Buddhist Devas in Sri Lanka
The religious culture of Sri Lanka provides an excellent context for discussing what can 
make for a specifically “Buddhist deity.” Indeed, sometimes the Buddha himself is referred to 
as devātideva, or the “god beyond the gods,” located beyond the apex of the karmically deter­
mined pantheon of deities, the supernatural figures who do the Buddha’s bidding in relation 
to assuaging suffering (dukkha) in this world. Obeyesekere (1983, 59) has made the interesting 
observation that “while the Buddha is made into a kind of god, the god is made into a kind 
of Buddha.” In fact, most deities in Sinhala Buddhist religious culture are understood to be on 
the path to Buddhahood themselves and to have been provided with warrants (Sinh. varama) 
by the Buddha to assist in compassionately assuaging the conditions of suffering encountered 
by Buddhist devotees (Holt 2003, 179). In this sense, then, they are soteriologically significant, 
and by virtue of their perceived intimate relation to the Buddha and his mission, they are 
unmistakably “Buddhist” in their perceived raison d’être.
Nātha dēviyō, whose original identity was none other than Mahāyāna bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, 
whose cult thrived from the eight through the eleventh century largely in the south and south­
eastern littorals of the island (based on an analysis of surviving sculpture; Holt 1991, 72–90), 
eventually became regarded as the “god of Senkadagala” (the oldest name for the city of Kandy, 
the late medieval upcountry royal capital of Sri Lanka) and ultimately as the tutelary deity of 
the dynasty of Kandyan kings from the late sixteenth through the early nineteenth century. 
Nātha also came to be regarded as one of the four guardian deities (Sinh. satara varam dēvi) of 
the Kandyan kingdom in this late medieval period. His central dēvālaya (deity shrine), the oldest 
remaining architectural structure in the city of Kandy today, is located adjacent to the Daḷadā 
Māligāva (Temple of the [Buddha’s] Tooth-Relic) and the former royal palace, and it became 
the ritual hub for annual rites celebrated throughout the kingdom. But of greater significance 
is the fact that Nātha finally came to be identified as the deity who would eventually be reborn 
as Metteyya (Sk. Maitreya; Sinh. Maitri), the future Buddha following Gotama’s dispensation 
who will again make known the dhamma for the soteriological benefit of those reborn during 
his time (Holt 1991, 214–215.) As such, Nātha is regarded by many devotees as the highest 
and most virtuous of the Sinhala deities ranking immediately below the Buddha Gotama at 
the apex of the divine hierarchy.

--- PAGE 366 ---
Deities
345
Like the dēvālayas dedicated to other higher deities in the Sinhala pantheon, Nātha’s shrines 
field petitions from the faithful on kemmura days (Wednesdays and Saturday mornings), the 
most inauspicious times of the week when people are more likely to feel the greatest need 
for divine compassion (P. karuṇā). Compassion has remained the divine trait most commonly 
associated with him since his introduction to the island as Avalokiteśvara. The iconography of 
Nātha images in his dēvālayas dating from between the fourteenth and the eighteenth centu­
ries remains consistent with Avalokiteśvara’s, insofar as he is always depicted with a Buddha in 
his crown, indicating not only his near Buddha status but also his unequivocal identification 
with the soteriological path. His current epithet of Nātha derives from Lokanātha (lord of the 
world), a name often given to Avalokiteśvara wherever his cult spread throughout South and 
Southeast Asia (Holt 1991, 41). Significant for the religion as a whole, relevant to the needs of 
local people where his shrines are located, Nātha epitomizes the nature of Buddhist divinity 
insofar as he responds compassionately to the immediate existential needs of his petitioners 
while simultaneously embodying and symbolizing their future soteriological hopes. He is both 
laukika (present-this-worldly) and lokottara (future-other-worldly) significant. Indeed, the per­
formance of meritorious acts of positive karmic efficacy by laity is often motivated by the desire 
to be reborn in Maitri’s future time. Often, merit derived from these karmic actions is ritually 
transferred to deceased family members so that they might gain rebirth in Maitri’s era too. This 
motivation for rebirth during Maitri’s era is not limited to the Sinhala Buddhist context but 
can be found in virtually all other Theravāda oriented religious cultures as well (Holt 1993).
Hindu devas were introduced to Sri Lanka from at least the second half of the first millen­
nium, but especially so following the late tenth-century invasion of South Indian Cōḷa armies 
that decimated Anurādhapura, the longstanding Sinhala royal capital and center of Buddhist 
monasticism for thirteen centuries (third century bce–tenth century ce), located in the north-
central region of the island known as the rājaraṭa (king’s country). The subsequent establishment 
of Polonnaruva as the new capital by the Cōḷas in the eleventh century, about 120 kilometers to 
the southeast, witnessed an increasing presence of Hindu cultic life, both Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava. The 
Theravāda Buddhist monastic chronicle, the Mahāvaṃsa, especially the sections written in the 
twelfth- and thirteenth-century Buddhist Polonnaruva period, is replete with many references 
to Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava deities and practices as it describes the courtly culture of those Sinhala 
kings who had displaced the Cōḷas in Polonnaruva. Polonnaruva became a great center of 
power, home not only to a Buddhist monastic pirivena (school of higher learning) of some ten 
thousand resident monks, some of the most resplendent sculpture in the history of Sri Lanka’s 
religious culture, but also the venue of Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava temples and sculpture in the classic 
South Indian style as well (Holt 2003, 36). Judging from archeological remains in this context, 
Hindu and Buddhist cultic practices seemed to have been celebrated separately at this time.
In the politically chaotic centuries following the fall of Polonnaruva in the thirteenth cen­
tury, when many mercenaries were imported from south India to engage in various battles 
for political hegemony, many Hindu literary and cultic traditions were also introduced at all 
levels of Sinhala society, from village to court. It is during this particular historical period 
that a wholesale acceleration of the assimilation of Hindu deities and their worship into a 
Buddhist rationalized and hierarchically arranged pantheon and cosmos began to take place 
and processed within ritual contexts. The rationale for this hierarchy, and thereby the manner 
in which specific deities were understood, was articulated through an understanding of moral 
economy. The formula for this understanding was simply this: deities are who they are, and do 
what they do, on the basis of what they have done: the karma they have performed. Karma has 
empowered them. The more compassionate and beneficial these gods are in relation to their 
devotees, the further along the path to Buddhahood do they advance. To illustrate their storied

--- PAGE 367 ---
John Clifford Holt
346
careers leading to their contemporary positions of divine power to respond to their devotees’ 
petitions, a vast literature of mythic narratives was formulated accounting for their great past 
deeds. It is within these narratives illustrating the positive karmic efficacy of their exploits that 
the perceived dynamics of a moral economy are revealed. At the base of this understanding is 
the belief that these deities have been enlisted and sanctioned to do work in the world war­
ranted ultimately by the Buddha.
A prime example of assimilation from Hindu to Buddhist context is the deva Viṣṇu, ostensi­
bly one of the most important and elevated deities in India’s evolving Hindu religious culture. 
Within the context of Sanskrit and Indian vernacular literature and across the broad spectrum 
of regionalized Hindu cultic activity, Viṣṇu has a commanding presence. For his devotees, and 
the devotees of his ten avatars, especially Kṛṣṇa and Rāma, Viṣṇu is the eternal deity who 
periodically re-creates the world. For the more philosophically minded, he is the embodiment 
of brahman, the fundamental reality or force of this world beyond its variegated and everchang­
ing observable material forms (māyā). Periodically, he descends to take the form of an avatar 
(divine incarnation) to restore the order of dharma when its efficacy has waned and chaos 
threatens the well-being of the world. Eventually, when the world is beyond hope at the end 
of the Kaliyuga, the last of four great eons comprising a kalpa (temporal world cycle), existence 
devolves back into his cosmic body, mythically imagined as resting in a dreamlike state during 
intervals between kalpas.
Viṣṇu’s grand profile as one of the highest, if not for some the highest deity in the Hindu 
cosmos, was not lost on Sinhala Buddhists. There is literary and ritual evidence of the popu­
larity of the epic Rāmāyana from the Polonnaruva period forward, but especially during the 
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century period of the Kandyan kingdom (Holt 2003, 225–246). 
Of greater importance was the conflation of Viṣṇu’s identity with the indigenous deity Upulvan; 
for, it is this historically earlier Sinhala deity who provides much of the color for what eventually 
became the “Buddhist Viṣṇu.” Of chief importance in this regard is the Mahāvaṃsa’s account 
of what happened at the time just after the Buddha’s enlightenment experience. The Buddha
spoke to Sakka (Indra) … : “Vijaya, son of Sı̄habāhu, is come to Laṅkā from the country 
of Lāḷa, together with seven hundred followers. In Laṅkā, O lord of the gods, will my 
religion be established, therefore carefully protect him with his followers and Laṅkā.”
When the lord of the gods heard the words of the Tathāgata, he from respect handed 
over guardianship of Laṅkā to the god who is in colour like the lotus.
… And all the followers of Vijaya came to him and asked him: “What island is this 
sir?” “The island of Laṅkā,” he answered. There are no men here, and here no dangers 
will arise.” And when he had spoken so and sprinkled water on them from his water 
vessel, and had wound a thread around their hands, he vanished into the air.
(Mahāvaṃsa 7: 8; 55; emphasis mine)
In the preceding passage, there are two salient points to emphasize. The first is that “the god 
who is in colour like the lotus” is a glossed translation of Pāli devass’ uppalavaṇṇassa. In a footnote 
to this passage, Wilhelm Geiger, the Mahāvaṃsa’s translator, said simply: “That is, Viṣṇu.” This 
assertion, however, is entirely anachronistic, and perhaps this reference to the deity Upulvan 
that is inherent in this Pāli passage is itself a later interpolation; for, there is no further notice 
of Upulvan in Sinhala or Pāli literature or inscriptions of any kind until a ninth-century royal 
inscription, and Upulvan does not seem to gain widespread notoriety until the dissemina­
tion of the well-known “Myth of the Sandalwood Image,” originating from Devinuvara, and 
articulated to account for the spread of the Upulvan cult into Sri Lanka’s upcountry in the late

--- PAGE 368 ---
Deities
347
thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries (Holt 2003, 95–96). Moreover, the eventual confla­
tion of Upulvan and Viṣṇu does not seem to have been affected until the seventeenth century.
The second point of significance is much more straightforward: that Upulvan’s act of sprin­
kling water and tying a thread around the hands of Vijaya’s followers is regarded widely as a 
primordial instantiation of the practice of pirit, the ritual of protection par excellence in later 
Sinhala religious culture that captures one of the basic virtues associated with Viṣṇu: protec­
tion. Taking both of these points into consideration, Viṣṇu has been later identified with the 
original mythic and ritual acts of divine protection accorded to the Sinhala people in Sri Lanka.
But who is Upulvan more specifically and what is the legacy of his cult for the later 
“Buddhist Viṣṇu”? The following summarizing passage concisely reveals the answer to this 
question.
[T]he cult of Upulvan originated amidst Buddhist people most likely in the southern 
extremities of the island [in the region of modern Devinuwara]. What seems clear 
is that every notice pertaining to his cult in the Buddhist tradition (the Mahāvaṃsa-
Cūlavaṃsa or inscriptions left by various Sinhala Buddhist kings) is politically related or 
politically motivated. He appears as the [protective] guardian deity of the Sinhalas and 
their religion in the Mahāvaṃsa colonization myth of Vijaya; he is the patron deity and 
namesake of an important regional town [Devinuwara] apparently established in the 
ninth century by a Buddhist king or contender for the throne; he is thanked by a royal 
pilgrim (Prince Vı̄rabāhu) after strategic military victories in the 13th century; he is 
recognized as one of the “four guardian deities” of the island in the fourteenth century 
Gampola era; his cult is lavishly patronized by royalty in the 15th c. Kotte period, and 
he is recognized in 15th c. century sandēśa literature as perhaps the most powerful of 
all the gods (devarāja), as one of the most frequently appealed to for divine assistance 
to benefit the state.
(Holt 2003 100–101; brackets mine here)
The later conceived “Buddhist Viṣṇu” was the beneficiary of this legacy while the cult of 
Upulvan per se disappeared almost entirely from active propitiation subsequently.
Viṣṇu’s relation to the protection of the state was further intensified during the Kandyan 
period, especially during the reigns of the last six kings who royally endowed Viṣṇu dēvālayas 
throughout the kingdom, especially the shrines located in proximity to the royal palace, and 
at Hangurankheta, Gadaladeniya, Lankatilaka, and in Alutnuwara, where for some time Viṣṇu 
was known locally as “Alutnuvara Dēviyō.” During this time, an extensive Sinhala literature 
recast Viṣṇu’s divine exploits within the idiom of the moral economy of karma. He was even 
regarded in some texts as the future Rāma Buddha. But most significant of all, Viṣṇu came to 
be known popularly as the guardian protector of the Buddhasāsana (Buddhist tradition), a type 
of “minister of defense” (Holt 2003, 23). It is this important development that was read back 
anachronistically into the Mahāvaṃsa passage about Vijaya’s arrival in Sri Lanka cited earlier. 
Eventually his cult became as thoroughly integrated into local Sinhala religious culture as any 
other deity on the island (Holt 2003, 24). Indeed, Buddhist villagers in rural Sri Lanka would 
be surprised to learn that Viṣṇu could be anything other than a Buddhist deity, that his origins 
derived from Hindu India. Viṣṇu became a paradigmatic symbol of protection, from the level 
of the village to the state and to the veritable Buddhist tradition in Sri Lanka itself.
This assessment of the “Buddhist Viṣṇu” provides an opportunity to compare and contrast 
Buddhist conceptions of the divine, specifically Viṣṇu, with the Hindu in order to bring more 
clarity into the discussion of what constitutes a Buddhist conception of devas. Rather than being

--- PAGE 369 ---
John Clifford Holt
348
understood as the cosmic creator of existence who also abstractly embodies the fundamental 
power of existence, the “Buddhist Viṣṇu” has been subordinated to the soteriological regime 
of the Buddha. He has become primarily a divine protector of the people, the state, and the 
monastic community, all understood as destined to sustain the Dhamma of the Buddha. He no 
longer stands over against the conditioned world of rebirth (samsāra) but is an active participant 
in sustaining those whose ultimate religious goal is to transcend it. Viṣṇu is envisaged as being 
on this same path, and his success in abetting the Buddha’s prophecy is what enhances his own 
progress. Insofar as he is best known now for his role as the protector of the Buddhasāsana, his 
profile is consonant with the consistently asserted modern constitutional responsibilities of the 
Sri Lankan state3 to provide special protection to the Buddhist religion. This conception of 
divinity is far more politically entwined and more thoroughly this-worldly than the Hindu. 
Yet it is not separate from soteriological significance insofar as not only Viṣṇu is regarded as 
being on the soteriological path himself but his chief function also is to guard the means by 
which that soteriological path can be traversed.
The Phi of Thai-Lao Buddhist religious culture
Phi may not be regarded as devas or deities per se, but they represent a very important and 
contrasting type of conception of the supernatural in Buddhist Thailand and Laos, and they 
bear some similarities to the neak ta spirits of Cambodia and some nats in Myanmar. In Sri 
Lanka, devas and lesser supernatural figures have been thoroughly integrated into what is clearly 
a Theravāda Buddhist religious episteme. Many deity shrines, including those not found specifi­
cally within the precincts of Buddhist temples, are impressive autonomous institutions super­
vised by socially prestigious lay administrators (basnāyake nilames), supported historically through 
royal endowments of land, and operated by a cadre of full-time specialist priests (kapuraḷas) 
who regularly offer liturgical petitions on behalf of Buddhist laity to deities whose powerful 
and attractive anthropomorphic likenesses form the focus of devotional attention within highly 
symbolically decorated sanctum sanctora.
By contrast in northeastern Thailand and Laos, the representation of supernatural phi is 
subtle and almost always aniconic.4 There are virtually no artistic traditions of sculpting anthro­
pomorphic images of phi or portraying their mythic or supernatural exploits in temple mural 
paintings. While diminutive spirit houses for phi are regularly positioned near the boundaries 
of premises for many commercial establishments (usually hotels and guest houses in urban 
areas like Vientiane and Luang Phrabang in Laos), the shrines for village guardian phi are usu­
ally humble sheds or ramshackle canopies located in the forest outside the boundaries of the 
village with little or no symbolic representations, or their presence is indicated simply by a 
pole or pillar placed at a central location in the village, often in front of the house of the vil­
lage headman. Some stūpas (such as That Dam in central Vientiane) or sacred trees within vats 
(temples) are also regarded as the abode of phi. However, there are no freestanding buildings 
“housing” phi within which petitioners can enter to offer their invocations or petitions. Nor 
will one find full-time administrative or priestly specialists overseeing the wellbeing of a local 
village phi cult or orchestrating an open public ritual at regularized weekly or monthly timings. 
There may be an annual or semiannual public ritual in honor of the phi ban (village spirit), 
but any other interaction with the village guardian spirit or other phi is totally dependent on 
individual, private initiative, and the availability of part-time ritual specialists.
The relative lack of an iconic tradition for the representation of phi, the relative lack of social 
administration related to the cult, and the relative paucity of public ritual orchestration are sure 
indications of a relative lack of institutionalization of the phi cults in general (Condominas 1973,

--- PAGE 370 ---
Deities
349
254). Yet there is no doubt that the various cults of phi are related intimately to a number 
of important social institutions: beginning with the family household and then extending to 
private or commonly held village fields, the village vat (monastery), the village itself, collec­
tions of villages (muang), regional chiefdoms, kingdoms, and even the institution of Theravāda 
Buddhism itself.5 They may also be associated with particular natural phenomena such as rivers, 
ponds, caves, or mountains. Phi are the spiritual forces linked to specific places. But particularly 
in Laos, phi as supernatural phenomena seem to be significantly more nebulous in nature and 
function than the devas of Sri Lanka, the nats of Myanmar, and neak ta in Cambodia.6
An especially relevant example of “relative lack of institutionalization” is illustrated by the 
typical spirit house one finds in Lao and Thai urban centers. In contemporary Laos, spirit houses 
are often constructed so that they resemble miniature Buddhist vats. This style of spirit house 
would, in itself, seem to indicate the domestication of the phi cult within a religious culture 
now dominated by Theravāda Buddhism. Yet there is no image of any kind to be found within 
the “Buddhist-vat-inspired-and-styled spirit house.” The spirit house remains an empty dwell­
ing, precisely because the spiritual force that it symbolically represents refuses, ultimately, to be 
permanently embodied; for the phi are actually, within the Lao purview, not essentially person­
ages at all. Rather, they are fundamentally bodiless or “post-embodied” forces, wills, or powers 
of jurisdiction. So, it would appear that the phi of Lao religious culture, unlike the devas in Sri 
Lanka, have not been subjected to, at least not to the same extent, the powerful processes of 
“Hinduization or Buddhicization” that have contributed significantly to the anthropomorphiz­
ing of spirits or minor deities in other nominally Buddhist religious cultures. Although some 
Lao literature entertained by the elites became coated with a Buddhist moralizing, the popular 
religious culture of the Lao was never subjected as intensively to the kind of matchmaking 
identification process between indigenous deities and Hindu gods or Buddhist bodhisattvas. 
Moreover, the phi cults have not been subjected to the process of karmic rationalization either. 
Historically, then, the phi cults of the Lao, and the regions of Thailand that are historically of 
ethnic Lao origins, have remained relatively less acculturated (“sanskritized” or “buddhacized”) 
and have retained their own ontology of power based primarily on power of place.
Consequently, what one doesn’t see in play within Lao religious culture, as one does see very 
clearly in the Sinhala Sri Lankan context, is a thoroughly Buddhistic rationalization that serves 
to interpret various aspects of popular religion. In Sri Lanka, one can expect to find a variety 
of ballads, poetry, and/or mythologies, in written or oral forms, explaining, from a Buddhist 
perspective, how it is that particular deities or spirits have risen to a current status of great 
power because of how, in the past, they have accumulated vast loads of merit through virtuous 
exploits, thereby earning warrants from the Buddha himself to dispense power on behalf of 
the Dhamma to deserving suffering people within a certain region or throughout the country 
as a whole. In Laos, there are no claims made that any phi is regarded as spiritually or morally 
advanced or a potential candidate for nibbāna. Their power, rather than being understood as 
unambiguously good or morally based, while often protective in nature, is also understood to 
be potentially destructive if not, at times, malevolent. For phi can be of many kinds. Rather 
than begging a comparison to the devas of Sri Lanka, the power of phi is more reminiscent of 
the power of yakṣas, a power to be feared because it is ambivalent in nature and less morally 
informed or engendered. The power of phi, therefore, seems less domesticated, less morally 
guided, less “buddhisticly” channeled, more intrinsic rather than cultivated, and therefore more 
to be feared because of its ambiguity.
While Theravāda Buddhism in Laos may have become the authorizing religion of the Lao 
royal courts beginning in Luang Phrabang as early as the late fourteenth or early fifteenth cen­
tury ce, and while the monastic vat eventually became the veritable hub of the ban (village) in

--- PAGE 371 ---
John Clifford Holt
350
ethnic Lao cultural areas, the popular religious culture of the Lao in the form of phi cults was 
never provided with a Buddhistic ontology. Along with the related cult of the khwan, “vital 
spirits” or “souls,” the cult of the phi maintained its own basic conceptual ontology, relating 
to and sometimes informing but, at the same time, understood apart from Buddhist concep­
tuality or in a complementary relation to it.7 Some Western scholars have characterized the 
relationship between Buddhism and the spirit cults in Lao religious culture as “blended;” still 
others have used terminology in which Buddhism is seen as “encompassing” or “subordinat­
ing.” Rather than finding a sustained interpretive Buddhist understanding of phi on the basis 
of Buddhist conceptuality, the converse is actually more likely to be found among the Lao: 
Buddhist conceptuality, symbol, and ritual tend to be understood at the popular level of Lao 
culture through the prism of the indigenous religious substratum constituted by the cults of 
phi and khwan. Following the French historian of religions Paul Mus, this archaic ontology 
reverberates or resonates with the same kind of indigenous religious culture or substratum out 
of which Buddhism, itself, within its own native Indian religious milieu, originally emerged.8
In his classic study of Buddhism and the Spirit Cults of North-east Thailand, Tambiah (1970: 
332) had written that villagers “view malevolent agents more as disorderly forces emanating 
from the unpredictable external non-human world or the world of the dead than as originating 
amongst the living contemporary fellow villagers and kin.” This observation helps to explain 
why Buddhism and the spirit cults remain two separate forces in play. Phi represent powers from 
an extra human supernatural plane of existence, and because their powers were not regarded as 
of human origins, their forces are, therefore, somewhat uncontrollable and require the exper­
tise of a specialized ritual practitioner. Because the actions of phi are unpredictable, they fall 
outside the Buddhist regime of karma, the inexorable principle of cause and effect. Since the 
powers of phi are regarded as phenomena operating outside the cause-and-effect expectations 
of karmic retribution, phi are not necessarily influenced or placated by the ethical behavior of 
human beings.9 Their power cannot be controlled through the moral power of karma. Rather, 
the expressions of their power are more a matter of caprice or, at best, ritual cajoling. Thus, 
the protective power of phi is more likely to be elicited through bargaining and bribes than by 
undertaking ethical action to please them. Or they may be cajoled not by the ethical power of 
karmic actions but by the superior magical power that is often associated with Buddhist Pāli 
mantras, Pāli inscribed amulets, and the like. The punishing power of phi is also just as likely to 
be elicited by neglect, by not showing proper respect for their jurisdiction than by unethical 
behavior in relation to other human beings.
Regarding how aspects of Buddhist religious culture have been interpreted through the prism 
of the phi cult, there are several examples that can be briefly noted. Every vat in Laos has a vat 
phi worshipped within the temple sermon hall. It is often none other than the original found­
ing abbot of the temple, akin in function and substance to a phi ban (village spirits who are 
often understood as the original inhabitants or “grandparents”10 of the village). Second, familial 
or national stūpas are almost always believed to be the abode of a jurisdictional phi. They are 
identified with ancestors of the family, or even with the spirit of the nation (as with the That 
Luang in Vientiane). And perhaps most controversial, the Prabang image of the Buddha, the 
image that functioned as the palladium for the Lao Lan Xang kingdom historically, was vested 
with the kind of power that would be analogous to a mandala phi. Its power could be elicited or 
activated in defense of the kingdom in times of threat. In each of these instances, the ontology 
of spirits can be seen in operation, an understanding of generative power that renders the ritual 
and material culture of Theravāda Buddhism within an alternative interpretive frame of refer­
ence11 but one, nonetheless, remaining of vital importance to Lao and Thai Theravāda Buddhists 
for whom an awareness of a boundary between Buddhism and spirit cults is largely missing.

--- PAGE 372 ---
Deities
351
Nats of Burmese Myanmar
Regarding yet another different conceptualization of the supernatural, nats are a category of 
supernatural beings that is quite eclectic, insofar as their types seem to overlap somewhat with 
devas or devatās in Sinhala Buddhist culture, and with the phi among the Thai-Lao. Some neak 
ta among the Khmer in Cambodia may also be classified as overlapping in this fashion. Nats 
are basically of three types. First, those that, like some phi, are forces associated with natural 
phenomena such as rivers, forests, or rice fields. These are clearly, like phi, jurisdictional and 
protective. Second, some nats very clearly resemble devas, some of them directly derived from 
Hindu culture, whose main function is to protect the Buddhasāsana and to assist devotees in 
their encounters with dukkha. A classic visual material expression of these devas is found atop 
the boundary walls protecting the famous thirteenth-century Shwezigon Pagoda in Pagan. The 
profile of these devas is similar to the “Buddhist Viṣṇu” of Sri Lanka. Third, nats known collec­
tively as the “37 nats” are potentially malevolent forces who have been provided with a mythic 
or quasi-historical biography that explains their transformations from human to supernatural 
(Spiro 1967, 42). The brief discussion that follows focuses on this third type; for, these are the 
most well-known and ubiquitous nats in Burmese culture, although few people are actually able 
to identify all of them and their enumeration varies from locale to locale, despite royal efforts 
in the eighteenth century to certify their identities in uniform fashion.
Because this type of nat is potentially dangerous, the “37 nats” are often objects of propitia­
tion. Before entering their jurisdictions, quiet and brief petitions are offered to mollify potential 
harmful outbreaks. Why these nats are bent toward violence and misfortune is suggested by 
accounts of their earlier human lives, when they were murdered, executed unjustly, or died 
in very unfortunate circumstances. It is their fury that is now channeled into aptitudes for 
malevolence, which can strike capriciously for the unsuspecting. It would seem difficult to relate 
them to positive religious virtues, especially because their cultic celebrations sometimes involve 
a license to transgress. Spiro (1967, 140–142) went so far as to describe the social behavior 
of devotees at nat festivals as “symbolic opposition to Buddhist values,” similar to festivals like 
Carnival in Christian contexts or holi in Hindu, types of ritual reversals in which a release from 
normative social repressions is expressed. But, in fact, there is a thoroughly Buddhist explana­
tion for the malignant behavior of these nats that most Burmese ascribe to since the quality 
of one’s consciousness is so crucial to the rebirth process (it is consciousness [P.: viññāṇa] that 
transmigrates from one birth to another), a violent death presages, or makes very much more 
likely, what becomes a very unfortunate and dangerous rebirth. In Cambodia, this kind of death 
is known as “dying in the street” in juxtaposition to “dying at home” (Holt 2017, 240–249). It 
is not uncommon in all Theravāda Buddhist religious cultures for family members and friends 
to assuage their dying loved ones in a manner that helps produce mental tranquility during 
the last moments of life. This is done in the belief that it will ensure smoother transitions to 
rebirth either in the human realm or in a supernatural afterlife. Here, Buddhist conceptuality 
(consciousness transmigrating) and indigenous conceptions of spirits have been wedded. The 
former explains the latter. And it indicates how Buddhist religious culture in Myanmar, as in 
Sinhala Buddhist Sri Lanka but not so much among the Lao Buddhists, functions as the means 
by which the supernatural can be explained. The “37 nats” died while their minds and disposi­
tions were terrified. They now live out the legacy of that trauma.
The cultic posture assumed in relation to these nats is therefore quite defensive or preven­
tative owing to their negative predilections. But they are also propitiated during virtually all 
life-cycle rites: at birth, at pabbajjā (monastic novice ordination), marriage, and death. They may 
also be venerated simply at different stages of the agricultural cycle. In each of these cases, a

--- PAGE 373 ---
John Clifford Holt
352
nat is formally addressed “to evoke assistance … or, more typically, to avoid his anger” (Spiro 
1967, 108). But there are also nat pwes, public ritual celebrations that involve singers and 
orchestras to perform music associated with a particular nat that tells of his tragic past and 
current powers. More important, shamanic ritual specialists are hired to become possessed 
by the nat and then express his will and expectations (Brac de la Perriere 1989). Festivals in 
honor of one of the “37 nats” may be local, regional, or national and are usually held on an 
annual basis. The most famous national annual festivals are held for the nat Min Mahagiri 
at Mount Popa southeast of Pagan and for the Taungbyon Brothers in Taungbyon north of 
Mandalay. For Burmese Theravāda Buddhists, the cultic celebration of nats is simply a neces­
sity, another means of controlling the forces produced by the karmic dynamics that swirl 
through samsaric existence.
Conclusion
These various patterns of supernatural conceptions within these Theravāda Buddhist cultures 
seem to have evolved on the basis of many historical and political factors. One is the degree to 
which Theravāda, the authorizing religion of kingship, was able to penetrate the grassroots level 
of religious culture in villages and in peripheral realms of respective kingdoms. For example, 
Laos itself has always been an especially remote region of Southeast Asia where Theravāda did 
not arrive with any force at the grassroots level until at least the sixteenth century, less than five 
hundred years ago. By comparison, Buddhism has been present in Sri Lanka and Myanmar for 
more than two millennia. Moreover, the comparative weakness of Lao’s royal political regimes 
to exercise cultural hegemony in relation to peripheral regions beyond its capitals made village 
populations much less likely to be aware of, or conform to, the orthodoxy and orthopraxy of 
Theravāda or to adopt exclusively a Theravāda epistemic regime. Instead, they remained, as they 
have to this day, thoroughly subsumed in a worldview in which phi remain active powers in 
their daily lives that require careful attention and respect (Holt 2009, 232–258). A related factor 
may be attributed to the more intensive types of Hindu cultural migrations that occurred in 
Sri Lanka, Myanmar, and Angkor, whereby Hindu cults were thoroughly transmitted and took 
root before being transformed and assimilated under the canopy of Theravāda conceptuality.
Notes
	 1	It is also actually more common to hear religious people in these national or cultural contexts refer to their 
religion as Sinhala Buddhism, Burmese Buddhism, Thai Buddhism, Lao Buddhism or Khmer Buddhism, 
and so on rather than to Theravāda per se (Holt 2017, 3–4).
	 2	Perhaps the most visible legacy of Hindu deva presence through assimilation is the manner in which 
the kings of Bangkok’s Chakri dynasty are enumerated as Rama, the current being designated as avatar 
number 10.
	 3	See Article 9 of Sri Lanka’s current constitution and its extensive discussion in Schonthal (2016).
	 4	In other regions of Thailand, especially Central Thailand, and even in the Northeast, there is now a pattern 
of placing an image resembling the Hindu deity Brahma within spirit houses.
	 5	In some ways, the cult of Nang Thoranee, although not a phi per se, functions as a protective cult for the 
Buddhasāsana, functionally akin to Viṣṇu’s role in Sri Lanka.
	 6	Harris also agrees: “[T]he phiban [village deities of Laos] are geographically more specific and functionally 
less well-defined” (Harris 2005: 257; brackets mine). Indeed, the fact that they are more “geographically 
specific” is a key insight in recognizing their archaic yet continuing function for Lao religious culture.
	 7	Condominas (1973: 272) also saw the relationship in this very same way: “this common religious core [of 
the spirit cults] has been penetrated only superficially by exogenous world religions, and has been less than 
profoundly affected by other cultural elements taken over seemingly in toto by the peoples of Southeast 
Asia” (brackets mine).

--- PAGE 374 ---
Deities
353
	 8	The art historian Robert De Caroli (2004) has also recently argued cogently that the rise of Buddhism, 
at least insofar as it can be understood through a study of sculpture and popular literature (especially the 
jātakas), needs to be understood within the context of a religious culture dominated by spirit cults.
	 9	Davis (2016) does not find this true in contemporary Cambodia, where the ability of Buddhist monks 
to bind the wild and dangerous power of spirits depends on their moral bases of power, what he calls 
“Deathpower.”
	10	This attribution may signal the residual presence of ancestor veneration present within the substratum of 
religious culture throughout Southeast Asia.
	11	For a full discussion of these phenomena, see Holt (2009, 46–53 and 250–258).
References
Ang, Cholean. 1988. “The Place of Animism Within Popular Buddhism in Cambodia: The Example of the 
Monastery.” Asian Folklore Studies 47: 35–41.
Brac de la Perriere, Benedicte. 1989. Les rituels de possession en Birmanie: du culte d’état aux cérémonies priveés. 
Paris: Éditions Recherche sur les Civilisations.
Condominas, Georges. 1973. “Phiban Cults in Rural Laos.” In Change and Persistence in Thai Society, eds. 
William Skinner, A. Thomas Kirsh, 252–273. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Davis, Erik. 2016. Deathpower: Buddhism’s Ritual Imagination in Cambodia. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
De Caroli, Robert. 2004. Haunting the Buddha. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eberhardt, Nancy. 2006. Imagining the Course of Life: Self-transformation in a Shan Buddhist Community. 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Ebihara, May. 1968. “Sway, a Khmer Village in Cambodia.” Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University.
Gombrich, Richard. 1971. Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural Highlands of Ceylon. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.
Gombrich, Richard, Gananath Obeyesekere. 1988. Buddhism Transformed: Religious Change in Sri Lanka. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Harris, Ian. 2005. Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Holt, John Clifford, ed., and U.P. Meddegama, trans. 1993. The Anāgatavaṃsa Desanā: The Sermon of the 
Chronicle-to-be. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Holt, John Clifford 1991. Buddha in the Crown: Avalokiteśvara in the Buddhist Traditions of Sri Lanka. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Holt, John Clifford. 2003. The Buddhist Viṣṇu: Religious Transformation, Politics and Culture. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Holt, John Clifford. 2009. Spirits of the Place: Buddhism and Lao Religious Culture. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai‘i Press.
Holt, John Clifford. 2017. Theravāda Traditions: Buddhist Ritual Cultures in Contemporary Southeast Asia and Sri 
Lanka. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Kapferer, Bruce. 1983. A Celebration of Demons. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Mahāvaṃsa or the Great Chronicle of Ceylon. 1950 Trans, and ed. Wilhem Geiger. Colombo: Ceylon 
Government Department of Information; originally published by the Pali Text Society in London, 
1912.
Masefield, Peter. 1986. Divine Revelation in Pali Buddhism. Boston: George Allen and Unwin.
McDaniel, Justin. 2011. The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: Practicing Buddhism in Modern Thailand. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Mus, Paul. 1975. “India Seen from the East. Trans. from the French by I.W. Mabbett, ed. I.W. Mabbett and 
D.P. Chandler. Monash: Monash University Centre of Southeast Asian Studies; originally published 
as “Cultes indiens et indigenes au Champa”.” Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 33 (1933): 
367–410.
Obeyesekere, Gananath. 1983. The Cult of the Goddess Pattini. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Padma, Sree. 2019. “Are Satara Varan Devi Sinhala Buddhist Deities? Vibishana, a Case Study.” In Sagar 
(South Asia Institute, University of Texas at Austin), 26: 92–119.
Poree-Maspero, Eveline. 1951. “Le ceremonie de l’appel des esperits vitaux chez les cambodgiens.” Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 45 (1): 145–183.
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2016. Buddhism, Politics and the Limits of Law: The Pyrrhic Constitutionalism of Sri Lanka. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

--- PAGE 375 ---
John Clifford Holt
354
Spiro, Melford. 1967. Burmese Supernaturalism. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Strong, John. 2004. Relics of the Buddha. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tambiah, S.J. 1970. Buddhism and the Spirit Cults of Northeast Thailand. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Thompson, Ashley. 1996. The Calling of the Souls: A Study of the Khmer Ritual Hau Bralin. Clayton, Australia: 
Monash University Centre of Southeast Asian Studies.
Zucker, Eve. 2013. Forest of Struggle: Moralities of Remembrance in Upland Cambodia. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press.

--- PAGE 376 ---
355
DOI: 10.4324/9781351026666-28
23
MONS
Creating a narrative of the origins of Theravāda
Patrick McCormick
Constructing an image: Mons in Southeast Asia
Seeing “the Mons” as a people of Theravāda Buddhism, as the first Theravāda Buddhist civiliza­
tion of Burma and Southeast Asia, or as the people who brought Theravāda Buddhism to the 
rest of Southeast Asia is to recast an ambiguous, contingent past through a series of “modern,” 
colonial-era practices of creating knowledge and the ensuing categories. Each of these terms, 
the Mons, Theravāda, Buddhism, Burma, and Southeast Asia, is a historically contingent product 
of modernity with little depth beyond 150 years and are not simply natural given categories 
of thought. A British technology of governance, the classification of the peoples of the newly 
conquered colony of Burma by language, led to the creation of “races” based in the new colony. 
Colonial conquest imposed definite borders on the new colony and thus created another 
new subject. At the same time, a similar mania for classification, this time situated in a wider 
European conversation on “religion,” created new religions and religious categories, including 
“Hinduism” and “Buddhism,” the latter further divided into “Theravāda” and “Mahāyāna,” 
among others.
Each of these new subjects became objects of study, sites of history (the bound territories in 
which history occurred) or agents in history (racialized actors), and subject to further processes 
inherent in the logic of their emergence. Race emerged out of Romantic nationalism, which 
associates each race with its own history, territory, language, culture, and sometimes religion. 
One of the primary concerns of “history” in this context, whether of a race or of territory 
delimited as a kingdom, colony, or country, is to establish origins, or the point in time when 
that race or territory “emerged” into history in the shape it has today.
The British created nothing out of whole cloth. The British (who themselves in the nine­
teenth century were a recently emerged subject) did not arrive on the scene and conjure subject 
races out of thin air, nor was it they who sowed dissent among those races and subjects where 
only harmony across difference had existed before. Rather, the British usurped local preroga­
tives to write and interpret local pasts. In Burma—even if renamed Myanmar, it is still the 
same colonial-defined construction—local scholars and intellectuals have largely come to accept 
those British terms and practices, in particular the reorganization of language, culture, and dif­
ference under the boundaries of “race” (rechristened “ethnicity” during the twentieth century), 
and the reconfiguration of history as the search for origins. Origins, in this sense, points to the

--- PAGE 377 ---
Patrick McCormick
356
moment when a race—a racial subject—emerged as an actor in a historical narrative, usually 
the narrative of the origins of a kingdom or country. In the process of adopting these practices 
and categories, local scholars and intellectuals have taken forward a central concern of preco­
lonial historiography, the lineage of the sāsana (now reconfigured as “Theravāda Buddhism”; 
Skilling et al. 2012), and the connection of local kingdoms and rulers to the sāsana, whether 
as patrons, purifiers, or as descendants of supra-local patrons and purifiers located elsewhere in 
(what we now call the Theravāda) Buddhist cosmopolis (Pollock 2006; Goh 2014). Today, the 
intellectuals of one of those newly emerged races, the Mons, have come to understand and 
define themselves through an assertion (“the Mons have the first Theravāda Buddhist civiliza­
tion of Burma and Southeast Asia”) that is couched in colonial and postcolonial terms, each 
an interpretation and rearticulation of local experiences.
Spatial constraints allow me to explore just one aspect of this conjuncture: how the associa­
tion between Mon and Theravāda came to hold definitional importance to Mon intellectuals 
in their projects of writing and interpreting their own history. Tracing this process involves 
crossing unexpected territory, at least if the traveler is following the premises of race or ethnic­
ity: modern stories of Mon origins are deeply intertwined with Burmese-language sources, not 
only to the origins of “Burma” but also, disconcertingly, with the country now called Thailand. 
Even if the story of Mon origins as local scholars and intellectuals create and retell it finds its 
own origins in the emergence of British categories and practices, that story remains only loosely 
connected to ongoing conversations taking place largely outside the country about archaeology, 
race, or ethnicity and “Theravāda” among cosmopolitan scholars.1
Cosmopolitan scholars and the search for Mon origins
Despite decades of studying nationalism and deconstructing ethnicity, such heuristic terms as the 
Mon remain in common use. Inherent in an ethnonym is the idea of a coherent people who 
have their origins in a particular time and place. It is not clear that the cosmopolitan “scholarly 
gaze” treats this association with the reservation it deserves: Robbins Burling, an anthropologist 
and linguist who worked extensively in Southeast Asia and Northeast India, has pointed to the 
absurdity of asking, for example, “When did ‘the French’ begin?” Yet questions of origins have 
become so naturalized in the study of Southeast Asia that cosmopolitan scholars rarely question 
it. Local scholars have taken up the quest for them with great seriousness (Burling 2012: 49–62). 
The origins of the Mons are intertwined with the spread of “Theravāda” Buddhism to a region 
now called “mainland Southeast Asia” through Mon intermediaries. Local scholars see Theravāda 
Buddhism as the purest and best form of Buddhism, and they take great pride in this association. 
The corollary is a suspicion of and hostility toward any attempts to untangle or historicize what 
are, after all, terms situated in a recently emerged discourse, here, “the Mons” and “Theravāda.”
Nevertheless, the origins remain a compelling question. Where did the Mon come from, or 
said another way, when did the Mons first appear? Archaeological, art historical, and linguistic 
evidence serves to answer such questions. For most of the ancient peoples of Southeast Asia, 
this evidence includes inscriptions and various physical artifacts, especially temples and shrines. 
Scholars see the sixth century ce as the starting point of Mon civilization, which was when 
the first inscriptions in the earliest form of the Mon language appeared in what is now Central 
Thailand, at the same time that inscriptions in Khmer appeared a bit farther east. These Old 
Mon inscriptions are associated with such religious objects as votive tablets or “Buddhist seal­
ings” and dharmacakras or “wheels of the law” (Skilling 2019). Such objects render the Mon 
past legible and so seemingly mark the emergence of the Mons into history and therefore the 
Mon people (Brown 1996).

--- PAGE 378 ---
Mons
357
Of crucial importance here is an equation so naturalized as to be self-evident and unre­
marked, at least in English-language scholarship: language is equated with ethnicity, so evi­
dence of a language is taken as evidence of an ethnicity, usually in the sense of indicating 
the ancestors of a group existing today (McAuliffe 2017). To historicize this association, 
consider whether the appearance of (Classical) Latin inscriptions in Spain would be taken 
as evidence of “the Spanish” there. Many take the appearance of a language as evidence for 
ethnic emergence.
Earlier generations of cosmopolitan scholars, most prominently French archaeologist and 
historian Georges Cœdès, built a narrative of the “Indianization” of Southeast Asia based on 
how Mon- and Khmer-language inscriptions appear in close association with artifacts bearing 
clear Indic connections (Cœdès 1968). Mon-language inscriptions appear with Pāli-language 
inscriptions, suggesting a “Theravāda Buddhist cosmopolis” (Pollock 2006; Thompson 2016). 
As a result, there has emerged the idea that the Mons were the first Theravāda Buddhists of 
mainland Southeast Asia, who were responsible for transmitting Theravāda Buddhism to the 
rest of the region. That same early generation of scholars thought that the linguistic and art-
historical evidence also indicated an entire cultural complex, which they associated with an 
empire, called Dvāravatı̄. Cœdès and Quaritch Wales were some of the first to write about 
Dvāravatı̄ in these terms (Wales 1969). Perhaps physical and linguistic proximity between the 
Khmers and the Mons led many to assume that the Dvāravatı̄ was the same kind of entity as 
the Khmer or Angkor “empire.”2
Around the turn of the second millennium ce, our story of the Mons becomes more com­
plicated. Mon language inscriptions and artifacts continue to appear until about the thirteenth 
century throughout what are now the Central, North, and Northeast regions of Thailand and 
even over into what is now Laos. Sometime in the tenth to eleventh centuries ce, art and 
architectural styles, which the highly influential British scholar G.H. Luce attributed to the 
Mons, start to appear in Pagan in the form of Buddhist temples. Mon- and Burmese-language 
inscriptions appear at about the same time in the eleventh century.
In recent years, cosmopolitan scholars have begun the important work of revisiting the 
foundational interpretative work of the early founders of modern, high-colonial Burmese 
historiography, attempting to move historiographical conversations into the postcolonial. 
Michael Aung-Thwin (2005), for example, questions many of the ethnic attributions and 
associations that Luce and others claimed and which have become set in proverbial stone. 
From a linguistic perspective, Pagan falls considerably to the west, both of all earlier Mon-
related finds and, more generally, from the center of gravity of most of the Austroasiatic 
languages, the family to which Mon belongs. The usual reading of such geographical disper­
sion has simply been that the Mons had a wide-ranging presence. Another reading is that 
local peoples (here, the people of Pagan) associated the Mon language and cultural forms 
with the prestige and power of Buddhism and expressed themselves through that trans-local 
medium with the assistance of experts invited there.3 Luce saw Pagan as the beginning of 
Burma—ancient in its lineage, new in its conception—so Pagan was the locus of the emer­
gence of the Burmese language, people, and culture. That emergence was predicated upon 
the presence of the Mons and Theravāda Buddhism at that founding. Pagan thus establishes 
the prestige of Burma as a particular inheritor of the Theravāda tradition. Even if similar 
Theravādin practices or lineages stand behind other countries, such as Thailand or Cambodia, 
the lineage of Burma is thus one of the most ancient. As I explore in the following, the 
cosmopolitan concern with Theravāda and Burma is—wittingly or not—caught up in the 
discourse of legitimation, precedence, and a narrative of purity, many of the same concerns 
of local precolonial historiographies.

--- PAGE 379 ---
Patrick McCormick
358
Local historiographies of “origins” before the colonial encounter
This cosmopolitan narrative is not anything like that found in local historiographies before 
the colonial era, in the sense that local historiographies were not concerned with origins or 
the various subjects that emerged in the colonial moment: the Mons, the Burmese, Theravāda 
Buddhism, and Burma. In a grammatical sense, none of those terms occur in the subject posi­
tion. Rather, local narratives concerned the lineage of the sāsana (a preconfiguration of the 
latter-day “Theravāda Buddhism”) of the “Mon lands,” with latter polities in the place that 
became Burma. We must first, however, deal with the tricky nature of local sources and fraught 
questions of textual lineage, the former of vital interest to the “proper” practice of history, 
and the latter often a fetish of historian and Pāli scholar alike. Before briefly reviewing the 
development of a particular narrative as a way to understand local historiographies, however, 
we must deal with the tricky nature of local sources. The quest to recover a precolonial local 
historiography—at least one based solely on Mon-language sources, taken as representative of  
“Mon historiography”—involves questions of “authenticity,” transmission across languages, and 
complex, interdependent textual lineages.
A common expectation is that the Mon past will have come down to the present in 
the Mon language through ancient Mon texts written in “Monland,” understood as a sort 
of kingdom-empire in what is today Lower Burma. The preponderance of history-related 
texts in the Mon language is extant in the form of a two-volume book, the Rājāvaṁsa 
Kathā, printed in the Mon community of Pak Lat in Siam in the early twentieth century 
(Candakanta 1912). In other words, the “primary” texts of “Mon history” are artifacts of 
modernity.4 Based on linguistic evidence, the component texts of the Rājāvaṁsa Kathā were 
partly composed around the time of printing, while other sections were taken from written 
predecessors, either in Mon or Thai (McCormick 2011a, 2011b). No manuscript of any of 
the component texts are extant in Burma or Thailand today in the exact form as in the 
Rājāvaṁsa Kathā. A lack of exact antecedents, however, reflects not the inauthenticity or 
unreliability of the Rājāvaṁsa Kathā but, rather, reminds us of the extent to which textual 
lineages—even those of religious texts in a classical language like Sanskrit or Pāli—also 
incorporate change, “improvements,” even oral elements, with each inscription (McCormick 
2010; Veidlinger 2006).
Mon-language accounts
I consider a few “retellings” of one of the earliest narratives concerning the people we think of 
as Mons from a local perspective. I use the term retelling because it suggests but one iteration 
of a narrative, without the specter of degradation from a pure “original” inherent in the term 
“version.” The first I consider is perhaps not the oldest, but it is the retelling that has served as 
a site of elaboration over the centuries.
The first retelling is but a brief blurb in the Kalyāṇı̄ Inscriptions erected between 1476 
and 1478 to record King Dhammacetı̄’s purification of the local sāsana in his kingdom of 
Haṁsāvatı̄, or Pegu/Bago.5 The stone plaques, written in Pāli, commemorate the purifica­
tion and describe why Dhammacetı̄ sent local monks to Laṅkā to be reordained in the more 
orthodox Mahāvihāra tradition there. The inscriptions start with earlier examples of monarchs 
undertaking purifications of the sāsana, such as King As´oka. After the narrative of the trip to 
Laṅkā, the text concerns details of the new ordination ritual.
The incident of interest falls towards the very beginning of the inscriptions in a section 
outlining the history of the sāsana in and around Haṁsāvatı̄. The text speaks of its arrival in

--- PAGE 380 ---
Mons
359
“Rāmañña lands.” I offer my translation of a recent Mon-language text, Nāy Indaka’s Prakuih 
Trāy Lik TmaɁ Kalyāṇ ı̄ (Nissaya Treatise on the Kalyāṇ ı̄ Inscriptions):6
When Manuhaw [Manuhā] or Sūriyakumā, also called Smiṁ Upārājā, ruled, the 
Rāmañña lands truly had little power. It is the truth [that it happened] 1600 years from 
the time that the Noble Buddha entered nibbāna.
After a long time, after three ages had passed, the vast Rāmañña lands were destroyed 
and split through the looting and stealing of thieves and dacoits. It came about that 
the soldiers of seven smiṁ brought to straitened circumstances the noble sāsana in the 
Rāmañña lands, which had become weak through eruptions of skin diseases, destruc­
tive floods, hunger and starvation. Because of this weakness, the monks and clergy 
living in the Rāmañña lands were not able to practice fully the sāsana [nor maintain] 
the pariyatti or piṭika in peace.
In 1600, or 419 [1057 ce] in the local system, after three ages, King Anawrahta, who 
had power over the country of Bakāṁ [Pagan], also called Arimaddana, arranged for a 
group of monks and clergy, together with the three piṭika, to be brought and have them 
preach in Arimaddana, also called Bakāṁ.
(Indaka 131, translation by author)
This section of the narrative continues that over a hundred years later, the king of Pagan visits 
Laṅkā in the company of a novice from Rāmañña lands, where they conduct another ordination 
ritual before eventually returning to Pagan. The narrative speaks of transmission of teachings 
between various places—Pagan, Laṅkā, and Rāmañña lands—and the ordination lineages con­
necting them through individuals. It also fixes the connection between Rāmañña lands and 
the sāsana at an early date, around the end of the first millennium ce.
We can pause to note carefully what terms the passage does and does not speak in. The 
passage speaks of leaders in the polysemous term <SMIṀ>, which can signify a “king” in the 
European sense, down through a local leader or warlord, just as does its Burmese-language 
analogue mìn. Nor does the Mon text speak of “kingdoms,” “Buddhism,” “Burma,” or 
“Monland.” Rather, it speaks of place and land: <TWUIW RAḤ GLAḤ TI RĀMAÑÑA>, 
“Rāmañña area (and) land,” and <ṬHĀN TWUIW RAḤ GLAḤ TI RĀMAÑÑA>, 
“Rāmañña place, area, (and) land.” The term Rāmañña is a “Pālicization” of the native Old 
Mon term for “Mon,” written <RMEÑÑ>.7 These two phrases are equivalent to the better 
known Pāli term Rāmaññadesa, which many have taken as a political entity equivalent to 
Dvāravatı̄ or Angkor rather than the “land(s) of the Rāmañña” which the native expression 
encompasses.
Burmese-language accounts
Burmese language sources continue the narrative in a much-expanded form. The last line of the 
above rendering is of particular interest: up to that point, the sāsana had become well established 
in the Rāmañña lands, suggesting that in those lands were both orthodoxy (correct texts and 
views) and orthopraxy (correct practices). Then the sāsana weakens. This last line suggests that 
the sāsana, or at least the canon in the form of the piṭaka, and members of the saṅgha or clergy, 
went from the Rāmañña lands up to Pagan. This one line became ever more elaborated, ever 
more vivid in detail: retellings appear in Burmese-language court-sponsored histories several 
centuries later, including U Kalà’s Mahā Yāzawin Gyì, compiled in 1730; Twìnthìn Myanmā 
Yāzawin Thit, eighteenth century; and the Hmannàn Mahā Yāzawindaw Gyì, compiled in 1829.8

--- PAGE 381 ---
Patrick McCormick
360
Histories of the sāsana, including the Thāthanālinkāra Sādàn (late eighteenth century) and U 
Pyinnyāthāmi’s Thāthanawunthá (mid-nineteenth century),9 also retell these events. Suffice it 
to say that there is a high degree of intertextuality among these retellings. The reigning king 
would order the yāzawin (often glossed as “court chronicles”) to be updated, and so a commit­
tee of scholars would consult older sources to compose a “new” chronicle, at times including 
texts or narratives from other languages.
The eighteenth-century context of the retelling in the Mahā Yāzawin Gyì differs from that of 
the fifteenth-century Kalyāṇı̄ Inscriptions.10 Now, Anawrahta Mìn Zàw of Pagan is in conversa­
tion with Shin Arahan, a monk advising him on how to encourage the sāsana to flourish in his 
kingdom. Shin Arahan observes that Anawrahta does not have the piṭaka or any Buddha relics 
but that he can ask for them from Thaton, a country that does. Anawrahta prepares suitable 
gifts and sends them down to make a request. Manuhā, king of Thaton, becomes exceedingly 
angry on hearing the request and refuses. Anawrahta himself becomes angry and decides to 
attack Thaton:
Anawyahta called together all the war heroes in the country, and sent forth land and 
water forces, including 800,000 ships and a million soldiers. Included in the land 
forces were the four great warriors Kyanzitthà, Nga Htwèi Yù, Nga Lòun Let Hpe, 
and Nyaung Ù Hpì, who were sent to the front line. They set off with Anawyahta 
holding the rear. The land forces consisted of 800,000 elephants, 800,000 horses, and 
eight million soldiers. The boats had not even finished setting off from Pokkarāma 
[Pagan] when the front of the forces reached Pegu [close to Thaton], nor had the 
rear land forces finished leaving Pokkarāma when the front reached the outer vil­
lages of Thaton.
(U Kalà 1962: 20, translation by author)
Despite their overwhelming size, Anawrahta’s forces cannot gain victory because Manuhā has 
used “magic”11 to protect the city. After they dispose of the cut-up body parts used in the 
magic, Anawrahta’s forces are victorious. Anawrahta takes possession of Manuhā, his children, 
wife, and courtiers and loads the “bejewelled relics which the line of kings of Thaton had 
worshipped” and the piṭaka on the backs of thirty-two white elephants to carry them back to 
Pagan. A lengthy description of various groups of artisans and specialists of Thaton follows, 
including makers of canon and guns. He enshrines the relics, places the piṭaka in a bejeweled 
prasāda (a sort of pavilion) and has the saṅgha preach.
Out of the merest mention of texts and monks being brought to Pagan has grown an 
account of full-on attack ending in the total vanquishing of Thaton and its civilizational 
accomplishments. This retelling reflects the contemporary environment: not only have artisans 
been arranged into groups, not a feature of Pagan-era social organization, but we also hear of 
gun- and canon-makers.
Continuities nevertheless do run through the retellings separated by over two hundred 
years: the narratives are premised on what today would be called “Buddhist cosmology” or take 
place in a universe in which events reflect karma and the teachings of the Dharma. The Mahā 
Yāzawin Gyì speaks in a Burmese Buddhist vocabulary of power: hpòun, “power, glory, influ­
ence”; dagò, “power, potency”; and the Pāli loanword anúbaw, “dignity, power, magnificence.”12 
Key here is an understanding of Manuhā’s defeat as the result of his karma, since his use of 
magic suggests either a desperate ploy to prop up waning power or was a karmic consequence 
of the magic, which involved dismemberment.

--- PAGE 382 ---
Mons
361
Narratives in circulation: colonial-era Mon texts
A brief look at two retellings from the texts of the Rājāvaṁsa Kathā reveal how these narra­
tives are in conversation with Burmese-language retellings. The first appears in the Uppanna 
Sudhammavat ı̄ (Arising of Sudhammavat ı̄) text of the Rājāvaṁsa Kathā.13 At the end of the text 
appears the following:
When Smiṁ Manuhaw reigned, he had as his queen Naṅgaladevı̄, daughter of the 
smiṁ of Pachālaraḥ. Smiṁ Manuhaw was master of thirty white elephants, and of a rat-
eggplant drum. All the smiṁ in his line had been glorious owners of this drum. During 
his reign, Nuratā Jaw [Anawrahta Mìn Zàw]14 rose to power in Bakāṁ and heard tell 
that Manuhaw’s line was no more. He came down and surrounded Sadhuim [Thaton], 
then brought back Manuhaw, monarch of Sadhuim. Thenceforth the fifty-seven suc­
cessions in the line of Sadhuim were broken off.
(Candakanta 1912: 25, translation by author)
The details may differ yet again, but the story operates in the same universe, as the symbols of 
karmic accumulation in the form of the white elephants and the unidentified “rat-eggplant” 
drum indicate. This retelling gives little detail of violence, although it clearly has occurred. In 
fact, the text does not explicitly mention either texts or monks being taken to Pagan.
The second retelling is similarly short, found this time in the far lengthier text concerning 
the ruler Rājādhirāj, a ruler, military, and culture hero whose story has been retold over the 
centuries in Mon, Burmese, and Thai:15
Smiṁ Manuhaw, Lord of Thirty-Three White elephants and Smiṁ Nawrathā Maṅ Jaw, 
Lord of Sixteen White Elephants, became kalyāṇamitta16 under a eugenia tree named 
Jammarukho and swore an oath [of friendship] before Indra. Later there was a war 
attacking Sadhuiṁ. Smiṁ Manuhaw sent a royal letter to Nawrathā Maṅ Jaw, who sent 
down four brave soldiers to help in the fight. When they won, Smiṁ Manuhaw sent a 
woman up [to Pagan] to give to Nawrathā Maṅ Jaw.
(Candakanta 1912: 310)
Here is a radically different depiction of relations, couched less in terms of location and more as 
two rulers, who have formed a bond of friendship with each other. There is a war not between 
the two named rulers but with an outside force (from the context, the Krom or Khmers). 
This retelling also makes no mention of texts or monks. The exchange of a “woman”—likely 
a princess—is ambiguous: she may represent an act of reciprocity, with Manuhā thanking 
Anawrahta for his help, or she may be an indication of subordination, in that the exchange of 
royal daughters is often an act of fealty in Southeast Asia.
This second retelling highlights the complex layering of chronology in dealing with this 
narrative. The Kalyāṇı̄ Inscriptions themselves were put up in the late fifteenth century but 
record events (at least the events related to the Rāmañña lands and Pagan) from the middle of 
the eleventh century ce. The retelling from the Rājādhirāj narrative occurs in the context of 
Rājādhirāj, leader of Haṁsāvatı̄ in the mid-fourteenth century, dealing with a diplomatic crisis. 
He has received a provoking letter from Min Gaung (r. 1400–1421), leader of Ava or Inwa 
(1364–1555) and is considering how to respond. One of his advisors cites what had happened 
between Anawrahta and Manuhā as a possible model for action. To reiterate, the actual site 
of recording of the retelling, the Rājāvaṁsa Kathā, comes from early twentieth-century Siam.

--- PAGE 383 ---
Patrick McCormick
362
The plurality of the retellings suggests a fluid narrative, only loosely interconnected, each 
liable to change according to contemporaneous circumstances, including political and religious 
interests.
A new normativity: British creations of national pasts
Beginning with the first Anglo-Burmese war in 1824 through to the end of colonial control 
in 1948, the British wrought profound changes in the conception and practice of history. With 
each successive war, culminating in the takeover of the rump Konbaung dynasty in Mandalay in 
1885, the British wrested ever-greater control over the writing of history out of the hands of 
locals. The courts were displaced as the site of the production and interpretation of local pasts. 
Similarly, the role of monasteries as a site of production of religious histories also waned. Instead, 
the desks of a handful of British scholars and administrator-scholars became the preeminent site 
of Burmese historiography. These figures include Arthur Purves Phayre (1812–1885), Godfrey 
Eric Harvey (1889–1946), John Sydenham Furnivall (1878–1960), Gordon Hannington Luce 
(1889–1979), and Daniel George Edward Hall (1891–1979).17 The latter two were instrumental 
in developing the study of history at places like the newly established Rangoon University, 
founded in 1878. The move also marked a professionalization of history, which became a sub­
ject of academic inquiry that Burmese could now study and receive degrees in. The rise of 
the university under colonial rule also meant that English became the preeminent language of 
intellectual life in the colony, and even in historical research, retains that position to this day, 
at least in terms of the salience of English-language interpretation.
History itself was an emerging field of inquiry in Britain and Europe in the nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries and was deeply imbricated in emergent nationalist discourses. The 
language of history was inflected with the vocabulary of races (later developing into “ethnici­
ties” in the English-speaking world), nations, and territories. Scholars in Europe were writing 
new kinds of histories, one which often sought to establish the ideal of one “nation,” “race,” or 
“people” sharing one language, one culture, one territory, and therefore one past. These new 
histories reflected an ideological shift—at least in western Europe—away from the political 
formation of the empire, with its mismatch between languages, peoples, territories, and pasts, 
towards the seemingly rational, unified nation-state.
British historians sought to create a “national” history for the new territory, albeit one 
contingent on British colonial control. This new national history involved the creation of new 
historical subjects and actors: first “Burma” itself, as a coherent and territorially demarcated site 
for history. This new “Burma” displaced the looser, expanding and contracting maṇḍala-based 
histories from before the colonial period (Wolters 1997). These scholars also spoke in terms of 
new “national” subjects not only in the sense of anyone from the colony but also more nar­
rowly in the sense of coherent, bounded, exclusive, unified “races” who shared the same past 
(even if, as in many cases, that past had yet to be discovered). These new racial subjects were 
the Burmans, Mons, and Pyus, and over time, all the other 135 “national races” emerged, with 
more continuing to make claims for recognition. Thus, also emerged racial history—the history 
of each race, confined to a delineated territory, whether a kingdom or a colony.
To return to the narrative of Thaton and Pagan, under the British, the events were further 
reworked, being placed in a European historiographical frameworks and emergent religious 
categorizations. The British gave the events a title, the “Sack of Thaton,” with sack recalling 
the successive attacks on Rome by Germanic barbarians, a trope familiar from British classical 
education and here fitting nicely with a British view of “the Burmese” as warlike, late-coming 
Romans to “the Mons” as early bearers of religion and culture, who were thought weak. Luce

--- PAGE 384 ---
Mons
363
and his local interlocutor Pe Maung Tin published a partial translation of the Hmannàn Mahā 
Yāzawindaw Gyì (itself based largely on U Kalà’s Mahā Yāzawin Gyì) as the Glass Palace Chronicles 
in 1923. D. G. E. Hall, whose influence is still strong both inside and outside the country, wrote 
in 1950 an interpretation of the events, seeing them as seminal:
Directed by Shin Arahan, Mon monks spread far and wide the doctrine of Hinayana 
Buddhism. Pali, the language of the Tripitakas, became the sacred language of the 
Burmese. The Mon alphabet was adopted, and Burmese became for the first time a 
written, not merely a spoken language.
The conquest of Thaton in 1057 was a decisive event in Burmese history. It brought 
the Burman into direct contact with the Indian civilizing influences in the south and 
opened the way for intercourse with Buddhist centres overseas, especially Ceylon. The 
possession of the Pali scriptures revolutionized his outlook: they supplied him ‘ready-
made, with a complete mental outfit’ (Luce). They introduced him to the Buddhist 
ethic, which, as monasteries and teachers multiplied throughout the land, began to 
exert its moral force, to restrain his more barbarous impulses, and to liberate him from 
the worst of his animistic practices. 18
(Hall 1950: 16)
Here Hall speaks in racial categories, with races as subjects, in striking distinction to their 
absence in precolonial narratives. Racial thinking of the nineteenth and early twentieth centu­
ries reflected social Darwinism, embodied in the notion of “national characters.” In the colonial 
context, these characters marked the degree of civilization of a race and what they were fit 
for (soldiers, farmers, businessmen) or whether they could be granted independence. Equally 
important is that Hall speaks not in terms of sāsana or even religion but specifically of Hı̄nayāna 
Buddhism and its fitness for the people of Pagan. The larger cosmopolitan historiographical 
context of Hall’s comment is that local sources speak of “heretical” practices at Pagan, which 
cosmopolitan scholars have tentatively identified as “Mahāyāna.” The possibility of British and 
European approval of (rational, Protestant-like) Theravāda in contrast to (irrational, Hindu-
inflected, Papist-like) Mahāyāna inflecting that line of cosmopolitan interpretation must be 
put aside for another occasion.
What quickly followed was that local scholars themselves adopting these British ideas and 
interpretations and began to reconceptualize local histories in their light. Through English-
language publications, often in the form of school textbooks, this new kind of history spread 
throughout society. One typical example is that of the work of Ba Shin, a leading figure in 
Burmese historiography during the twentieth century, offers a typical interpretation of the Sack 
of Thaton in his History of the Union of Burma, written in 1953:
The Myanmā of Pagan, in addition to their own natural law which was their own orig­
inal belief system, also believed in nat worship. They accepted and believed Hı̄nayāna, 
or Southern Buddhism, which the Pyu in Thamaya had followed; and Northern 
Buddhism, called Mahāyāna, which came into Burma from the north and had become 
changed and corrupted. Such a corrupt belief system would not have been satisfying 
for the developed Myanmā people. Therefore, Anawrahta, as leader of an advanced 
people, looked for a more suitable and proper belief system. At the time of his search, 
a Mahā Thera named Shin Arahan had arrived in Pagan from Thaton to proselytize. In 
Thaton prospered Southern Buddhism, which was purer than the Buddhism of Pagan. 
(Bo Ba Shin 1953: 43–44)19

--- PAGE 385 ---
Patrick McCormick
364
Ba Shin’s take on the Burmans (here called by their more formal name, “Myanmā”) is more 
flattering than those of Hall or Harvey, but he ends up telling a similar story couched in 
similar terms: the Sack of Thaton was a civilizing moment, a foundational moment if not 
the very beginning of Burma as reconceived of as the preeminent site of the Burman or 
Myanmā people. Both “the Mons” and “the Burmans” were present and participated at that 
foundation, albeit in unequal roles. The terms in which he sees Hı̄nayāna and Mahāyāna 
are clear, with Mahāyāna decidedly inferior. Ba Shin also makes reference to yet another 
emergent categorization of religion, “nat worship” (although not stated but understood as 
“animism”). Local historiographies had taken up the banner of Theravāda and promoted 
it with vigor.
As a foundational moment, this new retelling of the Sack of Thaton has taken on great 
importance in current Mon-language historiography. The “Sack” enshrines the position of 
the Mons as having had civilization, and most importantly, Theravāda Buddhism before the 
Burmans. Once the narrative shifted away from tracing the lineage of orthodox practice, to 
becoming a story with a title that records the founding of the newly imagined nation, starring 
two subject races, a next step was to view the conflict as fundamentally racial. Indeed, many 
Mon and other minority intellectuals take the Sack of Thaton as indicative of long-standing 
racial enmity in the country. Many Mon scholars view attempts to displace the Mon from the 
early history of Burma with deep hostility, as they read Michael Aung-Thwin doing in his 
Mists of Rāmañña.
Local adaptations
While British scholars introduced new terms and categories, it was actually local scholars who, 
in internalizing the new terms and categories, carried forward their earlier historiographi­
cal concern with lineages and purifications, this sealing the association between the Mons 
and Theravāda. The British and other Europeans created and introduced the categorization 
of local religious practices into separate orders of Hı̄nayāna (in recent decades, rechristened 
“Theravāda”), Mahāyāna, Hinduism, and nat worship or animism. Overall, however, British 
historiography was more concerned with the mundane, the secular. In this new historiogra­
phy of Burma, new subjects provided new causality: the Burmans and the Mons had always 
been at war in Burma because of their racial difference. Much less important was the purity 
of practice and texts, which in the precolonial historiography offered if not a causality, more 
a correlation between events. The signs of the workings of karma were everywhere evident, 
indicating the rise and fall of figures in cycles of arising and decaying. A central feature of 
post-enlightenment historiography is after all a secular, rational, unenchanted reading (or, 
better, creation) of the past.
Local scholars and intellectuals, however, were not mindless subjects simply replicating the 
historiography, nor is the addition of local inflections a matter of imperfect learning or mimicry. 
Rather, local scholars’ “take” on the new colonial historiography was to see continued concern 
with the sāsana (albeit in a new guise) as central to their own narratives of the Burmese and 
Mon pasts. Theravāda, for these local scholars, has represented a superior form of Buddhism 
with none of the “corruptions” or “changes” apparently inherent in Mahāyāna, and as such, is 
a noblest and excellent part of their self-understanding. A point for future consideration would 
be to analyze further the interactions among British, local, and then cosmopolitan scholars tak­
ing up this local concern with Theravāda in their work on the country, Buddhism, and various 
Burmese ethnic groups in succeeding decades.

--- PAGE 386 ---
Mons
365
Notes
	 1	Scholars trained in the Euro-American tradition, usually writing primarily for a similarly international 
audience, in contrast to the “local” scholar, usually writing in a local language for a local audience. 
“Cosmopolitan” accommodates “local” scholars who have acquired an education abroad or who teach 
and write outside their home countries.
	 2	In recent years, that understanding has been reassessed to a number of small probable polities, which had 
little superordinate political structure.
	 3	The widespread use of English in Burma today perhaps parallels the situation in Pagan: a widely used 
language with almost no local body of native speakers.
	 4	British linguist and father of Mon Studies, Harry Shorto, repeats a common idea that there are few 
Mon-language historical texts because they were destroyed in the fall of Haṁsāvatı̄ or Pegu in the late 
eighteenth century (Shorto 1961: 63–72). The Rājāvaṁsa Kathā, Nidāna Ārambhakathā, and the “Pak Lat 
Chronicles” are all names for the same text.
	 5	I use the Pāli term (thāthanā in Burmese pronunciation) rather than the gloss religion to ease the burden of 
that loaded term.
	 6	Indaka (1984). A nissaya is a bilingual text with a few lines of Pāli immediately followed by a vernacular 
rendering. I have chosen this text over Taw Sein Ko’s “standard” translation from Pāli into English (Taw 
Sein Ko 1892: 7–9) because as an interlocutor of the high colonial period, he makes use of the new 
English-language categories.
	 7	Myanmar Unicode is still not compatible with most word processors. Because of the marked discrepancy 
between script and pronunciation, I have provided a transliteration. The Old Mon pronunciation was 
something like */rəmaɲ/ or */rəmɔɲ/ until perhaps the thirteenth century. Over time, the <R> was 
dropped, and the graphic form <MAN> appeared, reflected in the modern pronunciation /mo̤n/. See 
Shorto (1971: 325).
	 8	For details of the people and committees involved in the creation of these texts, see Hla Pe (1985: 52–67) 
and Aung-Thwin (2005: 142–144) and throughout.
	 9	Pāli scholars will recognize in these the Burmese pronunciations of Sāsanālaṅkāra, Paññāsāmı̄, and 
Sāsanavaṁsa, respectively.
	10	The following summary is based on my reading of Ù Kalà (1962: 19–23).
	11	Burmese payàwgá, from Pāli payoga. “Sorcery” or “witchcraft” are also possible renderings.
	12	The first two terms seem to have a connotation of power based on an accumulation of merit; indeed, the 
etymology of dagò suggests the “(incense) smoke of donations.” For a fuller discussion of these first two 
terms and their gendered aspects, see Keeler (2017).
	13	Linguistically, this appears to be a fairly typical eighteenth-century text.
	14	This Mon form becomes clearer in light of Written Burmese <ANORATHĀ MAṄḤ CO>, which 
preserves an earlier pronunciation of /ʔənɔrətʰa màn jò/
	15	The linguistic evidence of this section of the Rājādhirāj narrative suggests that much of it was written 
around the time of publication in the early twentieth century.
	16	The Pāli term here, “virtuous friend.” The Mon is actually <KAÑÑĀMIT>; the change of /ly/ to /ññ/ 
is not a process in Mon phonology but is in Thai, suggesting that this word came through Thai.
	17	This list is not exhaustive. The British did not wholly replace everything that went before them, nor did 
they work alone. Some of their local interlocutors, protégés, and intellectual heirs include Taw Sein Ko 
(1864–1930), Pe Maung Tin (1888–1973), who worked extensively with Luce, Htin Aung (1909–1978), 
and Than Tun (1923–2005).
	18	Despite the late date, his interpretation here reflects ideas formed in previous decades during his stints as 
a lecturer at Rangoon University. Here he echoes much of the sentiments of Harvey in Harvey ([1925] 
2000: 28–29).
	19	Apparently, Ba Shin was Muslim, so his role in promoting these new categories of religious thought are 
remarkable.
References
Aung-Thwin, Michael. 2005. Mists of Rāmañña: The Legend That Was Lower Burma. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press.
Ba Shin (Bo). 1953. Myanmā Naingngandaw Thamàing [History of Burma] (5th ed.). Rangoon: Pyithu Alì 
Pounhneittaik.

--- PAGE 387 ---
Patrick McCormick
366
Brown, Robert L. 1996. The Dvāravatı̄ Wheels of the Law and the Indianization of South East Asia. Leiden: E.J. 
Brill.
Burling, Robbins. 2012. “Where did the question, “Where did my tribe come from” come from?” In 
Origins and Migrations in the Extended Himalayas, eds. Toni Huber, Stuart Blackburn, 49–62. Leiden: Brill.
Candakanta (Nai). 1911/1912. Rājāvaṁsa Kathā, vol. 1–2. Pāk Lat: Siam.
Cœdès, George. 1968. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia. Honolulu: East-West Center.
Edwards, Penny. 2003. “Re-locating the interlocutor: Taw Sein Ko and the triangulation of colonial knowledge,” 
in Traditions of Knowledge in Southeast Asia, conference proceedings, 17–19 December 2003, Yangon, 
Myanmar, pp. 1–46.
Goh, Geok Yian. 2014. The Wheel-Turner and His House: Kingship in a Buddhist Ecumene. Dekalb: Northern 
Illinois University Press.
Hall, D.G.E. 1950. Burma. New York: Hutchinson’s University Library.
Harvey, G.E. 1925/2000. History of Burma. New Delhi: Asian Educational Services.
Hla, Pe. 1985. “Burmese historiography: the source, nature, and development of the Burmese Chronicles.” 
In Burma: Literature, Historiography, Scholarship, Language, Life, and Buddhism, ed. Hla Pe, 52–67. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Indaka, Nai. 1984. Prakuih Trāy Lik TmaɁ Kalyāṇı̄ [Nissaya Treatise on the Kalyāṇı̄ Inscriptions]. Mudon: 
Lwı̄ Mān Htaw Monastery.
Kalà, U. (Hsayā Pwà, ed.). 1962. Mahā Yāzawin Gyì, vol. 1. Rangoon: Hanthawadi Press.
Keeler, Ward. 2017. The Traffic in Hierarchy: Masculinity and its Others in Buddhist Burma. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press.
McAuliffe, Erin. 2017. Caste and the Quest for Racial Hierarchy in British Burma: An Analysis of Census 
Classifications from 1872–1931. MA Thesis. International Studies: Southeast Asia, University of 
Washington.
McCormick, Patrick. 2011a. “The position of the Rājāvaṁsa Kathā in Mon history-telling.” Journal of Burma 
Studies 15 (2): 283–304.
McCormick, Patrick. 2011b. “Mon converging towards Thai models.” In Austroasiatic Studies: Papers from 
ICAAL 4, Mon-Khmer Studies Journal Special Issue No. 2, ed. Sophana Srichampa, Paul Sidwell, 81–97. 
Canberra: Australian National University: Pacific Linguistics.
McCormick, Patrick. 2010. Mon Histories: Between Translation and Retelling. PhD Dissertation, University of 
Washington, History Department.
Pe Maung, Tin, G.H. Luce. 1960. The Glass Palace Chronicle of the Kings of Burma. Rangoon: Rangoon 
University Press.
Pollock, Sheldon. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, Culture, and Power in Premodern 
India. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Shorto, Harry. 1971. A Dictionary of the Mon Inscriptions from the Sixth to the Sixteenth Centuries. London: 
Oxford University Press.
Shorto, Harry. 1961. “A Mon genealogy of kings: Observation on the Nidāna Ārambhakathā.” In Historians 
of South East Asia, ed. D.G.E. Hall, 63–72. London: Oxford University Press.
Skilling, Peter. 2019. “Many lands of gold.” In Suvarnabhumi, the Golden Land: The New Finding for Suvarnabhumi 
Terra Incognita, eds. Bunchar Pongpanich, Somchet Thinapong, 191–218. Bangkok: GISTDA.
Skilling, P., Carbine, J., Cicuzza, C., Pakdeekham, S. 2012. How Theravāda is Theravāda: Exploring Buddhist 
Identities. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Taw Sein, Ko. 1892. The Kalyāṇı̄ Inscriptions Erected by King Dhammacetı̄ at Pegu in 1476 AD, Text and 
Translation. Rangoon: Government Printing.
Thompson, A. 2016. Engendering the Buddhist State: Territory, Sovereignty and Sexual Difference in the Inventions 
of Angkor. London: Routledge.
Veidlinger, Daniel. 2006. Spreading the Dharma: Writing, Orality, and Textual Transmission in Buddhist Northern 
Thailand. University of Hawai’i Press.
Wales, H.G.Q. 1969. Dvaravati, the Earliest Kingdom of Siam (6th to 11th Century Ad). London: Quatrich.
Wolters, O.W. 1997. History, Culture, and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives. Ithaca: Southeast Asia Program 
Publications, Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University.

--- PAGE 388 ---
367
Abeysekara, A. 100, 101, 103
Abhayagiri 20, 25, 30–31, 33–34, 236
Abhidhamma 129, 227; and filial piety 164; initial 
development of 227–228; literature 228–
231; and meditation practices 133–137; 
theory of dharmas 231–240
aesthetics: of art 312; of bodily comportment 
188, 190; of Buddhist path 84; of film 
330, 334, 337, 339; of Pāli language 49; of 
repetition 145, 148; of texts 276, 278; as 
trans-regional process 67
affect: and attachment 329–330, 338; of 
impermanence 329; of objects 329, 339; 
of Pāli chanting 53; purification as 84; 
repetition as 142; theory 327; and trauma 
332, 335, 339
Abhidhammatthasaṅgaha 151, 152, 230–231, 259
Aggañña Sutta 71, 340n13
Allon, Mark 143–145
Ambedkar, Bhim Rao 178
amulets 329
Anālayo, Bhikkhu 144–145
Ānandavardhana 148
Anawrahta, King 359–361
Ang Chan, King 320
Angkor 65, 72, 160, 313, 344
Angkor Wat temple, Cambodia 311, 312, 
319–322, 320
aniconic Buddhist art 310–311
Anurādhapura 21, 31, 106, 229, 246, 250, 345
Arañ Nikāya 288, 296
arahant/arhat 3, 129, 246–248
Ariyaratne, A. T. 92
Asad, Talal 99, 100, 116
āsevana (repetition) 150–152
Asoka/Aśoka, King: council of 45; as devotee 246; 
legends of 299; missions of 27; model of 
72, 250, 252; purifications of 84, 245, 358
Association for Asian Studies 7
aṭṭhakathā (commentaries) 4, 5, 23, 32, 244, 278
Atthasālinı̄ 228–229, 258, 259, 261
Aung, Shwe Zan 151
Aung-Thwin, Michael 357, 364
authenticity 94, 100, 103–104, 108–109, 116, 220, 
358; of relics 120, 249; see also tradition
authority, also authorization: assertion of 
100–102; and canon 84, 210, 216, 220, 
222–223; of images 250; of kings 33, 61, 
252; of meditation teachers 131; of monks 
10, 45, 123, 174, 186; and Pāli language 
44–47, 52, 213, 217, 282; political 119–
120; of reformers 90, 94; of ritual 142; of 
Sri Lanka 59; and Theravāda 251–254
Ayutthaya 59, 63, 75, 163, 222, 297
Ba Shin (Bo) 363–364
baan-muang system 76–77
Bagan 73, 121; see also Pagan
Bareau, André 22, 24, 26
bhāvanā (contemplation) 129, 151, 257, 258, 260
bhikkhunı̄s (higher-ordained Buddhist nuns) 
99–109; see also nuns
bi-texts: contemporary 282–283; creation 272–
278; diffusion 279–282; Pāli-vernacular 
51–52, 271–283
Bizot, François 338
INDEX
Page numbers in bold indicate tables, page numbers in italics indicate figures and page numbers 
followed by n indicate notes.

--- PAGE 389 ---
Index
368
Blackburn, Anne 47, 184, 313, 317–318
Bodhgaya (-ā) 18, 92, 104, 109, 160, 292, 299
Bodhi, Bhikkhu 144
Bodhi Tree 61, 160, 246, 248, 250, 264, 293
bodhisatta/bodhisattva: Avalokiteśvara 344; 
identification of deities as 349; identification 
of monk with 317–319; murals of 291; 
narratives of 299–300; perfections of 156; 
Rāma as 322; royal actors as 321; saving 
parents 159; veneration of 163
book, culture of 223–224
boran kammathan 95, 135
boundary markers see sı̄mā
Brahmanism 73, 76, 157
Braun, Erik 173, 174
Brown, Robert 305–307, 311, 314, 321
Buddha images 5, 249–251; in early Pagan 
289–292, 291; footprint 298, 306; in his 
remote existence 301; iconography of 
“Eight Major Episodes” 292–296, 294; see 
also icons
Buddha relics 249, 327; destruction of 328–330; 
and kings 61, 65; in films of Apichatpong 
Weerasethakul 330–333, 331; Footprint 
Relics 66, 306; housing of 200, 247; 
installation at frontiers 61; journeys of 73, 
246–247; narratives about 244; power of 
79, 249, 316–318, 327; representations 
of 297; self-reproductions of 317; Tooth 
Relic 119–120, 179, 248; in work of 
Rithy Panh 334–339
Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu 87, 92
Buddhadatta 230, 259
Buddhaghosa 4, 45, 90, 131, 245, 328
Buddhavacana 216, 221, 222
Buddhavaṃsa 243, 297, 299
cakkavatti (wheel-turning monarch) 72, 75–76, 320
Candavimala, Rērukānē 264–265
canon(s): and authority 222–223; epigraphic 
218–219, 219; model 218; notion of 209, 
212, 214–215; ritual 216–217; sermons 
217; sponsorship/production of 216; 
vernacular 218; see also Pāli canon
Carter, John Ross 142
Cassaniti, Julia 185–186
cetiya see stūpa (funerary monument)
Chan Htoon, U 87
Chapata 288
Chiang Mai 59, 199, 221
Childers, R. C. 46
Chirapravati, Pattaratorn 314, 316, 318–319
Chladek, Michael Ross 189–191
Christianity 64, 101, 175, 219
chronicles see vaṃsa (chronicles/genealogical 
literature)
circulatory processes 66–68
citta (consciousness) 131,133, 135, 232, 236, 
238–239, 258, 351
classification 71, 171, 215, 249, 355
Clifford, James 1
clothing 93–94; monastic robes 183–184; nuns’ 
monastic attire 101
Cœdès, George 76, 321, 322, 357
Collins, Steven 3, 7, 20, 43, 72, 115, 116, 212, 
220, 328; and “Pāli imaginaire” 46–47, 73; 
on scripturalism 89
Colombo 174
colonialism 78, 88, 128, 136, 174, 355; see also 
meditation practices, in response to 
colonialism and modernity; reform(s), 
during colonial period
consciousness: bhavaṅga 238–239; classes of 
236–237; in meditation 131; and rebirth 
239, 351; as results of karma 238; states of 
(citta) 131, 133, 236; through repetition 
142, 151; transformation of 135–136; 
types of 233, 235, 237; viññaṇā 128
contemplation see bhāvanā
Councils 83, 252; First 253; Sixth 92; Third 287
Cousins, Lance S. 22, 26
Dambulla Temple 104–105
dāna (generosity) 115–117, 125, 257; advantages 
of 262, 263; definitions 258, 260; of kings 
252; practice of 118–119, 172–173, 257
Dāṭhāvāṃsa 51
decolonization, and reform(s) 84, 91, 95
Dehejia, Vidya 305–306
deity (term or category) 343
Deleuze, Gilles 327
democracy 87
demythologization 94
dependent origination see pratı̄tyasamutpāda
devas (deity): rebirth as 199, 290; in Sri Lanka 
344–348
dēvālaya (deity shrine) 344, 347
dhamma (teachings) 44; Abhidhamma theory of 
231–239; in action 236–239; iconized 
307–308, 307; lists of Theravāda and 
Sarvāstivāda traditions 233–234; material 
culture of 6; study by laity 176–178
Dhammaceti, King 49, 358
Dhammapada 156, 217, 220, 265
dhammarāja 250, 252, 253
Dhammasami, Khammai 177–178
Dharmakı̄rti, Jayabāhu 28, 30–32
Dharmarama, Yatramulle 176–177
Dı̄pavaṃsa 15, 22–27, 31, 252
dispensation see sāsana
diversity: perception of 18; see also nikāya
doctrine, and repetition 148–153
donors, among laity 171–173
Duṭṭhagāmaṇı̄, King 253, 263

--- PAGE 390 ---
Index
369
early Buddhism 93, 219–222, 224
Eckel, Malcolm 329–330
Eightfold Path 92, 116, 227, 229
elaboration, cultural 48–49
encompassment, cultural 49–51
Engaged Buddhism 96, 115, 120, 122
epigraphy: of Angkor 161; in Burma 161; in Pāli 
49; Sinhalese 160; Sukhothai 61; see also 
inscriptions
esoteric 95, 166, 254, 338
Eurocentrism 78; see also Western
filial piety 156; and Abhidhamma 164; in 
Buddhist practice 159–162; as Buddhist 
virtue 162–167; and ordination 165; in 
Pāli scriptures 157–159, 166
Finot, Louis 75–76
Foucault, Michel 78
Free Funeral Society 123
funerary monument see stūpa
funerary practices: bird offerings 196–197; burial 
196, 199; changes in 194–204; charnel forests 
199; chedi 200, 201; commercialization 201, 
202; cremains 200; cremation 195–199, 203; 
post-World War II 201–203
Gavaṃpati 248
Geiger, Wilhelm 346
gender 183
generosity see dāna
Gethin, Rupert 23, 24, 27, 145, 259, 263–264
Ghosānanda, Mahā 91–93, 95
ghosts 119, 158, 161, 194, 199–200, 265–266, 331, 
335; see also phi; nats; neak ta; peta; spirit
giving: ritual 117, 124; theories of 124–125; see 
also dāna
Goenka, S. N. 134, 175
Gombrich, Richard 144, 179
governance/governmentality: of Aśoka 84; 
Buddhist forms of 73–74, 79, 121; 
European discourse of 88, 355; pre-
Buddhist 71–72; modern 78; and ritual 
80; texts on 76
Griswold, A. B. 317, 318
Hall, Daniel George Edward 362, 363
Hallisey, Charles 1, 83–84
haptic experience 330, 332, 333
Heim, Maria 4
Heine, Steven 209
heresies: “teaching of the Blue Robe” 32, 38n57; 
Vaitulyavāda 30–33; Vājiriyavāda 32
hermeneutics 84, 85
Hikkaḍuvē Sumaṅgala 86
Hindu: cosmology 73; literature 50; notion of the 
divine 343–345, 347; political structure of 
77, 313; rituals 351; thought 160
historicist/historicism/historicity: agenda of 
scholars 19, 220; of early Buddhism 220; 
in European discourse 88; idea of canon 
4; in reform movements, 89–91
historiography: British creations 362–364; 
Burmese-language 359–360; colonial-
era Mon texts 361–362; Mon-language 
358–359; Theravāda Buddhist 243–244
history, professionalization of 362
Hocart, Arthur M. 74, 80
Horner, I. B. 144
householders 102, 108, 146, 171–172
icons 305–306, 310; image-text relations 307–310
image(s): anthropomorphic 310–311; of crowned 
Buddha 302; donation of 5, 167, 251; as 
equivalent to written letters 223–224; 
as icon 306; and kings 251–252, 358; 
multiplication of 250; narratives of 
248–250; power of 249, 350; as relics 249; 
and text-relations 307–310
impermanence, doctrine of 4, 194, 327, 333, 338
indexical/indexicality, of amulets 330; of Pāli 
language 44, 52–54; or relics 330
Induangchanthy, Xaisongkham 339
inscriptions: Buddhist identity in 18, 21; donative 
160, 163, 215; Kalyānı̄ 287, 358, 361; 
and kingship 65, 74, 347; languages of 
5; in Mon language 356–357; in Pāli 52, 
218–219; Sanskrit-Khmer 280; Sukhothai 
58–63, 65, 67; of Tipiṭaka 49; as vows of 
truth 321; see also epigraphy and stele
Jayavarman VII, King 61, 313
Jetavana 20, 31, 33–35
jhāna 131–132, 151, 264
Jinakālamālı̄ 244, 250–251, 253, 296–297
Kālāma Sutta 85–88, 109
Kandy 102, 344
karma/kamma: in Abhidhamma 231, 267; 
collective 164; and conditions for 
experience 238; of deities 345; and 
ethics 156; in historical events 360, 364; 
moral economy of 347; notion of 160; 
overemphasis on 265; repetition of 152
kammatic Buddhism 171, 173
Kathāvatthu 15, 152, 162, 229
kāvya (poetic literature) 148, 267, 279
Kāvyaśēkharaya 257, 262, 263
Khmer Rouge 93, 95, 135, 335, 337
kingship, Buddhist: in Pāli-Sanskrit cosmopolis 
71–74; in premodern Lao and Tai 
kingdoms 75–78
Kinnard, Jacob 305, 311–312
Kornfield, Jack 133
Kulke, Hermann 72, 74

--- PAGE 391 ---
Index
370
labor, 63, 71, 74, 118, 121, 123; see also slaves
laity: conceptions of 95; in contemporary 
Theravāda 170–180; as donors 171–173; 
and meditation practices 91, 173–175, 
179; and monastic discipline 189–190; 
study of Dhamma by 176–178; women 
178–179
Lanka Insight Meditation Society 174
Lanna: bitexts in 281–282; Buddha image in 251; 
Buddha visits to 246, 248; funerals in 163, 
199; local traditions of 75, 79; Pāli works 
from 53, 158–159, 230; resistance to 
Bangkok 88; ritual canons of 217, 313
Lan Xang, kingdom of 75, 160, 350
Lao Buddhist law 76
Latour, Bruno 63, 66
Leach, Edmund 77, 78
Ledi Sayadaw 91, 134, 174
literacy 64, 93, 217
Literary Sinitic translations 271–272
Lokapaññatti 50–51, 299
Loubère, Simon de la 196, 198
Luang Prabang 75, 77
Luce, Gordon H. 290, 292, 357, 362
Magadha, and Pāli language 44–45, 48, 212
Mahābodhivaṃsa 28, 246, 250
Mahā Dhammarāja I, King 59–61
Mahā Ghosānanda 91–92, 95
Mahasi Meditation Center, Yangon 121, 133–134
Mahāvaṃsa 15, 22, 25, 31, 34, 176, 244, 252
Mahāvihāra: historiography 35; lineage of 21, 25, 
28, 251; monastery 246, 248; monks 4, 
245; nikāya 16, 35; orthodoxy of 20–22, 
25, 30, 248; pure tradition of 287–288, 
358; texts 156, 162, 220, 229
Mahāyāna, idea of 109, 363; merit-making 
in 266–267; iconography of 298; as 
heterodoxy 106, 312
Mahinda 4, 30, 45, 245, 251, 254; legend of 22
Maitreya/Metteyya 66, 130, 319, 321, 322, 
343–345
Malalasekera, G. P. 91–92
maṇḍala (circle; circle of states) 71–75, 77, 293
Mandalay 122, 211, 362
manuscript(s): age of 211–212, 218; bilingual 271, 
272, 282; burning of 165; canonical 212; 
culture 76, 85; epigraphic 218; iconization 
of 309; images in 116, 293, 308–310; 
libraries 132, 271; for making merit 164, 
167, 221, 223–224; materiality of 211; of 
practical canons 47; as sacred objects 93, 
211; transmission of 251
Marxism 88, 92, 135
Martaban/Mottama 62, 67, 297, 316
masculinity 189
materiality 133, 211–212, 248–251, 329, 336
Mauss, Marcel 117, 124
media: manuscripts 211; and reform(s) 93–94
meditation practices 127–128; and Abhidhamma 
133–137; authoritative texts 131–132; 
goal of 128–129; lay 91, 173–175, 179; 
and Pāli language 53; Pāli terms for 
129–131; in response to colonialism and 
modernity 128, 136, 174; samatha 130–
131; vipassanā 130–131, 133, 173–175; see 
also Buddhaghosa; Visuddhimagga (Path of 
Purification)
merit/merit-making: Abhidhamma texts 
on 259–260; on behalf of the dead 
160–162, 166, 194, 261; commentaries 
on 258–259; contemporary sources 
on 264–266; cultivation of faith 263; 
defining 115–116; donating to monks 
117, 120–122, 171–173; and institution 
building 120–122; listening 259–260; 
paying respect 258–260; poetic works on 
261–262; recollection 261, 263; rejoicing 
in 259, 261; in service of others 122–124, 
258, 260; sharing of 118–119, 159–162, 
259, 261; straightening one’s views 259; 
as taught in Dhamma schools 265–266; 
teaching 259; ten ways of 257–268; 
transference of 260
Meru, Mount 197–199, 202
Milindapañha 215, 219, 265
military 61, 65, 74, 118–121, 183, 185, 332–333
mindfulness: applications of 227, 229; cultivating 
145; culture of 127, 133; meditation 127, 
131; objects of 131, 133; in therapeutic 
settings 129; in Theravāda thought 235
modernism, Buddhist 175, 179
Moggaliputta Tissa 228–229, 245, 251
monasteries: building of 120–121, 175, 251–253; 
for deceased 163; Dhamma teaching at 
177, 187; donations to 173; histories of 
251, 362; international 135; and sāsana 
248–249; social services of 122; women’s 
societies at 179
monastic code see Vinaya
monastic community see saṅgha
monastic lineage see nikāya
monastics: bodies of 187–189; duty toward 
laity 172; formation 182–184, 186–187; 
physical exercise 188; and questions of 
power 107–109; robes 101, 183–184; 
and smoking 190–191; and the state 
99–100, 107–109, 185; undisciplined 
184–186
mondop (maṇḍapa) 314–316
Mongkut, King 89–90, 94, 135, 219
Mons, in Southeast Asia 355–356

--- PAGE 392 ---
Index
371
morality see sı̄la
Muslims 64, 121, 123, 299
Nāgārjunakoṇḍa 21–22
Ñāṇābhivaṃsa 44
Nātha dēviyō 344–345
nationalism: Asian 88; Buddhist 78, 91, 96, 185; 
discourses of 183; and race 355
nats, of Burmese culture 351–352; see also ghost; 
neak ta; phi; peta; spirit
Navayāna (New Vehicle) Buddhism 178
neak ta, of Cambodian culture see ghost nats phi 
peta spirit
Nepal 2, 211, 271
network(s) 62–66; as analytical term 58, 63–64
nibbāna: as dhamma 232; insight of 240; and 
meditation 127; realization of 129; of 
relics 328; see also nirvana
Nidānakathā 290, 292
nikāya (monastic lineage): concept of 16–18; 
genealogies 22–33; genealogy of 
Dı̄pavaṃsa 26; in Theravāda 247
Nikāyasaṅgraha 15, 27–33
nirvana: for ancestors 163; of the Buddha 29, 
247, 307; as ultimate goal 170–171; as 
unconditioned 232, 240
Norman, Kenneth R. 144, 146, 259
Nu, U 91, 92
nuns 2; attire 101, 104; authenticity of 100, 102; 
giving to 175; legal rights of 99; and 
meditation 128; monastic disapproval 
of 107–108; in nikāyas 16; ordination of 
99–100, 103, 105–106, 109, 245–246; 
protests by 122; rules given to 182; 
training precepts 102; see also bhikkhunı̄s
Nyanaponika 141–142
Nyāṇatiloka 152
Obeyesekere, Gananath 173–174, 179, 344
ordination: and filial piety 165; lineages 103, 
106–109; see also nikāya
organization and reform, and Pāli language 43, 
47–51
origins: local historiographies of 358–362; search 
for 355–357
orthodoxy: disputed 106, 215; Mahāvihāra 
16, 261, 301; of Rāmañña 359; and 
scripturalism 89; Sı̄haḷa 288–289, 296; as 
Theravāda claim 23, 302, 352
orthopraxy 84, 85, 95, 352, 359
pabbajjā (novice ordination) 102, 104, 142, 166, 
351; see also ordination
Pagan 357; Buddhism of 289; murals 290–296, 
298–302; see also Bagan
painting: cave temple 135; of jātakas 116, 219, 
309; of phi 348; and texts 309–310; use of 
European techniques 94
Pāli canon 2, 4, 44, 209–210; closure 212–213; 
and early Buddhism 220–221; and filial 
piety 157–159, 166; formation 210–211; 
idea of 46–47; materiality 211; in 
modernity 214; translations 177; writing 
systems 211–212
Pāli language: authoritative tradition 
43–47; as classical language 45–46; 
epigraphy 49; indexical power of 43, 
53; as language of Magadha 45; and 
meditation practices 53, 129–131; and 
organization and reform 43, 47–51; 
and performative rituals 52–53; as root 
language 44–45; and Sanskrit 45–46, 
50, 73; as spoken by the Buddha 4, 44; 
use as sacred 2, 43
Pali Text Society 177
Panh, Rithy 328, 330; The Missing Picture 
334–338, 335, 337
parahita (service of others) 122–124
Parākramabāhu I, King 28, 32, 48, 287–288
pāramı̄/pāramitā (perfections) 5, 156, 290, 305, 308, 
312, 329
paritta (protective chants) 53, 221
pariyatti (scriptural knowledge) 44, 84, 176, 359
patipatti (practice) 84
Pātho-htā-mya Temple 290–291
Pātimokkha 142–143, 182–183, 277
Paṭṭhāna 134, 230
peta/preta (hungry ghost) 158, 161–163
Perreira, T. L. 3, 108–109
Phayre, Arthur Purves 362
phi/phii 199–200, 343, 352; of Thai-Lao culture 
348–350; see also ghost; nats; neak ta; 
spirit
photograph 88, 94, 201, 265, 332–333, 339
Phnom Penh 322, 336
Phra Malai 213, 217, 222
Pichard, Pierre 314–316, 319
pilgrimage: to sites of Buddha’s life story 292; 
and intra-religious encounters 18; and 
merit-making 120, 264; to relics 64; sites 
mentioned in vaṃsas 60; in Sri Lanka 
53, 61
Pollock, Sheldon 72, 74
Polonnaruva 213, 230, 297, 315, 345
Poon Pismai Diskul, Princess 87
postcolonial 78, 89, 92, 356–357
pratı̄tyasamutpāda/paṭiccasamupāda 
(dependent origination) 128, 134, 
227, 237, 307
Prasert na Nagara 60, 61, 68n3, 317, 318
Premchit, Sommai 72, 201

--- PAGE 393 ---
Index
372
print: of Buddhist texts 86, 144, 212, 358; and 
Dhamma knowledge 177, 214, 217; 
and literacy 93; and merit-making 165; 
opposition to 93, 176; rise of 85, 88–89, 
93; subjects of 94; see also media
procession 119, 197, 216, 320
purity, and purification: modern forms of 79, 
89; of nuns’ lineage 108; revolutionary 
337; of robes 183; of Saṅgha 28, 72–73, 
84, 124, 245; of sāsana 33, 287–288, 358; 
of society 95; of Theravāda 85, 100, 109, 
254
race/racial thinking 123, 185, 355, 362–364
Rajadhon, Anuman 197
Rāma (deity) 320, 322, 347
Rāma I, King 216, 218
Ramanujan, A. K. 140
Rāmāyaṇa 254, 322, 346
Ramkamhäng/Ramkhamhaeng, King 59–60, 313
Rangoon 211, 222; see also Yangon
Rationalism/rationalization: of Ambedkar 
Buddhism 178; of the Buddha 86, 89; 
Buddhist 89, 91; concept of 88; of Europe 
89, 362–363; in governance 80; of popular 
religion 349; and progress 219; reform 
value of 95
Rattana, Vandy 339
reform(s): during colonial period 88; and 
decolonization 91; as idea 83–84; 
and media 93–94; mid-20th-century 
91–93; and modern Buddhist subjects 
94–95; modern movements 85–89; 
premodern 83–84; scripturalism in 
Siam 89–91
refuge: merit in taking of 259, 261–263, 265; of 
monasteries 122; Pāli formula 141–142, 
216; threefold 142; for women 109
relics see Buddha relics
religion, as term 64, 101
renunciants: female see nuns
repetition 140–141; and doctrine 148–153; and 
ritual 141–143; and textual composition 
143–148; threefold 142–143
Rhys Davids, Caroline A. F. 151
Rhys Davids, T. W. 143–144, 177, 221
ritual(s): for benefit of ancestors 157; of exchange 
117; funerary 161, 165, 194–204; of 
giving 117, 124; and governmentality 
79–80; merit-making 117–119, 161; 
and Pāli language 52–53; and repetition 
141–143
robe/robes: allusions to 258, 334; of the Buddha 
328; dustheap 334, 338; offering of 59; 
styles of wearing 90, 183, 190
Royal Asiatic Society 264
Saffron Revolution 121
saṅgha (monastic community) 3; centralization 
of 88, 90, 191, 194, 201; criticisms of 179, 
184; donations to 117, 124, 172, 252; and 
king 72–73; and masculinity 189; protests 
by 96, 121; purification of 48, 84, 245, 
251; split in 23; veneration of 52, 141, 263
Saṅgha Act (1902) 194, 195, 201
Saṅghamittā 99, 245
Sanskrit: Abhidharma 228; bilingualism 271–272, 
280–281; Buddhism 289; canons 2, 4, 210; 
cosmopolis 71–73; and cultic activity 346; 
grammar 49; inscriptions 160; knowledge 
systems 60, 73; and Pāli language 45–46, 
50–51, 73, 178, 210; poetry 148; textuality 
59, 67; works in 48, 50, 279, 290, 299, 
329; writing on sects 15, 22
Sāriputta 48–49
Sarnath 103–104, 160
Sarnatha Trust 134–135
Sarvāstivāda: Abhidharma 228–229, 240; canon 
212, 214, 221; dedicating merit in 166; 
dharmas in 232, 236–237; material world 
in 235; as nikāya 18, 27; treatises of 231
Sarvōdaya 92
sāsana (dispensation/tradition) 3–4; preservation 
28; purification 33; see also tradition
schools 94, 120, 177, 186–187; eighteen 16, 210, 
220–221, 228
Scott, James 71, 77
scripturalism, in Siam 89–91
sculpture: animal 333; of bodhisattva 344; colossal 
Buddha 293; Hindu 345; of jātakas 5; 
presence of Buddha in 306, 312; see also 
statue
sect/sectarianism, as terms 16, 35n1; see also 
nikāya
sermons 217; on radio 266
service of others see parahita
Shan 195, 199, 218
Shwedagon Pagoda 173, 222
Shwezigon Pagoda 280, 351
Si Sattha/Śrı̄ Śraddhā 60, 61, 63–65, 316–319, 
321–322, 324
Sı̄haḷa order (nikāya) 287–288, 296–297, 302
sı̄la (morality) 5, 179, 257, 258, 260, 262
sı̄mā (boundary markers) 6
Sipsongpannā 10, 186–188; see also Yunnan
Sisowath Monireth 87
Sitagu Sayadaw 121
Skilling, Peter 245, 308–309, 314
slaves 74, 118; see also labor
Soma Mahā Thera, Kotahene 87
Somdet Phra Vanarat 211
Sophy, Him 337
spirit 77, 348, 350; see also ghost; phi

--- PAGE 394 ---
Index
373
Spiro, Melford E. 171, 173
Srivichai, Khruba 79, 195, 201
state, the 70; and monastics 99–100, 107–109, 185
statecraft, Buddhist: modern 78–81; notion of 
70–71; in Pāli-Sanskrit cosmopolis 71–74; 
in premodern Lao and Tai kingdoms 
75–77
statue(s): of Aśoka 72; of Buddha 5, 322; donation 
of 160, 163; as a god 321; iconization 
of Dharmma in 307, 309; and kings 
79; objectification of Dhamma in 6; as 
receptacle for ashes 163; as receptacle for 
relics 306; see also image and sculpture
stele(s) 75, 160, 215, 319
Stone, Jacqueline 194
Strong, John 328–329
stūpa (funerary monument) 6, 116–117, 306, 311, 
315–316, 322, 327
Subhūti, Vaskaḍuvē 46
subjects/subjectivity/subjecthood: of the British 
355; Buddhist 94–95; colonial 94, 358; 
ethical 329; of kings 60–61, 66, 118, 251; 
of monks 182, 186; and races 363–364; 
sources of 65, 89; of the state 119–120, 
362
Sudharmachari 100–103
Sukhothai 58–62, 65, 67, 297, 313, 316
Sumangala, Inamaluwe 103–104, 106–109
Sumaṅgalavilāsinı̄ 148, 258–259, 261
Sūryavarman II, King 319, 320
Suttanipāta 145–146, 153, 171
Swearer, Donald 72
Tambiah, Stanley 72, 84, 89, 329, 350
teachings see dhamma (teachings)
Teh, David 330
temple wives 186
textual composition, and repetition 143–148
Thai forest tradition 135, 136
Thammayut 89
Than Tun 301
Thanlyin Thabawa Meditation Centre, Yangon 
123
That Luang 79, 80
Theravāda: and authority 251–253; as Buddhist 
sect 19–20; canon see Pāli canon; 
civilizations 7–8; expansion of 245–248; 
as habitus 6, 8; idea of 2–7; and materiality 
248–251; as term 1–3, 19–20, 23, 33
Theriya (Nikāya) 19–21
Thittila, Sayadaw U 87
Thūpavaṃsa 51, 244, 247, 253
Tipiṭaka (“Three Baskets”) 1, 4, 5, 44, 210, 
212–213; inclusive 215
tradition 101–103, 109–110; see also sāsana
Tripiṭaka see Tipiṭaka
Turnour, George 43
universal decay, idea of 28
U Nu 91, 92, 96, 119, 121, 211, 222
Upagupta 213
Upāsakajanālaṅkāra 257, 261, 267
upasampadā (higher ordination), of Theravāda 
Buddhist nuns 99–101, 103–109; 
recitation in 142; on behalf of one’s father 
166
Upulvan (deity) 346–347
Vajirañāṇavarorasa, Prince 86, 183
Vajrayāna: artistic developments of 312; in Sri 
Lanka 32, 34; texts of 29; in Thailand and 
Laos 313
vaṃsa(s) (chronicles/genealogical literature): 
emotive force of 329; as genre 243; 
history in 245, 247, 251; and images 
249–250; and kings 72, 250–253; narrative 
in 243; nikāya identity in 21–23, 33–34; 
other names for 244; Pāli 51; predictions 
in 247–248; and relics 245–249; religious 
diversity in 15, 26; spread of 60, 244, 254; 
themes in 244, 245; Theravāda lineage 
214, 219, 251, 253; see also Dharmakı̄rti, 
Jayabāhu; Nikāyasaṅgraha
Vasubandhu 237
Vasumitra 24, 26
vernacular: bitexts 271–272; canons in 213, 218; 
differences in styles 5–6; elaborations 
in 48, 51–52, 244, 276, 281; obligations 
to parents in 164; practice 332, 338; 
reworked in Pāli 49, 51; texts in 46, 51, 
73, 91, 131–132, 244; transcended by 
nikāya 18
Vessantara Jātaka 60, 115, 116, 222, 317–318
Vimuttimagga 230
Vinaya (monastic disciplinary code) 2, 3, 16, 84, 
90, 182–183
Vinaya Vardhana movement 175, 179
violence: in death 199, 336; experience of 336; 
and Khmer Rouge 93; of nats 351; of 
nation-state 79, 85; against monastic 
protestors 122; against non-Buddhists 95; 
political 330, 339; sāsana purifications as 
33; witness to 333; see also war
Vipassana: as contemplation 258; lay practice of 
131, 174, 176, 179; as merit practice 122; 
and mindfulness 133; purpose of 127, 130
Viṣṇu (deva) 64, 319, 321, 346–348
Visuddhimagga (Path of Purification) 5, 131–133, 
229–230

--- PAGE 395 ---
Index
374
Wales, H. G. Quaritch 195, 196, 357
war: affective histories of 333; Buddhism and 
Cold War 87, 91, 330–332; captives of 
199; effects on Theravāda of 95–96, 296; 
freedom from 119; in historiography 
360–364; and reconciliation 91, 334; 
remains of 339
Wat Si Chum 311–319, 315, 321, 322
Weber, Max 170
Weerasethakul, Apichatpong 328, 330–333, 
339; Fireworks (Archives) 332–333, 334; 
Phantoms of Nabua 331–332, 331
weikza (wizard) 119, 130, 137n5
Western 133, 209, 221, 335, 350; see also 
Eurocentrism
Wichasin, Renoo 77
women: advocating for 123; in encounters with 
monks 189–190; higher ordination of 109; 
among laity 178–179; mastery of Dhamma 
by 171; support of monks by 177
Woodward, Hiram W. 61, 301–302
World Fellowship of Buddhists (WFB) 87, 91–92, 
95; inaugural conference in 1950, 100, 
108–109
Yangon 121, 122, 173
ye dhamma stanza 219, 221, 323n5
Young, Ernest 196–197
Young Men’s Buddhist Association 177
Yunnan 2; see also Sipsongpannā
