--- Page 1 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 2 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 3 ---
buddhism and comparative constitutional law
Buddhism and Comparative Constitutional Law offers the ﬁrst comprehensive account
of the entanglements of Buddhism and constitutional law in Sri Lanka, Myanmar,
Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam, Tibet, Bhutan, China, Mongolia, Korea, and Japan.
Bringing together an interdisciplinary team of experts, the volume offers a detailed
portrait of “the Buddhist-constitutional complex,” demonstrating the intricate and power-
ful ways in which Buddhist and constitutional ideas merge, interact, and co-evolve. The
authors also highlight the important ways in which Buddhist actors have (re)conceived
Western liberal ideals such as constitutionalism, the rule of law, and secularism.
Available Open Access on Cambridge Core, this trans-disciplinary volume is written to
be accessible to a non-specialist audience.
tom ginsburg is the Leo Spitz Professor of International Law at the University of
Chicago and a Research Professor at the American Bar Foundation.
benjamin schonthal is Professor of Buddhist Studies and Head of the Religion
Programme at the University of Otago, where he also co-directs the Otago Centre for
Law and Society.
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 4 ---
COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW AND POLICY
Series Editors
Tom Ginsburg University of Chicago
Zachary Elkins University of Texas at Austin
Ran Hirschl University of Texas at Austin
Comparative constitutional law is an intellectually vibrant ﬁeld that encompasses an increasingly
broad array of approaches and methodologies. This series collects analytically innovative and
empirically grounded work from scholars of comparative constitutionalism across academic discip-
lines. Books in the series include theoretically informed studies of single constitutional jurisdic-
tions, comparative studies of constitutional law and institutions, and edited collections of original
essays that respond to challenging theoretical and empirical questions in the ﬁeld.
Books in the Series
Amending America’s Unwritten Constitution edited by Richard Albert, Ryan C. Williams,
and Yaniv Roznai
Constitutionalism and a Right to Effective Government? edited by Vicki C. Jackson and Yasmin
Dawood
The Fall of the Arab Spring: Democracy’s Challenges and Efforts to Reconstitute the Middle East
Toﬁgh Maboudi
Filtering Populist Claims to Fight Populism: The Italian Case in a Comparative Perspective
Giuseppe Martinico
Constitutionalism in Context David S. Law
The New Fourth Branch: Institutions for Protecting Constitutional Democracy Mark Tushnet
The Veil of Participation: Citizens and Political Parties in Constitution-Making Processes
Alexander Hudson
Towering Judges: A Comparative Study of Constitutional Judges edited by Rehan Abeyratne
and Iddo Porat
The Constitution of Arbitration Victor Ferreres Comella
Redrafting Constitutions in Democratic Orders: Theoretical and Comparative Perspectives edited by
Gabriel L. Negretto
From Parchment to Practice: Implementing New Constitutions edited by Tom Ginsburg and
Aziz Z. Huq
The Failure of Popular Constitution Making in Turkey: Regressing Towards Constitutional
Autocracy edited by Felix Petersen and Zeynep Yana¸smayan
A Qualiﬁed Hope: The Indian Supreme Court and Progressive Social Change edited by Gerald N.
Rosenberg, Sudhir Krishnaswamy, and Shishir Bail
Reconstructing Rights: Courts, Parties, and Equality Rights in India, South Africa, and the United
States Stephan Stohler
Constitutions in Times of Financial Crisis edited by Tom Ginsburg, Mark D. Rosen, and Georg
Vanberg
Hybrid Constitutionalism: The Politics of Constitutional Review in the Chinese Special
Administrative Regions Eric C. Ip
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 5 ---
Constitution-Making and Transnational Legal Order edited by Tom Ginsburg, Terence C.
Halliday, and Gregory Shaffer
The Invisible Constitution in Comparative Perspective edited by Rosalind Dixon and Adrienne
Stone
The Politico-Legal Dynamics of Judicial Review: A Comparative Analysis Theunis Roux
Constitutional Courts in Asia: A Comparative Perspective edited by Albert H. Y. Chen and Andrew
Harding
Judicial Review in Norway: A Bicentennial Debate Anine Kierulf
Constituent Assemblies edited by Jon Elster, Roberto Gargarella, Vatsal Naresh, and Bjorn Erik
Rasch
The DNA of Constitutional Justice in Latin America: Politics, Governance, and Judicial Design
Daniel M. Brinks and Abby Blass
The Adventures of the Constituent Power: Beyond Revolutions? Andrew Arato
Canada in the World: Comparative Perspectives on the Canadian Constitution edited by Richard
Albert and David R. Cameron
Constitutions, Religion and Politics in Asia: Indonesia, Malaysia and Sri Lanka Dian A. H. Shah
Courts and Democracies in Asia Po Jen Yap
Proportionality: New Frontiers, New Challenges edited by Vicki C. Jackson and Mark Tushnet
Constituents before Assembly: Participation, Deliberation, and Representation in the Crafting of
New Constitutions Todd A. Eisenstadt, A. Carl LeVan, and Toﬁgh Maboudi
Assessing Constitutional Performance edited by Tom Ginsburg and Aziz Huq
Buddhism, Politics and the Limits of Law: The Pyrrhic Constitutionalism of Sri Lanka Benjamin
Schonthal
Engaging with Social Rights: Procedure, Participation and Democracy in South Africa’s Second
Wave Brian Ray
Constitutional Courts as Mediators: Armed Conﬂict, Civil-Military Relations, and the Rule of Law
in Latin America Julio Ríos-Figueroa
Perils of Judicial Self-Government in Transitional Societies David Kosaˇr
Making We the People: Democratic Constitutional Founding in Postwar Japan and South Korea
Chaihark Hahm and Sung Ho Kim
Radical Deprivation on Trial: The Impact of Judicial Activism on Socioeconomic Rights in the
Global South César Rodríguez-Garavito and Diana Rodríguez-Franco
Unstable Constitutionalism: Law and Politics in South Asia edited by Mark Tushnet and Madhav
Khosla
Magna Carta and Its Modern Legacy edited by Robert Hazell and James Melton
Constitutions and Religious Freedom Frank B. Cross
International Courts and the Performance of International Agreements: A General Theory with
Evidence from the European Union Clifford J. Carrubba and Matthew J. Gabel
Reputation and Judicial Tactics: A Theory of National and International Courts Shai Dothan
Social Difference and Constitutionalism in Pan-Asia edited by Susan H. Williams
Constitutionalism in Asia in the Early Twenty-First Century edited by Albert H. Y. Chen
Constitutions in Authoritarian Regimes edited by Tom Ginsburg and Alberto Simpser
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 6 ---
Presidential Legislation in India: The Law and Practice of Ordinances Shubhankar Dam
Social and Political Foundations of Constitutions edited by Denis J. Galligan and
Mila Versteeg
Consequential Courts: Judicial Roles in Global Perspective edited by Diana Kapiszewski, Gordon
Silverstein, and Robert A. Kagan
Comparative Constitutional Design edited by Tom Ginsburg
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 7 ---
Buddhism and Comparative
Constitutional Law
Edited by
TOM GINSBURG
University of Chicago
BENJAMIN SCHONTHAL
University of Otago
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 8 ---
Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge cb2 8ea, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, ny 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, vic 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009286046
doi: 10.1017/9781009286022
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2023
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions
of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
An online version of this work is published at doi.org/10.1017/9781009286022 under a Creative
Commons Open Access license CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 which permits re-use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium for non-commercial purposes providing appropriate credit to
the original work is given. You may not distribute derivative works without permission.
To view a copy of this license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
All versions of this work may contain content reproduced under license from third parties.
Permission to reproduce this third-party content must be obtained from these
third-parties directly.
When citing this work, please include a reference to the doi 10.1017/9781009286022
First published 2023
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
names: Ginsburg, Tom, editor. | Schonthal, Benjamin, 1976– editor.
title: Buddhism and comparative constitutional law / edited by Tom Ginsburg,
University of Chicago; Ben Schonthal, University of Otago, New Zealand.
description: Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New York, NY : Cambridge University Press, 2022. |
series: Comparative constitutional law and policy | Includes bibliographical references and index.
identiﬁers: lccn 2022028560 (print) | lccn 2022028561 (ebook) | isbn 9781009286046 (hardback) |
isbn 9781009286053 (paperback) | isbn 9781009286022 (epub)
subjects: lcsh: Constitutional law–Southeast Asia. | Constitutional law–East Asia. |
Law–Southeast Asia–Buddhist inﬂuences. | Law–East Asia–Buddhist inﬂuences.
classiﬁcation: lcc knc524 .B83 2022 (print) | lcc knc524 (ebook) |
ddc 342.59–dc23/eng/20220831
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022028560
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022028561
isbn 978-1-009-28604-6 Hardback
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
remain, accurate or appropriate.
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 9 ---
Contents
List of Contributors
page xi
Preface
xiii
by Rebecca Redwood French
Acknowledgments
xvii
Notes on Transliteration and Language
xix
1
Introduction: Mapping the Buddhist–Constitutional Complex
in Asia
1
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
part i religious and political underpinnings
2
Buddhism and Constitutionalism in Precolonial Southeast Asia
35
D. Christian Lammerts
3
Theorising Constitutionalism in Buddhist-Dominant Asian Polities
57
Asanga Welikala
part ii himalayan asia
4
The Zhabdrung’s Legacy: Buddhism and Constitutional
Transformation in Bhutan
73
Richard W. Whitecross
5
The “Trick of Law”: The Hermeneutics of Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
99
Martin A. Mills
6
Tibetan Buddhist Monastic Constitutional Law and
Governmental Constitutional Law: Mutual Inﬂuences?
124
Berthe Jansen
vii
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 10 ---
part iii southern asia
7
Guardians of the Law: Sinhala Language and Buddhist
Reformation in Postwar Sri Lanka
143
Krishantha Fedricks
8
Thai Constitutions as a Battle Ground for Political Authority:
Barami versus Vox Populi
161
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
9
Establishing the King as the Source of the Constitution: Shifting
‘Bricolaged’ Narratives of Buddhist Kingship from Siam to Thailand
181
Eugénie Mérieau
10
Buddhist Constitutionalism beyond Constitutional Law: Buddhist
Statecraft and Military Ideology in Myanmar
198
Iselin Frydenlund
11
Reconstituting the Divided Sangha: Buddhist Authority in
Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
220
Benjamin Lawrence
part iv northern and northeastern asia
12
Constitutional Buddhism: Japanese Buddhists and
Constitutional Law
241
Levi McLaughlin
13
Governing Buddhism in Vietnam
272
Ngoc Son Bui
14
The Buddhist Association of China and Constitutional Law in
Buddhist Majority Nations: The International Channels
of Inﬂuence
285
André Laliberté
15
Governing “Lamaism” on the “Frontier”: Buddhism and Law in
Early Twentieth-Century Inner Mongolia
305
Daigengna Duoer
16
Buddhist Constitutional Battlegrounds: Using the Courts to
Litigate Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
325
Mark A. Nathan
viii
Contents
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 11 ---
part v comparative perspectives
17
On the Familiar Pleasures of Estrangement
345
Deepa Das Acevedo
18
Buddhism and Constitutionalism: A Comparison with the Canon Law
354
Richard H. Helmholz
19
Islam and Constitutional Law: Insights for the Emerging Field of
Buddhist Constitutional Law
360
Clark B. Lombardi
Contents
ix
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 12 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 13 ---
Contributors
Deepa Das Acevedo is Assistant Professor of Law at the University of Alabama
School of Law.
Ngoc Son Bui is Associate Professor of Asian Laws at the Faculty of Law, University
of Oxford, and a fellow of St. Hugh’s College, Oxford.
Daigengna Duoer is a PhD Candidate in religion at the University of California,
Santa Barbara.
Krishantha Fedricks is a PhD Candidate and a graduate teaching assistant in
anthropology at the University of Texas–Austin as well as a Senior Lecturer in the
Department of Sinhala at the University of Colombo.
Iselin Frydenlund is Professor of Religion at MF Norwegian School of Theology,
Religion, and Society.
Tom Ginsburg is Professor of Law at the University of Chicago.
Richard H. Helmholz is Professor of Law at the University of Chicago Law School.
Berthe Jansen is Junior Professor of Tibetan Studies in Leipzig University.
André Laliberté is Professor of Comparative Politics at the School of Political
Studies and Co-director of the Research Chair in Taiwan Studies at the University
of Ottawa, Canada.
D. Christian Lammerts is Associate Professor of Religion at Rutgers University.
Benjamin Lawrence is a Research Fellow at the Centre for Asian Legal Studies,
National University of Singapore.
Clark B. Lombardi is Professor of Law at the University of Washington School of
Law and serves as the Director of Islamic Legal Studies.
xi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 14 ---
Levi McLaughlin is Associate Professor in the Department of Philosophy and
Religious Studies at North Carolina State University.
Eugénie Mérieau is Associate Professor of Public Law at the University of Paris 1
Panthéon-Sorbonne.
Martin A. Mills is Senior Lecturer in Anthropology at the University of Aberdeen,
Scotland, and Director of the Scottish Centre for Himalayan Research.
Mark A. Nathan is Associate Professor in the Department of History and Director of
the Asian Studies Program at the University at Buffalo, State University of New York.
Benjamin Schonthal is Professor of Buddhist Studies and Head of the Religion
Programme at the University of Otago, where he also co-directs the Otago Centre
for Law and Society.
Khemthong
Tonsakulrungruang
is
Lecturer
in
constitutional
law
at
Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok, Thailand.
Asanga Welikala is Senior Lecturer in Public Law, and the Director of the
Edinburgh Centre for Constitutional Law, at the School of Law, University of
Edinburgh.
Richard W. Whitecross is Head and Professor of Law at Edinburgh Napier
University.
xii
List of Contributors
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 15 ---
Preface
Rebecca Redwood French
State University of New York, School of Law
To understand the context of the current volume, it is necessary to return to the early
discussions of Buddhism and Law. It began at the Bellagio Center on Lake Como, a
sixteenth-century convent restored with exquisite taste in modern Italian design,
where a group of scholars came together in the summer of 2006 for the ﬁrst
International Conference on Buddhism and Law. I arrived early in Italy to help
set things up. Soon, the participants began to arrive from all around the globe: Leslie
Gunawardena from Peradeniya University in Sri Lanka appeared, as did Bernard
Faure from New York City. Ryuji Okudaira came in from Japan; José Cabezón and
Vesna Wallace took long ﬂights from Santa Barbara, as did Tim Brooks from
Vancouver, and Frank Reynolds from the University of Chicago. Winni Sullivan,
a theorist in religious studies, now at Indiana University, arrived, as did Richard
Whitecross, a specialist on Bhutan. Andrew Huxley came from SOAS in London,
Justin McDaniel, who worked in Laos, and Michael Thamtai came from Thailand.
To round the conference off, Peter Skilling and Petra Kiefer-Pülz, two famous Pa¯li
scholars, arrived from Thailand and Germany, respectively. For a week, in these
beautiful halls ﬁlled with up-to-date electronics and technology, an ever-ready staff,
and plentiful workspaces, the group engaged in intense and enjoyable discussions
about the role of the Buddha, the different variants of the Vinaya, the problems with
translation, the environment of law schools, the intersection of Buddhism and
politics in different nations, and the place of Buddhism in different academic
contexts. And slowly, they began discussing a possible roadmap for the new discip-
line of Buddhism and Law within the purview of Religion and Law, Religious
Studies, Comparative Law, International Law, Asian Studies, and Buddhist Studies.
Throughout the conference, the participants were aware of misconceptions in the
scholarly community about the nature of Buddhism and Law. The ﬁrst was the
misunderstanding in Western scholarship that Buddhism as a religion had not been
a signiﬁcant legal or political inﬂuence in any Asian country in which it predomin-
ated historically or presently. A second common misunderstanding was that the
xiii
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 16 ---
Vinaya had been translated as “the book of discipline” in Western languages, which
resulted in legal scholars assuming that it was not “law.” Andrew Huxley, who
worked in Myanmar, spoke of the colonial powers in Asia that had discarded and
“disappeared” most secular Buddhist and Buddhist-inﬂuenced law codes. A fourth
misconception was what constituted “religious inﬂuence on a legal system.” While
scholars well understand the Christian roots of legal policies in most Western states,
the inﬂuence of Buddhism on Buddhist states in Asia over the past two millennia is
often seen as “cultural” and not religious.
The most interesting day of that initial meeting was the last, when the group
ﬁnally turned to what was needed to develop the ﬁeld. The group spoke about the
possibility of this project, and the obvious difﬁculties with it. Winni Sullivan started
out by saying provocatively that, maybe, there was “no hole to ﬁll.”1 She argued that
the academic discipline of Religion and Law simply disregarded most religions
outside of Christianity or, at times, Judaism, so perhaps it was no different for
Buddhism. Andrew Huxley, with his sonorous, booming voice, interrupted to
contradict, stating: “Arguing there is no hole is not right! There surely is a hole.
Just look at the growth of Hindu Legal Studies, Islamic Legal Studies. The ﬁrst
professorship of Islamic, Hindu, and Jewish Law began in 1840 at Oxford
University.” The group then launched into a lively discussion on what Buddhist
law was. Several points become clear. Participants agreed that if one can say that the
United States, for example, is a Christian nation, then we can say that many of the
current and historic societies of Asia are Buddhist-inﬂuenced societies and nations.
The role of karma in legal decisions was “a way of justifying things,” Bernard Faure
said. Michael Thamtai added that “there is no difference between going to litigate
and a karmic explanation. They act together, karma is also used in the sense of ‘let’s
be compassionate to him.’”
One scholar cautioned that “Law in the West” was not a good contrast, because
there is no unitary generalization available for what “the West” means, and then
others presented a series of basic questions about the relationship between religion
and law. Native American religions came up as did Muslims in Myanmar; the adat
legal system of Southeast Asia; the situation of stateless persons; “the rule of law” in
China, whether or not the notion of the “rule of law” is fundamentally hostile to
Buddhism; and many other topics. While wide-ranging, exciting, and difﬁcult at
times, the conversation was always based on deep personal experience, as well as
scholarly insight. As for the idea of justice, Peter Skilling provoked a lot of laughter
with his example of Aṅgulima¯la, a famous disciple of the Buddha, who began his life
as a criminal with a necklace of ﬁngers from his victims. Peter asked, “Was he just
beyond justice?” Frank Reynolds summed up the week of conversations with a list of
what was needed to establish the new discipline. He outlined the following com-
ponents: a basic, introductory text explaining the ﬁeld; a source volume with short
1
All quotations come from the author’s notes from the 2006 conference.
xiv
Preface
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 17 ---
translations of the important texts; a scholarly network of excellent academics and
scholars; a journal for the development of articles on the topic; a bibliography
divided into appropriate categories with annotations of every entry; and a series of
books on the topic of Buddhism and Law.
The present volume, Buddhism and Comparative Constitutional Law, skillfully
edited by Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal, is just what Frank Reynolds
ordered. Engaging the scholars who have gathered together to form a Buddhism and
Law network over the last sixteen years, then adding several comparative lawyers and
scholars from other ﬁelds, they have assembled one of the ﬁrst edited volumes on a
speciﬁc and compelling topic in Buddhism and Law. Some large themes emerge as
one reads the chapters, which have been central problematics of this ﬁeld since the
Bellagio Center conference years ago, and remain important issues for further
research, such as the nature of Buddhist legal cosmologies. For cultures that precede
modern constitutional law, developing a legal cosmology means presenting the
rules, categories, and practical building blocks that structure legal reasoning and
actions in a particular society or government as well as their interrelations, historical
locations, and creative use. In this way, Buddhist concepts of law, legality, legal
consciousness, legal history, and legal theory ﬁt into ideas of government and
citizenship. In each of these essays, the reader can detect the dynamic way in which
Buddhism sits as a foundational backdrop for the legal cosmology of the society.
This is the ﬁrst time in which ideas of constitutionality, both modern and historical,
have been seriously approached by Buddhist and Asian experts, and this volume will
be a cornerstone in the development of the ﬁeld for many years to come.
Preface
xv
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 18 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 19 ---
Acknowledgments
Our sincere gratitude to the National Science Foundation (NSF), Award
No. 1921184, which originally funded a conference to present the papers that appear
in this volume. We thank Reginald Sheehan, the NSF Program Ofﬁcer, for his
ﬂexibility in allowing us to turn the workshop into a series of events that were both
open to the interested public and also the basis for a seminar class held at the
University of Chicago Law School. We thank Dean Thomas Miles and Deputy
Dean Anthony Casey for their support. We also thank Ajay Mehrotra of the
American Bar Foundation. A special debt of gratitude goes to Paride Stortini who
has been an incredible research assistant and overall champion of this project over
the course of nearly eighteen months. This volume beneﬁted enormously from his
efforts. We also thank Arunima Bhattacharjee for the important early assistance she
provided on the project.
In addition to the authors, we had superb engagement from colleagues who
attended the series and generously offered comments. We thank David Engel,
Rebecca French, Ran Hirschl, Cuilan Liu, Clark Lombardi, Jessica Main, Mark
McClish, Fernanda Pirie, Winnifred Sullivan, Vesna Wallace, Matthew Walton,
and Roshan de Silva Wijeyeratne. Scholarship is always a collective endeavor and
this volume especially so. Finally, the extraordinary students at the University of
Chicago Law School seminar in early 2021 enriched this project tremendously.
xvii
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 20 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 21 ---
Notes on Transliteration and Language
Buddhist texts are preserved in multiple languages, and even common Buddhist
terms enter Asian vernaculars by way of multiple linguistic transformations. This
means that a particular Buddhist phrase can appear in multiple forms and spellings
across time and space, making it difﬁcult to standardize terms for a volume such as
this. In what follows, we employ the following conventions:
Where a Buddhist term is included in the Oxford English Dictionary (OED), we
used the OED spelling unitalicized (e.g., dharma, sangha, nirvana).
Where a term did not appear in the OED, we used the following rules:
1. In chapters dealing with Therava¯da Buddhist contexts, we opted for the
Pa¯li forms of words (e.g., dhammara¯ja instead of dharmara¯ja).
2. In all other chapters we maintained the transliteration conventions
speciﬁc to the languages in question, with the exception of favoring
the Sanskrit form of common Buddhist terms.
xix
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 22 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 23 ---
1
Introduction
Mapping the Buddhist–Constitutional Complex in Asia
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal*
In 2011, the 14th Dalai Lama Tenzin Gyatso announced his intention to complete a
major legal transformation that would redeﬁne the government of the Tibetan
community-in-exile. In a speech given from his headquarters in Dharamshala, the
world’s most well-known Buddhist monk conﬁrmed that he would be retiring as the
political leader of the Tibetan people. That event would catalyze a dramatic consti-
tutional change: from a system based on the “rule by kings and religious ﬁgures,” the
Tibetan Government-in-Exile was to follow a new Charter that provided for demo-
cratically elected leaders, whose authority would be constrained by law (Mills 2018,
155 and passim; see also Brox 2016).1 The preamble to the new 2011 constitutional
text explained that, in spite of the Tibetan people’s willingness to accept the
continuation of theocracy, “His Holiness the Dalai Lama decided that the time
had now come to complete the process of full democratization and that the Tibetan
people should no longer remain dependent on a single individual” (Tibetan
Parliament-in-Exile 2011, 2). The chapters of the Charter that followed laid out
this vision. The “Tibetan People” would continue to promote “the noble
Buddhist faith” and respect the Dalai Lama as “the manifestation of [the bodhisat-
tva] Avalokiteshwara in human form . . . the master of all Buddhist teachings”
(Article 17(11); Article 1).2 But they would also uphold fundamental rights and hold
elections, maintain a judiciary and bureaucracy, limit executive power, and follow
standardized procedures for promulgating laws. Theocracy, in short, would give way
to constitutional democracy.
This episode – which attracted more attention among Tibetologists than among
scholars of comparative constitutional law – provides one tantalizing example of the
*
The authors are particularly appreciative of D. Christian Lammerts and Levi McLaughlin for
their comments on a draft of this chapter.
1
A “Constitution for a Future Tibet” had appeared as early as 1963, with another major iteration
coming in 1991.
2
We use the spelling of the original. The more common spelling is the Sanskrit, Avalokiteshvara.
1
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 24 ---
many ways in which Buddhism and constitutional thought have become entangled
and interfused in Asian polities, both now and in the past. On the one hand, the
event appears to be a clash of categorical opposites: something old and something
new, a form of religion and political ordering, a system purportedly designed for
ultimate release from the world, and one intent on structuring power within it. On
the other hand, the very of idea of having a Tibetan Charter – one that is imagina-
tively descended from and modeled on a centuries-old system of rule by “the
manifestation of Avalokiteshwara in human form” – implies that Buddhist and
constitutional thought may in fact share certain things, among them symmetrical
commitments to sovereignty, legitimacy, order, and continuity.
This volume examines the interactions of constitutional and Buddhist traditions
in historical and contemporary Asia. This introduction makes the case for why this
topic is important, and argues that despite surface incongruities, constitutionalism
and Buddhism share certain values, even if they differ in their typical institutional
forms. We consider Buddhist idioms that speak to constitutional ideals, arguing
that the two discourses address common problems of legitimation and constraint
that arise in human polities. Further, we demonstrate that the inﬂuence of
Buddhism on the constitutional politics of contemporary Asia has been substantial.
We then situate the various case studies examined in this book in terms of the
interaction and intertwining between Buddhism and various examples of consti-
tutions. We conclude with thoughts on how scholars can extend the ﬁndings
presented here.
1.1 WHY BUDDHISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW?
EXAMINING THE BUDDHIST–CONSTITUTIONAL
COMPLEX
As a collective project, this volume takes a twofold approach to the study of
Buddhism and constitutions. It examines their nexus as a coming together of
disparate traditions and as the integration of complementary ones. It considers the
effects of constitutional discourse, institutions, and ideas on the practice of
Buddhism and it examines the inﬂuence of Buddhist principles, actors, and ration-
ales on the conception and practice of constitutional law. At the same time, the
contributors to this volume also reveal that the spaces, discourses, and authorities
associated with Buddhism are not always as foreign to those of constitutional
thought as one might expect. Although we speak of Buddhism and constitutional
law, in many ways, it is more accurate to talk about our object of investigation as the
Buddhist–constitutional complex, an object that can connote both a singular amal-
gamation as well as a hybrid of distinct components. This play of commonality and
difference, integration and separation, is echoed by the volume’s authors, who come
from a diverse variety of scholarly disciplines including law, Buddhist studies,
political science, anthropology, and history.
2
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 25 ---
The contributions that follow examine the Buddhist–constitutional complex in
almost all jurisdictions in Asia that have a large Buddhist population.3 While
accurate estimates are difﬁcult to come by, one can say that there are nearly
500 million Buddhists in Asia belonging to a variety of groups.4 A majority of citizens
in Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia follow the Therava¯da (“the
Doctrine of Elders”) tradition of Buddhism, which they consider to be the oldest
and purest form of the religion. Vietnam, China, Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea
also have large numbers of Buddhists, although not enough to constitute an absolute
majority.5 Most Buddhists in these countries observe a version of the Maha¯ya¯na
(“the Great Vehicle”) tradition of Buddhism, a broad and diverse collection of
movements that, unlike the Therava¯da tradition, differ widely in their key texts
and doctrines. A majority of the population in Bhutan, Mongolia, and Tibet
(including the Tibetan diaspora) identify as Buddhists and, for the most part,
practice a version of the religion referred to as “the Thunderbolt Vehicle”
(Vajraya¯na), which originated in India before rising to particular prominence on
the Tibetan plateau. Among other things, Vajraya¯na Buddhists underscore the
importance of esoteric knowledge and the institution of reincarnated monks, known
as tulku in Tibet.6
Although it is difﬁcult to generalize about law, society, or religion across all of
these places, we believe these jurisdictions constitute an important and coherent set
for comparative consideration. That is because these countries are all settings in
which Buddhist communities, doctrines, and institutions have had a formative
inﬂuence on social and political life, both historically and in the present. To
understand the full range of constitutional politics and practice in these places
requires familiarity with what Matthew Walton (2016, 4–9) calls the “moral uni-
verse” of Buddhism. This universe is grounded in ideas about transmigration and
rebirth (sa _msa¯ra), intentional action and its consequences (karma), cosmic truth
and righteous teachings (dharma), spiritual awakening and those who have achieved
it (buddhas and bodhisattvas). In the same way that Christian theological ideas and
legal forms have had a major impact on the development and conception of
constitutional law in Europe (Berman 1983; Tierney 1982), Buddhist concepts like
these – and others discussed in the chapters that follow – have had an important
inﬂuence on the development and application of national constitutions in Asia.
3
Our chapters directly examine all of the countries identiﬁed in this paragraph, except for Laos.
Taiwan is discussed by Laliberté in Chapter 14.
4
On these difﬁculties, see Laliberté in Chapter 14. Our estimates come from www.pewforum
.org/2012/12/18/global-religious-landscape-buddhist/.
5
According to the Pew Research Center, China is home to roughly half of the world’s Buddhists:
www.pewforum.org/2012/12/18/global-religious-landscape-buddhist/.
6
Vajraya¯na is also understood to be a branch of the Maha¯ya¯na. For those who would like more
information about Buddhism and its major divisions, there are a number of good general
introductions to Buddhism, among them: Gethin 1998; Harvey 2013; Lopez and Miles 2017;
Prebish and Keown 2006; Strong 2002.
Introduction
3
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 26 ---
These jurisdictions have also given rise to a variety of genres and ideologies of
legality that one might call “Buddhist law,” about which more will be said below.
While we do not assert that discussions of constitutional law ought to be shaped
by a strong bifurcation between “Asian values” and “Western” ones (Bauer and Bell
1999), we do argue that a full and complete understanding of constitutional law in
many parts of Asia demands a fuller understanding of Buddhism. This includes the
ways in which declaredly Buddhist rationales, narratives, and textual forms, along
with Buddhist clerics and organizations, have shaped how governments, judiciaries,
and everyday people understand the nature and purpose of constitutional projects.
Moreover, we further insist that a rigorous understanding of Buddhism, particularly
since the mid-twentieth century, requires an awareness of how the rise of
constitution-based national polities – the most common form of legal–political
governance in the world – have affected and often altered how Buddhists conceive
their own structures and practices of self-administration. We thus see a conversation
between two large historical “normative social practices” (Wallace 2014, 332) that
shapes both.
1.2 BUDDHISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW TODAY
To date, the kind of two-way conversation our authors present here has been
relatively rare, among both scholars of Buddhism and scholars of constitutional
law. With some important exceptions, scholars of Buddhism have not engaged with
the literature on comparative constitutional law, and vice versa. This lack of
scholarly engagement is all the more obvious when one considers the abundance
of important scholarship examining the interactions of religion and constitutional
law in other jurisdictions, most notably those with majority Christian or Muslim
populations.7
One should not mistake this academic neglect for a lack of importance. As the
chapters in this volume demonstrate, Buddhism plays a major role in Asia’s consti-
tutional cultures. Buddhist monks and lay activists have been central agents of
constitutional change, engaging in “Buddhist legal activism” and “Buddhist-interest
litigation” throughout the continent (Schonthal and Ginsburg 2016). Monk-led
groups like the Bodu Bala Sena (BBS) in Sri Lanka or the Association for the
Protection of Race and Religion (Ma Ba Tha)8 in Myanmar have made legal
activism and constitutional politics a key feature of their nationalist agendas
(Frydenlund 2017; Walton and Aung Tun 2017–2018; Schonthal 2016b). Political
regimes in China, Thailand, Myanmar, Vietnam, and South Korea have mandated
7
Since 1970, at least thirty-four books have been written looking explicitly at the interactions of
Islam and constitutional law, and at least nineteen books that focus primarily on constitutions
and Christianity. An even greater body of work has thought to theorize the links between liberal
constitutionalism and religion more generally.
8
In 2018, the group renamed itself the Buddha Dhamma Charity Foundation.
4
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 27 ---
the creation of constitution-like charters for Buddhist groups, in large part as ways to
preempt any political and legal activism on the part of would-be Buddhist activists
(Borchert 2020; Kyaw 2019; Larsson 2020; Liu 2020; Nathan 2018). Even in Japan,
where strong expressions of religious identity are generally frowned upon in politics,
the Buddhist organization Soka Gakkai has exerted a disproportionate inﬂuence on
constitutional negotiations, largely through its afﬁliated political party Komeito
(McLaughlin 2021).
Today, six of the seven Buddhist-majority countries in Asia (Myanmar, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, and Bhutan) grant Buddhism special status
or recognition in their constitutions, using a wide variety of formulae.9 Article 9 of
Sri Lanka’s Constitution, for example, gives to Buddhism the “foremost place” and
obliges the government to “protect and foster the Buddha Sa¯sana.” The
Constitution of Cambodia makes Buddhism the “religion of the state” and
includes the country’s two chief monks in its “Royal Council of the Throne,”
charged with choosing the monarch.10 Bhutan’s Constitution describes Buddhism
as the “spiritual heritage of Bhutan” and makes it a matter of state policy to
promote a society “rooted in a Buddhist ethos and universal human values.”11
Even socialist Laos revised its constitution in 2003 to provide that “the State
respects and protects all lawful activities of Buddhists and of followers of other
religions, [and] mobilizes and encourages Buddhist monks and novices as well as
the priests of other religions to participate in activities that are beneﬁcial to the
country and people.”12 The 2017 Thai Constitution remains one of the most
verbose on the topic, declaring not only that the king must be a Buddhist (sect. 7)
but that the state should “support and protect Buddhism and other religions,”
which it glosses in the following way:
In supporting and protecting Buddhism, which is the religion observed by the
majority of Thai people for a long period of time, the State should promote and
support education and dissemination of dharmic principles of Theravada Buddhism
for the development of mind and wisdom development, and shall have measures
and mechanisms to prevent Buddhism from being undermined in any form. The
State should also encourage Buddhists to participate in implementing such meas-
ures or mechanisms. (sect. 67)
Visible in this paragraph are references to Buddhist history, soteriology, and political
philosophy which have fed into Thailand’s political culture and continue to deﬁne
9
Of majority-Buddhist countries, only Mongolia does not mention Buddhism in its
Constitution, perhaps because it was drafted in 1991 immediately following seventy years of
Soviet domination.
10 Art. 43. and Art. 13, respectively. Cambodia’s constitution also obligates the state to “promote
and develop Pali schools and Buddhist institutes,” Art. 68.
11 Art. 3.1 and Art. 9.20, respectively. In addition, Art. 2.1 provides that the King must be a
Buddhist and Schedule 1 provides for Buddhist symbols in the national insignia and ﬂag.
12 Const. Lao People’s Democratic Republic (1991, rev. 2003), Art. 9. See Bui (2021).
Introduction
5
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 28 ---
it in the present. In Thailand, as in other places, Buddhism remains closely bound
up in the design, interpretation, and politics of constitutional law and practice.
1.3 MAPPING THIS VOLUME
The chapters that follow present the landscape of the Buddhist–constitutional
complex in Asia. Given the relative absence of such mapping to date, the areas
and topics we identify ought to be considered, for the most part, initial forays; broad
areas of study that invite further exploration by scholars. The intellectual cartog-
raphy undertaken here was conducted collaboratively between January and May
2021, in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic, as part of an online workshop series in
which all of the contributing authors participated, along with other scholars who
generously contributed as discussants and commentators.
As a group, we explored a broad range of questions: what have been the roles of
Buddhist monks, activist groups, and other religious actors in inﬂuencing consti-
tutional changes? In what ways might constitution-making processes transform the
practice and institutions of Buddhism in Asia? Do existing models in the study of
religion and constitutional law adequately explain the dynamics of Buddhism and
constitutional law in this region? How do Buddhist-inspired interpretations of public
law differ from those of other interpretative traditions? Are there links across borders
in the region, either in terms of borrowed concepts or religious networks, that shape
constitutional thought and action? What historical antecedents and Buddhist doc-
trinal principles help us predict or understand these trends? Although the workshop
series was, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst one dedicated to the topic of
Buddhism and constitutional law, this intellectual endeavor would not have been
possible were it not for the important foundations in the study of Buddhism and law
laid down by other scholars, many of whom participated in the workshop and others
who crowd the texts and bibliographies of the pages to follow.13
In the remainder of this introduction, we present a preliminary conceptual
framework for the broader mapping of the Buddhist–constitutional complex. In
the next section, we look to the orienting terms of our inquiry, Buddhism and
constitutional law, which are themselves the subjects of perpetual deﬁnitional
contestation. While we do not claim to resolve these contests, we nevertheless
hope to give some sense of how these terms are used and inﬂected by the authors
of this volume, and by Buddhist actors on the ground. Doing so requires that we
disaggregate our binary into four, including two “-isms” and two forms of law:
Buddhism and Buddhist law, and constitutionalism and constitutional law. After
developing this framework, we next situate the various contributions in terms of
this broad matrix.
13 In addition to the authors whose names appear in this volume, other contributors and
commentators are mentioned in the acknowledgements.
6
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 29 ---
1.4 BUDDHISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW:
SETTING THE TERMS
At ﬁrst glance, the conjunctive phrase “Buddhism and constitutional law” seems to
suggest the coming together of two different sets of institutions, persons, ideas, and
practices: some associated prima facie with Buddhism (such as monasteries, monks,
meditation, and merit-making) and others with national constitutions (such as laws,
legislators, and litigation). The ﬁeld of view is, of course, more complicated than
this, given the many deﬁnitions and referents associated with each of the terms as
well as their inconsistent and variable use in different contexts.
Things get even messier when one projects the topic back into history. Somewhat
confoundingly, premodern “Buddhist” texts do not speak about “Buddhism,” but
about a variety of other topics, including the dispensation (sa¯sana), the teaching
(dharma),
the
words
of
the
Buddha
(buddhavacana),
and
other
matters.
“Constitution” does not fare much better. Even granting that “constitution” is a
modern legal category, D. Christian Lammerts points out in his chapter that the types
of Buddhist law that we would instinctively want to call constitutional avant la lettre
do not appear to have been conceived as a distinct, separate domain of law in the same
way that constitutional law is in the Western legal tradition. The laws that pronounce
on institutions, processes, and ofﬁces of governance are not elevated as a separate body
of “higher law” but are rather integrated with a miscellany of other matters: rules
about witchcraft, tolls, taxes, rituals, bathing, animals, ordeals, and many others. The
mass of “law-stuff” (Llewelyn and Hoebel 1941) in the premodern polities of Asia is far
more variegated than that found in any modern rational–legal code.
The categorical challenges we struggle with here are similar to those that French
and Nathan (2014) struggled with in their path-breaking volume Introduction to
Buddhism and Law, where they also noted instability and dissensus around the
categories contained in their title. An original intellectual sin – for some anyway –
inheres in their volume as it does in ours: to speak of “Buddhism” or “law” as though
they were coherent objects spanning regions and epochs is to imply a misleading
consistency encompassing what can be highly disparate textual, ritual, and
philosophical traditions.
What gives us some comfort, however, is that we scholars are not the only ones
generalizing. As the subsequent chapters reveal, the legal and discursive ﬁction of a
singular dispensation is one shared by most of the actors described in this volume.
The protagonists in these chapters speak about a coherent community, lineage, and
scriptural tradition associated with the Buddha, even if they mean very different
things. To examine the Buddhist–constitutional complex is, therefore, both to rely
on and transgress designations: to look for constitutions within ﬁelds designated as
Buddhist; to look for Buddhism in ﬁelds designated as constitutional; and to attend
carefully to how such acts of designation affect the lives of persons in particular
places and times.
Introduction
7
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 30 ---
For those unfamiliar with Buddhism, we offer some preliminary details, conced-
edly as generalizations, which might help frame the chapters to come. For those
unfamiliar with constitutional law, we undertake an equally cursory overview.
1.5 BUDDHISM
As noted above, Buddhism constitutes one of the largest religions in Asia, and
roughly 7 percent of the global population identiﬁes with it. As with all religious
traditions, Buddhism entails a range of different practices, some of which bear little
similarity to each other. Nevertheless, a set of core ideas can be found in most
manifestations. As the name suggests, all forms of Buddhism aver the existence of a
special set of beings who discover the laws of the cosmos and, through so doing,
become buddhas (literally, “awakened ones”). Some versions of Buddhism, particu-
larly the Vajraya¯na, identify many different buddhas who are thought to populate
the universe at any one time. Other versions, such as Therava¯da, underscore the
extreme rarity of buddhahood and focus primarily on the central importance of a
single historical buddha, an ancient South Asian prince named Siddhartha
Gautama, who is credited with teaching the truths he discovered to humankind.
This is the ﬁgure to whom we refer when we use the deﬁnite article and a capital B,
the Buddha.
Although Buddhists venerate a variety of buddhas and other advanced beings on
the path to buddhahood (called bodhisattvas), they will also afﬁrm the importance of
the Buddha as the awakened teacher who is closest to us in space-time, having lived
“only” 2,500 years ago in the vicinity of what is today the Indian state of Bihar and
Southern Nepal.14 During his eighty years of life, the Buddha delivered a series of
sermons explaining how the universe worked and how humans ought to behave.
Those teachings – collectively referred to as the dharma – are thought to contain, in
an abbreviated form cognizable by humans, the key truths of the cosmos (also
referred to as the dharma), which might be (inadequately) summarised as follows:
The cosmos, and all things in it, are guided by cycles of creation and destruction.
Sentient beings similarly undergo countless cycles of birth, life, and death in an
ongoing process called sa _msa¯ra (literally “wandering”). One’s journey through
sa _msa¯ra is not random but determined by volitional actions (karma) that one
undertakes. Those who undertake meritorious actions will gain beneﬁts including
rewards in this and/or future lifetimes, while those who act immorally will suffer
more. These cycles of rebirth and re-death, while they contain many pleasurable
things, must in the ﬁnal analysis be understood to be painful or stressful because
even the greatest pleasures are ultimately temporary and impermanent. Therefore
14 This is true for most, but not all, traditions of Buddhism. In particular, Pure Land Buddhism, a
form of Maha¯ya¯na, tends to focus its devotions on a different Buddha named Amita¯bha, who is
imagined to be “close” in other ways. On Pure Land Buddhism generally, see Yu (2014).
8
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 31 ---
one’s ultimate goal should be to exit the cycle of sa _msa¯ra. By following the
teachings of the Buddha one can move toward nirvana, the ultimate “extinguish-
ing” of one’s rebirth in sa _msa¯ra, in this lifetime or in a future life.
Beyond these core principles, tremendous variation exists. In the Therava¯da trad-
ition, for example, the goals of Buddhist practice tend to be the achievement of a
better rebirth through meritorious actions (which include everyday moral conduct
as well as acts of donation to build Buddhist monuments or support monastics). The
progressive improvement of one’s rebirths and strict adherence to the dharma, it is
thought, will lead ultimately to nirvana. Maha¯ya¯na traditions of Buddhism, by
contrast, often emphasize the nearer-term achievement of bodhisattva-hood, a
process of awakening in which one vows to defer individual nirvana in order to
help other sentient beings attain salvation.
In all schools of Buddhism, the journey toward a better rebirth or awakening
requires a combination of moral practices and techniques of mental cultivation. In
many, but not all, traditions, these are thought to be most fully embodied in the
community of monks and nuns (the sangha) who “go forth” from the normal life of a
layperson and are ritually reborn as “sons and daughters of the Buddha.”15 In Southern
and Himalayan Asia, Buddhist monks tend to be celibate; practices vary in Northeast
Asia in this regard. On entry into the sangha, monastics are, at least in theory, expected
to follow special rules which tend be based on the code of monastic law called the
Vinaya Pi_taka (“the Basket of Discipline”), which contains rules of monastic conduct
and organization that are considered to have been originally enunciated by the
Buddha.16 In most traditions of Buddhism, fully-ordained monks (bhikkhus) and nuns
(bhikkhunīs) are charged with preserving the Buddha’s entire dispensation of teach-
ings, practices, and material artifacts such as relics and temples. They are therefore
regarded as embodiments of and authorities on the Buddha’s legacy.
1.6 BUDDHIST LAW
Although notions of law and legality appear throughout Buddhist traditions, there is
no single phrase in premodern Buddhist texts that perfectly approximates the
15 While there is a long and vibrant history of Buddhist nuns in Asia, the status of Buddhist nuns
(bhikkhunī) today differs according to the schools of Buddhism, national policies, and local
communities. There is a large literature on Buddhist nuns in modern Asia, including (Arai
1999; Cheng 2006; Heirman 2011; Kawanami 2013; Mrozik 2009; Salgado 2013; Seeger 2018).
16 Although often referred to in the singular, the Vinaya Pi_taka has survived from the ancient
period in six relatively complete versions, preserved in the languages of Pali, Sanskrit, Chinese,
and Tibetan. Three of these versions are used by Buddhist monastics today: the
Dharmaguptaka Vinaya predominates in China and Taiwan; the Mūlasarva¯stiva¯da Vinaya
recensions are used by monastics following Tibetan and Mongolian traditions, and the Pali
Vinaya is used in the Therava¯da sanghas that predominate in Southern Asia. It is worth noting
that the practical importance and/or presumed centrality of the Vinaya differs among forms of
Buddhism and monastic groups. On the history and variety of Vinaya texts see (Clarke 2015;
Liu and Andrews 2017; Heirman 2007; Kieffer-Pülz 2021–2022).
Introduction
9
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 32 ---
English collocation “Buddhist law.” The absence of such a phrase in emic discourse
does not mean, however, that Buddhists failed to produce written codes and insti-
tutions that claimed to uphold and implement the teachings of the Buddha. The
very idea of dharma – a term that encompasses both the law of the cosmos and the
instructions of the Buddha – suggests the possibility of pairing transcendent and
human injunctions in ways similar to those observed in European legal history. In
the same way that lawmakers in early-modern Europe claimed to align the law of
God and the law of man, or natural law and temporal law, so too did lawmakers in
Asia claim to align dharma and temporal law.
How law actually worked to inﬂuence behaviour in historical Asia, dharmically or
otherwise, is a vast topic for which we have little reliable evidence. What we have are
various types of prescriptive texts. In his chapter, Lammerts identiﬁes three inter-
lacing “environments of ‘Buddhist law’” operative in pre-colonial Southeast Asia.
The ﬁrst is vinaya, a term that, as used by monastics, refers not only to the rules of
the Vinaya Pi_taka, but to the larger corpus of monastic regulations that sits around it,
including so-called monastic constitutions that have served as guiding legal charters
for monastics living in Sri Lanka, Tibet, and South Korea (Jansen 2018; Kaplan 2016;
Schonthal 2021a; B. Sullivan 2020). The second environment is dhammsattha, a
genre of legal treatises apparent in mainland Southeast Asia from the second
millennium, which provided rules and jurisprudential principles for kings, judges,
and other “good persons” responsible for resolving disputes (Baker and Phongpaichit
2016; Ishii 1986; Lammerts 2018). The third environment is ra¯jasattha, royal orders
that claimed to align worldly rule with Buddhist principles (Huxley 1997; Prasert Na
Nagara and Griswold 1992; Zan 2000).
For Lammerts, all three environments are forms of Buddhist law because
[e]ach entails a distinct relation between what may be called “Buddhism” and
“law.” Certain general features common to these environments include: 1) (usually)
a form of material embodiment and circulation in writing; 2) an orientation toward
the authority of a foundational, preternatural, text (the speech of a buddha, a
cosmic treatise, or the speech of a king); and 3) a rationale or jurisprudential logic
whereby the normative program of such legalism is imagined to have the capacity to
enable or perpetuate, via different mechanics, the religion of Buddhism itself.
Although Lammerts applies this analysis only to the premodern polities of Southeast
Asia, the framework could be extended further to encompass other genres of law in
the contemporary period and other parts of Asia. By the terms of Lammerts’
deﬁnitions, many of the national constitutions described earlier in this introduction
would also qualify as “Buddhist law,” as would the many types of statutes and
administrative ordinances used in contemporary Asia to regulate Buddhist monks
or protect Buddhist pilgrimage sites (Schonthal 2017–2018).
It is important to note that, in many contexts, the question of whether a given law
qualiﬁes as “Buddhist” is itself contested. One of the most striking examples of this
10
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 33 ---
can be seen in debates about the Buddhist character of the laws issued by the
seventh-century Tibetan king Songtsen Gampo. Scholars disagree as to whether or
not the body of laws promulgated by the putative founder of Tibet were originally
conceived as embodying Buddhist principles. Some, such as Fernanda Pirie (2017,
406), insist that the earliest laws of Tibet were “not linked in any signiﬁcant way with
Buddhist principles” at their inception, but were retrospectively understood as such
as part of an ideological project in the tenth and eleventh centuries to provide moral
certainty in an era of political chaos. Others, such as French (1995), along with a
variety of Tibetan jurists and scribes, prefer to read the legal archives of Tibet in a
strongly Buddhist light.
Two chapters in this volume reﬂect on this debate and its implications. Martin
Mills, whose perspective leans toward that of Pirie, characterizes the post-hoc
Buddhicizing of Tibet’s founding laws as a kind of “constitutional mythology”
underwritten by hidden Buddhist virtues. According to this mythology, even those
forms of royal law that seem to contradict the dharma are actually “skilful means” for
governance, virtuous “tricks” that embody a deeper dharmic quality which is invis-
ible to untrained individuals.
In her chapter, Berthe Jansen comes at the question of Tibetan law’s Buddhist
quality from another angle. Writing about monastic constitutions (bca’yig), she
demonstrates that even this ostensibly most religious form of law cannot be under-
stood in the absence of royal law. The texts reﬂect clear mutual inﬂuences.
Monastic law always existed in the shadow of royal law, and temporal authorities
frequently asserted jurisdiction in cases of serious crimes. She notes that “the very
fact that various Indic Buddhist normative sources emphasize the sangha’s legal
autonomy is exactly because it was regularly being challenged.” At the same time,
monks did enjoy a good deal of both legal and practical autonomy, far more than did
ordinary Tibetans.
1.7 CONSTITUTION, CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW, CONSTITUTIONALISM
In the same way that Buddhism and Buddhist law implicate an unruly collection of
referents, so too does the constitution have its own sets of semantically generative
terms. The core term, constitution, itself is subject to multiple deﬁnitions. Modern
usage emphasizes the importance of writing, focusing on a document or set of
documents that declares the identity of a given community, organizes its structures
of governing power, deﬁnes foundational norms, and authorizes further acts of
rulemaking. Understood in this way, constitutions may be said to exist across a broad
sweep of times and places. More narrowly understood, the term constitution ought
to be reserved for the basic laws of nation-states that developed from the late
eighteenth century onward. In this volume we keep both denotations in play:
holding the deﬁnitional door ajar such that the term constitution refers both to
Introduction
11
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 34 ---
the various types of foundational law used to regulate premodern polities and
Buddhist monasteries, as well as to modern national constitutions, depending on
usage (e.g., Schonthal 2021b).
We take a similarly accommodative stance toward the status of writing and the
long-standing question of whether the term constitution ought to apply only to
written codes or whether it might refer more generally to the broader congeries of
written and unwritten rules and durable norms that exert strong inﬂuences on
polities over time. Scholars frequently distinguish between the “large-C” consti-
tution, which is the formal text that is now a feature of most countries, and the
“small-c” body of broader norms and practices that actually structure political and
legal behaviour. The latter might include formal rules, embodied in statutes and
rules of legislative procedure, but also unwritten norms. We ﬁnd all these usages
implicated in the chapters that follow. While a written code, such as that which
governs the Chogye monastic order in Korea, might exemplify a form of consti-
tutional writing, our authors also analyze formative and perennial ideals that shape
political culture, such as the ideal of barami in Thailand, which links political
power to moral perfection and karmic consequences.
Linked
to
the
idea
of
constitutions
is
the
idea
of
constitutionalism.
Constitutionalism, most agree, denotes the normative ideal that rulers should be
constrained by a consistent set of norms, embodying commitment across time. Such
commitments and limitations, scholars have argued, make political life possible by
providing structures for joint action (Holmes 1995). Limited government is, in the
modern conception, good government. The particular values associated with con-
stitutionalism vary with the analyst, but generally involve some notion of human
dignity or liberty.
Constitutional law is central to the practice of modern constitutionalism, reﬂect-
ing the importance of legal constraint of government. The famous British jurist
Albert Venn Dicey (1907) had a capacious deﬁnition of constitutional law as “all
rules which directly or indirectly affect the distribution or the exercise of the
sovereign power of the state.” This deﬁnition seems to allow for informal or unwrit-
ten rules, of the kind embodied in every religious tradition. More narrowly, one
might deﬁne constitutional law as the understanding of a constitution generated by
lawyers and judges in the course of practices of adjudication and interpretation. So
understood, many premodern Buddhist polities did not have constitutional law, but
others may have had some analogs. After all, the idea that rulers should be limited by
law may appear in many other cultural artifacts: philosophy and storytelling, ritual
and art.
As this discussion suggests, we deploy a range of terms that specify the phenomena
classiﬁed as constitutional. For our purposes, constitution refers to the fundamental
norms of society, whether embodied in writing or other unwritten norms.
Constitutionalism refers to the idea that these norms constrain the exercise of power.
And constitutional law is the use of legal forms to express either of these concepts.
12
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 35 ---
We use the adjective constitutional in purposefully broad ways, to suggest a link with
one or more of these phenomena.
As should now be apparent, our approach is squarely within the tradition of what
Hirschl (2014) calls comparative constitutional studies. That is, we do not focus
strictly on the domains of the written constitution, or the disciplinary perspective of
law. Rather, we understand constitutions broadly as a set of social practices that are
best approached through interdisciplinary inquiry. At the same time, we distinguish
constitutionalism as a value-imbued theory of normative constraint, that has power-
ful resonance in our era.
1.8 BUDDHISM AND CONSTITUTIONS, PAST AND PRESENT
Although this volume invokes the terms constitution and constitutionalism in deliber-
ately broad ways, we are also cautious about reading contemporary categories back into
history. That is because the terms Buddhism and constitutional law, even interpreted
in the broadest sense, also seem to implicate a variety of other terms which do not
travel very well when applied to the past, especially across geographical contexts. These
categories include things like “religion,” “state,” and “secular” (Asad 2003; Day 2002).
The reverse direction of chronological travel should also be treated with care:
what does it mean to invoke ancient Buddhist motifs, imagery, and ideals – such as
the notion of dharmara¯ja or righteous kingship – in a contemporary context? Can
we assume that these terms carry with them their older connotations, or should we
think of them as rhetorical shells whose meanings owe more to the present than to
their glossing in earlier manuscripts? As our workshop discussions revealed, thinking
across the modern–premodern divide is always a delicate dance of difference and
identity. Indeed, as David Engel reminded the workshop in his comments, the story
is even more complex than that, given that there are many variants of the premodern
just as there are “multiple modernities” (Eisenstadt 2000).
As with the Buddhist–constitutional complex, the inquiries into past also evoke
complex patterns of similarity and difference. Consider for example one of the most
basic binaries that inhere in many of the chapters that follow: the binary between
something like religion and something like politics. Given recent critiques of
secularism and the category of religion (Agrama 2012; Hurd 2015; W. F. Sullivan
et al. 2015), as well as a recognition that the modern state has deeply theological
origins (Bourdin 2010; Nelson 2010), one might be justiﬁed in feeling sceptical of
inquiries that look for conjunctions between something like a religious and political
domain prior to modernity. And yet, one does ﬁnd a variety of terms and discourses
within the premodern world that appear to carve similar discursive divisions in their
imagination of society. Premodern Buddhist polities did not have a doctrine of
secularism per se, but they drew on other logics of separation that, in various places
and times, could be used to cleave apart domains of authority associated with the
Buddha’s commands and those associated with monarchs.
Introduction
13
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 36 ---
Ideas of virtuous kingship are important in this regard because they frequently
implicate a distinction between two kinds of activities: those necessary for ensuring
social order and justice in a given polity and those necessary for protecting and
upholding the Buddha’s teachings. In the Pali sources that inﬂuenced Therava¯da
Buddhist thought, for example, one ﬁnds a distinction between the “wheel of the
dharma” (dhamma-cakka) and the “wheel of power” (a¯ _na¯-cakka), both of which were
necessary for a well-functioning society, but which monks and kings were imagined
to embody respectively (Gokhale 1969; Reynolds 1972).17 Similar distinctions – for
example, between the “orders of the king” and the “orders of the Buddha” – were also
taken up throughout Southern Asian polities over time, often in the context of
discussions about righteous rulers (Ladwig and Kourilsky 2017–2018; Larsson 2016;
Schonthal 2021a). Two of the most common terms of praise ascribed to rulers –
“wheel turner” (cakravartin) and “righteous king” (dharmara¯ja) – only make sense
because they fuse otherwise juxtaposed notions of temporal and otherworldly author-
ity, royal power, and moral restraint. In this sense they appear to incorporate, if only
implicitly, quasi-constitutionalist ideas of normative limitation on the actions of the
monarch in the service of cosmic law.
On the Tibetan plateau, one ﬁnds a similar contrast between chos and srid. Chos
implicated the timeless laws of dharma, while srid referred to the rules issued by
kings and other powerful elites, which governed relations in this lifetime (Cüppers
et al. 2004; Reugg 2014). The system of religio-political control by lamas came to be
known as the chos srid gdan or “dual system” that united chos and srid, in a manner
not dissimilar to the ideal dharmara¯ja (a title also used to praise Tibetan monarchs).
While these kinds of arrangements do not conform to modern categories of the
religious and the secular, they nevertheless suggest some awareness that monastic
and monarchical authority come from different and analytically separable sources.
Moreover, twentieth-century lawmakers and politicians have used these terms to
justify polices that aim to separate those activities thought to be proper to Buddhism
from those which are thought to be proper to statecraft. In mainland Southeast Asia,
for example, the distinction between dhamma- and a¯na¯-cakkas has been used to
rationalize monks’ denial of the right to vote or to hold public ofﬁce (Larsson 2016),
about which more will be said below. Similarly, Tibetan lawmakers drew heavily on
the binary of chos and srid to translate the idea of secularism in the context of recent
debates about the Charter of Tibetans-in-Exile (Brox 2010 and 2012).
In at least one case, the dharmic principle of anicca or impermanence has been
used as a resource to undermine temporal law. Perhaps rationalizing his country’s
continuous constitutional turnover since 1932, the late King Rama IX of Thailand
characterized constitutions as impermanent human creations, subject to replace-
ment as conditions demand (Harding 2007). This illustrates another kind of
17 See also Collins’ (1998, 473–4) important remarks on the relative rareness of this pairing in
Pali literature.
14
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 37 ---
common rhetorical move, which is to characterize the formal constitution as a
foreign, Western form, to be distinguished from the true and eternal dharma.
1.9 BUDDHIST CONSTITUTIONALISM?
Given that Buddhism and constitutional thought both draw upon categories that
distinguish more-than-worldly authority from merely-worldly authority, idealised
systems of order (dharma, rule of law) from practical acts of governing, the question
then becomes how are these things brought together in particular forms of govern-
ance and legal texts? Put another way, what does it mean to both accommodate and
align the wheels of dharma and power, or chos and srid, in a constitutional mode?
One way to talk about this merger in the context of national constitutions is to use
the language of Buddhist constitutionalism, a formula that implies a purposeful
comparison with other variants, such as secular or Islamic constitutionalism. The
phrase also implies that there is something distinctive, vis-à-vis other constitutional
variants, about the history and orientation of such a project. In an initial deﬁnition,
Schonthal described Buddhist constitutionalism as
attempts to use written constitutions and other basic laws to organize power in ways
that protect and preserve Buddhist teachings and institutions, especially the insti-
tution of Buddhist monasticism, the saṅgha. (2017, 707)
According to this deﬁnition, what links together the various contemporary consti-
tutional projects in Buddhist-majority states is two things: an impulse to safeguard
Buddhism in general, and a concern with the sangha in particular. Schonthal argues
that a deﬁning feature of this kind of constitutional project is the question of
“properly structuring the relationship between governing elites and Buddhist
monks – each of whom have, historically, claimed special responsibilities and
authority for the protection of the religion” (2017, 708).
An advantage of this formulation of Buddhist constitutionalism is that it acknow-
ledges the kinds of entanglements that emerge between what we moderns would call
religion and public law (Hirschl 2010). It deﬁnes the project in active terms, as a set
of undertakings designed to generate, implement, or expand the promotion of
Buddhism through, in this case, national constitutions. Such a deﬁnition admits,
even normalizes, the possibility of monks engaged in law-making, or reincarnated
tulku (such as the Dalai Lama) serving as heads of state. Yet, for some, it directs
attention too strongly toward certain Buddhist authorities, namely the sangha, rather
than others, such as lay elites or Buddhist political theory more generally.
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang (2020) has argued that the study of “Buddhist
constitutionalism” ought to take more seriously the profound inﬂuence and strategic
deployment of Buddhist notions of karma and dharmic kingship on political behav-
iour in Thailand. He argues that one should view the constitutional history of
Thailand as reﬂecting a contest between two forms of constitutionalism, a
Introduction
15
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 38 ---
Buddhist constitutionalism that has roots going back to the thirteenth century, and a
liberal democratic version that emerges with the 1932 revolution (see also McCargo
2004). From this perspective, a modern project of Buddhist constitutionalism might
mean imbuing the constitution with normative values associated with the dharma
and trying to secure a righteous ruler who will act in accordance with internalized
norms of appropriate restraint. Empowering a wise ruler rather than constraining a
bad one thus serves as the focal point for Buddhist constitutionalism.
In her chapter, Eugénie Mérieau also notes the amalgamated structure of
Buddhist constitutionalism in Thailand, albeit from a different angle. Examining
the history of constitution-making in Siam/Thailand from 1932, Mérieau demon-
strates the deep interfusion of Buddhist and European ideas of sovereignty, kingship,
law, and constitution that make up the country’s constitutional monarchy. This
“bricolage” of legal authority (see also, Mérieau 2021) did not so much evolve
naturally as through careful design. As Mérieau shows, Thailand’s early constitu-
tionalists, such as Pridi Banomyong, purposefully merged evolving theories of Thai
constitutionalism with traditional notions of Buddhist kingship and ritual authority.
Indeed, they went so far as to encourage the ritual, symbolic interpretation of the
physical constitution as a sacred text akin to the Buddhist canon. Read through this
history, the notion of Buddhist constitutionalism takes on an entirely new valence,
in which the union of the two terms suggests not so much the support of Buddhism
through constitutional measures, as the acts of grounding, rationalizing, and legit-
imating the entire ediﬁce of the modern constitution itself within the framework of
Buddhist cosmology and morality.
Yet another example of the way in which conjoined Buddhist and liberal logics
can animate constitutional practice can be seen in the chapter by Richard
W. Whitecross, who examines the relationship of Buddhism and national
constitution-making in Bhutan. According to Whitecross, the “dual system of
governance” established by Bhutan’s theocratic founder, Zhabdrung Ngawang
Namgyal, established a conceptual separation between religious and temporal
power. When Bhutan produced its ﬁrst written constitution in 2008, constitutional-
izing the monarchy and introducing elections for the ﬁrst time, the drafters reached
back to the Zhabdrung’s ideas to imbue the Himalayan kingdom with a Buddhist
mantle. At the same time, they removed monks from having a direct role in
governance, leading to a number of unintended consequences and a degree of
popular unease about the constitutional status of Buddhism in this deeply
religious country.
Iselin Frydenlund further expands the semantic range of Buddhist constitutional-
ism. Examining the evolution of constitutional law in post-independence Myanmar,
she calls attention to the broader ambit of Buddhist constitutionalism beyond
explicit concessions given in the constitutional text. In Frydenlund’s view, state
support for Buddhism can also be entrenched constitutionally through statutes,
unwritten norms, and more subtle rhetorical genuﬂexions to the preeminence of
16
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 39 ---
Buddhism, such as the calendrical conventions used in Myanmar’s laws, which
record the dates of legislation with reference to the birth of the Buddha. More
provocatively, Frydenlund ﬁnds the presence of Buddhist constitutionalism in legal
language and practices that purport to separate religion from politics in impartial
ways. The very forms of secularism enacted by Myanmar’s constitution, she argues,
give preferential treatment to Buddhism by carving up “secular” and “religious”
issues in ways that indirectly advantage Buddhist groups or adopt Buddhist perspec-
tives on the proper role of religious clergy in voting, campaigning, and holding
public ofﬁce, and other political processes. Even attempts at separation cannot
escape the deeply Buddhist political idiom of the majority population. As she notes,
though, these practices of Buddhist statecraft have been challenged by ethnic and
religious minority communities in Myanmar. The 2021 military coup ushered in a
new period of contestation in this regard, as the democratic opposition adopted a
new “Federal Democracy Charter” that declared an end to Buddhist constitutional
privileges, while the military junta has positioned itself as the protector of Buddhism.
1.10 DIRECTIONS OF INFLUENCE: BUDDHIST
CONSTITUTIONALISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL BUDDHISM
There is little question that Buddhist texts, institutions, and ideals have inﬂuenced
the design, interpretation, and practice of constitutional law in contemporary Asia.
As noted, similar arguments have long been made about Christianity in the
European context by scholars such as Harold Berman and Brian Tierney. They
and others argued even more explicitly that constitutional thought in the West, and
the liberal constitutional tradition more generally, grew out of Christian theological
principles and acts of ecclesiastical reformation in medieval Europe. Less well
studied, both in Europe and in Asia, are the effects of “constitutional practice”
(Schonthal 2016a, 11) – by which we mean the various, often high-proﬁle, acts of
drafting, implementing, and interpreting contemporary constitutional law – on the
practice and institutional organization of Buddhism.
One example can be found in Krishantha Fedricks’ chapter on Sri Lanka, which
highlights how features of constitutional law – its histories, principles, and “linguis-
tic ideologies” – inﬂuence the ways in which Buddhism is practiced and understood
within a new Buddhist movement on the island. Drawing on his expertise in
linguistic anthropology, Fedricks identiﬁes both a conceptual symmetry and a
historical continuity between two linguistic ideologies. The ﬁrst is a “Sinhala-only”
ideology that gained momentum in the decades following independence and which
led to making Sinhala (rather than English or Tamil) the dominant language in Sri
Lanka’s 1972 and 1978 constitutions. The second is a “vernacularising” ideology that
has been championed by a popular new Buddhist movement in Sri Lanka called
Mahamevna¯va and which led to Sinhala (rather than Pali) being the preferred
language for Buddhist religiosity by that group. This reformist movement,
Introduction
17
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 40 ---
Fedricks insists, takes inspiration from provisions in Sri Lanka’s constitution when
creating its own manifestos, which underscore the ultimate goal of creating a
transnational gautama buddha ra¯jya, or Buddhist state.
Similar vectors of inﬂuence, running from national constitutions to Buddhist
groups, can also be observed in Japan. Though the country has a long and rich
history of engagement with Buddhism (dating back to the “Constitution” of Prince
Shotoku of 604 CE), Buddhists in modern and contemporary Japan have operated
under two constitutional regimes that marginalized their activities (Thomas 2016).
The Meiji Constitution of 1889 enabled the wartime government to prioritize
Shintō, while the postwar constitution reacted to that by institutionalizing a very
strong separation of church and state. In his chapter on the topic, Levi
McLaughlin demonstrates the strong social and cultural impacts that Japan’s
1947 Constitution has had on the self-presentation and institutional organization
of Buddhist groups. Using two case studies – one looking at the activities of
Buddhist clerical training and humanitarian aid programs and the other tracking
the development of the highly inﬂuential lay Buddhist group Soka Gakkai –
McLaughlin stresses the strong social and legal impacts that Japan’s modern
constitutions have had on the activities of Buddhist organizations. Attention to
the nation’s constitutions has caused Japan’s Buddhists to reorient, revise, and even
reconceive their activities in ways that demonstrably conform to constitutional
prohibitions against mixing religion with state.
So inﬂuential has Japan’s Constitution been, that McLaughlin even proposes an
alternative pairing of Buddhism and constitutional law from the forms described
above: rather than a form of Buddhist constitutionalism, which seeks to align state
law with Buddhist goals, Japan constitutes a case of constitutional Buddhism, the
deliberate aligning of Buddhist organizations and activities with a national consti-
tution. Religious organizations have themselves become constitutionalized, as insti-
tutional imaginaries ﬂow from state to society (McLaughlin 2019). This illustrates
powerfully our theme of mutual interdependence and construction.
1.11 FURTHER ENTANGLEMENTS IN THE
BUDDHIST–CONSTITUTIONAL COMPLEX
We do not wish to give the mistaken impression that the only way to conceive of the
relationships within the Buddhist–constitutional complex is as vectors of inﬂuence
running one way or the other, with either Buddhist elements inﬂuencing the
practice of constitutional law or constitutional prototypes shaping the practice of
Buddhism. In many cases the dynamics of inﬂuence and integration are more
complicated than this, as our designation of the Buddhist–constitutional complex
implies. Rather than one domain deﬁning the other, Buddhism and constitutional
cultures codevelop and coconstitute each other. For example, in his chapter on
Cambodia, Ben Lawrence examines the intermeshed histories of the country’s two
18
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 41 ---
major Buddhist monastic bodies, the Thammayut and Mahanikay, through the
various ways in which those divisions were recognized or occluded in constitutional
texts from 1947 onwards. The 1947 Constitution, which appointed the patriarchs of
each sect to the Council of the Throne, suggested a balance between the elite and
royally afﬁliated lineage of the Thammayut sect (which had been imported from
Siam) and the more populous, home-grown Mahanikay, to which more than
95 percent of monks claimed afﬁliation – a balance that seemed consequential in
the waning days of French inﬂuence. When the same arrangement reemerged in
the 1993 constitution following periods of control by the military, Khmer Rouge, and
Vietnamese, it did not signal equality between the two sects, but rather, competition.
By recognizing the two patriarchs in the constitution, lawmakers contributed to
hardening sectarian identities, while at the same time obscuring the de facto
dominance of the larger and politically connected Mahanikay. In this way, the
effects of constitutional provisions were, as Lawrence tells us, “contingent” on
complex histories of politics, alliances, elections, and occupation.
A different version of the intermeshing of national and monastic constitution-
making can be seen in Mark Nathan’s chapter, in the form of what might be called a
double clash of constitutional orders: a clash, on the one hand, between the
constitutions of South Korea’s secular state and those of the country’s Buddhist
monastic orders; and a clash, on the other hand, between the monastic constitutions
of celibate and non-celibate monks within the Chogye order. It is notable that all of
these texts were classiﬁed using the same word for law, hon. The clashes may be
more apparent than direct, yielding an impression of disharmony or incompatibility
that was mobilized by different parties at different times. Nevertheless, the story
Nathan tells – which culminates in an attempted ritual disembowelling on the
grounds of the Supreme Court – reminds readers of the overlapping and nested lines
of tension that can develop between and among forms of state law and Buddhist law,
national constitutions, and monastic constitutions.
In his chapter on Thailand, Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang reminds readers
that, while monks often play important roles in South and Southeast Asian politics,
the inﬂuence of Buddhism on constitutional politics extends well beyond the
impacts of the sangha. Remarking on the sudden rise and inﬂuence of unelected
“watchdog agencies” in Thai political culture, Khemthong asks why these elitist,
conservative, and anti-democratic institutions have been allowed to ﬂourish and, for
many, appear to be legitimate. His answer points to a particular concept that has
been underlying Thai Buddhism for centuries and which has been usefully appro-
priated in modern Thai politics. The notion of barami, or moral perfection,
Khemthong argues, undergirds popular culture in Thailand and feeds into a conser-
vative political mentality that aligns tradition, morality, hierarchy, elitism, and
Buddhism with good governance and Thai-ness. At the same time, the doctrine
also seems to align democracy, popular sovereignty and free debate with foreignness,
Western imperialism, and political chaos. In Khemthong’s estimation, Thai-style
Introduction
19
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 42 ---
democracy is dhammacracy, a philosophy of governance rooted in the idea that, by
virtue of their past karmic merit, a small group of powerful elites has the moral
authority to rule over a broader population of less meritorious, less virtuous, less
capable people. It is this “barami-based” political philosophy, he argues, that
explains the elite-centric shape of Thai constitutional culture from 1997 onward.
These analytical and descriptive accounts also have normative implications.
Acknowledging a contrast, even an incommensurability, between models of liberal
constitutionalism which emanate from “the West” and forms of Buddhist normativ-
ity and legality endemic to Asia, Asanga Welikala calls for the creation of alternative
models of constitutionalism that might have more global purchase (see also, de Silva
Wijeyeratne 2013). These new models, argues Welikala, would have more ﬁdelity to
normative and descriptive dimensions of constitutional practice in Asia. They would
have to draw both from the ﬁelds of “Buddhism and law” and comparative consti-
tutional law to think of alternative paradigms that “could make the constraining
function of constitutionalism in its normative dimension more consistent with, and
less jarring to, the Buddhist–Asian ethos.”
1.12 THE CONSTITUTIONAL REGULATION OF SĀSANA
AND SANGHA
Looking at these diverse case studies, it is clear that the Buddhist–constitutional
complex in Asia is both similar to and different from the intermeshing of religion
and constitutions in other parts of the world. One point of distinction is the
understanding of precisely what is being protected when constitution drafters obli-
gate the state to protect “Buddhism,” or, as it is commonly referred to in South and
Southeast Asia, the Buddha sa¯sana (the “instructions of the Buddha”).18 One legal
commission in Sri Lanka, for example, glossed the term sa¯sana as referring to the
following:
the Buddha, the nine other-worldly truths (dhamma-s) discovered by the Buddha,
the complete teaching of the Buddha (dhamma), the jewel of the monks, the limb
of Buddhist temples together with forest hermitages and meditation centres, bodhi
trees, stupas, image houses, relic palaces, monastic preaching books and [other]
books, meeting houses for monks, ﬁelds and properties that belong to temples,
Buddhist education, the shrines to important deities endowed by Buddhist kings
(devalaya), female renunciants (silma¯ta¯-s) and their sanctuaries, the lay persons who
have gone to the triple gem for refuge, Buddhist literature, culture and civilisation,
Buddhist festivals, processions (perahæra), offerings and customs, Buddhist prin-
ciples (pratipatti) and ethics (a¯ca¯ra dharma), as well as those things like this that are
basic to [the Sa¯sana’s] cultivation. (Government of Sri Lanka 2002, 15)
18 On the complexity of the term sa¯sana see Carter (1993).
20
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 43 ---
As one can see in this example, those who draft and interpret laws designed to
protect Buddhism, qua sa¯sana, often understand it in different terms than US
Supreme Court justices would understand “religion.” More than a set of beliefs
and practices held by individuals congregating voluntarily as a “church,”19 the
sa¯sana explicitly denotes a broad range of ideas, texts, objects, institutions, proper-
ties, and practices. In short, it is a capacious term interpreted, in many cases, as
covering the entire ideal and material legacy of the Buddha and his followers.
In addition to being regarded as an abstract and collective noun, Therava¯da
Buddhists also understand the sa¯sana in a more personalistic and concrete sense:
like all things in sa _msa¯ra, the sa¯sana is also ﬁnite, subject to degeneration and
decline and predicted to vanish within the next 2,500 years (Nattier 1991; Turner
2014). In this frame of reference, constitutional mandates to protect the sa¯sana are
not simply attempts to prevent damage to an otherwise stable dispensation, but calls
to extend Buddhism’s existence over time, by actively defending the Buddha’s fragile
legacy against anything that might hasten the decline that is already underway.
Another point of distinction is the tendency to use constitutional mandates to
promote Buddhism as a pretence for inhibiting Buddhist monks from intervening in
politics. As mentioned above, the Constitutions of Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, and
Bhutan prohibit Buddhist monks from voting or holding public ofﬁce, in order to
protect them from the supposedly profaning impact of politics on what should be a
purely “religious” vocation circumscribed by the rules of vinaya (Larsson 2015).
Although similar restrictions were abandoned in Cambodia, Buddhist monks there
have launched pressure campaigns encouraging the government to reintroduce
such measures (Lawrence 2022). Analogous dynamics can be found throughout
colonial and postcolonial Asia (Streicher 2021a; Brac de la Perrière 2021). This kind
of logic, which urges separation of religion and politics in the name of protecting the
former against the latter, is, of course, familiar to historians of American consti-
tutional law: similar rationales appear in Madison’s “Letter to the Danbury Baptists.”
The universe of Buddhist constitutionalism, however, gives the separation of sangha
and state its own kind of virtuous patina (Frydenlund 2016; Streicher 2021b).
Claims of separation notwithstanding, projects of statecraft in Asia, both old and
new, have often engaged in reforming and regulating Buddhist monks. The records
left by kings who ruled in premodern Sri Lanka, Myanmar, and Thailand celebrate
the monarchs’ role in “cleansing” the sangha of impious monks and restructuring
the remaining clerics as an orderly, centralized hierarchy (Bechert 1970; Tambiah
1976). As Daigengna Duoer’s chapter on early twentieth-century Inner Mongolia
reminds us, Japan’s imperial government undertook similar projects of monastic
manipulation under the sign of puriﬁcation, using lama education programmes and
clerical organizations to reshape the Tibetan and Mongolian clergy in ways that
19 On “church” as a legal category in US jurisprudence as well as debates over the corporate
imagination of religion, see W. F. Sullivan (2020).
Introduction
21
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 44 ---
cohered with reformist understandings of Buddhism popular in Japan at the time.20
The region of Inner Mongolia was the site of contested political authority, exposing
monasteries to the regulatory approaches of Japan, the Republic of China and, less
directly, theocratic government and subsequently communism that took hold in
Outer Mongolia.
Leninist governments by deﬁnition seek to penetrate all social institutions, but
they vary in their particular approaches to doing so. As Ngoc Son Bui demonstrates,
the Leninist government of Vietnam has sought to draw legitimacy from Buddhism,
while of course coopting and regulating its institutions. The Charter of the Buddhist
Sangha of Vietnam mimics constitutional forms while providing a structure for
governance of Buddhist institutions. It is, in this sense, an instrument producing
constitutional Buddhism of a particular type. As compared with other Leninist
regimes, the Vietnamese government has a softer regulatory approach (in part
because of the important role of Buddhist institutions in resisting the government
of South Vietnam during the Vietnam war), as well as a generally reformist orienta-
tion of the government within a one-party framework. But there is no doubt that
Buddhist institutions play a subservient role to state-building needs.
The apogee of such attempts might be seen in the various regulations for
Buddhist monks promulgated by the People’s Republic of China (PRC). With
Buddhism the dominant faith among the country’s Tibetan and Mongolian
minority populations, it was perhaps inevitable that the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) would seek to control and coopt it. But the CCP has been particularly
aggressive in recent years, as it has tightened controls over every aspect of Chinese
society. One of the mechanisms directed at Buddhist institutions has been the
establishment of the Buddhist Association of China, described in detail in the
chapter by André Laliberté (see also, Liu 2020). He notes that the Buddhist
Association plays both an internal regulatory role as well as one involving external
representation. As China has been stymied in acquiring a leadership role in global
Buddhist organizations, it has launched its own World Buddhist Forum, in part to
accomplish diplomatic goals of bringing Taiwan back into the national fold. This
Buddhist diplomacy reﬂects the seemingly complete subservience of Buddhist
institutions to national goals as deﬁned by the Leninist Party-State. Viewed
through the prism of contemporary Vietnamese and Chinese laws, then, the
modern Buddhist–constitutional complex can be seen not only as touching dis-
courses and imagery that moralise state power, but also those that seemed to
routinize, regularize, and reform monastic power.21
20 A similar drive to reform monastic education and forms of knowledge are visible in early
modern efforts by kings to edit and compile the collection of texts that can be considered “the
word of the buddha,” buddhavacana (Lammerts 2018, 137–78).
21 Understood this way, the political-cum-religious institution of the reincarnate lama, popular
throughout Tibet and Mongolia, might be seen as a perfect synthesis of both inclinations: the
spiritualizing of statecraft and the etatization of monasticism.
22
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 45 ---
1.13 IDEALS AND ACTUALITIES IN
CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORIES
As is always the case in comparative constitutional studies more generally, investi-
gations of Buddhism and constitutional law must reckon with the distance between
what texts say and what humans do, between the ideals of constitutionalism written
down and the actual realities about which those ideals claim to speak. In his
workshop comments, Mark McClish pointed out that we have no evidence that
the pious duties of the king listed in ancient Indian dharma´sa¯stra texts actually
functioned as limitations on royal power. Despite a long history of scholars under-
scoring the moral limits placed on rulers by “sacred” norms and brahmins, the
actual behaviour of rulers in premodern India remains an open question. Similar
questions were raised by Lammerts, who cautioned scholars against assuming that
ideologies of virtuous kingship that appear in early Buddhist texts – notions of
dharmara¯ja, cakravartin, or bodhisattva – necessarily constrained the behaviour of
kings in practice. We simply do not know. Those who are interested in ﬁnding
premodern forms of Buddhist constitutionalism, Lammerts suggests, should not be
spellbound by the images of dharmic kingship that appear throughout Buddhist
studies and contemporary politics in Southern Asia, but look for more direct
evidence about how law-making actually worked on the ground.
Of course, many legal historians ﬁnd themselves wrestling with similar dilemmas.
Generally speaking, legal archives provide an abundance of normative sources such
as codes, court records, and juristic writing that explain what ought to happen, but
comparatively few sources that help scholars evaluate whether people actually do
what the texts demand. Therefore, it is impossible to know whether the various
ideals of limited rule laid out in Buddhist texts ever translated into actual constraints
on the powerful. Here, methodological concerns found in legal history, in Buddhist
studies, and in constitutional studies converge. In recent years, the ﬁeld of compara-
tive constitutional studies has become increasingly attentive to the deviations
between rule-of-law ideals and political actualities (Hirschl 2014). Ideas of illiberal
or autocratic constitutions – which have become increasingly relevant to consti-
tutional studies and the current world order – evince a similar scepticism about the
relationships between rules and outcomes (Ginsburg and Simpser 2014). They
highlight the ways in which textual norms not only deviate from human actions
but may in fact serve as ideological cover for the very opposite types of behaviour.
This methodological parallax between Buddhist and constitutional studies casts
important light on our attempts to locate Buddhist constitutionalism in history.
The textual ideals on which scholars rely may serve more as propaganda than
guardrails on power.
Among the various beneﬁts of interdisciplinary inquiries into the Buddhist–
constitutional complex are the potential sharing of approaches and techniques for
thinking about the work of normative texts in the world, beyond the question of
Introduction
23
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 46 ---
whether textual ideals are accurate or reliable indicia of human behaviour. As several
scholars in this volume and at the workshop pointed out, the study of constitutions
across cultures, geographies, and histories can sensitize scholars of both Buddhism
and law to manifold ways in which the rhetoric of normative texts may be interpreted
or used: to hide acts of domination, or justify rebellion, or to elevate the importance of
one group (e.g., monks or judges) above others (e.g., kings or presidents). At the same
time, these kinds of studies should also remind legal historians that, even as pure
ideals, legal codes and concepts also inﬂuence actors on the ground, even if not in the
injunctive way suggested by texts themselves. As Fernanda Pirie urged in her com-
ments, premodern forms of law were not always meant to be practical and enforce-
able, in the way we understand today. Legal texts are also cosmologies, narratives,
ideologies – all which are, themselves, actors in history.22
1.14 COMPARATIVE REFLECTIONS
In what ways is the nexus of Buddhism and constitutional law distinctive vis-à-vis
other religio–constitutional arrangements, beyond the particularities of sa¯sana and
sangha mentioned above? Mills, in his chapter on Tibet, identiﬁes a “core soterio-
logical distinction” between Buddhism and Abrahamic traditions which he sees as
essential to legal thinking. In Buddhist traditions, the personal morality of law-
makers, mostly kings, is integral to the legitimacy of law. This is different, he insists,
from the monotheistic faiths, which underscore the divine origin of proper law that
exists apart from the individual.
Of course, Buddhist polities also had a theory of transcendent law, dharma,
that would ideally constrain the behaviour of humans. As with notions of divine
law in Christian or Islamic traditions, the consequences for transgressing dharmic
principles were, in the ﬁrst instance, soteriological. Those who ﬂouted dharma
risked a variety of unpleasant outcomes: the prolonging of sa _msa¯ra, an inferior
rebirth (as an animal or hungry ghost), even a reincarnation in hell. While some
readers might want to dismiss these threats as imaginary, one can nevertheless
assume that for many Buddhists the cosmic laws of dharma are understood to be
no less “real,” and perhaps more reliable, than the laws of kings or countries
(Engel and Engel 2010).
Buddhism has likely shaped the expression and exercise of power in other ways as
well. Whether or not premodern kings or contemporary politicians actually altered
their behaviour out of concern for dharma’s laws, the idea that rulers should govern in
dharmic ways has undoubtedly provided ideological parameters for the normalization
and presentation of political authority. As with other religious traditions, rulers in
Buddhist-majority polities take pains to advertise their ﬁdelity to local expectations
about the nature of moral rule (Blackburn 2017; Holt 1996; Schober 2011).
22 On the “legal cosmology” of Tibetan Buddhists, see French (1995).
24
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 47 ---
Critics and reformers may also appeal to the laws of dharma to call for political
change (Bowie 2014; Ladwig 2014). Sulak Sivaraksa (2007), for example, has invoked
dharma as a source of principles of justice to guide judges and as a grounding for
substantive freedoms of thought, speech, and action, as well as the notion of equality
before the law. Similarly, the Dalai Lama (Gyatso 1999) draws on dharmic prin-
ciples of liberality, forbearance, and non-violence to support arguments of comple-
mentarity between Buddhism and liberal democracy. These programmatic efforts
are important, especially as they inform political projects like that of the Tibetan
exiles laid out at the beginning of this introduction. In all of this, the Buddhist–
constitutional
complex
looks
very
much
like
the
Islamic–
or
Christian–
constitutional complex. It contains a set of resources (discourses, texts, ideals, ritual
scripts) that might be used to express or contest power using a Buddhist grammar,
and that can be deployed in conversations about governance.
What other distinctions might one make? The ﬁnal section of this volume offers
comparative reﬂections from scholars of religious legal traditions outside Buddhism.
Deepa Das Acevedo points to a number of instructive similarities and differences in
the ways that constitutional law and religion interact in Buddhist-majority settings
and the Hindu-majority jurisdiction of India. Despite certain dissimilarities between
Buddhism and Hinduism as religious traditions, Das Acevedo ﬁnds in Bhutan,
Korea, and Sri Lanka points of profound resonance with India. Like that of
Bhutan, India’s Constitution also encodes ambiguity, even inconsistency, into its
treatment of the majority religion, suggesting both separation and integration of
religion and state. As in Korea, India’s judiciary both avows and violates the
autonomy of religious communities and encourages (rather than resolves) religious
disputes. And, much as in Sri Lanka, state-legal idioms and ideals in India work to
shape religious institutions and practices. The Indian judiciary’s willingness to wade
into intra-religious disputes is instructive for the relationships among state and
religion uncovered in this volume.
At the same time, one ﬁnds strong similarities with religio-legal histories in other
parts of the world, including Europe and the Middle East. Richard Helmholz, one
of the foremost experts on medieval canon law, offers a number of reﬂections on the
similarities between Christian law, Buddhist law, and constitutional law. Pointing to
the distinct legal status of clerics in canon law, for example, he suggests a striking
complementarity between “the beneﬁt of clergy” in medieval Europe and the
distinct status and various prerogatives accorded to Buddhist monks and nuns in
premodern and modern Asia. Helmholz also identiﬁes several principles of canon
law that seem consonant with constitutionalism in the sense of limits on governing
power and protections of individual rights. These incipient constitutional principles
include the (partial) freedom of conscience for believers, protections against self-
incrimination, and biblically derived notions of common welfare rights. The juxta-
position with Buddhism is illuminating, for one does not see the same obvious
incorporation of substantive norms into constitutional law in the modern period.
Introduction
25
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 48 ---
Instead, one might conclude that Buddhism’s inﬂuence has been at the level of the
unwritten small-c constitutional norms that structure the exercise of power. The
medieval Church in Europe promoted and beneﬁted from the development of its
own legal personality, which had powerful spill-over effects in Western legal devel-
opment. We do not know about the same process in Asia. We do know, however,
that Buddhist monasteries could hold property and had internal jurisdiction over at
least some crimes committed by the members of the sangha (Gunawardana 1979;
Jansen 2018; B. Sullivan 2020). This raises the question of the limits of state power in
dealing with monastic institutions, as well as what the conceptions of proper
temporal authority were.
In a similar vein, Clark Lombardi explores the chapters from the perspective of
Islamic law. In contrast with both Christianity and Buddhism, the Muslim world
lacks a separate class of people who follow their own legal code. The ulama, or
community of scholars, plays an important role in articulating the law and stafﬁng
positions in the legal system, but it is not subject to a distinct set of rules. The moral
code and the law itself is, in principle, the same for everyone, but its source in
revealed scripture means that human beings only have partial access to it. The tools
developed for elaboration of the law in the Islamic tradition led, in practice, to
diverse and multiple human interpretations through legal institutions. This plural-
ism, which is a deﬁning feature of Islamic law, raises similar questions to those
observed in Buddhist legal settings: Whose voices are considered probative on
correct practice? How does one distinguish questions that are open to plural
interpretations from those for which uniformity is required? Lombardi speculates
on myriad cross-religious comparisons and divergences that may emerge as the ﬁeld
of Buddhism and comparative constitutional law evolves.
1.15 CONCLUSION
Rather than concluding inquiry into the Buddhist–constitutional complex, the
contributions in this volume only begin to open up the ﬁeld. The comparative
reﬂections in the ﬁnal section of the book perhaps conﬁrm the point made by
French and Nathan (2014) that the Buddhist legal tradition is less consolidated as an
object of study than are those of other religious traditions. The internal pluralism of
the Islamic legal tradition, for example, was ultimately constrained by the legal
character of the Qu’ran, and the consolidation of the legal tradition by the jurists
operating in subsequent centuries. As Hallaq (2004) has argued, these jurists formed
the essential connecting tissue between state and society.
Buddhist polities, by contrast, routinely demonstrate the impact of the transcend-
ent law on human governance, constitutional and otherwise, even if they do not
attribute to the Buddha himself positive legislation binding upon all humans.
Dharma could inform the laws made by rulers and the decisions made by judges.
In certain times and places (though not universally), dharma itself was even
26
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 49 ---
imagined as a cosmic legal system (dhammasattha) readymade for implementation
by the virtuous (Lammerts 2018). Nevertheless, in all cases dharma required medi-
ation and modulation in its application to the sociopolitical sphere; and these modes
of application, although they often drew on common repertoires (the dharmara¯ja
ideal, the dual system, and so on), also included creative elaborations particular to a
given place and time. The Buddhist–constitutional complex has, in this way, been
as creative as it has been inﬂuential. To be sure, some scholars have noted inherent
tensions between aspects of the Buddha’s teachings (e.g., on non-violence), on the
one hand, and statecraft (e.g., warfare), on the other, implying that dharmic kingship
was equal parts ideal and impossibility (Collins 1998, 414–96; Zimmerman 2006).
This might have meant that, compared with Christianity and Islam, the “law” of
dharma might be less convincing as a rationale for social ordering, given that rulers
had to claim not only that they upheld the dharma but that they themselves were the
embodiments (karmically and otherwise) of its virtue. But viewed from the broad
socio-legal perspective offered in this volume, the “law” of dharma has clearly had
an impact on social ordering as great as the laws of shari`a or Torah.
More can be said about the Buddhist–constitutional complex, and much more
will be illuminated in the chapters that follow. Whether or not the terrain of
Buddhism and constitutional law has similar contours to other areas of comparative
constitutional studies we cannot yet say. As a ﬁeld-in-the-making, we only hope that
this rough guide will encourage and enable others to go further.
references
Agrama, Hussein Ali. 2012. Questioning Secularism: Islam, Sovereignty, and the Rule of Law in
Modern Egypt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Arai, Paula Kane Robinson. 1999. Women Living Zen: Japanese Sōtō Buddhist Nuns. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Asad, Talal. 2003. Formations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity. Palo Alto:
Stanford University Press.
Baker, Chris and Phongpaichit, Pasuk. 2016. The Palace Law of Ayutthaya and the
Thammasat: Law and Kingship in Siam. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Bauer, Joanne and Bell, Daniel. 1999. The East Asian Challenge for Human Rights. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Bechert, Heinz. 1970. “Theravada Buddhist Sangha: Some General Observations on
Historical and Political Factors in Its Development.” The Journal of Asian Studies 29
(August): 761‒78. https://doi.org/10.2307/2943086.
Berman, Harold J. 1983. Law and Revolution, the Formation of the Western Legal Tradition.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Blackburn, Anne M. 2017. “Buddhist Technologies of Statecraft and Millennial Moments.”
History and Theory 56 (1): 71–9. https://doi.org/10.1111/hith.12004.
Borchert, Thomas. 2020. “Belt-and-Road Buddhists: Religion-Making and the Rebuilding of
Minority Buddhism in the Reform Era.” Review of Religion and Chinese Society 7 (1):
92–119. https://doi.org/10.1163/22143955-00701005.
Introduction
27
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 50 ---
Bourdin, Bernard. 2010. The Theological–Political Origins of the Modern State. Tr. Susan
Pickford. Washington: Catholic University Press.
Bowie, Katherine. 2014. “The Saint with Indra’s Sword: Khruubaa Srivichai and Buddhist
Millenarianism in Northern Thailand.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 56
(July): 681–713. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0010417514000292.
Brac de la Perrière, Bénédicte. 2021. “‘Religion’ as an Issue in Political Transition. Two
Competing Secularities in Buddhist Burma (Myanmar).” HAL: Open Science. https://
hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03500666.
Brox, Trine. 2010. “Changing the Tibetan Way? Contesting Secularisms in the Tibetan
Diaspora.” In Tibetan Studies. An Anthology, edited by Peter Schweiger and Saadet
Arslan, 117–42. Halle: IITBS.
2012. “Unyoking the Religious from the Secular.” In Varieties of Secularism in Asia:
Anthropological Explorations of Religion, Politics, and the Spiritual, edited by Nils
Bubandt and Martijn van Beek, 55–74. New York: Routledge.
2016. Tibetan Democracy: Governance, Leadership and Conﬂict in Exile. London: I.B.
Tauris.
Bui, Ngoc Son. 2021. “Constitutional Amendment in Laos.” International Journal of
Constitutional Law 17: 756‒86.
Carter, John Ross. 1993. “The Origin and Development of ‘Buddhism’ and ‘Religion’ in the
Study of Theravada Buddhism.” In On Understanding Buddhists. Essays on the
Therava¯da Tradition in Sri Lanka, 9–26. Albany: SUNY Press.
Cheng, Wei-Yi. 2006. Buddhist Nuns in Taiwan and Sri Lanka: A Critique of the Feminist
Perspective. London: Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203966518.
Clarke, Shayne. 2015. “Vinayas.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, edited by Jonathan A.
Silk, I: Literature and Languages: 60–87. Leiden: Brill.
Collins, Steven. 1998. Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cüppers, Christoph, Ruegg, David Seyfort, Ardussi, John, Stoddard, Heather, Vitali, Roberto,
Walters, Michael, Sperling, Elliot, et al., eds. 2004. The Relationship between Religion
and State (chos srid zung ’brel) in Traditional Tibet: Proceedings of a Seminar held in
Lumbini, Nepal, March 2000. Lumbini: Lumbini International Research Institute.
Day, Tony. 2002. Fluid Iron: State Formation in Southeast Asia. Honolulu: University of
Hawaiʻi Press.
de Silva Wijeyeratne, Roshan. 2013. Nation, Constitutionalism and Buddhism in Sri Lanka.
London: Routledge.
Eisenstadt, S. N. 2000. “Multiple Modernities.” Daedalus 129: 1‒29.
Engel, David and Engel, Jaruwan. 2010. Tort, Custom and Karma: Globalization and Legal
Consciousness in Thailand. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
French, Rebecca Redwood. 1995. The Golden Yoke: The Legal Cosmology of Buddhist Tibet.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
French, Rebecca and Nathan, Mark, eds. 2014. Buddhism and Law: An Introduction. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Frydenlund, Iselin. 2016. “Particularist Goals through Universalist Means: The Political
Paradoxes of Buddhist Revivalism in Sri Lanka.” In Buddhism and the Political
Process, edited by Hiroko Kawakami, 97–120. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
2017. “Religious Liberty for Whom? The Buddhist Politics of Religious Freedom during
Myanmar’s Transition to Democracy.” Nordic Journal of Human Rights 35 (January):
55–73. https://doi.org/10.1080/18918131.2017.1288950.
Gethin, Rupert. 1998. The Foundations of Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
28
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 51 ---
Ginsburg, Tom and Simpser, Alberto, eds. 2014. Constitutions in Authoritarian Regimes. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Gokhale, Balkrishna Govind. 1969. “The Early Buddhist View of the State.” Journal of the
American Oriental Society 89 (4): 731–8.
Government of Sri Lanka. 2002. Report of the Buddha Sasana Presidential Commission:
Summary of Conclusions and Recommendations. Colombo: Ministry of Buddha
Sasana.
Gunawardana, R. A. L. H. 1979. Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic Interest in
Early Medieval Sri Lanka. The Association for Asian Studies: Monographs and Papers,
No. XXXV. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Gyatso, Tenzin (14th Dalai Lama). 1999. “Buddhism, Asian Values, and Democracy.” Journal
of Democracy 10 (1): 1–7.
Hallaq, Wael. 2004. The Origins and Evolution of Islamic Law. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Harding, Andrew. 2007. “Buddhism, Human Rights and Constitutional Reform in Thailand.”
Asian Journal of Comparative Law 2: 1‒25.
Harvey, Peter. 2013. An Introduction to Buddhism. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Heirman, Ann. 2007. “Vinaya: From India to China.” In The Spread of Buddhism, edited by
Ann Heirman and Stephan Peter Bumbacher, 167–202. Leiden: Brill. https://brill.com/
view/book/edcoll/9789047420064/Bej.9789004158306.i-474_007.xml.
2011. “Buddhist Nuns: Between Past and Present.” Numen 58: 603–31.
Hirschl, Ran. 2010. Constitutional Theocracy. New York: Oxford University Press.
2014. Comparative Matters. New York: Oxford University Press.
Holmes, Stephen. 1995. Passions and Constraint: On the Theory of Liberal Democracy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Holt, John. 1996. The Religious World of Kīrti ´Srī: Buddhism, Art, and Politics in Late
Medieval Sri Lanka. London: Oxford University Press.
Hurd, Elizabeth Shakman. 2015. Beyond Religious Freedom: The New Global Politics of
Religion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Huxley, Andrew. 1997. “Studying Theravada Legal Literature.” Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies 20: 63–92.
Ishii, Yoneo. 1986. “The Thai Thammasat (with a Note on the Lao Thammasat).” In The
Laws of South-East Asia, edited by M. D. Hooker, 143–203. NUS: ISEAS.
Jansen, Berthe. 2018. The Monastery Rules: Buddhist Monastic Organization in Pre-Modern
Tibet. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kaplan, Uri. 2016. “Updating the Vinaya: Formulating Buddhist Monastic Laws and Pure
Rules in Contemporary Korea.” Contemporary Buddhism 17 (2): 252–74.
Kawanami, Hiroko. 2013. Renunciation and Empowerment of Buddhist Nuns in Myanmar–
Burma: Building a Community of Female Faithful. Social Sciences in Asia, 33. Leiden:
Brill.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. 2021–2022. “Brief Summary of the Development of Buddhist Monastic
Law Codes and Institutions.” Buddhism, Law & Society 6: 147–84.
Kyaw, Nyi Nyi. 2019. “Regulating Buddhism in Myanmar: The Case of Deviant Buddhist
Sects.” In Regulating Religion in Asia, edited by Jaclyn L. Neo, Arif A. Jamal, and Daniel
P. S. Goh, 169–86. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781108235983.009.
Ladwig, Patrice. 2014. “Millennialism, Charisma and Utopia: Revolutionary Potentialities in
Pre-Modern Lao and Thai Therava¯da Buddhism.” Politics, Religion & Ideology 15 (2):
308–29. https://doi.org/10.1080/21567689.2014.899067.
Introduction
29
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 52 ---
Ladwig, Patrice, and Gregory Kourilsky. 2017–2018. “Governing the Monastic Order in Laos:
Pre-Modern Buddhist Legal Traditions and Their Transformation under French
Colonialism.” Buddhism, Law & Society 3: 191–242.
Lammerts, D. Christian. 2018. Buddhist Law in Burma: A History of Dhammasattha Texts and
Jurisprudence, 1250–1850. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Larsson, Tomas. 2015. “Monkish Politics in Southeast Asia: Religious Disenfranchisement in
Comparative and Theoretical Perspective.” Modern Asian Studies 49: 40–82.
2016. “Keeping Monks in Their Place?” Asian Journal of Law and Society 3 (1): 17–28.
2020. “Royal Succession and the Politics of Religious Puriﬁcation in Contemporary
Thailand.” Journal of Contemporary Asia 19 (2): 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/00472336
.2020.1849775.
Lawrence, Benjamin. 2022. “Monkish Constitutionalism: Contesting the Enfranchisement of
Cambodia’s Buddhist Sangha.” Journal of Law and Religion 37 (2): 1–25.
Liu, Cuilan. 2020. “The Fall of a Chinese Buddhist Monk: Law and State Governance of
Buddhism in Post-Imperial China.” Journal of Law and Religion 35 (3): 432–49. https://
doi.org/10.1017/jlr.2020.34.
Liu, Cuilan, and Susan Andrews. 2017. “Introduction.” In Rules of Engagement: Medieval
Traditions of Buddhist Monastic Regulation, edited by Susan Andrews, Jinhua Chen,
and Cuilian Liu, 9–24. Hamburg Buddhist Studies 9. Bochum; Freiburg: Projektverlag.
Llewelyn, Karl and E. Adamson Hoebel. 1941. The Cheyenne Way. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Lopez, Donald S. Jr., and Jack Miles. 2017. The Norton Anthology of World Religions:
Buddhism. New York and London: W.W. Norton.
McCargo,
Duncan.
2004.
“Buddhism,
Democracy
and
Identity
in
Thailand.”
Democratization 11 (4): 155‒70.
McLaughlin, Levi. 2019. Soka Gakkai’s Human Revolution: The Rise of a Mimetic Nation in
Modern Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
2021. “Soka Gakkai’s Impact on Constitutional Revision Attempts.” In Japanese
Constitutional Revisionism and Civic Activism, edited by Helen Hardacre, Timothy S.
George, Keigo Komamura, and Franziska Seraphim, 161–74. Lanham: Lexington Books.
Mérieau, Eugénie. 2021. Constitutional Bricolage: Thailand’s Sacred Monarchy vs. The Rule
of Law. London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
2018. “Buddhist Constitutionalism in Thailand: When Ra¯jadhamma¯ Supersedes the
Constitution.” Asian Journal of Comparative Law 13 (2): 283‒305.
Mills, Martin A. 2018. “Last Gift of the God-King.” In Tibetan Subjectivities on the Global
Stage: Negotiating Dispossession, edited by Shelly Bhoil and Enrique Galvan-Alvarez,
155–75. London: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Mrozik, Susanne. 2009. “A Robed Revolution: The Contemporary Buddhist Nun’s
(Bhik_su_nī) Movement.” Religion Compass 3 (3): 360‒78.
Nathan, Mark A. 2018. From the Mountains to the Cities: A History of Buddhist Propagation in
Modern Korea. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Nattier, Jan. 1991. Once Upon a Future Time: Studies in a Buddhist Prophecy of Decline.
Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Nelson, Eric. 2010. The Hebrew Republic: Jewish Sources and the Transformation of European
Political Thought. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Pirie, Fernanda. 2017. “Buddhist Law in Early Tibet: The Emergence of an Ideology.” Journal
of Law and Religion 32 (3): 406–22.
Prasert Na Nagara, and Alexander B. Griswold. 1992. Epigraphic and Historical Studies.
Bangkok: Historical Society.
30
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 53 ---
Prebish, Charles S., and Damien Keown. 2006. Introducing Buddhism. New York: Routledge.
Reugg, D. Seyfort. 2014. “The Temporal and the Spiritual, and the So-Called Patron–Client
Relation in the Governance of Inner Asia and Tibet.” In Patronage as Politics in South
Asia, edited by Anastasia Piliavsky, 67–79. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Reynolds, Frank. 1972. “The Two Wheels of Dhamma: A Study of Early Buddhism.” In The
Two Wheels of Dhamma, edited by Gananath Obeyesekere, Frank Reynolds, and
Bardwell Smith, 6‒30. Boston: American Academy of Religion.
Salgado, Nirmala S. 2013. Buddhist Nuns and Gendered Practice: In Search of the Female
Renunciant. New York: Oxford University Press.
Schober, Juliane. 2011. Modern Buddhist Conjunctures in Myanmar. Honolulu: University of
Hawaiʻi Press.
Schonthal,
Benjamin.
2016a.
Buddhism,
Politics
and
Limits
of
Law:
The
Pyrrhic
Constitutionalism of Sri Lanka. New York: Cambridge University Press.
2016b. “Making the ‘Muslim Other’ in Myanmar and Sri Lanka.” In Islam, State, and
Society in Myanmar, edited by M. Crouch, 234–57. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
2017. “Formations of Buddhist Constitutionalism in South and Southeast Asia.”
International Journal of Constitutional Law 15 (3): 705–33.
2017–2018. “Buddhist Legal Pluralism? Looking Again at Monastic Governance in Modern
South and Southeast Asia.” Buddhism, Law & Society 3: vii–xxxvii.
2021a. “Buddhist Law Beyond the Vinaya: Monastic Constitutions (Katika¯vatas) and Their
Transformations in Colonial Sri Lanka.” History of Religions 60 (4): 1–38.
2021b. “The Case for Religious Constitutions: Comparative Constitutional Law among
Buddhists and Other Religious Groups.” Law & Social Inquiry 47(2): 391–419.
Schonthal, Benjamin, and Tom Ginsburg. 2016. “Setting an Agenda for the Socio-Legal
Study of Contemporary Buddhism.” Asian Journal of Law and Society 3 (February):
1–15.
Seeger, Martin. 2018. Gender and the Path to Awakening: Hidden Histories of Nuns in Modern
Thai Buddhism. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Sivaraksa, Sulak. 2007 “Buddhist Concept of Law.” LAW Magazine 1: 12‒16.
Streicher, Ruth. 2021a. “Imperialism, Buddhism and Islam in Siam: Exploring the Buddhist
Secular in the Nangsue Sadaeng Kitchanukit, 1867.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies
52 (1): 7–25. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022463421000126.
2021b. “Introduction: Towards an Analysis of Buddhist Secular Grammars.” Journal of
Southeast Asian Studies 52 (1): 2–6. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022463421000096.
Strong, John. 2002. The Experience of Buddhism: Sources and Interpretations. Belmont:
Wadsworth Pub. Co.
Sullivan, Brenton. 2020. Building a Religious Empire: Tibetan Buddhism, Bureaucracy, and
the Rise of the Gelukpa. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Sullivan, Winnifred Fallers. 2020. Church State Corporation: Construing Religion in US Law.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sullivan, Winnifred Fallers, Elizabeth Shakman Hurd, Saba Mahmood, and Peter G. Danchin,
eds. 2015. Politics of Religious Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tambiah, Stanley J. 1976. World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of Buddhism and
Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Thomas, Jolyon. 2016. “Varieties of Religious Freedom in Japanese Buddhist Responses to the
1899 Religions Bill.” Asian Journal of Law and Society 3 (1): 49–70.
Tibetan Parliament-in-Exile. 2011. The Charter of Tibetans-in-Exile. https://tibet.net/wp-con
tent/uploads/2021/04/English-Charter-ﬁnal.doc.pdf.
Introduction
31
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 54 ---
Tierney, Brian. 1982. Religion, Law, and the Growth of Constitutional Thought, 1150–1650.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tonsakulrungruang, Khemthong. 2020. Toward a New Buddhist Constitutionalism: Law and
Religion in the Kingdom of Thailand. PhD dissertation, Bristol University, UK.
Turner, Alicia Marie. 2014. Saving Buddhism: The Impermanence of Religion in Colonial
Burma. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Wallace, Vesna. 2014. “Buddhist Laws in Mongolia.” In Buddhism and Law: An Introduction,
edited by Rebecca Redwood French and Mark A. Nathan, 319–33. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Walton, Matthew J. 2016. Buddhism, Politics and Political Thought in Myanmar. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Walton, Matthew J. and Aung Tun. 2017–2018. “Monks and the Ambiguities of Law in
Myanmar.” Buddhism, Law & Society 3: 1–38.
Yu, Jimmy. 2014. “Pure Land Devotion in East Asia.” In The Wiley Blackwell Companion to
East and Inner Asian Buddhism, edited by Mario Poceski, 201–20. Chichester: Wiley
Blackwell.
Zan, Myint. 2000. “Woe unto Ye Lawyers: Three Royal Orders Concerning Pleaders in Early
Seventeenth-Century Burma.” American Journal of Legal History 44 (1): 40‒72.
Zimmerman, Michael. 2006. “Only a Fool Becomes a King: Buddhist Stances on
Punishment.” In Buddhism and Violence, edited by Michael Zimmermann, Chiew
Hui Ho and Philip Pierce. LIRI Seimar Proceedings Series, vol. 2. 213–42. Lumbini:
Lumbini International Research Institute.
32
Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 55 ---
part i
Religious and Political Underpinnings
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 56 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 57 ---
2
Buddhism and Constitutionalism in Precolonial
Southeast Asia
D. Christian Lammerts*
In Siam and, it seems, in all the Indianized kingdoms, one ﬁnds, alongside custom, another
source of law, which is none other than dharma´sa¯stra, a speciﬁc contribution of Hindu
civilization. The king does not legislate. His essential mission is to assure and maintain peace
among his subjects. As such, he must ensure the proper administration of justice and fulﬁll
the role of supreme judge in disputes that arise among his subjects. In this capacity, also, he
can and must enact punishments against those who disturb the order. He may still lay down
the rules for the organization of courts and the procedure to be followed before them; in sum,
to take all measures so that his subjects live in peace. But all this constitutes only, so to speak,
the outer casing of the law. As for the substance of law, that is, as for the rules for which it is a
question of ensuring compliance, the king does not create them, because the law is entirely
contained in immemorial custom and dharma´sa¯stra. The king is simply the defender and
protector of custom and dharma´sa¯stra. This does not prevent the king from being an absolute
sovereign and being able to do whatever he wants. He is therefore at liberty to make decisions
contrary to dharma´sa¯stra and established custom. But such decisions have only the force of
royal authority, they are not law. On the contrary, when the decisions of the king conform to
equity, as understood by dharma´sa¯stra, they merge with it and are invested with the
same authority.
(Lingat 1937, 21–22)
2.1 THE PROBLEM
The king does not make law. His sovereignty is absolute. Law, as dhamma, origin-
ates outside the king, who merely acts as the judge and enforcer of law. The
commands of the king are not legal enactments. They form the “outer casing of
the law” as “mere orders . . . personal and accidental injunctions” (Lingat 1950, 9).
*
For their comments and criticisms on this chapter the author is grateful to Fernanda Pirie,
Benjamin Schonthal, Tom Ginsburg, and the participants of the Buddhism and Comparative
Constitutional Law workshop.
35
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 58 ---
The authority of royal command is proportionate to the degree that it conforms to
dhamma as an exogenous standard of justice.
This thesis on precolonial Southeast Asian law by Robert Lingat reﬂects a
particularly entrenched perspective in the history of scholarship on Buddhist (and
more broadly Indic) constitutionalism – even if scholars themselves have not always
employed the phrase. It highlights a certain antinomy, if not an antinomianism, at
the heart of reﬂection on Buddhist “law.” On the one hand, the political function
and legal authority of the king is thoroughly restrained, if not eclipsed, by dhamma
(Sanskrit, dharma), envisaged as a sort of natural law. The pragmatics of this
dhamma, seen to be embodied either in Tai, Mon, Khmer, or Burmese dhamma-
sattha1 texts, or in classical Pali sutras manifesting a buddha’s speech, therefore
furnish the skeleton of a constitutionalist doctrine purportedly realized in the
historical practice of Buddhist communities.
The inﬂuence of this position, which locates law, as dhamma, outside kingship, is
pervasive in Buddhist and Asian legal studies, but not always in the way our sources
might anticipate, for the claim is not, simply, that there are forms of “natural” or
“non-state” law. Indeed, to the extent that constitutional features have been con-
sidered at all by scholars of precolonial Buddhisms, we have hardly advanced
beyond this perspective. It is brought to bear in nearly every analysis of Buddhist
law or politics; for example, when the normative dimensions of Buddhist kingship
are analyzed in relation to the dasara¯jadhamma¯ (“ten laws for kings”) and the
related dhammara¯ja¯ motif (Gokhale 1953; 1966; 1969; Collins 2006, 460ff.), the
career of the primordial Buddhist king Maha¯sammata (Tambiah 1989), or the
beleaguered ﬁgure of the cakravartin (“‘wheel-turner’ king;” Tambiah 1976, 39ff.).
It is there, also, in devaluations of royal authority that elevate the status, in dhamma/
law, of monasticism (Collins 2006, 420). Such are the so-called ideologies of
Buddhist kingship, Collins posits, which are “exempliﬁed from any period and
place in Southern Asia, across which Pali texts spread as the Therava¯da form of
Buddhism was adopted by monarchs, many of them would-be Wheel-turning Kings
(cakkavatti-s) seeking what they hoped would be a universal empire, emblazoned
with the universal truths of Buddhism” (Collins 2006, 415). Frank Reynolds, com-
menting upon the tropes of dhammara¯ja¯, cakravartin, and Maha¯sammata as found
in the early strata of Pali texts, remarks that “these elements are of crucial import-
ance because they provided a commonly accepted, orthodox basis for the richer and
1
I advise against Lingat’s occasional habit of employing the Sanskrit term dharma´sa¯stra to name
a corpus of texts that was never written in Sanskrit. In references to this genre of Buddhist legal
literature, on which more below, I employ the usual Pali term dhammasattha. Some examples
of attested vernacular forms across the region include: dhammasa¯t (Mon), dhammasat
(Burmese), tha _mmasat (Shan), dhammasatr (Tai Khoen), dharrma´sa¯str (central Thai), dham-
masa¯tr (Khmer). For a consideration of dhammasattha’s connection with what Lingat calls a
“speciﬁc contribution of Hindu civilization,” see Lammerts 2018, 13–17.
36
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 59 ---
more complex patterns of royal symbolism and political involvement which were
developed during the subsequent periods of Buddhist history” (Reynolds 1972, 23).
Accordingly, as Balkrishna Gokhale claimed, Buddhism would seem to offer
many resources to scholars of constitutionalism. Dhamma, “a constitutional concept
of great signiﬁcance” (Gokhale 1953, 161), operates as the framework that enables
and constrains the king and the organs of royal power. Dhamma, as the “king of the
king who is a cakravartin, a righteous king who rules by dhamma”2 serves as a check
on tyranny. As William Koenig restates the formula in relation to eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century Burma, “the ruler became but the servant and agency of
dhamma and his righteous conduct or sinful behavior infected the whole universe”
(Koenig 1990, 68). On this reading, political and legal institutions ﬁnd their justiﬁ-
cation in dhamma (in its representative texts), and it is dhamma (its representative
texts) that places limits upon them in the name of supreme justice.
Lingat’s corollary however belies the puzzle. He adds that the king’s sovereignty is
absolute; an absolutism circumscribed by law. It is my suspicion that Lingat, who
among all authors to have contributed to the debate on constitutionalism – again,
without naming it as such – in precolonial Therava¯da Buddhism was surely the most
well acquainted with a relevant archive (viz., local legal texts produced by the
historical contexts in question) is here hedging his bets. He wants to have it both
ways. An absolutism, but a righteous, or dhamma-constrained, absolutism –
an aporia.
In what follows I aim, ﬁrstly, to raise criticisms of this now standard presuppos-
ition. The analysis of precolonial Buddhist constitutionalism developed by the
likes of Lingat, Gokhale, Tambiah, Reynolds, Collins, and many others – and still
very much current in the scholarly literature – is rooted in a speculative theoriza-
tion of Buddhist constitutionalist law-as-exogenous-dhamma. This theory resists,
with remarkable tenacity, most actual domains of law or legislation themselves, if
by these terms we signify those forms of historical evidence that pertain to formal
dispute resolution by courts and judges, juristic institutions and processes, or the
normative, enforceable distribution and organization of social, economic, and
political power. The rhetoric of kingship encountered in classical Pali Buddhist
texts, despite its occasional (likewise rhetorical) redeployment even in legal dis-
course,3 is in tension with precolonial Southeast Asian laws, jurisprudence, and
juridical practices, and, moreover, with what is knowable about the operation,
transformation, and effect of classical Pali Buddhist discourses of kingship and
politics in history. This is so in the ﬁrst instance empirically because the rhetoric of
kingship advanced in local Southeast Asian law texts is rarely, if ever, closely
2
rañño cakkavattissa dhammikassa dhammarañño ra¯ja¯ (AN III, 149); referenced in Gokhale
1953, 162.
3
See Lammerts 2018, 184–89 for examples of how the dasara¯jadhamma and cakravartin motifs
have been deployed in Burmese legal texts.
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
37
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 60 ---
parallel to classical ﬁgurations. Local Buddhist narratives of Maha¯sammata and
Manu, which I have written about at length elsewhere, are a perfect example: the
jurisprudential signiﬁcations of Thai and Burmese variants of their biographies
bear only a “similar dissimilitude” to representations in the Pali sutras and com-
mentaries (Lammerts 2013; Lammerts 2018, 48, 66–71). We have been misled, in
my view, by work that has, by and large, taken a misplaced rhetoric of royal
dhamma as proxy for law.4
This argument is not intended to diminish the signiﬁcance of classical Pali
ﬁgurations of dhamma (those related to kingship or otherwise), via their local
translations and transformations, for the general history of Buddhism or law in
precolonial Southeast Asia. The salience of these ﬁgurations is to be established
on a case-by-case basis.5 Here my aim is to demonstrate that standard scholarly
conceits about precolonial or “traditional” Buddhist constitutionalism – conceits
concerning “righteous” and “wheel-turning” monarchs, or the exogenous, abstract
dhamma that, as a higher principle of justice, somehow itself “reigns” sovereign and
thereby exerts a regulatory function – are not, in fact, operative constitutional or
even legal concepts according to the attested vocabularies of the legal history itself.
There are many thousands of extant legal manuscripts and inscriptions, in many
languages, from across precolonial Southeast Asia. Fewer than 1 percent have
received any competent hermeneutical scrutiny. If we want to understand the
changing historical expressions of Buddhist constitutional thought and practice,
we must learn to read them. In doing so, it quickly becomes apparent that the
construction of Buddhist constitutionalism according to the academic ﬁeld is
woefully at odds with, and does not do justice to, the richness and nuance of
the archive.
By turning to more prevalent, effective, and historically situated legal discourses,
this essay conﬁrms that constitutionalism is indeed a pervasive feature of Buddhist
lawmaking in precolonial Southeast Asia, yet its form bears little resemblance to
classical tropes of dhamma. It may even be broader than any narrow focus on
kingship and politics would suggest. The surviving testimony readily shows that
the constitution of political power was not a separate or higher sphere of law with a
singular genesis or formal instantiation. This is to say, constitutional discourse,
including the ordering of the ofﬁces of the king (ra¯ja¯), and of the monastic
community (sangha), was part of an all-embracing process of constitutionalizing
that encompassed other social, economic, and familial arenas. Thus, attempts to
characterize or criticize constitutionalism in precolonial Buddhist law require that
4
Baker and Pasuk (2021) have recently voiced a similar criticism of claims by Lingat and Prince
Dhani Nivat regarding the supposed legal restraints imposed by dhamma upon Siamese kings.
Their analysis is additionally valuable for its engagement with Thai-language sources and
scholarship, including Lingat’s Prawatisat kotmai thai (“History of Thai Law”).
5
A highly effective example of such an approach is Patrick Jory’s book (2016) examining the
intellectual history of Thai kingship in light of the concept of Buddhist perfection (pa¯ramī).
38
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 61 ---
we respond to this more capacious scope of law-writing. It demands that we
reimagine that thing we call “law,” and to see the constitution of ra¯ja¯ or lordship
in immediate relation to other, constituted, legal phenomena. This undoubtedly
betrays a certain friction with modern conceptions of constitutionalism that envision
it as a singular type of legal creature narrowly concerned with regulating the exercise
of executive power.
2.2 THREE ENVIRONMENTS
There are three principal, occasionally intersecting or conﬂicting, environments6
of “Buddhist law” in precolonial Southeast Asia: vinaya, dhammasattha, and
ra¯jasattha (“royal legislation” or “royal edict/command”). 7 Each entails a distinct
relation between what may be called “Buddhism” and “law.” Certain general
features common to these environments include: (1) (usually) a form of material
embodiment and circulation in writing, (2) an orientation toward the authority of a
foundational, preternatural, text (the speech of a buddha, a cosmic treatise, or the
speech of a king), and (3) a rationale or jurisprudential logic whereby the normative
program of such legalism is imagined to have the capacity to enable or perpetuate,
via different mechanics, the religion of Buddhism itself.
2.2.1 Vinaya
Broadly speaking, and eventually from such a distant perspective that the analysis
begins to lose utility, the monastic vinaya – the paradigmatic though non-exhaustive
subset of the broad category of monastic law (laws governing monks) – is the only
environment of precolonial Southeast Asian law that is somewhat shared, in terms of
a general repertoire and jurisprudence, among diverse Buddhist traditions across
Asia. This apparent unity is also deceptive. There are multiple, more or less partial or
complete, variant vinayas transmitted in several different languages (Clarke 2015),
6
I am indebted to Benjamin Schonthal for the image of “legal environments.” The phrase calls
attention to the “overlapping and nonexclusive nature of . . . legal contexts” that “interlace and
impinge upon each other” and “cannot be viewed in isolation and are not always imagined as
mutually compatible” (Schonthal 2016, 138).
7
This way of drawing the picture excludes various genres of records of local legal practice,
including judicial rulings, stone inscriptions, land and population registers, contracts, and so
on, which often summon inﬂuences from multiple environments. On Burmese inscriptions as
legal texts, see Lammerts (2022); for debt contracts, see Saito 2019, Htun Yee 1999a; for judicial
rulings, see Htun Yee 2006. These documents are set aside here since they generally serve
procedural, not legislative, ends as forms of written evidence. Scholars have unanimously
mischaracterized the corpus of judicial rulings (vinicchaya), for example, as judicial “prece-
dent.” Nevertheless, the vinicchaya genre begins to shade into the domain of jurisprudence
when it comes to certain compendia that served as exemplars of judicial reasoning to be
emulated by judges. The Decisions of Sudhammaca¯rī is a key text of the latter sort (see Latter
1850, 1–29; Sparks 1851).
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
39
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 62 ---
whose employment and application by monastic communities in history is highly
uneven across time and space. Nevertheless, the inﬂuence of this law in Southeast
Asia is hardly slight: a lengthy excerpt of the Pali vinaya, the bodhikatha¯ of Vinaya-
maha¯vagga, is attested in Pyu epigraphy (discovered in Kunzeik, modern-day
Burma), from around the sixth to seventh centuries CE, making this legal treatise,
or a section thereof, possibly the earliest documented transmission of Buddhist
literature in the region (Skilling 1997, 95 n. 7).8
While vinaya texts were widely transmitted, copied, glossed, and kept in monastic
libraries across Asia, perhaps unsurprisingly there is rather little direct evidence that
vinaya law was in fact routinely observed in the everyday life of monks, and indeed
in some cases, including in fairly recent times, there is considerable evidence that
vinaya was wittingly transgressed or ignored. In many contexts, the classical vinaya
texts and their commentaries are supplanted in practice by a preference for manuals,
pamphlets, summaries, and rulebooks on monastic law and administration that
comment upon, or occasionally depart from, that corpus (Blackburn 1999). In
certain areas – though not prominently in Southeast Asia – what we tend to think
of as vinaya “properly speaking” was supplemented, or displaced, through the
issuance of local documents that may be classiﬁed as monastic “constitutions,”
“guidelines,” or “charters” (Jansen 2015) – e.g., katika¯vata in Sri Lanka (Ratnapala
1971; Schonthal 2021a), or chayik in the Tibetan sphere (Ellingson 1990; Jansen 2018;
Sullivan 2021) – which established norms for the operation of one or more monastic
communities and, sometimes, those laypersons who happened to interact with them
(Jansen 2018, 19, 153–57). In Burma, moreover, certain dimensions of monastic law
were, in the seventeenth century and perhaps earlier, at least partly imagined to fall
under the jurisdiction of dhammasattha, which presented norms decidedly at odds
with the Pali vinaya and its commentaries – a feature of the legal history that
stimulated considerable debate among eighteenth- and nineteenth-century jurists
(Lammerts 2018, 112–15, 164–68). And nearly everywhere throughout Buddhist Asia,
kings regularly legislated rules for monks that often had no relationship whatsoever
to vinaya.
Despite differences internal to, and in the application of, the various Buddhist
vinaya literatures, this massive corpus tends toward a rather uniform jurisprudence
concerning the sources and aims of law. Authoritative vinaya rules are understood to
derive ultimately from the lawmaking efforts of a singular type of legislator: a
buddha.9 Gautama Buddha’s ﬁrst legislative act, some two decades after he attained
8
For a recent edition of this inscription by Arlo Grifﬁths and D. Christian Lammerts, see http://
hisoma.huma-num.fr/exist/apps/pyu/works/PYU040.xml.
9
A basic interpretive framework of vinaya jurisprudence, the four “great standards” (maha¯-a¯
padesa), stipulates that when a legal question is not explicitly answered by the preserved
legislation of a buddha (sutta; i.e., the vinaya rules), its resolution must conform to that
legislation by analogy (sutta¯nuloma). If an answer remains elusive, only then is it permissible
to defer to the teachings of the 500 arahants involved in the First Buddhist Council
40
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 63 ---
omniscience, was the declaration of the ﬁrst pa¯ra¯jika (an offense leading to loss of
clerical status) forbidding sex, including with animals or nonhumans (amanussa),
among his male monastic disciples. The vinaya presupposes that other buddhas also
promulgated laws for monks and some of Gautama’s own rules are attributed to
them. The rationale of vinaya is routinely advocated in language that stresses its
essential role in maintaining a functioning monastic system of lineage and disciple-
ship, creating the possibility for rituals such as ordination, ensuring the survival of
the Buddhist teachings, and even promoting the achievement of nirvana.10
Until very recently the category of “Buddhist law” has been understood, entirely
incorrectly, yet more or less exclusively, in terms of vinaya. But vinaya is not, at least
not according to its founding vision,11 a universal body of norms regulating the entire
Buddhist community including the laity. This circumscription around the monastic
population thus insinuates the existence of a plural legal environment, as scholars
such as Robert Lingat (1951, 164) and Andrew Huxley (1999, 325) have observed.
While the overtly “religious” character of vinaya law is uncontroversial – the rules
are attributed to an omniscient superhuman legislator and exist to facilitate the
advancement of ritual and soteriological imperatives – the corpus is largely com-
prised of what we might call administrative law; much of its content pertains to the
mundane organization and business of monastic institutions and the everyday
comportment of monks and nuns. Nevertheless, vinaya was, and remains, a major
body of law and litigation in Southeast Asia as elsewhere, and proceedings of vinaya
courts, tried by monastic judges, survive from the early seventeenth century
(Lammerts 2018, 37–43) and continue into the present across the Therava¯da world
(Schonthal 2017–2018; Schonthal 2021b; Janaka and Crosby 2017).
The constitutional dimensions of vinaya, as well as those genres of monastic
regulations and guidelines mentioned above, are immediately suggestive. Yet these
have been hardly explored, perhaps due partly to the relative absence of consider-
ations of kingship and politics in much of monastic legal discourse, though perhaps
more so due to bias and a lack of appetite on behalf of comparative constitutional
law scholars (Mérieau 2020). Nevertheless, as Benjamin Schonthal (2021c) has
recently argued, there are strong grounds to characterize vinaya and local genres
of monastic law as manifesting constitutions, inasmuch as these documents aim not
(a¯cariyava¯da), or, failing that, the legal opinions of later monastic jurists (attanoma¯ti). See
Kieffer-Pülz, 2016–2017, 111–15. On the maha¯padesa framework applied beyond the monastic
context in dhammasattha, see Lammerts 2018, 161.
10 Compare for example the summary treatment at Sp, 104–5; translated in Jayawickrama 1986,
92–93.
11 Vinaya rules have moved beyond the monastery in various times and places, exerting a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on aspects of lay jurisprudence. One among many examples of this
phenomenon is the widespread adoption of the vinaya motif of the “twenty-ﬁve types of theft”
(Kieffer-Pülz 2011) that is elaborated in Southeast Asian dhammasattha texts (Lammerts 2018,
72–73).
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
41
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 64 ---
only to legislate rules for monks, but also to organize the institution, ofﬁces, and
judicial processes of the monastic community.
2.2.2 Dhammasattha
Dhammasattha (“treatise on dhamma” or “instructions of dhamma”) is the Pali
name of a regional Southeast Asian genre of legal literature that has a documented
history of transmission in Burma beginning in the mid-thirteenth century
(Lammerts 2018, Ch. 2). Later references to and manuscript witnesses of the genre
are attested in what is today Thailand, Laos, Yunnan, Cambodia, and Bangladesh.
In Burma alone there are well over one hundred individual dhammasattha treatises
surviving in thousands of palm-leaf and paper manuscripts. By the phrase legal
literature, I mean ﬁrstly the generic sense of texts that present rules and sanctions
related to matters such as inheritance, marriage, contract, theft, assault, etc., and also
prescribe norms and procedures for adjudicating disputes (courts, ordeals, witnesses,
evidence, judges, etc.). More speciﬁcally, however, I refer to the fact that these texts
(like so many embodiments of law) are literary expressions. Some are written as
poetry, and all dhammasatthas – quite unlike their Sanskrit dharma´sa¯stra cousins –
repeatedly, even excessively, employ narrative (i.e., stories), such as the example
from The Responsa of Manura¯ja¯ discussed below, somewhat akin to the model of
the Buddhist vinayas, in the characterization of a rule.
There are considerable limitations to our knowledge of dhammsattha. The scope
and substantive content of any text called dhammasattha (or cognate vernacular
terms) during the earliest historical phase – before the seventeenth century – are
uncertain, since the textual traditions are difﬁcult to date. There is also a question
whether the word “dhammasattha” during this early phase indexed a perception of a
legal genre or corpus, or if it simply referred to a single text. Nevertheless, some
general contours of dhammasattha as a source of law are evident from the thirteenth
to ﬁfteenth centuries onward.
The ﬁrst Burmese inscription to invoke dhammasattha does so in the context of a
retelling of a trial pertaining to a complex dispute within the extended royal family
over the inheritance of land and slaves to be donated to a monastery (Lammerts
2018, 21–22). During the trial, the king orders his ofﬁcials to consult dhammasa¯t (=
dhammasattha) to determine the legitimate line of succession. The ofﬁcials carry
out the king’s command, and the inheritance is consequently awarded to the heir
perceived to be sanctioned by the text. This heir then proceeds to donate the
inherited property to a monastery in the year 1232.
In Thailand, the vernacular word dharrma´sa¯stra ﬁrst appears in an inscription
dated to around 1400 as part of a compound with the term ra¯ja´sa¯stra.12 According to
12 On the problematic date of this inscription, see Baker and Pasuk 2021, 28 n. 27. I add that the
history and transmission of the genre in Siam (central Thailand) between c. 1400, the
42
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 65 ---
this inscription, a king, presumably Ra¯mara¯ja¯dhira¯ja, the ruler of Ayutthaya,13
announces, “in the center of the city of Sukhothai,” a series of royal pronounce-
ments (oṅka¯ra)14 dealing mainly with slavery and theft. Punishment (e.g., for
stealing slaves) or reward (e.g., for facilitating the return of stolen property), the
king says repeatedly, shall be “in accordance with the rule [or “measure”15] of
dharrma´sa¯stra and ra¯ja´sa¯stra.”16
In the Burmese inheritance dispute, we see that royal judgment defers to the
authority of the text to determine the rule. The judgment of the king is to let the
dhammasa¯t establish the verdict. His judgment is simply a deferral of judgment to
the letter of the law text. The Thai evidence, by contrast, is not a trial context, but an
account of lawmaking by the king. The inscription represents law as established by
royal command. Ra¯mara¯ja¯dhira¯ja refers to dharrma´sa¯stra, and also royal edicts
(ra¯ja´sa¯stra), only as a source for determining legitimate ﬁnes and compensation.
In his discussion of Ra¯mara¯ja¯dhira¯ja’s inscription, Lingat (1951, 182–83) writes:
“[The inscription] contains, a rare thing, if not unique in Asia, a series of legislative
provisions. However, these provisions are placed under the double authority of
dhammasattham-ra¯jasattham. [. . .] So we have there, in a relatively early period,
and in any case close to the foundation of Ayutthaya, evidence for the existence, in
Tai country, of a dhammasattham already generally employed as a legal principle,
which suggests its introduction dates back to an even earlier era.”
A year earlier, Lingat (1950, 24) elaborated what is meant by this “double authority”:
“The Royal prescriptions engraved on [Ra¯mara¯ja¯dhira¯ja’s inscription] are said to
have been enacted according to dharmasa¯t-ra¯jasat, i.e. according to the system
which derives authority of royal orders from the authority of a supreme Dharma.”
Lingat appears to recognize the royal legislative features of the text as an exception, a
“rare thing, if not unique in Asia,” for sovereigns inﬂuenced by the Indic religions
are, according to him, always dutiful servants of dhamma. Lingat could no doubt
read the original inscription as well as anyone. Yet he fails to adequately explain,
perhaps because it troubles his conception of the “supreme Dharma” governing all
Buddhist law, that the laws for slavery and theft mentioned in the inscription are
nowhere characterized, in fact, as deriving from the authority of dharma´sa¯stra. The
force of the king’s speech (oṅka¯ra) does not emanate from any source outside the
king himself. While it is facile to argue that the legislative prerogative of the king
approximate date of this inscription, and 1805, the date of the recension of the dhammasattha
in the Three Seals Code (Baker and Pasuk 2016), remains something of a mystery. See Baker
and Pasuk 2021, 28–29 for an overview of the evidence.
13 For the historical context see Griswold and Prasert 1975.
14 On this term see Lammerts 2019–2020, 52 n. 61.
15 The Thai/Khmer term khana¯t/kna¯t implies the sense of measure, scale, rule, or model.
16 For an edition and English translation of this inscription see Griswold and Prasert 1969;
reprinted in Griswold and Prasert 1992, 109–44.
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
43
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 66 ---
results, to some degree, from his capacious merit (puñña), and is thus not entirely
disconnected from cosmological or ritual considerations,17 this is rather different
from claiming that dhamma qua dhamma is the only legitimate source of law, or
that all law was necessarily derivative of an exogenous source, whether dhamma,
dhammasattha, or custom.
The Dhammavila¯sa dhammasat is the earliest surviving dhammasattha text from
Burma, written in vernacular Burmese, including some scattered Pali verses and
citations, sometime before 1638 (Lammerts 2018, 56). It was shortly followed by the
vernacular Responsa of Manura¯ja¯ (Manura¯ja¯ lhyok thu _m_h),18 a series of jurispru-
dential questions and answers (puccha¯-vissajjana¯) between a legist and king, com-
piled sometime between 1638 and 1648. In 1651 or 1652 the Manusa¯ra
dhammasattha was composed by the monk Tipi_taka¯laṅka¯ra and a lay jurist styled
Manura¯ja¯, the “eater” of taxes of Kaing Village. Manusa¯ra is a Pali verse legal text
that was probably compiled on the basis of earlier, now apparently lost, vernacular
law treatises, to which was appended an interphrasal Burmese gloss commentary
(nissaya). The Manusa¯ra verses were eventually reedited and glossed anew in a
recension by Va_n_nadhamma Kyaw Htin, also titled Manusa¯ra dhammasattha, in
1769. Judging from surviving manuscript copies as well as citations and references in
other legal texts, Va_n_nadhamma’s Manusa¯ra was among the most popular and
widely circulated law books in late precolonial Burma.
The dhammasattha corpus – which, in Burma, expands by more than a hundred
additional treatises during the eighteenth to nineteenth centuries – is deﬁnable as a
species of “Buddhist law” in at least three different senses, each of which are quite
dissimilar from vinaya jurisprudence, since only very rarely are its rules directly
attributed to any buddha (and when they are so-attributed, the buddha is usually
Dīpaṅkara). In the earliest surviving texts, including those mentioned above, dham-
masattha law is represented as an earthly instantiation of a cosmic treatise. The
original text of the law is inscribed – in “letters as big as a cow” – on the boundary-
wall of the universe, from which it is transcribed and transmitted to the human
realm by the variously-named seer Manu, Manusa¯ra, or Manosa¯ra, who magically
retrieves the alien text during the reign of the ﬁrst king Maha¯sammata.19 In addition
17 See, for example, the description of the king’s merit in the epigraph’s “preamble” delineating
his majesty (Griswold and Prasert 1969, 116–17, 124–28).
18 While this text is not strictly a dhammasattha treatise in terms of form and content, it is
presented as a commentary on certain dhammasattha laws, often categorized by precolonial
bibliographers as a dhammasattha, and remained inﬂuential in the development of the genre
in the eighteenth to nineteenth centuries, for example by serving as the basis of
Va_n_nadhamma’s Vinicchayapaka¯sanī of 1771. The Responsa, which circulated under several
different titles, is conventionally attributed to the authors of the 1651/2 Manusa¯ra (viz., Kaingza
Manura¯ja¯ and Tipi_taka¯laṅka¯ra), although not unproblematically (Lammerts 2018, 130–31).
19 For a translation of the origin story in Dhammavila¯sa, see Lammerts 2005. A draft edition of the
nissaya version of the tale in the 1651/2 Manusa¯ra may be found in Lammerts 2010, 502–8,
554–95. For an analysis of the Burmese narratives and their relation to accounts of
Maha¯sammata and Manu in transregional Pali literature, see Lammerts 2018, 66–71, 107–10.
44
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 67 ---
to its origins in outer space, accessible only to superhuman cosmonauts, dhamma-
sattha texts are engaged in a complex relationship with Buddhist vinaya and sutra
texts, which are frequently redeployed, although sometimes with substantial
changes, to justify or illuminate certain laws. Finally, dhammasattha texts repeatedly
remind their audience that the norms they prescribe are intended to preserve and
perpetuate the sa¯sana (“teachings”) of Gautama Buddha, and that observing dham-
masattha law offers a range of worldly (lokiya) and supermundane (lokuttara)
beneﬁts for judges and litigants, not least including nirvana.20
Dhammasattha is neither a form of positive law nor “state” law – at least not prior
to the mid-nineteenth century when functionaries of the British colonial state began
to transﬁgure and redeploy the genre for use by the imperial judiciary. The laws are
not attributed to any legislator; like stars they are a natural feature of the cosmos and
will ultimately perish along with it. Over the course of the development of dham-
masattha jurisprudence it is however certain that legists increasingly sought to align
laws of the corpus with the provisions of vinaya and sutra. This entailed a self-
conscious project of “purifying” aspects of the legal tradition and bringing them into
putative alignment with a buddha’s speech. This involved, among other things,
attributing rules to various buddhas or to ancient kings and bodhisattvas depicted in
the ja¯taka corpus. A certain trend in the direction of emergent positivity is clearly
evident. These complex reformulations, still too poorly understood, were discrete
projects by laymen and monks who focused their efforts on different legal treatises
and topics, not an organized or centralized movement of religio-legal reform under
the explicit banner of the palace (Lammerts 2018, 172–78). Nevertheless, during the
full history of its transmission in precolonial Burma, dhammasattha texts were
repeatedly justiﬁed in terms of their ability to extend the longevity of Buddhism in
the world by establishing social, political, and economic norms that would, it was
argued, increase human material wealth and thereby generate ever more resources
for the support and expansion of Buddhist institutions.
Despite the circumscribed role of the ra¯ja¯ in the production or puriﬁcation of
dhammasattha law, if we are to understand constitutionalist norms in the “thin
sense,”21 as laws that regulate kingship or politics, dhammasattha provides no
shortage of examples. Akin to Bra¯hma_nical dharma´sa¯stra, there are laws about
how a king should judge legal disputes, how he should urinate and brush his teeth,
how he should worship the triple gem, about his prerogatives in assigning ﬁnes and
punishment, about taxation, about royal property and insignia, about demarcating
the extent of the realm’s territorial boundaries, about transgressions against the
throne (rebellion, treason), about the king’s duties to investigate crimes, about the
For a central Thai example dated 1805 that is closely parallel with Manusa¯ra, see Baker and
Pasuk 2016, 33–39.
20 For a fuller explication of these features, see Lammerts 2018, particularly Ch. 6.
21 Raz 1998, 153.
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
45
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 68 ---
qualiﬁcations and appointment of ministers, ofﬁcers, and judges, and so forth. There
are even laws that govern the exemption of royal animals from criminal prosecution
for trespass, causing destruction, or committing murder. The history and variation of
these or similar rules could easily be mined to furnish examples of constitutionalist
dimensions of dhammasattha law.
2.2.2.1 An Example of a Plausibly Constitutional Provision
Dhammasattha treatises are usually organized around eighteen major “titles of law”
(typically called “roots;” mūla in Pali or amrac in Burmese – a category clearly
related to the vyavaha¯rapada framework of Bra¯hma_nical dharma´sa¯stra): debt, inher-
itance, assault, theft, slavery, gifts, gambling, marriage, and so on. Provisions dealing
with procedure are sometimes grouped together in a prefatory section, or sometimes
scattered throughout relevant discussions of substantive law. One of the more
interesting procedural clauses in the corpus, which has bearing on the question of
regulating the king, concerns what we shall refer to as the “statute of limitations” on
bringing legal suits. Toward the end of its introductory section, after enumerating
the eighteen “titles of law,” Dhammavila¯sa states:
Among the eighteen foundational titles of law in the dhammasat, the following four
titles of law may be litigated when the king, lord of water and earth, has changed: the
law of taking loans, the law of inheritance,22 the law of saṅghika monastic lands, and
the law of hereditary slaves (mi la¯ pha la¯ kyvan). But the following four titles of law
shall not be litigated when the king, lord of water and earth, has changed: the law of
murder, the law of intentional physical assault and verbal abuse, the law of rape,23 and
the law of theft of property, gold, or silver. Thus has the seer Manu declared.24
The Manusa¯ra of 1651/2 puts the same law this way:
I cite these verses (ga¯tha¯) regarding the nine types of legal disputes (amhu) that
should be dismissed upon the change of king:
Pasayhana _m abbhūtañ ca parada¯rañ ca vadhaka _m |
Vañcana _m gūhana _m lumpa _m coraka _m gha¯takan ti ‘me ||
A_t_ta¯ nava viparito ra¯ja¯ 25 vina¯ vinicchaya¯ |
Na pana i_nakada¯sa _m paccha¯ passa _m pala¯yana _m ||
22 Omitted, presumably by scribal error, in UCL 9926.
23 maya¯ _h khui_h, literally, “wife-stealing.” This phrase is often best translated as “rape,” although it
also covers adulterous sexual relationships in which a married woman is a consensual
accomplice.
24 NL Kaṅ_h 18, ka _m.r; UCL 9926, khī.r; BL 12248, khū.v; UBhS 163–582, kha¯.r.
25 A majority of witnesses read viparite ra¯ja¯, although with viparite (loc. sg.) we would expect
raññe (loc. sg.), as emended by Va_n_nadhamma in his later recension of the text. A minority of
manuscripts have viparito ra¯ja¯ (nom. sg.). The Burmese gloss clearly indicates that the clause
was taken as an absolute construction. For present purposes, therefore, I analyze viparito ra¯ja¯ as
an elusive “nominative absolute,” while noting that it is hardly beyond suspicion. On the
46
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 69 ---
Suppression [of uprisings/rebellion], gambling, [transgressions against] another’s
wife, murder,
fraud, concealment [of another’s property], armed robbery, theft, destruction.
These nine legal suits (a_t_ta) are without a ruling (vinicchaya) when the
king changes.
But not suits [involving] a runaway debtor or runaway slave who is apprehended
after [the change of reign].26
Provisions along similar lines are repeated, with minor variation, in most subsequent
dhammasattha treatises compiled up to the colonial era. Their implication is that
the period for initiating a legal proceeding in what we might call “criminal” cases –
including murder, assault, rape, and theft – is limited to the reign of the king on the
throne at the time the crime was committed. Following a change of reign, the ability
to bring a suit lapses. This is not the case, however, when it comes to other titles of
law, such as inheritance or monastic property. The window for litigating these
domains does not expire.
As far as I am aware, this curious provision is unique to Burma, or minimally is
not something echoed by Sanskrit dharma´sa¯stra rules or those of Thai or
Cambodian dhammasattha. The only scholar to have commented upon it, the legal
historian Shwe Baw, surmised that the logic underlying the formulation and persist-
ence of the rule is uncertain, as is the question of whether it was ever observed in
practice (1955, 538–39). Nevertheless, the law suggests that the reigning king has a
special relationship to crimes committed during his tenure. Judges or kings them-
selves do not have legal authority (in dhammasattha’s ﬁeld of view) to pass judgment
over crimes perpetrated during the reign of former kings.
This, it seems to me, is one among many examples of a constitutionalist provision
furnished by the dhammasattha corpus. The rule simultaneously enables and
constrains the operation of courts in relation to certain categories of substantive
law. Moreover, it imposes a limitation upon not only judges, but upon the king’s
judicial power, for he is unable to adjudicate crimes committed prior to his
coronation. A likely explanation for the law may be found in the fact that personal
status was a determining factor in deciding “criminal” cases such as murder, assault,
rape, and theft. The appropriate punishment for such crimes is assigned as a
function of the socioeconomic “class” (Burmese, amyui_h; Pali, va_n_na) of both
victim and perpetrator. In cases of murder and rape, for example, penalties often
involved ﬁnes linked to the variable “body-price” (kuiy bhui_h) of the victim,
sometimes in addition to corporal punishment such as mutilation, the value of
which was determined by socioeconomic status, such as being a poor person, rich
doubtfulness of the nominative absolute in Pali, see von Hinüber 1968, 28–31. I thank Petra
Kieffer-Pülz and Aleix Ruiz-Falqés for a stimulating discussion about the syntax of these verses.
26 UCL 105682, ññu.v; BL 12241, _tū.r; NL Taṅ10 jhī.r; UCL 5440, jau.r.
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
47
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 70 ---
person, “Good Person,” military ofﬁcer, minister, relative of the king, and so on.
Status identities were highly ﬂuid, inasmuch as they were bestowed by or in light of
a dependent relationship with the reigning king, his kinspeople, and clients. They
were not ﬁxed in perpetuity across reigns in the same way as certain other social
identities – such as, for example, father and daughter, husband and wife, monk, or
hereditary slave status – which were of essential concern in other domains of law.
It is worth reiterating that this brief example of one among very many consti-
tutional provisions in dhammasattha has absolutely nothing to do with a representa-
tion of the king as a dhammara¯ja¯, cakravartin, or bodhisattva. Nor does it relate to
conceptions of exogenous dhamma as higher justice. The law, or if you prefer, the
“dhamma” (Burmese, tara¯ _h), of the text is no doubt authorized by a justiﬁcatory
narrative (like all law), which at times invokes certain complex ﬁgurations of
cosmology and kingship, such as the story of Maha¯sammata and Manu, but these
ﬁgurations alone are woefully inadequate to the task of elucidating the substance
and mechanics of individual constitutionalist rules such as this. This is to say, again,
that if we want to understand the operation of Buddhist constitutionalism in
precolonial Southeast Asia, there is simply no substitute for direct engagement with
the evidence of the legal texts themselves.
2.2.3 Royal Legislation
The legal ecosystem inhabited by dhammasattha recognized multiple sites of authori-
tative law. Dhammasattha was not a purely self-referential normative environment,
but one that sanctioned forms of legal-textual alterity that could, and sometimes did,
conﬂict with its own norms, including both vinaya and royal legislation (ra¯jasattha).
These other environments or genres of legislation did not necessarily differ on
cosmological or ritual grounds – for example, in the sense that one was “religious”
and the other “secular” – but were nonetheless deferred to on certain occasions.
Indeed, dhammasattha texts not only recognize a hierarchy of law but yield to royal
command as legislation of the highest authority superseding all other legal rules.
For example, in the ﬁnal section of its seventh chapter, Responsa of Manura¯ja¯
states:
Regarding the point that ra¯jasattha has authority over dhammasattha, and an
agreement (gati) annuls ra¯jasattha: Despite whatever dhammasattha may author-
ize, the three spheres of life, wealth, and body shall be regulated by the command
of the sovereign (ra¯jasattha) prescribed by kings of great merit. Yet, despite what-
ever royal edicts might authorize, an agreement annuls royal legislation when the
two litigants have reached mutual consensus. The following [tale] is evidence
(sakse, lit. “a witness”) for this norm (thu _m_h ca _m):
Once upon a time, two men entered into the service of the king. One day, the king
asked them, “in what do you place your trust (yu _m)?” One man replied, “only
karma.” The other replied, “only my lord the king.” To the man who said that he
48
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 71 ---
trusted only karma, the king gave a bunch of bananas. To the man who said that he
trusted only his lord, the king gave a coconut that had been ﬁlled with gold.
When the two men departed the palace and were out on the road, the one with the
coconut said, “I have many children and grandchildren at home, whereas you have
none, therefore let us exchange the coconut for the bananas.”
When he reached his house, the man who trusted only the king distributed the
bananas among his children and grandchildren. The man who trusted only karma,
when he arrived home, split open the coconut, found it ﬁlled with gold, and
became rich.
Later, when they returned to the palace, the king inquired, “which of you has become
rich?” The man who had said he trusted only the king replied, “your servant is still
poor.” But the man who said he trusted only karma replied, “your servant is now rich.”
The king then asked what they had done with the bananas and coconut he had
given them.
“Because I have many children and grandchildren, I exchanged the coconut my
lord had presented to me.”
The king said, “I wanted you to have the gold-ﬁlled coconut. Because you
exchanged it for the bananas, your colleague has received the gold and is now rich.”
The man responded, “Before I exchanged the coconut, I did not know that it was
ﬁlled with gold intended for me. If this is true, a legal ruling (acī raṅ) resolving this
case should be issued in accordance with the original intention of your gift.”
The king ruled that his original intention was irrelevant to the case. Since the two
men mutually agreed to the exchange, their agreement must stand.
From that time onward, even when kings or other men may judge or command that
someone receive something, the legal decision (cī raṅthu _m_h) has conformed to the
mutual agreement of litigants. Thus, ra¯jasattha has authority over dhammasattha,
and an agreement annuls ra¯jasattha.27
In this rule and its accompanying narrative, dhammasattha subordinates itself to the
legislation of the sovereign, nullifying its own jurisdiction over all legal questions on
which the king himself might wish to issue an edict. However, ra¯jasattha is also
limited by mutual consensus or contractual agreement as a higher standard that even
dhammasattha or royal law cannot abrogate. This provision echoes a maxim fre-
quently encountered in Burmese legal documents, according to which dhammasat-
tha law and formal tribunals become necessary only when disputes cannot be settled
through other, non-legal means. That is, when parties to a dispute reach consensus in
the resolution of conﬂict, there is no cause to invoke the law, even if the terms of the
agreement do not conform to established legal norms. Even when the law is invoked,
a trial held, and a judge has issued a ruling, transcripts of precolonial Burmese trial
27 UCL 4645, gū.r; UCL 8270, gau.r; UCL 105690, _tha.v.
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
49
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 72 ---
proceedings often conclude by stating that the litigants faced each other and together
ate pickled tea (lak phak), symbolizing their mutual acceptance of and submission to
the decision.28 This ultimate goal of conﬂict resolution, outstripping any formal
“legal” remedies, is not limited to the dhammasattha corpus, but is frequently
promoted in surviving texts of royal edicts themselves.
The sovereign power of the king to determine and inﬂict corporal punishment
according to royal legislation is also something routinely granted by dhammasattha
law. For example, Dhammavila¯sa states, in relation to oath breakers:
In fortiﬁed towns and large and small villages of the realm and in districts of the
royal dominion that have been described [in the foregoing], whosoever makes an
oath of truth in front of Good People, such as bhikkhus and bra¯hma_nas, or others,
saying that they will not break the oath, and then at a later time breaks that oath,
they should be mercilessly beaten with the cane so that in the future they do not do
it again. If the oath breaker is a person of high social status, they should be dragged
down from their residence, their head covering or face cloth removed, and with
their head bent down in shame they must leave their relatives behind and go to
work as a gravedigger (dvan_h ca_n_da¯la). They should be conﬁned in the elephant or
horse stable under the house. Let them collect the elephant and horse shit for two
days, or four or ﬁve days, or six or seven days, or eight days, nine days, ten days, or a
fortnight. Such is the punishment they should receive. This type of punishment is
known as maṅ_h da_n (“punishment of the king,” ra¯jada_n_da). If they will not accept
this sort of punishment once it has been given, let them pay a ﬁne of 5 gold pieces
or 100 silver coins. They should never again be trusted. They should suffer defeat in
all legal affairs. However, if such a man is executed, or if his feet or hands are cut
off, one should not invoke dhammasattha. In such cases one has invoked royal
legislation (ra¯jasattha). The judge who does this [i.e. invokes the dhammasattha as
justiﬁcation for corporal punishment] shall suffer punishment in the Four Hells.29
A representative (though inexhaustive) collection of hundreds of Burmese royal
edicts (Pali ra¯jasattha; Burmese, amin. tau, “royal speech”) dated (not always
unproblematically) between the late sixteenth and late nineteenth centuries has
been edited by the historian Than Tun and published along with English-language
summaries of each edict.30 A cursory perusal of this remarkable corpus immediately
reveals the legislative imperatives of Burmese kingship, a sort of paradigmatically
Austinian archive of law as sovereign command, in which the king takes center stage
in legislating the realm through the regulation of political institutions and identities.
While the edicts are usually presented in the king’s ﬁrst-person voice, they were
28 Such features obviously invite comparison with other contexts of dispute resolution, for
example in medieval Europe or modern Tibet, which have preferred to avoid recourse to
formal law, on which see Pirie 2013, 33–38; Keyser 2012.
29 UCL 7490, gai.r; UCL 9926, go.v; DhV Kaṅ_h 18, khau.v; BL 12248, ga.v; UBhS 163–582, gī.r.
30 Than Tun 1983–1990 (available online: https://repository.kulib.kyoto-u.ac.jp/dspace/handle/
2433/173188). A related late precolonial genre of royal law is the upade legislation issued during
the reigns of King Mindon and King Thibaw (1853–85), on which see Htun Yee 1999b.
50
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 73 ---
often executed and proclaimed by his ministerial advisors at the palace. In one of the
earliest such documents, for example, issued 29 April 1597, King Nyaungyan-min
declares a lengthy list of dozens of duties for newly appointed ministers at the rank of
senapati, including that they:
. . . Ceaselessly work to regulate the affairs of the realm; . . . render legal judgments
that diligently strive to diminish theft, murder, and arson; render legal judgments for
all beings that are proportionate to the offense; investigate and record in writing for
the palace archive the qualiﬁcations of all subordinate royal ofﬁcers (amhu
tham_h); . . . support and exhibit saṅgaha31 to the four social classes; . . . advise the
king when disputes arise, presenting him with the legal norm (thu _m_h ca _m), so he
may properly adjudicate the case; . . . do not judge cases under the sway of anger,
ignorance, or greed for money;32. . . do not maltreat or oppress the people; . . . observe
the ﬁve precepts (sīla) every day; observe the uposatha [i.e., observe the eight
precepts] four times a month; strive to perform meritorious deeds; send metta¯ to
the lord who holds authority [= the reigning king]; for the sake of all beings, meditate
‘sabbe satta¯ avera¯ hontu’ [may all beings be free from evil];33 . . . do not allow the
royal ﬁnances in the palace treasury to become depleted; do not follow the desires of
women; avoid the three kinds of judicial bribes (ucca¯ ta _m cui_h);34 . . . in the ﬁrst
watch of the night, confer with those who know the dhammasattha and tales of
judicial decisions, those who know legal norms, those who know how to judge and
understand how to investigate, those who know trading and buying and selling, those
who know the scriptures (kyam_h gan), and those who know about astrology.35 . . .36
Many other edicts seek to regulate the conduct of tax ofﬁcials, military servicemen,
traders, monks, and slaves, and particularly the comportment of judges and the
operation and fees of legal courts. Numerous examples demonstrate that the edicts
of former kings may be regarded as settled law or established “precedent,” or they
31 saṅgaha pru. This suggests that the ministers should demonstrate the four saṅgahavatthu –
da¯na, peyyavajja, atthacariya¯, sama¯nattata¯ (generosity, kind speech, beneﬁcial conduct, and
impartiality) – frequently mentioned in Pali and Burmese literature.
32 This is parallel with the provision frequently encountered in dhammasattha treatises that
judges must avoid the four “bad courses” (agati) of desire, fear, anger, and ignorance, on
which see Lammerts 2018, 35, 83–86, 189–90.
33 Compare Ja¯ II, 61, etc. This is a standard verbal formula offering protection (anugga_nha). Avera
is often translated as “without hatred,” although this tends to miss the sense here, wherein vera
is essentially synonymous with pa¯pa, akusala, apuñña, and so on.
34 The precise referent is unspeciﬁed, and there are at least two different formulations of threefold
bribery. The most common in Burmese judicial contexts refers to a fraudulent decision made
by a judge out of consideration for: (1) personal enrichment (dhanagga¯ha), (2) love or affection
(pīyamitta) for one of the litigants, or (3) a blood relative (ña¯tilohita) who is of one of
the litigants.
35 This clause reﬂects those sections in dhammasattha and dharma´sa¯stra texts where the nightly
“routine” of a king is detailed.
36 This order is reproduced in Than Tun 1983–1990, Vol. 2, although it is drawn by him from
U Htun Yee n.d., 2–3. Htun Yee takes the order from a manuscript in the private collection of
historian Toe Hla. There are some complexities relating to this text, not least that it appears to
have been issued prior to Nyaungyan-min’s formal consecration.
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
51
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 74 ---
might be seen to be in conﬂict, nulliﬁed by the dictate of the reigning monarch.
The orders also reveal the integration of dhammasattha law into royal law, in a sort
of reversal of dhammasattha’s pluralist deference to ra¯jasattha mentioned above: for
example, an edict dated June 23, 1607, states that judges should follow dhammasat-
tha norms in the conduct of trials and determination of punitive ﬁnes, or another
dated August 11, 1692, that prescribes that the division of heritable property for
military ofﬁcers shall follow dhammasattha rules of succession.
Lingat would surely contend that “such decisions have only the force of royal
authority, they do not make law” (Lingat 1937, 22). While such commands are not,
in most cases, grounded in dhammasattha, nor in any “supreme Dharma,” nor in
the words of a buddha, it is rather difﬁcult to conceptualize a deﬁnition of “law”
with which the ra¯ja¯’s edict, as lavishly depicted in these documents, is incongruous,
especially given that the transgression of such edicts was met with “severe punish-
ment,” including bodily mutilation and execution (September 6, 1573). Likewise,
Chris Baker and Pasuk Phongpaichit have recently demonstrated contra Lingat that
in the neighboring context of precolonial Thailand “the evidence for kings making
laws is very strong” (Baker and Pasuk 2021, 29).
2.3 THE OUTER CASING OF THE LAW
The study of constitutional aspects of Buddhist law is beleaguered by the faithfully
monogamous marriage of constitution and “state” in theoretical discussions, as well
as, relatedly, the dissociation of constitutional law from other types of law. Aristotle
popularized the distinct status of constitutions in Politics. Yet this persistent decoup-
ling, so inﬂuential in modern Europe and contemporary constitutionalist scholar-
ship, fails to account for the fact that in many terrains of history, including
precolonial Southeast Asia, the regulation of the action of the political sphere has
not been conceived of as at all distinct from other forms of law and lawmaking. Here
all law is “constitutive” or “constituting,” and the ra¯ja¯, for example, is merely
another staged character in the legal performance.
If we are to try to engage constitutional aspects of precolonial Buddhist law, it is
therefore necessary to expand the inherited parameters of the governing analysis,
since a signiﬁcant quantum of such law, until quite recently, has not been legislated
under the aegis of a ra¯ja¯ (or “state”), much less by a demos, or “We the People,” even
if it occasionally sought to regulate the throne. It is an anthropological common-
place that all formations of community, including the most acephalous, entail a
regulatory or normative dimension that seeks to negotiate or manage relations of
power, and thus evince constitutionalist aspects or strategies (Amborn 2009).
Recognizing such features of Buddhist legal discourse, however, at least those
actually circulating in precolonial Southeast Asia, asks us to think about constitu-
tionalism from a somewhat different angle, one more aligned with the contours of
our archive.
52
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 75 ---
If we would like to discover Buddhist constitutionalist norms, if by this we mean
the “thin,” non-Aristotelian sense of laws that order spheres of politics or institutional
power (the palace, the monastery), we need not search very far at all. These are
abundant across the several Southeast Asian legal environments discussed above,
and I have offered only a handful of illustrative specimens, mostly from Burmese
dhammasattha. There are extensive, readily accessible, examples elsewhere, too.
Among these are the recently translated Kot Monthianban (“Palace Law of
Ayutthaya;” Baker and Pasuk 2016), the long-ago translated “lois constitutionnelles”
of precolonial Cambodia (Leclère 1898, I, 37–232), as well as the local varieties of
monastic law treated in the work of Berthe Jansen (2018), Benjamin Schonthal
(2021a; 2021c), and Brenton Sullivan (2021). It is nevertheless evident from the
examples given above that the heretofore standard approach, ﬁxated on the rhet-
orical tropes of Buddhist kingship spellbound by dhamma, fails to nominate even
approximately viable candidates.
As Chris Baker and Pasuk Phongpaichit have recently observed, “the basis of
kingship in Siam and neighboring states is often described solely in relation to
sacredness and religious power through terms such as devaraja (god king), tham-
maraja (dhamma king), and cakravartin (wheel-turning emperor)” (Baker and
Pasuk 2016, ix). This indefensible predicament needs to change. There is, in short,
no sparsity of rich legal documentation from precolonial Buddhist Southeast Asia
that offers scholars access to distinctive local forms of constitutionalist thought and
practice. Classical Pali repertoires are no doubt variously relevant to the discussion,
but often in oblique and surprising ways. Indeed, the foregoing analysis argues for
precisely an inversion of Lingat’s inﬂuential thesis. The integument or “outer casing
of the law” is neither the king’s command nor the complex historical substance of
lawmaking in whichever of our three environments, but rather the conceit of
dhamma as the “king of kings,” which has received far too much attention in
scholarship, at the expense of legal history itself.
ABBREVIATIONS
BL
British Library
NL
National Library of Myanmar, Yangon
UBhS
U Bho Thi Manuscript Library, Thaton
UCL
Universities’ Central Library, Yangon
references
Amborn, Hermann. 2009. Law as Refuge of Anarchy: Societies without Hegemony or State.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
[AN] Morris, Richard, and E. Hardy. 1883–1900. The Aṅguttara-nika¯ya. 5 vols. London: Pali
Text Society.
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
53
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 76 ---
Baker, Chris and Pasuk Phongpaichit. 2016. The Palace Law of Ayutthaya and the
Thammasat. Ithaca: Southeast Asia Program Publications, Cornell University.
2021. “Thammasat, Custom, and Royal Authority in Siam’s Legal History.” In Thai Legal
History: From Traditional to Modern Law, edited by Andrew Harding and Munin
Pongsapan, 23–40. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blackburn, Anne. 1999. “Looking for the Vinaya: Monastic Discipline in the Practical
Canons of the Therava¯da.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies
22 (2): 281–309.
Clarke, Shayne. 2015. “Vinayas.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Vol. 1, edited by
Jonathan A. Silk, et al., 60–87. Leiden: Brill.
Collins, Steven. 2006. Nirva¯na and Other Buddhist Felicities. New York: Cambridge.
Dhammavila¯sa dhammasat. NL Kaṅ_h 18; UCL 7490; UCL 9926; BL 12248; UBhS
163–582.
Ellingson, Ter. 1990. “Tibetan Monastic Constitutions: The bCa’ yig.” In Reﬂections on
Tibetan Culture: Essays in Memory of Turrell V. Wylie, edited by L. Epstein and R. F.
Sherburne, 205–29. Lewiston: Edward Mellen.
Gokhale, Balkrishna. 1953. “Dhammiko Dhammara¯ja: A Study in Buddhist Constitutional
Concepts.”
In
Indica:
The
Indian
Historical
Research
Institute
Silver
Jubilee
Commemoration Volume, 161–65. Bombay: St. Xavier’s College.
1966. “Early Buddhist Kingship.” Journal of Asian Studies 26 (1): 15–22.
1969. “The Early Buddhist View of the State.” Journal of the American Oriental Society,
89 (4): 731–38.
Griswold, A. B. and Prasert Na Nagara. 1969. “A Law Promulgated by the King of Ayudhya¯ in
1397 A.D.” Journal of the Siam Society 57 (1): 109–48.
1975. “Kingship and Society at Sukhodaya.” In Change and Persistence in Thai Society:
Essays in Honor of Lauriston Sharp, edited by G. William Skinner and A. Thomas
Kirsch, 29–92. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
1992. Epigraphical and Historical Studies. Bangkok: The Historical Society.
von Hinüber, Oskar. 1968. Studien zur Kausussyntax des Pa¯li, Besonders des Vinaya-Pi_taka.
München: Kitzinger.
Htun Yee [Thvan_h Rī]. n.d. Ññoṅram_h khet amin. tau mya¯ _h, vol. 1. Yangon: Mran ma¯ mhu
bima¯n.
1999a. Kun_h bhoṅkhet ṅve khye_h sakkara¯j ca¯ khyup mya¯ _h: Collection of Thet-kayit
(Moneylending Contracts of Myanmar Rural Area in Kon-baung Period). 3 Vols.
Toyohashi: Aichi University.
1999b. Ratana¯ pu _m khet upade mya¯ _h: Collection of Upade (Laws and Regulations of
Myanmar Last Two Kings). Toyohashi: Aichi University.
2006. Kun_h bhoṅkhet phrat ca¯ poṅ_h khyup: Collection of Hpyat-sa (Legal Cases and Court
Decisions of Myanmar in the Kon-baung Period, A.D. 1752–1885). 4 vols. Yangon: Mran
ma¯ mhu bima¯n ca¯ pe bha_n.
Huxley, Andrew. 1999. “Buddhist Case Law on Theft: The Vinītavatthu on the Second
Pa¯ra¯jika.” Journal of Buddhist Ethics, 6: 313–30.
Janaka, Ashin and Crosby, Kate. 2017. “Heresy and Monastic Malpractice in the Buddhist
Court Cases (Vinicchaya) of Modern Burma (Myanmar).” Contemporary Buddhism 18:
199–261.
Jansen, Berthe. 2015. “Monastic Organizational Guidelines.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of
Buddhism, Vol. 1, edited by Jonathan A. Silk, et al., 442–49. Leiden: Brill.
2018. The Monastery Rules: Buddhist Monastic Organization in Pre-Modern Tibet.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
54
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 77 ---
[Ja¯] Fausbøll, V. 1877–1896. The Ja¯taka, together with Its Commentary, Being Tales of the
Anterior Births of Gotama Buddha. 6 vols. London: Trübner.
Jayawickrama, N. A. 1986. The Inception of Discipline and the Vinaya Nida¯na. London: Pali
Text Society.
Jory, Patrick. 2016. Thailand’s Theory of Monarchy: The Vessantara Ja¯taka and the Idea of the
Perfect Man. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Keyser, Richard L. 2012. “‘Agreement Supersedes Law, and Love Judgement:’ Legal Flexibility
and Amicable Settlement in Anglo-Norman England.” Law and History Review 30 (1):
37–88.
Kieffer-Pülz, Petra. 2011. “The Law of Theft: Regulations in the Therava¯da Vinaya and the
Law Commentaries.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 31: 1–54.
2016–2017. “Translocal Debates and Legal Hermeneutics: Early Pa¯li Vinaya Texts in the
Adjudication of Sīma¯ Procedures, c. 1200–1900 C.E.” Journal of Buddhism, Law &
Society 2: 103–58.
Koenig, William J. 1990. The Burmese Polity, 1752–1819: Politics, Administration, and Social
Organization in the Early Kon-baung Period. Ann Arbor: Center for South and Southeast
Asian Studies, University of Michigan.
Lammerts, D. Christian. 2005. The Dhammavila¯sa Dhammathat: A Critical Historiography,
Analysis, and Translation of the Text. M.A. thesis, Cornell University.
2010. Buddhism and Written Law: Dhammasattha Manuscripts and Texts in Premodern
Burma. PhD thesis, Cornell University.
2013. “Narratives of Buddhist Legislation: Textual Authority and Legal Heterodoxy in
Seventeenth through Nineteenth-Century Burma.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies
44, (1): 118–44.
2018. Buddhist Law in Burma: A History of Dhammasattha Texts and Jurisprudence,
1250–1850. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
2019–2020. “Judicial Ordeals in Premodern Thailand: Robert Lingat’s ‘Les ordalies au siam’
(1949), An Annotated Translation and Commentary.” Journal of Buddhism, Law &
Society 5: 31–60.
2022. “Burmese Inscriptions as Buddhist Legal Texts.” Journal of Buddhism, Law &
Society.
Latter, Thomas. 1850. Selections from the Vernacular Boodhist Literature of Burmah.
Maulmain: American Baptist Missionary Press.
Leclère, Adhémard. 1898. Les Codes Cambodgiens. 2 Vols. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Lingat, Robert. 1937. “L’inﬂuence indoue dans l’ancien droit siamois.” In Institut de droit
comparé, conférences 1936, edited by Robert Lingat and Denise Paulme, 1–29. Paris:
Domat-Montchrestien.
1950. “Evolution of the Concept of Law in Burma and Siam.” Journal of the Siam Society
38 (1): 9–31.
1951. “La conception du droit dans l’indochine hînayâniste.” Bulletin de l’École Française
d’Extrême-Orient, 44 (1): 163–87.
Manura¯ja¯ lhyok thu _m_h (Responsa of Manura¯ja¯). UCL 4645; UCL 8270; UCL 105690.
Manusa¯ra dhammasattha. UCL 105682; BL 12241; NL Taṅ10; UCL 5440.
Mérieau, Eugénie. 2020. “Area Studies and the Decolonisation of Comparative Law: Insights
from Alternative Southeast Asian Constitutional Modernities.” International Quarterly
for Asian Studies 51 (3–4): 67–84.
Pirie, Fernanda. 2013. The Anthropology of Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ratnapala, Nandasena. 1971. The Katika¯vatas: Laws of the Buddhist Order of Ceylon from the
12th Century to the 18th Century. München: Kitzinger.
Buddhism & Constitutionalism in Southeast Asia
55
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 78 ---
Raz,
Joseph.
1998.
“On
the
Authority
and
Interpretation
of
Constitutions:
Some
Preliminaries.” In Constitutionalism: Philosophical Foundations, edited by Larry
Alexander, 152–93. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Reynolds, Frank. 1972. “Two Wheels of the Dhamma: A Study of Early Buddhism.” In The
Two Wheels of the Dharma, edited by Frank Reynolds and Bardwell Smith, 6–30.
Chambersburg: American Academy of Religion.
Saito, Teruko. 2019. 18–19 seiki Biruma shakkin shōmon no kenkyū: Tōnan Ajia no hitotsu no
kinsei [A Study of Debt Contracts in 18–19th century Burma: A Southeast Asian Early
Modernity]. Kyoto: Kyoto Daigaku Gakujutsu Shuppankai.
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2016. “Environments of Law: Islam, Buddhism, and the State in
Contemporary Sri Lanka.” Journal of Asian Studies 75 (1): 137–56.
2017–2018. “Litigating Vinaya: Buddhist Law and Public Law in Contemporary Sri Lanka.”
Journal of Buddhism, Law & Society 3: 69–111
2021a. “Buddhist Law Beyond the Vinaya: Monastic Constitutions (Katika¯vatas) and their
Transformations in Colonial Sri Lanka.” History of Religions 60 (4): 287–324.
2021b. “Judging in the Buddha’s Court: A Buddhist Judicial System in Contemporary Asia.”
Asian Journal of Law and Society 8 (2): 206–25.
2021c. “The Case for Religious Constitutions: Comparative Constitutional Law among
Buddhists, and Other Religious Groups.” Law and Social Inquiry 47 (2): 391–419.
Shwe Baw. 1955. Origin and Development of Burmese Legal Literature. PhD thesis, University
of London.
Skilling, Peter. 1997. “The Advent of Therava¯da Buddhism to Mainland South-East Asia.”
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 20 (1): 93–107.
[Sp] Takakusu, Junjiro, and Makoto Nagai. 1924–1947. Samantapa¯sa¯dika¯: Buddhaghosa’s
Commentary on the Vinaya Pi_taka. 7 vols. London: Pali Text Society.
Sparks, T. P. 1851. Decisions of Princess Thoo-Dhamma Tsari: Translated from the Burmese,
According to the Text of Lieut. T. Latter. Maulmain: American Mission Press.
Sullivan, Brenton. 2021. Building a Religious Empire: Tibetan Buddhism, Bureaucracy, and
the Rise of the Gelukpa. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Tambiah, Stanley. 1976. World Conqueror & World Renouncer. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
1989. “King Maha¯sammata: The First King in the Buddhist Story of Creation, and his
Persisting Relevance.” Journal of the Anthropological Society of Oxford 20 (2): 101–22.
Than Tun. 1983–1990. The Royal Orders of Burma. 10 vols. Kyoto: Center for Southeast Asian
Studies, Kyoto University.
56
D. Christian Lammerts
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 79 ---
3
Theorising Constitutionalism in Buddhist-Dominant
Asian Polities
Asanga Welikala*
3.1 INTRODUCTION
One of the main research questions of this volume is: Do existing models in the
study of religion and constitutional law adequately explain the dynamics of
Buddhism and constitutional law in Asia? This might be broken down into two
further and somewhat more speciﬁc questions, namely, what are the elements of a
theory of constitutionalism that have the capacity to explain existing constitutional
practice, and on that basis, prescribe certain general norms of constitutional order,
in Buddhist-dominant Asian polities?
In giving some preliminary answers to these two questions within the scope of a
short chapter, I rely on the following assumptions. I deﬁne the empirical context of
study as “Buddhist-dominant Asian polities,” meaning contemporary states in Asia
where Buddhism is a material and salient inﬂuence on the law and politics of
constitutionalism. This group of countries is both geographically widespread and
extremely diverse in terms of its socioeconomic structures, societal and political
cultures, and, importantly, its traditions of Buddhism. Notwithstanding those differ-
ences, we possess sufﬁcient comparative knowledge in the ﬁeld of “Buddhism and
Law” studies to be plausibly able to work with a set of general propositions about
how Buddhism inﬂuences constitutionalism. Buddhist-dominant Asian polities are
also highly varied in terms of constitutional democracy, representing everything
from non-democracies to consolidated democracies, meaning that there is no
common concept of analytical constitutionalism through which we can understand
their governance and politics. The normative assumptions underpinning the
*
Thanks to Rohan Edrisinha, Tom Ginsburg, Andrew Harding, Dinesha Samararatne, and most
of all, Benjamin Schonthal, for their penetrating and helpful comments on a previous draft.
Many of those comments raise complex and difﬁcult points that require addressing in future
work. However, and subject to the customary caveat, I am grateful to these friends for helping
make this initial statement of my views more coherent than they were in the original draft.
57
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 80 ---
dominant contemporary discourse of comparative constitutional law, chieﬂy the
assumptions concerning the autonomy and normative superiority of legal norms
over other norms, are either inadequate or inappropriate for analysing the consti-
tutional cultures of these countries. As a consequence, mainstream comparative
constitutional law has found it difﬁcult to ﬁnd purchase in these countries as an
explanatory framework, a normative philosophy of good government, and as a
technology of constitutional design.
Existing accounts therefore do not adequately deal with the key relationships
between politics, law, and culture, which produce, legitimate, structure, and limit
governing power – in a word, constitutionalism – in Buddhist-dominant Asian
polities. These relationships are between, on the one hand, the constitutional forms
of legal authority that more or less originate in some version of a Western model,
and on the other hand, the formal or informal modes of the exercise of political or
public power that more or less derive from Buddhist-infused cultural norms. The
ﬁrst step in the construction of a meaningful theory of constitutionalism for and in
this category of polity, therefore, is to be able to provide a descriptive account of this
relationship between authority and power, form and function, state and society,
institutions and culture.1 This account must not be distorted by either external
substantive normative assumptions (e.g., derived from liberalism) or by a “normati-
vist style” of theorising.2 In particular, it must not be assumed from the facile
resemblance of constitutional forms to Western models that Western values can
be used to understand and evaluate their operation. The methodology of theory-
building in this ﬁrst phase thus ought to be descriptive and interpretative, as opposed
to normative and prescriptive, so as to achieve two important preliminary aims. The
ﬁrst is to capture, as accurately as possible, the reality of constitutionalism as it is
actually practiced in these polities. The second is to provide plausible and explicit
explanations of the various dialectic or syncretic ways in which the interaction
between Western forms and Buddhist norms gives shape to the practice of constitu-
tionalism. Only once such a satisfactory descriptive account has been developed
should we turn our attention to the normative dimensions of a theory of constitu-
tionalism, that is, questions about the nature of power-constraining principles, and
the reasons by which they are justiﬁed.
This two-step theory-building exercise engages the two distinct bodies of scholar-
ship already mentioned – “Buddhism and Law” studies and mainstream compara-
tive constitutional law – which have hitherto developed along parallel trajectories.
Driven mostly by the methodological frames and substantive concerns of religious
1
I use the term “descriptive theory” here in the same sense and a similar context as John Grifﬁths
(Grifﬁths 1986).
2
Loughlin deﬁnes the “normativist style” as “rooted in the belief in the ideal of the separation of
powers and in the need to subordinate government to law. This style highlights law’s adjudi-
cative and control functions and therefore its rule orientation and conceptual nature.
Normativism essentially reﬂects an ideal of the autonomy of law” (Loughlin 1992, 60).
58
Asanga Welikala
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 81 ---
studies, anthropology, sociology, and history, “Buddhism and Law” studies aspire to
an emic approach to understanding Buddhist conceptions of law and legal order.
Comparative constitutional law, typifying an etic approach, is driven by lawyers and
political scientists, with the formalist methodologies characteristic of those discip-
lines and concerned mostly with structures, institutions, and procedures of political
power and legal authority. Even when comparative constitutional law concerns itself
with agentic and cultural questions, it usually looks at local speciﬁcities from the
perspective of certain ideal-typical normative frameworks, which are Western in
origin, but are projected now as values of universal application.3 These two bodies of
knowledge, in terms of both methodology and substance, have their strengths and
weaknesses as partial accounts of constitutionalism in Buddhist societies, but as
noted, they have largely developed without much engagement with each other. In
theorising a model of constitutionalism that could have the best potential explana-
tory and prescriptive value in Buddhist-dominant Asian polities, “Buddhism and
Law” studies and comparative constitutional law should therefore be brought into a
dialogic conversation.
Such a conversation would have two dimensions. One the one hand, it would
draw from the contextual insights of “Buddhism and Law” to answer general
questions of constitutionalism posed by comparative constitutional law, and thus
contribute to the broadening and deepening of the potential contribution of
“Buddhism and Law.” On the other hand – and this is what this chapter is mostly
concerned with – it would be the beginning of a process of reﬁning the conceptual
equipment of comparative constitutional law in two related ways. One would consist
of modest and incremental ways of improving current methods of “doing” consti-
tutional comparativism, while the other involves a more fundamental and even
radical revaluation of the foundations of the discipline. The more modest challenge
would be that, through its incorporation of “Buddhism and Law” insights, compara-
tive constitutional law could become more methodologically and analytically
responsive to the normative and institutional speciﬁcities of the constitutional
cultures of Buddhist-dominant Asian polities. The more radical possibility is that it
could be an opportunity to reappraise the prevailing liberal normativity of main-
stream comparative constitutional law in a novel way.
This new pathway to reappraisal is presented by a consideration of the dynamic,
as opposed to an either/or, relationship between tradition and modernity in
Buddhist-Asian societies. Serving as an analogy for revisiting comparative consti-
tutional law’s origins in the European Enlightenment, this enables multiple mean-
ings of that intellectual watershed to be rediscovered, in particular, alternatives to
the dominant liberal narrative of the Enlightenment as (liberal) modernity’s
triumph over (illiberal) tradition. Such alternative meanings of constitutional
3
For this general point being made from the perspective of the case of Buddhism and consti-
tutional law in Sri Lanka, see Schonthal 2016, Chapter 8.
Constitutionalism in Buddhist Asian Polities
59
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 82 ---
modernity have the potential to pluralise the normative foundations of comparative
constitutional law, and to curb liberalism’s dominance within its discourse and
practice. Some of these alternative meanings of constitutional modernity could
make the constraining function of constitutionalism in its normative dimension
more consistent with, and less jarring to, the Buddhist-Asian ethos than individual-
ist liberal precepts, without at the same time undermining their constraining
function. It would also make the necessary reappraisal of the normative core of
comparative constitutional law an inclusive and iterative process between different
world cultures.4
3.2 BUDDHISM AND LAW STUDIES AND
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
There are a number of insights relevant to constitutional theory-building that might
be gleaned from the emergent literature on “Buddhism and Law.” Extensively
discussed in this literature, albeit not always in ways that directly help the consti-
tutional theorist, are Buddhist ideas of law and dharma, personhood, sovereignty,
statehood, political order, collective identity and nationalism, political and territorial
space, political ethics, and the relationships between the sangha and laity in general
and rulers in particular.
One of the ﬁrst lessons is that understanding constitutionalism in the Buddhist
world demands a comparative methodology that is contextual, which is to say, an
approach that looks at the interplay of positive law and other informal types of law in
the context of history, politics, culture, and society (French and Nathan 2014, 17–24).
For this reason, it is also necessarily a multidisciplinary endeavour. A comparative
methodology that focuses only on formal law or institutions, or one that looks at
constitutional structures that resemble Western models through Western normative
values or animating conventions alone, is likely to result in heavily misleading
conclusions. Of course, even in fully modern constitutional systems of positive
law, scholars understand that there is more to constitutionalism than the formal
laws of the system (Ferejohn, Rakove, and Riley 2010, 10–11). But the difference here
is that constitutionalism involves an interplay between laws, rules, norms, practices,
and modes of behaviour that emanate from at least two fundamentally different
cultural sources – the Western and Buddhist traditions – and often more than two
sources depending on the “cultural packages” accompanying legal transplantation
through which the given Buddhist-dominant legal system has historically taken
shape (French and Nathan 2014, 22 n. 6).
In terms of traditional comparative law methods, the approach that perhaps
has the greatest relevance for constitutional law is the idea of legal transplants,
4
For similar observations from the perspective of the related ﬁeld of comparative political theory,
see Walton 2017, 20–21. See also Moore 2016.
60
Asanga Welikala
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 83 ---
because this permits study not only of how legal concepts are transmitted
between different polities, but also examines “the role of power, legitimacy,
and authority in their transmission” (French and Nathan 2014, 21). French and
Nathan note the prevalence of studies concerning what appear to be “private
law” in the Buddhist world, but they underscore a caution that is especially
important for constitutional law: “ . . . a subject for investigation is the degree to
which the public-private dichotomy enshrined in Comparative Law discourse is
of heuristic value in Buddhism, and also whether or not these putatively univer-
sal constructs are too culturally and historically determined to be useful” (French
and Nathan 2014, 19–20). This is a point that holds true across a much broader
set of issues in constitutional law than simply the public/private divide. Similarly,
legal history is a ﬁeld that contributes much to our understanding of consti-
tutional law by helping us gain a better understanding of law in the past,
explaining the role of law in history, and in these ways giving us a more
complete understanding of the present (Harding 2021, 1–3).
In terms of substance, Buddhism is directly and extensively concerned with
questions of social, political, economic, and legal order; its concerns and its regula-
tory ambitions are not just otherworldly (French and Nathan 2014, 14 n. 6). In
“Buddhism and Law” studies, the idea of law includes the modern conception of a
legal system as the body of binding rules governing a polity, conceptions of justice
underpinning those rules, and the institutions and procedures for its creation and
execution as well as adjudication under those rules. However, as French and
Nathan pertinently add, “ . . . law also includes other practices, such as . . . the
social customs, practices, and rules that constitute a form of social control for the
maintenance of the group; and . . . social manners, customary practices, etiquette,
and general behaviours regulating silence, speech, and interaction” (French and
Nathan 2014, 13–14). This clearly underscores the expansive notion of “law” in
Buddhist societies, and this is salient for determining the province of constitutional-
ism in both the descriptive and normative sense.
Buddhist law operates in a diffuse, fragmented, pluralistic, overlapping, and
syncretic way, which must be understood on its own terms. Comparison with other
systems of religious law in world history may help in appropriate cases (e.g., law
within the Ottoman empire, which functioned in similarly plural and dialectical
ways over a large and heterogenous territory). But other comparisons (e.g., with the
canon law of medieval Europe) may lead to misleading conclusions, such as the
equation of the strength and coherence of the legal system with qualities such as
centralisation, codiﬁcation, and institutionalisation. As French and Nathan argue,
“The Buddhist tradition has always been known for its wide diversity in terms of its
vast store of sacred texts and different canons, multiple buddhas and bodhisattvas,
and accommodation to local beliefs and worldviews” (French and Nathan 2014, 14).
This pluralistic, open-ended, and adaptable character of Buddhist law is not a
weakness or a marker of incoherence but the very source of its vitality. It is one
Constitutionalism in Buddhist Asian Polities
61
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 84 ---
reason why Buddhism has been both able to form the basis of historic state-
formation in so many societies in such a geographically vast and culturally diverse
expanse across Asia, and continue to inﬂuence the legal systems and political
processes of these countries today (French and Nathan 2014, 15). Yet at the same
time, this fundamental pluralism is what also explains why there has never been a
uniﬁed object called “Buddhist law” in the same sense as Islamic law, Jewish law, or
canon law.
One of the most important lessons for constitutional theorising that emerges from
this brief survey is thus the theme of pluralism. Within Buddhism’s unity is a rich
pluralism of contextualised expressions. The theme of inherent pluralism is salient
in both analytical and normative terms. In the analytical sense, it tells us that
constitutionalism in Buddhist societies ought not be constructed on overdetermined
positivist categories. Similarly, strong analytical regimes of separation – between
domains such as law, politics, culture, and society, or state and religion, or state and
society, or the public and the private, or the individual and the collective – would
also be inadvisable in building descriptive theory in these contexts. Likewise, the
distinctive nature of legal authority, political power, and the forms of their inter-
actions in Buddhist Asia raise questions about how theoretical frameworks on law
and religion built with primarily the Abrahamic monotheistic religions in mind
might work in this region.5
In the normative sense, the inherent diversity of both the Buddhist world and
Buddhist traditions appears to offer a rich empirical and ideational basis for develop-
ing metaconstitutional theories (or foundational political theories) for constitutional
order and constitutional design. Given the centrality of the themes of pluralism and
syncretism to the formation of these theories, they moreover promise to take shape in
ways that are very different to the Western European and North American historical
and cultural contexts from which monistic and centralist theories that currently
serve comparative constitutional law have emerged.6 In particular, we should note
that the sociological pluralism of the type we must account for in the Buddhist world
has little to do with the value pluralism of Western liberalism, and likewise, the
syncretic character of its various constitutionalisms is both a cause and consequence
of a historical experience with modern state-formation that is fundamentally differ-
ent to that of the West. Put another way, plausible constitutional theory for
Buddhist-dominant
polities
cannot
be
constructed
through
the
prism
of
Enlightenment liberalism, and its principles of individualism, voluntary choice,
and its various regimes of separation.
5
See e.g., Hirschl and Shachar 2018. The authors persistently refer to Hindu and Buddhist
nationalisms, that is, a modernist form of political mobilisation, in order to ﬁt these two Asian
religions into their framework of competing orders.
6
For recent explorations of these themes of pluralism and syncretism in relation to African and
Confucian constitutionalisms, see Gebeye 2021 and Bui 2017.
62
Asanga Welikala
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 85 ---
3.3 COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL LAW AND
BUDDHIST-DOMINANT ASIAN POLITIES
As is well-established, comparative constitutional law developed in a succession of
waves as a result of major global events, such as the response to the horrors of World
War II, decolonisation, and the third wave of democratisation beginning with the
collapse of Latin American dictatorships in the 1970s through to the fall of the Soviet
bloc in the 1990s. It has now become a self-sustaining interdisciplinary academic
ﬁeld as well as a community of practice, through the linkages between international
development policy and constitution-building as an instrument of democratisation
and conﬂict resolution in the global south. In the post-Cold War period, when
comparative constitutional law saw its greatest expansion, it has also undergone
several phases of rapid discursive evolution, with new challenges superseding older
concerns and new information technologies assisting comparativism in multiple
ways. For example, a major shift has been from the comparative study of speciﬁc
subjects within municipal constitutions to the comparative study of general themes
of constitutionalism (Tushnet 2018, 1–11). More recently, scholars have noted a
“global south turn” in the ﬁeld, to which we will return in a moment.
One thing about comparative constitutional law that has remained stable and
constant throughout this period of exponential growth is its core set of normative
precepts, and an institutional design heuristic that is intended to realise those goals.
The latter includes democratic elections, constitutional bills of justiciable rights,
strong-form judicial review, the separation of powers, fourth pillar institutions, and
other institutional devices for constraining power and protecting the rule of law.
This normative-institutional core has been deﬁned by the values of liberal constitu-
tionalism, also theorised as “liberal constitutional democracy” (Ginsburg and Huq
2018, 9–15), “the postwar paradigm” (Weinrib 2006, Chapter 4), and “structural-
liberalism” (Dowdle and Wilkinson 2017, 17–20). Heavily inﬂuenced by the
American and French encounters with Enlightenment thought, the normative
dimension of the core can be said to encapsulate the following theses. I present
these theses here in a highly abstracted and stylised form, with some sacriﬁce of
historical complexity and nuance for the sake of analytical clarity.
The American and French revolutions and consequent constitutional foundings
represented the historical paradigm shift of social and political organisation from
tradition to modernity (or as the shift is sometimes described, from hierarchy to
equality, status to contract, religion to reason). Premodern society was a source of
human misery. By the application of human reason and human will, however,
society and indeed human nature was radically reconstructed so as to ensure liberty,
equality, and fraternity for all. Human beings possess the vast power to destroy and
recreate society on a total scale. The constitutional modernity so created is under-
pinned by two key principles. First, constituted authority is legitimate only to the
extent that it is based on the general will of the people. Second, the moral basis of
Constitutionalism in Buddhist Asian Polities
63
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 86 ---
any obligation of obedience to authority, which necessarily involves some restriction
on individual freedom, is that it is self-imposed. Only the individual can decide what
these self-imposed limits are, based on the individual’s own exercise of reason. Any
other restraint emanating from existing legal, political, social, and especially reli-
gious structures of the community in which the individual lives, lacks the legitimacy
required by constitutional modernity.
The philosophy of liberal constitutionalism therefore is based on a historical
mindset that sharply and favourably distinguishes modernity from whatever form of
order that was present before. It reproduces a sociological worldview of individualism,
a normative commitment to individual choice based on the voluntary will, a rejec-
tion or at least a subordination of any conception of natural or cosmological order as
a legitimate basis of constitutional order, and a set of institutional commitments
geared to the protection of individual liberty rights as the main end of constitutional-
ism. Moreover, constitutional liberalism, as a variant of Enlightenment thought, casts
its normative principles as universal precepts applicable to the whole of humanity.
This represented a rejection of the premodern notion of the constitution as the
expression of the identity of speciﬁc politico-cultural communities, or broadly, the
concept of the “body politic” (Collingwood 1942, Chapter XXIV) in classical Western
political theory, or the synecdochical polities bound by ritual idioms in premodern
Buddhist states (Nissan and Stirrat 1990, Chapter 2).
The success of liberal constitutionalism within the American experience, together
with the global geopolitical position of the United States in the post-World War II
and post-Cold War era, made it possible for a theory otherwise contingent on time,
place, and culture, to be projected as the basis of a universal theory of constitutional-
ism.7 Liberal constitutionalism’s universality, of course, has always been a contested
claim within and without the Western tradition (Dowdle and Wilkinson 2017, n. 21).
The unevenness of democratisation in Buddhist-dominant Asian polities immedi-
ately demonstrates at least one of the sources of contestation, namely, that the
universalist blueprint struggles to gain traction in societies where there is a powerful
existing source of values and ideas of selfhood. Indeed, it would have been surprising
if liberalism’s individualist principles had gained more traction in Buddhist societies,
where constitutional ordering is cosmological and karmic rather than rationalist and
secular. Bluntly put, on the Buddhist view of the nature of social life and of political
obligation, the legitimacy and acceptance of constitutional arrangements are not
dependent on individual reason and will (although in the Buddhist democracies
these will have a place in constitutional politics and law), but on other fundamental
concepts of the moral universe, and on the Buddha’s teachings on the human
7
The migration of Western constitutional ideas to the non-Western world of course began in the
earlier colonial era, but the transmission of constitutional liberalism through the expansion of
comparative constitutional law is the unique product of the formally non-imperial era of
American global dominance after 1945.
64
Asanga Welikala
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 87 ---
nature and the nature of political authority (Schonthal 2016, n. 4; Walton 2017, n. 5;
de Silva-Wijeyeratne 2013).
Constitutional forms may be imposed, borrowed, or imported from the West, but
this does not mean either that these societies have also collectively converted to the
liberal normativity that liberalism assumes to be the essential condition of consti-
tutional modernity, or that the adoption of Western constitutional forms denotes a
clean rupture between traditional and modern constitutionalism. Rather, the more
accurate depiction would be that tradition and modernity in relation to constitution-
alism are not two counterposed elements separated by time and distinctive normative
conceptions of legitimate order, but are coeval, coterminous, and coexisting elements
of a longer and continuing story of historical evolution (Welikala 2017). Buddhist-
dominant Asian polities had different encounters with the West in the age of Western
imperialism; some were, and some were not, colonies. But while the Western inﬂu-
ence did transform the legal forms of constitutionalism in virtually all of them, it did
not create or fundamentally reconstitute the modern culture of constitutionalism.
Of course, this experience has not been unique to Buddhist Asia, and the challenge
posed by the clear dissonance between the normative assumptions of the current
paradigm of comparative constitutional law and the realities of democratisation in the
global south has led to a “Southern turn” in the scholarship (Dann, Riegner, and
Bönnemann 2020, 3). This work is still developing, but recent contributions broadly
fall into either rejectionist or accommodationist attitudes about liberal constitutional-
ism, with a number of different types of argument within each category. Rejectionist
views are of three types (Dann, Riegner, and Bönnemann 2020, chapters 2–5). The
two strongest forms of rejectionism are the arguments that hold that liberal constitu-
tionalism’s association with either colonialism, or colonialism’s successor paradigm of
“classical modernist” (Smith 1998, Chapter 1) post-colonial nation-state building,
makes it inappropriate wholesale for the post-colonial world. The key objection here
is to the assumed superiority of the Enlightenment conception of modernity and
progress that underpinned both paternalist colonial constitutional development and
post-colonial classical modernism. The somewhat softer form of rejectionist argu-
ments are those that question if the Western cultural and historical particularities,
which are the inseparable context of liberal constitutionalism’s successful operation,
render it inapplicable to non-Western conditions. This is a type of amendatory
critique that may blend into accomodationism, provided its analytical concerns are
satisfactorily met. Accommodationist accounts argue for the relevance and retention
of liberal constitutionalism in the global south, either through a “re-imagining” of
substantive liberal values from a global south perspective (Roux 2021), or through a
“self-reﬂexive” style of constitutionalism (Dowdle and Wilkinson 2017, n. 21).
Accommodationist accounts, as Dowdle and Wilkinson put it, are about constitution-
alism “ . . . beyond liberalism, not against liberalism” (Dowdle and Wilkinson 2017, 1).
All these views have their explanatory and normative value, although perhaps the
rejectionist accounts are less persuasive overall than the accommodationist ones.
Constitutionalism in Buddhist Asian Polities
65
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 88 ---
Despite being based on valid considerations of justice and dignity of former colonial
peoples, the rejectionist approach can nevertheless be seen as too binary to form the
basis of a satisfactory account of constitutional contexts in which the reality is not,
and ought not to be, deﬁned by an either/or choice between democratic and some
other form of constitutionalism, but as a dialectical or syncretic relationship between
the two. As noted before, both the descriptive and prescriptive tasks of constitutional
theory are deﬁned by this reality in Buddhist Asia. Thus, while the accommodation-
ists offer more to this undertaking, a characteristic feature of their work is the
acceptance
of
the
dominant
Franco–American
interpretation
of
the
Enlightenment and the consequential substantive model of modern liberal consti-
tutionalism that is the legacy of their revolutions. This interpretation reiﬁes liberty
and reason, as outlined above, but it ignores a central dimension of the intellectual
debates of the Enlightenment, namely, social and political virtue.
Himmelfarb characterises this body of Enlightenment thought as the “sociology
of virtue,” counterposed to the two other strands she labels the “ideology of reason”
and the “politics of liberty” (Himmelfarb 2008, 3–22). This strain of Enlightenment
thought focuses empirically on sociological and historical traits of societies, and
normatively on social virtue and political morality, for its account of modern
constitutionalism. Less preoccupied with the evils of religion as well as less enam-
oured with the potency of human reason, this style of constitutionalism foregrounds
the innate human capacities for moral conduct as the basis of a statecraft of limited
politics, scepticism, prudence, and accommodation, and values tradition and orga-
nicism alongside reason and liberty. It opposes revolution and holds that consti-
tutional statecraft was primarily about the management of human imperfection.
What can we extrapolate from this for the present? Himmelfarb gives us a descrip-
tive and empiricist model of constitutionalism that tracks the descent of certain
aspects of the present’s constitutional arrangements to alternative, more primordial,
sources of human nature. She also suggests an underlying concept of social consent
to constitutional arrangements, but this is organic rather than rationalist. The longev-
ity of the constitution (qua body politic) and its deep social acceptance exist in a
symbiosis; and it is this symbiosis that invests the constitution with legitimacy. The
constitution, in this reading, is the whole body of legal and political rules and moral
principles that authorise the institutions of government and regulate the relationship
between government and society. No sharp distinctions are drawn in this conception
between the political, social, and cultural spheres of life.
If this should raise understandable concerns that the model favours established
patterns of hierarchical social, economic, and political power that are inimical to the
interests of individuals, minorities, and vulnerable social groups, it would be import-
ant to emphasise that this model of constitutionalism as an ideal type also, crucially,
integrates the function of principles derived from reason and the common good in
its normative dimension. The role of objective reason and a notion of the common
good are critical here, as this is what distinguishes this model from one based solely
66
Asanga Welikala
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 89 ---
on the ascriptive demands of the dominant religion or ethnicity – as one might ﬁnd
in the context of the ethnic and religious pluralism of Buddhist-dominant Asian
polities, or in the latent traditions of the pre-democratic past that have mutated into
modern forms of authoritarianism, or in the other hierarchical structures that
adversely affect non-dominant groups and individuals. A model of constitutional
modernity of this type, it can be argued, is more consistent with the empirical
realities that constitutionalism encounters in Buddhist-dominant Asian polities than
a model based on reason and revolution. Its organicism can readily embrace the
cosmological ordering of the Buddhist world. Its traditionalism enables ancient
traditions of Buddhist societies to be treated with respect, rather than with the
derision of tradition that often accompanies liberalism’s reiﬁcation of individualism
and rationalism.
But how does it function as a constitutionalism of limitation on power and
authority? Buddhist political ideas are primarily about enabling virtuous rule, and
its principles of limitation rely primarily on moral suasion (the dasa-ra¯jadhamma
being the exemplary device). These techniques are more often than not inadequate
for the purposes of disciplining the vast power of the modern state. While therefore it
is clear that law must have a meaningful role in disciplining politics, and the
institutional means of operationalising this function can look very similar to those
of liberal constitutionalism, the crucial difference is the way in which the principle
of limitations is normatively justiﬁed. Unlike liberal constitutionalism, the organic
conception of constitutionalism Himmelfarb foregrounds is not concerned with
remoulding state and society in the image of its ideal conception of the good. The
idea of limits here serves not a transformative, but a preservative purpose, although
preservation may require prudent and proportionate reformation. Concerned pri-
marily with maintaining peace, order, and good government, this model of consti-
tutionalism strives to ensure that the constitution is not instrumentalised in favour of
this or that substantive conception of the good, whether that is liberal constitutional-
ism, or monistic ideologies (such as nationalism and authoritarianism) in plural
societies, which may be contrary both to modern democratic values and the inher-
ent pluralism of the Buddhist tradition. The constitution, rather, remains funda-
mentally a procedural framework that enables the peaceful co-existence of multiple
and competing conceptions of the good, albeit within the “moeurs”8 of the particu-
lar Buddhist society to which it gives political and legal expression.
3.4 CONCLUSION
This brief outline of the makings of a theory of constitutionalism in and for
Buddhist-dominant Asian polities of course leaves many questions yet unanswered.
8
Ibid. 5. By ‘moeurs’ de Tocqueville meant the “habits of the mind” and the “habits of the heart”
that make up “the whole moral and intellectual state of a people.”
Constitutionalism in Buddhist Asian Polities
67
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 90 ---
Further research would be needed to more fully theorise the foundational, norma-
tive, and institutional aspects of this model. However, what I hope I have achieved
through these brief reﬂections is to underscore the point that liberal constitutional-
ism is neither the sole nor even an essential basis for constitutional democracy. If
that premise is accepted, then complementary pathways for constructive scholarship
open up, which may give us a better model of constitutionalism for Buddhist Asia,
and via greater epistemological self-awareness, the regeneration of comparative
constitutional law on more plural and inclusive foundations.
references
Bui, Ngoc Son. 2017. Confucian Constitutionalism in East Asia. New York: Routledge 2017.
Collingwood, Robin George. 1942. The New Leviathan or Man, Society, Civilization and
Barbarism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dann, Philipp, Riegner, Michael and Bönnemann, Maxim eds. 2020. The Global South and
Comparative Constitutional Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Silva Wijeyeratne, Roshan. 2013. Nation, Constitutionalism and Buddhism in Sri Lanka.
New York: Routledge.
Dowdle, Michael W., and Wilkinson, Michael A. 2017. “On the Limits of Constitutional
Liberalism: In Search of Constitutional Reﬂexivity.” In Constitutionalism Beyond
Liberalism, edited by Michael W. Dowdle and Michael A. Wilkinson. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ferejohn, John, Rakove, Jack N., and Riley, Jonathan, eds. 2010. Constitutional Culture and
Democratic Rule. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
French, Rebecca Redwood and Nathan, Mark A., eds. 2014. Buddhism and Law: An
Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gebeye, Berihun. 2021. A Theory of African Constitutionalism. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Ginsburg, Tom, and Huq, Aziz Z. 2018. How to Save a Constitutional Democracy. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Grifﬁths, John. 1986. “What Is Legal Pluralism?” The Journal of Legal Pluralism and
Unofﬁcial Law 18 (24): 1–55.
Harding, Andrew. 2021. “Introduction.” In Thai Legal History: From Traditional to Modern
Law, edited by Andrew Harding and Munin Pongsapan. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Himmelfarb, Gertrude. 2008. The Roads to Modernity: The British, French and American
Enlightenments. New York: Vintage Books.
Hirschl, Ran, and Shachar, Ayelet. 2018. “Competing Orders? The Challenge of Religion to
Modern Constitutionalism.” The University of Chicago Law Review 85 (2): 425–56.
Loughlin, Martin. 1992. Public Law and Political Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nissan, Elizabeth, and Stirrat, Roderick L. 1990. “The Generation of Communal Identities.”
In Sri Lanka: History and Roots of Conﬂict, edited by Jonathan Spencer. New York:
Routledge.
Roux, Theunis. 2021. “The Global South and Liberal Constitutionalism: Incommensurable
Opposites?” Australian Public Law, July 2, 2021. Accessed on December 15, 2021. https://
auspublaw.org/2021/07/the-global-south-and-liberal-constitutionalism-incommensurable-
opposites/
68
Asanga Welikala
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 91 ---
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2016. Buddhism, Politics and the Limits of Law: The Pyrrhic
Constitutionalism of Sri Lanka. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, Anthony D. 1998. Nationalism and Modernism: A Critical Survey of Recent Theories of
Nations and Nationalism. New York: Routledge.
Tushnet, Mark. (2014) 2018. Advanced Introduction to Comparative Constitutional Law.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Walton, Matthew J. 2017. Buddhism, Politics and Political Thought in Myanmar Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Weinrib, Lorraine E. 2006. “The Postwar Paradigm and American Exceptionalism.” In The
Migration of Constitutional Ideas, edited by Sujit Choudhry. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Welikala, Asanga. 2017. “The Idea of Constitutional Incrementalism.” CPA Working Papers on
Constitutional Reform 14. Accessed on December 15, 2021. http://constitutionalreforms
.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Working-Paper-14.pdf
Constitutionalism in Buddhist Asian Polities
69
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 92 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 93 ---
part ii
Himalayan Asia
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 94 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 95 ---
4
The Zhabdrung’s Legacy
Buddhism and Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
Richard W. Whitecross
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Constitutional democracy emerged in Bhutan, the last surviving independent
Buddhist state located in the eastern Himalaya, in an unusual way. It arrived neither
as the result of colonialism, as in Malaysia, nor from popular democratic move-
ments, as in Nepal in the early 1990s. Rather, limited monarchy was introduced by
royal command (kasho). The monarchy circumscribed its own power, without any
overt pressure to do so.
Buddhism and governance were intertwined in the Bhutanese system of govern-
ment created in the early seventeenth century by Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal,1
the Tibetan religious leader who uniﬁed the country and conceived it as a “reli-
gious” estate. This intertwining of religion and government ended on July 18, 2008,
when the ﬁrst written Constitution of Bhutan was enacted, seven years after the royal
command to prepare its drafting. The new Constitution declared Buddhism “the
spiritual heritage” of Bhutan, whilst removing representatives of the Central Monk
Body from the National Assembly. This separation of religion and politics was
underscored by the Electoral Commission’s ban on public religious events in the
six months leading up to elections (Election Commission of Bhutan 2012).
Buddhism and Bhutanese social and cultural life are difﬁcult to separate.
Elizabeth Allison has observed the role of Tibetan, or Vajraya¯na Buddhism, in
shaping the “attitudes, practices and beliefs” of the eastern Himalaya (2015). The
above-mentioned deﬁnition of Buddhism as the spiritual heritage of the kingdom
can be found in Article 3 of the Constitution. Yet, as Matthew Moore notes, “there
is very little discussion in the [constitutional] document” about Buddhism
(2016, 51). Although the Constitution does not declare Buddhism to be the “state
1
The title Zhabdrung (zhabs drung) means “at the feet of/ in the presence of” and is an
honoriﬁc title. It is used, unless indicated otherwise, to refer to Zhabdrung Ngawang
Namgyal (1594–1651).
73
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 96 ---
religion,” scholars interpret Article 3, and the Constitution in general, as promot-
ing Buddhism as the state religion.2 Indeed, during the drafting and ﬁnalizing of
the Constitution, the Fourth King, the then-Crown Prince, the chairman of the
drafting committee, and other ofﬁcials asserted that the Constitution and its new
form of government were consistent with Buddhism. Therefore, on what basis is
the Constitution consistent with Buddhism and what are the post-enactment
implications of such claims?
Leo Rose has observed that Bhutan posed a “novel methodological problem,” for
it was, in his opinion, “data-free” (1977, 10). Much has changed since Rose’s
research in the 1970s, though it is still true that the “early history of this remarkable
country is enveloped in great obscurity” (White 1999, 99). But some aspects of
governance are becoming more legible. In this regard, this chapter focuses on the
recent process of constitution making and Buddhism following the enactment of the
Constitution in 2008. The ﬁrst section contextualizes the interrelationship between
religion and government in the Bhutanese polity between the early and mid-
seventeenth century, as well as the establishment of the hereditary monarchy in
1907. The twentieth century saw the consolidation of the monarchy along with
major political reforms in the mid- to late twentieth century that informed the
preparation of the 2008 Constitution. The second section focuses on how the
constitutional drafting committee navigated the debates and sensitivities over
whether to declare Buddhism the state religion and the roles of the two main
schools of Vajraya¯na Buddhism found in Bhutan, the Drukpa Kagyu and
the Nyingma.
The third and ﬁnal section draws on interviews with Bhutanese about their
changing perspectives on Buddhism and politics in Bhutan following the enact-
ment of the 2008 Constitution. These interviews enable us to understand some of
the consequences that are only gradually emerging over a decade after the ratiﬁca-
tion and enactment of the Constitution. Two principal themes emerge: the unex-
pected outcome of the separation of religion and politics, as reﬂected in lay monk/
practitioners3 choosing to put aside their religious role so that they can enter village-
level politics; and the role of the monarch as Buddhist king and royal kidu (royal
prerogative to grant aid).4 The chapter concludes by arguing that whilst there is a
minority that wishes to amend the Constitution to make Buddhism the state
religion, there is a growing concern about the unintended consequences of the
Constitution and, more speciﬁcally, the exclusion of religious practitioners from
engaging in local-level politics as part of a more general ambivalence between the
legitimizing power of “continuity” and the demands of “modernity.”
2
For example, Givel (2015), in reference to Art. 4(1) of the Constitution, says that it is “[a]
mandate to preserve and promote Maha¯ya¯na Buddhism as a state religion and policy,” 23.
3
Tib/Dzo: sgom chen.
4
Tib/Dzo: skyid sdug.
74
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 97 ---
4.2 THE ZHABDRUNG NGAWANG NAMGYAL: THE DRUKPA
STATE AND DUAL SYSTEM
The ﬁrst half of the seventeenth century saw the creation of the three “great
theocracies of the greater Tibetan cultural world” (Smith 2001, 119): the Ganden
Phodrang in Lhasa, the Jetsun Dampa lineage among the Khalkha Mongols, and
the Drukpa state established by the Zhabdrung, Ngawang Namgyal, in Bhutan.5
The Zhabdrung ﬂed Tibet in 1616 following a dispute over his recognition as the
reincarnation of Padma Karpo, the Fourth Drukpa Kagyu hierarch. From his
arrival in Bhutan, the Zhabdrung began the process of unifying those leading
families afﬁliated with the Drukpa Kagyu school, such as the ‘Ob mtsho family,
whilst dealing with the internal opposition and the external threats from Tibet
(Phuntsho 2013).
According to a biography of the Zhabdrung, after entering a three-year-long
retreat in 1623/24, he experienced a series of visions, including one where he saw
the founder of the Drukpa Kagyu school, Tsangpa Gyare, and his protector deity,
Mahakala, both encouraging him to establish a Drukpa state “by securing both
spiritual and political power over the southern lands” (Phuntsho 2013, 223). In 1624,
news of the death of the Tsangpa ruler in 1621, which had been kept secret,
emerged. His death was attributed by Tibetans and Bhutanese to the Zhabdrung’s
use of magic. Shortly afterwards, the Zhabdrung, assuming the title “Great
Magician,” composed the “Sixteen I-s.”6 As in any iconic document of this form,
the ﬁrst three I-s are signiﬁcant:
1. I turn the Wheel of the Dual System
2. I am a good refuge for all
3. I hold the teachings of the Glorious Drukpa (Phuntsho 2013, 220).
It is interesting that the ﬁrst I does not refer – as might be expected in the Buddhist
context – to “a good refuge.” Instead, it is based on the Zhabdrung’s role as the
embodiment of a system of government in which he combines religious (chos) and
secular authority (srid). It is in this role that he is the “good refuge for all.”
In 1625/26, the Zhabdrung sent out edicts stamped with the seal of the “Sixteen
I-s” to be placed at strategic locations on mountain passes, cliffs, and other sites,
declaring that “all gods, humans and spirits of the Lhomonkazhi, from this day, fall
under the dominion of the great magician Ngawang Namgyal and everyone must
heed his words.”7 The construction of fortiﬁed monasteries (dzongs) in the major
5
We should not overlook Sikkim, for the seventeenth century saw the establishment of an
absolute monarchy under a Buddhist king, chosgyal.
6
Tib/Dzo: mthu chen and Nga bcu drug ma.
7
Lhomonkhazhi – Southern Land with Four Approaches – one of the historical names for
Bhutan (Phuntsho 2013, 233; Sangay Dorji 1999, 188).
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
75
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 98 ---
valleys of western Bhutan enabled him to establish control over the region. In time,
further dzongs were built across central and eastern Bhutan, helping combat the
ongoing threat from Mongol and Tibetan forces.8 Unlike the administrative fort-
resses of Tibet, the dzongs of Bhutan were, and remain, both administrative centers
and monasteries.
The organization of the Drukpa administration took its deﬁnitive form during the
1630s and 1640s, shortly before the Zhabdrung’s death in 1651. The Zhabdrung
embodied both religious and secular authority, as witnessed by the Portuguese
missionary Father Cacella: “He was the King and at the same time the Chief
Lama” (Aris 1986, 173). The Zhabdrung created two positions: a regent, called the
“Druk Desi,” was appointed to exercise political power,9 and a Chief Abbot, the
“Druk Je Khenpo,” was entrusted with the spiritual and administrative leadership of
the Drukpa Kagyu religious institutions.10 The introduction of these two positions
created the Dual System (chhoe-sid-nyi),11 a term still used in contemporary Bhutan,
including in Article 2(2) of the Constitution, referring to the “religious and secular”
branches of the state.12
Whilst the concept of the Dual System was not new, the Bhutanese version can
be distinguished from the one used in Tibet. Unlike in Tibet, where lay ofﬁcials
dealt with secular matters, and monks dealt with religious affairs, in Bhutan,
government ofﬁcials were ordained. Whilst it is tempting to understand the concept
of the Dual System as separating religion and politics or secular matters, Georgios
Halkias points out an ambiguity in the concept. According to his view of the concept
of “dual sovereignty”:
While there are clear lines of demarcation between the role of the Buddha and his
sangha and the function of the king, there is often a blurring of these lines in the
literary, practical, and cultural manifestations of Buddhism across Asia. Ambiguity is
nowhere more evident than in the promotion and application of notions of “dual
sovereignty” combined in a single person capable of arbitrating secular and spiritual
power in this world and the world beyond. (2013, 493)
This ambiguity is particularly relevant to Bhutan. The Desi and Je Khenpo were
below the Zhabdrung, who embodied both secular and spiritual power in his
8
Tib/Dzo: rdzong.
9
Tib/Dzo:‘druk sde srid.
10 Tib/Dzo: ‘drug rje mkhan po. The dispute over his recognition served to split the Drukpa Kagyu
school further. Prior to the dispute, the Drukpa Kagyu school was divided into three main
branches: upper, middle, and lower. The middle school split into two: the northern lineage
continued in Tibet and in Bhutan, and the southern lineage continued under the Chief Abbot,
the Druk Je Khenpo (Aris 1979, 172–81).
11 Tib/Dzo chos srid gnyis. I use the Romanized Dzongkha that appears in the English version of
the Constitution for consistency.
12 For an interesting analysis and summary of the term “Dual System” in Tibetan and Bhutanese
sources, see Schwerk 2019.
76
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 99 ---
function as “the Wheel of the Dual System.” It may have been his hope that he
would be succeeded by his only son, but the son’s early death prevented the position
of Zhabdrung from becoming hereditary. As a result, in time, the Zhabdrung passed
to a series of incarnations, below whom the Desi and Je Khenpo oversaw the
running of the Drukpa state.
The theocratic basis of the Zhabdrung system of government is outlined in two
available law codes. The early eighteenth-century law code – the Bka ‘khrims – and
the Black Stone Edict set out detailed rules for government ofﬁcials. Notably, both
draw parallels between the system of government instituted by the Zhabdrung and
that of the Tibetan empire under Srong-btsan Gampo.13 Each text emphasizes that
the purpose of Drukpa Kagyu theocracy established by the Zhabdrung was to bring
happiness to the populace, for “if there is no law, happiness for the beings does not
arise. The beings are not happy, there is no sense that the Dharma masters of the
Drukpa uphold the two teachings [Dual System]” (Windischgratz and Wangdi 2019,
15). Bhutan itself was divided into three large regions: Paro, Dagana, and Trongsar.
Each region was placed under a “universal lama” who was also the governor.14 The
Zhabdrung system of government was to remain in place until the establishment of
the monarchy in 1907.
4.3 CIVIL WAR AND THE DECLINE OF THE DUAL SYSTEM:
EIGHTEENTH AND NINETEENTH CENTURIES
The Dual System functioned reasonably well until the last quarter of the eighteenth
century, when a rivalry emerged between regional governors who vied for the post of
Desi. Similarly, rival candidates as reincarnations of the Zhabdrung were promoted
by individual governors (Aris 1979). Despite its central government being weak and
fragmented, Bhutan retained its independence. The weakened central government
eventually lost its authority to the Trongsa governor, Jigme Namgyel, in the mid-
nineteenth century (Pommaret 1997). A major ﬁgure in the 1864 Duar War with the
British, Jigme Namgyel defeated various political rivals, such as the governor of
Paro, to claim power in 1870. Building on his success, his son Ugyen Wangchuk
further consolidated power after his father’s death in 1881 and developed closer ties
with the British, notably through his role as a mediator during the Younghusband
expedition to Tibet in 1904. Sir Frances Younghusband described Ugyen
Wangchuk’s role in the treaty with the Tibetan authorities as “highly instrumental
in effecting a settlement” (Kohli 1982, 164). With the death of the Zhabdrung, Jigme
Chogyel, in 1904 and the retirement of the ﬁfty-seventh Desi, Yeshe Ngodrup, in
13 Tib: srong brtsan sgam po (Aris 1986; Windischgratz and Wangdi 2019). For a discussion of
Srongtsen Gampo, please see Chapter 5 by Martin Mills in this volume.
14 Tib/Dzo: spyi bla ma and dpon slob.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
77
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 100 ---
1905, a political vacuum appeared in Bhutan.15 The absence of both a religious and
a secular head of state threatened the recent stability of the country and provided the
basis for the creation of the Wangchuck monarchy.
4.4 THE CONTRACT OF MONARCHY: PRESERVING THE
ZHABDRUNG’S LEGACY
In late 1906, Ugyen Dorji, the drungpa (local ofﬁcial) of Haa, submitted a letter to
the State Council proposing that Ugyen Wangchuk be elected King of Bhutan.
Furthermore, Ugyen Dorji proposed that the position should be hereditary. The
letter was addressed to the Desi, the Je Khenpo, the four monastic masters, the
regional governors of Punakha, Thimphu, and Wangdi, the three governors of Paro,
Trongsa, and Dagana, plus various ofﬁcials. Whilst it is usually presented that there
was unanimous agreement that Ugyen Wangchuck be elected king, Phuntsho notes
there are no records of the reactions of the clergy and state administrators to the
petition (2013, 520). The coronation was held at Punakha on December 17, 1907.
A British mission attended under John Claude White, the British political ofﬁcer for
Sikkim and Darjeeling. The ceremony took place in the main assembly hall in
Punakha Dzong. Two important features of the ceremony need to be highlighted.
The ﬁrst is that a contract (genja) establishing the monarchy was signed during the
ceremony.16 The contract states:
To the lotus feet of the Precious Judge, the Exalted one of the Dual System.
It is submitted that while from former times in our kingdom of Bhutan, the Great
Regent took ofﬁce from among any that came forth from the lamas and teachers of
the monastic college or from the council of ministers and the regional governors,
there was otherwise no hereditary monarch . . . the purport of this contract express-
ing the deliberations and common desire of all those mentioned above . . . Sir
Ugyen Wangchuck is empowered as hereditary monarch . . . has been installed on
the Golden Throne . . . and to the succession of his royal heirs. (Aris 1994, 96)
The clear statement that the monarchy would be hereditary is central to the
contract. It was a simple formula, yet one that made an important point: the system
of rule by reincarnations was ended.
15 It should be noted here that the Zhabdrung Jigme Chogyel was the Mind Incarnation of the
original Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal (Thugtrul). The ﬁfty-seventh Desi Yeshe Ngodrup was
himself an incarnation of the Zhabdrung known as the Sungtrul, or Speech Incarnation.
Following the death of the Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal, three lineages of Zhabdrung were
to emerge in the eighteenth century: Body (sku sprul), Speech (gsung sprul), and Mind (thugs
sprul). The Body lineage was born in Sikkim and did not continue. However, the Speech
incarnation was born in southern Bhutan (Dagana) and the Mind incarnation in Tibet.
According to Phuntsho, a “convenient accommodation” was arrived at to recognize each rival
incarnate: “Both lines became legitimate but the Thugtrul incarnates assumed a slightly
superior position” (2013, 335).
16 Tib/Dzo: rgan rgya.
78
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 101 ---
The second aspect worth our attention is that, after reading out the oath of
allegiance to the new king, the Je Khenpo ﬁxed the Ngachudrukma seal to the top
of the document in vermillion. State ofﬁcials, governors, representatives of the people,
and other lamas then afﬁxed their own seals. The application of the Ngachudrukma
seal underscored that the new monarchy was not replacing the Zhabdrung; rather
the new monarchy and its dynasty were a continuation of the Zhabdrung’s vision. The
ritual used at the coronation in 1907 underlined – indeed continues to underline –
the hereditary nature of the monarchy and the continuity of the Zhabdrung’s vision.
The key moment in the coronation of each Bhutanese king is not the public
ceremony. Rather, the high point of each coronation is the receipt by the new king
of the ﬁve colored scarves from the Je Khenpo in front of the Zhabdrung’s shrine in
the Machen Temple in Punakha Dzong. This private moment marks, for the
Bhutanese, the legitimacy and recognition of the monarch by the Zhabdrung. It is
unclear if the intention was for the monarch to replace the Desi (secular ruler);
however, the last Desi, Yeshe Ngodup, was also a Speech reincarnation of the
founding Zhabdrung. Tensions arose as the new king assumed power, as Yeshe
Ngodrup, the former Desi and incarnate felt sidelined. In 1915, he became the ﬁfty-
third Je Khenpo, until his death in 1917. The king died in 1926 and was succeeded by
his son, Jigme Wangchuk.
In 1908–1909, the sixth reincarnation of the Zhabdrung Thugtrul (Mind
Incarnation) lineage was identiﬁed in Arunachal Pradesh, his parents having
migrated there from Bhutan.17 The young reincarnate, Jigme Dorji returned even-
tually to Bhutan. After the death of the First King, moves by his supporters to recover
the temporal powers of the Zhabdrung led to conﬂict between the Second King
and the reincarnate Zhabdrung. Matters reached a head in 1931, when the brothers
of the Zhabdrung sought political support from Gandhi. Shortly afterwards, the
Zhabdrung was murdered at Talo, near Punakha (Aris 1994, 119–25; Wangchuck
1998). These events were perceived at the time as presenting a serious threat to the
institution of hereditary monarchy.
From the 1930s onwards, the Second King, Jigme Wangchuk concentrated his
efforts on reforming and centralizing the administrative system. The structure of
Dual System established by the Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal remained in place;
however, it was recognized by the Bhutanese elite, as well as by the British, that the
strife of the nineteenth century was due to the lack of effective control. To address
this, the king created a central cabinet to assist him: the state minister, the chief of
protocol, the chamberlain, and, depending on the season, the Thimphu or Punakha
17 Several lineages, representing the Body, Speech, and Mind of the Zhabdrung emerged in
Bhutan after the death of Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal in 1651 was eventually announced in
1705. The Thugtrul refers to the Mind lineage. See Aris for a discussion of the concept of
multiple reincarnation (Aris 1979, 258–62).
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
79
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 102 ---
governor. It is important to note that the Central Monk Body did not have any direct
role in government.
4.5 REFORM AND RENEWAL: DRUKPA KAGYU
REPRESENTATION IN GOVERNMENT
The ﬁrst two kings consolidated royal authority and control in Bhutan. The transi-
tion to the monarchy perpetuated the structures of the Zhabdrung government, and
as Michael Aris has noted, “the state is still today [in the early 1990s] presented as
the church triumphant under the motto ‘the Glorious Drukpa Victorious in All
Directions’” (1994, 24). The succession of the Third King, Jigme Dorji Wangchuk,
in 1952, saw the breadth and pace of economic, political, and social change,
supported by India, accelerate. From the royal edict creating the National
Assembly in 1953, a series of reforms sought to restructure the Bhutanese adminis-
trative system.18 A notable aspect of the creation of the National Assembly was the
provision for representation by the state-sponsored Central Monk Body of the
Drukpa Kagyu school headed by the Je Khenpo.19 The National Assembly primarily
performed an advisory role until 1965, when a new Royal Advisory Council was
established which included a representative of the Central Monk Body.20 The Royal
Advisory Council took over the advisory role from the National Assembly, which in
turn focused on developing its legislative functions.
The Third King reﬁned the changes made to the central bureaucracy, which
oversaw the wider structural changes in government toward creating a distinct
separation of powers. New ministries and governmental departments were estab-
lished, and a regular centralized bureaucracy emerged, offering positions for the
emerging numbers of formally educated Bhutanese. The personal, charismatic
aspects of the former system remained, but with the separation of the judiciary
under the High Court in 1968, the district ofﬁcers relinquished their roles as
dispensers of justice. Local government continued to draw on preexisting forms,
although the villages were reorganized into gewog under the supervision of a gup
(village headman) and eventually, once membership of the National Assembly was
reformed in the 1960s, the gewog were represented by chimi (representatives).
Starting in 1961, a series of Five Year Plans took shape, with each plan emphasiz-
ing various goals and policies. Until the late 1980s all of these plans can be
characterized as secular and outward-looking. Central to the changes was the
introduction of formal state education. Until the 1950s, the only education available
in Bhutan was provided in monasteries and dzongs and focused on the monastic
curriculum (Kinga 2002, 19–21; Phuntsho 2000). The introduction of secular
18 Dzo: tshogs ‘du chen mo.
19 Dzo: gzhung drwa tshang.
20 Dzo: blo gro tshogs sde.
80
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 103 ---
education broke this connection and depended initially on Indian schoolteachers.
Kinga describes the new education system as “creating administrative and technical
personnel . . . required for development programmes” (Kinga 2002, 20).
The sudden death of the Third King in 1972 led to the ascension of his son, the
Fourth King, Jigme Sengye Wangchuk. In a public declaration following his
succession to the throne, he recognized the religious authority of the Je Khenpo
and stated that he had no intention of “making any competing claims” in terms of
religious authority (Kinga 2002, 20).
The main emphasis of royal government continued to focus on the infrastructure
of Bhutan. The Sixth Five Year Plan issued in 1987 saw a shift in emphasis:
The wellbeing and security of the country depends on the strength of its culture,
traditions, and value systems. Therefore, every effort must be made to foster the
unfailing faith, love and respect for the country’s traditional values and institutions
that have provided the basis and ensured the security and sovereignty of the nation
while giving it a distinct national identity.21
In 1989, a royal decree stressed the importance of a shared culture uniting the
Bhutanese, irrespective of religion or ethnic group. At this point, relations between
the government and the political leaders of the ethnic Nepali communities, who
had settled in Bhutan in the early part of the twentieth century, deteriorated. The
implementation of the new “One Nation, One People” policies and the new
Citizenship Act escalated tension on both sides.
The period between the late 1980s and 1990s was a troubled one for Bhutan. The
widely reported exodus of approximately 100,000 Nepali speakers, primarily from
southern Bhutan, to refugee camps in eastern Nepal brought Bhutan under the
scrutiny of a range of international organizations, notably Amnesty International, the
International Red Cross, and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees
(UNHCR). To address the criticisms made by these organizations, the royal govern-
ment began a series of legal reforms. The reforms of the legal system were instigated
under the supervision of Chief Justice Lyonpo Sonam Tobgye. These included
improving the training of judges and restructuring the criminal justice system. At the
same time, the government introduced the ﬁrst formal legal education course, the
National Legal Course, which included classes on Bhutanese and international law,
Buddhist literature, and religion (Royal Court of Justice 1999, Appendix C. iv–viii).
4.6 THE END TO DIRECT ROYAL RULE:
CABINET GOVERNMENT
“[The] Bhutanese monarchy,” it has been said “has always been very ﬂexible in its
attitude towards political structures” (Mathou 1999, 120). On June 10, 1998, the
21 National Assembly 65th Session, June 1987, Resolution No. 18. Emphasis added.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
81
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 104 ---
Fourth King announced the devolution of his full executive power to an elected
cabinet of ministers. In retrospect, the kasho (royal command) transferring royal
power to the cabinet of ministers was the ﬁrst step toward a written constitution and
the introduction of parliamentary democracy. In the kasho, the Fourth King states
that “having observed the political systems of other countries, it is important that
Bhutan should have a system of government that is best suited for the needs and
requirements of a small nation . . . to ensure its continued wellbeing and security
and safeguard its status as a sovereign independent country” (Wangchuck 1998, 5).
This suggests that the Fourth King was actively seeking to reform the system
of government.
During the ten-year period of cabinet government, the role and prestige of the
monarchy remained unchanged. Responsibility for governing the country rested
with the cabinet ministers. The National Assembly elected the cabinet ministers,
with the king playing an important role in indicating his support for the cabinet.
The ministers were accountable to the National Assembly, and the Central Monk
Body continued to be represented among the members. The role of the king, even
after the de jure transfer of powers to the cabinet, remained central.
4.7 DRAFTING THE CONSTITUTION: RE-IMAGINING
THE POLITY
The move toward democratization continued to be led by the Fourth King.
Although the June 1998 edict transferred royal power to a cabinet elected by the
National Assembly, the Fourth King retained considerable charismatic power.
Therefore, when the king issued a royal edict on September 4, 2001, that Bhutan
should have a written constitution, his command was acted on. In December 2001, a
committee was established to prepare a draft constitution. A drafting committee of
thirty-nine delegates under the chairmanship of Chief Justice Sonam Tobgye, was
appointed. Among the thirty-nine delegates were two monastic representatives
nominated by the Je Khenpo. The drafting committee held a series of meetings in
different locations in Bhutan and prepared a draft which was ﬁrst submitted to the
king and then to the cabinet.22
After the completion of the draft Constitution, the chief justice commented that
the most difﬁcult sections to draft related to local government, whilst the most
sensitive discussions revolved around Buddhism and the role of the Central Monk
Body. Underlying the discussions on Buddhism were concerns expressed by one
delegate that “ethnic and religious differences are the main causes of problems in
22 The drafting committee held its ﬁrst meeting in Thimphu between November 30 and
December 14, 2001. A further series of eight sessions of varying duration were held in
Punakha, Bumthang, and Thimphu. The ﬁrst draft was submitted to the Fourth King on
December 9, 2002, and a second draft on June 11, 2003. It was not until late 2005 that a draft
version was publicly circulated, and series of public events held across the country.
82
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 105 ---
this world.”23 The same delegate referenced the problems caused by vying reli-
gious factions when the Zhabdrung, Ngawang Namgyal, arrived in the seven-
teenth century. More signiﬁcantly, he noted, “we have experienced it ourselves . . .
in recent years in Dramitse. Tibet lost its independence because of politicization
of religion.”24 The observation drew the drafting committee’s attention to a brief
challenge
to
the
central
government
that
had
arisen
in
the
1990s
in
eastern Bhutan.
Three recurring themes emerge from the available notes of the drafting committee
deliberations. The ﬁrst is that the Dual System established by the Zhabdrung should
be consolidated in the monarch. The second is a concern about the potential for
religion to cause social division. The third is an emphasis on the similarity between
the two main Buddhist schools in Bhutan, the Drukpa Kagyu and the Nyingma. The
Punakha chimi argued that Kagyu and Nyingma “are just like different paths leading
to the same destination.”25 The comment is accurate for, although each school can
be distinguished by its particular ritual practices and teachings, both draw on texts
translated from Sanskrit into Classical Tibetan and on philosophical treatises and
commentaries by masters of each school (Mynak Trulku 1997).
Prior to the publication of the draft Constitution in March 2005, rumors of the
uncertainty about its contents circulated through Thimphu. When the draft was
published, the king, cabinet ministers, the chief justice, and other ofﬁcials began a
series of meetings in each of the twenty dzongkhags (districts). The meetings, as
reported by the media, appear to reveal a deep unease among the people who
attended them toward both the draft Constitution and the proposed new form of
government. Among the key concerns reported during these public meetings were
provisions for the removal of the monarch and, at least during the ﬁrst meetings, the
fact that Buddhism was not declared the state religion. The king and the ministers
addressed the concerns expressed during these meetings, with the king noting that
the language used in the Dzongkha text presented difﬁculties for many ordinary
people. As a result of the meetings and later debates, the draft Constitution under-
went at least two further phases of revision with a third version of the Constitution
released in August 2006. Finally, it is worth noting that the draft Constitution was
published on the Internet, stimulating wide-ranging discussions and drawing critical
comments from anonymous Bhutanese bloggers. The Internet has provided the
Bhutanese with a range of platforms on which they are able, anonymously, to
comment and critique a range of policies, including the draft Constitution.
However, it is unclear to what extent, if any, the views expressed in chat rooms or
other platforms inﬂuenced the revision and ﬁnal version of the Constitution.
23 Dasho Ugen Dorji, Hon. Speaker of the National Assembly (Drafting Committee n.d., 4.61).
24 Dorji (Drafting Committee n.d., 4.61). Dramitse is a Nyingma monastery located in Mongar
district, eastern Bhutan.
25 Namgyal Phuntsho, Punakha chimi (Drafting Committee n.d., 4.62).
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
83
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 106 ---
The ﬁnal Constitution came into force on July 18, 2008. In a televised event, the
occasion was marked with a simple ceremony held in the main temple of
Thimphu Dzong. A special version of the Constitution, written in gold
Dzongkha script, was placed before the images of the Buddha, Guru Rinpoche,
and the Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal. Beside it was a copy of the Zhabdrung’s
own law code underscoring the continuity between the government established by
him in the early seventeenth century and the new system of government estab-
lished by the Constitution. The ceremony was marked by prayers “for the prosper-
ity of the nation and the fulﬁlment of the aspirations of the Bhutanese people”
(Dorji, Penjore and Wangchuk 2008). The Fifth King, in an act reminiscent of the
1907 coronation, added his seal to the Constitution. After the ceremony, the
Constitution text was escorted to the National Assembly “where it was placed
before the Golden Throne.”
Before turning to consider the Constitution, it is worth commenting on the
transition from the Fourth to the Fifth King. On December 9, 2006, the Fourth
King announced in a kasho that he was abdicating and transferring his power to the
Fifth King. The kasho ends with a “religious homage and a prayer for the nation”
that emphasizes Bhutan as a Buddhist country and the legacy of the Zhabdrung:
May the blessing of Ugyen Guru Rinpoche, the father of our nation, Zhabdrung
Ngawang Namgyal, and our guardian deities continue to guide the destiny of our
country and protect the future of the Glorious Palden Drukpa. (Pommaret 2015, 258)
The kasho shocked the Bhutanese; the draft Constitution provided for the monarch
to step down once they reached the age of sixty-ﬁve. The Fourth King was only ﬁfty-
one. When I spoke with the Bhutanese about the Fourth King’s abdication and the
kasho, they described the Fourth King as being a religious monarch, succinctly
expressed in this ﬁnal statement. The sacral element of the Bhutanese monarch is a
theme to which we will return later in the chapter.
4.8 THE CONSTITUTION: SEPARATION OF RELIGION
AND POLITICS
According to the chairman of the constitutional drafting committee, Lyonpo Sonam
Tobgye, the “Constitution is . . . the Supreme Law of the nation and throws light on
the structure of the polity” (Tobgye 2015, 1). Lyonpo Sonam Tobgye’s exposition on
the new Constitution emphasized the role of the monarch as a “Buddhist” monarch,
but the new government structure removed the Central Monk Body from the
executive and legislature. Buddhism is mentioned as “ideology and precepts” or as
the “ethics” that underpin the “tradition, culture, [and] philosophy” of Bhutan
(Tobgye 2015, 1–2). To understand the Constitution’s underlying reconﬁguration
of the Bhutanese polity, this section analyzes select articles that highlight the
intention of the constitutional drafters to separate religion and politics in Bhutan.
84
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 107 ---
4.8.1 An Invocation: Three Jewels and the Protectors
Before turning to consider the Constitution proper, it is worth noting the preamble.
Set out on a separate page in both the Dzongkha and English versions, the preamble
is contained within a circular representation of a mandala.26 In the four corners of
the page and surrounding the mandala are four white conch shells (reminiscent of
those on the Zhabdrung’s Ngachudrukma seal),27 each with a ﬂowing ribbon. The
outer circle of ﬂames protects an inner circle or fence of gold vajras.28 Inside the
circle of vajras are eight dharma wheels, each separated by eight mantras written in
Lantsa script with the actual text of the preamble in the center.29 The precise
symbolism of the preamble’s mandala may not be fully understood by ordinary
Bhutanese: for example, the white conch shells are associated with, among other
things, the proclamation of the buddhadharma. But the idiom of the text is familiar
and recognizable.
Preamble
WE, the people of Bhutan:
BLESSED by the Triple Gem, the protection of our guardian deities, the wisdom
of our leaders, the everlasting fortunes of the Pelden Drukpa and the guidance of
His Majesty the Druk Gyalpo Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck;
SOLEMNLY pledging ourselves to strengthen the sovereignty of Bhutan, to secure
the blessings of liberty, to ensure justice and tranquility and to enhance the unity,
happiness and well-being of the people for all time;
DO HEREBY ordain and adopt this Constitution for the Kingdom of Bhutan on
the Fifteenth Day of the Fifth Month of the Male Earth Rat Year corresponding to
the Eighteenth Day of July, Two Thousand and Eight.
The opening line in English mirrors other written constitutions. In the Dzongkha
version, the term “nga bcas” or “we” is used to emphasis the “people as a collective
body” (Tobgye 2015, 22). However, the English translation glosses references to a
range of deities. The complete Dzongkha invocation to the “guardian deities” refers
to “dharma protectors” (chos skyong) and guardian deities (srung ma).30 The pre-
amble succinctly merges the range of worldly deities that still play an important role
in religious practices at the local and national level. The opening section of the
preamble mirrors the language found in the preamble to the Supreme Law Code
26 Tib/Dzo: dkyil ’khor.
27 Tib/Dzo: Dung dkar.
28 The “mountain of ﬁre” (Tib: me ri) follows the traditional sequence of yellow, blue, red, and
green. Vajra–Tib: rdo rje.
29 Tib/Dzo: ‘khor lo. Lantsa is an Indian Buddhist script used for mantra based on Sanskrit.
30 The Dzongkha reads: rang re’i chos skyong srung ma’i mgon skyabs.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
85
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 108 ---
1959 and other statutes.31 In his discussion of the preamble, Lyonpo Sonam Tobgye
simply states, “this invocation denotes the records of historical and religious beliefs
and its derivative values” (Tobgye 2015, 22–23). Whilst acknowledging Bhutan’s
religious beliefs and values, this comment glosses over for the non-Dzongkha reader
the richer, fuller meaning given in the Dzongkha version, which is ﬁrmly rooted in
the ritual practices of the Drukpa state.32 It serves as a reminder that we should not
overlook or undervalue the implicit underlying cultural and religious values of the
drafters, including the chairman of the drafting committee.
4.8.2 Article 1: The Kingdom of Bhutan
Broad and wide-ranging, Article 1 contains provisions on territory and international
borders, as well as on the national ﬂag, national anthem, national day, and national
language (Article 1(5), 1(6), 1(7) and 1(8)). These provisions underscore the import-
ance to the Bhutanese state of recognition, both internally and externally, of its
independence and distinct identity. Of signiﬁcance, Article 1 of the Constitution
deﬁnes the sovereignty of Bhutan and the new structure of the Bhutanese state.
Declared by Article 1(2) to be a “democratic constitutional monarchy,” the
Bhutanese state “shall be a separation of the Executive, Legislative and
Judiciary” (Article 1(13)). It is worth noting that according to Lyonpo Sonam
Tobgye this separation of powers has deep roots in premodern Bhutan.
According to him “[the] Zhabdrung’s Kathrim and the Thimzhung Chhenmo [also]
have a provision on separation of powers” (Tobgye 2015, 26). According to Article 1
(11), the Supreme Court “shall be the guardian of this Constitution and the ﬁnal
authority on its interpretation.” Here too one ﬁnds a hidden Buddhist element,
given that the new Supreme Court complex in Thimphu was designed as a
mandala with each of the ﬁve court buildings dedicated to one of the ﬁve dhya¯na
buddhas (Whitecross 2018).
4.8.3 Article 2: The Monarch
In the process of developing the Constitution, the role and position of the monarch
was a key consideration. The Fourth King instigated the shift from direct royal rule
to cabinet government and, with the 2008 Constitution, to an elected parliament
and national government for the ﬁrst time in Bhutanese political history. In discus-
sions with the Bhutanese during the years between the royal kasho and the ﬁnaliza-
tion of the Constitution, the future role of the monarch was one about which they
31 Khrims Gzhung Chennmo 1959. A more recent example is the Water Act 2011, which has a
foreword that opens with references to Padmasambhava and to Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal.
32 As with all Bhutanese legislation or legal texts, the Dzongkha version is the deﬁnitive text rather
than the English version. Following the public consultation in 2004, the Dzongkha version
underwent further work to ensure it would be easily understood.
86
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 109 ---
expressed deep concern. These Bhutanese interlocutors identiﬁed the monarch
with their sense of national identity and implicitly, the wellbeing of the country.33
Article 2 is one of the longest in the Constitution, running to twenty-six subsections,
two of which will be analyzed. Article 2(1) states that “His Majesty the Druk Gyalpo
is the Head of State and the symbol of unity of the Kingdom and of the people of
Bhutan.” This simple statement captures and addresses Bhutanese concerns about
and views of the monarch. As with the Zhabdrung, the monarch is the apex of the
political system.
The sacral, religious dimension of the monarch is expressed speciﬁcally in
Article 2(2). The article does two key things. Firstly, it proclaims that the Dual
System (Chhoe-sid-nyi) remains in place “uniﬁed in the person of the Druk Gyalpo”
(Article 2(2)). Secondly, it declares that the Druk Gyalpo, “as a Buddhist, shall be the
upholder of the Chhoe-sid.” This goes further than the 1907 contract for the
monarchy because it sets out, for the ﬁrst time, that religious (chos) and secular
(srid) authority are combined in one person: the monarch. This is very reminiscent
of the previously mentioned Zhabdrung declaration “I turn the Wheel of the Dual
System.” Where it was unclear whether Ugyen Wangchuk, when elected in 1907 as
king, was replacing the Desi or both the Desi and the Zhabdrung lineages, this
matter has been implicitly addressed by Article 2(2).34 The monarch continues
Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal’s legacy of merging temporal and religious authority.
This is further underscored by the provision in Article 10 requiring that each session
of the parliament open with the king present and accompanied by rituals introduced
by the Zhabdrung. These include the opening and closing of each session with
Buddhist prayers.35 The monarch, as the Zhabdrung’s legitimate heir, embodies the
Dual System and is explicitly a Buddhist.
4.8.4 Article 3: Spiritual Heritage
The Constitution states in Article 3(1) that “Buddhism is the spiritual heritage of
Bhutan, which promotes the principles and values of peace, non-violence, compas-
sion, and tolerance.” The intention of the drafters was, after debate, not to declare
Buddhism, or a particular Vajraya¯na school of Buddhism, to be the state religion.
Rather, its centrality to Bhutanese culture, society, and history should be acknow-
ledged. As suggested in the introduction, the separation of Bhutanese culture and
33 This was noticeable after the Fourth King led a short military action in southwest Bhutan to
remove various Indian insurgent groups from Bhutanese territory (November/December 2003).
34 Implicitly, it addresses any concerns that had previously arisen from subsequent incarnations of
the Zhabdrung during the twentieth century.
35 Art. 10(6). At the commencement of each session of parliament, the Druk Gyalpo shall be
received in a joint sitting of parliament with Chibdrel Ceremony. Each session shall be opened
with a Zhugdrel-phunsum tshog-pai ten-drel and each session shall conclude with the Tashi-
mon-lam.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
87
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 110 ---
society from the pervasive presence of Buddhism is a difﬁcult challenge with which
drafters grappled.
Under the Dual System established by Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal, monks
and religious ﬁgures played a key role in the administration of the Drukpa state. The
political reforms of the Third King ensured that the Drukpa Kagyu order were
represented in government and on the Royal Advisory Council. However, Article
3(3) of the 2008 Constitution states:
It shall be the responsibility of religious institutions and personalities to promote the
spiritual heritage of the country while also ensuring that religion remains separate
from politics in Bhutan. Religious institutions and personalities shall remain above
politics [emphasis added].
For the ﬁrst time since the foundation of the Drukpa state in the 1620s, religious
ﬁgures from the Drukpa Kagyu order are excluded from participating in politics at
any level. Of course, this exclusion applies across all religious practitioners, not only
those in the Central Monk Body, and includes non-Buddhist “institutions and
personalities.”36 The decision to break with the tradition of including representatives
and advisors from the Central Monk Body (Zhung Dratshang) was not taken
lightly.37 However, it was probably recognized by those involved in drafting the
Constitution that its terms could not exempt the Central Monk Body from this
exclusion from political activities if it was to achieve the envisaged separation of
politics and religion.
Article 3(4)–(6) brieﬂy addresses the appointment of the Je Khenpo and the ﬁve
lopons (spiritual masters), as well as the membership of the Dratshang Committee.38
These provisions solely concern the Central Monk Body. Other Buddhist organiza-
tions must comply with the requirements set out in the Religious Organizations Act
2007. It is important to note that the majority of temples, monasteries, and other
religious institutions are privately owned, or community based.
Of course, it would be difﬁcult, after 400 years, to remove state support for the
Central Monk Body. After all, the declaration of the “glorious Drukpa victorious in
every direction” implicitly refers to the Drukpa Kagyu school. The Central Monk
Body continues to perform the rituals for the wellbeing of the kingdom and,
accordingly, the Constitution states in Article 3(7) that “the Zhung Dratshang and
Rabdeys shall continue to receive adequate funds and other facilities from the
State.” Therefore, whilst no longer represented in the reformed National Assembly
or National Council, the Drukpa Kagyu retains the ofﬁcial endorsement of the
Bhutanese state.
36 In this way, it is similar to the disenfranchisement of religious clergy in Myanmar, which Iselin
Frydenlund describes in Chapter 10.
37 Dzo: gzhung grwa tshang literally means the State Monk Body and is usually referred to as the
Central Monk Body.
38 The Dratshang Committee (grwa tshang lhan tshog) has oversight of the Central Monk Body.
88
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 111 ---
The state is given further responsibilities under Article 4. This article focuses on
the role of culture and heritage. Article 4(1) states that:
The State shall endeavor to preserve, protect, and promote the cultural heritage of
the country, including monuments, places, and objects of artistic or historic
interest, Dzongs, Lhakhangs, Goendeys, Ten-sum, Nyes, language, literature, music,
visual arts, and religion to enrich society and the cultural life of the citizens.
Whereas Buddhism is deﬁned as the “spiritual heritage” of the kingdom, Article 4(1)
classes religious sites and buildings, as well as “religion,” as part of Bhutan’s “cultural
heritage.” There is an interesting merging of tangible and intangible culture encom-
passed by Article 4(1). The Bhutanese state has in recent years recognized the
importance of its national culture, as well as the vulnerability of religious sites and
their contents to natural disasters, ﬁre, theft, and vandalism. What is unclear from
the wording is to what extent the Bhutanese state is obliged to “promote” religion.
The clause is arguably heavily focused on Buddhist cultural heritage, and by
extension “religion” refers to Buddhism, rather than Hinduism, which is practiced
by Nepali speakers. The state has supported the construction of a major new Hindu
temple in the capital, Thimphu, but there have been claims by Hindu organizations
that their other planning applications are less likely to be given approval than those
submitted by Buddhist organizations (U.S. Department of State, Ofﬁce of
International Religious Freedom 2019, 1).
4.8.5 Religion: State Policy and Fundamental Rights
References to religion and to Buddhism appear in several other articles of the
Constitution. Under Article 7(4) on Fundamental Rights, Bhutanese citizens enjoy
the freedom of religion, subject to the state being able to reasonably restrict this
freedom to avoid “incitement to an offence on the grounds of race, sex, language,
religion or region” (Article 7(22)(d)). This provision is further developed in Article
15 on political parties, which explicitly prohibits parties organizing on a regional,
ethnic, or religious basis. The Election Act 2008 builds on these restrictions,
suggesting that the state is concerned with the potential of religion, as well as other
markers of difference, to undermine “national cohesion and stability.”
Whilst political parties and candidates must not use religion as the basis for
membership, the principles underlying state policy set out in Article 9 include a
clear statement reminiscent of those contained in earlier law codes that emphasized
the “happiness” of the populace. Article 9(2) declares that “the State shall strive to
promote those conditions that will enable the pursuit of Gross National Happiness
[GNH].”39 In the period following the enactment of the Constitution, the concept
39 Art. 9 contains twenty-four sections ranging from Gross National Happiness to the right to a fair
trial, and broader principles reﬂecting its international obligations, for example in relation to
the rights of children and women, as well as around employment, health, and education.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
89
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 112 ---
of Gross National Happiness was secular, and focused on four pillars: sustainable
and equitable socio-economic development; environmental conservation; the pre-
servation and promotion of culture; and good governance (Royal Government of
Bhutan 2009). In turn, these four pillars were incorporated into nine domains of
GNH set out in the 2010 “GNH Index of Bhutan.”40 Whilst acknowledging that
“socially engaged Buddhism and Buddhist moral and ethical engagement with
happiness inﬂuences GNH,” Ritu Verma describes GNH as “a secular concept”
(2017). In the 2015 GNH survey, questions on spiritual practice and belief (for
example, around compassion, karma, and meditation practice) were reﬁned and
extended, allowing for a more nuanced presentation of the underlying Buddhist
ethics that informs GNH (Ura et al. 2015).
Finally, Article 9(20) builds on the idea of Buddhism as a “spiritual” and “cultural
heritage,” by promising that the state will “strive to create conditions that will enable
the true and sustainable development of a good and compassionate society rooted in
Buddhist ethos and universal human values.” This is the most explicit reference in
the Constitution to Buddhism and its values. For his part, the chief justice who
helped design this clause has suggested that “Buddhist ethos” refers to the six
perfections of Buddhist morality, or pa¯ramita¯s (Tobgye 2015, 137).
If Buddhism is not the ofﬁcial state religion and the Central Monk Body is not
part of the government, how can the constitutional scheme be described as
“Buddhist” in any strong sense? The answer lies in its embodiment of the Dual
System explicitly by the monarch himself – a novel situation in Bhutanese history.
The coronation rituals created for enthronement symbolically present the monarch
as the legitimate successor of the Zhabdrung. The monarch, as a Buddhist king,
takes the role of the Zhabdrung, supported by the prime minister and government
(secular) and by the Je Khenpo and Central Monk Body (religious). The status of
the monarch as a Buddhist king, however, sits alongside other constitutional prin-
ciples that claim to separate religion and politics.
4.9 WHAT DO THE BHUTANESE THINK OF THE
CONSTITUTION?
The previous sections considered the nature of the theocracy established by
Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal and its development up to the enactment of the 2008
Constitution, focusing particularly on the legal texts themselves. This section considers
how Bhutanese citizens have interpreted those texts, drawing on recent interviews with
the Bhutanese about their views of the Constitution.41 Two principal themes emerged
40 The nine domains are: living standards, health, education, ecological diversity and resilience,
cultural diversity and resilience, community vitality, time use, psychological wellbeing, and
good governance (Ura, Alkire, Zangmo, and Wangdi 2012).
41 Interviews were conducted via Zoom and Facetime. In total, ten interviews were conducted
with seven men and three women. All of the interviewees are from farming families, three hold
90
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 113 ---
during these interviews. The ﬁrst theme relates to the separation of religion and
politics. The second returns to the conceptualization of the Buddhist monarch in light
of the recent role of the Fifth King in leading the country’s efforts to contain the
COVID-19 pandemic, as well as in responding to associated economic challenges. The
interviews focused on ordinary Bhutanese citizens, rather than lawyers, judges, or state
ofﬁcials. This approach was chosen to redress the discussion of the Constitution as a
legal document by acknowledging its value as a living document.
4.10 FROM GOMCHEN TO GUP: AN UNEXPECTED
CONSEQUENCE
Aku Sengge rises early every morning. In a small room off the main living space, in
front of an altar made from tubular shelving, he begins his daily ritual practice.
Once the morning prayers and mantra recitations are completed, accompanied with
the occasional ringing of a small hand bell and, on certain days, the rattle of a small
hand drum, he prepares breakfast for his family. Now that he is retired, he devotes
his days to religious practice. Born and raised in northeastern Bhutan adjacent to the
Tibetan border, Aku Sengge was sent to become a monk when he was twelve. He
remained in the local monastery in Kurtoe where he learned to read Classical
Tibetan, and to perform a range of rituals, as well as to carry out a range of tailoring
tasks, including making appliqué thangkas. In his late twenties he met his wife, and
when she fell pregnant, he decided to leave the monastery to raise a family. Since
settling in his wife’s village, Aku Sengge has become an indispensable part of local
life, conducting rituals for his neighbors.
A devout practitioner, Aku Sengge, became close to the village lay monk/ practi-
tioner. The elderly gomchen appreciated Aku Sengge’s knowledge of rituals and his
ability to read Classical Tibetan.42 It was through his participation in and conduct of
the annual rituals for his neighbors that Aku Sengge eventually became the village
gomchen. Outside the formal state-sponsored monastic body, the gomchen is an
important feature of local, everyday religious practice in villages and rural commu-
nities. They are called on to perform rituals and prayers at times of childbirth,
marriage, and death, to remove sickness, and for “other social and religious functions”
(Kinga 2002, 27). Aku Sengge’s own teacher taught him about the local deities and
spirits that are a prominent feature of popular religious practice throughout Bhutan.
Despite his fulﬁlling life, Aku Sengge is worried. His son died young, and his
daughter moved away from her natal village to teach Dzongkha in another district.
Education and a desire for a life removed from agriculture has led many young
university-level degrees, three hold college-level degrees, and four have no formal educational
qualiﬁcations. Two were aged 60+, four were 50+, and the remaining four were 40+. They
were located in the following districts: Phuentsholing (1), Paro (1), Thimphu (3), Jakar (2),
Tashigang (1), Kanglung (2).
42 Tib: chos skad.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
91
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 114 ---
people, particularly, though not exclusively, men, to leave the village. Few of the
young people want to train to become gomchen, and Aku Sengge worries that there
will be no new gomchen to continue the practices taught to him. His concerns touch
on a wider social challenge: the migration from rural to urban settings that has
escalated over the last decade.
A younger Bhutanese informant has different concerns. Karma Tshering asked to
join a monastery when he was sixteen. Originally from the eastern district of
Tashigang, he was educated and raised at the military base at Tencholing, in
Wangduephodrang. After eight years of study, he decided to return to lay life and
moved back to his mother’s home village in Tashigang district. His maternal aunt’s
husband was the village gomchen and his uncle welcomed him as his assistant
gomchen. Through Karma’s family ties and his attendance at ceremonies hosted by
village households and the annual rituals for the community, he established a good
reputation. However, Karma, who had attended high school until he was sixteen,
explained he wanted to help his neighbors in more practical ways. Acknowledging the
important spiritual role of being a gomchen, Karma decided after discussion with his
family, in particular his mother, aunt, and uncle, to stop being a gomchen in order to
be able to vote and, more importantly for Karma, to stand for election at the village
level. These activities were forbidden to gomchen by Bhutanese law.
In interpreting the aim of the Constitution to separate politics and religion,
Section 184 of the Election Act 2008 states that:
A tulku [reincarnate], lam [religious person], any inﬂuential religious personality or
ordained member of any religion or religious institutions excluding the laity, as
determined/registered as religious organizations or religious personalities under the
provisions of the Religious Organizations Act 2007, shall neither join a political
party nor participate in the electoral process as they must remain above politics and
cannot use their inﬂuence for the beneﬁt of any party or candidate.
Gomchen, as locally “inﬂuential religious personalities,” may not stand for election
nor vote. Aku Sengge is equivocal about his lack of voting rights. He views politics as
a worldly activity that distracts from religious practice, speciﬁcally meditation and
merit making. During the various elections held since 2008, he has avoided all
meetings and chosen not to take part in discussions, even with family members of
the candidates put forward. Aku Sengge’s attitude contrasts with that of Karma.
Karma lacks the necessary educational requirements to stand for the National
Assembly or the National Council. Both require “a formal university degree”
(Election Act, Sections 176(d), 177(d)). However, he is “functionally literate and
possesses skills adequate to discharge his duties” as a member of the local govern-
ment (Election Act, Section 178(d)). Karma explained: “It was my mother who ﬁrst
suggested it. I was surprised because she wanted me to be a monk . . . Now she feels
that if she can’t stand, I should.” However, Karma’s surprise at his mother’s change
of attitude and her preference that he take on a local political role was echoed by
92
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 115 ---
other Bhutanese. A former monk from eastern Bhutan, Tenzin, commented that
women in his home village were increasingly looking to learn about business, and
less inclined to attend to the annual rituals. Although the comment was made in
passing, it is one that others have observed in recent years.
Concerns over the decline of religious practice are not new in Bhutan. Nor can
these observations be taken to suggest that Buddhism is waning in the country. They
do suggest that the formal separation of politics and religion, inaugurated by the
2008 Constitution, may be having unexpected consequences. These include the
declining numbers of gomchen and the number who are choosing to set aside their
lay monk/practitioner status. Karma’s decision was made because of the legal
prohibitions set out in the Election Act. Yet, his mother was a key factor in his
decision. Her preference that her son give up his status as a gomchen echoes
Tenzin’s own observations about changes taking place at the local level. This was
highlighted in 2016, when both candidates for the local government position of gup
(village chief ) in Bartsham were former gomchen (Zangmo 2016).
Echoing the separation between religion and politics that appears in the 2008
Constitution, the Religious Organizations Act of 2007 applies a similar rubric to all
organizations except for the Central Monk Body.43 At present, the register of
religious organizations shows 127 entries, all Buddhist, except 2 Hindu organizations.
The legal body created to oversee the implementation of the Act, the Chhodey
Lhentshog,44 has six duties set out in Section 13. These include, in addition to
promoting “the principles and values of peace, non-violence, compassion, and
tolerance” echoing the phrasing of Article 3(1), working to “create the conditions
that will enable the true and sustainable developments of a good and compassionate
society rooted in Buddhist ethos” (The Religious Organizations Act 2007, Section 13
(a) and (b)). The fourth duty is to “ensure that religion remains separate from
politics in the country” (Section 13(d)).
Based on the provisions of the Religious Organizations Act 2007 and the Elections
Act 2008, there have been bans on public religious activities ahead of upcoming
elections. For example, the Election Commission of Bhutan issued a notiﬁcation that
it expected religious institutions and clergy “shall not hold, conduct, organize or host
any public activities from January 1 until the election.” The Election Commissioner,
Chogyel Dago Rigdzin, described the ban as a “preventative measure” to avoid the
mixing of politics and religion. Guidelines published by the Election Commission
remind readers that under the Constitution, religious institutions and personalities
“shall be responsible . . . to promote the spiritual heritage of the country while also
ensuring that religion remains separate from politics in Bhutan” (Election
Commission of Bhutan 2012, 1). The Guidelines go on to deﬁne a “religious person-
ality” as a Bhutanese “citizen who is a monk, gomchen, nun, priest, sa¯dhu, pundit, an
43 Dzo: dGe ‘dun grwa tshang, an alternative term for the Central Monk Body.
44 Dzo: Chos sde lhan tshogs, Religious Council.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
93
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 116 ---
ordained, or a robed person of any religion” (3). The Guidelines then prohibit
“performing or sponsoring any activity of religious nature for or by a political party,
candidate or supporter . . . that could be exploited for political gains” (2).
Aku Senge and Karma both commented that the ban included important prac-
tices that they, as gomchen, regularly performed, such as rituals dedicated to the
local deities that form a major part of religious practice at the village level.45 Do they
feel that the current laws should be amended? Aku Senge worries about the longer-
term impact of the prohibitions. For him, failing to perform the rituals regularly is
serious. His concerns range from the immediate spiritual and welfare concerns of
not performing the rituals for individuals and communities, to the necessity of rituals
for building and representing communities. Karma hopes that by encouraging a
public discussion over the prohibitions on rituals before elections and the impact on
gomchen that the current laws will be repealed. Karma’s comments reﬂected
concerns expressed by Tshering Dorji, an elected member of the National
Council for whom “Buddhism has played [a] signiﬁcant role in the life of an
individual citizen and leaders, which in turn has shaped Bhutanese polity, culture,
and society. That is why I appreciate the merit in the need for the religion to stay
above (not separate from) politics in our context” (2012).
4.11 THE BUDDHIST MONARCH: GRANTING KIDU
IN A PANDEMIC
Throughout my reign, I will never rule you as a King. I will protect you as a parent, care for
you as a brother and serve you as a son. I shall give you everything and keep nothing; I shall
live such a life as a good human being that you may ﬁnd it worthy to serve as an example for
your children; I have no personal goals other than to fulﬁl your hopes and aspirations. I shall
always serve, day and night, in the spirit of kindness, justice and equality.
His Majesty’s Coronation Address, Punakha Dzong, November 6, 2008
Conducting any interviews at present means that interviewer and interviewee share
one problem: the COVID-19 pandemic. A recurring theme across the interviews was
the role of the Fifth King in supporting the Bhutanese government’s control of the
pandemic. The handling of the pandemic by the Bhutanese authorities has been
remarkable: national lockdowns were successfully rolled out and enforced, citizens
ﬂown home by the state, and infection rates were kept low, with only one death
(Drexler 2021). In his public speeches and messages throughout 2020, the Fifth King
regularly supported the Bhutanese government in its work to contain the virus and to
reassure the population.
45 The Guidelines specify the following rituals: kelha-yuellha-neydhag-zhidhag soelkha, dralha
soelni (various forms of local deity), tordog phangni (torma rituals), jangkri, pawo pamo soelni
(shaman/medium), gegtrey phangni (expulsion rituals), witchcraft, exorcism . . . wang, lung thri
(forms of empowerment) (Election Commission of Bhutan 2012, 2).
94
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 117 ---
The discussion of the king’s words and, more importantly, his actions, highlighted
one key feature: the granting of kidu (royal relief ). The above-discussed Article 2 of
the Constitution of Bhutan sets out the right of the monarch to give kidu to those in
need. An established feature associated with the monarch – the right to ask for and
be awarded kidu – was described by one interviewee as “going for shelter to the
king.” Awarding kidu is for many a demonstration of the king’s fulﬁlment of his
Buddhist duties as king. Kidu has featured in several speeches by the Fifth King,
notably in 2012, when he linked the granting of kidu to sacred duty: “a King’s sacred
duty is in looking after the wellbeing and kidu of our people” (Wangchuk 2012). In
2020, as a result of the closing of the borders and the cessation of tourism, it is
estimated that up to 50,000 Bhutanese have either lost their main source of income
or employment.
In April 2020, the Druk Gyalpo’s Relief Kidu fund was launched by the Fifth
King.46 The fund was established to support those whose incomes have been
affected by the pandemic. Originally set to run for three months, the relief fund
was extended until July 2022. Between April 2020 and March 2022, the fund has
provided ﬁnancial support to over 54,783 applicants.47 The practical and symbolic
signiﬁcance of the relief fund was emphasized in interviews. The sacral element of
the monarch, though not expressed in such terms, was noticeable to observers and
Bhutanese alike, and suggests that for many Bhutanese, Article 2 encapsulates their
views on the Fifth King as a Buddhist king. Admittedly, for some who grew up and
remember tales of their grandparents living under the Second King there appears to
have been a shift in the perception or character of the monarch. This shift appears
linked to the increased focus on the Fourth King and, more recently, on the Fifth
King, as Buddhist monarchs.
The Fourth King, Jigme Sengye Wangchuk was (and is) revered by the Bhutanese
in a way that other earlier kings do not appear to have been.48 In a longevity prayer
written for the Fourth King in about 1967 when he was crown prince, Dilgo
Khyentse, a prominent Tibetan Nyingma teacher, appealed to the Bodhisattva
Padmasambhava on behalf of the king,
With your power of blessing and pervasive charisma,
In the southern great land of Dharma,
May the crown prince reign supreme in great fame,
During his noble reign as Dharma king,
And may his service toward all people.
(Palmo 2008, 246–48)49
46 Dzo: ‘brug rgyal po’i rgud gso’i skyid sdug.
47 https://royalkidu.bt/ (last accessed July 11, 2022).
48 A similar point is made by Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang in Chapter 8 in relation to the late
Thai king, Bhumibol.
49 Chapter 16, “Blessing Bhutan,” is by the Queen Mother Kesang Chodron Wangchuck (mother
of the Fourth King) and Lopon Pemala.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
95
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 118 ---
The emphasis on the Fourth King as a dharma king appears to foreshadow how he
became viewed by the Bhutanese. During earlier ﬁeldwork and more recent
discussions with the Bhutanese, several commented on the family descent of the
Fourth King and Fifth King from the Buddhist teacher Pema Linga (1450–1521).
More recently, in a publication marking his sixtieth birthday, the Fourth King is
explicitly described as a bodhisattva and cakravartin king, a common theme that is
discussed in other chapters in this volume. In the recent pandemic, we see a
similar portrayal of the current king, the ﬁfth Druk Gyalpo, Jigme Khesar Namgyal
Wangchuk. In one conversation, the cakravartin king was described as appearing
during difﬁcult times and that the Fourth King demonstrated this throughout his
reign, particularly through his vision to transform the government of Bhutan. The
religious dimensions of the monarch have been cultivated and serve to elevate him
above the political fray, associating him and his successor with the wellbeing of the
kingdom. As discussed above, the separation of religion from politics was aimed at
placing religion – or speciﬁcally Buddhism – above politics. In a similar way, the
reconﬁguration of the political system of government allows the expressly Buddhist
monarch to be on the one hand supportive of governments and on the other,
above “politics.”
4.12 CONCLUSION
Four hundred years after his arrival in Bhutan, Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal’s
legacy remains. The election as king of Ugyen Wangchuck in 1907 shifted political
power and control to the monarch. The move to cabinet government was the ﬁrst
step of a trajectory raising the monarch above everyday politics and government, and
towards the unifying role of the Zhabdrung. The removal of the Central Monk Body
from government marked a shift in the relationship between state and religion, but
not one that undermined or removed the centrality of Buddhism in Bhutanese life.
Rather, the Constitution recast the Dual System through its embodiment in the
person of the monarch. As argued above, the Constitution transformed the role of
the monarch as a Buddhist king, a dimension that was not promoted by the ﬁrst two
Bhutanese kings. The Fourth King, as prophesized by Drudra Dorje (Pommaret
2015, 258), ordered the preparation of the Constitution, marking a shift toward the
explicit sacralization of the monarch, as bodhisattva, dharmara¯ja, and cakravartin.
However, as illustrated above, there are concerns about the unintended conse-
quences on religious practices and practitioners of the desire by the drafters of the
Constitution to separate politics and religion. Running through the discussions of
the drafting committee, and in more recent public discussions about the separation
of Buddhism and politics, is a tension between continuity with the past – real or
imagined – and modernity. Perhaps, as some informants suggested, the current
restrictions will be removed as Bhutan matures as a democracy. Yet there are strong
forces that other Bhutanese view as marking a decline in religion – Buddhism – in
96
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 119 ---
Bhutan. As Aku Senge wistfully noted, each generation “must work out what the
dharma – Buddhism – means to them.”
references
Allison, Elizabeth. 2015. “Religion Inscribed in the Landscape: Sacred Sites, Local Deities
and Natural Resources.” In The Changing World Religion Map, edited by Stanley D.
Brunn, 439–59. Dordrecht: Springer.
Aris, Michael. 1979. Bhutan: The Early History of a Himalayan Kingdom. Warminster: Aris &
Phillips.
1986. Sources for the History of Bhutan. Vienna: Arbeitskries fur Tibetische und
Buddhistische Studien Universitat Wien.
1994. The Raven Crown: The Origins of Buddhist Monarchy in Bhutan. London: Serindia
Publications.
Dorji, Kinley, Penjore, Ugyen, and Wangchuk, Rinzin. 2008. “The Constitution of the
Kingdom of Bhutan Has Been Adopted.” RAO Online, July 19, www.raonline.ch/
pages/bt/pol/bt_polconst01i.html
Dorji, Sangay. 1999. dpal ‘brug pa rin po che zhabs drung nga dbang rnam rgyal gyi rnam.
Thimphu: Dzongkha Development Commission.
Dorji, Tshering. 2012. “Religion and Politics. What Is the Right Mix?” Tshering Dorji’s Blog,
July
30.
https://tsheringbhutan.wordpress.com/2012/07/30/religion-and-politics-what-is-
the-right-mix/. Accessed February 7, 2021.
Drafting Committee. n.d. Minutes of the Drafting Committee (English). High Court of
Judiciary (no longer available).
Drexler, Madeline. 2021. “The Unlikeliest Pandemic Success Story.” The Atlantic. February
10.
Druk Gyalpo’s Relief Kidu. 2021. https://royalkidu.bt/. Accessed July 11, 2022.
Election Commission of Bhutan. 2012. Guidelines for Interpretation of Section 184 of the
Election Act of the Kingdom of Bhutan, 2008, Concerning Religion and Elections.
Thimphu: Election Commission.
Givel, Michael. 2015. “Mahayana Buddhism and Gross National Happiness in Bhutan.”
International Journal of Wellbeing 5 (2): 14–27.
Halkias, Georgios T. 2013. “The Enlightened Sovereign: Kingship and Buddhism in Indo-
Tibetan Tradition.” In A Companion to Buddhist Philosophy, edited by Steven
Emmanuel, 491–511. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
Kinga, Sonam. 2002. Changes in Bhutanese Social Structure. Impacts of Fifty Years of
Reforms: 1952–2002. Chiba: Institute of Developing Economies, Japan External Trade
Organisation.
Kohli, Manorama. 1982. India and Bhutan. A Study in Interrelations 1772–1910. New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers.
Mathou, Thierry. 1999. “Bhutan: Political Reform in a Buddhist Monarchy.” Journal of
Bhutan Studies 1 (1): 114–45.
Moore, Matthew J. 2016. Buddhism and Political Theory. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mynak Tulku. 1997. “Religion and Ritual.” In Bhutan: Mountain Fortress of the Gods, edited
by Christian Schicklgruber and Françoise Pommaret, 137–57. London: Serindia
Publications.
Palmo, Ani Jinba (trans.). 2008. Brilliant Moon: The Autobiography of Dilgo Khyentse.
Boston: Shambhala Press.
Buddhism & Constitutional Transformation in Bhutan
97
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 120 ---
Phuntsho, Karma. 2000. “On the Two Ways of Learning in Bhutan.” Journal of Bhutan
Studies 2(2): 96–126.
2013. The History of Bhutan. Noida: Random House India.
Pommaret, Françoise. 1997. “The Birth of a Nation.” In Bhutan: Mountain Fortress of the
Gods, edited by Christian Schicklgruber and Françoise Pommaret, 179–207. London:
Serindia Publications.
2015. “The Cakravartin King.” In The Bodhisattva King: His Majesty Jigme Singye
Wangchuck, edited by Thierry Mathou, 253–67. Bangkok: Bhutan Publishing House.
Rose, Leo E. 1977. The Politics of Bhutan. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Royal Court of Justice. 1999. The Bhutanese Legal System. Thimphu: Royal Court of Justice.
Royal Government of Bhutan. 2009. Tenth Five Year Plan (2008–2013), vol. 1. Thimphu:
Gross National Happiness Commission.
Schwerk, Dagmar. 2019. “Drawing Lines in a Mandala: A Sketch of Boundaries between
Religion and Politics in Bhutan.” Working Paper Series of the HCAS “Multiple
Secularities – Beyond the West, Beyond Modernities” 12. Leipzig: Leipzig University.
Smith, E. Gene. 2001. Among Tibetan Texts: History and Literature of the Himalayan Plateau.
Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Tobgye, Sonam. 2015. The Constitution of Bhutan: Principles and Philosophies.Thimphu:
Royal Court of Justice.
Ura, Karma, Alkire, Sabina, Zangmo, Tshoki and Wangdi, Karma. 2012. A Short Guide to
Gross National Happiness Index. Thimphu: Centre for Bhutan Studies.
2015. Provisional Findings of the 2015 GNH Survey. Thimphu: Center for Bhutan Studies
and Gross National Happiness Research.
US Department of State, Ofﬁce of International Religious Freedom. 2019. Bhutan
2019 International Religious Freedom Report. www.state.gov/reports/2019-report-on-inter
national-religious-freedom/bhutan/.
Verma, Ritu. 2017. “Gross National Happiness: Meaning, Measure and Degrowth in a Living
Development Alternative.” Journal of Political Ecology 24: 476–90.
Wangchuck, Ashi Dorji Wangmo (HM the Queen of Bhutan). 1999. Of Rainbows and
Clouds: The Life of Yab Ugyen Dorji as Told to His Daughter. London: Serindia.
Wangchuck, Jigme Khesar Namgyel (HM the Fifth Druk Gyalpo). 2012. “About His Majesty
the King of Bhutan.” July 26. http://kidufoundation.org/about-his-majesty-the-king-of-
bhutan/
Wangchuck, Jigme Singye (HM the Fourth Druk Gyalpo). 1998. “Kasho Issued to the
Speaker of the National Assembly.” June 10. www.nab.gov.bt/assets/uploads/docs/reso
lution/2014/76th_Session.pdf
White, J. Claude. 1999 (1909). Sikkim and Bhutan: Twenty-One Years on the North-East
Frontier, 1887–1908. Delhi: DK Fine Art Press.
Whitecross, Richard W. 2018. “Thrimskhang and the Spatial Evolution of the Courthouse in
Bhutan.” In Buddhism, Culture and Society in Bhutan, edited by Seiji Kumagai, 97–115.
Kathmandu: Vajra Press.
Windischgratz, Michaela and Wangdi, Rinzin. 2019. The Black-Slate Edict of Punakha
Dzong. Thimphu: JSW Law Publishing Series.
Zangmo, Tanden. 2016. “Two Ex-Gomchens Vying for Bartsham Gup Post.” The Bhutanese,
August 13. https://thebhutanese.bt/two-ex-gomchens-vying-for-bartsham-gup-post/
98
Richard W. Whitecross
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 121 ---
5
The “Trick of Law”
The Hermeneutics of Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
Martin A. Mills*
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Constitutionalism – the principle that government should be limited in its powers,
and those limits enshrined within laws that stand above the individuals and insti-
tutions that govern – is generally regarded as a good thing. As a good thing, it might
seem obvious that everyone, or at least as many people as possible, should have it.
Here, of course, things get trickier: after all, the very concept of whether something
is a good idea depends on an underlying moral (and ultimately religious) culture,
one that may not be shared universally or organized in a comparable way. For
present purposes, one of the most salient questions facing any study of Buddhism
and constitutional law is whether constitutionalism as a legal ideal might be
consonant with Buddhism at all. That it might not be does not, of course, imply
that Buddhist culture must be in some sense deﬁcient, or indeed a ‘bad thing.’
Instead, we must actively consider the possibility that it is a different thing. In what
follows, I will examine how, in Tibetan constitutional history, one of those major
differences lies in the perceived role of the personal morality and ethical insight of
Buddhist rulers and lawmakers.
Before addressing that question, however, it is worth rendering explicit how
Western constitutional thinking depends upon its own Christian (or more broadly,
Abrahamic) history of ‘Higher Law,’ or foundational constitutional principle. As
Richard Helmholz (2010) has pointed out with great clarity elsewhere, Western
constitutionalism is generally underlaid by three facets of Christian ecclesiastical
thinking, all of which are in some sense either negated by, or have no direct
equivalent in, many Buddhist traditions.
*
For help in preparing this paper and the ideas behind it, my profuse thanks go to Jill Sudbury,
Benjamin Schonthal, Tom Ginsburg, Daniel Wojahn, Sam Van Schaik, Fernanda Pirie,
Rebecca French, Matthew Kapstein, Ron Davidson, Robert Mayer, Cathy Cantwell, and of
course the many sharp-eyed and -eared attendees of the Constitutional Buddhism conference.
99
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 122 ---
The ﬁrst principle is that the fundamental rules of Biblical law “stand outside our
own volition, indeed our own full understanding,” largely as a consequence of
having been bequeathed by God, rather than men. This is most obvious in the case
of the Hebrew foundations of Biblical law, wherein Moses received the Ten
Commandments from God on tablets of stone at Mount Sinai, and the law in the
direct verbal instructions from God in the revelations of Leviticus; it is also inscribed
in the Gospel of John’s opening proclamation that In principio erat Verbum, et
Verbum erat apud Deum, et Deus erat Verbum (“In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.” John 1:1). In this sense, the
word of true law, in a Biblical sense, necessarily precedes its human adjudicants and
disseminators, who thereby cannot stand above or prior to it. Even in the case of
secular and royal law, the Christian tradition – following the writings of Paul and
Peter – ascribes the authority of kings and emperors to the power vested in them by
God, rather than as something that ﬂows from them personally (Roman 13:1–7;
1 Peter 2:13).
The second principle is that human law – whether ecclesiastical, royal, or
secular – could not infringe or adjudicate upon the realm of ‘hidden things’ (De
occultis non judicat ecclesia). Neither the devices and desires of the heart nor the
personal convictions of the soul can be judged by a public court of law, coming
instead under the jurisdiction and judgement of God, through private prayer,
confession, and repentance.
In combination, the upshot of these two principles has been to set aside private (or
‘inner’) morality and insight from the scope of formal law, which exists in the public
realm between individuals. Law in a formal sense is received primarily in textual
form and submitted to and interpreted by persons not as individuals, but as repre-
sentatives of an ofﬁce in the Weberian sense – that is, as contractees, citizens,
subjects, soldiers, judges, or monarchs. This ‘exclusion of the inner’ in turn serves
as the foundation of what we might call a ‘constitutionalist disposition.’ This is the
view that human law is, or at least should be, a public matter in both principle and
practice, the parameters of which lie outside the subjectivities of the individual
human heart. In the study of legal history, this disposition is found most clearly in
the assumption that if you are seeking the source of a legal code or doctrine you will
ﬁnd it in one of two places: either in a previous legal codex, or in the hand of the
divine. The one place you would not, or at least should not, ﬁnd its source is within
the heart of the lawgiver.
This disposition is not universally shared within the history of Christendom. Ideas,
after all, do not hold sway by themselves. The two principles above found their place
within constitutional history largely as a consequence of the birth-pangs of the
Protestant Reformation in Europe, which often pitted private conviction against
royal law. This struggle framed the formation of American constitutionalism. As
Edwin Corwin pithily summarized in 1955:
100
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 123 ---
The Reformation superseded the infallible Pope with an infallible Bible; the
American Revolution replaced the sway of a king with that of a document. (1955, 1)
Indeed, this rejection of the personal authority of rulers in making and applying law
has motivated the penning of most of the world’s great constitutions. If the king
himself (that is, in his ‘body natural’ as English law would term it – see Kantorowicz
1957) cannot be the source of law, then he must be constrained by it. This is the
essence of what Richard Helmholz rightly identiﬁes as the third main aspect of
constitutionalism: its role in providing “structured and substantive limitations on
government,” restrictions that apply either to (i) the boundaries between private
rights (such as personal religious convictions) and public law (such as nationally
established religions) and (ii) claims by monarchs and legislators to exist ‘above the
law’ – a possibility deemed not only illegitimate but impossible according to the ﬁrst
principle, above.
While appropriate to the ‘Higher Law’ ideas held by certain forms of Christian
constitutionalism, this methodological exclusion of the personal moral qualities of
the lawmaker sits far less easily with Buddhist conceptions of law. Here, the
legitimate role of the personal morality and sagacity of emperors, kings, and judges
in both producing, overseeing, and interpreting law remains vital to the general
understanding of Buddhist constitutional thought.
In large part, this derives from one of the core distinctions between Buddhism and
the Abrahamic faiths. Within Buddhism, the central soteriological framework does
not lie in the gulf between sinful humanity and a lawmaking and judging Godhead,
but rather in a combination of paths (Sanskrit. ma¯rga; Tib. lam) and grounds
(S. bhūmi; T. sa) that lead, through ethical realization, to liberation from sa _msa¯ra.
While Buddhism certainly has ample place in its cosmologies for divine realms
and deities, this overarching ‘path and grounds’ framework sees both the human and
the divine as subordinate to its vision of suffering and liberation. Indeed, humans
and deities are only seen as morally distinct from one another as a matter of degree,
not kind – a property shared within Hinduism (Fuller 1992, 3–4).
As a consequence, law in any absolute sense is neither recognized as, nor
legitimated by, being divine in origin: while gods may be called upon as witnesses
or guarantors and may also be seen to make demands that bind particular commu-
nities to certain ritual practices and prohibitions, there is simply no Buddhist
equivalent of the Ten Commandments.
However, this is not to say that the Buddhist doctrine regards law as a purely
personal and subjective matter. Here, we need to recognize that the term dharma
involves two distinct but related meanings, particularly in Maha¯ya¯na Buddhist
thought. The ﬁrst meaning is dharma as a doctrine of reality: that phenomena are
characterized by impermanence, non-self, and emptiness, and that clinging to those
phenomena produces suffering. Dharma from this perspective is seen to exist
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
101
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 124 ---
eternally, whether a Buddha emerges in the world to reveal it or not (Williams et al
2000, 8) – it therefore precedes personal realization. The second meaning, however,
refers to the paths that lead from ignorance of reality to knowledge and awakening,
and from suffering to liberation. Travelling these paths involves different vehicles
(S. ya¯na; T. theg pa) or traditions of teaching – most conventionally the
´Sra¯vakaya¯na (T. nyan thos kyi theg pa, ‘hearer vehicle’), the Pratyekabuddhaya¯na
(T. rang rgyal gyi theg pa, ‘solitary realizer vehicle’), and the Bodhisattvaya¯na
(T. byang chub sems dpa’i theg pa, ‘bodhisattva vehicle’).
This last reference to the various ‘vehicles’ for teachings of the dharma is most
famously illustrated in the parable of the burning house in the Lotus Sūtra, told by
the Buddha to his disciple ´Sa¯riputra. In the parable, a wealthy man returns home to
ﬁnd his house on ﬁre and his many children, unaware of the danger, engrossed in
playing with their toys. Knowing that there is only one exit from the house and that
trying to herd them out himself will take too long, the Buddha explains the solution
devised by the wise father:
At that time the rich man had this thought: the house is already in ﬂames from
this huge ﬁre. If I and my sons do not get out at once, we are certain to be burned.
I must now invent some expedient means that will make it possible for the
children to escape harm. The father understood his sons and knew what various
toys and curious objects each child customarily liked and what would delight
them. And so he said to them, “The kind of playthings you like are rare and hard
to ﬁnd. If you do not take them when you can, you will surely regret it later. For
example, things like these goat-carts, deer-carts and ox-carts. They are outside the
gate now where you can play with them. So you must come out of this burning
house at once. Then whatever ones you want, I will give them all to you!” At that
time, when the sons heard their father telling them about these rare playthings,
because such things were just what they had wanted, each felt emboldened in
heart and, pushing and shoving one another, they all came wildly dashing out of
the burning house. (Watson 1993, 56–57)
When the children emerge from the burning house, however, they discover only
one vehicle: a large jewel-encrusted carriage drawn by a pure white ox. Challenging
´Sa¯riputra as to whether the rich man had lied to his children (and thereby whether it
is deceitful to teach different ya¯nas), the Buddha explains that while it was necessary
to preach several vehicles “to attract and guide living beings,” in truth there is only
one ultimate vehicle (S. ekaya¯na; T. theg pa gcig pa) of Buddhahood, which
becomes clear once beings have escaped from the burning house of sa _msa¯ra. He
concludes, “that rich man was not guilty of falsehood. The Tathagata does the same,
and he is without falsehood.”
The purpose of the burning house parable is explicitly to explain the Maha¯ya¯na
distinction between the transcendent wisdom that sees reality, and the conventional
wisdom of ‘skillful means’ (S. upa¯yakau´salya; T. thabs la mkhas pa) that is historic-
ally imminent and sees what each individual disciple requires at a particular point of
102
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 125 ---
the path in order to be released from sa _msa¯ra. While the latter wisdom is seen to
arise out of the cultivation of the former, the latter does not take the form of the
former: the goat cart and the jewel-encrusted carriage are different.
This Buddhist emphasis on the soteriology of path and vehicle means that, while
there is a ‘ﬁnal reality’ that exists prior to personal insight into it, any ‘law’ that is
focused on Buddhist goals of liberation from sa _msa¯ra depends upon a conventional
and historically situated moment between teacher and disciple or, as we shall see,
between a Buddhist ruler and subject, and most particularly upon the “wisdom of
skillful means” possessed by the teacher and ruler. As a consequence, from the
Maha¯ya¯na perspective especially, the ‘hidden’ (in the sense of inner personal moral-
ity and ethical insight) cannot be excluded from the process of situated lawmaking.
More than this, because the Buddhist path contains ethical insight at its heart, law is
understood as being emphatically within personal volition and understanding.
Nevertheless, royal law in Buddhist kingdoms was generally understood to be
distinct from Buddhist codes of lay and monastic discipline, thus separating out
constitutional principle into two distinct spheres (Pirie 2017a, 406). In what
follows, I will examine one of the few apparent exceptions to this split when it
comes to Buddhist legal culture: the claim, widespread in Tibetan history, that its
ﬁrst Buddhist emperor, the seventh century Purgyal ruler, Songtsen Gampo, based
the ﬁrst written law codes of his new empire on the ‘ten virtues’ (T. dge ba bcu)
of Maha¯ya¯na Buddhism – something of an early test case of “Buddhist
constitutionalism.”
To do that, however, it is necessary to ask not simply whether Buddhist consti-
tutional law is a contradiction in terms, but ﬁrst and foremost to ask what Buddhist
religious thinkers thought about public law in the ﬁrst place. Here I will address the
views of late Indian and Tibetan Maha¯ya¯na writers. I will argue that they had much
to say on this subject – in particular, regarding the origins, reality, and objectives of
legal governance – much of which requires us to pay close attention both to legal
texts and codes as well as to the rich philosophy and hermeneutics of governance
within the Maha¯ya¯na tradition.
Before moving on, a few words are necessary on the relationship between the
terms constitutional and constitutionalism as used in this chapter. By ‘constitu-
tional,’ I mean the very general sense of pertaining to understandings, however
diverse, of the nature and form of legitimate governance, what Philip Abrams
referred to as the “state-idea” (Abrams 1988). This is distinct from ‘constitutionalism,’
that far narrower idea that texts provide for formal limits on legitimate governance
(generally in abstract, ofﬁce-bearing terms). Thus, while the United Kingdom may
lack a single written constitution, it certainly has deeply embedded constitutional
and constitutionalist ideas. Constitutionalism thus argues that constitutional ideas
should be rendered in a very speciﬁc way: one which, regardless of how secular it
may claim to be, follows the principles of Christian ecclesiastical law in separating
overarching law from the person of rulers, both in theory and in practice.
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
103
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 126 ---
To these terms, however, I would add one further – that of “constitutional
mythology,” a phrase I have explored brieﬂy elsewhere (Mills 2011 and 2018), but
which is hugely pertinent to the general study of Tibetan historiography. Tibetan
history-writers, rather than seeking to discuss their ideas of governance in abstract,
legislative terms, tend to embed those ideas within the life-narratives of key historical
ﬁgures. In doing so, and in rendering coherently those ideas within the narrative,
they usually transform those narratives signiﬁcantly, in effect turning source material
into mythology.
Such constitutional mythologies are exceptional neither to Tibet, nor to Buddhist
societies, nor indeed to non-Western legal cultures – they are simply to be found in
those constitutional frameworks that have not yet been captured by the rationalized,
rule-based format of modern constitutional texts. Space precludes a comparative
review of this here, but a single example will sufﬁce: that of the constitutional status
of the English monarch. The political theology of early modern English kingship
has been examined in depth in Ernst Kantorowicz’s magisterial 1957 study, The
King’s Two Bodies. But to grasp the full strangeness of English constitutional
mythology, there are few better places than the opening page of John Allen’s
Inquiry into the Rise and Growth of the Royal Prerogative in England:
To unlearned persons desirous of understanding the constitution of England, the
transcendent attributes ascribed to the King, in his high political capacity, must
prove a stumbling block at the very commencement of their studies. They may have
heard that the law of England attributes to the King absolute perfection, absolute
immortality, and legal ubiquity. They will be told that the King of England is not
only not capable of doing wrong, but of thinking wrong, that he cannot mean to do
an improper thing, that in him there is no folly or weakness. They will be informed
that he never dies, that he is invisible as well as immortal, and that in the eye of the
law he is present at one and the same instant in every court of justice within
his dominion. (1830, 1)
Such constitutional mythologies might offend our modern sensibilities, appearing as
folklore-ish renditions of the supernatural, the products of irrational and uncritical
piety. This, however, is mainly because, as moderns, we are used to our consti-
tutional ideals of governance being enshrined within the pages of a document,
rather than being hung upon the shoulders of a historical person. For the Tibetan
tradition, such a person was Songtsen Gampo and, later, the ruling Dalai Lamas
(Mills 2018).
5.2 THE FIRST WRITTEN TIBETAN LAW CODES
Tibet’s Purgyal Empire Period – during which the Yarlung Dynasty of southern
Tibet expanded to found one of the most powerful empires of ﬁrst millennium Asia,
bringing into being what we call Tibet today – is revealed to us only partially in
scattered piles of historical fragments: monumental inscriptions, tattered imperial
104
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 127 ---
records hidden in the library cave of Dunhuang, and textual portions retranscribed
by Tibetan historians across the intervening centuries.
In addition to these early fragments, however, later Tibetan tradition offers
scholars a millennium worth of revealed prophecies, religious commentaries, and
scholarly ethnohistories of the Tibetan Empire. Together these sources combine to
create the received tradition prevalent from the medieval period onwards. These
texts were generally composed from the late tenth century at the earliest, several
hundred years after Songtsen Gampo’s reign and in the wake of the fall of the
Tibetan Empire. The accounts of Songtsen Gampo’s life and rule can be found in
some of Tibet’s most famous post-imperial literature: from the ‘hidden treasure’
(terma) literature of the post-dynastic period such as the eleventh-century Pillar
Testament and the twelfth-century Compendium of Ma_nis, to later histories such as
Sonam Gyaltsen’s fourteenth-century Clear Mirror of Royal Genealogies or Pawo
Tsuglag Threngwa’s sixteenth-century Feast for the Wise. All of these sources present
an idealized portrait of his rule, with many elements that are simply absent for near-
contemporary accounts, such as those found at Dunhuang.
These post-imperial texts narrate the lives of the great and pious ‘religion kings’
(chögyel) that brought about the ‘First Diffusion’ (sngar dar) of Buddhism to Tibet,
and with it the foundations of Buddhist culture in Tibet. Foremost among these
‘religion kings’ was the thirty-third tsenpo (emperor) of the Yarlung Dynasty, Tri
Songtsen or Songtsen Gampo (or ‘Songtsen the Wise,’ c. 569?–649?). He was
heralded by subsequent Tibetan tradition as the human manifestation of the celes-
tial bodhisattva Avalokite´svara, Tibet’s patron Buddhist tutelary deity; as having
expanded the imperial borders massively, effectively founding Tibet, as we now
understand it, out of a medley of surrounding polities; as having founded the city of
Lhasa as his personal ﬁef; as having constructed the famed Jokhang, Ramoché, and
Trandruk temples; as having brought writing and Buddhist scriptures to Tibet; and
most of all for our purposes, as having inscribed the ﬁrst written legal codes (bka’
khrims). To say, as some have, that Songtsen the Wise was to Tibetans as King
Arthur was to the British is to understate the matter; a closer analogy would be King
Solomon’s role in the history of Israel.
5.3 THE RECEIVED TRADITION AND ITS CRITICS
In these post-imperial narratives, the codiﬁcation of imperial written law under
Songtsen Gampo went hand in hand with the emperor’s initiation of a Tibetan
written script and formal court literacy. Texts such as the eleventh-century Pillar
Testament record how, during the reign of Songtsen Gampo’s ancestor Lhatotori,
Buddhist scriptures and a stūpa fell from the sky onto the roof of the dynastic palace
at Yumbulagang in the Yarlung Valley. Among them was the Karandavyūha, a sūtra
detailing
the
qualities
and
worship
of
the
great
Maha¯ya¯na
bodhisattva
Avalokite´svara, celestial protector of the Land of the Snows. However, Lhatotori
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
105
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 128 ---
and his court were illiterate and unable to read the newly revealed scriptures, and as
a consequence he had this ‘Powerful Secret’ sealed in a casket, enshrined and left for
future generations to unravel.
Five generations later, as Songtsen Gampo expanded the Purgyal Empire across
the Tibetan Plateau, he sent emissaries to India to study writing and grammar.
Among these emissaries, most of whom died from the rigors of the journey and the
Indian climate, was the young Sambhota of the clan Thonmi, a ministerial scion
reputed for his intelligence. Arriving in India, he studied for years under two
scholars, Kamsadatta and Devavidya¯simha, transforming the ﬁfty consonants of the
Indian Gupta script into thirty consonants of the Tibetan spoken language.
After some years, Thonmi Sambhota and Kamsadatta returned to Tibet, bringing
with them several Buddhist texts. The Pillar Testament describes how, on his arrival
at Lhasa, Thonmi both translated the texts in Lhatotori’s casket and aided the
emperor in formulating Tibet’s ﬁrst written law codes:
To the joy of the king, [Thonmi Sambhota] offered him the noble doctrine of the
Maha¯ya¯na, whereupon the king said: “Can you read the ‘powerful secret’ of my
ancestor
Lhatotori
Nyenshel?”
Lotsa¯wa
Sambho_ta
studied
them,
reading
Vimalamitra’s Glorious Mudras for Amending Breaches, the Karandavyūha Sūtra,
Na¯ga¯’s Glorious Mudras for Amending Breaches and Reversing the Karma of the Ten
Non-Virtues.
They established four legal codes of the laws of the ten virtues. Then, in studying
the script, the king did not go out for four years. The ministers said, “In not coming
out for four years, the king is a know-nothing idiot! The happiness of the Tibetan
people is down to us, the ministers.”
The king overheard this, and thinking, “If they call me an idiot, it will not be
possible to tame the people,” spoke thus: “All you ministers and people, come and
gather around me! When I, the king, remained in one palace and didn’t move
around from place to place, you were happy. Yet you ministers are saying that this
very happiness of the Tibetan people is down to the ministers and that the people
are under the command of the ministers.” Having said this, he gave them an order:
“It has become necessary for me to formulate the laws of the ten virtues. I wanted to
make the law before. Previously, the lawless twelve minor border kingdoms of
Tibet, lacking law, created manifold wickedness, harming my maternal lineage.
All the people within my kingdom wanted blood price if a murder was committed
and compensation if there was theft; wanted compensation for assault or robbery;
for adultery, they desired the adultery price; and punishments to be enacted for
lying, divisive speech, covetousness; harmful intent, wrong view and whatever
actions were against the law. [The king] having declared this, the ministers thought:
“this king is wise (sgam po) and will correctly hold and protect the practices of the
holy doctrine.” Being of profound mind, therefore, they named him King Songtsen
the Wise.” (KKM: 107–8)1
1
See also Uray’s rendition of this episode (Uray 1972, 25–26).
106
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 129 ---
The Pillar Testament rendition of the founding of Buddhist law translated above
does indeed closely approximate the classical ten virtues within wider Maha¯ya¯na
literature: the three virtues of body (avoiding killing, stealing, and sexual miscon-
duct), speech (avoiding lying, gossip, harsh speech, and slander), and mind
(avoiding avarice, ill-will, and wrong views).
This is the version of the narrative of Songtsen Gampo’s founding of the law of
the ten virtues that probably represents the locus classicus of the later medieval
received tradition. Its generally understood implication, at least among modern
scholars, is that the emperor, in collaboration with Thonmi Sambhota, formulated
his royal law on the basis of its codiﬁcation in a Sanskrit text on the ten virtues,
variously rendered as Reversing the Karma of the Ten Non-Virtues, or more simply
The Ten Virtues, and that this was some version of, or commentary on, the
Da´saku´sala¯ni Sūtra. The later (and more famous and widespread) Compendium
of Ma_nis, supports this general interpretation:
Then the emanated king, in order to introduce the sentient beings of the snowy
land to the dharma, applied the law based on the Sūtra of the Ten Virtues. (MKB,
Vol. E: f. 375–76)
But if the Pillar Testament presents us with the locus classicus for the received
tradition of Songtsen Gampo’s relationship with “the ten virtues,” other texts and
sources present a far less clear picture, one that has made the received tradition the
object of considerable scholarly criticism. The most common and substantial
criticism focuses on the historical possibility of literary transmission: that Songtsen
Gampo’s laws were based on pre-existing Indian texts on the ten virtues such as the
Da´saku´sala¯ni Sūtra. The core criticisms here are, ﬁrstly, that there seem to be no
mention of them in any contemporary or near-contemporary imperial sources
related to Songtsen Gampo’s rule. Indeed, nothing resembling the Da´saku´sala¯ni
seems to arrive in Tibet until at least one and a half centuries after Songtsen
Gampo’s death. Thus Rolf Stein, in his 1986 essay, “Tibetica Antiqua IV: La
tradition relative au début du bouddhisme au Tibet,” places the ﬁrst Tibetan literary
references to the ten virtues in and around the reign of Trisong Détsen, a century
later: in Buddhaguhya’s letter to emperor Trisong Détsen (Tanjur No 5693, vol. 129,
284, col. 5); in the translation of the Ten Teachings of Ks_itigarbha, Great Summary of
the Maha¯ya¯na into Tibetan by the Chan master Rnam par mi rtog pa in 800
(Kanjur No 905, Chapter 6); and, ﬁnally, in the imperial promulgation of the text
in 822 (Stein 1986). Even then, as Fernanda Pirie has argued in detail, it was not
associated with the practice of royal governance or administration (2017a). In other
words, the assertion that Songtsen Gampo deployed the ‘law of the ten virtues’
exclusively on the basis of textual transmission from India is fairly clearly a post
hoc fabrication.
The second criticism is that the legal code that is said to have emerged from this
process – of both the ‘ten virtues’ and the appended ‘sixteen norms of moral
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
107
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 130 ---
behavior’ – is only barely recognizable as the classical ten virtues. Thus, for example,
the fourteenth-century Clear Mirror of Royal Genealogies lists these as follows:
Thonmi Sambhota, Gar Tongtsan Yulzung, Tiseru Gongton, Nyang Trizang
Yangton, and one hundred ministers in all levelled differences and, in accordance
with the king’s behest, enacted the law of the ten virtues:
(i) The good should be rewarded, and the wicked punished.
(ii) The high should be suppressed by law, and the low skillfully protected.
(iii) The bodyguard should be divided into four units.
(iv) Highland water should be assembled into ponds, and lowland water
conducted into channels.
(v) Weights and measures should be organized, and ﬁelds divided into plots.
(vi) People are to train in writing.
(vii) Horses should be marked with ownership-colors.
(viii) Exemplary customs should be established.
(ix) Those making quarrels should be punished.
(x) Murder should be ﬁned variably.
(xi) That which is stolen should be substituted eightfold, and with the thing
itself, ninefold.
(xii) Adulterers, having been castrated, should be banished to another country;
liars/frauds should have their tongues cut off.
Furthermore:
(i) Go for refuge in the Three Jewels, showing them devotion and respect.
(ii) Maintain gratitude to one’s parents and honor them.
(iii) Do not forget benefactors such as fathers, uncles, and elders, the three, and
repay them in kindness.
(iv) Do not quarrel with superior persons and noblemen, but have faith in
them, and adapt one’s manners and behavior to them.
(v) Fix one’s mind on the divine religion and writings and understand
their meaning.
(vi) Have trust in karmic causation and avoid perpetrating sins.
(vii) Be of beneﬁt to friends and neighbors, and do not enact mischievous thoughts.
(viii) Acting from a straightforward foundation, rest in a mind of renunciation.
(ix) Showing moderation in food and alcohol, act modestly.
(x) Returning debts on time, do not act dishonestly with weights and measures.
(xi) Do not think on matters to which one is neither promised nor commissioned.
(xii) Among friends, remain independent of women’s useless gossip.
(xiii) When the truth or falsity [of a case] does not emerge, pledge [one’s] oaths
before the local gods and protectors of the teachings as witnesses.
Taking the ten virtues as an exemplar, the twenty laws of Tibet were ﬁnalized at
Shomara and afﬁxed with the seal of the king and all the ministers, and so they were
propagated [in Tibet] like the light of the sun and moon. (KKM, ff. 159–60)2
2
See also Sørensen 1994: 180–84 for comparison.
108
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 131 ---
Indeed, from this perspective, sources like the Clear Mirror themselves appear
quite confused at times. For example, the enumeration of the king’s new laws, as
outlined above, is directly preceded by a section which states that Songtsen
Gampo’s imperial law was derived less from sacred India than from Tibet’s
northern neighbors:
Having adopted accounting from the eastern kingdom [China] and the Mi-Nyag;
translated the holy doctrine from India in the south; unlocked treasuries of food,
wealth, and ﬁneries from the Sogdians and Nepalese in the west; and adopted law
and work (practices) from the Tartars and Uyghurs in the north – in short, having
enacted dominion over the four directions, he became the helmsman king over half
the world. (GSM, f. 158, emphasis added)3
Indeed, on the question of Songtsen Gampo’s law codes, we ﬁnd them variously
presented as the ‘law of the ten virtues,’ the ten religious virtues and sixteen codes of
moral behavior, the four religious laws and sixteen secular ones, and, often enough,
as the six law books. Even these presentations are once again at odds with the
complex sets of legal precedents and procedures found in partial fragments in the
Dunhuang documents (Dotson 2006).
Possibly the most confusing source on this is the tenth-century Considerations of
Wa which, as one of the earliest post-dynastic sources, seems to claim that Songtsen
Gampo both did and did not base his laws on the ten virtues. Thus, it describes the
arrival of Thonmi Sambhota, accompanied by an indecipherable copy of The Ten
Virtues (dGe ba bcu; Da´saku´sala¯ni):
[Returning to Tibet, Thonmi Sambhota] was accompanied by [Kamsadatta], an
Indian versed in reading and writing, and took with him some [texts of] the doctrine
such as Chos dkon mchog sprin [Ratnameghasﬁtra], Pad ma dkar po, Rin po che tog,
gZugs grwa lnga and dGe ba bcu [Da´saku´sala¯ni]. As there was nobody to translate
them, the [texts of the] doctrine received the royal seal and were placed in the
treasury of Phying pa [castle]. Then [the emperor] announced: “In my lineage after
ﬁve generations there will be a descendant who will spread the doctrine of Buddha,
and at that time the casket should be opened.” (dBZh, 27–28)
Whereupon the emperor entered retreat for four years, at the end of which he
nonetheless produced laws “on the basis of the ten virtues”:
He therefore held a discussion with his four attendants who had been taught the
alphabet and in four months, on the basis of the Ten Virtues, he made the law (bka’
khrims) and put it into writing. [It included] the ‘wergild’ for the taking of human
life, compensation (rku ‘jal) for theft and robbery, the [cutting off of] the nose and
the [removing of] eyes for sexual misbehavior, the taking of oaths for preventing
lying, etc.). Wangdu and Diemberger 2000, 28)
3
See also Sørensen 1994:180.
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
109
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 132 ---
The picture here is therefore a confused one, and while, for example, the Pillar
Testament is extremely explicit that the ten virtues as understood in the classical
Indian formulation were proposed by Songtsen Gampo – speciﬁcally, in the text
itself, putting them in his own reported speech – , the principal assertion by post-
imperial writers appears to be that, whatever form the imperial law actually took, it
was in essence the ‘ten virtues’ (see also Uray 1972, n. 53).
We can see this in the way the Considerations of Wa asserts – indeed, within the
same passage – that despite the fact that the dGe ba bcu (Da´saku´sala¯ni) text would
not be translated for a further ﬁve generations, the king’s law was nonetheless based
on the ten virtues. This, at the very least, suggests that we need a wider frame of
reference for understanding the post-dynastic claim that Songtsen Gampo’s laws
were ‘based on the ten virtues’ than pure textual transmission.
In trying to make sense of all this – and perhaps more pertinently trying to
understand how Tibetan post-imperial writers themselves made sense of it – one
of the most important questions to address is: What precise legal reality was implied
by a term such as “law based on the ten virtues?” In many respects, and by extension,
this question evokes a much larger question about whether later writers, working as
they also were within the fragmented ruins of the old Tibetan Empire, regarded
Songtsen Gampo’s reign as institutionally ‘Buddhist’ in the ﬁrst place.
For many modern historians of Tibet, the received tradition of Songtsen Gampo’s
founding of written law cannot be taken as reliably historical,4 with Andreĭ Vostrikov
famously lamenting the inability of Tibetan historians to “distinguish facts from
myths – what is historical from what is legendary” (1970, 59). Toni Huber provides a
somewhat more nuanced take on this frustratingly labile historical moment:
A large amount of painstaking historical, philological, and archaeological research
now supports the view that what Tibetans have held most dear about their pur-
ported early Buddhist past and its founding ﬁgures is more a creative product of
later, Buddhist-inspired history writing than a reﬂection of contemporary circum-
stance during the dynastic period. (1996, 58)
In approaching this problem, modern scholarship has frequently taken a distinctly
political approach. The core conclusion – that much of Songtsen Gampo’s rule is a
post hoc idealization – is either understood in terms of a bald political partisanship
such as the ‘progressive gloriﬁcation of royal ancestors’ (Aris, 1997, 9; Dotson, 2006,
11; Sørensen, 1994, 24; Tucci, 1962, 126) or some version of Hobsbawm and Ranger’s
‘invented tradition’ (1983), in which events such as Songtsen Gampo’s development
of the ‘law of the ten virtues’ is a post hoc projection of textual ideas that actually
came to Tibet centuries later (Stein 1986, 213–14, see also below). In many cases, this
is treated as a pious elaboration. For others still, it is sufﬁcient simply to discreetly
4
See Alexander Macdonald’s wonderful review of modern scholarly disappointment (2003,
129–31).
110
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 133 ---
express doubt as to the historicity of such accounts and move on (Pirie 2017a, 2017b;
van Schaik 2016).
5.4 LAW BEYOND THE TEXTS
It is worth being clear at this point: most of the criticisms, regarding the integrity of
the textual lineage connecting the Indian corpus of Buddhist ideas about the ten
virtues to Songtsen Gampo’s laws, seem entirely sound. Setting aside the view that
‘hidden treasure’ revelations, discovered more than three hundred years after the
events they describe, retain any privileged claim to historicity, there is effectively no
evidence that the ten virtues as a textual tradition or codex existed in Tibet prior to
Trisong Détsen’s rule, more than a century after the death of Songtsen Gampo. In
this regard, post-imperial claims that there was a textual lineage that bridged
between the Indian tradition of Maha¯ya¯na Buddhism and Songtsen Gampo’s laws
(such as in the Compendium of Ma_nis) remain unsupported, at least according to
our present records.
With that said, however, we should be careful not to allow the dubious historicity
of such claims to distract us from two important considerations: ﬁrstly, the sheer
difﬁculty in objectively assessing what exactly makes Songtsen Gampo’s kingdom
‘Buddhist’; and, secondly, the actual meaning and signiﬁcance of such a post hoc
fabrication, beyond merely whether it was true. It is possible, after all, to refuse to be
taken in by an ideological claim and simultaneously to take it seriously as an
inﬂuential artifact in its own right, which is itself worthy of further analysis.
While there are, so far, no known contemporary or near-contemporary written
references to Buddhism during Songtsen Gampo’s rule, we are reasonably certain
that some of the great ediﬁces of Tibetan Buddhism – in particular, the Jokhang,
Ramoché, and Trandruk temples – seem almost certainly to have been built during
that time. The signiﬁcance of those building projects remains unknown to us, and
the contemporary written records from that time are spartan at best. Upon what do
we rely as criteria for such a designation as ‘Buddhist’: what people did, or what
people said about what they did? Do we depend upon our own deﬁnitions of what
counts as Buddhist, those of the time, those of later Buddhist writers, or indeed those
of the nearby non-Tibetan courts? More speciﬁcally, when it comes to a phrase like
“based on the ten virtues,” are we sure we know what the writers of the Pillar
Testament or the Considerations of Wa meant by this when they put pen to paper?
Such assessments are necessarily and inevitably interpretative: they depend not
simply on a veriﬁable history of textual and monumental sources, but also on an
identiﬁable hermeneutics of governance and history. As Paul Ricœur described in
detail, the simple fact of ‘writing afterwards’ changes the signiﬁcance of historical
events precisely because one knows what came after (1983). England’s King John
signing the Magna Carta at Runnymede in 1215 was famously described by Stubbs’
Constitutional History of England (1874–78) as the earliest spark of the spirit and
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
111
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 134 ---
growth of democracy, but we can be sure that neither King John nor the rebel
barons he met with had any such idea in their heads.
In this regard, the historicity, intent, and Buddhist credentials of Songtsen
Gampo’s law codes raise three distinct kinds of question:
(i) What can we understand of the Tibetan imperial period from contem-
porary and near-contemporary sources? This is typically the subject of
Old Tibetan Studies, and centers around the study of archaeological
remains, such as the royal tombs, imperial inscriptions, and the vast
textual collections unpacked from Dunhuang, such as the Old
Tibetan Annals, the Tibetan Chronicle, and the many legal fragments
and case law reports.
(ii) What can we glean from later, post-imperial sources about the Tibetan
imperial period? This inquiry involves either ﬁltering out accumulated
additions and interpolations within post-imperial works or sourcing
their references, thus mining them for the contents of putative original
imperial material. The most famous of such endeavors is undoubtedly
Géza Uray and Helga Uebach’s analysis of textual sources to unpick
the original imperial texts (Uebach 1992, Uray 1967 and 1972). In what
follows, in order to create some continuity in this debate, I will revisit
some of Uray’s own examples in light of my own analysis.
(iii) What can we glean from those later sources about how post-imperial
Tibetan writers understood and thought about history-writing itself?
This question, which I will also attend to, relates to what Huber refers
to as “Buddhist-inspired history writing.” Here, it is not sufﬁcient to
simply argue that subsequent Buddhist historiography was ‘pious’
(a common cipher for ‘simple’ and ‘uncritical’) or indeed that histor-
ical ﬁgures were simply ‘gloriﬁed’ (a distinctly Christological term,
along with words like ‘majesty’ and ‘power,’ all associated with Hebrew
and Greek notions of the divine). Nor can we necessarily be taken in
by too monolithic a notion of ‘tradition’ with regard to the early post-
imperial sources. While a ‘received tradition’ may have emerged
by the late medieval period, we know that texts such as the
Considerations of Wa, the Pillar Testament, and the Compendium of
Ma_nis emerged during a remarkably fractured and fractious period of
Tibetan history (indeed, the so-called post-imperial silbu-dü, or ‘time
of fragmentation’). Much like today’s scholars, the medieval authors of
these and many other works were themselves trying to make sense of a
difﬁcult and often confusing range of historical sources from the
imperial period, some (most notably the likes of Pawo Tsuglag
Threngwa) engaged in extensive and detailed textual reconstruction,
and others (such as Lama Dampa Sonam Gyaltsen, author of the
112
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 135 ---
Clear Mirror) seeking to integrate their textual sources into a particu-
lar and sophisticated historical worldview and understanding of gov-
ernance. Many were trained Buddhist chroniclers with signiﬁcant
philosophical training in the Maha¯ya¯na. In other words, we can and
should expect to ﬁnd political, philosophical, and historiographic
principles at work in their writings, just as Corwin could identify
complex and sophisticated Christological ideas at work in the ‘higher
law’ of American constitutional thought.
And indeed, this is what we ﬁnd. The textual sources, both before and after the
imperial period, consistently tell us that while texts are important, they are not the
sole domain or object of constitutional thought and history.
5.5 THE HERMENEUTICS OF BUDDHIST KINGSHIP
Previously, I have argued that works such as the Pillar Testament and the
Compendium of Ma_nis are clearly inﬂuenced – both substantively and organization-
ally – by the hermeneutics of the Avata _msaka Sūtra, a voluminous and inﬂuential
Maha¯ya¯na scripture from around the third or fourth century CE (Mills 2012).
The Avata _msaka (also known as the Maha¯vaipulya Buddha¯vata _msaka Sūtra) was
translated into Chinese in two versions by Buddhabhadra in 418–20 and ´Sik_sa¯nanda
in 695–99 and rendered into Tibetan in the ninth century CE by the Indian pa_n_dita
Jinamitra at Samyé during the reign of Trisong Détsen ( ¯Otake 2007). Thematically,
the Avata _msaka Sūtra centers on the question of the cosmological reality of the
historical Buddha as an object of devotion and discipleship, and the role of bodhi-
sattvas within the world. Its most famous chapters – the Da´sabhūmika (“Ten
Grounds”; Tib: ‘phags pa sa bcu pa’i mdo) and the Ga_n_davyūha (“Flower Array,”
T. Tib. sdong po bkod pa’i mdo) – have much to say on the subject of bodhisattva-
kingship and the nature of history, and lengthy sections are given over to the precise
status and role of the ten virtues and ten non-virtues in the path of the bodhisattva.
There are three aspects of this that will be considered in this chapter, since they give
us a doorway into understanding the post-imperial view of Songtsen Gampo’s law:
the Avata _msaka Sūtra’s notions of the origins of law, the reality of law, and the
objectives of law.
5.5.1 The Origins of the Law
The Da´sabhūmika, or Sutra of the Ten Grounds, details the ten virtues and their
relationship with kingly law: speciﬁcally, it explains in depth both the ten virtues and
the three realms of lower rebirth (familiar to many from the ‘wheel of life’ motif
painted at the entrance to Maha¯ya¯na Buddhist temples and monasteries) to which
the ten non-virtues lead. An important aspect of the Ten Grounds’ explanation is that
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
113
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 136 ---
the ten virtues are not primarily understood as a code of personal discipline, but as
the personal qualities of a bodhisattva who has attained the second ground (the
‘stage of purity’). That is, the virtues emerge ‘naturally’ from their stage of realization.
For example, on the question of virtues of body:
Enlightening beings in the stage of Purity naturally become imbued with ten
virtuous ways of acting: they avoid taking life, they abandon weapons and hostility,
they have conscience and sympathy and are compassionate and kind to all living
beings, wishing for their welfare. They do not harm living beings even in their
fantasies, much less injure other beings by gross physical harm with the conception
of beings as such. The enlightening beings also abandon taking what is not given.
They are satisﬁed with what they have and do not desire others’ possessions.
Thinking of things that belong to others as belonging to others, they do not give
rise to any intention to steal and do not take even so much as a blade of grass or a
leaf that is not given to them, much less take the necessities of life from others. The
enlightening beings also abandon sexual misconduct. They are satisﬁed with their
own spouses and do not desire the spouses of others. They do not give rise to desire
for others’ spouses, much less have sexual intercourse with them. (Cleary 1993, 714)
The Da´sabhūmika Sūtra clearly identiﬁes this second bodhisattva ground as occu-
pied by monarchs and emperors:
This is a brief explanation of the second stage of enlightening beings, the stage of
Purity. Many of the enlightening beings in this stage are sovereigns, lords of four
continents, and masters of the law, competent, powerful, able to rid beings of the
impurities of bad behavior, to set them on the ten paths of virtuous conduct . . .
Here enlightening beings become monarchs, leading sentient beings by the ten
virtues: by all the virtue they have amassed, they will become saviors of the world,
rich in the ten powers. (Cleary 1993, 718–20)
In this sense, the Avata _msaka Sūtra presents the virtuous king as inherently inclined
toward the ten virtues, which spontaneously and karmically emerge, along with their
royal status, from the stage of the path they have reached as a bodhisattva. Thus,
lawmaking and the morality of the lawmaker are seen as naturally and logically
intertwined. As with the narrative of Songtsen Gampo’s formulation of the ﬁrst
written laws, these are seen as produced spontaneously from his wisdom (sgam po).
If we were to take such an understanding as our basis for the historical formula-
tion of law – which I would argue that some medieval Tibetan writers certainly did –
there is no necessary requirement for Songtsen Gampo to base his new written legal
code on a speciﬁc pre-existing text or coding of the ten virtues. To say that his law
was “emergent from the ten virtues” was to say that it emerged from his personal
qualities as a regal bodhisattva.
This formulation, I would argue, can help explain the persistent conditional
linguistic forms used by subsequent writers to relate the ‘ten virtues’ to the speciﬁc
elements of Songtsen Gampo’s law. Thus, the Considerations of Wa states:
114
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 137 ---
For four months, the tsenpo wrote the law codes, drawn out from the foundation of
the ten virtues. (dBZh, 28)5
Here, “drawn out from the foundation” is gzhi blangs, in which gzhi is a basis,
foundation or birthplace. Similarly, Orgyan Lingpa’s Five Books of Law has:
Conjoined with the ten virtues, a decree of law was composed. (KDNg, f. 20b.2)
And the Treatise Known as Gateway to Engaging with the Dharma by Sonam
Tsémo (1142–82) has:
Taking the ten virtues as a basis/beginning, the law was composed. (Uray 1972, 53)
In all cases, this implicit connection between the ten virtues and the law is regularly
understood not as a transposition or replication, but rather as an inspiration or
spontaneous production. As we shall see below, this implies a potential distinction
between the moral intentions of the lawgiver and the laws they produce.
5.5.2 The Reality of the Law
The second aspect of the Avata _msaka Sūtra’s treatment of governance is the manner
in which rule, whether religious or political, is seen as perspectivally disparate. Quite
literally, both buddhas and bodhisattvas are ‘seen’ differently by different people,
depending on those people’s spiritual inclinations and stage of realization.
In the opening verses of the Ga_n_davyūha chapter, this perspectival standpoint is
laid out in voluminous detail. The text, famous for its presentation of the Maha¯ya¯na
view of the hierarchical distinction between the Maha¯ya¯na and ´Sra¯vakaya¯na
vehicles, describes the Buddha’s teaching of the “coming forth of the lion” at
Sravasti, in the garden of Anathapindada in the Jeta grove, to ﬁve thousand bodhi-
sattvas, kings, and hearer-disciples (Cleary 1993, 1138). On entering meditative
concentration, the Buddha reveals that he is not simply sitting in a grand kingly
pavilion at Sravasti, but instead at the epicenter of an inﬁnite buddha-ﬁeld, its
ground made of diamond and jewels, the pavilion a mighty palace the size of a
city, all surrounded by and coextensive with an inﬁnite number of buddha-ﬁelds,
worlds and palaces, each inhabited with hosts of buddhas, bodhisattvas, and world-
turning emperors. All of this vast cosmological drama was witnessed by the ﬁve
thousand bodhisattvas attending upon the Buddha, but not his closest disciples,
´Sa¯riputra, Maudgalya¯yana, Maha¯ka¯´syapa, Revata, Subhūti, Aniruddha, Nandika,
Kapphi_na, Ka¯tya¯yana, Pūr_na Maitra¯yaniputra, and so on, for whom little of
note happened.
The Ga_n_davyūha then renders in extensive detail the reasons for the different
views of the bodhisattvas and the hearers which, it asserts, revolves around the fact
5
See Lewis Doney for a slightly different translation (Doney 2020, 105). Emphasis is added in
all excerpts.
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
115
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 138 ---
that the disciples, being hearers rather than bodhisattvas, seek only the personal
peace of nirvana and are therefore incapable of the compassionate omniscience
involved in the bodhisattva vehicle:
Because they were emancipated by the vehicle of hearers, they had realized the path
of hearers, they had fulﬁlled the sphere of practices of hearers, they were ﬁxed in
the fruit of hearers; they rested on the knowledge of the light of truth, they were
ﬁxed at the limit of reality, they had gone to the state of eternal peace, they had no
thought of great compassion and had no pity for the beings of the world; they had
accomplished what they had to do for themselves. (Cleary 1993, 1147)
There then follows a lengthy discourse elaborating this general perspectival
principle in multiple examples. Thus,
The situation was like that of hundreds of thousands of ghosts gathered on the bank
of the great river Ganges, hungry and thirsty, naked, without shelter, emaciated,
dehydrated by the wind and heat, attacked by ﬂocks of crows, terrorized by wolves
and jackals – they do not see the Ganges River, or they may see it as dry, without
water, or full of ashes, because they are shrouded by actions that blind them. In the
same way the old great disciples there in the Jeta grove did not see or penetrate the
transﬁgurations of the Buddha, because they rejected omniscience and their eyes
were veiled by ignorance. (Cleary 1993, 1148)
This same view is commonly enough expressed today. Thus, Dilgo Khyentse
Rinpoche, in his recent commentary on the twelfth-century Copper Mountain
Testament, which shares some authorship with the Compendium of Ma_nis, argues:
Try to understand this comparison: the Buddha’s twelve deeds and so forth differ in
the traditions of the Hīnaya¯na and Maha¯ya¯na [forms of Buddhism]. We only take
the Maha¯ya¯na version to be truly authentic. The Hīnaya¯na version is what was
perceived through the limited vision of Hīnaya¯na disciples. This is the same as the
analogy of a white conch shell being seen to be yellow by someone who has
jaundice . . . The inconsistencies and dissimilarities in the life stories of enlightened
beings come about because those beings are perceived differently from different
levels of people who are inﬂuenced . . . The buddhas appeared [in different ways]
because of the different karmic perceptions of different followers. (Dilgo Khyentse
Rinpoche 1993, 12)
This aspect of the Avata _msaka Sūtra clearly inﬂuenced post-dynastic Tibetan
writings on these subjects, both in substantive, narrative, and philosophical terms.
The famous tale of Songtsen Gampo’s meeting with the two monks of Khotan,
found in almost all post-imperial Tibetan renditions and generally seen as the
seminal portrayal of Songtsen Gampo as the bodhisattva Avalokite´svara, is a classic
example (Mills 2012). The two monks are described as receiving a vision in Khotan
that Songtsen Gampo was Avalokite´svara in person. Making the long pilgrimage to
Central Tibet to meet the emperor, however, they witness a terrifying spectacle of
torture and carnage in the name of the king’s law, leading them to reject the idea
116
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 139 ---
that he could possibly be Avalokite´svara. Summoned before the king, however, he
explains to them that what they saw were not actual people being harmed, but
illusory manifestations (sprul pa), magically produced each day by the ruler. This
vignette demonstrates clear matches with the Ga_n_davyūha’s account of the seeker
Sudhana’s meeting with the Indian king Anala (Mills 2012).
In the post-dynastic texts on Songtsen Gampo’s life from the Pillar Testament
onwards this moral perspectivism is formalized, not only in the story of the
Khotanese monks, but also in a series of narrative tropes that appear episodically
throughout his royal biography. Indeed, even the king’s birth is presented in terms of
levels of illusion and clarity:
Three different ways of seeing this event arose: to the Buddhas of the Ten
Directions, it appeared that the sublime Chenrésik, having planned the liberation
of sentient beings in the snowy land of Tibet on the basis of the power of prayers in
former times, shining like a brilliant lamp in the darkness of this wild region, had
cast his gaze upon that precious place. In the perception of the Bodhisattvas of the
Ten Grounds, it appeared that Chenrésik, with the intention of leading the sentient
beings of this wild and snowy realm to the Dharma, manifested himself as a king
who would strive to beneﬁt beings by means appropriate to each. In the perception
of the common black-headed people, it appeared that a son of unsurpassed wonder
had been born to the king. (GSM, ff. 140–42)6
Likewise, as post-imperial texts such as the Pillar Testament and Clear Mirror
regularly state, the essential relationship between the ten virtues of Buddhist doc-
trine and kingly law are, like the Buddha ´Sa¯kyamuni’s “coming forth of the lion,”
seen only by bodhisattvas and those others “who have eyes to see.”
5.5.3 The Objectives of the Law
If, as mentioned above, there was potentially a difference between the spontaneous
moral intentions of the bodhisattva-king and the laws he formulated, this was
because such a formulation was understood to take into account the moral nature
of the Tibetan people themselves. This is most obvious in the tale of the Khotanese
monks mentioned above. Songtsen Gampo explains to the terriﬁed monks:
Those who are to be tamed by me are not clothed by peace. [Therefore], through
the door of wrathful means, illusory people are punished. (KKM 1989, 304)
And, in the Compendium of Ma_nis version of this tale:
The Tibetan people, having a monkey-father and a rock demoness mother, were
difﬁcult to subdue [and thus] difﬁcult to lead to religion. As a consequence, fearful
religious law was protectively employed. (MKB, Vol. 1(E), ff. 407)
6
See also Sørensen 1994, 161–62.
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
117
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 140 ---
This idea of the nature of a people as an object of law – as an intermediary function
in the formation of legal codes and practice themselves – is similarly enshrined in
the Ga_n_davyūha chapter of the Avata _msaka Sūtra. Thus, after the seeker Sudhana
questions King Anala’s apparently ruthless and bloody application of the law in his
kingdom, Anala explains:
I have attained enlightening beings’ magical liberation. The people in my realm are
given to all sorts of evildoing – murder, theft, rape, falsehood, slander, viliﬁcation,
divisive talk, covetousness, malice, false views, villainy, violence, cruelty. I am
unable to turn them away from evildoing by any other means, so in order to subdue
them, mature them, guide them, and secure their welfare, out of compassion I have
illusory executioners kill and maim illusory criminals, making a display of intense
suffering and pain; seeing this, the people in my realm become afraid to do evil.
Seeing the people alarmed by this device, I have them give up evildoing and
conduct themselves virtuously; then I establish them in ultimate security, the end
of all suffering, the bliss of omniscience. (Cleary 1993, 1245)
In Maha¯ya¯na Buddhist terms, this is of course the principle of ‘skillful means’
discussed above, in some respects similar in logic to the Islamic concept of the
“objectives of the law” (maqasid al-shari’ah). This is the jurisprudential principle that
the law, however it is formed, must lead people toward a particular set of religious
objectives (Kamali 1999), even if they do not completely understand their full religious
signiﬁcance. Within such a perspective, law is goal-oriented rather than simply
normative. In the Islamic legal traditions, these are largely focused on the formation
of mutual aid, compassion, and education within the Islamic community itself. In the
post-dynastic Tibetan sources and the Avata _msaka, the objectives of law are focused
on avoidance of the lower realms of rebirth and, as we saw above, “ultimate security,
the end of all suffering, the bliss of omniscience.” Similarly, in the seventeenth
century, Geluk scholar Sumpa Khenpo described how:
At that time good laws were introduced by the king and the councilors, in order to
lead the Tibetan subjects to the excellent religion, according to which (the laws)
the men steady in the ten virtues and the so-called “sixteen pure human moral
rules,” (notably) . . . should be noblemen. (Uray 1972, 54)
In the tale of the Khotanese monks and also the Ga_n_davyūha, such a goal required
both the deployment of wrathful kingly means and the performance of ‘illusory
manifestation’ (sprul ba): in the Pillar Testament, the Compendium of Ma_nis, and
the Clear Mirror, Songtsen Gampo is depicted as magically producing both
victims and torturers and executioners, all with the objective of terrifying his
subjects into observing the ten virtues. Put simply, in goal-oriented jurisprudence,
codiﬁed law does not need to look like the “ten virtues” in order to lead Tibetans
toward them.
Medieval Tibetan writers thus identiﬁed a disjuncture between the intentions of
Songtsen Gampo as bodhisattva-king and the necessities of ruling non-virtuous and
118
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 141 ---
recalcitrant
populations,
a
recurring
theme
in
Tibetans’
historical
self-
understanding. Similarly, in Müsépa’s Lineage of Sakya Succession (1475),7 the story
is told of how the Sakya ruler Pakpa carried out harsh laws. When a monk grew
concerned at this behavior by a Buddhist ruler, Pakpa – in a manner remarkably
similar to Songtsen Gampo and the Khotanese monks – explained the skillful means
behind his actions. The monk later exclaimed:
Being truly amazed at [Pakpa] Lama’s ability, he told everyone he saw about this
incident. He realized that Pakpa’s actions and behavior were performed to tame all
beings, and that the animal slaughter, tax collection, and corvée labor pertained to
the karma of the individuals. May I come to regard [all these actions] as the
extraordinary [karmic consequences]! (Mus srad pa: Sa skya gdung rabs)
This obviously means that, from this Tibetan perspective, law as a form of royal and
governmental regulation can and does often ‘look’ very different from more norma-
tively identiﬁed Buddhist ethical principles. The relationship between the two is
expressly understood as indirect, mediated by the nature of the people ruled over,
and the wisdom and skillful means of the ruler as bodhisattva.
Indeed, in a sense the secular law (as opposed to the Buddhist vinaya) is understood
as derivative and in a very real sense ‘illusory.’ Thus, in his Naming of the Sources of
Religious Sponsors (StSby, ff. 14–15), the Geluk historian Longdöl Lama Ngawang
Losang (1719–94/5), explained how this involved law as a ‘trick’ (T. zol):
If (it is asked) so: What are the sixteen (points) of the law of the sixteen pure human
moral rules composed by king Songtsen Gampo . . . As in this way the ten virtues of
the excellent religion were completed by the trick (zol) of law, the gates of the three
damnations were closed, the way of paradise and liberation was widened. So it
is said. (Uray 1972, 54)
Here, Longdöl’s use of the term zol is cognate with the notion of a magician’s
illusion, akin in many respects to the Maha¯ya¯na idea of ‘illusory manifestations.’ In
this respect, the post-dynastic texts are both explicit and repetitious on the point,
following the philosophical view of the Avata _msaka Sūtra: that the reality and
mechanisms of law, and therefore of kingly rule itself, are illusory in nature, and
certainly not clear to ordinary eyes.
5.6 CONCLUSION
In his monumental study of Buddhism in Tibetan societies, Civilised Shamans,
Geoffrey Samuel commented extensively on the historical tensions between two
modalities of Tibetan religious life: the clerical and the shamanic. The shamanic,
Samuel argued, invoked “alternative modes of reality” that were fundamental to the
7
Mus srad pa (1424–98): Sa skya gdung rabs. Text ref. S1550: Sakya Research Centre.
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
119
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 142 ---
vicissitudes of everyday life and often ethically antinomian in application; while the
clerical concentrated on the authority of scholarship, philosophical analysis, and
adherence to more classical rule-bound notions of ethical behavior (1993, 9–10).
Indeed, in line with Samuel’s analysis, there are Tibetan clerical approaches that
emphasize a clear lineage of textual sources that leads from Indian Buddhism to
Tibetan law.
Nonetheless, most of what has been discussed above ﬁts very neatly into
Samuel’s characterization of the ‘shamanic modality’: the idea of public law as a
kind of ‘trick’, ‘manifestation’, or ‘skillful means’: the notion of reality, and in
particular the reality of governance, as being perspectival and somewhat illusory;
the idea that ethics is a hidden underlying or fundamental reality that shapes law,
even laws that do not seem to follow ethical codes in any straightforward or
obvious way.
In seeking to understand these things, we are forced to grapple with a
Buddhist tradition that is different from Helmholz’s portrait of European and
American constitutional thought in three key ways. First and foremost, public
law in this view was expressly understood as not directly embodying or represent-
ing Buddhist norms and rulings, but rather as moving toward the underlying
objectives of those norms and rulings. This principle was not uniquely Tibetan
but derived from long-established Maha¯ya¯na logics about the nature of the
spiritual path (lam) toward liberation, and the place of rulers and monarchs on
that path. This meant that law was seen as Buddhist in a complex and perspec-
tival way. Secondly, as with the Islamic traditions of jurisprudence, public law
was understood as goal-focused rather than norm-focused. The form of law was
seen as determined by larger moral objectives that, in turn, were derived from a
wider picture of Buddhist striving toward liberation. Thirdly, and as a conse-
quence of the above, the quality of public law was seen as dependent on the
personal moral insight and sagacity of the lawmaker. While there is seen to be a
clear distinction between royal law and the monastic code of discipline, both are
seen to derive from the wisdom of the founding leader, whether that be the
emperor or the Buddha.
In regard to its origins, reality, and objectives then, Buddhist law (within this
Maha¯ya¯na framework, at least) is quite unlike Helmholz’s description of Christian
constitutional thought, in that Buddhist law (in the Tibetan examples discussed in
this chapter) must exist within the purview of the lawmaker’s “own full understand-
ing” because “hidden things” – namely, private conviction and morality – are seen
to be essential elements in its formation.
Thus, the post-imperial narratives about Songtsen Gampo’s founding of the law
both emphasize a textual lineage (in particular, reference to a ‘sūtra of the ten
virtues’) as well as valorizing the wisdom of Songtsen Gampo in formulating the
laws ‘based on the ten virtues.’ Like the wealthy father standing outside his burning
house in the Lotus Sūtra parable then, medieval Tibetan histories of law present
120
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 143 ---
multiple legitimations to promote Tibetans’ ﬂight from non-virtue to law. And as
with the parable, this may be seen as a ‘trick,’ but it is not seen to be a falsehood.
TIBETAN SOURCES
ANK 2000. ཨ་མེས་ཞབས་ངག་དབང་ཀུན་དགའ་བསོད་ནམས་་བཀའ་འབུམ།(The Collected Works of
A-mes-shab Ngag-dbang Kun-dgah bSod-nams). TBRC: W29307.
dBZh དབའ་བཞེད།(Considerations of Wa). Wangdu, Pasang, and Hildegard
Diemberger. 2000. dBa’ bzhed – The Royal Narrative Concerning the
Bringing of the Buddha’s Doctrine to Tibet. Wien: Verlag der
Otserreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
CJsG བསོད་ནམས་རྩེ་མོ།(1142–1182) ཆོས་ལ་འཇུག་པའི་སྒོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བའི་བསྟན་བཅོས།(Treatise Known as
Gateway to Engaging with the Dharma). TBRC: W2DB4568.
GSM བསོད་ནམས་་མཚན།(1312–1375)
ལ་རབས་གསལ་བའི་མེ་ལོང་(Clear Mirror of Royal
Genealogies) W23770.
KDNg ཨོ་ན་གླིང་པ།(b. 1323) བཀའ་ཐང་སྡེ་ལྔ་།(Five Books of Law). TBRC: W17319.
KhGSt (Feast for the Wise) དཔའ་བོ་གཙུག་ལག་ཕྲེང་བ་(1504–1566) ཆོས་
ང་མཁས་པའི་དགའ་སྟོན་
TBRC: W1PD96069.
KKM rGya-mtsho, Smon-lam, ed. 1989. བཀའ་ཆེམས་ཁ་ཁོལ་མ་(Pillar Testament)
Lanzhou: Kan su’u mi rigs dpe skrun khang.
MKB 1975. མ་ཎི་བཀའ་འབུམ་(Compendium of Ma_nis). Bla brgyud gsol ‘debs dan
lo rgyus skor sgrub thabs kyi chos skor. New Delhi.
Mus srad pa མུས་སྲད་པ་(1424–1498) ས་ག་ང་རབས།Sa skya gdung rabs. S1550: Sakya
Research Centre.
StSby ཀློང་རྡོལ་བླ་མ་ངག་དབང་བློ་བཟང་།(1719–94/5) བསྟན་པའིན་བདག་ང་ཚུལ་་མིང་གི་གྲངས།(Naming of
the Sources of Religious Sponsors) TBRC: W1NLM293.
references
Abrams, Philip. 1988. “Notes on the Difﬁculty of Studying the State.” Journal of Historical
Sociology 1 (1): 58–89.
Allen, John. 1830. Inquiry into the Rise and Growth of the Royal Prerogative in England.
London: Longman.
Aris, Michael. 1997. “Foreword.” In Tibetan Histories: A Bibliography of Tibetan-Language
Historical Works, edited by Dan Martin, 9–12. London: Serindia.
Cleary, Thomas. 1993. The Flower Ornament Scripture. Translation of the Avatamsaka Sutra.
Boston: Shambhala.
Corwin, Edward S. 1955. The ‘Higher Law’ Background of American Constitutional Law,
vol. 1. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Doney, Lewis. 2020. Bringing Buddhism to Tibet: History and Narrative in the Dba’ bzhed
Manuscript. Berlin/Boston: Walter de Gruyter GmbH.
Dotson, Brandon. 2006. Administration and Law in the Tibetan Empire: The Section on Law
and State and Its Old Tibetan Antecedents. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of
Oxford.
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
121
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 144 ---
2009. The Old Tibetan Annals: An Annotated Translation of Tibet’s First History. Vienna:
Austrian Academy of Sciences Press.
Fuller, Christopher. 1992. The Camphor Flame: Popular Hinduism and Society in India.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Helmholz, Richard H. 2010. “Human Rights in the Canon law.” In Christianity and Human
Rights: An Introduction, edited by John Witte, Jr. and Frank Alexander, 99–112.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hobsbawm, Eric, and Ranger, Terence. 1983. The Invention of Tradition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Huber, Toni. 1996. “Literal or Literary: Reﬂections on New Translations of History’s Mirror.”
Tibet Journal 21 (4): 58–67.
Kamali, Mohammad Hashim. 1999. “‘Maqa¯_sid Al-Sharī’ah’: The Objectives of Islamic Law.”
Islamic Studies 38 (2): 193–208.
Kantorowicz, Ernst. 1957. The King’s Two Bodies: A Study in Medieval Political Thought.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Khyentse, Dilgo. 1993. “Foreword.” In The Lotus-Born: The Life Story of Padmasambhava, by
Yeshe Tsongyal, 3–7. Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
Macdonald, Alexander W. 2003 (1982). “Religion in Tibet at the Time of Srong-Btsan Sgam-
Po: Myth as History.” In History of Tibet, edited by Alex McKay, 129–40. London:
Routledge.
Mills, Martin A. 2011. “The Many Bodies of King Songtsen Gampo: Constitutional
Mythology in Tibetan History.” In Exploring Tibet’s History and Culture, edited by
Pabitrakumar Roy, 88–120. New Delhi: Central University of Tibetan Studies.
2012. “Ritual as History in Tibetan Divine Kingship: Notes on the Myth of the Khotanese
Monks.” History of Religions 51 (3): 219–38.
2018. “Last Gift of the God-King: Narrating the Dalai Lama’s Resignation.” In Tibetan
Subjectivities on the Global Stage, edited by Shelley Bhoil and Enrique Galvan-Alvarez,
155–74. New York: Lexington Books.
¯Otake, Susumu. 2007. “On the origin and early development of the Buddha¯vata _msaka Sūtra.”
In Reﬂecting Mirrors: Perspectives on Huayan Buddhism, edited by Imre Hamar, 87–107.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Pirie, Fernanda. 2017a. “Buddhist Law in Early Tibet: The Emergence of an Ideology.”
Journal of Law and Religion 32 (3): 406–22.
2017b. “Which ‘Two Laws’? The Concept of trimnyi (khrims gnyis) in Medieval Tibet.”
Cahiers d’Extrême-Asie 26 (1): 41–60.
Ricœur, Paul. 1983. Time and Narrative, vol. 1, trans. Kathleen McLaughlin and David
Pellauer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 1993. Civilised Shamans: Buddhism in Tibetan Societies. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Sørensen, Per. 1994. Tibetan Buddhist Historiography: The Mirror Illuminating the Royal
Genealogies. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Stein, Rolf. 1986. “Tibetica Antiqua IV: La tradition relative au début du bouddhisme au
Tibet.” Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient LXXV: 169–96.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1962. “The Two Wives of Srong-btsan sgam-po.” Oriens Extremus 9: 161–66.
Uebach, Helga. 1992. “Notes on the Section of Law and State in the Chos-’byung of IDe’u.”
In Tibetan Studies: Proceedings of the 5th Seminar of the International Association for
Tibetan Studies Narita 1989, edited by Ihara Shōren and Yamaguchi Zuihō, 823–32.
Narita: Naritasan Shinshoji.
122
Martin A. Mills
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 145 ---
Uray, Géza. 1967. “Traces of a narrative of the Old Tibetan Chronicle in the Mkhas pa’i dga’
ston.” Monumenta Serica 26 (1): 498–505.
1972. “The Narrative of Legislation and Organization of the Mkhas-Pa’i Dga’- Ston: The
Origins of the Traditions Concerning Sroṅ-Brcan Sgam-Po as First Legislator and
Organizer of Tibet.” Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 26 (1): 11–68.
van Schaik, Sam. 2016. The Spirit of Tibetan Buddhism. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Vostrikov, Andreĭ Ivanovich. 1970. Tibetan Historical Literature. Calcutta: R.D. Press.
Wangdu, Pasang and Diemberger, Hildegard. 2000. dBa’ bzhed - The Royal Narrative
Concerning the Bringing of the Buddha’s Doctrine to Tibet. Vienna: Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Watson, B. 1993. The Lotus Sutra. New York: Columbia University Press.
Williams, P. 2009. Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations (2nd ed.). Oxon:
Routledge.
Early Buddhist Law in Tibet
123
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 146 ---
6
Tibetan Buddhist Monastic Constitutional Law
and Governmental Constitutional Law
Mutual Inﬂuences?
Berthe Jansen*
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Did constitutional law exist in Tibet? According to one popular source, the
Encyclopedia Britannica, constitutional law denotes “the body of rules, doctrines,
and practices that govern the operation of political communities.” The entry
continues: “In modern times, the most important political community has been
the state.”1 Lending a broad interpretation to the phrase “political communities,”
I hypothesize that, in the context of pre-1950s Tibet, Buddhist monasteries could be
constituted as communities that not only governed themselves but also exercised
political and judicial power far beyond the monasteries’ boundary markers. The
relative autonomy of the monasteries, their power, and unique legal status mean that
a study of Tibet’s legal system would be incomplete without considering monastic
“constitutional law.” Furthermore, there are a number of indications that monastic
concepts of the law inﬂuenced the Tibetan state’s legal procedures.
This chapter explores a number of these inﬂuences. Regarding the so-called
monastic ideologies of law, one has to be aware that these are hardly ever found
explicitly in legal literature. This is signiﬁcant since “despite the many remarkable
achievements of Tibet’s religious leadership in areas of culture including literature
and the arts, philosophy, and spiritual discipline, sustained reﬂection on the basis of
political organization itself was never part of traditional learning”(Kapstein 2006,
138).2 Similarly, Ruegg states: “The search for theoretical models and ancient Indian
historical precedents which might have served Tibetan thinkers is, however, no
straightforward matter, for our Tibetan sources are not as explicit on the subject as
*
This investigation is part of my research project on Buddhism and Law in early modern Tibet,
which is funded by the Dutch Research Council (NWO).
1
Encyclopedia Britannica, available at www.britannica.com/topic/constitutional-law.
2
Italics added.
124
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 147 ---
we would wish” (2013 [1997], 220).3 More speciﬁcally, with regard to Tibetan law,
Tucci writes: “There is no profane literature to speak of, because culture belonged
entirely to the monks; even the laws which ruled Tibet for several centuries,
although bearing the names of the kings who enforced them, were almost certainly
written down by lamas”(1949, 94).
By extension, primary sources available today do not contain much reﬂection by
Tibetan authors on how religion and the law were to be reconciled. To get a glimpse
of Tibetan Buddhist legal thinking, one has to read between the lines of prescriptive
legal texts as well as works that describe the juridical process.
In recent decades, a number of compilations of older Tibetan legal texts have
been published in the Tibetan Autonomous Region as well as in China proper.
Some of these volumes contain a classiﬁcation of “religious” legal texts (chos khrims)
and secular legal texts (srid khrims).4 The religious legal texts tend to be monastic
guidelines (bca’ yig), a genre of texts that deals with the rules within monastic
institutions (see Jansen 2015, 2016, and 2018). This distinction between Tibetan
religious rules and secular rules is by no means a modern one; it is not uncommon
that monastic guidelines written between the twelfth century and the 1950s refer to
the secular law, and that secular law books from similar periods refer to monastic
guidelines. My interest lies in the connections between these so-called religious and
secular legal texts, between laws for monks and laws for lay people. Aside from
contents and vocabulary use, authorship connects these two types of legal texts. This
is obvious when the legal texts are written by – for example – the ﬁfth Dalai Lama
(1617–82), but less clear when the author is unknown. By reading these works closely
and noting the quotations drawn from other types of literature contained in them,
we get a better understanding of the ways in which the author was educated
and inspired.
6.2 TIBET’S LEGAL CODES
Generally speaking, in the Indian classical model, the relationship between the king
and Buddhist monastics is modeled on that of the advice-giving monk – the
kalya¯ _namitra, if you will – and the well-meaning king, who is occasionally prone
to violence. This relationship between ruler and “spiritual friend,” between “donor”
and “priest,” which is particularly prevalent in the Maha¯ya¯na tradition, has been
extensively studied and commented upon by scholars of Buddhism (most notably by
Ruegg 1991; 2013 [1997], but also see Deeg 2016). While there are instances in which
3
See also Ruegg 1991.
4
e.g., Bod kyi khrims srol skor gyi lo rgyus yig tshags phyogs sgrig zhal lce phyogs sgrig 2016; Snga
rabs bod kyi srid khrims gsal ba’i me long 2014; Gzhung dga’ ldan pho brang skabs kyi khrims srol
bca’ chings bdams bsgrigs. 2008; Snga rabs bod kyi srid khrims 2004; Bod kyi snga rabs khrims
srol yig cha bdams bsgrigs 1989; Zhal lce phyogs bsdus: Bod kyi dus rabs rims byung gi khrims yig
phyogs bsdus dwangs byed ke ta ka zhe bya ba bzhugs so 1987.
Monastic & Governmental Constitutional Law: Tibet
125
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 148 ---
this Buddhist relationship between religion and politics became a historical reality,
it appears that more often than not, the two domains – secular rule and the
Dharma – were not easily distinguishable categories. This is to say that the lines
between them were often blurry, if they existed at all.
The presence of a prosperous and powerful sangha meant that there was less need
for the sponsorship and protection of a secular ruler. In premodern Tibet, where
monks and monasteries were, at times, particularly inﬂuential, the harmonious
merging of the “secular” and the religious domains even became an explicit desider-
atum (Tib. Chos srid zung ’brel). Even so, the monks in their monasteries were
meant to keep to their own “constitutional” laws – “the body of rules, doctrines, and
practices” that governed their communities – while lay Tibetans were expected to
abide by local “secular” laws. The former consisted of pra_timok_sa vows, the vinaya
more generally, other religious vows, more universal Buddhist ethics, and last but
not least, the more localized and often highly pragmatic “monastic guidelines” (bca’
yig). These guidelines were often written by religious ﬁgures of high standing. A fair
number of surviving sets of guidelines were authored by monks who also had
signiﬁcant political power.5 Therefore, the same monks who wrote the texts that
regulated monasteries were also responsible for issuing ofﬁcial decrees, judicial
decisions, and possibly legal codes. One would thus expect there to be considerable
similarities between these genres of literature, something upon which I will further
elaborate below.
That monks had their own “laws” meant that they were – again in theory – not
subject to the laws of the local ruler. In serious cases such as murder, however, this
also meant that monastics could get punished twice. First the monk would be
beaten, forcibly disrobed, and expelled. Next, he would be tried as a lay person in
a secular court (Jansen 2018, 171). Minor legal cases that involved both monks and
lay people were often solved through mediation or through adjudication at the
monastery in whose territory the case had taken place. Among historians of Tibet
there is a general consensus that in such cases, the monks had a greater advantage.
While the Tibetan tradition claims that law emerged on the basis of Buddhist
notions, in fact when Buddhism was ﬁrst adopted as the royal religion in the eighth
century, legal works preserved in Dunhuang roughly datable to that time did not
directly reﬂect Buddhist sentiments. It seems that a juridical system was already in
place during the height of the Tibetan empire (Pirie 2017, 409–10).6 According to
Uray, the introduction of Buddhism did indeed promote the development (and
possible adaptation) of (new) legal codes, which suggests that the imperial legal
codes from the seventh and eighth centuries reﬂected the new religion’s inﬂuence
(Uray 1972, 11–68; also see Jansen 2020a). In those codes, four fundamental laws are
5
e.g., the ﬁfth, seventh and thirteenth Dalai Lamas; various Panchen lamas; the crown-prince of
Sikkim. On the latter see Jansen 2014.
6
Also see van der Kuijp 1999. For an exploration of those laws see Dotson 2006.
126
Berthe Jansen
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 149 ---
given, prohibiting murder, thievery, lechery, and the bearing of false witness. These
works also refer to the ten non-virtuous acts (mi dge ba bcu), which appear to be an
obvious reference to the basic Buddhist ethical framework. In other words,
“Buddhism contributed to the substance of Tibetan laws, as well as providing their
formal framework” (Dreyfus 1995, 120).
There is no universal agreement on these points, however. Schuh claims that the
legal texts that were subsequently produced (the Zhal lce) were not based on these
non-virtuous acts, nor on the sixteen pure human rules (mi chos gtsang ma bcu
drug).7 Schuh argues that the inﬂuence of Buddhism was a “retrospective, purely
ﬁctitious, ideological construct” (1984, 299–300). Van der Kuijp has also noted “the
total absence of anything that might remotely be construed as Buddhist, except for
their propagandistic introductions written for the purposes of legitimation and
authority”(1999, 288).8 My contention is that while the legal codes in their earliest
beginnings, for example, those dateable to the early seventh century, may not have
been Buddhist, they most certainly came to integrate Buddhist values as time passed
and as legal texts were further edited, elaborated, and “modernized” to accommo-
date the sentiments of the day. As a result, Tibetan legal codes contain a mix of
notions, ideas, and vocabulary – often difﬁcult to understand even for highly
educated readers of Tibetan.
Perhaps the most well-known and widespread Tibetan legal code is “The Sixteen
Pronouncements” (Zhal lce bcu drug). Although nothing of the contents suggests as
much, the origin of this code is traditionally attributed to King Songtsen Gampo
(Srong btsan sgam po, seventh century CE), who is credited with igniting the ﬂame
of Buddhism in Tibet (see Chapter 5, this volume). Some see the genre of zhal lce
texts as being Tibet’s constitution, and indeed at certain times in the history of Tibet
certain zhal lce codes did actually function as something referred to as an authorita-
tive “body of rules” used to govern the operation of political communities. At the
same time, we also know that informal socio-legal practices formed, and still form, a
large part of the social reality in Tibetan regions (see Pirie 2006). The fact remains
that Tibet’s literary and oral tradition – now and in the past – points to these texts as
foundational when discussing Tibetan law.9
We have always assumed that the various zhal lce works are individual and distinct
texts, which borrow heavily from each other. Upon closer examination, it appears
that any given zhal lce text bases itself on previous works, ultimately referring back to
the presumed original version by the dharmara¯ja Songtsen Gampo. This is reminis-
cent of the Buddhist genre of commentarial literature (e.g., ´sa¯stras) that try to clarify,
apprise, and make relevant the authoritative source, namely the words of the
7
While these sets are nowadays seen as unproblematically Buddhist, it appears that they were
closer to being codes of morality, containing considerable overlap with Chinese Confucian
principles. See Uray 1972; Yamaguchi 1987; Roesler 2015.
8
Also see Pirie 2013a, 170.
9
For an overview of these texts as a genre see French 1996.
Monastic & Governmental Constitutional Law: Tibet
127
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 150 ---
Buddha, the sutras. In a similar way, the deiﬁed ruler Songtsen Gampo’s legal
visions – whatever those may have been – have not been and can never be changed
or contradicted.10 However, they can be adapted to certain times and circumstances.
A number of variations and adaptations exist, resulting in not only various numbers
of pronouncements but also different contents among the recensions.11 While the
relatively early legal code (fourteenth century CE) studied by Pirie maintains the
framework of a list of a set number of laws, “[i]t seems as if the writer has carried out,
or commissioned, a survey of contemporary customs and recorded different prac-
tices” (Pirie 2020, 605). Not coincidentally, this is similar to how the monastery’s
rulebooks were – and are still – composed (Jansen 2018, 21–22).
Confusingly, legal codes (zhal lce) that look like different editions of the same
work (as they both have the same number of articles) may also be distinct works
altogether. It is therefore better to speak of a genre of zhal lce texts, rather than of
textual variations, which suggests that there was one Ur-text on which all others are
based (despite what the Tibetan tradition itself may claim). To improve our under-
standing of this genre then, scholars should stop viewing and treating individual zhal
lce texts as existing independently and start looking at the works as a corpus. In this
way, we can see how the legal texts interact with each other. This philological
approach to legal texts has been a desideratum for decades now.12 Obviously, the
format of the zhal lce genre is more or less ﬁxed: there are to be a number (twelve,
thirteen, ﬁfteen, or sixteen) of “laws” on which the author then comments.
Frequently, the works have long introductions, sometimes relating the “history” or
origins of law in Tibet (see Jansen 2020a).
It appears that these pronouncements had a mainly symbolic function, nonethe-
less they were deeply engrained in what has been called the “legal consciousness” of
the Tibetans (see Pirie 2013b, 239–41). The purpose of the main Tibetan legal codes,
the zhal lce – in particular after the Ganden Phodrang government (headed by the
ﬁfth Dalai Lama) was established in 1642 – is seen by some to be pro forma, mere
symbolic representations of juridical power (Pirie 2016, 241; Cassinelli and Ekvall
1969, 153). As Pirie has rightly remarked, “there is little evidence that the provisions
of rules and agreements . . . were applied in any detail” (Pirie 2016, 232). Still, I have
found that the different zhal lce texts draw upon each other: they cite, rework, and
10 This is perhaps similar to how the Christian Ten Commandments are not subject to appeal or
amendment on account of their sacred nature. See Chapter 18 by Helmholz in this volume.
11 These texts were reproduced and circulated widely throughout Tibet, well into the
twentieth century.
12 i.e., Schuh 1984, 297: “Ohne eine Edition der inzwischen bekannt gewordenen Gesetzbücher
und ohne eine erfolrgreiche Suche nach weitern Rechtsbüchern des tibetischen Mittelalters
werden viele Fragen zur Rechtsgeschichte in Tibet nur hypothetisch oder überhaupt nicht
beantwort bleiben.”; Cüppers, 2011b: “Obwohl in neuerer Zeit Wissenschaftler sich mit dem
traditionellen Recht in Tibet beschäftigen, gibt es jedoch bisher keine philologische
Bearbeitung dieser Werke.” (www.tibet-encyclopaedia.de/gesetzbuecher.html) This philo-
logical groundwork is part of an ongoing research project in which I am involved.
128
Berthe Jansen
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 151 ---
reinterpret earlier versions. Much like the way in which a Tibetan scholar would
attempt to make an old Buddhist text from India ﬁt the sensibilities of a much later
audience, there appear to be instances in which authors seem to “update” and
maintain the relevance of the previously existing zhal lce by explaining them in the
terms of that day. While this is not evidence that they were applied in a court of law,
the regular updating of these texts does suggest they were far from obsolete to those
who dealt with legal matters.
6.3 MONASTIC CONSTITUTIONAL LAW?
I have mentioned that monks and monasteries generally were not subject to
“secular” laws. Stein argues that this is one of the reasons why monasteries should
be seen as “independent overlords,” since “monasteries are exempt from tax and
services, they can be regarded as independent overlords, for they own land and serfs
yielding them taxes and services, and discharge all the functions of authority (justice,
etc.)”( Stein 1972 [1962], 141). What is unknown, however, is exactly how this legal
unit functioned. The question also arises: To what extent were monasteries autono-
mous in terms of jurisdiction? When considering Buddhist monasticism as an Asian
phenomenon, in general terms and without relation to a particular cultural setting,
some scholars have suggested that monks are only ever answerable to themselves
(Carrasco 1959, 121): in other words, by taking his ordination vows, the monk is no
longer subject to the secular authority and answers only to the Buddhist code of
discipline, the vinaya (e.g., Vermeersch 2008, 151). The monastic legal code, the
Mūlasarvastiva¯davinaya, that Tibetan monks adhere to makes it clear that the king
must acknowledge that lay law does not apply to the monks and monastic law does
not apply to the laymen (Schopen 1995, 117). Buddhist sutras, such as the
Āka¯´sagarbha Sūtra, also reﬂect this notion. In this particular sutra the Buddha
names ﬁve transgressions for a member of the k_satriya caste who is due to become
a ruler. One of these transgressions is the forcibly disrobing or punishing of Buddhist
monks – regardless of whether they are innocent of their crimes and transgressions:
Taking by force the saffron robes of those who have shaved their heads and beards
for my sake and donned the saffron robes – whether they uphold the precepts or
not, whether they observe the discipline or not – thus making them householders;
inﬂicting corporal punishment on them, imprisoning, or killing them: all of these
constitute the third root transgression.13
13 This translation is by the Sakya Pandita Translation Group (International Buddhist Academy
Division) on behalf of 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (https://read.84000.co/
translation/UT22084-066-018.html). D66, 273a: gang yang nga’i phyir skra dang kha spu bregs
nas | gos ngur smrig bgos pa bslab pa ’dzin kyang rung | bslab pa mi ’dzin kyang rung | tshul
khrims ’chal kyang rung | tshul khrims dang ldan yang rung ste de’i gos ngur smrig dag ’phrog
cing khyim par byed dam | lus la chad pas gcod par byed dam | btson rar ’jug par byed | srog dang
’bral bar byed pa ’di ni ltung ba’i rtsa ba gsum pa’o|.
Monastic & Governmental Constitutional Law: Tibet
129
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 152 ---
Later on, this sutra prophesizes that monks will, in a future time, resort to plunder-
ing and stealing (even from temples) in order to pay the ﬁnes the ruler has imposed
on them (D66, 277b), displaying an awareness of what a ruler’s strong juridical hold
on monastics could lead to. From this, and other historically better attested
instances, we can gather that the notion of the legally independent renunciant
represents a mere ideal – one that in and of itself has value – but which is
thoroughly ahistorical.
The very fact that various Indic Buddhist normative sources emphasize the
Sangha’s legal autonomy is exactly because it was regularly being challenged.
Throughout history, mass forced disrobements of monks, or “sangha puriﬁcations,”
initiated by secular rulers were a regular occurrence in countries such as China,
Mongolia, Burma, Thailand, and Sri Lanka. Naturally, this was more often than not
a pretext for political gain and not necessarily done out of concern for the purity of
the monkhood. It is perhaps signiﬁcant that for the case of Tibet, the only time that
Tibetan sources attest to such a thing happening is during the reign of Glang Dar
ma (r. ?838 to ?841), an “anti-Buddhist” king who, as Tibetan historiographers report,
forced monks out of their monasteries and made them wear lay clothes. Later
historians suppose that the Glang Dar ma was not the villain he was made out to
be and that he even restored Buddhist monuments during his lifetime (e.g., Karmay
2003; Yamaguchi 1996). The decline in monastic Buddhism in Central Tibet that
followed Glang Dar ma’s reign was more likely due to the economic drain posed by
the still relatively new phenomena of monks and monasteries during a time when
the region was hit by multiple natural disasters. Clear parallels can be drawn with
the large-scale laicization of monks under Emperor Wuzong (武宗814–46;
r. 840–46) in Tang dynasty China that took place around the same time (Gernet
1995, 14–25; Weinstein 1987). Perhaps the more pertinent question is how monks
saw themselves, and the vows and monastic rules that they were bound to, in
relation to secular laws, rules, and rulers. To put this in more abstract terms:
What is the relationship between religious ideals and the secular space?
According to Ellingson, who was the ﬁrst Western scholar to investigate the
genre, monastic guidelines were based on “secular” law codes (Ellingson 1990,
205). A preliminary comparison of the bca’ yig and the extant legal codes of Tibet
indeed indicates that – in particular, terminologically and linguistically – there are
striking similarities between the two genres. One of the possible reasons for these
similarities is the fact that the authors of the two types of texts were often one and
the same. This is because the educated few were almost always heavily inﬂuenced
by monastic training, in one way or the other. As mentioned above, there are even
instances of law codes that were explicitly based on monastic guidelines, of which
the code of conduct issued by the Bhutanese state (Sgrig lam rnam gzhag), which
is in current use, is a case in point (Penjore 2011, 23).14 While the question as to
14 For the constitutions of Bhutan see Aris 1979; Whitecross 2014.
130
Berthe Jansen
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 153 ---
how exactly monastic guidelines and legal documents are related requires further
investigation,15 my research suggests that the one genre was not necessarily based
on the other but that they were still strongly related and made use of each other.
Answering this question involves a more in-depth philological study of legal texts
and their “Buddhist and monastic” heritage, details of which are beyond the scope
of this chapter.16
My research into legal texts from the mid-seventeenth century and later has so far
revealed that the judicial independence enjoyed by many monasteries was not
simply asserted by the monastic authorities themselves but was also deliberately
awarded to them by the government or local ruler (or the authors of these texts).
This notion is indeed clearly stated in many sets of monastic guidelines, as well as in
legal texts. Both of these subsets of legal constitutional literature refer to each other.
The monastic guidelines tend to stress that monks’ behavior should be in accord-
ance with the “royal laws” (rgyal khrims), while legal texts issued by rulers emphasize
that monastics are to live by their own rules. My research has shown that the latter
works often display an acute awareness of the internal contents of the monastic
guidelines, suggesting that the authors either were informed by monastic agents, or
had a monastic background themselves. A legal edict issued in 1643 – possibly one of
the very ﬁrst to have been issued by the young Ganden Phodrang government –
addresses all Tibetans, of high or low status, monk or layperson. Its authorship is
contested, but there are indications that the ﬁfth Dalai Lama was involved in
composing it. The edict addresses the monk community separately, while at the
same time also exerting authority over the monasteries (and other religious insti-
tutions) by stating the following:
People who have committed grave offenses such as murder may not be given refuge
in the religious institutions. From now on, one is to be wise and successful [by]
remaining in accordance with the Dharma, without disregarding the instructions
established by the general monkhood (spyi mchod)17 who are [to behave] in
accordance with their own monastic guidelines (bca’ yig). Whether one is high
or low, no one is to go carelessly into the ﬁnancial accounts18 of what is deﬁnitely
the general monkhood’s.19
15 In terms of chronology, naturally “Tibetan secular law preceded ecclesiastic law,” which only
began with the ﬁrst ordinations at Samye in the middle of the second half of the eighth century.
See Van der Kuijp 1999, 289.
16 This is part of my current research project.
17 This gloss is suggested by Cüppers (2011, 172). It can also refer to speciﬁc kinds of festivals or
other religious ceremonies.
18 mtho khongs or mtho khong (version C) is here read as tho khungs, which means
(bank-) account.
19 mi bsad sogs khrims ’gal nyes byas che ba byas pa’i rigs rnams chos sde khag rnams su rten skyabs
ma byed / de phyin rang rang gi bca’ yig dang mthun pa’i / spyi mchod tshugs kha ma bor ba’i
chos mthun gzhugs mkhas byas rjes / drag zhan sus kyang spyi mchod yin nges kyi mtho khongs
nang la rtsis med du ’gro ba ma byed/. See Jansen 2023.
Monastic & Governmental Constitutional Law: Tibet
131
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 154 ---
On the one hand, the decree forbids monasteries from taking in wanted criminals;20
on the other it simply reminds the monks that they have their own laws to abide to. It
is furthermore interesting that the language used in the text is very similar to
monastic guidelines written around the same time.21
Another legal text, apparently written during the Tsangpa (Gtsang pa) dynasty
(1565–1642), similarly views the monastery as a separate legal entity: it states how
people guilty of thieving should be punished (by, for example, chopping off of the
hand), but it also describes how monasteries generally dealt with their own monk-
thieves: they were to be expelled under the sound of the ga_n_di and be treated in
accordance with the monastery’s own set of guidelines.22 It thus appears that
monastic legal independence was not just condoned but also encouraged by the
legal codes. If the periodization of the aforementioned legal text is indeed correct,
this interdependence of monastic and secular law was not necessarily a result of
the “uniﬁcation of Church and State” that took place under the ﬁfth Dalai Lama
but existed prior to it. In other legal texts, the genre of bca’ yig, and by extension
monastic law, are referred to numerous times. My previous research on this genre
did not properly touch upon the political usage of the genre of monastic guide-
lines, but here we ﬁnd that lawmakers read them, referred to them, and invoked
their (religious) authority.
6.4 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW AND THE SANGHA
The liberties that monasteries and monks were meant to have had clearly existed in
theory, as evidenced by Tibetan legal texts. By extension then, one would presume
that monks and monasteries were not expected to pay taxes. A number of edicts,
issued by various rulers, reinforce the exemptions monastics tended to enjoy. An
edict issued by the ﬁfth Dalai Lama in 1648 for the holy place La stod (also spelled
Las stod) that forbids hunting in the region along with hindering monks from
collecting alms, also explicitly warns that monastics living in the region were not
to be harassed.23 Another edict written for the abbot of Bsam grub dgon in ’Bar rta
(situated in Ldan ma, Kham, currently part of Sichuan province) on behalf of the
seventh Dalai Lama in 1748, similarly reminds the local rulers and inhabitants to
20 That this in fact happened is attested by Duncan’s eyewitness account of eastern Tibet before
1959: “The monastery is the haven of refuge for the criminal. A hundred feet from the Batang
Monastery is a place called Jaoo-Gyatse-Pung ‘the life hell of a hundred steps’ which once
reached by the breaker of a law secures for him the protection of the lamas until his case is
settled by mediators of the parties involved. As wealth can settle for any deed, even murder, this
right of refuge is more valuable for the rich than the poor.” (Duncan 1998, 172).
21 For an examination, critical edition, and annotated translation of this work see Jansen 2022.
22 Gtsang stod rgyal blon gyi mdzad pa zhal lce bcu drug pa: 198–9: dge ’dun nang khul nas rkun
ma byas tshe (198) ’gan dung btang ba’i gnas nas dbyung ba sogs so so’i bca’ yig dang mthun ba
gyis/. This exact procedure of casting out monastic criminals is described in various bca’ yig, see
Jansen 2018, 168.
23 See Schuh 1981, vol. 5, document XXXIII: 316–22.
132
Berthe Jansen
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 155 ---
allow monks of said monastery to move around freely; not to rob them; not to hinder
their access to water and grass; and for the guardians of the roads, paths, and bridges
not to harass them. The audience of the edict is furthermore reminded that the
monastery should not be taxed in any way.24 A much earlier but similar legal text
written in 1267 by the famous Sakya (Sa skya) monk Phakpa (’Phags pa 1235–80) for
all those “people included among the Sakyapa, big or small” requests them to
exempt the monks of Chos sding monastery from military duty, taxes, and labor
(dmag khral las gsum); from land and commercial taxes (sho dam kha);25 and from
giving foods and corvée labor (za ma ’u lag). Signiﬁcantly, Phakpa writes this at the
behest of the king (rgyal po lung gis) – presumably Kublai Khan.26 It appears that
since this legal note mostly concerns religious matters – that is to say, the sangha’s
concerns – the authority lay with the “preceptor” rather than with the “donor,” in
other words with the religious leader and not with the king.27
These documents, of which there are many more, conﬁrm the notion that monks
and monasteries had their own legal systems, but also that they were perhaps better
protected than their lay fellow countrymen by the laws that were upheld outside of
their monastic boundaries. Scholars should, however, be cautious in how they
interpret such texts. If indeed all monks and monasteries were and had always been
“untaxable” and not to be harassed in any way, why would there be a need to
conﬁrm this in multiple legal documents? The presence of these prohibitions
suggests that monasteries and their inhabitants were indeed occasionally subjected
to taxes levied by local rulers – be it legally or illegally. This is further attested by the
famous Maha¯siddha Tangtong Gyalpo (Thang stong rgyal po ?1361–1485), who in
his biography, written by his disciple Mönpo Dewa Zangpo (Mon pa Bde ba bzang
po, ﬁfteenth century), is recorded to have addressed and criticized all the leaders of
Tibet for their poor leadership, since kings in this “degenerate age”:
. . . monger for war, disallowing tantrikas and monastics to practice the Dharma
They pursue monasteries for inﬂated28 taxes and corvée labor
They take delight in sinners and cheaters, saying they are “tough guys”
They accuse those who are innocent of breaking the law
When they are not eloquent enough29
24 See Schuh 1981, vol. 5, document XXXV: 329–30.
25 According to Schuh sho is a loanword from “sino-mongolian” indicating land taxes (Schuh
1981, vol. 5: 343).
26 See Schuh 1981 vol. 5, document XXXVII: 341–5.
27 cf. Ruegg 2013 [1997], 220: “Moreover, in view of the many demands doubtless made on their
time and energy and of their numberless practical day-to-day concerns and responsibilities, it is
likely that neither Pakpa in his relation with Qubilai Khaghan nor his uncle Sakya Pa_n_dita in
his relation with Prince Köden was ever in a position to compose a full theoretical treatise on
the ‘constitutional’ relation between the two orders represented by the ofﬁciant/spiritual
preceptor and the donor-ruler.”
28 Tib: ’gol, this translation is tentative.
29 Mon pa bde ba bzang po: 460: sngags btsun rnams chos byed mi ’jug par dmag la ’deg | dgon pa
rnams la khral‘gol‘u lag‘ded | sdig can g.yo rgyu can la pho rgod po zer bya dga’ byed | khog
skyon med kyang gtam lab ma mkhas na | khrims la‘gel zer |.
Monastic & Governmental Constitutional Law: Tibet
133
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 156 ---
The protagonist of this biography is critical of local rulers of Tibet whom he calls
self-centered. Clearly, Tangtong Gyalpo, who was not a monk, merely makes an
appeal to the rulers’ conscience, since he had not much political clout beyond his
charisma and immense popularity among the people of Tibet (and beyond).
Signiﬁcant here is the notion that raising taxes among the monks is presented as
morally abject – nonetheless it is implied that these taxes were indeed levied. The
issue of taxes directly addresses the tension between monastic juridical independ-
ence and the concerns of local rulers seeking to control the monks, possibly by
limiting their income.
Along with the liberties and exemptions that monastic institutions enjoyed also
came responsibilities. For monasteries, to remain legal sub-units was contingent
on them remaining diligent with respect to speciﬁc religious matters. A legal
decree issued by the ﬁfth Dalai Lama, for example, states that the monastery of
Bsam gtan gling (in Skyid grong, in southwestern Tibet) was to be left alone by
local rulers, to be allowed to make use of the ﬁelds in the surroundings, and to be
exempt from taxation – but only for as long as the monks would continue to
perform rituals for the living and the dead, uphold the vinaya [ritual] cycle, make
offerings at the temples, and take responsibility for repairs and leaks (of the
monastic compound) in a proper manner.30 This same document also warns that
no one can hunt on the monastic grounds.31 Elsewhere, I have demonstrated that
monks were often also burdened with the responsibility of policing their own
monastery’s territory to prevent hunting and other untoward activities (Jansen 2018,
154–5). Indeed, when monasteries defaulted on their basic responsibilities, the
local rulers or the government were allowed to intervene, which they did do not
infrequently.32
The monk-polymath ‘Jam mgon Mi pham (1846–1912) conﬁrms to the king of
Derge that the secular ruler is entirely justiﬁed to put monks in their place, despite
the fact that Buddhist sutras advise against it:
In like fashion,
sutras such as the Āka¯´sagarbha and so forth,
state that our teacher, the Buddha,
prohibits the punishment of monks.
They state that if the followers of the Buddha
are subjected to legal punishments,
the power of the kingdom’s merit diminishes
and becomes the reason for its destruction.
30 See Schuh 1981, vol. 5, document XL: 369: grwa ris | gson gshin dge rgyun | ‘dul la lkhor las |
gtsug lag khang la dkar bsnon mchod pa | zhig gsos thig cha[g] kyi las khur rnams tshul ldan
sgrub cing . . ..
31 For a fascinating study on hunting regulations in Tibet see Huber 2004.
32 A number of these occasions will be treated as case studies in my forthcoming monograph on
Buddhism and Law in early modern Tibet.
134
Berthe Jansen
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 157 ---
However, in this degenerate age,
there are many monks who are exceedingly unruly,
When they cannot be disciplined
through the sangha council’s religious procedures,
then the king needs to do this.
(trans. by Cabezón 2016, 192)
This advice to the king of Derge (Bde dge, in Kham, current-day Sichuan province),
which is self-consciously modeled upon Indic nīti´sa¯stras (Cabezón 2016, 247),
continues with the procedure of how the king needs to relate himself to the sangha
in those instances. The prerogative of the king to purge the sangha of unwanted
elements – occurring often in other Buddhist countries – may have been justiﬁed by
Buddhist monastic scholars, but in practice there are very few historical instances
that a ruler (even when a monk himself ) actually managed to bring about large-scale
changes among the sangha in greater Tibet. This is something attempted by the
thirteenth Dalai Lama (1876–1933), with limited success: many reforms aimed at the
monkhood were reversed after his demise (Bell 1998 [1946]; Goldstein 1989).
By contrast, we see that the power relations among monks and their rulers in
Mongolia, for example, were very different. There, the rulers, who of course also
claimed to uphold the dual system of “Church and State” (lugs gnyis), regularly
“defrocked” and punished monks for minor transgressions (Wallace 2010).
A Mongolian post-Qing era law code (“Laws and Regulations to Actually Follow,”
M. Jinkhene Yavakh Dagaj Khuuly Dürem), which covers monastic, criminal, and
civil law, in place between 1913 and 1918, states that monks caught gambling were to
be punished with up to a hundred strikes of the whip – not dissimilar from the
proscribed punishment for laypeople (Wallace 2014, 331). The difference between
the legal privileges of Mongolian and Tibetan monks here is remarkable, more so
since all monastics involved historically follow Tibetan Buddhism, but it may well
lie in the fact that many Buddhist monasteries in Tibetan areas, especially from the
seventeenth century onwards, were both politically and economically powerful on a
local and translocal level.
In Tibet, when monks and monasteries were subjected to government interven-
tion, it was more often than not for political or sectarian reasons – no large-scale
sangha-puriﬁcations ever took place.33 One famous instance of this is the incident
that occurred in 1921 when monk managers of Drepung Loseling (‘Bras spungs Blo
sel gling), a monastic college of the largest monastery in central Tibet, tried to
repossess certain estates by force. Drepung Loseling had previously invoked the
thirteenth Dalai Lama’s ire by siding with the Chinese during their brief takeover of
Lhasa in 1911–12. The monks involved were caught hiding in the mountains behind
33 The thirteenth Dalai Lama did try–albeit unsuccessfully–to do exactly this, but it failed also
because the large Dge lugs monasteries in Central Tibet opposed his attempts at moderniza-
tion. See Bell 1998 [1946] and Goldstein 1989.
Monastic & Governmental Constitutional Law: Tibet
135
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 158 ---
Drepung monastery (Goldstein 1989, 104–5); they were beaten, and then ofﬁcially
expelled. According to a Tibetan minister Charles Bell spoke with about the matter,
the ringleaders were then “made over to different ofﬁcials with iron fetters on their
legs and cangues (square wooden boards, each side three feet long) round their
necks.” They were subsequently set to work in the stables (Bell 1998 [1946], 332).
The government’s harsh treatment of these men resulted in violent protests by the
Drepung Loseling monks, who marched to the summer palace to purposefully
disturb the Dalai Lama’s retreat. In the end, 3,000 Tibetan soldiers had to be
deployed to restore calm in the Tibetan capital (Goldstein 1989, 106–7). The
relatively powerful political position the thirteenth Dalai Lama found himself in
at the time – evidenced by his triumph over thousands of rebellious monks – was,
however, something of a historical anomaly: throughout the roughly 300 years of the
Dalai Lamas being the ofﬁcial heads of state, only the ﬁfth, the thirteenth, and the
fourteenth Dalai Lama held any signiﬁcant power.
The monastic antipathy toward government intervention has become even more
distinct in the last seventy years, during which Tibetan monasteries have had to deal
with the highly repressive People’s Republic of China. When, in the 1980s, monas-
teries were rebuilt and monastic education was reestablished, the tendency toward
monastic (legal) autonomy was also rekindled. Many of the current-day protests
initiated by monks and laity alike arise fundamentally from structural repression but
are initially set off by the government’s interference in monastic affairs. An example
of this is the large-scale protest that resulted from the attempts by the Chinese
communist government to reinstate the Great Prayer Festival (smon lam chen mo) in
Lhasa in 1986.
This age-old festival had been traditionally used by the Tibetan government to
strengthen its bond with the Buddhist clergy. During this three-week period, monks
from the three large Geluk monasteries in and near Lhasa would ﬂock toward the
city to conduct prayers for the success of the Tibetan government. Monks, refusing
to pray on behalf of a repressive communist government, protested the mandate to
attend, which resulted in large-scale arrests. Subsequent boycotts and further arrests
eventually sparked the riots that took place on March 5, 1988. Attempts to quell the
riots with violence resulted in an unknown number of deaths (for the historical
context of this see Jansen 2020b). Similar protests, in many cases relating to religious
self-determination, crop up time and again in Chinese-ruled Tibetan areas.
Understanding the historical precedent for these protests to be based in the long
tradition of monastic legal autonomy is helpful in comprehending the regularity and
vehemence with which they occur.
6.5 CONCLUDING REMARKS
The very basic function of monastic law as understood by monastic authors them-
selves is rather similar, if not identical, to law outside of the Tibetan monastery.
136
Berthe Jansen
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 159 ---
Laws–and by extension justice–essentially serve to secure social order in both
milieus. In Tibetan societies, where the government has traditionally been symbol-
ically prominent yet functionally absent, the distinctions between law and custom
(Ramble 2008, 41) – or for that matter law and morality – are less easily made. The
same may be said for other Buddhist traditions in Asia.34 Buddhist morality and
secular law ultimately are both “normative social practices” and also “symbolic
expressions of social values” (Wallace 2014, 332). Religion – and by extension
Buddhism – is often viewed by scholars as providing a means of social control,
which implies, to cite Gombrich, “a system of rewards and punishments, either
internalized during socialization or externally supplied by institutions, or both”
(1975, 218). The two kinds of legal codes thus existed symbiotically in order to
support this social order.
What this chapter emphasizes is that monks – or to be more speciﬁc, monastic
members of a monastery – had a special legal status that awarded them signiﬁcantly
more liberties than lay Tibetans. At the same time, monastic institutions were
supposed to “pay” for those liberties by carrying out duties that were seen as
essentially the responsibility of monks. When a monastery neglected these religious,
ritual, and social duties, its special legal status was nulliﬁed, which could potentially
have severe consequences. The bodies of rules that governed the monastery and its
inhabitants, as well as those which governed the rest of the Tibetans, display an
awareness and an acceptance of the status of the monastic institutions. These two
sub-genres of legal works clearly inﬂuenced each other, not just because their
authors were often one and the same but also because the inherently Buddhist
value of putting the sangha ﬁrst was shared among all legal actors.
references
Tibetan Language Materials
Āka¯´sagarbhasūtra (Nam mkha’ snying po’i mdo). Degé Kangyur, vol. 66 (mdo sde, za), folios
264.a–283.b.
Bod kyi khrims srol skor gyi lo rgyus yig tshags phyogs sgrig zhal lce phyogs sgrig. 2016. Rdo sbis
Tshe ring rgyal & Rdo sbis Tshe ring rdo rje eds. Lhasa: Bod ljongs mi dmangs dpe skrun
khang.
Bod kyi snga rabs khrims srol yig cha bdams bsgrigs. 1989. Lhasa: Bod ljongs mi dmangs dpe
skrun khang.
Gzhung dga’ ldan pho brang skabs kyi khrims srol bca’ chings bdams bsgrigs. 2008. Nor bu
bsam ’phel (ed.). Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun khang.
Mon pa bDe ba bzang po. 1984–85. Bla ma thang stong rgyal po’i rnam thar gsal ba’i sgron
me. In Thang stong rgyal po gsung ’bum, vol. 2. National Library of Bhutan, 3–591.
Snga rabs bod kyi srid khrims. 2004. Bsod nams tshe ring (ed.). Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun
khang.
34 A similar remark can be made with regard to Burma, for example. See Huxley 1995, 81.
Monastic & Governmental Constitutional Law: Tibet
137
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 160 ---
Snga rabs bod kyi srid khrims gsal ba’i me long. 2014. Bsod nams tshe ring (ed.). Beijing:
Mi rigs, dpe skrun khang.
Zhal lce phyogs bsdus: Bod kyi dus rabs rims byung gi khrims yig phyogs bsdus dwangs byed ke
ta ka zhe bya ba bzhugs so. 1987. Tshe ring bde skyid (ed.). Xinhua: Bod ljongs mi
dmangs dpe skrun khang.
Other Sources
Aris, Michael. 1979. Bhutan: The Early History of a Himalayan Kingdom. Warminster: Aris &
Phillips.
Bell, Charles. 1998 [1946]. Portrait of a Dalai Lama: The Life and Times of the Great
Thirteenth. Delhi: Book Faith India.
Carrasco, Pedro. 1959. Land and Polity in Tibet. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Cassinelli, Charles William, and Ekvall, Robert B. 1969. A Tibetan Principality: The Political
System of Sakya. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Cüppers, Christoph. 2011a. “Ein Erlaß des Königs Gushri Khan aus dem Jahr 1643.”
Zentralasiatische Studien des Seminars für Sprach und Kulturwissenschaft Zentralasiens
40: 164–77.
2011b. www.tibet-encyclopaedia.de/gesetzbuecher.html. Accessed on November 15, 2021.
Deeg, Max. 2016. “The Order of the dharma and the order of rulership: On the relationship
between monastic community and worldly power in the history of Buddhism.”
Fruehmittelalteriche Studien - Jahrbuch des Instituts für Fruehmittelalterforschug der
Universität Münster 50 (1): 297–314.
Dotson, Brandon. 2006. Administration and Law in the Tibetan Empire: The Section on Law
and State and its Old Tibetan Antecedents. DPhil dissertation, Oxford University.
Dreyfus, Georges. 1995. “Law, State and Political Ideology in Tibet.” Journal of International
Association of Buddhist Studies 18 (1): 117–38.
Duncan, Marion H. 1998 [1964]. Customs and Superstitions of Tibet. Delhi: Book Faith India.
Ellingson, Ter. 1990. “Tibetan Monastic Constitutions: The bCa’ yig.” In Reﬂections on
Tibetan Culture: Essays in Memory of Turrell V. Wylie, edited by Lawrence Epstein and
Richard F. Sherburne, 205–29. Lewiston: Edward Mellen Press.
French, Rebecca Redwood. 1996. “Tibetan Legal Literature: The Law Codes of the Dga’
Ldan Pho Brang.” In Tibetan Literature: Studies in Genre, edited by Sopa Lhundup, José
I. Cabezón and Roger R. Jackson, 438–57. Ithaca: Snow Lion.
Gernet, Jacques. 1995. Buddhism in Chinese Society: An Economic History from the Fifth to
the Tenth Centuries, trans. Franciscus Verellen. New York: Columbia University Press.
Goldstein, Melvyn C. 1989. A History of Modern Tibet, 1913-1951: The Demise of the Lamaist
State. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gombrich, Richard F. 1975. “Buddhist Karma and Social Control.” Comparative Studies in
Society and History 17 (2): 212–20.
Huber, Toni. 2004. “Territorial Control by ‘Sealing’: A Religio-Political Practice in Tibet.”
Zentralasiatischen Studien 33: 127–52.
Huxley, Andrew. 1995. “Studying Therava¯da Legal Literature.” Journal of the International
Association of Buddhist Studies 20 (1): 63–91.
Jansen, Berthe. 2014. “The Monastic Guidelines (bCa’ yig) by Sidkeong Tulku: Monasteries,
Sex and Reform in Sikkim.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 24 (4): 597–622.
2015. “Monastic Organizational Guidelines.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1,
edited by Jonathan Silk et al., 442–49. Leiden: Brill.
138
Berthe Jansen
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 161 ---
2016. “Monastic Guidelines (bCa’ yig): Tibetan Social History from a Buddhist Studies
Perspective.” In Social Regulation: Case Studies from Tibetan History (Proceedings of
the International Association of Tibetan Studies Conference, Ulan Baatar, 2013), edited
by Jeannine Bischoff and Saul Mullard, 64–98. Leiden: Brill.
2018. The Monastery Rules: Buddhist Monastic Organization in Pre-modern Tibet. Oakland:
University of California Press.
2020a. “The Origins of Tibetan Law: Some Notes on Intertextuality and the Reception
History of Tibetan Legal Texts.” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 55: 221–44.
2020b. “Law and Order during the Lhasa Great Prayer Festival.” In On a Day of a Month of
the Fire Bird Year: Festschrift for Peter Schwieger on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday,
edited by Jeannine Bischoff, Petra Maurer, and Charles Ramble, 415–35. Lumbini:
Lumbini International Research Institute.
2022. “Visualising Tibetan Social History through Philology: A Case-Study of a Legal
Decree in Eight Versions.” CRCAO.
Kapstein, Matthew. 2006. The Tibetans. Oxford: Blackwell.
Karmay, Samten. 2003. “King Langdarma and His Rule.” In Tibet and Her Neighbors, edited
by Alex McKay, 57–68. London: Edition Hansjörg.
Mipham, Jamgön and José I. Cabezón (trans.) 2017. The Just King: The Tibetan Buddhist
Classic on Leading an Ethical Life. Boulder: Shambhala Publications.
Penjore, Dorji. 2011. “Rows of Auspicious Seats: The Role of bzhugs gral phun sum tshogs pa’i
rten ’brel Ritual in the Founding of the First Bhutanese State in the 17th Century.”
Journal of Bhutan Studies 24: 1–42.
Pirie, Fernanda. 2006. “Secular Morality, Village Law, and Buddhism in Tibetan Societies.”
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 12 (1): 173–90.
2013a. “Who Were the Tibetan lawmakers?” In Tibetans Who Escaped the Historian’s Net:
Studies in the Social History of Tibetan Societies, edited by Charles Ramble, Peter
Schwieger and Alice Travers, 161–78. Kathmandu: Vajra Publications.
2013b. “Law and Religion in Historic Tibet.” In Religion in Disputes: Pervasiveness of
Religious Normativity in Disputing Processes, edited by Franz von Benda-Beckmann,
Keebet von Benda-Beckmann, Martin Ramstedt and Bertram Turner, 231–47. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
2016. “State, Law, and Morality in Traditional Tibet.” In Social Regulation: Case Studies
from Tibetan History, edited by Jeannine Bischoff and Saul Mullard, 231–49. Leiden:
Brill.
2017. “Buddhist Law in Early Tibet: The Emergence of an Ideology.” Journal of Law and
Religion 32 (3): 406–22.
2020. “The Making of Tibetan Law: The Khrims gnyis lta ba’i me long.” In On a Day of a
Month of a Fire Bird Year: Festschrift for Peter Schwieger, edited by Jeanine Bisschoff,
Petra Maurer and Charles Ramble, 599–618. Lumbini: Lumbini International Research
Institute.
Ramble, Charles. 2008. The Navel of the Demoness: Tibetan Buddhism and Civil Religion in
Highland Nepal. New York: Oxford University Press.
Roesler, Ulrike. 2015. “‘16 Human Norms’ (mi chos bcu drug) – Indian, Chinese, and
Tibetan.” In The Illuminating Mirror: Tibetan Studies in Honour of Per K. Sørensen on
the Occasion of his 65th Birthday, edited by Olaf Czaja and Guntram Hazod, 389–409.
Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag.
Ruegg, D. Seyfort. 1991. “Mchod yon / yon mchod and mchod gnas / yon gnas: On the
Historiography and Semantics of a Tibetan Religio-Social and Religio-Political
Concept.” In Tibetan History and Language: Studies Dedicated to Uray Geza on His
Monastic & Governmental Constitutional Law: Tibet
139
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 162 ---
Seventieth Birthday, edited by Ernst Steinkellner, 441–53. Vienna: Arbeitskreis für tibe-
tische und buddhistische Studien.
2013 [1997]. “The Preceptor-Donor Relation in Thirteenth Century Tibetan Society and
Polity: Its Inner Asian Precursors and Indian Models.” In The Tibet History Reader,
edited by Gray Tuttle and Kurtis Schaeffer, 211–32. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Schopen, Gregory. 1995. “Monastic Law Meets the Real World: A Monk’s Continuing Right
to Inherit Family Property in Classical India.” History of Religions 35 (2): 101–23.
Schuh, Dieter. 1981. Grundlagen tibetischer Siegelkunde: Eine Untersuchung über tibetische
Siegelaufschriften in ‘Phags-pa-Schrift. Monumenta Tibetica Historica, vol. 5. Sankt
Augustin: VGH Wissenschaftsverlag.
1984. “Recht und Gesetz in Tibet.” In Tibetan and Buddhist Studies: Commemorating the
200th Anniversary of Alexander Csoma de Kőrös, edited by Louis Ligeti, 291–311.
Budapest: Akadémiai kiadó.
Schwieger, Peter. 2021. Conﬂict in a Buddhist Society: Tibet under the Dalai Lamas.
Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Stein, Rolf A. [1962] 1972. Tibetan Civilization. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1949. Tibetan Painted Scrolls, vol. 1. Rome: Libreria dello Stato.
Uray, Geza. 1972. “The Narrative of the Legislation and Organization of the Mkhas pa’i dga’
ston: The Origins of the Traditions Concerning Sroṅ-brcan Sgam-po as the First
Legislator
and
Organizer
of
Tibet.”
Acta
Orientalia
Academiae
Scientiarum
Hungaricae 26: 11–68.
Van der Kuijp, Leonard. 1999. “The Yoke Is on the Reader: A Recent Study of Tibetan
Jurisprudence.” Central Asiatic Journal 43: 266–92.
Vermeersch, Sem. 2008. The Power of the Buddhas: The Politics of Buddhism during the Koryŏ
Dynasty (918–1392). Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Wallace, Vesna. 2014. “Buddhist Laws in Mongolia.” In Buddhism and Law: An Introduction,
edited by Rebecca Redwood French and Mark A. Nathan, 319–33. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
2010. “Legalized Violence: Punitive Measures of Buddhist Khans in Mongolia.” In
Buddhist Warfare, edited by Michael Jerryson and Mark Juergensmeyer, 91–103.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weinstein, Stanley. 1987. Buddhism under the T’ang. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Whitecross, Richard W. 2014. “Buddhism and Constitutions in Bhutan.” In Buddhism and
Law: An Introduction, edited by Rebecca Redwood French and Mark A. Nathan,
350–67. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Yamaguchi, Zuihō. 1987. Chibetto, vol. 1. Tokyo: Tokyo daigaku shuppankai.
1996 “The Fiction of King Dar ma’s Persecution of Buddhism.” In Du Dunhuang au
Japon: études chinoises et bouddhiques offertes à Michel Soymié, edited by Jean-Pierre
Drège, 231–58. Geneva: Droz.
Websites
www.britannica.com/topic/constitutional-law. Accessed on November 15, 2021.
https://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-066-018.html. Accessed on July 26, 2022.
140
Berthe Jansen
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 163 ---
part iii
Southern Asia
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 164 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 165 ---
7
Guardians of the Law
Sinhala Language and Buddhist Reformation
in Postwar Sri Lanka
Krishantha Fedricks
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Discussions of Buddhism and constitutional law frequently focus on one direction
of inﬂuence: the inﬂuence of Buddhist principles on the guiding law of the state.
But what about the other direction? In what ways do notions of constitutional law
ﬁnd their way into Buddhist institutions? Are there notions within Buddhist
communities, both traditional and emergent, that seem similar to the notion of
constitutional law?
This chapter builds on previous work that examines Buddhism and constitutional
law in Sri Lanka and other Therava¯da contexts.1 While it considers the broader
dynamics of politics, nationalism, and Buddhist groups that helped shape Sri Lanka’s
1972 and 1978 Constitutions – which ofﬁcially give to Buddhism “the foremost place”
and oblige the state to “protect and foster” it – this chapter directs its major questions
about Buddhism and constitutional law elsewhere. It investigates a Buddhist group
that claims to commit itself to nonviolence and scriptural Buddhist reform, and it
examines the ways in which this group blends religious practice with linguistic and
nationalist ideologies drawn from secular constitutionalism.
More speciﬁcally, this chapter looks closely at a new transnational movement of
televangelist Buddhist monks, who form part of the “Mahamevna¯va Monastery” in
Sri Lanka. These monks publicly proclaim their support for a state of Gautama
Buddha (gautama buddha ra¯jya) that is governed by the authentic doctrine (saebae
dahama). They also encourage their followers to liberate themselves from all
suffering (siyalu dukin) by attaining nirvana in this life. This Mahamevna¯va group
believes that most everyday Buddhists fail to live up to the Buddha’s teaching and
the Noble Eightfold Path to nirvana because they do not fully understand the
language in which the teaching has been preserved.
1
See among others: de Silva-Wijeyeratne 2014; Schonthal 2016 Frydenlund 2017; Harris 2018;
Kyaw 2019; , Tonsakulrungruang 2020.
143
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 166 ---
Mahamevna¯va believes, not unlike constitutional draftspersons, that the correct
language – in the form of accurate vernacular translations of the Buddha’s teaching –
might solve the problem. Although the monks of this group claim to maintain a
separation of religion and political life and actively cultivate an air of other-
worldliness, they actually use the status and prestige that Sinhala acquires through
the Constitution to argue for its use in sacred contexts. In their case, Mahamevna¯va
insists that a reform of Buddhism ought to involve a reform of the language used in
rituals and textual practices. More speciﬁcally, they believe that Buddhist practices
ought to shift from Pa¯li, the Buddhist canonical and ritual language to Sinhala
(Harvey 2012), the majority language of the Sinhalese Buddhists which is one of the
two ofﬁcial languages in the country (Dharmadasa 2000).
As a linguistic anthropologist, I draw upon tools of linguistic analysis and ethnog-
raphy to offer a unique viewpoint on the interrelations of Buddhism and consti-
tutional law. More speciﬁcally, I use the concept of linguistic ideologies, by which
I mean “the ideas with which participants and observers frame their understanding of
linguistic varieties and map those understandings onto people, events, and activities
that are signiﬁcant to them,” (Irvine and Gal 2000) in order to explain the inﬂuence
of constitutional law on Buddhist practices. This chapter shows how Mahamevna¯va
has taken the linguistic ideology of Sinhala nationalism, the ideology which was
absolutely central to constitutional practice in Sri Lanka and made it a central tenet
of Buddhist practice. The group has also taken a core idea of Sri Lankan constitu-
tionalism – that the law of the land should be accessible to and representative of the
“nation,” and turned it into a soteriological principle of direct access to nirvana. By
making these points, I suggest that both the Constitution and Mahamevna¯va’s
Buddhist reforms embody similar forms of linguistic ideology in which the ideal
state – for example either the Republic of Sri Lanka or the ideal Buddhist state – can
be realized by creating “public” texts for the uplift of the “nation.”
In what follows, I will ﬁrst sketch the histories of constitutional debates on the
Sinhala language in colonial and postcolonial Sri Lanka and their nationalist
underpinnings. I will then consider the emergence of the Mahamevna¯va monastic
group and their interpretation of Buddhism, language, and state. In contrast to the
popular idea that Buddhism inﬂuences public law in many South and Southeast
Asian societies, I demonstrate that constitutional design and interpretation have also
come to inﬂuence Buddhism.
7.2 LANGUAGE POLICY AND MONASTIC POLITICS
IN POST-INDEPENDENCE SRI LANKA
In postcolonial constitutional debates in Sri Lanka, the issue of the “national
language” became one of the major themes of both religious and political spheres.2
2
Regarding the need to establish a national language, D. B. Jayatilaka, an active member of the
Buddhist revival, stated: “It is impossible for a people to grow to their full manhood, to their
144
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 167 ---
A number of lay and monastic groups have been concerned with protecting the
linguistic preeminence of the ethnic majority Sinhalese while at the same time
ensuring the safeguarding of Buddhism, the main religion of the ethnic Sinhalese.3
Buddhist monks allied with politicians and political parties which promised to
secure the authority of the Sinhala language and Buddhism. According to some
scholars, the development of this relationship between politically engaged monks
and Sinhalese nationalist politicians was an opposition to the secular, Western-style
government that was implemented during colonialism and continued to be used in
the newly sovereign nation (Kapferer 1998).
Religio-linguistic politics based on ethnic outbidding gained pace, especially in
the early 1950s in post-independence Sri Lanka, with the formation of the Sri Lanka
Freedom Party (SLFP) under the leadership of S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike.4 During
the general election in 1956, Bandaranaike promised to safeguard the interests of the
Sinhalese Buddhists by offering populist social reforms such as the introduction of
the Sinhala-only ofﬁcial language policy. His attempts to reform the status of ofﬁcial
language/s echoed the dominant “one nation–one language” ideology which grew
during the colonial period as a reaction against the dominance of English. Sinhala-
only politics came to be seen as a tool of decolonization. This fed a growing culture
of linguistic nationalism which was, as K. M. De Silva points out, a form of “populist
nationalism, in contrast to the elitist constitutionalism of the early years after
independence” (De Silva 1986, 164).
In the decade following independence in 1948, Buddhist pressure groups – mainly
monastic organizations – campaigned for the adoption of a Sinhala-only policy, and
for the restoration of the “rightful status” of Buddhism (Phadnis 1976, 65). The newly
fullest stature, unless the individuals that compose that people have a language of their own, in
which they give expression to their highest and best thoughts” (Debates, LC 1928: 367).
Jayatilaka emphasizes the necessity of replacing English with a language that appropriately
reﬂects an authentic Sri Lankan identity. He also supports the cause for making Sinhala the
national language and recognizes the Sinhalese people as the founders of the island, and the
perceived need for them to reclaim authority over their country.
3
The Sinhalese people who are predominantly Buddhist are the major ethnic group in Sri
Lanka. They constitute, according to government statistics from 2012, 74.9 percent of the
population. The Sinhala–Buddhist identity in Sri Lanka derives from two factors: (1) the
Sinhala language and (2) the Buddhist religion. These factors have been enthusiastically
promoted in the development of a Sinhalese Buddhist ethno-religious nationalism in post-
colonial politics as part of the larger discourse on nation building. They have also been at the
core of the discourse on constitutional reform and legislature.
4
Bandaranaike relied upon socially and politically inﬂuential groups, albeit non-elite, popularly
known as panchamaha balavegaya (ﬁve great forces), which included the Buddhist clergy,
indigenous physicians, teachers, farmers, and workers to carry his political message to his major
vote base in Sinhalese villages. To win the general elections of 1956, Bandaranaike also formed
an electoral alliance with the pro-Sinhala nationalist parties. The election coalition manifesto
declared “Sinhala only within 24 hours” with “reasonable use of Tamil.” The ‘Sinhala-only’
movement had developed and, under the inﬂuence of the monks, had become linked to the
issue of state support for Buddhism (Tambiah 1992: 42–44).
Sinhala Language & Buddhist Reformation
145
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 168 ---
formed Eksath Bhikku Peramuna (EBP) or the United Monks Front, for example,
played a critical role in the 1956 general election as a major political pressure group.
They presented a ten-point agenda (the Dasa Panatha) to Bandaranaike which
included making Sinhala the only ofﬁcial language and giving Buddhism its “rightful”
place (Tambiah 1992, 42–44).
Shortly after Bandaranaike was elected as the prime minister in 1956, the parlia-
ment passed the Sinhala Only Act,5 which made the majority language the sole
ofﬁcial language of the country. Government institutions such as the Department of
Ofﬁcial Language Affairs and the Department of Swabhasha were brought under
the purview of the Prime Minister from October 1, 1956. A separate Ministry of
Cultural Affairs, which was largely mandated with preserving Sinhalese culture and
Buddhism, was also established in that year. In accordance with the Sinhala Only
Act, a number of activities were carried out by the Ofﬁcial Languages Department.
This included publishing the Government Gazette in Sinhala, franking ofﬁcial
letters in Sinhala, issuing important government circulars in Sinhala, printing
ofﬁcial publications in Sinhala, compiling glossaries of technical terms, and imple-
menting language training classes for government servants. In addition, two major
pirivenas, or “oriental study centers,” the Vidyalankara and Vidyodaya, were trans-
formed into universities, further encouraging the study of Sinhala and Buddhism
with the beneﬁt of added government funding. These attempts led to a cultural
revolution in the following years, popularly known as “the Revolution of 1956”
(panas haye peraliya).
Predictably, the Sinhala-only language policy marginalized non-Sinhala speaking
minorities in the multilingual country. It not only promoted religio-ethno-linguistic
nationalism on both sides of the ethnic divide, but became a key source of frustra-
tion and anger among Tamil nationalist groups, including a variety of militant
movements (most notably the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam) that gained inﬂu-
ence beginning in the 1980s (Wilson 1975). Ethnic riots against Tamils erupted in
July 1983 in the Sinhala-dominant south, and the subsequent civil war conditions
further complicated the problems related to linguistic rights of the minority Tamils.6
During this time, the notion of Tamil as a minority language had been used as a
justiﬁcation for separatist aspirations among Tamils. Even the Indo-Sri Lanka
Accord signed by Sri Lankan President J. R. Jayewardene and Indian Prime
5
The Sinhala Only bill was introduced by Bandaranaike in the House of Representatives,
supported by the main opposition UNP voting with the government and was opposed by the
Tamil parties (Federal Party and All Ceylon Tamil Congress) and leftist parties (Lanka Sama
Samaja Party and Communist Party). Because Tamil was not given the same ofﬁcial language
status as Sinhala, minority Tamils actively tendered their support to the Federal Party’s
nonviolence campaigns.
6
Discussing this period of ‘linguistic nationalism of civil war,’ DeVotta (2004) says: “while
economic rivalry and ethnic jealousies partly lay behind the 1983 riots, the major reasons were
the Sinhala-only policy and the culture of ethnic outbidding and institutional decay that the
language issue initiated, enculturated, and legitimated” (157).
146
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 169 ---
Minister Rajiv Gandhi in July 1987, which declared that Sri Lanka is “a multi-ethnic
and multilingual plural society,” could not ameliorate the situation. The country
was unsettled by mass protests organized by monks, political parties, and lay
Buddhist associations under the powerful umbrella organization Mavbima
Sirakeeme Wiyaparaya, or “The movement for safeguarding the motherland”
(Amunugama 1991). Tamil and English were, in the end, proclaimed to be ofﬁcial
languages, along with Sinhala in 1988, as a part of the 13th amendment to the
Constitution. Tamil was raised to the status of an ofﬁcial language, while English
was assigned the position of a “link language.”7 Nevertheless, linguistic nationalism
and Sinhala-only attitudes still endure among many parts of the population.
7.3 RESURGENCE OF SINHALA-BUDDHIST NATIONALISM
IN POSTWAR SRI LANKA
Sri Lanka saw a resurgence of Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism after the end of its
three-decade-long civil war in 2009, with the emergence of numerous extremist
groups of Buddhist monks.8 Yet, the driving ideological force that fueled postwar
ethnonationalism has shifted from Sinhalese ethno-linguistic nationalism to the
global rhetoric of war on terror. For instance, in 2012, an extreme Sinhalese
Buddhist organization called the Bodu Bala Sena (Buddhist Power Force or BBS)
was created under the leadership of Ven. Galagodaththe Gna¯nasara and Ven.
Kirama Wimalajothi.9 One of the key objectives of this organization was to draw
attention to the threats of minority ethnic and religious groups, especially extremist
Islamic groups, faced by the Sinhalese Buddhists (Zuhair 2016, 20). The BBS
claimed that their major goal was to protect the rights of Sinhalese Buddhists who
have no international links, in the face of both internal and external threats. Along
with other less prominent organizations such as Sinhala Ravaya, Sinha-le and
Mahasohon Balakaya, the BBS launched a virulent anti-Muslim campaign and
ﬁnally led violent actions against the Muslims in various parts of the island. These
movements draw upon this post-independence history of Sinhala-only politics,
blending it further with Buddhist nationalism.
7
This part of the 13th amendment to the constitution stated, “Tamil shall also be an ofﬁcial
language.” However, the legality of the word “also” was not explained in the relevant consti-
tutional provision. As K. M. De Silva (1993) observed, “[a]lthough there is some ambiguity
about the position of English, its legal position appears to be almost equal to Sinhalese and
Tamil in many areas” (299). The provisions of the 13th amendment were clariﬁed and indeed
consolidated by the 16th amendment. The beneﬁts of the 13th amendment to the Constitution
have not, in fact, percolated down to the Tamil-speaking population in the country due to the
lack of policy implementation. The Tamil language was afforded parity status only after Tamil
youths mobilized militarily, seeking a separate state, Eelam.
8
For a comparative discussion on the rise of Buddhist Power Force (BBS) and militant Buddhist
groups in Myanmar see Schonthal and Walton (2016).
9
Ven. Kirama Vimalajothi subsequently disavowed the group.
Sinhala Language & Buddhist Reformation
147
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 170 ---
7.4 EMERGENCE OF THE MAHAMEVNĀVA MONASTERY
During this time, a nonviolent movement of televangelist Buddhist monks, collect-
ively part of the Mahamevna¯va Monastery (Pa¯li: Maha¯meghavana), named after the
legendary monastery founded by Mahinda when Buddhism was introduced into the
island in the third century BCE, has emerged under the guidance of Ven.
Kiribathgoda Gna¯na¯nanda.10 Gna¯na¯nanda’s movement has challenged mainstream
Buddhist nationalistic politics by criticizing commonlinguistic and ritual practices
with the aim of rediscovering saebae dahama, or the authentic teaching of the
Buddha. Deﬁning its religious mission and the Mahamevna¯va’s objectives, the web-
site states: “Mahamevna¯va Buddhist Monastery was established to beneﬁt the spiritual
development of human beings through the teachings of Buddha. Founded in
1999 in Sri Lanka by Ven. Kiribathgoda Gna¯na¯nanda Thero, its sole purpose is to
spread the original teachings of the Buddha. The monastery is a warm and
welcoming place for everyone to investigate true happiness through Dhamma and
meditation.”11 Several key messages are embedded in this seemingly banal wel-
come. First, Mahamevna¯va identiﬁes with the original teachings of the Buddha,
which they believe are found in the sutras of the Pali canon. Mahamevna¯va’s stress
on the sutras is part of a more general textual orientation for the community, which
claims to base its practices not simply on the authority of the Pali texts themselves,
but on a particular, authorized Sinhala translation of those texts that the group has
produced. Using these texts, they consider the doctrine (dharma) and the monastic
code (vinaya) as the twin pillars of Buddha Nītiya (the law of the Buddha), which
functions as their religious constitution. According to Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda,
Mahamevna¯va’s mission consists of three major aims, namely, helping the buddha
sa¯sana (teaching of the Buddha)12 to endure, ending the suffering of sa _msa¯ra in this
life, and preserving the teaching of the Buddha for future generations. He is critical
of the current state of Buddhist practice: “What we are doing now is just visiting
monks at the temple and talking nonsense with them till evening. We do not
discuss anything related to the teaching of the Buddha. Even monks show no
enthusiasm to teach anything. We should change this” (Gna¯na¯nanda 2010, 36).
10 Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda was originally born into a Catholic family, but he claims that his birth
inspired his parents to become Buddhist and to raise him as a Buddhist. After becoming a
monk in his teens, he entered the traditional monastic educational system, but soon left the
university in search of a more direct path to realizing the True Dharma in the exact way that
the Buddha had taught it. After spending time as an ascetic in the Himalayas – in imitation of
the Buddha – Gna¯na¯nanda returned to Sri Lanka and began studying the sutras of the Buddha
directly. Having gained a realization of the Dharma, he founded the Mahamevna¯wa monastery
as a forest hermitage in Polgahawela (Berkwitz 2016, 112).
11 Mahamevna¯wa, “Starting of the monastery,” https://mahamevnawa.lk/en/about-us/(Accessed
May 2, 2021).
12 Generally, the term sa¯sana designates everything that is related to the Buddha’s teaching:
Buddhist doctrine, its propagation, study, and putting into practice.
148
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 171 ---
Gna¯na¯nanda’s reformist stance seeks to replace common forms of Buddhism,
which he claims have been politicized and inﬂuenced by non-Buddhist practices.
In its place, he advocates for a fully ‘spiritual’ form of the tradition, which might end
the suffering of all. The implication here is that there are other types of so-called
Buddhist practices that revolve around false views, not taught by the Buddha.
Mahamevna¯va ridicules monastic political activism and popular rituals, such as
tying banners around Bodhi trees (which are thought to dispel the negative fruits of
karma) or reciting protective verses in Pa¯li by rote memory. These, Mahamevna¯va’s
monks claim, are ineffective for true spiritual development, and secondary to the
practice of the path to liberation that the Buddha has outlined. They lament that
the traditional Buddhists (sa¯mpradaika bauddhayo) who do not follow the noble
path to nirvana are Buddhists only by name (namata bauddayo) and are misled by
the opportunist monks and politicians who emphasize this-worldly beneﬁts and
material wealth. According to Mahamevna¯va, the correct path that should be
followed by “True Buddhists” (saebae bauddhayo) includes developing an under-
standing and practicing of the Four Noble Truths, the Noble Eightfold Path, and
the system of Dependent Co-origination (pa_ticca-samuppa¯da).
Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda has argued that mere knowledge of the religious ideals that
were revealed by the Buddha is not enough to be a True Buddhist. Rather, those
ideals must be enacted to become free from suffering in this world. He claims that
the doctrine of dependent origination, pa_ticca-samuppa¯da, is the real dharma, and
should be investigated by people to develop their insight and to become virtuous
persons (satpuru_sa): “The Buddha’s teaching is for the wise person. This wise person
can belong to any caste, clan, race, or ethnic group. The Buddha’s teaching is not
limited to a single nation, it is for the wise man. If there is no wise man in one clan,
no one is able to reach out the teaching” (Gna¯na¯nanda 2016, 95–96). Ven.
Gna¯na¯nanda often states that the major threat to Buddhism is the majority
Buddhists themselves, who do not follow the teaching of the Buddha; therefore,
they are responsible for the declining of the Buddha’s dispensation, the buddha
sa¯sana, in contemporary society. Even though politicized Buddhist monks and their
followers fought for the political status of the Sinhala language and Buddhist
religion, Mahamevna¯va posits that they have neither taught their followers to pursue
the correct path of the doctrine, nor hastened the ideal “kingdom/state of the
Buddha” (gautama buddha ra¯jya).
7.5 ME GAUTAMA BUDDHA RĀJYAYAY: “THIS IS THE STATE
OF GAUTAMA BUDDHA”
The desired gautama buddha ra¯jya is not a speciﬁc polity deﬁned by a set of secular
laws, geographical boundaries, or speciﬁc political authority, but a more general
climate in which the Buddhist doctrine reigns supreme. Consider, for example, the
following statement in their ofﬁcial print magazine, Mahamēgha:
Sinhala Language & Buddhist Reformation
149
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 172 ---
If there is an undefeatable supreme state in the entire human history, that is the
State of Gautama Buddha (gautama buddha ra¯jya) and neither humans nor super-
human forces can overthrow the powerful rule of the supreme lord Buddha. In this
supreme state of Gautama Buddha there are no territorial boundaries, ethnic
disparities, or any other divisions such as clergy-laity, gender. Hence the unity of
this state cannot be broken. Anyone who believes in the supreme power of the
Buddha and accepts him as the only king and his doctrine as the supreme rule,
establishes strong connections with the other noble citizens. They are protected by
the unity of the state. True guardians of the state of Gautama Buddha are the ones
who follow the Buddha and his doctrine (“Gautama Buddha Ra¯jyaye Maha Rajun
Sarana Yamu” 2015).
What is notable here is that Mahamevna¯va’s deﬁnition of the Buddhist state appears
to draw inspiration from Sri Lanka’s secular Constitution. Similar to protecting
Buddhism’s “foremost place” in the Sri Lankan Constitution, which also protects
the rights and freedoms of all citizens, the buddha ra¯jya of Mahamevna¯va’s cele-
brates the “true Buddhist” which anyone can be.
A secular-legal mentality also appears to apply to the Mahamevna¯va’s criticisms of
the activities of politically active Buddhist monks who, in their estimation,
attempted to rule the country rather than practice the doctrine or guide their lay
followers on the path of nirvana. For Mahamevna¯va, the disappearance of true
dharma is caused mostly by the decline of the vinaya (monastic discipline) with the
emergence of such politized Buddhist monks. Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda posits:
We should clearly understand the [real] followers of [the Buddha]. We follow the
maharath (monks who attained nirvana), who followed the noble teaching of the
Buddha to achieve different levels of spiritual liberation. Monks in the Buddha’s
time dedicated themselves to cultivate sīla (virtuous conduct), sama¯dhi (concen-
tration) and prajña¯ (wisdom). We can also develop ´sraddha¯ (faith) when we think
about these noble followers of the Buddha. Can you build ´sraddha¯ when you see a
Buddhist monk making a political speech on a stage? Or by seeing a misbehaving
monk in a protest?. . . We should have the ability to differentiate the followers of the
Buddha from the others. Who is on the path of doctrine? Who is not? Then, you
will realize who is truthful and who is not. (Gna¯na¯nanda 2010, 31–32)
Mahamevna¯va laments that the decline of the “true teaching” in the island occurred
from time to time due to both internal and external forces. For instance, Ven.
Gna¯na¯nanda posits that the historical decline of Gautama Buddha’s sa¯sana
happened in the late medieval period of Sri Lankan history, when “Maha¯ya¯na
inﬂuences” arrived from India and led people to aspire to become Buddhas and to
see the future Buddha Maitreya (Gna¯na¯nanda 2004, 42). In contemporary society,
such decline is caused by the ignorance of the lay people misguided by politicized
and opportunist monks.
Also apparent among Mahamevna¯va Buddhists is an attitude towards the
Buddha’s teaching, or dharma, that treats it as a constitution for everyday life, a
150
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 173 ---
set of rules applicable to everyone in the world. In their rendering, Buddhism is
not merely a religion of blind followers, but contains the true principles of the
world itself, the loka dharmaya. Due to inﬂuences of other religious rituals and
misinterpretation of the dharma, the philosophical value of the dharma has been
covered with false faith. During an interview I conducted with Ven. Bandarawela
Saddhasheela, a young Mahamevna¯va monk who was residing in Mahamevna¯va
Monastery in California, he said that the terms Buddhist or Buddhism themselves
emerged very much later, when the idea of religion became prominent. For him,
there was no religion called Buddhism during the Buddha’s time and the followers
did not identify themselves as Buddhists. What Siddhartha Gautama did,
according to Ven. Saddhasheela, was to preach loka darmaya, and the people
who had the wisdom and accumulated good karma could realize it through
listening to him.13
Mahamevna¯va’s focus on the gautama buddha ra¯jya, which is governed by these
dharmic ideals, serves to orient the group’s reformist project towards a transnational
Buddhist citizenship. Explaining who is a “True Buddhist citizen” (saebae bauddha
puravaesiya), Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda explains:
We all are blessed because we have the opportunity to listen to the teachings of the
Buddha. There are no divisions based on ethnicity, caste, religion or clan in it . . .
Nobody is superior because of the language he speaks. No matter whether he speaks
English, Tamil, or Sinhala, it does not make anyone superior. Even the skin color
does not make anyone superior . . . Anyone can be superior depending on the good
or bad karma he commits. (Gna¯na¯nanda 2016, 119)
This broadly inclusive stance has assisted Mahamevna¯va in expanding their move-
ment across multiple continents and creating a single ethical community. Since the
establishment of the ﬁrst branch of the temple at Polgahawela, Sri Lanka, in August
1999, the organization has expanded to seventy branches in Sri Lanka and world-
wide including the United States, Australia, India, Canada, Germany, England, and
Dubai. This network is instrumental in establishing their imagined state of Gautama
Buddha across geographical, ethnic, caste, and class boundaries.
Mahamevna¯va has also adopted modern media and technology to disseminate
their interpretation of Buddhism among the members of this transnational
Buddhist state. It is the ﬁrst organized Sri Lankan Buddhist group to adopt
multimedia technologies – including TV, radio, print media, and internet – as
part of their religious mission. They also use modern televisual technologies such
as drones, camera-equipped helicopters, and other audio-visual techniques to
create new ritual spectacles, meaningful for media modalities such as TV, radio,
DVD, and the internet, and to make these rituals accessible to their wider
transnational audience.
13 Bandarawela Saddhasheela, interview with the author, December 2012.
Sinhala Language & Buddhist Reformation
151
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 174 ---
7.6 LINGUISTIC REFORMATION IN THE BUDDHIST STATE
While Mahamevna¯va’s reformation poses challenges to mainstream Buddhist
monastic politics and rituals, it holds different ideologies about the religious lan-
guage of their imagined Buddhist state. On the one hand, they stress that the
authentic teachings of the Buddha can be found in the Pa¯li canon. On the other
hand, they argue that the doctrine should be rendered in a simple, vernacular
language so that Buddhists may understand it. In this way, Mahamevna¯va down-
grades the authoritative status of Pa¯li in traditional Buddhist practice, while also
questioning the language’s inherent sacredness and disavowing the idea that simply
chanting Pa¯li verses produces supernatural powers.
This attitude towards Pa¯li is an innovation. Although monastic politics during the
colonial and postcolonial period has been anchored in the status of Sinhala, Pa¯li
central importance in Sri Lankan Buddhism was never in dispute. Pa¯li is an Indo-
Aryan language, and its origins go back to the ancient Indian language called
Ma¯gadhi, spoken in the state of Magadha where the Buddha spent the greater part
of his life. Therava¯da Buddhists believe that the truest and most authentic versions of
the earliest and most important scriptures, such as the “The Three Baskets,” were
preserved in Pa¯li.14 The Dīpava _msa and Maha¯va _msa, the two major chronicles in
Sri Lanka, relate the writing down of the scriptures in Pa¯li during the reign of the Sri
Lankan King Vattaga¯mani Abhaya (89–77 BCE). In some cases, Pa¯li was even used
as a medium of communication between kingdoms in the premodern Buddhist
world (Blackburn 2010).
In fact, a second language ideology runs alongside the Sinhala-only attitude
described above. This ideology, which is held among many Buddhists in Sri
Lanka, maintains that Sinhala is a “low” and colloquialized language derived from
the “high” language of Pa¯li, in which Buddhist texts and rituals are preserved
(Ferguson 1959, Gair 1986, Paolillo 1997). Moreover, given that Pa¯li is imagined
to be the language of the Buddha himself, its sound and appearance are thought to
be inherently efﬁcacious, capable of generating karmic merit and having a protect-
ive effect (Hackett 2011). Deegalle Mahinda documents a number of verbal rituals
14 In Therava¯da Buddhism, Pali scripture is treated as the sacred medium, as it enshrines the word
of the Buddha – particularly the dhamma and vinaya. It is generally known as the Pali canon,
or Buddhist canon, because it contains the fundamental principles of Buddhism. The Pali term
for the Pali canon is Tipi_taka, from ti ‘three’ + Pi_taka ‘text, scripture, or basket (where things are
collected)’, which literally designates its three major divisions of teachings: The Vinaya Pi_taka
is the collection of monastic rules laid down by the Buddha for monks and nuns. The Sutta
Pi_taka is the collection of discourses, or speciﬁc teachings that were adaptively expounded by
the Buddha to suit the individual, place, and event or situation in question, together with
supplemental material. The Abhidhamma Pi_taka is the collection of the teachings that are
purely substantive or academic, without reference to any individuals or events, and without any
supplemental material. The Pali canon is not a single-volume scripture, but an enormous set of
scriptures containing as many as 84,000 textual units.
152
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 175 ---
and preaching styles prevalent in traditional Sri Lankan Buddhism that exemplify
the place of Pa¯li acoustics in those rituals (2006). Among these are the modern
poetic genre of preaching called kavi bana, devotional hymns or ga¯tha¯, and
protective verses (paritta), that form a central part of many Buddhist rituals. For
devotees, the sacredness of these verbal rituals is derived from the acoustics of Pa¯li
language and unique verbal styles.
For Mahamevna¯va, Pa¯li is an unintelligible language for their followers, which
makes them ignorant of true dhamma. Therefore, Mahamevna¯va argue that collo-
quial Sinhala should be used for religious activities, as it is for other modern activities
including public law. Highlighting the importance of comprehensible language in
achieving their religious mission, the ofﬁcial website of Mahamevna¯va states:
Here the Buddha’s teachings are presented in modern language that is easy to
understand. What makes Mahamevna¯va unique is the effort to bring the
Supreme Dhamma to listeners in its original form. Because of this, both young
and old listen to the Dhamma and practice virtue, concentration, mindfulness and
wisdom to realize the Four Noble Truths revealed by the Supreme Buddha.
Presently there are more than 650 monks, more than 100 Anagarika nuns, and
thousands of lay disciples practicing Dhamma at Mahamevna¯va Monasteries
around the world. (Mahamevna¯va 2021)
The program of Mahamevna¯va is in large part directed toward bringing Sinhalese
Buddhists toward an authentic understanding and practice of the Buddha’s dhamma
through simpliﬁed language. Their emphasis on simple Sinhala in disseminating
dhamma serves to orient their teachings to a transnational Buddhist audience
afﬁliated to their branch temples around the world. Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda maintains
that he was able to learn the true dhamma by studying the Pa¯li canon directly in
Pa¯li, which required years of study. By translating these texts into vernacular, he
hopes people will arrive at a similar knowledge of the truth discovered and taught by
the Buddha.
Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda’s linguistic ideology also aims to ‘disenchant’ Pa¯li by clearing
from some of its magical associations. For example, he posits in one of his sermons
that most Buddhist monks do not know the meaning of many of the protective verses
they chant in Pa¯li. According to him, these monks utter aspirated sounds in these Pa¯li
verses expecting those sounds to extinguish the non-human evil forces and that there
is no logic behind this other than ignorance. These misbeliefs, he points out, are
caused by ignorance of the true dhamma, one which has existed among Buddhists for
centuries. In a statement that resembles the interpretive attitude of many public law
jurists, Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda insists that protection from the spiritual law (the dhamma)
can be expected only when one fully and accurately understands it.
The parallels between Sri Lankan constitutional law and ‘true’ Buddhist practice
were even more pronounced in a discussion I conducted with a Mahamevna¯va
monk, who argued that:
Sinhala Language & Buddhist Reformation
153
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 176 ---
even though the Constitution of Sri Lanka favors Sinhala and Buddhism as this is a
Sinhala-Buddhist country, our monks have failed to disseminate the Buddha’s word
in intelligible language so that the entire Buddhist state is at risk. Real followers of
the Buddha are not the Buddhists by birth who blindly follow the religious rituals or
recite hymns and protective verses (paritta) in Pa¯li by heart, but the ones who
understand the doctrine and practice meditation.15
In other words, in order to fully realize the guarantees of Sri Lanka’s Constitution
and to safeguard Buddhism, Buddhists had to fully understand the teachings of the
Buddha. According to this monk and Mahamevna¯va more generally, the proper
enactment of Sri Lanka’s constitutional language depended on the proper recogni-
tion of the Buddha’s religious language.
7.7 POPULARIZING RELIGIOUS TEXTS AND RITUALS
IN SINHALA
In order to make colloquial Sinhala the medium of the true doctrine,
Mahamevna¯va has translated the threefold Buddhist canon and protective verses
from Pa¯li to simple Sinhala, and they are developing novel forms of chanting and
devotional rituals. In the book series of Mahamevna¯va Tipi_taka translation entitled
Mahamevna¯ve Bodhi Gna¯na Tripitaka Granta Ma¯la¯, there is a Sinhala verse
translated from Pa¯li highlighted in the title page. The verse explains that “the
dhamma (doctrine) and vinaya (monastic code) are shining only when they are
exposed, not when they are hidden” (Mahamevna¯ve Bodhigna¯na Tripitaka Granta
Ma¯la¯ 2004), indicating that the teachings of the Buddha should be in a comprehen-
sible language in order for the followers to easily understand them.
In addition to translating the Tipi_taka and protective verses from Pa¯li to Sinhala,
Mahamevna¯va has published more than 100 books in simple Sinhala, including
books of Buddhist stories aimed at children. Their Mahamēgha monthly magazine
attracts thousands of Sinhalese readers while the Shraddha television channel,
Damviru radio channel, and YouTube video channel are popularizing among the
Sinhalese around the world a vernacular version of Buddhism through innovative
televised rituals.
These activities of vernacularization of religious texts can be understood in the
larger discourse of religious language planning. As Sinnemäki and Saarikivi suggest,
there are two competing processes at work in language planning in many religious
communities: the preservation of doctrinal purity and the unity of the community,
on the one hand, and the need to understand the sacred texts and doctrine, on the
other (2019). They argue that translations that alter the understanding and expression
of a religion may prove harmful for unity and continuity, because languages
never have identical semantics and the metaphors typical of each language are
15 A Mahamevna¯va monk in discussion with the author, January 2020.
154
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 177 ---
culture-bound. The same conﬂict arose when the Mahamevna¯va Tipi_taka transla-
tions provoked a backlash from mainstream Buddhist monks. For instance, the late
Ven. Bellanwila Wimalaratana, a well-known and outspoken Buddhist monk, at a
public gathering in Colombo in 2013 criticized Mahamevna¯va’s use of “vulgar
Sinhala” (hadu Sinhala) for the Tipi_taka translations because, according to him, it
challenges the purity of the dhamma in Pa¯li language and that of the Buddhist
tradition. When I asked Ven. Saddhasheela of the Mahamevna¯va to comment on
these allegations during my encounters with him, he claimed that the purity or
impurity of dhamma relies not upon the vehicle in which it is transported, but the
accuracy of the content.
Most recently, Mahamevna¯va translated the Maha¯va _msa (Great Chronicle), the
most celebrated literary work in Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism, into simple
Sinhala from Pa¯li. Originally written during the sixth century CE in the
Anuradhapura period and attributed to a Buddhist monk named Maha¯na¯ma, the
Maha¯va _msa consists of thirty-seven chapters describing the founding of the Sinhala
kingdom by Vijaya, who migrated from India during the sixth century BCE, as well
as the history of Buddhism up to king Maha¯sena, who lived during the third century
CE.16 More importantly, the chronicle legitimates the relationship between Sri
Lanka and Buddhism by claiming that Buddha chose the island to preserve and
promote his teachings. Sinhalese Buddhists thus ardently hold that Sri Lanka is
sinhaladipa (the island of the Sinhalese) and dhammadipa (the island containing
Buddha’s teachings).
The Maha¯va _msa was ﬁrst translated into literary Sinhala between 1877 and 1883,
during the British colonial period by Ven. Hikkaduwe Sri Sumangala and Don
Andris de Silva. Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda translated the chronicle again into colloquial
Sinhala and the ﬁnal volume of the series of the translation was launched in
2019 during a ceremony named Maha¯wanshabima¯ni held in the Mahamevna¯va
temple in Kaduwela. The president of Sri Lanka (2019–2022), Gotabhaya Rajapakse,
who was then a presidential candidate, attended the ceremony as the chief guest,
and the ﬁrst copy of the translation was handed over to him by Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda.
At the launch ceremony, Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda made a speech where he stated that
all Sri Lankans, including Buddhist monks, are ignorant of history. Therefore,
according to him, these Buddhist monks shamelessly propagate ideas against both
Buddhism and the history of the Sinhalese people. The only way that the nation can
be protected is by making the Maha¯va _msa available for a broad readership. In
16 The Maha¯va _msa played a decisive role in shaping the modern ideologies of Sinhalese
Buddhist nationalism, with its depiction of the Sinhalese king Dutugemunu (who reigned
between 161 and 137 BCE) as the chronicle’s supreme hero. According to the chronicle, King
Dutugemunu vanquished the foreign non-Buddhist Tamil king Elara and uniﬁed the country
as a centralised Sinhalese Buddhist kingdom, with the blessings and staunch support of the
sangha, the Buddhist clergy. Thus, King Dutugemunu became the historical ﬁgure of
Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism and revival in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Sinhala Language & Buddhist Reformation
155
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 178 ---
addition, Gna¯na¯nanda said that he translated the chronicle into simple Sinhala in
order to make it easier for the public to read and learn about the Sinhalese nation,
buddha sa¯sana, and the role of the Buddhist clergy. Strongly apparent in this
speech, then, was the linkage between linguistic purity and religio-national ﬂourish-
ing. As with the decades of legal discussions that had occurred over the twentieth
century, prioritizing Sinhala was cast as the key to ensuring the future of Sri Lanka.
Yet, Mahamevna¯va has gone further to link Sinhala language with Buddhism and
the idea of a Buddhist state, using the appeal of popular culture. Consider, as one
example, the creation of a mega-ritual called arahantaka vandana¯va, or “the
veneration of enlightened monks,” organized in 2017 in Polonnaruwa, which
included music and songs. The ritual was a massive public celebration broadcast
over all Mahmevna¯va’s media outlets. The opening of the ritual was a recorded song
in Sinhala performed by professional singers while the attendees were engaged in
the act of arahant veneration. The lyrics of the song describe the Buddha’s path as
the only way of liberation, and with the merits people gain from arahant veneration,
they accumulate merit toward achieving nirvana in this life. The melody of the song
makes it closer to secular songs rather than to the rhythm and style of stereotypical
Mahamevna¯va hymns.
The incorporation of these popular aesthetic forms in religious rituals set them
apart from the dominant religious public, while it appeals to the interests of a wider
audience. In an interview I conducted with a woman in her mid-twenties who
attended the ritual with a group of friends, she revealed that these innovative
aesthetic practices are important means to distract them from popular music, which
attach them to this-worldly suffering. Further, she asserted that these recorded songs
can be enjoyed over and over again whenever she wants to motivate herself to
practice dhamma.
Scholars recognize that the consumption of popular culture in religious or
political traditions creates new forms of publics across the world. For instance,
Charles Hirschkind’s work analyzes the production of Islamic recorded sermons
vis-à-vis a recalibration of politics in Islamic countries (Hirschkind 2006). Junxi Qian
proposes that the public singing of nationalist songs can constitute an alternative
community through the agentive reinterpretation of lyrics (Qian 2014). As
Shoemaker (2017) posits, the recognized characteristic of these productions is that
they offer a dialogical space that resists normative tropes and complicates the ways in
which audience understands marginalized groups, religious or political positions,
social issues, or social life differently from the way mainstream consumers do.
In Mahamevna¯va’s case, Sinhalized styles in rituals and texts allow them to
constitute new religious identities within the same religion and pose challenges
to the linguistic ideologies of mainstream Buddhism, establishing alternative
religio-linguistic nationalism. Through the use of constitutional language for reli-
gious rituals and religious texts, Mahamevna¯va attempt to democratize Buddhist
practice, allowing the public to access what they believe is “true” doctrine.
156
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 179 ---
Similarly, Sinhalized ritual forms and texts created by Mahamevna¯va constitute a
language community which is part of their imagined gautama buddha ra¯jya. These
rituals function as boundary markers for their group, which, like a constitutional
public, binds both monks and laypeople in a single imagined collective. These
textual and ritual practices conﬁrm Michael Warner’s idea that publics rely on
archived and indexed records of their texts and discourses to establish “style” that
allow “participants in its discourse to understand themselves as directly and actively
belonging to a social entity that exists historically in secular time and has conscious-
ness of itself, though it has no existence apart from the activity of its own discursive
circulation” (2002).
7.8 CONCLUSION
The relation between Buddhism and constitutional law is not just a one-way story of
Buddhist inﬂuences on public law. It is also a story of how concepts and ideas that
are prominent in constitutional design and interpretation come to inﬂuence
Buddhism. Mahamevna¯va is a perfect example of this for two reasons. First, they
have taken the linguistic ideology of Sinhalese nationalism, which was central to
constitutional practice in post-independence Sri Lanka and made it the language of
Buddhism. Ven. Gna¯na¯nanda has reshaped the “ofﬁcial” language of public
Buddhism in much the same way that constitutional experts have reshaped the
ofﬁcial public language of Sri Lanka. In both cases, a Sinhalization program has
taken place. Although these Sinhalization projects did not overlap in time, they can
be seen as emerging from similar and connected historical trajectories, running
from colonialism to anticolonial movements, to projects of populist nationalism. In
its own programs of religious reform, the Mahamevna¯va group has creatively
borrowed the prestige of Sinhala language – acquired through the Constitution
and nationalist politics – and deployed it in religious reforms to constitute an ideal
religious state. In other words, debates over constitutional law have, today, found
their way into debates over Buddhism.
Second, Mahamevna¯va has in its own way taken up the very concept of consti-
tutional law: it has transformed the constitutional principle that the law of the land
should be accessible to and representative of the nation and turned it into a
soteriological principle – that the Buddha’s dharma should be available and inter-
pretable to all. The constitution of a country is a set of rules regulating the powers of
its government and the rights and duties of its citizens. A codiﬁed constitution is one
in which key provisions are collected together in a single legal document; it should
be accessible and representative of its citizens. Mahamevna¯va monks have borrowed
this principle to make Buddhist doctrine transparent and accessible to its followers.
Vernacularizing religious and historical texts, rebuilding religious rituals, and circu-
lating them among a transnational audience through modern media technologies
are key strategies in a broader mission of democratizing Buddhist doctrine – and
Sinhala Language & Buddhist Reformation
157
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 180 ---
with it, the pursuit of nirvana. Both of these interactions between the Constitution
and the Mahamevna¯va reforms embody similar forms of linguistic ideology in which
the ideal state can be realized by creating “public” texts for the uplift of the “nation.”
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological
Research for the generous support of his dissertation research, without which this
chapter would not have been possible. He would also like to thank Benjamin
Schonthal and Courtney Handman for substantive comments on this chapter.
Finally, thanks to Tom Ginsburg and Roshan de Silva Wijeratne for a very productive
conversation and their comments on the early version of this chapter at the workshop.
references
Amunugama, Sarath. 1991. “Buddhaputra and Bhumiputra? Dilemmas of Modern Sinhala
Buddhist Monks in Relation to Ethnic and Political Conﬂict.” Religion 21 (2):
115–39.
Berkwitz, Stephen. 2016. “A Buddhist Media Pioneer: Ven. Kiribathgoda Gna¯na¯nanda.” In
Figures of Buddhist Modernity in Asia, edited by J. Samuels, J. McDaniel, and M. Rowe,
30–33. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Blackburn, Anne M. 2010. Locations of Buddhism: Colonialism and Modernity in Sri Lanka.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
De Silva, K. M. 1986. Managing Ethnic Tensions in Multi-ethnic societies: Sri Lanka
1880–1985. Lanham: University Press of America.
1993. “The Making of the Indo-Sri Lanka Accord: The Final Phase, June–July 1987.” In
Peace Accords and Ethnic Conﬂict, edited by K. M. de Silva and S. W. R. de A.
Samarasinghe, 112–55. London: Pinter Publishers.
de Silva-Wijeyeratne, Roshan. 2014. Nation, Constitutionalism and Buddhism in Sri Lanka.
New York: Routledge.
Deegalle, Mahinda. 2006. Popularizing Buddhism: Preaching as Performance in Sri Lanka.
New York: University of New York Press.
DeVotta, Neil. 2004. Blowback: Linguistic Nationalism, Institutional Decay, and Ethnic
Conﬂict in Sri Lanka. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Dharmadasa, K. N. O. 2000. Bhashawa Ha Samajaya. Colombo: Godage and Brothers.
Ferguson, Charles A. 1959. “Diglossia.” Word 15 (2): 325–40.
Frydenlund, Iselin. 2017. “Religious Liberty for Whom? The Buddhist Politics of Religious
Freedom during Myanmar’s Transition to Democracy.” Nordic Journal of Human Rights
35 (1): 55–73.
Gair, James W. 1986. “Sinhala Diglossia Revisited, or Diglossia Dies Hard.” In South Asian
Languages, Structure Convergence and diaglossia, edited by Colin P. Masica
Krishnamurti and Anjani Sinha, 147–64. Delhi: Motilal Basarsidas.
“Gautama Buddha Ra¯jyaye Maha Rajun Sarana Yamu.” 2015. Mahamēgha, February 4, 2015.
https://mahamegha.lk/2015/02/04/maharajun-sarana-yamu/. Accessed August 22, 2021.
Gna¯na¯nanda, Kiribathgoda. 2004. Andura Viniwida Eliya Dakinnata. Colombo: Dayawansa
Jayakodi.
158
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 181 ---
2010. Ape Nawa Wasara Buddha Warshayay. Polgahawela: Mahamegha Publishers.
2016. Lokayen Nidahasweema. Polgahawela: Mahamegha Publishers.
Hackett, Rosalind. 2011. “Auditory Materials.” In Engler Handbook of Research Methods in
Religious Studies, edited by Michael Stausberg and Steven Engler, 447–58. New York:
Routledge.
Harris, Ian. 2018. “Buddhist Republicanism in Cambodia: A Colonialist Legacy?” In
Theravada Buddhism in Colonial Context, edited by Thomas Borchert, 206–19.
Abingdon: Routledge.
Harvey, Peter. 2012. An Introduction to Buddhism. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hirschkind, Charles. 2006. The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic
Counterpublics. Columbia: Columbia University Press.
Irvine, Judith and Gal, Susan. 2000. “Language Ideology and Linguistic Differentiation.”
In Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Polities and Identities, edited by Paul V. Kroskrity,
35–84. Santa Fe: School of American Research Press.
Kapferer, Bruce. 1998. Legends of People, Myths of State: Violence, Intolerance and Political
Culture in Sri Lanka and Australia. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Kyaw, Nyi. 2019. “Regulating Buddhism in Myanmar.” In Regulating Religion in Asia, edited
by Jaclyn L. Neo, Arif A. Jamal and Daniel P. S. Goh, 169–86. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mahamegha. 2015. “Gautama Budda Rajjaye Maha Rajun Sarana Yamu.” February 04,
https://mahamegha.lk/2015/02/04/maharajun-sarana-yamu/. Accessed May 2, 2021.
Mahamevanwa. 2021. “About us.” https://mahamevnawa.lk/en/about-us/. Accessed May 2,
2021.
Mahamevna¯ve Bodhigna¯na Tripitaka Granta Ma¯la¯. 2004. Polgahawela: Bodhi Gnana
Sabhawa.
Paolillo, John C. 1997. “Sinhala Diglossia: Discrete or Continuous Variation?” Language in
Society 26 (2): 269–96.
Phadnis, Urmila. 1976. Religion and Politics in Sri Lanka. London: C. Hurst & Co Publishers
Ltd.
Qian, Junxi. 2014. “From Performance to Politics? Constructing Public and Counterpublic in
the Singing of Red Songs.” European Journal of Cultural Studies 17 (5): 602–28.
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2016. Buddhism, Politics and the Limits of Law: The Pyrrhic
Constitutionalism of Sri Lanka. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schonthal, Benjamin and Walton, Matthew J. 2016. “The (New) Buddhist Nationalisms?
Sumetries and Speciﬁcitis in Sri Lanka and Myanmar.” Contemporary Buddhism 17 (1):
81–115.
Shoemaker, Terry. 2017. “Escaping Our Shitty Reality: Counterpublics, Orange Is the New
Black, and Religion.” Journal of Religion and Popular Culture 29 (3): 217–29.
Sinnemäki, Kaisu Tatu-Kustaa and Saarikivi, Janne. 2019. “Sacred Language: Reformation,
Nationalism, and Linguistic Culture.” In On the Legacy of Lutheranism in Finland:
Societal Perspectives 2, Studia Fennica Historica, no. 25, edited by Kaius Sinnemäki,
Anneli Portman, Jouni Tilli and Robert H. Nelson, 39–68. Helsinki: Suomalaisen
kirjallisuuden seura.
Sri Dhammananda Thero, K. 2021. “The Signiﬁcance of Paritta Chanting.” What Buddhists
Believe: The Signiﬁcance of Paritta Chanting, www.budsas.org.. Accessed July 21,
2022.
1992. Buddhism Betrayed? Religion, Politics, and Violence in Sri Lanka. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Sinhala Language & Buddhist Reformation
159
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 182 ---
Tonsakulrungruang, Khemthong. 2020. Toward A New Buddhist Constitutionalism: Law and
Religion in the Kingdom of Thailand. Unpublished PhD Dissertation.
Warner, Michael. 2002. “Publics and Counterpublics.” Public Culture 14: 49–90.
Wilson, A. J. 1975. Electoral Politics in An Emergent State. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Zuhair, Ayesha. 2016. Dynamics of Sinhala-Buddhist Nationalism in Post-War Sri Lanka.
Colombo: Center for Policy Alternatives.
160
Krishantha Fedricks
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 183 ---
8
Thai Constitutions as a Battle Ground for
Political Authority
Barami versus Vox Populi
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
8.1 BEYOND SANGHA AND RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
Discussions of Buddhism and constitutional law tend to focus on a relatively limited
set of topics, usually freedom of religion (Khemthong 2021) and the administration
of sangha (Larsson 2018; Katewadee 2019). While important, such narrow coverage
implies that the modern legal system of Thailand has already broken away from the
past because it insinuates that Buddhism’s inﬂuence on law is presently conﬁned to
only a few aspects of law that explicitly deal with religion. Often, these studies treat
law as a set of positive rules, adopted from the European and Anglo-Saxon cultures,
to replace the traditional code of Buddhist-inspired dhammasattha. Law, especially
a constitution, is taken to represent modernity.
Recently this view has been facing growing challenges. While it is true that the
contemporary Thai legal system is a Western import, a growing body of literature is
beginning to suggest that certain ancient elements are still active and vibrant,
shaping the conscience of legislators, law enforcers, lawyers, and judges alike
(Harding & Munin 2021; Thongchai 2021; Mérieau 2018; Dressel 2018; Streckfuss
2011). Thai legal scholars in particular are often criticized for a lack of awareness of
these issues (Thongchai 2021, 114) given that they focus on comparative work,
looking for the right model to be adapted into the local context – without realizing
that it is the local context that makes these transplants problematic.
This chapter seeks to challenge these trends. It argues that Thai constitutional
law, in particular in the last decade, is heavily inﬂuenced not only by the Western
idea of liberal democratic constitutionalism but also traditional ideas of power
derived from Thai Buddhism. Notions of dhammara¯ja are clearly important in this
regard (Mérieau 2018). Yet there are other notions, relating to the king’s role in
political and constitutional crises and to the overall structure of the supreme law of
the land. Particularly important are the ways in which constitutional design has
become the battleground for ideological contestation between liberal democracy,
161
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 184 ---
which relies on the popular mandate as the source of political legitimacy, and the
Buddhist concept of barami, the perfect man. The contest has become particularly
acute in recent years when Thailand has taken an undemocratic path.
This chapter examines how previously existing Buddhist notions, such as barami,
have enabled the phenomenal rise of the judiciary and other elite agencies, which
have lately become the imposing forces that steer Thailand’s constitutional regime
further away from liberal democracy. Even the high point of democratic constitu-
tionalism, the adoption of the 1997 People’s Constitution, turns out to have also
provided resources for barami-type notions of public authority. The chapter begins
with recent history and then turns to explicate the notion of barami and its
continued relevance.
8.2 THE RISE OF UNELECTED ELITES
Thailand’s constitutional history is a turbulent one. In 1932, Siam ended absolute
monarchy and introduced the concept of constitutional democracy, but an alliance
of royalist conservatives and military dictators interrupted the democratization pro-
cess. Coups occurred regularly whenever the military felt that electoral politics had
reached a deadlock. Still, liberal democracy clung on and occasionally emerged,
ﬁrst among university students and, later, the middle class (Hewison 2015).
Sometimes crises arose when the two factions – military and democratic reformers –
clashed. The king would intervene as a deus ex machina to preserve the fragile
political equilibrium (McCargo 2005). Thailand’s turbulent political history reﬂects
this ongoing struggle, which resulted in a high constitutional turnover. The sixteen
years since the 2006 coup have witnessed a continuation of these general trends in
contemporary Thai constitutional law.
Since 2006, constitutional development has been characterized by the rise of the
judiciary in politics, a phenomenon known as “judicial activism” (Dressel &
Khemthong 2019, 6; Khemthong 2018; Dressel 2010). This phenomenon is charac-
terized by the fact that judges feel empowered to assert their preference on political
decisions (Barroso 2019). This activism began in 2006, together with the coup and
the beginning of democratic decline. Mass protests and two coups in 2006 and 2014
undermined the democratization that had been achieved under the 1997
Constitution. Right-wing conservatives occupied key public ofﬁces, including
constitution-drafting bodies, while nationalism, royalism, and moralism were offered
as antidotes to the Western imports of democracy and liberalism (Hewison 2015,
57–60; Ukrist 2008). Inevitably, the last two constitutions of 2007 and 2017 tilted
Thailand further toward authoritarianism.
However, attributing all of this to judicial activism is misleading. These activities
involved not only the judiciary but also other unelected bodies. Judicial
activism that took place in 2006 is only one symptom of a constitutional design that
had reshaped politics since its beginning a decade earlier. In 1997, Thailand carried
162
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 185 ---
out a major reform to consolidate its democracy and permanently end military
intervention. On the one hand, the 1997 Constitution promoted the idea of popular
sovereignty with a progressive bill of rights, a new electoral system that favored
national-level parties, and several mechanisms to assist a prime minister to boost his
leadership (Borwornsak 2010, 41). On the other hand, the charter also introduced
new constitutional bodies that could serve as ﬁnal arbiters, outside the usual group
of army generals and the king (McCargo 1998). The 1997 drafters further identiﬁed
corruption as a key threat to the democratically elected government (and key
justiﬁcation for previous military intervention). Therefore, the drafters suggested
stronger checks and balances and better monitoring procedures by introducing a
new set of watchdog agencies that were autonomous and more powerful (Thailand
Research Fund 2017).
As a result, the 1997 Constitution established a number of new actors: the
Constitutional Court, the Administrative Court, the Criminal Division for
Political Ofﬁce Holders of the Supreme Court, the National Anti-Corruption
Commission (NACC), the Election Commission (EC), the National Human
Rights Commission (NHRC), the Ombudsman, and the Auditor General Ofﬁce
(AGO). Their mission was to uphold the sense of accountability of elected polit-
icians without external help from the military. The NACC acted as a prosecutor for
high-proﬁle corruption cases. The EC was an election organizer. The Ombudsman
heard general complaints, while the NHRC focused on human rights cases. The
AGO audited the government’s ﬁnance. The judicialization of Thai politics
occurred also because some important cases would be referred to the abovemen-
tioned three courts.
Whereas independent regulatory agencies were already part of the Thai adminis-
trative branch, these independent accountability agencies – the watchdogs – were
novel and were not categorized into the same group. The 1997 Constitution
intended these watchdog agencies to be non-partisan independent bodies (Dissatat
2011) and placed them under neither the parliament nor the cabinet. Procedures for
appointment and removal were prescribed in the constitution: a panel of profession-
als, representatives of political parties, as well as civic societies, would convene to
nominate a candidate, who had to meet very high standards of expertise and ethics,
before the non-partisan senate approved the list. Once appointed, their terms in
ofﬁce outlasted those of the government. They enjoyed autonomy in managing their
own budget and personnel. Overall, these watchdog agencies gave an impression
similar to that of the judiciary: they acted as guardians of democracy against short-
sighted and self-interested elected politicians. Yet, there was no effective mechanism
to watch the watchdogs. They were not subject to political oversight. Theoretically,
they were still liable for criminal offences and impeachment for high crimes.1 But
their decisions would not be judicially reviewable.
1
Constitution of Thailand, B.E. 2540 (1997), sec 303.
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
163
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 186 ---
The ﬁrst few years were promising. The Constitutional Court handed ﬁve-year
bans to those politicians who failed to disclose their assets (Harding & Leyland 2010,
180). One minister was convicted for corruption, an unprecedented event.2
Elections were mostly free and fair. Inquiry by NACC and AGO instilled a greater
sense of transparency and accountability in the civil service. However, in late 2005 a
constitutional crisis emerged. The highly popular Thaksin Shinawatra, who came
into power in 2001, had skillfully dominated the parliament as well as watchdog
agencies, effectively rendering the new check-and-balance mechanisms useless. His
regime was tainted by human rights violations, harassment of his political enemies,
and corruption (Kasian 2006). Unfortunately, through lobbying and manipulation,
Thaksin was able to coopt the Constitutional Court, NACC, and EC, so that they all
refused to investigate allegations of his corruption (Kasian 2006, 28–29). Their
inertia led to a growing sense of distrust among the public.
The prime minister’s ambitious rise alarmed many Thais who formed an oppos-
ition movement (Hewison 2010, 27) which eventually grew more radical. The anti-
Thaksin movement blamed the constitution and liberal democracy for being the
root of these recent political evils. A key strategy of the movement was to turn legal
and political issues into moral ones. Thaksin was portrayed as a greedy, disloyal, and
immoral representative of ‘imported’ electoral democracy. Thaksin’s opponents, by
contrast, were associated with patriotism, Buddhism, and, most importantly, royal-
ism as preferable choices for Thailand (Connors 2008, 154–155; Ukrist 2008). In this
way, their campaign resonated deliberately with the traditional three pillars of
“Thainess”: namely, the nation, the religion, and the king. Opponents of Thaksin
even asked the king to take over control from Thaksin (Connors 2008, 155–156). This
was the beginning of Thailand’s moralistic politics, known as khon dee politics
(politics of the righteous people), which emphasizes appointing righteous persons
to public ofﬁce to rule over an ignorant populace.
The ﬁrst round of conﬂict culminated in the 2006 coup, led by radical conserva-
tives, and fueled by animosity towards democracy. The coup leaders invited the
return of the military and of several of the temporarily disbanded watchdog agencies.
Members of the EC were even sentenced to imprisonment. But the 2006 coup was
also a turning point in the conception and deployment of the watchdog agencies.
The right-wing conservatives appreciated the role and capacity of the judiciary and
agencies in imposing constraints on elected politicians. They appreciated especially
the Constitutional Court’s invalidation of the 2006 election (Khemthong 2018,
200–202). Thus, in designing the 2007 Constitution, conservative politicians restored
and further empowered these watchdog agencies. Thailand’s judiciary had long
been a passive accomplice of coup makers, endorsing the legality of every coup since
2
See the case of Rakkiat Sukthana at www.abc.net.au/news/2003-10-28/thai-ex-minister-found-
guilty-of-corruption/1500788.
164
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 187 ---
1947 (Piyabutr 2017). However, the anti-democracy camp in 2006 enlisted the
judiciary as an active player in punishing its political enemies.
The 2007 Constitution hinted at the new understanding of these agencies. Firstly,
Section 3 of the constitution makes the legislative, executive, judiciary, and consti-
tutional agencies, as well as other state agencies, subject to the rule of law.3 The
clause implicitly acknowledged watchdog agencies, which the new constitution
referred to as the constitutional agencies, to be detached from the threefold separ-
ation of power. Secondly, the new constitution amended the rule on nominations of
the watchdogs, making the process more politically isolated and homogenous. The
numbers of political representatives in the nomination commission were reduced,
and the commission was to be dominated by representatives of the judiciary and of
other watchdog agencies.4 This homogeneity, together with absence of political
oversight, allowed conservatives to capture the nomination process and recruit only
from a pool of right-wing candidates (Dressel & Khemthong 2019). Watchdog
agencies were still unaccountable, but they would now work in the interest of the
antidemocratic faction. The third and most crucial change applied to the legal
authority of the watchdog agencies. The constitution gave more bite to weaker
bodies. Most interesting was the Ombudsman’s new duty of preparing the code of
ethics for other agencies, hence acting as the moral policeman for the entire group.5
This ofﬁce gained tremendous power to oversee the other branches of the govern-
ment with virtual impunity.
Post-2006 politics was characterized by the growing role of these unelected bodies
in toppling democratic governments linked to Thaksin, and the endorsement of
Thaksin’s enemies. The EC ﬁled a petition to dissolve Thaksin’s proxy, the People’s
Power Party, but spared his rival, the Democrat Party, by failing to submit the
complaint in time (Khemthong 2016, 180–182). The NACC relentlessly investigated
Thaksin’s men for failing to follow a constitutional protocol on treaty-making, as
well as the rice subsidy scheme. But the NACC never pursued a case against the
Democrat Party. The agency dragged its feet in investigating the Democrat Party
and the Royal Thai Army’s role in a deadly 2010 crackdown on Thaksin’s supporters
(Haberkorn 2018, 194–201). The NHRC, for its part, refused to acknowledge any
human
rights
abuses
related
to
that
crackdown.
Most
importantly,
the
Constitutional Court disqualiﬁed many of Thaksin’s allies from ofﬁce and blocked
key policies (Khemthong 2018 and 2019). The Constitutional Court was accused of
corruption, but no action was taken (Khemthong 2018, 189). In its decisions, the
court often showed distrust toward politicians while emphasizing morality as a
pretense for overriding the majority’s choice (Khemthong 2017). A volley of lawsuits
3
The Constitution of Thailand, B.E. 2550 (2007), sec. 3.
4
2007 Constitution, sec. 206.
5
2007 Constitution, sec. 280.
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
165
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 188 ---
badly jeopardized the legitimacy of the democratic government, leading ultimately
to another coup d’état.
When it became clear that the conservatives could never defeat Thaksin in
normal electoral politics, another mass protest shut down Bangkok for months.
On 22 May 2014, a junta calling itself the National Council of Peace and Order
(NCPO) overthrew the government in a coup. Even compared with many earlier
coups, it deployed excessive force by incarcerating, detaining, torturing, and even
murdering thousands of people – many of whom later ﬂed abroad (Amnesty
International 2014). The unelected watchdog agencies kept silent about such abuses.
The NACC and NHRC refused to investigate corruption scandals and human rights
violations of the junta. The Constitutional Court raised no objection to the junta’s
legitimacy. Meanwhile, the EC helped intimidate dissidents in the 2016 constitu-
tional referendum (Desatova & Alexander 2021) and the NACC charged Yingluck
Shinawatra and her ministers of corruption.
Watchdog agencies continued to gain inﬂuence under the 2014 junta. The
2017 Constitution modiﬁed the nomination process by further streamlining the
nomination panel for these agencies to a small group from the judiciary and fellow
watchdog bodies.6 Given that the junta-appointed National Legislative Assembly
acted as the new senate, the junta was effectively able to nominate its sympathizers
and cronies into the watchdog agencies. Under the 2017 Constitution, the NACC
can now investigate not only criminal cases but even cases of ‘unethical conduct.’7
With the 2017 charter, the EC can order a new election in case of possible fraud,8
while the Ombudsman has powers to report directly to the cabinet if the agency fails
to address its recommendation.9 In fact, the NHRC is the only body that has had its
power diminished. It can no longer ﬁle a case of human rights violation against a
state agency and is now in charge of defending the Thai government in cases of
human rights reports that wrongly or inaccurately accuse the state.10
8.3 BARAMI AS POLITICAL AUTHORITY
The rise of unelected bodies, like those in Thailand, has been well documented
worldwide. The phenomenon is generally associated with democratic deﬁcits: when
the existing political mechanism fails to make sound public policies, a novel insti-
tution replaces the old one, bringing with it impartial scientiﬁc or economic
expertise (Vibert 2007; Veerayooth 2016). However, Thailand’s empowerment of
independent constitutional agencies is different. Watchdog agencies are concerned
with accountability, not with regulation. They are not a response to democratic
6
The Constitution of Thailand B.E. 2560 (2017), sec. 203 and 217.
7
The Constitution of Thailand B.E. 2560 (2017), sec. 234 (1).
8
The Constitution of Thailand B.E. 2560 (2017), sec. 224.
9
The Constitution of Thailand B.E. 2560 (2017), sec. 230.
10 The Constitution of Thailand B.E. 2560 (2017), sec. 247.
166
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 189 ---
shortfalls in decision-making but to perceived moral deﬁciencies. Therefore,
Thailand’s constitutionally created watchdog agencies act not as regulatory experts,
but as moral authorities designed to restrain immoral politicians.
How could the few govern the many? While vox populi is often regarded as the
source of legitimacy in a democratic regime, not all regimes or institutions reﬂect
this. Unelected regulatory agencies may claim impartial knowledge as justiﬁcation
(Vibert 2007, 116), yet watchdog agencies in Thailand can claim no such expertise.
Their source of legitimacy is linked instead to Buddhism, and the ancient concept of
moral perfection, or barami.
8.3.1 Understanding Barami
A belief in karma (in Pali, kamma) – moral laws of cause and effect – forms the basis
of Thai Buddhism. Simply put, a person reaps what he or she sows. Good deeds
result in merit (bunna), while evil deeds generate their own negative results (Ishii
1986, 14–16; Jackson 1989, 40–41). Merit that is acquired through good deeds in this
life insures a better situation in the next life. The system is not supposed to be
deterministic, however, people commonly believe that they are born in their current
condition because of the amount of merit and demerit accumulated in past lives.
Buddhism encourages a person to constantly improve one’s fortune by making new
merit and avoiding committing further evil. Ultimately, a person with high merit
will obtain true understanding of the Buddha’s teaching and gain release from the
cycle of rebirths by attaining nirvana, at which point all of one’s sufferings will come
to an end.
For most people nirvana is a distant prospect. Monks might be interested in this
spiritual goal, but ordinary folks are generally not ready to follow such practices of
renouncing the mundane world. Their goals tend to be more practical and materi-
alistic, such as improving their worldly situation. A person of high merit is said to
enjoy wealth, wisdom, or good family fortune, for example (Terwiel 2012,
Chapter 9), whereas demerit produces undesirable consequences, including pov-
erty, ailment, or demotion at work.
Thai Buddhists believe that some forms of good karma produce not ordinary
bunna, but a quality known as barami. The relationship between the two, bunna
and barami, is not always clear but barami is used principally in a political sense.
Although there is no perfect translation, barami is understood as perfection or virtues
(Jory 2016, 15–18). It can be used as ‘power,’ and a person with a high level of barami
is ﬁt to rule.
Examples of barami appear in stories about the Buddha’s various rebirths, which
treat him as a personiﬁcation of dhamma (Nidhi 2012, 329–330). The stories often
emphasize that, to become a buddha, a person must accumulate the ultimate level
of barami, which could only be achieved through countless rebirths. It is a journey
spanning eons and involving rebirth as various life forms, for example, an elephant, a
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
167
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 190 ---
quail, a deer, or a prince. In each life, the buddha-to-be is described as undergoing
adventures that demonstrate certain kinds of virtues. In Thai versions of these stories,
many incarnations are similar to quests that the Buddha must overcome to gain
more barami. Gradually, he perfects himself, therefore reaching the status of
Buddha. These stories, known as ja¯taka, are weaved into a larger tapestry of time,
connecting the previous buddhas with the coming Maitreya Buddha of the future
(Nidhi 2012, 331–340).
Accounts of ja¯taka are scattered throughout Buddhist texts, both in the canon (the
Tipi_taka) and outside of it (Baker & Pasuk 2019, xix–xxi). Ja¯takas often begin with a
framing story explaining how a previous rebirth is linked to the present one: an
incident, cause célèbre, or a dispute among monks. The story often ends with some
moral guidance in which characters in the story are linked to particular people in
the Buddha’s life, as previous incarnations, or the Buddha’s close associates
or enemies.
Ja¯takas are a major source of Buddhism through which many Thais learn about
religion. Particularly in premodern times, few people read the canon, which was
written in Pali on a palm leaf. Sacred books were to be worshipped, in many cases,
not studied. The canonical approach to Buddhist studies would not begin until the
turn of the twentieth century, when King Chulalongkorn ordered his half-brother
Sangha Raja to reform monastic education (Phibul 2015, Ishii 1986, 85–88). Ja¯takas
by contrast were treated as entertainment because they entailed life and death and
other drama and were easy to tell orally to illiterate locals through performance (Jory
2016; Baker & Pasuk 2019, xii). Later generations ‘borrowed’ the religious credibility
of the stories and added their local lore into the ja¯taka genre, expanding the local
ja¯taka universe (Baker & Pasuk 2019, xvii–xix).
In this worldview, the Buddha stands as the most meritorious, most perfect person
of our time. But there are several other individuals endeavoring to reach such
exalted status. They are known as bodhisattvas (Pali: bodhisatta), those on the path
to becoming the future buddha (Jory 2016, 17–19). Many Thai kings were identiﬁed
as bodhisattva, associating their political power with moral superiority (Jory 2016,
50–54; Skilling 2007; Sweaerer 2010, 105). In this way, the concept of barami came
to explain the king’s authority over his subjects. As the most perfect man (next to the
Buddha), he was portrayed as being morally entitled to the throne as well as
empowered to wage wars against other less perfect monarchs. Some scholars have
even described premodern Thai statecraft as a space of several smaller tributary
kingdoms united by one man’s charisma (Tambiah 1976, 102; Sunait 1990; Prapod
2010, 18–19).
According to some sources, the well-being of a Buddhist kingdom depended on
the barami of this single person, which was not static, but in danger of being eroded.
Barami could be depleted, requiring the king to practice dhamma. If the king
behaved, the kingdom was supposed to prosper. Those rulers who ignored dhamma
brought disasters, draughts, ﬂoods, or ﬁres to their subjects. Folklore from northern
168
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 191 ---
Thai kingdoms tells a story of a kingdom that sank overnight as a punishment for the
behavior of an evil king (Chai-anan & Sombat 1980, 46–51).
One of the most important works of literature on barami is Trai Phum Phra
Ruang, the “Three Worlds of King Ruang.” Composed by King Lithai in the
fourteenth century as a reading on Buddhism for his mother, Trai Phum Phra
Ruang is also a great work of political literature (Reynolds 1976; Cholthira 1974).
The text describes vividly a cosmology consisting of many worlds of deities, men,
demons, and other creatures covering four continents, and their people and fauna. It
tells the story of the creation of the universe at the start of the last eon, drawing from
many other important Buddhist texts.11
The underlying message of the Trai Phum is clear: a sentient being’s fate is
determined by its karma (Jackson 1993, 70–74). The book begins with a description
of the lowest realm of hell, gradually working its way up through different realms of
animals, ghosts, and demons. Lower realms are full of creatures of disgusting birth
and lowly livelihood, feeding on mud and waste, and of ugly unsightly aspect. The
later chapters deal with the realm of humans and gods of varying qualities. The
lower heavens are full of worldly pleasures, while the higher realms enjoy more
sublime ones. Within the present world, the three continents hold people of perfect
appearance and longevity. They know no sadness. Their lands have food aplenty and
no hardship will ever befall them. All this is because the residents of the three
continents practice dhamma.12
The Trai Phum describes the political system as dominated by kings who have
accumulated barami over their past lives (Chontira 1974, 116). According to this
view, they are entitled to their throne and prestige as well as loyalty from their
subjects. Such kings speak in words that are always just and fair. They dispense with
wealth without reservation and, as a result of their moral character, ensure that the
kingdom’s wealth grows even wider. The kings are described as cakravartin (Pali:
cakkavattin), ‘wheel turners’ who have the power to defeat all others and who guide
their citizens and protect dhamma (Chai-anan & Sombat 1980, 61–67). Barami
brings kings power and wisdom as well as a fair appearance, perfect for a ruler. Other
members of society are born or assigned into their places, high and low, according to
their karma too.
In the ﬁfteenth century, the Kingdom of Ayutthaya implemented its own hier-
archical scheme called the sakdina system, in order to regulate its workforce (Akin
2017). All men and women, from a beggar to the viceroy, were assigned certain
rankings, from 5 rai to 100,000 rai. All beneﬁts and duties are conferred based on the
ranking. The sakdina system created a social and political organization similar to the
Trai Phum’s karma-based cosmology. On this sociopolitical pyramid, the king sits at
11 This article relies principally on a modernized version prepared by the Department of Fine Arts
in 2012 at Vajirayana Digital Library, https://vajirayana.org/.
12 Chapter 5: The realm of human at Vajirayana Digital Library, https://vajirayana.org/.
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
169
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 192 ---
the zenith as the most perfect man. Below him are courtiers, commoners, and other
persons. As with the Trai Phum, men with higher barami were imagined to rule over
those with lower barami.
These notions of barami came under immense pressure by the end of the
nineteenth century. Newly arrived Christian missionaries challenged Buddhism,
criticizing it as a mythical barbaric religion. Siamese aristocrats responded by
redeﬁning Buddhism (Thongchai 2015; Jackson 1993, 43–47). They emphasized
the ‘rational’ features of the Pali canon and tried to discredit elements such as
miracles as later corruptions of an essentially logical religion. Trai Phum and ja¯takas
were downgraded from the status of sacred texts to fables (Jory 2002).
These changes to Buddhism ﬁt with the construction of the new Thai nation-
state, which emphasized the Western concept of sovereignty. King Chulalongkorn
was the ﬁrst Thai king to claim this kind of sovereignty, which, unlike barami, was
absolute, static, and, most importantly, inheritable by his son. Where ancient
kingdoms were loosely constructed, consisting of greater and lesser kings along with
dominant and tributary states, under the new political philosophy the king’s power
was imagined to reach every corner of the new Thai “geo-body” without ever waning
(Thongchai 1994). Chulalongkorn relied less on barami and more on written
legal codes.
One might assume that the era of barami-based Buddhist kingship was over in the
nineteenth century. But is that the case? King Chulalongkorn was the ﬁrst modern
king, but he was also revered as a demi-god. The worshipping of Chulalongkorn
suggests that the king was still viewed with high barami. Even those aristocrats who
were pressured to undertake the reforms of modern Thai Buddhism might not have
abandoned
the
barami
concept
entirely.
For
example,
King
Vajiravuth,
Chulalongkorn’s son and successor, ordered a royal anthem called san-sern-phra-
barami, which praises His Majesty’s barami. A Thai reference to a man of high
power is still phu mi barami, meaning ‘one who has barami.’ When a man falls from
his grace, some will say that he has depleted his barami, mod barami. Buddhism as a
religious philosophy may have been rationalized and modernized, but Buddhism as
a political ideology remained unchanged (Gray 1986). Many Thais seem to adopt a
rationalistic version of Buddhism for their personal life philosophy and guidance,
while advocating for traditional barami-based sociopolitical hierarchy (Nidhi 2012,
311–325). How could barami be preserved and popularized in the modern age?
8.3.2 Popularizing Barami
Seven hundred years are enough for belief in barami to seep into Thais’ deepest
conscience. Few have heard of Trai Phum and fewer still read it. But for most Thais,
men are not equal. As one Thai proverb goes, one can compete in a boat race, but
one could not compete in bun (merit) and wasana (luck). The taboo of someone
whose lifestyle is not compatible with his or her social status always draws criticism.
170
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 193 ---
This kind of thinking is still prevalent among conservatives. As Thai politics turn
more moralistic, conservative voices often chant the mantra that men are not equal.
They justify the authoritarian regime by labelling ordinary people as stupid and not
worthy of the right to self-governance (Apichat & Anusorn 2017, 97–116). Only good
people can acquire an ofﬁce of political power (Aim 2020, 151). Barami, I would
argue, is still one of the most important sources of political authority in twenty-ﬁrst-
century Thailand.
Some might argue that, as evidenced by declining attendance at temples, along
with a declining number of monks and temples (Channarong 2011), Thais are
becoming less religious and therefore barami is not important. Yet, the majority of
Thais learn about barami through contemporary and vernacular sources. For
example, the story of Phra Malai is a popular narrative that also emphasizes the
importance of karma (Igunma 2013). The story focuses on an arahant called Malai
who visits heaven and hell. In hell, he documents the types of punishment related to
a given action. A drinker is fed red-hot molten copper. An adulterer is forced to
climb a Bombax tree with sharp iron thorns while being preyed on by crows. Those
who insult an arahant would have mouths as narrow as a needle hole, and therefore,
be forever hungry. Beliefs like these are deeply entangled in the Thai conscience,
even among those who do not regularly attend temples. Most Thais could probably
recite an evil deed and its matching punishment even without having read the tale
of Phra Malai. Some monks and nuns even offer a service where disciples are told
which type of bad behavior results in which type of mishap. By matching certain
types of merit to a speciﬁc blessing, these monks and nuns recommend merit-
making according to one’s goal. It is common to ﬁnd a book or a TV show that
discusses a participant’s past lives and the consequence of his or her karma.13
Several ja¯takas were turned into plays, and later, literature of prose and verse,
making them popular moral tales as much as Buddhist stories. Rathasenaja¯taka
became Phra Rot-Meri, the story of Prince Rathasena’s adventure into the land of a
monster queen, Meri, ending in romantic tragedy (Baker & Pasuk 2019, 57).
Suthanaja¯taka was adapted into Suthana-Manohara, another adventure of Prince
Suthana in pursuit of a mythical half-woman, half-bird princess, Manohara (Baker
& Pasuk 2019, 1). Suvannasankhaja¯taka is retold as the story of Sank Tong, a prince
who was born with a golden conch (Baker & Pasuk 2019, 27). Samuddaghosaja¯taka
is Samuddhaghosa, another adventure of Prince Samuddhaghosa who was kid-
napped by a playful god and introduced, for a night, to a princess (Baker & Pasuk
2019, 75). All these stories depict a protagonist of a noble class, with beautiful aspect
and exceptional courage. They were given a difﬁcult task but received aid from gods
and goddesses who believed that a man of high merit deserved better treatment and
13 One of the best-known ﬁgures is Mae Chi Tossapon, or Nun Tossapon, who has run the
program called Scan Kamma (Scanning your karma) since early 2000. Nun Tossapon scans a
person’s karma and suggests a sometimes very controversial solution.
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
171
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 194 ---
should not suffer. These stories are still being made into dances, cartoons, and TV
series to this day.
The best-known of the ja¯taka stories is that of the Buddha’s penultimate rebirth
before his ﬁnal incarnation, in which he is born as a king named Vessantara. The
story of Prince Vessantara emphasizes the importance of generosity or giving, da¯na.
Vessantara inspires the exceedingly popular performance of Mahachat, “the Great
Birth,” where monks recite the entire beautiful prose of Prince Vessantara’s adven-
ture within a single day. The importance of this story and this celebration have been
analyzed by Patrick Jory, who argues that it forms the foundation of Thailand’s
theory of divine kingship (2016).
Even King Bhumibol was involved in popularizing ja¯taka stories, rewriting
Mahajanakaja¯taka to teach the virtue of perseverance (Bhumibol 1996). The story
tells of Prince Mahachanok, who had to swim in the ocean for seven days straight
before the Goddess Mekhala rescued him. It became a big hit in Thailand, and a
best-selling book. Later, it was simpliﬁed and illustrated by a famous cartoonist, Chai
Ratchawat (1999). It was also adapted into an opera by Somtow Sucharitkul.14 A new
breed of mango was grown to honor the story in which the prince learned to
resurrect a delicious mango tree which had been ravished by ignorant greedy
men: the king named it “Mahajanaka mango.”
These stories of barami and bunna are included in the national educational
curriculum. For most Thais, the primary contact point with Buddhism is in public
education, of which the ﬁrst twelve years are compulsory, and where Buddhism-
inspired stories constitute a signiﬁcant part of the reading list. These readings reﬂect
Buddhist thinking about karma and its effects. It does not include Trai Phum, but it
does include the tale of Phra Malai and the Vessantara Ja¯taka.
Moreover, notions of barami have been a big part of the modern idealizations of
kingship in Thailand. King Bhumibol himself is said to be the living example of the
perfect man ﬁlled with barami. In the last thirty years of his reign, Thailand
witnessed the rise of hyper-royalism, an excessive worship of the monarch as the
morally absolute ruler (Thongchai 2016). Through this process, Bhumibol has been
elevated from a hard-working developer of the nation into a semi-divine ﬁgure.
Some prominent royalists, such as a public scholar, Kukrit Pramoj, told accounts of
King Bhumibol’s barami, for example, that His Majesty seemed to be able to
command animals and weather patterns. Other stories tell that when the king was
presiding over a ceremony, his presence stopped the drizzling rain or, in the case of
a hot sunny day, brought light showers, equivalent to spraying holy water. Bhumibol
was revered for possessing an innate spiritual power. These accounts are openly
published in newspapers (Siamrath 2016).
During the peak of the Cold War, when Thailand was struggling against a
communist insurgency, the king’s barami became the basis to produce a powerful
14 See <www.youtube.com/watch?v=7BSvgOAVSMg>.
172
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 195 ---
amulet, “Phra Somdej Chitrlada,” named after the king’s palace. The amulet
needed no further ceremony of sacralization because the presence of the king was
deemed sufﬁcient to ensure it. It was distributed to security personnel, soldiers,
border-patrol police, local militias, and other government employees who were
ﬁghting against communism (Art & Culture Magazine 2021; Kom Chad Luek
2012). Many military personnel conﬁrmed that the sacred amulet saved their lives.
Several senior monks conﬁrmed that Bhumibol had great interest and knowledge in
dhamma and had even attained various levels of enlightenment – implying that he
was one genuine bodhisattva (MGR Online 2016). At his funeral, Thais were
amazed by the news that a ﬂock of white birds were circling his crematorium as a
sign of barami (Matichon 2016). All of these accounts, some well documented,
others anecdotal, provide the public with an image of a mythical king.
8.3.3 Barami and “Dhammacracy”
The Buddhist notion of barami evolved to justify absolute monarchy in premodern
times, but can it become part of Thailand’s democracy today? Unfortunately, recent
developments suggest that there is a problem with its use in a modern democratic
system. The idea of barami suggests that only a meritorious and morally upright
individual will rise to power. In other words, it allows only khon dee (good persons)
into public ofﬁce while excluding khon mai dee (bad persons). The core idea of
democracy, by contrast, is basically to give the most popular person power, regardless
of his or her personal moral quality. However, this risk is compensated with the
limited duration of one’s political ofﬁce. When Buddhist intelligentsia compares
Buddhism and democracy, the conclusion is always that Western-imported ideology
is inferior to the ﬁner, and more nuanced, traditional one.
Thailand has come too far to return to absolute monarchy, which was abolished
in 1932. The best the conservatives can offer is to forge a new ideology that
suppresses democracy while justifying an undemocratic regime. The result of this
process is “dhammacracy,” the governance of dhamma.15
The famous monk Buddhadasa is regarded as the leading scholar of modernist
Buddhism in Thailand. He advocates dhammic socialist dictatorship against liberal
democracy (Buddhadasa 1975; Jackson 2003, 239–242). Buddhadasa imagines a
Platonic-style philosopher-king whose objective and behavior are constrained by
his own inner dhammic morality. Thus, his goal could only be to serve the whole
and never be corrupt. According to Buddhadasa, dhammic socialist dictatorships are
more efﬁcient than capitalist democracies, which are too individualistic. In his
estimation, MPs in a democratic government will waste precious time arguing,
not for the public interest, but for their own wealth.
15 The term was used, with a slightly different meaning, by Schalk to describe a Sinhalese-
Buddhist concept of governance in the Sri Lankan context (1991).
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
173
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 196 ---
This view is supported by other scholars of the conservative spectrum (Pinyapan
2019, 329–330). Chamlong Srimuang, the leader of the People’s Alliance for
Democracy (PAD), which toppled Thaksin and incited a coup, was himself an
admirer of the righteous dictatorial style of governance (Nelson 2010). The remark is
undoubtedly controversial, leading to criticism that Buddhadasa’s ideas were used to
support authoritarianism (Wanpat 2017; Gabaude 1990; Jackson 2003, 243–244).
Perhaps, the most important articulation of barami-based political authority came
from King Bhumibol, himself the embodiment of a hierarchical moral order. His
1969 speech delivered at the Vajiravuth boy scout camp in Chon buri succinctly
encapsulated the essence of what the ideal Buddhist constitutionalism should be
like. In the speech, the king admitted that there were good and bad people. While
bad people could not always be converted, Thais could exclude those people from
politics while supporting the rule of good people.16 The speech was hugely popular,
and it has become a mandate for the conservatives, appalled by the democratic idea
that an evil yet popular man could win ofﬁce. It is often recited to justify antidemo-
cratic protests and coups. Bhumibol was himself a proof of his own theory when he
intervened to settle political disputes.
The concepts of karma and barami form important building blocks of “dhamma-
cracy,” the ultimate goal of which is to impose dhamma over any form of political
regime (Jackson 1993, 77–80). In its application, “dhammacracy” forms the founda-
tion of Thai-style democracy but can simply be a euphemism for authoritarianism
(Hewison & Kengkij 2010; Connors 2008). The king’s barami radiates to those who
have close proximity to him: politically, his barami is extended to army generals,
who are portrayed as guardians of the throne and of the nation (Chambers & Napisa
2016, 425). Thai-style democracy thus places the king at the top of the political
system. Below are his loyal senior bureaucrats, especially army generals, above
corrupt and selﬁsh civilian politicians. The lowest ranking is that of the populace,
who are deemed to always vote for the wrong politicians. Thai-style democracy
therefore permits military coup intervention in the name of His Majesty (Thongchai
2018). The system of Thai-style democracy was formed during the military dictator-
ship in the Cold War period, but it began to crumble with the political and
economic liberalization of the 1990s. That was when the majority demanded the
1997 political reform.
With the beneﬁt of hindsight, the efforts of Thai-style democracy and the barami-
based political authority can be detected even in the 1997 Constitution, questioning
its name of the People’s Constitution. The 1997 Charter is called the People’s
Constitution due to its empowerment of the people through a very progressive list
of rights and liberties, and because it was produced as a result of a popular
16 Royal speech at the opening ceremony for the 6th National Boy Scout Assembly on 11
December 1969.
174
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 197 ---
movement. But the initial agenda resulted in the introduction of the new judicial
and independent watchdog bodies (Connors 2002).
The judicialization of politics often makes authoritarians’ control of politics appear
to conform more to the international norm of democracy than an outright military
junta (Landau & Dixon 2020, 1335–1338). Yet, in Thailand these judicial and inde-
pendent agencies replaced the military as the new actor of high barami. Their goal was,
in this sense, also to impose control over elected politicians and to prevent a political
crisis. They are elite not only because they enjoy superior power, but also because these
ofﬁces are limited to a few people of extraordinary qualiﬁcation. The discrepancy is
obvious in comparison to qualiﬁcation for MP candidates. While any person aged
twenty-ﬁve and above is eligible to run for parliament, a candidate for the watchdog
agencies must be forty-ﬁve years old and have acquired higher education and a certain
bureaucratic rank – for example, director-general of a government department, chief of
a court, or professor – and display exemplary behavior and morality. All of these could
arguably be considered modern signiﬁers of one’s barami. It should be no surprise
therefore that Borwornsak Uwanno, the constitutional law scholar and key advocate of
the 1997 Constitution drafting, later advocated “dhammacracy” (2016).
Independent agencies are not a new feature in Thai public administration, the
Bank of Thailand being one ﬁne example of an independent body under the
cabinet’s arm-length control. The Court of Justice has undoubtedly been independ-
ent from the political branches since 1901. Nevertheless, these new judicial and
watchdog agencies are particularly signiﬁcant because they are more independent
than ever, with the constitution guaranteeing virtually no meaningful political
oversight. Moreover, unlike the Court of Justice, these agencies are not bound by
any tradition that serves as an implicit constraint. They are basically the fourth, ﬁfth,
sixth, and many other branches of government. The constitutions recognize them as
separate from the conventional trinity of powers. There is therefore no guidance or
constitutional convention to provide advice on how the legislative, executive, or
judiciary should scrutinize them. The independence of these agencies, together
with their expansive jurisdiction, may be necessary for scrutinizing politicians. But
they are also a tangible display of barami, according to which a meritorious elite is
set above the political actors. In fact, it might be argued that candidates are selected
not because of their unique professional qualiﬁcations, but because of their moral
quality. The Constitutional Court judges are the best example of this: no judge
serving on that body can be described as an expert in public law (Somchai 2018); and
the better-known ones have a reputation for notable ascetic style, such as Jaran
Pakdithanakul, whose interest in Buddhism is well known.
Why did the constitution drafters not install mechanisms to hold these elite
bodies accountable? In a way, the political ideals of the Trai Phum have become
self-fulﬁlling prophecies in modern Thailand: barami is considered to enhance
political authority and so political authority comes to stand in for barami. More
often than not, Thais accept that political authority indicates barami and that
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
175
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 198 ---
barami entails morality. All of this upends the Western concept of power and the
famous maxim that power tends to corrupt. In Thailand, absolute power can never
be corrupt because absolute power is granted only to a person of barami, which in
itself guarantees righteousness.
8.4 BARAMI VERSUS VOX POPULI
The ﬁrst sign of trouble for Thaksin has been associated with his remark on June 29,
2006, that phu mi barami nok ratthathammanoon, “the one with barami outside the
constitution, was manipulating the constitutional politics.” (Chai-anan 2006). In a
way, the remark also encapsulated well the tension between barami and Thai
constitutional politics. Thaksin was becoming so popular that he had the potential
to overshadow the country’s already incumbent perfect man, the king (Jory 2016,
184–88). In a view based on Trai Phum, such a dislocation could not stand, as it
threatened to upend an entire scheme of moral authority and karmic merit that,
even if not explicit, upheld the legitimacy of Thailand’s system of social and political
inequality. As Thaksin sought to eclipse King Bhumibol, the king’s close aide and
the head of privy council, General Prem Tinnasulanonda, called for the military to
stage a coup and restore the proper order of things, placing the king (the epitome of
barami) back in the center of power.
The military alone could not carry out a coup successfully. It was the king’s
criticism of Thaksin and the Constitutional Court – and its group of khon dee – that
invalidated the 2006 election and justiﬁed Thaksin’s ousting (Ukrist 2008;
Khemthong 2016, 79–177). The event symbolizes the mixture of Buddhism and
constitutional politics in post-2006 Thailand: the rise of unelected elite agencies,
legitimated by notions of barami, and the decline of popular ideals of democracy.
But how long can barami suppress the voice of the people? The judiciary and
watchdog agencies are under massive pressure: every time they punish democratic-
ally elected politicians, more people question whether they are legitimized to do so.
Their supposedly high morality fails to prevent them from exercising power arbitrar-
ily. Barami as a source of political legitimacy is today sounding somewhat less
convincing to angry ears.
references
Aim Sinpeng. 2020. “From the Yellow Shirts to the Whistle Rebels: Comparative Analysis of
the People’s Alliance for Democracy (PAD) and the People’s Democratic Reform
Committee (PDRC).” In Routledge Handbook of Contemporary Thailand, edited by
Pavin Chachavalpongpun, 145–55. New York: Routledge.
Akin
Rabibadhana.
2017.
พระมหากษัตริย์-ขุนนาง:
นาย-ไพร่ในโครงสร้างสังคมไทยยุคต้นกรุงรัตนโกสินทร์
[The
Organization of Thai Society in the Early Bangkok Period 1782–1873]. Bangkok: Kob
Fai Foundation.
176
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 199 ---
Amnesty International. 2014. Thailand: Attitude Adjustment: 100 Days Under Martial Law.
www.amnesty.org/en/documents/ASA39/011/2014/en/ (accessed June 5, 2021).
Apichat Satitniramai and Unno Anusorn. 2017. “การเมืองคนดี”: ความคิดปฏิบัติการและอัตลักษณ์ทางการเมืองของผู้สนับสนุน
“ขบวนการเปลี่ยนแปลงประเทศไทย” [“Good Man’s Politics”: Political Thoughts, Practices, and
Identities of the “Change Thailand Movement” Supporters]. Research Report,
National Policies and International Relations Division, The Thailand Research Fund.
Art & Culture Magazine. 2021. พระสมเด็จจิตรลดาพระเครื่องทรงสร้างของในหลวงรัชกาลที่9 [Phra Somdej
Chitrlada, the Amulet of the Ninth King]. Last modiﬁed April 9, 2021. www.silpa-mag
.com/history/article_50863.
Baker, Chris and Pasuk Phongpaichit. 2019. The Palace Law of Ayuttaha and the Thammasat:
Law and Kingship in Siam, 166. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Barroso, Luís Roberto. 2019. “Countermajoritarian, Representative, and Enlightened: The
Roles of Constitutional Courts in Democracies.” The American Journal of Comparative
Law 67 (1): 109–43.
Bhumibol Adulyadej. 1996. พระมหาชนก[The story of Mahajanaka]. Bangkok: Amarin Printing
& Publishing.
1999. ‘พระมหาชนก: ฉบับการ์ตูน’ [The story of Mahajanaka: cartoon edition]. Illustrated by Chai
Ratchawat, 119. Bangkok: Amarin Printing & Publishing.
Borwornsak Uwanno. 2010. คำอธิบายวิชากฎหมายรัฐธรรมนูญ[On Constitutional Law]. Bangkok:
Institute of Legal Education of the Thai Bar.
2016. หลักนิติธรรมประชาธิปไตยและธรรมาธิปไตย[Rule of Law, Democracy, and Dhammacracy].
Individual Study Paper, The Rule of Law and Democracy Course, The Constitutional
Court.
Buddhadasa Bhikkhu. 1975. ธัมมิกสังคมนิยมแบบเผด็จการ[Dictatorial Dhammic Socialism]. Bangkok:
Cremation Memorial of Montha Meunnikorn.
Chai-anan Samudavanija. 2006. ผู้มีบารมีนอกรัฐธรรมนูญ[Barami Person of Extra-Constitutional].
MGR Online. https://mgronline.com/daily/detail/9490000091103 (accessed June 5,
2021).
Chai-anan Samudavanija and Sombat Thamrongthanyawong. 1980. ความคิดทางการเมืองและสังคมไทย
[Thai Political and Social Ideas]. Bangkok: Bannakij.
Chambers, Paul and Napisa Waitoolkiat. 2016. “The Resilience of Monarchised Military in
Thailand.” Journal of Contemporary Asia 46 (3): 425–44.
Channarong Boonnoon. 2011. การลดจำนวนของพระสงฆ์และผลกระทบต่อพระพุทธศาสนาในอนาคต[Reducing the
Number of Monks and Their Impact on Buddhism in the Future]. Journal of Buddhist
Studies Chulalongkorn University 18 (3): 7–30.
Cholthira Klud-U. 1974. ไตรภูมิพระร่วงรากฐานของอุดมการณ์การเมืองไทย[Trai Phum Phra Ruang: The
Foundation of Thai Political Ideology]. Thammasart Journal 4 (1): 106–21.
Connors, Michael. 2002. “Framing the People’s Constitution.” In Reforming Thai Politics,
edited by Duncan McCargo, 37–55. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
2008. “Article of Faith: The Failure of Royal Liberalism in Thailand.” Journal of
Contemporary Asia 38 (1): 143–65.
Desatova, Petra and Alexander, Saowanee T. 2021. Election Commissions and Non-democratic
Outcomes: Thailand’s Contentious 2019 Election. Thousand Oaks: Politics. https://doi
.org/10.1177/02633957211000978.
Dissatat Hotrakit. 2011. องค์กรของรัฐที่เป็นอิสระในระบบกฎหมายไทย[Independent State Entity in Thai
Legal System]. In แทนดอกไม้ไหว้ครู[Gratitude to Professor Wisanu Krue-ngam], edited by
Narongdech Srukhosit, 39–52. Bangkok: S Charoen Printing Co., Ltd.
Dressel, Björn. 2010. “Judicialization of Politics or Politicization of the Judiciary?
Considerations from Recent Events in Thailand.” Paciﬁc Review 23 (5): 671–91.
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
177
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 200 ---
2018. “Thailand’s Traditional Trinity and the Rule of Law: Can They Coexist?” Asian
Studies Review 42 (2): 268–85.
Dressel, Björn and Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang. 2019. “Coloured Judgements? The Work
of the Thai Constitutional Court, 1998–2016.” Journal of Contemporary Asia 19 (1): 1–23.
Gabaude, Louis. 1990. “Thai Society and Buddhadasa: Structural Difﬁculties.” In Radical
Conservativism Buddhism in the Contemporary World, edited by Sulak Sivaraksa, 211–29.
Bangkok: International Network of Engaged Buddhism.
Gray, Christine. 1986. Thailand: The Soteriological State in the 1970s. PhD dissertation,
Anthropology: The Faculty of The Division of Social Sciences, University of Chicago.
Haberkorn, Tyrell. 2018. In Plain Sight: Impunity and Human Rights in Thailand. Wisconsin:
The University of Wisconsin Press.
Harding, Andrew and Leyland, Peter. 2010. The Constitutional System of Thailand:
A Contextual Analysis. Oxford and Portland: Hart.
Harding, Andrew and Munin Pongsapan, eds. 2021. Thai Legal History: From Traditional to
Modern Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hewison, Kevin. 2010. “Thaksin Shinawatra and the Reshaping of Thai Politics.”
Contemporary Politics 16 (2): 119–33.
2015. “Thailand: Contestation Over Elections, Sovereignty and Representation.” Journal of
Representative Democracy 51 (1): 51–62.
Hewison, Kevin and Kengkij Kitirianglarp. 2010. “Thai-Style Democracy: The Royalist
Struggle for Thailand’s Politics.” In Saying the Unsayable: Monarchy and Democracy
in Thailand, edited by Søren Ivarsson and Lotte Isager, 179–202. Copenhagen: NIAS
Press.
Igunma, Jana. 2013. “A Buddhist Monk’s Journeys to Heaven and Hell.” The Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Universities 6 (3): 65–82.
Ishii, Yoneo. 1986. Sangha, State, and Society: Thai Buddhism in History. Kyoto: Central for
Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University.
Jackson, Peter A. 1989. Buddhism, Legitimation, and Conﬂict: The Political Functions of
Urban Thai Buddhism. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
1993. “Re-interpreting the Traiphuum Phra Ruang: Political Functions of Buddhist
Symbolism in Contemporary Thailand.” In Buddhist Trends in Southeast Asia, edited
by Trevor Ling, 64–100. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
2002. “Thai and Western Buddhist Scholarship in the Age of Colonization: King
Chulalongkorn Redeﬁnes the Jatakas.” The Journal of Asian Studies 61 (3): 891–918.
2003. Buddhadasa: Theravada Buddhism and Modernist Reform in Thailand. Chiang Mai:
Silkworms.
Jory, Patrick. 2016. Thailand’s Theory of Monarchy: The Vessantara Ja¯taka and the Idea of the
Perfect Man. New York: SUNY Press.
Kasian Tejapira. 2006. “Toppling Thaksin.” New Left Review 39 (May–June): 5–37
Katewadee Kularbkeaw. 2019. The Politics of Thai Buddhism under the NCPO Junta.
Singapore: ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute.
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang. 2016. ‘Thailand: An Abuse of Judicial Review.’ In The
Judicial Review of Elections in Asia, edited by Yap Po Jen. Routledge.
2017. “Entrenching the Minority: The Constitutional Court in Thailand’s Political
Conﬂict.” Washington International Law Journal 26 (2): 247–68.
2018. “The Constitutional Court of Thailand: From Activism to Arbitrariness.” In
Constitutional Courts in Asia: A Comparative Perspective, edited by Albert H. Y. Chen
and Andrew Harding, 184–213. New York: Cambridge University Press.
178
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 201 ---
2019. “Constitutional Amendment in Thailand: Amending in the Spectre of Parliamentary
Dictatorship.” Journal of Comparative Law 14 (1): 173–87.
2021. “The Revival of Buddhist Nationalism in Thailand and Its Adverse Impact on
Religious Freedom.” Asian Journal of Law and Society. https://doi.org/10.1017/als.2020
.48.
Kom Chad Luek. 2012. พระกำลังแผ่นดินกำลังแรง!’ทั้งพุทธคุณและค่านิยม’ [The Sacred and Popular Amulet
of the Land]. Last modiﬁed December 4, 2012. www.komchadluek.net/news/lifestyle/
146362.
Landau, David and Dixon, Rosalind. 2020. “Abusive Judicial Review: Court against
Democracy.” U.C. Davis Law Review 53 (3): 1313–87.
Larsson, Thomas. 2018. “Buddhist Bureaucracy and Religious Freedom in Thailand.” Journal
of Law and Religion 33 (2): 197–211.
MGR Online. 2016. พระอริยสงฆ์กับ“ในหลวงรัชกาลที่9” [Enlightened Monks and Rama IX King].
Last modiﬁed November 1, 2016. https://mgronline.com/dhamma/detail/9590000109033.
Matichon. 2016. เผย‘หมอกธุมเกตุ’ ปกคลุมกรุงอาลัยพระบาทสมเด็จพระเจ้าอยู่หัวในพระบรมโกศ[Fog Mourning the
Late King]. Last modiﬁed October 1, 2016. www.matichon.co.th/local/news_320906.
McCargo, Duncan. 1998. “Alternative Meanings of Political Reform in Contemporary
Thailand.” The Copenhagen Journal of Asian Studies 13 (5): 5–30.
2005. “Network Monarchy and Legitimacy Crises in Thailand.” The Paciﬁc Review 18 (4):
499–519.
Mérieau, Eugenie. 2018. “Buddhist Constitutionalism in Thailand: When Ra¯jadhamma¯
Supersedes the Constitution.” Asian Journal of Comparative Law 13 (2): 283–305.
doi:10.1017/asjcl.2018.16.
Nelson, Michael H. 2010. “People’s Alliance for Democracy: From ‘New Politics’ to a ‘Real’
Political Party?” In Legitimacy Crisis and Political Conﬂict in Thailand, edited by Marc
Askew, 119–59. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Nidhi Eowsriwong. 2012. ปากไก่และใบเรือ[Pen and Sail]. 4th ed. Nonthaburi: Same Sky Book.
Phibul Choompolpaisal. 2015. “Political Buddhism and the Modernisation of Thai Monastic
Education:
From
Wachirayan
to
Phimonlatham
(1880s–1960s).”
Contemporary
Buddhism 16 (2): 428–50.
Pinyapan Potjanalawan. 2019. ไทยปิฎก[Thai-pitaka]. Bangkok: Illuminations Editions.
Piyabutr Saengkanokkul. 2017. ศาลรัฐประหาร: ตุลาการระบอบเผด็จการและนิติรัฐประหาร[The Court of Coup:
Judiciary, Dictatorial Regime, and Legal Coup]. Nonthaburi: Same Sky Book.
Prapod Assavavirulhakarn. 2010. The Ascendancy of Theravada Buddhism in Southeast Asia.
Chiang Mai: Silkworm.
Reynolds, Craig J. 1976. “Buddhist Cosmography in Thai History, with Special Reference to
Nineteenth-Century Culture Change.” The Journal of Asian Studies 35 (2): 203–20.
Schalk, Peter. 1991. “The Sinhala Concept of ‘Dharmacracy’ as an Obstacle to Peace in a
Crisis of the State.” In Asian Societies in Comparative Perspective: Nordic Proceedings in
Asian Studies 2, 929–54. Denmark: Nordic Institute of Asian Studies and Scandinavian
South and East Asian Researchers.
Siamrath. 2016. กฤษดาภินิหารของในหลวงฯที่“คึกฤทธิ์” เห็น[The King’s Miracle as Kukrit Pramoj Had
Seen]. Last modiﬁed October 1, 2016. https://siamrath.co.th/n/5229.
Skilling, Peter. 2007. “King, Sangha, and Brahmans.” In Buddhism, Power, and Political
Order, edited by Ian Harris, 182–215. New York: Routledge.
Somchai Preechasinlapakul. 2018. “ศาลรัฐธรรมนูญที่ไร้ผู้เชี่ยวชาญรัฐธรรมนูญ” [The Constitutional Court
without Constitutional Experts]. Last modiﬁed July 11, 2018. The 101 World. www.the101
.world/constitutional-court-without-constitution-expert/.
Thai Constitutions as a Battleground
179
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 202 ---
Streckfuss, David. 2011. Truth on Trial in Thailand: Defamation, Treason, and Lese Majeste.
London: Routledge.
Sunait Chutintaranond. 1990. “‘Mandala,’ ‘Segmentary State’ and Politics of Centralization
in Medieval Ayudhaya.” Journal of Siam Society 78 (1): 88–100.
Sweaerer, Donald. 2010. The Buddhist World of Southeast Asia. 2nd ed. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Tambiah, Stanley J. 1976. World Conqueror and World Renouncer. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Terwiel, Barrend Jan. Monks and Magic: Revisiting a Classic Study of Religious Ceremonies in
Thailand. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Thailand Research Fund. 2017. การปฏิรูปการเมืองไทยฐานคิดและข้อเสนอว่าด้วยการออกแบบรัฐธรรมนูญฉบับประชาชนปี
2540 [Thai Political Reform: Conceptual Basis and Proposal on Constitutional Design
for the People’s Constitution B.E. 2540]. Bangkok: Thailand Research Fund.
Thongchai Winichakul 1994. Siam Mapped: A History of the Geo-Body of a Nation.
Honolulu: The University of Hawaiʻi Press.
2015. “Buddhist Apologetics and a Genealogy of Comparative Religion in Siam.” Numen
62 (1): 75–99.
2016. Thailand’s Hyper-Royalism: Its Past Success and Present Predicament. Singapore:
ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute.
2018. “Toppling Democracy.” Journal of Contemporary Asia 38 (1): 11–37.
2021. นิติรัฐอภิสิทธิ์และราชนิติธรรม: ประวัติศาสตร์ภูมิปัญญาของRule by Law แบบไทย[Thai-style Rule of Law
and Legal State]. In รัฐราชาชาติว่าด้วยรัฐไทยในปัจจุบัน[The Royalist Nationalist State: On
Contemporary Thai State], edited by Thongchai Winichakul, 135–232. Nonthaburi:
Same Sky Book.
Ukrist Pathmanand. 2008. “Nation, Religion and Monarchy in the Fight against Thaksin.”
Last modiﬁed August 13, 2008. New Mandala. www.newmandala.org/nation-religion-
and-monarchy-in-the-ﬁght-against-thaksin/
Veerayooth Kanchoochat. 2016. “Reign-Seeking and the Rise of the Unelected in Thailand.”
Journal of Contemporary Asia 46 (3): 486–503.
Vibert, Frank. 2007. The Rise of the Unelected: Democracy and the New Separation of Power.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wanpat Youngmevittaya. 2017. พุทธทาสกับการให้ความชอบธรรมต่ออุดมการณ์แห่งรัฐไทย[Buddhadasa and the
Legitimation for the Ideology of the Thai State]. Journal of Social Science Naresuan
University 13 (1): 181–224.
180
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 203 ---
9
Establishing the King as the Source of the Constitution
Shifting ‘Bricolaged’ Narratives of Buddhist Kingship
from Siam to Thailand
Eugénie Mérieau
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Thailand’s constitutional order, as deﬁned and redeﬁned constantly by courts, scholars,
and kings from the late nineteenth century until present, is a bricolage of constitutional
monarchy and Buddhist kingship (Mérieau 2021b). In the mid-nineteenth century,
doctrines of law and kingship still relied mostly on concepts derived from Hinduism and
Buddhism. These doctrines were expressed in religious texts, treatises, and tales as
well as in the Phrathammasat portion of the Three Seals Code, dating back from the
Chakri Reformation of the early nineteenth century. From the late nineteenth
century, in its quest to become “civilized” (siwilai) and to escape colonization,
Siam engaged in a process of legal “modernisation” (Thongchai 2000). Thai modern
legal categories, concepts, rules, and doctrines were creatively invented, based on
borrowings from Western countries (from both common law and civil law traditions),
then hybridised with “re-invented” indigenous categories, often rooted in Buddhism.
In particular, Thai scholars and jurists indigenised European legal categories by
creating neologisms based on Pali, the sacred language of Therava¯da Buddhist
scriptures, and by fusing European doctrines with similar Buddhist narratives.
Besides the well-known history of the lèse-majesté law (Streckfuss 2011, Mérieau
2021a), one of these foundational “mergers” includes the hybridisation of the
European, monarchist, myth of the royal constitutional “octroy” (the king as the
source of law, who benevolently grants the Constitution to his subjects) with the Thai
Hindu-Buddhist myth of the dhammara¯ja king (the king is the upholder of the
dharma/natural law, who turns the wheel of the law). As a result, the king became,
in Thai doctrine, both the granter and “turner” of the country’s foundational law, the
source of the Thai constitutional order. This ideal was enshrined in the preambles of
the successive Thai constitutions from 1932 until this day, embodied in state institutions
and reenacted in various state ceremonies, themselves “bricolaged” using Buddhist and
Western symbolism, such as the ceremony of royal “constitution-granting.” The
181
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 204 ---
narrative of the king as the source of the Constitution is one of the key aspects of
Thailand’s “Buddhist constitutionalism” (Mérieau 2018).
The current Constitution, the 2017 Constitution, was “granted” (de jure: promul-
gated) by King Vajiralongkorn on 6 April 2017 – the date of the anniversary of the
Chakri dynasty’s foundation. The ritual depicted the king, seated on a golden
throne, signing the book of the Constitution in three copies to a kneeling then-
leader of the military junta, General Prayuth Chan-ocha (now “elected” Prime
Minister). The Constitution, in the form of a folded golden book called samutthai,
was handed back and forth between the king and the leader of the military junta on
a golden tray used to pass sacred objects and/or to pass objects from/to sacred people,
called a phanwenfa. The ceremony presented the Constitution as rooted in an
ancient tradition of Thai law drawing on Hindu and Buddhist ideas and images.
Echoing the tripartite nature of the Buddhist canon (Pali: Tipi_taka, literally three
baskets), the samutthai was kept in three thrice-folded copies. The golden tray
symbolised the royal gift of a sacred constitution: the king was here performing
the ritual of “constitutional octroy” according to which the Constitution is a sacred
grant of the king onto his people.
Yet, the imagery was a bricolage of the European idea of law as a gift from the
king with the Hindu-Buddhist idea of the king as the upholder and turner of the
sacred law, the dhamma. In this construction, the king is not only the source of the
positive legal order, but also the upholder of the natural (cosmic) legal order. This
doctrinal bricolage, as performed in the “constitution-granting” ritual, undoubtedly
aims to consolidate the king’s authority and legitimacy. Yet, it is not without its
challenges, as a bitter competition for legal supremacy plays out between the king
and the Constitution (or rather, between their respective defenders), a conﬂict
which still remains at the heart of the current Thai political crisis. This chapter will
trace this process of doctrinal bricolage from the nineteenth century until present
and reﬂect on some of its implications.
9.2 THE KING-DHAMMARĀJA AS UPHOLDER OF THE ‘ANCIENT
CONSTITUTION’ IN THE PHRATHAMMASAT OF THE THREE
SEALS CODE (1805)
In the mid-nineteenth century, the laws governing the Siamese monarchy were part
of a wider body of legal prescriptions assembled in a code called the “Three Seals
Code” (kotmai tra sam duang). The Three Seals Code had been compiled on the
order of Phraputtayotfachulalok (r. 1782–1809), later known as Rama I, the founder
of the Chakri dynasty, by a commission of royal scribes, pundits, and bra¯hma_nas
(Lingat 1929; Wales 1934). It was named after the three seals of the north (mytho-
logical lion), south (mythological elephant), and centre (crystal lotus) corresponding
respectively to the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Defence, and the Ministry
of Finance, a testimony to the territorial rather than functional organisation of the
182
Eugénie Mérieau
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 205 ---
ancient administration of Siam. Three ofﬁcial copies of the Code were kept: one
was deposited at the Royal Library, another in the king’s apartment, and a third in
the Court of Justice.
9.2.1 The King According to the Phrathammasat
The Three Seals Code contained a reconstructed version of the old laws of Siam,
dating back to the Ayutthaya, Thonburi, and early Bangkok periods. It had three
components: the Phrathammasat exposing the various sources of disputes (mula-
khadi) as derived, it claimed, from the Hindu Code of Manu; the Phrarachasat
detailing the various “ramiﬁcations of disputes” – namely, laws/rulings claimed to be
made by kings based on the principles of the Phrathammasat; and other pieces of
royal legislation not claimed to be derived from the Phrathammasat, called the
Phrarachanitisat, which were concerned mostly with administrative matters, such as
key royal edicts on legal procedures and civil and military administration, but also to
some extent with constitutional matters, such as the palace Law (kot montien ban)
regulating the exercise of royal power.
The Phrathammasat opens with a mention of the Three Jewels: the Buddha,
“discoverer of the Four Noble Truths,” the dhamma, or “nine transcendental
practices, to which must be added knowledge,” and ﬁnally the sangha, “the noble
community of the eight perfect disciples of the monk community.” The text gloriﬁes
the ideal of kingship as practiced by past kings as dhammara¯ja or Buddhist righteous
rulers, who governed according to the Ten Virtues of a Righteous King (totsapit-
rajadharma) (Saichon 2003; Thianpanya 2008). In its normative components, the
Phrathammasat also states that the king ought to subject his rule to the “Ten Virtues
of a Righteous King” as well as the thammasat at all times. Therefore, according to
the Phrathammasat, the Siamese king ought not to have legislative power, as the
king was only to have adjudicating powers: namely, his role was to apply the
thammasat, not to modify it (Lingat 1941, 26–31).1 The Phrathammasat also estab-
lished kings as bodhisattva, or Buddha-to-be, as cakravartin, or universal sovereign
rulers, and ﬁnally as maha¯sammata or great elected kings.
9.2.2 The King-Maha¯sammata Doctrine
Besides being a cakravartin and a bodhisattva, the dhammara¯ja is also referred to in
the Phrathammasat as a maha¯sammata. The Phrathammasat opens with the
following tale of origin: “A Lord bodhisattva was born as a great man at the start of
this era. After a time, disputes arose, and nobody could be found to control them.
Everyone came together in a meeting and appointed this great man to be the ruler
1
On the actual practice of royal law-making during the Ayuthaya Kingdom and early
Rattanakosin kingdoms, see Baker and Phongpaichit 2021.
Narratives of Buddhist Kingship in Thailand
183
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 206 ---
with the name King Maha¯sammata, equipped with the seven gem attributes [refer-
ring to the cakravartin]2, and accepted by all four continents.” (translation in Baker
and Pongpaichit 2016, 106). In the Phrathammasat, the maha¯sammata king is
elected by popular acclamation for his qualities, as the “most capable” person to
end chaos through the implementation of the dhamma. The maha¯sammata theory
thus posits a contractual basis of kingship, but without discarding the religious origin
of kingship.3 Indeed, the Phrathammasat states that the king was chosen by the
people based on his previously accumulated merit, which allowed him to claim
sovereignty and rule over the people:
All the branch matters described here [were created by] past kings [who] had
miraculous wisdom and accumulated merit (barami) to be rulers over the popu-
lace, to have fought with enemies, and to be powerful under the splendid white
umbrella, upholding moral truth, honesty, good conduct with wisdom, insight and
reason, with the intention to make the city and territory within the realm prosper in
happiness and joy. (Baker and Phongpaichit 2016, 100)
According to the Phrathammasat, kingship is acquired through the principle of
karmic retribution: the king reigns “thanks to the power of his merits” and this is the
basis of his “popular” election. As Stanley Tambiah puts it:
[The] elective theory of kingship is counterbalanced by asserting at the same time
that Maha¯sammata was a virtuous man, an embodiment of dharma and destined to
become a Buddha; and that it was as his minister that the sage Manu discovered the
perfect law. Thus we see how a contractual theory of government is yoked to the
charismatic properties of kingship, thereby constantly compelling the pragmatics of
politics to measure itself against an enduring standard. (1976, 13)
9.2.3 Secularisation of the King-dhammara¯ja Doctrine
The beliefs or religious-legal doctrines of kingship listed above, as written in the
Phrathammasat, have their origins in the Pali Canon, most notably in the Aggañña
Sutta and the ja¯taka or tales of the past lives of Buddha, as well as in various treatises
and epics, most notably the Three Worlds, a book about heavens and hells that
contains the ﬁrst systematic description of the world according to the Buddhist
cosmology, and the Ramakien, a Siamese version of the Ramayana. These were
rewritten in the early nineteenth century, prior to the launch of the legal
2
The seven gem attributes are those of a cakravartin or universal ruler, as described in the
cosmogony of the Three Worlds: the gem wheel, the gem elephant, the gem horse, the gem
woman, the gem treasurer, the gem son, and the gem jewel (Reynolds and Reynolds 1982,
125–72).
3
On the idea of contract, see Huxley 1996 and Collins 1996.
184
Eugénie Mérieau
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 207 ---
codiﬁcation process, on the order of Rama I as part of his project of the restoration of
royal authority relying on Buddhism (Wenk 1968; Wyatt 1982).
Among the ja¯taka tales, Rama I placed particular emphasis on the tale of the very
last incarnation of the Buddha as Prince Vessantara (Wales 1931, 31; Jory 2016). In
the tale, the prince gives away everything he possesses, including his wife and
children, to attain enlightenment, and this is precisely how he succeeds in becom-
ing the Buddha. In his version of the Three Worlds, Rama I placed particular
emphasis on the story of the King-dhammara¯ja (cakravartin-bodhisattva), which
he put at the very centre of the story.4 Lastly, his version of the Ramakien tells the
story of a prince, Phra Ram, said to exhibit the practice of the “Ten Virtues of a
Righteous King.” He is also of divine nature as an avatar of the god Vishnu (Phra
Narai in Thai). Thanks to his royal virtues, his ﬁghts with demons to save his
abducted wife Sita are ultimately victorious. These three stories, as rewritten in
the early nineteenth century on the order of Rama I, included powerful allegories of
the Siamese concept of royalty, which underscored the ideals of Buddhist royal
virtue mentioned above. In the end, both the Three Worlds and the Tipi_taka were
referred to in the preface to the Phrathammasat (Baker and Pasuk 2016, 104), but the
Ramakien was not.
From the mid-nineteenth century, the tale of Vessantara, the Three Worlds, and
the Ramakien began to be progressively reduced to the status of non-historical, non-
scientiﬁc “tales,” while the Hindu gods were downgraded to make way for the
worship owed to the Buddha. The Siamese kings were nonetheless considered
sommuthithep or “supposed gods,” avatars of Vishnu or Shiva, an idea that was
reenacted in state ceremonies (Riggs 1966, 99). Yet, the entire scientiﬁc and
historical character of Buddhist literature was discarded. The ja¯takas and stories of
4
Chapter 1 deals with the realm of hell beings, Chapter 2 with the realm of animals, Chapter 3
with the realm of the suffering ghosts, Chapter 4 with the realm of the Asura, Chapter 5 with
the realm of men, Chapter 6 with the realm of the devata, Chapter 7 with the world with only a
remnant of material factors, Chapter 8 with the world without material form, Chapter 9 with
the Cakkavaka and the Jambu continent, Chapter 10 with the destruction and renewal of the
Mahakappa, and Chapter 11 with nibbana and the path. Originally written in the times of
Ayuthaya and rewritten at the time of the Chakri Reformation, it describes a world composed of
thirty-one levels of birth and rebirth governed by the laws of karma and dharma. According to
the Three Worlds cosmogony, the highest levels of the cosmos are the realm of the brahma
(phrom), whereas thevada or thep inhabit inferior levels. Dusit, the fourth level of paradise, is
the house of the bodhisatva before he returns as Buddha. The sommuthithep Buddhist King
ﬁnds himself at the summit of the terrestrial hierarchy, acting as an interface between hell and
paradise. In the fourteenth-century version, the character of the Universal Monarch, called
chakravatin, appears halfway through the book, between hell and paradise. He is described as
resting in his Palace when the Wheel of the Law, the Dharmachak, rises out of the Ocean to
reward his practice of the ten Buddhist Virtues. Then, turning the Wheel of the Law, the
Universal Monarch conquers the four continents of the Universe, before returning to the
Palace. His triumphant return is welcomed by the apparition of celestial attributes: woman,
elephant, horse etc. See Reynolds and Reynolds 1982. In the Rama I version of the Three
Worlds, the Book opens on the very ﬁgure of the Dharmaraja.
Narratives of Buddhist Kingship in Thailand
185
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 208 ---
the life of the Buddhas, which until then had been considered historical facts, as
well as the Three Worlds, which until then had been considered somewhat of a
treatise on geography (Thongchai 1994) were reassessed and rebranded as “folk
tales”: they became part of the Western category of literature. The theories of the
bodhisattva and cakravartin as well as the maha¯sammata were likewise dismissed as
old superstitions (Jory 2016, 21).
The general movement towards rationalisation and secularisation that had been
born out of the encounter with the West was bringing about new challenges to the
monarchy. The monarch could no longer derive his authority simply from a
supposed lineage linking him to the Buddha, nor from his status as Buddha-to-be
or universal sovereign. Instead, the monarchy would have to base its legitimacy on
the dynastic principle pertaining to a speciﬁc territory and population. The
maha¯sammata doctrine of the elected king would have to be secularised and
“legalised” to make it acceptable by Western standards. At the same time, based
on European understandings of law and kingship, new tools and doctrines of
sovereignty could be devised to enable Siamese kings to acquire effective legislative
power and then use the law to consolidate their authority. Among these tools, the
principle of a modern constitution soon appealed to Siamese kings.
9.3 THE KING-DHAMMARĀJA IN THE 1932 “GRANTED”
CONSTITUTION
From the end of the nineteenth century to the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century,
successive Thai kings Chulalongkorn (r. 1868–1910), Vajiravudh (r. 1910–25) and
Prajadhipok (r. 1925–35) engaged in various constitution-drafting projects. In order
to establish absolutism, King Chulalongkorn had a Bonapartist Constitution (but
without a parliament) drafted by an advisor in 1889.5 His successors, King
Vajiravudh and King Prajadhipok, likewise engaged in constitution-drafting experi-
ments, in 1918,6 1926,7 and 1932,8 drawing from various models derived from the
unwritten British Constitution, but all nonetheless articulated around the project of
securing royal sovereignty.
These constitutional drafts all attempted to consolidate royal authority by estab-
lishing the king as the source of the Constitution and increasing his legislative
powers, drawing on the nineteenth-century European model of so-called limited
monarchy, especially in its Bonapartist version, as well as on the newly imported
tenets of legal positivism, which vested legal authority in the dicta of sovereigns
5
พระราชกฤษฎีกาฉบับ๑ว่าด้วยราชประเพณีกรุงสยาม[1889 First Law on Royal Custom in Siam].
6
ธรรมนูญ
ดุสิดธานีลักษณปกครองคณะนนาคาภิบาล[1918 Constitution
of the
Administration
of
the
Municipality], 7 November 1918.
7
‘An Outline of Preliminary Draft’ [Francis B. Sayre’s draft Constitution], 27 July 1926.
8
‘An Outline of Changes in the Form of Government’ [Phraya Sriwisanwacha – Raymond
B. Stevens draft Constitution], March 1932.
186
Eugénie Mérieau
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 209 ---
rather than cosmic principles. In particular, kings and their legal advisors looked to
the doctrine of “granted constitutionalism,” which established the king as the
sovereign source of the Constitution, a modern construct from continental
European monarchies, which could easily be hybridised with traditional theories
of Buddhist kingship.
9.3.1 The Bricolage of the Word “Constitution” (“Rattathammanun”)
These endeavours, however, were hijacked by the 1932 Revolution, which abolished
the absolute monarchy in Siam. In June 1932, the People’s Party, under the
leadership of French-educated jurist Pridi Banomyong, imposed a constitution on
King Prajadhipok. As the concept of “constitution” was imported, Pridi and his
group needed to create a Thai term for it. To translate the foreign word “consti-
tution,” they could either build a secularised term, or a term rooted in the Buddhist
idea of law, dhamma, thamma in Thai. The People’s Party chose to rely on terms
found in the Three Seals Code and called its ﬁrst constitution the “Fundamental
Rule of Procedure for the Administration of Siam” (phrarachabanyat thammanun
kan pokkrong phaendin). Phrarachabanyat referred at the time to royal legislation,
while thammanun referred to dhamma: in the Three Seals Code, the title contain-
ing the cosmic law discovered by Manu was called laksana phrathammanun.
Finally, phaendin was the traditional term for territory, which was strongly associated
with traditional conceptions of kingship. The term was thus entirely rooted in Thai
traditional concepts of law and kingship.
The term however did not survive long. An inﬂuential prince who was sympa-
thetic to the revolution, Oxford-educated Wan Waithayakon, proposed a new word:
rattathammanun, based on a new, secularist, Western-oriented word rat for state and
on the traditional, Buddhist-derived word thammanun. To him, a constitution was
“sacred” (saksith) and the word used to refer to it should denote this sacredness. At
the same time, a constitution was also a modern construct based on Western
political concepts, such as the idea of a nation-state. In accordance with Prince
Wan’s proposal, the following Constitution, adopted in December of the same year,
was called rattathammanun, mixing Buddhist and Western conceptions of law
and kingship.
9.3.2 Merging the King-dhammara¯ja Doctrine and Doctrine
of “Granted Constitutionalism”
The preamble of the December 1932 Constitution enshrined Hindu-Buddhist
doctrines of kingship. It stated that the Constitution, on the one hand, had been
“granted” (phrarachathan) by the king and, on the other hand, bestowed upon the
king the duty “to preserve the country eternally”. The preamble delved into the “150
years of absolute monarchy under the principle of the Ten Virtues of a Righteous
Narratives of Buddhist Kingship in Thailand
187
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 210 ---
King.” The king’s full name with titles, added to the preamble of the Constitution,
occupied the whole of the ﬁrst page of the Constitution in thirteen lines. He bore
the titles of bodhisattva, maha¯sammata, Great Elect, cakravartin, divine angel,
reincarnation of Vishnu, and, last but not least, dhammara¯ja. In the ﬁrst title of
the Constitution, dealing with kingship, the traditional conceptions of kingship and
the law were twisted and secularised: as the supreme commander of the army, the
king was associated with the traditional function of cakravartin, as the patron of
Buddhism, with that of bodhisattva, and as the sovereign exercising legislative,
executive, and judicial power in the name of the people, with the dhammara¯ja–
maha¯sammata.
The December 1932 Constitution stated that sovereignty did not belong to
Siamese subjects but “emanate[d] from the people,” being “exercised by the king
in accordance with the dispositions of this Constitution” (Article 2). Sovereignty was
referred to by a new term, amnatipatai, formed from a Pali sufﬁx. According to
Phraya Sriwisanwacha, one of the key drafters of the December Constitution:
When we say that sovereignty comes from the people, it means that the king
ascends the throne upon invitation by the people, what is in conformity with our
old precept which stated in the name of the king that he had been
elected. (Nattapol 2013, 16)
Likewise, Prime Minister Phraya Manopakorn Nithithada explained that this article
on sovereignty and the doctrine it relied on in fact derived from the maha¯sammata
doctrine:
In reality, the ﬁrst part of the article [on sovereignty] is simply a reafﬁrmation of our
ancient traditions (phrapheni boran). Indeed, if we open ancient books, it is said in
the very name of the king that he has been elected; in the coronation ceremony,
there are brahmins and high civil servants who give the crown jewels, representing
the fact that the king ascends the throne at the invitation of the people and not by
Heaven’s Will, what some foreign countries cannot understand. (Noranit 2009, 19)
In the parliamentary debates of 1932, Phraya Manopakorn Nithithada also explained
that the Constitution was “granted” by the king, therefore the king always retained
sovereignty, as he pre-existed the Constitution. But, because he was “elected,” he
did so “in the name of the people.” This rationale justiﬁed why the Constitution did
not mandate that the king swear an oath of allegiance to uphold it. As a member of
the Constitution-drafting committee explained: “We know well that the king must
swear an oath before the representatives of the Therava¯da gods, as well as Buddha,
etc. Consequently, [the text] can remain silent [on the issue of the royal oath to the
Constitution]” (Noranit 2009, 48).
The result is that, in the Siamese constitutional imaginary of that time, the king
was accountable to Therava¯da gods and dhamma, but not to the Constitution he
“gave”; he must uphold dhamma but does not need to submit himself to “his own”
188
Eugénie Mérieau
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 211 ---
Constitution. Therefore, the 1932 Constitution, which by all accounts resembled a
Western parliamentary monarchy constitution, was nevertheless very much inﬂu-
enced by the king-dhammara¯ja doctrine. The king remained, albeit in a modernised
and more symbolic form, the law-giver or, rather, the constitution-giver.
9.3.3 The Cult of the Sacred Constitution (as a Royal Gift)
It must be noted that during this time, religious discourse increasingly permeated
the way the Constitution was understood: members of the People’s Party framed the
Constitution as “sacred” (rattathammanun saksith) (Nattapol 2013, 18–19; Suthachai
2008, 33–34; Bandit 2007, 13) precisely because it had been a “king’s octroy”
(rattathammanun phrarachathan). In 1933, as a royalist counterrevolution was
looming large, revolutionaries including Pridi Banomyong used the idea of the
“royally granted constitution” to mobilise people throughout the country in its
defence, despite the fact that they had fought for the recognition of parliamentary
sovereignty at the expense of royal sovereignty. Symbolically, constitutional suprem-
acy was replacing royal supremacy, even while drawing its legitimacy from the
monarchy and borrowing its modes of legitimation, many of which had their roots
in Buddhism. Eventually, the royalist counterrevolution was defeated, and its leaders
went into exile.
From 1934, as a way to consolidate the revolution, the government, led by Pridi as
minister of the interior, continued to work hard to shift the locus of sacredness from
the monarchy to the Constitution. The Constitution became the object of a truly
ofﬁcial cult. An “Association for the Constitution” (samakhom khana rattathamma-
noon), with branches all over the country, organised celebrations and marches in the
honour of the Constitution, mimicking past ceremonies for the king (Puli 2018).
The Constitution was worshipped as a “royal gift,” angering then-King Prajadhipok.
In his last words before abdication, as he hopelessly pleaded with the government to
get back some of his old, customary royal prerogatives, he wrote to the members of
the People’s Party: “The Constitution should not be sacred, it should be revisable. It
is not right to venerate it with scented candles as you do, venerating the Constitution
is a joke!” (Mérieau 2021, 99). Following Prajadhipok’s abdication in March 1935,
the People’s Party aimed to ﬁll the void left by the disappearance of the ﬁgure of the
king by relying even more on the cult of the Constitution. Firmly in power, and
without a king, the People’s Party commissioned two monuments to honour the
new cult of the Constitution.
The ﬁrst ediﬁce, called “Safeguarding the Constitution” was built in 1936 to
commemorate the victory of the People’s Party over the attempted royalist counter-
revolution led by Prince Boworadet in 1933. It is the burial site of the remains of
those who “fought and died for the Constitution” (Thanavi 2018, 235). A second
monument, the “Democracy Monument,” was commissioned in 1939 to commem-
orate the 1932 abolition of the absolute monarchy. It portrays Thai democracy as
Narratives of Buddhist Kingship in Thailand
189
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 212 ---
being composed of ﬁve elements: the four branches of the Thai security forces
(Army, Navy, Air Force, and Thai police) at the periphery, and the Constitution, at
its core. The Constitution is represented in a Buddhist-scripture-like longitudinal
book made of golden palm leaves, the samutthai, placed on top of two royal golden
trays used for sacred objects – the phanwenfa – in effect, displaying the Constitution
as a sacred object. The security forces are represented by three erect, obelisk-like, 24-
metre-high wings surrounding and overlooking the Constitution. The monument
embodies the following narrative: that democracy takes the form of a sacred
“granted” Constitution, whose guardian is the military (Nidhi 2004, 106). In both
these monuments, it is the Constitution, rather than the king, that becomes the
sacred centre of the nation: the Democracy Monument also marks Thailand’s
“kilometre zero” – the central location from which all distances are measured
(Thanavi 2016). As such, it is the Constitution that becomes the rallying symbol of
the nation.
9.4 THE KING-DHAMMARĀJA IN CONTEMPORARY
CONSTITUTIONAL DOCTRINE
Following King Prajadhipok’s abdication in 1935, his nephew, Ananda Mahidol, was
proclaimed king by the Assembly. As he was then a young student in Switzerland, a
council of regents was appointed, giving the People’s Party free rein to design Thai
political institutions and eradicate any traces of royal sovereignty. From Ananda’s
return to the kingdom in 1946 onwards, the monarchy started to reclaim Buddhism
at the expense of the People’s Party and reafﬁrm its role as dhammara¯ja-source of
the Constitution.
9.4.1 Duties of a King: Performing Constitution-Granting Ceremonies
In 1946, King Ananda Mahidol agreed to return to the kingdom at the request of
then-prime minister Pridi Banomyong in order to promulgate the 1946 Constitution:
for Pridi, it was important to have the king ritually re-enact the myth of the “royal
octroy” in order to make the 1946 Constitution as “sacred” as its predecessor, the
December 1932 Constitution. The ceremony was grandiose and seemed to mark the
reconciliation between the monarchy and the People’s Party. However, a few days
later, King Ananda died from a bullet wound in the head in his palace bedchamber.
Amidst the state of general shock and confusion, his younger brother, Bhumibol
Adulyadej was named king as Rama IX. He was crowned in May 1950 in a traditional
Hindu-Buddhist ceremony in which he made clear that he was mobilising Buddhist
narratives on kingship to establish his authority as a dhammara¯ja. He pronounced
the following, very short Accession Speech: “I shall reign by dharma, for the beneﬁt
and happiness of all the Thai people.”
190
Eugénie Mérieau
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 213 ---
The return of Bhumibol to the kingdom coincided with the rise of military
dictatorship. In 1957, US-backed General Sarit Thanarat seized power in a coup,
with the support of the king. General Sarit had nothing but contempt for the
constitutional project, which he considered alien to Thai culture. Yet he appointed
a constitution-drafting assembly, which doubled as acting legislative assembly, and
whose work continued until after his death in 1963. In 1968, the Assembly had ﬁnally
a complete text: it was promulgated in great pomp by King Bhumibol in a ceremony
of “royal octroy” (Darling 1977, 117). The king, seated on his throne, signed the three
copies of the Constitution on a phanwenfa tray, given to his people. The ceremony
was televised and photographed, with copies distributed all over the kingdom for
people to worship. Bhumibol had presided over his ﬁrst “constitution-granting
ceremony,” just as Prajadhipok had done in 1932 and Ananda in 1946. Even though
the 1968 Constitution did not last long – it would be abolished by a coup in 1971 –
this ceremony marked a turning point: from this moment, King Bhumibol would
increasingly act as a modern dhammara¯ja, or at least his actions would increasingly
be interpreted as such by the legal profession. The concept of dhammara¯ja would
invite itself back into law handbooks, articles, and essays.
Bhumibol had a ﬁrst occasion to project an image of true dhammara¯ja in 1973.
That year, students demanded that the military, which had come to power in the
1971 coup, resign and let them draft a new, democratic constitution. On 14 October
1973, they organised mass protests all over Bangkok. The king offered shelter and
protection in his palace to the students who were ﬂeeing the police. These moments
were photographed, and the photographs distributed throughout the kingdom.
Thanks to the king’s intervention, the protests were successful: the military govern-
ment resigned, and Bhumibol “granted” the students a prime minister of his own
choice but to their liking, Sanya Dharmasakti, the rector of Thammasat University.
Rama IX also proposed the convening of a “National Convention” of nearly 2,500
members who would be tasked with the selection of new members of the parlia-
ment. He then dissolved the Assembly and directly appointed the members of the
National Convention through a Royal Command. The National Convention was
headed by Prince Wan Waithayakorn, the author of the Buddhist-inspired Thai
neologism for “Constitution.” The National Convention selected the members of
the new parliament in December 1973. Finally, a new constitution-drafting com-
mittee was appointed. The drafting started in early 1974 and the Constitution was
ﬁrst presented to the cabinet in February, before sailing through the Assembly.
9.4.2 The Concept of Rachaprachasamai Constitution
(King-People “Joint” Constitution)
The 1974 Constitution had literally been granted by the king through direct royal
appointment of both the prime minister, called “the royally-granted prime minis-
ter” (nayok phrarachathan) and the legislature, called the “royally-granted house”
Narratives of Buddhist Kingship in Thailand
191
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 214 ---
(sapha phrarachathan). Its preamble reafﬁrmed the myth of Prajadhipok’s initial
royal octroy:
King Prajadhipok granted the constitution of Siam to the Siamese people on
December 10, 1932 – which established democracy in Siam, in accordance with
the royal wish to grant royal power to the Siamese people in its entirety, not to a
person or a group in particular; [a democracy] in which the Head of State exercises
sovereignty of the people in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.9
In line with the principle of royal sovereignty inherent in the doctrine of royal
octroy, the king could veto, as well as order, the holding of a referendum on any
proposition of constitutional revision (Article 220). This Constitution, which was
highly royalist – as the Senate was initially fully and directly appointed by the king
(Article 107) – was referred to as the “King-People Joint Constitution” (rattathama-
nun chabap rachaphrachasamasai), owing to the role played by the king in its
engineering, together with the amount of public participation involved (Kobkua
1981, 58). Rachaphrachasamasai (joint King-people) was actually a transformation of
the old doctrine of anekchonnikon samosonsammut according to which the king and
the people are one united body, a complementarity between “Heaven” and “Earth,”
itself echoing the maha¯sammata doctrine:
According to the mode of governance of rachaphrachasamasai, the Monarchy and
the people govern together. The Monarchy has more prerogative to govern than in
a democracy and the people also have more power to govern than in the past
experience of Thai Democracy. The Monarchy and the People in such a system are
not dangers to one another. They love each other and help each other always. If the
Monarchy and the People unite to govern the country together, and help each
other out, as has always been the case, I have the hope that our land will turn into
the land of peace and development in all dimensions according to the wishes of
the people. (Kukrit 1971)
In the same period, a new doctrinal theory, named “Democracy with the King as
Head of State” (prachatipatai seung mi phramahakasat pen pramuk), emerged,
building on the idea of rachaprachasamasai and mixing elements of constitutional
monarchy, notably Walter Bagehot’s tripartite convention (the king has “the right to
be consulted, to warn and to encourage”) and elements of Buddhist kingship. This
theory referred to kingship as being deﬁned by the Ten Virtues of a Righteous King,
and by the king’s election – in other words, the modern king was still both a
dhammara¯ja and a maha¯sammata. In “the Democratic System with the King as
Head of State,” there were two sources of law. The positive law (khotmai) gave the
king the power to exercise sovereignty in the executive, legislative, and judicial
domains through the cabinet, the parliament and the judiciary, as well as grant royal
pardons and receive petitions from the people, following Bagehot’s tripartite
9
1974 Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand, preamble. Translation by the author.
192
Eugénie Mérieau
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 215 ---
convention. The royal customary law (rachaphrapheni) was composed of the 26
Royal Virtues. These were the Ten Virtues of a Righteous King (generosity, morals,
sacriﬁce, honesty, gentleness, diligence, compassion, non-violence and non-harm,
patience, and righteousness); the Twelve Virtues of the cakravartin (chakravativat) (to
love and be compassionate to his subjects, to adhere and maintain dhamma, to judge
cases with justice, equity and rapidity, to listen to the advice of philosophers and act
accordingly, to abstain from committing the ﬁve major sins – killing, stealing,
committing adultery, lying, and drinking alcohol – to feel compassion and not envy
the wealth or the work of the people, to collect taxes but not to increase them, to give
to the poor, to distribute wealth to civil servants, to judge cases meticulously, to
honour and look after bra¯hma_nas and philosophers, and to distribute rewards and
honours to those who are deserving); and the additional Four Virtues of a bodhisattva
(sangkhahawatu) (a sense of sacriﬁce, carefulness in speech, social usefulness in
action, consistency and appropriateness of action) (Thanin 1976, 32–33).
The aim of a dhammara¯ja king is to attain the status of cakravartin and bodhisat-
tva by demonstrating the perfect practice of these twenty-six cumulative virtues
(Sawaeng 2000, 90–93). As presented in this formula, then, modern Buddhist
kingship still relied on the ideals of bodhisattva, cakravartin, maha¯sammata, and
dhammara¯ja, and royal customary law still pre-existed positive law. In his authorita-
tive handbook on the subject, Thanin Kraivichien gives, as an example of a key
kingly duty, that of giving (than) a constitution to his subjects (1976, 33).
9.4.3 The Concept of “Shared Sovereignty” between the King and the People
In developing the theory of “Democracy with the King as Head of State,” Thanin
suggested that “Thai-Style Democracy” did not require a constitution nor elections
held periodically. Since the king was, in a mythical sense, elected, and thereby
represented the people, there was democracy, even in times of military dictatorship.
In addition, the king always retained his sovereignty: being the army chief, the king
was, during coups or when there was no constitution under military dictatorship,
still fully sovereign (Thanin 1976, 26–29). Regarding the king’s role in times of crisis,
Thanin stated: “when the country enters into a crisis, one can no longer rely on the
constitution at all. One must rely on the wisdom (phrapricha) of the king” (1976,
58). Thanin’s legal theory established the king as commander of the army and
source of political legitimacy. He linked it with the legality of military coups through
the royal prerogative of declaring and revoking martial law:
In military terms, the monarchy (phramahakasat) means “great warrior.” This is
because in ancient times, the king was the one leading in the battleﬁeld, ﬁghting
courageously against the enemy . . . The legacy has continued until today, and that
is why the king is the army chief according to the constitution . . . The title of
general (chompon) is the highest in the military hierarchy, it is true, but the king has
an even higher status, which is army chief. It is not a military rank, but it is a title for
Narratives of Buddhist Kingship in Thailand
193
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 216 ---
the monarchy specially, which is based on royal constitutional customs (nittira-
chaphrapheni) since ancient times . . . That is why this constitution gives the king
the title of army chief and the power to declare and revoke Martial Law. (1976, 26)
Finally, building on both the theory of rachaprachasamasai and the theory of
“Democracy with the King as Head of State,” prominent Thai jurists later developed
the “doctrine of King-people’s shared sovereignty,” according to which the king and
the people hold joint or shared sovereignty, something which bears practical conse-
quences in times of military coups:
In the Thai democratic system, sovereignty is held by the king and the people. It
thus differs from other countries in which the people are the only bearer of
sovereignty. There are two reasons for this. The ﬁrst reason relates to traditions
(phrapheni). The Thai Monarchy is identiﬁed with the Thai people, and this has
become a tradition. The second reason relates to law. Sovereignty has at all times
belonged to the king. When the People’s Party changed the system of government,
the royalty, holder of sovereignty, granted it to the people by giving a constitution.
The king accepted to be placed under the authority of the constitution but would
still have the sovereign power in the name of the people. Whenever a coup
abolishes the constitution, one must consider that the power given with the
constitution goes back to the monarch, being the sovereign before June
24, 1932. (Bowornsak 2007, 143)
According to this doctrine – which was never explicitly accepted by the court
(Mérieau 2021, 241) – whenever the king signs the interim constitution after a coup,
the act is considered legal, and sovereignty becomes “shared” with the people. The
coup then is legalised whenever it bears the king’s signature. This all derived from
the fact that the king is the source of the Constitution. In The Monarchy in the
System of Democracy, a book commissioned by the National Legislative Assembly
appointed by the military in 2007, prominent Thai jurist Meechai Reechupan
explained how Thailand’s luck, “a luck unique in comparison to other countries,”
was that all Thai kings, whether absolute or constitutional monarchs, had always
ruled according to doctrines of Buddhist kingship, and because – since Prajadhipok
had unilaterally granted the 1932 Constitution to the people (the Interim
Constitution bearing the sole signature of the king) – the monarchy remains to date
the source (thi ma) of the Constitution and constitutionalism in the country
(Meechai 2007, 5). Even though this doctrine was never explicitly recognised by
the courts, implicit references and traces of the doctrine can be found in several
landmark rulings of the Constitutional Court.
9.5 CONCLUSION
The dhammara¯ja (cakravartin/bodhisattva) and maha¯sammata theories of royal
power – what can be called “the four images of Buddhist kingship” – were
194
Eugénie Mérieau
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 217 ---
progressively secularised throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth centur-
ies, then Westernised and articulated with legal and constitutional theories in the
1930s. The Siamese term for dhamma, based on the Pali word, was used to
Buddhicise the Western borrowings so as to “indigenise” them. The nineteenth-
century European model of limited monarchy, relying on the idea of the royally
granted constitution, was imported and hybridised with the doctrine of the elected
king and the Hindu-Buddhist conceptions of kingship and the law. By the 1930s, all
references to the dhamma, the thammasat or the rajasat had seemingly been
removed from the law and the doctrines of kingship, but in fact, they had been re-
invested in a new sacred object: the Constitution. The ﬁction of the Constitution as
a royal octroy was enshrined in the preamble to the 1932 Constitution and since
then, a reference to the royal octroy appeared in almost all permanent constitutions.
In law handbooks, various doctrines on royal sovereignty (such as rachaprachama-
sai) married the doctrine of “granted constitutionalism” with that of the dham-
mara¯ja doctrine. Altogether, the doctrine of royal constitutional octroy, according
to which the Constitution is a royal gift, established the king as the source of the
Thai constitutional order, therefore endowed with powers to grant, suspend, and
abolish the Constitution.
These various theories, derived from the bricolage of Western and Buddhist
concepts of the Constitution as the king’s gift to his people, still have much salience
today. The 2017 Constitution states in its preamble that it has been graciously
“granted” by King Vajiralongkorn, following the initial “royal octroy” of a consti-
tution by King Prajadhipok in 1932. Additionally, the document refers to the
Buddhist-kingship-infused narrative of “Democracy with the King as Head of
State” almost ﬁfteen times in the body of its text: “Democracy with the King as
Head of State” is deﬁned as Thailand’s constitutional identity, protected by the
Constitutional Court from both amendment (through an eternity clause prohibiting
amendment) and from “threats” by political parties and individuals (by a clause
allowing the court to order the cessation of such “threat” including the dissolution of
the
political
party
in
question).
Like
former
Thai
constitutions,
the
2017 Constitution gives the king a constitutional veto over all constitutional, legisla-
tive, and executive matters – in fact, the title on the monarchy in successive Thai
constitutions has been the most stable of all titles since 1932. In the words of Thanin,
“the reason why the status of the monarchy was never changed in any epoch, no
matter how many times the constitution was abrogated, is because this institution
has ultimate stability and has inherent perfection so that there has never been any
need to alter it” (1976, 30).
references
Baker, Chris and Pasuk Phongpaichit. 2016. The Palace Law of Ayutthaya and the
Thammasat: Law and Kingship in Siam. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Narratives of Buddhist Kingship in Thailand
195
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 218 ---
2021. “Thammasat, Custom, and Royal Authority in Siam’s Legal History.” In Thai Legal
History: From Traditional to Modern Law, edited by Andrew Harding and Munin
Pongsapan, 23–40. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bandit Chanrochanakit. 2007. ชีวประวัติธรรมนูญการปกครองและรัฐธรรมนูญแห่งราชอาณาจักรไทยพ.ศ. 2475–2520
[A Biography of the Interim Constitutions and the Constitutions of the Kingdom of
Thailand 1932–1977]. Bangkok: Research Development Fund.
Bowornsak
Uwanno.
2007.
กฎหมายมหาชน
เล่ม
2:
การแบ่งแยกกฎหมายมหาชน-เอกชน
และพัฒนาการกฎหมายมหาชนในประเทศไทย[Public Law Vol. 2: The Separation of Public Law and
Private Law and the Development of Public Law in Thailand]. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn
University Press.
Collins, Steven. 1996. “The Lion’s Roar on the Wheel-Turning King: A Response to Andrew
Huxley’s ‘The Buddha and the Social Contract.’” Journal of Indian Philosophy 24:
421–46.
Darling, Frank C. 1977. “Thailand in 1976: Another Defeat for Constitutional Democracy.”
Asian Survey 17: 116–32.
Huxley, Andrew. 1996. “The Buddha and the Social Contract.” Journal of Indian Philosophy
24: 407–20.
Jory, Patrick. 2016. Thailand’s Theory of Monarchy: The Vessantara Jataka and the Idea of the
Perfect Man. New York: State University of New York Press.
Kobkua Suwannathat-Pian. 1981. “The Monarchy and Constitutional Change since 1972.” In
Reforming Thai Politics, edited by Duncan McCargo, 57–71. Copenhagen: NIAS.
Kukrit Pramoj. 1971. Column in Siam Rath, 11 December.
Lingat, Robert. 1929. “Note sur la révision des lois siamoises en 1805.” Journal of the Siam
Society 23: 19–27.
1941. “Evolution of the Conception of Law in Burma and Siam.” Journal of the Siam
Society 38: 9–31.
Meechai
Reechupan.
2007.
“The
King
According
to
the
Constitution.”
In
พระมหากษัตริย์ในระบอบประชาธิปไตย[The Monarchy in the System of Democracy], edited by
National Legislative Assembly, 4–9. Bangkok: Ofﬁce of the National Legislative
Assembly.
Mérieau Eugénie. 2018. “Buddhist Constitutionalism in Thailand: When Ra¯jadhamma¯
Supersedes the Constitution.” Asian Journal of Comparative Law 13: 283–305.
2021. Constitutional Bricolage: Thailand’s Sacred Monarchy vs. The Rule of Law. Oxford:
Hart.
Nattapol Chaiching. 2013. ขอฝันใฝ่ในฝันอันเหลื่อเชื่อ. [Dreaming the Impossible Dream: The Counter-
Revolutionary Movement in Siam]. Nonthaburi: Same Sky Books.
Nidhi Eoseewong. 2004. ชาติไทย, เมืองไทย, แบบเรียนและอนุสาวรีย์ว่าด้วยวัฒนธรรม, รัฐและรูปการจิตสํานึก. [The
Thai Nation, Thai Politics, Textbook and Monuments: About Culture, the State, and
Consciousness]. Bangkok: Matichon.
Noranit Settabutr (ed). 2009. เอกสารการพิจารณาร่างรัฐธรรมนูญ๑๐ธันวาคม๒๔๗๕. [Documents Related to
the Examination of the Draft 10 December 1932 Constitution]. Bangkok: Thammasat
University Press.
Puli Fuwongcharoen. 2018. “Long live the Rattathammanun.” Modern Asian Studies 52 (2):
609–44.
Reynolds, Frank and Mani Reynolds. 1982. Three Worlds According to King Ruang: A Thai
Buddhist Cosmology. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Riggs, Fred. 1966. Thailand: The Modernization of the Bureaucratic Polity. Honolulu: East-
West Center.
196
Eugénie Mérieau
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 219 ---
Saichon Sattayanurak. 2003. พุทธศาสนากับแนวคิดทางการเมืองในรัชสมัยพระบาทสมเด็จพระพุทธยอดฟ้าจุฬาโลก(พ.ศ.
2325–2352) [Buddhism and Political Ideologies in the Times of Phraphuttayotfachulalok
(1782–1809)]. Bangkok: Matichon.
Sawaeng Bunchalemphiwat. 2000. ประวัติศาสต์รกฎหมายไทย. [Thai Legal History]. Bangkok:
Winyuchon.
Suthachai Yimprasert. 2008. สายธารประวัติศาสตร์ประชาธิปไตยไทย. [A View of the History of Thai
Democracy]. Bangkok: Democracy Foundation.
Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. 1976. World Conqueror and World Renouncer: A Study of
Buddhism and Polity in Thailand against a Historical Background. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Thanavi Chotpradit. 2016. Revolution versus Counter-Revolution: The People’s Party and the
Royalist(s) in Visual Dialogue. PhD dissertation, University of London.
2018. “Countering Royalism with Constitutionalism: The People’s Party’s Visual Culture
after the Boworadet Rebellion.” South East Asia Research 26: 235–55.
Thanin Kraivichien. 1976. พระมหากษัตริย์ไทยในระบอบประชาธิปไตย. [The Thai Monarchy in the
Democratic System]. Bangkok: Ministry of Education.
Thianpanya
Paphatsaun.
2008.
จักรวาลวิทยาสยาม:
การศึกษาที่มาของอํานาจทางการเมือง
และกฎหมายในกฎหมายตราสามดวง. [Siamese Cosmology: A Study of the Sources of Political and
Legal Authorities in the Three Seals Law]. Bangkok: Thammasat University Press.
Thongchai Winichakul. 1994. Siam Mapped: A History of the Geo-body of a Nation.
Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
2000. “The Quest for ‘Siwilai’: A Geographical Discourse of Civilizational Thinking in the
Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth-Century Siam.” The Journal of Asian Studies 59:
528–49.
Wales, H. G. Quaritch. 1931. Siamese State Ceremonies: Their History and Function. London:
Bernard Quaritch Ltd.
1934. Ancient Siamese Government and Administration. London: Bernard Quaritch Ltd.
Wenk, Klaus. 1968. The Restoration of Thailand under Rama I, 1782–1809. Tucson: University
of Arizona Press.
Wyatt, David K. 1982. “The Subtle Revolution of King Rama I of Siam.” In Moral Order and
the Question of Change: Essays on Southeast Asian Thought, edited by David K. Wyatt
and Alexander Woodside, 9–52. New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asia Studies.
Narratives of Buddhist Kingship in Thailand
197
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 220 ---
10
Buddhist Constitutionalism beyond Constitutional Law
Buddhist Statecraft and Military Ideology in Myanmar
Iselin Frydenlund*
10.1 INTRODUCTION: BUDDHIST CONSTITUTIONALISM
UNDER MILITARY RULE
In Burma/Myanmar, the constitutional regulation of religion has undergone major
shifts following the country’s successive political transformations from democratic
multi-party system to one-party (one man) socialist military rule, to military “law and
order” rule, to hybrid regime and “post-dictatorship,” and as of February 1, 2021,
direct military rule. The constitutional management of religion in Burma/Myanmar
has relied upon democratic procedures or been the object of public discussion only
for very short periods of time (1948–58, 1960–62, 2011–21). Moreover, due to military
rule and the illiberal 1974 and 2008 Constitutions, legal claims and litigation have
rarely been a way for politically disempowered actors, such as non-Buddhist reli-
gious minorities or Buddhist “deviant” groups, to gain state recognition or support.
With the 2011 political reforms, however, legal debates about religion surfaced
again in parliament, as well as in the public sphere. This paper looks at various forms
of constitutional practice with regards to religion in Burma/Myanmar, by which
I mean “the acts of drafting, debating, implementing and invoking constitutional
law” (Schonthal 2016, 11). It should be underlined from the onset that such activism
as a form of public practice has – even during the years of political liberalization –
been scarce on account of authoritarian, military rule. Exactly how the February 1,
2021, military coup will affect constitutional law in Myanmar remains to be seen, but
Buddhist protectionist associations such as the Buddha Dhamma Parahita (formerly
known as MaBaTha) issued statements showing strong support for the 2008
Constitution, just hours before the coup. This indicates support to the Tatmadaw
(the military) at least among certain leading monks, and more importantly for the
*
I wish to thank Benjamin Schonthal, Matt Walton, D. Christian Lammerts, and Tom
Ginsburg for their insightful comments on this chapter.
198
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 221 ---
purpose of this paper, support for the ways in which Buddhism is protected in
the Constitution.
“Buddhist constitutionalism” is deﬁned by Benjamin Schonthal (2017, 707) as
“attempts to use written constitutions and other basic laws to organize power in ways
that protect and preserve Buddhist teachings and institutions, especially the insti-
tution of Buddhist monasticism, the sangha.” Central to Buddhist constitutionalism
are questions about how to balance royal/political authority and ecclesiastical
authority. This, Schonthal points out, is in contrast to Islamic constitutionalism
(which concerns the application of transcendent laws in a man-made legal order), as
well as secular-liberal constitutionalism and questions regarding the balance
between religious privileges and general religious rights. As this chapter will show,
the case of Burma/Myanmar clearly conﬁrms the centrality of questions pertaining
to the balance between political and ecclesiastical authority. However, the paper
also argues for a broader understanding of Buddhist constitutionalism, which
expands the concept beyond the conundrum of political versus ecclesiastical author-
ity, to include a wider range of policies and laws that seek to enact constitutional
preferences for Buddhism. This expanded set of pro-Buddhist policies include prima
facie “secular” civil law and the Penal Code as well. Thus, the key regulatory issue at
stake is not only sangha affairs, but also the privileging of Buddhism vis-à-vis other
religions in a wide array of policies and state law. Broadening the concept of
Buddhist constitutionalism in this way helps scholars to acknowledge the unwritten
or “living” forms of Buddhist constitutionalism that also inﬂuence social and
political life.
This chapter proceeds in ﬁve parts. The ﬁrst section analyses Buddhist constitu-
tionalism in postcolonial Burma/Myanmar from a historical perspective. The
second section analyses Buddhist constitutionalism and its return in the 2008
Constitution. The third section discusses current regulatory contestations between
political and ecclesiastical authorities, making the argument that secularism in
postcolonial Burma/Myanmar is a function of Buddhist constitutionalism, rather
than the result of British colonial policies. The fourth section discusses what
I suggest is the protection of Buddhism through “secular” law, focusing on the
2015 “race and religion” laws and religious offense legislation. The ﬁfth and last
section analyzes Buddhist constitutionalism as a form of alterity vis-à-vis Myanmar’s
religious minority communities.
10.2 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND: THE RETURN OF BUDDHIST
CONSTITUTIONALISM IN MYANMAR
Inspired by clauses in the Irish Constitution at that time, Burma’s 1947 Constitution
included two articles of consequence as it relates to Buddhism: Article 21(1) held that
“The State recognizes the special position of Buddhism as the faith professed by the
great majority of the citizens of the Union;” Article 21 (4) prohibited the “abuse of
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
199
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 222 ---
religion for political purposes.” This ambiguity between state protection for
Buddhism, on the one hand, and strict separation of religion and politics on the
other came to mark Burmese democratic politics in the years to follow.
Independent Burma’s ﬁrst prime minister, U Nu, had a strong Buddhist revivalist
agenda, and the initial few years of democracy witnessed vibrant constitutional
debates and activism to promote state protection of Buddhism. The Buddhist consti-
tutional policies of the U Nu era included the Vinasaya Act of 1949 (registration of
monks and sangha courts), the Buddha Sasana Council Act (1949), the Pali
University and Dhammacariya Act (1950), and the Pali Education Board Act
(1952). Monastic associations at the time suggested that Buddhism should be the
state religion and opposed freedom of religion. In his 1960 campaign, U Nu called
for Buddhism to become the state religion and managed, in August 1961, against
strong opposition from Burma’s non-Buddhist minorities, to make Buddhism the
state religion (Kyaw Win, Mya Han & Thein Hlaing 2011, 96–102). However, this
constitutional amendment was soon to be abolished by General Ne Win, who came
to power during the military coup of March 2, 1962.
The ﬁrst period of military rule (1962–88) represents a radical shift in the consti-
tutional regulation of religion and secularism (as ideology) in Burma. In contrast to
U Nu, the Ne Win regime hardly referred to Buddhism, and the 1974 Constitution
does not mention any state preference for Buddhism. Furthermore, the 1974
Constitution is strictly secularist in that it states that “Religion and religious organiza-
tions shall not be used for political purposes” (Article 156c). It grants equality before
the law and religious freedom, but limits those rights with reference to “national
solidarity and the socialist social order” (Article 153b, The Constitution of the Socialist
Republic of Burma 1974). The 1974 Constitution did not offer any form of legislative
representation for ethnic groups, but introduced new forms of recognition of ethnic
claims, such as “Seven States” and “Seven Divisions” (Crouch 2019).
Ne Win generally turned a blind eye to the issue of regulating the sangha
throughout the 1960s and 1970s. However, Buddhism – particularly the sangha –
was subject to increased legal regulation from 1980 onwards, in order to control so-
called “unruly” monks and subsequently to curb monastic resistance to the regime.
In May 1980, General Ne Win’s government convened the Sangha Convention of
All Buddhist Gaing for the Puriﬁcation, Perpetuation, and Propagation of
Therava¯da Buddhism, and, in the name of “puriﬁcation,” streamlined the sangha
and imposed direct control over its monastic members. Only nine gaings (Buddhist
sects) have since become ofﬁcially recognized by the state. Ne Win also formed the
State Sangha Maha Nayaka Committee, which oversees the sangha.
Attempts to effectively act on the Vinasaya Act from 1949 had failed during the
early years of Ne Win’s rule as part of its secularist orientations (Tin Maung Maung
Than 1988). Vinaya transgressions were only to be dealt with within each monastic
lineage, or gaing. Without a state-backed supra-gaing structure in place, no rulings
regarding heresy (adhamma) could be made. It was not until 1980 that a speciﬁc
200
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 223 ---
legal system to deal with vinaya cases came into place at the national level, as will be
discussed in detail later.
The 1988 democratic uprising eventually led to the collapse of the socialist
regime, only to be replaced by direct military rule (1988–2011): ﬁrst through the
State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) and later by the State Peace
and Development Council (SPDC). The new junta abandoned a socialist ideology
altogether, and the SLORC/SPDC made “law and order” its new slogan, which did
not imply the rule of law, but rather subsuming law into order. In this period, a new
hierarchy of judges, comprised of bureaucrats and administrators, resurrected a
system marked by non-independence and “unrule” of law. As Cheesman (2015)
points out, in contrast to the Ne Win years, soldiers were no longer necessary in the
courtroom as the civilian judiciary was fully subordinated to military interests.
From 1988 to 2008 the country was ruled without a constitution, but in the same
period the military was preoccupied with drafting a new constitution, making the
drafting process of the 2008 Constitution one of the longest constitution-making
exercises in the world (Crouch 2019, 27). The drafting of a new constitution was part
of General Khin Nyunt’s 2003 document, “Roadmap to a Discipline-Flourishing
Democracy.”1 The constitution-making process was isolated from public debates,
and submissions from ethnic groups regarding language rights and customary laws
were ignored (Crouch 2019). To what extent Buddhist monks and laypeople outside of
the military were active in pushing the constitution-makers for constitutional protec-
tion of Buddhism remains unclear. What is clear, however, is that the Buddhist
protection clause (Article 361, 2008 Constitution) is taken verbatim from the 1947
Constitution. One explanation for the return of Buddhist constitutionalism relates to
military reorientation after the 1988 violent crackdown on the student movement and
pro-democracy monks. The regime needed to repair its relations to the sangha
through its so-called saya-dayaka (monk-donor) program, which eventually resulted
in a state-sponsored Buddhist nationalist ideology (Schober 2011). However, reducing
monastic-military relations to pure strategy would be to ignore the fact that the military
is largely comprised of Buddhists and that monks serve as “military chaplains,”
consoling soldiers and boosting their morale, for example during the 2017 massive
violence against the Rohingya population in Rakhine. Thus, understanding the
importance of Buddhism to the military needs to move beyond mere instrumentalism.
10.3 SECULARISM AS A FUNCTION OF BUDDHIST
CONSTITUTIONALISM
The highly controversial 2008 Constitution institutionalized a military state in
Myanmar, enabling the role of the military in governance. It contains three
1
Matthew Walton (2017, 167–74) has argued that the concept of discipline-ﬂourishing democ-
racy is connected to Buddhist principles of unity and discipline, but also fears of anarchy.
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
201
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 224 ---
meta-principles: non-disintegration of the Union, non-disintegration of national
solidarity,
and
the
perpetuation
of
sovereignty
(Basic
Principles,
2008
Constitution). The military treats the 2008 Constitution as a sacred object – insisting
on faithfulness to the Constitution itself – and resists all attempts at constitutional
reform. This raises some interesting questions about ideology, rituals, and materiality
with regard to the 2008 Constitution. First, in saying that it is sacred, I refer to the
fact that it is treated as a self-referencing text, the authority of which lies within its
status as a foundational charter for military rule – a document that, for the military,
ought not to be changed. Second, members of parliament are obliged to make an
oath (which is outlined in Schedule Four of the Constitution itself ) to “uphold and
abide by the Constitution,” and by that, pressurizing MPs to be loyal to military
ideology as enshrined in the Constitution. The material book is used in this oath-
making ritual in parliament (for military and civilian MPs alike), as a way for the
military to ensure loyalty to its ideology. This explains Aung San Suu Kyi and the
initial refusal by her party, the National League for Democracy (NLD), to partake in
the Oath ritual in 2012.
As a political document that enshrines the authoritarian ideology of the military
state, it would be an understatement to say that the 2008 Constitution has received
strong criticism. The 2008 Constitution is the site of contestation between the
military, the ethnic minority parties, and the NLD, and constitutional reform has
been ﬁrst priority for the NLD. Not surprisingly, therefore, after the February 1, 2021,
military coup, protesters have been tearing apart or burning the material book in
public, and later posting images of such events on social media, as a sign of their
commitment to end military rule.
Put simply, the principle of non-secession and self-determination is controversial
for the ethnic minorities and their political parties and Ethnic Armed Organizations
(EAOs), while the role of the military in politics has been the main issue of
contestation for democracy activists in majority population areas. Importantly,
however, the question of Buddhist constitutionalism is, as we shall see, one that
has been avoided in public debate, but simmers under the surface.
The 2008 Constitution is a mix of ideas from the 1947 Constitution, the
1974 Constitution and the post-1988 military ideology. Put another way, it draws
on colonial legality, socialist legality, and military legality. Importantly, it focuses on
duties rather than rights, which affects the ways in which religion is regulated. In the
following, I will identify what can be regarded as “Buddhist” in the 2008
Constitution, identifying four sites of Buddhist constitutionalism in the text: reli-
gious privilege, morality, temporality, and, counterintuitively, secularism.
First, there is the privileged, but not necessarily preeminent, status given to
Buddhism as a religion. Article 361 grants Buddhism a special position as the
majority religion, which is taken almost verbatim from the 1947 Constitution
(Article 21 [1]). Article 362 “recognizes Christianity, Islam, Hinduism and
Animism as the religions existing in the Union at the day of the coming into
202
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 225 ---
operation of this Constitution.”2 In this way, the Constitution balances Buddhist
constitutionalism on the one hand, and the recognition of Christianity, Islam,
Hinduism, and Animism and, as discussed below, secularist orientations on
the other.
Second, Chapter 1, “Basic Principles of the Union,” lists as a state responsibility
that “The Union shall strive for youth to have strong and dynamic patriotic spirit, the
correct way of thinking and to develop the ﬁve noble strengths” (Article 33). This is a
reference to the Buddhist principle of pañcabala¯ni (“ﬁve strengths”): faith (saddha¯),
energy (viriya), mindfulness (sati), concentration (sama¯dhi), and wisdom (pañña¯).
This is, in fact, the only explicit reference to Buddhist principles in the entire
Constitution. It is an article that cannot be missed as it not only imbues the text
with a certain Buddhist quality, but even more importantly, explicitly makes it a state
obligation to foster new generations of Buddhist citizens. This emphasis on Buddhist
virtues is not present in the 1947 and 1974 Constitutions.3
Third, as in the Thai and the Sri Lankan constitutions, Buddhist constitutional
privilege in Myanmar is also shown in the preference of the Buddhist calendar.
Referring to the approval date of the Constitution – the tenth waxing day of Kasone
1370 M.E. (“May 29, 2008, CE” in the ofﬁcial English translation) – the text situates
the political community with reference to Buddhist historiography. The Burmese
Buddhist calendar is used in all legislation, in addition to a range of other social
settings, including the press statement announcing the 2021 military coup. Burmese
Buddhist temporality is also present in the 1947 and the 1974 Constitutions, and for
the latter, it is the only reference to Buddhism.
Fourth, parallel to the constitutional privileges discussed above, the 2008
Constitution expresses a speciﬁc secularist orientation by referring to a remarkably
strong separation between “religion” and “politics.” Some of these articles are
similar to the two previous constitutions, while other articles are new to the 2008
Constitution, expanding on existing principles of institutional differentiation
between “religion” and “politics.” Chapter 4, the “Legislature,” Article 121, speciﬁes
who is disqualiﬁed for election to the Legislature, listing (among many others)
persons who receive support from foreign religious organizations (Article 121g),
persons who convince others to vote or not vote based on “religion for political
purpose” (Article 121h) and members of religious orders (Article 121i). In addition to
banning parliamentarians from using religion for electoral purposes, Chapter 8,
“Citizen, Fundamental Rights and Duties of the Citizens,” bans the abuse of
“religion” (however deﬁned) for political purposes among citizens generally
2
The 1947 clause includes an important “some”: “The State also recognizes Islam, Christianity,
Hinduism and Animism as some of the religions existing in the Union at the date of the coming
into operation of this Constitution” (italics added), opening up for the existence of other
religions not mentioned in the text.
3
In the 1947 Constitution, the focus is on health and working capacity “to strengthen the defensive
capacity of the State” (Article 39). Cultivating citizens’ morality is not mentioned here.
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
203
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 226 ---
(Article 364). Any action that sows enmity between religions and races is considered
unlawful (Article 364).
On elections and voting rights, Chapter 9 (Article 392a) states “members of
religious orders” do not have the right to vote, which is primarily interpreted as
Buddhist monks and nuns, as well as Catholic fathers and nuns, but in practice this
is a ﬁeld open for negotiation, and one might add, corruption. Ordained members of
the Catholic Church are disenfranchised, the Muslim ulema are granted voting
rights, and Protestant, Evangelical, and Baptist ministers are, depending on local
context, sometimes entitled to vote and sometimes not. The rationale behind these
distinctions is less than clear, but as the Constitution speciﬁcally states “members of
religious orders” it is reasonable to argue that the distinctions in voting rights
depend, at least in part, on ofﬁcials’ perceptions about how organized a group is –
and perhaps how closely it resembles sangha organizational structures. As such, this
can be read as an example of a Buddhist formatting process of non-Buddhist
institutionalized religion.
The principle of separation between “religion” and “politics” is further elaborated
in Chapter 10, “Political Parties,” which speciﬁcally prohibits political parties from
directly or indirectly receiving funding from a religious association (Article 407c),
and furthermore, that a political party is not allowed continued existence if it is
found guilty of “abusing religion for political purpose” (Article 407d). In case of
violation, the party’s registration shall be revoked. This provision is further developed
in the Political Parties Registration Law No. 2/2012, 6(d) which prohibits political
parties from writing, speaking, and campaigning in a manner that will instigate
conﬂict or violence among religious and ethnic groups or individuals. Articles
121 and 407 are new to the 2008 Constitution, indicating how the Tatmadaw military
foresaw how religion could be a mobilizing factor in parliamentary elections.
How are we to understand this particular conceptual division between the “reli-
gious,” the “secular,” and the “political” expressed in Myanmar’s three constitu-
tions? It is my contention that in the case of postcolonial Burma/Myanmar,
secularism was not separate from Buddhist constitutionalism, but rather a function
of it. This likely echoed British legal distinctions between the “religious” and the
“secular” that undergirded colonial policies. However, this path dependency might
also predate British colonial policies of secularism: a key point in Therava¯da
Buddhist political ideology is a formal divide between the state and the monastic
order.4 With the introduction of modern political systems, this has been interpreted
in different ways. Sri Lanka introduced universal suffrage as early as 1931, and
4
For example, as expressed in the Samantapasadika, Buddhagosa’s famous vinaya commentary,
about monks not serving in royal ofﬁce. Such boundary-making between monastic and
political spheres does of course not imply that monks have not served as close advisors to kings,
but, noticeably, that authoritative sources in vinaya jurisprudence have valued institutional
differentiation and considered it to be an issue of regulatory importance. I thank Jens Borgland
for this reference.
204
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 227 ---
accordingly the monks gained civil and political rights on a par with all other
citizens (Schonthal 2016). This is completely different from the situation in
Myanmar (and Thailand), where Buddhist monks and nuns are deprived of their
political rights. The ostensible reason is to cohere with a Therava¯da Buddhist
political paradigm, namely that there should be a formal separation between the
monastic order and political power. Translated into modern democratic language,
lawmakers have justiﬁed these provisions as protecting the order from political
participation. This kind of logic goes back to 1946 when monks in Burma were
formally disenfranchised, after strong pressure from the monks themselves (Larsson
2015).
The 2008 Constitution reads “members of religious orders,” which means that
monks and nuns do not have the right to vote, form political parties, stand for
election, or sit in parliament. Melissa Crouch (2019, 62) argues that this reﬂects “the
Tatmadaw’s concern that Buddhist monastic authority is a rival center of power that
needs to be constrained in the military-state.” Myanmar’s half-million monks and
nuns comprise a signiﬁcant base of would-be voters, and it is easy to jump to the
conclusion that this rule was introduced either by British colonial powers due to
their secularist preferences, or by the later military regime in order to restrict
monastic “political activities” and hence curb regime resistance. In this way, the
question of monastic disenfranchisement represents a political paradox. One the
one hand, it points to the privileged status of Buddhism within the Myanmar state.
On the other hand, it represents a very strict form of secularism, with certain obvious
illiberal consequences of depriving particular groups of their basic social and
political rights. Importantly – and this is a point to which I shall return in more
detail later – this particular form of secularism or even the use of “secular” law is not
inimical to Buddhist constitutionalism. It can rather be seen as a function of it.
Leaving the question of secularism aside for a moment, what exactly does the
preferential treatment of Buddhism mean in the Burmese context? It should be
noted that the Constitution does not grant Buddhism the status of state religion, but
as I argue in an earlier article (Frydenlund 2017), Article 361 as well as post-1988
reorientations toward Buddhist symbols and institutions indicate that the state has
become a de facto Buddhist state. State policies in support of religion have their
support in Article 363, which says that “[t]he Union may assist and protect the
religions [bathathathanamyar] it recognizes to its utmost.” Clearly, this implies state
support for all recognized religions, but as shown below, what it means in reality is
heavy state support for speciﬁc forms of Therava¯da Buddhism.
For example, the Department for the Promotion and Propagation of the Sasana,
under the Ministry of Religious Affairs and Culture (MoRAC) reafﬁrms the consti-
tutionally protected right of religious freedom but gives economic and adminis-
trative priority to Buddhism as the majority religion. The Ministry also appears to
favor Buddhism over other religions in the higher education sector, as seen in state
funding of the State Pariyatti University and the International Therava¯da Buddhist
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
205
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 228 ---
Missionary University. In addition, the Ministry coordinates Buddhist missionary
activities in the name of thathana-pyu or “the dissemination of sa¯sana,” which has
been an essential political project of the Myanmar state since the 1990s (Kawanami
2021). The most controversial aspects of the missionary politics relate to missionary
activities in ethnic minority areas dominated by non-Buddhist religions and has
been a long-standing concern for Christians in the Chin and Kachin States.
MoRAC is also responsible for dealing with sangha matters, in consultation with
the State Sangha Maha Nayaka Committee often referred to as the MaHaNa – a
state-sponsored monastic body that oversees the sangha. Despite its focus on
Buddhist affairs, the MoRAC also oversees affairs relating to religious minorities.
However, a mapping of attitudes toward the nature of the state and its regulation of
religion in Myanmar found that representatives from religious minority commu-
nities felt marginalized in relation to the Ministry in terms of protection in territorial
disputes with Buddhist monks, access to information, and, above all, with regards to
ﬁnancial support (United Institute of Peace 2021). Such minority grievances raise
questions of Buddhist constitutionalism as a form of exclusionary politics that has
effects on majority–minority relations. This point will be discussed toward the end of
this chapter.
10.4 “PURIFYING” THE SANGHA THROUGH “HYBRID” LAW
Similar to Thailand, but different from Sri Lanka, Buddhist constitutionalism in
Myanmar implies heavy regulation of the monastic order. In Thailand, Schonthal
(2017, 715) notes “crises relate to the integration or expulsion of Buddhist groups
from an ofﬁcial national monkhood,” while in Sri Lanka they relate to “deep
disagreements over the proper sources of Buddhist authority.” Comparing Burma/
Myanmar to Thailand and Sri Lanka, it becomes clear that in spite of instances of
monastic resistance to the military regime (e.g., 1988 and 2007) – or as in speciﬁc
cases of contestation discussed below – a combination of the military state, laws
regulating the sangha and the centralized organization of monks in Myanmar
inhibit large conﬂicts within Buddhism, or between the state and the sangha.
There are important exceptions to this general trend, however, and questions persist
about the integration or expulsion of groups from the state-sanctioned sangha.
Disagreements over Buddhist authority also occasionally arise.
As discussed below, with state patronage of Buddhism comes heavy regulation of
the sangha. In the following, I analyze two recent examples of contestation over
what is considered “proper” monastic behavior: the ﬁrst case shows how the Penal
Code is used to enforce monastic judgments in cases of non-acceptance of the
monastic court’s ruling; the second case illustrates the friction between state monas-
tic authorities and certain monks with regard to deﬁnitions of the “political.” Such
cases sometimes imply a principled resistance to heavy sangha regulation per se, but
they can also point to political difference, or speciﬁc issues of contestation.
206
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 229 ---
10.4.1 The Vinicchaya Court System
Under British colonial rule, the monastic community retained a relative degree of
autonomy in overseeing its internal affairs. It was not until 1980, under the rule of
General Ne Win, that a state-level judiciary would oversee monastic affairs. With
the establishment of the Buddhist state court system (called Vinicchaya), the state
has acquired a highly effective means to uphold speciﬁc notions of Therava¯da
Buddhist orthodoxy and orthopraxy. The court has absolute authority in doctrinal
matters and constitutes a particular Buddhist legal culture that shapes and formats
Buddhist thought and practice in decisive ways. In these courts, monks may be
charged with heresy (adhamma) and malpractice (avinaya) under the jurisdiction of
the MaHaNa. Between 1981 and 2017, twenty-one cases were brought before the
state Vinicchaya committee, of which three concerned monastic misconduct, and
the rest hinged on the degree of misrepresentation or false understanding of
Buddhist doctrine. All of the accused have been found guilty (Janaka and Crosby
2017, Kawanami 2021).
With few exceptions, those convicted have accepted the court’s decisions. In the
two cases where the accused have refused to accept the verdict, the 1990 Law Relating
to the Sangha Organization has also been at the regime’s disposal. This law states that
anyone disobeying the Vinicchaya Court can be sentenced with up to three years
imprisonment. Another legal instrument at hand to ensure compliance is the Penal
Code, especially Sections 295–298, on “religious offense.” So far, this has only been
applied in the most recent Vinicchaya Court case, namely the Mopyar case. The
monk, U Nyana (often referred to as U Mopyar, a reference to his sky-blue outﬁt), had
been found guilty in 1983 of making false superhuman claims – a charge which,
according to the vinaya, requires expulsion from the order. Later, he was accused of
having established a new gaing, based on his particular “doctrine of present action.”
Based on a ruling from 2011, the Mopyar gaing was ofﬁcially outlawed by the state on
the grounds that U Mopyar taught adhamma, or “wrong teachings” (Kawanami 2021).
His teaching, which appeared to negate karmic logics of reward and retribution,
seems to have been of particular concern to the monastic guardians of Therava¯din
orthodoxy. When U Mopyar did not comply with the rulings of the Vinicchaya
Court, a recommendation was sent from the court to the Ministry of Religious Affairs,
and he was charged under Sections 295 and 295-A of the Penal Code for acts
“intended to offend religious feelings,” in this case insulting Buddhism. Critics even
claimed his activities were an attempt to destroy Therava¯da Buddhism. U Nyana was
also charged under Section 5(e) and 5(j) of the 1950 Emergency Provisions Act for
behavior deemed to be a threat to national security, under which he was sentenced to
a further twenty years imprisonment (Kawanami 2021, 21). In 2016 MaHaNa recon-
ﬁrmed its stand on the Mopyar group as being an illegal sect and both MaHaNa and
MaBaTha stated that U Nyana was an internal enemy (thathana atwin yanthu) of
Myanmar Buddhism (Kawanami 2021, 22).
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
207
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 230 ---
As shown by the Mopyar case, secular state law can function as a “back-up”
resource when speciﬁc Vinicchaya Court regulations fail to regulate “deviant”
behavior. The Buddhist court system in Myanmar is mostly a legal mechanism for
the conservative and largely “apolitical” sangha hierarchy to uphold speciﬁc notions
of purity and orthodoxy, within a deﬁned sphere of elite textual specialists (pariyatti
monks). The driver of this system is the wish to protect the sa¯sana from impurity and
corruption, based on a speciﬁc form of Buddhist scriptural fundamentalism unique
to Myanmar. Furthermore, state mechanisms for the legal regulation of religion,
both religious and secular, are potential tools for the exercise of political power.
All of this seems to have intensiﬁed after the 2011 political liberalization, when the
term adhamma replaced the term micchaa ditthi (“wrong views”). Kawanami (2021,
19) observes that compared to micchaa ditthi, adhamma is a broader and more
politically loaded term, and that “any particular religious viewpoints that are
regarded as threatening to law and order have been called adhamma as a means
of de-authenticating and discrediting them.” In this way accusations of and prosecu-
tions for heresy remain tools of the state policy of ngyeinwut pibya-ye (law and
order). Thus, Vinicchaya court cases (as well as religious offense cases discussed
below) show how the legal regulation of religious offense, blasphemy and heresy
have served both religious and political interests.
10.4.2 MaBaTha: Testing the Limits for “Political” Engagement
Given the speciﬁc, legally inﬂected distinction between religion and politics in
Myanmar, Buddhist associations such as MaBaTha – which since the 2011 political
liberalization have been particularly active in the public sphere – need to avoid
possible allegations of “doing politics.” As discussed above, the task of overseeing
and deciding on appropriate monastic behavior lies with the MaHaNa, including to
what extent monastics are involved in “politics.”5 While constitutional articles that
prohibit monastic engagement in formal politics (such as monastic disenfranchise-
ment, non-eligibility for parliament, or being members of political parties) are clear-
cut, other aspects of constitutional secularism (such as Article 364) are polysemantic
ﬁelds open for contestation and negotiation. As the MaBaTha case discussed below
indicates, what is deemed by MaHaNa as adhamma, or political activity largely
depends upon the views of the current government. The case began with the
2013 MaHaNa ruling against a loosely organized monastic network called “969,”6
which can be seen as a forerunner to MaBaTha. Or to be precise, MaHaNa banned
5
The 1990 Law does not speciﬁcally consider what constitutes “politics,” and it remains unclear
if monks have been convicted for “doing politics,” and if so under what provisions. Rather,
activist monks can be charged with allegations of state defamation, religious offense, or under
emergency laws.
6
The 969 refers to the nine qualities of the Buddha, the six of the Dhamma, and the nine of the
Sangha, which together constitute the “three Jewels of Buddhism.”
208
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 231 ---
the political use of the 969 symbol, as well as the creation of formal organizations
associated with the symbol, but did not ban the 969 symbol itself, nor did it judge
the teachings of 969 as adhamma.
With the entry of the NLD into ofﬁce in 2016, the ties between the government
and MaBaTha loosened. Likely responding to the preferences of the newly elected
political leaders, MaHaNa reduced its previous support for MaBaTha by denying
them formal recognition as a lawful monastic organization (Walton & Tun 2016). In
2017, after allegations of anti-Muslim hate speech, MaHaNa banned Ashin Wirathu
from public speaking and preaching for one year. The decision was made a few days
after Ashin Wirathu had publicly expressed support for the assassination of
Myanmar’s leading constitutional lawyer, U Ko Ni, a Muslim. A few months later,
MaHaNa ruled that the “MaBaTha” name was not in compliance with the
1990 Sangha Law and ordered all MaBaTha signs and symbols be removed (while
stopping short of condemning the organization or its activities). While most
MaBaTha groups accepted the enforced rebrand and simply continued their activ-
ities, the chapters in Mandalay and the Karen State refused, arguing that MaBaTha
was not an ofﬁcial sangha organization, and thus did not breach the 1990 Sangha
Law. Read one way, the MaBaTha–MaHaNa disputes in 2016–17 might suggest that
monks are less regulated compared to those in, say, Thailand. Yet it is important to
note that this semi-independence is more contingent upon political context than on
legal ﬂexibility: under USDP rule the MaHaNa supported MaBaTha and its
campaign for the so-called race and religion laws, while it limited MaBaTha once
the NLD came into power. As previously noted, MaBaTha monks supported
MaHaNa in banning the Mopyar sect. Clearly, then, the contestation between
MaHaNa and MaBaTha is more about manoeuvring shifting political landscapes
than resistance to high levels of state regulation per se.
10.5 DEFENDING BUDDHISM THROUGH CIVIL LAW
AND THE PENAL CODE
So far, I have analyzed some of the ways in which state obligations to protect
Buddhism have resulted in heavy sangha regulation. In the following sections,
I move to other areas of state law such as civil law and the Penal Code, which
appear to be based on principles of secularism and equality between ethnic and
religious groups (a kind of de jure egalitarianism). However, as I will argue below,
even these forms of “secular” law have increasingly been used as legal tools for
Buddhist protectionist actors, which can be seen as attempts at legally locking
in Buddhist claims to the state. Or put differently, they can be seen as acts of
Buddhist statecraft.
Understanding how nominally secular law can be used to enact Buddhist consti-
tutionalism is particularly important given the restricted space for constitutional
practice in Myanmar: the Constitution’s provisions have not been the subject of
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
209
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 232 ---
constitutional adjudication; there are very few Constitutional Tribunal decisions;
access to the tribunal is highly restricted; and the protection of rights via petition in
the Supreme Court is highly circumscribed (Crouch 2019). Therefore, there is very
limited space for taking Buddhist grievances to the higher judiciary. Under military
rule, public law is weak and the possibilities for Buddhist interest litigation or legal
activism curbed. Certainly, the Vinicchaya Court is important for sangha regulation
and doctrinal issues, but it was not until the years following the 2011 political
reforms, that Buddhist activists could engage in public legal activism to secure the
sa¯sana beyond Vinicchaya courts. In the following, I analyze two forms of Buddhist
legal activism in secular state law, which aim at securing the sa¯sana in lay
Buddhist society.
10.5.1 The 2015 Race and Religion Laws
The early years of political liberalization (2011–15) witnessed a marked rise in
Buddhist nationalism. In 2015 this resulted in the passing of a package of four laws,
referred to as the “race and religion laws,” which sought to regulate marriages
between Buddhist women and non-Buddhist men, to prevent forced conversion,
to abolish polygamy and extra-marital affairs, and to promote birth control and
family planning in certain regions of the country.7 Mobilization of MaBaTha was
key to passing the legislation, and their declared motivation for legal activism was the
protection of Buddhism, particularly against the alleged “Islamization” of Myanmar
and claims of violations of religious freedom for Buddhists, predominantly Buddhist
women (Frydenlund 2017).
Among these laws, the Religious Conversion Law is of particular interest because
it makes explicit reference to the Constitution. The ﬁnal version of the Conversion
Law does not have a preamble, but a preamble contained in its second draft version
gives a clue of the rationale behind the law. That draft preamble repeats the
language of Article 34 of the Constitution on freedom of religion, but states that
there is a need for transparency and a system in place to ensure the right to freedom
of religion and the freedom to choose and convert to another religion. A repeated
aim is to ensure that change of religion is according to the individual’s “own free
will.”8 A set of formal procedures and an application process supposedly guarantees
converts free will, including an interview with a committee to ensure that the
applicant has a free conscience. Compared to the ﬁrst draft, the ﬁnal law contains
a more developed religious freedom discourse, in which the stated aim is not to ban
conversion, but to secure freedom from coercion. This is also evident in the fact that
7
Control of Population and Health Care Law No 28/2015; the Religious Conversion Law
(Conversion Law) No 48/2015; the Myanmar Buddhist Women Special Marriage Law No
50/2015 (Marriage Law); the Monogamy Law No 54/2015.
8
“Religious Conversion Law (draft).” On ﬁle with author.
210
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 233 ---
the law allows for persons to declare allegiance to atheism, or no-religion (batha-
me), thereby explicitly stating for the ﬁrst time one’s right not to have a religion
(Frydenlund 2018).
With the exception of the Marriage Law (which distinguishes between
“Buddhist” and “non-Buddhist”), the language of the “race and religion laws” refers
to “religion” (batha) in the neutral, which means that the laws apply to all Myanmar
citizens, regardless of the religious identity given in one’s National Identity Card.
Given the political-legal context and the rationale given by MaBaTha itself, the laws
were clearly made to protect Buddhism, but their generic language makes them
seem applicable to all citizens. As with the monastic disenfranchisement discussed
above, supposedly secular laws do not always ensure impartiality and neutrality with
regard to state regulation of religion. They can also be effective means for protecting
religious privilege.
10.5.2 Protecting Buddhism from “Offense”
Compared to the monastic courts discussed above, cases involving lay people –
Buddhist or non-Buddhist – with regard to “religious offence” fall under the Penal
Code and are usually dealt with in general state courts (as the Mopyar case
illustrates, however, a case can also move from the monastic court to the general
court.) Such “religious offense” legislation was introduced by the colonial state to
ensure interreligious harmony between its subjects as it sought to protect the
religious feelings of all citizens.9
Since 2011, charges of religious offense against lay people have become another
important form of sa¯sana protection (Frydenlund 2019). In particular, two cases of
religious offense have made national headlines in recent years, both passed after
strong mobilization by MaBaTha.10 The ﬁrst case involved a dual British/New
Zealand citizen, Phil Blackwood, and two Burmese citizens, Tun Thurein and
Htut Ko Ko Lwin. All were found guilty in 2015 of “insulting religion” for a
psychedelic bar advertisement depicting the Buddha wearing headphones and
accompanied by the text “Bottomless Frozen Mararita [sic] K 15000.” On the eve
of December 9, 2014, Blackwood posted the ad on Facebook to promote cheap
drinks at the V Gastro Bar in Yangon. The ad went viral, and after having received
several complaints, he removed the image and posted an apology. Following
9
The Penal Code contains ﬁve sections pertaining to “religious offence”: 295. Injuring or
deﬁling place of worship, with intent to insult the religion of any class; 295-A. Deliberate
and malicious acts intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by insulting its religion or
religious beliefs; 296. Disturbing religious assembly; 297. Trespassing on burial places etc.; 298.
Uttering words etc. with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings.
10 Only weeks after the Htin Lin Oo verdict in June 2015, the MaBaTha at its annual conference
in Insein published a twelve-point statement in which they demanded blasphemous (pyit mhar
saw kar thaw) attacks against monks to be stopped (Fuller 2016).
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
211
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 234 ---
complaints made by MaBaTha, the police took action. Only hours later the three
were arrested and sent to prison, charged under the Penal Code, Sections 295 and
295-A. According to the judge, who heard the case in the Bahan Township Court,
Blackwood’s apologies in court did not remove his guilt of having “intentionally
plotted to insult religious belief” (Kyaw Phyo Tha 2014). The judge deemed,
moreover, that Blackwood should have known that this would hurt Buddhist
feelings and sentenced the three men to two and a half years in prison with
hard labor.
The second case was against the writer and NLD activist, Htin Lin Oo, who gave
a speech at a literary festival in Chaung-U Township in Sagaing Division in 2014. In
this speech, he criticized the use of Buddhism to promote discrimination. Shortly
afterwards, a ten-minute edited video appeared on social media, causing outrage
among MaBaTha monks. He was charged by the Chaung-U Township Court, after
a complaint was ﬁled against him by township ofﬁcials, under Sections 295-A and
298. In his speech Htin Lin Oo pointed out that the Buddha was not Burmese, not
Shan, not Karen, nor did he belong to any of Myanmar’s national races. He stated,
“if you want to be an extreme nationalist and if you love to maintain your race that
much, don’t believe in Buddhism.” The speech concluded by stating that “Our
Buddhism is being destroyed by these people wearing robes”.11 He was acquitted of
the charge of “wounding religious feelings,” but found guilty of the charge of
“insulting religion.” He was sentenced to two years in prison, then released, but
was among the ﬁrst to be sentenced again after the 2021 military coup.
In both cases, MaBaTha monks attended the public spectacles outside the
respective courtrooms – something that would have been unthinkable just a few
years before. During military rule, judicial proceedings were held in secret. There
were closed trials and no coverage of cases in public media, particularly from the
1980s onwards. Yet the conjuncture of economic and political liberalization, as
well as a new media reality, created new spaces for monastic engagement in public
life, including legal activism. Although press freedom was still under heavy
pressure, court cases were again reported in the media. From the MaBaTha point
of view, race and religion legislation and blasphemy cases were tools that could be
used to protect the sa¯sana and ensure that the state acted as a guardian
of Buddhism.
10.6 CONTESTING BUDDHIST CONSTITUTIONALISM
So far, I have made the argument that Buddhist constitutionalism in Myanmar has
produced a speciﬁc form of secularism through the process of legally deﬁning religion
in particular ways. I have also argued for the need to address Buddhist constitutional-
ism beyond the constitutional text in order to capture how a wide range of policies and
11 You Tube clip, www.youtube.com/watch?v=0piWM3c_5sg.
212
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 235 ---
legal practices promote Buddhism in particular ways. This calls for a differentiation
between explicit and implicit forms of Buddhist constitutionalism. In the following
section, I will analyze the practice of Buddhist constitutionalism in the context of
massive humanitarian crisis, ethnic cleansing, and civil war. Again, as discussed above
in regard to the prima facie secular and egalitarian quality of the Penal Code and the
“race and religion laws,” I would like to emphasize the need for the study of Buddhist
constitutionalism to go beyond sangha-political controversies and systematically ana-
lyze the effects of Buddhist constitutional practices upon interreligious relations and
ethnic minorities.
Historically, several of Burma’s insurgencies are related to the question of
Buddhist constitutionalism. Both the formation of the Kachin Independence
Army and the Chin rebellion can be seen as direct responses to the 1961 amendment
to make Buddhism the state religion (a move that was overturned by the military
following its 1962 coup). Even among non-Bamar ethnic groups that are majority
Buddhist, such as the Shan, the 1961 efforts to make Buddhism the state religion
were seen as counter to the Panglong Agreement and so resisted. Therefore, peace
negotiations and religious constitutionalism are two closely related questions, at least
as seen from an ethnic and religious minority point of view.
As previously discussed, the military is concerned with presenting itself as the
protector of the sa¯sana. For example, at the third Advisory Forum on National
Reconciliation and Peace in Myanmar in NayPyiTaw on November 14, 2019, the
Commander-in-Chief of Defense Services, Senior General Min Aung Hlaing,
explicitly reminded the multireligious audience of the fact that Buddhism has a
special position in Myanmar. General Hlaing said:
Despite the fact that every country around the world has citizens of different
religions, all of them pay heed to the religion which is practiced by the majority
in the country. Cultural evidence suggests that religious beliefs in Myanmar
date back to Pyu Period, the most ancient period of the country. Pagodas in
Bagan are testimony to the fact that Therava¯da Buddhism has been practiced by
the majority since Bagan Period, the ﬁrst Myanmar Empire in AD 11. And there
are also comprehensive historical records that the majority of Myanmar citizens
have wholeheartedly embraced Buddhism in successive periods. Only after
Myanmar fell under colonial rule, followers of Christ and other religions have
increased. (Global New Light of Myanmar 2019, 59)
In this speech Hlaing clearly privileges Buddhism over other religions, while at the
same time degrading other religions as non-indigenous, colonial newcomers.
Simultaneously, the military is building up its Buddhist networks, through sangha
donations and ritual celebrations. As MaBaTha experienced restrictions under NLD
rule, the military has reinvigorated organizations like the Young Men’s Buddhist
Association (YMBA) in order to expand the ﬁelds of Buddhist-military interaction.
For example, at one YMBA event only two months prior to the coup, the leading
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
213
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 236 ---
MaBaTha monk, Insein Sayadaw, participated in Buddhist functions together with
Hlaing. Hlaing also made large donations to Insein Sayadaw in the same period.
For decades, the need for decentralization and a federal structure has been
claimed by democracy activists, EAOs, and international actors as the way to peace
and democracy. As discussed in detail below, from the EAOs’ perspectives, this new
federal state is to be secular, thereby respecting the principles of the 1947 Panglong
Agreement. This is also in line with Christian (political) theologies among Christian
ethnic minority communities such as the Chin, Kachin, and Karen, which hold a
secular state as a prerequisite and a sine qua non in a future federal and democratic
state. Rooted in the Christian (often Baptist) theological notion of the separation
between religious and political powers, Myanmar’s proponents of Christian political
theology dismiss calls for a Buddhist state as extreme, even if they show limited
understanding of the historical background and colonial grievances of Buddhists
who make such calls.12
Demands for a secular state were in fact granted in the 2015 National Ceaseﬁre
Agreement (NCA). Given the strong support among Myanmar’s religious majority
for Buddhist constitutionalism, it is rather surprising that the NCA did not attract
much attention, as it offered a totally new vision on the relationship between
religion and state. Section 1(e) of the NCA, which was ﬁrst signed by the Thein
Sein government and eight EAOs on October 15, 2015 (with two more joining on
February 13, 2018) sought to “establish a secular state based on the principle of the
separation of religion and state in order to avoid abuse of religion for political
interests.”13 The explicit mention of “separation of religion and state” was novel
and went against Article 361 of the Constitution. In 2016, the newly formed NLD
government took a new initiative to end decades of armed conﬂict. This process,
called the Union Peace Conference, was mostly known as the “Twenty-ﬁrst Century
Panglong,” an explicit reference to the famous 1947 agreement between the
Burmese government under Aung San and the Shan, Kachin, and Chin peoples.
While building on the 2015 NCA, the Union Peace Conference was intended to be
more inclusive and to transform the military state into a democratic federal state.
Again, the question of state regulation of religion resurfaced, if not in public debate,
then at least among those involved in the peace process. The “secular state” clause
in the 2015 NCA was, however, changed in the Union Accord Part III which was
signed on August 21, 2020. Here, clause three reads the purpose as: “To establish a
nation where there is no misuse of religion for political purpose and where politics
and religion are separated from each other” (Global New Light of Myanmar 2020,
10). This is more in line with the 2008 Constitution, but the reasons behind this
semantic shift remain unclear. It will also be a point for new negotiation if a peace
process recommences if – or when – the civil war-like situation across the country
12 Frydenlund, ﬁeldnotes, 2018.
13 https://peacemaker.un.org/sites/peacemaker.un.org/ﬁles/MM_151510_NCAAgreement.pdf.
214
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 237 ---
since 2021 ends. If it does, one of the challenging issues is state regulation of religion
at the sub-national level. One proposal that appears to have been accepted as part of
the peace process is for states/regions to draft their own constitutions, which has
been a key demand since the 1960s (Crouch 2019). How religion will be dealt with at
the sub-national level needs to be discussed as demands for religious privileges at
regional level are likely.
As previously noted, religious minority communities have, since the late 1940s,
worked for a secular constitution. Due to military rule, the political space for debates
on the constitutional regulation of religion have been almost non-existent. However,
under the NLD government (2016–21) the 2019 constitutional amendment process
provided new opportunities for political parties to discuss the issue. “The Union of
Myanmar Constitution (2008) Amendment Joint Committee” comprised represen-
tatives from the ruling NLD, the military, the USDP, and ethnic minority parties,
and by July 2019 they had received thousands of recommendations. However, the
NLD, which chaired the committee, conﬁrmed the constitutional recognition of
the ﬁve religions (Buddhism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Animism), but did
not discuss other religion clauses at all.
By contrast, members from ethnic minority parties suggested changes. For
example, the Shan National League for Democracy (SNLD) and the Mon
National Party (MNP) suggested deleting conditions of public order, morality,
health, and other provisions of the Constitution that limit the right to freedom of
religion. They suggested that freedom of religion should be absolute, and no
conditions be imposed on it. The Ta’ang (Palaung) National Party called for the
inclusion of a subsection to declare that the Union of Myanmar would be a secular
state. The SNLD also suggested entirely removing Article 360, which restricts the
right to religious freedom as granted in Article 34. The SNLD, together with the
Zomi Congress for Democracy (ZCD), proposed to remove Article 361 (granting
Buddhism a special position). The ZCD further advocated for deleting Article
362 which names Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Animism religions recognized
by the state and replacing it with this: “Every citizen has the right to profess any
religion of his or her faith.” The SNLD and the Pa’O National Organization (PNO)
wanted to oblige the state to assist and protect the religions it recognizes by suggest-
ing removing the phrase “to its utmost” from Section 363, which seems to enable the
state to give an excuse in cases of inability to protect and assist the religions.14
However, the NLD, the USDP, and the military bloc in parliament did not touch
these constitutional sections relating to religion in their recommendations made to
the committee, or in draft bills separately submitted. Therefore, questions about the
14 “Proposals by Political Parties, Groups and Independent Representatives for (Constitutional)
Amendment, Deletion, and Additions,” circulated by the Ofﬁce of the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw to
members of parliament on July 15, 2019, 15. Quoted in United Institute of Peace (USIP) report
2021, unpublished.
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
215
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 238 ---
constitutional regulation of religion did not arise when the bills were debated in
parliament. Except those few ethnic parties that suggested changes, questions
concerning constitutional regulation of religion did not reach the broader public.
A notable fact is that the NLD claimed no ofﬁcial stance on religion, although there
has been widespread support among NLD members for Buddhist constitutional
privileges (Laird 2020). The lack of interest shown by the military MPs, the USDP,
and the NLD in discussing Buddhist constitutional privileges in parliament, dem-
onstrates the broad consensus at the time among the Bamar Buddhist majority about
Buddhist constitutionalism. When minorities have worked to raise this question in
formal politics, the Bamar Buddhist political elites – including both the military and
the NLD – have chosen to lay the issue to rest.
10.7 CONCLUSION: BUDDHIST CONSTITUTIONALISM
IN A MILITARY STATE
Secularism as an ideology of the military state (1962–2011) lost its ground as the
military sought to legitimize its rule through Buddhist symbols and structures. This
process had already begun in the post-1988 period, but was ampliﬁed, I suggest, with
the 2008 Constitution and during the years of political liberalization and semi-
civilian rule (2011–16, 2016–21). The ﬁrst period under the rule of the USDP allowed
for Buddhist legal activism in the public sphere. In alliance with the USDP and the
military, Buddhist pressure groups engaged in Buddhist lawmaking, not with the
aim of having religious laws govern the state (as a form of constitutional theocracy),
but to protect Buddhism from internal and external threats. This, I contend, is a
form of Buddhist statecraft, anchored in constitutional preference for Buddhism.
But could the claim be made that Myanmar is a Buddhist state? Seen from a strictly
legal perspective, the answer is no. The Constitution neither holds Buddhism as the
religion of the state (as in Cambodia), nor does it say anywhere that the head of state
must be Buddhist (as in Thailand). Nonetheless, in practice the head of state must
be Buddhist, and as the military has refashioned itself as the protector of Buddhism,
spreading its protective wings over Buddhist legal activism, it can be argued that
Myanmar is a de facto Buddhist state.
Perhaps the most salient and under-appreciated feature of Buddhist constitution-
alism in Myanmar is its distinct form of secularism, which I suggest, also privileges
Buddhism in ways that are not always acknowledged. In fact, to understand how the
military state has shaped Buddhist constitutionalism, one must start with two
important observations: ﬁrst, what might be called “Buddhist secularism” (focused
on a strict separation between religion and politics rooted in Buddhist political
ideology) has served military interests. This is testiﬁed by the ampliﬁcation of such
distinctions in the 2008 Constitution compared to the 1947 and the 1974
Constitutions. Second, the military state has granted limited space for constitutional
jurisprudence, for example to clarify what Buddhist constitutionalism might imply.
216
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 239 ---
The 2015 “race and religion laws,” which caused massive protests among religious
minority communities and human rights groups alike, were never heard at the
Constitutional Tribunal (a constitutionally recognized forum for all constitutional
disputes15), to assess their coherence with rights to religious freedom. Even the
Myanmar Commission of Human Rights avoided assessing the case as it was
considered too politically sensitive (Frydenlund 2017). In both ways, this supposed
absence of religion from law and politics has, in fact, advantaged Buddhism.
The practice of limited constitutional jurisprudence in an authoritarian state also
suggests that we need to expand the study of Buddhist constitutionalism beyond
constitutional law, to include its implicit or unwritten forms. Conceptionally, this
bears some afﬁnity with the notion of a “living constitution” like we ﬁnd in China
(Xin He 2014), indicating the importance of context and practice beyond the written
text. Such implicit forms point to a larger constitutional complex of policies, laws,
courts, and legal practices aimed at acting out the constitutional preference for
Buddhism. For example, the Vinicchaya courts are not mentioned in the
Constitution, but can be seen as “constitutional statues,” that is, as “sets of founda-
tional, basic laws that structure the relationship between monks and rulers”
(Schonthal 2018, 6). If we broaden the notion of constitutional statues beyond
monastic regulatory concerns to include state Buddhist missionary policies,
Buddhist civil laws, religious offense legislation, and Buddhist interest litigation,
we will be able to capture Buddhist constitutionalism as an extensive form of
Buddhist statecraft.
The 2021 military coup brought about a new twist to the state–religion nexus in
Myanmar. After the coup, elected members of parliament formed the Committee
Representing Pyidaugsu Hluttaw (CRPH), which on April 16, 2021, formed the
National Union Government (NUG). The NUG claims to be the only legitimate
government of Myanmar and includes representatives from the NLD and ethnic
minority parties. It represents a new cross-ethnic and multireligious political force
against the military. The military, through its State Administration Council (SAC),
declared the shadow government illegal.
Just
prior
to
the
formation
of
the
NUG,
the
CRPH
“annulled”
the
2008 Constitution and declared a “Federal Democracy Charter.” In relation to
the historically contentious position of Buddhist constitutionalism, the charter states
that the Federal Union shall practice a political system that has separation between
politics and religion. In the English version of the document, the word “secular” is
used, while in the Burmese version it reads “a political system not based on
religion.” Although not explicitly expressing that the state should be religion-neutral,
both the Burmese and the English versions of the text indicate the end of
15 From 2011 to 2018 the Tribunal only published decisions in thirteen cases, none on religious
matters.
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
217
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 240 ---
constitutional preferential treatment of Buddhism.16 The military for its part
declared in May 2021 – through its new puppet organization the YMBA – General
Hlaing to be a bodhisattva, thereby conﬁrming the aim of creating a Buddhist-
military state. In a televised speech on August 1, 2021, General Hlaing extended
emergency rule to August 2023 and declared himself the thirteenth prime minister
of Myanmar. In that speech, he explicitly presented SAC rule as pro-Buddhist (in
contrast to the previous NLD rule), and importantly, as being in line with the
religious clauses of the 2008 Constitution (Global New Light of Myanmar, 2021).
Thus, while democratic forces work toward a more inclusive Myanmar, the military
will stand as the protector of Buddhist constitutionalism, making it an integral part of
military ideology as enshrined in the 2008 Constitution.
references
Cheesman, Nick. 2015. Opposing the Rule of Law: How Myanmar’s Courts Make Law and
Order. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Constitution of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar. 2008. Ofﬁcial bilingual version.
Ministry of Information.
Constitution of the Socialist Republic of Burma. 1974. Avaivlable at https://www.burmalibrary
.org/sites/burmalibrary.org/ﬁles/obl/docs07/1974Constitution.pdf
Constitution of the Union of Burma, 1947. Available at https://www.burmalibrary.org/sites/
burmalibrary.org/ﬁles/obl/docs07/1947Constitution-facsimile-red.pdf)
Crouch, Melissa. 2019. The Constitution of Myanmar. A Contextual Analysis. Oxford: Hart
Publishing.
Frydenlund, Iselin. 2017. “Religious Liberty for Whom? The Buddhist Politics of Religious
Freedom During Myanmar’s Transition to Democracy.” Nordic Journal of Human
Rights 35 (1): 55–73.
2018. “The Birth of Buddhist Politics of Religious Freedom in Myanmar.” Journal of
Religious and Political Practice 4 (1): 107–21.
2019. “The Rise of Religious Offence in Transitional Myanmar.” In Outrage: The Rise of
Religious Offence in Contemporary South Asia, edited by Paul Rollier, Kathinka Frøystad
and Arild Engelsen Ruud, 77–102. London: UCL Press.
Frydenlund, Iselin, Pum Za Mang, Phyo Wai and Hayward, Susan. 2021. “Religious
Responses to the Military Coup in Myanmar.” Review of Faith and International
Affairs 19 (3): 77–88.
Fuller, Paul. 2016. “The Idea of ‘Blasphemy’ in the Pa¯li Canon and Modern Myanmar.”
Journal of Religion and Violence 4 (2): 159–81.
Global New Light of Myanmar. 2019. “Interfaith Body Holds 3rd Advisory Forum on National
Reconciliation, Peace in Myanmar.” November 5.
2020. “Myanmar signs Union Accord Part III for establishing Democratic Federal Union.”
August 22.
16 “Federal Democracy Charter Part I,” Declaration of Federal Democracy Union, 2021, 5.
Available
at
https://crphmyanmar.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/Federal-Democracy-
Charter-English.pdf. For more on religious responses to the coup, see Frydenlund et al., 2021.
218
Iselin Frydenlund
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 241 ---
2021. “The Speech Made by State Administration Council Chairman Senior General Min
Aung Hlaing on the Occasion of Six Months on 1 August 2021 since the State
Administration Council has taken the State’s Responsibilities.” August 2.
Janaka, Ashin and Crosby, Kate. 2017. “Heresy and Monastic Malpractice in the Buddhist
Court Cases (Vinicchaya) of Modern Burma (Myanmar).” Contemporary Buddhism
18 (1): 199–261.
Kawanami, Hiroko. 2021. “The Making of a Buddhist Heretic: A Case Study of Sky-Blue
Sect.” Journal of Buddhism, Law & Society 6: 1–25.
Kyaw Phyo Tha. 2014. ‘Police Arrest New Zealander, 2 Burmese for Promotion Insulting
Buddhism’, December 11. www.irrawaddy.com/news/burma/police-arrest-new-zealand-
er-2-burmese-promotion-insulting-buddhism.html, currently unavailable.
Kyaw Win, Mya Han, and Thein Hlaing. 2011. Myanmar Politics: 1958–1962: Volume III.
Yangon: Department of Historical Research.
Laird, Hanna. 2020. Sa¯sana Over Secularity. A Discourse Analysis of the Role of Religion for
the National League for Democracy in Transitional Myanmar. MA thesis.
Larsson, Tomas. 2015. “Monkish Politics in Southeast Asia: Religious Disenfranchisement in
Comparative and Theoretical Perspective.” Modern Asian Studies 49: 40–82.
Penal Code. 1861. Available at Burma Library, www.burmalibrary.org/show.php?cat=1860.
Samantapasadika, Sp 996, 997, 7, vol. V. Oxford: Pali Text Society.
Schober, Juliane. 2011. Modern Buddhist Conjunctures in Myanmar: Cultural Narratives,
Colonial Legacies, and Civil Society. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Schonthal,
Ben.
2016.
Buddhism,
Politics
and
the
Limits
of
Law,
The
Pyrrhic
Constitutionalism of Sri Lanka. New York: Cambridge University Press.
2017. “Formations of Buddhist Constitutionalism in South and Southeast Asia.”
International Journal of Constitutional Law 15: 705–15.
2018. “Buddhism and Constitutional Practice.” Asian Journal of Comparative Law: 245–54.
Tin Maung Maung Than. 1988. “The “Sangha” and “Sasana” in Socialist Burma.” Sojourn:
Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia 3(1): 26–61
United Institute of Peace. 2021. The State-Religion Nexus in Myanmar State-Religion
Relations in Peace-Making, Constitutional Reform, and Elections. Unpublished report.
Walton, Matthew J. 2017. Buddhism, Politics and Political Thought in Myanmar. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Walton, Matthew J. and Aung Tun. 2016. “What the State Sangha Committee Actually Said
about Ma Ba Tha.” Tea Circle, July 29.
Xin He. 2014. “The Party’s Leadership as a Living Constitution in China.” In Constitutions in
Authoritarian Regimes, edited by Tom Ginsburg and Alberto Simpser: 245–64. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Buddhist Statecraft & Military Ideology in Myanmar
219
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 242 ---
11
Reconstituting the Divided Sangha
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
Benjamin Lawrence
11.1 INTRODUCTION
The Cambodian Constitution was the product of an internationalized peace process
that saw the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) super-
vise a short-lived nationwide ceaseﬁre, assume responsibility for state administration,
and facilitate the election of a Constituent Assembly. The subsequent promulgation
of the Constitution was meant to introduce a triple transition: from war to peace,
from Marx to market, and from dictatorship to democracy. The 1993 Constitution
also returned Cambodia to a system of constitutional monarchy, largely based on
that which had been overthrown in a military-led coup d’état of 1970. The
Constitution also reafﬁrmed the status of Buddhism as the state religion (a status
which had already been reintroduced by constitutional reforms in 1989). Beyond
this, Cambodia’s new constitutional document also recognized a transition that had
already taken place within Cambodia’s Buddhist institutions: namely, the move
from what had been a uniﬁed sangha to one in which authority was again divided
between two major monastic sects, the Mahanikay and the Thammayut. Alongside
several other articles that clearly related to Buddhism – the Article 4 reintroduction of
the national motto, “Nation Religion King,” the Article 43 assertion that “Buddhism
shall be the religion of the State,” and the Article 68 provision of a mandate for the
state to “help promote and develop Pa¯li schools and Buddhist institutes” – another
article, Article 13, had major implications for the religion it was ostensibly discussing,
relating to the rareﬁed issue of how to structure the “Council of the Throne.” The
article speciﬁed that, upon the death of one king, a new king should be declared within
seven days by a council that included the Supreme Patriarchs (sanghareach1) of the
1
Sanghareach (Khmer) is, like Sangharaja, literally translated as “Sangha King.” The title
Supreme Patriarch will be used herein.
220
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 243 ---
Mahanikay and of the Thammayut, along with seven other members (all elected to
ofﬁces in the civilian government).2
Although the present version differs slightly in its composition, the Council of the
Throne established in 1993 can effectively be understood as a reincarnation of an
institution that had been formalized in Cambodia’s ﬁrst formal constitution, initially
the product of a joint Franco–Khmer Commission while Cambodia was still under
French colonial rule, and eventually promulgated in 1947. In both instances, the
Constitution provided for an elected monarchy of sorts, with the mechanism of royal
succession being placed primarily under the control of the government rather than
the royal family, albeit initially at the behest of King Norodom Sihanouk (Jennar
1995, 35). This chapter traces the contours of Buddhist authority in Cambodia since
1947, as that authority changed, disappeared, and reemerged. It also links these
changes to Cambodia’s changing constitutional orders in those years. It argues that
the bifurcation of Buddhist authority recognized in the current Constitution is the
result of historical and political contingencies that continue to affect the interaction
of Buddhism and public law in Cambodia. This account begins from a recognition
that while the inclusion of the two Supreme Patriarchs on the reconstituted Council
of the Throne was a predictable outcome of the constitution-making process of 1993,
it was in fact only possible because of a wholesale restructuring of the architecture of
sangha authority that had been initiated less than two years earlier. The presence of
two Supreme Patriarchs, representing separately the Mahanikay and Thammayut
sects, was made possible by the fact that Cambodia’s Buddhist authorities had
themselves effectively been reconstituted and divided into two over the course of
1991 and 1992, shortly after the negotiation of the Paris Peace Accords, which in turn
formed the basis of Cambodia’s 1993 Constitution.
While the distinctions between Mahanikay and Thammayut sects are relatively
slight in doctrinal terms, the division between the two is both politically and
symbolically
signiﬁcant,
as
this
chapter
will
explain.
The
arrival
of
the
Thammayut sect in the mid-nineteenth century was historically controversial pre-
cisely because it introduced divisions in religious authority between a traditional
Mahanikay sect, which remained broadly popular, and a newer lineage that had
been imported from Siam and was almost exclusively associated with urban elites
and aristocracy. These divisions remained latent throughout the colonial and
immediate post-independence eras, and only threatened to surface after the fall of
the monarchy in 1970. After the tragedies of the Democratic Kampuchea period, in
which the Khmer Rouge entirely deconstructed and destroyed Cambodia’s religious
institutions, the country’s Buddhist sangha reemerged slowly, in a hobbled and
2
Art. 14 states that: ‘The King of Cambodia shall be a member of the Royal family, be at least
30 years old and descend from the bloodline of King Ang Duong, King Norodom or King
Sisowath.’ The Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia 1993, Art. 14. The other seven
members of the Throne Council include the President and ﬁrst and second Vice Presidents of
both the Senate and the National Assembly, and the Prime Minister.
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
221
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 244 ---
homogenized form. During the 1980s, the sangha’s membership was tightly
restricted, and its structures uniﬁed and centralized under the auspices of the
historically more prominent Mahanikay sect. Only after the reinstatement of
Buddhism as the state religion in 1989, and the return of King Norodom
Sihanouk during the negotiation of the Paris Accords, was the Thammayut sect
reestablished. The Mahanikay and Thammayut sects, then, continued to be repre-
sented separately by their respective Supreme Patriarchs, who have occasionally
adopted different stances on social and political issues. However, an additional
ambivalence has been introduced since 2006, with the creation of the superordinate
position of Great Supreme Patriarch, not to mention the immediate elevation of
Samdech Tep Vong – the former head of the uniﬁed sangha of the 1980s and the
Supreme Patriarch of the Mahanikay sect from 1991 to 2006 – to that position.
As this chapter will demonstrate, the existence of a division within the sangha’s
authority in Cambodia, let alone the constitutional recognition of this division, is far
from inevitable. Instead, it can be understood as part of a political settlement that
sought to end Cambodia’s decades-old civil war, and which has subsequently been
superseded to some degree by changes in the political landscape, particularly the
declining inﬂuence of royalism as a political force in Cambodia (Norén-Nilsson
2016b). To convey the historical signiﬁcance of this conﬁguration of Buddhist author-
ity in Cambodia, and its constitutional recognition, this chapter will start by providing
a brief account of the arrival of the Thammayut sect into Cambodia’s religious and
political milieu, and its gradual consolidation in Cambodia over the course of the
French colonial rule. The following section will then sketch the contours of the
relationship between sangha and state authority after independence from France,
following the overthrow of the monarchy, under Khmer Rouge rule, and during the
protracted period of civil war thereafter, noting how the postures of these various
regimes were reﬂected in the corresponding Constitutions of 1947, 1972, 1976, and
1979. The short-lived period under the Constitution of the State of Cambodia
provided an opening for the reconstitution of sangha institutions which has in turn
shaped the current constitutional order. The remainder of the chapter considers these
legacies, examining the design of the new constitutional text and highlighting the
ways in which the sangha has manifested its (newly redivided) authority in Cambodia
since 1993. It ends with a discussion of the creation of the position of Great Supreme
Patriarch in 2006, noting its symbolic implications and placing those implications in
the broader sociopolitical context of contemporary Cambodia. This chapter will
ultimately demonstrate that the structure of sangha authority in Cambodia continues
to be the subject of political inﬂuence and intervention.
11.2 OF ROYAL IMPORT: THE THAMMAYUT SECT AND IN ITS
HISTORICAL CONTEXT
The Mahanikay sect, which remains the largest monastic order in Cambodia, traces
its roots back to the arrival of Therava¯da Buddhism in the Angkorian empire
222
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 245 ---
(Kent 2016, 378). Initially inﬂuencing only the ruling elite, as reﬂected in the fact
that many princes are said to have ordained as monks as part of their training for
effective leadership, Therava¯da Buddhism was increasingly widespread in the gen-
eral Khmer population by the fourteenth century (Yang Sam 1987, 1, 7). As
Alexandra Kent explains, “[w]hile Hinduism seems to have been . . . fairly irrelevant
to daily life in the villages, Therava¯da Buddhism became woven into the fabric of
rural life.” The fact that “young village men could now acquire religious credentials
by ordaining as Buddhist monks” allowed for a “socially diverse” sangha to develop
in a decentralised manner across the Kingdom (Kent 2016, 379). Whether as a result
of this shift in social and political ordering, of inﬁghting within the ruling elite, or of
external factors, the newly Therava¯da Buddhist kingdom soon went into a prolonged
decline (known as the “middle period” in Cambodian historiography). This was
catalyzed by the sacking ﬁrst of Angkor, and then of the short-lived alternative capital
in Longvek. As a result, while the center of the Kingdom’s (diminishing) political
authority moved southeast to Udong (near the current capital of Phnom Penh), the
center of its Buddhist inﬂuence moved to Ayutthaya, and eventually to Bangkok. In
the words of the historian, Alain Forest, “[m]onks destined to become the most
respected Venerables of the Cambodian sangha came to the monasteries of these
two capitals,” while from a religious perspective Udong became “little more than an
extension of its Siamese counterparts” (2008, 23). Nevertheless, historical accounts
of the early nineteenth century court in Phnom Penh speak of “a fairly rigid
hierarchy” in which the Buddhist patriarchs sat just below the royal family (Harris
2005, 51).
It is in this context that the teachings, practices, and order of the Thammayut sect
were established in Cambodia in 1853. Arriving “through the importation of courtly
Buddhist practice and thought from Thailand,” Cambodia’s Thammayut fraternity
was derived from that established by Mongkut (later, King Rama IV) two decades
earlier (Kent 2008, 84). Concerned primarily with monastic practice, which
Mongkut perceived to have erred from the word of the Vinaya, the Thammayut
movement can be understood as an attempt to purify Buddhist practice by returning
to a more direct and strict reading of Pa¯li scripture. Thammayut texts and teachings,
to which much of the more mystical Buddhist practices in Cambodia at the time
would have been antithetical, were initially introduced to Cambodia under King
Ang Duong, who acquired eighty bundles of texts, and also sent both of his sons
(Norodom and Sisowath) to ordain with the fraternity (Peng, Kong & Menzel 2016,
395). However, the commitment of the Cambodian crown to Thammayut teaching
was made explicit when Ang Duong’s successor – King Norodom – sponsored the
construction of a Thammayut temple next to the royal palace as the Cambodian
capital moved to Phnom Penh in 1867 (Edwards 2007, 103–9). That temple, Wat
Botum Vadey, remains the center of Thammayut practice in Cambodia today.
Yet, Thammayut teachings appear to have remained the preserve of the aristoc-
racy and urban elite in Cambodia, while the unreformed majority – which came to
be known as the Mahanikay – prevailed across the rest of Cambodian society. While
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
223
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 246 ---
royal patronage was central to its ability to gain a foothold in Phnom Penh, the
Thammayut initially also beneﬁted from the support of colonial authorities. As
Penny Edwards explains, French “manipulation of strategic alliances with the
Thammayut and Mahanikay would fundamentally alter the balance of power
between the two sects” (Edwards 2007, 110). Initially sympathetic to the rationalism
and modernist ambitions of the reformist movement, colonial authorities later
became suspicious of the extent to which Thammayut leaders continued to be
inﬂuenced by developments, and allied to institutions, in Siam. As the colonial
administration’s engagement with Buddhism developed, therefore, French alle-
giances shifted towards the Mahanikay. By giving preferential opportunities for
further religious study abroad, Edwards notes, “French scholars and colonial insti-
tutes stymied the monopolization of Cambodge’s ‘national’ religion, Buddhism, by a
sect they identiﬁed as Siamese in origin and orientation” (Edwards 2007, 112).3
Ultimately, the Thammayut would establish itself in Cambodia, but only in a
limited way: a reality which is underlined by the fact that, by the turn of the
twentieth century, the Mahanikay made up 97 percent of all temples nationwide,
although this number dropped as low as 85 percent in areas around the capital
(Harris 2005, 111). The Thammayut sect represented only a small fraction of
Cambodia’s monastic community at this time, but it had a concentrated inﬂuence
close to the center of political power.
The Thammayut’s consolidation in Cambodia occurred contemporaneously with
the formalization of Buddhist authority through an attempt at state-led centraliza-
tion. This process began in 1880, when King Norodom – apparently inspired by
Mongkut’s creation of a national sangha in Thailand – ordered the restructuring of
the sangha, resulting in the appointment of the most senior Mahanikay monk –
Venerable Nil Tieng – to the apex position of Supreme Patriarch, and the elevation
of the most senior Thammayut monk – Samdech Preah Maha Sokhoun Pan – to the
second highest position (Harris 2005, 109). These appointments occurred within a
broader milieu that, according to French colonial functionary and author of the
1899 book Le Buddhisme au Cambodge, Adhémard Leclère, contained “a multitude
of sanghas” (Leclère 1899).
While recognizing Mahanikay ascendency, this formalized hierarchy nonetheless
recognized the coexistence within it of two distinct monastic orders, each with their
own hierarchies and leadership. This new status quo was soon reﬁned by French
colonial authorities, as they began just two decades later to formalize sangha
authority in secular law. Speciﬁcally, the authorities of the French Protectorate in
Cambodia introduced procedures for the state administration’s registration of
temples in 1904, and for its registration of monks and novices in 1916, before
3
Also, note that the shift in the attention of colonial authorities also appears to have precipitated
a reformist movement within the Mahanikay, which rose in prominence under French rule
over the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century.
224
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 247 ---
restructuring the sangha nationwide and bringing it under state authority in 1919. In
February and September of 1943, meanwhile, the complete restructuring of the
sangha hierarchy was ordered by royal decrees that gave the Supreme Patriarchs of
the Mahanikay and Thammayut greater independence to appoint chief monks at
the provincial level, but still made these appointments subject to approval by the
king and the Ministry of Cults and Religious Affairs. Ultimately, however, this
formal recognition of two distinct monastic fraternities within a single, uniﬁed
sangha authority belied a social undercurrent of increasing tension, in which both
Mahanikay and Thammayut authorities had sought to obstruct one another’s
activities.4 The divisiveness of this situation was most forcefully articulated in the
anti-colonial publication Nagaravatta, which cited the division as a potential cause
for the decline of Buddhism in the country and called for the eradication of divisions
within the sangha (albeit without success) under the slogan of “One Nation, One
Religion” (Edwards 2007, 208). This phrase would reemerge in the 1980s, as will be
discussed shortly.
Cambodia’s ﬁrst formal Constitution was promulgated by King Norodom
Sihanouk in 1947, after a drafting process initially led by a joint Franco–Khmer
Commission but then taken up by an elected Constituent Assembly. The process
eventually produced a draft which largely followed the contours of that of the
French Fourth Republic (Jennar 1995, 35–36). One notable change from the ﬁrst
Franco–Khmer Commission draft, which was introduced at the request of King
Sihanouk, however, was the introduction of a system of elected (rather than heredi-
tary) monarchy (Jennar 1995, 35–36). This, in turn, demanded the creation of a
Crown Council which would lead the selection process; a Council that was chaired
by the President of the Family Council of the Royal Family, but also included the
President of the National Assembly, the President of the Council of the Kingdom,
the President of the Council of Ministers, and the Supreme Patriarchs of both the
Mahanikay and Thammayut monastic orders (Article 28). Beyond the inclusion of
the two Supreme Patriarchs on the Crown Council, reference to Buddhism, or
religion more generally, can be found in Article 8, guaranteeing freedom of religion,
and recognizing Buddhism as “the religion of the state,” and Article 49, which
explicitly excludes members of the sangha from the principle of universal suffrage.
The 1947 Constitution also refers to the King as dhammika mahareach (“great
4
For example, Harris notes that “The hostility is illustrated by the fate of the Vinayava_n_nanà, the
foundation document of the Thammayut, which tells how King Mongkut came to see the need
for reform of monastic Buddhism in Siam. It was ﬁrst translated from Thai into Khmer in 1912,
but this ﬁrst edition is now quite rare because traditionalist members of the Mahanikay were
successful in ensuring its systematic destruction” (2005, 108). Meanwhile, Edwards suggests that
“[m]any Thammayut monks were actively obstructing the diffusion of the Royal Library’s
‘works of popularization’ in their key zones of inﬂuence, namely Battambang, Siem Reap,
and Sisophon” (2007, 205).
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
225
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 248 ---
righteous king”), implying that he was the protector and patron of Buddhism, and
the embodiment of rightful rule according to Buddhist principles.
The period which followed full independence from France – which was ﬁnally
negotiated by Sihanouk in 1953 – is frequently referred to in glowing terms. In his
book, Khmer Buddhism and Politics from 1954 to 1984, for example, Yang Sam
claims that “this time was probably the peak period of modern Khmer Buddhism”
(1987, 2). The Buddhist credentials of Sihanouk’s post-independence rule (ﬁrst as
king, then as president, and later in a hybrid prince-and-head-of-state role) are
discussed at length elsewhere (Harris 2005, 144–56). However, it is worth noting
that, in the context of general growth in the size of the Buddhist sangha, this period
actually saw a relative decline in the size and inﬂuence of the Thammayut sect.
From a total of 202 monasteries at the moment of independence, there were only
139 still operating by 1970, while the number of Mahanikay temples increased from
2,461 to 3,369 in the same period (Yang Sam 1987, 17). This decline in the
Thammayut sect is attributed by Yang Sam to a generalized unwillingness to
abandon ritual practices (typically associated with Brahmanical and animist trad-
itions), a reluctance amongst rural Cambodians to send their children to ordain in
Thammayut temples which tended to be concentrated around the capital of Phnom
Penh, and the emergence of a dynamic reformist movement within the Mahanikay.
As a result, there appears to have been an increasingly widely felt sentiment that the
Thammayut order enhanced division and disharmony in Cambodia’s monastic and
lay community, because it “emphasized the division of social classes between the
royalty, the rich and the poor” (Yang Sam 1987, 17). While this divisiveness is
frequently remarked upon by historical accounts of the period, it did not manifest
in open confrontations within the sangha.
Serious divisions within the sangha became increasingly evident as, in
1970, Cambodia descended into civil war. The fall of the Kingdom of Cambodia,
courtesy of parliament’s dismissal of Sihanouk as Head of State, and the seizing of
power by military General Lon Nol, had the support of many notable ﬁgures within
the sangha, particularly reformist elements within the Mahanikay sect. Venerable
Khieu Chum, for example, gained notoriety for his critique of the sangha’s depend-
ence on monarchy, which he argued the Buddha himself had rejected, and after the
coup became a prominent supporter of republicanism. Khieu Chum’s vision of a
republican but nonetheless Buddhist Cambodia – which he articulated with
increasing clarity after 1970 (Harris 2008, 98) – would also inspire later political
leaders, such as Heng Samrin during the early 1980s (Yang Sam 1987, 83).
Meanwhile, only private appeals from then Mahanikay Supreme Patriarch, Huot
Tat, prevented a signiﬁcant number of Thammayut monks from embarking on a
march to protest the overthrow of Sihanouk and the imminent dissolution of
the monarchy.
The Khmer Republic – which was eventually formalized in the 1972
Constitution – was far from secular, let alone anticlerical. Lon Nol himself
226
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 249 ---
described the ongoing civil war, against the communist insurrection led by the
Khmer Rouge, as “a religious war” against a “thmil” (devil/atheist) enemy (Harris
2005, 174). Article 2 of the Constitution of the Khmer Republic also recognized
Buddhism as the state religion. The removal of the monarchy meant that the Crown
Council had been dispensed with, thereby removing previous references to the
leaders of the Thammayut and Mahanikay sects in the new charter. Nevertheless,
Lon Nol had already reassured both leaders in the months after the coup that: “the
present radical change of political rule is not meant to be prejudicial to Buddhism,
which remains the state religion as it has up till now” (Harris 2012, 16).
The subsequent rise of the Khmer Rouge was a disaster for Buddhism. Though a
number of Buddhist monks appear to have been involved in the Indochinese
Communist Party and then the Communist Party of Kampuchea in earlier years,
the Khmer Rouge’s four years of rule under the Democratic Kampuchea regime
were characterized by the complete destruction of religious institutions, the system-
atic elimination of Buddhist leadership, and the generalized defrocking and mis-
treatment of monks from urban centers. Inevitably, the Constitution of Democratic
Kampuchea, promulgated in 1975, did not recognize a state religion, and although it
did purport to recognize the right to worship in Article 20, it simultaneously forbade
the worship of any “reactionary religion which is detrimental to Democratic
Cambodia and the Cambodian people.” This latter prohibition appears to have
been interpreted so broadly as to prohibit the practice of any religion, other than the
animism of highland communities. Whether as a result of an intentional policy of
eradication or not, less than 100 – and by some estimates only 12 – Cambodian
monks survived the Democratic Kampuchea period, meaning that some 80,000
monks had been lost over the course of a period in which almost a quarter of the
population died from either exhaustion, starvation, disease, torture or execution
(Yang Sam 1987, 81; Kent 2016, 383).
11.3 RECONSTRUCTING THE SANGHA
The fall of Democratic Kampuchea, then, might have provided an opportunity to
rebuild Buddhist institutions in the wake of the destruction wrought by Khmer
Rouge rule. Though the Vietnamese-installed People’s Republic of Kampuchea
(PRK) was ideologically opposed to the promotion of Buddhism, it nevertheless
“allowed the restoration of temples and a restricted revival of the sangha” in order to
accrue some much-needed legitimacy (Kent 2008, 383). Strict limits were intro-
duced on the expansion of the sangha, preventing anyone under the age of ﬁfty from
ordaining, and limiting to four the number of monks residing at any particular
temple (Marston 2009). Meanwhile, historical accounts of the period describe a
situation in which Buddhism was made wholly subservient to the authority of the
party (the National United Front Salvation of Kampuchea, herein the Front) and
the PRK state. As John Marston explains, the restored sangha “was considered a mass
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
227
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 250 ---
organization structurally parallel to labor unions and the women’s association,” such
that newly appointed Buddhist leaders (ofﬁcially ordained at a ceremony in 1975)
were nonetheless “under the administrative direction of Front ofﬁcials.” Temple
(wat) committees that were primarily constituted by laypeople exercised “great
power over the direction of the wat,” ensuring some portion of donations would
be directed to broader community initiatives (Marston 2009, 225–26). As such,
Buddhist monks were treated as “state employees” and were expected to sustain
themselves by growing vegetables on temple land. The unique reality of this status is
similarly reﬂected in the fact that monks were formally enfranchised and allowed to
run for public ofﬁce for the ﬁrst time by way of Article 31 of the 1979 Constitution of
the People’s Republic of Kampuchea.5
Meanwhile, Buddhist authority was reconstituted in the form a single, uniﬁed
sangha (the “Front order,” or bra_h saṅgh ra_nasirsa). After being one of seven people
to take part in the ﬁrst ofﬁcial ordination ceremony, which was overseen by a group
of Therava¯da monks brought in from Vietnam, Tep Vong was soon selected to sit at
the apex of the new monastic order, as well as to sit as the vice president of the
National Assembly. Although this privileged political position could be perceived as
a recognition of the status of Buddhist authority, it is better understood – particularly
from a historical perspective that recognizes the conventional separation between
Buddhist and state authority – as an attempt to ensure the subservience of the sangha
hierarchy to the state. From his position in the National Assembly, for example, Tep
Vong is reported to have offered justiﬁcations for state-led political violence against
domestic political dissent, which he sought to base in Buddhist doctrine.
Meanwhile, the sangha over which Tep Vong now presided as President
(pradha¯n) – rather than Supreme Patriarch (sanghareach), with its royal connota-
tions – was ofﬁcially one without sects or divisions. “Now we make no difference
between the two orders; there is at present only one sangha,” Tep Vong is reported
to have told a Vietnamese reporter. Another senior monk – Oum Soum – later
remarked that “our monks are neither Mahanikay nor Thammayut but are
Nationalist monks” (Yang Sam 1987, 86). However, some accounts indicate that
in reality the teaching and practice of the sangha at the time leaned heavily towards
Mahanikay rather than Thammayut conventions in all relevant respects. Writing in
1987, for example, Yang Sam explains that the “overall practices [of the uniﬁed bra_h
saṅgh ra_nasirsa] are those of the Mahanikay order” (1987, 87). In response, there
appear to have been some attempts to reestablish a Thammayut monastic order,
which were suppressed on the basis that any Buddhist institutions outside of the
ofﬁcially recognized order were illegal. That these initiatives appear to have been so
swiftly and categorically dealt with by Front or PRK authorities suggests that there
was a particular sensitivity to any potential for an alternative locus of Buddhist
5
As Tomas Larsson explains, the (re)enfranchisement of Buddhist monks was typically the
preserve of the “most virulently anti-religious and anti-clerical regimes” (2015, 71).
228
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 251 ---
authority to develop, given that this could provide a challenge to the legitimacy of
the bra_h saṅgh ra_nasirsa. By contrast, the establishment of unofﬁcial wats, which
circumvented the rigid registration restrictions imposed by the state, were relatively
commonplace at this time (Bektimirova 2002).
11.4 THE RETURN OF A DIVIDED SANGHA
The most recent reconstitution of Buddhist authority in Cambodia was ultimately
precipitated by global events. The Soviet policy of perestroika, which saw the
reduction of aid to Vietnam as part of the gradual winding-down of the Cold War,
ultimately forced Hanoi to reconsider its support for the PRK regime. Plans for the
ﬁrst withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia were announced in May 1988
(Cima 1989). This, in turn, prompted Hun Sen, who had become prime minister of
the PRK three years prior, to undertake a series of fundamental reforms, starting with
the almost immediate lifting of limits on ordination to the sangha and culminating
in the promulgation of the Constitution of the State of Cambodia (SoC) in 1989.
While the Constitution of the SoC bore many similarities to that which had
preceded it, it also contained a number of signiﬁcant changes. Alongside the
reintroduction of private property and the shift away from a planned economy, for
instance, the SoC Constitution in Article 6 reinstated Buddhism as the state religion
and removed provisions of Article 31 which had previously enfranchised Buddhist
monks. The new constitutional recognition of Buddhism’s special status was accom-
panied by a public apology from Hun Sen for the “mistakes” made toward religion
over the previous decade of the Front’s rule (Harris 2005, 200).
While signiﬁcant in themselves, the reforms of the State of Cambodia era must
also be understood as symbolic moves designed to further open up the opportunity
for a comprehensive peace agreement to end the country’s ongoing civil war.6
Negotiations toward this settlement had begun by the middle of 1988, at the First
Jakarta Informal Meeting, and culminated in the signing of the Paris Peace
Agreements on October 23, 1991. In this context, steps such as the constitutional
recognition in 1989 of Buddhism as the state religion must be understood as attempts
to reassure other warring parties and the international community. As John Marston
explains: “the reforms represented the country as amenable to basic changes of the
kind that would make a settlement with resistance factions feasible” (2009, 226).
Signiﬁcant structural changes to the sangha, meanwhile, began apace toward the
end of 1991, after the signing of the Paris Peace Accords enabled the return of
Norordom Sihanouk in November of that year. The bra_h saṅgh ra_nasirsa was
6
Since the fall of Democratic Kampuchea, the civil war had pitted the Front and its Vietnamese
patrons against a coalition made up of the royalist FUNCINPEC (Front uni national pour un
Cambodge indépendant, neutre, paciﬁque et coopératif), the anti-communist Khmer People’s
National Liberation Front (KPNLF), and remnants of the Khmer Rouge, which still controlled
signiﬁcant portions of the country’s western and southwestern provinces.
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
229
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 252 ---
promptly dissolved, and the returning former king appears to have immediately (and
unofﬁcially) resumed a role as patron of the sangha. As such, Sihanouk awarded Tep
Vong the royally imbued title of Sanghareach, and concurrently applied the same
title to the prominent, Paris-based Thammayut monk, Bou Kry, whose temple had
accommodated Sihanouk’s son (Prince Sihamoni) when he ordained as a monk
almost a decade earlier. By February 1992, the separate monastic orders of
Mahanikay and Thammayut sects had been fully reconstituted. The two Supreme
Patriarchs, Tep Vong and Bou Kry, respectively, sat at the apex of the two newly
reconstituted hierarchies, with power to appoint Chief Monks at province, munici-
pality, district, and village level via preah sangha prakas (sangha decrees), with the
cosignature of the Minister for Cults and Religious Affairs (Peng, Kong & Menzel
2016, 411). Though there is no reference to the sangha or to Buddhism in the
Accords,7 it seems likely that this reconstitution of the sangha, along lines closely
resembling that which had existed prior to the fall of the Kingdom of Cambodia in
1970, was at least an implicit – if not explicitly agreed but unwritten – aspect of the
broader political settlement.
Cambodia’s peace-time state authority, then, was reconstituted after that of its
religious authorities. In an eighteen-month process beginning in March 1992, the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia assumed responsibility for the
functions of the Cambodian state, sought to oversee the disarmament of the warring
factions, and administered elections in May 1993. Ahead of that election, both
samdech Tep Vong and samdech Bou Kry unsuccessfully sought to secure an
exception to the universal franchise, so as to prevent monks from both monastic
orders being allowed to vote for what would be the ﬁrst time in the country’s history
(Larsson 2015). The denial of this request by the head of the UNTAC mission,
Yasushi Akashi, ultimately set a precedent whereby monks have been formally
included in the franchise ever since, much to the chagrin of the two patriarchs.
Nevertheless, the Constituent Assembly formed by the 1993 elections, in which the
royalist FUNCINPEC won a narrow majority, went on to draft a constitution
(promulgated on September 24, 1993) which restored Cambodia to the status of
constitutional monarchy, and otherwise synthesized key features of the amended
1947 Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia and the 1989 Constitution of the
State of Cambodia: Article 4 of the Constitution restored the national motto of
“Nation, Religion, King”; Article 43 reafﬁrmed the special status of Buddhism as the
state religion; and Article 68 provided the state with a duty to “develop Pa¯li schools
and Buddhist institutes.” Along with the reinstatement of the monarchy, meanwhile,
in Article 13 came the reforming of the Council of the Throne, wherein the
7
There is also virtually no mention of religion more broadly, other than the general commit-
ment to human rights in Part 3 of the Accords and a guarantee provided in Annex 5 that the
Constitution due to be drafted pursuant to UN-administered elections would include the right
to freedom of religion and a prohibition against religious discrimination.
230
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 253 ---
Supreme Patriarchs of the Mahanikay and Thammayut were joined by the president
and ﬁrst and second vice presidents of the National Assembly, the prime minister,
and (after the formation of the Upper House in 1999) by the president and ﬁrst and
second vice presidents of the Senate.
Most scholars view the UNTAC experiment and its legacies as having been a
heavily qualiﬁed success, particularly with regard to its purported democracy-
building mandate. A major reason for this was that Cambodia’s multi-party political
settlement could not be reconciled with an institutional context that otherwise
remained overwhelmingly dominated by the Cambodian People’s Party (herein,
CPP).8 Many of these dynamics were paralleled in the reconstituted sangha. This is
most clearly embodied by Tep Vong, who remained at the top of the sangha
hierarchy (as Supreme Patriarch of the Mahanikay sect) after 1993, despite his close
association with the PRK regime. This continuity has, according to Alexandra Kent,
meant that Tep Vong – and much of the hierarchy of the post-1993 Cambodian
sangha more generally – “continues to be popularly viewed as the religious mouth-
piece of a Vietnamese-friendly [CPP] government,” in spite of the formal independ-
ence that has been afforded to Buddhist institutions (Kent 2008, 85). In the newly
reestablished Thammayut order, meanwhile, positions of signiﬁcant inﬂuence were
actually held by other CPP-afﬁliated, Mahanikay-educated monks. The position
immediately below Bou Kry, Ian Harris notes, was ﬁlled by the Oum Soum, who
had himself been a prominent ﬁgure in the bra_h saṅgh ra_nasirsa of the 1980s
(Harris 2005, 214–15). Similarly, the lay chairman of the Pagoda Council at Wat
Botum Vadey – the temple built by King Norodom as the center of the Thammayut
sect and, after 1992, the home of Bou Kry9 – was none other than the father of Hun
Sen (Harris 2005, 215). According to Harris, the positioning of such ﬁgures can be
understood as an attempt to surveil the Thammayut order, which was likely to have
been viewed with suspicion by the CPP even after the uneasy and fragile peace had
been established. In fact, Harris states that “it could be argued that they are well
placed to feed intelligence to the relevant authorities” (Harris 2005, 214–15). While
appointments within each order were ostensibly the prerogative of their respective
Sanghareach, there are indications that these decisions were subject to political
inﬂuence and intervention at the local level. Alexandra Kent, for example, reports
data showing that “head monks are not always elected by the monks but may
instead be instated through the support of local politically supported ofﬁcials”
(Kent 2008, 89). Though formally reconstituted as two distinct orders, and to a
large extent formally independent from the state, the order of the Thammayut
8
The CPP was the new name given in 1991 to the National United Front Salvation of
Kampuchea, which had ruled Cambodia with Vietnamese support since the overthrow of
the Khmer Rouge in 1979.
9
Although historically the center of the Thammayut monastic order, and still of central
importance to the sect, the majority of monks at Wat Botum Vadey are also now Mahanikay.
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
231
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 254 ---
was – from 1992 – largely in a process of transition which reﬂected the broader
political change that was ongoing in Cambodia.
11.5 POST-1993 PRACTICE
Despite their new conﬁguration and the relative autonomy it appeared to confer, the
Thammayut and Mahanikay sects were largely uniﬁed in the public positions on
signiﬁcant social and political questions. One issue where daylight was visible
between the two, however, was in response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic that gathered
momentum after the departure of UNTAC (Ledgerwood 1994). The difference in
posture between the Supreme Patriarchs of the two orders came to a head in 2000,
around a conference organized for Buddhist monks by the National AIDS Authority,
with signiﬁcant support from international donors. Speciﬁcally, Tep Vong made
only a brief appearance at the conference, and later explained that his reticence
reﬂected a more fundamental skepticism about the involvement of monks in HIV/
AIDS education or support to people with HIV/AIDS. Suggesting that the extent of
the epidemic had been inﬂated by the CPP’s political opponents in order to
discredit the ruling party, Tep Vong argued that the ofﬁcial ﬁgure of 170,000 was
incorrect and that only around 30,000 people had contracted HIV (Post Staff 2000).
Meanwhile, the Supreme Patriarch argued, the holding of workshops brought
unwanted attention, since “the more people who attend the meeting, the more
people will tell the world Cambodia is not good” (Post Staff 2000). Rather, Tep
Vong appears to have advocated a more hardline approach, suggesting the govern-
ment should ﬁrst crack down on vice in the country before involving monks in
awareness-raising activities, and ultimately suggested the sangha’s stance should be
to withhold support, since those who were suffering were only being punished for
their immorality: a kind of karmic justice. “If we help sick people, then we will only
encourage them not to be afraid of catching the virus,” Tep Vong also explained
“[i]f you support the people with AIDS then we openly broadcast to the world we
support AIDS” (Post Staff 2000).
The Supreme Patriarch’s stance was not shared throughout the Mahanikay sect,
of which he was the premier authority, however, as many monks were profoundly
involved in the ﬁght against HIV/AIDS across the country, and in offering care to
people with AIDS. Neither was the stance shared by the Thammayut Supreme
Patriarch. In contrast to Tep Vong, Bou Kry was more conciliatory towards those
suffering from the disease and largely supportive of monks’ engagement with the
HIV/AIDS issue. “The subject should be mixed with Buddhist sermons – and every
monk has to do that,” the Thammayut Supreme Patriarch told the English-language
Phnom Penh Post newspaper, before explicitly dismissing the idea of suppression as a
strategy and advocating education as “the best way.” Finally, Bou Kry called on
monks “to give moral support to the sick [with AIDS] so they can die peacefully –
even though they have committed a bad thing” (Post Staff 2000). On what was an
232
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 255 ---
increasingly politicized societal issue, in other words, the division of the sangha
between Mahanikay and Thammayut orders – as well as the heterogeneity of
practice that was possible within the former – allowed for Cambodia’s Buddhist
monks to be prominently involved in the dissemination of information about HIV/
AIDS, and in the provision of important services to its sufferers at a time when state
capacity was still profoundly limited.
Simultaneously, tensions between the two orders threatened to surface over a
more overtly political issue: the deaths of sixteen supporters of the opposition
politician Sam Rainsy, who were killed by a grenade attack in the public park
immediately outside of Wat Botum Vadey in March 1997. Sam Rainsy, it seems,
had already established a relationship with the Thammayut Supreme Patriarch, who
resided at the Wat Botum Vadey temple at the time: both had been part of the
Cambodian diaspora in France during the 1980s, at which point Bou Kry is rumored
to have told worshipers to donate to the FUNCINPEC party, with whom Sam
Rainsy was afﬁliated at the time (Harris 2005, 214). Meanwhile, Sam Rainsy had
himself spent three weeks ordained as a monk at the temple just a year prior to the
attack. Although Bou Kry steered clear of any comment at the time of the killings, he
provided some measured remarks to journalists three years later, as supporters of
Sam Rainsy sought to erect a stupa in the park to memorialize the dead. Aware that
three previous such memorials had been removed or destroyed by authorities, Bou
Kry told journalists that he was “very concerned” about the fate of the fourth
iteration, noting that the stupa contained a Buddha statue and that any damage
done to the statue “would be like they were attacking the Buddhist religion”
(O’Connell and Saroeun 2000). The Supreme Patriarch’s sympathy, however,
may have been made clearer when the stupa was temporarily rehoused within the
walls of Wat Botum Vadey. In the context of a profoundly polarized political
context, and in light of Bou Kry’s general opposition to Buddhist ﬁgures engaging
in politics, such support (muted though it was) can be understood as a politically
symbolic gesture.
The two Supreme Patriarchs have also been engaged in political matters when
called upon to participate in the deliberations of the Council of the Throne,
conﬁrming King Sihamoni’s ascension in 2004. This process was complicated by
the fact that Sihamoni was to be selected as king in the wake of his father’s
abdication of the throne, an event for which there was no provision made in the
constitutional articles relating to royal succession. Sihanouk’s abdication came in
the midst of a post-election political crisis (Peou 2006). As with the elections ﬁve
years earlier (Khuy 1998), the 2003 elections had seen the CPP win a majority of
seats in the National Assembly but fall short of the super-majority needed to form a
government. Initially the CPP failed in attempts to form a coalition with opposition
parties who disputed the results of the election. Provided a “supreme role as
arbitrator to ensure the regular execution of public powers” by Article 9 of the
Constitution, Sihanouk’s frustrations with the dysfunction of Cambodia’s political
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
233
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 256 ---
system and the inability of the parties to reach a compromise, which he described as
a “dishonorable deadlock” (Yun 2003), came to the fore as he repeatedly threatened
to abdicate the throne (Yun 2004). By contrast, Bou Kry appears not to have
intervened to stop Sihanouk from abdicating. Instead, shortly after King Sihanouk
had formally issued his notice of abdication, Bou Kry publicly stated his support for
Norodom Sihamoni to assume the throne. “Prince Sihamoni deserves the position
because it belongs to him,” the Thammayut Supreme Patriarch explained, noting
that the prince – who had previously ordained as a Thammayut monk at a temple in
France in 1981, where he came under Bou Kry’s personal guidance – had immedi-
ately sought his personal advice after hearing of the abdication (Lor & Leung 2021).
The contrast between these two positions – Tep Vong’s attempt to persuade
Sihanouk to remain on the throne and Bou Kry’s close involvement in preparing
Sihamoni to succeed his father, which he did in October 2004 – hint at the ongoing
closeness between the royal family and the Thammayut sect, if not also the
Mahanikay Patriarch’s view of the throne as a symbol of political stability, comprom-
ise and, ultimately, legitimacy for the ruling party (Lawrence 2020).
A signiﬁcant alteration to the conﬁguration of the sangha hierarchies was made in
2006, though this was not reﬂected in any change in the composition of the Council
of the Throne, let alone the text of the Constitution more generally. Speciﬁcally, a
new position of Great Supreme Patriarch was established by royal decree (No. NS/
RKT/0506/207, 2006), with Tep Vong being appointed, and his previous position as
Supreme Patriarch of the Mahanikay being ﬁlled by his former deputy, Nuon Nget
(Royal Decree No. PS/RKT/0406/200, 2006). As such, a ﬁgure who had until that
point been the Supreme Patriarch of the Mahanikay, and who had himself presided
over the uniﬁed bra_h saṅgh ra_nasirsa of the 1980s, became the ultimate authority
within the Cambodian sangha once again. Tep Vong became the ﬁrst Supreme
Patriarch to represent both the Mahanikay and Thammayut orders of the
Cambodian sangha since Nil Teang was appointed to a similar position in 1859.
The move, which was signed by the recently crowned King Sihamoni, was immedi-
ately criticized by opponents and dissidents. One former monk, Chin Channa, who
himself claimed to have been “hounded out” of the sangha due to his interest in
politics, described the change at the time as “politically made only to undermine
and downgrade the Dhammayuth [sic] and put it under the inﬂuence of the CPP,”
and noted that the move had been made possible by a political context in which
“royalists are declining.” Striking a similar tone to that of Chin Channa, opposition
political leader Sam Rainsy similarly argued that “[t]he best way to maintain peace
as it is today, is to please keep it [the structure of sangha authority] the same.” This
call went unheeded, however, and a year later a royalist-afﬁliated newspaper,10
10 Khmer Amatak News was informally associated with Prince Norodom Ranariddh, the former
leader of FUNCINPEC who had – at this point – formed his own eponymous political party,
the NRP.
234
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 257 ---
Khmer Amatak News, was threatened with closure after it published a story praising
Thammayut Supreme Patriarch Bou Kry for his ability to rise above politics and
accusing Tep Vong of using his position to act as “the CPP’s spokesman” (Yun 2007).11
Despite having won enough seats in the National Assembly in the 2003 elections
to avert a super-majority for the CPP, the royalist political movement was clearly on
the wane. This decline was not helped by the abdication (and withdrawal from
political life) of Sihanouk, with whom the vast majority of royalist political prestige
continued to adhere (Norén-Nilsson 2016a, 2016b). Ultimately, the reality of this
decline was borne out two years later, when the royalist opposition parties (namely,
FUNCINPEC and the Norodom Ranariddh Party that splintered from it) were
resoundingly defeated in the 2008 elections.12 The return, recognition, and then
relative relegation of the Thammayut vis-à-vis the more popular Mahanikay sect can
be understood to reﬂect the plight of royalism as a political force, and even the
direction of Cambodia’s post-conﬂict political settlement more generally. In other
words, both the reintroduction in 1992 of the Thammayut order to Cambodia and
the subsequent elevation of a Mahanikay Supreme Patriarch (and particularly Tep
Vong) to a position of ascendency over his Thammayut counterpart less than ﬁfteen
years later are symptomatic of changes in the post-conﬂict political settlement in
Cambodia. Just as the former development reﬂected the progress of a peace process
in which the ruling CPP was compelled to compromise with royalist political and
military opponents led by Sihanouk, so the latter can be understood as a conse-
quence of the extent to which that compromise had subsequently been superseded
by political developments, and thus abandoned.
11.6 CONCLUSION
The constitution of Buddhist authority, and of the two monastic orders that make up
contemporary Cambodia’s sangha, then, has historically been subject to broader
political shifts in Cambodian society. That trend continues to hold into the present
day. Since its royally sanctioned introduction to Cambodia in 1853, members of the
Thammayut sect have remained a minority within Cambodia’s sangha community.
Initially encouraged by colonial authorities who identiﬁed with the order’s commit-
ment to rationalization, the Thammayut fell out of favor with the French as suspicion
grew around its connection to Thailand. Royal patronage of the Thammayut
remained a constant, however. As such, from Cambodia’s ﬁrst written constitution,
11 Within the year, the outlet had seen its license suspended as it became embroiled in another
dispute, this time with another ﬁgure from within the now fractious and fragmented royalist
movement (Lor 2007).
12 In fact, aside from the 2018 elections (the results of which were foreclosed by the dissolution of
the opposition Cambodian National Rescue Party less than a year prior), the 2008 elections
stand as an anomaly in Cambodia’s post-1993 electoral history, as the only elections in which
the CPP was able to muster more than 50 percent of the popular vote.
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
235
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 258 ---
promulgated in 1947, the place of the Thammayut has largely run alongside the place
of the monarchy. After being accorded equivalent status from 1947, and through the
immediate post-independence era dominated by Norodom Sihanouk, the division of
authority within the sangha was maintained by the Khmer Republic, albeit without
the constitutional recognition that came with the existence of a Crown Council.
While the Cambodian sangha then suffered almost universally at the hands of the
Khmer Rouge, it was Thammayut authority that was most notably sidelined during
the initial (limited) rebirth of Buddhist institutions in the 1980s, as the People’s
Republic of Kampuchea recognized only a homogenous, uniﬁed sangha that ofﬁ-
cially knew no sectarian difference but, in reality, largely favored Mahanikay practice.
The return of a divided sangha, intriguingly, was a religious representation of what
was supposed to be a moment of increasing unity thereafter, as the peace negotiations
of 1988–91 were paralleled by increased religious freedom and, eventually, the
reconstitution of separate Mahanikay and Thammayut orders.
From one vantage point, Cambodia’s contemporary conﬁguration of Buddhist
authority appears quite similar to that which existed at the turn of the twentieth
century. At that time, a Great Supreme Patriarch sat alone at the apex of the
hierarchy of sangha authority, with separate sect-speciﬁc Supreme Patriarchs for
the Mahanikay and Thammayut immediately beneath him. In this role, Tep Vong
appears able to exert a palpable inﬂuence over questions of monastic discipline and
practice, as well as to claim a singular symbolic signiﬁcance as the primary repre-
sentative of Cambodia’s state religion. Yet, the text of the Constitution, and particu-
larly the provisions of Article 13 on the Council of the Throne, continue to evoke a
relative equivalence between the two sects by including only the two Supreme
Patriarchs. This ambivalence may reﬂect the particular signiﬁcance of the
Thammayut to the institution of the monarchy, meaning that the Thammayut
leadership is permitted greater prominence in questions relating to the crown than
in other matters. Alternatively, it may simply be the result of a reluctance to change
the constitutional text to acknowledge what may yet turn out to be a temporary status
quo. It is not clear, in other words, whether the position of Great Supreme Patriarch
will be a permanent feature in the conﬁguration of Cambodia’s sangha hierarchy, or
whether it is considered to inhere with the particular person of Tep Vong. What is
clear, however, is that Tep Vong’s current preeminence, and his ascendency to the
position of Great Supreme Patriarch, along with any attempt to maintain that
position whenever Tep Vong’s occupancy to it comes to an end, is a reﬂection of
political contingencies in Cambodian society, particularly the place of royalism as a
political movement and the monarchy as a social institution in Cambodia.
references
Bektimirova, Nadezhda. 2002. “The Religious Situation in Cambodia in the 1990s.” Religion,
State & Society 30 (1): 63–72. https://doi.org/10.1080/09637490220127639.
236
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 259 ---
Cima, Ronald J. 1989. “Vietnam in 1988: The Brink of Renewal.” Asian Survey 29 (1): 64–72.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2644517.
Croissant, Aurel and Beate Martín. 2006. Between Consolidation and Crisis: Elections and
Democracy in Five Nations in Southeast Asia, vol. 3. Southeast Asian Modernities.
Münster: LIT.
Edwards, Penny. 2007.Cambodge: The Cultivation of a Nation, 1860–1945. Southeast Asia –
Politics, Meaning, and Memory. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Forest, Alain. 2008. ‘Modernism and Morality in the Colonial Era.’ In People of Virtue:
Reconﬁguring Religion, Power and Moral Order in Cambodia Today, edited by
Alexandra Kent and David P. Chandler, 16–34. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Harris, Ian. 2005. Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice. Honolulu: University of
Hawaiʻi Press.
2008. “The Monk and the King: Khieu Chum and Regime Change in Cambodia.” Udaya:
Journal of Khmer Studies 9: 81–112.
2012. Buddhism in a Dark Age: Cambodian Monks under Pol Pot. University of Hawaiʻi
Press. https://muse.jhu.edu/book/19862.
Jennar, Raoul Marc. 1995. The Cambodian Constitutions, 1953–1993. Bangkok: White Lotus.
Kent,
Alexandra.
2008.
“Peace,
Power
and
Pagodas
in
Present-Day
Cambodia.”
Contemporary Buddhism 9 (1): 77–97.
2016. “A Shifting Universe: Religion and Moral Order in Cambodia.” In The Handbook of
Contemporary Cambodia. London: Routledge.
Kent, Alexandra and David P. Chandler. 2008. People of Virtue. NIAS Press.
Khuy, Sokhoeun. 1998. ’Talks Fruitless; King Hints at Abdication.’ The Cambodia Daily,
September 7. https://english.cambodiadaily.com/news/talks-fruitless-king-hints-at-abdica
tion-10598/.
Larsson, Tomas. 2015. “Monkish Politics in Southeast Asia: Religious Disenfranchisement in
Comparative and Theoretical Perspective.” Modern Asian Studies 49 (1): 40–82. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0026749X14000419.
Lawrence, Benjamin. 2020. “Outlawing Opposition, Imposing Rule of Law: Authoritarian
Constitutionalism in Cambodia.” Asian Journal of Comparative Law 15 (2): 225–49.
Leclère, Adhémard. 1899. Le Buddhisme au Cambodge. Paris: E. Leroux.
Ledgerwood, Judy L. 1994. “UN Peacekeeping Missions: The Lessons from Cambodia.” Asia-
Paciﬁc Issues 11 (1):1–10
Leung, Wency. 2004. “King Appeals to Top Monk to Let Him Abdicate.” The Cambodia
Daily, August 3. https://english.cambodiadaily.com/news/king-appeals-to-top-monk-to-
let-him-abdicate-42105/.
Lor, Chandara. 2007. “Khmer Amatak Newspaper License Suspended.” The Cambodia
Daily, October 9. https://english.cambodiadaily.com/news/khmer-amatak-newspaper-
license-suspended-78596/.
Lor, Chandara and Leung, Wency. 2021. “Mentor Says the Throne Belongs to Sihamoni.”
The Cambodia Daily, October 13, 2004. https://english.cambodiadaily.com/news/
mentor-says-the-throne-belongs-to-sihamoni-43247/.
Marston, John. 2009. ‘Cambodian Religion Since 1989.’ In Beyond Democracy in Cambodia,
vol. 12, edited by Joakim Öjendal and Mona Lilja. Democracy in Asia Series.
Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Norén-Nilsson, Astrid. 2016a. Cambodia’s Second Kingdom: Nation, Imagination, and
Democracy. Ithaca: Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University.
2016b. “The Demise of Cambodian Royalism and the Legacy of Sihanouk.” Sojourn:
Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia 31 (1): 1–36.
Buddhist Authority in Post-Conﬂict Cambodia
237
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 260 ---
O’connell, Stephen and Bou Saroeun. 2000. “Stupa Standoff Simmers after Fourth Round.”
Phnom Penh Post, May 26. www.phnompenhpost.com/national/stupa-standoff-simmers-
after-fourth-round.
Öjendal, Joakim and Lilja, Mona. 2009. Beyond Democracy in Cambodia, vol. 12. Democracy
in Asia Series. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
Peng, H. O. R., Kong Phallack and Menzel, Jörg. 2016. Cambodian Constitutional Law.
Singapore: Konrad Adenauer Stiftung.
Post Staff. 2000. “Top Monks Disagree on Role in Fighting AIDS.” Phnom Penh Post, June 9.
www.phnompenhpost.com/national/top-monks-disagree-role-ﬁghting-aids.
Samean, Yun. 2003. “King Might Turn to Ballot to End Crisis.” The Cambodia Daily,
December 15. https://english.cambodiadaily.com/news/king-might-turn-to-ballot-to-end-
crisis-70476/.
2004a. “King Says He Won’t Return.” The Cambodia Daily, March 26. https://english
.cambodiadaily.com/news/king-says-he-wont-return-39413/.
2004b. “Hun Sen Ignores King’s Threat to Abdicate.” The Cambodia Daily, August 5.
https://english.cambodiadaily.com/news/hun-sen-ignores-kings-threat-to-abdicate-42152/.
2007. “Gov’t Accuses Paper of Stoking Religious Tensions.” The Cambodia Daily,
February
5.
https://english.cambodiadaily.com/news/govt-accuses-paper-of-stoking-reli
gious-tensions-2-72895/.
Peou, Sorpong. 2006. ‘Consolidation or Crisis of Democracy? Cambodia’s Parliamentary
Elections in 2003 & Beyond.’ In Between Consolidation and Crisis: Elections and
Democracy in Five Nations in Southeast Asia, edited by Aurel Croissant and Beate
Martin. Berlin: Lit Verlag.
Yang, Sam. 1987. Khmer Buddhism and Politics from 1954 to 1984. Newington: Khmer Studies
Institute.
238
Benjamin Lawrence
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 261 ---
part iv
Northern and Northeastern Asia
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 262 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 263 ---
12
Constitutional Buddhism
Japanese Buddhists and Constitutional Law
Levi McLaughlin
12.1 INTRODUCTION: FINDING BUDDHISM IN JAPAN’S
POSTWAR CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER
When it comes to constitutional law, Japan contrasts starkly with most other
nominally Buddhist-majority polities. In spite of the fact that Japan conventionally
numbers among countries with a population that is mostly Buddhist, Buddhism
appears to have exerted a marginal inﬂuence on the composition and legal applica-
tion of Japan’s modern constitutions (enacted in 1890 and 1947). This chapter
considers historical causes and effects of Buddhism’s scant presence in the
Supreme Court of Japan’s deliberations on constitutional religion/state divides,
and it considers the impact of the 1947 Constitution’s strong separations between
religion and state on the actions and attitudes of Japanese Buddhist actors. It
discusses reasons why Japan’s identity as a Buddhist nation should be reconsidered
in light of Buddhism’s low proﬁle in its legal record, and it provides two case
studies – of Buddhists’ post-disaster aid mobilization and lay Buddhist engagement
in electoral politics – to illustrate how Japan’s postwar constitutional separations
guide Japanese Buddhists as they mitigate legal challenges and confront concerns
about violating constitutional norms. By highlighting ways Japanese Buddhist indi-
viduals and institutions have been shaped by concern for constitutional law, in spite
of appearing rarely in court deliberations on religious freedom, I propose that
Japanese Buddhism exhibits an inversion of tendencies found in many other
Buddhist-majority regions. It thus serves as a necessary counterexample to include
in a global overview of Buddhism and comparative constitutional law. In contrast to
what Benjamin Schonthal terms a “Buddhist constitutionalism” evident in countries
whose national constitutions have been drafted in keeping with forms of governance
maintained by monastic lineages, Japanese Buddhist individuals and organizations
represent what might be conceived as Buddhist constitutionalism’s mirror opposite,
241
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 264 ---
that of “constitutional Buddhism” (Schonthal 2017).1 The institutional makeup of
Japanese Buddhist organizations and the dispositions and tactics cultivated by their
clerical and lay adherents indicate that explicitly non-religious constitutional law
serves Japan’s Buddhists as an operative framework. It is one they continually adapt
in order to establish their legitimacy in the face of potential legal challenges, a leery
public, and a need to preserve their increasingly precarious traditions.
Let us explore how a distinctive relationship between Buddhism and constitu-
tionalism emerged in Japan. Today, Japan distinguishes itself by having the world’s
longest-ever unamended national constitution. Put into effect on May 3, 1947, the
postwar Japanese Constitution is also notable for its multiple articles that lay out how
religion is to be separated from the state.2 This emphatic demarcation is a product of
reforms carried out by the US Occupation (1945–1952) after Japan’s surrender to the
Allied powers on August 15, 1945.3 As its advisors deliberated on how to articulate
rights guaranteeing freedom of religion, the Occupation sought to forestall any
possibility that Japan would return to its wartime-era regime requirement that the
people of Japan foster loyalty as imperial subjects by taking part in Shintō shrine-
based rituals.4 These requirements were sanctioned by Japan’s 1890 Constitution, in
which Article 28 stipulated that “Japanese subjects shall, within limits not prejudicial
to peace and order, and not antagonistic to their duties as subjects, enjoy freedom of
religious belief.”5 Until 1945, Japan’s imperial subjects were promised the legal right
to maintain private belief in Buddhism, Christianity, or other religions, but were
nonetheless required to take part in ritual veneration of Shintō deities, including the
Emperor, as civic obligations.6 General Douglas MacArthur, Supreme Commander
for the Allied Powers, and his advisors on religion characterized the wartime
1
For discussions of monastic regulations as viable comparisons to national constitutions, see
Schonthal 2021.
2
For the text of the 1947 Constitution (in English), which is reproduced throughout this chapter,
see Prime Minister of Japan and His Cabinet 1946.
3
For analyses of the Occupation, the drafting and promulgation of the 1947 Constitution, and
related developments in the immediate postwar years, see Dower 1999; Gordon 1993; Ruoff
2020; Thomas 2019.
4
In this chapter, I follow Thomas in adding the macron to Shintō (save in Occupation-era uses
of “State Shinto”) to indicate the long vowel in Japanese, even though “Shinto” is recognized
as an English-language term, to emphasize it as an entity distinguished from religion in pre-
1945 Japan and one that remains distinctive in the present constitutional order (2019). I do not
add macrons to “Soka Gakkai” or “Komeito” because these organizations do not use them in
their own English-language publications.
5
The English-language text of the 1890 Constitution (promulgated in 1889) is available at
National Diet Library 2021.
6
While the 1890 Constitution did not stipulate veneration at Shintō shrines as a legal require-
ment, Article 28 supported executive orders that required schools and other institutions to
organize visits to shrines and other ritual practices. These requirements were enforced with
increasing severity by Japan’s wartime government. See Nakai 2017 for examples of how
Christians contended with these mandates.
242
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 265 ---
requirement to uphold what they termed “State Shinto” as evidence that post-
imperial Japan needed guidance to establish “true” religious freedom.7 Jolyon
Thomas demonstrates, however, that Japan’s 1890 Constitution was on par with
international norms for qualiﬁed forms of religious freedom, as embodied in the
constitutions of the imperial powers that served as models for Japan’s expansion into
its own empire (2019). As a polity that installed requirements for civic engagement in
ritual veneration of its deiﬁed sovereign, Japan’s contingent prewar and wartime
religious freedoms were those of a normal constitutional government of the late
nineteenth to the early twentieth centuries.
In contrast to its 1890 predecessor, the 1947 Constitution declares that sover-
eignty resides in the people of Japan and that the Emperor is relegated to “the
symbol of the State and of the unity of the people.” Article 20 ensures that religious
freedom is no longer limited by obligations for Japan’s citizens (no longer imperial
subjects) to accommodate civic dedication to a non- or supra-religious Shintō, and
that Shintō is demoted to a religion that is to no longer enjoy state support.8 Article
89 prevents the Japanese state from subsidizing Shintō shrines, as it did during the
imperial era, and Shintō instead now ranks alongside Buddhism and other reli-
gions that are guaranteed freedom but whose institutions must comply with the
1951 Religious Juridical Persons Law (revised signiﬁcantly in 1996 and multiple
times since) in order to enjoy privileges as shūkyō hōjin, or “religious juridical
persons,” not least of which is relief from paying tax on revenue-producing
property and faith-related activities.9
Much of the scholarship on religion and constitutional law in postwar Japan thus
focuses on Articles 20 and 89 to identify issues related to religion/state separations.
Some studies also investigate religious concerns with Article 9, Japan’s famed
postwar “peace clause.” Commitments by religion-afﬁliated actors to defending,
amending, or doing away with Article 9 have animated much activism and debate,
while Articles 20 and 89 set religious activities, institutions, and objectives apart from
state enterprises.10 It is worth presenting the text of these three articles in full, given
that their contents pertain to challenges Buddhists have faced continually in postwar
Japan, and to speciﬁc instances in this chapter:
7
Analyses of “State Shinto,” its construction by the Allied forces, and how the category has been
elaborated upon in political and religious discourses, have developed in recent years. Valuable
studies in English include Hardacre 2017; Josephson 2012; Mullins 2021; Rots 2017; Thomas
2019; Zhong 2016.
8
For an analysis of legal and other ramiﬁcations of the shift from imperial subject to democratic-
ally enfranchised citizen, see Avenell 2010.
9
The 1951 law was enacted as a corrective for a December 28, 1945, directive intended to
eliminate “State Shinto” that made it excessively easy to register as a religious juridical person.
For a clause-by-clause analysis of 1996 amendments to the 1951 Religious Juridical Persons Law,
see LoBreglio 1997.
10 See Larsson 2020 for extensive citations and discussions of research on religion and consti-
tutional law in Japan. See also Hardacre et al. 2021; O’Brien and Ohkoshi 1996.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
243
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 266 ---
Article 9
(1) Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order,
the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the
nation and the threat or use of force as a means of settling international
disputes.
(2) In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea,
and air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be maintained.
The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized.
Article 20
(1) Freedom of religion is guaranteed to all. No religious organization shall
receive any privileges from the State, nor exercise any political authority.
(2) No person shall be compelled to take part in any religious act, celebra-
tion, rite or practice.
(3) The State and its organs shall refrain from religious education or any
other religious activity.
Article 89
No public money or other property shall be expended or appropriated for the use,
beneﬁt or maintenance of any religious institution or association, or for any charit-
able, educational or benevolent enterprises not under the control of public authority.
Despite the importance of the religion-related clauses to Japan’s Constitution,
their application in Supreme Court cases has been sparing, and uneven. Cases
brought before the Supreme Court of Japan that have involved rulings that interpret
Articles 20 and 89 have almost exclusively concerned Shintō shrines and rituals
(Hardacre 1989, 2017; Larsson 2017; 2020). The only religious freedom case in
Japan’s highest court that has involved a Buddhist defendant was Nishida v. Japan
(1963), in which a faith healer ordained in Shingon Buddhism was convicted for
inﬂicting a head injury on a young woman in the course of exorcizing her of a
tanuki (raccoon dog) spirit. The court rejected the practitioner Nishida’s claim that
injuries resulting from her ritual practice did not qualify as a criminal act, even
though her right to carry out exorcisms was protected by Article 20, stipulating in the
decision that the Constitution’s Article 12 conﬁrms that people must refrain from
abusing their freedoms and rights and must utilize them for public welfare.11 The
only other non-Shintō religious freedom case was decided on February 24, 2021,
when the Supreme Court justices announced in a 14–1 ruling that a Confucian
temple in a public park in Naha (Okinawa prefecture) operates as a religious facility,
11 For details on Nishida v. Japan, see Larsson, 2020, 203; Takahata 2007. For accounts of female
Buddhist exorcists practicing around the time of Nishida v. Japan, see Blacker 1975.
244
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 267 ---
in spite of its registration as a “general incorporated association” (ippan shadan
hōjin), and that a waiver of land usage fees it received from the city government
violated the constitutional divide (Abe 2021; Kyodo 2021).
Some of the most high-proﬁle cases concerning Shintō have involved suits by
afﬁliates of other religions who have charged that their constitutional rights were
violated by rituals carried out at shrines with the agreement or support of govern-
mental representatives. The most heated controversy has tended to surround dis-
putes related to Yasukuni Shrine, where spirits of Japan’s war dead, including Class
A war criminals executed following the Tokyo Trials, are enshrined.12 These cases
also involve the network of prefecture-level “nation-protecting shrines” (gokoku
jinja) at which the spirits of local residents who died in service to the Japanese
nation are revered. Helen Hardacre chronicles the travails of the widow of an active-
duty Japan Self-Defense Forces (the postwar Japanese armed services) member who
was killed in a trafﬁc accident in 1968. She sued the Yamaguchi Prefecture Veterans’
Association for deifying her husband via an apotheosizing rite (called gōshi) at the
prefectural-level nation-protecting shrine, claiming that this violated her Christian
beliefs. The Supreme Court ultimately decided against her, ruling that the shrine
was also protected by the Constitution’s guarantee of freedom of belief and possessed
the right to “seek the tranquility of that person’s soul through the religion that
expresses one’s faith” (Hardacre 2017, 420–422; see also Field 1991).
Concern about transgressing the postwar constitutional religion/state divide has
encouraged a disposition on the part of Japan’s religious professionals to proceed
with extreme caution so as not to be accused of inappropriately pushing religion into
public life. As I will discuss through attention to the chapter’s two case studies, a type
of separation anxiety is especially apparent in the personal conduct and institutional
undertakings of Japanese Buddhist clergy and lay activists. Buddhist practitioners in
Japan typically foster an extreme aversion for entanglement with constitutional
matters. The early postwar case of a practitioner who invoked freedoms guaranteed
by Article 20 is exceptional. The defendant Nishida was marginalized on multiple
fronts: by virtue of not being a temple priest, because she engaged in the stigma-
laden practice of exorcism (which tends to be downplayed by temple-based clergy),
and because she was an ordained woman in a clerical hierarchy dominated by
men.13
Another Buddhist cleric made a notable appearance in Japan’s highest court, as a
plaintiff in a case that involved a ruling on constitutional issues. Ernils Larsson
details the activities of Anzai Kenjō, a Jōdo Shinshū (True Pure Land) Buddhist
priest who distinguished himself as the organizational head of twenty-four plaintiffs
12 For discussions of Yasukuni Shrine and post-1947 efforts on the part of the Association of Shinto
Shrines to regain state support for it, see Mullins 2021.
13 For discussions of women clergy and their quotidian engagements with local-level parishioners,
see Rowe 2017; Starling 2019. For accounts of exorcism in Japanese Buddhism and its renewal
in the wake of the March 2011 disasters in northeast Japan, see Takahashi 2016.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
245
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 268 ---
in a well-documented and long-lasting case called the Ehime Tamagushiryō lawsuit
that culminated in the 1997 Anzai v. Shiraishi decision. Anzai and his fellow
plaintiffs, with support from the Japan Buddhist Federation, were pitted against
Shiraishi Haruki, governor of Ehime prefecture, who commissioned a tamagushiryō
shrine offering ritual with public funds. Anzai and his allies decried this act as state
patronage of Shintō that violated constitutional
guarantees (Larsson 2017,
chapter 7).14 This instance of a Buddhist activist bringing a religious freedom case
to the Japanese courts is extremely rare, and while there are numerous legal
challenges pertaining to contracts, property, taxation, and other matters that involve
Buddhist temples, their clergy, and their parishioners, Japan’s Buddhists have
generally avoided litigation over constitutional issues.15 It is likely that this absence
in the court record is an important reason why legal scholars tend not to scrutinize
Japanese Buddhism in studies of constitutional law.16
12.2 CHALLENGES JAPAN PRESENTS TO TREATING BUDDHISM
AS A FRAMEWORK FOR COMPARATIVE
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
How should we make sense of contrasts between Japan and other countries with
large Buddhist populations in comparative constitutional law? Speciﬁcally, how
shall we account for Japanese Buddhism’s low proﬁle in cases pertaining to religious
14 A majority of ten Supreme Court justices found that the Ehime governor had violated the
terms of Article 20. See also Abe 2011.
15 Buddhists in Japan have been consistently embroiled in lawsuits that involve matters other than
constitutionally guaranteed religious freedoms. One high-proﬁle example that is relevant to this
chapter’s case studies are suits by and against Soka Gakkai. The largely negative public image
of the lay Nichiren Buddhist organization Soka Gakkai has been profoundly impacted by the
early tendency of the group to go after its religious and political rivals through threatened or
real legal action, and the group has weathered a large number of legal challenges. Many of
these conﬂicts surround defamation suits, particularly in matters that pertain to Soka Gakkai’s
leadership, as well as suits pertaining to its registry as a religious juridical person, often in
connection to its object of worship. Numerous challenges have concerned the Gakkai’s
1991 schism with its erstwhile temple Buddhist parent denomination Nichiren Shōshū, some
of which involve efforts by Gakkai parishioners to move family graves away from the auspices of
the Shōshū head temple Taisekiji and other denominational properties to Soka Gakkai
“memorial parks” (cemeteries). None of these many legal disputes have led to constitutional
challenges in the Supreme Court of Japan. For information on Soka Gakkai’s grave matters,
see Shimada Hiromi et al. 2007; Tōyō Tetsugaku Kenkyūjo, 1993; 2006. Representative
examples of the large volume of publications on Soka Gakkai-related defamation suits and
connected legal challenges include Genron Shuppan no Jiyū o Mamoru Kai, 2012; Kurata
Takuji et al. 2002; Matsumoto 1973; and Okkotsu 2003.
16 Attention to cases below the Supreme Court level yields a limited number of lawsuits brought
by Buddhists on religious freedom grounds. Mark Mullins details the lead-up to a February 26,
2009 decision in the Osaka District Court that struck down an attempt by an ecumenical group
of plaintiffs (Buddhist and Christian) to sue Yasukuni Shrine for carrying out ritual enshrine-
ments without permission (2021, 137–143).
246
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 269 ---
freedom? A detailed history exceeds the capacity of this chapter, but a cursory
overview is necessary to clarify reasons for Japanese Buddhism’s all but complete
absence from religious freedom-related court proceedings.
In the centuries immediately preceding Japan’s rapid transformation into an
imperial power following the 1868 Meiji Restoration, Buddhist temples enjoyed
governmental support from the Tokugawa (1603–1867) regime. Clergy were respon-
sible for maintaining a “temple registration system” (terauke seido) that functioned as
a census, family registry, basis for taxation, and a means for ofﬁcials to root out social
undesirables, such as outcastes (hinin) and Christians.17 From the beginning of the
Meiji era (1868–1912), the new regime began to promote Shintō. A new policy of
shinbutsu bunri, or “separation of the kami (Shintō deities) and buddhas,” contrib-
uted to violent uprisings led by nativists as part of the haibutsu kishaku (abolish the
Buddha, destroy ´Sa¯kyamu_ni) movement that saw the destruction of numerous
Buddhist temples and their material holdings, the defrocking of priests or their
transformation into Shintō clergy, and the seizure of Buddhist lands and other
wealth.18 Thereafter, throughout the Meiji, Taishō (1912–1926), and early Shōwa
(1926–1989) eras, Shintō was designated by the nation’s powerholders as Japan’s
primordial faith and was routinely contrasted to the “foreign” tradition of
Buddhism.19 Buddhists sought to demonstrate the relevance of their teachings and
traditions by undertaking reforms to suit state priorities, pledging fealty to the nation,
and taking part enthusiastically in imperialist exploits, including war and violence
against civilian populations.20
Following World War II,
Japanese
Buddhism continued to
experience
upheaval. As religions were subjected to a new constitutional regime, parishioner
bases shifted dramatically as millions emigrated from rural areas into Japan’s cities,
driving the country’s postwar “economic miracle.” Even as numerous so-called
new religions (many based in Buddhism), such as Reiyūkai, Risshō Kōseikai,
Shinnyo-en, Soka Gakkai, and others attracted millions of converts in the postwar
decades, these years saw a steady decline in denominational Buddhist patronage due
to a reduction in temples’ regional communities and a growing tendency in Japan
toward disavowal of religious identity.21 Aversion to self-identifying as religious was
17 Leading scholarship on Buddhist temples during the Tokugawa era includes Hardacre 2002;
Hur 2007; Tamamuro 2001; and Williams 2004.
18 For investigations of haibutsu kishaku events and their effects, see Ketelaar 1989; Thal 2005;
Yasumaru 1979.
19 For origins of this ideological movement and its Meiji-era developments, see Sawada 2004.
20 The consequences of Buddhists’ support for the Japanese imperial project have inspired intense
scholarly engagement. See Klautau 2014; Klautau and Krämer 2021; Victoria 2006. For counter-
examples of Buddhists who at times opposed governmental authorities and promoted progres-
sive ideals, see Shields 2017.
21 For analyses of shifts in postwar Japanese temple-based Buddhism, including attention to rural
depopulation and other demographic changes, see Covell 2005; Rowe 2011; Sakurai and
Kawamata 2016. For discussions of the category “new religions” and its development in postwar
Japan, see Baffelli and Reader 2019; McLaughlin 2019a.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
247
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 270 ---
exacerbated dramatically by events in the mid-1990s, most crucially the January 1995
Kobe-area earthquake and the sarin gas attacks by the apocalyptic new religion Aum
Shinrikyō.22 While religion’s public image was salvaged somewhat by positive
impressions of aid mobilization by Buddhists and other religious activists after the
March 11, 2011 compound disasters in northeast Japan, the generations that came of
age after Aum have retained what many refer to as a “religion allergy.”23 People in
Japan today rarely describe themselves as religious, partly out of fear of triggering
lingering associations with violence and social marginality.
The Japanese government’s statistics on religion, and some measurements by
well-known pollsters, tend to mask the Japanese public’s distaste for explicit religious
avowals. According to the 2020 Shūkyō nenkan [religion almanac], an annual report
issued by Japan’s Agency for Cultural Affairs, there were 84,329 Buddhist-based
organizations in Japan, including temples and other entities registered as religious
juridical persons. As a proportion of the total number of legally designated religious
bodies in the country, this amounts to 42.7 percent. Moreover, these organizations
claimed 84,835,110 parishioners, or just over 67 percent of the Japanese population.
A decade earlier, Japan ranked as the third-largest Buddhist nation in the world, in
terms of adherent numbers, according to measures provided by the Pew Research
Center’s 2010 Global Religious Landscape survey.24 Going by these ﬁgures alone, it
would seem appropriate to place Japan alongside Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
Tibet, and other identiﬁably Buddhist-majority countries and regions in a
comparative framework.
However, popular Japanese nervousness about religion, including Buddhism, and
prevaricating attitudes expressed both by those who deny religious afﬁliation and by
self-described Buddhists, requires that we call this comparison into question. Most
recent surveys cast Japan’s identity as a Buddhist country into doubt. The Pew-
Templeton
Global
Religious
Futures
Project
calculates
that
self-identiﬁed
Buddhists in Japan comprised 36.2 percent in 2010 and projected a drop to 33.2
percent in 2020; in 2050, only 25.1 percent of a rapidly aging, and shrinking, Japanese
population is predicted to identify as Buddhist, and 67.7 percent will be religiously
unafﬁliated (Global Religious Futures Project 2016). A survey undertaken by the
NHK Broadcasting Culture Research Institute in 2018 found that 38 percent of
respondents afﬁrmed belief in the buddhas, while 31 percent professed belief in the
kami of Shintō. Ambiguity surrounds these NHK ﬁgures, given that respondents
were mostly unwilling to ﬁrmly reject religion: only 32 percent conﬁrmed that they
“did not believe” in divine powers, 71 percent carried out ritual visits to (predomin-
antly Buddhist) family graves, and only 12 percent did not perform religious activities
22 For accounts of the impact of the Aum attacks on the category “religion,” see Baffelli and
Reader 2012.
23 For discussions of aversion to the category “religion,” as well as critiques of the statistical
measures of Japanese religious identity I cite here, see Horii 2018.
24 See Agency for Cultural Affairs 2020; Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life 2012.
248
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 271 ---
of any type. The 2018 belief rates nonetheless conform to a broader trend of steady
decline in reported religious activity observable in ﬁgures recorded from 1898, when
close to 90 percent of the population claimed faith in the buddhas and kami.25
The other chapters in this volume speak to the signiﬁcant legal and political
inﬂuence of Buddhist clergy and lay proponents in other parts of Asia. In most cases,
these chapters indicate a level of Buddhist inﬂuence on public life that differs
markedly from that found in Japan today. Contrasts between Japan and
Therava¯da-dominant
polities
in
Southeast
Asia
are
perhaps
most
glaring.
Khemthong Tonsakulrungruang points to the persistence underlining all of the
Thai constitutions from 1932 to 2017 of presumptions about the dhammara¯ja, the
Buddhism-based notion of kingly power, and barami (karmic bonds and conse-
quences) as means to perpetuate non-democratic command by an authoritarian elite
as morally justiﬁable. Krishantha Fedricks highlights conﬂicts in post-civil war Sri
Lanka between rival Sinhalese Buddhists, including monastics elected to parlia-
ment, who engage in intra-Buddhist disputes to produce competing visions of
Buddhism-based ethnonationalist ideals they propose for constitutional enshrine-
ment. Iselin Frydenlund identiﬁes a comparable imperative in Myanmar to protect
Buddhism against perceived enemies of the dharma by enacting laws that establish
the country as a de facto Buddhist nation. Frydenlund expands upon Schonthal’s
notion of “Buddhist constitutionalism” to outline how Burmese legal, military, and
ecclesiastical forces have combined to privilege Buddhism as the state’s foundation.
These examples make clear that, at least in Southeast Asia, Buddhism endures as a
non-negotiable, taken-for-granted starting point from which to create and interpret
constitutional law.
Postwar Japan, formulated as a constitutional polity based in an unamended
constitution written by an occupying government that rejected speciﬁc religious
commitments in favor of commitment to universal values, could be characterized as
the inverse of these Southeast Asian examples.26 The Japanese situation contrasts
also with Buddhism’s legal proﬁle in neighboring countries in Northeast Asia, which
share Japan’s Maha¯ya¯na Buddhist heritage. Mark Nathan, for instance, chronicles
appeals by monks to the Supreme Court of Korea to arbitrate in disputes over
interpretation of monastic rules of conduct (vinaya) and emphasizes the importance
of court battles in determining South Korea’s contemporary system of Buddhist lay
and monastic orders. And the legal proﬁle of Buddhism in the People’s Republic of
China differs from its status in contemporary Japan, as Cuilan Liu details in her
research on the potentially surprising extent to which Chinese courts lean toward
beneﬁting Buddhist claimants in inheritance disputes and otherwise avoid
25 See NHK Broadcasting Culture Research Institute 2020. For analyses of trends in data on
postwar religious afﬁliation and participation, see Ishii 2008.
26 See Thomas 2019 for more on the Occupation authorities’ emphasis on universal values and
the process by which its drafters came to reject speciﬁc religious priorities.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
249
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 272 ---
diminishing the legal authority of Buddhist institutions and lineages associated with
the Buddhist Association of China, in spite of constitutional divisions between
religion and state and the absolute dominance of the ofﬁcially atheist Chinese
Communist Party (Liu 2020).
Comparisons that take into account premodern Japanese regimes would position
Japan closer to polities deﬁned by Buddhist epistemologies. This volume’s studies of
pre-1950 Tibetan monastic political rule, the pre-2008 Drukpa State in Bhutan, and
Mongolian precedents provided by Berthe Jansen, Richard W. Whitecross, and
Daigengna Duoer suggest exciting potential for expanding the comparative consti-
tutional law framework to include a comparison of premodern Japan with Tibetan
and other non-Japanese premodern Buddhist political orders. Regulatory norms
within northern Asian antecedents could be compared productively with those of
Japan after the establishment of Buddhism in the archipelago from the sixth century.
This comparison would require that we follow these scholars in broadening our
understanding of “constitution” to accommodate regulations that contrast with
jurisprudence modeled on European standards.27 Japan, as it coalesced in antiquity
as a polity controlled by the Yamato court, began as a bureaucracy that promoted
Buddhist ideals of kingship. The early Japanese court supported a network of
government-sponsored monasteries and nunneries dedicated to protecting the coun-
try from disease, invasion, and social upheaval, and it included administration of the
monastic community as a foundational component of governance.28 An expanded
interpretive purview would accommodate Japan’s Seventeen-Article Constitution of
604 and the Taihō Code of 703; while neither necessarily qualify as “proper”
constitutions, both centralize monastic Buddhism as a foundational component of
government, as do numerous edicts in the centuries that followed. Buddhist norms
that informed early Japanese governmental structures, however, are not apparent in
the country’s contemporary constitutional order. Including Japan in a comparative
constitutional law exercise thus requires clear historical speciﬁcity.
Despite contemporary Japanese Buddhism’s comparative distance from law and
government, and in spite of the fact that Buddhist priests and lay activists have
appeared rarely in cases heard by Japanese courts, they and their organizations
deserve attention in regard to present-day constitutional concerns. While Shintō
has taken precedence in the courts, Buddhists have been forced to contend with
constitutionally guaranteed divides in order to carry out individual and collective
activities, formulate their institutions, and overcome popular suspicion propelled by
27 For analysis of what this expansion of the category “constitution” into the vinaya entails, see
Schonthal 2021.
28 There is an extensive literature on inextricable connections between Buddhism and govern-
ment that persisted throughout Japanese history prior to the Meiji and postwar constitutional
orders. Representative examples include Kuroda 1996; Ooms 2008; Piggott 1997; and Sango
2015. See also Japan-relevant sources in the 2021 entry on “Buddhist Statecraft” (Benn and
Balkwill 2021).
250
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 273 ---
postwar expectations that religious activists will steer clear of government in all its
forms. This has meant that Buddhism, and Buddhists, in Japan have been deﬁned
by constitutional wording and interpretation. Additionally, Japanese Buddhist con-
tentions with the 1947 Constitution contrast in crucial ways with examples found in
other nominally Buddhism-majority countries. They thus provide valuable nuance
to a comprehensive comparative constitutional law inquiry.
Here, I present two contrasting examples of Japanese Buddhist activists whose
efforts have been constitutionally deﬁned. The ﬁrst is aid mobilization and training
for religious professionals by Buddhist priests and other denominationally afﬁliated
volunteers in the wake of the January 17, 1995, Great Hanshin Earthquake disaster
and the March 11, 2011, compound disasters in northeast Japan. Because of restric-
tions enshrined in Articles 20 and 89, Buddhist aid providers have faced steep
challenges negotiating access to state or state-afﬁliated facilities that would allow
them to distribute material aid to the living and perform rituals to pacify the
deceased. Having learned harsh lessons from difﬁcult experiences in 1995, most
notably with damage to the category “religion” wreaked by Aum Shinrikyō, activists
in northeast Japan were able to navigate constitutional divides to the extent that they
transformed emergency measures implemented following the 2011 earthquake,
tsunami, and nuclear cataclysms into training programs for religious social welfare
providers, the most prominent of which is now housed at a prestigious public
university. This section outlines how constitutional concerns shaped the direction
of these post-disaster initiatives. In particular, it demonstrates how uneasiness about
direct religious engagement in public social welfare provision led, ironically, to use
of sectarian resources to train Buddhist priests to “overcome religion” in order to
secure positions in hospitals, hospices, and other caregiving settings. It also high-
lights uncertainty about the future of Buddhist-led care provider training programs
and places for clergy in care provision teams, due in large part to persistent concerns
about Japan’s constitutional religion/state divide.
The second example is the most well-known instance of sustained political
engagement on a mass scale by a Japanese Buddhist organization, namely the
actions of the lay Nichiren Buddhist organization, Soka Gakkai, and its afﬁliated
political party, Komeito. This section considers the transformative impact of consti-
tutional law on shifts undertaken by the religion and the party by chronicling a
dramatic transformation that began with Soka Gakkai’s initial electoral forays in
pursuit of an eschatological Nichiren Buddhist objective and led to Komeito’s rise to
the position of casting vote in the National Diet. It also surveys politics surrounding
constitutional law that are strongly affected by Komeito’s pivotal role in guiding
successive governmental reinterpretations of Article 9. As the junior partner in the
national-level governing coalition and a signiﬁcant force in subnational politics,
Komeito certainly represents the most prominent, and controversial, intersection of
Japanese Buddhism and constitutional law. The case of Komeito also stands out as a
promising example of Buddhist groups’ entanglements with constitutional law and
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
251
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 274 ---
party politics that is ripe for transnational comparison. Finally, this section considers
another aspect of Soka Gakkai and Komeito that invites comparisons between legal
contexts, namely how Japanese Buddhist practitioners’ mimesis of the constitutional
form, the legal structures that gird it, and practices of commemorating and promot-
ing the national constitution produces forms of “constitutional Buddhism.” In the
chapter’s conclusion, I suggest ways Soka Gakkai and Komeito serve as a counter-
point to a pattern of “Buddhist constitutionalism” in order to productively compli-
cate this volume’s comparative project.
12.3 NAVIGATING CONSTITUTIONAL RELIGION/STATE
DIVIDES BY “OVERCOMING RELIGION”: POST-DISASTER
INITIATIVES BY JAPANESE BUDDHIST AID PROVIDERS
Covid-19 was hard on training initiatives for Japanese Buddhists of all stripes,
including those for Buddhist clergy and laity who provide clinical care. In a
January 2021 email to the author, Taniyama Yōzō, Jōdo Shinshū priest and professor
at Tōhoku University’s Department of Practical Religious Studies in Sendai,
lamented that training programs for rinshō shūkyōshi, or “Interfaith Chaplains,”
only went forward in 2021 at his department and at Ryūkoku University, a Jōdo
Shinshū institution in Kyoto. Interfaith Chaplain training programs modeled on
modules created in large part by him were on hold at the Jesuit institution Sophia
University in Tokyo and at the headquarters of the Buddhism-based new religion
Risshō Kōseikai. Declining enrolment in these certiﬁcation programs can be
blamed on an abrupt shift to online learning and difﬁculties ﬁnding clinical
placements under pandemic conditions. But these initiatives faced challenges even
before the onset of Covid-19, on account of uneasiness in Japan about religion in
public spaces.
It is thus all the more notable that the care provider certiﬁcation program founded
by Taniyama and his colleagues found a place in a public university. Tōhoku
University’s Department of Practical Religious Studies serves as a principal coordin-
ator for the Society for Interfaith Chaplaincy in Japan (Nihon Rinshō Shūkyōshikai),
which Taniyama founded in 2016 in cooperation with fellow priests from temple-
based Japanese Buddhist denominations, Christian clergy, and representatives from
a number of new religions, notably Konkōkyō, Risshō Kōseikai, and Tenrikyō. They
have collaborated with psychologists, grief care specialists, hospice care workers, and
other clinical experts to provide services for the dead and the bereaved after the
March 11, 2011 disasters.29 Mostly referred to as “3.11,” the Great East Japan
Earthquake disasters left upwards of 24,600 people dead, injured, or missing, and
29 For analyses of Interfaith Chaplaincy and its related initiatives, see Berman 2018; Graf 2016;
Horie and Takahashi 2021; Kasai 2016; McLaughlin 2016a.
252
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 275 ---
dealt a severe psychic blow to Japan. They also inspired Japan’s largest mobilization
of religious actors and their resources since the Paciﬁc War.30
Interfaith Chaplaincy can be characterized as a constructive response to negative
attitudes that Buddhist aid providers have confronted after disasters. This new class
of post-disaster chaplains learned harsh lessons after the January 17, 1995, Great
Hanshin earthquake, which devastated the city of Kobe and its surrounding area in
western Japan. Approximately 6,400 people were killed in and around Kobe and
many thousands were displaced. The national government failed to coordinate
effectively, and the suffering of residents, which stretched into the months after
January 17, underscored a woeful lack of state preparation.31 Failure by state agencies
to deliver reliable assistance inspired people from across Japan to contribute to an
upsurge in volunteering. Organizations of many different types mark the Hanshin
earthquake anniversary as Hōsai no Hi, or “Disaster Prevention and Volunteerism
Day,” by engaging in volunteer activities across the country. Religious volunteerism
emerged as a signiﬁcant component of this post-Hanshin response.
Following the January 1995 earthquake, hundreds of volunteer groups from
temple Buddhist sects, new religions, Christian organizations, and Shintō shrines,
including many that lost their own afﬁliates and facilities, mobilized to rescue
disaster victims. Religious organizations housed numerous displaced residents in
homes, temples, churches, and other institutions, raised funds for relief, and other-
wise cared for survivors and the deceased. However, Buddhist clerics described
running up against an “allergy to religion” when it came to dealing with state
agencies (Chūgai Nippō, 1996). Their testimony makes clear that negative senti-
ments about religion in Japanese public life ﬁnd purchase in the language of the
1947 Constitution, which sets the standard for how to condemn religious inﬂuence
in the public sphere. Japanese religious aid launched in January 1995 faced oppos-
ition from a public that suspected aid groups might be hiding covert proselytization
agendas and from government agencies that were nervous about transgressing
constitutional principles. Priests interviewed about their 1995 aid activism described
receiving requests from representatives of government agencies to not display any
overt signs of their religious afﬁliation, even as these clergy sought to perform sutra
recitations over bodies of the deceased. This is a memorial act that is their vocational
specialty, and Buddhist invocations over the dead remain conventional in
Japan. One Jōdoshū (Pure Land Sect) representative emphasized the hostility
religious organizations faced in dealing with governmental restrictions, recounting
how he and fellow clerical aid providers were denied permission to carry out
30 For a summary of statistical measures of the religious response to 3.11, see McLaughlin 2016b.
Comprehensive ﬁgures on 3.11 casualties and reconstruction efforts in Fukushima, Miyagi, and
Iwate prefectures are updated by Japan’s Reconstruction Agency at www.reconstruction.go.jp/.
See also Kingston 2012; Gill, Steger, and Slater 2013.
31 For overviews of the Hanshin disaster, its aftermath, and details on religious responses, see
Kuroda and Tsuganesawa 1999; Miki 2001.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
253
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 276 ---
funerary activities in public facilities while wearing their vestments. As a result,
bodies that were lying in repose did not receive memorial rites.32
Negative sentiments about religious aid provision prevented news about salutary
efforts from making it into widespread media coverage. One notable example from
Jōdo Shinshū, Japan’s largest temple-based Buddhist denomination, received only
scant public notice. The Japan Buddhist Federation (Zen Nihon Bukkyōkai) calcu-
lated that 536 Jōdo Shinshū Hongwanji-ha (Hongwanji lineage) temples were
damaged or destroyed in the Hanshin earthquake, and that it lost twelve priests
and clerical family members, the most of any denomination.33 These deaths
number among the 1,200 parishioners it lost, accounting for 19 percent of the total
number of dead. In the absence of reliable government assistance, temple priests in
the disaster area set about aiding local residents. Hongwanji-ha’s single largest aid
activity was initiated by its Hokkaido Parish Young Priest’s Association. This group of
volunteer clerics traveled more than 1500 km from the northern island of Hokkaido
to Kobe, where they constructed twenty prefab housing units for refugees on the
premises of the temple Kōenji, a facility that they called the Rokkō Hermitage
(Rokkōan), named for the Kobe landmark Mount Rokkō. A total of 3,600 volunteers,
including Jōdo Shinshū priests but also lay afﬁliates and other participants, cooper-
ated to care for the material and psychological needs of victims housed in the prefab
units. The Hermitage served as a base for the sect’s volunteers, who delivered
material goods and counseling to Kobe residents struggling to carry on in the most
devastated regions of the city.
Though public distaste for news about religious activism rendered this initiative
largely invisible, the Rokkō Hermitage created an important precedent upon which
Japan’s Buddhist denominations have built in responding to subsequent disasters.
Importantly, especially in terms of attention to constitutional law, in spite of the fact
that the complex stood on temple grounds, its Shinshū organizers intentionally
designated it as a non-religious facility open to all in need. Secondly, resources at
the Hermitage focused on the emotional and psychological needs of refugees rather
than temple-based ritual responses. Hermitage residents were cared for by careful
attention to a category that gained popularity in the broader context of the Hanshin
disaster: kokoro no kea, or “care for the heart/mind/spirit,” a catch-all term referring
to counseling and related measures taken to aid bereaved survivors. To raise funds
for the Rokkō Hermitage, Hongwanji-ha appealed to the emotional bonds between
disaster survivors and empathetic fellow citizens by enjoining activists from across
Japan to sacriﬁce part of their daily expenses to feed the large budget the Rokkō
32 Chūgai Nippō 1996. See also McLaughlin, 2016a.
33 These details and those that follow regarding Jōdo Shinshū aid initiatives following the
Hanshin disaster are discussed in Miki 2012; Nishihonganji Hanshin/Awaji Daishinsai Fukkō
Shien Renraku Kyōgikai 1998.
254
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 277 ---
Hermitage required. Volunteer work thus rose to the fore as a means by which the
True Pure Land sect could demonstrate its relevance to the Japanese public.
Religious responses to the March 11, 2011, disasters indicate that many religious
organizations in Japan internalized the hard lessons of 1995 and put in place plans
to dispatch aid in ways that mitigated public fears about violating constitutional
prohibitions. Upon hearing news of the earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear disaster,
the headquarters of every imaginable sort of Japanese religious organization
immediately suspended ordinary operations to mobilize relief. Measurements of
aid mobilization after 3.11 indicate that relief and reconstruction initiatives
launched by religious organizations made up a signiﬁcant portion of the humani-
tarian response (McLaughlin 2016b; Okamoto 2014). Japanese religious activists
were among the ﬁrst on the scene after the tsunami hit, opening their temples,
shrines, churches, and other facilities to refugees as they dispatched volunteers to
search mountains of wreckage for bodies and provide survivors with crucial
emergency supplies. Long after most government agencies and other aid providers
wrapped up their operations in northeastern Japan, religious practitioners con-
tinue to serve afﬂicted communities.
As they devised care initiatives, afﬁliates of Japan’s Buddhist denominations
understood the need to conform with the expectation that they limit obvious
religious displays. This concern was evident in the immediate tsunami aftermath.
For example, priests associated with the Sendai Buddhist Association who volun-
teered to perform sutras over bodies gathered at municipally-administered disaster
response centers composed an ad hoc manual that called for clerics to limit their
recitations to no more than ten minutes in order to avoid triggering accusations that
they were violating constitutional provisions (Fujiyama 2020, 130–131). These same
priests would contribute to the publication of a comprehensive disaster response
guidebook for religious practitioners that includes attention to difﬁculties temples
encounter being recognized as “designated evacuation shelters” (shitei hinanjo) by
municipal and prefectural authorities (Buddhist NGO Network 2013, 33).
From March 2011, Japanese religion engaged in a double mobilization: while
transporting personnel and emergency supplies to disaster-afﬂicted regions, religious
groups and their advocates also mounted an elaborate print and electronic media
campaign intended to disseminate images of aid work that would forestall the
negative impressions that dominated coverage seventeen years earlier. In contrast
to post-Hanshin prevarications over clerical involvement in ﬁrst-phase relief work,
accounts curated from 2011 by media-savvy religious activists and sympathetic aca-
demics cast Buddhist priests in ways that skilfully afﬁrmed constitutional priorities.
These media discourses tended to frame clerical contributions using neologisms
such as borantia (volunteer), kokoro no kea (care for the heart/mind/spirit), the
increasingly popular designation supirichuaru kea (spiritual care), and other categor-
ies that deliberately minimize Buddhist commitments (Berman 2018; McLaughlin
2016a). Importantly, media coverage tended to emphasize the contributions of
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
255
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 278 ---
religious individuals over sectarian organizations. This approach preserved the
religious liberties of the aid providers while it anticipated, and diffused, fears that
these providers represented a coordinated conversion effort. The post-3.11 religion
narrative also included a marked emphasis on ecumenical cooperation, which
involved repeated use of phrases along the lines of “overcoming religious boundar-
ies” (shūkyō no waku o koe) or “overcoming sectarian [divides]” (shūha o koe) in
descriptions of Buddhist, Shintō, Christian, and other religious practitioners coming
together to work with one another and with non-religious experts. There was a
tendency to highlight praiseworthy efforts by innovative religious activists who were
marginalizing their sectarian identities in favor of working with academics, medical
professionals, and other nominally non-religious actors. In these accounts, religious
action took the form of scientiﬁcally veriﬁable treatment that has immediate, this-
worldly relevance – in other words, treatment appropriate for the needs of unafﬁli-
ated individuals rather than parishioners.
This carefully mediated post-3.11 religion narrative provided an alternative to
images of religion as a threat to constitutional divides. The narrative’s emphasis on
individual caregivers who side-lined their sectarian identities coheres with speciﬁc
constitutional wording, notably of Article 20, which asserts that “No religious
organization [emphasis added] shall receive any privileges from the State, nor
exercise any political authority.” Ironies abound as clerics rely on organizational
support to foster professionalization in clinic-based care that requires them to
“overcome” their sectarian afﬁliations. The Institute for Interfaith Chaplaincy began
in 2012 as the Kokoro no Sōdanshitsu, or “Consultation Room for the Spirit,” an aid
outreach initiative in Sendai that relied on funding from a host of Buddhist and
Christian denominations and other religious associations. Donations from religious
juridical persons enabled the establishment of the Department of Practical Religious
Studies at Tōhoku University. Presentations by the Department and its advocates
nonetheless afﬁrm Interfaith Chaplaincy as non-sectarian and driven by individual
activists rather than religious organizations, and concern for constitutional divides is
palpable in Interfaith Chaplaincy training. Taniyama emphasizes that “religious
care” (shūkyōteki kea) requires chaplains to be ready to provide whatever services the
recipient requires.34 This means that a Buddhist priest should be ready to join an
evangelical Christian hospital patient in a bedside prayer, and a Protestant minister
must be prepared to chant “all praise the Amita¯bha Buddha” (namu amida butsu)
with a Pure Land Buddhist hospice care recipient. The public sphere, Taniyama
stresses, should be seen as an “away game” for the religious professional, while the
professional’s own temple or church is home ﬁeld. At home, clergy can make
presumptions about how to lead services, and practitioners enjoy constitutional
protection of freedom of religion. Because Article 20 stipulates that no person can
be compelled to take part in a ritual or teaching, the chaplain must wait to be asked
34 An example of Taniyama’s instruction is available in English in McLaughlin 2019b.
256
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 279 ---
to perform the service in a public setting: following Taniyama’s metaphor, he must
be invited to play. The Interfaith Chaplaincy training materials insist that clear
conﬁrmation is required from all recipients before any religious act is performed in a
caregiving situation outside sectarian boundaries.
Post-disaster activism conﬁrmed for these instructors that the survival of their
enterprises depends on how their actions are perceived in the public sphere.
Retaining a place for Buddhist care providers in public forums remains a delicate
balancing act, as indicated by the challenges these programs faced during the
Covid-19 era. This precarity remains strongly determined by postwar constitutional
mandates.
12.4 HOW CONCERNS ABOUT CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
STEERED A BUDDHIST PARTY INTO “NORMAL” POLITICS:
SOKA GAKKAI AND KOMEITO
Claiming a Japanese membership of 8.27 million households, Soka Gakkai (the
“Value Creation Study Association”) is a dominant presence in Japanese
Buddhism.35 It also exerts a signiﬁcant inﬂuence in education, ﬁnance, publish-
ing, and numerous other spheres. With a declared membership of close to two
million Soka Gakkai International (SGI) adherents in 192 countries and territories,
it may be Japan’s most successful religious export, in terms of adherent numbers.
In Japan, Soka Gakkai is perhaps best known for its afﬁliation with Komeito, the
political party it founded in 1964.36 The Gakkai’s move into electoral politics
invited heated critique from religious and political rivals. Much of this discourse
has been informed by constitutional concerns. In turn, many of Soka Gakkai’s and
Komeito’s institutional features have been shaped by attention to Japan’s
national constitutions.
Soka Gakkai is a lay association following Nichiren (1222–1282), a Japanese
Buddhist reformer who confronted the temple-based traditions of his day to propa-
gate the belief that only exclusive faith in the Lotus Sūtra, the putative ﬁnal sermon
delivered by ´Sa¯kyamu_ni before a retinue of beings from across the Buddhist realms,
serves as an effective means of salvation during mappō, the degraded Latter Day of
the Buddha’s dharma. The Gakkai maintains Nichiren Buddhist liturgies, such
as chanting sections of the Lotus and repeatedly invoking its seven-syllable title,
35 Discussions of Soka Gakkai’s history, institutional makeup, member activities, and other details
in this section rely on these sources and others cited below: Aera Henshūbu 1996; Asano 1974;
Asayama 2017; Higuma 1971; McLaughlin 2019a; Nakano 2016; Nishiyama 1975; Shimada 2004;
Sōka Gakkai Nenpyō Hensan Iinkai 1976; Sōka Gakkai Yonjūshūnenshi Hensan Iinkai 1970;
Tamano 2008; and White 1970.
36 Details regarding Komeito in this section rely on Asayama 2017; Ehrhardt et al. 2014; Hori
[1973] 1999; Klein 2015; Kōmeitō Shi Hensa Iinkai 2014; McLaughlin 2015 and 2019a; Nakano
2016; Suzuki 1970; Tsukada 2015; White 1970; sources cited below.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
257
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 280 ---
namu-myōhō-renge-kyō, and members rely on Nichiren’s writings as their primary
Buddhist scriptural base. However, as the name “Value Creation Study Association”
indicates, the group did not begin as a religion. It started as an educational reform
movement, ﬁrst called Sōka Kyōiku Gakkai (“Value Creation Education Study
Association”), founded on November 18, 1930. The Gakkai’s ﬁrst president was
Makiguchi Tsunesaburō (1871–1944). He was a schoolteacher and intellectual who
in 1928, with his fellow teacher and disciple Toda Jōsei (1900–1958), converted to lay
afﬁliation under Nichiren Shōshū, a minority temple-based sect that reveres
Nichiren as the Buddha of the mappō era. From the late 1930s, Makiguchi and
Toda’s exclusivist convictions hardened, and Sōka Kyōiku Gakkai shifted away from
educational reform to focus primarily on Nichiren Buddhist practices, including
shakubuku, a forceful conversion tactic Nichiren prescribed for lands (such as
Japan) that slander the Lotus. Conducting shakubuku led to conﬂicts with the
wartime Japanese state, as did the group’s opposition to the governmental mandate
that all religions enshrine kamifuda (deity talismans) from the Grand Shrine at Ise.
Makiguchi and Toda were among very few adherents in wartime Japan to maintain
Nichiren’s strict rejection of heterodox teachings and objects. They refused to
enshrine the Shintō talismans and even encouraged converts to burn them,
deeming them hōbō, or “slander to the dharma,” as they persisted in carrying out
shakubuku conversions. The Gakkai leaders were arrested in July 1943 for violating
the terms of the 1925 Peace Preservation Law. Both were incarcerated, and
Makiguchi died of malnutrition in prison on November 18, 1944, on the anniversary
of the Gakkai’s founding.
After World War II, Toda reformed the group as Soka Gakkai and drove insti-
tutional growth through a particularly hard-sell version of shakubuku. By the time of
his death in April 1958, the religion had expanded to over one million adherent
households. Converts were largely poor and socially atomized people who moved
from the countryside into Japan’s rapidly growing cities. While the Gakkai’s aggres-
sive proselytizing produced a massive surge in membership, it also created a negative
public image. Public opposition to Soka Gakkai was driven in large part by the
religion’s move into electoral politics from the mid-1950s, which led to the founding
in 1964 of the political party Komeito, often glossed as the “Clean Government
Party.” Today, Komeito qualiﬁes as a “normal” political party, in the sense that it
gathers votes by promoting policies that appeal to its constituents (Klein and
McLaughlin 2022). Though it has wielded policy inﬂuence in national coalition
with Japan’s majority Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) since 1999, there is no
evidence that Komeito has pursued an explicitly religious agenda in government,
nor has it worked to undermine or otherwise transform Japan’s political structure. It
nonetheless grew out of a Soka Gakkai campaign to satisfy a millenarian Nichiren
Buddhist objective: the construction of a honmon no kaidan, or “true ordination
platform.” This was to be a temple facility constructed at the Nichiren Shōshū sect
headquarters at Taisekiji, near Mount Fuji, at which the sect’s (and then also Soka
258
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 281 ---
Gakkai’s) principal object of worship was to be enshrined. This enshrinement would
celebrate the conversion of the populace to exclusive worship of the Lotus Sūtra, a
goal interpreted by the group as the nation’s conversion to Soka Gakkai. Following
Nichiren Buddhist dictates, a governmental decree ordering the construction of the
ordination platform would be required. In postwar Japan, this entailed a majority
vote in the Japanese Diet (Stone 2003). The Diet decree requirement appeared to
violate the Article 20 prohibition on religious organizations exercising political
authority or receiving privileges from the state, as well as the Article 89 proscription
on public expenditure for the beneﬁt of any religion.
Concern about potentially violating the then-recently promulgated Constitution
did not stiﬂe members’ enthusiasm for institutional expansion in the immediate
postwar years. From the early 1950s, as Soka Gakkai grew by leaps and bounds, Toda
drove members to work toward the kaidan goal by sending them into politics. The
group ﬁrst ﬁelded independent candidates for local elections in 1955. In 1956, three
Gakkai administrators were elected to the House of Councillors (Upper House), and
a surge of local- and national-level electoral victories followed. Members in early
Gakkai campaigns transgressed multiple times against elections law, driven as they
were by the objective to convert the populace to realize their Nichiren Buddhist
aim. Murakami Shigeyoshi surmised that Soka Gakkai’s shakubuku-driven efforts to
gain a majority Diet vote and bring about the ordination platform was a case of
substituting wartime refuge in the Emperor for a postwar effort from the ground up
to install Nichiren Shōshū as Japan’s national religion (1967, 155). In July 1957, Ikeda
Daisaku (1928–), a Toda disciple who was then a Young Men’s Division leader, was
arrested alongside other young leaders, not on constitutional grounds, but for
violating elections law prohibitions against house-to-house campaigning. Soka
Gakkai came to eulogize Ikeda’s legal tribulations as the “Osaka Incident,” an
episode they treat as the now honorary president’s hōnan, or “persecution [for
defending] the dharma.” He was cleared of all charges in January 1962. By this
time, Ikeda Daisaku was third president of Soka Gakkai, having taken the ofﬁce on
May 3, 1960.
May 3 has become one of Soka Gakkai’s most signiﬁcant commemorative dates.
The importance of the Gakkai’s May 3 memorials is emblematic of an ethic of
constitutionalism that underlies the religion and, to a lesser extent, its afﬁliated
political party. Both Toda and Ikeda ascended to the Gakkai presidency on May 3,
the same day that the 1947 Constitution went into effect, and Japan’s annual May
3 Constitutional Memorial Day also serves as Soka Gakkai’s “Mother’s Day,” as well
as the wedding anniversary of Ikeda and his wife Kaneko. A survey of other Gakkai
and Komeito events on May 3 reveals the deep importance of the date for the
religion and the party. This became particularly apparent under Ikeda’s leadership,
when the Gakkai’s political engagement increased dramatically, keeping pace with
the lay sect’s explosive membership growth and institutional diversiﬁcation.
Between 1960 and 1970, Soka Gakkai in Japan grew from just over one million to
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
259
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 282 ---
over seven million households, and the organization began to gain signiﬁcant
numbers of followers in countries overseas. On November 27, 1961, Gakkai polit-
icians in the Diet organized as Kōmei Seiji Renmei (or Kōseiren), the “League for
Just and Fair Politics,” enacting a new political body following a May 3,
1961 announcement at Soka Gakkai headquarters that established an institutionally
distinct “culture bureau” (bunkakyoku) that would oversee political engagement
(Kōmeitō Shi Hensa Iinkai 2014, 35–36). On May 3, 1964, Ikeda declared that
henceforth Soka Gakkai would be a purely religious organization, that politics
would be left to Kōmei politicians, and that the religion would soon establish an
independent political party (Kōmeitō Shi Hensa Iinkai 2014, 35–41). This declar-
ation, falling as it did on Constitutional Memorial Day, resonates with the consti-
tutional guarantee separating religion and government. On November 17, 1964, the
day before Soka Gakkai’s founding anniversary, Ikeda announced the dissolution of
Kōseiren and the establishment of Kōmeitō.
Initially, Komeito did not separate religious and political objectives. Just as Soka
Gakkai is heir to the twin legacies of Nichiren Buddhism and humanism, Nichiren
Buddhist priorities and a modern ideal of securing world peace through democracy
inform Komeito’s ofﬁcial founding statement. It reads (in part):
We hold the ﬁrm conviction that it is only through the singular path of the
Buddhist philosophy of absolute paciﬁsm – that is, the superior path of a harmoni-
ous fusion of government and Buddhism (ōbutsu myōgō) – that the world will attain
salvation from the horror of war. The Clean Government Party, through the
founding ideals of a harmonious fusion of government and Buddhism and
Buddhist democracy (buppō minshūshugi), will fundamentally cleanse Japan’s
political world, conﬁrm the basis of government by parliamentary democracy, put
down deep roots in the masses, and realize the well-being of the common
people. (Kōmeitō 1964)37
From August 1, 1956, Toda Jōsei had issued an essay titled “Ōbutsu myōgōron” (“On
the Harmonious Union of Kingship and Buddhism”) in which he asserted that this
utopian goal was to be realized through conversion of the populace and construc-
tion of the ordination platform (Toda 1956, 204). Ikeda’s use of ōbutsu myōgō in
Komeito’s November 1964 founding statement reafﬁrmed the goal to unite
Buddhism and government, and members continued to be inspired by this millen-
arian aim as they worked for Komeito campaigns. From 1964, Komeito ﬁelded
candidates in both the Lower and Upper Houses, and it expanded its presence in
local legislatures across Japan. By June 1969, Komeito was the third-largest party in
the National Diet, and its proportion of votes in national and regional elections was
still increasing. However, Komeito’s fortunes shifted abruptly. On May 3, 1970,
following a scandal the previous year surrounding a failed attempt to quash the
37 Printed transcript of founding statement. See also Ehrhardt et al. 2014, 67–68.
260
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 283 ---
publication of a book titled I Denounce Soka Gakkai, Ikeda announced a formal
institutional separation between Soka Gakkai and Komeito. The religion renounced
its ordination platform plans, and Komeito eliminated its references to Buddhism
and replaced them with a pledge to uphold the 1947 Constitution.
The party gained its largest-ever proportion of Diet seats in 1983, but suffered
setbacks thereafter, and while Gakkai members have continued treating election-
eering for Komeito candidates (and their allies) as a component of their regular
practice, the party struggled to deﬁne its raison d’être until it entered into coalition
with the LDP in 1999. In the meantime, constitutionalism grew into something of
a Soka Gakkai constant. While Komeito began to prevaricate on its commitment
to strict constitutional observance, Soka Gakkai consistently supported constitu-
tional preservation. In particular, reverence for Article 9 continued to inspire
Gakkai events and organizations. Early examples include the Youth Division’s
1974 “May 3 Memorial Peace Constitution Preservation Central Committee
Event” in Setagaya Ward, Tokyo, at which the Committee leadership asserted
the need to protect the Constitution for its guarantee of religious liberty (Kiuchi
1974, 169).
A ﬁerce loyalty to constitutionalism drove Gakkai institution-building and
member dispositions over the course of Ikeda’s leadership. Except for a small and
rapidly diminishing number of elderly pioneers who converted under Toda, the
present-day majority of the Gakkai’s adherents, and almost all members who power
Komeito’s campaigns today, came of age as Ikeda disciples. From early in his
presidency, Soka Gakkai transformed from an organization run by Ikeda into a
group dedicated to him, and after Soka Gakkai split from Nichiren Shōshū in
November 1991, member reverence for Ikeda grew ever more intense. Having left
behind the Nichiren Buddhist ordination platform objective, Soka Gakkai clariﬁed
its commitment to the constitutional ideals Ikeda cherished, and the religion
focused to an increasing extent on cultivating Ikeda’s proﬁle as an international
statesman who reached across cultural and national boundaries to advance peace, in
keeping with Japan’s postwar international stance as paciﬁst exemplar.38
During Ikeda’s most vigorous decades, from the 1960s into the early 2000s,
members engaged in a tireless mix of peace-promoting activities. The group became
famous for its “world peace culture festivals” (sekai heiwa bunkasai) in which
thousands of costumed members swirled through stadiums in complex dance
numbers as marching bands performed triumphal Gakkai anthems and attendees
in the stands held up placards bearing peace messages. From January 1983, Ikeda
began issuing annual Peace Proposals, treatises with detailed recommendations for
multilateral action in the interest of resolving global conﬂicts. Nichiren Buddhism’s
38 For analyses of Japan’s shifting security positions from the postwar into the present, see Le 2021;
Midford 2020. For discussions of Buddhist paciﬁsm and attitudes toward the peace clause of the
1947 Constitution, including those of Soka Gakkai members under Ikeda, see Kisala 2000.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
261
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 284 ---
status inversed, shifting from the group’s guiding framework into a foundation
undergirding Soka Gakkai’s “three pillars”: peace, culture, and education.
Even as Ikeda rallied Gakkai members around a peace platform that upheld the
Japanese postwar Constitution’s ideals, Komeito began to compromise on its support
for paciﬁsm. After its May 3, 1970, separation from Soka Gakkai, the party at ﬁrst
emphasized the absolute paciﬁsm of its founding charter. It asserted that Japan
should maintain neutrality and should establish alternatives to the 1960 US–Japan
Security Treaty and maintenance of the Japan Self-Defense Forces (Kōmeitō 1973,
44–45). From 1978, however, the party came to acknowledge the legality of the
US–Japan Treaty and the JSDF. Komeito’s next signiﬁcant adjustment came in
1992, when it supported the LDP decision to include JSDF troops in UN peace-
keeping operations. After it entered into coalition government with the LDP from
1999, Komeito made more concessions, going along with Prime Minister Koizumi
Jun’ichirō’s decision to send troops to the Persian Gulf (2002) and Iraq (2004).39 This
policy shift inspired some of the ﬁrst protests against Komeito by Soka Gakkai
members (Nakano 2016, 68–69). On January 21, 2004, a group of adherents called
the “Society for Preserving the Peace Constitution Opposed to the Iraq Troop
Dispatch” (Irakku Hahei ni Hantai Shi Heiwa Kenpō o Mamoru Kai) submitted
1,800 signatures to Komeito headquarters protesting the party’s policy reversal (Asahi
Shinbun 2004; Nakano 2016, 67–69). The largest anti-Komeito protests by Gakkai
adherents were triggered by the party’s support of eleven security bills sponsored by
Prime Minister Abe Shinzō that were rushed through the National Diet in
September 2015. These laws allow Japan the “right of collective self-defense,” which
includes the ability for the JSDF to come to the aid of Japan’s military allies. This is
a security posture that radically reinterprets the Article 9 pledge to “forever renounce
war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as a means of
settling international disputes.” Observers in summer 2015 were struck by the
presence of protesters waving Soka Gakkai ﬂags and bearing signs emblazoned with
strident Nichiren Buddhist and Soka Gakkai slogans in demonstrations before the
Diet and at other locations across the country. These were Gakkai adherents who
endured harsh rejection by their fellow members as they rebuked the party their
religion founded for abandoning its foundational paciﬁsm (McLaughlin 2015).
Komeito now sidesteps clear-cut policy commitments when it comes to consti-
tutional interpretation or revision. The party manifesto for the 2017 general election,
for example, only included a short discussion in the ﬁnal section that mentioned the
potential for adding a third clause that acknowledges the legality of the JSDF,
should this be supported by a majority of Japanese voters (Kōmeitō 2017). In the
2019 election manifesto, the only mention of the Constitution appeared as an
appendix and simply stated that revision “should be discussed carefully from now
on” (Kōmeitō 2019), and the manifesto for the October 2021 election only dedicated
39 For a chronicle of Komeito’s peace concessions, see Lindgren 2016.
262
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 285 ---
the penultimate page of its seventy-two-page “Policy Compilation” (Seisakushū) to
constitutional matters (Kōmeitō 2021). However, while constitutional ﬁdelity as a
Komeito priority seems to be fading, the party remains well known for its historical
success as a brake against LDP constitutional revision attempts. Adam Liff and Ko
Maeda compared the LDP’s 2012 constitutional revision draft to proposals made on
May 3, 2017 by Prime Minister Abe (2019). Instead of pursuing the 2012 LDP
amendment strategy of kaiken (wholesale revision), Abe’s 2017 proposal followed a
modest plan ﬁrst outlined by Komeito in 2005 to potentially add a third clause to
Article 9 to acknowledge the legality of the JSDF, while leaving the ﬁrst two clauses
unchanged, should public opinion indicate approval for this course of action.
Without at least 80 percent Komeito voter support for LDP politicians running in
Single-Member Districts, the LDP would fall below a simple majority in both
Houses of the National Diet and would lose the two-thirds super-majority typically
retained by the coalition. So long as Komeito holds a signiﬁcant number of Diet
seats, and so long as Gakkai members continue to electioneer on behalf of LDP
politicians, Gakkai member dedication to paciﬁst principles ensures that the
LDP-Komeito coalition remains unlikely to revise or replace the 1947 Constitution.
As Komeito has shied away from explicit engagement with constitutional matters,
Soka Gakkai has deepened its commitment to constitutionalism. One way the
religion expresses its constitutional focus is by enacting its own constitution, which
looks very much like its Japanese national constitutional predecessors. The Gakkai’s
promulgation of a constitution is in keeping with how the group models itself
explicitly along the lines of Japanese state institutions. Elsewhere, I have character-
ized Soka Gakkai as a “mimetic nation-state” to explain the comprehensive extent to
which the religion replicates state and state-afﬁliated institutions within its own
parameters (McLaughlin 2019a). These replicated institutions include a massive
bureaucracy modeled on a civil service, doctrinal instruction and other forms of
study derived from standardized education, de facto sovereign territory at its head-
quarters and other facilities protected by trained cadres and bedecked by a tri-color
ﬂag, and collective memory of the organization preserved in anthem-like songs and
a massive and ever-expanding published record that functions akin to a national
literature. The group also mandates donation practices labeled zaimu (ﬁnances, or
taxes) and offers singular reverence to its apotheosized Honorary President
Ikeda Daisaku.
A written constitution numbers among the Gakkai’s nation-like appurtenances.
Announced on November 18, 2017, on the anniversary of the group’s founding in
1930, the “Constitution of the Soka Gakkai” establishes an orthodox understanding
of its history and conﬁrms the transcendent authority of its “eternal mentors,” the
three founding presidents Makiguchi, Toda, and Ikeda.40 Aspects of this document
follow standards set out in Japan’s 1947 Constitution. For example, Article
40 English text is available at The Constitution of the Soka Gakkai 2017.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
263
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 286 ---
15 stipulates that a vote of two-thirds of the members of Soka Gakkai’s Constitution
Amendment Committee is required to make any changes to the document, a rule
that appears similar to Article 96 of the 1947 national Constitution, which requires a
two-thirds vote in both Houses of the Diet and a referendum of 50 percent plus one
vote in order to carry out a constitutional amendment. Notably, the Gakkai version
of this clause makes no room for the voice of an electorate. Overall, Soka Gakkai’s
constitutional mimesis arguably takes its cue less from the postwar constitution than
its 1890 predecessor. Like that of the Meiji Constitution, the preamble of the Gakkai
equivalent outlines a genealogy that conﬁrms the constitution’s basis in primordial
and transcendent authority. Where the 1890 Constitution speaks in the voice of the
Emperor who “ascended the throne of a lineal succession unbroken for ages
eternal,” the Gakkai Constitution declares a “profound karmic connection” from
´Sa¯kyamu_ni Buddha to Nichiren to Makiguchi and Toda, culminating in Ikeda. The
Meiji Constitution repeatedly conﬁrms the supremacy of the Emperor while defer-
ring to the need for the populace to create and interpret appropriate laws. Similarly,
the Gakkai’s 2017 Constitution afﬁrms the primacy of the three founding presidents
while empowering the religion’s administrative bodies to generate and oversee its
internal regulations.
Ironically, Soka Gakkai’s mimetic equivalent of a national constitution appears
closer to the document upheld by the wartime state that martyred its founding leader
and destroyed the wartime-era Gakkai. Soka Gakkai’s 2017 Constitution appears to
call for a utopian version of the very polity that victimized its originators.
12.5 CONCLUSION: “CONSTITUTIONAL BUDDHISM” AS A
COUNTERPOINT TO “BUDDHIST CONSTITUTIONALISM”
On May 3, 1970, on the tenth anniversary of his appointment as third president of
Soka Gakkai, Ikeda Daisaku afﬁrmed the religion’s policy of seikyō bunri, or
“separation of politics and religion,” the principle upheld in the Japanese
Constitution that came into effect on the same day in 1947. In his address, Ikeda
postulated that Soka Gakkai might adopt conventions from the Japanese political
system and institute a practice of soliciting votes from the religion’s membership. He
suggested that, in the future, Soka Gakkai might put in place a term limit of three or
four years for an elected Gakkai president (Kiuchi 1974). The 2017 Gakkai
Constitution, however, stands as the culmination of decades spent solidifying
Ikeda Daisaku as the religion’s absolute authority. Its content and tone suggest that
the referents for the Gakkai’s mimetic processes are drawn not only from the postwar
constitutional order and its defenses of paciﬁsm and unconditional freedom of
religion, but also from the prewar, Emperor-centric constitutional nation-state.
Komeito has needed to compromise on constitutionalism in order to survive as a
small party within Japan’s postwar political system. Soka Gakkai has remained free to
promote utopian visions inspired by multiple Japanese constitutional precedents.
264
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 287 ---
While its 2017 Constitution may stand as the example that hews most closely to
national models, Soka Gakkai is not the only Japanese Buddhist organization to
promulgate a constitutional equivalent. Sōtō Zen, for instance, formulates its
denominational regulations as a multi-article “Sōtō Sect Constitution” (Sōtōshū
Shūken), and other temple-based denominations present their guiding rules in
similar formats, albeit not always in documents that bear the title “constitution.”
One might also posit that an ethic of constitutionalism is identiﬁable across the
broad spectrum of Japanese Buddhism, whether or not an institution maintains a
set of internal rules that functions in a de facto manner as a constitution.41 The
case study of post-disaster clerical aid makes clear that Buddhists in Japan
formulate their public conduct and institutional practices to comport with
national constitutional norms. This widely shared ethic is certainly the result of
Buddhism’s fraught position in modern and contemporary Japan and is indicative
of the need for Japan’s Buddhists to defend their continued relevance to the
nation.42 Soka Gakkai’s mimesis of a national constitution can also be read as a
defensive posture adopted in response to being targeted by political rivals and the
threat of legal challenges mounted within a state based in constitutional law.
It is a distinctive instance of what is otherwise a widely shared Japanese
Buddhist convention to internalize and manifest concern for the nation’s
constitutional authority.
This chapter’s introduction included a brief discussion of Benjamin Schonthal’s
theory of “Buddhist constitutionalism” that describes processes in Southeast Asia in
which “Buddhist ideas and institutions ﬁgure prominently as topics of constitutional
negotiation.”43 In Southeast Asian nations, lawmakers, monastics, and other power-
holders work to secure Buddhism as a foundation for the state, maintaining a
principle of enshrining religious teachings and institutions that Schonthal compares
convincingly with Islamic and other religiously informed state-building enterprises.
I suggest that the cases in this chapter exemplify a contrasting ethic of constitutional-
ism that has emerged as a response to the comparatively precarious position
Buddhism has occupied in Japan since the nineteenth century. There is an observ-
able urge on the part of contemporary Japanese Buddhists to foster “constitutional
Buddhism,” Buddhist constitutionalism’s opposite. The Japanese Buddhist cases,
perhaps especially the case of Soka Gakkai’s constitutional mimesis, represent a
countercurrent within what Schonthal identiﬁes as global Buddhist ﬂuidity between
two putatively heterogeneous categories of religions and constitutions. In many
Buddhist-majority countries, Buddhism persists as a foundational inﬂuence on the
41 See Schonthal 2021.
42 In his discussions of Japanese Buddhist prison chaplaincy, Adam Lyons describes this as a
“statist” approach on the part of clergy who must observe constitutional divisions in their work
within state institutions (Lyons 2021).
43 Schonthal 2017, 707.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
265
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 288 ---
formation of national constitutions. By contrast, inﬂuence ﬂows in the opposite
direction in Japan, where Buddhist organizations take their cue from constitutions
that set out an explicit religion/state divide. A full account of Buddhism as a lens
through which to approach comparative constitutional law must account for
Buddhism’s circumstances in Japan.
references
Abe, Keisuke Mark. 2011. “Separation of Church and State in Japan: What Happened to the
Conservative Supreme Court?” St. John’s Law Review 85 (2): 447–72.
Abe Shunsuke. 2021. “Kōshibyō tochi shiyōryō menjo wa iken seikyōbunri soshōde saikōsai.”
Asahi Shinbun, February 24. Accessed on November 15, 2021. www.asahi.com/articles/
ASP2S54RJP2KUTIL018.html
Aera Henshūbu, ed. 1996. Sōka gakkai kaibō. Tokyo: Asahi Shinbun.
Agency for Cultural Affairs. Shūkyō nenkan 2020. Accessed on November 15, 2021. www
.bunka.go.jp/tokei_hakusho_shuppan/hakusho_nenjihokokusho/shukyo_nenkan/index
.html
Asano Hidemitsu. 1974. Watashi no mita sōka gakkai. Tokyo: Keizai Ōraisha.
Asayama Taichi. 2017. Uchigawa kara miru Sōka gakkai to Kōmeitō. Tokyo: Discovery
Twenty-One.
Avenell, Simon. 2010. Making Japanese Citizens: Civil Society and the Mythology of the
Shimin in Postwar Japan. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Baffelli, Erica and Reader, Ian. 2012. “Editor’s Introduction: Impact and Ramiﬁcations: The
Aftermath of the Aum Affair in the Japanese Religious Context.” Japanese Journal of
Religious Studies 39 (1): 1–28.
2019. Dynamism and the Ageing of a Japanese ‘New’ Religion: Transformations and the
Founder. London: Bloomsbury.
Benn, James A., and Balkwill, Stephanie. 2021. “Buddhist Statecraft.” In Oxford Bibliographies.
Accessed on November 15, 2021. www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo-
9780195393521/obo-9780195393521-0269.xml
Berman, Michael. 2018. “Religion Overcoming Religions: Suffering, Secularism, and the
Training of Interfaith Chaplains, in Japan.” American Ethnologist 45 (2): 228–40.
Blacker, Carmen. 1975. The Catalpa Bow: A Study of Shamanistic Practices in Japan.
London: Allen & Unwin.
Buddhist NGO Network, ed. 2013. Ji’in to chiiki no kizuna de takameru ji’in bisai gaidobukku.
Tokyo: BNN.
Covell, Stephen G. 2005. Japanese Temple Buddhism: Worldliness in a Religion of
Renunciation. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Dower, John W. 1999. Embracing Defeat: Japan in the Wake of World War II. New York:
W.W. Norton.
Ehrhardt, George, Klein, Axel, McLaughlin, Levi and Reed, Steven R., eds. 2014. Kōmeitō:
Politics and Religion in Japan. Berkeley: Institute of East Asian Studies.
Field, Norma. 1991. In the Realm of a Dying Emperor: Japan at Century’s End. New York:
Vintage Books.
Fujiyama Midori. 2020. Rinshō shūkyōshi: shi no bansōsha. Tokyo: Kōbunken.
Genron Shuppan no Jiyū o Mamoru Kai, ed. 2012. Fujiwara Hirotatsu Sōka gakkai o kiru
41-nen no kenshō. Tokyo: Nisshin Hōdō.
266
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 289 ---
Gill, Tom, Steger, Brigitte and Slater, David H., eds. 2013. Japan Copes with Calamity:
Ethnographies of the Earthquake, Tsunami, and Nuclear Disasters of March 2011. Bern:
Peter Lang.
Global Religious Futures Project. 2016. “Japan.” Accessed on November 15, 2021. www
.globalreligiousfutures.org/countries/japan#/?afﬁliations_religion_id=0&afﬁliations_year=
2050&region_name=All%20Countries&restrictions_year=2016
Gordon, Andrew, ed. 1993. Postwar Japan as History. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Graf, Tim. 2016. “Buddhist Responses to the 3.11 Disasters in Japan.” In Disasters and Social
Crisis in Contemporary Japan: Political, Religious, and Cultural Responses, edited by
Mark Mullins and Koichi Nakano, 156–81. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hardacre, Helen. 1989. Shinto and the State, 1868–1988. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
2002. Religion and Society in Nineteenth-Century Japan: A Study of the Southern Kantō
Region, Using Late Edo and Early Meiji Gazetteers. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press.
2017. Shinto: A History. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hardacre, Helen, George, Timothy S., Komamura, Keigo and Seraphim, Franziska, eds. 2021.
Japanese Constitutional Revisionism and Civic Activism. Lanham: Lexington Books.
Higuma Takenori. 1971. Toda Jōsei/Sōka gakkai. Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Ōraisha.
Hori Yukio [1973] 1999. Kōmeitōron. Tokyo: Nansōsha.
Horie Norichika and Takahashi Hara. 2021. Shisha no chikara: tsunami hisaichi “reiteki
taiken” no shiseigaku. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
Horii, Mitsutoshi. 2018. The Category of ‘Religion’ in Contemporary Japan: Shūkyō and
Temple Buddhism. Palgrave Macmillan.
Hur, Nam-lin. 2007. Death and Social Order in Tokugawa Japan: Buddhism, Anti-
Christianity, and the Danka System. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
“Hyōgoken nanbu jishin kara ichinen zadankai.” 1996. Chūgai Nippō, January 1.
Ishii Kenchi. 2008. Dēta¯ bukku: gendai Nihonjin no shūkyō. Tokyo: Shin’yōsha.
Josephson, Jason Ānanda. 2012. The Invention of Religion in Japan. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Kasai, Kenta. 2016. “Introducing Chaplaincy to Japanese Society: A Religious Practice in
Public Space.” Journal of Religion in Japan 5 (2–3): 246–62.
Ketelaar, James. 1989. Of Heretics and Martyrs in Meiji Japan: Buddhism and Its Persecution.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kingston, Jeff. 2012. Natural Disaster and Nuclear Crisis in Japan: Response and Recovery after
Japan’s 3/11. London and New York: Routledge.
Kisala, Robert. 2000. Prophets of Peace: Paciﬁsm and Cultural Identity in Japan’s New
Religions. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Kiuchi Hiroshi. 1974. Kōmeitō to Sōka gakkai. Tokyo: Gōdō Shuppan.
Klautau, Orion. 2014. “Nationalizing the Dharma: Takakusu Junjirō and the Study of
Buddhism in Taishō Japan.” Japanese Religions 34: 53–70.
Klautau, Orion and Krämer, Hans Martin, eds. 2021. Buddhism and Modernity: Sources from
Nineteeth-Century Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Klein, Axel. 2015. “Kōmeitō: Rock ‘n’ Row the Coalition Boat.” In Japan Decides 2014, edited
by Robert Pekkanen, Steven R. Reed, and Ethan Scheiner, 72–86. London, New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Klein, Axel and McLaughlin, Levi. 2022. “Kōmeitō: The Party and Its Place in Japanese
Politics.” In The Oxford Handbook of Japanese Politics, edited by Robert J. Pekkanen and
Saadia M. Pekkanen, 201–22. New York: Oxford University Press.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
267
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 290 ---
Kōmeitō. 1964. “Printed transcript of founding statement.”
ed. 1973. Kōmeitō handobukku. Tokyo: Kōmeitō.
2017. Shūinsen jūten seisaku. Accessed on January 5, 2021. www.komei.or.jp/campaign/
shuin2017/manifesto/manifesto2017_l.pdf
2019. Shūinsen 2019 manifesuto. Accessed on November 15, 2021. www.komei.or.jp/cam
paign/sanin2019/policy
2021. Shūinsen seisakushū. Accessed on January 5, 2021. www.komei.or.jp/special/shuin49/
wp-content/uploads/manifesto2021.pdf
Kōmeitō Shi Hensa Iinkai, ed. 2014. Kōmeitō 50 nen no ayumi. Tokyo: Kōmeitō Kikanshi Iinkai.
Kurata Takuji et al. 2002. Hanketsu, soken no ranyō: danzai sareta gyōgen soshō. Tokyo:
Nihon Hyōronsha.
Kuroda Toshio. 1996. “The Imperial Law and the Buddhist Law.” Japanese Journal of
Religious Studies 23 (3–4): 271–85.
Kuroda Nobuyuki and Tsuganesawa Toshihiro, eds. 1999. Shinsai no shakaigaku: Hanshin/
Awaji daishinsai to minshū ishiki. Kyoto: Sekai Shisōsha.
Kyodo. 2021. “Top Court Says Free Land Offer for Confucian Temple was Unconstitutional.”
The Japan Times, February 24. Accessed on November 15, 2021. www.japantimes.co.jp/
news/2021/02/24/national/crime-legal/okinawa-temple-land/
Larsson, Ernils. 2017. “Jinja Honchō and the Politics of Constitutional Reform in Japan.”
Japan Review 30: 227–52.
2020. Rituals of a Secular Nation: Shinto Normativity and the Separation of Religion and
State in Postwar Japan. PhD thesis, Uppsala University, Sweden.
Le, Tom Phuong. 2021. Japan’s Aging Peace: Paciﬁsm and Militarism in the Twenty-First
Century. New York: Columbia University Press.
Liff, Adam and Ko Maeda. 2019. “Electoral Incentives, Policy Compromises, and Coalition
Durability: Japan’s LDP-Komeito Government in a Mixed Electoral System.” Japanese
Journal of Political Science 20 (1): 53–73.
Lindgren, Petter. 2016. “Kōmeitō’s Security Ideals and Collective Self-Defense: Betwixt
Paciﬁsm and Compromises.” East Asia 33: 233–54.
Liu, Cuilan. 2020. “The Fall of a Chinese Buddhist Monk: Law and State Governance of
State Buddhism in Post-Imperial China.” Journal of Law and Religion 35 (3): 432–49.
LoBreglio, John. 1997. “The Revisions to the Religious Corporations Law: An Introduction
and Annotated Translation.” Japanese Religions 22 (1): 38–59.
Lyons, Adam J. 2021. Karma and Punishment: Prison Chaplaincy in Japan. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
McLaughlin, Levi. 2015. “Komeito’s Soka Gakkai Protestors and Supporters: Religious
Motivations for Political Activism in Contemporary Japan.” The Asia-Paciﬁc Journal
13 (41/1): 1–28. Accessed on November 15, 2021. https://apjjf.org/-Levi-McLaughlin/4386
2016a. “Hard Lessons Learned: Tracking Changes in Media Presentations of Religion and
Religious Aid Mobilization after the 1995 and 2011 Disasters in Japan.” Asian Ethnology
75 (1): 105–38.
2016b. “Religious Responses to the 2011 Tsunami in Japan.” In Oxford Handbooks Online.
Accessed on November 15, 2021. www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/
9780199935420.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199935420-e-29
2019a. Soka Gakkai’s Human Revolution: The Rise of a Mimetic Nation in Modern Japan.
Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
2019b. “Using Buddhist Resources in Post-disaster Japan: Taniyama Yōzō’s ‘Viha¯ra Priests
and Buddhist Chaplains.” In Buddhism and Medicine: An Anthology of Modern Sources,
edited by Pierce Salguero, 164–76. New York: Columbia University Press.
268
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 291 ---
Matsumoto Katsuya. 1973. Soshō sareta Sōka gakkai. Tokyo: Gendai Burēnsha.
Midford, Paul. 2020. Overcoming Isolationism: Japan’s Leadership in East Asian Security
Multilateralism. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Miki Hizuru, ed. 2001. Fukkō to shūkyō: shinsaigo no hito to shakai o iyasu mono. Osaka:
Tōhō.
2012. “Hanshin Awaji daishinsai hisaichi ni okeru shūkyō no ‘tōji’ to ‘ima.’” Shūkyō kenkyū
86 (2): 421–46.
Mullins, Mark R. 2021. Yasukuni Fundamentalism: Japanese Religions and the Politics of
Restoration. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Murakami Shigeyoshi, 1967. Sōka gakkai = Kōmeitō. Tokyo: Aoki Shoten.
Nakai, Kate Wildman. 2017. “Between Secularity, Shrines, and Protestantism: Catholic
Higher Education in Prewar Japan.” Japan Review 30: 97–127.
Nakano Jun. 2016. Sōka gakkai/Kōmeitō no kenkyū: jiko renritsu seiken no naizai ronri. Tokyo:
Iwanami Shoten.
National Diet Library. “The Constitution of the Empire of Japan.” Accessed on November 15,
2021. www.ndl.go.jp/constitution/e/etc/c02.html
NHK Broadcasting Culture Research Institute. 2020. Gendai Nihonjin no ishiki kōzō (9th
ed.). Tokyo: NHK Books.
Nishihonganji Hanshin and Awaji Daishinsai Fukkō Shien Renraku Kyōgikai, ed. 1998.
Hanshin/Awaji daishinsai fukkō shien katsudō hōkoku: rokkōan monogatari. Kyoto:
Nishihonganji.
Nishiyama Shigeru. 1975. “Nichiren shōshū sōka gakkai ni okeru ‘honmon kaidan’ ron no
hensen: Seijiteki shūkyō undō to shakai tōsei.” In Nichirenshū no shomondai, edited by
Takashi Nakao, 241–75. Tokyo: Yūzankaku.
O’Brien, David and Yasuo Ohkoshi. 1996. To Dream of Dreams: Religious Freedom and
Constitutional Politics in Postwar Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Okamoto Masahiro. 2014. “Higashi Nihon daishinsai ni okeru 18 shūkyō kyōdan no hisaisha/
chi shien katsudō chōsa ni tsuite: chōsa hōkoku ni, jakkan no kōsatsu o kuwaete.”
JANPORA: Japan NPO Research Association Discussion Papers.
Okkotsu Masao. 2003. Kōmeitō = Sōka gakkai no shinjitsu 2: “Ji/sō” gōseiken o utsu. Kyoto:
Kamogawa Shuppan.
Ooms, Herman. 2008. Imperial Politics and Symbolics in Ancient Japan: The Tenmu Dynasty,
650–800. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life, ed. 2012. The Global Religious Landscape: A Report on
the Size and Distribution of the World’s Major Religious Groups as of 2010. Washington
DC: Pew Research Center.
Piggott, Joan R. 1997. The Emergence of Japanese Kingship. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Prime Minister of Japan and His Cabinet. 1946. “The Constitution of Japan.” Accessed on
November 15, 2021. https://japan.kantei.go.jp/constitution_and_government_of_japan/
constitution_e.html
Rots, Aike P. 2017. Shinto, Nature and Ideology in Contemporary Japan: Making Sacred
Forests. London: Bloomsbury.
Rowe, Mark M. 2011. Bonds of the Dead: Temples, Burial, and the Transformation of
Contemporary Japanese Buddhism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
2017. “Charting Known Territory: Female Buddhist Priests.” Japanese Journal of Religious
Studies 44 (1): 75–101.
Ruoff, Kenneth J. 2020. Japan’s Imperial House in the Postwar Era. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
269
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 292 ---
Sakurai Yoshihide and Kawamata Toshinori, eds. 2016. Jinkō genshō shakai to jiin: sōsharu
kyapitaru no shiza kara. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
Sango, Asuka. 2015. The Halo of Golden Light: Imperial Authority and Buddhist Ritual in
Heian Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Sawada, Janine Tasca. 2004. Practical Pursuits: Religion, Politics, and Personal Cultivation in
Nineteenth-Century Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2017. “Formations of Buddhist Constitutionalism in South and
Southeast Asia.” International Journal of Constitutional Law 15 (3): 705–33.
2021. “The Case for Religious Constitutions: Comparative Constitutional Law among
Buddhists and Other Religious Groups.” Law & Social Inquiry 20: 1–29.
Shields, James Mark. 2017. Against Harmony: Progressive and Radical Buddhism in Modern
Japan. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shimada Hiromi. 2004. Sōka gakkai. Tokyo: Shinchō Shinsho.
Shimada Hiromi et al. 2007. Ikeda Daisaku nakiato no Sōka gakkai. Tokyo: Takarajimasha.
The Constitution of the Soka Gakkai. 2017. Accessed on November 15, 2012. www.sokanet.jp/
info/constitution.html
Sōka Gakkai Nenpyō Hensan Iinkai, ed. 1976. Sōka gakkai nenpyō. Tokyo: Seikyō
Shinbunsha.
Sōka Gakkai Yonjūshūnenshi Hensan Iinkai, ed. 1970. Sōka gakkai yonjūshūnenshi. Tokyo:
Sōka Gakkai.
“Sōka Gakkai yūshi ‘iraku hantai shomei’ o kōmei ni teishutsu.” 2004. Asahi Shinbun,
January 21.
Starling, Jessica. 2019. Guardians of the Buddha’s Home: Domestic Religion in Contemporary
Jōdo Shinshū. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Stone, Jacqueline I. 2003. “‘By Imperial Edict and Shogunal Decree’: Politics and the Issue of
the Ordination Platform in Modern Lay Nichiren Buddhism.” In Buddhism in the
Modern World: Adaptions of an Ancient Tradition, edited by Steven Heine and
Charles Prebish, 193–220. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Suzuki Hiroshi. 1970. Toshiteki sekai. Tokyo: Seishin Shobō.
Takahashi, Hara. 2016. “The Ghosts of Tsunami Dead and Kokoro no kea in Japan’s Religious
Landscape.” Journal of Religion in Japan 5: 176–98.
Takahata, Eiichiro. 2007. “Religious Accommodation in Japan.” BYU Law Review 2007 (3):
729–50.
Tamamuro Fumio. 2001. “Local Society and the Temple-Parishioner Relationship within
the Bakufu’s Governance Structure.” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 28 (3–4):
261–92.
Tamano Kazushi. 2008. Sōka gakkai no kenkyū. Tokyo: Kōdansha.
Thal, Sarah. 2005. Rearranging the Landscape of the Gods: The Politics of a Pilgrimage Site in
Japan, 1573–1912. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Thomas, Jolyon B. 2019. Faking Liberties: Religious Freedom in American-Occupied Japan.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Toda Jōsei. 1956. Toda Jōsei-sensei kantōgenshū. Tokyo: Sōka Gakkai.
Tōyō Tetsugaku Kenkyūjo, ed. 1993. Yūjinsō o kangaeru: Nihon ni okeru bukkyō to girei.
Tokyo: Daisan Bunmeisha.
Tōyō Tetsugaku Kenkyūjo, 2006. Yūjinsō no genzai: kawariyuku sōsō girei. Tokyo: Tōyō
Tetsugaku Kenkyūjo.
Tsukada Hotaka. 2015. Shūkyō to seiji no tentetsuten. Tokyo: Kadensha.
Victoria, Brian. 2006. Zen at War (2nd ed.). Lanham: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
270
Levi McLaughlin
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 293 ---
White, James W. 1970. The Sōkagakkai and Mass Society. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Williams, Duncan Ryūken. 2004. The Other Side of Zen: A Social History of Sōtō Zen History
in Tokugawa Japan. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Yasumaru Yoshio. 1979. Kamigami no meiji ishin: shinbutsu bunri to haibutsu kishaku. Tokyo:
Iwanami Shinsho
Zhong, Yijiang. 2016. The Origin of Modern Shinto in Japan: The Vanquished Gods of Izumo.
London: Bloomsbury.
Japanese Buddhists & Constitutional Law
271
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 294 ---
13
Governing Buddhism in Vietnam
Ngoc Son Bui
13.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter explores the Vietnamese state’s constitutional framework for governing
Buddhism. The framework includes: (1) principles in the big-C Constitution (the
formal, written Constitution of 2013); (2) small-c constitutional rules, including
broader legislation enacted to implement the formal Constitution, particularly the
2016 Law on Religions and Belief; and (3) the Buddhist constitution, a body of
governing law of the Buddhist community, particularly the Charter of the Buddhist
Sangha of Vietnam (on the religious constitutions, see Schonthal 2021; on small-c
constitutions, see Chilton & Versteeg 2021). This chapter argues that the consti-
tutional framework for Vietnamese Buddhism is both facilitative and regulatory. On
the one hand, the constitutional framework facilitates the development of Buddhism
due to its historical role, the state’s reformist commitment, and the state’s universalist
outlook toward religions. On the other hand, the same constitutional framework
places Buddhism under state control, so as to prevent Buddhist opposition to the
socialist regime and to rally the support of Buddhist followers for state-building.
Some historical context is helpful before we begin the analysis. Buddhism is the
second-largest organized religion in Vietnam (after Catholicism) with 4,606,543
followers according to the government’s ofﬁcial 2019 report (General Statistics
Ofﬁce of Vietnam 2019). Historians debate whether Buddhism came to Vietnam
in the third or second century BCE from India, or in the ﬁrst to second century from
China, but in any case, it is well established with deep roots (Taylor 2018). In the Ly
dynasty (1009–1225) and Tran dynasty (1225–1400), Buddhism was a state religion and
played an important institutional and legal role, including legitimizing royal author-
ity (Anh 2002). The Le dynasty in the ﬁfteenth century endorsed Confucianism as
the ofﬁcial ideology, but Buddhism, Confucianism, and Daoism coexisted within
the framework of the harmony of three religions. In the period of the French
colonial rule, the inﬂuence of Buddhism declined due to the spread of
272
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 295 ---
Christianity. During the Vietnam war from 1945 to 1975, Vietnam was divided into
North and South: Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam in the
South, was a Catholic and launched an anti-Buddhist policy, which triggered
protests by Buddhists against the government (Roberts 1965). After national uniﬁca-
tion, the socialist state supported the uniﬁcation of Buddhist organizations under a
body called the Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam (BSV, Vietnamese: Giáo hội Phật giáo
Việt Nam) (Trần Th_i Hằng 2020). Another Buddhist organization called the Uniﬁed
Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam (UBSV, Vietnamese: Giáo hội Phật giáo Việt Nam
Thống nhất) rejected joining the BSV, was banned by the state, and operates in exile
(for an overview of the history of Buddhism in Vietnam, see Soucy 2017).
This chapter is organized as follows. The ﬁrst part from Section 13.2 explores
the constitutional framework for Vietnamese Buddhism, Section 13.3 explains the
facilitative and regulatory elements of the constitutional framework, and ﬁnally,
Section 13.4 offers a conclusion.
13.2 THE GOVERNING FRAMEWORK
13.2.1 The Big-C Constitution
The 2013 Constitution does not mention Buddhism. However, it includes the
principles of the Communist Party of Vietnam and the Vietnamese Fatherland
Front, of representative institutions, and of religious freedom, all of which are
relevant to the framework for the state’s governance of religions in general and
Buddhism in particular.
First, the Constitution provides for the leadership of the Communist Party of
Vietnam over “the state and society” (Article 4). Society includes Buddhism, which
means – at least in theory – that the religion is under the Party’s leadership. In fact,
responding to the increase in complaints and disputes involving religious facilities,
and protests carried out by religious believers, among others, in 2003 the Party issued a
resolution which laid down political directives to guide the state’s management of
religious affairs. This included creating the conditions for religions operating within
the law (such as the commitment to religious freedom), promoting patriotism among
religious followers, and preventing the use of religions to oppose the state and the
socialist regime (Resolution on Religious Affairs 2003). These political directives deal
with religions in general and are thus applicable to Buddhism, along with other faiths.
Buddhist groups as well as other religious groups are required to operate within the
Party policy regarding religious affairs. In relation to religious policies, the
Constitution conﬁrms Marxism–Leninism as the Party’s ofﬁcial ideology (Article 4).
As the Party plays the leading role in society, its ideology prevails thanks to the Party’s
propaganda and indoctrination. Following this framework, Marxism–Leninism is
secular, while Buddhism is sacred, and this generates an ideological tension between
the Party and Buddhism. To deal with the tension, the Party tolerates Buddhism but
Governing Buddhism in Vietnam
273
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 296 ---
also seeks to ensure that the religion will serve the Party’s political goal to build
socialism in Vietnam. As a response, the quasi-ofﬁcial BSV aligns with Marxist
ideology, as evident in its motto “Dharma, Nation, and Socialism.”
The second constitutional principle of note concerns the Fatherland Front. The
Constitution provides that “The Vietnamese Fatherland Front is a political alli-
ance and a voluntary union of the political organization, socio-political and social
organizations, and prominent individuals representing their class, social strata,
ethnicity or religion, and overseas Vietnamese” (Article 9). As the Fatherland
Front is an ally of the Party, the BSV, as a member of the Front, is presumed to
support the Party and submit to the Party’s control. In addition, like other member
organizations, the BSV must perform the constitutional duties and functions of the
Fatherland Front, including promoting national unity and social consensus,
supervising state activities, and participating in state institutions (Article 9).
The third constitutional principle affecting Buddhism relates to the place of
religion in representative institutions. Article 22 of the Constitution provides for
the right to stand for election to the National Assembly. Article 69 of the
Constitution deﬁnes the National Assembly as “the highest representative body of
the People.” Thus, even in the context of a one-party state, Buddhists are repre-
sented in the legislature. To illustrate this, after the last election in June 2021, ﬁve
Buddhist leaders (compared with one Catholic leader) were elected to the National
Assembly (Thanh Trà 2021). Although the national elections are under the Party
control through the Fatherland Front’s multiple rounds of nominations, the
National Assembly represents different sections of the society, including religion.
As Buddhism is a major religion, with the BSV allied with the party and the state, the
representation of Buddhists in the National Assembly is understandable. The inclu-
sion of Buddhist leaders in the legislature may help to ensure the support of
Buddhist organizations for the state and law.
A fourth constitutional principle to note is that of religious freedom. The
Constitution stipulates that:
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of belief and religion, and has the right to
follow any religion or to follow no religion. All religions are equal before law. 2. The
State shall respect and protect the freedom of belief and religion. 3. No one may
violate the freedom of belief and religion, nor may anyone take advantage of a belief
or religion in order to violate the law. (Article 24)
Under these provisions, Vietnamese citizens are free to adhere to Buddhism as well
as any other religions. There is no state religion in Vietnam: although Buddhists are
practically an ally of the party and the state, the Constitution does not provide for
any state support for Buddhism or any other religion. This is due to the consti-
tutional commitment to the equality of religions. The last clause in the religious
freedom provisions, regarding the manipulation of religion for illegal purposes,
justiﬁes state’s regulation of religious activities, including the practice of Buddhism.
274
Ngoc Son Bui
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 297 ---
Buddhist groups played no role in shaping the constitutional framework governing
its activities. However, Buddhist monks sometime engage in public constitutional
debate in defence of religious autonomy, as well as for other issues. For example,
when the state released a draft constitution for public debate in 2013, a Buddhist
monk called for the constitutional recognition of religious organizations as legal
entities so that they could enjoy more autonomy (Tá Lâm 2013). More recently, in
April 2021, the BSV submitted a petition to the relevant authorities opposing a draft
regulation by the Ministry of Finance which provides that the state will manage the
“merit money,” meaning funds donated to religious institutions. As reported by mass
media, the BSV argued that the term “merit money” was not clearly deﬁned, and in
practice the term is mainly used to refer to money donated to Buddhist institutions
rather than to those of other religions. The BSV also invoked Article 53 of the
2013 Constitution to afﬁrm that “merit money” does not belong to public property
managed by the state (Thiên Điểu 2021). In this case, Buddhists employed consti-
tutional argumentation to strengthen their demand for ﬁnancial autonomy, as a
response to the state’s attempt to place Buddhism under greater control.
13.2.2 The Small-c Constitution
The small-c constitution refers to a body of legislative rules issued by the Vietnamese
state to regulate religions and to implement relevant provisions in the big-C
Constitution (Vu Hoang Cong 2016). In 2004, the National Assembly’s Standing
Committee enacted the Ordinance on Belief and Religion. The Ordinance was
recently replaced by the Law on Belief and Religion (hereinafter, the Law) enacted
by the National Assembly in 2016 and implemented in 2018. The Law, however,
retains the substantive contents of the Ordinance (Bui 2019).
The Ordinance and the Law do not speciﬁcally mention Buddhism but articulate
a general legal framework for the state’s management of religion which is applicable
to Buddhism. The Ordinance and the Law inﬂuence Buddhist activities in two
modes: facilitative and regulatory. First, the Law recognizes religious freedom, and
therefore facilities the freedom of Buddhist practices (as well as other religious
practices). This has enabled the development of Vietnamese Buddhism after
national uniﬁcation. The development is manifested in various aspects, such as:
an increase in the number of Buddhist followers; numerous Buddhist festivals; the
creation of four Buddhist academies for Buddhist teachings at Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh
City, Hue, and Can Tho; the publication of numerous Buddhist texts (around 1,000
titles with around 6,000,000 copies published by the Religion Publishing House
since 1999); the engagement of the BSV in international Buddhist activities; and the
holding of the United Nations Vesak Cerebrations in Vietnam in 2008, 2014, and
2019 (Nguyen Thanh Xuan 2012, 77–84).
The religion Law is also an instrument for the state to regulate Buddhist activities.
Regulation of religion refers to “the state’s intentional intervention into the religious
Governing Buddhism in Vietnam
275
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 298 ---
activities of the target believers and followers and their organizations and groups”
(Bui 2019, 149). Using this deﬁnition, one can identify three regulatory aspects:
setting binding standards (legal rules); state monitoring to ensure the implementa-
tion of these rules (monitoring); and using coercive sanctions (sanctioning) to
guarantee compliance (Bui 2019, 149). Below I will illustrate the application of this
general regulatory framework to Buddhism in Vietnam.
First, regarding setting standards, the government applies to Buddhist groups
general legal rules prohibiting certain types of religious activities and religious
organizations. The Law prevents religious organizations, including Buddhist organ-
izations, from undermining national uniﬁcation or conducting propagation cam-
paigns in contravention of the state’s laws and policies. In addition, annual programs
for Buddhist activities (among other religious activities) must be approved by local
governments. Local authorities may suspend Buddhist activities if they believe that
they endanger national security and public order. Moreover, Buddhism – as with all
other religions in Vietnam – must be ofﬁcially recognized by the state. The BSV,
like other religious organizations, must be formally approved and registered with the
state. The congresses of the BSV and the establishment and operation of Buddhist
schools must also be approved by the authorities.
Second, there are different state institutions at both central and local levels
responsible for monitoring the implementation of legal rules regarding religions in
general, including Buddhism. At the central level, according to a decision taken by
the prime minister in 2018, the Department of Buddhism in the Government
Committee for Religious Affairs plays a role in governing Buddhism. There are also
committees for religious affairs in local governments, which are responsible for
managing religions, including Buddhism, at the local level.
Third, the Ordinance and the Law do not provide for formal sanctions of
unapproved religious activities and organizations. However, authorities have
employed informal mechanisms to deal with unapproved religious activities and
organizations, including those involving Buddhists. For example, Thích Huyê`n
Quang and Thích Quảng Độ, patriarchs of the Uniﬁed Buddhist Sangha of
Vietnam, were placed under house arrest because of their opposition to the govern-
ment (Johnson 2007).
13.2.3 The Buddhist Constitution
The Charter of the Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam (hereinafter, the Buddhist Charter)
was ﬁrst adopted by the Sangha in 1981 and has been amended six times, with the
last amendment in 2017. The Buddhist Charter can be considered a kind of consti-
tution for Buddhism in Vietnam. It lays down fundamental principles for the
Buddhist community, the structural institutions of the Sangha, the distribution of
the authority and duties among Buddhist leaders, and amendment rules. Beyond
being a religious document, the Buddhist Charter operates as an instrument for the
276
Ngoc Son Bui
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 299 ---
state to manage Buddhism. In this regard, its formal structure and substantive
contents share several features of the state’s Constitution.
13.2.3.1 Formal Structure
The Buddhist Charter’s formal structure is similar to those of the state’s
Constitution. It includes a preamble and thirteen chapters divided into seventy-
one articles. It includes the titles below:
Chapter I: Name, Badge, Flag, Song, Headquarter
Chapter II: Aims, Components
Chapter III: Principles of Operation and System of Organization
Chapter IV: Patriarch Council
Chapter V: Executive Council
Chapter VI: The Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam at Provinces and Cities
Chapter VII: The Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam at County, District, Town,
and Provincial City
Chapter VIII: Congress, Conference
Chapter IX: Clergy
Chapter X: Monastery and Members
Chapter XI: Finance, Property
Chapter XII: Praise of Merit and Discipline
Chapter XIII: The Validity of The Charter and Amendments to The
Charter
13.2.3.2 Expression
Like the state’s Constitution, the Buddhist Charter has an expressive function.
Descriptively, the Buddhist Charter’s preamble provides a narrative of the history
of Vietnamese Buddhism and the birth of the Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam:
In more than two thousand years of presence in Vietnam, accompanying the
nation, Buddhism has become the religion of the nation. Throughout the history
of nation building and nation defence, in the cause of national liberation,
national unity, as well as building and protecting the Socialist Fatherland of
Vietnam today, Vietnamese Buddhism has always been a reliable and strong
member of the national unity bloc . . . Since 1975, the Fatherland has been
united, the whole country unites for the goals of “prosperous people, strong
country, democratic, equitable, and civilised society,” Vietnamese Buddhism
fully has the opportunity to fulﬁl the aspiration to fully unify church organiza-
tions, associational organizations, and Buddhist denominations, and to establish
the Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam on November 7, 1981. (Charter of The Buddhist
Sangha of Vietnam, Preamble)
Governing Buddhism in Vietnam
277
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 300 ---
The Buddhist Charter describes Buddhism as an ally of Vietnam generally and of
the socialist state in particular. In describing modern Vietnamese history, the
Buddhist Charter’s preamble uses similar language of the state Constitution’s pre-
amble, such as “to liberate the nation, reunify the country, defend the Fatherland”
(The Constitution of The Socialist Republic of Vietnam 2013, preamble). The
Buddhist Charter’s preamble also aligns the creation of the BSV with the
Vietnamese socialist state’s goals (“a prosperous people and a strong, democratic,
equitable and civilised country”) which are conﬁrmed in the state Constitution’s
preamble (The Constitution of The Socialist Republic of Vietnam 2013, preamble).
The parallel between the preambles of the Buddhist Charter and the state
Constitution aims to establish a constructive relationship between Vietnamese
Buddhism, the BSV, and the Vietnamese socialist state.
Prescriptively, the Buddhist Charter expresses the aspirations and commitments of
the Buddhist community. Its preamble declares the motto “Dharma, Nation, and
Socialism” (Charter of The Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam, preamble). The BSV’s
stated aims are to develop Buddhism and to contribute to building Vietnamese
socialism, a commitment also conﬁrmed in the preamble of the state’s Constitution
(The Constitution of The Socialist Republic of Vietnam 2013, preamble). In
addition, Article 6 of the Buddhist Charter expresses the Buddhist, nationalist, and
internationalist commitments: “The purpose of the Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam is
to promote Buddhism, develop the Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam at home and
abroad, participate in building and protecting the Fatherland, serve the nation,
[and] contribute to building peace and peace for the world” (Charter of The
Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam, Article 6). Particularly, beyond religious aspirations,
the Charter commits the Buddhist community to contributing to nation building.
The nationalist commitment aims to align Vietnamese Buddhism with the state’s
societal and institutional development.
13.2.4 Buddhist Institutions
Apart from the expressive function, the Buddhist Charter operates as a blueprint to
structure and coordinate powers within Buddhist institutions and with regard to
their relationship with state institutions. It stipulates the Leninist organizational
principle of democratic centralism: “The Sangha leads according to the principle
of democratic centralism, collective leadership, individual responsibility, majority
decisions and unity of action” (Charter of The Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam, Article
10). Democratic centralism aims to combine democratic discussions and centralized
actions, conﬁrmed in the state’s Constitution (The Constitution of The Socialist
Republic of Vietnam 2013, Article 8). On the basis of democratic centralism, the
Buddhist Charter creates a hierarchical Buddhist institutional system, relatively
similar to the state’s constitutional system.
278
Ngoc Son Bui
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 301 ---
At the central level, the BSV includes the Patriarch Council and the Executive
Council (Charter of The Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam, Chapters IV and V). The
institutional functions and relationship of these two bodies have some features in
common with those of the National Assembly and government provided in the
state’s Constitution. The Patriarch Council, created with a ﬁve-year term by BSV’s
congress, is a collective decision-making body, while the Executive Council is an
administrative institution. Some language of the state’s Constitution is used to
describe the functions of these Buddhist institutions. For example, the Charter
provides that the Patriarch Council is “the supreme leading organ” of the BSV
and its Standing Committee enjoys the power of “supreme supervision” over the
activities of the Sangha and the Executive Council (Charter of The Buddhist
Sangha of Vietnam, Articles 15 and 16). This echoes the state Constitution’s descrip-
tion of the National Assembly as “the supreme organ of state power” which has the
power of “supreme supervision” over the government and other state organs (The
Constitution of The Socialist Republic of Vietnam 2013, Article 69).
Apart from the central institutions, the structural hierarchy of the Buddhist
organizations includes provincial and communal sanghas. The local sanghas are
comprised of the Patriarch committee and executive committee, modelled after the
structure of the central Sangha. The communal sanghas work under the guidance of
the provincial sanghas which in turn work under the guidance of the central Sangha
(Charter of The Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam, Articles 31 and 38). Thus, the
Buddhist Charter provides for a hierarchical relationship within Buddhist institu-
tions, consistent with the broader principle of democratic centralism.
The local sanghas are structured in line with the state’s local administrative
system. Additional Buddhist sanghas can be created at the local levels subject to
the approval of the local governments at the same levels (Charter of The Buddhist
Sangha of Vietnam, Articles 29 and 37). The parallel administrative arrangement
places Buddhist institutions at various levels under the management of the state
institutions at the same levels. This allows state authority to closely monitor the
activities of Buddhist institutions.
13.2.4.1 Buddhist Constitution and State Institutions
According to the Law on Belief and Religion, the Buddhist Charter is only imple-
mented after it is approved by the state. The state’s approval ostensibly ensures that
the Buddhist Charter will serve the state’s management of Buddhism. In addition, in
consistence with the Law on Belief and Religion, various activities regarding
implementation of the Charter (such as the elections of the Patriarch Council
and Executive Council, and the holding of the BSV’s congress) must be approved
by state authorities. In this way, the state can keep Buddhism ﬁrmly under
its control.
Governing Buddhism in Vietnam
279
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 302 ---
The Buddhist Charter also seeks to coordinate the relationship between the state
and Buddhist institutions. For example, the Charter provides that BSV’s Executive
Council must be “responsible for coordinating with competent state agencies in
dealing with organizations and individuals speaking out and disseminating infor-
mation with distorted, inaccurate, and unorganized content related to Buddhism in
general and to the organizations of the Vietnam Buddhist Sangha at all levels and to
its members” (Charter of The Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam, Article 19). The Charter
requires Buddhist institutions and members to cooperate with state institutions in
the management of Buddhism. Moreover, the Charter stipulates that:
If members of the Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam have activities and acts that hurt the
reputation, harmony, and interests of the Sangha or members of the Sanga, and
harm the great unity of the whole nation, the peace, independence, and unity of
the Fatherland, the Sangha shall deal with canon law [Vinaya], and depending on
the extent of violations, the Sangha shall request the competent state agency to
consider and handle it in accordance with the [state’s] law. (Charter of The
Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam, Article 64)
This provision enables the punishment of members of the BSV for their actions
against not only the interests of the Buddhist community but also the interests of the
state. The provision also allows the Sangha to request the state authority to apply
legal remedies. The Sangha is, therefore, an ally of the state in its internal manage-
ment of Buddhism.
13.3 FACTORS OF GOVERNING BUDDHISM
The state constitutional framework has facilitated the development of Buddhism in
Vietnam, shaped by factors internal and external to the Vietnamese context. The
internal factors include the historical role and nature of Vietnamese Buddhism and
the state’s reformist commitment. As Buddhism has a long tradition in Vietnam and
deep roots in the Vietnamese culture, the constitutional framework needs to accom-
modate its continuing development.
In addition, during the Vietnam war, Buddhist monks played an important role in
opposing the Diem government and advocating for peace. As Topmiller states:
“Some Buddhists perceived the deep distress in South Vietnamese society over the
war and responded with calls for peace. Sensing signiﬁcant war-weariness after a
quarter-century of conﬂict, Thich Nhat Hanh introduced a resolution calling for an
end to the ﬁghting during a conference of monks early in 1964” (2002, 7). The fact
that Buddhist monks resisted the South government to struggle for peace would
make the socialist state less hostile to Buddhism after national uniﬁcation.
Another internal factor involves the socialist party-state’s reformist commitments.
The reform program known as Doi moi (Renovation) introduced by the Communist
Party of Vietnam in 1986 has resulted in the implementation of several liberal
280
Ngoc Son Bui
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 303 ---
policies, which include policies that not only support economic liberalization but
also those which facilitate religious freedom. For example, different to the previous
dogmatic belief that religions would soon disappear in a new socialist society in
Vietnam, in 1990 the Communist Party of Vietnam issued a resolution announcing
reformist views and policies regarding religion. The resolution recognized three
points: “religion is a long-standing issue”; “belief and religion are spiritual needs of a
part of the people”; “religious ethics has many things suitable for the construction of
a new society.” (Nguyễn Nguyên Hồng 2018). These reformist views have facilitated
the development of religion in general and Buddhism in particular.
Another internal factor concerns the political leaders’ discourse which recognizes
the positive contribution of Buddhism to state-building and social and economic
development in Vietnam. John Gillespie observes that “HồChí Minh is credited
with saying that the values underlying Buddhism and Christianity are fundamentally
the same as the party’s objectives. According to this theory, the party should remain
staunchly atheist, but acknowledge that in the transition to socialism, religion
promotes social order and enriches lives” (2014, 143). More recently, President of
State Nguyễn Xuân Phúc has said, “Over the past forty years, many Buddhist monks
and nuns have made contributions and sacriﬁces for the revolution. The Buddhist
Sangha has always been at the forefront of national unity.” (Nguyễn Phan 2021).
Such political rhetoric indicates the positive view of the state toward Buddhism,
which has constituted a necessary political condition for the development of the
religion in Vietnam.
Apart from internal factors, the constitutional space for Buddhism in Vietnam has
been animated by external factors beyond the Vietnamese context. Globalization has
led the Vietnamese state to engage with international legal regimes, and sign major
international human rights treaties. This international engagement has resulted in the
party-state’s turn toward a universalist approach to religion, including Buddhism. As
Gillespie points out, “Party leaders have developed a more cosmopolitan outlook and
expanded their loyalties to include a wide range of religious beliefs and practices.
A consensus is emerging that the party should recognize and promote religiosity in
Vietnamese society” (2014, 141–42). This approach to internationalization enables the
development of religions in general – and Buddhism in particular – in Vietnam.
As noted above, the constitutional framework of Vietnam places Buddhism under
the state’s control. As Buddhism has enjoyed a signiﬁcant place in Vietnamese
culture and society, the socialist state has recognized the importance of turning it
not into an enemy but a supporter of the state. The regulative constitutional space is,
therefore, animated by both preventive and constructive political motivations. The
preventive motivation is that the state needs to preclude Buddhism from becoming a
force inimical to the socialist regime.
This preventive motivation may have been inspired by the Uniﬁed Buddhist
Sangha of Vietnam’s continued opposition to the socialist regime. For example, in
2013, a leader of the UBSV issued a letter opposing the Vietnamese government’s
Governing Buddhism in Vietnam
281
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 304 ---
imprisonment of Cu Huy Ha Vu for his subversive actions, including his call to
delete Article 4 of Vietnam’s Constitution, which mandates the leadership of the
Communist Party of Vietnam (Thich Vien Dinh 2013). One of the leaders of UBSV
stated: “The United Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam has a clear goal of serving the
nation and the dharma, not socialism” (Gia Minh 2015). The UBSV’s goal is
resistant to the BSV’s goal and the Vietnamese socialist state’s goal. The state,
therefore, is motivated to prevent Buddhist groups from cooperating with dissidents
who oppose the socialist regime.
The constructive motivation in the constitutional regulations of religion is that
the state needs to mobilize social forces, including Buddhist followers, for state-
building and socioeconomic development. As Buddhists are an important social
force, the state needs their support for state-building and the implementation of state
policy. This explains why Buddhists have been included in state institutions and
involved in national affairs, for example, supporting state authority in the ﬁght
against the spread of the Covid-19 virus in Vietnam (HồPhúc 2021).
13.4 CONCLUSION
This chapter has explored the multiple constitutional framework employed by the
state to govern Buddhism in Vietnam. It has illustrated the elements and function-
ing of such a constitutional framework, consisting of the principles and rules in the
formal Constitution, the small-c constitution or legislations, and the Buddhist
constitution or Charter of the Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam. On the one hand, the
constitutional framework facilitates the development of Vietnamese Buddhism due
to the nature and role of Buddhism in Vietnamese history, to the state’s reformist
policy regarding religious freedom, and to the party-state’s universal perspective on
religious freedom. On the other hand, the state places Buddhism ﬁrmly under its
control to ensure that it supports the Party and its programs of state-building and
socioeconomic development.
To some extent, the Vietnamese case illustrates unique features compared to
other countries in terms of the relationship between Buddhism and constitutional
law. These peculiar aspects are mainly due to the presence of Vietnamese socialism,
as in the case of the mimicry of the Vietnamese socialist political principals visible in
the BSV Buddhist constitution, the BSV’s replication of national socialist insti-
tutions in its organizational structure, and the general intimacy between
Buddhism, Communist Party, and the Fatherland Front.
However, the Vietnamese case also reveals commonalities with the other Buddhist
contexts analysed in this volume. One comparable aspect is the relation between
Buddhism and constitutional design. A written constitution may not directly refer to
Buddhism, but its general provisions on human rights, religious freedom, and the
broader institutional setting will undoubtedly affect the practice of Buddhism.
Another element that can be compared is the distinction between Buddhist
282
Ngoc Son Bui
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 305 ---
constitutionalism and the legal regulation of Buddhism. While the former concerns
how Buddhist fundamental norms and principles hold state authorities accountable,
the latter deals with how states use law to regulate Buddhism. A third dimension that
can suggest similarities across national contexts is the presence of Buddhist consti-
tutions, other examples of which can be found in this volume. The Charter of the
Sangha of Vietnam provides a good example for the comparative study of constitution-
like Buddhist texts, which in this case, draws heavily on the structure of state consti-
tutions. What the analysis of the Vietnamese case in this chapter can suggest is that a
comparative study of Buddhist constitutions needs to explore the relational similarities
between Buddhist constitutions and state constitutions, which are echoed in similar
content patterns in the guiding charters of both states and Buddhist groups. The
exploration of these similarities may help to highlight the important interaction that
takes place between Buddhist and state constitutional regimes.
references
Anh, NT. 2002. “From Indra to Maitreya: Buddhist Inﬂuence in Vietnamese Political
Thought.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 33 (2): 225–41.
Bui, Ngoc Son. 2019. “Legal Regulation of Religion in Vietnam.” In Regulating Religions in
Asia, edited by Jaclyn Neo, Arif Jamal, and Daniel P. S. Goh, 146–68. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Chilton, Adam and Versteeg, Mila. 2021. “Small-c Constitutional Rights.” International
Journal of Constitutional Law. https://doi.org/10.1093/icon/moac004.
Gia Minh. 2015. “Tựdo tôn giáo và Giáo hội Phật giáo Việt Nam Thống Nhất [Religious
Freedom and The United Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam]. RFA, August 23. Accessed on
December 15, 2021. www.rfa.org/vietnamese/in_depth/freed-of-religion-uniﬁ-buddhist-
08232015053404.html
Gillespie, John. 2014. “Human Rights as a Larger Loyalty: The Evolution of Religious
Freedom in Vietnam.” Harvard Human Rights Journal 27: 107–49.
“Hiến chương Giáo hội Phật giáo Việt Nam.” 2017. [Charter of The Buddhist Sangha of
Vietnam, amended through 2017.]
HồPhúc. 2021. “64 tăng ni, phật tửĐồng Nai tham gia tuyến đầu chống d_ich” [64 Buddhists
Monks and Nuns at Dong Nai Join the Front Line to Fight the Epidemic]. Bien phong,
September 10. Accessed on December 15, 2021. http://baodongnai.com.vn/tintuc/202109/
64-tang-ni-phat-tu-phat-giao-dong-nai-len-duong-vao-tuyen-dau-chong-dich-dot-2-3078106/
Johnson, Kay. 2007. “The Fighting Monks of Vietnam.” Time, March 2. http://content.time
.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1595721,00.html
“Luật Tín ngưỡng, tôn giáo năm 2016, Luật số02/2016/QH14” [2016 Law on Belief and
Religion, No. 02/2016/QH14].
“Ngh_i quyết số25-NQ/TW công tác tôn giáo 2003” [Resolution on Religious Affairs 2003,
No. 25-NQ/TW].
Nguyễn Phan. 2021. “Chủt_ich nước Nguyễn Xuân Phúc tiếp đoàn Giáo hội Phật
giáo Việt Nam” [President Nguyen Xuan Phuc Welcomes the Delegation of the
Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam]. Nguoi Lao Dong, May 13. Accessed on December 15,
2021.
https://nld.com.vn/chinh-tri/chu-tich-nuoc-nguyen-xuan-phuc-tiep-doan-giao-
hoi-phat-giao-viet-nam-2021051316092032.htm
Governing Buddhism in Vietnam
283
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 306 ---
Nguyễn, Nguyên Hồng. 2018. “Quan điểm đổi mới của Đảng vê` tôn giáo, tín ngưỡng” [The Party’s
Renovative Opinions on Religions and Belief]. Tuyen Giao, December 3. www.tuyengiao.vn/
nghien-cuu/ly-luan/quan-diem-doi-moi-cua-dang-ve-ton-giao-tin-nguong-117039
Nguyen, Thanh Xuan. 2012. Religions in Vietnam. Hanoi: The Gioi Publishing House.
“Pháp lệnh Tín ngưỡng, Tôn giáo 2004 21/2004/PL-UBTVQH11” [2004 Ordinance on Belief
and Religion, No. 21/2004/PL-UBTVQH11].
“Quyết đ_inh số32/2018/QĐ-TTg ngày 03 tháng 8 năm 2018 của Thủtướng Chính phủ”
[Decision No. 32/2018/QD-TTg dated August 3, 2018, of the Prime Minister].
Roberts, Adam. 1965. “Buddhism and Politics in South Vietnam.” The World Today 21 (6):
240–50.
Schonthal,
Benjamin.
2021.
“The
Case
for
Religious
Constitutions:
Comparative
Constitutional Law among Buddhists and Other Religious Groups.” Law & Social
Inquiry: 1–29. doi:10.1017/lsi.2021.36.
Soucy, Alexander. 2017. “Contemporary Vietnamese Buddhism.” In The Oxford Handbook of
Contemporary Buddhism, edited by Michael Jerryson, 177–95. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Tá Lâm. 2013. Chức sắc tôn giáo góp ý sửa Hiến pháp [Buddhist Monks Comment on
Amending the Constitution]. Vietnamnet, January 30. Accessed on December 15, 2021.
https://vietnamnet.vn/vn/thoi-su/chuc-sac-ton-giao-gop-y-sua-hien-phap-107730.html
Taylor, KW. 2018. “What Lies Behind the Earliest Story of Buddhism in Ancient Vietnam?”
The Journal of Asian Studies 77 (1): 107–22.
Thanh Trà. 2021. “5 chức sắc tôn giáo trúng cửđ_ai biểu Quốc hội khóa XV” [Five religious
dignitaries elected to the National Assembly]. Vietnam News Agency, June 14. Accessed
on December 15, 2021. https://baucuquochoi.vn/infographics-5-chuc-sac-ton-giao-trung-
cu-dai-bieu-quoc-hoi-khoa-xv/1159.vnp
“The Constitution of The Socialist Republic of Vietnam.” 2013.
Thich, Vien Dinh. 2013. “Letter from Leader of UBCV’s Institute for the Dissemination of
Dharma on Attorney Cu Huy Ha Vu’s Hunger Strike in Prison.” WordPress, June 19.
Accessed on December 15, 2021. https://saveubcv.wordpress.com/2013/06/19/letter-from-
leader-of-ubcvs-institute-for-the-dissemination-of-dharma-on-attorney-cu-huy-ha-vus-hunger-
strike-in-prison/
Thiên Điểu. 2021. “Giáo hội Phật giáo kiến ngh_i Nhà nước không nên quản lý tiê`n công
đức” [Buddhist Sangha recommends state not to manage merit money]. Tuổi Trẻ
Online, June 17. Accessed on December 15, 2021. https://tuoitre.vn/giao-hoi-phat-giao-
kien-nghi-nha-nuoc-khong-nen-quan-ly-tien-cong-duc-20210617151806168.htm
Tổng c_uc Thống kê Việt Nam [General Statistics Ofﬁce of Vietnam]. 2019. “Kết quảtoàn bộ
Tổng điê`u tra Dân sốvà Nhà ởViệt Nam năm 2019” [The Results of the 2019 Vietnam
Population and Housing Census]. Accessed on December 15, 2021. www.gso.gov.vn/du-
lieu-va-so-lieu-thong-ke/2020/11/ket-qua-toan-bo-tong-dieu-tra-dan-so-va-nha-o-nam-2019/
Topmiller, Robert J. 2002. The Lotus Unleashed: The Buddhist Peace Movement in South
Vietnam, 1964–1966. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
Trần Th_i Hằng. 2020. Tổchức và ho_at động của Giáo hội Phật giáo Việt Nam hiện nay
[Organization and Operation of The Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam Nowadays]. PhD
dissertation, Vietnam National University, Hanoi.
Vu Hoang Cong. 2016. “Religious Policies in the Socialist Law-ruled State of Vietnam.”
Political Theory, December 2. Accessed on December 15, 2021. http://lyluanchinhtri.vn/
home/en/index.php/theory-research/item/396-religious-policies-in-the-socialist-law-ruled-
state-of-vietnam.html
284
Ngoc Son Bui
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 307 ---
14
The Buddhist Association of China and Constitutional
Law in Buddhist Majority Nations
The International Channels of Inﬂuence
André Laliberté
14.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter looks at the Buddhist Association of China (BAC), which claims
authority over the largest Buddhist community in the world, as it has tried in recent
years to assert itself as an inﬂuential actor on the global stage. The BAC has acted
with the full support of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), via one of its key
instruments for inﬂuence in Chinese societies and abroad, the United Front Work
Department (UFWD, herein United Front) (Brady 2019). The goal of this chapter is
to understand how the emergence of the BAC affects constitutional law in countries
where Buddhism plays an important role in the political and legal system.
I will introduce the BAC as the main institution representing Buddhists today in
the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and examine the relationship between the
BAC and the CCP United Front. Next, I assess the BAC efforts to establish itself as
one of the prime movers among Buddhist international organizations and interpret
the signiﬁcance of this increasing visibility. The chapter dovetails with a broader
research agenda headed by Yoshiko Ashiwa and David Wank (2020), examining how
the United Front operationalizes Buddhist activities outside China.
14.2 THE BUDDHIST ASSOCIATION OF CHINA
The BAC claims authority over the largest Buddhist community in the world.
Estimating the precise size of the community is difﬁcult, in part because, as in
other East Asian societies, many people practice what Michael Carrithers calls
“polytropy,” which means that they simultaneously practice more than one religion
(2000). The BAC estimates – which err on the conservative side and are reproduced
routinely by the ofﬁcial media – of the total number of Buddhists in China suggest
that there are around 100 million adherents (ZFX 2017a). Recently conducted
sociological surveys, however, point to widely divergent numbers, depending on
285
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 308 ---
the methodology used by the investigators (Wenzel-Teuber 2017, 27). For example,
the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS), a survey created in 2010 by the Institute of
Social Science Survey (ISSS) in Beijing University, reported vastly different
numbers in 2012 and 2014, depending on whether people were asked about their
religious afﬁliation or their beliefs in deities. Wenzel-Teuber (2017, 27) also quotes
from the 2012 survey by sociologists Lu Yunfeng and Zhang Chunni, undertaken for
the CFPS, which showed that about 6.5 percent of respondents disclosed an
afﬁliation to Buddhism; two years later, over 15.8 percent of respondents mentioned
their belief in the Buddha and bodhisattvas. Whether one chooses the more
conservative ﬁgure of 91 million or that of 212 million, however, more Buddhists
live in China than in Thailand, the country with the second largest number of
Buddhists, projected to number 67 million by 2020 (Pew-Templeton 2016).
This large Buddhist community, relative to other countries, represents only a
minority of the Chinese population, and not a sizable proportion, even though there
are more Buddhists than there are followers of other religions in China. In a country
where 90 percent of the population in 2012 professed no religious afﬁliation, and
73 percent admitted in another survey two years later that they have no religious
beliefs, the cultural inﬂuence of Buddhism in Chinese society – while signiﬁcant in
aesthetics, the practice of popular beliefs, and ethics – does not reach as deep as it
does in societies where Buddhism represents the religion of the majority, let alone
countries in which it is the state religion. There are signiﬁcant differences, more-
over, when one considers the speciﬁc forms of Buddhism practiced by different
ethnic groups, known in China as national minorities (xiaoshu minzu 小数民族)
(Borchert 2017). While a small minority of the Han population practices Buddhism
of the Maha¯ya¯na school, the inﬂuence of the Vajraya¯na school is more prevalent
among most of the Tibetan and Mongol minorities (Charleux 2017). The Therava¯da
school, which is also practiced among some of the minority populations in the
Southern parts of the country, is not practiced to the same extent (Sasas 2020). Still,
China is the only country in the world with signiﬁcant numbers of adherents to all
three major branches of Buddhism.
The leadership structure of the BAC reﬂects these realities, albeit in a way that
does not reﬂect the relative proportion of the three Buddhist schools. Its ofﬁcial
documents distinguish between Han (hanzhuan 漢傳), rather than Maha¯ya¯na
(dacheng 大乘); Tibetan (zangzhuan 藏傳), rather than Vajraya¯na or esoteric
(mizong 密宗); and Southern (nanzhuan 南傳) Buddhism, rather than Therava¯da
(shangzuobu 上座部) (ZFX 2017b). For 2017, the State Administration for Religious
affairs (SARA) provided the following numbers of registered sites for the three
branches of Buddhism: 28,270 sites for the Han tradition; 3,862 for the Tibetan sites;
and 1,705 for Southern sites (Wenzel-Teuber 2018, 34). In 2014, SARA counted
148,000 ordained Tibetan clergy, but only half that number among Han monastics,
and only 2,000 clerics among Southern Buddhists (Wenzel-Teuber 2018, 35). Only
in the ﬁrst years of its existence did the BAC governance structure reﬂect this reality.
286
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 309 ---
During the ﬁrst congress between 1953 and 1957, only one among the four honorary
chairs was Han; the others were the Dalai Lama, the tenth Panchen Lama, and the
spiritual leader of the Mongol orders. Of the seven vice-directors who assisted the
BAC director, only one was a Han, four represented the Tibetan school, and one
the Southern school. The governance structure of the BAC has since changed
signiﬁcantly: today, the majority of the thirty-three vice-presidents represent
Han Buddhism.
The state’s rigid deﬁnition of what constitutes an acceptable religion makes the
enumeration of religious believers even more difﬁcult. If sociological surveys can
count those who mention an afﬁliation to a religion or a belief in a deity, they often
miss those whose beliefs belong to what the sociologist of religion Yang Fenggang
(2006) called the “black market” of religions. By this, Yang means those religions
opposed by the state, in contrast to the “red market” of religions recognized by the
CCP. For obvious reasons, people who follow religions that the state opposes are not
likely to admit they do so. The population is aware of the religions the CCP opposes
as well as those it labels “evil cults” (xiejiao 邪教), but there is another category of
tolerated practices in the liminal space between religion and culture, belief, and
heritage. Yang Fenggang (2006) describes these as “gray market” practices, for which
people may not fear sanction. People afﬁliated with Falun Gong know about this too
well: their practice was legal before the state imposed a ban in the summer of 2000
(Palmer 2007).
The established sangha fears this kind of competition from the margins of the
ofﬁcial Buddhist associations, and over the years it has expressed its opposition to
new religious movements that use the name or the symbols of Buddhism, such as
Falun Gong, or the Guanyin 观音Method of Master Qinghai 青海(Irons 2018).
The BAC also fears sources of division within its own ranks, like the ethnic and
linguistic cleavages mentioned above. A primary source of concern is the unrest in
the Tibetan Autonomous Region and in the prefectures where ethnic Tibetans live
(Powers 2016). Moreover, tensions exist even within the Han clergy. Anonymous
sources allege that Jingkong (Chin Kung 净空), a well-known overseas monastic
who claims to speak in the name of the Chinese tradition and has established a large
following abroad and in China, has seen his writings condemned as “pornography”
in 2019 (Wang 2020). Tensions within the BAC also broke out in the open with the
downfall of its President Xuecheng 学诚in 2018, following allegations of sexual
misconduct (Johnson 2018).
The association has looked after the interests of the sangha and lay devotees since
its founding in 1954, often against great odds. Most Buddhist monastics chose not to
move outside China after 1949 and showed loyalty to the new regime (Xue 2009).
That attitude did not serve them well, however: Buddhism went through what
historian Hou Kunhong (2012) described as a stage of “calamity” for three decades.
While full collectivization happened only in the late 1950s (Clarke 2017), the most
zealous CCP cadres had earlier conﬁscated landed property of religious institutions
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
287
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 310 ---
to meet the state objectives of modernization, as documented by Jan Kiely (2016) in
the case of Suzhou. During the Cultural Revolution (1966–76), the BAC faced near
extinction, as much property was destroyed and monastics had to return to lay life,
while lay followers were forced to hide their beliefs (Welch 1969). The pressure on
Buddhists was disproportionately felt among Tibetan and Mongol minorities:
Buddhism represented a key element of their social organization, and they viewed
religious persecution by Red Guards in ethnic terms as an attack by the Han
majority against minority nationalities. These disruptions did not last long, but they
left a legacy of suspicion toward the CCP and the Han that never dissipated among
Tibetans and Mongols (Woeser 2020).
After 1978, with the policy of economic reform and opening which favored
foreign investment and support from overseas Chinese communities, the BAC
began to recover. From 1980 until 2002, Zhao Puchu, a lay Buddhist, served as its
director. Known for his organization of relief for refugees during the war of resist-
ance against Japan, Zhao was one of the key founders of the Chinese Association for
the Promotion of Democracy (CAPD) in 1945, a group that brought together
intellectuals and CCP members (Ji 2017). One of the key themes that Zhao sought
to develop as BAC president was demonstrating that Buddhism was compatible with
socialism, a process that Ji (2004) divided into three stages. First, in the early 1980s,
the BAC promoted the idea of “combining Chan with agricultural work” (nong
chan bingzhong 农禅并重), to ensure that monasteries would be self-reliant.
Second, in the 1990s, as more monasteries reopened, traditional aspects of religious
exchange revived, and lay followers made offerings in return for spiritual beneﬁts, a
practice known as “cultivating the good earth” (zhong futian 种福田) or “making
merit” (zuo gongde 做功德). In the third stage, as many local governments sought to
attract investment from abroad, the BAC emphasized the use of Buddhist cultural
capital for tourism, under the slogan “culture builds the stage and the economy
performs (wenhua datai, jingji changxi 文化搭台，经济唱戏)” (Chang 2016).
The above account of the close relationship between the CCP and the BAC does
not deny that the latter has some agency, as Yoshiko Ashiwa (2009) demonstrated in
her case study of Xiamen Buddhists: clerics, she showed, use existing institutions to
preserve their autonomy. Although the BAC is subordinated to the state apparatus
according to the mechanism described below, it shares with the CCP some con-
cerns about inﬂuence from its competitors. Even if the BAC has become a powerful
institution that can serve the state by rallying its followers behind the CCP – the
essence of United Front work – it can also protect the interests of the Buddhist
sangha against forces that can undermine its authority from within. For these tasks,
lay and monastic Buddhist milieu (fojiaojie 佛教界) relied on many institutions.
Hence, Buddhist academies developed for the training of monastics also served the
social reproduction of the monastic orders (Ji 2019, 171). The householder groves
(jushilin 居士林), where devotees meet for their religious practice and socialization,
played a key role in the life of lay Chinese Buddhists. Destroyed at the time of Mao,
288
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 311 ---
these institutions have since been revived, according to Jessup (2016, 69). Other
revived institutions include vegetarian restaurants, publishing houses, and merit
societies (gongdehui 功德会) that provide relief to people in need. Simply because
these groups can promote moral activism does not mean that lay Buddhists have
built a social movement (Fisher 2017). These developments have all happened in
the context of an unpredictable and potentially repressive legal system.
14.3 CONSTITUTIONAL LAW IN THE PRC: SERVING THE CCP
UNITED FRONT WORK
There is no constitutional law in the PRC that compares to what one observes in the
West or in the liberal democratic societies of East Asia: Japan, South Korea, and
Taiwan (Dowdle 2018). The CCP concept of rule of law, inherited from the
experience of the former Soviet Union, also draws on ancient Chinese ideas of
Legalism (fajia 法家), as distinct from the moral tenets of Confucianism (rujia
儒家). The CCP draws on the Legalist idea that the state ruler is supreme over the
judiciary; this old idea ﬁts nicely with the superimposed practice from the Soviet
Union that assigned to the Communist Party the role of vanguard institution above
the law (Li 2015). Many aspects of social life, including religious beliefs and
practices, are accordingly subjected to the paternalistic guidance of the Party. The
basic political supremacy of the CCP has not changed in any fundamental way,
even with legal reforms in recent decades. Mao had denounced constitutionalism as
a bourgeois invention and deprived the Chinese judiciary of independence.
Although the policy of economic reform and opening by Deng Xiaoping has led
outsiders to believe that the CCP has relinquished totalitarian ambitions, it never
gave up its authority in the realm of religious affairs. If anything, under Xi Jinping,
the CCP regime is moving towards a new phase of control, as it seeks to nullify any
restraining inﬂuence from constitutional law (Delisle 2017; Minzner 2015).
The weakness of constitutional law in China is rooted deep in its history, and the
Buddhist tradition has only marginally inﬂuenced this development (Beydon 2015,
527ff.). Although the status of Buddhism, as a social force and as a religion, has
changed over the course of centuries and imperial dynasties, the dominance of
Confucianism and Legalism in the legal system endured until the end of the Qing
Dynasty (1644–1911), when reformers promoted the introduction of Western norms
of constitutionalism in their project to modernize China (Piquet 2005). These
attempts failed during the Republican era (1911–49) as the country was divided
politically between different warring factions and suffering from the Japanese inva-
sion; no central government had the will or the capacity to reform the legal system.
Moreover, neither the concept of the rule of law derived from the Germanic–
Roman legal code nor Common Law judicial thought managed to leave a good
impression among Chinese patriots. Introduced in the treaty ports during the Qing
Dynasty, Western legal forms were associated with the unequal treaties that
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
289
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 312 ---
protected the Western and Japanese privileges of extraterritoriality (Scully 2000). It
was only near the end of the Civil War, in 1947, that the Nationalist Party
(Kuomintang 國民黨, or KMT) promulgated a constitution for the Republic of
China (ROC). This green shoot of constitutionalism vanished from China after
1949 when the CCP took control and would be suspended for thirty-eight years
in Taiwan, where the KMT relocated the ROC government. In the absence of
constitutional law, the unfettered power of the state can impose its will on society.
In the PRC, however, the state itself serves as an instrument for the CCP, an
organization that sees itself as the vanguard of society, guiding all social forces,
including religions.
Although internal reforms have erased some of the most extreme language used at
the time of Mao, its charter still asserts that the CCP stands above the legal system
enforced by the government (Holbig 2018). China’s system differs starkly from the
legal regimes prevalent in Western societies and most other societies where the rule
of law prevails: the state is not an impartial arbiter between different political
factions, but an instrument in the service of the political line determined by the
CCP. This conception of the law, implemented in the Soviet Union and other
Leninist regimes (as well as by the fascist regimes in Italy and Nazi Germany), found
acceptance in the CCP because it resonated with some of the characteristics of
China’s own legal system that had remained in place after the fall of the ancien
régime in 1911: most importantly, the idea of a strong state led by a vanguard elite
(Zheng 2015). The CCP United Front represents a key instrument in that renewed
assertiveness, both domestically and on the international stage.
Once the CCP gained power in 1949, it formalized the United Front with the
creation of the Chinese People Political Consultative Conference. That deliberative
assembly included representatives of “people’s organizations” from a wide variety of
sectors: broad categories of the population such as youth, women, and returned
overseas Chinese; economic groups such as chambers of commerce, trade unions,
and a variety of other associations, federations, and foundations representing differ-
ent corporations and guilds (Sagild and Ahlers 2019). Our focus is on the religious
component of the broader United Front. Although they remained committed to the
view that religion would whither under socialism, CCP leaders initially avoided
precipitous actions against religious believers during campaigns against “sects” and
foreign missionaries, lest they oppose the new regime. To that end the CCP United
Front sought to nurture “patriotic” religious leaders who were supportive of socialist
ideals, and relied on them to ensure that they would obtain compliance with
government directives from their followers (Wickeri 2011). The Religious Affairs
Bureau – which would later become SARA – and the BAC emerged in that context
in 1954. That period of relative openness did not last long.
The failing attempt in 1954 at establishing constitutional law became increasingly
apparent between 1956 and 1976. Meanwhile the United Front went into what
Gerry Groot (2004) called its phase of “hibernation.” Religious associations had by
290
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 313 ---
then become targets of attacks by young “red guards,” and even after the peak years
of the Cultural Revolution began to subside in 1969, the radical factions of the
“Gang of Four” maintained their restrictions on religion. The period covered by
these political vicissitudes may appear short, but the damage to a generation has
proven enduring and long-lasting. The aging monastic leaders who had survived the
political persecution found few successors, and it would take years before the BAC
recovered lost ground. The political struggle initiated by Mao Zedong had led to the
abolition of the 1954 Constitution and its replacement by the 1975 Constitution,
which instituted the principle of the CCP as the paramount source of power.
Although that document did not last more than three years, the 1978 Constitution,
which brought back some of the elements of the more lenient 1954 Constitution,
such as checks on executive power and guarantees for religious beliefs, maintained
the principle that citizens must support CCP leadership and the socialist system.
After Deng took charge as paramount leader of the CCP, the new leadership
revived the United Front and expanded the scope of its activities to include Taiwan,
Hong Kong, and overseas Chinese communities. In 1982, the CCP enunciated
“The basic viewpoint on the religious question during our country’s socialist
period,” known as Document 19. This political statement spelled out the limits in
which religious freedom can be exercised (Potter 2003). The SARA resumed its
duties as monitoring agency for all religious activities and the BAC reestablished
itself as a key component of the apparatus of state control for Buddhism, albeit in a
subordinate position. Under Deng’s successor, Jiang Zemin, the priority of the
government was to deepen the policy of reform and opening. The CCP United
Front, however, focused more openly on Taiwan, and it encouraged religious
exchanges, along with trade, business, and tourism, to serve the goal of “re-uniﬁca-
tion.” This approach included the pilgrimage to the goddess Matsu, but also the
humanitarian work of Taiwanese Buddhist associations across the Taiwan Strait.
The strategy also included an effort to support the rebuilding of Buddhist temples.
These efforts paid off, as Buddhist leaders rallied behind the regime in denouncing
Falun Gong in 1999 (Tong 2009). During the administration of Hu Jintao, the
situation in Tibet became a major target of attention for the CCP United Front.
Near the end of Hu’s tenure as CCP secretary-general in 2012, the United Front
encouraged the development of charity by religious organizations to serve the public
interest (cishan gongyi shiye 慈善公益事业), a policy which the BAC endorsed
enthusiastically.
Under the instruction of the CCP Secretary-General Xi, the United Front again
changed its approach vis-à-vis religion after 2014, when Xi expressed his wish to see
Chinese religions becoming more “Chinese,” a goal that has left many people
perplexed, since all the ﬁve recognized religions in China have been going
through a process of acculturation for centuries (Cook 2017). A speech in
2016 clariﬁed further the meaning of this “Sinicization” (zhongguohua 中国化):
religion must serve the interests of the state and the value of the CCP (Vermander
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
291
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 314 ---
2019). In 2018, the CCP passed new regulations that implemented these ideas, with
the incorporation of SARA under the umbrella of the CCP United Front (Joske
2019). These policies reveal the wish of the party to monitor religious affairs more
closely than ever before. Two aspects of this policy stand out. Firstly, the CCP
reverted to a policy which was more hostile to religion in general, and seemed to
target, in particular, Christians and Muslims. Secondly, the CCP redeﬁned reli-
gions such as Buddhism and Daoism as “culture,” promoting them at the expense
of the others.
The new reorganization of the CCP United Front deepens some of the trends
observed under the administration of Hu. When Xi took power, SARA was divided
into four bureaus, one for Buddhist and Daoist affairs; one for Christians; another for
Muslims; and one for all the other types of religions inside or outside China about
which the regime wanted to know. The incorporation of SARA’s four branches into
the United Front suggests greater integration and coordination with its other key
missions: communication with like-minded people in Hong Kong, Macau, and
Taiwan (Third Bureau), and liaison with people among overseas Chinese (Ninth
and Tenth Bureaus). Recent efforts by the CCP United Front to promote its
interests on the international stage via the promotion of the BAC has added a layer
of complexity to the issue of Buddhist institutions and constitutional law throughout
contemporary societies. In the framework of its strategy of “soft power” to support the
project of “One Belt One Road,” the CCP has promoted the transnational expan-
sion of Chinese temples and sponsored the organization of international Buddhist
meetings that serve to establish the presence of the BAC on the global stage
(Raymond 2020). The next section looks at the achievements of the CCP in making
Chinese Buddhism more visible.
14.4 FROM THE WORLD FELLOWSHIP OF BUDDHISTS TO THE
WORLD BUDDHIST FORUM
The BAC stood little chance of being admitted into international Buddhist associ-
ations after its founding in 1954 and has faced difﬁculty for half a century. This
exclusion rested on three rationales reinforcing each other: the context of the Cold
War (1954–91); the inﬂuence of the BAROC (Buddhist Association of the Republic
of China) in Buddhist international associations (Jones 1999); and the CCP’s
continued insistence on rejecting the legitimacy of the Dalai Lama. During the
Cold War, as recent evidence conﬁrms, the US diplomacy service sought to enlist
Southeast Asian Buddhists to support its policies against the PRC (Ford 2017). In
contrast to the PRC’s admission to the United Nations (UN) in 1971, the BAC had to
wait another three decades before achieving the same feat in the major international
Buddhist associations. The difﬁculties experienced by the BAC within the PRC
through the end of the 1970s, which undermined its credibility to represent Chinese
Buddhism, may explain this delayed admission.
292
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 315 ---
Another causal factor behind the late recognition of the BAC may lie with the
nature of the two most important international Buddhist organizations: the World
Fellowship of Buddhists (WFB 2021a) and the World Buddhist Sangha Council
(WBSC 2021). Although both advertise their activities, there is little academic study
in the English language about their activities (Schedneck 2016). The WFB included
mostly representatives of the Therava¯da tradition, practiced by a minuscule minority
in the PRC. And while the WBSC leadership includes a greater proportion of the
Maha¯ya¯na clergy than the WFB, a disproportionate number of them were based in
Taiwan. As the latter endured a regime of martial law from 1949 to 1987 which
limited freedom of expression, the independence of the BAROC from the govern-
ment in Taipei may seem theoretical. However, as Jones (1996) showed, the
BAROC clergy had agency and could defend the interests of Buddhists in
Taiwan. Moreover, it had its own reasons to support the authoritarian regime in
Taiwan: it shared with the KMT a hostility to the CCP regime and did not fear
religious persecution under the culturally conservative Chiang Kai-shek. These
facts, in their view, only added credibility to the BAROC claim of representing
Chinese Buddhism in Taiwan.
The WFB, founded in 1950 in Colombo, relocated its permanent headquarters to
Bangkok in 1969. Although based in the Therava¯da world, since 1986, countries
where the Maha¯ya¯na tradition prevails have hosted most of its conferences (WFB
2021b). The BAC tried unsuccessfully to gain admission and asked for the ﬁrst WFB
conferences to exclude the delegation from Taiwan (Abbott 1966). The exclusion of
the BAC from the WFB until then mirrored the exclusion of the PRC from the UN
until 1971. The BAROC gained legitimacy in representing Chinese Buddhism when
the BAC stopped activities in China from 1966 to 1978, but that position appeared
vulnerable and open to challenge with the reform and opening policy that followed.
The WBSC, also established in 1966 in Colombo and relocated in Taipei in 1981,
stood out as primarily an association of monastics and their organizations. It worked
to harmonize the three traditions of Maha¯ya¯na, Therava¯da, and Vajraya¯na, and
includes representatives from all traditions; its leadership counts a larger proportion
of Taiwanese than the WFB, and its third, ﬁfth, and seventh conferences were held
in Taipei.
The admission of the PRC to the UN and the extension of diplomatic recognition
by the US in 1979 did not lead to an improvement in the BAC situation within the
international Buddhist organizations. More research needs to be done to fully
understand why national Buddhist associations waited so long before agreeing to
extend an invitation to the BAC to join them in international Buddhist organiza-
tions. The process took years, if not decades, after most of their governments
extended recognition to the PRC. The opposition of the BAROC alone – although
understandable – does not sufﬁce to explain this delay. Certainly, the BAROC
played a disproportionate role in the WBSC, but not in the WFB. The BAC’s
staunch opposition to the spiritual authority of the Dalai Lama, who is much
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
293
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 316 ---
respected by his peers, has certainly complicated relations between Buddhists from
the PRC and their counterparts abroad, at least until 2008 (Repp 2008). However,
that motive does not sufﬁce.
When Deng Xiaoping sought to open China to foreign investors, the revival of
Christian institutions such as the YMCA and the Amity Press mattered more to the
CCP than supporting Buddhist institutions because of the connections of Christian
institutions to their counterparts in North America (Carino 2016). Showing good
will toward religions sent a message that China was now open to international
cooperation. That approach toward religion also affected Buddhism, although it
was limited mostly to Japan and South Korea. This changed with the sixteenth WFB
conference held in 1988. That event was remarkable for two reasons. Convened in
Los Angeles, this was the ﬁrst such conference held outside of Asia. Under the
sponsorship of the Hsi Lai (literally “Coming to the West”) Temple, it resulted from
the initiative of Hsing Yun, a Chinese monastic who had established in Southern
Taiwan a major monastic order, the Buddha Light Mountain (Foguangshan)
(Chandler 2004). This mattered to the BAC because Hsing Yun has never hidden
his wish to promote Chinese Buddhism on the international stage. Moreover,
although he did not express sympathy for the CCP, he shared with the latter an
opposition to Taiwanese demands for self-determination.
The eighteenth general conference, held in 1992, took place in Kaohsiung, in
Taiwan, also under the cosponsorship of Foguangshan. In the same year, another
event occurred that went unnoticed outside of Taiwan, but with signiﬁcance to
relations with China and the future of Buddhism in that country. The Tzu Chi
Foundation, the largest philanthropical organization in Taiwan, received from the
CCP the authorization to deliver relief to victims of ﬂooding in eastern China that
year, and to contribute to the rehabilitation of villages. This case of relative
openness represented an example of CCP United Front work directed at the
Taiwanese, promoting the idea of “reuniﬁcation” with China (Laliberté 2003).
Despite these cases of rapprochement between Chinese and Taiwanese Buddhists,
the exclusion of the BAC from the WFB remained in place. As the WFB
organized its events without it, the BAC sought to work around its exclusion from
Buddhist international associations by creating its own international institution,
the World Buddhist Forum (WBF), with an international conference held every
three years (Ramachandran 2019).
In 2006, the Religious Culture Communication Association of China, a CCP
United Front organization, worked with the Hong Kong Buddhist Association, and
two prominent Buddhist leaders in Taiwan, Hsing Yun and Wei Chueh, to set up
the ﬁrst WBF in the province of Zhejiang, the ﬁrst religious event of its kind since
the establishment of the PRC (Zongwen 2006). The second WBF, held three years
later in both China and Taiwan, promoted a CCP priority: the “re-uniﬁcation”
between China and Taiwan at a time when the political climate in Taipei seemed to
294
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 317 ---
favor that possibility. However, the United Front work achieved mixed results, as
Taiwanese Buddhists preferred to leverage their own networks to serve broader
interests outside the PRC (Brown and Cheng 2012). Held in 2012, the third WBF
showcased the eleventh Panchen Lama, promoting the CCP preference for the
spiritual leadership of Tibetan Buddhism. Held in Hong Kong, that conference
suffered from the same limitation as the previous ones: it was a China-centric event,
with limited international participation that went unnoticed outside the Sinosphere
(Xinhua 2012). Even as the United Front has shifted again to a new strategy directed
at other genuinely international Buddhist associations, the global landscape of
Buddhism has become more complicated: in addition to the WFB and WBSC, a
new
association
has
emerged
in
New
Delhi,
the
International
Buddhist
Confederation (IBC 2021).
The IBC, which began in 2010, resulted from the initiative of an Indian monastic,
Lama Lobsang. Convening for the ﬁrst time in 2013, the IBC could not beneﬁt from
the Indian government’s patronage, because of the Indian state’s constitutional (if
not actual) commitment to secularism. However, with the arrival into power of the
Bharatiya Janata Party in 2014, its leader, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, adopted a
strategy that mirrors the United Front’s, promoting events such as the IBC meetings
on Indian soil, as examples of Indian “soft power” projection in the international
arena (Ranade 2017). For the CCP, the IBC represented the same problem as the
WSBC: its governing structure included monastics from associations that were
politically close to governments whose relations with China were difﬁcult.
Moreover, the participation of the Dalai Lama made the participation of any
member of the BAC problematic. In the same year, however, the United Front
efforts to ensure the BAC joins the WFB ﬁnally bore fruit: not only was the BAC
admitted into the WFB, but the latter met for the ﬁrst time in the PRC (Ma &
Liang 2014).
When the fourth WBF convened again in Wuxi in 2015, it had lost one of its main
raisons d’être because the situation in Taiwan the year before had taken a turn less
favorable to the CCP, following popular rejection of a cross-strait service trade
agreement between Taiwan and China submitted by the KMT (Ho 2019). When
the WBF convened for the ﬁfth time in Putian, Fujian, three years later, it experi-
enced a conﬁrmation of these setbacks (Xinhua 2018). The Taiwanese general
election held in 2016 had brought to power Tsai Ying-wen and delivered most of
the seats in the legislature to the party led by her, the Democratic Progressive Party,
whose policy opposes PRC rule over Taiwan. The WBF promoters have not issued
any announcement about a sixth meeting in 2021; it is unclear if this is because the
CCP has realized that the organization has lost its purpose, or because of the Covid-
19 pandemic. Likewise, the other major venue through which the PRC could
perform its “religious diplomacy,” the WFB, did not meet in 2020, and had no
plans to meet in 2021.
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
295
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 318 ---
14.5 INTERPRETING THE SIGNIFICANCE FOR BUDDHISTS
WORLDWIDE OF THE BAC “GOING OUT OF CHINA”
Why would the CCP choose to rely on Buddhism for its “soft power”? The CCP
recognizes the growing relevance of religion in global affairs – not necessarily in
China itself, but abroad. In the current nationalist turn of the Chinese government,
Christianity – whether Protestant or Catholic – has no appeal for the regime: the
evidence of its presence in China evokes the “century of humiliation.” Moreover,
many Chinese political dissidents have over the years converted to Christianity and
attracted the sympathy of foreign governments (Wright and Zimmerman-Liu 2015).
Islam presents the regime with a thorny dilemma: on the one hand, the supply to
China of energy from Muslim-majority countries may lead one to believe that the
CCP would seek to cultivate the goodwill of Islamic countries by promoting an
image of good relations with Islamic minorities within the country. On the other
hand, the security concerns of the regime, whether they are real or manufactured (as
a justiﬁcation ex post facto for its policies targeting the Muslim minorities, mostly
Uyghurs and Kazakhs) appear to trump the wish to cultivate good relations with
Islamic regimes. Daoism is a less valuable asset than Buddhism for a different
reason: apart from ethnic Chinese minorities living overseas, few people outside
China practice that religion.
When the CCP acknowledges the international inﬂuence of Buddhism, it can
harness the importance of that religion in neighboring countries, as seen above, as
well as its popularity for many other people living outside Asia. These include not
only those with Chinese heritage, but also others disenchanted with their own
religious tradition who are seeking answers in their search for meaning (Scott
2016). Moreover, from the perspective of the CCP leaders who have a more
nationalist orientation, the authorities can evoke important precedents in
Chinese history, for example when Buddhism constituted a crucial element of
governance during the two “foreign dynasties.” In those periods, the Mongol rulers
of the Yuan Dynasty (1279–1368) and the Manchu rulers of the Qing Dynasty, who
had maintained good relations with Buddhist clerics, incorporated into one realm
the people of Central Asia alongside the Chinese. Although the patronage of
Buddhist monastic hierarchies under the Yuan and the Qing favored Tibetan
and Mongol Buddhists and not the Han Chinese hierarchies, the present regime
nevertheless relies on these historical precedents to reinforce its legitimacy in
international fora.
For three decades after 1949, the multi-denominational composition of the BAC
leadership structure suggests that the CCP recognized the legacy bequeathed to the
Republican regime by the imperial regime. Under Mao and his successor Deng, a
sizable proportion of the leaders of the BAC were still representing the Tibetan
tradition. Under the two more recent administrations of Jiang and Hu, however, the
BAC has moved away from that, with the voices of Tibetan Buddhism within its
296
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 319 ---
leadership structure increasingly drowned out by those of the Han tradition. To what
extent this reﬂects the tense relations between the Han central government and the
restive Tibetan minority in the Greater Tibetan area is not clear. There could also
be another rationale: Maha¯ya¯na Buddhist leaders have worked hard since 1995 to
improve relations between China, Japan, and South Korea (Zhang 2012, 28; Yang
and Cheng 2010).
In more recent years, many in the CCP would certainly welcome a “softening” of
PRC diplomacy at a time when “warrior diplomacy” has put off many governments
and people around the world (Martin 2021). However, a few obstacles stand in the
way of this strategy of “soft power” through Buddhist diplomacy. In Western societies
particularly, most people know little about the Chinese Buddhist tradition, but
many are already familiar with the leaders of the Tibetan, Japanese, or even
Therava¯da traditions. Many in the West who already associate the Buddhist tradition
with a message of peace and non-violence attribute those qualities to the Dalai
Lama, and they have not failed to notice that the CCP has targeted him for decades.
The strategy of the CCP on this matter has backﬁred. Unless the CCP ceases the
rhetoric that demonizes the Tibetan leader in exile and unless the BAC demon-
strates a sincere attempt to enter into dialogue with him, it will be difﬁcult to
convince outsiders in the West of its goodwill.
The United Front reliance on the BAC also faces some serious limitations in
Asian countries, on several grounds. A major obstacle to overcome is the tarnishing
of Buddhism by the violent actions of extremist leaders such as Ashin Wirathu in
Burma and movements such as the Bodu Bala Sēna¯ in Sri Lanka (Keyes 2016; Reny
2020), that claim to defend their religion against its enemies. These movements have
little to do with the CCP, but they matter to its United Front strategy with the BAC,
as it targets societies where most of the population is Buddhist. These movements
horrify democratic societies, and engagement with them may cancel out the effect-
iveness of any projection of soft power by the PRC via the BAC on the global stage.
One way to preempt such an outcome would be to take a principled stand and
publicly speak out against extremist violence. However, the BAC abides by the CCP
principle of non-interference in other countries’ domestic affairs and has so far
kept quiet.
Of course, the political leanings of Buddhists in Southeast Asia are diverse.
Without denying there are hyper-nationalist movements, pro-democratic and non-
violent groups have arisen in the region, which are associated informally in what
scholars have deﬁned as engaged Buddhism (Sivaraksa 2005; Queen and King 1996).
New groups of Buddhist democratic activists, such as the All-Burma Monks’
Alliance founded by U Nat Zaw have also emerged (Lehr 2019). As targets of
authoritarian regimes themselves, these Buddhists are not likely to support the
BAC because of its close relationship with a regime that is an accomplice to their
tormentors. Although the differences between the schools are not sources of conﬂict
in the way sectarian differences can be between Christian denominations and the
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
297
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 320 ---
Sunni and Shi’a branches of Islam, it is not clear how Buddhists in Therava¯da
countries view China, considering the minority and marginal status of Therava¯da in
China (Yang 2017).
The CCP United Front must also overcome formidable obstacles in societies
where most Buddhists identify with the Maha¯ya¯na tradition in East Asia. As religious
minorities in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan, Buddhists in these three countries
are unlikely to sway most of the population to their side. Moreover, reﬂective of the
political pluralism that prevails there, no government-licensed corporation holds a
monopoly on the representation of Buddhists, which means that there is competi-
tion between Buddhist leaders and their followers (Watts 2004; Nathan 2017;
Laliberté 2004). In other words, even if the BAC were successful in swaying a
national Buddhist association’s leadership to espouse the policies of the CCP, its
rank-and-ﬁle members may not follow suit. For instance, although the monastic
Hsing Yun, founder of the popular Taiwan-based Buddha Light International
Association promotes the improvement of relations with China, aligning him with
some high-ranking members of the KMT and allied political parties, many lay
Buddhists in the same association do not agree with the views of their leaders on
matters of politics.
If the CCP were to succeed in overcoming these obstacles and bringing into a
United Front the BAC and other national Buddhist associations in countries with
Buddhist majorities to inﬂuence their respective governments, the international
community would face a serious conundrum. Such a convergence could reinforce
trends already unfolding in most of Southeast Asia, where authoritarian governments
either support the PRC as a fellow authoritarian regime or depend on its promise of
developmental support (Soong 2018). As demonstrated by the deafening silence of
many authoritarian governments in Muslim-majority countries over the genocide
committed in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (Kelemen and Turcsányi
2020), we should not be surprised if the authoritarian governments of countries
where most people identify as Buddhists support the PRC policy against the Dalai
Lama. Buddhist actors who seek to shape, interpret, and reformulate constitutional
law in their respective countries based on their spiritual tradition will have to keep in
mind that the international organizations that represent them face the prospect of
being inﬂuenced by a fellow Buddhist association, one that cannot come close to
achieving that in its own country.
There is even a risk that Buddhists in Southeast Asia who want cooperation with
their Chinese counterparts may have to fulﬁll some conditions. One telling
example, taken from Buddhists in Canada, gives us a sense of what is in store.
Even though Canada is a country where the rule of law prevails and Buddhists can
express their views without fear of retribution, key actors in that milieu have shown
remarkable deference to the CCP United Front perspective that “there is one China
in the world” and that “Taiwan is part of China.” Hence, the online directory of
298
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 321 ---
the Canadian Buddhist associations, which numbers over 450 associations and
groups them by national origins, ranks branches of Taiwanese associations in
Canadian cities as Chinese, mirroring the practice that the PRC is imposing on
governments, international organizations, private corporations, and even civil soci-
ety organizations (Sumeru n.d.). If Canadian Buddhists fear upsetting the CCP
United Front on a matter such as the sovereignty of Taiwan, there is little reason to
believe that Buddhists in countries more dependent on China’s largesse will be
more assertive in the afﬁrmation of their own views.
14.6 CONCLUSION
What are the implications of the above for constitutional law? Different Buddhist
traditions have shaped and inﬂuenced the legal systems of the countries in which
they have evolved but China stands out from its neighbors in that respect: although
Buddhism represents a vital element of its religious tradition, philosophy, and
culture writ large, it has left no important trace on its legal system, let alone its
constitutional law. Constitutionalism – or more speciﬁcally the idea of an independ-
ent judiciary – has been declared one of the seven forbidden topics that Chinese
academics should not address, following orders issued by the General Ofﬁce of the
CCP Central Committee to institutes of higher education in 2013 (the others are
universal values, press freedom, civil society, civic rights, historical mistakes by the
CCP, and elite cronyism). Since the establishment of the PRC, Buddhist elites have
failed to leave a mark on the evolution of constitutionalism, leaving the ﬁeld open to
“rights protection lawyers” (weiquan lushi 维权律师) and other legal activists –
many of whom, such as Gao Zhisheng 高智晟, are Christians (Xi 2013). The
promotion by the CCP of Buddhism in a variety of international associations does
not mean a new-found appreciation for religion, but a return to a purely instrumen-
talist strategy of using a United Front work to convince Buddhists in Southeast Asia
that they share the same ideals as the CCP for harmonious coexistence, peace, and
development. Human rights and self-determination are improper topics in that kind
of “dialogue.” In democratic and open societies like Japan, South Korea, and
Taiwan, the public can see through the ulterior motives behind the projection of
“sharp power” by the Chinese state. On the other hand, the non-democratic regimes
in Thailand, Burma, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, and Laos, prone to soliciting the
acquiescence, if not the legitimation, provided by Buddhist monastic orders in their
own countries, may welcome this source of support from a Buddhist association
sponsored by a fellow authoritarian state. Buddhist actors who seek to shape,
interpret, and reformulate constitutional law in their respective countries will have
to come to terms with the reality of a fellow Buddhist association that may wield
considerable inﬂuence abroad if its sponsors support it, but little capacity to push
back at home if it wants to express dissent.
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
299
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 322 ---
references
Abbott, Arthur. 1966. “World Buddhists Under Pressure.” World Affairs 129 (2) (July, August,
September 1966): 101–8.
Ashiwa Yoshiko. 2009. “Positioning Religion in Modernity: State and Buddhism in China.” In
Making Religion, Making the State: The Politics of Religion in Modern China, edited by
Ashiwa Yoshiko and David Wank, 43–73. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Ashiwa Yoshiko and Wank, David. 2020. “The Chinese State’s Global Promotion of
Buddhism.” Geopolitics of Religious Soft Power, Policy Brief 4 (November 11).
Washington, DC: Georgetown University’s Berkley Center for Religion, Peace &
World Affairs and Brookings Institution.
Beydon, Olivier. 2015. Introduction à la pensée juridique chinoise. Bruxelles: Larcier.
Borchert, Thomas A. 2017. Educating Monks: Minority Buddhism on China’s Southwest
Border. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Brady, Anne-Marie. 2019. “On the Correct Use of Terms for Understanding ‘United Front
Work.’” China Brief 9 (9): 1–5.
Brown, Deborah A., and Cheng Tun-jen. 2012. “Religious Relations across the Taiwan Strait:
Patterns, Alignments, and Political Effects.” Orbis 56 (1): 60–81.
Carino, Theresa. 2016. “Faith-based Organisations Between Service Delivery and Social
Change in Contemporary China: The Experience of Amity Foundation.” HTS
Theological Studies 72 (4): 1–10.
Carrithers, Michael. 2000. “On Polytropy: Or the Natural Condition of Spiritual
Cosmopolitanism in India: The Digambar Jain Case.” Modern Asian Studies 34 (4)
(Oct.): 831–61.
Chandler, Stuart. 2004. Establishing a Pure Land on Earth: The Foguang Buddhist Perspective
on Modernization and Globalization. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.
Chang Kuei-min. 2016. Spiritual State, Material Temple: The Political Economy of Religious
Revival in China. PhD dissertation, Columbia University.
Charleux, Isabelle. 2017. “Chinese, Tibetan and Mongol Buddhists on Mount Wutai (China)
from the Eighteenth to the Twenty-ﬁrst Century.” In Pilgrimage and Ambiguity: Sharing
the Sacred, edited by Thierry Zarcone, Pedram Khosronejad and Angela Hobart, 87–118.
Herefordshire: Sean Kingston Publishing.
Clarke, Donald. 2017. “Has China Restored Private Land Ownership? The Implications of
Beijing’s New Policy.” Foreign Affairs, May 16. www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/
2017-05-16/has-china-restored-private-land-ownership
Cook, Sarah. 2017. The Battle for China’s Spirit: Religious Revival, Repression, and Resistance
under Xi Jinping. Lanham: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Delisle, Jacques. 2017. “Law in the China Model 2.0: Legality, Developmentalism and
Leninism under Xi Jinping.” Journal of Contemporary China 26 (103): 68–84.
Dowdle, Michael W. 2018. “Infrastructural Power and Its Possibilities for the Constitutional
Evolution of Authoritarian Political Systems: Lessons from China.” In Authoritarian
Constitutionalism: Comparative Analysis and Critique, edited by Helena Alviar García
and Günter Frankenberg, 76–94. Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Fisher, Gareth. 2017. “Lay Buddhists and Moral Activism in Contemporary China.” Review of
Religion and Chinese Society 4 (2): 247–70.
Ford, Eugene. 2017. Cold War Monks: Buddhism and America’s Secret Strategy in Southeast
Asia. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Groot, Gerry. 2004. Managing Transitions: The Chinese Communist Party, United Front
Work, Corporatism and Hegemony. New York: Routledge.
300
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 323 ---
Ho Ming-shi. 2019. Challenging Beijing’s Mandate of Heaven: Taiwan’s Sunﬂower Movement
and Hong Kong’s Umbrella Movement. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Holbig,
Heike.
2018.
“China
After
Reform:
The
Ideological,
Constitutional,
and
Organisational Makings of a New Era.” Journal of Current Chinese Affairs 47 (3):
187–207.
Hou Kunhong 侯坤宏. 2012. Haojie yu chongsheng: yijiusijiu nian yilaide dalu fojiao 浩劫与
重生：一九四九年以来的大陆佛教. Tainan: Miaoxin 妙心.
IBC (International Buddhist Confederation). 2021. “International Buddhist Confederation.”
Accessed June 3, 2021. www.ibcworld.org/
Irons, Edward A. 2018. “On sects in China.” The Journal of CESNUR 2 (1) (January–
February): 33–57.
Jessup, Brooke. 2016. “Buddhist Activism, Urban Space, and Ambivalent Modernity in 1920s
Shanghai.” In Recovering Buddhism in Modern China, edited by Jan Kiely and J. Brook
Jessup, 37–78. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ji Zhe. 2004. “Buddhism and the State: The New Relationship.” China Perspectives,
55 (September–October 2004). Accessed May 31, 2021. http://journals.openedition.org/
chinaperspectives/408
2017. “Comrade Zhao Puchu: Bodhisattva under the Red Flag.” In Making Saints in
Modern China, edited by David Ownby, Vincent Goossaert and Ji Zhe, 312–46. New
York: Oxford University Press.
2019. “Schooling Dharma Teachers: The Buddhist Academy System and Sangha
Education.” In Buddhism after Mao: Negotiations, Continuities, and Reinventions,
edited by Ji Zhe, Gareth Fisher and André Laliberté, 171–209. University of Hawaiʻi
Press.
Johnson, Ian. 2018. “#MeToo in the Monastery: A Chinese Abbot’s Fall Stirs Questions on
Buddhism’s Path.” New York Times, September 15. Accessed May 31, 2021. www.nytimes
.com/2018/09/15/world/asia/metoo-china-monastery.html
Jones, Charles B. 1996. “Relations Between the Nationalist Government and the Buddhist
Association of the Republic of China (BAROC) since 1945.” Journal of Chinese
Religions, 24 (1): 77–99.
1999. Buddhism in Taiwan: Religion and the State, 1660–1990. Honolulu: Hawaiʻi
University Press.
Joske, Alex. 2019. “Reorganizing the United Front Work Department: New Structures for a
New Era of Diaspora and Religious Affairs Work.” China Brief 19 (9): 6–14.
Kelemen, Barbara and Turcsányi, Richard Q. 2020. “It’s the Politics, Stupid: China’s
Relations with Muslim Countries on the Background of Xinjiang Crackdown.” Asian
Ethnicity 21 (2): 223–43.
Keyes, Charles. 2016. “Therava¯da Buddhism and Buddhist Nationalism: Sri Lanka, Myanmar,
Cambodia, and Thailand.” The Review of Faith and International Affairs, 14 (4): 41–52.
Kiely, Jan. 2016. “The Communist Dismantling of Temple and Monastic Buddhism in
Suzhou.” In Recovering Buddhism in Modern China, edited by Jan Kiely and J. Brooks
Jessup, 216–53. New York: Columbia University Press.
Laliberté, André. 2003. “‘Love Transcends Borders’ or ‘Blood is Thicker than Water’? The
Charity Work of the Compassion Relief Foundation in the People’s Republic of China.”
European Journal of East Asian Studies 2 (2): 243–61.
2004. The Politics of Buddhist Organizations in Taiwan, 1989–2003: Safeguarding the Faith,
Building a Pure Land, Helping the Poor. London: Routledge.
Lehr, Peter. 2019. Militant Buddhism: The Rise of Religious Violence in Sri Lanka, Myanmar
and Thailand. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
301
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 324 ---
Li Ling. 2015. “Chinese Characteristics of the ‘Socialist Rule of Law’: Will the Fourth Plenum
Cure the Problems of the Chinese Judicial System?” Asia Policy 20 (July): 17–22.
Ma Xiaojun and Liang Jun. 2014. “27th General Conference of the World Fellowship of
Buddhists Kicks Off in Famen Temple in Baoji.” People’s Daily, October 24. Accessed
July 16, 2022. http://en.people.cn/n/2014/1024/c204459-8799435.html
Martin, Peter. 2021. China’s Civilian Army: The Making of Wolf Warrior Diplomacy. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Minzner, Carl. 2015. “Legal Reform in the Xi Jinping Era.” Asia Policy 20 (July): 4–9.
Nathan, Mark A. 2017. “Contemporary Korean Buddhist Traditions.” In The Oxford
Handbook of Contemporary Buddhism, edited by Michael Jerryson, 100–21. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Palmer, David. 2007. Qigong Fever: Body, Science, and Utopia in China. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Pew-Templeton (Global Religious Futures Project). 2016. “Countries Proﬁles: Thailand.”
Religion
and
Public
Life
Project.
Washington:
Pew
Research
Center.
www
.globalreligiousfutures.org/countries/thailand#/?afﬁliations_religion_id=0&afﬁliations_
year=2020&region_name=All%20Countries&restrictions_year=2016. Accessed July 16,
2022.
Piquet, Hélène. 2005. La Chine au carrefour des traditions juridiques. Bruxelles: Bruylant.
Potter, Pittman. 2003. “Belief in Control: Regulation of Religion in China.” The China
Quarterly 174: 317–37.
Powers, John, 2016. The Buddha Party: How the People’s Republic of China Works to Deﬁne
and Control Tibetan Buddhism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Queen, Christopher S. and King, Sallie, eds. 1996. Engaged Buddhism: Buddhist Liberation
Movements in Asia. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Ramachandran, Sudha. 2019. “Rivalries and Relics: Examining China’s Buddhist Public
Diplomacy.” China Brief 19 (5): 15–20.
Ranade, Jayadeva. 2017. “Buddhism: A New Frontier in the China–India Rivalry.” Carnegie
India 17. Washington: Carnegie Endowment of International Peace.
Raymond, Gregory V. 2020. “Religion as a Tool of Inﬂuence: Buddhism and China’s Belt and
Road Initiative in Mainland Southeast Asia.” Contemporary Southeast Asia 42 (3):
346–71.
Reny, Marie-Eve. 2020. “Myanmar’s Transition and the Resurgence of Buddhist Nationalism:
How Incumbents Seek to Hold on to Power.” Asian Survey 60 (6): 1072–89.
Repp, Martin. 2008. “HH The 14th Dalai Lama and Japanese Buddhists: An Account and
Analysis of Complicated Interactions.” Japanese Religions 33: 103–26.
Sagild, Rebekka Åsnes and Ahlers, Anna Lisa. 2019. “Honorary Intermediaries? The Chinese
People’s Political Consultative Conferences in Theory and Practice.” China Perspectives
(2): 9–16.
Sasas, Roger. 2020. “Monastic Intimacies: An Anthropology of Good and Bad Buddhism
Among the Tai Lue of Sipsong Panna (P.R. China).” Journal of Global Buddhism 21:
153–69.
Schedneck, Brooke. 2016. “Buddhist International Organizations.” In The Oxford Handbook
of Contemporary Buddhism, 398–416. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scott, David. 2016. “Buddhism in Current China–India Diplomacy.” Journal of Current
Chinese Affairs 45 (3): 139–74.
Scully, Eileen P. 2000. “Historical Wrongs and Human Rights in Sino-Foreign Relations:
The Legacy of Extraterritoriality.” Journal of American–East Asian Relations 9 (1–2):
129–46.
302
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 325 ---
Sivaraksa, Sulak. 2005. Conﬂict, Culture, Change: Engaged Buddhism in a Globalizing
World. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Soong Jenn-Jaw. 2018. “China’s One Belt and One Road Initiative Meets ASEAN Economic
Community: Propelling and Deepening Regional Economic Integration?” The Chinese
Economy 51 (4): 291–97.
Sumeru. n.d. “The Sumeru Guide to Canadian Buddhism.” Ottawa: Sumeru Press. Accessed
May 31, 2021. www.directory.sumeru-books.com/tag/chinese/
Tong, James. 2009. Revenge of the Forbidden City: The Suppression of the Falungong in
China, 1999–2005. New York: Oxford University Press.
Vermander, Benoît. 2019. “Sinicizing Religions, Sinicizing Religious Studies.” Religions 10
(2): 1–23.
Wang Yichi. 2020. “Buddhist Books Seized as ‘Pornography and Illegal Publications.’” Bitter
Winter (January 22). Accessed May 31, 2021. https://bitterwinter.org/buddhist-books-
seized-as-pornography-and-illegal-publications/
Watts, Jonathan, S. 2004. “A Brief Overview of Buddhist NGOs in Japan.” Japanese Journal of
Religious Studies 31 (2): 417–28.
Welch, Holmes. 1969. “Buddhism Since the Cultural Revolution.” The China Quarterly 40:
127–36.
Wenzel-Teuber, Katharina. 2017. “Statistics on Religions and Churches in the People’s
Republic of China – Update for the Year 2016.” Religions & Christianity in Today’s
China 7 (2): 26–53.
2018. “Statistics on Religions and Churches in the People’s Republic of China – Update for
the Year 2017.” Religions & Christianity in Today’s China 7 (2): 26–51.
WFB (World Fellowship of Buddhists). 2021a. “Welcome to the World Fellowship of
Buddhists.” Accessed May 31, 2021. http://wfbhq.org/index.php
2021b. “General Conference.” Accessed May 31, 2021. http://wfbhq.org/general-conference
.php
Wickeri, Philippe. 2011. Seeking the Common Ground: Protestant Christianity, the Three-Self
Movement, and China’s United Front. Eugene: Wipf and Stock.
Woeser, Tsering. 2020. Forbidden Memory: Tibet During the Cultural Revolution. Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
World Buddhist Sangha Council (WSBC). 2021. “Introduction,” WBSC. Accessed May 31,
2021. www.wbsc886.org/en/aboutus-142
Wright, Teresa and Teresa Zimmerman-Liu. 2015. “Atheist Political Activists Turned
Protestants: Religious Conversion Among Chinese Dissidents.” Journal of Church and
State 57 (2): 268–88.
Xi Lian. 2013. “‘Cultural Christians’ and the Search for Civil Society in Contemporary
China.” The Chinese Historical Review (May) 20 (1): 70–87.
Xinhua (staff writer). 2012. “Third World Buddhist Forum Closes in HK.” China Daily, April
27. www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2012-04/27/content_15164025.htm. Accessed July 16,
2022.
(staff writer). 2018. “World Buddhist Forum Opens in Fujian.” China Daily, October 28.
https://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201810/28/WS5bd5b67ca310eff303285046.html.
Accessed July 16, 2022.
Xue Yu. 2009. “Buddhist Contribution to the Socialist Transformation of Buddhism in
China: Activities of Ven. Juzan during 1949–1953.” Journal of Global Buddhism 10:
217–53.
Yang Fenggang. 2006. “The Red, Black, and Gray Markets of Religion in China.” The
Sociological Quarterly 47 (1) (Winter): 93–122.
The Buddhist Association of China and Law
303
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 326 ---
Yang Zeng-wen, trans. Janet Mei-kee Cheng. 2010. “The Contribution of Buddhist Scholars
Toward the Friendship of China and Japan.” Journal of Oriental Studies 20: 155–70.
Yang Zi. 2017. “The Soft Power Limits of Chinese Therava¯da Buddhism.” The Diplomat,
August
15.
https://thediplomat.com/2017/08/the-soft-power-limits-of-chinese-theravada-
buddhism/
ZFX (Zhongguo fojiao xiehui 中国佛教协会). 2017a. “Zhongguo fojiao xiehui jianjie 中国佛
教协会简介.” Benhui jieshao 本会介绍. Accessed May 31, 2021. www.chinabuddhism
.com.cn/e/action/ListInfo/?classid=540.
2017b. “Zuzhi jigou 组织机构,” Benhui jieshao 本会介绍. Accessed May 31, 2021. www
.chinabuddhism.com.cn/e/action/ListInfo/?classid=533.
Zhang, Juyan. 2012. Buddhist Diplomacy: History and Status Quo. USC Center on Public
Diplomacy at the Annenberg School, Paper, 7.
Zheng Qi. 2015. Carl Schmitt, Mao Zedong and the Politics of Transition. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Zongwen 宗文(ed.). 2006. Hexie shijie: Congxin kaishi 和谐世界, 从心开始[A Harmonious
World Begins in the Mind]. Beijing: Zongjiao wenhua chubanshe 宗教文化出版社.
304
André Laliberté
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 327 ---
15
Governing “Lamaism” on the “Frontier”
Buddhism and Law in Early Twentieth-Century Inner Mongolia
Daigengna Duoer*
15.1 THE CASE OF INNER MONGOLIA IN THE STUDY
OF BUDDHISM AND LAW1
Since Rebecca French declared Buddhist legal studies a “missing discipline” in
2004, this interdisciplinary subﬁeld has been slowly but surely growing. However, as
Benjamin Schonthal and Tom Ginsburg have pointed out, most of these advances
focus on the ancient, premodern, and early modern periods, and on Buddhists
sources relating to Buddhist conduct (Schonthal and Ginsburg 2016). This chapter
addresses this gap in the “missing discipline” by focussing on the state regulations of
Buddhism in Inner Mongolia in the early twentieth century.
The early twentieth-century regimes considered in this chapter are the Republic
of China (1912–49), the Japanese puppet states of Manchukuo (1932–45), and the
Mengjiang United Autonomous Government (1939–45). These three modern states
competed to make claims of sovereignty over Inner Mongolia, the southern half of
Qing-era Mongolia after the northern half (Outer Mongolia) declared independ-
ence under the Bogda Khan2 government in 1911. Under the leadership of Bogda
*
I am grateful for the insightful comments I was able to receive on this chapter from the editors,
Benjamin Schonthal and Tom Ginsburg, and from their research assistant, Paride Stortini.
I am also thankful for the valuable feedback I received throughout writing this chapter from
Vesna Wallace, José Cabezón, Kate McDonald, Matthew King, Rory Lindsay, Anran Wang,
James Meador, Yiming Ma, and Yanshuo Zhang. All translations are by the author,
unless speciﬁed.
1
By “Inner Mongolia” (M: Dotogadu Monggol, and later 1947, Öbör Monggol, C: neimenggu 內
蒙古, J: uchi mongoru 内モンゴル), this chapter refers mostly to the geographical regions
included in Qing-era Inner Mongolia. The idea of “Inner Mongolia” however, has taken on
different shapes and forms in the various spatial imaginations of modern states since the Qing,
resulting in different systems of administrative divisions.
2
In this chapter, all terms in Mongolian have been transliterated according to the system used in
Christopher P. Atwood’s Encyclopedia of Mongolia and the Mongol Empire (2004), except for
305
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 328 ---
Khan, who was also the Eighth Jebtsundamba Khutugtu3 (1870–1924), Outer
Mongolia operated as a theocratic state until the establishment of the socialist
Mongolian People’s Republic in 1924.4 Inner Mongolia, on the other hand, never
became politically independent and was subject to the inﬂuences of the competing
nation-building and empire-building projects of modern China and the Japanese
empire. This period between the fall of the Qing empire (1912) and the establish-
ment of the People’s Republic of China (1949) was formative not only for the Inner
Mongolia Autonomous Region as we know it today, but also for the state regulations
of Buddhism in the region. During this period, Chinese and Japanese policymakers
considered the Buddhist tradition in Inner Mongolia as ethnically and geopolitically
relevant for their frontier policies. In the same way that Buddhism was understood to
be the solution to the “Tibetan Problem” for the Republic of China (Tuttle 2005,
11), Buddhism was also taken as the key to winning the support of Inner Mongolia
and beyond for nation-building and empire-building projects.
This chapter argues that early twentieth-century Inner Mongolia makes a fascin-
ating case for the study of Buddhism and law in the modern East Asian context
because it was governed by multiple states and empires, which drew upon parallel
and overlapping policies toward Buddhism as part of their competing projects of
nation-state construction and imperialism. As a religion that is neither fully foreign
nor domestic for the Chinese and Japanese policymakers, Buddhism in Inner
Mongolia also provides an important case study for the understanding of how
religions on the “ethnic frontier” were understood and governed by modern East
Asian nation-states that were built on ethno-nationalist foundations. While
Buddhism and law in Asia is often discussed in national terms, the Inner
Mongolia case exposes the fact that different legal structures sometimes exist for
people of different ethnic groups belonging to different Buddhist traditions living
under one nation or empire, and that legal practices directed at the peripheries may
look very different from those directed at the center.
One reﬂection of this distinctive context is that the terms used to discuss
Buddhism in Inner Mongolia in the legal discourses of the Republic of China,
Manchukuo, and Mengjiang were not fojiao or bukkyō, terms more commonly used
the term “Jebtsundamba,” as this spelling has become more commonly used than
“Jibzundamba.”
3
The Jebtsundamba Khutugtus belong to a lineage of incarnate lamas in Tibeto-Mongolian
Buddhism and were one of the most revered Buddhist leaders among the Khalkha Mongols in
Qing Outer Mongolia, comparable to the Dalai Lamas in Tibet. The Eighth Jebtsundamba
Khutugtu (1870–1924) was born in Tibet into the family of an ofﬁcial of the Dalai Lama’s estate.
Despite his Tibetan birth, the Jebtsundamba identiﬁed strongly with Khalkha Mongolia and
consistently supported Mongolian independence from the Qing. On the Jebtsundamba
Khutugtu and his lineage, see “Jibzundamba Khutugtu” in Atwood’s Encyclopedia of
Mongolia and the Mongol Empire (2004).
4
By “theocratic state,” this chapter refers to the fact that the Eighth Jebtsundamba was pro-
claimed the “holy emperor” (Bogda Khan) and “dual ruler of religion and state” on December
29, 1911.
306
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 329 ---
to refer to Buddhism in the Chinese and Japanese languages. Instead, the type of
Buddhism in Inner Mongolia was mostly referred to as “Lamaism” (C: lamajiao;
J: ramakyō),5 or sometimes as “Mongolian-Tibetan Buddhism” (C: mengzang
fojiao), or “Manchu-Mongolian Buddhism” (J: manmō bukkyō).6 In contrast
to the Buddhist traditions of China and Japan, “Lamaism” was understood as
spatially, temporally, racially, and morally distinct in the legal languages of these
modern East Asian states. More speciﬁcally speaking, “Lamaism” was imagined to
be an “exotic” Buddhism practiced by ethnic groups on the “frontiers” of nations
and empires built on Sinocentric and Japan-centric foundations. “Lamaism,” with
its maintenance of the reincarnated lamas and traditional monasticism, was deemed
“backwards,” “superstitious,” and even morally “degenerate” for the modern nation-
state, when compared to Chinese and Japanese Buddhism that had been open to
modern reforms.
Situating this “Lamaism” on a spatial and temporal frontier, the legal practices of
the three modern states of Republican China, Manchukuo, and Mengjiang aimed
to exploit Buddhism in Inner Mongolia for their multiethnic nation-building and
empire-building projects and strived to discipline the religion as a political-
economic issue that needed to be depoliticized, modernized, and reformed. On
the one hand, these three modern states supported Buddhism and the tulku system
of reincarnated lamas under “religious freedom” legislated in their constitutions and
emphasized Buddhism as a commonly shared heritage that could link culturally
diverse regions in post-Qing Inner and East Asia together into new modern nation-
states. In these discourses, the three modern states would replace the Manchu rulers
of the Qing empire as the new patrons in the priest–patron relationship with the
tulkus of Inner Mongolia. These renewed alliances would not only help justify the
three modern states’ claims over disputed land on the “frontiers” of post-Qing Inner
Mongolia, but they would also help to create coalitions to combat Soviet inﬂuences
and Euro-American imperialism.
5
Donald S. Lopez, Jr. has written on the history of the term “Lamaism” in “‘Lamaism’ and the
Disappearance of Tibet” (1996) and in Prisoners of Shangri-la (1998). He points out that the ﬁrst
ofﬁcial usage of the Chinese term lamajiao 喇嘛教to talk about Tibetan Buddhism can be
dated to 1775 during the reign of the Qing Qianlong emperor and argues that the later
European usages of the term “Lamaism” served as a trope in the Orientalist historicism of late
Victorian colonialism. How the post-Qing Chinese states and modern Japan came to use the
term (喇嘛教・ラマ教), however, is not discussed in Lopez’s works. The author of this chapter
ﬁnds that the usages of “Lamaism” in the early twentieth-century East Asian context offers two
additional points to consider: ﬁrst, “Lamaism” in modern China and Japan referred not only to
Tibetan Buddhism, but to Buddhism in Mongolia and Manchuria as well; second, the
Orientalist usages of the term in modern East Asian discourses suggest that modern East
Asian states and empires similarly engaged with colonialist imaginations toward the “Other.”
Jason Ānanda Josephson has argued that although Japanese scholars writing about Asia and its
religions could position themselves as liberating Asian religions from European colonialism,
they did so as the colonizer rather than the colonized (Josephson 2012, 247).
6
蒙藏佛教; 満蒙仏教.
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
307
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 330 ---
On the other hand, in the actual articles of the regulations, Buddhism in Inner
Mongolia was governed and disciplined as a political-economic issue. Politically,
“Lamaism” in Inner Mongolia and the substantial authority of its tulku system was
deemed inappropriate for the modern states that operated on centralized power.
Thus, monastic involvement in politics was restricted in legislations that attempted
to challenge existing Buddhist structures. The management of monastic affairs, such
as reincarnations and monastic exams, became centralized, and monastic organiza-
tions were restructured with new centers of authority. Economically, “Lamaist”
monasticism in Inner Mongolia was understood to be one of the major causes of
the decline in population in the region and the culprit for the shrinkage of prime-
age male labor forces. Laws were thus created to curb the growth of monasticism so
that an “unproductive” male population could be redirected toward more econom-
ically “productive” endeavors. It also became necessary for monastic assets, such as
land, property, monastic population, and lay subjects, to be regularly registered with
and surveilled by the central governments.
This rather contradictory promotion and limitation of Buddhism in Inner
Mongolia in the laws of the Republic of China, Manchukuo, and Mengjiang shows
that instead of completely revoking the Qing policies on Buddhism among the
Mongols, the modern East Asian states chose to maintain a certain kind of continu-
ity with Qing-era practices so that they could continue to make claims of sovereignty
over Qing-occupied territories. As Gray Tuttle has argued for modern Tibet, the
Inner Mongolia case examined in this chapter also shows us that religion can serve
as “a crucial link between the social organization of dynastic empire and that of the
nation-state” (2005, 3). The Inner Mongolia case examined in this chapter demon-
strates that Buddhism indeed served as a “crucial link” through which the three
modern East Asian states competed to make sense of remnant ethnopolitical,
economic, and labor structures from the Qing era. This formative period between
the fall of the Qing to the end of World War II eventually established a legacy of
governance and legal precedents on which the People’s Republic of China’s frontier
policies would be built later.
15.2 BUDDHISM IN INNER MONGOLIA AT THE TURN OF THE
TWENTIETH CENTURY
Similar to Tibet, Inner Mongolia at the turn of the twentieth century was a
signiﬁcantly Buddhist society. Toward the end of the Qing era, there were around
1,600 monasteries and temples and 100,000 Buddhist monks in the region, which
comprised around 10 percent of the entire male population (Delege 1998, 452). In
certain regions, this percentage was even higher: in the Xilingol League, for
example, in the 1940s the total monastic population was 20 percent of the entire
population in the region and 42 percent of the entire male population (Delege 1998,
219). On the steppes of Inner Mongolia, where life remained largely nomadic for
308
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 331 ---
centuries, Buddhist monasteries were often the only architectural structures that
dotted the landscape. Many of the larger monastic institutions also functioned as
colleges that taught languages, medicine, and astrology. For centuries, monasteries
in these regions of Mongolia were the sole providers of education, health care, and
social mobility.
In Inner Mongolia, as was in the case of Tibet, Buddhism was intimately linked
with political power. Since the second conversion of the Mongols to Buddhism in
the late sixteenth century, Mongolian society operated under the principle of dual
law (qoyar yosu, Tib., lugs gnyis), which maintained that both the state and the
Buddha Dharma were fundamental sources of spiritual refuge and the most sacred
domains of one’s social duties (Wallace 2014, 321). This principle of dual law was
said to have originated in India and refers to the conjoining of Dharma and rule
(Tib., chos srid zun ‘brel) and the sharing of authority between religion and the state.
Buddhist teachings and state laws were regarded as complementary and equal,
occupying distinct social domains. However, under certain circumstances one or
the other could be regarded as preeminent, and in some cases both orders could
be concentrated in a single person (Ruegg 2014, 68). Under this principle, both the
Buddha Dharma and the state would endure as long as they continued to be
consolidated and interdependent; conversely, crimes committed against either the
state or Buddhism entailed serious karmic consequences (Wallace 2014, 321). This
system of dual law encouraged the formation of priest–patron relationships between
powerful rulers and monastic networks not only in Inner Mongolia, but all across
Inner Asia.7 In this relationship, the lama, especially incarnate ones, served as the
donee (takhil-un oron, Tib., mchod gnas), while the state ruler served as the donor
(öglige-yin ejen, Tib., yon bdag). The lama offered religious teachings and spiritual
protection for the state, and the state ruler promised to defend monastic properties
and the socioeconomic privileges of the lamas. In this arrangement, offenses
committed against the state entailed serious karmic consequences; on the other
hand, the state also had the duty to regulate the conduct of the monastic community
and their interactions with lay communities and state authorities (Wallace
2014, 324).
Economically, Buddhist institutions in the Mongolian regions in the Qing period
also possessed enormous wealth. Monasteries, especially the larger ones, and the
incarnate lamas received sizeable incomes through donations and contributions
from elite patrons and shabinar – lay disciples and subjects of a monastery, or a
reincarnated lama. The shabinar were required to pay services, such as corvee labor
to maintain temples and monasteries, as well as taxes in kind and in currency (Moses
1977, 131–32). For example, in 1918, the Eighth Jebtsundampa Khutugtu had 8,833
shabinar families, 21,180 lamas, for a total of 49,878 individuals under his jurisdiction
(Moses 1977, 127). The annual tax income from the shabinar subjects alone for the
7
On these monastic networks in Inner Asia and their political history, see Sullivan 2021.
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
309
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 332 ---
Jebtsundamba ranged from 500,000 to one million lans8 of silver per year (Moses
1977, 132). The total wealth of the Jebtsundamba’s personal estate was estimated at
57 million gold rubles or one ﬁfth of the total wealth of Outer Mongolia in 1921
(Moses 1977, 125). Although the khutugtus of Inner Mongolia were not as wealthy as
the Eighth Jebtundamba at the turn of the twentieth century, they similarly received
signiﬁcant donations and contributions from patrons and shabinar subjects, in
addition to accumulating wealth from herds, land, land rentals, and money lending
(Miller 1959, 97–105). For example, in some regions of Inner Mongolia, such as in
the Jalaid banner,9 the lamas (4 percent of the population) reportedly held 7 percent
to 23 percent of the cattle and horses in the entire banner (Miller 1959, 116).
Monasteries in the Kharachin banner alone were able to collect at least 100 million
wen10 from their hundreds of qing11 of leased land in 1835 (Huricha 2013, 230). Being
the only permanent structures on the vast steppes in Inner Mongolia also allowed
the monasteries to become trade centers and key economic hubs. Often located on
major trade routes, the monasteries held regular fairs where markets, trade, and
large-scale public rituals took place (Miller 1959, 109; Huricha 2009, 202–3).
Therefore, to say that Buddhism was a formidable political, social, and economic
force in Inner Mongolia at the turn of the twentieth century is an understatement.
The power of the tradition of dual law and the inﬂuence of Buddhist economy in
both local and transregional terms was not lost on the modern states and empires in
the post-Qing that were vying to gain control of the region for their nation-building
and empire-building projects. It is their attempts at governing the powerful Buddhist
institution in Inner Mongolia that is the focus of this chapter.
15.3 QING REGULATION OF BUDDHISM IN INNER MONGOLIA
Prior to the twentieth century, Mongolian society operated under a kind of legal
pluralism in addition to the dual law tradition that allowed the regulation of
Buddhism to be managed from afar, regionally, and within speciﬁc monastic settings.
In the Yuan period (1271–1368), the administration of local religious affairs in the
empire was delegated by the Khan to Tibetan clerics (Barrett 2014, 214). After the
second conversion of the Mongols to Buddhism in the late sixteenth century, multiple
types of laws were instituted within Mongolian territories to regulate Buddhism,
8
According to the Mongolbank, the central bank of Mongolia, lan was introduced as a tempor-
ary monetary unit to function as a medium of exchange in August 1921. One lan equaled one
Chinese silver Yanchaan and 1.42 Russian gold coins. See “History of Mongolian currency,”
(Mongolbank n.d.). www.mongolbank.mn/eng/listbanknote.aspx?id=15
9
A banner (khoshuu) is an administrative division ﬁrst used in Inner Mongolia in the Qing. The
banner system remained the basis for local administrative units under the Republic of China.
10 Wen 文is a standard unit of currency used in the Qing period. Approximately 1,000 wens
equals one liang 兩(tael of silver) (Harris 2018, IX).
11 Qing 頃is a unit of area for measuring land in the Qing period. One qing is approximately
16 acres (Harris 2018, IX).
310
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 333 ---
including banner laws, state laws, the laws of individual monasteries, and the laws of
governing the Great Shabi (Ikh Shav’), the personal estate of the Jebtsundamba
Khutugtus (Wallace 2014, 320). Buddhist monasteries, especially the large network
of Geluk Buddhist monasteries in Inner Mongolia, also had their own internal
monastic regulations in the form of bca’ yig, or monastic constitutions that instituted
administrative procedures, curricula, and ﬁnancial protocols, among other things.12
During the Qing period, Mongolia was understood by the Mongols to be a
constituent realm or ulus within the Qing empire that existed not as a part of but
alongside China (Khitad) and Tibet (Töbed), so in this view, Mongolia had its
distinctive way of life and government system that the Manchu Qing rulers pre-
served and nourished (Atwood 2002, 37–38). Governed separately from the rest of
Qing China, Buddhist affairs in Mongolia were regulated from Beijing by the
Lifanyuan, or the Court of Colonial Affairs that oversaw issues of the Qing
Empire’s frontiers. In governing Buddhism in Inner Mongolia, the Lifanyuan acted
on behalf of the Manchu emperors in the dual law structure and was mostly
responsible for codifying and promulgating regulations that were intended to bind
all Buddhist monastics throughout Mongolia. Among other things, these regulations
established administrative posts for monasteries, managed their salary schedules,
handled requests that the emperor grant a name to a temple or contribute toward a
temple’s repair, planned visits of high-level lamas to the capital, regulated pilgrim-
ages, prohibited certain groups of Mongols from becoming lamas, and restricted the
right of lamas to be buried at the sacred site of Mount Wutai (Miller 1959, 76). The
Lifanyuan also managed the titles and positions of prominent Mongolian and
Tibetan Buddhist monastics, and even prevented high-level incarnate lamas from
being identiﬁed among the Mongols, in order to curb their inﬂuence, although
Mongolian incarnate lamas became more common in the late Qing (Atwood 2002,
36). As we will see in the next paragraphs, the regulation of Buddhism in the post-
Qing attempted to preserve and maintain these Qing-era policies based on the dual
law and priest–patron arrangements before more intrusive reforms were introduced.
15.4 REPUBLICAN CHINA’S REGULATIONS OF BUDDHISM
IN INNER MONGOLIA
With the fall of the Qing empire in 1912, the Lifanyuan was abolished. Taking its
place to govern the religious affairs of Inner Mongolia was the Mengzangju
(Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Bureau) of the Republic of China, which was later
reorganized into the Mengzangyuan (Mongolian and Tibetan Ministry) in 1914 (Lin
2006, 32). This time, instead of a government agency managing the affairs of the
Mongols and the Tibetans for the multicultural Manchu Qing empire, the
Mengzangju and Mengzangyuan were agencies that served a modern nation-state
12 On bca’ yig, see Jansen 2018 and Sullivan 2021.
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
311
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 334 ---
built on Sun Yat-sen’s vision of “Five Races Under One Union” (wuzu gonghe).
Under this vision, the Republic of China connoted a single nation formed through
the union of the Han Chinese, the Manchus, the Mongols, the Tibetans, and the
Muslims. Unlike the Qing Manchus that had created racial hierarchies that placed
themselves at the top, the Republic of China pledged to treat all ﬁve races as equal
before the law, eliminate any special status, and represent all ﬁve races in the new
parliament (Atwood 2002, 39). However, in practice, the new Republic did not dare
to eliminate the special ethno-legal statuses that these different ethnic groups had
enjoyed under Qing rule (Atwood 2002, 40). To woo the support of the Inner
Mongolia nobility, the President of the Republic, Yuan Shikai (1859–1916), main-
tained the privileges that the Mongol nobles had enjoyed in the Qing period,
increased their salaries, and gave them prestigious posts in the capital (Atwood
2002, 40). For high-ranking Buddhist lamas, the same strategy of preserving Qing-
era treatment was deployed (Boyan Mandu 1979, 109).
On the other hand, the new Republic was also aware of the large monastic presence
in Inner Mongolia, which posed potential threats to the central authority and placed
economic strain on the nation. Considering this, members of the Mengzangyuan, or
the Mongolian and Tibetan Ministry, proposed the “Legislation for Limiting Mongols
on Becoming Lamas”13 in 1924. The six-article document proposed to prohibit the
only child or the sole living heir of any given family from joining the Buddhist
monastic order. Parents of children who did not wish to join the monastic order
would be unable to force their children to become lamas, especially when they were
underage. Those who wished to join the monastic order were required to report to
their banner ofﬁcials ﬁrst and could only be ordained if the banner leaders had found
that none of the articles had been violated (Mengzangyuan 1924, 43). This proposal
expressed concern over the decline of the Mongols since the Qing and the decrease in
population due the growth of Buddhist monasticism, and it argued that Buddhist
monasticism must be limited if the Mongolian population was to bounce back
(Mengzangyuan 1924, 42–43). A report carried out by the Mengzangyuan revealed
that the proposal gained unanimous support within the Ministry, even though the
Republic of China’s Constitution at the time promised freedom of religion. On this
point, the report explains that although the twelfth article of the Constitution of the
Republic of China promised freedom of religion to its citizens, this proposed legisla-
tion was based on “the utmost of good intentions,”14 because it was aimed at prevent-
ing a further decrease in the Mongolian population (Mengzangyuan 1924, 44–45).
The report also reminded members of the Ministry to “not openly limit” monasticism
and instead use the words of “respect and support” (Mengzangyuan 1924, 45).15
13 限制蒙人充當喇嘛案.
14 用意至善.
15 不必明白限制應改為尊崇黃教. Huangjiao 黃教, or “yellow religion,” here refers to
“Lamaist” Buddhism.
312
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 335 ---
Similar limitations were imposed on Buddhist monasticism in Inner Mongolia
when the Nationalist Government under Chiang Kai-shek was established, ushering
in a period of political tutelage beginning in 1928. One of the ﬁrst things that the
Kuomintang (KMT) did when they came to power was to divide the central part of
Inner Mongolia into the four new provinces of Rehe (Jehol), Chahar, Suiyuan, and
Ningxia. Other Mongol regions were then incorporated into the provinces of
Gansu, Ningxia, Heilongjiang, Liaoning, and Jilin (Lin 2006, 25). On this disﬁgura-
tion of Inner Mongolia under the KMT, Hsiao-ting Lin writes, “The newly estab-
lished provincial boundary cut ruthlessly across the traditional Mongol tribal and
league or banner boundaries, contributing further to the Mongols’ disunity and
facilitating their ultimate colonization by the Han Chinese” (2006, 25).
Unlike the treatment of Buddhism in Inner Mongolia during the Yuan Shikai
period, the state regulation of Buddhism in the Republic of China after the KMT
came into power was more intrusive. Buddhist affairs were managed by the
Mengzang weiyuanhui (Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission, MTAC),
which had to approve most decisions, such as the appointment of important lamas’
reincarnations, the granting of monastic certiﬁcations, and the handling of shabinar.
In June 1931, the KMT government issued the “Statutes for the Supervision of
Mongolian Lama Monasteries”16 where it stated that all “Lama” monasteries in
Inner Mongolia must release all shabinar17 from monastic possessions and that
all monasteries report their registers and budgets annually to the MTAC (Wuliji
2015, 300–1). In December 1935, the “Statutes for the Management of Lama
Monasteries”18 were announced by the Republican government. The statutes fur-
ther required all “Lamaist” monasteries and lamas to register with the MTAC, and
stipulated that only the reincarnation identiﬁcations, appointments, and remuner-
ations approved by the MTAC would be recognized (Zhongguo di’er lishi dang’an
guan 1994, 13). In a supplementary directive to the statutes announced in January
1936 and entitled, “Measures for the Awards and Punishments of Lamas,”19 lamas
were rewarded with elevated titles and monetary prizes if “meritorious services”20
were performed for the nation, and were punished through forced secularization,
demotion of titles, and monetary ﬁnes if they did not register with the MTAC as
prescribed (Zhongguo di’er lishi dang’an guan 1994, 14–16).
It is unclear whether these Republican Chinese regulations were enforced on the
ground. Scholars of the Republic of China, such as Hsiao-ting Lin, have pointed out
16 蒙古喇嘛寺廟監督條例.
17 Shabinar are referred to as “black disciples” 黑徒in Chinese. In contrast to this legislation in
Inner Mongolia, the Mongolian People’s Republic (Outer Mongolia) legislated to abolish the
shabinar from the lama’s estates following the death of the lama-emperor Bodg Khan in 1924
(Atwood 2004, 47).
18 管理喇嘛寺廟條例.
19 喇嘛獎懲辦法.
20 有大勳勞於國家.
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
313
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 336 ---
that it should not be assumed that Chiang Kai-shek’s asserted policies on China’s
frontier and minority affairs reﬂected what he and his regime intended to achieve,
especially given the fact that the Nationalist Government, which emerged as a
localized regime in Nanking, only had alleged authority over the vast border regions
of Qing China (Lin 2006, 32). Lin argues that the KMT’s assertion of sovereignty
over the frontier was based on a political imagination that was engineered to
maintain its nationalist façade and legitimacy (Lin 2006, 13). In fact, Lin reminds
us that frontier policies were more important for internal power struggles within the
Nationalist Party and that “regional militarists and politicians also capitalized on
frontier and ethnopolitical issues to criticize and oppose their political enemies in
Nanking” (Lin 2006, 32). In any case, the regulation of Buddhism in Inner
Mongolia merged with a much broader set of political goals emanating from
Nanking, namely, to create the impression of taming the frontier in order to
consolidate the nation.
15.5 MANCHUKUO REGULATIONS OF BUDDHISM IN
INNER MONGOLIA
While Buddhism in Inner Mongolia was being regulated in the laws of the Republic
of China, the Japanese puppet states of Manchukuo and Mengjiang were also
drafting competing regulations of Buddhism for the area under their control.
Although Manchukuo encompassed most of northeast China, a signiﬁcant
Mongol population lived in the eastern part of the state, especially the Xing’an
Province, which the Republic of China also claimed for itself. According to a 1940s
study, the Xing’an region included 32 percent of the geographical area of
Manchukuo and contained 64 percent of the Mongol population in all of
Manchukuo (Qi 2016, 14). Connecting Manchukuo with the Soviet Union, Outer
Mongolia, and the northern part of the Republic of China, the Xing’an region was
considered to be geopolitically critical to Manchukuo and the “lifeline” (J: seimei-
sen) of the Japanese Empire. In this crucial region, the presence of Mongolian
Buddhism was dominant. Ofﬁcial statistics from the Manchukuo government
records 29,697 lamas and 985 Buddhist monasteries in the region in the 1940s
(Manzhou diguo zhengfu 1969, 830). A total of 61 percent21 of these lamas were
located in the Xing’an area alone (Manzhou diguo zhengfu 1969, 828–29).
In contrast to Republican Chinese laws, Manchukuo regulations of Buddhism in
its Mongol regions attempted to separate Buddhism from political activities to
reform Buddhist monasticism and to create transnational Buddhist organizations
21 The population of lamas in the Xing’an region was as follows: Xing’an South Province 興安南
省: 7,280; Xing’an West Province 興安西省: 7,566; Xing’an North Province 興安北省: 3,528.
The total lama population in the Xing’an region was 18,374, which was 61.87 percent of the
total lama population in Manchukuo, according to the statistics compiled by the Xing’an
Bureau 興安局in 1940.
314
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 337 ---
and education programs. Nine months after the creation of Manchukuo, in
December 1932, the Xing’an Provincial government issued a directive called “On
the Prohibition of Lamas’ Involvement in Politics.”22 This directive stated that the
practice of dual law in the Inner Asian Buddhist tradition was incompatible with the
new nation-state of Manchukuo, which was built on the foundations of “scientiﬁc
development”23 (Guowuyuan fazhichu 1936, 2).24 The directive recognized that
although religion (C: zongjiao, J: shūkyō) offered moral teachings and bonded
people for the unity of societies, it had only been necessary in the past when
humanity was “ignorant,”25 and lacked the organizational units of families and
nations (C: jiaguo, J: kakoku). With the establishment of bureaucratic structures
and legal processes, the directive contends, the nation was able to use politics
(C: zhengzhi, J: seiji) to regulate morality and discipline wrongful behaviors,
rendering religion relevant only in the realm of spiritual salvation (Guowuyuan
fazhichu 1936, 2). Thus, for Manchukuo, a modern state operating under the
ideology of the “kingly way”26 (C: wangdao, J: ōdō), the mix of politics with
“Lamaism” was considered to be not only inappropriate but an unacceptable
“immoral practice”27 (Guowuyuan fazhichu 1936, 2). In other words, the directive
made it apparent that Manchukuo now operated under a centralized authority of
the “kingly way” in the Confucian model of sage rulership, and not in the model of
the dual law that had been supported by the Manchu rulers of the Qing.
In August 1940, the Manchukuo government issued another, more comprehen-
sive collection of policies regarding the regulation of Buddhism. Entitled, “Outline
for the Reformation of Lamaism,”28 this document contained policies to address the
“problems” of Lamaism for the welfare of the Mongolian people (Manzhou diguo
zhengfu 1969, 825). These “problems” were the “low quality” of lamas, the heavy
economic burdens that lamas and monasteries had created for the Mongolian
people, and the issue of depopulation caused by regional overpopulation of mon-
astics (Manzhou diguo zhengfu 1969, 825). To solve these “problems” of Mongolian
Buddhism in Manchukuo, the Outline lists the following seven articles of reform.
The ﬁrst article of reform was the creation of the Manchukuo Empire Lamaist
Group29 that would unite all the lamas in the nation under one organization. This
22 關於禁止喇嘛干政之件/喇嘛ノ政治干渉禁止ニ関スル件.
23 科學發達.
24 The speciﬁc location of this document in the Manzhouguo faling jilan, vol. 2 is in the fourth
section on religion.
25 無知無識.
26 The idea of the “kingly way” was based on the Confucian concept of sage rulership in which
the ruler governed with the mandate of heaven. Policymakers of Manchukuo used the idea to
justify the restoration of the last Qing emperor, Pu Yi (1906–67), as the emperor of the state
(Young 1998, 286).
27 弊端.
28 喇嘛教整頓綱要/喇嘛教整備に就て.
29 滿洲帝國喇嘛教宗團/満洲帝国喇嘛教宗団.
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
315
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 338 ---
new organization would not only centralize followers of Tibeto-Mongolian
Buddhism into a nationwide religious reform movement, but it would also prevent
“blind dependency”30 on khutugtus from outside the nation.
The second article claimed to remedy the imputed fact that many of the 30,000
lamas within Manchukuo were uneducated, illiterate, and unaccomplished. In
order to “improve” the situation, public secular education programs would be
established within major monasteries and reeducation programs introduced for
underage lamas. These public education programs were aimed at inserting modern
knowledge into existing monastic curricula to cultivate the future leaders of
Mongolian Buddhism. Monastic study-abroad programs were also initiated where
young Mongolian lamas would be sent to Buddhist monasteries in Japan to study,
where “the most correct Buddha Dharma ﬂourished.”31
Third, the ranks, titles, and posts of Mongol lamas that had been preserved in the
region needed to be organized and centralized under the approval of the
Manchukuo Empire Lamaist Group, which implied yet another intervention at
restructuring the monastic organization systems established since the Qing.
Although the Tibetan language was the lingua franca among Mongol Buddhists
in the region, the fourth article encouraged Mongols to use Buddhist texts in
Mongolian language in their daily practices and liturgies. Showing awareness that
changing the language of religious rituals overnight is not an easy task, the article
recommended a gradual promotion of Mongolian Buddhist texts.
Articles ﬁve and six addressed perceived deﬁciencies in monastic infrastructure.
Article ﬁve promised that, in addition to establishing the Manchukuo Empire
Lamaist Group, the Manchukuo government would found a national head temple
(J: sōhonzan) for all the lamas of Manchukuo at a suitable location headed by a
respectable khutugtu. Article six promised that the economic management of
Buddhist monasteries in the state was to be systematized. Speciﬁcally, a clear
ﬁnancial management system needed to be set in place to oversee the assets of the
monasteries and the daily spending of the monastic community.32
Seventh, regarding the Mongol lay Buddhist population, an emphasis was put on
the development of secular public education, especially for the cultivation of “a
critical stance toward the superstitious elements within Lamaism”33 (Manzhou
diguo zhengfu 1969, 825–27). Interestingly, what entailed “superstitious elements”
was not elaborated on in the document.
As with the regulation of Buddhism in Inner Mongolia under Republican
Chinese laws, it is unclear how these Manchukuo policies directed at reforming
Mongolian Buddhism were implemented on the ground. The Manchukuo Empire
30 盲目的依存性.
31 世界に於て最も正法の興隆せる日本佛教.
32 Notably, in contrast to the Republican Chinese regulations of Buddhist assets in Inner
Mongolia that prescribed the abolition of shabinar subjects, these Manchukuo articles did not.
33 喇嘛教が多分に有する迷信的要素に対する批判力の養成.
316
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 339 ---
Lamaist Group was indeed created on December 5, 1940, in Xinjing, the capital of
Manchukuo, and was headed by the Chagan Khutugtu, a high-ranking Mongolian
lama, and the Japanese vice director Satō Tomie (Narangoa 2003, 501). About two
hundred Mongol lamas were also sent to Japan to study between 1932 and 1945,
funded by Japanese Buddhist organizations such as the Jōdo, Shingon, and Tendai
schools (Narangoa 2003, 500). However, these policies did not seem to spark
signiﬁcant discussions of Buddhist reform among the Mongols themselves.34 On
the effects of these policies toward Mongolian Buddhism, Narangoa Li writes:
In general, the response of the Mongol leaders in Manchukuo to Japanese reform
efforts was selective. They were happy with the introduction of modern facilities
such as health care and medical training and they were generally willing to accept
the broadening of the education system and the promotion of Mongol culture. But
especially on more strictly doctrinal issues, the Mongolian lamas and politicians saw
little reason to change their established beliefs and practices at the behest of
the Japanese. (Narangoa 2003, 501)
Interestingly, Thomas DuBois has found that as in the case of codiﬁed laws of
Manchukuo, case records were largely silent on the topic of Buddhism and religion
in general (DuBois 2017, 126), which again raises the issue of the actual implemen-
tation and enforcement of Manchukuo regulations on Buddhism. DuBois adds,
“such silence on the topic of religion notably contrasts not only with the activism
displayed in government ordinances, but also with the pivotal role that other
judiciaries have subsequently played in the interpretation of religion” (2017,
127–28). Similar to how Buddhism in Inner Mongolia was governed under the
Republic of China with an “imagined sovereignty” over the frontier region, the
Manchukuo policies were probably more active on paper than in practice.
15.6 MENGJIANG REGULATIONS OF BUDDHISM
IN INNER MONGOLIA
As Japanese inﬂuence expanded from Manchuria to Inner Mongolia following the
establishment of Manchukuo in 1932, the puppet state of the Mengjiang United
Autonomous Government was created in 1941 under the military leadership of
Demchugdongrub (1902–66), a Mongol prince who also spearheaded an independ-
ence movement in Inner Mongolia. At ﬁrst, the same policies toward Buddhism
created in Manchukuo were to be implemented in Mengjiang (Hirokawa 2007, 92).
However, being a Qing-era Mongol noble and a devout Buddhist sandwiched
between rising Chinese, Japanese, and Soviet powers, Demchugdongrub looked
34 Narangoa contends that “Although many monasteries sent young lamas to Japan to study, most
of the lamas remained faithful to their belief in the tenets of Mongolian Buddhism. Only a few
of the lamas who studied in Japanese Buddhist temples and schools were attracted to the
religious forms they were introduced to in Japan” (2003, 505).
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
317
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 340 ---
to the past to the traditions of the Qing for inspiration in his management of
Buddhist affairs in his state. As a result, the Ofﬁce of Lama Seals and Services
(C: lama yinwuchu), a Qing-era administrative agency overseeing Buddhist affairs in
Mongolia and Tibet, was revived (Hirokawa 2007, 92). However, the prince was not
unreceptive to the suggestions of modern reforms of Buddhism suggested by the
policies of Manchukuo. As Hirokawa has pointed out, Demchugdongrub was
supportive of the Buddhist reform measures aimed at solving the depopulation issue
among his fellow Mongols (2007, 92). Thus, at the Xilingol League Conference of
1942, the administration under Prince Demchugdongrub promulgated regulations
to limit monasticism. These regulations prohibited the only son of any family from
joining the monastic order, and put a cap of four as the maximum number of
monastics a given family could have (Narangoa 2003, 503).
By the end of 1942, qualifying monastic examinations were carried out in the
various leagues in Mengjiang, promoting the secularization of Buddhist lamas in
the region. For example, after lama qualifying examinations were instituted in the
Ulanqab League, only 375 individuals out of 525 passed.35 Out of the remaining 150
individuals, 55 joined the army, and 95 joined other forms of secular occupations
(Hirokawa 2007, 92). In 1943, the Mengjiang government further tightened its grip
on the growth of monasticism. Newspapers at this time began criticizing the
tradition of child lamas and blamed Tibetan Buddhism for the decrease in the
Mongolian population (Hirokawa 2007, 94).
As for how these reform policies toward Buddhism were received by the Mongols,
Narangoa suggests that there was neither enthusiastic support nor signiﬁcant protest.
She argues that Mongolian Buddhist resistance to Japanese policies in the puppet
states of Manchukuo and Mengjiang was weaker than that of colonial Korea, and
there were no active Mongolian Buddhist attempts to protest Japanese invasion and
war, nor cases of entire monasteries converting to Japanese Buddhism, as had
occurred in colonial Korea and Taiwan (2003, 506).
15.7 GOVERNING BUDDHISM ON THE FRONTIERS
OF THE NATION AND THE EMPIRE
To summarize, the regulation of Buddhism in Inner Mongolia in the post-Qing by
the Republic of China, Manchukuo, and the Mengjiang governments began with a
continuation of Qing-era policies. In the early years of the Republic of China, the
socioeconomic statuses that high-level Buddhist leaders in Inner Mongolia had
enjoyed in the Qing were maintained and even further elevated in service of political
alliance-making. Considering the amount of political, religious, social, and even
emotional capital that the Buddhist institution was able to maintain in Inner
35 For these qualifying examinations, monastics were tested on their knowledge of Buddhist
doctrines and practices.
318
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 341 ---
Mongolia, all three of these modern East Asian states chose not to drastically disrupt
the status quo of dual law that respected the Buddhist clergy as much as (if not more
than) the state. As a result, although the policymakers of these modern states saw
Buddhism in Inner Mongolia as an outdated “superstitious” institution that caused the
decline of Mongolian society both demographically and economically, the reforms
that they wanted to see had to be planned gradually and diplomatically.
Beginning in the mid-1920s, the policies of these three modern states toward
Buddhism in Inner Mongolia began to limit monasticism and Mongolian Buddhist
agency. To diminish the power of Buddhist monasticism in Inner Mongolia and to
increase the non-monastic population in the form of mobilizable labor forces for the
nation and the empire, the tradition of “monk taxes,” which required families
sending at least one male child to the Buddhist monastic system, was restricted in
various ways. As an alternative to the Buddhist monastery, which had served as one
of the only venues for education in Qing Inner Mongolia, modern public secular
education was offered to children and young adults, often on the sites of large
monasteries. In the 1930s, Buddhism in Inner Mongolia was regulated to be
separated from political involvement, and the management of monastic affairs was
given to new structures of monastic organizations created by these modern states to
deal speciﬁcally with ethnic religious matters on the frontiers. In this period,
Buddhism in Inner Mongolia was increasingly the subject of biopolitics and
governed as a political-economic issue for the state. Monastic assets, such as
property, income, herds, and monastic population were required to be registered
with the central government. The practice of holding shabinar, or lay subjects at
monasteries for labor, was also abolished.
But as we have discussed in the previous paragraphs, how these regulations were
implemented on the ground, if they were indeed implemented at all, is rather
murky. Situating Buddhism in Inner Mongolia spatially on the frontiers of
Sinocentric and Japan-centric nation-states, these regulations of Buddhism were
mostly top-down elite legal practices directed from metropolitan centers at the
periphery. As Hsiao-ting Lin has contended, frontier policy for the Republic of
China was a form of “imagined sovereignty” (Lin 2006, 15), which I argue the
Japanese puppet states of Manchukuo and Mengjiang similarly participated in,
given the fact that both puppet states did not stay in power long enough for their
policies to be implemented effectively on the ground. Observing how these post-
Qing modern East Asian states made competing claims of “imagined sovereignty”
over Inner Mongolia, we can see that overlapping legal structures were created that
competed to govern Buddhism in the region. These competing regulations and
frontier policies may have played a role in the internal power conﬂicts of these
modern states, such as in the case of the Kuomintang, but they were also useful for
nation-building and empire-building projects. For the policymakers of the Republic
of China, Manchukuo, and Mengjiang, Buddhism was one of the only trans-Asian
threads that could link ethnic groups with different languages and cultures together
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
319
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 342 ---
under one nation and/or empire. Therefore, having the power to manage and
govern Buddhist institutions meant the ability to tap into and mobilize the political,
economic, and social capital of the religion, and to do so transnationally.
As tools of nation-building and empire-building, these elite regulations assumed a
linear temporality and a teleology of “progress” and “modernization” for Inner
Mongolian Buddhism deemed “unproductive” and “backwards.” I argue that this
is a form of epistemic violence inﬂicted on the religious bodies (especially the non-
tulku ones) on the peripheries of modern national and imperial projects. In her well-
known essay, “Can the Subaltern Speak?” Gayatri Spivak states that “The clearest
available example of such epistemic violence is the remotely orchestrated, far-ﬂung,
and heterogeneous project to constitute the colonial subject as Other” (Spivak
2003). The state regulations of Buddhism in our Inner Mongolia case are examples
of this colonial project remotely orchestrated to constitute the Other through
competing and overlapping frontier policies.
It is important to remember that the practice of epistemic violence through legal
processes preceded actual violence in the Mongolian case. In post-Qing Outer
Mongolia, similar limitations were created to curb Buddhist monasticism in the
region, especially after the fall of the theocratic Bogda Khan government when
the socialist Mongolian People’s Republic (1924–92) came into power. Under the
leadership of Khorloogiin Choibalsan (1895–1952), approximately 18,000 lamas were
killed in a socialist purge lasting eighteen months from late 1937 to mid-1939, and all
but a handful of Buddhist monasteries were destroyed across the country (Kaplonski
2014, 5). Before the carnage took place, however, modern legal and bureaucratic
frameworks existed to “know and control the population and the lamas, to introduce
measures of governmentality, and to rule through the economic deployment rather
than the blunt application of power” (Kaplonski 2014, 226). As Christopher
Kaplonski shows, for the Mongolian socialist state, the problem of the lamas was
“not that they were religious but that they possessed substantial economic, political,
and ideological power” (2014, 227). The way that the socialist state chose to solve this
“lama question” was ﬁrst through accommodation, symbolic violence, structural
violence, and proactive measures before choosing direct physical violence
(Kaplonski 2014, 226). Indeed, state violence for modern Mongolia was not an event
but a process that involved multiple modes of violence.
In Inner Mongolia, although the Republic of China and the Japanese puppet
states of Manchukuo and Mengjiang did not manage to stay in power long enough
to purge Buddhism on a similarly massive scale,36 their legacy of governing
36 The monastic population in Inner Mongolia declined gradually throughout the decades after
the fall of the Qing Empire. Compared to the Qing period which had about 100,000 lamas and
1,600 monasteries and temples in the region, there were about 60,000 lamas and 1,366
monasteries and temples after 1945 (Delege 1998, 452–53). This translates to an approximate
40 percent decrease in monastic population and a 15 percent decrease in Buddhist sites
between 1912 and 1945.
320
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 343 ---
Buddhism and the inﬂiction of epistemic violence through legal practices would
later be inherited by the Chinese Communist Party in its policies toward ethnic
minorities’ religions in the People’s Republic of China. In May 1947, the Inner
Mongolia Autonomous Region was established under the leadership of the Chinese
Communist Party, two years before the establishment of the People’s Republic of
China itself in October 1949. In the “Policy Guidelines for the Inner Mongolia
Autonomous Government,”37 announced on April 27, 1947, “freedom of religion”
was promised to the Mongols in the region. However, in the same document,
“separation of religion from the state”38 was to be instituted. Lamas were also
persuaded to “voluntarily” participate in secular industries and join the larger labor
force (Zhonggong zhongyang tongzhanbu 1991, 1111–13).39
By the early 1960s, there were about 17,000 Buddhist monks in Inner Mongolia,
compared to 100,000 at the end of the Qing period (Delege 1998, 761). According to
a 1961 survey, 11,584 lamas out of 13,000 surveyed participated in forms of secular
labor. Of these, 354 individuals were involved in mining, 2,330 in agriculture, 6,400
in husbandry, 1,200 in medicine, and 1,300 in other industries (Delege 1998, 761).
During the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s and 1970s, Buddhism in Inner
Mongolia experienced brutal repressions similar to that of the Mongolian People’s
Republic in the 1930s and was one of the worst affected areas within the People’s
Republic of China. According to ofﬁcial statistics, the Cultural Revolution resulted
in over 22,000 deaths and 300,000 injuries in Inner Mongolia (Brown 2007). The
Buddhist community was heavily affected in the campaign to remove “the Four
Olds.” It is unclear how many Buddhist monastics in Inner Mongolia were killed or
injured during this period, but according to ofﬁcial statistics, only 5,000 lamas were
found in the region after the Cultural Revolution in 1984, and 3,854 out of these
5,000 lamas reported no sources of income (Delege 1998, 779). The number of
Buddhist monasteries still standing in the area was also reduced from at least 1,600 at
the end of the Qing period to less than 500 after the storm of the Cultural
Revolution (Delege 1998, 777). Only seventy-two monasteries received renovation
funds from the government and were reopened to the public between 1985 and 1995
(Delege 1998, 777).
15.8 WHAT CAN THE INNER MONGOLIA CASE TELL US ABOUT
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW AND BUDDHISM?
The Inner Mongolia case discussed in this chapter can tell us at least four things
about the relationship between constitutional law and Buddhism in the modern
37 內蒙古自治政府施政綱領.
38 實行信教自由與政教分立.
39 提倡喇嘛自願投資經營農工商業與各種合作事業，獎勵喇嘛自願入學與參加勞動，
行醫，識字.
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
321
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 344 ---
East Asian context. First, although the constitutional practices of modern East Asian
states were mostly inﬂuenced by western law,40 they contained considerable con-
tinuities with the laws of imperial China when it came to the regulation of
Buddhism in Inner Asia. Western constitutional ideas such as “freedom of religion”
were present in the modern East Asian constitutional discourses discussed in this
chapter, but they had to be mediated through previously existing political formations
and structures, such as the tradition of dual law that allowed Buddhism to play key
roles in legitimating or resisting political and legal orders.
Secondly, when we observe how Buddhism in Inner Mongolia was regulated in
post-Qing East Asia, we begin to see that there were parallel, overlapping, and
competing legal structures in place. Different laws were created to regulate different
traditions of Buddhism in different geographical regions practiced by people of
different ethnicities. This can be seen in the varieties of legal vocabulary developed
to govern Buddhism. For example, while institutional Buddhism was regulated as
fojiao in the Republic of China, Buddhism in Inner Mongolia was regulated
as lamajiao, or “Lamaism,” which was understood as an ethnic religious tradition
that needed uniquely designed modernizing reforms. Thus, the regulation of reli-
gion on the frontier regions, which was more often informed by frontier policies, can
look very different from the regulation of religion in the rest of the nation. At the
same time, the Inner Mongolia case shows that in the modern East Asian context,
there could be overlapping and even competing legal structures – competing consti-
tutions – operating simultaneously when it comes to the regulation of religion.
Competing claims of sovereignty over the region of Inner Mongolia allowed
modern states backed by very different political ideologies to “ﬂex their legal
muscles” in religion governance in overlapping and competing ways.
Thirdly, the state governance of religion in modern East Asia reveals its teleo-
logical dimension. Situating the region of Inner Mongolia and its people in a
particular spatiality and temporality, namely, the “frontier” and the “pre-modern,”
Buddhism and Buddhist monasticism in Inner Mongolia came to be understood as
“uncivilized,” “backwards,” and even morally “degenerate” in the reform policies of
the Republic of China and the Japanese puppet states of Manchukuo and
Mengjiang. Following this logic, Buddhism in Inner Mongolia was governed and
disciplined in these state regulations as a political-economic and biopolitical prob-
lem. As DuBois has pointed out in his study of religion in early twentieth-century
northeast Asia, “[l]awmaking and social policy are not merely a passive platform for
the expression of religious ideas, but a realm of ethical and theological exploration
in their own right” (2017, 109).
40 Maria Adele Carrai has shown in her work on the governance of Tibet in Republican China
that strategies of empire are not only a prerogative of the West but were also adopted by both
the Republican China and later the People’s Republic of China, to assert themselves in the
international domain as sovereign states and pursue their ﬁctional claims over Tibet (Carrai
2017, 801).
322
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 345 ---
Lastly, these parallel, overlapping, and competing regulations of religion created
paradigms of constitutional practice that created a legacy of religion governance and
frontier policies that would be inherited by subsequent nation-states, even if the new
state operated under a different political ideology. I argue that this legacy of the
governance of religion on the frontiers exempliﬁes a legacy of epistemic violence
carried out through the processes of law-making. This legacy has been passed on
from the Qing to the People’s Republic of China. As Ilana Feldman argued in her
book Governing Gaza, the authority of any governmental bureaucracy is reiterative;
it has to be enacted through practice as an ongoing process and cannot simply be
established once and for all (2008, 15).41 Interestingly, the legacy of reiterative
authority examined in this chapter only reveals the contingent nature of these
modern East Asian states, be it the Republic of China, Manchukuo, Mengjiang,
or the People’s Republic of China.
references
Atwood, Christopher. 2002. Young Mongols and Vigilantes in Inner Mongolia’s Interregnum
Decades, 1911–1931. Leiden: Brill.
2004. Encyclopedia of Mongolia and the Mongol Empire. New York: Facts on File.
Barrett, Timothy Hugh. 2014. “Buddhism and Law in China: The Emergences of Distinctive
Patterns in Chinese History.” In Buddhism and Law: An Introduction, edited by Rebecca
R. French and Mark A. Nathan, 201–16. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boyan Mandu. 1979. “Huiyi xinhai geming.” In Neimenggu Xinhai Geming Shiliao, 74–76.
Hohhot: Neimenggu renmin chubanshe.
Brown, Kerry. 2007. “The Cultural Revolution in Inner Mongolia 1967–1969: The Purge of
the ‘Heirs of Genghis Khan’.” Asian Affairs 38 (2):173–87.
Carrai, Maria Adele. 2017. “Learning Western Techniques of Empire: Republican China and
the New Legal Framework for Managing Tibet.” International Legal Theory 30: 801–24.
Delege. 1998. Neimenggu lamajiao shi. Hohhot: Neimenggu renmin chubanshe.
DuBois, Thomas David. 2017. Empire and the Meaning of Religion in Northeast Asia:
Manchuria 1900–1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Feldman, Ilana. 2008. Governing Gaza: Bureaucracy, Authority, and the Work of Rule,
1917–1967. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
French, Rebecca R. 2004. “The Case of the Missing Discipline: Finding Buddhist Legal
Studies.” Buffalo Law Review 52 (3): 679–700.
Guowuyuan fazhichu, ed. 1936. Manzhouguo faling jilan, vol. 2. Xinjing: Manzhou xingz-
heng xuehui.
Harris, Lane J. 2018. The Peking Gazette: A Reader in Nineteenth-century Chinese History.
Leiden: Brill.
Hirokawa, Saho. 2007. “Mōkyō seiken no tai-Mongoru seisaku – Manshūkoku to no hikaku
wo tsūjite.” In Nihon no Mōkyō senryō: 1937–1945, edited by Tomoyuki Uchida and
Yoshimasa Shibata. Tokyo: Kenbun shuppansha.
Huricha. 2009. Qingdai Neimenggu diqu siyuan jingji yanjiu. Shenyang: Liaoning minzu
chubanshe.
Qingdai Menggu simiao guanli tizhi yanjiu. Shenyang: Liaoning minzu chubanshe.
41 I am grateful for Kaplonski’s The Lama Question (2014) for introducing me to Feldman’s work.
Buddhism and Law: Early Inner Mongolia
323
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 346 ---
Jansen, Berthe. 2018. The Monastery Rules: Buddhist Monastic Organization in Pre-Modern
Tibet. Oakland: University of California Press.
Josephson, Jason Ānanda. 2012. The Invention of Religion in Japan. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Kaplonski, Christopher. 2014. The Lama Question: Violence, Sovereignty, and Exception in
Early Socialist Mongolia. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Lin, Hsiao-ting. 2006. Tibet and Nationalist China’s Frontier: Intrigues and Ethnopolitics,
1928–49. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
Lopez, Donald S. 1996. “‘Lamaism’ and the Disappearance of Tibet.” Comparative Studies in
Society and History 38 (1): 3–25.
1998. Prisoners of Shangri-La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Manzhou diguo zhengfu, ed. 1969. Manzhou jianguo shinian shi. Tokyo: Hara shōbō.
Mengzangyuan. 1924. Mengzangyuan zhaoji Mengshi huiyi yishilu. Publisher unknown.
Miller, Robert. 1959. Monasteries and Culture Change in Inner Mongolia. Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz.
Mongolbank. n.d. “History of Mongolian Currency.” Accessed October 4, 2021. www
.mongolbank.mn/eng/listbanknote.aspx?id=15.
Moses, Larry William. 1977. The Political Role of Mongol Buddhism. Bloomington: Asian
Studies Research Institute, Indiana University.
Narangoa, Li. 2003. “Japanese Imperialism and Mongolian Buddhism, 1932–1945.” Critical
Asian Studies 35 (4): 491–514.
Qi, Baishun. 2016. Riben qinzhan shiqi “Xing’an sheng” jingji tongzhi zhengce yanjiu.
Shenyang: Liaoning chubanshe.
Ruegg, David Seyfort. 2014. “The Temporal and the Spiritual, and the So-called Patron–
Client Relation in the Governance of Inner Asia and Tibet.” in Patronage as Politics in
South Asia, edited by Anastasia Piliavsky. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schonthal, Benjamin and Tom Ginsburg. 2016. “Setting an Agenda for the Socio-Legal Study
of Contemporary Buddhism.” Asian Journal of Law and Society 3: 1–15.
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 2003. “Can the Subaltern Speak?” In Colonial Discourse and
Post-Colonial Theory, edited by Patrick Williams and Laura Chrisman. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Sullivan, Brenton. 2021. Building a Religious Empire. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.
Tuttle, Gray. 2005. Tibetan Buddhists in the Making of Modern China. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Wallace, Vesna. 2014. “Buddhist Laws in Mongolia.” In Buddhism and Law: An Introduction,
edited by Rebecca R. French and Mark A. Nathan. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wuliji Taogetao, ed. 2015. Minguo zhengfu youguan Menggu de falv. Chifeng: Neimenggu
kexue jishu chubanshe.
Young, Louise. 1998. Japan’s Total Empire: Manchuria and the Culture of Wartime
Imperialism. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Zhongguo di’er lishi dang’an guan, ed. 1994. Zhonghua minguo shi dang’an ziliao huibian:
vol. 5, no. 1. Nanjing: Jiangsu guji chubanshe.
Zhonggong zhongyang tongzhanbu. 1991. “Neimenggu zizhi zhengfu shizheng gangling.”
In Minzu wenti wenxian huibian, 1111–13. Beijing: Zhongguo zhongyang dangxiao
chubanshe.
324
Daigengna Duoer
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 347 ---
16
Buddhist Constitutional Battlegrounds
Using the Courts to Litigate Monastic Celibacy in South Korea
(1955–1970)
Mark A. Nathan
16.1 INTRODUCTION
On November 24, 1960, at around three o’clock in the afternoon, six young monks
(all between the ages of 21 and 35) surreptitiously entered the Supreme Court
building in Seoul, South Korea. Upset about a ruling that had been handed down
earlier that day, they demanded to see the Chief Justice, but upon learning that he
was out, they went to the ofﬁce of the presiding judge, Ko Chaeho. Although the
young monks were told that the presiding judge, too, was not in his ofﬁce, they
barged in anyway, announcing their intention to wait for him. At least some of the
monks present that day were familiar with this ofﬁce, having visited just one day
prior with their senior monastic leader, Chŏngdam sŭnim, who had lectured Ko
about the righteousness of their cause. The leader had also apparently warned the
judge that if the Court ruled against their side in the pending case, the monks seated
before him were prepared to become martyrs for the cause.
Thus, the next day, after delivering a short message explaining their opposition to
the Court’s ruling, each of them pulled out a knife and, as promised, attempted to
disembowel themselves right there in the judge’s ofﬁce. When the crowd of some
four hundred Buddhist monks, nuns, and laity who had gathered outside the
courthouse to demonstrate heard a rumor that the young monks had killed them-
selves to protest the decision, they stormed the Supreme Court building. This chain
of events resulted in over three hundred arrests, including the six young men who
had tried unsuccessfully to commit suicide, as well as Chŏngdam himself, who was
accused of orchestrating the events from behind the scenes.1
1
Ninety-three nuns and four laywomen were among those taken into custody. Most of those
initially detained were eventually let go, and of the ﬁfty-two who were prosecuted, only twenty-
four were ultimately sentenced. This included, it should be noted, the six monks who had
disemboweled themselves. Although Chŏngdam was initially taken into custody, the charges
against him were dropped and he was even allowed to testify at the trial of the younger monks
(Pak 2007).
325
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 348 ---
This incident remains as shocking to learn about today as it was for those hearing
about it just over six decades ago when it occurred. Although those protesting at the
Supreme Court that day were roundly condemned in the press for their extreme
actions, public opinion at the time was decidedly in their favor when it came
to the larger goals of their so-called puriﬁcation movement (chŏnghwa undong
淨化運動). The monks who snuck into the Supreme Court building ostensibly to
commit hara-kiri were part of a minority group of monastics who had sought to
restore the vow of celibacy in post-colonial South Korea as a necessary qualiﬁcation
for membership in the Korean monastic order. They had managed to wrest control
of the Chogye Order (Chogyejong 曹溪宗) from the dominant faction that permit-
ted monks to marry and eat meat, but only with the heavy support of the president at
the time, Syngman Rhee.
This story of married monks and attempted disemboweling may seem like an odd
way to start a chapter on Buddhism and constitutional law, but the emotionally
charged events described above also involve an important set of legal disputes that
help to illuminate the mechanics of Buddhism and constitutional law in Korea. The
puriﬁcation movement has been studied from a wide variety of perspectives, but few
studies have fully appreciated what one might call the “clash of constitutions” that
lies at its core. Celibacy may have been the most visible theme in the legal battles
over control of the Chogye Order, but the court cases and extra-judicial conﬂicts
were not really about celibacy per se. Rather, litigants and judges in these cases
focussed instead on the legal justiﬁcations for revising the Chogye Order’s own
constitution (chonghŏn 宗憲) or, by extension, the legality of the meeting or
gathering in which these changes were authorized.
Neither the Vinaya, nor any traditional temple regulations that predated the
colonial period, represented legitimate sources of authority under the law. The
courts were concerned only with the written constitution, rules, and regulations of
an organization composed of members who self-identiﬁed as Buddhist. At the same
time, the Korean courts – guided as they were by their own national constitution –
were unwilling to wade into the doctrinal disputes over celibacy due to the provi-
sions contained in Article 12 of the 1948 Constitution that guaranteed freedom of
religion and the separation of religion and the state.2 Ultimately then, the clash
between unmarried and married monks – between supporters of monastic “puriﬁ-
cation” and proponents of the status quo – became a contest over the respective
legitimacy of two rival Buddhist monastic constitutions written by and representing
the rival factions. And that contest was enabled, even encouraged, by legal mandates
stemming from state law.
2
South Korea’s ﬁrst constitution was adopted on July 17, 1948. Article 12 reads “All citizens shall
enjoy freedom of faith and conscience. No state religion shall exist. Religion shall be separated
from politics.”
326
Mark A. Nathan
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 349 ---
16.2 PRELUDE TO THE PURIFICATION MOVEMENT: TEMPLE
LAWS AND MONASTIC MARRIAGES IN THE COLONIAL PERIOD
The origins of the above events can be traced to the period of Japanese colonial rule
(1910–1945), when clerical marriages among Korean monks became normalized and
increasingly common. Korean monks who may have had wives or concubines, and
sometimes families, could certainly be found prior to Japan’s colonial takeover of
Korea, but such relationships were usually kept secret. Exposure to Japanese
Buddhism in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, however, introduced
the idea that monks could legally marry. Clerical marriage in Japan had been
decriminalized in 1872 during the early years of the Meiji period (1868–1912). In
Korea during the mid-1920s, celibacy was removed from the requirements necessary
to become the abbot of a temple according to Korean own temple laws (sabŏp
寺法), which were then approved by the government-general.3 The colonial gov-
ernment claimed the sole legal power to approve or certify revisions to the temple
laws, but did not assert the power to enforce (or, conversely, to abrogate) the Vinaya
precepts that ostensibly underpinned monastic conduct. These powers had been
formalized through the creation of the Temple Ordinance (sach’allyŏng 寺刹令) in
1911, after the start of colonial rule, as a way for the Japanese government-general to
regulate the entire Korean monastic community.4 This law mandated the creation
of temple laws, which were legal rules laying out the administrative authorities and
regulations to be observed by monks living at a particular temple. When the long-
standing desire to create a centralized monastic order ﬁnally brought about the
creation of the Chosŏn Pulgyo Chogyejong in 1941, a constitution (hŏn 憲) for the
monastic order (chong 宗) that superseded the individual temple laws was written,
which set out the qualiﬁcations to become a monk or a temple abbot, as well as
other positions within the monastic order.5 However, with no way to adjudicate the
propriety or impropriety of allowing monks to marry and eat meat based on the
Vinaya or other sources of Buddhist law, court rulings in this matter necessarily
revolved around the issue of who had the power to revise the monastic order’s
constitution (chonghŏn) and whether the actions taken to do so were in accordance
with the organization’s own governing procedures.
Discussions of law and Buddhism during the Japanese colonial period (1910–1945)
typically begin (and often end) with a discussion of the Temple Ordinance
(sach’allyŏng) mentioned above. Studies of colonial-era Korean Buddhism have
3
Kue-jin Song has persuasively argued recently that the colonial government’s approval of these
changes to the temple regulations was granted reluctantly in response to the growing presence
of married Korean monks and demands for change (Song 2019).
4
The Temple Ordinance was promulgated as Law No. 7 on June 3, 1911 (Meiji 44).
5
Disputes over the monastic constitution and attempted revisions led to further strife in the
1990s, although by that time authoritarianism had given way to democracy in South Korea and
the number of monastic orders had multiplied signiﬁcantly.
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
327
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 350 ---
comprehensively traced the law’s broader implications for the exercise of state power
and colonial control over the Buddhist community, and the practical impact of the
law on Buddhism has been widely examined. The law itself, though, is actually
rather short, consisting of just seven articles, only ﬁve of which actually contain
substantive content. Brieﬂy, the Temple Ordinance required government approval
for the disposal of any temple property (Article 5), for merging, relocating, closing, or
renaming temples (Article 1), and for any activities taking place at temples and
monasteries other than those speciﬁed by this law (Article 2).6 In addition, Article
4 mandated the appointment of an abbot (chuji 住持) to act as the legal representa-
tive of the temple. The abbot had to assume responsibility for administrative duties,
including managing all property and assets of the temple, and for carrying out
ceremonies and rituals at the temple. Article 3 stipulated the creation of temple
laws (sabŏp), which had to be ofﬁcially approved by the Japanese governor-general,
and these regulations not only detailed the relationship between head or main
monasteries (ponsan 本山) and branch temples (malsa 末寺), but also set forth
the necessary qualiﬁcations for becoming an abbot.7 These temple laws came to
play an important role in the question of clerical marriages during the colonial
period since the revisions approved by the government-general in 1926 removed
celibacy from the list of required qualiﬁcations to assume the duties of abbot, which
seemed to open the door to legal recognition of monastic marriages.8
In addition to these seven articles, the Temple Ordinance also came with a set of
enforcement rules that further spelled out the legal regulations and rules to which
monasteries and temples would be subjected.9 The enforcement rules mainly
elaborated on the third and fourth articles of the Temple Ordinance concerning,
respectively, the temple laws, especially the head-branch temple structure, and the
role and duties of the abbot as the legal representative of a temple. Article 1 stated
that the temple laws must explicitly address the procedures for selecting and
replacing an abbot or otherwise handling a vacancy in the post, but Article 2 gave
the ultimate power to decide who would serve as abbot to the colonial state,
negating the independence that Article 1 seemed to promise. In the case of the
thirty head monasteries (later increased to thirty-one), the abbot had to be approved
6
A copy of the law (in Korean) can be found in Yi [1918] 2003, 249–51.
7
The last two articles of the law merely spell out the penalties for the failure to comply with the
law (Article 6) and empower the government-general to enact any further provisions as needed
(Article 7).
8
In fact, as Jeongeun Park has convincingly shown, the temple laws did not actually determine
the legality of monastic marriages. Her careful study of the archives demonstrates that house-
hold registers, which the Japanese had instituted in 1909, were the actual avenues that monks
used to gain legal recognition for their marriages, often under their secular names (Park 2016;
Park 2017, 131–63).
9
The Sach’allyŏng sihaeng kyuch’ik (寺刹令施行規則), Law No. 84, was promulgated on July
8, 1911. Comprised of eight articles in total, it contained additional rules and regulations that
were needed for the actual implementation of the law. Both the Temple Ordinance and its
enforcement rules took effect on September 1 that same year.
328
Mark A. Nathan
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 351 ---
directly by the governor-general, while the branch temples could obtain the consent
of provincial ofﬁcials when ﬁlling the post. The remaining articles dealt mostly with
matters pertaining to the position of abbot.
Article 3 of the Temple Ordinance instructed the thirty “head temples” to com-
pose “temple laws,” which were designed to cover a wide range of monastic oper-
ations and activities related to the structure, organization, ofﬁces, and ﬁnances of the
head monasteries and their branch temples.10 The laws appear to have been based in
part on the sectarian regulations and temple laws found contemporaneously in Japan,
and they generally follow a similar pattern of 13 chapters and roughly 100 articles.11
Jeongeun Park points out, however, that through “a clever blend of Korean Buddhist
practices and Japanese Buddhist customs,” the Korean temple laws were largely
accepted by the Korean Buddhist community. Park further posits that the laws
“successfully stabilized the entire Korean Buddhist monastic community on the
heels of the Japanese annexation of Korea” (2017, 146). Unlike the laws and regula-
tions for many Japanese Buddhist institutions at the time, however, the early iteration
of temple laws adopted by Korean monasteries explicitly stated that individuals who
marry or eat meat are not eligible for bhikkhu (pigu 比丘) ordination or for taking the
bodhisattva precepts.12 This was a problem mainly for those monks who sought
higher positions within the monasteries, such as the abbot, because they were more
closely scrutinized; even those who were empowered to vote in the elections for
abbot had to have received bhikkhu ordinations. Nevertheless, the colonial state
retained ultimate supervisory powers over the temple codes because the ratifying of
those laws required the approval of the governor-general.
After being exposed around the turn of the twentieth century to the practice of
marriage among Buddhist clerics in Japan, some within the Korean Buddhist
community wanted to permit Korean monks to enjoy similar opportunities (Jaffe
2001). For many progressive-minded Korean monks, Japanese Buddhism at the time
seemed to represent a modernized form of the religion, which should be emulated
to strengthen their own tradition and secure its place in contemporary society. As
early as 1910 the monastic reformer Han Yongun expressed strong support for
clerical marriage when he submitted formal petitions on two separate occasions to
10 The legal adoption of the temple laws was contingent, of course, on the approval of the
governor-general. The ﬁrst monastery to submit a set to the colonial authorities and receive
approval was Haein-sa on July 2, 1912, and most others followed the same basic template (Kim
2003, 53).
11 The Japanese temple laws and sectarian regulations were apparently consulted by a bureaucrat
named Watanabe Akira who worked for the government-general in order to generate a rough
draft, which was then sent to the abbots of the thirty main monasteries in Korea. For more on
this matter, see Han 2006, 127–28, and Park 2016, 89–91. For the process leading to the adoption
of temple laws and regulations among Japanese Buddhist schools and sects in the late
nineteenth century, see Ikeda 1998.
12 The language regarding marriage and meat-eating can be found in Chapter 8, Article 58 of the
temple laws, a copy of which is reproduced in Yi (Yi 2003, 284–85).
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
329
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 352 ---
the Japanese authorities, asking them to remove any restrictions on monks and nuns
that would prevent them from marrying.13 Han even appended the text of these
petitions to his Treatise on the Restoration of Korean Buddhism (Chosŏn Pulgyo
yusillon 朝鮮佛敎維新論), published in 1913, where he further explained his
position on the topic of monastic or clerical marriages. From a practical point of
view, Han feared that maintaining the precepts on celibacy would hinder the
modernization and reform of Korean Buddhism, leading to a steady decline in the
number of people willing to join the monasteries. He also argued that it would make
it exceedingly difﬁcult for monks to effectively carry out propagation (p’ogyo),
further jeopardizing the future viability of the religion in the peninsula.14
These types of arguments in favor of clerical marriage did not result in any
changes to the laws and regulations governing the monastic community during
the ﬁrst decade of colonial rule. Yet they did bear fruit in the following decade.15 In
October 1926 the governor-general approved the revised temple laws that had been
submitted by some abbots of the head monasteries, thereby lifting the restrictions on
certain monks needing to have bhikkhu ordinations, namely the abbots themselves.
The reality on the ground, of course, is that a good many monks were already
married by this time, and some even had families of their own. According to
some estimates, roughly half of all monks were married during the mid-1920s
(Kim 2014, 213).16 By the end of the colonial period in 1945, a clear majority of
Korean monks had taken advantage of the relaxed rules to ﬁnd marriage partners.
Despite being a small minority, a committed core of mostly senior monks sought
ways to restore the vow of celibacy to its rightful place among the Vinaya precepts
required for ordination, and many of these individuals were afﬁliated with the Sŏn
hagwŏn (Sŏn Study Center). This important organization was formed in the 1920s as
a conservative, practice-oriented monastic organization that operated independently
of the colonial-recognized Dual Sŏn-Kyo Order of Korean Buddhism (and later
from its successor, the Chogye Order). It served as the institutional base for the
13 An English translation of both of these petitions can be found in Tikhonov and Miller 2008.
Hwansoo Kim points out that, even though this seems early, Han was actually the second
Korean known to have submitted petitions to the Japanese seeking permission for monks to
marry, although he was the ﬁrst to do so from within the monastic community as a monk (Kim
2012, 265).
14 In addition to these practical reasons based on social concerns, Han also tried to support his
position with appeals to doctrine. Philosophically, Han pointed to the doctrine of sasa muae 事事
無碍(unimpeded interpenetration of all phenomena) to argue that the difference between
celibacy and marriage does not exist at the absolute level of truth. For a discussion of both lines
of argument, both the practical and philosophical, in Han’s writings, see Buswell 1992, 27–30.
15 For a discussion of other arguments and viewpoints put forward in favor of clerical marriage
within the Korean Buddhist community prior to the 1926 revision of the temple laws, see Park
2016, 149–62.
16 Jeongeun Park’s estimate of the ratio of married to unmarried monks at the famous monastery
T’ongdosa in 1926, based on historical documents relating to an investigation conducted by the
Japanese colonial authorities, shows similar parity (Park 2017, 153).
330
Mark A. Nathan
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 353 ---
celibate faction of Buddhist monks for the remainder of the colonial period, and it
was also pivotal, organizationally speaking, for carrying out the puriﬁcation move-
ment after liberation (Taehan Pulgyo Chogyejong Kyoyug’wŏn 2001, 195–200).
16.3 THE UNCONSTITUTIONAL LONGEVITY OF THE TEMPLE
ORDINANCE AFTER LIBERATION
After liberation from Japanese rule, the Korean people soon learned that they would
not immediately be given the right to govern themselves. In the southern half of the
peninsula, where the Americans established a military government (USAMGIK) to
rule the country, one might reasonably have expected them to eliminate the
Japanese laws regarding religion, especially onerous ones like the Temple
Ordinance that so blatantly infringed the religious rights and freedoms of the
monastic community. Unfortunately, that turned out to be a false assumption.
The law was never overturned during the period of American military rule that
ended in 1948. This is perhaps less surprising when we consider the fact that the
Americans mostly left the Japanese legal system intact in order to facilitate the
daunting task of running a country about which they knew next to nothing
(Hahm 1996, 70; Henderson 1991, 139). The Paciﬁc Command (AFPAC) under
General MacArthur gave vague assurances to the Korean people in Proclamation
No. 1, promulgated the day before the commander of USAMGIK and his troops
landed in Korea, about protecting their “personal and religious rights” (Cho 2013,
153; Kim 2007, 301). This was followed about a month later with the public
announcement of Ordinance 11, which eliminated various laws regarding the
Japanese emperor, Shintō shrine worship, and related matters, as well as containing
in Section II a blanket repeal of all laws that “would cause discrimination on the
grounds of race, nationality, creed or political opinion” (Henderson 1991, 140).
The Temple Ordinance, however, was not among those laws that were explicitly
struck down. The following month, Ordinance 21, issued on November 2, stipulated
that “all laws which were in force, regulations, orders, notices or other documents
issued by any government of Korea having the force of law as of August 9, 1945, will
continue in force until repealed by [a] competent authority” (Henderson 1991, 139).
Beginning with this declaration, the Temple Ordinance, which gave state actors a
degree of control over internal monastic affairs, would remain in force throughout
the period of American military occupation and beyond.
Although the American military government claimed to be upholding the
principle of religious freedom in Korea, the Buddhist and Christian communities
were treated very differently by the state, and there was very little doubt about which
group was favored.17 Christmas, for instance, was designated a national holiday in
17 As Don Clark notes, “Koreans understood the Americans to be promoting a package of
democracy, capitalism and Christianity in their country” (Clark 2004, 24).
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
331
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 354 ---
October 1945, despite the fact that Christians represented only a small fraction
(perhaps two to three percent) of the total population at that time (Cho 2013, 155;
Kim 2007, 307). The Buddha’s birthday, by comparison, did not become a national
holiday in Korea until thirty years later in 1975 (Kim 2011, 237). Other examples
could be cited, but most important, as long as the Temple Ordinance remained in
effect, the Buddhist monastic community would be subject to government oversight
and interference through the imposition of legal constraints that did not apply to
Christian organizations. The Temple Ordinance clearly gave the Americans a
powerful tool that enabled them to keep a watchful eye on Buddhist temples and
monastic leaders and to exercise substantial control over them. At the same time, the
American military government relied heavily on native Koreans who could speak
English, which disproportionately favored Christians who had been educated in
mission schools, where English language instruction was guaranteed.18 The unfair-
ness of maintaining the colonial-era law that regulated the Korean monastic com-
munity was repeatedly emphasized.
Buddhist leaders from around the country made repealing the Temple Ordinance
a priority when they gathered at the ﬁrst national monastic conference (chŏn’guk
sŭngnyŏ taehoe) which was held after liberation on September 22 and 23, 1945 and
headed by Kim Pŏmnin (Kim 2011, 213–14). All thirty-one head temples under the
Japanese system were asked to send representatives, and all but a few in the northern
half of the peninsula did so.19 At the gathering, steps were immediately taken to
eliminate this head-branch temple system and to abolish the temple laws since they
were both deemed colonial creations. In place of these governing structures, the
Buddhist leaders set out to erect a more centralized monastic order (chongdan) that
used a type of parish system (kyoguje 敎區制) with a central administrative affairs
ofﬁce (ch’ongmuwŏn) at T’aego-sa, the headquarters monastery, that would oversee
various regional ofﬁces (kyomu) in the provinces (Kim 1997, 102–3). They also
formed a Central Assembly (chung’ang chonghoe) which met in early 1946 and
passed a constitution for the order. Although a monastic constitution was technically
created when the monastic community received permission to establish a temple
headquarters of the newly renamed Chogye Order in 1941 during the late colonial
period, the one created in 1946 was the ﬁrst to be drafted free from state interference.
Despite the fact that the current constitution of the Chogye Order is considered a
revision of an original passed in 1962 (for reasons that will be discussed), the
1946 monastic constitution was the basic template that was later revised during the
course of the puriﬁcation movement.
The continued existence and enforcement of the Temple Ordinance, however,
remained a major obstacle to fully implementing these institutional changes and
other reforms. Kim Kwangsik has noted that multiple requests for the repeal of this
18 This fact has led some to refer to USAMGIK as the “interpreters’ government” (Clark 2004, 24).
19 Of the seventy-nine invitees to the conference, sixty were actually present (Kim 2006, 24).
332
Mark A. Nathan
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 355 ---
law in the summer of 1946 were all ignored. He also points out that in March of the
following year, the Order formally submitted a written petition to the newly created
South Korean Interim Legislative Assembly (SKILA), and its demands even received
the backing of twenty-ﬁve of its members (Kim 2011, 214–15). Although this body
unanimously passed a piece of legislation on August 8, 1947 that would have
abolished the Temple Ordinance – not to mention other Japanese laws regarding
religion – and created in its place a temporary law dealing only with the protection
of Buddhist property, the American military government refused to approve it (Kim
2007, 304; Kim 2011, 215; Mun 2011, 224).20 Thus, despite their best efforts, Buddhist
leaders within the Chogye Order never managed to convince the Americans to do
away with the Temple Ordinance, which remained in effect when Syngman Rhee
took over from the Americans at the helm of a new government in 1948, giving him
undue powers to intervene in the internal affairs of the Buddhist monastic
community.21
16.4 THE BATTLE OVER CELIBACY AND CONTROL OF THE
CHOGYE ORDER
Not long after the conclusion of the Korean War, President Syngman Rhee (Yi
Sŭngman), the ﬁrst president of the Republic of Korea (ROK), in power from
1948 until he was forced out by the people in 1960, began issuing a series of
presidential messages or speciﬁcally “admonitions” (yusi 諭示), that were highly
critical of clerical marriage among the Buddhist monks in Korea. These public
statements are widely seen as sparking the puriﬁcation movement that quickly
consumed much of the time and energy of the Buddhist community for the rest
of the 1950s and into the 1960s. Rhee’s motivations for wading into this matter are
opaque and his sincerity may be questionable, but the impacts of his actions on
Korean Buddhism are profound and undeniable.22
20 The USAMGIK, of course, exercised veto power over SKILA. While the former issued
352 ordinances from its inception through to August 1948, when the Republic of Korea
(ROK) came into existence, this quasi-legislative body managed to pass a mere twelve laws
during its year and half in operation, none of which were particularly signiﬁcant (Henderson
1991, 140).
21 Land and Buddhist property rights were central to this issue. Kim Kwangsik points out that
there were 857 Japanese Buddhist temples or propagation stations, 593 of which were located in
the South. Although initially the rights to manage these temples were given to the Korean
monastic community (the Sŏn Hagwŏn and then the Chogye Order’s ch’ongmuwŏn), in
1947 this policy changed and the Americans took direct control of the Japanese Buddhist
temples (Kim 2011, 218–19).
22 In addition to the oft-noted fact that Rhee was a devout Christian who wanted to see South
Korea become a majority Christian country, there were possible political calculations at work
in his actions. In 1954, Rhee could have been looking ahead to the upcoming elections, and
among his opposition in the National Assembly were several married monks who had won
local elections.
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
333
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 356 ---
After the Korean War ended, stories began circulating about President Rhee’s
visits to various Buddhist temples. In one case, he claimed to have seen women’s
undergarments hanging out to dry; in another anecdote, he supposedly witnessed a
Korean monk with not one, but two wives! It was also rumored that he encountered
a monk who had studied in Japan for a long time and who had a Japanese wife,
alongside written placards of praise for the Japanese emperor. True or not, these
stories served to conveniently illustrate the main thrust of Rhee’s rhetorical attack on
the married monks.23 Rhee cast the practice of monastic marriage as a vestige of
Japanese colonialism, which amounted to a corruption of traditional Korean
Buddhist monasticism, and he bemoaned the lack of morality and patriotism among
these monks. Therefore, he instructed married monks (and their wives, of course) to
vacate the precincts of Buddhist temples and to turn over the running of the Chogye
Order and its temples to the monks who adhered to the vow of celibacy. It is
important to keep in mind what a bold statement this must have been: at the time
of his ﬁrst public pronouncement on this issue in 1954, celibate monks constituted
an estimated ten percent of the total number of Korean monks and controlled not
even one monastery in all of Korea.
Despite the constitutional guarantees separating religion from the state, Rhee was
able to utilize his authority under the Temple Ordinance to justify his intervention
into the internal affairs of the monastic community. Because the law was not
abolished during the period of American military rule after liberation, Rhee could
use this powerful legal tool to maintain control over the monastic community.
Eventually, the Supreme Court invalidated certain parts of the law and its accom-
panying enforcement rules, but this did not take place until 1956, and even then, the
justices did not strike down the law entirely.24
The disputes over control of the Chogye Order and its temples initiated by Rhee
would eventually turn not only litigious, but also violent.
16.5 CONTENTIOUS DEBATES AND RIVAL CONSTITUTIONS
The minority of unmarried monks argued against clerical marriage by drawing both
on religious grounds and appeals to tradition. By not following the precepts outlined
in the Four-Part Vinaya that had been used in Korea traditionally, which clearly
prohibited sexual activity as a major transgression, they argued that the monastic
23 These stories are recounted in Kang and Pak 2002, 208–9. Some or all of them may be
apocryphal since they appear to be uncorroborated, as far as I can tell, but their veracity cannot
be discounted nor dismissed out of hand.
24 The parts that were challenged in court and overturned concerned the legal requirement to
obtain government approval for the selection of abbots to individual monasteries. This had
been perhaps also the most damaging and widely opposed provision of the Temple Ordinance
during the colonial period. The decisions in these cases are found in Supreme Court Judgment
on March 30, 1956, 4288 Haengsang 21 and Supreme Court Judgment on April 20, 1956, 4289
Hyŏngsang 1 (Taehan Pulgyo Chogyejong Ch’ongmuwŏn 1996, 25–27).
334
Mark A. Nathan
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 357 ---
community had become corrupted. Syngman Rhee’s intervention, however, added
a strong undercurrent of nationalist arguments to the debate, assigning blame for the
supposedly degenerate state of Korean Buddhism to the corrupting inﬂuence of
Japanese Buddhism and the legacy of colonialism. In response, the married faction
“argued that they practiced taejung Pulgyo (Buddhism for lay people) and modern
Buddhism” (Park 2007, 135). In other words, they maintained that monks who
married could better understand the everyday lives of the laity and thus were better
suited to carry out propagation. They also claimed that if they were not monks, then
neither were the unmarried monks since they did not adhere to the entire Vinaya
either. Although the leadership of the Chogye Order attempted to make concessions
by offering to give the celibate monks possession of some monasteries, the unmar-
ried faction forged ahead with its plan to cleanse the order completely of
married monks.
To this end the celibate monks convened their own ﬁrst national conference at
the Sŏn Hagwŏn in August 1954, at which they resolved to revise the order’s
constitution. The revised constitution, which reinstituted celibacy as a necessary
qualiﬁcation for ordination and maintaining one’s status as a monk, would be
adopted at a second national conference held in late September of the same year
(Mun 2011, 245–53). The unmarried monks were steadfast in their refusal to recog-
nize married clerics as legitimate members of the monastic order, insisting instead
that they be classiﬁed simply as lay people or as a special group of (lay) Dharma
protectors (hobŏp chung 護法衆).25 The married monks had earlier that summer
already revised their own constitution, passed in 1946, presumably to legally identify
two types of monks – those that maintained the vow of celibacy as well as those that
entered into marriages – as both belonging to the order (chongdan).
President Rhee continued to periodically issue presidential messages supporting
the unmarried monks and denouncing the married clerics, with his second
appearing on November 4, 1954, after the unmarried monks had produced and
passed their revised version of the order’s constitution at their ﬁrst two monastic
conferences (Sinmun ŭro pon Han’guk Pulgyo kŭnhyŏndae sa 1995, 185–87). The
impasse between the two sides soon sparked violent confrontations in the temples as
well as litigation in the courts, and Rhee issued yet another yusi on November 19
(Sinmun ŭro pon Han’guk Pulgyo kŭnhyŏndae sa 1995, 188). The Rhee adminis-
tration directly intervened at the ministerial level, bringing the leaders of each
faction together repeatedly for face-to-face meetings to seek a resolution. At one of
these meetings on December 22, 1954, held at the National Police Headquarters,
representatives of the two sides were presented with a document outlining the
government’s basic position on the dispute and containing a concrete proposal for
how to resolve it. Of particular interest is the assertion that the married clerics should
25 Park 2007, 136; Tong’a ilbo, September 10, 1954 (Sinmun ŭro pon Han’guk Pulgyo kŭnhyŏndae
sa 1995, 185).
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
335
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 358 ---
be classiﬁed as propagation monks, which is very close to the position taken by the
married monks who had already revised their constitution in accordance with this
same basic approach:
The monastic order is composed of two groups, ascetic monks and propagation
monks. The ascetic monks, constituting celibate monks and nuns, and monastics of
more than 10 years after making a divorce, should concentrate on one or two
practices in the following ﬁve practices: (1) the preservation of precepts, (2) the
practice of Seon [Sŏn meditation], (3) the chanting of the titles of Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas, (4) the reading of scriptures, and (5) the chanting of spells. They
should live and practice Buddhism in the praxis compounds, follow the teachings
of the Seon patriarchs, and obey the monastic rules. The propagation monks should
preserve the ten precepts and can practice Seon, chant the titles of Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas, read scriptures, or chant spells. They are also able to accomplish the
mission of Maha¯ya¯na Buddhism by dedicating themselves to propagation, educa-
tion, and social affairs and to take charge of all administrative and accounting
affairs. (Mun 2011, 267)
Although this compromise would have technically allowed married monks to
remain in the order, the proposal further speciﬁed that the so-called propagation
monks had to remove their families from temple grounds and that any private homes
within the boundaries of the temple should either be removed or taken over by the
temple, but only after ﬁnancially compensating the married monks (Mun 2011, 268).
The government’s proposal was completely rejected by the three representatives of
the celibate monks who were present at the meeting, and the conﬂict, violence, and
court battles continued unabated. Lay Buddhists and the general public for the most
part supported the celibacy faction, and with public opinion on their side and the
president’s ofﬁce exerting pressure on lower-level ministers and possibly the courts,
the celibates eventually gained the upper hand and took control over most of the
Buddhist temples in the country.
16.6 CONTROVERSIES AND THE COURT
The controversy continued into the following year as more seizures of temples, more
frequent and intense ﬁghting, and more lawsuits in the secular courts dominated the
news. There were further meetings between the two sides and efforts by government
ofﬁcials and agencies to mediate the dispute. By the summer of 1955, however, the
unmarried monks were ready to hold another national conference for celibate
monastics. This time they wanted explicit government authorization for their
gathering, allowing them to ostensibly establish a legal basis for a newly revised
monastic constitution that placed power in the hands of those who had received the
traditional bhikkhu ordinations and to reinstitute celibacy as a condition for monk-
hood. Two conferences were thus held in quick succession in the ﬁrst two weeks of
August, with a newly revised constitution created at the ﬁrst, which would then be
336
Mark A. Nathan
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 359 ---
passed and conﬁrmed at the second. Government ofﬁcials from the Ministry of
Education who were present at the conference could thus grant approval and
permission for the celibate faction’s version of the monastic constitution, their
selection of executive and administrative ofﬁcers, and their control over the appoint-
ment of abbots to the country’s roughly 1,000 temples (Mun 2011, 296–97; Park
2007, 238).
In terms of the subsequent court battles that eventually came before the Supreme
Court on that day in late November 1960, the central legal question the Court had
to consider was whether this celibate monastic conference was, in fact, authorized
and sanctioned in accordance with the rule of law. The only reason this fact
mattered at all was because of the monastic constitution that was passed that day:
the changes to the Chogye Order constitution, if approved by the courts, would
legally establish a deﬁnition of monkhood that excluded married individuals.
The situation remained tense, however, and the married monks did not willingly
step aside. Nor, for that matter, did the celibate monks have enough qualiﬁed monks
to complete the takeover of every Buddhist temple in the country. Accommodations
were eventually made to allow some of the married monks to resume their positions
at many of the smaller temples and monasteries. The married faction also refused to
hand over the management of key business interests and corporations afﬁliated with
the Chogye Order. However, the lower courts eventually validated the monastic
conference, thus approving the celibates’ revised constitution and handing power to
the unmarried faction of monks, which they maintained through the remainder of
the 1950s.
In April 1960, facing growing protests over political corruption and his govern-
ment’s widespread human rights abuse, Syngman Rhee was forced to resign from
ofﬁce. His departure reignited the internal conﬂict within the monastic community,
as unmarried monks lost their most important backer and the married monks sought
to retake many of the temples they had previously lost, often through force. With the
Supreme Court set to rule later that year on the case concerning the government’s
recognition of the national conference of unmarried monastics in August 1955,
tensions were extremely high. The non-married faction continued to demonstrate
to publicly press their case, with the Ven. Ha Dongsan, who was the Supreme
Patriarch of the celibate faction of monks, even leading a procession of demonstra-
tors to the Supreme Court while sitting cross-legged on the roof of an automobile. As
noted earlier, while the ruling merely sent the case back to a lower court, it was
interpreted as favorable to the married monks since they had prevailed in the
pending case.
16.7 LEGAL AFTERLIVES UNDER PARK CHUNG HEE
While that case was pending, a new political leader emerged, and the new regime that
came to power in May 1961 following a military coup took immediate steps to quell
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
337
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 360 ---
the disorder that had engulfed the monastic community by forcing the two sides to
come together and form a “uniﬁed order” (t’onghap chongdan 統合宗團) in early
1962.26 The new leader, Park Chung Hee, moved fairly quickly to push through a new
law to replace the colonial-era Temple Ordinance, which had remained in effect for
more than a decade and a half after liberation from Japanese rule. Less than six
months after the married and unmarried monks were forced to come together and
create the uniﬁed order, Park repealed the Temple Ordinance and replaced it with
the Buddhist Property Management Law (Pulgyo chaesan kwalli pŏp 佛敎財産管理
法) in May 1962.27 While the long-overdue elimination of the despised colonial-era
Temple Ordinance was certainly welcomed by the Buddhist community, its replace-
ment unfortunately followed many of the former law’s precedents.28 Despite being
challenged in court on constitutional grounds, the Supreme Court held in 1969 that
the Buddhist Property Management Law did not violate the constitution and its
guarantee of religious freedom and neutrality toward religion, a dubious verdict that
some legal scholars and others have repudiated.29 After democratization in 1987, this
law was ﬁnally replaced with the Traditional Temple Preservation Law (Chŏnt’ong
sach’al pojon pŏp 傳統寺刹保存法) which went into effect in late May the following
year with the promulgation of its accompanying enforcement rules. It has remained in
place since that time.30
Park’s forced alliance between the two factions failed to completely quell the
unrest and discord, and feeling disadvantaged by the new arrangement, the married
monks once again turned to the secular courts to resolve the issue. Once again, the
courts failed to address the necessary qualiﬁcations for monkhood and the question
of celibacy, and concentrated instead on matters pertaining to the rules and regula-
tions regarding the number of people needed to validate and certify decisions made
by the administrative leaders of the organization. In the end, though, after they had
lost the last of their court appeals in 1969, the leaders of the married faction broke
away and formed a separate order, ofﬁcially named the T’aego Order of Korean
Buddhism (Han’guk Pulgyo T’aegojong 韓國佛敎太古宗).31 Other Buddhist orders
26 For more information about the origins of the t’onghap chongdan, see Kim 2002, 338–39.
27 Law No. 1087, promulgated on May 31, 1962.
28 For instance, it was established through non-democratic means under authoritarian rule; it
applied exclusively to Buddhist temples and organizations, requiring them to register with the
appropriate ministry (Article 6); it made disposal of temple property subject to prior govern-
ment
approval
(Article
11);
and
it
enabled
close
government
supervision
of
the
Buddhist community.
29 Supreme Court Judgment on December 23, 1969, 69 Ta 1053. See Taehan Pulgyo Chogyejong
Ch’ongmuwŏn 1997, 29. For a discussion of the constitutional issues surrounding this law, see
Yŏn 1987.
30 Law No. 3974, November 28, 1987. The law has undergone numerous revisions, beginning in
1993. See Korean Law Information Center, www.law.go.kr/ (last accessed July 29, 2022).
31 The T’aego Order remains the second largest Buddhist order in Korea today. Despite the
formal schism, litigation involving the T’aegojong and Chogyejong did not end in 1970 as the
two monastic orders continued to ﬁght in court over temples, property, and assets.
338
Mark A. Nathan
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 361 ---
were formed and also gained legal recognition in the 1960s under the Buddhist
Property Management Law; each of these possessed the right to determine whether
monks needed to adhere to a vow of celibacy or could get married in order to
become a member.
16.8 CONCLUSION
While much more could be said about the historical episodes described above, the
details show clearly the complex entanglements of Buddhism and constitutional
law in Korea, both historically and in the present. At issue was not one type of
constitution but two – state constitutions and monastic constitutions – which
themselves existed in various relationships fraught with tensions. During the
Japanese colonial period, the Temple Ordinance required that each head temple
create its own set of rules and regulations, known as temple laws, to govern
individual monasteries. These temple laws, while notionally autonomous, were
nonetheless open to state intervention, and that dynamic gave rise to one sort of
tension between monks and state authorities. After the advent of American military
rule on the peninsula and continuing after the creation of a South Korean state,
these constitutional tensions took a slightly different form. Where the constitution
for the Republic of Korea mandated a separation between state and religion, the
constitutional conﬂicts among rival factions of Chogye monks drew state leaders
and courts into the fray.
Through all of this, notions of Buddhism and state authority were not resolved or
stabilized but multiplied and were increasingly contested. Rather than narrowing or
“stabilizing” discourses around internal governance and administrative regulation of
the monastic community, these nested constitutional conﬂicts opened up new
spaces for intense disagreement and instigated an internal schism among monks
and lay Buddhists alike. At the same time, constitutional guarantees of religious
freedom and separation of church and state forced the Supreme Court to sidestep
any determination about the Vinayic propriety disputes of allowing monks to marry –
ultimately the Court sidestepped the matter, sending the dispute back to a lower
court on technical, procedural matters.32 In other words, the Court could not
pronounce on the content of monastic constitutions, but only on the question of
who had the right to amend or draft them. In fact, one of the biggest differences
between the colonial and post-colonial contexts may have been the greater judicial
recourse that was available to members of the monastic community in the 1950s and
1960s, as well as the litigiousness that came to characterize the puriﬁcation move-
ment as a result. While Buddhist actors were able to use colonial courts to press
certain claims relating to internal monastic disputes, these judicial avenues were
32 For similar examples of civil courts evading substantive questions of Vinaya or Buddhism civil
course in Sri Lanka, see Schonthal 2017–18.
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
339
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 362 ---
highly constrained under colonial authorities. The establishment of the Republic of
Korea and its constitutional guarantees of religious freedom and the separation of
religion and the state, on the one hand, allowed for increased judicial recourse on
the part of Buddhist actors, but on the other hand, it simultaneously restricted the
ability of the courts to adjudicate doctrinal disputes, including whether monks had
to take a vow of celibacy to be considered monks.
The case of the puriﬁcation movement in Korea highlights an important aspect of
Buddhism’s interlinking with constitutional law in Asia. Not only does it highlight
the signiﬁcance of history, sectarianism, and change in national constitutions, but it
also calls attention to the importance of non-state constitutions – Buddhist monk
constitutions – in the legal, political, and religious histories of this complex part of
the world.
references
Buswell Jr., Robert E. 1992. The Zen Monastic Experience: Buddhist Practice in Contemporary
Korea. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cho, Kyuhoon. 2013. The Appropriation of Religion: The Re-formation of the Korean Notion of
Religion in Global Society. PhD dissertation, University of Ottawa.
Clark, Donald N. 2004. “Protestant Christianity and the State: Religious Organisations as an
Example of Civil Society in South Korea.” Papers of the British Association for Korean
Studies 9: 19–32.
Hahm, Pyong-choon. 1996. “Korea’s Initial Encounter with the Western Law, 1910–1948
A.D.” In Korean Law in the Global Economy, edited by Sang-hyun Song, 61–74.
Seoul: Bak Young Sa.
Han, Tongmin. 2006. “Sach’allyŏng ch’eje ŭi yŏksa jok paegyŏng kwa ŭimi.” In Pulgyo
kŭndaehwa
ŭi
chŏngae
wa
sŏnggyŏk,
edited
by
Taehan
Pulgyo,
Chogyejong
Kyoyug’wŏn and Pulhak Yŏnguso, 93–134. Seoul: Chogyejong Ch’ulp’ansa.
Henderson, Gregory. 1991. “Human Rights in South Korea, 1945–1953.” In Human Rights in
Korea: Historical and Policy Perspectives, edited by William Shaw, 125–69. Cambridge:
Harvard University Asia Center.
Ikeda Eishun. 1998. “Teaching Assemblies and Lay Societies in the Formation of Modern
Sectarian Buddhism.” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 25 (1–2): 11–44.
Jaffe, Richard M. 2001. Neither Monk nor Layman: Clerical Marriage in Modern Japanese
Buddhism. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kang Sŏkchu and Pak Kyŏnghun. (1980) 2002. Pulgyo kŭnse paengnyŏn. Seoul: Minjoksa.
Kim, Hwansoo Ilmee. 2012. Empire of the Dharma: Korean and Japanese Buddhism,
1877–1912. Cambridge: Harvard University Asia Center.
Kim Kwangsik. 2002. Sae Pulgyo undong ŭi chŏn’gae. Ansŏng, South Korea: Top’i ansa.
2006. Han’guk hyŏndae Pulgyosa yŏn’gu. Seoul: Pulgyo Sidaesa.
2011. “1945–1980 nyŏn kanŭi Pulgyo wa kukga kwŏllyŏk.” Pulgyo hakbo 58: 209–43.
Kim Pŏmjun. 2007. “Haebang konggan migunchŏng ui Pulgyo ch’ŏngch’aek yŏn’gu.”
Sŏnmunhwa yon’gu 3: 295–334.
Kim Sunsŏk. 2003. Ilche sidae Chosŏn ch’ongdokbu ŭi Pulgyo chŏngch’aek kwa Pulgyogye ŭi
taeŭng. Seoul: Kyŏngin Munhwasa.
340
Mark A. Nathan
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 363 ---
Kim Ŭngch’ŏl. 1997. “Chung’ang chonghoe ŭi yŏkhalpyŏnhwa wa unyŏngsilt’ae e kwanhan
yŏn’gu.” In Chogyejong chung’ang chonghoe hwaldong yŏn’gu, 95–146. Seoul: Silch’ŏn
Pulgyo Chŏnguk Sŭnggahoe.
Kim, Yeong-tae. 2014. “Korean Buddhism’s Efforts to Establish Itself as a Modern Religion,
and Its Political Subjugation to Authorities in the Process.” In The State, Religion, and
Thinkers in Korean Buddhism, edited by Robert M. Gimello, Robert Evans Buswell and
Richard D. McBride, 192–232. Seoul: The Institute for Buddhist Culture, Donnguk
University.
Korean Law Information Center. Accessed on December 15, 2021, www.law.go.kr/
Mun, Chanju. 2011. Puriﬁcation Buddhist Movement, 1954–1970: The Struggle to Restore
Celibacy in the Jogye Order of Korean Buddhism. Honolulu: Blue Pine Books.
Pak Puyŏng. 2007. “Taebŏbwŏn yukpi’gu halbok sa’gŏn.” Pulgyo p’yŏngnon 33. Access on
December 15, 2021. http://www.budreview.com/news/articleView.html?idxno=92.
Park, Jeongeun. 2016. Clerical Marriage and Buddhist Modernity in Early Twentieth-Century
Korea. PhD dissertation, University of British Columbia.
2017. “Re-thinking Married Bhik_su: Examination of Bhik_su Ordinations and Clerical
Marriage in 1920s Korean Buddhism.” Seoul Journal of Korean Studies 30 (2): 131–63.
Park, Pori. 2007. “The Buddhist Puriﬁcation Movement in Postcolonial South Korea:
Restoring Clerical Celibacy and State Intervention.” In Identity Conﬂicts: Can
Violence be Regulated? edited by J. Craig Jenkins and Esther E. Gottlieb, 131–45. New
Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
Schonthal, Benjamin. 2017–2018. “Litigating Vinaya: Buddhist Law and Public Law in
Contemporary Sri Lanka.” Buddhism, Law & Society 3: 69–111.
Song, Kue-jin. 2019. “The Real Face of Korean Buddhism under Japanese Colonial Rule.”
Journal of Korean Religions 10 (2): 275–99.
Sŏnu Toryang Han’guk Pulgyo Kŭnhyŏndaesa Yŏn’guhoe, ed. 1995. Sinmun ŭro pon
Han’guk Pulgyo kŭnhyŏndae sa. Seoul: Sŏnu Toryang Ch’ulp’anbu.
Taehan Pulgyo Chogyejong Ch’ongmuwŏn, ed. 1996. Pulgyo p’allyejip. Seoul: Taehan
Pulgyo Chogyejong Ch’ongmuwŏn Ch’ulp’ansa.
Taehan Pulgyo Chogyejong Kyoyug’wŏn, ed. 2001. Chogyejong sa: kŭnhyŏndae p’yŏn. Seoul:
Taehan Pulgyo Chogyejong Kyoyug’wŏn.
Tikhonov, Vladimir and Miller, Owen. 2008. Selected Writings of Han Yongun: From Social
Darwinism to Socialism with a Buddhist Face. Kent: Global Oriental.
Yi Nŭnghwa. (1918) 2003. Chosŏn Pulgyo t’ongsa: kŭndae p’yŏn. Seoul: Hyean.
Yŏn Kiyŏng. 1987. “Pulgyo chaesan kwallibŏp ŭi munjejŏm (wan)”. Pŏmnyul Sinmun 1671.
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea (1955–1970)
341
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 364 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 365 ---
part v
Comparative Perspectives
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 366 ---
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 367 ---
17
On the Familiar Pleasures of Estrangement
Deepa Das Acevedo*
17.1 INTRODUCTION
Anthropological analysis, at any rate the kind that has been emanating from Euro-
American departments for the last ﬁfty years or so, is grounded in the discovery of
difference. Anthropologists look closely, watch patiently, think critically, and engage
in a kind of concentrated musing – what others have more elegantly called “culti-
vated attentiveness” – all in the hopes of seeing new colors in the rainbow.1 We are
the science, if one cares to use that word, of human speciﬁcity. And yet, as much as
anthropology trades in human difference, it also delights in sameness. Nineteenth-
century anthropologists of the armchair variety, turn-of-the-century ﬁeldworkers of a
functionalist persuasion (as well as their structuralist others), postmodernists, and
even twenty-ﬁrst century anthropologists ever so gingerly attempting an ontological
turn are all committed to seeing what can, and what cannot, be considered true of
humankind writ large. In the face of difference, we are fascinated by similarity.
The chapters in this collection are, therefore, not only a source of incredibly rich
insight on the relationship between Buddhism and constitutional law; they are,
additionally, the source of a peculiarly anthropological pleasure because they offer a
charming lesson in the interpretive possibilities of sameness. For those of us who are
not scholars of Buddhism and are only very tenuously students of constitutional law,
the chapters cast into stark and provocative relief the assumptions that we may carry
about the wide swath of Buddhist contexts examined by the chapter authors. What
that means, of course, is that the chapters also reveal the assumptions we as scholars
carry about ourselves and our own areas of work.
*
My thanks to Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal for including me in this fantastic
project, to all of the participants for sharing their work, and to my colleagues on the April 15,
2021, roundtable for a truly enjoyable conversation.
1
This phrase comes from the syllabus for a graduate anthropological methods class taught at The
University of Chicago in 2015 (Sunder Rajan 2015).
345
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 368 ---
In the rest of my own short chapter, I will tease out a few moments where the
thematic concerns addressed by some of the authors with respect to Buddhism speak
powerfully to concerns that have animated the study of Hinduism and constitutional
law as undertaken by myself and others. I focus on three chapters in particular: Mark
Nathan’s analysis of monasticism and celibacy in Korea; Richard W. Whitecross’
reﬂections on dual sovereignty in Bhutan; and Krishantha Fedricks’ writing on
language ideology in Sri Lanka. This selection both is and is not random. I read
Nathan’s chapter ﬁrst and was so struck by the way its central concerns resembled
issues that I have repeatedly engaged with in my own work on Hinduism in India,
that I decided to cast about the series collection for geographical and thematic
variety. I landed on the chapters by Whitecross and Fedricks and realized that,
together with Nathan’s, they constituted an excellent triad. Each of them showed
me, thoughtfully but unequivocally, how themes I had only considered with respect
to India and Hinduism were applicable and generative far beyond those contexts. As
with all anthropological endeavors, my hope is to unsettle assumptions about one
thing via an exploration of another. But ﬁrst, a little background.
17.2 HINDUISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
What I am about to say certainly does not apply to all Hindus or all Buddhists. But,
just as certainly, it does capture the way a particularly signiﬁcant constitutional law
system – India’s – understands the contours and content of Hinduism. It also seems
to capture elements of Buddhism as it is understood by the legal systems of several
countries. Two points of divergence between Hinduism and Buddhism seem
especially important for the task of regulating them constitutionally.
First, everyday Hinduism is deeply tied to temple worship. There are caveats, of
course: not all Hindus worship in temples; those who do so worship for different
reasons and at different frequencies; and, ﬁnally, both the experience and the
perceived merits of temple worship vary widely. Nevertheless, the importance of
dar´sanam (“auspicious sight”) necessarily makes temples, whether they are roadside
altars, pilgrimage centers, or precolonial royal masterpieces, central to the practice
of Hinduism. Moreover, Hindu temples are not primarily or even signiﬁcantly
associated with religious elites in the vein of bhikkhus and bhikkhunis – although,
again, there are many such elites and many of them are linked with speciﬁc temples.
Second, it is difﬁcult to identify stable communities or hierarchies within
Hinduism of the sort generally associated with the Buddhist sangha – for the most
part. Communities that are generally (and certainly judicially) considered Hindu
range from the tens of thousands in the Ramnami Samaj to the tens of millions in
the Radha Soami Satsang. The various mathas that control many of Indian
Hinduism’s most venerated temples are nothing if not hierarchical. And castes are
both hierarchical and communitarian, even if their membership boundaries and
religious bona ﬁdes have long been up for debate. Despite these and other
346
Deepa Das Acevedo
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 369 ---
reasonable caveats, it remains the case that Hinduism writ large lacks a standing
religious elite that is hierarchically structured.
Both of these features suggest that the challenges precipitated by “Hinduism and
constitutional law” ought to be markedly, albeit not entirely, different from those
triggered by the conﬂuence of “Buddhism and constitutional law.” And yet, as the
rest of this chapter shows, that is not the case. The three chapters I will discuss below
demonstrate that, despite these seemingly foundational religious differences
between Hinduism and Buddhism (as well as innumerable legal differences
between the countries in question), the puzzles to be solved – or not – are in many
ways the same.2 That lesson is, in itself, striking in the extreme.
17.3 MONASTICISM AND CELIBACY IN KOREA
In his chapter, Mark Nathan uses a longstanding dispute over monastic celibacy to
argue that South Korea’s modern constitutional framework opened up spaces for
disagreement over Buddhist institutions, rather than having a consolidating, stabil-
izing, or homogenizing effect, as we might have expected. In November 1960, a
group of young monks stormed into the Supreme Court and threatened to commit
suicide because the Court had not deﬁnitively supported their side in a battle over
whether Korea’s national Chogye Order mandated monastic celibacy. Rather than
ruling on this core issue, the justices relied on procedural reasons to send the case
back to a lower court (where the protestors’ pro-celibacy side had won). Indeed,
despite repeated and contentious litigation, Korean courts never actually made a
determination as to the religious necessity of monastic celibacy. As Nathan observes,
they remained unwilling to wade into doctrinal disputes and were “concerned only
with the written constitution, rules, and regulations of an organization composed of
members who self-identiﬁed as Buddhist” (2022).
Self-governance within a framework of intense state oversight is, as Nathan argues,
a characteristic feature of Foucauldian governmentality, and it is a thread that runs
through the historical period he discusses. The Temple Ordinance published in
1911 by Korea’s colonial Japanese government comprised just seven short articles,
and it required Korean monastics to formulate the laws that would govern their own
behavior as well as the procedures by which their leaders would be chosen. These
temple laws were, however, subject to the colonial government’s approval, and as
such they became an important avenue for indirect state involvement in the reshap-
ing of Korean Buddhism. In 1926, for instance, revisions that won Japanese approval
“removed celibacy from the list of required qualiﬁcations to assume the duties of
abbot, which seemed to open the door to legal recognition of monastic marriages”
(Nathan 2022). Because the colonial approach both depended on and reinforced the
appearance of Korean Buddhist autonomy in matters of religious life, disputes over
2
Readers should note that I use the authors’ own transliterations of non-English terms.
On the Familiar Pleasures of Estrangement
347
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 370 ---
religious practice – including over the issue of monastic celibacy – became disputes
over which religious faction had the authority to issue behavioral mandates, rather
than disagreements over which practice better reﬂected Buddhist tenets.
I confess that what initially drew me to this chapter was its focus on religiously
motivated celibacy. For the last ten years, my own work in India has centered on the
Hindu temple at Sabarimala, Kerala, whose presiding deity, Ayyappan, is most
famous for being a permanent celibate who is unable or unwilling to receive
fertile women devotees. But the dynamics that Nathan explores – of state involve-
ment under cover of religious autonomy, and of state involvement that facilitates
(rather than erases) uncertainty and contestation – were also immediately recogniz-
able to me, as indeed they would be to any student of religion-state relations in India.
Like so many other public Hindu temples, Sabarimala is subject to intense and
statutorily mandated state oversight that is often presented as, and sometimes
actually is, the product of citizens’ preferences. Similarly, although there is no
organizational constitution at play in the women’s entry dispute, an earlier phase
of the dispute required courts to determine “who had the power to revise . . . the
rules of governance”: the temple’s chief priest, its advisory committee (a non-
governmental body of local elites), or governmental overseers (Nathan 2022; Das
Acevedo 2018).
There is, to be sure, a key difference: namely, the willingness of Indian courts to
wade enthusiastically into religious doctrinal waters. Scholars disagree about
whether or not these forays reﬂect indigenous or foreign interpretive styles, about
whether they are democratically defensible given the unelected nature of the
judiciary, and even about whether they negate India’s ostensibly secular character –
but there is little disagreement over whether or not Indian courts do, in fact,
pronounce on the validity of religious beliefs and practices (Das Acevedo 2013;
Dhavan 2001; Fuller 1988; Galanter 1971; Mehta 2005; Smith 1963). At various
points during the women’s entry dispute, for instance, Indian courts have declared
both that Sabarimala’s ban on women is an “essential” aspect of Ayyappan worship
(making it eligible for more robust constitutional protections) and that it is a non-
essential aspect of Hinduism that gives way to other constitutional guarantees of
equality and non-discrimination (Das Acevedo 2020).
But what Nathan’s chapter makes beautifully clear to outsiders like me, aside from
the similarities and differences I’ve just described, is that we may need to reexamine
our often too-quick assumptions about the traditions and countries we study.
Scholarship on religion-state relations in India has generally rationalized extensive
state involvement in the management of Hindu temples by pointing to the lack of
religious hierarchy and congregational identity within Hindu tradition. If the state
didn’t step in, this thinking goes, there would be no one to coordinate resources,
resolve disputes, or pursue reforms. While Nathan’s chapter on Buddhism in Korea
does not by itself unravel this way of understanding Hinduism in India, it does –
given the existence of religious hierarchy within most iterations of Buddhism and
348
Deepa Das Acevedo
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 371 ---
the importance of the sangha – suggest that we may need to more carefully examine
its explanatory power.
17.4 DUAL SOVEREIGNTY IN BHUTAN
In his chapter on Bhutan, Richard W. Whitecross argues that the Dual System
implemented in Bhutan by the Zhabdrung, Ngawang Namgyal (d. 1651), and
further entrenched by the 2008 Constitution, has had unexpected and not always
positive consequences. The Zhabdrung himself embodied both religious (chos) and
secular (srid) authority but he separated these two aspects of his authority among his
subordinates – most relevantly, between a secular regent (the Druk Desi) and a chief
abbot (the Druk Je Khenpo). This Dual System “functioned reasonably well until the
last quarter of the eighteenth century when the rivalry emerged between the
regional governors who vied for the post of Desi” (Whitecross 2022, 7). The 2008
Constitution, which was largely the achievement of Bhutan’s Fourth King but only
came into force during the reign of his son, the Fifth King, simultaneously embraces
and resists the Dual System.
On the one hand, the 2008 Constitution provides, for the ﬁrst time, that the Dual
System will be embodied in the person of the monarch (Whitecross 2022).
Whitecross notes that “[t]he coronation rituals created for the enthronement sym-
bolically presented the monarch as the legitimate successor, the Zhabdrung,” who
was, it should be remembered, the last ruler of Bhutan to personify both forms of
authority. More explicitly, Article 2(2) of the Constitution states that the Dual
System “shall be uniﬁed in the person of the [king] who, as a Buddhist, shall be
the upholder of the [Dual System].”
At the same time, the Constitution takes signiﬁcant steps to separate religious and
secular authority because of the drafters’ belief that “ethnic and religious differences
are the main causes of problems in this world” (Whitecross 2022). Article 3(1) calls
Buddhism the country’s “spiritual heritage,” rather than its state religion. Article 3(3)
obliges “religious institutions and personalities” to ensure “that religion remains
separate from politics” and even declares that “[r]eligious institutions and personal-
ities shall remain above politics.” And ﬁnally, there is no formal role for the Zhung
Dratshang (Central Monk Body) within any central governing bodies, as had been
the case since 1953. Thanks to these provisions, Whitecross argues that the
2008 Constitution has led to a decidedly “un-dual” outcome, which is “the exclu-
sion of religious practitioners from engaging in local level politics” (2022).
Once again, there are plenty of similarities with the Indian – and speciﬁcally,
Hindu – context. A primary and well-documented worry of India’s constitutional
framers was that “left to itself, religion could permit orthodox men to burn widows
alive on the piers [sic] of their deceased husbands . . . coerce indulgence in social
evils like child marriage or even crimes like human sacriﬁce . . . or relegate large
sections of humanity to the sub-human status of untouchability and inferiority”
On the Familiar Pleasures of Estrangement
349
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 372 ---
(Bhagwati 2005, 43). Likewise, India still formally – although the hollow formality of
this statement is becoming every day more extreme – lacks an established state
religion. At the same time, and apart from political developments that have made
India a Hindu state in all but name, the Constitution accords considerable cultural
and legal dominance to Hinduism over other religious traditions. It identiﬁes India
by a name, Bharat, with largely Hindu connotations; it authorizes reforms respect-
ing Hindu temples that are widely understood to have been motivated by a desire to
consolidate Hindu identity and prevent an exodus of Dalit Hindus through conver-
sion; it includes the prohibition of cow slaughter among its non-justiciable Directive
Principles; and, perhaps most unambiguously, it treats Buddhism, Jainism, and
Sikhism as legally equivalent to Hinduism.3
Notwithstanding these considerable similarities between the Bhutanese and
Indian contexts, what is most striking to me about Whitecross’ study is the way in
which it acknowledges, even embraces, the inescapable ambiguity of the Dual
System of sovereignty. For some time now I have been arguing – and I think the
“women’s entry” dispute demonstrates – the extent to which India’s Constitution
reﬂects allegiance to two very different visions of democratic sovereignty. Many of
the Constitution’s more striking elements reveal an understanding of sovereignty as
something that is shared between citizens and the state; conceptualizing sovereignty
this way “enables the state to undertake the kind of broad and often unpredictable
reforms required to construct a more equitable society” (Das Acevedo 2016,
579–580). At the same time, and often within the very same constitutional articles,
India’s charter also promises traditional liberal protections that are predicated on the
state’s obligation, as a mere agent of citizens’ (wholly owned) sovereign authority, to
stay out of various spheres of activity. What other commentators have discounted,
I’ve argued, “is the possibility that this tension is an intentional and productive
feature of Indian constitutionalism writ large (and by extension, of Indian democ-
racy) rather than being accidental, pathological, or speciﬁcally about religion” (Das
Acevedo 2016, 579). Even as it explores the unintended consequences of the Dual
System, Whitecross’ chapter encourages us to take seriously the tensions baked into
it in both its original formulation by the Zhabdrung and its interpretation in the
2008 Bhutanese Constitution.
17.5 LANGUAGE IDEOLOGY IN SRI LANKA
Krishantha Fedricks’ chapter argues that the religio-political Mahamevna¯wa move-
ment is shaped by a Sinhala-centered language ideology in a way that is responsive
to both nationalist and constitutionalist idioms. Since its establishment in 1999,
3
Constitution of India, Art. 1(1) (“Bharat”); Art. 48 (“cow slaughter”); Art. 25, Explanation II
(regarding Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism). On the Hindu nature of India’s constitution see
Singh (2005).
350
Deepa Das Acevedo
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 373 ---
Mahamevna¯wa has founded seventy branches within Sri Lanka as well as inter-
national outposts in countries like the United States, India, Germany, England, and
Dubai. The movement is both nationalist and transnationalist. On the one hand,
Mahamevna¯wa challenges the liturgical primacy and sonic sacredness of Pa¯li, and it
also embraces popular aesthetic and religious forms to a degree that is unusual
within “mainstream nationalist monastic politics” (Fedricks 2022). On the other
hand, Mahamevna¯wa is intentionally transnational in its orientation and techno-
logically diversiﬁed in its methods, so much so that Fedricks considers it to be “the
ﬁrst televangelist Buddhist group in Sri Lanka” (2022). Similarly, the movement is
both constitutionalist and anti-constitutionalist. Its faith in the power of correct
language and form, like its emphasis on a philosophical orientation or set of
principles – the dhamma – as a guiding charter for the true Buddhist state, means
that Mahamevna¯wa incorporates the foundational premises of constitutional law
within its own structure and strategy. At the same time, the movement is ﬁrm in its
disavowal of secular constitutions and its critique of monastic participation in
politics, on the grounds that both have led to the decline of Buddhism in contem-
porary Sri Lanka.
Fedricks’ inversion of the usual question – how religion impacts law – is familiar
and familiarly productive to anyone studying the impact of constitutional law on
Hinduism in India. The Indian Supreme Court’s religious freedom jurisprudence is
regularly applauded or derided (or both) for its construction of a Hinduism that
coheres remarkably well with the Constitution’s more progressive impulses. In the
mid-twentieth century, for instance, some of the Court’s most famous adjudicative
efforts argued that, properly understood, neither Hindu texts nor Hindu principles
required that temples absolutely exclude Dalit individuals from their premises;
instead, what they required was “insigniﬁcant participation” on par with many other
Hindu constituencies. More recently, the Supreme Court held that neither the
tenets of Ayyappan worship nor those of Hinduism as a whole require the exclusion
of women aged ten to ﬁfty from Sabarimala’s premises. “It is a universal truth,” wrote
Chief Justice Dipak Misra in 2018, “that faith and religion do not countenance
discrimination” – because, in the end, he said, “[a]ll religions are simply different
paths to reach the Universal One” (Indian Young Lawyers Association v. State of
Kerala, at para. 4). Scholars of Indian religious freedom jurisprudence, myself
included, have thus become accustomed to pointing out how, to paraphrase
Fedricks, “notions of constitutional law ﬁnd their way into [Hindu] institutions”
(2022).
But what is striking is that Fedricks begins his account with a brief history of
ethnolinguistic nationalism before he ever gets to constitutional law, and even after
discussing constitutional concerns he returns to language ideology as it is marshalled
by Mahamevna¯wa. The bidirectional nature of this dynamic is just as evident in the
Indian context: Chief Justice Misra’s comment about different paths riffs off a well-
known line from the Ṛg Veda that was arguably mistranslated by Swami
On the Familiar Pleasures of Estrangement
351
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 374 ---
Vivekananda, and that now makes cameo appearances in both legal and popular
discourse with such frequency that it is impossible to accurately parse the direction
of ﬂow (Doniger 2014, 18). What Fedricks’ chapter reminds us of, in other words, is
not simply the value of occasionally fronting law as subject rather than object in
conversations about religion and constitutionalism, but the need to always remem-
ber the chicken-and-egg nature of that relationship.
17.6 CONCLUSION
As I began by suggesting, the chapters in this volume offer a rare opportunity: the
chance to learn substantively about a fascinating new area of interdisciplinary legal
scholarship while also learning, thematically and analytically, about one’s own. For
the anthropologist who seeks difference, there is nuanced, granular analysis that
teases out the unique dimensions of both Buddhism and constitutionalism as they
manifest across several contexts. And for the anthropologist who delights in same-
ness, there is an invitation, subtly different in each chapter but present in them all, to
consider how these lessons about a particular religious tradition (and several coun-
tries) are also lessons about other traditions and other countries.
For the scholar of comparative constitutional law – who is, after all, one of the
primary readers of this volume – these chapters offer a distinct yet related provocation:
how are the chapters’ shared points of emphasis, Buddhism and constitutionalism,
best thought of? Is it Buddhism and constitutional law, Buddhism as constitutional
law, or even the preposition-free Buddhist constitutional law? Too often, comparative
constitutional law scholarship has rested on the easy assumption that what is being
compared is most relevantly thought of in political and geographic terms – the nation-
state – and, consequently, that the third of these formulations is best: American
constitutional law versus Indian constitutional law, and so on. That assumption may
always have been problematic, but it is now even less defensible given the rapid
ascendance of movements that are populist, transnational, and very often ethnoreli-
gious in nature. By troubling the premise that the objects of comparison and analogy
in comparative constitutional law are easily identiﬁable, these chapters open up a
space for thinking more creatively about the intersection of religion and law.
references
Bhagwati, P. N. 2005. “Religion and Secularism Under the Indian Constitution.” In Religion
and Law in Independent India (2nd ed.), edited by Robert D. Baird, 35–50. New Delhi:
Manohar.
Das Acevedo, Deepa. 2013. “Secularism in the Indian Context.” Law & Social Inquiry 38 (1):
138–67.
2016. “Temples, Courts, and Dynamic Equilibrium in the Indian Constitution.” The
American Journal of Comparative Law 64 (3): 555–82.
352
Deepa Das Acevedo
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 375 ---
2018. “Gods’ Homes, Men’s Courts, Women’s Rights.” International Journal of
Constitutional Law 16 (2): 552–73.
2020. “Just Hindus.” Law & Social Inquiry 45 (4): 965–94.
Dhavan, Rajeev. 2001. “The Road to Xanadu: India’s Quest for Secularism.” In Religion and
Personal Law in Secular India, edited by Gerald Larson, 301–29. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Doniger, Wendy. 2014. On Hinduism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fedricks, Krishantha. 2022. “Guardians of the Law: Sinhala Language and Buddhist
Reformation in Post-war Sri Lanka.” In Buddhism and Comparative Constitutional
Law, edited by Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal, X–X. Location: Cambridge
University Press.
Fuller, C. J. 1988. “Hinduism and Scriptural Authority in Modern Indian Law.” Comparative
Studies in Society and History 30 (2): 225–48.
Galanter, Marc. 1971. “Hinduism, Secularism, and the Indian Judiciary.” Philosophy East and
West 21 (4): 467–87.
Indian Young Lawyers Association v. State of Kerala, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 373 of 2006,
2018 SCC OnLine Sc 1690.
Mehta, Pratap Bhanu. 2005. “Reason, Tradition, Authority, Religion and the Indian State.” In
Men’s Laws, Women’s Lives: A Constitutional Perspective on Religion, Common Law and
Culture in South Asia, edited by Indira Jaising, 56–86. New Delhi: Women Unlimited.
Nathan, Mark A. 2022. “Buddhist Constitutional Battlegrounds: Using the Courts to Litigate
Monastic Celibacy in South Korea, 1955–1970.” In Buddhism and Comparative
Constitutional Law, edited by Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal, X–X.
Location: Cambridge University Press.
Singh, Pritam. 2005. “Hindu Bias in India’s ‘Secular’ Constitution: Probing Flaws in the
Instruments of Governance.” Third World Quarterly 26 (6): 909–26.
Smith, Donald E. 1963. India as a Secular State. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sunder Rajan, Kaushik. 2015. Syllabus: ANTH 42000: Anthropological Fieldwork Methods.
Whitecross, Richard W. 2022. “The Zhabdrung’s Legacy: Buddhism and Constitutional
Transformation in Bhutan.” In Buddhism and Comparative Constitutional Law, edited
by Tom Ginsburg and Benjamin Schonthal, X–X. Location: Cambridge University
Press.
On the Familiar Pleasures of Estrangement
353
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 376 ---
18
Buddhism and Constitutionalism
A Comparison with the Canon Law
Richard H. Helmholz
18.1 INTRODUCTION
Readers of this volume may be wondering, as I myself have wondered, why a person
with only the most rudimentary knowledge of Buddhism and only a smattering of
knowledge about constitutionalism itself should be involved in a discussion devoted
to both subjects. I have considered this question as a likely one among you, and
I want to offer two possible justiﬁcations for my appearance.
One is Tom Ginsburg’s invitation. An offer from him was something I hesitated to
reject. Tom stands at the top of the ﬁeld of comparative constitutionalism, and
I ﬁgured: If he asked me, there must be a plausible reason. You can make your own
decision on this. The other is my own interest in the character of religious law – not
just Christian law but the law of other religions. Both this volume and my research
involve the possible connection between the two. I thought – I still think – that
organized religion may, by its inherent nature, be connected with constitutionalism.
Both stand upon a conviction that there are certain fundamental rules and prin-
ciples that must be respected. They stand outside our own volition, indeed our own
full understanding, and they shape our law. Perhaps the easiest example from the
perspective of Christianity is that of the Ten Commandments. Its commands are not
subject to repeal or amendment, though our adherence to them will never be
perfect and their exact reach may be controversial. They are “constitutional” in that
sense. Containing no penalties for violation, they cannot be considered positive law,
but they invite legislators to provide more deﬁnite enactments to secure
their enforcement.
In contributing to this volume, I was motivated by a desire to discover whether
another religion – Buddhism – shared this feature with Christianity. Does what
I have described make an intellectual connection with what exists in the practice of
Buddhism? For purposes of comparison, this short chapter contains four examples
354
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 377 ---
that show how the canon laws, which regulated life in Christian churches, were
understood and treated in practice.
18.2 DEFINITIONS
I begin with two deﬁnitions. Canon law means the law of the medieval church. In
its deﬁnitive form, it was the product of the twelfth to the thirteenth centuries,
fashioned from decrees of church councils, papal rulings, biblical texts, the ancient
laws of Rome, and the dictates of natural law. It lasted in its medieval form for a long
time: in the Catholic church until the twentieth century, and in Protestant lands, in
what might be called a secularized but still substantially similar form, until about the
same time. It was part of the European ius commune, the general law of European
lands that supplemented and directed the scope of local customary laws.
Constitutionalism is a more contested term. If I may borrow from what
I remember from a talk given by the dean who ﬁrst invited me to come to the
University of Chicago, Gerhard Casper, later president of Stanford University, it is
not simply a set of laws that preempted other laws. He wrote: “Constitutionalism
does not refer to having a constitution but to structured and substantive limitations
on government” (Casper 1987, 16). He did not mean that only a democracy could
have such constitutional limitations. As Tom Ginsburg has himself shown, even
authoritarian regimes may leave room for institutions that check the exercise of
despotic powers (2008). The signiﬁcant question is not where we place any particu-
lar category of rights, but how close they are to being unlimited. Almost all the rights
we hold are subject to limitations. They cannot be absolute, and it is more useful to
examine what the limitations are than it is to attempt to place those rights into one
box or the other. In what follows, I shall assume that the reader knows only slightly
more about the medieval canon law than I do about Buddhist law.
18.3 FIRST: STATUS-BASED RIGHTS OF THE CLERGY,
INCLUDING MONKS AND NUNS
A foundational principle of the canon law was that the clergy should be treated as a
class and separately in law than were other men and women. Most famously, this
principle was the basis for “beneﬁt of clergy” in England, a privilege that allowed
clerics accused of serious crimes to escape prosecution in the royal courts. Instead,
they were to be remitted to the hands of their bishop, who would deal with them as
he saw ﬁt – no mean privilege in an age when the ordinary punishment for those
found guilty of a felony was death at the gallows. This was only the most famous
application of what the church itself considered a matter of right ordering in a world
where clergy stood apart from the laity. The claim, canonists said, was one that no
secular ruler had authority to reverse. The temporal law itself recognized this
principle, as in Magna Carta’s ﬁrst clause – the English church shall be free. This
A Comparison with the Canon Law
355
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 378 ---
arrangement had consequences. It meant that physical attacks against a cleric were
to be dealt with differently from similar attacks against the laity – an offender was to
be tried in an ecclesiastical court and, if found guilty, required to undertake a
journey to the papal court in Rome to seek absolution from the Roman pontiff. It
also required special disposition of the property of clerics at their death, much like
the situation of Buddhist monks.
Of course, it was also true that the clergy was bound by stricter rules in some
respects. Requirements in their dress, limitations on the right to own property, and
of course the burden of celibacy – the issue we learned about in the context of
Korean Buddhism presented by Mark Nathan in this volume – were all regarded as
consequences of this part of the canon law. I should add that some of these
assertions were contested in speciﬁc situations – just as the reach of provisions in
the US Constitution today sometimes become matters of dispute. Allowing claims to
freehold land to escape secular jurisdiction simply because it came into the hands of
an ecclesiastic seemed an abuse of the right ordering of society to most English
common lawyers for instance, and they developed ways to prevent it. However, that
there existed a basic and permanent difference between the spiritual and the
temporal spheres of life those lawyers did not dispute, and this fundamental differ-
ence had in effect constitutional consequences.
18.4 SECOND: FREEDOM OF RELIGIOUS CHOICE
Surprising as it may seem to ﬁnd any mention of freedom of choice in matters of
religious faith in the law of the medieval church – the architect of the
Inquisition – the canon law did in fact contain such a principle. No unwilling
person was to be required to embrace Christianity. Jews were permitted to raise
their children in the Jewish faith, even where the government of a land was in
the hands of orthodox Christian bishops and magistrates. The same was true of
other religions. This is, however, an example of a fundamental freedom that was
reduced to a very small corner of human life as it was put into practice, and the
medieval church cannot pretend to have been a champion of religious freedom.
This is because the canon law also held that, although the choice to accept
baptism or to refuse it was a real one, once baptism had been chosen freely, it
was ﬁnal. No freedom to renounce Christianity was available, and since in
practice most baptisms were conducted while the person was an infant, in fact,
this freedom of choice largely disappeared. It was akin to circumcision among
the ancient Israelites; it could not be undone, and it obliged the circumcised to
keep the Mosaic Laws. The constitutional freedom to choose one’s religion,
found in the texts of the medieval canon law, would thus have to wait to become
fully effective – just as in the history of the common law, freedom of speech in
English had to wait until it could be expanded from the privileged ﬂoor of the
Houses of Parliament to the streets of London.
356
Richard H. Helmholz
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 379 ---
18.5 THIRD: A RIGHT TO REMAIN SILENT
Known commonly in modern legal parlance as the “privilege against self-incrimin-
ation,” this constitutional principle was commonly stated by the legal maxim Nemo
tenetur prodere seipsum: No one is obliged to proceed against himself. Included in
Amendment V to the US Constitution (1791), the principle is also found in several of
the canonical texts as understood in the Middle Ages. It was buttressed also by the
principle, stated in the same basic texts, that De occultis non judicat ecclesia: The
church does not pass judgment on matters that are hidden. The proper place for
these private matters was the private forum of confession to God, not the public
forum of a court of law. As Panormitanus, the greatest of the late medieval canonists,
stated in this argument, buttressing it with citations from the Bible and the
Decretum, “It seems that no one is required to answer an interrogation or an
incriminating charge, because Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum” (Panormitanus
1615). Like the concept of religious freedom, however, this constitutional right
turned out in practice to mean less than it does today. This happened because
public fame was accepted as raising a legitimate presumption of a person’s guilt,
requiring him to swear a compurgatory oath of his innocence if he wished to
squelch the rumor’s effect. In other words, he could not be required to incriminate
himself, but he could be required to rebut public fame against him if it was held by
good and substantial members of the community. Parallels to this situation may be
seen today – most recently in the reputation of “inappropriate behavior” that has
been fastened on many men in respect of women they admired. Had this been 1250,
in the absence of deﬁnitive proof of their offenses, they might have been obliged to
undergo canonical purgation, and I think it is fair to say that this would be an inroad
on the presumption of innocence and the privilege against self-incrimination.
18.6 FOURTH: WELFARE RIGHTS
Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights declares that “Everyone has
the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of his family.”
It may be surprising to discover that the medieval canon law contained a similar,
though not identical, provision. However, it was based not upon noble aspirations,
but rather upon dictates canon lawyers found in the law of nature. Before society was
organized, their argument ran, all things on Earth had been held in common. So it
was in the Garden of Eden. Private property depended upon a general agreement to
forgo common ownership in favor of individual incentives to make productive use of
what they possessed. It would reward effort and protect against thievery. However,
that agreement did not extend to times of extreme want. When those times arrived
and social organization fell apart, the poor could take from the wealthy without
scruple. In a sense, they were simply taking what was already theirs – held in
common perhaps – because they were entitled to it under the agreement made at
A Comparison with the Canon Law
357
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 380 ---
the time. It followed also that governments had the ability to organize efforts in this
direction to avoid the chaos and public disquiet that would accompany a regime of
pure self-help. This point may also be amusing. Of course, the idea that there had
actually once been a “world parliament” that agreed to this system requires a stretch
of the imagination. William Blackstone, the great eighteenth-century English
lawyer, described it as “too wild” to be believed (Blackstone 1979). But he did not
reject the conclusions that lawyers had always drawn from it. Undoubtedly more
limited in scope than what is now found in the Universal Declaration, it has been
claimed that it stands as a worthy ancestor of today’s aspirations.
18.7 CONCLUSION
There is a good deal more that could be said on this subject. More examples could
be provided, more rights and limitations expanded upon. My hope, however, is that
there may be some parallels in Buddhist thinking that relate to what I have
described. I picked my four subjects because I thought there might be, and there
are, indications in the chapters from this volume to encourage my hopes on this
score. Clerical privileges, for instance, might be just such an area which Buddhist
thought held to be off limits from meddling and change by secular authorities.
Berthe Jansen’s very helpful chapter on monastic constitutional law certainly
encourages this approach. Perhaps another example would be Martin Mills’ discus-
sion of Songtsen Gampo’s royal law based on the Buddhist ten virtues, or Iselin
Frydenlund’s chapter on events in Myanmar. Seemingly, it also resembles what
D. Christian Lammerts wrote about the dhammasattha law of precolonial Southeast
Asia and his wonderful example of the exchange of a bunch of bananas for a
coconut ﬁlled with gold. Richard W. Whitecross’ treatment of constitutionalism
in Bhutan encouraged the same thought, as did Krishantha Fedricks’ intriguing
introduction to televangelist Buddhist monks. On the other hand, some of the
contributions seem to me to suggest the opposite – that the real problem has been
simply the treatment of Buddhists by avowedly secular governments rather than the
place of constitutional ideas within Buddhism itself. Levi McLaughlin’s consider-
ations on the impact of the 1951 Religious Juridical Persons Law on Japanese
Buddhists is an example. This chapter and a few others have addressed the treatment
of Buddhism under current law, not constitutionalism itself as part of religious law.
Valuable and interesting as they are in themselves, they have suggested to me the
absence of Buddhism as a likely source of constitutional principles. If that is what we
must conclude the evidence shows, I will be wiser, but also sadder.
references
Blackstone, William. [1765–1769] 1979. Commentaries on the Laws of England: A Facsimile of
the First Edition of 1765–1769. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
358
Richard H. Helmholz
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 381 ---
Casper, Gerhard. 1987. Constitutionalism. Occasional Papers from the Law School, n. 22.
Chicago: University of Chicago Law School.
Ginsburg, Tom. 2008. “Administrative Law and the Judicial Control of Agents in
Authoritarian Regimes.” In Rule by Law: The Politics of Courts in Authoritarian Regimes,
edited by Tom Ginsburg and Tamir Moustafa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Panormitanus (Nicolaus de Tudeschis). 1615. Commentaria super decretalium libros, f. 137
(X 2.18.2, no. 16). Venice.
A Comparison with the Canon Law
359
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 382 ---
19
Islam and Constitutional Law
Insights for the Emerging Field of Buddhist Constitutional Law
Clark B. Lombardi
19.1 INTRODUCTION
In the hope of encouraging the enormously valuable project of developing a ﬁeld of
Buddhism and law that can interact symbiotically with the young ﬁeld of Islam and
constitutional law, this chapter will try brieﬂy to do three things. First, it will
ruminate upon the surprisingly long delay in commencing a study of the relation-
ship between Islam and constitutional law, and upon the political and academic
developments that eventually inspired the academic ﬁeld to focus its energies
productively onto studies in this area. Second, it will discuss some of the central
ﬁndings produced by scholars over the past twenty-ﬁve years as they started,
belatedly, to explore the complex relationships between Islam and constitutional
law around the world. This part of the chapter will focus on the conclusions that
have been drawn by scholars of the Sunni tradition. The study of Islam and consti-
tutional law makes clear that when one is dealing with a global, internally plural
tradition such as Islam or Buddhism, it is sometimes necessary to generalize ﬁrst
about particular sects or regional instantiations of a religious tradition, before one
can draw broader conclusions. Scholars of Islam and constitutional law have largely,
though not exclusively, focussed on the Sunni world and its “constitutional imagin-
ary.”1 Third, this article will very cautiously draw upon the contributions in this
volume to highlight some ways in which patterns found in the Sunni Muslim world
seem to be absent in a number of Buddhist countries. The claims made in this
section are cautious and the ambitions of the discussion modest. Hopefully, though,
1
Martin Loughlin deﬁnes the constitutional imagination as “the manner in which constitutions
can harness the power of narrative, symbol, ritual and myth to project an account of political
existence in ways that shape – and re-shape – political reality. The phrase draws our attention to
the capacity of constitutions to offer alternative perceptions of reality, revealing new ways of
conceiving the boundaries of practical political action” (2015, 3).
360
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 383 ---
this discussion will highlight some possible areas for productive future research for
scholars in the new ﬁeld of Buddhism and constitutional law.
19.2 THE RISE OF THE STUDY OF “ISLAM AND
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW”
In retrospect, it should have been obvious that the introduction of constitutions into
the Muslim world would have profound effects upon the constitutional imagination
of people around the world, Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
From a very early period, Islamic thinkers have been interested in questions of
ethical governance and about how government should be structured, both to ensure
that the ruler acts morally and that he creates a society in which morality is
encouraged. Scholars of Islamic thought have long been interested in this subject.
Furthermore, almost from the time that they were ﬁrst introduced in the nineteenth
century, constitutions in majority Muslim states have generally made at least some
reference to Islam. Over time, the references to Islam have become more wide-
spread and more elaborate. Furthermore, in countries where the constitution expli-
citly carved out a role for Islam or Islamic values, governments began to feel
signiﬁcant pressure to honor the constitutional obligation to respect Islam. As a
result, national administrative legislation was adopted to organize (and control) the
institutions that had historically interpreted Islam for the people. A number of
scholars, particularly political scientists focusing on Islamic politics in post-colonial
countries, have discussed these developments.
Hiding in plain sight within this literature were questions that begged to be
answered. Why over the course of the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst centuries, were
polities throughout the heterogeneous Muslim world demanding that constitutional
systems carve out a role for Islam in shaping state practices and state law? What was
the role of religious mentalities in the shaping of these demands? What were the
effect of debates about constitutionalizing Islam on Muslims’ understanding of their
own religion? Were they causing Muslims fruitfully to revisit the works of Islamic
religious and intellectual history? If so, should their ﬁndings cause the Western
academy to rethink some of its accepted wisdom about Islamic intellectual and
political history? Were these debates inspiring them to develop viable alternatives to
classical liberal constitutionalism? If so, what was (or should be) the effect of this
development of the constitutional imaginary outside the Muslim world?
The Islamic tradition, like many global religious traditions, presents itself differ-
ently in different parts of the world and, indeed, within a single majority Muslim
country, different classes or communities may express their commitment to Islam
in different ways.2 After World War II, scholars focusing on the Islamic tradition
2
Variations are so large that after World War II, some scholars of religious studies in the Euro-
American academy suggested that it was misleading even to talk about a single religion of Islam
Islam and Constitutional Law
361
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 384 ---
started to emphasize the importance of describing the way that Muslims in a
particular region experienced and understood their religion. Less attention was
focussed on the task of identifying transregional patterns in Muslim religious
discourse or practices.3 During this same period, many sociologists of religion were
under the thrall of a secularization thesis, a commitment that likely led them to
discount the possible signiﬁcance of religious language in political discourse or in
new constitutional texts.
By the 1980s, however, global events were forcing policymakers and academics to
admit and address the obvious. Islamist discourse was becoming an increasingly
important factor in politics all over the Muslim world. This discourse often involved
a common demand that national governments recognize (and honor) a constitutional
obligation to respect supposedly “Islamic” traditions of government. In 1979 alone, the
world watched as a military government in Pakistan continued to impose a program of
Islamic constitutional reforms accompanied by massive legal reforms; Iran completed
a dramatic Islamic revolution against a dictatorial ally of the US; Afghanistan was
convulsed by an Islamically inﬂected war of resistance against a Soviet puppet regime;
and oil-rich Saudi Arabia experienced a shocking armed takeover of the Grand
Mosque in Mecca by Islamist radicals, who believed that the seemingly conservative
monarchy was insufﬁciently respectful of Islamic traditions of moral governance.
Within two years, the president of Egypt had been assassinated by Islamist radicals
and in Sudan, a military junta decided to shore up its ﬂagging popularity by embra-
cing a radical program of Islamic constitutional and legal reform.
By the early 1990s, scholars studying different parts of the Muslim world through a
variety of disciplinary lenses were beginning to think about how best to approach the
phenomenon of Islamic political discourse in a world of nation-states and of Islamic
language embedded into national constitutions. As they did so, these scholars began
(see e.g., Al-Azmeh 1993). Although few people adopted the strong form of this argument, it
nonetheless had an impact on the way that Islam was studied. The study of “Islam” continued
to accept at face value Muslims’ shared description of themselves as partners engaged in a
common project – the project of engaging with, interpreting, and obeying the divine message
revealed in a shared set of scriptures.
3
The post-war academy began increasingly to react against a long “orientalist” tradition of
Islamic studies in the West, one that had very justly been accused of developing simplistic
generalizations about Islam, generalizations that had shaped in unfortunate ways Western
attitudes towards Muslims as well as colonial (and post-colonial) policies toward Muslim
populations. After World War II, academics began consciously and systematically to challenge
old generalizations about Islam and began speciﬁcally to focus on highlighting the rich
diversity of different ways in which a commitment to “Islam” could be manifested in different
countries or communities. Helping to push this trend were structural shifts. Many scholars who
focused on Islam were placed into newly formed “area studies” departments, so that scholars
working on Islam in South Asia had far more contact with scholars of Hinduism in South Asia
than with scholars of Islam in the Middle East. And even scholars located in traditional
methodological departments tended more than in the past to focus on exploring the nuances
of Islamic belief, practice, and institutions as they developed in a particular region, rather than
trying to look for broader patterns in Islamic beliefs and practices.
362
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 385 ---
to identify some new questions. Among them: When and where did the impulse to
constitutionalize Islam ﬁrst emerge? Did it really grow organically (as some modern
Islamist thinkers asserted) out of a premodern tradition of political thought that had
incubated a latent commitment to constitutionalism even before the age of written
constitutions? Why was the wording of the constitutional provisions that referenced
Islam so idiosyncratic? How did a decision to integrate Islam into a constitutional
text (or into the interpretation of a formally secular constitution) actually affect the
people who lived under that constitution? This last issue involved two distinct but
symbiotic questions. First, did the decision to bring Islam into constitutional dis-
course change the way that Muslims understood and engaged with their religion?
Second, did the decision to bring Islam into the constitutional order change the
practices of the state and/or the experiences of its subjects?
To answer all these questions scholars had to draw upon a multitude of disciplines
that had not hitherto existed in regular dialogue. Historians of classical Islam had to
revisit the accepted wisdom in their ﬁeld about both Islamic thought and state
practices, while historians, anthropologists, sociologists, and political scientists with
expertise in one or more parts of the Muslim world had to explore the evolution of
modern ideas about constitutions and constitutionalism. Building on these micro-
studies of constitutional (or proto-constitutional) thought and of religious develop-
ments, scholars could attempt to draw broader conclusions about the way in which
ideas and practices traveled and evolved across space and time, and about the nature
of the impact in the Muslim world both of Islam on constitutional law and,
conversely, of constitutional law upon Islam.
As scholars have begun to answer some of these questions, the promise of a greater
prize has appeared. Some scholars began tentatively to draw hypotheses about the
broader lessons that evolving studies of Islam and constitutional law might teach the
world about the role religion can and often does play in the modern world and,
more speciﬁcally, about the roles that religion can play in the constitutional
orderings of modern states (Brown 2002, Hirschl 2010). For some of the more
ambitious hypotheses to be tested, scholars needed access to studies that could help
establish whether patterns in the Muslim world were analogous to patterns in other
parts of the world, especially parts in which a person’s identity was understood in
terms of a religion other than Islam. For example, were majority Buddhist countries
constitutionalizing Buddhism? If so, was the process being driven by factors similar
to those driving constitutional Islamization? Was the process proceeding in a fashion
similar to that unfolding in the Muslim world? Was the constitutionalization of
Buddhism enshrined in constitutional provision similar to that being drafted in the
Muslim world? And ﬁnally, was the constitutionalization of Buddhism affecting
governance in the Buddhist world in a manner similar to the way it was affecting
governance in the Muslim world?
The present volume provides hope that some of the answers to these questions
may start to be answered in the coming years. Contributions to this volume
Islam and Constitutional Law
363
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 386 ---
demonstrate that Buddhism, like Islam, has clearly engaged from a very early period
with questions about how rulers should act and about how political actors should
interact with religious actors to ensure that ethical behavior is encouraged in society.
Buddhism does show up, albeit sometimes obliquely, in modern constitutional texts
and/or commentaries. And Buddhist actors are active politically, sometimes in ways
that affect constitutional politics directly and sometimes in ways that signiﬁcantly
affect the political dynamic and political expectations and thus, albeit indirectly,
shape the constitutional order of the state.
The study of Buddhism and constitutional law seems to be at an even earlier stage
in its development than is the now quite robust study of Islam and constitutional
law. Possessing only the most cursory knowledge about the history of Buddhist
studies in the modern world, I cannot say whether the delay grows out of the
institutional structures and academic trends that postponed the arrival of a robust
community focussed on studying Islam and constitutional law. Looking at the
wealth of material produced in this volume, one can only be grateful that scholars
in the ﬁeld of Buddhist studies have, like scholars of Islamic studies, identiﬁed the
study of religion and constitutional law as a fruitful area for research. Already in this
pathbreaking volume, the editors and contributors have demonstrated that they have
a great deal to work with. For anyone who is interested in generating robust
comparative work on the phenomenon of “religion and constitutions,” “constitu-
tionalization of religion,” or something that might be described as the “religiﬁcation
of constitutions,” the contributions to this volume, taken together are eye-opening
and provocative. One can only hope that scholars of Buddhism and constitutional
law will be interested in actively engaging with scholars focusing on the study of
Islam and constitutional law and vice versa.
19.3 THE STATE OF “ISLAM AND CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW” STUDIES
As the intellectual project of “Buddhism and constitutional law” begins, the partici-
pants in that project might productively bear in mind some of the insights that
scholars of “Islam and constitutional law” have to date developed as they have
sought to describe the evolving constitutional imaginary for the vast number of
Sunni Muslims who today want their state simultaneously (i) to satisfy the obliga-
tions of an “Islamic state” and (ii) at the same time to operate as a modern state
under a modern constitution.
Over roughly the past twenty-ﬁve years, scholars interested in the broader con-
nection between Islam and constitutional law have produced and slowly begun
to synthesize a wide variety of ﬁndings from a myriad of different academic
ﬁelds including, among others, religious studies, political history, social history,
contemporary Islamic politics, anthropology, sociology, and area studies. As a result
of this work, scholars have begun to develop a new understanding of Sunni Islamic
364
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 387 ---
intellectual and political history – one that tries to explain patterns in Islamic
thought and behavior, that scholars of Islam until recently tended to see as counter-
intuitive and problematic.
19.3.1 The Rise of Classical Sunni Institutions and Theories of Islamic Law
Islam is a global religion growing out of the experiences of a man, Muhammad, who
lived in Western Arabia in the late sixth century and early seventh centuries CE. His
revelations lay the basis for the shari`a (literally the “path”), God’s moral code that
was simultaneously the path to individual salvation for an individual Muslim and
the path to material welfare for a Muslim community. When the Prophet died
without a designated successor, the young Muslim community lost both its moral
guide and its political leader. Henceforth the community’s access to God would
come through texts, which provide a record of the signs given to the community in
the special prophetic moment both in direct revelation and in the exemplary
practices of its messenger. Since the secrets were recorded in scriptural texts, the
community needed to identify people who could help them understand these texts,
and it also needed to identify the people who could be trusted effectively to govern
the expanding Islamic empire and its growing Muslim populations, protect its
borders, and establish an order which allowed people to enjoy the material beneﬁts
that God had revealed to be “goals of the shari`a.”
Muslims after the death of the prophet faced two questions: Who should engage
with scripture to ﬁnd information about God’s moral command? Who should be
trusted to develop and impose rules that realize the social beneﬁts that God
commands Muslim societies to enjoy? While some suggested that the roles of moral
guide and political leader should be held by the same person, the group that would
become the “Sunni” community ultimately concluded that the two roles could be
divided and that, in many circumstances, dividing these roles was not only manage-
able but inevitable. The thinkers who developed Sunni Islam decided to begin with
the ﬁrst question. They believed that if they ﬁrst identiﬁed people who could be
trusted to uncover in the scriptures reliable information about God’s moral expect-
ations for individuals and for the community, those ﬁgures could then explain how
the community should select the proper leaders.
Some Muslims, including the group that would evolve into the Shiite sect of
Islam, suggested that people were not all born with the same capacity to understand
scripture. According to them, God had granted to certain men known as “Imam”
special abilities and insights. At any one point in time, there would be one Shiite
Imam, and the community should defer to his interpretations of God’s law.
Upon his death, the Imam’s unique insight and authority would transfer to a
designated successor.
The community that would become the Sunni sect took a more democratic view
of human capacities in the area of moral reasoning. According to the formative
Islam and Constitutional Law
365
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 388 ---
Sunni thinkers, it was impossible to identify one person who was destined always to
interpret scripture correctly; all humans were born with the ability to do this. While
most Muslims would remain untrained, a self-selected group of Muslims could and
should take on the responsibility for providing moral guidance. After enormous
training and effort, a person gained the right to try and demonstrate their command
of scriptures and logic and to try and shape the views of other scholars – and, thus, of
all the followers that those scholars had amassed among the untrained.
An aspiring scholar of God’s law must not only demonstrate mastery of texts and
language but must bear in mind God’s assurance that his laws always promoted
human welfare. This was tricky because, in some cases, it could be hard to understand
how accepting and following one interpretation of God’s command (as opposed to
another) might promote the goals of the shari`a. The successful moral reasoner would
have to develop a compelling interpretation of God’s command from texts. Some texts
could be accepted at face value. Ambiguous text needed to be interpreted in a
sophisticated manner, drawing on tools adapted from Greek logic, where analogical
reasoning was inﬂuenced in subtle (and often tentative) ways by utilitarian calcula-
tions in which “the good” was deﬁned as communal enjoyment of the shari`a’s goals.
Recognizing the need to develop a robust system of education in which particu-
larly talented scholars could develop and distinguish themselves, Muslim commu-
nities began to encourage and support scholarly guilds. Those guilds devoted
themselves to the task of training people to elaborate law from scripture and reason
and to credential people whose opinions should be considered probative (if not
dispositive) on questions of God’s law. These guilds were not created and regulated
by rulers. Rather, they emerged organically within communities committed to the
goal of living according to God’s law. The power of a guild depended upon its ability
to attract students and to produce scholars whose interpretations of God’s law were
judged compelling.
Over the course of several centuries, the Sunni community came to prefer certain
guilds of religious law over others. The four which ultimately survived, the Hanaﬁ,
Maliki, Shaﬁ`i, and Hanbali are often described as the “four Sunni schools of law.”
For roughly 1,000 years (very roughly from 900 until 1900) these four Sunni juristic
guilds, or “schools of law,” functioned as self-governing institutions that controlled
the teaching of Islamic law and the credentialing of scholars. Their opinion could
be sought by anyone, ruler or subject, who needed an informed opinion about how
God wanted people to behave. Aspiring scholars underwent training from a senior
jurist recognized as a master of one among the Sunni schools of law. Upon receiving
their own credentials as a master jurist of the guild/school’s doctrines, they were
deemed to be member of the Sunni fuqaha’, the profession of Islamic jurists who
were understood almost uniformly to be the only trustworthy sources for reasonable
opinions on the shari`a.
To understand the evolution of Islamic political thought, it is important to note
that four guilds taught slightly different variations on the classical approach to legal
366
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 389 ---
interpretation and taught different versions of God’s law. Each guild could trace its
origin back to a founding scholar. Each founder employed moderately different
tools of interpretation and left a record of answers to questions about the morality of
particular types of behavior. Members of a guild assumed axiomatically that the
answers provided by the founder were correct, at least at the precise time and under
the speciﬁc circumstances in which the question was posed to him. To be recog-
nized as a member of the fuqaha’, a Sunni Muslim would have to study with a
master jurist from one of the guilds/schools and would have to demonstrate com-
mand of the guild’s preferred methodology and precedents. The successful student
would receive a certiﬁcation from the master stating that he was now a faqih, able to
and, indeed, with a moral duty to provide informed opinions (fatwas) to anyone who
had questions about God’s law. Those opinions could be trusted reasonably to
approximate the answer that the founder of the guild would most likely have
provided were that founder alive today. As he issued these opinions, the master
jurist was supposed to familiarize himself as far as possible with the opinions that his
contemporaries in the guild were issuing on similar topics. To be a “Hanaﬁ” jurist
then was by deﬁnition, (i) to be formally recognized by one or more masters of the
Hanaﬁguild, (ii) to commit to answering questions about God’s law as one
reasonably believed the school’s founder, Abu Hanifa, would have done, and (iii)
to continue to engage in dialogue with other Hanaﬁscholars and to allow one’s
understanding of the law, over time, to evolve in line with the views of thinkers that
one found compelling.
The credentialed jurists trained within the Sunni schools of law represented
within premodern Islamic society a distinct professional class of religious experts
who were independent of the political authorities, although, as will be discussed
shortly, they were constantly in dialogue with political authorities. In short, they
represented a religious “establishment” distinct from the political establishment.
While it is tempting to analogize them to members of the Buddhist sangha (or to
members of the Catholic priesthood), one should recognize some ways in which the
credentialed jurists of the guilds, the fuqaha’, as professionals, differ from the
members of religious orders who constituted a special class of human within society.
First: the members of the Sunni schools of law, masters and apprentices alike,
considered themselves to be members of society similar in crucial ways to all other
members and generally subject to the same moral commands. Interpreting God’s law
was seen as a job among other jobs in society. God expected certain things from
credentialed scholars that he did not expect from others, and God had also estab-
lished rules that required scholars to follow certain procedures when they issued
Islamic legal opinions. Outside of their professional duties, however, a credentialed
scholar understood themselves to be a person like other people. Food that God had
made permissible for a layman was also permissible for a credentialed scholar.
Words that would form a contract for a layman would also form a contract that
bound a scholar. Scholars could own property to the same extent that other
Islam and Constitutional Law
367
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 390 ---
members of Muslim society could, and like all adult Muslims, they were permitted
(indeed encouraged) to marry according to the same rules as non-jurists. When they
did, they understood that their obligations to their spouse were no different than the
obligations of a married layperson.
Second, when they acted in their particular area of expertise – issuing opinions
about God’s law – the credentialed jurists refused to establish a formal hierarchy of
interpretive authority. While the community of scholars could identify some rules
upon which they agreed and about which the Muslim community could know with
certainty to be rules of shari`a, the community also recognized those areas of
jurisprudence in which they had come to equally reasonable but fundamentally
different understandings of God’s law. Given the guilds’ disagreements on questions
of proper interpretive methodology and their decision to look to a competing body
of precedents, the different guilds/schools of law inevitably taught slightly different
versions of God’s law. Each of these versions was described as a body of ﬁqh: literally,
a well-reasoned “understanding” of God’s law. Furthermore, the scholars within a
single guild might disagree on questions of ﬁrst impression, meaning that on some
issues there would be different versions of ﬁqh within a single guild. Rather than try
to establish a hierarchy of scholars who were empowered to make arbitrary and
potentially incorrect judgements about which of the guild’s interpretations was best,
the guilds concluded that it was morally better just to “agree to disagree.” Outside of
the small number of rules that the guilds jointly recognized as those that were
indubitably rules of shari`a, they acknowledged that it was impossible to say which of
the competing interpretations of God’s law was correct and all things being equal,
humans had the right to choose for themselves which of the competing interpret-
ations they wanted to follow. This was a concession that would come to impact in
important ways classical Sunni political philosophy and the practice of premodern
Islamic states. This would in turn shape profoundly the ways in which modern
Muslims engaged with the idea (and realities) of constitutions.
19.3.1.1 Classical Sunni Discussions about Whether (and How) to Develop a
Body of Predictable and Uniform State “Law”
Classical Sunni Islamic political thought developed in this very particular concep-
tual and institutional context. It was assumed that (i) God had laid down a code
which dictated how every human was to act, and thus dictated how a ruler was to act
when he laid down rules to govern his society; (ii) following this code would result
not only in the salvation of individuals but also in the production of material beneﬁts
for the community (the so-called “goals of the law”), of which the most important
were the protection within the society of religion, life, children, reason, and wealth;
(iii) the secrets to the moral code were embedded in scripture (and to some extent in
nature), and although all humans were given equal access at birth to scriptural
secrets, their meaning could be properly discovered only by people who were
368
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 391 ---
trained both in the arts of scriptural analysis and of logical reasoning; (iv) those who
are trained to seek and acquire skills in the art of scriptural moral interpretation
remain, in almost all respects, members of society like any other and subject to the
same moral rules as anyone else; (v) among the many people who are recognized
(and credentialed) as experts in the arts of Islamic moral interpretation, none can
claim unquestioned superiority over another, thus Sunni society must accept that
there are moral questions for which there is no indisputably correct answer. It
follows that, although the answers to some moral questions are obvious to any
trained scholarly mind (and are known with certainty to be part of God’s shari`a),
there will always be questions on which trained minds will disagree and about which
the community will be given a range of answers, any of which might turn out to be
correct. With respect to these rules-about-which-we-can-only speculate, no one can
say with certainty which of the competing interpretations is deﬁnitively the best.
Indeed, no one can preclude the possibility that the correct rule of shari`a will turn
out to be “none of the above,” a rule that is yet to be proposed.
God’s shari`a surely required that a ruler establish and impose a uniform body of
social laws that was consistent with what the scholars had discovered about God’s
law and would also demonstrably promote communal welfare. Notwithstanding the
default rule that allowed Muslims generally to select for themselves which guild’s
version of ﬁqh to follow, that freedom disappeared when the ruler had established
within the areas of behavior that could not be regulated with absolute moral
certainty, stable rule of law not inconsistent with what scholars had discovered about
the shari`a’s rules and goals. At that point (though only at that point) every Muslim
was required by God to abandon her preferred interpretation of God’s shari`a and
act as if the ruler’s positive law accurately reﬂected God’s will. Paradoxically, God
would at that point reward in heaven the person who followed a ruler’s ultimately
incorrect laws to the exclusion of their own ultimately correct understanding of what
God wanted to do. And God would punish in hell the person who did not. So much
was known with certainty. But agreement on those basic principles raises its
own questions.
The fuqaha’, the scholars credentialed by one of the four Sunni schools of law,
struggled to understand who had the right to serve as the ruler who established order,
what methods that ﬁgure should use when selecting rules to impose, and, of course,
what the substance of that law should be. Although members of the fuqaha’ touched
upon such questions in a variety of different scholarly genres, many seem to have
directed their energies towards developing theories that deﬁned the legitimately
“Islamic” body of state law as a body of law created by a special type of ruler.
19.3.1.2 Classical Caliphal Theories
For a time, leading Sunni thinkers such as al-Mawardi, a famous jurist of the Shaﬁ`i
school of law, proposed that Sunni societies should ideally be ruled by a person who
Islam and Constitutional Law
369
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 392 ---
combined, among many other extraordinary characteristics: credentials as a master
scholar within one of the four Sunni schools of law, expertise in matters of
governance, and the military power to impose his command. Once a person with
such qualities was recognized as “Caliph” by the leading religious and military
notables, he was allowed (indeed required) to draw upon his scholarly training as a
faqih to ﬁll in the gaps where the scholars had not identiﬁed with certainty all the
rules necessary to regulate life efﬁciently and to ensure communal thriving. When
he did so, Muslims were divinely commanded to set aside their respect for scholars
who had urged humans to act in a way other than that favored by the Caliph, and to
obey the Caliph’s laws. According to this theory the legitimacy of state law depends
upon the quality of the ruler who produces it.
19.3.1.3 The Emergence of the Classical Doctrine of
Siyasa Shari`iyya
By the thirteenth century, many Sunni scholars had concluded that it was unrealis-
tic to expect any proper Caliph to appear. As a result, some including Ibn Taymiyya,
a famous jurist of the Hanbali school, proposed a new theory about the type of ruler
that God permits. This theory, sometimes called the theory of siyasa shar`iyya
(literally “governance” that is consistent with the shari`a), is far more radical in its
implications than might at ﬁrst be obvious.
The theory asserts that a ruler’s right to impose his laws, and his subjects’ duties to
obey them (at the risk of divine punishment), do not depend upon the ruler’s
personal qualities. Under some circumstances, a ruler can be untrained in Islamic
law and even personally impious and yet can produce, in the areas where God’s law
is not known with certainty, a set of legitimate positive laws, laws that God expects all
the ruler’s subjects to obey. The one quality a ﬁgure must always have if he is to be
recognized as one-qualiﬁed-to-create-legitimate-positive-law-for-an-Islamic-state is
simply the ability to project hard power and compel people to act in accordance
with his preferred rules.
When such a person establishes himself, then irrespective of his personal qualities
and irrespective of whether he has been “appointed” through the process of investi-
ture that marked the rise of a Caliph, this “possessor of power” (wali al-`amr) is
authorized to enact uniform rules. Each of these rules will be legitimate – meaning
that God will punish people who fail to act in accord with them – so long as that rule
satisﬁes two conditions. First, the rule must not require any Muslims to act in a way
that violates a rule of ﬁqh that is known with certainty. Second, the ruler must be
able to make a plausible argument that his rule will promote the social beneﬁts that
God wants his believers to enjoy. So long as a ruler’s siyasa (the rules that he
enforces in society) meet the conditions necessary to be recognized as siyasa
shar`iyya, his laws are legitimate and deserve to be obeyed even in cases where they
conﬂict with a subject’s preferred interpretation of ﬁqh.
370
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 393 ---
The doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya thus inverts the logic of Caliphal theories.
Caliphal theories assume that the legitimacy of a ruler’s law depends upon the
quality of a ruler and, in particular of his possessing certain qualities. By contrast,
the doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya assumes that the legitimacy of a ruler depends upon
the quality of his positive laws. For the purpose of comparing Sunni and Buddhist
intuitions about governance, it is important to note that according to the jurists who
embraced the doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya (a group that came over time to include
the vast majority of jurists), a legitimate positive state law binds all of a ruler’s
subjects. So long as a ruler’s orders satisfy the twin requirements, credentialed jurists
and lay-people alike, fuqaha’ and non-fuqaha’, are required to obey them. Unless
the ruler voluntarily chooses, by edict, to treat the fuqaha’ differently, a member of
the fuqaha’ is obliged to obey the same contracts, pay the same taxes, and litigate in
the same courts as lay-people.
19.3.1.4 The Incorporation of Siyasa Shar`iyya into the State Practice
in Premodern and Early Modern Empires
In the wake of the Mongol invasions of the thirteenth century CE, the theory of
siyasa shar`iyya came to be embraced by jurists and rulers alike in a number of
empires around the world. Among the largest, longest-lived and most inﬂuential
empires to establish its legitimacy in terms of this theory was the Ottoman Empire.
The Ottoman sultan established a cabinet with a central role for a leading member
of the fuqaha’, invariably a master jurist trained in the Hanaﬁguild. The bureau-
cracy of this appointed jurist, the Shaykh al-Islam, was tasked with the duty to review
every statutory pronouncement and to conﬁrm that it did not violate clear scriptural
commands. The Shaykh al-Islam also stood as head of a judiciary staffed entirely by
guild-trained jurists, which was instructed to approach cases that could not be
resolved by statute by reference to the rules of ﬁqh (scholarly interpretations of
God’s moral law). The legitimacy of the Ottoman Empire came very much to be
understood in terms of its adherence to the theory of siyasa shar`iyya, a theory whose
own authority expanded as the empire that had adopted it thrived, and this success
seemed to conﬁrm God’s promise that obedience to his command would allow a
community to enjoy the goals of the law.4
4
Although in the nineteenth century the Ottoman sultan began to assert that he should be
recognized as a “Caliph,” he did not claim to have the qualities of a Caliph in the classical
Mawardian sense. Rather, he claimed to be a person whose rule was legitimate unlike, he said,
the rule of Western colonialists and of their puppets. His rule alone was morally binding
according to the doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya. By applying a body of rules that were either (i)
statutes approved by scholars as being consistent with juristic ﬁqh, or (ii) judge-made rules
grown of the ﬁqh tradition, the Ottomans could legitimately claim to be governing according to
the doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya.
Islam and Constitutional Law
371
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 394 ---
19.3.2 Initial Muslim Engagements with Written Constitutions
The tradition of siyasa shar`iyya and the Ottoman instantiation of that tradition gave
many Muslims a conceptual lens through which they viewed the modern innov-
ation of a written constitution. The Sunni tradition as mediated through the
Ottomans proved to be a vernacular that could easily translate the normative claims
of liberal constitutionalism and see them as cognates of at least some ideas and
institutions already present in the Islamic tradition.
As scholars like Nathan Brown have described, during the nineteenth century,
many states in the Muslim world, both colonial and independent states trying to
strengthen themselves to fend off would-be colonizers, began to borrow tools of
Western governmental organization to expand the power of the state at the expense
of its citizens and of civil society (Brown 1997; 2002). Ironically, as Brown points out,
the ﬁrst written constitutions in the Muslim world, including the Ottoman
Constitution of 1876, were part of this state-empowering process. They were pro-
mulgated by unaccountable rulers in order to establish the procedures by which
rulers would henceforth come to power and make decisions. Naturally, they did not
include many provisions which explicitly deﬁned substantive limits on the govern-
ment’s discretion with respect to lawmaking or policy.
What Brown calls “non-constitutionalist” constitutions were increasingly chal-
lenged, however, by constitutionalist movements in Muslim societies, which
demanded reforms that would rewrite constitutions to include substantive con-
straints on the government’s legislative discretion, and in some cases also include
institutions which could enforce those constraints. Increasingly these were charac-
terized, sometimes explicitly and sometimes implicitly, as calls to integrate into
constitutions provisions which required the state to respect the traditional logic of
siyasa shar`iyya.
It is easy to see in the doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya some areas of overlap with
modern European theories of liberal constitutionalism. Rereading scriptures and
classical texts in light of modern constitutionalist theories, an inﬂuential group of
Islamic intellectuals – many but not all of whom were based in the Ottoman
Empire – argued that there was built into Islam a sophisticated theory of constrained
government in the service of the public good that, when implemented properly, was
superior to the liberal constitutionalism that Europeans had developed far later
using their reason alone. Accepting that liberal constitutionalism reﬂected a mean-
ingful, if imperfect way of guaranteeing constrained government, Islamic constitu-
tionalists saw constitutions as useful tools to help reinvigorate traditional Muslim
commitments to the ideal of an Islamically constrained state. Islamic constitutional-
ists were thus eager participants in constitutional politics in the late nineteenth and
twentieth-century Middle East, and backed many of the demands of liberal consti-
tutionalists, such as rights guarantees and demands for judicial review. They
372
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 395 ---
demanded, however, the addition of further provisions which would require the
state to respect the core principles of Islamic law.
The earliest successful call for Islamic constitutionalism of this type appeared in
majority Shiite Persia (soon to be renamed “Iran”). Persia/Iran was a neighbor of
the Ottoman Empire, with its population close observers of its powerful Sunni
neighbor. Over the course of 1906 and 1907, a diverse group of liberal and Islamic
constitutionalists in Iran forced the king of Iran to enact constitutional documents
that required the state both to respect some fundamental liberal rights and also to
forswear the adoption of any law that was inconsistent with principles announced
in Islamic scriptures. This Iranian Constitution, as amended in 1907, also estab-
lished what was for all practical purposes a constitutional council staffed by
credentialed Shiite clerics. It was empowered to exercise preenforcement review
of legislation and had the power to void any draft law that its members deemed to
be inconsistent with Islam. Notwithstanding their success in having this consti-
tution enacted, the Iranian king later reasserted his power and thereafter he and his
successors ignored entirely their constitutional commitments. But the Iranian
revolution of 1979 ushered in a new constitution which reiterated the requirement
that Iran enact only legislation that conformed to Islamic law as understood by
credentialed clerics.
In Istanbul and the Anatolian heartland of the Ottoman Empire, incipient Sunni
Islamic constitutionalism associated with the Young Ottoman movement was sup-
planted during the early decades of the twentieth century by the militantly secularist
and non-constitutionalist Young Turk movement, leading to the dissolution of the
Ottoman Empire and the formation of modern Turkey and a multitude of other
nation-states. Yet Sunni Islamic constitutionalism thrived in the Arab-speaking states
that had formerly been part of the Ottoman Empire as well as in parts of the British
Empire, where Pakistan was about to emerge as a new state that would be a
homeland for the Muslims of the subcontinent.
Harnessing the tools of mass communication and mass political organization and
ﬁnding around the world a community of Sunni Muslims whose scriptural studies
had equipped them to read in Arabic, a number of Sunni thinkers were able to
transmit these ideas and this particular framing of constitutionalism to a global
audience. Among the inﬂuential Arab thinkers were activists like Rashid Rida, the
founder of a publication with a global audience, and the founders and early leaders
of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood, a group that inspired like-minded organiza-
tions around the Muslim world. Their ideas of such thinkers and groups were
reframed by local thinkers, some of whom expanded upon the idea of Islamic
constitutionalism in ways that, themselves, were transmitted globally. A notable
example of such a thinker was Maulana Maududi, an Islamist thinker in India –
and later Pakistan – whose ideas on Islamic law and Islamic constitutionalism were
transmitted back to the Middle East, where they inﬂuenced the ongoing evolution
of the ideology of the Muslim Brothers.
Islam and Constitutional Law
373
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 396 ---
The development of a transnational ideology of Islamic constitutionalism helped
to shape the way in which Sunni Muslims around the world engaged with the
phenomenon of written constitutions and the constitutional demands of liberal
colonial legal elites, many of whom had been trained abroad and were using their
inﬂuence to push for the adoption of liberal constitutionalism. In the hands of
thinkers like Rida, al-Banna, Qutb, Maududi, and many others, a Sunni Islamic
constitutionalism reframed classical Sunni Islamic texts, including those that were
connected with the doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya, as texts which (if properly under-
stood) embraced constitutionalist ideas long before European liberals had reasoned
out their own arguments in favor of constrained governance. They saw European
constitutionalism as an area in which the ideal end-state embraced values that
overlapped in some but not all ways with Islamic values, and more importantly as
a source of ideas about institutional design that would permit those with moral
insight to constrain executive power.
Today it seems plausible to deﬁne an “Islamic constitution” as a constitution that
contains a provision prohibiting the state from enacting legislation that is inconsist-
ent with Islamic values (a provision almost invariably read to require the state to
govern only by siyasa shar`iyya which is consistent both with all clear scriptural rules
and with the quasi-utilitarian requirement that government rule to advance the
spiritual and material welfare of the people).5
19.3.2.1 Pressures of Modernity
As noted earlier, during the classical period when it came to the question of who
could be trusted to interpret the shari`a, the fuqaha’ established for themselves a
monopoly on interpretive authority. Their initial claim was, however, a humble one.
Interpretive authority, they claimed, belonged to those who could develop the most
compelling interpretation of God’s law. Jurists associated with the four Sunni
schools of law had developed the most compelling method of interpreting God’s
law, as proved by its ability to attract the leading intellects of the day and to inspire
compliance on the part of rulers and masses alike, and by its ability to generate a
society that thrived as God had promised its law, properly understood and obeyed,
would do.
The colonial era represented for many Muslims a humiliation which suggested
that if classical Islamic legal theory as applied by the fuqaha’ had once been a
trustworthy source of information about God’s law and about how to integrate God’s
law into the governance of a state, that situation no longer held true. Either the
5
Some constitutions that contain these two types of provision contain other provisions as well.
Depending upon the nature of the additional provisions, one could probably identify a number
of different types of “Islamic constitution.” Nonetheless, the presence of the two core provisions
is the only near constant in the constitutions of states that seek to deﬁne themselves as
Islamic states.
374
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 397 ---
methodology was appropriate only for an earlier period and was now obsolete or,
alternatively, the fuqaha’ misunderstood and were misapplying the method that
their forebears had used. Sharing these intuitions, many of the twentieth-century
champions of Sunni Islamic constitutionalism accepted these institutions. It was
instrumental in another development as an extraordinary attack on the authority of
the fuqaha’ and an insistence that Muslims who were not trained within the four
Sunni schools of law should be able to opine on an equal footing with classically
trained jurists. This was the second development that would shape the ongoing
evolution of Sunni Islamic constitutionalism in subtle but signiﬁcant ways and
would create new possibilities for thinkers who wanted to harmonize the new
Islamic constitutionalism with liberal constitutionalism.
For a myriad of reasons, many of the early theorists and champions of Islamic
constitutionalism came to question the value of the highly complex, often formalis-
tic methods of Islamic legal interpretation that were associated with the four Sunni
guilds/schools of law. These Sunni “modernists” argued that people without creden-
tials as fuqaha’ could and should reengage with scriptures using the new quasi-
utilitarian methods of reasoning. As they did so, modern thinkers should not defer
excessively, if at all, to the conclusions that had been reached in the past by scholars
associated with the classical Sunni schools of law. Going back to the scriptures and
applying their new methods of interpretation, modernist champions of Sunni
Islamic constitutionalism, including Maududi in Pakistan and the Muslim
Brothers in Egypt, argued that if a modern Sunni state was to be effectively
constrained by Islamic values, it could not rely upon institutions that measured
compliance according to the views of classically trained jurists steeped in the
methodologies and worldviews of the four Sunni schools of law.
Anti-clerical movements ﬂeetingly appeared in Shiite Persia, but they had little
success, relative to those in the Sunni world.6 While some in the Sunni Middle
East, Pakistan, Southeast Asia, and Africa continued to defer to classically trained
scholars, many did not. The growing number of dissenters accepted the “modernist”
position that if Islam created constraints on governmental power and should be a
source of guidance for humans when they acted in private areas not governed by
law, then Islam had to be interpreted not by classically trained jurists, but rather by
people who were pious, ﬂuent in Arabic, trained in modern sciences, including
modern social sciences, and usually committed to less formalistic, more utilitarian
modes of interpreting God’s law.
The rise of “lay” Islamic legal interpretation created new spaces for discussion
about the possible overlaps between Islamic constitutionalism (seen as a modern
6
Where Sunni jurists were divided among four guilds, Shiite jurists all belonged to one Shiite
guild. The jurists centralized the procedures by which they trained jurists and by which they
recognized hierarchies of authority among the credentialed jurists. The reorganized, newly
centralized body of Shiite ulama were able to maintain their prestige within Persia (soon to be
renamed Iran).
Islam and Constitutional Law
375
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 398 ---
corollary of the doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya) and liberal constitutionalism. Modern
Sunni ideas of constitutionalism, as a reframing of the classical doctrine of siyasa
shar`iyya declares un-Islamic (and thus constitutionally invalid) state laws that either
unambiguously violate clear scriptural commands or impede the public welfare.
Classical jurists had historically deﬁned “the good” as the enjoyment of ﬁve core
values (religion, life, children, reason, and wealth) and they were very deferential to
the ruler’s judgement as to whether a law was likely to advance one or more of those
beneﬁts. Modernist lay intellectuals, by contrast, tended to consider a far larger
number of possible beneﬁts and harms, and they tended to be less deferential to a
government ofﬁcial’s conclusions about a law’s impact. Depending on how a
utilitarian lay Islamic modernist deﬁned “the good,” she might, in theory, conclude
that a law was invalid because it violates internationally recognized human rights or
principles of equitable social distribution. Conversely, if she were a social reaction-
ary, she might strike down a law as violating the public good simply because it
indirectly led to the subversion of traditional gender roles.
The assault in the Sunni world on the authority of a single self-regulating
profession of scholars forced Muslims to think in a new way about what sort of
institution could be trusted to mediate between the growing number of competing
interpretations of Islam and establish one interpretation that would be binding on
the state (Lombardi 2013). As Sunni political theorists and activists tried to answer
these questions, new possibilities opened up, in theory, for the possible fusion of the
proto-constitutionalism inherent in the doctrine of siyasa shar`iyya, on the one
hand, and on the other, the democratic versions of liberal constitutionalists.
Andrew March has recently described the process by which a number of inﬂuen-
tial modernist Sunni Islamist thinkers moved in the direction of democratic popular
constitutionalism (2019). In a world where every Muslim must be trusted to engage
with scripture and to bring her own insights to bear upon questions of interpretation
and in which on most questions no individual could ever be trusted with inevitable
certainty to have superior insight to another, then one must trust “the wisdom of the
[Islamically committed] crowd.” According to this line of thought, in a modern era
where every Muslim could be expected to be literate, the demos did not need to
defer to a special scholarly class. Potentially each member of the demos could come
to his or her own understanding of what moral rules a ruler must respect and could,
through democratic institutions, identify and develop an ofﬁcial understanding on
the point. It would then enforce the constitutional boundaries of moral governance
through popular constitutionalism (March 2019). Since at least some members of
the demos are likely to be reactionaries and other liberals, democratically deﬁned
versions of Islam will involve compromises between the two.
Alternatively, other modern Islamic intellectuals suggested that a modern, edu-
cated demos should not be asked to interpret God’s law or to identify the boundaries
it placed on rulers. The demos could, however, be trusted to set up systems that
would appoint people to carry out this task on their behalf. In other words, they
376
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 399 ---
argued that a constitution should provide some process by which judges would be
appointed to perform a special type of judicial review: Islamic review. These judges
should then be trusted to police the moral boundaries of the shari`a alongside other
further constitutionally speciﬁed boundaries, such as liberal boundaries or socialist
boundaries (Lombardi 2013). In this alternative mode of Sunni Islamic constitution-
alism, constitutional benches (which might be staffed, in part or in whole by lawyers
without classical training) would have the power to determine whether a state law
was consistent with the core principles of Islamic law, by satisfying the twin obliga-
tions of (i) being consistent with clear scriptural commands, and (ii) plausibly
advancing the public welfare.
Islamic review has, in fact, been adopted in many countries with Islamic consti-
tutions. Depending on the process by which judges were appointed to the court, the
training, and the character of the judges, a court could sometimes serve as a
mediator between traditional understandings of Islamic law and the demands of
modern liberalism. Among the judges who have exercised Islamic review in consti-
tutional courts in the Muslim world some have been judges with degrees from
secular law schools and of these some have apparently, a commitment to the
modern, liberal rule of law. In some countries that have institutionalized the
practice of Islamic review, including Egypt and Pakistan, constitutional courts have
issued decisions that see Islam not merely as tolerating a liberal state but as
afﬁrmatively requiring the state to respect liberal values. Sometimes judges have
tried to accomplish this through creative reading of Islamic scriptures.7 In other
cases, they have argued that in modern times, the traditional requirement that a
ruler never enact a law that fails to serve the public good must be understood to
preclude a court from upholding a law that manifestly violates internationally
recognized human rights (Lombardi & Brown 2006).8
19.3.3 A Note Regarding the Recent Evolution of Authoritarian Islamic
Constitutionalism in Shiite Iran
The doctrines of Sunni Islam, historical patterns of governance (which has shaped
popular expectations regarding government behavior), and the increasingly frag-
mented nature of Sunni religious authority have combined to facilitate not only the
embrace of constitutions, but more speciﬁcally the embrace of constitutions as a tool
to promote “constitutionalism.” It also has, in at least some places, created oppor-
tunities for thinkers to argue, sometimes controversially, that the substantive
demands of Sunni Islamic constitutionalism might overlap signiﬁcantly with the
7
For example, in Pakistan, Hazoor Bakhsh v. Federation of Pakistan [1981] PLD 145 (FSC) but
compare with Federation of Pakistan v. Hazoor Bakhsh [1983] PLD 255 (FSC).
8
For a particular case, see Egypt, Supreme Constitutional Court of Egypt Case No. 8 of Judicial
Year 17 (May 18, 1996) as published in Brown & Lombardi 1996.
Islam and Constitutional Law
377
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 400 ---
demands of liberal constitutionalism. This is to say that Sunni Islam seems in the
grand scheme of things to have helped mediate the entry of modern constitutional-
ism into the public discourse of modern Muslim societies, and has, at the same time,
resulted in creative new thinking about the different types of constitutionalism that
might meaningfully constrain a state. During a period of ongoing religious revival,
the presence of good faith arguments has had an impact, and a handful of Muslim
states have, even if tentatively, tried to implement liberal or liberal-leaning versions
of Islamic constitutionalism.
This has not been the case over the past ﬁfty years in Iran, the largest Shiite
nation in the world. In Shiite-dominated Iran, Islamic thinkers and, it appears, the
people remained committed to the ideal of Islamic constitutionalism. The
1979 Islamic revolution was designed to overthrow an unabashedly secular nation-
alist authoritarian regime. Yet the constitutional regime evolved in a direction that
was distinctly illiberal. One reason appears to be that the Shiite fuqaha’, jurists
trained and credentialed in the one Shiite guild/school of law, retained an
extraordinary degree of popularity and religious authority and, furthermore the
scholars had established for themselves an internal hierarchy of religious authority,
subordinated to a “Supreme Leader.” Unlike the Sunni fuqaha’ who in most parts
of the Sunni world had lost their monopoly on religious authority, the Shiite
fuqaha’ of Iran retained in the eyes of most Iranians a monopoly on the right to
opine on questions of Islamic law. Because the 1979 constitution only required the
state to respect the principles of Islamic law as interpreted by clerics and because
the Supreme Leader was, for all practical purposes, the highest-ranking clerical
authority in the country, the “Islamic” constraints on his authority were largely
ineffective (Künkler and Law 2021).
Iran’s constitutional experiment has, sadly, expanded the constitutional imaginary
of Muslims outside the Shiite community. For some reactionary Sunni Muslims
who decry the space that modernist Islam has created for liberal values, the Shiite
example is inspiring. In Afghanistan, the Taliban regime from 1997 to 2001 clearly
aspired to construct a clerical regime ruled by credentialed jurists from the Hanaﬁ
school that represented an embryonic reimagining of the clerical Iranian regime. It
is quite likely that after the Taliban’s recent military conquest of Kabul and the
restoration of a second Taliban regime they intend to continue in this project
(Lombardi and March 2022).
19.4 ISLAM AND BUDDHISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
Looking at the contributions to this volume, it seems clear that scholars of Buddhism
and law are making progress toward some broader hypotheses about the relationship
of Buddhism to constitutional law at different times and places. It is exciting to think
that one may soon be able to do comparative studies of Islamic and Buddhist
constitutional ideals, and it will be fascinating to see whether these potentially quite
378
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 401 ---
different conceptualizations may have led Muslims and Buddhists to use consti-
tutions (and constitutional law) in different ways. Many of the contributors to this
volume describe ways in which the nature of Buddhist concepts and intuitions may
have led Buddhists to embrace a different understanding to Muslims about what
religion is, what the role that religious law and religious institutions should play in a
modern state, and thus, in the modern world, what types of constitutional provision
a religious constitution should include.
In the Sunni Muslim world, Islamic ideas have to date tended to facilitate the rise
of a “constitutionalist” ethos in Sunni Muslim polities, albeit one that does not
necessarily understand “constitutionalism” to require state respect for liberal values.
This in turn has led to the widespread adoption of constitutional provisions that are
explicitly constitutionalist and which announce that government discretion is
broadly constrained by some moral principles that are announced in scripture. In
these cases, the boundaries on moral governance are to be interpreted in the ﬁnal
instance by people outside the control of the ruler and whose authority comes,
ultimately, from their recognition as scholars by the community as a whole. This
pattern, already present in the premodern period, sounds in a “constitutionalist” key.
It has led to the rise of Islamic constitutions that are marked by their consistent
concern with identifying Islam as a source of restraint on state power, and with the
identiﬁcation of a system that can guarantee that the executive is not given control of
the deﬁnition of Islam to such an extent that it is left to be the judge of its own
power, notwithstanding the different assumptions about religious authority in the
Shiite context of Iran.
19.4.1 Some Questions for Scholars of Buddhism and Constitutional
Law Going Forward
As scholars in the still-congealing ﬁeld of Buddhism and constitutional law go
forward, I for one will be interested to see further exploration into a number
of questions.
19.4.1.1 Is the Buddhist Tradition More Fragmented than
the Muslim Tradition?
Based on the contributions to this volume, it seems possible that since the passing of
the Buddha, the Buddhist tradition may have fragmented in a more complete way
than the Muslim tradition did after the death of Muhammad. If so, this raises
questions about how broadly one can generalize about “Buddhism” and
constitutional law.
The possibility of fragmentation is suggested primarily by the fact that the
Buddhist tradition is developed in any particular country by thinkers and activists
who are often divided linguistically from thinkers and activists in another. By
Islam and Constitutional Law
379
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 402 ---
contrast, throughout the Muslim world, Muslims engage with scriptures that are
written in Arabic, and the tradition is developed largely by people who read and
write in this common language. Thus, from the beginning of Islamic history, one
has been able to ﬁnd in every country religious authorities and religious-minded
people who read and teach in Arabic. Notwithstanding regional variations in Islamic
thought and practice, people throughout the Muslim world (or at least educated
people with a command of the Arabic language) have been able to engage with each
other’s ideas about Islam, and in the twentieth century the spread of literacy, the rise
of mass media, and the phenomenon of religious revival have together increased the
set of people able to engage with common ideas. This may explain why one ﬁnds
transregional patterns in Sunni thought about constitutional law and in the structure
of self-consciously Sunni constitutional regimes.
This core of Arabic speakers around the world has also facilitated communication
and productive discourse across sectarian divides. Notwithstanding the differences
between Sunni and Shiite ideas and between Sunni and Shiite institutions, the two
sectarian traditions have evolved in an environment where religious scholars (in the
past) and a large number of literate pious lay Muslims (in the present) have access to
views developed among members of the rival sects. Sunni Muslims in the modern
era seem generally to have developed a different view on questions of governance
and “constitutional law” than have Shiite Muslims, with Sunnis embracing a more
decentralized understanding of religious authority than Shiites, one that might be
analogized to Protestant Christian views that plant themselves in opposition to more
hierarchical and bureaucratic views held by, for example, members of the Catholic
or Orthodox church. Even here more work needs to be done to determine if this is
in fact true and if so, whether there is any reason to believe that one or both of the
traditions will change in ways that causes the two to converge. There was a time
when it seemed possible that Shiite understandings of religious authority might
move in a “Sunni” direction and the example of the Taliban suggests that at least
some Sunnis might embrace a more centralized view.
Looking at the contributions to this volume, a specialist in Islamic intellectual
and social history is led to wonder whether the Buddhist tradition has over the
centuries, atomized in a deeper way than the Islamic tradition. Because the core
scriptures of different sects and/or different regions seem to be written in differ-
ent languages, there may not be in each country a religious elite capable of
engaging with the ideas that are developing in other sects or religions, and thus
around the word, Buddhism may see fewer broad transregional trends than Islam
with respect to its constitutional imaginaries. If so, scholars of Buddhism may
ﬁnd it more difﬁcult than scholars of Islam to develop a holistic view of the
global religious tradition and constitutional law. While scholars of Islam need to
be careful to avoid hasty and unnuanced generalizations, the scholarship to date
suggests that it is possible to talk meaningfully about “Islam and constitutional
law.” Scholars of Buddhism may ﬁnd it necessary to talk instead about
“Buddhisms and constitutional law.”
380
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 403 ---
19.4.1.2 Does Sunni Thought Tend to Incorporate and Build Upon a More
Egalitarian View of Humanity than Buddhist Thought?
Sunni Islam has reﬂected, from the start, fairly egalitarian intuitions about humanity.
All humans are born equal, and each is given an equal opportunity to succeed or fail,
with success being rewarded in heaven and failure punished in hell. God has created a
moral law to which all humans are subject in the same way; the rules apply to
everybody. Everybody must pray in the same fashion, irrespective of one’s social status
or profession. Other rules govern certain activities. As a result, a ruler (when acting as a
ruler) is subject to rules that do not apply to the subject (when acting as a subject), a
trader (when carrying on his trade) must obey rules that are simply not relevant to a
shepherd (and vice versa). Being a ruler or a scholar does not imply that one is morally
superior to a subject or uneducated person, or that one is subject to different moral rules
when it comes to the vast majority of one’s daily life. One has distinct moral obligations
only insofar as one is acting in one’s professional capacity, whatever that profession may
be. This intuition has consequences for the constitutional ordering of the state, as it
tends to promote the idea that state laws too should tend to apply equally to all people. If
a particular activity is regulated, then all people who engage in that activity should be
subject to the same regulation. And if there are limits to the ruler’s ability to regulate an
activity, then those regulations provide space for every one of his subjects.
By contrast, Buddhism asserts that humans are not all born equally far along the
path to salvation. In the contributions to this volume, one ﬁnds suggestions that this
belief in the inequality of humankind may impact Buddhist intuitions about the way
in which a Buddhist society should be structured and the goals that a Buddhist
government should pursue – intuitions that might in turn affect the drafting and
interpretation of constitutions in a Buddhist state. Buddhist societies are divided, in
one way, between the members of the sangha and lay-people. At least in some
contexts, it is suggested that members of the sangha are farther along the path to
enlightenment, deserving of special solicitude and, therefore, should be allowed to
govern themselves without governmental interference.
If this is correct, it would be interesting to see more work exploring whether
Buddhist constitutions are generally drafted (or understood) that might be con-
sidered almost “federal” or even “confederal” insofar as they identify a country in
which one community, the sangha, which is subject primarily to rules established by
its own governing institutions; and a second community, the laity, which is subject
to a second layer of national government.
19.4.1.3 Does Sunni Thought Tend to Incorporate and Build Upon a More
Egalitarian View of Human Capacity to Understand the Higher Law than
Buddhist Thought?
Sunni Islam posits that all humans are born to develop the same ability to discern
their obligations under the law. Ultimately, everyone who wants to do so can seek
Islam and Constitutional Law
381
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 404 ---
training to work in the profession of Islamic jurist; and if they do, their success or
failure is not to be assumed based on the circumstances of their birth. Rather, it is to
be judged by their ability to convince people that their interpretation of God’s law is
to that of other interpreters. More striking still, Sunnis believe that if they are to
maintain their monopoly on religious authority, religious institutions must also
continue to justify themselves to the public by producing compelling interpretations
of God’s law that society – rulers and masses alike – ﬁnd convincing. When in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, intellectuals without guild training were able to
produce compelling interpretations of God’s law, the fuqaha’ lost their monopoly on
religious authority. This development had signiﬁcant consequences for the way in
which Sunni societies decided, constitutionally, to design the institutions that would
interpret and police a constitutional obligation for the executive and legislature to
respect all limits established by the shari`a. (Shiism, it should be noted, seems to
have been less consistently enthusiastic about the idea that all humans have an
equal capacity to understand God’s scriptural command and the implications of
God’s promise that obedience to His law will inevitably promote social ﬂourishing.)
The embrace of egalitarian views about humanity’s capacity to engage with the
law seems to have impacted subtly but signiﬁcantly the way in which constitutions
are drafted and interpreted. Egalitarian understandings of human capacity to under-
stand God’s law implies egalitarian understandings about human capacity to under-
stand the constraints that God has placed on a ruler (or government’s) discretion in
social regulation. It facilitates intriguing discussions about the institutional structure
of a state, and about who should have ultimate authority to determine whether
government laws or policies are Islamic and thus deserving of obedience. As Andrew
March has demonstrated (2019), it has facilitated in many Sunni Muslim countries
arguments in favor of democracy as a moral obligation. If the Muslim community as
a whole might be conceptualized as the ultimate arbiters of Islamic-ness, society
must be structured to allow the community regularly to express its views on the
matter. In other countries, it has facilitated the discussion on what sorts of institution
should be trusted to speak for the public when it comes to interpreting constitutional
guarantees that the state will govern in accordance with core Islamic principles, and
in many countries, this has led Islamic constitutionalists to ally with liberal constitu-
tionalists in clamoring for strong independence of the judiciary. (That said, the
degree to which Islamic and liberal constitutionalists agree on the qualities that they
would like to see judges possess may, in some countries, differ signiﬁcantly.)
For a person familiar with Islam and constitutions, it is striking that some
contributions to this volume suggest that some strains of Buddhism seem to have
taken a non-egalitarian position and that this has affected the structure of govern-
ments in Buddhist societies over the years, and more recently seems to have
impacted the drafting/implementation of constitutions. For example, it seems that
a great deal of Buddhist thought suggests that not only is the sangha best suited to
understanding what members of the sangha themselves are supposed to do as they
382
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 405 ---
pursue enlightenment (a fact that requires that the sangha be given autonomy
within society), but it also assumes that with respect to the regulation of lay-people,
some members of lay society, by virtue of their advanced position at birth on the
path to enlightenment, have more of an innate capacity to understand how they and
their fellow lay-people are supposed to behave. In short, if I understand these
contributions correctly, in some Buddhist societies, rulers are assumed to be, by
virtue of the fact that they have accumulated enough merit to be born as rulers,
people who are likely to have unique insights into the secrets of moral behavior.
Rulers are thus uniquely prepared to develop laws that can be trusted to encourage
the acquisition of merit.
19.5 CONCLUSION
These are only an initial set of questions that comes to mind from comparing my
own ﬁeld of specialty, in Islam and constitutional law, with the incipient subﬁeld of
Buddhism and constitutional law, as apparent in the contributions to this volume.
The study of Islam and constitutional law has emerged only recently, but it has
already produced provocative work that has challenged some long-held assumptions
in the ﬁelds of Islamic studies and in comparative constitutional law alike. The study
of Buddhism and constitutional law promises on its own to do similar things for the
academy. More exciting yet, the work produced by scholars of Buddhism and
constitutional law creates the possibility of meaningful comparative study in a
broader ﬁeld of “religion and constitutional law.”
references
Al-Azmeh, Aziz. 1993. Islams and Modernities. London and New York: Verso.
Brown, Nathan J. 1997. The Rule of Law in the Arab World: Courts in Egypt and the Gulf.
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
2002. Constitutions in a Nonconstitutional World. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Brown, Nathan J. and Lombardi, Clark B. 2006. “The Supreme Constitutional Court of
Egypt on Islamic Law, Veiling and Civil Rights: An Annotated Translation of Supreme
Constitutional Court of Egypt Case no. 8 of Judicial Year 17 (May 18, 1996).” American
University International Law Review 21: 437.
Hirschl, Ran. 2010. Constitutional Theocracy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Künkler,
Mirjam
and
Law,
David
S.
2021.
“Islamic
Constitutionalism:
Iran.”
In
Constitutionalism in Context, edited by David S. Law, 449‒73. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Lombardi, Clark B. 2013. “Designing Islamic Constitutions: Past Trends and Options for a
Democratic Future.” International Journal of Constitutional Law, University of
Washington School of Law Research Paper No. 2013‒18. Available at SSRN: https://
ssrn.com/abstract=2258089
Lombardi, Clark B. and Brown, Nathan J. 2006. “Do Constitutions Requiring Adherence to
Sharīʿa Threaten Human Rights? How Egypt’s Constitutional Court Reconciles Islamic
Islam and Constitutional Law
383
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


--- Page 406 ---
Law with the Liberal Rule of Law.” American University International Law Review 21 (3):
379‒435.
Lombardi, Clark B. and March, Andrew F. 2022. “Afghan Taliban Views on Legitimate
Islamic Governance. Certainties, Ambiguities, and Areas for Compromise.” United
States Institute of Peace, February 28. www.usip.org/publications/2022/02/afghan-tali
ban-views-legitimate-islamic-governance
Loughlin, Martin. 2015. “The Constitutional Imagination.” Modern Law Review, 78 (1): 1‒25.
March, Andrew F. 2019. The Caliphate of Man: Popular Sovereignty in Modern Islamic
Thought. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
384
Clark Lombardi
use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/36B349A13BAFF639EC6E737A9C9FB186
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 27.130.227.211, on 17 Sep 2026 at 06:58:01, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
