--- Page 1 ---
The Importance of Buddhism to Heal Trauma in 
Pahadi’s “The Tears of Terror” 
Badri Prasad Pokharel, Ph.D* 
Article History:  Received 15 Oct. 2022; Reviewed 25 Nov. 2022; Revised 18 Dec. 2022; Accepted 15 Jan. 2023. 
Abstract 
This article has tried to analyze Kishor Pahadi’s “The Tears of Terror” by applying Buddhism and 
its principal assets which would help the victims relieve from the pain and suffering or trauma 
they have got during the ten-year long Maoist insurgency. People during the decade-long conflict 
were badly inflicted by the fatal consequences from which they could hardly get over. Different 
measures were taken to help them get over, however, following some meditative aspects of 
Buddhism, one can get relief from the mental shock which has been imprinted in mind for a long 
time. This article is not talking about leaving home and going to the monasteries, rather it 
highlights some meditative aspects of Buddhism which can relieve the victims who is/are narrated 
in this story.  
Keywords: 
Buddhism, meditation, peace, People’s War, trauma 
Introduction 
It has been a long time Buddhism has been practiced to bring peace and solidarity in the world 
inflicted from wars and conflicts. It has been used and its main philosophy of calmness, peace, 
forgiveness and reconciliation to resolve the unresolved traumatic pains of the affected people 
have been taken as an important asset to understand the pain and suffering of the people due to 
war and conflict in the world. In many parts of the world, the relation of religion to politics has 
defied simple interpretation. This is certainly true in the case of Buddhism and its role in regard to 
various pains and suffering due to internal and external conflicts. Buddhism as a religion or 
philosophy of peace and non-violence, on the vitality in the regions around the world has been 
understood as a way to peace and relief. Nepal’s ten-year long insurgency which took the lives of 
more than seventeen thousand people and millions of others remained displaced internally and 
externally has been a fertile area of writing about the testimonies of war-affected people either 
from the state security personnel or from the rebels. For such traumatized people as mentioned in 
the narratives written about the insurgency as characters, some important assets of Buddhism 
would be very good tool to analyze their suffering and solutions, so that they could have got some 
relief. Kishor Pahadi’s “The Tears of Terror” is one such narrative which has been written about 
the Maoist insurgency which has taken the lives of more than seventeen thousand innocent 
people. Its main character Chet dai is presented as traumatized and looking for refuge to get relief 
from the shock he has got from the Maoist cadres. To get relief from this mental shock or trauma, 
some aspects of trauma would be very good tool to live once again as he used to live previously. 
                                                          
* Associate Professor, Department of English,Saraswati Multiple Campus, TU, Nepal

--- Page 2 ---
IJMSS, Vol. 4, No. 1, Jan., 2023 
Badri Prasad Pokharel 
 
2 
 
 
Buddhism as a tool of analysis 
Hence, for prevailed peace and its comprehensive efforts of peacemaking and peacekeeping 
accredited by conflicts and wars, it is Buddhism which with its worldview characterized by 
dynamic interdependence and its behavioral codes stressing non-violence and loving-kindness 
offers rich resources for peacemaking techniques. Here, Theresa Dar-lan Yeh views, “in 
examining the development in the field of peace studies, the Buddhist worldview is surprisingly 
in accordance, and hence worthy of further studies in at least three areas: the process-oriented 
paradigm, peace by peaceful means, and the micro and macro linking in a holistic framework of 
peace” (104). In today’s world wars, rivalries and hatred are the result of desire, greed and 
craving.  
The craving is the bottom of all troubles of this world. It is the root cause of avarice, anger, 
hatred, malice, rivalry, jealousy, envy, hypocrisy, deceit, pride, arrogance and ignorance and has 
ruined individuals and nations. It is present in everyone’s heart, no amount of prayer will remove 
it, no belief in any doctrine will eradicate it. No outward agency can remove it. It can be removed 
by one own self-understanding and self- purification, that can only be attained with the help of 
basic principles of Buddhism. 
Above all, the present time prevailing in the world is not satisfactory to all denizen living in any 
parts of the world. The threats of nuclear war, of civil war, of Muslims’ jihad on the western 
countries and America, ethnic conflict of Sri Lanka, the Maoist rebellion in India and Nepal are 
some challenges that would not let anyone lessen one’s vigilance as wars with all their cruel and 
inhuman manifestations are still prevalent in the world. Though the relationship between the 
nations characterized as "peaceful coexistence, mutual understanding, negotiation instead of 
confrontation, market frontiers rather than war frontiers" (Chau 92). The basic principles like 
peaceful coexistence can be helpful to have mutual understanding to prevail peace. 
 Still, the credibility of Buddhism either in Buddhist countries or others have been attained with a 
belief that “we are preparing for an era of real peace, peace for the whole planet, not only for 
some regions, but peace for all human beings. All kinds of wars, not only nuclear war, should be 
banished.” (93). All these manifestations of violence should be done away with forever.  
 The world would, thus, have a positive trend towards more democracy, avoidance of oppressions 
and cultural and intellectual coercion and more respect and understanding towards different ways 
of thinking.It would also have more humanism in politics in the national and international 
relationship will help strengthen and deepen in each one living in the universe. 
Daisaku Ikeda, the president of the Soka Gakkai International (SGI), in one seminar coined a new 
term “inner universalism” a method for searching the inner self to find a universal value within it 
(47). In it, one would try to find a new meaning within the self. Having known the inner meaning, 
one would go ahead of all grief, passion, jealousy and hypocracy. He or she would think more 
than his or her race or any other identity. In this way, Buddhism is “a method of probing the depth 
of life, addressing the levels of human life, race, nation, biosphere and earth leading to an 
understanding of original life force as ultimately fused with the universe itsel.” (Kawada 104). 
This kind of internal search may produce transcendence and then transcendence may return to the 
inner existence.

--- Page 3 ---
IJMSS, Vol. 4, No. 1, Jan., 2023 
Badri Prasad Pokharel 
 
3 
 
 
The search for universal values in the depths of life corresponds to Buddhist wisdom while 
transcending of the self to reach out to external existence. This again corresponds to the practice 
of compassion. Furthermore, Yoichi Kawada argues that Buddhism holds that “wisdom equals 
compassion” (104), meaning that wisdom itself contains the potential to act with compassion, and 
compassion needs brilliant wisdom to guide it. In the practice of Buddhism, the universal values 
of internality and transcendence are brought together while a kind of paradoxical tension is 
maintained between them. 
In this way, Buddhism essentially directs itself to create infinite value in life and society based on 
the life condition of the greater self, the true self. In other words, Buddha further opines that the 
ideal human image pictured in the Lotus Sutra is the one who does not turn his back upon reality 
but rather the one who involves himself positively and actively in the world.  Therein lies the 
intrinsic value of Buddhism.  
Here, the quintessence of (Mahayana) Buddhism consistently expounds the dignity of human life, 
peace, love, brotherhood, non-violence, equality of all sentient beings, and ultimately building of 
a peaceful society where all denizen forget their previous miseries. Here, traumatic experiences of 
the past life can live in a reconciliatory ways in accordance with the core Buddhist philosophy. 
The central aim of Buddhism is to solve and overcome the problem of suffering. This has been the 
unchanging purpose of Buddhism since its foundation by Siddhartha Gautama who according to 
Dalai Lama, “was led to philosophizing by an intense longing for the eradication of suffering” 
(“The En of Suffering 2). Gautama Buddha and subsequent Buddhist masters have never been 
interested in metaphysical or speculative philosophies: their aim has been consistently concerned 
with overcoming suffering by the means of the eradication of its cause . The central concern of 
Buddhism is suffering, its origin, its cessation and the way to its cessation and the Four Noble 
Truths play the central role in showing the means to eliminate suffering and to achieve 
enlightenment.  
The Four Noble Truths are the fundamental elements of all Buddhist teachings and are the core 
doctrinal framework of every school of Buddhism including Theravada, Mahayana and 
Vajrayana. According to Geshe Kelsang Gyatso the Four Noble Truths are “truths of pain, origin 
[of pain], suppression [of pain] and the way [to suppress pain]” (172). The First Noble Truth 
states that from Buddhist perspectives, life is nothing but suffering and pain. According to Paul 
Williams, what the First Noble Truth claims is that “awryness and unsatisfactoriness are inherent 
features of the universe” (43).  The Second Noble Truth presents the cause of suffering. Suffering 
is caused by craving. 
Besides craving, ignorance is recognized as the fundamental cause of suffering. According to 
Dalai Lama, ignorance means “lack of self-awareness and correct knowledge of the world and 
human life” (The End of Suffering 15).  One’s failure to understand the way things really are 
results in his/her craving, strong attachment and consequently suffering. Thus, the Second Noble 
Truth is that ignorance and craving are the fundamental causes of suffering.  
Further, these two elements give rise to three mental defilements: greed, anger and delusion 
(Williams 98). Carmen Meinert argues that these three are representative mental afflictions 
derived from ignorance and craving (23). Accordingly, it can be seen that Buddhist understanding 
of suffering is psychologically or subjectively-oriented. In other words, Buddhism can be

--- Page 4 ---
IJMSS, Vol. 4, No. 1, Jan., 2023 
Badri Prasad Pokharel 
 
4 
 
 
understood as the codification of the insights about human psychology developed by Gautama 
Buddha. By knowing the cause of suffering, human beings will be inspired to overcome its cause, 
which is the main thrust of the Third Noble Truth.  
The Third Noble Truth states that suffering can be eliminated. What the Third Noble Truth 
expresses is that suffering or affliction is not everlasting: rather, it stems from one’s temporary 
craving and ignorance. While the Third Noble Truth clarifies that the cause of suffering can be 
eliminated, one question remains to be addressed: How can one attain the eradication of the cause 
of suffering?  The answer is the Fourth Foble Truth. The Fourth Noble Truth provides one with 
the way to address suffering and restore mental health or tranquility, which is generally called the 
Noble Eightfold Path. The Eightfold Path is: right view or understanding, right thought, right 
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. 
 Apart from them, there are three essentials of Buddhism for attaining liberation from suffering: 
ethical conduct, mental discipline and wisdom. They are embodied in the Fourth Noble Truth, that 
is, the Eightfold Path as Bhante Yogavacara Rahula argues; 
 Right view or understanding and right thought are categorized into wisdom 
while right speech, right action and right livelihood are in ethical conduct. 
Accordingly, mental discipline indicates right effort, right mindfulness and right 
concentration. The eightfold path categorized into three pillars embraces 
everything we do and aims at the achievement of eradication of suffering, as a 
result of which we can enjoy an authentic way of being in the world. (145)   
What should be emphasized is that these three essentials are interdependent and interconnected 
with each other: without one, the other two cannot be actualized. 
The Four Noble Truths can be understood as the core of Buddhism that teaches people the 
potentials of suffering in order to enable them to realize the truth about suffering. They lead all to 
eradicate it and what is stressed as the core of Buddhist teachings is that suffering is not beyond 
human reach or beyond solution. With the help of a holistic approach represented by the three 
pillars of Buddhist discipline like ethical conduct, mental discipline and wisdom, suffering can be 
eradicated by human beings themselves. 
 
Applying Buddhism in “The Tears of Terror” 
The trauma of Chet dai, the principal character in Kishor Pahadi’s “The Tears of Terror” is very 
different and heart touching because he happens to see the Maoists rebels in everyone he sees and 
meets. It is because once the Maoist rebels in the command of comrade Agni saw him “on the 
chautara talking merrily with the soldiers of the Durga battalion” (Pahadi 147) and supposed him 
spying against them. On the charge of being spied against the rebels, he was kidnapped and taken 
little away from his home. He was “so terrified that he could not muster the courage to deny their 
false accusation against him” (147). He was badly beaten until “he fainted dead away” (147). 
When he comes to his senses, he “found himself in the hospital bed. There were some stitches in 
his cheeks. The leg was broken. His body was aching all over with severe pain. He at least came 
to know that he was not killed and was still alive” (147). After two and half month time, when he 
comes to the town for the follow-up of his treatment, at a tea stall he sees three young boys of

--- Page 5 ---
IJMSS, Vol. 4, No. 1, Jan., 2023 
Badri Prasad Pokharel 
 
5 
 
 
different backgrounds and supposes them the rebel Agni and others who are following him. They 
are carrying bag on their back and asking for toilet. But he supposes they have bombs in their 
bags and “want to plant the bombs there” (146). He could not drink tea and take other snacks, but 
leaves for the bus park to go back to his village. After getting off the bus, with his limping steps, 
he tries to walk fast, but seeing someone walking a bit far ahead of him and then standing to light 
a cigarette, he gets startled and thinks, “That man might be the one who had called him out of his 
house two and a half months ago. Like the face of the boy who had grabbed his hair, the face also 
terrified him” (149). But, luckily, the stranger turns out to be his own student who, seeing him 
throws his cigarette and greets him. He even could not be happy rather his “eyes welled with tears 
of terror” (Ibid) and remains staring at him. His mentality in such condition is traumatized and 
unable to decide what was happening to him and who the people around him are doing. 
The condition of Chet dai is rather different from what has happened to other people who 
normally get abducted and terrified after the traumatic events. The abduction of Chet dai by the 
Maoist rebels on charge of talking with the army at Chautara hauled him in so much as he lost his 
mental obsession that in every stranger he would see the face of the rebels. Then, he begins 
fleeing away not from the rebels but from his own fear ‘inner fear’ that cannot be overcome. 
Having found some boys looking for toilet, he supposes them the rebels fixing bombs there. Even 
he cannot identify his own student and tries to escape from him assuming him the same rebel who 
had kidnapped him once. One finds him losing his mental balance due to the traumatic experience 
he had once gone through. The suffering and trauma of Chet dai has been experienced as the 
consequences of war, abuse, illness, and crime (Wright 1).  This has disenfranchised him from 
other people, driven him into emotional isolation, and made him appear as less than sane in the 
eyes of others, be it the victim or the perpetrator.  
Richard H. Jones puts forward that some codes consist of right speech, action and livelihood that 
can help one develop the mental exercises i.e. right effort, mindfulness, and concentration. In the 
context of Chet dai, this code can be a cure. Not involving in the socially immoral conducts i.e. 
killing, stealing, etc. the right path followers can weaken greed and consequently weaken the 
sense of a self if interests need to be enhanced. The precepts can give concrete recommendations 
to him to enact this attitude (374). The radical end of Chet dai’s suffering can only be 
accomplished on his individual basis when he would contemplate his mental stress as a normal act 
which can be purified following the sacred precepts that Buddha had advanced for the commoners 
for their happy and peaceful life. 
According to Dalai Lama, following the Great Vehicles – Lower Vehicle, Great Vehicle, and the 
Vehicle of tantra, can provide a person like Chet dai for achieving liberation from suffering and 
cycle of existence. This method would enable each one to overcome ignorance which is the root 
cause of spinning in the cycle of existence. Then, one can feel selflessness, which gives rise to a 
profound understanding that could help eliminate all ignorance and disturbing emotions. He 
further views that the highest vehicle known as the Tantric Vehicle could comprise not only a 
technique for heightening human beings’ own realization of emptiness or mind of enlightenment, 
but also certain techniques for penetrating the vital points of the body (A Human Approach 14). In 
doing so, in the case of Chet dai, he can expedite the process of realization, eliminating ignorance 
and its imprints. The fear he is fleeing away each moment can be eliminated and he can have 
soothed himself and peace can have been prevailed to him hereafter.

--- Page 6 ---
IJMSS, Vol. 4, No. 1, Jan., 2023 
Badri Prasad Pokharel 
 
6 
 
 
He should realize the suffering that he is going through is from his own ignorance and 
undisciplined mind. For that, he has to restrain himself from all negative actions and thoughts that 
always cause his suffering. He must have to end such causes.Dalai Lama further suggests that in 
the Four Noble Truths, two sets of causes and effects are found. His suffering is the effect and its 
origin is the cause (A Human Approach 15). In the same way, the cessation of craving more is 
peace and the path leading to it is the cause of that peace that should prevail to him.  
Following Dalai Lama once again in the context of Chet dai, the happiness can be achieved by 
bringing discipline and transformation within his own mind by purifying his mind. This 
purification is possible when he is able to eliminate his ignorance – running away from his 
meaningless fear. The cessation of ignorance is true peace and happiness. That cessation can be 
achieved only when he is able to realize the nature of phenomena and penetrate the nature of 
reality (A Human Approach 15). For this too, training in wisdom is important.  When wisdom is 
combined with the faculty of his single-pointedness, he will be able to channel all his energy and 
attention toward a single object or virtue. 
Therefore, the training in concentration comes in, and for the training of concentration and 
wisdom to be successful, a very stable foundation of morality is required and the practice of 
morality or ethics remains prevalent to him. This, at last, would lead him to the door of ecstasy 
forever. 
 
Conclusion 
People like Chet dai have been victimized from both the state security personnel and the rebels. 
Now their treatment going to hospitals and meeting doctors would not be possible, but if followed 
strictly, some important aspects of Buddhism like meditative practice would help them get relief. 
It has a message for the violent world. It must do more than condemn violence. It must be able to 
interpret its nature, its roots, and its hold on the world and the possibilities for its transformation. 
Since the ultimate goal of the spiritual path for the Buddhist is nirvana, attitudes towards violence 
must first be seen in relation to it. Nirvana is the ultimate eradication of dukkha (suffering). It is a 
possible goal within this life and, among other things, it involves a complete de-toxification of the 
mind from greed, hatred and delusion, and revolution in the way the world is perceived, freedom 
from craving and liberation from the delusion of ego. Attaining this goal, many people have 
soothed themselves from the prevailing suffering. In principle, the goal set forth by Buddhism has 
always been, and always will be, the attainment of Nirvana or Nibbana, however these terms are 
understood. Many people think that Buddha means the Enlightened one that only spread peace 
and love among the people who are in trauma and sufferings(8). Buddhism has been aware of the 
necessity and desirability of peace, order, and harmony in this world, as evidenced by the 
scattered references regarding Gautama Buddha's attitude toward the ongoing conflicts and 
sufferings of the people.

--- Page 7 ---
IJMSS, Vol. 4, No. 1, Jan., 2023 
Badri Prasad Pokharel 
 
7 
 
 
Works Cited 
Chau, Thich Minh. “Five Principles for a New Global Moral Order.” Buddhism Nonviolence: 
Global Problem Solving. Eds. Glenn D. Paige and Sarah Gilliat. Hawaii: Center for Global 
Nonviolence, 2001: 91-102. 
Gyatso, Geshe Kelsang. Modern Buddhism. London: Tharpa Publications, 2009. 
Jones, Richard H. “Theravada Buddhism and Morality.” Journal of the American Academy of 
Religion 47.3 (1979): 371-87. 
Kawada, Yoichi. “The Importance of the Buddhist Concept of Karma for World Peace.” 
Buddhism Nonviolence: Global Problem Solving.” Eds. Glenn D. Paige and. Sarah Gilliat. 
Hawaii: Center for Global Nonviolence, 2001: 103-14. 
Lama, His Holiness the Dalai.  The End of Suffering and the Discovery of Happiness: The Path  of 
Tibetan Buddhism. Carlsbad: Hay House Inc., 2012. 
_ _ _ . A Human Approach to World Peace. London: World Publications, 1981. 
Meinert, Carmen. “Between the Profane and Sacred? On the Context of the Rite of 
Liberation.”Buddhism and Violence. Ed.  Michael Zimmermann. Lumbini: Buddhist 
International Research Institute, 2006: 99-130.                  
Pahadi, Kishor.  “The Tears of Terror.” Stories of Conflict and War. Ed. and Trans.  Govinda  Raj 
Bhattaraai. Kathmandu: Govinda Raj Bhattarai, 2007. 
Rahula, Bhante Yogavacara. The Way to Peace and Happiness, A Penetrating Study into the 
Teaching of Gotama Buddha. West Virginia: Bhawana Society, 2004. 
Wright, Barbara. A Buddhist Perspective on Trauma: Understanding, Forgiveness, and 
Atonement. Kandy: Bodhicari Dharmapala, 1987. 
Yeh, Theresa Der-lan. “The Way to Peace: A Buddhist Perspective.” International Journal of 
Press Studies 11.1 (2006): 95-117.