--- Page 1 ---


--- Page 2 ---
“The monograph makes an extremely important contribution to a multi­
layered debate that has been intensely preoccupying not only religious and 
Buddhist studies for several years. The timing of the publication is excellent, 
as the book makes a decisive contribution to objectifying a debate that often 
drifts into polemics and polarisation. I cannot but strongly recommend this 
book for publication.” 
– Christoph Kleine, University of Leipzig, Germany 
“Borup’s book addresses important and timely issues for the study of Bud­
dhism and Religious Studies as a whole.” 
– Stephen C. Berkwitz, Missouri State University, USA 


--- Page 3 ---


--- Page 4 ---
Decolonising the Study of Religion  
Decolonising the Study of Religion: Who Owns Buddhism? analyses historical 
and contemporary discussions in the study of religion and Buddhism and criti­
cally investigates representations, possibilities, and challenges of a decolonial 
approach, addressing the important question: who owns Buddhism? 
The monograph oﬀers a case-based perspective with which to examine the 
general study of religion, where new challenges require reﬂection and prospects 
for new directions. It focuses on Buddhism, one religion which has been studied 
in the West for centuries. Building on postcolonial theories and supplemented 
with a critical analysis of identity and postsecular engagement, the book oﬀers 
new possibilities and challenges to the study of religion. It critically investigates 
decolonisation in the study of religion, subscribing to a third way between 
‘objectivist’ and ‘subjectivist’ positions. 
Analysing the postcolonial and decolonial critique of the study of religion, 
with a particular focus on Buddhist studies in the West and in Japan, this book 
will be of interest to researchers in the ﬁeld of Religious Studies, Buddhism, 
Japanese religions, anthropology, Asian Studies and those interested in religion 
and decolonisation. 
Jørn Borup is Associate Professor in the Department of the Study of Religion 
at Aarhus University, Denmark. 


--- Page 5 ---
Routledge Studies in Asian Religion and Philosophy 
24 Divinizing in South Asian Traditions 
Edited by Diana Dimitrova and Tatiana Oranskaia 
25 Christianity in India 
The Anti-Colonial Turn 
Clara A. B. Joseph 
26 Chinese Theology and Translation 
The Christianity of the Jesuit Figurists and their Christianized Yijing 
Sophie Ling-chia Wei 
27 Christianity in Northeast India 
A Cultural History of Nagaland from 1947 
Chongpongmeren Jamir 
28 Theories of the Self, Race, and Essentialization in Buddhism 
The United States and the Asian “Other”, 1899-1957 
Ryan David Anningson 
29 Christianity and Radical Democracy in the Philippines 
Building a Church of the Poor 
Christopher Moxham 
30 The Nature and Rationale of Zen/Chan and Enlightenment 
The Mind of a Pre-Natal Baby 
Ming Dong Gu 
31 Inter-religious Practices and Saint Veneration in the Muslim World 
Khidr/Khizr from the Middle East to South Asia 
Edited by Michel Boivin and Manoël Pénicaud 
32 Decolonising the Study of Religion 
Who Owns Buddhism? 
Jørn Borup 
For more information about this series, please visit: https://www.routledge.com/ 
Routledge-Studies-in-Asian-Religion-and-Philosophy/book-series/RSARP 


--- Page 6 ---
Decolonising the Study of 
Religion 
Who Owns Buddhism? 
Jørn Borup 


--- Page 7 ---
First published 2023
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 Jørn Borup
The right of Jørn Borup to be identiﬁed as author[/s] of this work has been
asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record has been requested for this book
ISBN: 978-1-032-59339-5 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-59344-9 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-45427-4 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003454274
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Taylor & Francis Books


--- Page 8 ---
Contents  
List of ﬁgures 
viii  
Acknowledgments 
ix  
1 Introduction 
1  
2 Decolonisation 
9  
3 Colonial Religion and Decolonising the Study of Religion 
36  
4 Colonial and Decolonial Buddhism 
61  
5 Buddhist Studies in the West: From the Science of Religion to  
Buddhology and Postcolonialism 
80  
6 Decolonising Buddhist Studies in the West 
96  
7 Modern and Colonial Buddhism in Japan 
113  
8 Modern and Postcolonial Buddhist and Religious Studies in  
Japan 
129  
9 Critical Discussion of Decolonial Critique 
149  
Conclusion: Decolonising Buddhist and Religious Studies and  
Beyond 
172  
References 
180  
Index 
209  


--- Page 9 ---
Figures
2.1
Imperial division. China divided by British, French, German,
Russian and Japanese powers. French cartoon from 1898.
12
4.1
Henry Steel Olcott, the white Buddhist.
62
4.2
Anagarika Dhamapala. National hero of Sri Lankan reform
Buddhism.
66
4.3
Racially engaged Buddhism. Lion’s Roar (May 2020).
74
5.1
Abanindranath Tagore: Buddha as mendicant (1914).
84
7.1
Van Gogh −Bodhidharma. Chinese artist’s illustration of
European representation of/identiﬁcation with Chan/Zen
monk.
121
-
(A.1)
Blind men examining an elephant, by Hanabusa Itcho
(1652–1724).
172


--- Page 10 ---
Acknowledgments  
This monograph was made possible by a generous grant from the Carlsberg 
Foundation allowing me the privilege of an extended period of research. 
Together with a grant from the Aarhus University Research Foundation, I had 
the pleasure of enjoying also a two-month research stay at Otani University in 
Spring 2022. I thank the Carlsberg Foundation, Aarhus University Research 
Foundation and Otani University for allowing me such opportunities without 
which the present project would not have been possible. 
At Otani University, I enjoyed (apart from the view of Mount Hiei from the 
assigned oﬃce) the possibilities of pursuing the project and discussing with col­
-
leagues at the department of Shinshu Studies. I am grateful for the comments to 
and discussion of the project presentations at the Eastern Buddhist Society at 
Otani University, the Department of Religious Studies at Tokyo University, the 
Department for the Study of Religion at Aarhus University and the Centre for 
Contemporary Buddhist Studies at Copenhagen University. I had the pleasure of 
also insightful talks on the project with individual scholars, including Michael 
-
Conway, Fujiwara Satoko, Fujii Shuhei, Elizabeth Kenney, Elizabeth Harris, 
Ugo Dessi, Lene Kühle, Lars Albinus, Jeppe Sinding Jensen, Ben Purzyckie, 
Jakob Egeris Thorsen, Trine Brox and Paula Kolata. All scholarly achievements 
are basically based on collective knowledge. Needless to say, however, that all 
mistakes, illusions and bewildering stray thoughts are entirely my own. 


--- Page 11 ---


--- Page 12 ---
1 
Introduction 
In a feature about mindfulness as a new cultural phenomenon in the USA, 
Time magazine illustrated “The Mindful Revolution” with a cover of a medi­
tating woman. This seemingly innocent signiﬁcation of a popular meditation 
practice with Buddhist roots itself was part of a long narrative of presenting the 
successful robustness of an Oriental religion in a Western setting. Previously, 
the same magazine on the front cover had used a young Brad Pitt from the 
movie Seven Years in Tibet to illustrate ‘America’s fascination with Buddhism’ 
and another young meditating woman to frame the story of ‘the science of 
meditation’ as a symbol of health and wellness.1 Stereotyped images of Bud­
dhism have been part of much Western popular culture, constituting almost a 
research genre in itself. What triggered the anger of many practicing American 
Buddhists was not the fact that this was yet another example of classical 
Orientalism. It was mainly that the young woman was white, slim and healthy, 
suggesting the so-called whitewashing and commodiﬁcation of a religion being 
appropriated and colonised by a middle- and upper-class white segment. 
Instrumentally reducing Buddhism to secular spirituality and excluding the 
tradition of non-whites had previously been problematised. An editorial in an 
American Buddhist magazine thus suggested that “the spokespeople for Bud­
dhism in America have been, almost exclusively, educated members of the 
white middle class … [whereas] Asian American Buddhists … so far … have 
not ﬁgured prominently in the development of something called American 
Buddhism” (Tworkov 1991: 4). The celebration of white teachers having 
learned spiritual insights from Asian Buddhism and establishing American 
sanghas as authorities of authentic Buddhism has become a new trope to be 
critically contradicted. American Buddhist magazines and social media in 
recent years have turned several of the Orientalist and ‘whitewashed’ narratives 
upside down. A new tendency in Western (or at least, so far, North American) 
Buddhism has oﬀered new narratives and prescriptions of how to represent 
them through new identity tropes. 
Identity is not a new phenomenon to problematise in the study of religion. 
But the new focus on identity as a category of suppression, agency and power 
in recent years has become an important channel of understanding and acting 
in all spheres of social life, including Buddhism. While mainly having 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003454274-1 


--- Page 13 ---
2 Decolonising the Study of Religion 
attracted attention and force in North American culture wars, global eﬀects 
and parallel developments signify the necessity of taking it seriously as topics 
of also research. Race, gender and sexuality have become the new ﬁlters 
encouraging social activism with new ways of understanding and ordering the 
world. Identitarian critique is directly linked to what in a broader matrix with 
a global perspective has been termed decolonisation. Both because the two 
concepts are often identiﬁed by its users, and because both perspectives cor­
relate in interest topics and discourses asking for critical activism and episte­
mological alternatives based on subjective (and often religious) experiences 
‘from below’. Decolonisation calls for political, economic and social change 
in an unequal world based on the perceived still-lasting eﬀects of Western 
colonisation. But decolonisation also asks for changes in the very systems and 
structures governing such inequalities, including the modalities and regimes of 
knowledge institutionalised in universities. Decolonising knowledge requires 
deconstruction of hitherto taken for granted values of orientation, including 
revised standards of what can be said, taught and thought. Modernist and 
Enlightenment ideals with their rationality, naturalistic ontology, subject-
object dichotomy and anthropocentrism have been questioned as particu­
larised Western-centrism, or even knowledge regimes based on white supre­
macy. Postmodern and post-anthropocentric responses to social inequality, 
racism and climate crisis have been aligned with decolonial critique for their 
alternative world reconstructions focusing on diversity, equality, nature, (neo) 
animism and interactionalism. What in the decolonial perspective has been 
seen as monolithic Western (or ‘white’) knowledge is being rethought and 
promoted as alternative models with multiple value systems, multiple moder­
nities, multiple ontologies and diversiﬁed or even reversed systems of knowl­
edge and power. 
Decolonial and identity-based approaches call for action to show the social 
relevance of academia as well. Paradoxically, such a relevance imperative 
‘from below’ goes hand in hand with another kind of relevance imperative 
‘from above’. In recent years, the societal values of the humanities have 
repeatedly been doubted, and there seems to be a global trend of an instru­
mentalisation of education and of research structures. Analytical thinking and 
‘neutral’ observation are no longer universally valued as academic compe­
tences. Universities have increasingly become comparable to business co­
operations aiming at ﬁnancial robustness with students as critical customers 
navigating in fractionalised knowledge systems to perform in neo-liberal 
societies. If the humanities ought to survive, it is claimed, they need to 
demonstrate societal relevance and show their beneﬁcial impact. Modern 
humanities are thus squeezed and criticised from two diﬀerent directions, 
which traditionally hold political agendas that are worlds apart: decolonial 
voices questioning the very raison d’être of academia demanding disruptive 
action on the one hand, and neo-liberal ideologies on the other hand ques­
tioning the relevance of human sciences, asking for economically measurable 
universities. The two diametrically opposed and yet parallel value systems 


--- Page 14 ---
Introduction 3 
share a conviction of the relevance of instrumental and action-based knowl­
edge. While most scholars would be reluctant to wholeheartedly buy into a 
neo-liberal colonisation of the universities, the decolonial and identity-based 
alternatives seem to have received much more sympathy and to have been 
judged to be more relevant. 
Decolonisation and its alliance with identity-based values undoubtedly 
constitute a challenging ﬁeld in the humanities these years. Not least in the 
academic study of religion, (variously called ‘comparative religion’, ‘religious 
studies’, or with its German notion common to many of its practitioners 
Religionswissenschaft) this is an obvious challenge which cannot be ignored. 
With its origin in a European and Christian context and foundation on 
Enlightenment ideals of rationality, secular epistemology, arms’ length prin­
ciples of comparison by analytical models aiming at universal application 
(sometimes mistaken for sui generis essentialism) beyond normative partici­
pation (and a long history of white men deﬁning the tradition), decolonial 
critique has here an illustrative case of reformable (or annihilatable) scholar­
ship. Buddhist studies, Buddhology and studies of Buddhism in all their 
diversities naturally would be in an equally criticisable position, although they 
are placed in a variety of disciplines (e.g. anthropology, area studies, etc.) 
which do not necessary have bonds to Religionswissenschaft. 
The aim of the book is not to come up with a decolonial agenda, or to 
resist and reject it as an irrelevant nuisance. The purpose is to investigate the 
scope and the challenges of theories related to decolonisation and identity 
with a special focus on the study of religion and Buddhism in a contemporary 
and historical perspective. Neither of these ﬁelds have yet responded with 
critical analysis to this complex topic beyond scattered thoughts and general 
programmatic ideals. Rather than presenting itself as the profound One 
Vehicle (ekayana) surpassing or accumulatively integrating all other approa­
ches with a new grand narrative, the book more humbly aims at introducing 
and discussing a multifaceted ﬁeld which undoubtedly will attract increasing 
attention in the years to come. 
Diversity in the study of religion and Buddhism is a valuable ideal repre­
sented already in the various scholarly traditions. Critical approaches are 
already part of the canon, challenging also the models presumed to have 
universal applicability. Diversifying methods and theories have become nat­
ural outcomes of such critical scholarly endeavours. What is not applauded in 
this book, however, is the tendency to withdraw into exclusivist particularism. 
Diﬀerentiation narratives and fractionalised epistemologies are indeed seduc­
tive. Finding commonalities - pertaining even to possible universals - without 
subscribing to outdated Eurocentrism is much more challenging, but worth­
while upholding as ideal for university research. Sometimes thick descriptions 
need to be counterbalanced by thin description with particularised deep ana­
lyses compared to larger perspectives, even at the risk of performing easily 
criticisable hermeneutic overkill. As Jason Josephson-Storm says, we need 
‘more scholars working together to track the enfolding set of categories, many 


--- Page 15 ---
4 Decolonising the Study of Religion 
of which emerged in their current form alongside the diﬀusion of the current 
version of the university system itself” (Josephson-Storm 2021, 146). We also 
need to “ﬁnd a balance between over-generalization and over-particulariza­
tion” (ibid, 95), not least in times of fragmentation, hyperspecialisation and 
postmodern scepticism of anything reminding of metanarratives where “we 
are increasingly writing for ourselves and in ignorance of our intellectual 
neighbours” (ibid, 19). The challenge is to negotiate the balance between cri­
tical deconstruction, pragmatic reconstruction and resistance to identitarian 
exclusivism (which insists on debunking old existentialist claims that we exist 
before we are essentialised in our particularity). 
Decolonisation is probably more problematic and directly relevant when 
applied to the study of indigenous people, a ﬁeld having already experienced 
counter-colonial research methods integrating social justice methodology, 
collaboration and participatory research. Buddhism might not be an obvious 
topic of decolonial research for several reasons. As an axial, proto-global 
religion with grand narratives and missionary elements, it has itself instigated 
both religious and cultural dissemination. However, the variety of Buddhist 
traditions’ meetings with Western modernity as well as the very origin of the 
modern academic study of Buddhism was very much embedded in (Western) 
colonialism. Colonialism’s lasting impact is, as several scholars of Buddhism 
have already previously exposed, a factor to be continuously conscious about. 
The contemporary identity focus has taken a new dimension. But identity has 
been a perspective inherent in also previous critical discourses within the 
study of both religion and Buddhism. What is ‘Buddhism’? Which theories 
can be applied to approach it? Which methods are relevant to unwrap 
understanding of it? 
The book focuses on Buddhism comparing scholarly traditions from ‘the 
West’ and Japan, but it is not written from a Buddhologist’s perspective, nor 
is it a work from a ﬁeldworking anthropologist or a specialised Japanologist. 
It is thought and written from the tradition of the study of religion (Reli­
gionswissenschaft), a scholarly ﬁeld parasitising on other specialised ﬁelds and 
sometimes thought of as a hybrid of all sorts of stuﬀ, being a “lively con­
temporary ﬁeld of Comparative Religion, where there is a broad sense of 
freedom as to what topics are deemed relevant” (Blum 2021, xi). Hybrid 
scholarly identities and tendencies to cross ﬁelds, which some might think 
should not be crossed if compared to more ‘pure’ scholarly traditions with 
more bounded and well-deﬁned objects of research, are not always appre­
ciated. While not identifying with “those postmodern anthropologists who, 
having become their own natives, can only write about themselves” (Bena­
vides 2013, 226), it is acknowledged that contemporary ideals of exposing 
personal positioned situatedness are more than just virtue signalling. As 
James Spickard asks about his own role as a sociologist of religion: “is it not 
rather colonialist for a White, male, American scholar to pluck Confucian, 
Muslim and Navajo ideas out of their indigenous contexts and bring them 
home for his own society’s intellectual enjoyment?” (Spickard 2017, 18). It 


--- Page 16 ---
Introduction 5 
could be asked in a parallel way, revealing to some the illegitimate project 
unfolding in the rest of the book: Is it not rather colonialist, privileged and 
probably a problematic gaze for a white, male, secular, Danish scholar inter­
ested in Asian religion, visiting, studying and interacting with ‘the others’ to 
pluck out Buddhist (and Japanese) ideas and practices out of their indigenous 
contexts and bring them home for own intellectual enjoyment? I am not 
advocating for the position of the scholar of religion to be caretaker pursuing 
personal ideologies and confessional convictions. Neither am I (as a scholar) 
interested in normatively judging good and bad religion. I do however, 
acknowledge, that no scholarship is entirely neutral, but also that scholars 
attempting to conduct critical research as good as they can (even if trans­
gressing the categories of appreciation and appropriation) are valuable also 
beyond new ideals of instrumentalised relevance. 
This book only addresses certain aspects of decolonisation. It does not 
discuss the whole ‘mindset’ or institutional framings, the diﬃculties of job 
hiring, publication strategies or access to power in general. Not discussing the 
whole system might be seen as yet another attempt to assimilate and thus 
annihilate the true forces of change. As such, it could probably be guilty of 
appropriating a toxic ﬁeld, domesticating it into mere theory, a criticism 
which both postcolonialism and the ‘Europeanisation’ of intersectionalism 
have been accused of. 
Rather, it is an attempt to understand and contextualise decolonial theories, 
investigating their possible applications in particular aspects related to 
knowledge production in a concrete ﬁeld. It basically asks for critical con­
siderations of understanding and representation of Buddhism and what we 
call religion. To unwrap the entangled ﬁeld, it describes and analyses pro­
blems of studying religion, with concrete cases from Western and Japanese 
traditions in historical and contemporary contexts. It does not aspire to pre­
sent itself as a coherent theory or methodology. It is meant as an attempt to 
open-mindedly discuss the decolonial challenges to the study of Buddhism 
and religion, including the relations to identity politics, postcolonialism and 
‘critical studies’. 
Outline of the book 
Although colonialism has largely ended, postcolonial eﬀects still play a role in 
the contemporary globalised world. Beyond economic and political ties, 
colonialism has inﬂuenced cultural, religious, and educational perspectives to 
such an extent that recent eﬀorts at decolonisation have spurred the academic 
realm to deconstruct previously acknowledged knowledge regimes and to 
present alternative ways of theoretical understanding and practical change. 
The chapter Decolonisation delves into the facets of colonialism and decolo­
nisation, including topics like cultural appropriation. It will introduce some of 
the aspects of a ‘decolonial turn’ in academia, discussing its varying eﬀects 
across scholarly disciplines and placing it in context with postcolonial theory 


--- Page 17 ---
6 Decolonising the Study of Religion 
and the increasing signiﬁcance of identity in cultural orientations, activist 
movements, and academic discourse. It is claimed that the emphasis on iden­
tity categories is inherent in much decolonial ideology triggered not least by 
post-global orientations. Moreover, it is contended, that the decolonial com­
plex with deconstruction, reconstruction and activism is particularly challen­
ging to the study of religion. 
Christianity was embedded in and supporting colonialism. Race, religion 
and civilisation formed the triumvirate and rationalised colonisation and the 
qualitative diﬀerentiation of the world. From its inception, the academic 
study of religion was steeped in Western culture and (Protestant) Christianity, 
framing its analytical orientation. Consequently, a ‘Protestant’ understanding 
of religion has typically emphasised texts, doctrines, belief, and the duality of 
transcendence/immanence. It has also outlined distinct ‘world religions’, 
intertwined with Eurocentric enlightenment ideals of rationality, individual­
ism, secularity and evolutionism. Investigating, ‘discovering’ and appropriat­
ing other worlds were also part of the endeavour of understanding and 
comparing religions, making the Western study of religion a product of colo­
nial modernity. Decolonial study of religion rests on postcolonial theory and 
‘critical studies’ but goes further in deconstructing the power regimes and 
biased epistemologies, adding imperatives of social change and engaged 
scholarship. Colonial Religion and Decolonising the Study of Religion 
describes Christianity’s role in the colonial project before analysing the post-
and decolonial critique of the general study of religion, placing it among 
other postmodern and post-anthropocentric ideas, including the quest for 
integrating identity politics in academia. 
H. S. Olcott was a 19th century Theosophist and excavator of ‘the mystical 
East’. Alongside his spiritual conﬁdante, Madame Blavatsky, he is often 
hailed as the ﬁrst Western Buddhist who ardently championed its cause, with 
Theosophy as the magical gateway combining the ‘spiritual East’ with the 
‘rational West’. Olcott was also male and white, and in contemporary times a 
symbol of the ‘white gaze’ appropriating Eastern religions, a process having 
continued as a ‘neo-colonial’ project with the import and domestication of 
Buddhism in the West. The chapter Colonial and Decolonial Buddhism corre­
lates early Theosophist Buddhism with American convert Buddhism. It 
addresses present-day critiques of religious appropriation and the concept of 
‘white Buddhism’, whilst also outlining instances of identity-based Buddhism. 
Since its ‘discovery’, Buddhism in the Western gaze has served as a distant 
mirror, reﬂecting Western culture’s engagement with ‘otherness’. It has evoked 
diverse images and ideas, and to the general study of religion, the study of 
Buddhism has contributed to both deeper understandings of non-Western 
religions as well as the comparative study of religion. Consequently, post­
colonial and ‘post-Eurocentric’ critique of the general study of religion are 
thus intrinsically related to the study of Buddhism. The very notion of ‘Bud­
dhism’, along with its traditional focus points (Buddhism as a ‘religion’, 
Buddha-, Theravada- and Sangha-centrism, doctrinal texts, philosophy) have 


--- Page 18 ---
-
-
Introduction 7 
been deconstructed as expressions of Orientalist constructions. Buddhist Stu­
dies in the West: From the Science of Religion to Buddhology and Post-
colonialism elucidates the Buddhist postcolonial turn and some of its critique 
against previous scholarship. It asks how and to which extent Buddhism has 
been constructed in the West, which impact it might have for practitioners 
and scholars today and how postcolonial Buddhist studies have paved the way 
for later ‘critical Buddhist studies’. 
Whilst the postcolonial critique of the study of religion and Buddhism was 
mainly focused on the cultural context of Orientalist power regimes and 
epistemological distortions, advocating for theoretical reorientations, the 
decolonial critique is more oriented towards identity (especially race) and 
asking for institutional, social and epistemological change. Decolonial cri­
tique is still in the making within the general study of religion, and primarily 
performed in the English-speaking world. Within Buddhist studies it often 
runs parallel to, or is even synonymous with, developments in ‘post-global’ 
Buddhism, thereby emphasising its inclination to transcend secular and 
objectivist studies of religion. Decolonising Buddhist Studies in the West sheds 
light on emerging trends of identity-based movements within American Bud­
dhism. It analyses the contours of a new decolonial and identity-based turn 
within the study of Buddhism, including critical race studies and slogans of 
letting the (white/Western) studies die. 
To explore a context that doesn’t conventionally fall under the domain of 
‘Western studies’, two chapters investigate the Japanese context and genealogy of 
both modern Buddhism and the modern and postcolonial study of religion and 
Buddhism. While Japan was not colonised, it was highly inﬂuenced by ’Wester­
nisation’ and the introduction of Western modernity from the late 19th century. 
The country had to adapt to emerging nation-building frameworks and negoti­
ate new ideas pertaining to also cultural spheres. The concept of ‘religion’ was 
introduced and translated as ‘shukyo’, having impact on both political conﬁg­
urations and on religious traditions’ self-understanding. Shinto and Buddhism 
were split, sacred/secular dichotomies as well as notions of freedom of belief 
were introduced, mainly with inspiration from Protestantism as the default reli­
gion of modernity. Buddhism faced the challenge of reinventing itself, prompting 
a robust movement of young intellectuals to delineate a ‘New Buddhism’ (shin 
-
bukkyo). International Buddhist ﬁgures (such as Olcott and Dharmapala) vis­
ited Japan, and conversely, Japanese monks and missionaries journeyed to the 
West and Southeast Asia both to propagate and ﬁnd inspiration for the new 
reform Buddhism. Japan itself became a colonial power, and ‘colonial Bud­
dhism’ was part of also Japan’s presence in East Asia. Modern and Colonial 
Buddhism in Japan describes the modernisation of Japan’s Buddhism and its 
lasting impact on also the contemporary religion. 
Though Buddhism, Shinto, and Confucian thought were critically studied 
in premodern Japan, modernity and the introduction of ‘Western knowledge’ 
were instrumental in bringing about profound transformations of the aca­
demic study of religion and Buddhism. Inspired by Western Buddhology, Pali 


--- Page 19 ---
8 Decolonising the Study of Religion 
and Sanskrit emerged as pivotal areas of study, accompanied by a more 
rational and scientiﬁc orientation that mirrored the religious formations of 
the Meiji ‘New Buddhism’. Recent years’ postmodern re-orientations have 
challenged the Eurocentric underpinnings of religious studies, advocating for 
greater recognition of cultural particularism and diversity within the study of 
both religion and Buddhism while at the same time addressing challenges of 
engaged or secular scholarship. The chapter Modern and Postcolonial Bud­
dhist and Religious Studies in Japan oﬀers a general overview of the historical 
trajectory of Buddhist and religious studies in Japan, with a particular 
emphasis on postmodern and post-colonial critiques. 
A decolonial perspective within both the general study of religion and 
Buddhism is instrumental for its disclosure and deconstruction of previously 
held assumptions based on situated and privileged positions. The ‘white male 
gaze’ undoubtedly warrants further examination and both theoretical and 
methodological recalibrations within the ﬁelds are imperative, including the 
topic of cultural appropriation. However, some of the foundational presump­
tions and strategies of the decolonial ideology are similarly problematic, and 
rooted in essentialism, (new) constructions, engaged religiosity and reverse 
Orientalism. Critical Discussion of Decolonial Critique critically discusses the 
challenges of decolonisation within the ﬁeld of Buddhism and the study of 
religion, partly acknowledging its relevance and partly criticising its revi­
sionary ambitions as new modes of hegemonic reversal. Rather than identi­
tarian exclusivism and subjectivism, it argues for alternative approaches based 
on analogies, genealogies and transculturality. It is asserted that the academic 
study of religion needs not die. 
The primary object of this book is to scrutinise the postcolonial and deco­
lonial criticisms of the study of religion, concentrating speciﬁcally on Bud­
dhist studies in the West and in Japan. While elements of the emergent 
decolonial critique, with its identitarian focus, is relevant, its inherent limita­
tions preclude it from serving as a standalone comprehensive theory. The 
concluding chapter, Decolonising Buddhist and Religious Studies and Beyond, 
revisits the insights from previous chapters and navigates beyond the ideolo­
gised ‘culture wars’ and between objectivist and subjectivist positions. In 
undertaking this exploration, it proposes an alternative approach that both 
appreciates the nuances of relevant decolonial ‘critical studies’ and champions 
academic rigour free from the conﬁnes of identity politics. A cardinal char­
acteristic of the academic study of religion, then, is not to normatively (and 
religiously) assert the possession of deﬁnitive answers, but rather to build 
robust prerequisites for asking tricky questions, such as: who owns Buddhism? 
Note 
1 The above-mentioned articles can be found in Time Magazine 1997, 2003 and 2014. 


--- Page 20 ---
References
 
Abeysekara, Ananda 2002. Colors of the Robe: Religion, Identity, and Difference. Columbia,
SC: University of South Carolina Press.
 
Abu-Er-Rub, Laila , Christiane Brosius, Sebastian , Meurer, Diamantis , Panagiotopoulos and
Susan Richter 2019. Introduction. In Engaging Transculturality. Concepts, Key Terms, Case
Studies, edited by Laila Abu-Er-Rub et al., 23–44. London: Routledge.
 
Ahmed, Sara 2007. A Phenomenology of Whiteness. Feminist Theory 8(2): 149–168.
 
Aktor, Mikael 2015. Asymmetrical Religious Commitments? Religious Practice, Identity, and
Self-Presentation among Western Scholars of Hinduism and Buddhism. Numen 62: 265–300.
 
Alba, R. , Raboteau, A. J. and Dewind, J. 2009. Introduction. In Immigration and Religion in
America: Comparative and Historical Perspectives, 1–24. New York and London: New York
University Press.
 
Allen, Theodore 1994 and 1997. The Invention of the White Race (two volumes). London: Verso
Books.
 
Alles, Gregory D. (ed.) 2008. Religious Studies: A Global View. London and New York:
Routledge.
 
Almond, Philip C. 1988. The British Discovery of Buddhism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
 
Ama, Toshimaro . 1996. Nihonjin wa naze mushūkyō na no ka . Tokyo: Chikuma Shobō.2005.
Why Are the Japanese Non-Religious?: Japanese Spirituality: Being Non- Religious in a
Religious Culture. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.]
 
Amstutz, Galen 2014. Global Communication versus Ethno-Chauvinism. Framing Nikkei Pure
Land Buddhism in North America. Journal of Religion in Japan 3: 141–176.
 
Anczyk, Adam and Halina Grzymała-Moszczyńska 2020. Psychology of religion(s) and religious
studies: into the future. Religion 50: 24–31.
 
Anderson, Warwick 2020. Decolonizing Histories in Theory and Practice: An Introduction.
History and Theory: Studies in the Philosophy of History 59(3): 369–375.
 
Andreeva, Anna 2019. Economies of the Sacred in Premodern Japan. In Engaging
Transculturality: Concepts, Key Terms, Case Studies, edited by Laila Abu-Er-Rub , 228–246,
London: Routledge.
 
Andrews, Kehinde 2021. The New Age of Empire: How Racism and Colonialism Still Rule the
World. London: Allen Lane.
 
Antić, A. 2022. Decolonizing madness? Transcultural psychiatry, international order and birth of
a ‘global psyche’ in the aftermath of the Second World War. Journal of Global History 17(1):
20–41.
 
App, Urs 2010. The Birth of Orientalism. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
 
Arjana, Sophia Rose 2020. Buying Buddha, Selling Rumi. Orientalism and the Mystical
Marketplace. Oneworld Publications.
 
Arnold, Edwin 1879. The Light of Asia, or The Great Renunciation (Mahâbhinishkramana).
London: Trübner & Co.
 
Amunugama, Sarath 1985. Anagarika Dharmapala (1864–1933) and the Transformation of
Sinhala Buddhist Organization in a Colonial Setting. Social Science Information 24(4): 697–730.
 
Anningson, R.D. 2021. Theories of the self, race, and essentialization in Buddhism: The United
States and the Asian “other”, 1899–1957. London and New York: Routledge.
 
Appiah, Kwame Anthony 2018. The Lies That Bind. Rethinking Identity. London: Profile Books.
 
Arudō, Debito 2015. Embedded Racism: Japan’s Visible Minorities and Racial Discrimination.
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
 
Asad, Talal 1993. Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and
Islam. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
 
Asad, Talal 2003. Formations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
 
Asprem, Egil and Julian Strube 2021. New Approaches to the Study of Esotericism. Leiden:
Brill.
 
Attwood, Jayarava 2020. Edward Conze: A Call to Reassess the Man and his Contribution to
Prajñāpāramitā Studies. Journal of the Oxford Centre for Buddhist Studies 19: 22–51.
 
Avalos, Natalie 2017. Becoming Human: ‘Urban Indian’ Decolonisation and Regeneration in the
Land of Enchantment. In Handbook of Indigenous Religions, edited by Greg Johnson and Siv


--- Page 21 ---
Ellen Kraft , 176–191. Leiden: Brill.
 
Baba, Mariko 2022. The Transformation of the Meaning and Concept of Zoku . The “Sacred”
and “Profane” in Japanese Translation. Journal of Religion in Japan 11(2): 165–195.
 
Bachmann-Medick, Doris 2016. Cultural Turns. New Orientations in the Study of Culture. Berlin:
DeGruyter.
 
Baldoquin, Hilda G. (ed.) 2004. Dharma, Color, and Culture. New Voices in Western Buddhism.
Berkeley, CA: Parallax Press.
 
Banton, Michael 1987. Racial Theories. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
Barnett, R. 2021. The activist university: Identities, profiles, conditions. Policy Futures in
Education 19(5), 513–526.
 
Barrett, T. H. and Tarocco, F. 2012. Terminology and religious identity: Buddhism and the
genealogy of the term Zongjiao. In Dynamics in the History of Religions between Asia and
Europe: Encounters, Notions, and Comparative Perspectives, edited by V. Krech and M.
Steinicke , 307–319. Leiden: Brill.
 
Bauman, Whitney A. and Kocku von Struckrad (n.d.) Ten Theses on Academia, Society, and
the Planetary Future: A Counterpoint Manifesto. www.counterpointknowledge.org/ten-theses-
on-academia-society-and-the-planetary-future-a-counterpoint-manifesto (Accessed 5 January
2023).
 
Baumann, Martin 2001. Global Buddhism: Developmental Periods, Regional Histories, and a
New Analytical Perspective. Journal of Global Buddhism 2: 1–43.
 
Bejarano, Carolina Alonso , Lucia Juárez López , Marian A. García Mijangos , and Daniel M.
Goldstein 2019. Decolonizing ethnography: Undocumented immigrants and new directions in
social science. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
 
Beliso-De Jesús, Aisha M. 2018. Confounded Identities: A Meditation on Race, Feminism, and
Religious Studies in Times of White Supremacy. Journal of the American Academy of Religion
86(2): 307–340.
 
Beliso-De Jesús, Aisha M. and Pierre, J. 2020. Special Section: Anthropology of White
Supremacy. American Anthropologist 122: 65–75. https://doi.org/10.1111/aman.13351.
 
Bellah, Robert N. 2011. Religion in Human Evolution. From the Paleolithic to the Axial Age.
Cambridge MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
 
Benavides, Gustavo 2013. The study of religion under late capitalism, or commodity triumphant.
In Reinventing Religious Studies: Key writings in the history of a discipline, edited by Scott Elliot
, 221–227. Durham, UK: Acumen Publishing.
 
Bergunder, Michael 2014. What is Religion?. Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 26(3):
246–286.
 
Bergunder, Michael 2016. ‘Religion’ and ’Science’ within a Global Religious History.
Aries:Journal for the Study of Western Esotericism 16: 86–141.
 
Bergunder, Michael 2021. Global Religious History in Theory and Practice. Method & Theory in
the Study of Religion 33: 441–462.
 
Berkwitz, Stephen C. 2004. Conceptions and Misconceptions About ‘Western Buddhism’:
Issues and Approaches for the Classroom. Teaching theology & religion 7(3): 141–152.
 
Berkwitz, Stephen C. 2018. The Rhetoric of Authenticity: Modernity and ‘True Buddhism’ in Sri
Lanka. In Theravada Buddhist Encounters with Modernity, edited by Juliane Schober and
Steven Collins , 103–117. New York: Routledge.
 
Bevir, Mark . 2000. Theosophy as a Political Movement. In Gurus and Their Followers, edited
by Antony Copley , 159–179. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
 
Bhaba, Homi K. 1994. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
 
Bilge, S. 2014. Whitening Intersectionality. Evanescence of Race in Intersectionality
Scholarship. Racism and Sociology. Racism Analysis Yearbook, 5: 175–205.
 
Blackburn, Anne M. 2001. Buddhist Learning and Textual Practice in Eighteenth-Century
Lankan Monastic Culture. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Bleeker, C. Jouco . 1960. The Future Task of the History of Religions. Numen 7: 221–234.
 
Blum, Mark 2021. Introduction. In Selected Works of D. T. Suzuki, vol IV, edited by Mark Blum ,
xi–xxiv. University of California Press.
 
Boatcă, Manuela and Sérgio Costa 2010. Postcolonial Sociology: A Research Agenda. In
Decolonizing European Sociology: Transdisciplinary Approaches, edited by Gutierrez
Rodriguez, E. , Boatcă, M. and Costa, S. , 13–31: London and New York: Routledge.


--- Page 22 ---
Bocking, Brian 2006. Mysticism: No Experience Necessary?. Diskus 7
http://jbasr.com/basr/diskus/diskus7/bocking.htm (Accessed March 2023 ).
 
Bond, George 1988. The Buddhist Revival in Sri Lanka. Religious Tradition, Reinterpretation
and Response. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
 
Borchert, Thomas 2014. The Buddha’s Precepts on Respecting Other Races and Religions?
Thinking about the Relationship of Ethnicity and Theravada Buddhism. Sojourn: Journal of
Social Issues in Southeast Asia 29(3): 591–626.
 
Borchert, Thomas 2018. Introduction. In Theravada Buddhism in Colonial Contexts, edited by
Thomas Borchert , 1–18. London: Routledge .
 
Borup, Jørn 2004. Zen and the Art of Inverting Orientalism: Religious Studies and Genealogical
Networks. In New Approaches to the Study of Religion, edited by Peter Antes ; Armin W. Geertz
and Randi R. Warne , 451–487. Berlin: Verlag de Gruyter.
 
Borup, Jørn 2008. Japanese Rinzai Zen Buddhism: Myoshinji, a living religion. Leiden, Boston,
MA: Brill.
 
Borup, Jørn . 2013. Aloha Buddha—the secularization of ethnic Japanese-American Buddhism.
Journal of Global Buddhism 14: 23–43.
 
Borup, Jørn 2015. Propagation, Accommodation and Negotiating Social Capital: Jōdo Shinshū
Responses to Contemporary Crises. Japanese Religions 40(1–2):85–107.
 
Borup, Jørn 2016a. Branding Buddha – Mediatized and Commodified Buddhism as Cultural
Narrative. Journal of Global Buddhism 17: 41–55.
 
Borup, Jørn 2016b. Who are these Buddhists and How Many of Them are There? Theoretical
and Methodological Challenges in Counting Immigrant Buddhists: A Danish Case Study.
Journal of Contemporary Religion 31(1): 85–100.
 
Borup, Jørn 2017. Pizza, Curry, Skyr and Whirlpool Effects: Religious Circulations East and
West. In Eastspirit: Transnational Spirituality and Religious Circulation in East and West, edited
by Jørn Borup and Marianne Q. Fibiger , 11–35.
 
Borup, Jørn 2018. Managing and Negotiating Asian Religious Unities and Diversities. In The
Critical Analysis of Religious Diversity, edited by Lene Kühle , Jørn Borup , and William Hoverd ,
128–146. Leiden: Brill.
 
Borup, Jørn . 2019. Spiritual Capital and Religious Evolution: Buddhist Values and Transactions
in Historical and Contemporary Perspective. Journal of Global Buddhism 20: 49–68.
 
Borup, Jørn 2020. Who Owns Religion? Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Cultural
Appropriation in Postglobal Buddhism. Numen, 67(2–3): 226–255.
 
Borup, Jørn 2021a. Buddhism and globalization. In Oxford Research Encyclopaedias. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.013.599.
 
Borup, Jørn 2021b. Japanese Buddhism in Europe: Introduction. Journal of Religion in Japan
10(2–3): 113–133.
 
Borup, Jørn 2021c. Identity Turn: Managing Decolonialization and Identity Politics in the Study
of Religion. Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 34(1–2): 162–181.
 
Borup, Jørn and Marianne Q. Fibiger 2017. Eastspirit – Transnational Spirituality and Religious
Circulation in East and West. Leiden: Brill.
 
Borup, Jørn and Fabio Rambelli (eds) 2019. Materiality of Religion in Japan. Japanese
Religions 43(1–2).
 
Brodkin, K., Morgen, S. and Hutchinson, J. 2011. Anthropology as White Public Space?.
American Anthropologist 113: 545–556.
 
Brown, Donna Lynn 2021. Is Buddhism Individualistic? The Trouble with a Term. Journal of
Buddhist Ethics 28: 55–99.
 
Brown, Donna Lynn 2023. Beyond Queen and King: Democratizing ‘Engaged Buddhism’.
Journal of Buddhist Ethics 30 https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/files/2023/02/Beyond-
Queen-and-King-final.pdf (Accessed March 2023).
 
Brox, Trine 2022. A Framework for Studying Buddhism and Waste. In Buddhism and Waste:
The Excess, Discard, and Afterlife of Buddhist Consumption, edited by Trine Brox and E.
Williams-Oerberg , 1–30. Bloomsbury Academic.
 
Brubaker, Rogers 2004. Ethnicity without groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 
Brubaker, Rogers . 2016. Trans: Gender and Race in an Age of Unsettled Identities. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Brubaker, Rogers . 2017. The Uproar Over ‘Transracialism.’ The New York Times 18 May: 1–4.


--- Page 23 ---
Bucar, Liz 2022. Stealing My Religion: Not Just Any Cultural Appropriation. Cambridge, MA and
London: Harvard University Press.
 
Burgess, Chris 2008. Celebrating 'Multicultural Japan’. Writings on ‘Minorities’ and the
Discourse on ‘Difference’. Electronic Journal of Contemporary Japanese Studies.
www.japanesestudies.org.uk/articles/2008/Burgess.html (Accessed 22 December 2022).
 
Burke, Peter 2020. Identity. In The Cambridge Handbook of Social Theory: Volume 2:
Contemporary Theories and Issues, edited by Peter Kivisto , 63–78. Cambridge University
Press
 
Burke Peter J. and Jan E. Stets . 2009. Identity Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Buswell, Robert and Robert M. Gimello (eds) 1992. Paths to Liberation: the Marga and its
transformations in Buddhist thought. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai'i Press.
 
Cabezón, José Ignacio 1995. Buddhist Studies as a Discipline and the Role of Theory. Journal
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 18(2): 231–268.
 
Cabezón, José Ignacio 2004. Introduction. In Identity and the Politics of Scholarship in the
Study of Religion, edited by José Ignacio Cabezón and Sheila Greeve Davaney, 1–24. New
York and London: Routledge.
 
Cabezón, José Ignacio 2004. Identity and the Work of the Scholar of Religion. In Identity and
the Politics of Scholarship in the Study of Religion, edited by José Ignacio Cabezón and Sheila
Greeve Davaney, 43–59. New York and London: Routledge.
 
Cabezón, José Ignacio 2021. 2020 AAR Presidential Address: The Study of Buddhism and the
AAR. Journal of the American Academy of Religion 89(3): 793–818.
 
Calame, Claude 2018. What Is Religion? Between Christianocentric Paradigm and
Anthropological Relativism. In Irreverence and the Sacred: Critical Studies in the History of
Religions, edited by Hugh Urban and Greg Johnson , 286–303. New York: Oxford University
Press.
 
Carr, Ryan 2022. Indigenous secularism and the secular-colonial. Critical Research on Religion
Volume 10(1): 24–40.
 
Carrette, Jeremy and Richard King . 2005. Selling Spirituality: the Silent Takeover of.Religion.
London: Routledge.
 
Carter, Jeffrey 2004. Comparison in the History of Religion: Reflections and Critiques. Method
and Theory in the Study of Religion 16: 3–11.
 
Castells, Manuel 1997. The power of identity. Oxford: Blackwell.
 
Chakrabarty, Dipesh . 2000. Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical
Difference. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Chawla, D. and Atay, A. 2018. Introduction: Decolonizing Autoethnography. Cultural Studies ↔
Critical Methodologies 18(1): 3–8.
 
Cheah, Joseph 2011. Race and Religion in American Buddhism: White Supremacy and
Immigrant Adaptation. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
 
Cheah, Joseph 2017. US Buddhist Traditions. In Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Buddhism,
edited by M. Jerryson , 316–331. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Chen, Kuan-Hsing 2010. Asia as Method: Toward Deimperialization. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
 
Chen, Huaiyu 2014. East Asian Transformations of Monasticism. In The Wiley Blackwell
Companion to East and Inner Asian Buddhism, edited by M. Poceski, 299–317. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell.
 
Chidester D. 1996. Savage Systems: Colonialism and Comparative Religion in Southern Africa.
Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press.
 
Chidester, D. 2007. Real and imagined: Imperial inventions of religion in colonial southern
Africa. In Religion and the Secular: Historical and Colonial Formations, edited by T. Fitzgerald ,
153–176. Acumen Publishing.
 
Chidester, David . 2014. Empire of Religion: Imperialism & Comparative Religion. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
 
Chryssides, George D. and Stephen E. Gregg (eds) 2019. The Insider/Outsider Debate: New
Perspectives in the Study of Religion. Sheffield and Bristol: Equinox.
 
Clammer, John . 2001. Japan and Its Others. Melbourne: Trans Pacific Press.
 
Clarke, J.J. 1997. Oriental Enlightenment. The Encounter Between Asian and Western Thought.
London: Routledge.


--- Page 24 ---
Clifford, James 1988. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth Century Ethnography, Literature
and Art. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
 
Cochran, Tracy 2004. Does Race Matter in the Meditation Hall? Tricycle (Fall),
https://tricycle.org/magazine/does-race-matter-meditation-hall (accessed 3 January 2023).
 
Collett, Alice 2006. Buddhism and Gender: Reframing and Refocusing the Debate. Journal of
Feminist Studies in Religion: 55–84.
 
Collins, Steven 1982. Selfless Persons. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
Collins, Steven 1998. Nirvana and other Buddhist Felicities. Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire.
Cambridge University Press.
 
Collins, Steven 2017. Periodizing Theravāda: Where to start?In Theravada Buddhist encounters
with modernity, edited by Juliane Schober and Steven Collins , 17–28. London: Routledge.
 
Comaroff, Jean and John L. Comaroff 2012. Theory from the South or, How Euro-America Is
Evolving toward Africa. Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers.
 
Conze, Edward 1958. Thirty Years of Buddhist Studies: Selected Essays by Edward Conze,
edited by Bruno Cassirer . London: Spottiswoode, Ballantyne & Co.
 
Conze, Edward 1979. The Memoirs of A Modem Gnostic (Part I). Sherborne: The Samizdat
Publishing Co.
 
Cooper, Frederick 2005. Identity (ed. Rogers Brubaker ). In Colonialism in Question: Theory,
Knowledge, History, 59–90. University of California Press.
 
Córdova Quero, Hugo and Nilta Dias 2021. Riding the Wave: Daily Life and Religoin among
Brazilian Immigrants to Japan in the Age of Covid-19 Pandemic. Religions 12(11): 943.
 
Corless, Roger 1990. How is the Study of Buddhism Possible? Method & Theory in the Study of
Religion 2(1): 27–41.
 
Cornille, Catherine 2020. Meaning and Method in Comparative Theology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley
Blackwell.
 
Cotter, C.R. and Robertson, D.G. 2016. After World Religions: Reconstructing Religious
Studies. London: Routledge.
 
Cox, Laurence 2013. Rethinking early western Buddhists: beachcombers, ‘going native’ and
dissident Orientalism. Contemporary Buddhism 14(1): 116–133.
 
Crosby Kate . 2020. Esoteric Theravada: The Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of
Southeast Asia. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Crosby, Kate 2021. The Sacred Origins of Traditionalism and Secularism in Theravada
Buddhism. In Secularizing Buddhism. New Perspectives on a Dynamic Tradition, edited by
Richard K. Payne , 135–162. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Csordas, Thomas J. (ed.) 2009. Transnational Transcendence – Essays on Religion and
Globalization. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
 
Curley, Anne-Marie Melissa 2021. Let the field of Buddhist Studies die. Collective Buddhist
Studies Manifesto http://buddhiststudiesmanifesto.net/let-buddhist-studies-die (Accessed 10
March 2023).
 
Daggers, Jenny 2013. Postcolonial Theology of Religions. Particularity and Pluralism in World
Christianity. London: Routledge.
 
Dake, Nobuya 2023. The Construction of History in English Translations of Shin Buddhist Texts:
Through the Creation of the Bibliography of Japanese Buddhist Texts. Journal of World
Buddhist Cultures 6: 3–34.
 
Dantley, Michael E. 2003. Critical spirituality: Enhancing transformative leadership through
critical theory and African American prophetic spirituality. International Journal of Leadership in
Education 6(1): 3–17.
 
Davis, K. 2020. Who owns intersectionality? Some reflections on feminist debates on how
theories travel. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 27
(2): 82–86.
 
Day, Abby 2020. Towards increasing diversity in the study of religion. Religion 50 (1): 46–52.
 
Day, Lee , et al. (eds) 2022. Introduction: Why Diversity, Inclusion, and Decolonization Matter.
In Diversity, Inclusion, and Decolonization: Practical Tools for Improving Teaching, Research,
and Scholarship, edited by Lee Day et al., 1–18. Bristol University Press.
 
Decolonizing Light
https://decolonizinglight.com/?fbclid=IwAR0WMKIJyD4LnK3sw7KXoauMD9JGd2V_I_j7h2l4KeF
YHP0SPfNZ4ZCydSY (accessed 3 January 2023).


--- Page 25 ---
Descola, Philippe 2013. Beyond Nature and Culture. Janet Lloyd (trans.). Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
 
Dessì, Ugo 2010. The Social Dimension of Shin Buddhism. Leiden: Brill.
 
Dessì, Ugo 2012. Religion, Hybrid Forms, and Cultural Chauvinism in Japan. Journal of
Religion in Japan (1/2): 168–187.
 
Dessì, Ugo 2013. Japanese Religions and Globalization. London: Routledge.
 
Dessì, Ugo 2017. The Global Repositioning of Japanese Religions: An Integrated Approach.
London and New York: Routledge.
 
Dewaraja, Lorna S. 1996. Rhys Davids Memorial Lecture: T. W. Rhys Davids (1843–1922):
’haunted and pursued by the spiritual legacy bequeathed to him from Ceylon’. Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society of Sri Lanka, New Series 41, Special Number: Sesquicentennial Memorial
Lectures 1995–1996:1–12.
 
Dharmapala, Anagarika 1915. The Constructive Optimism of Buddhism. Maha Bodhi Journal
23. Online: http://www.vipassana.com/resources/dharmapala/an42.php.
 
Diamond, Jared M. 2005. Guns, germs, and steel: the fates of human societies. New York:
Norton.
 
Diep, Francie 2023. The Academic-Freedom Controversy That Won’t Die. The Chronicle of
Higher Education. www.chronicle.com/article/the-academic-freedom-controversy-that-wont-
die?cid=gen_sign_in (accessed 17 January 2023).
 
Doniger, Wendy 2018. How the Arthashastra and the Kamasutra Got Away with Their Critiques
of Dharma. In Irreverence and the Sacred: Critical Studies in the History of Religions, edited by
Urban Hugh and Greg Johnson. New York, 2018; online Oxford Academic
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190911966.003.0004 (accessed 1 Aug ust 2022).
 
Drewes, David 2017. The idea of the historical Buddha. Journal of the International Association
of Buddhist Studies 40: 1–25.
 
Driscoll, Christopher M. and Monica Miller 2019. Method as Identity: Manufacturing Distance in
the Academic Study of Religion. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield,
 
Dussel, E. 1995. The Invention of the Americas: Eclipse of ‘the Other’ and the Myth of
Modernity, translated by M.D. Barber. London: Continuum.
 
Dussel, E. 2002. World-System and Trans-Modernity. Nepantla: Views from South,
 
3 (2): 221–244.
 
Eaton, Joshua 2014. Gentrifying the Dharma: How the 1 Percent is Hijacking Mindfulness.
www.salon.com/2014/03/05/gentrifying_the_dharma_how_the_1_is_hijacking_mindfulness
(accessed 3 January 2023).
 
Eddo-Lodge, Reni 2017. Why I’m No Longer Talking to White People About Race. New York:
Bloomsbury.
 
Eggington, William . 2019. Splintering of the american mind: Identity politics, inequality, and
community on today’s college campuses. New York: Bloomsbury.
 
Ejima Naotoshi, Miura Shū, Matsuno Tomoaki (eds) 2014. Kindai nihon no daigaku to shūkyō .
Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
 
Elison, George E. 1991. Deus Destroyed. The Image of Christianity in Early Modern Japan.
Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
 
Faure, Bernard 1991. The Rhetoric of Immediacy: A Cultural Critique of the Chan/Zen Tradition.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Faure, Bernard 1993. Chan Insights and Oversights. An Epistemological Critique of the Chan
Tradition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Faure, Bernard 2004. Double Exposure: Cutting Across Buddhist and Western Discourses.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
 
Faure, Bernard 2022. The Thousand and One Lives of the Buddha. Honolulu, HI: University of
Hawai'i Press.
 
Fer, Yannick . 2018. An Affective (U-)Turn in the Sociology of Religion? Religious Emotions and
Native Narratives. In Bringing Back the Social into the Sociology of Religion, edited by
Veronique Altglas and Matthew Wood , 142–168. Leiden: Brill.
 
Ferrer, Jorge N. and John Sherman 2008. The Participatory Turn: Spirituality, Mysticism,
Religious Studies. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
 
Fischer-Tiné, Harald , Huebner, Stefan , and Tyrrell, Ian 2020. Spreading Protestant Modernity:
Global Perspectives on the Social Work of the YMCA and YWCA, 1889–1970, Honolulu, HI:
University of Hawai'i Press.


--- Page 26 ---
Fitzgerald, Timothy 2000. The Ideology of Religious Studies. New York: Oxford University
Press.
 
Fitzgerald, Timothy 2007. Introduction. In Religion and the Secular: Historical and Colonial
Formations, edited T. Fitzgerald , 1–24. London: Equinox Press.
 
Fitzgerald, Timothy 2019. The ideology of religious studies then and now: The author’s view.
Implicit Religion 22(3–4): 268–290.
 
Fitzgerald, Timothy 2022. Japan, Religion, History, Nation. Religions 13(490): 2–36.
 
Foulk, Griffith T. 2013. Denial of Ritual in the Zen Buddhist Tradition. Journal of Ritual Studies
27: 47–58.
 
Freiberger, Oliver 2019. Considering Comparison: A Method for Religious Studies. New York:
Oxford University Press.
 
Fujita, Isshō , Nagai Hitoshi and Yamashita Ryōdō 2022. Buddhism 3.0. A Philosophical
Investigation. Translated by Jamie Hubbard with Maki Hirano Hubbard and Elizabeth Kenney.
Tokyo: Chisokudō.
 
Fujiwara, Satoko 2005. Survey on Religion and Higher Education in Japan. Japanese Journal of
Religious Studies 32(2): 353–370.
 
Fujiwara, Satoko 2010. On Qualifying Religious Literacy: Recent Debates on Higher Education
and Religious Studies in Japan. Teaching Theology and Religion 13(3): 223–236.
 
Fujiwara, Satoko 2016. An Analysis of Sixty Years of NVMEN: How Much Diversity Have We
Achieved?. NVMEN, the Academic Study of Religion, and the IAHR, 391–414. Leiden: Brill.
 
Fujiwara, Satoko 2019. Practicing Belonging? Non-religiousness in Twenty-First Century Japan.
Journal of Religion in Japan 8(1–3): 123–150.
 
Fujiwara, Satoko (ed.) 2023. Nihonjin mushūkyōsetsu. Sono rekishi kara mieru mono . . Tokyo:
Chikuma shobō.
 
Fujiwara, Satoko (forthcoming). Academia. In New Nanzan Guide to Japanese Religions, edited
by Matthew D. McMullen and Jolyon Baraka Thomas , 77–94. Honolulu, HI: University of
Hawai`i Press.
 
Fukao, Yoko 2012. Tamashi no datsushokuminchika . Tokyo: Seitōsha.
 
Fukuyama, Francis 2018. Contemporary Identity Politics and the Struggle for Recognition.
London: Profile Books.
 
Fuller, Paul 2018. The Narratives of Ethnocentric Buddhist Identity. Journal of the British
Association for the Study of Religions 20: 19–44.
 
Gajaweera, Nalika 2021. Sitting in the Fire Together: People of Color Cultivating Radical
Resilience in North American Insight Meditation. Journal of Global Buddhism 22(1): 121–139.
 
Garrett, Philip . 2022. Getting Away from ‘Religion’ in Medieval Japan. Religions 13(4): 288.
 
Gearon, Liam , Arniika Kuusisto , Yonah Matemba , Saija Benjamin , Petro Du Preez , Pia
Koirikivi and Shan Simmonds 2021. Decolonising the religious education curriculum. British
Journal of Religious Education 43(1): 1–8.
 
Geertz, Armin W. 2003. Ethnohermeneutics and worldview analysis in the study of Hopi Indian
religion. Numen 50(3): 309–348.
 
Gellner, David 1990. Introduction: What is the Anthropology of Buddhism About? JASO 21(2):
95–112.
 
Gleig, Ann 2019. American Buddhism After Modernity. New Haven, CT and London: Yale
University Press.
 
Gleig, Ann 2019. Undoing Whiteness in American Buddhist Modernism: Critical, Collective, and
Contextual Turns. Buddhism and Whiteness. Critical Reflections, edited by George Yancy and
Emily McRae , 21–42. Lanham, MD, Boulder, CO, New York and London: Lexington Books.
 
Gleig, Ann , and Brenna Artinger 2021. #BuddhistCultureWars: BuddhaBros, Alt-Right Dharma,
and Snowflake Sanghas. Journal of Global Buddhism 22(1): 19–48.
 
Go, Julian (ed.) 2013. Postcolonial Sociology. Bingley: Emerald Publishing.
 
Godart, G. Clinton 2017. Darwin, Dharma, and the Divine: Evolutionary Theory and Religion in
Modern Japan. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Goldberg David Theo 2006. Racial Europeanization. Ethnic and Racial Studies 29(2): 331–364.
 
Goldstein WS , King R , Boyarin J. 2016. Critical theory of religion vs. critical religion. Critical
Research on Religion 4(1): 3–7.
 
Gombrich, Richard 1971. Precept and Practice: Traditional Buddhism in the Rural Highlands of
Ceylon. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


--- Page 27 ---
Gombrich, Richard and Gananath Obeyesekere 1988. Buddhism Transformed: Religious
Change in Sri Lanka. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
 
Gómez, Luis J. 1995. Unspoken Paradigms: Meanderings through the Metaphors of a Field.
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 18(2): 183–230.
 
Gopal, Priyamvada 2021. On Decolonisation and the University. Textual Practice 35(6):
873–899.
 
Gordon, L.R. 2019. Decolonizing Philosophy. Southern Journal of Philosophy 57: 16–36.
 
Gorski, Philip 2017. American Covenant: A History of Civil Religion from the Puritans to the
Present. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Goss, A. 2021. Introduction. The Routledge Handbook of Science and Empire, edited by
Andrew Goss , 1–9. London: Routledge.
 
Goto-Jones, Chris 2022. Doing No Harm: Mindfulness, (Western) Buddhism, Appropriation,
Systemic Racism. The Newsletter (The International Institute for Asian Studies) 91: 4–5.
 
Gough, Kathleen 1968. New Proposals for Anthropologists. Current Anthropology 9(5):
403–435.
 
Gould, Hannah and Melin McKay 2020. An Introduction to Bad Buddhism. Journal of Global
Buddhism 21: 141–151.
 
Grosfoguel, Ramón 2006. World-Systems Analysis in the Context of Transmodernity, Border
Thinking, and Global Coloniality. Review (Fernand Braudel Center) 29(2): 167–187.
 
Grosfoguel, Ramón . 2012. The Dilemmas of Ethnic Studies in the United States: Between
Liberal Multiculturalism, Identity Politics, Disciplinary Colonization, and Decolonial
Epistemologies. Human Architecture: Journal of the Sociology of Self-Knowledge (Special
issue: Decolonizing the University: Practicing Pluriversity) X(1): 81–89.
 
Grosfoguel, Ramón 2013. The structure of knowledge in westernized universities: Epistemic
racism/sexism and the four genocides/epistemicides of the long 16th century. Human
Architecture: Journal of the Sociology of Self-Knowledge XI(1): 73–90.
 
Gross, Rita M. 2004. Religious Identity, Scholarship, and Teaching Religion. In Identity and the
Politics of Scholarship in the Study of Religion, edited by José Ignacio Cabezón and Sheila
Greeve Davaney , 113–132. New York and London: Routledge.
 
Gutierrez Rodriguez, E. , Boatcă, M. and Costa, S. 2010. Decolonizing European Sociology:
Transdisciplinary Approaches. London: Routledge.
 
Gutterman, David S. and Andrew R. Murphy 2016. Political Religion and Religious Politics.
Navigating Identities in the United States. New York and London: Routledge.
 
Hallisey, Charles . 1995. Roads Taken and Note Taken in the Study of Theravāda Buddhism. In
Curators of the Buddha: The Study of Buddhism under Colonialism, edited by Donald S. Lopez,
Jr ., 31–61. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
 
Hammer, Juliane 2016. To Work for Change: Normativity, Feminism, and Islam. Journal of the
American Academy of Religion 84(1): 98–112.
 
Han, Chenxing 2017. We’re Not Who You Think We Are. Lions’s Roar 15 May .
 
Hanegraff, Wouter J. 2016. Reconstructing ‘Religion’ from the Bottom Up. Numen 63: 576–605.
 
Haraway, Donna 1988. Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the
Privilege of Partial Perspective. Feminist Studies 14(3): 575–599.
 
Hardacre, Helen 2003. Fieldwork with Japanese Religious Groups. In Doing Fieldwork in Japan,
edited by Bestor, T. , Steinhoff, P. , and Bestor, V. , 71–88. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i
Press.
 
Harding John 2016. Trailblazers of Global Buddhist Networks. Contemporary Buddhism 17(2):
393–404.
 
Harris, Elizabeth 2006. Theravada Buddhism and the British Encounter: Religious, Missionary
and Colonial Experience in Nineteenth Century Sri Lanka. London: Routledge.
 
Harris, Elizabeth 2021. The Impact of Nineteenth-Century Missionary Translations of Theravada
Buddhist Texts. In Translating Buddhism. Historical and Contextual Perspective, edited by Alice
Collett , 127–148. New York: SUNY Press.
 
Hart, William D. 2000. Edward Said and the religious effects of culture. Cambridge and New
York: Cambridge University Press.
 
Harvey, Graham 2005. Animism: Respecting the Living World. Columbia University Press.
 
Hayashi, Makoto 2012. General Education and the Modernization of Japanese Buddhism. The
Eastern Buddhist 43(1 and 2): 133–152.


--- Page 28 ---
Hayashi, Makoto 2014a. The Birth of Buddhist Universities. Japanese Religions 39(1 and 2):
11–30.
 
Hayashi, Makoto 2014 b. Hajime ni – Yōroppa bukkyōgaku no seiritsu - . In Budda no henbō:
kōsaku suru kindai bukkyō, edited by Sueki Fumihiko, Hayashi Makoto , Yoshinaga Shin'ichi
and Ōtani Eiichi , 5–28. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
 
Hedges, Paul 2020a. Theorising a Decolonising Asian Hermeneutic for Comparative Theology:
Some Perspectives from Global and Singaporean Eyes, International Journal of Asian
Christianity 3(2): 152–168.
 
Hedges, Paul 2020b. White Jesus and Antisemitism: Toward an Antiracist and Decolonial
Christology. The Ecumenical Review 72(5): 777–796.
 
Hedges, Paul 2021. Understanding Religion: theories and methods for studying religiously
diverse societies. Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
 
Heine, Steven 2008. Zen Skin, Zen Marrow: Will the Real Zen Buddhism Please Stand Up?.
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
 
Henrich, Joseph , Steven J. Heine , and Ara Norenzayan 2010. The Weirdest People in the
World? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33: 61–135.
 
Heisig, James W. , Thomas P. , Kasulis and John C. and Maraldo 2011. Japanese Philosophy.
A Sourcebook. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai'i Press.
 
Henley, A. 2020. Islam as a Challenge to The Ideology of Religious Studies: Failures of
Religious Studies in the Middle East. Implicit Religion 22(3–4): 373–390.
 
Herbrechtsmeier, William . 1993. Buddhism and the Definition of Religion: One More Time.
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 32(1): 1–18.
 
Herbjørnsrud, Dag 2021. Beyond decolonizing: global intellectual history and reconstruction of a
comparative method. Global Intellectual History 6: 614–640.
 
Hershock, Peter D. 2014. Squaring Freedom with Equity: Challenging the Karma of the
Globalization of Choice. In Leah Kalmanson and James Mark Shields (eds) Buddhist
Responses to Globalization, 15–28. London: Lexington Books.
 
Hester, Jeffry T. 2008. Datsu Zainichi-ron: An emerging discourse on belonging among Ethnic
Koreans in Japan. In Multiculturalism in the new Japan: crossing the boundaries within, edited
by Graburn, Nelson , Ertl, John , and Tierney, R. Kenji . New York: Berghahn Books.
 
Heyes, Cressida 2020. Identity Politics. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy(Fall 2020
Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta . https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/identity-
politics (accessed 3 January 2023).
 
Hickey, Wakoh Shannon 2010. Two Buddhisms, Three Buddhisms, and Racism. Journal of
Global Buddhism 11: 1–25.
 
Hinnels, John S. (ed.) 1987 (1984). A Handbook of Living Religions. Suffolk: Penguin.
 
Hochman, A. 2021. Janus-faced race: Is race biological, social, or mythical? Am J Phys
Anthropol 175: 453–464.
 
hooks, bell 1994. Waking up to Racism. Dharma, Diversity, and Race. Tricycle fall.
https://tricycle.org/magazine/waking-racism.
 
Hori, Victor Sōgen 2016. D. T. Suzuki and the Invention of Tradition. Eastern Buddhist 47(2):
41–82.
 
Hori, Victor Sōgen , John S. Harding , and Alexander Soucy (eds) 2014. Flowers on the Rock:
Global and Local Buddhisms in Canada. Montréal, QB and Kingston: McGill Queen’s University
Press.
 
Horii, Mitsutoshi 2018. The category of religion in contemporary Japan: Shūkyō & Temple
Buddhism. Palgrave Macmillan.
 
Horii, Mitsutoshi 2021. ‘Religion’ and ‘Secular’ Categories in Sociology. Decolonizing the
Modern Myth. Palgrave Macmillan.
 
Hoshino, Seiji . 2012. Kindai Nihon no shūkyō gainen; shūkyōsha no kotoba to kindai : . Tokyo:
Yūshisha.
 
Hsu, Funie 2017. We’ve been here all along. Lion’s Roar 17 May . www.lionsroar.com/weve-
been-here-all-along (accessed 3 January 2023).
 
Hsu, Funie 2021. American Culture Baggage: The Racialized Secularization of Mindfulness in
Schools. In Secularizing Buddhism. New Perspectives on a Dynamic Tradition, edited by
Richard K. , edited by Payne , 79–94. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Hudson, Mark and Tessa Morris-Suzuki 2001. Afterword: Diversity and Identity in the Twenty-
First Century. In Multicultural Japan: Palaeolithic to Postmodern, edited by Donald Denoon ,


--- Page 29 ---
Mark Hudson , Gavan McCormack and Tessa Morris-Suzuki , 287–292. Cambridge University
Press.
 
Hughes, Aaron 2015a. Islam and the Tyranny of Authenticity. An Inquiry into Disciplinary
Apologetics and Self-Deception. Sheffield: Equinox.
 
Hughes, Aaron 2015b. How to Theorize with a Hammer, or, On the Destruction and
Reconstruction of Islamic Studies. In Writing religion: the case for the critical study of religion,
edited by Steven W. Ramey , 172–193. Tuscaloosa, AL: The University Alabama Press.
 
Hughes, Aaron W. and Russell T. McCutcheon 2022. Religion in 50 Words. A Critical
Vocabulary. London and New York: Routledge.
 
Human Architecture: Journal of the Sociology of Self-Knowledge special issue: Decolonizing the
University: Practicing Pluriversity www.okcir.com/product/decolonizing-the-university-practicing-
pluriversity (accessed 3 January 2023).
 
Hunt, Sarah and Sarah de Leeuw 2020. Decolonization. International Encyclopedia of Human
Geography, edited by Audrey Kobayashi , 181–185. Elsevier.
 
Hunter, Shona and Christi van der Westhuizen 2022. Viral whiteness: Twenty-first century
global colonialities. The Routledge Critical Whiteness Studies Handbook, edited by Shona
Hunter , Christi van der Westhuizen , 1–28. London: Routledge:
 
Hsi-yüan Chen 2013. Religionizing Confucianism and the Re-orientation of Confucian Tradition
in Modern China. Religion and Secularity: Transformations and Transfers of Religious
Discourses in Europe and Asia, edited by Marion Eggert and Lucian Hölscher , 231–256.
Leiden: Brill.
 
Hsu, Alexander O. 2022. Coming to Terms with “Engaged Buddhism”: Periodizing,
Provincializing, and Politicizing the Concept. Journal of Global Buddhism 23(1): 17–31.
 
Hur, Nam-lin 1999. The Soto Sect and Japanese Military Imperialism in Korea. Japanese
Journal of Religious Studies 26(1–2): 107–134.
 
Institute of Statistical Mathematics 2016 table 9.6
www.ism.ac.jp/kokuminsei/en/table/data/html/ss9/9_6/9_6_2013_g2.htm (accessed 3 January
2023).
 
Irizarry, Joshua A. 2022. Sōjiji. Discipline, Compassion, and Enlightenment at a Japanese Zen
Temple. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
 
Isomae, Jun'ichi 2005. Deconstructing ‘Japanese Religion’, Japanese Journal of Religious
Studies 32(2): 235–248.
 
Isomae, Jun'ichi 2012a. The Concepts of Religion and Religious Studies in Transcultural
Contexts, with a Focus on Japan (trans. by Tim Graf), Handbook of Contemporary Japanese
Religions, edited by Inken Prohl and John Nelson , 59–72. Leiden and Boston, MA: Brill.
 
Isomae, Jun'ichi 2012b. Japanese Modernity as Postcolonial Experience. Asia & Europe
Bulletin 1: 4–6.
www.aoi.uzh.ch/de/institut/geschichte/asienundeuropa/aboutus/bulletin/2012/modernity.html
(accessed 19 May 2022).
 
Isomae, Jun'ichi 2013a. Shūkyōgainen arui ha shūkyōgaku . Tokyo: University Press of Tokyo.
 
Isomae, Jun'ichi 2013b. Religion, Secularity, and the Articulation of the “Indigenous” in
Modernizing Japan. Kami Ways in National Territory: Shinto Studies in Prewar Japan and the
West, edited by Bernhard Scheid and Kate Wildman Nakai , 23–50. Vienna: Verlag der
Oestrreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
 
Isomae, Jun'ichi 2014. Religious Discourse in Modern Japan: Religion, State, and Shintō.
Leiden and Boston, MA: Brill.
 
Ivakhiv, Adrian 2022. Decolonialism and the invasion of Ukraine. E-flux Notes www.e-
flux.com/notes/457576/decolonialism-and-the-invasion-of-ukraine (accessed 3 December
2022).
 
Ives, Christopher 2009. Imperial-Way Zen: Ichikawa Hakugen’s Critique and Lingering
Questions for Buddhist Ethics. Honolulu: University of Hawai’I Press.
 
Iwamura, Jane Naomi 2011. Virtual Orientalism. Asian Religions and American Popular Culture.
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
 
Jaffe, Richard 2019. Seeking Sakyamuni. South Asia in the Formation of Modern Japanese
Buddhism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
 
Jain, Andrea 2015. Selling Yoga: from Counterculture to Pop culture. Oxford University Press.
 
Jansen, J. 2017. As by fire: The end of the South African university. Cape Town: Tafelberg.


--- Page 30 ---
Jansen, Jonathan D. (ed.) 2019. Decolonisation in Universities: The Politics of Knowledge.
Johannesburg: Wits University Press.
 
Jansen, J. 2019 . Introduction and Overview: Making Sense of Decolonisation in Universities.
Decolonisation in Universities: The Politics of Knowledge, edited by J. Jansen , 1–12. Wits
University Press.
 
Jardina, Ashley 2019. White Identity Politics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 
Jayawardana, Ruwini 2020. Pioneering legend of Buddhist education in Sri Lanka. Daily News,
27 November . www.dailynews.lk/2020/11/27/features/234614/pioneering-legend-buddhist-
education-sri-lanka (accessed 17 February 2023).
 
Jenkins, Tiffany 2016. Keeping Their Marbles: How the Treasures of the Past Ended Up in
Museums … and Why They Should Stay There. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Jennings, Willie James 2020. After Whiteness: An Education in Belonging. Grand Rapids, MI:
Eerdmans.
 
Jensen, Jeppe Sinding 2011. Revisiting the Insider-Outsider Debate: Dismantling a Pseudo-
problem in the Study of Religion. Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 23(1): 29–47.
 
Jerryson, M. , and M. Juergensmeyer (eds) 2010. Buddhist Warfare. New York: Oxford
University Press.
 
Jidong, Chen and James Baskind 2012. The Other as Reflected in Sino-Japanese Buddhism:
Through the Prism of Modernity. The Eastern Buddhist 43(1/2): 57–79.
 
Jiménez, Tomás R. 2010. Affiliative Ethnic Identity: A More Elastic Link between Ethnic
Ancestry and Culture. Ethnic and Racial Studies 33(10): 1756–1775.
 
Johnston, Jay and Ruth Barcan 2006. Subtle transformations Imagining the body in alternative
health practices. International Journal of Cultural Studies 9(1): 25–44.
 
Jolivétte, Andrew J. 2015. Research Justice: Radical love as a strategy for social
transformation. In Research Justice. Methodologies for Social Change, edited by Andrew
Jolivétte , 5–12. Bristol: Policy Press.
 
Jones, C. V. 2022. Buddhism and Its Religious Others: Historical Encounters and
Representations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Josephson-Storm, Jason Ānanda 2012. The Invention of Religion in Japan.
 
Josephson-Storm, Jason Ānanda 2014. The Politics of Buddhist Studies in Early Twentieth
Century Japan. An Introduction. Japanese Religions 39(1 and 2): 1–10.
 
Josephson-Storm, Jason Ānanda 2017. The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and
the Birth of the Human Sciences. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
 
Josephson-Storm, Jason Ananda 2021. Metamodernism. The Future of Theory. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
 
Joshi, K.Y. 2020. White Christian Privilege: The Illusion of Religious Equality in America. New
York: New York University Press.
 
Joy, David and Joseph F. and Duggan 2012. Decolonizing the body of christ: Theology and
theory after Empire? Palgrave Macmillan.
 
Joy, Morny 2007. Method and Theory in Religious Studies: Retrospect and Prognostications.
Temenos 43(2): 199–222.
 
Joy, Morny (ed.) 2012. After Appropriation: Explorations in Intercultural Philosophy and
Religion. University of Calgary Press.
 
Juschka, Darlene 2013. Religious Studies and identity politics: mythology in the making. In
Reinventing Religious Studies: Key writings in the history of a discipline, edited by Scott Elliot ,
210–217. Durham, UK: Acumen Publishing.
 
Kahan, Dan , Braman, Donald , Gastil, John , Slovic, Paul and Mertz, C. 2007. Culture and
IdentityProtective Cognition: Explaining the WhiteMale Effect in Risk Perception. Journal of
Empirical Legal Studies 4: 465–505.
 
Kallio, Alexis Anja 2019. Decolonizing music education research and the (im)possibility of
methodological responsibility. Research Studies in Music Education 42(2): 177–191.
 
Kalmanson, Leah 2019. Whiteness and the Construction of Buddhist Philosophy in Meiji Japan.
In Buddhism and Whiteness. Critical Reflections, edited by George Yancy and Emily McRae ,
61–78. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
 
Kaloyanides, Alexandra 2021. 'Intercultural Mimesis’, Empire, and Spirits. Journal of Global
Buddhism 22(1): 219–227.
 
Kameyama, Mitsuhiro 2022. Shaku Unshō in Korea: The Buddhist Precepts and Colonialism in
Modern East Asia. Japan Review 37: 51–76.


--- Page 31 ---
Kassor, Constance 2021. Buddhist Studies Has a Whiteness Problem. Contending modernities.
Exploring how religious and secular forces interact in the modern world.
https://contendingmodernities.nd.edu/global-currents/buddhist-studies-whiteness (Accessed
March 2023).
 
Kawahashi, Noriko and Kobayashi, Naoko 2017. Editors’ Introduction: Gendering Religious
Practices in Japan Multiple Voices, Multiple Strategies. Japanese Journal of Religious Studies
44(1): 1–13.
 
Kellner, Birgit 2019. Buddhism and the Dynamics of Transculturality: New Approaches. Berlin
and Boston, MA: De Gruyter.
 
Kennedy, Dane 1996. Imperial history and postcolonial theory. The Journal of Imperial and
Commonwealth History 24(3): 345–363.
 
Kim, Hwansoo 2009. The Adventures of a Japanese Monk in Colonial Korea Sōma Shōei’s Zen
Training with Korean Masters. Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 36(1): 125–165.
 
King, Katrina Quisumbing and Alexandre I.R. White 2021. Introduction: Toward a Global
Historical Sociology of Race and Racism. In Global Historical Sociology of Race and Racism,
edited by Alexandre I.R. White and Katrina Quisumbing King , 1–22. Bingley: Emerald
Publishing.
 
King, Richard 1999. Orientalism and Religion: Postcolonial Theory, India and ’the Mystic East’.
Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
 
King, Richard 2013. The Copernican Turn in the Study of Religion. Method and Theory in the
Study of Religion 25: 137–159.
 
Kirthisinghe, B.P. 1981. Colonel Henry Steel Olcott, the Great American Buddhist. The Wheel
Publication 281: 1–20.
 
Kiyofumi, Kato 2020. Kaigai hikiage no kenkyū: Bōkyaku sa reta `Dainipponteikoku’. : . Tokyo:
Iwanami Shoten.
 
Kiyota, Minoru 1984. Modern Japanese Buddhology: its history and problematics. Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist studies 7(1): 17–36.
 
Klautau, Orion 2014. Kindai Nihon no bukkyōgaku ni okeru ‘Bukkyō/Buddhism’ no katarikata ‘
Buddhism’  [The Discourse on ‘Bukkyō/Buddhism’ and Buddhist Studies in Modern Japan], In
Kōsaku suru kindai bukkyō —— [Transformations of the Buddha: Crisscrossing Streams of
Modern Buddhism], edited by Sueki Fumihiko , Hayashi Makoto , Ōtani Eiichi and Yoshinaga
Shin'ichi , 68–86. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
 
Kleine, Christoph . 2013. Religion and the Secular in Premodern Japan from the Viewpoint of
Systems Theory. Journal of Religion in Japan 2(1): 1–34.
 
Kleine, Christoph . 2019. Formations of Secularity in Ancient Japan? On Cultural Encounters,
Critical Junctures, and Path-Dependent Processes. Journal of Religion in Japan 8(1–3): 9–45.
 
Kleine, C. and Wohlrab-Sahr, M. 2021. Comparative Secularities: Tracing Social and Epistemic
Structures beyond the Modern West. Method & theory in the study of religion 33(1): 43–72.
 
Kleisath, C. Michelle 2014. The Costume of Shangri-La: Thoughts on White Privilege, Cultural
Appropriation, and Anti-Asian Racism. Journal of Lesbian Studies 18: 142–157.
 
Kohara, Katsuhiro 2020. Tabunka kyōseishakai to shite nihon ni okeru shūkyō kyōiku no
hitsuyōsei . In Kokusai shakai to nihon bukkyō , edited by Kusunoki Junshō , Nakanishi Naoki
and Dake Mitsuya , 227–232. Tokyo: Maruzen Shuppan.
 
Krämer, Hans Martin 2013. Japanese Discoveries of ‘Secularization’ abroad and at Home,
1870–1945. In Religion and Secularity: Transformations and Transfers of Religious Discourses
in Europe and Asia, edited by Marion Eggert and Lucian Hölscher , 193–216. Leiden: Brill.
 
Krämer, Hans Martin 2019. The Transcultural turn in the study of ‘religion’. In Engaging
Transculturality. Concepts, Key Terms, Case Studies, edited by Laila Abu-Er-Rub et al.,
373–385. London: Routledge.
 
Krämer, Hans-Martin and Julian Strube 2020. Theosophy Across Boundaries: Transcultural and
Interdisciplinary Perspectives on a Modern Esoteric Movement. Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press.
 
Kripal, Jeffrey J. 2004. Being John Woodroffe: Some Mythical Reflections on the Postcolonial
Study of Hindu Tantra. In Identity and the Politics of Scholarship in the Study of Religion, edited
by José Ignacio Cabezón and Sheila Greeve Davaney , 183–208. New York and London:
Routledge.
 
Langenberg, Amy Paris 2019. Reading against the Grain: Female Sexuality in Classical South
Asian Buddhism. Religion 49(4): 728–734.


--- Page 32 ---
Las Casas, Bartolomé 1992 [1542]. A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies. Transl.
and edited by Anthony Pagden . New York: Penguin.
 
LeMay, Alec R. 2022. Do You See What I See? ‘Religion’ and Acculturation in
Filipino–Japanese International Families. Religions 13(2): 93.
 
Licha, Stephan Kigensan 2021. Hara Tanzan and the Japanese Buddhist Discovery of
‘Experience’. Journal of Religion in Japan 10(1): 1–30.
 
Lichtenstein, Alex C. 2018. Decolonizing the AHR. American Historical Review 123(1): xiv–xvii.
 
Lincoln, Bruce 2005. Theses on Method. Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 17(1): 8–10.
 
Lindholm, Charles . 2008. Culture and Authenticity. Malden: Blackwell Publishing.
 
Lokyitsang, Dawa 2016. Decolonizing Ethnographic ‘Responsibility’: Towards a Decolonized
Praxis. Lhakar Diaries. https://lhakardiaries.com/2016/10/05/decolonizing-ethnographic-
responsibility-towards-a-decolonized-praxis (Accessed March 2023).
 
Loomba, Ania 2015. Colonialism/Postcolonialism. London: Routledge.
 
Lopez, Donald S. (ed). 1995. Curators of the Buddha: The Study of Buddhism under
Colonialism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
 
Lopez, Donald S. 1998a. Priosoners of Shangri-La. Tibetan Buddhism and the West. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
 
Lopez, Donald S. 1998b. Belief. In Critical terms for religious studies, edited by Taylor, M.C. ,
21–35. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
 
Lopez, Donald S. 2005. Critical terms for the study of Buddhism. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
 
Lopez, Donald S. 2008. Buddhism & Science. A Guide for the Perplexed. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
 
Lopez, Donald S. 2010. Introduction. Burnouf, Eugène. Introduction to the History of Indian
Buddhism, transl. by Katia Buffetrille and Donald S. Lopez , 1–28. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
 
Lopez, Donald S. 2013. From Stone to Flesh. A Short History of the Buddha. Chicago, IL and
London: University of Chicago Press.
 
Lybarger, Loren D. 2016. How far is too far? Defining self and other in religious studies and
Christian missiology. Journal of the American Academy of Religion 84(1): 127–156.
 
Maldonado-Torres, N. 2008. Secularism and Religion in the Modern/Colonial World-System:
From Secular Postcoloniality to Postsecular Transmodernity. In Coloniality at Large: Latin
America and the Postcolonial Debate, edited by C.A. Jáuregui , M.LMoraña , E. Dussel ,
360–387. Durham NC: Duke University Press.
 
Makransky, John 2008. The Emergence of Buddhist Critical-Constructive Reaction in the
Academy as a Resource for Buddhist Communities and for the Contemporary World. Journal of
Global Buddhism 9: 113–153.
 
Malalasekera, G. P. and Kulatissa Nanda Jayatilleke 1958. Buddhism and the Race Question.
Paris: UNESCO.
 
Maldonado-Torres, Nelson 2007. On the Coloniality of Being. Cultural Studies 21(2): 240–270.
 
Maldonado-Torres, Nelson 2020. Religious Studies and/in the Decolonial Turn. Contending
modernities. Exploring how religious and secular forces interact in the modern world.
https://contendingmodernities.nd.edu/decoloniality/religiousstudiesdecolonialturn (Accessed 15
November 2022 ).
 
Maltese, G. and J Strube 2021. Global Religious History. Method & Theory in the Study of
Religion, 33 ( 3–4): 229–257.
 
Mamgain V. 2010. Ethical Consciousness in the Classroom: How Buddhist Practices Can Help
Develop Empathy and Compassion. Journal of Transformative Education 8(1): 22–41.
 
Manuel, Zenju Earthlyn 2022. The Shamanic Bones of Zen. Revealing the Ancestral Spirit and
Mystical Heart of a Sacred Tradition. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Maraldo, John C. 2021. The Saga of Zen History and the Power of Legend. Nagoya: Chisokudō
Publications.
 
Martin, Craig 2015. Theses on the critique of 'religion’. Critical Research on Religion 3(1):
297–302.
 
Martin, Craig 2017. A Critical Introduction to the Study of Religion. London and New York:
Routledge.
 
Masuzawa, Tomoko 2005. The Invention of World Religions. Higher Education 15(1): 29–45.


--- Page 33 ---
Matsue, Regina Yoshie 2006. Religious Activities among the Japanese-Brazilians: ’Dual
Diaspora’ in Japan, Religious Pluralism in the Diaspora, edited by Kumar, P. Pratap, 121–146.
Leiden: Brill.
 
McCartney, Patrick 2021. The Evolution of ‘Woke Yoga’ as a Branding Strategy. The Wire.
https://thewire.in/society/the-evolution-of-woke-yoga-as-a-branding-strategy (Accessed March
2023).
 
Maylor, Uvanney 2011. What is the meaning of ‘black’? Researching ‘black’ respondents. In
Gender Race Religion: Intersections and Challenges, edited by Martin Bulmer and John
Solomos , 155–173. London and New York: Routledge.
 
Mbembe, Achille . 2016. Decolonizing the University: New Directions. Arts and Humanities in
Higher Education 15(1): 29–45.
 
McCutcheon, Russell 2019. Fabricating Religion. Fanfare for the Common E.G. Berlin and
Boston, MA: De Gruyter.
 
McEvilley, Thomas 2002. The Shape of Ancient Thought. Comparative Studies in Greek and
Indian Philosophies. New York: Allworth Press.
 
McLaughlin, Levi and Erica Baffelli 2021. The Aesthetics and Emotions of Religious Belonging:
Examples from the Buddhist World. Numen 68(5–6): 431–435.
 
McLaughlin, Pema 2020 Imagining Buddhist modernism: the shared religious categories of
scholars and American Buddhists. Religion 50(4): 529–549.
 
McMahan, David 2008. The Making of Buddhist Modernism. Oxford and New York: Oxford
University Press.
 
McMahan, David 2021. Buddhism and Secular Subjectivities: Individualism and Fragmentation
in the Mirrors of Secularism. In Secularizing Buddhism. New Perspectives on a Dynamic
Tradition, edited by Richard K. Payne , 57–78. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
McMahan, David L. and Erik Braun (eds) 2017. Meditation, Buddhism, and Science. New York:
Oxford University Press.
 
McMullin, Neil 1989. The Encyclopedia of Religion: A Critique from the Perspective of the
History of the Japanese Religious Traditions. Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 1/2:
243–251.
 
McNicholl, Adeana 2018a. Buddhism and Race. In The Oxford Handbook of Religion and Race
in American History, edited by Kathryn Gin Lum and Paul Harvey , 223–240. New York: Oxford.
 
McNicholl, Adeana . 2018b. Being Buddha, Staying Woke: Racial Formation in Black Buddhist
Writing. Journal of the American Academy of Religion 86(4): 883–911.
 
McTighe, Laura and Women With A Vision 2020. Theory on the Ground: Ethnography, Religio-
Racial Study, and the Spiritual Work of Building Otherwise. Journal of the American Academy of
Religion 88(2): 407–439.
 
McWorther, Hohn H. 2021. Woke Racism: How a New Religion Has Betrayed Black America.
New York: Penguin Publishing Group.
 
Mehdi, N. , Jameela, M. 2021. On the Fallacy of Decolonisation in Our Higher Education
Institutions (HEIs). In Doing Equity and Diversity for Success in Higher Education, edited by
D.S.PThomas and J. Arday , 151–160. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
 
Mellor, Phillip A. and Chris Shilling 1997. Re-forming the Body: Religion, Community and
Modernity. London: Sage Publications.
 
Mignolo, Walter D. 2008. ‘Coloniality: The Darker Side of Modernity’. In Coloniality at Large:
Latin America and the Postcolonial Debate, edited by Mabel Moraña , Enrico Dussel , and
Carlos A. Jáuregui , 39–49. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
 
Miki, Hizuru and Sakurai Yoshihide (eds) 2012. Nihon ni ikiru imin tachi no shūkyō seikatsu:
Nyū kamā no motarasu shūkyō tagenka ―  [Religious lives of immigrants to Japan: The
multidimensional development of religion brought by newcomers] Kyoto: Minerva Shobō.
 
Mitchell C. 2006. The Religious Content of Ethnic Identities. Sociologi 40(6): 1135–1151.
 
Mills, Charles W. 2008. White Ignorance. In Agnotology. The Making & Unmaking of Ignorance,
edited by Robert N. Proctor and Londa Schiebinger , 230–249. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford
University Press.
 
Miura, Shū 2014. Gakushū sareru bukkyō. Taishōshōwa shoki no shūmonkei daigaku ni okeru
karikyuramu o hensen to sono tokushitsu  . In Kindai nihon no daigaku to shūkyō , edited by
Ejima, Naotoshi , Miura Shū and Matsuno Tomoaki , 203–250. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
 
Moran, Marie 2018. (Un)troubling identity politics: A cultural materialist intervention. European
Journal of Social Theory 23(2): 258–277.


--- Page 34 ---
Muh-Chyun Tang , Weijen Teng and Miaohua Lin 2020. Determining the critical thresholds for
co-wordnetwork based on the theoryof percolation transition. A case study in Buddhist studies.
Journal of Documentation 76(2): 462–483.
 
Mühlematter, Yves and Helmut Zander 2021. The Occult Roots of Religious Studies. On the
Influence of Non-Hegemonic Currents on Academia around 1900. Oldenbourg: De Gruyter.
 
Müller, Max 1873. Introduction to the Science of Religion. London: Longmans, Green, and Co.
 
Muschik, E. 2022. Special issue introduction: Towards a global history of international
organizations and decolonization. Journal of Global History 17(2): 173–190.
 
Mutua, Kagendo and Beth Blue Swadener 2004. Decolonizing research in cross-cultural
contexts: Critical personal narratives. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
 
Nakamura, Rika 2017. Reorienting Asian American Studies in Asia and the Pacific. In Trans-
Pacific Japanese American Studies: Conversations on Race and Racializations, edited by
Takezawa, Yasuko and Gary Y. Okihiro , 288–312. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai'I Press.
 
Nakanishi, Ushirō 1889 (2021). On Religious Revolution. Translated by Hoshino Seiji . In
Buddhism and Modernity. Sources from Nineteenth-Century Japan, edited by Orion Klautau and
Martin Krämer , 51–63. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai'I Press.
 
Nakanishi Naoki and Yoshinaga Shin'ichi 2015. Bukkyō kokusai nettowāku no genryū: Kaigai
Senkyōkai (1888-nen−1893-nen) no hikari to kage :  (18881893)  (Origins of the International
Network of Buddhism: Lights and Shadows of the Overseas Missions Society, 1888−1893).
Kyoto: Sanninsha.
 
Nakanishi Naoki and Nose Eisui 2020. Nihon bukkyō Ajia fukyō no shosō  [Aspects of Japanese
Buddhist Missionary Activities in Asia]. Ryūkoku sōsho 53. Kyoto: Sanninsha.
 
Nakayama, Osamu 2019. New Spirituality in Japan and Its Place in the Teaching of Moral
Education. Religions 10(4): 1–12.
 
Nasu, Eishō 2020. Tabunka kyōsei shakai ni okeru nihon bukkyō no kanōsei –
toransunashonaru na shiten kara no saikentō ― [The Possibilities of Japanese Buddhism in
Multicultural Societies: A Reexamination from a Transnational Perspective]. In Kokusai shakai
to nihon bukkyō , edited by Kusunoki Junshō , Nakanishi Naoki and Dake Mitsuya , 219–221.
Tokyo: Maruzen Shuppan.
 
Newton, Richard 2020. Racial Profiling? Theorizing Essentialism, Whiteness, and Scripture in
the Study of Religion. Religion Compass 14: 1–15.
 
Ng, Edwin 2016. Buddhism and Cultural Studies: A Profession of Faith. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
 
Nitta, Tomomichi 2008. On the ‘Deification’ of the Historical Buddha in the Studies of the
Buddha’s Life Story. Hōrin 15: 43–53.
 
Nitta, Tomomichi 2021. 19 [The Emergence of the ’Human Buddha’ in the Nineteenth Century
Europe and the Prejudice of the Enlightenment].  [Otani gakuhō] 101(1): 25–53.
 
Nongbri, Brent 2015. Before Religion. A History of a Modern Concept. Yale University Press.
 
Nord, Warren A. 2010. Does God Make a Difference? Taking Religion Seriously in Our Schools
and Universities. Online ed., Oxford Academic,
doi:12048/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199766888.001.0001 (Accessed 4 August 2022).
 
Nye, Malory 2018. Whiteness, religion, and modernity. Religious Bites blog
https://medium.com/religion-bites/whiteness-religion-and-modernity-64729dc21e8e (accessed 3
January 2023).
 
Nye, Malory 2019. Decolonizing the Study of Religion. Open Library of Humanities 5(1): 43.
 
Obeyesekere Gananath 1970 . Religious Symbolism and Political Change in Ceylon. Modern
Ceylon Studies 1: 43–63.
 
Oh, Irene 2020. Decolonizing Religion: The Future of Comparative Religious Ethics. Contending
modernities. Exploring how religious and secular forces interact in the modern world.
https://contendingmodernities.nd.edu/decoloniality/decolonizing-cre (Accessed August 2022).
 
Ohnuma, Reiko . 2012. An elephant good to think − The Buddha in Pārileyyaka forest. Journal
of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 35(1–2): 259–294.
 
Olcott, Henry Steel 2009 (1881). The Buddhist Catechism. Project Gutenberg
www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/30216/pg30216-images.html (Accessed March 2023).
 
Omi, Michael 2017. The Unbearable Whiteness of Being. The Contemporary Racialization of
Japanese/Asian Americans. In Trans-Pacific Japanese American Studies: Conversations on
Race and Racializations, Takezawa Yasuko and Gary Y. Okihiro (eds), 39–59. Honolulu, HI:
University of Hawai'i Press.


--- Page 35 ---
Ōmi Toshihiro 2020. Kindai bukkyō no naka no kokusai nettowāku  [The International network of
Modern Buddhism]. In Kokusai shakai to nihon bukkyō , edited by Kusunoki Junshō , Nakanishi
Naoki and Dake Mitsuya , 113–116. Tokyo: Maruzen Shuppan.
 
Orsi, Robert A. 2016. History and Presence. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University
Press.
 
Ōtani Eiichi 2012. A Comparative Analysis of Buddhist Nationalism in Asia. The Eastern
Buddhist 43 (1 and 2): 153–180.
 
Ōtani Eiichi 2014. Ajia ni okeru ’bukkyō to kindai . In Budda no henbō: kōsaku suru kindai
bukkyō, Sueki, Hayashi , Yoshinaga and Ōtani (eds), 217–242. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
 
Owen, Suzanne 2011. The Appropriation of Native American Spirituality. London: Bloomsbury
Publishing.
 
Paden, William E. 1994 [1988]. Religious Worlds. The Comparative Study of Religion. Boston,
MA: Beacon Press.
 
Panagiotopoulos, A. and Roussou, E. 2022. We have always been transreligious: An
introduction to transreligiosity. Social Compass 69(4): 614–630.
 
Park, Peter 2013. Africa, Asia, and the History of Philosophy: Racism in the Formation of the
Philosophical Canon, 1780–1830. New York: SUNY Press.
 
Partridge, C. 2013. Lost Horizon: H.P. Blavatsky and Theosophical Orientalism. In Handbook of
the Theosophical Current, Olav Hammer and Mikael Rothstein (eds), 309–333. Leiden: Brill.
 
Patton, Kimberley C. and Ray, Benjamin C. 2000. A Magic Still Dwells: Comparative Religion in
the Postmodern Age. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
 
Payne, Richard 2008. Traditionalist Representations of Buddhism. Pacific World, Journal of the
Institute of Buddhist Studies 10: 177–223.
 
Payne, Richard 2016. White-Washing the Buddhisms: Unacknowledged Privilege and the
making of a White-Safe Buddhism. https://rkpayne.wordpress.com/?s=White-Safe+Buddhism
(Accessed March 2023).
 
Payne, Richard 2021. Editor’s Introduction. In Secularizing Buddhism. New Perspectives on a
Dynamic Tradition, edited by Richard K. , edited by Payne , 1–28. Boulder, CO: Shambhala
Publications.
 
Penner, Hans . 2009. Rediscovering the Buddha: Legends of the Buddha and Their
Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Perreira, Todd LeRoy . 2012. Whence Theravāda? The Modern Genealogy of an Ancient Term.
In How Theravāda Is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities, edited by Peter Skilling , Jason
A. Carbine , Claudio Cicuzza , and Santi Pakdeekham , 443–571. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
 
PEW Research Forum 2020. www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2020/08/11/about-one-in-four-u-s-
hispanics-have-heard-of-latinx-but-just-3-use-it (Accessed March 2023).
 
Pluckrose, Helen and James Lindsay 2020. Cynical Theories: How Universities Made
Everything About Race, Gender, and Identity—and Why This Harms Everybody. Durham, NC:
Pitchstone Publishing.
 
Prebish, Charles 1999. The Academic Study of Buddhism in America: A Silent Sangha. In
American Buddhism. Methods and Findings in Recent Scholarship, edited by Duncan Ryūken
Williams and Christopher S. Queen , 183–214. Richmond: Curzon.
 
Prebish, Charles 2006. The New Panditas. Lion’s Roar (March) www.lionsroar.com/the-new-
panditas (Accessed March 2023).
 
Prebish, Charles S. 2019. Bat Out Of Hell. H-Buddhism. 15 January 2019 . https://networks.h-
net.org/node/6060/pages/3571853/prebish-charles-s (Accessed March 2023).
 
Promta, Somparn 2000. Buddhist Studies in Thailand. In Donald K. Swaerer and Somparn
Promta (eds) The State of Buddhist Studies in the World 1972–1997, 1–32. Bangkok: Center for
Buddhist Studies, Chulalongkorn University.
 
Prothero, Stephen R. 1996. The White Buddhist: The Asian Odyssey of Henry Steel Olcott.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
 
Purser, Ronald E. 2019. McMindfulness: How Mindfulness Became the New Capitalist
Spirituality. New York and London: Repeater Books.
 
Purzycki, Benjamiin and Edward C. Holland 2019. Buddha as a god: An empirical assessment.
Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 31(4–5): 347–375.
 
Purzycki, B. G. and Sosis, R. 2022. Religion evolving: Cultural, cognitive, and Ecological
Dynamics. Equinox Publishing.


--- Page 36 ---
Pye, Michael 2003. Modern Japan and the Science of Religions. Method & Theory in the Study
of Religion 15(1): 1–27.
 
Pyysiäinen, I. 2003. Buddhism, Religion, and the Concept of God. Numen 50(2): 147–171.
 
Quijano, Aníbal 2007. Coloniality and Modernity/Rationality . Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 168–178.
 
Quisumbing King, K. and White, A.I.R. 2021. Introduction: Toward a Global Historical Sociology
of Race and Racism. In Global Historical Sociology of Race and Racism (Political Power and
Social Theory, Vol. 38), edited by White, A.I.R. and Quisumbing King, K. , 1–12. Bingley:
Emerald Publishing.
 
Quli, Natalie E. 2009. Western Self, Asian Other: Modernity, Authenticity, and Nostalgia for
‘Tradition’ in Buddhist Studies. Journal of Buddhist Ethics 16: 1–38.
 
Quli, Nathalie E. 2019. On Authenticity: Scholarship, the Insight Movement, and White
Authority. In Methods in Buddhist Studies: Essays in Honor of Richard K. Payne, edited by S.A.
Mitchell and N. Fisk Quli , 154–172. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
 
Rambelli, Fabio 2007. Buddhist Materiality: A Cultural History of Objects in Japanese
Buddhism. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
 
Rambelli, Fabio 2014. The Idea of India (Tenjiku) in Pre-Modern Japan: Issues of Signification
and Representation in the Buddhist Translation of Cultures. In Buddhism Across Asia: Networks
of Material, Intellectual and Cultural Exchange, edited by Tansen Sen , 259–290. Singapore:
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
 
Ramey, Steven W. 2015. Introduction: Writing, Riting, and Righting in the Critical Study of
Religion. In Writing religion: the case for the critical study of religion, edited by Steven W.
Ramey , 1–16. Tuscaloosa, AL: The University Alabama Press.
 
Reader, Ian 1993. Recent Japanese Publications on the New Religions: The Work of
Shimazono Susumu. Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 20(2/3): 229–48.
 
Reader, Ian 2004a. Ideology, Academic Inventions and Mystical Anthropology. Electronic
Journal of Contemporary Japanese Studies
http://www.japanesestudies.org.uk/discussionpapers/Reader.html (Accessed March 2023).
 
Reader, Ian 2004b. Dichotomies, Contested Terms and Contemporary Issues in the Study of
Religion. Electronic Journal of Contemporary Japanese Studies
www.japanesestudies.org.uk/discussionpapers/Reader2.html (Accessed March 2023).
 
Reader, Ian 2008. Buddhism and the Perils of Advocacy. Journal of Global Buddhism 9:
83–112.
 
Reader, Ian 2012. Secularisation R.I.P? Nonsense! The ‘rush hour away from the gods’ and the
decline of religion in contemporary Japan. Journal of Religion in Japan 1(1): 1–36.
 
Reiter, Bernd 2021. Decolonizing the Social Sciences and the Humanities: An Anti-Elitism
Manifesto. London and New York: Routledge.
 
Renan, Ernest 1886. First Works on Buddhism. In Studies in Religious History, edited by Ernest
Renan , 57–137. London: Richard Bentley and Son.
 
Rizvi, S. 2020. Reversing the Gaze? Or Decolonizing the Study of the Qurʾan. Method & Theory
in the Study of Religion 33(2), 122–138.
 
Roberts, Michael 1997. For Humanity. For the Sinhalese. Dharmapala as Crusading Bosat.
Introducing Sinhala Buddhist Chauvinism. The Journal of Asian Studies 56(4): 1006–1032.
 
Rocha, Cristina 2006. Zen in Brazil: The Quest for Cosmopolitan Modernity. Honolulu, HI:
University of Hawai'i Press.
 
Rodríguez, Encarnación Gutiérrez , Manuela Boatcă and Sérgio Costa (eds) 2010.
Decolonizing European Sociology: Transdisciplinary Approaches. Farnham: Ashgate.
 
Roetz, Heiner 2013. The Influence of Foreign Knowledge on Eighteenth Century European
Secularism. In Religion and Secularity: Transformations and Transfers of Religious Discourses
in Europe and Asia, edited by Marion Eggert and Lucian Hölscher , 9–33. Leiden: Brill.
 
Rogers, Richard A. 2006. From Cultural Exchange to Transculturation: A Review and
Reconceptualization of Cultural Appropriation. Communication Theory 16: 474–503.
 
Royal Historical Society 2018. Race, Ethnicity & Equality: A Report and Resource for Change.
https://files.royalhistsoc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/10/17205337/RHS_race_report_EMBARGO_0001_18Oct.pdf (accessed
3 January 2023).
 
Rozenberg, Guillaume 2005. Anthropology and the Buddhological Imagination: Reconstructing
the Invisible Life of Texts. Aséanie 16: 41–59.


--- Page 37 ---
Rudbøg, Tim 2021. Early Debates in the Reception of Buddhism: Theosophy and Esoteric
Buddhism. Imagining the East: The Early Theosophical Society, edited by Tim Rudbøg and Erik
Sand , 83–106. New York (online edn, Oxford Academic 2021),
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190853884.003.0005 (Accessed 4 October 2022).
 
Saler, Benson 1993. Conceptualizing Religion. Immanent Anthropologists, Transcendent
Natives, and Unbound Categories. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books.
 
Salvini, Mattia 2019. Decolonizing the Buddhist Mind. Newsletter. The American Philosophical
Association 19(1): 22–26.
 
Samuel, Geoffrey 1993. Civilized Shamans: Buddhism in Tibetan Societies. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
 
Santos, B.D.S. 2014. Epistemologies of the South: Justice Against Epistemicide. London:
Routledge.
 
Sasaki, Shōten 1988. Toward a Postmodern Shinshū Theology. Nanzan Bulletin 12: 13–35.
 
Schedneck, Brooke 2017. Religious Encounters in Thailand: International Meditation Centers
Within Transnational Settings. In Eastspirit – Transnational Spirituality and Religious Circulation
in East and West, edited by Jørn Borup and Marianne Q. Fibiger , 279–298. Leiden: Brill.
 
Scheffer, M. , van de Leemput, I. , Weinans, E. and Bollen, J. 2021. The rise and fall of
rationality in language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118(51): 1–8.
 
Schilbrack, Kevin 2020. A metaphysics for the study of religion: A critical reading of Russell
McCutcheon. Critical Research on Religion 8(1): 87–100.
 
Schmalzbauer, John and Kathleen Mahoney 2012. Religion and Knowledge in the Post-Secular
Academy. In The Post-Secular in Question: Religion in Contemporary Society, edited by Philip
Gorski , David Kyuman Kim , John Torpey and Jonathan Van Antwerpen , 215–248. New York:
New York University Press.
 
Schmalzbauer, John and Kathleen Mahoney 2018. The Resilience of Religion in American
Higher Education. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press.
 
Schipper, J. 2012. Toward a Buddhist Sociology: Theories, Methods, and Possibilities. Am Soc
43: 203–222.
 
Schopen, Gregory 1997. Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks. Collected Papers on the
Archeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in India. Honolulu, HI: University of
Hawai’i Press.
 
Schulzer, Rainer 2019. Inoue Enryō. A Philosophical Portrait. New York: SUNY Press.
 
Schuster, Dirk 2017. Die Lehre Vom Arischen Christentum: Das Wissenschaftliche
Selbstverstandnis Im Eisenacher Entjudungsinstitut. Göttingen: V&R Unipress.
 
Schwab, Raymond 1984. The Oriental Renaissance. Europe’s Discovery of India and the East,
1680−1880. New York: Columbia University Press.
 
Scott, David . 1994. Formations of Ritual: Colonial and Anthropological Discourses on the
Sinhala Yaktovil. Minneapolis, MI: University of Minnesota Press.
 
Sen, Tansen 2018. Introduction: Networks and Identities in the Buddhist World. In Buddhism
Across Asia: Networks of Material, Intellectual and Cultural Exchange, edited by Tansen Sen ,
1–20. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
 
Seneviratne, H.L. 1999. The Work of Kings: The New Buddhism in Sri Lanka. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
 
Sharf, Robert H. 1993. The Zen of Japanese Nationalism. History of Religions 33(1): 1–43.
 
Sharf, Robert H. 1995. Buddhist Modernism and the Rhetoric of Meditative Experience. Numen
42: 228–283.
 
Sharf, Robert H. 2002. Coming to Terms with Chinese Buddhism: A Reading of the Treasure
Store Treatise. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai'I Press.
 
Shepherd Nick . 2020. A Grammar of Decoloniality. In Colonial and Decolonial Linguistics:
Knowledges and Epistemes, edited by A. Scorch , Deumert A . and Shepherd N. , 303–324.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Shimazono, Susume 1993. New Age and New Spiritual Movements: The Role of Spiritual
Intellectuals. Syzygy: Journal of Alternative Religion and Culture 1(1–2): 9–22.
 
Shoji, Rafael 2014. The Making of ‘Brazilian Japanese’ Pentecostalism: Immigration as a Main
Factor for Religious Conversion. In Transnational Faiths. Latin-American Immigrants and their
Religions in Japan, edited by Hugo Córdova Quero and Rafael Shoji , 33–52. Farnham and
Burlington, NJ: Ashgate Publishing.


--- Page 38 ---
Sihlé, Nicolas . 2015. Towards a Comparative Anthropology of the Buddhist Gift (and Other
Transfers). Religion Compass 9(11): 352–385.
 
Sihlé, Nicolas and Patrice Ladwig 2017 . Introduction. Legacies, Trajectories, and Comparison
in the Anthropology of Buddhism. Religion and Society: Advances in Research 8: 109–128.
 
Simmer-Brown, Judith and Fran Grace and Fran Grace 2011. Introduction. In Meditation and
the Classroom: Contemplative Pedagogy for Religious Studies, edited by Simmer-Brown, Judith
and Fran Grace , xi–xxv. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
 
Skilling Peter 2012. Introduction. In How Theravāda is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist
Identities, edited by Peter Skilling , Jason A. Carbine , Claudio Cicuzza and Santi Pakdeekham ,
xiii–xxx. Bangkok: Silkworm Books.
 
Skorini, Heini and Torben Bech Dyrberg 2022. Framing Blasphemy as a crime: the curious
similarities between the secular left and the organization of Islamic cooperation. Journal of
Political Ideologies. doi:10.1080/13569317.2022.2040878 (Accessed March 2023).
 
Slone, D.J. and Mort, J. G. 2004. On the epistemological magic of ethnographic analysis.
Method & theory in the study of religion 16(2): 149–163.
 
Small, Jenny L. 2020. Critical Religious Pluralism in Higher Education. A Social Justice
Framework to Support Religious Diversity. New York: Routledge.
 
Smart, Ninian 2013. History of Religions. In Reinventing Religious Studies: Key writings in the
history of a discipline, edited by Scott Elliot , 46–50. Durham, UK: Acumen Publishing.
 
Smith, Jonathan Z. 1982. Imagining Religion: From Babylon to Jonestown. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
 
Smith, Linda Tuhiwai 2012 (1999). Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous.
Peoples. London: Zed Books.
 
Smith, Sharon E., Sally R. Munt and Andrew Kam-Tuck Yip 2016. Cosmopolitan Dharma. Race,
Sexuality, and Gender in British Buddhism. Leiden: Brill.
 
Smith, William Cantwell 1991 (1963). The Meaning and End of Religion: A New Approach to the
Religious Traditions of Mankind. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress.
 
Snodgrass, Judith 2003. Presenting Japanese Buddhism to the West: Orientalism,
Occidentalism, and the Columbian Exposition. Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina
Press.
 
Southwold, Martin 1978. Buddhism and the Definition of Religion. Man, 13: 362–379.
 
Spickard, James V. 2017. Alternative Sociologies of Religion: Through Non-Western Eyes. New
York: New York University Press.
 
Spivak, G.C. and Harasym, S. 1990. The Post-Colonial Critic: Interviews, Strategies, Dialogues.
London: Routledge.
 
Staal, Frits 1989. Rules Without Meaning: Ritual, Mantra, and the Human Sciences. New York:
Peter Lang.
 
Stack, Trevor , Naomi Goldenberg and Timothy Fitzgerald (eds) 2015. Religion as a Category of
Governance and Sovereignty. Leiden: Brill.
 
Stcherbatsky, Th . 1965 (1927). The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana. The Hague, London and
Paris: Mouton.
 
Stone, Jacqueline 1999. Review article. Some reflections on Critical Buddhism. Japanese
Journal of Religious Studies 26(1–2): 159–188.
 
Strickmann, Michel 1990. The Consecration Sutra: A Buddhist Book of Spells. In Chinese
Buddhist Apocrypha, edited by Robert E. Buswell, Jr ., 75–118. Honolulu, HI: University of
Hawai’I Press.
 
Strube, Julian 2021. Theosophy, Race, and the Study of Esotericism. Journal of the American
Academy of Religion 89(4):1180–1189.
 
Sueki Fumihiko 2012. Introduction to the Symposium on Modernity and Buddhism. Eastern
Buddhist 43(1 and 2): 7–24.
 
Sugirtharajah, Sharada 2003. Imagining Hinduism. A Postcolonial Perspective. London:
Routledge.
 
Sugirtharajah, R.S. 2005. The Bible and Empire: Postcolonial Explorations. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
 
Suh, Sharon A. 2017. Buddhism and gender. In The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary
Buddhism, edited by Michael Jerryson , 635–649. Oxford University Press.
 
Suh, Sharon A. 2019. ‘We Interrupt Your Regularly Scheduled Programming to Bring You This
Very Important Public Service Announcement…’. Aka Buddhism as Usual in the Academy.


--- Page 39 ---
Buddhism and Whiteness. Critical Reflections, edited by George Yancy and Emily McRae,
1−20. Lanham, MD, Boulder, CO, New York and London: Lexington Books.
 
Suh, Sharon A. 2020. Taking Refuge in the Body to Know the Self Anew: Buddhism, Race, and
Embodiment. In Asian and Asian American Women in Theology and Religion, Asian Christianity
in the Diaspora. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-36818-0_4 (Accessed
March 2023).
 
Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro 1921. Editorial. The Eastern Buddhist 1(1): 80–85.
 
Suzuki, Daisetz Teitaro 1970 (1953). Essays in Zen Buddhism. Third Series. London: Rider.
 
Suzuki, Kazuko . 2021. Empire and Racialization: Reinterpreting Japan’s Pan-Asianism from a
Du Boisian Perspective. In Global Historical Sociology of Race and Racism (Political Power and
Social Theory, Vol. 38), edited by A.I.R. White and Quisumbing King , 23–54. Bingley: Emerald
Publishing.
 
Takayama, Keita 2020. Engaging with the More-Than-Human and Decolonial Turns in the Land
of Shinto Cosmologies: “Negative” Comparative Education in Practice. ECNU Review of
Education 3(1): 46–65.
 
Takezawa, Yasuko 2017. Shifting Grounds in Japanese American Studies. Reconsidering
“Race” and “Class” in a Trans-Pacific Geopolitical-Historical Context. In Trans-Pacific Japanese
American Studies: Conversations on Race and Racializations, edited by Takezawa Yasuko and
Gary Y. Okihiro , 13–35. Honolulu, HI : University of Hawai'i Press.
 
Takezawa, Yasuko 2021. Japan’s Modernization and Self Construction Between White and
Yellow. In The Routledge Critical Whiteness Studies Handbook, edited by Shona Hunter and
Christi van der Westhuizen , 160–170. London: Routledge.
 
Tambiah, Stanley 1984. The Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
 
Tanabe, George J. , 2005. Grafting Identity: The Hawaiian Branches of the Bodhi Tree. In
Buddhist Missionaries in the Era of Globalization, edited by Linda Learman , 77–100. Honolulu,
HI: University of Hawai'i Press.
 
Temprano, Victor Gerard . 2013. Defining Engaged Buddhism: Traditionists, Modernists, and
Scholastic Power. Buddhist Studies Review 30(2): 261–274.
 
Thanissaro, P. 2010. Teaching Buddhism in Britain’s Schools: Redefining the Insider Role.
Contemporary Buddhism 11(1): 69–84.
 
Taves, Ann 2003. Detachment and Engagement in the Study of ‘Lived Experience’. Spiritus: A
Journal of Christian Spirituality 3(2): 186–208.
 
Taylor, Charles . 2007. A Secular Age. Cambridge, MA and London: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.
 
Thomas, Jolyon Baraka 2019. Religious Freedom in American-Occupied Japan. Chicago, IL:
The University of Chicago Press.
 
Thomas, Martin and Andrew S. and Thompson 2018. Rethinking Decolonization: A New
Research Agenda for the Twenty-First Century. In The Oxford Handbook of the Ends of Empire.
Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198713197.013.1 (Accessed 20
March 2023 ).
 
Tominaga, Nakamoto 1990. Emerging from Meditation(Transl. by Michael Pye). Honolulu, HI:
University of Hawai'I Press.
 
Trainor, Kevin 1997. Relics. Ritual, and Representation: Rematerializing the Sri Lankan
Theravada Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
Tran, Kim 2017. 4 Signs You’re Culturally Appropriating Buddhism – And Why It’s Important Not
To. https://upliftconnect.com/4-signs-youre-culturally-appropriating-buddhism (Accessed March
2023).
 
Tuck, Eve and K. Wayne Yang 2012. Decolonization is Not a Metaphor. Decolonization:
Indigeneity, Education & Society, 1(1): 1–40.
 
Tuladhar-Douglas, Will 2018. Towards a Buddhist Social Anthropology. Journal of
Ñāṇasaṃvara Centre for Buddhist Studies 1: 31–66.
 
Turda, Marius and Maria S. Quine 2018. Historicizing Race. London and New York:
Bloomsbury.
 
Turner, Alicia 2014. Religion, the Study of Religion and other Products of Transnational and
Colonial Imaginings. Journal of the Irish Society of the Academic Study of Religions 1(1):
12–25.


--- Page 40 ---
Turner, Alicia , Laurence Cox and Brian Bocking 2020. The Irish Buddhist:The Forgotten Monk
who Faced Down the British Empire. New York: Oxford University Press.
 
Tweed, Thomas 1992. The American Encounter with Buddhism, 1844–1912: Victorian Culture
and the Limits of Dissent. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
 
Tweed, Thomas 2015. Theory and Method in the Study of Buddhism: Toward ‘Translocative’
Analysis. In Buddhism Beyond Borders: New Perspectives on Buddhism in the United States,
edited by Scott A. Mitchell and Natalie E F. Quli , 3–19. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
 
Tworkov, Helen . 1991. Many Is More. Tricycle 1(2). http://tricycle.org/magazine/many-more
(Accessed March 2023).
 
Uji, Kazutaka 2020. LGBT/SOGI to bukkyō. Kuia bukkyōgaku no kōchiku ni mukete LGBT/SOGI
Kokusai shakai to nihon bukkyō , edited by Kusunoki Junshō , Nakanishi Naoki and Dake
Mitsuya , 242–245. Tokyo: Maruzen Shuppan.
 
UN 1960. Declaration on the granting of Independence to colonial countries and Peoples.
www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/declaration-granting-independence-
colonial-countries-and-peoples (Accessed 3 January 2023).
 
UN Commission on Human Rights 2006. Report on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, Addendum, Mission to Japan, 24 January
2006, E/CN.4/2006/16/Add.2, www.refworld.org/docid/4411820e0.html (Accessed 27 February
2023).
 
Urban, Hugh B. 2004. Power Still Dwells: The Ethics and Politics of Comparison in A Magic Still
Dwells. Method & Theory in The Study of Religion 16: 24–35.
 
Urban, Hugh B. 2022. Modernity and Neo-Tantra. In The Oxford Handbook of Tantric Studies,
edited by Richard K. Payne and Glen Hayes (online Oxford Academic, Accessed 18 August
2022).
 
van der Veer, Peter 2001. Imperial Encounters: Religion and Modernity in India and Britain.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
van Norden, Bryan W. 2017. Taking Back Philosophy. A Multicultural Manifesto. New York:
Columbia University Press.
 
Venkatkrishnan, A. 2021. Skeletons in the Sanskrit closet. Religion Compass 15:e12396.
doi:10.1111/rec3.12396.
 
Vesely-Flad, Rima 2022. Black Buddhists and the Black Radical Tradition. The Practice of
Stillness in the Movement for Liberation. New York: NYU Press.
 
Victoria, Brian 1997. Zen at War. New York and Tokyo: Weatherhill.
 
Viswanathan, Gauri 2000. The Ordinary Business of Occultism. Critical Inquiry 27(1): 1–20.
 
Viveiros de Castro, Eduardo 2009. Métaphysiques cannibales. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France.
 
Walpola, Rahula 1959. What the Buddha Taught. London: Oneworld Publications.
 
Walser, Joseph 2018. Genealogies of Mahāyāna Buddhism: Emptiness, Power and the
Question of Origin. New York: Routledge.
 
Walser, Joseph 2022. Buddhism without Buddhists? Academia & Learning to See Buddhism
Like a State. Pacific World 3: 103–170.
 
Waardenburg, Jacques 1998. Observations on the Scholarly Study of Religions as Pursued in
Some Muslim Countries. Numen 3: 235–257.
 
Watts, Galen and Sharday Mosurinjohn 2022. Can Critical Religion Play by Its Own Rules? Why
There Must Be More Ways to Be ’Critical’ in the Study of Religion. Journal of the American
Academy of Religion 90(2): 317–334.
 
Wenger, Tisa 2017. Religious Freedom: The Contested History of an American Ideal. Chapel
Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
 
White Awake https://web.archive.org/web/20210818140337/https:/whiteawake.org/about
(Accessed 3 January 2023 ).
 
Wiebe, Donald 2009. Religious biases in funding religious studies research? Religio 17(2):
125–140.
 
Wiebe, Donald . 2011. The Congress Director’s General Report on the XXth IAHR World
Congress. In Religion: A Human Phenomenon. Proceedings of the XXth World Congress of the
International Association for the History of Religions, 105–129.
 
Wiebe, Donald 2019a. Review of Method as Identity: Manufacturing Distance in the Academic
Study of Religion, written by Christopher M. Driscoll and Monica Miller. Numen 67(1): 93–99.


--- Page 41 ---
Wiebe, Donald 2019b. A Manifesto for the Scientific Study of Religions or Setting the
Parameters for a Scientific Study of Religions in the Modern University. Method and Theory in
the Study of Religion 33(1): 73–76.
 
Williams, Angel Kyodo, Rod Owens and Jasmine Syedullah 2016. Radical Dharma: Talking
Race, Love and Liberation. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
 
Williams, Paul 2009. Mahāyāna Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations. London: Routledge.
 
Willis, Jan 2020. Spirituality and Resistance: How We Wake Up to Racism. Journal of feminist
studies in religion 36(1): 85–97.
 
Willis, Jan 2016. Teaching Buddhism in the Western Academy. In Todd Lewis and Gary de
Angelis (eds), Teaching Buddhism: New Insights on Understanding and Presenting the
Traditions, AAR Teaching Religious Studies (online ed., Oxford Academic),
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199373093.003.0008 (Accessed March 2023).
 
Willis, D.B. and Murphy-Shigematsu, S. (eds) 2007. Transcultural Japan: At the Borderlands of
Race, Gender and Identity. Routledge.
 
Wilmore, Gayraud 1989. African American Religious Studies: An Interdisciplinary Anthology.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
 
Wilson, Jeff . 2014. Mindful America: The Mutual Transformation of Buddhist Meditation and
American Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Wilson, Jeff and Tomoe Moriya 2016. Introduction. In Selected Works of D. T. Suzuki. Volunme
III: Comparative Religion, edited by Jeff Wilson and Tomoe Moriya , xi–xxix. Oakland, CA:
University of California Press.
 
Wilton, L.S. , Apfelbaum, E.P. and Good, J.J. 2019. Valuing Differences and Reinforcing Them:
Multiculturalism Increases Race Essentialism. Social Psychological and Personality Science
10(5): 681–689.
 
Yamada, Shoji 2010. Shots in the Dark. Japan, Zen and the West. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
 
Yancy, George and Emily McRae 2019. Introduction. In Buddhism and Whiteness. Critical
Reflections, edited by George Yancy and Emily McRae , xv–xxi. Lanham, MD, Boulder, CO,
New York and London: Lexington Books.
 
Yang, Fenggang 2018. Religion in the Global East: Challenges and Opportunities for the Social
Scientific Study of Religion. Religions 9(10): 305. doi:10.3390/rel9100305.
 
Yeh C. , Rubel L. 2020. Queering Mathematics: Disrupting Binary Oppositions in Mathematics
Pre-service Teacher Education. In Borders in Mathematics Pre-Service Teacher Education,
edited by Radakovic, N. , Jao, L. , 227–243. Cham: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-44292-
7_11.
 
Yoshinaga, Shin'ichi 2009. Theosophy and Buddhist Reformers in the Middle of the Meiji
Period. Japanese Religions 34(2): 119–131.
 
Yoshinaga, Shin'ichi 2012. After Olcott Left: Theosophy and ‘New Buddhists’ at the Turn of the
Century. The Eastern Buddhist 43(1/2): 103–132.
 
Yoshinaga, Shin'ichi 2021. Shinchigaku to bukkyō Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
 
Yountae, An 2020a. A Decolonial Theory of Religion: Race, Coloniality, and Secularity in the
Americas. Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 88(4): 947–980.
 
Yountae, An 2020b. A Decolonial Theory of Religion. Contending modernities. Exploring how
religious and secular forces interact in the modern world.
https://contendingmodernities.nd.edu/decoloniality/a-decolonial-theory-of-religion (Accessed
March 2023).
 
Zahn, Max 2016. Mindfulness Has Gone Corporate – Why Has America Appropriated Buddhism
for Capitalist Ends? www.alternet.org/mindfullness-buddhism-capitalist-ends (Accessed March
2023).
 
Zembylas, Michalinos 2022. Decolonising religious education through the prism of affect theory:
analytical perspectives for approaching Islamophobia in curriculum and pedagogy. British
Journal of Religious Education 45(1): 3–13.
 
Zemmin, Florian 2019. How (Not) to Take ‘Secularity’ Beyond the Modern West: Reflections
from Islamic Sociology. Working Paper Series of the HCAS “Multiple Secularities – Beyond the
West, Beyond Modernities”. doi:10.36730/2020.1.msbwbm.9 (Accessed March 2023).
 
Zempi, Irene and Imran Awan (eds) 2019. The Routledge International Handbook of
Islamophobia. London: Routledge.


--- Page 42 ---
Zook, Darren C. 2006. Decolonizing Law: Identity Politics, Human Rights, and the United
Nations. Harvard Human Rights Journal 19: 95–122.
 
 
