--- Page 1 ---
Special Edition
The Amulet Culture of Thai-
land
Paul McBain1
Introduction
Thai amulets are made with clay, flowers, 
and other assorted materials, crushed 
and ground into a powder, then pressed 
and baked. They measure approximately 
2.5 x 3.75 x 0.5 cm and can sell for over 
30 million baht.2 Talking to amulet vendors 
and specialists, one often hears that “in 
Thailand we have the most expensive 
clay in the world”. These amulets are 
said to be “rented”―and not “bought” 
because nobody can ever truly “own” a 
buddha image―by pious laypeople out 
of devotion, by young men and women 
hoping for love, by government servants 
as conversation pieces, by businessmen 
as symbols of their success. For some, 
1 Pridi Banomyong International College, Thammasat 
University, Bangkok. Email: paulmcb@tu.ac.th.
2 Approximately one million USD at the time of 
writing. This is the stated value of the Benchaphakhi 
Rian Phra Kechi (เบญจภาคีีเหรีียญพระเกจิิ) amulet. 
Large payments for amulets are often not stated 
publicly and so they almost certainly go for much 
higher sums in practice. See: https://www.thairath.
co.th/horoscope/belief/2592736.
they are strange and superstitious; for 
others, they are a source of profit; for 
others still, they are examples of 
Buddhist devotion. The broad array of 
theoretical approaches that scholars 
have summoned in attempts to under-
stand amulets in Thailand is a veritable 
smorgasbord, covering magic, modernity, 
enchantment, and marketing. This tells 
us that we have a phenomenon that 
defies easy explanation, a topic good to 
think with. This Special Edition of the 
Journal of the Siam Society explores the 
culture of Thailand’s amulets and 
charms, with a particular focus on the 
ways in which amulets have adapted to 
the contemporary moment. 
	
In this introduction, I first provide 
a concise history of amulets and an 
overview of amulet culture in Thailand. 
I then summarize key theoretical 
approaches that have been employed 
to understand these practices. Finally, 
I discuss how the studies included in 
this Special Edition contribute to ongoing 
scholarly conversations on the subject.
The Amulet Culture of Thailand
Paul McBain1
Abstract—This introduction to the Special Edition on Thailand’s amulet 
culture provides an overview of the country’s vibrant and evolving 
landscape of amulet practices. It traces the historical development of 
diverse interpretations and uses of amulets in Thailand, highlighting how 
these practices have adapted over time. Additionally, the introduction 
discusses various theoretical frameworks that scholars have employed to 
understand why, in an era often said to be characterized by rationalism, 
such beliefs and practices not only endure but thrive. The introduction 
concludes by detailing how the articles in this Special Edition contribute 
to ongoing scholarly debates on modernity, enchantment, and the role of 
contemporary media.
Keywords: Material Culture of Thailand; Ritual Practices; Thai Amulets; 
Thai Buddhism; Thai Modern History
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024, pp. 7–15
https://doi.org/10.69486/112.2.2024.2 © The Siam Society Under Royal Patronage

--- Page 2 ---
8
A Brief History
To some extent, Thai amulets could be 
considered something of an “invented 
tradition” as, while some of them may 
appear ancient and indigenous, they are 
in fact a characteristically modern 
phenomena. It was only at some point 
in the middle of the 19th century that 
Siamese people began taking phra phim 
(พระพิิมพ์์), buddha images printed onto 
clay, out of stupas and started wearing 
them for protection (Pattaratorn 1997: 
67). Prior to that, buddha images had 
generally remained within the sacred 
confines of a monastery or a temple 
(Srisakra 2537: 81). Past technologies of 
ritual protection and attraction in Siam, 
such as wearing, including takrut 
(ตะกรุุด, rolled sheets of metal or palm 
leaf) to go to war, certainly contribute in 
part to contemporary practice; this 
development is covered in depth in 
Chris Baker & Pasuk Phongpaichit’s 
article in this Special Edition. Never- 
theless, today’s amulet “culture”, by 
which is meant not only the physical 
characteristics of these amulets but also 
the changing means by which they are 
interpreted and given value, is in many 
key respects distinct from premodern 
practices. As we shall see below and in 
the articles that follow, today’s amulet 
culture is intertwined with contempo-
rary narratives, often relayed via very 
modern modes of media, as well as 
linked with very modern patterns of 
commerce. 
	
Even though Buddhist amulets had 
existed since the mid-19th century, it 
was not until the middle of the 20th 
century that Buddhist amulets achieved 
their present-day popularity and value. 
Chalong Soontravanich, in a much-cited 
article on the development of the 
modern popularity of amulets in Thailand, 
attributes this rise to the violent, 
crime-infested period following the 
Second World War, where drug gangs 
and nak leng (นัักเลง, ruffians) controlled 
and competed for territory (Chalong 
2013: 197). The anthropologist Stanley 
Tambiah also noted the “street machismo”, 
“preoccupations with the exercise of 
power”, and violence prevalent in the 
1970s (1984: 229). Old narratives of 
military exploits in which amulets had 
caused enemies to drop their weapons 
or conferred invulnerability to bullets 
seemed to gain a new valence in this 
period as many turned to amulets, both 
Buddhist and non-Buddhist charms like 
yantras and nam mon (น้ำ�มนต์์, consecrated 
water) offering a sense of protection. 
Bangkok Markets specializing in amulets, 
at 
Sanam 
Luang 
and 
later 
Tha 
Prachan, nourished an ever-growing 
coterie of specialists who accumulated 
and shared “scientific” knowledge about 
which amulets were fake and genuine. 
Nowadays, 
books, 
magazines, 
and 
numerous websites discuss the cracks, 
bumps, flaws, and traces of ingredients 
mixed with the amulet powder in 
order to assist enthusiasts in verifying 
whether the amulet is genuine or not 
(McDaniel 2011: 190). Today, amulets 
have expanded greatly beyond depicting 
buddha 
images. 
As 
well 
as 
the 
legendary occult master and lover Khun 
Phaen (ขุุนแผน) and the Nine Tailed Fox 
amulets studied in this collection of 
articles,  amulets of Chinese deities and 
bodhisattvas, Indic gods, and royal 
family members have also become 
widespread.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 3 ---
9
	
The value of Thai amulets is deeply 
linked to the narratives which surround 
them. Particularly prevalent are stories 
of miracles. In 1993, the Royal Plaza 
Hotel in Khorat (Nakhon Ratchasima) 
collapsed and the media widely reported 
that the only survivors were those 
wearing amulets activated by Luang 
Pho Khun (หลวงพ่อคูณ; 1923–2015). 
Luang Pho Khun was the revered 
abbot of a noted wat (monastery) whose 
image could be seen all over Thailand 
during the financial hardships of the 
1990s: in his monk’s robes, squatting on 
a rug with both hands full of bank notes. 
Pattana 
Kitiarsa, 
employing 
Homi 
Bhabha’s notion of “hybridity”, which he 
understands as discourses which emerge 
as both counters to and products of 
hegemonic discourse, interprets the 
popularity of this image, which displays 
the monk’s “rustic” sensibility and his 
attitude of “bless everything” including 
simple desires, as both a counter and 
a product of Bangkok-centered ideas 
of what Buddhism “should” be (2012: 
105). In a similar miraculous story to 
the one above, a woman jumping from 
the Kader doll factory fire in Nakhon 
Pathom in 1993 survived ostensibly 
because she landed on the bodies of 
those who had jumped before her. 
However, popular media attributed her 
survival to her possession of a mass-
produced Luang Pho Khun amulet 
(Pattana 2012: 89). The articles in this 
collection show that the narratives 
surrounding some amulets are not only 
tied up with miracle narratives but also 
stories of Sino‒Thai “rags to riches” 
as well as online debates about the 
authenticity of the person who activated 
them. There are also trends in the 
amulet trade, with the value of 
particular items often rising and falling 
as swiftly as shares on a stock exchange 
and fads, known as khai (ไข้, fevers) for 
particular amulets, such as the craze 
surrounding the Chatukham-Ramathep 
(จตุคามรามเทพ) amulet in 2006. Spurred 
on by the funeral of the magically- 
endowed policeman Khun Phanthara- 
kratchadet (ขุนพันธรักษ์ราชเดช; about 
1898–2006) 
in 
that 
year, 
crowds, 
including politicians and film stars, 
rushed to Nakhon Si Thammarat to such 
an extent that two people were 
trampled to death when a new batch 
went on sale (McDaniel 2011: 191). 
	
Amulets are also involved in a 
flourishing trade with other countries 
such as Vietnam and China. Such 
intercultural exchanges have been little 
studied and are the subject of several 
of the articles in this Special Edition.
	
Theoretical Approaches
Almost every theoretical lens, from 
Homi Bhabha’s hybridity to Bruno 
Latour’s theories of modernity and 
enchantment, has been applied to make 
sense of modern-day Thai religious 
practices. Some studies focus exclusively 
on Thai amulets, though the majority 
consider Thai popular religiosity more 
broadly and attempt to answer the 
question of why, in an age of supposed 
rationalism, such practices and beliefs 
not only survive but also flourish.  
	
Early approaches to understanding 
Buddhism in Thailand tended to focus 
on Pali texts, the legacy of a Protestant- 
inflected inclination to think of a true 
world religion as stemming from key 
sacred texts. Since the middle of the 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 4 ---
10
19th century, when Siam’s reformist 
kings attempted to “purify” local Buddhism 
from superstition and non-canonical 
influences, such an attitude has been 
far from alien in Thailand itself. Many 
local commentators today continue to 
disparage Buddhist amulets as a form 
of phuttha phanit (พุทธพาณิชย์), Buddhist 
commercialism. Because of this  bifurca-
tion between “real” and “folk” or “com-
mercial” Buddhism, it was only well into 
the 20th century that scholars  began to 
argue for the proper study of “popular 
Buddhism”, a term coined in the 1960s 
(Anuman 1968: 33).3 Anthropological 
studies such as Barend J. Terwiel’s Monks 
and Magic (first published in 1975) 
began to take more seriously Buddhist 
cultures of amulets, astrological 
diagrams, and tattoos.
	
Appearing not long after Terwiel’s 
study, Stanley Tambiah’s The Buddhist 
Saints of the Forest and the Cult of Amulets 
(1984) 
principally 
discussed 
the 
veneration of amulets in terms of 
Weber’s notion of “charisma”. Tambiah 
linked the charisma of amulets to the 
charisma of the buddhas as well as to 
revered local Buddhist monk saints. 
The charisma of these “saints” to a 
large extent came from having endured 
harsh ascetic practices in peripheral 
zones such as in forests. Tambiah 
offers various interpretative strategies 
for understanding Thai amulets, including 
Marx’s “fetishization of commodities”. 
According to this interpretation, Buddhist 
amulets are an economy―a trade in 
3 Anuman Rajadhon coined this term in order to refer to 
forms in which Buddhism, animism and Brahmanism 
have become “intermingled in an inextricable 
degree”. The fact of Anuman having coined the term 
is cited from Jackson 2022: 71. 
objects linked to a complex of social 
relations, with values and narratives 
about these objects. This economy 
proceeds from social relations and values 
differing from a  capitalist economy. 
The relationship is not one of producer 
to consumer but, in part, of monk to 
devotee; the value, at least ideally, 
comes not from the material or use 
but from the faith, generosity, and 
charisma gained by that monk through 
his asceticism and loving-kindness. 
Because certain amulets are considered 
more powerful and valuable than others, 
they also act as symbols of wealth and 
power, becoming goods which reflect a 
“hierarchy of merit” (Tambiah 1984: 342).
	
Pattana Kitiarsa’s Mediums, Monks, 
and Amulets (2012) tried to understand 
amulets and other phenomena as part 
of a larger interconnected sphere of 
contemporary 
media 
forms, 
local 
monks, and traders. For Pattana, popular 
Buddhism, including amulets, were 
shaped by processes of deification, 
mediation, and commodification. The 
creation of a deity―or, sometimes, a 
real person who becomes deity-like―
is a process by which both small-scale 
communication networks and modern 
mass media spread the reputation of 
that person-becoming-deity.  
	
Similarly, Justin McDaniel’s The 
Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk (2011) 
defines Buddhist amulets as objects 
“in which art, religion, and economics 
have come together in creative ways” 
(p. 212). Thus, Buddhist amulets are 
not merely crassly commercial, but 
have boosted local economies, assisted 
temples in gaining large donations, 
and, moreover, acted as vehicles for the 
expression of an ethics of graciousness, 
generosity, and abundance.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 5 ---
11
	
Finally, Peter Jackson’s recent Capi-
talism Magic Thailand (2022) offers a bird’s 
eye survey of important theoretical 
approaches 
to 
contemporary 
Thai 
religiosity, drawing on the work of 
Christine Gray, Bruno Latour, and Erick 
White amongst others. Jackson under-
stands Thai religiosity in terms of “poly-
ontologism”, systems of belief which 
recognize the mysterious potency of 
images and ideas from multiple belief 
systems. Additionally, these images 
and ideas are recognized as, to some 
extent, distinct from one another. Thai 
religiosity is then understood as highly 
tolerant of ambiguity. It also possesses 
an “additive principle”, that more (more 
gods, more saints, more offerings) is 
good. In Thailand, one often sees shrines 
of Chinese deities, the buddhas, and 
Nang Kwak together. For Jackson this is 
possible because of “the common em-
bodied attitude of ritual respect that 
devotees exhibit towards all the deities 
and spiritual figures” (2022: 351). 
Because Thai religiosity has placed more 
emphasis on images and ritual than on 
doctrinal consistency, producers and 
consumers are relatively free to create 
new enchantments in response to, 
amongst other things, the “hypercom-
plexity” of modern liberal capitalism. 
	
Far from being an exotic curiosity 
or very peripheral to modern concerns, 
understanding Thai amulets helps us 
understand more about capitalism and 
the ways in which value is created and 
even about the nature of modernity. 
As Jackson writes, “The Thai cults of 
wealth are significant beyond studies of 
religion in Southeast Asia because they 
contribute to understanding the condi-
tions under which twenty-first-century 
global modernity makes, and remakes, 
magic” (2022: 409). The articles that 
follow offer detailed case studies of 
particular amulets and worshipped 
figures, adding nuance to the ways in 
which media, marketing, transcultural 
interpretation, cultural identify forma- 
tion are all tied up in with this 21st 
century form of enchantment.
Synopsis
The articles in this Special Edition are 
largely drawn from the International 
Conference on Amulet Cultures in 
Thailand, held at Pridi Banomyong 
International College at Thammasat 
University in Bangkok on 10–11 July 2023.4
This collection begins with historical 
and literary articles, dealing with the 
origins and historical development of 
amulets and icons in old Siam and 
Thailand, moving on to look at the 
development of certain amulets in 
the 20th century before focusing on 
new developments, such as recyclable 
amulets and NFT (Non-fungible token) 
amulets. 
	
Due to looting, termites, and humi- 
dity, tracing beliefs and practices in 
Thailand back to the premodern era is 
notoriously difficult. But Chris Baker & 
Pasuk Phongpaichit in “Before the Amulet: 
Concepts and Devices in Old Siam” ana-
lyze passages from old literature such as 
Khun Chang Khun Phaen (ขุุนช้้างขุุนแผน), 
and the Ramakien (รามเกีียรติ์์˦) to provide 
examples of the use of amulets and other 
powerful devices. In the premodern 
period, in a land of guardian spirits and 
4 Readers may see photographs and other materials 
from the event, as well as about subsequent and 
future events here: http://www.facebook.com/
pbicthaiconferences. 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 6 ---
12
dangerous animals, nature was seen as 
“fickle, dangerous, and capable of 
malevolent actions”. Faced with these 
dangers, sciences developed to interpret 
these forces and to manipulate them to 
one’s advantage. Supplying a fascinating 
wealth of detail from premodern texts, 
Baker & Pasuk provide the historical 
context of the practices and beliefs 
which in part led up to what may be 
considered the earliest modern amulets. 
	
One of the most popular amulet 
forms in Thailand emerges not from 
Buddhism but from popular literature. 
The character of Khun Phaen from 
the epic Khun Chang Khun Phaen was a 
handsome, talented but poor man who 
managed to achieve some success in 
war and in love through his mastery of 
arcane lore. Saran Suebsantiwongse, in 
“From Sacred to Profane:  Phra Khun 
Phaen Amulets in Modern Thailand”, 
reveals some of the earliest Khun Phaen 
amulets, found in the character’s home-
town of Suphanburi at Wat Phra Rup 
(วัดพระรูป). Saran goes on to describe 
how early amulet masters, such as 
Luang Pu Thim (หลวงปู่ทิม; 1879–1975) 
and Achan Pleng (อาจารย์เปล่ง; 1917–
2009) used real human body parts to make 
these amulets. The article demonstrates 
the ways in which narrative, lore, and 
beliefs about dark power can intertwine 
in Thai amulet culture.
	
Thomas Bruce’s paper, “Venerating 
Yi Koh Hong and Sian Pae Rongsi: 
A Sino–Thai Legacy”, begins by re- 
counting a consecration ceremony for 
amulets depicting Sian Pae Rong Si 
(เซีียนแปะโรงสีี; 吴锦溪仙; about 1898–
1984), a Chinese rice miller around 
whom, since his death in 1984, a cult of 
wealth developed. While he is known for 
his charitable acts, his image is often 
displayed 
with 
another 
distinctly 
Chinese figure, that of Yi Koh Hong 
(ยี่่˛กอฮง; 二哥豐; 1851–1937), known not 
only for his charitable acts but also for 
his successes as a gambling magnate. 
The article argues that it is through 
these rags-to-riches figures that a 
particular kind of pride in being Sino–
Thai can be made compatible with 
monarchical Thai nationalism. While 
more about the narratives surrounding 
these figures than their amulets per se, 
this study is an example of the complex 
dynamics of history and identity 
formation which often lend amulets 
much of their power to act as both 
symbols of self, success, and sacredness.
	
A 
particularly 
interesting 
and 
perhaps unexpected development 
is the popularity of Thai amulets in 
the rest of the world.  Several articles 
focus on the transnational exchange of 
amulets. Guanxiong Qi’s “Inventing Thai 
Amulets for the Chinese: Achan Meng 
and the Nine-Tailed Fox” traces the 
development of the Nine-Tailed Fox 
Amulet, popular largely among Chinese-
speaking customers. Qi follows debates 
and often conflicting stories around 
Sino‒Thai lay ritual master Achan Meng 
(อาจารย์เม้ง; 1957–2021), the producer of 
a sought-after example of such amulets. 
Using interviews with Meng’s disciples 
as well as research in online forums, 
Qi understands how ritual reputations 
both are advertised and argued against. 
Qi also demonstrates how the Fox 
Amulet and narratives are linked to 
both Chinese myths about the fox spirit 
as well as the image amongst Chinese of 
Thailand as a land of exotic Buddhism 
and potent black magic. 
	
Chari Hamratanaphon’s “Meaning 
Making and the Significance of Nang Kwak 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 7 ---
13
in Vietnam” looks at the ubiquitous 
female figure of Nang Kwak (นางกวัก), 
the lady beckoning customers and 
wealth, seen all over Thailand. Yantra 
cloths, figurines, and other Nang Kwak 
accessories have started to achieve 
popularity in Vietnam. Using interviews 
with sellers and buyers in Vietnam, 
Chari investigates how these foreign, 
enchanted items from Thailand are 
received in Vietnam, with a particular 
focus on how Nang Kwak accessories 
are marketed and used differently than 
in their country of origin. Chari observes 
that political pressures, such as the 
state’s 
anti-superstition 
campaigns, 
and the differing contexts of beliefs 
surrounding powerful items, contribute 
to how the meanings of Nang Kwak are 
not merely imported but negotiated 
within the Vietnamese context. Both 
Chari and Guanxiong Qi’s articles offer 
examples of an as yet little studied 
phenomenon, the adaptation of differing 
marketing strategies and diverse 
interpretations amongst audiences 
in different countries involved in the 
increasingly large international trade in 
Thai amulets.
	
Finally, the last two articles in this 
Special Edition deal with new directions 
in Thailand’s amulet culture. John 
Johnston & Chaiyaporn Phayakhrut’s 
“Beyond 
Rebirth: 
Materiality 
and 
Recycling in Thai Amulets” looks at 
the new trend of creating recyclable 
amulets. These “plastic amulets” are 
made from recycled water bottles, caps, 
shopping bags, and fishing nets. They 
follow some of the associative logic 
of other auspicious materials used in 
amulet production, such as with amulets 
made of fishing nets advertised as having 
the potential to help the wearer 
“catch” what they desire. Al Lim in an 
additional article on Nang Kwak, “The 
Gendered Allure of Nang Kwak: From 
Statuettes to NFTs in Thailand” studies 
the ways in which the wealth-bringing 
goddess is marketed in the Thai 
contemporary market. Covering different 
examples of the figure, Lim outlines 
where Nang Kwak figures in the modern 
Thai genderscape. Some models symbolize 
traditional femininity, offering prosperity 
and reassurance. But other models 
capitalize on her sex appeal; some even 
present Nang Kwak as queer. Lim’s 
study surveys the career of a traditional 
figure in the modern, digital world 
of rampant marketing, NFTs, and 
auspicious screen savers, demonstrating 
once again how fast and adaptable the 
Thai religious marketplace can be.
	
Nang Kwak can also be seen on the 
cover of this Special Edition, a reinter-
pretation of more traditional depictions 
of her which incorporates technological 
motifs. This cover, commissioned from 
the Thai NFT artist GINGA, was felt to 
encapsulate the mix of enchantment, 
tradition, and quick adaptability to 
modern commercial trends and media 
forms which are the theme of many of 
the articles within [Figure 1]. 
*********
While beginning with some studies on 
the history of amulets in old Siam, a 
majority of the articles in this collection 
deal with ways in which the Thai amulet 
culture has emerged and adapted to 
contemporary movements, such as 
international trade flows, contemporary 
concerns, 
and 
new 
technology. 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 8 ---
14
Figure 1: “The Beckoning Lady” or Thai Nang Kwak,  
digital art commissioned for this Special Edition of JSS © GINGA, NFT artist
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 9 ---
15
As the review of scholarly literature 
concerning Thai amulets indicates, 
these objects are fascinating because 
they provide us with an alternative 
modernity and an alternative stream in 
contemporary capitalism. Additionally, 
these articles provide detail and nuance 
to the ways in which this familiar but 
different nexus of commodities, desires, 
narratives, and networks has adapted 
to the modern world and may continue 
to do so. 
Acknowledgments 
The guest editor extends heartfelt 
thanks to all the authors who contri- 
buted to this Special Edition, as well as 
to the many anonymous reviewers. 
Particular appreciation is also given to 
the main editorial team of this journal, 
especially Nicolas Revire and Leedom 
Lefferts, for their invaluable support 
and feedback. Additionally, the guest 
editor wishes to express gratitude to the 
Pridi Banomyong International College 
at Thammasat University for hosting 
the International Conference, and to 
co-organizers Thomas Bruce, Chutiman 
Chuenjai, John Johnson, and Ornthicha 
Duangratana for their efforts in making 
the event a success.
References
• Anuman Rajadhon, Phya. 1968. Essays 
on Thai Folklore. Bangkok: Social Science 
Association Press of Thailand.  
• Chalong Soontravanich. 2013. The 
Regionalization of Local Buddhist Saints: 
Amulets, Crime and Violence in Post–World 
War II Thai society. SOJOURN: Journal of Social 
Issues in Southeast Asia 28 (2): 179–215.
• Jackson, Peter A. 2022. Capitalism Magic 
Thailand: Modernity with Enchantment. 
Singapore: ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute.
• McDaniel, Justin Thomas. 2011. The 
Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: 
Practicing Buddhism in Modern Thailand. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
• Pattana Kitiarsa. 2012. Mediums, Monks, 
and Amulets: Thai Popular Buddhism Today. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
• Pattaratorn Chirapravati, ML 1997. 
Votive Tablets in Thailand: Origin, Styles, 
and Uses. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
• Srisakra Vallibhotama (ศรีีศัักร วััลลิิโภดม). 
2537 be (1994 ce). พระเครื่่˛อง(ราง): 
พุุทธบููชาหรืือพุุทธพาณิิชย์์ [Buddhist Amulets: 
Homage to Lord Buddha or Buddhist 
Commercialism?]. ศิิลปวััฒนธรรม [Art & 
Culture] 15(2): 77–89. 
• Tambiah, Stanley Jeyaraja. 1984. The 
Buddhist Saints of the Forest and the Cult of 
Amulets: A Study in Charisma, Hagiography, 
Sectarianism, and Millennial Buddhism. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
• Terwiel, Barend Jan. 1975. Monks and 
Magic: An Analysis of Religious Ceremonies 
in Central Thailand. London: Curzon 
Press. 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition