--- Page 1 ---
Special Edition
Inventing 
Thai 
Amu-
lets 
for 
the 
Chinese: 
Achan Meng and the Nine-Tailed 
Fox Amulet1
Introduction
On 27 September 2023, I attended the 
second anniversary of the death of 
Achan Meng Khunphaen (อาจารย์์เม้้ง
ขุุนแผน) at his ritual studio in Minburi, 
Bangkok. Achan Meng (1957–2021) was 
a Thai lay ritual master specializing in 
incantation (มนต์์, mon), yantra design 
(ยัันต์์, yan),2 and the making of sacred 
objects 
(เครื่่˛องราง, 
khrueang 
rang). 
The commemoration started at about 
09.00 am. His son, Paeng Khunphaen 
(แบงค์์ขุุนแผน), set up an altar and 
performed the appropriate rituals 
1 Chulalongkorn University (PhD Candidate). Email: 
6588801922@student.chula.ac.th. 
2 Yantra is a type of magic device which uses letters, 
numbers, geometrical diagram, and other elements 
to induce supranormal abilities. The yantra patterns 
are flexible and usually inscribed or printed on 
different materials, such as tattooing on one’s body 
and printed on a cloth. See also the article by Chris 
Baker & Pasuk Phongpaichit, this Special Edition.
Inventing Thai Amulets for the Chinese:  
Achan Meng and the Nine-Tailed Fox
Guanxiong Qi1
Abstract―This article explores the creation of the Nine-Tailed Fox 
amulet by Achan Meng Khunphaen (1957–2021), a Sino–Thai lay ritualist. 
Since 2010, Achan Meng adapted the Chinese fox cult into his controversial 
amulet, believed to enhance charisma and sexual attraction, gaining 
immense popularity among trans-Asian ethnic Chinese communities. 
Opinions about his legitimacy vary, with some viewing him as a swindling 
opportunist while others see him as a gifted ritual master. The Nine-Tailed 
Fox amulet reflects the inclusivity of Thai religious practices and the rise 
of “cults of charisma” since the late 2000s, bridging two cultural traditions.
Keywords: Achan Meng; Buddhist Commerce; Fox Cult; Sino–Thai Religiosity; 
Thai Amulets
together with food offerings and incense 
burning. More than 20 disciples and 
devotees gradually arrived at the office; 
some flew in from China solely to help 
organize this anniversary commemoration. 
Attendees queued to worship Achan 
Meng’s cremains, chitchatted about 
Achan Meng’s marvelous life, and had 
lunch together [Figure 1]. 
	
Best known for his signature Nine- 
Tailed Fox amulet (Th., นางพญาจิ้้˞งจอก
เก้้าหาง, nang phaya chingchok kao hang; 
Ch., 九尾狐牌, jiuwei hu pai), Achan Meng 
is more famous, not to mention contro-
versial, amongst the ethnic Chinese in 
mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, 
Malaysia, and Singapore than among 
Thai people.3 Due to his Chinese ancestry, 
3 When I use terms “Chinese” and “ethnic Chinese”, 
I refer to the non-Thai ethnic Chinese who speak 
Mandarin, Cantonese, or Teochew. “Chinese” as an ethnic 
identity should not be confused with citizenship in 
the People’s Republic of China. Information about 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024, pp. 75–98
https://doi.org/10.69486/112.2.2024.6 © The Siam Society Under Royal Patronage

--- Page 2 ---
76
Achan Meng spoke Teochew fluently 
and was an amulet trader based in Penang, 
Malaysia for more than 10 years. His 
experience with Chinese Malaysians 
helped him to adapt the Chinese fox cult 
into 
his 
Nine-Tailed 
Fox 
amulet. 
Currently, one can easily find fox 
amulets made or inspired by Achan 
Meng in the Tha Phra Chan market, as 
well as at Thai amulet shops in major 
Asian cities such as Beijing, Taipei, and 
Penang. Amulets produced by Achan 
Meng allegedly grant the possessor 
marvelous abilities of attraction and 
seduction. The worship of the Nine-Tailed 
Fox brings luck and charisma, helps its 
Achan Meng and his Nine-Tailed Fox amulet spreads 
in the Chinese language via personal networks and 
social media. The targeted customers of the fox 
amulet are ethnic Chinese who read and speak 
Chinese. Note that this does not mean Achan Meng did 
not have Thai followers. Before the invention of the 
fox amulet, Achan Meng offered rituals (e.g., yantra 
tattoo and wai khru [ไหว้ครู] ritual) and made other 
kinds of amulets. He was modestly successful and 
enjoyed local popularity.
Figure 1: Achan Meng’s devotees lined up to burn joss paper in veneration of him, 
following the Chinese ancestral worship tradition, on the occasion of his second 
death anniversary on 27 September 2023, Minburi © Guanxiong Qi
owner captivate customers, and improves 
interpersonal relationships. The appearance 
and popularization of the Nine-Tailed 
Fox amulet were not without controversy, 
but the amulet is nevertheless widely 
favored among Chinese amulet collectors. 
	
Belief in the fox spirit has an unam-
biguous Chinese cultural origin.4 Some 
of the earliest Chinese references to the 
Nine-Tailed Fox can be found in the Classic 
of Mountains and Seas (山海經, shanhai 
jing; 4th c. bce), a compendium of 
geography and mythical beasts, and 
the Book of Rites (禮記, liji;  1st c. bce), a 
Confucian classic (Kang 2006: 15–24). 
These ancient accounts depict the 
Nine-Tailed Fox in different forms, from 
4 I do not wish to suggest Tai people, since ancient 
times, have never worshipped foxes. However, the 
worshipping of the Nine-Tailed Fox (九尾狐, jiuwei 
hu) clearly has a Chinese origin, and the Chinese 
image of the fox female spirit can be traced back to 
before the Common Era. In other words, Achan Meng’s 
Nine-Tailed Fox amulet clearly plays on the Chinese 
cultural perception of the fox spirit. 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 3 ---
77
human-eating beasts to auspicious 
animals. Rania Huntington writes that 
Chinese culture perceives the fox as a 
type of creature “between the explicable 
and the mysterious, between imagination’s 
habits and its innovations” (2003: 5–6). 
The Chinese image of the fox as a strange 
and supranormal species gradually 
developed into various literary 
representations and diffused into cultic 
practices. Since the Ming dynasty (1368–
1644), in various narrative compilations 
the fox has been depicted as a shape-
shifting monster, a powerful sorcerer, 
or an elegant celestial. In Daoist and 
Buddhist temples, the fox is sometimes 
worshipped as a celestial linked to female 
deities, such as the Lady of Taishan 
(泰山娘娘, taishan niangniang) and Queen 
Mother of the West (西王母, xiwangmu) 
(Kang 2006: 133–156).5 In contemporary 
northern China, one still encounters fox 
shrines in villages (Keith 2013: 161–162). 
The most prominent Chinese precon-
ception of the fox spirit relates to erotic 
romance and love magic.6 In the early 
17th century, female fox spirits began 
5 Queen Mother of the West is arguably the oldest 
Chinese mother goddess in written records. The most 
ancient mention of her traces back to the oracles 
in the Shang dynasty (17–11th c. bce). The Lady of 
Taishan is a mountain god who has been highly 
revered in northern China since the Song dynasty 
(960–1279 ce). 
6 “Magic”, derived from the ancient Greek, magus, 
is a contested term in academic discourse. Despite 
the complexities around its use, I use magic to refer 
to ritual performances that sympathetically apply 
supranormal rules and principles to achieve specific 
desired goals. With this definition, I concur with 
Richard Kieckhefer (2019) that magic should be used 
as a cross-cultural aggregating term vaguely conveying 
a range of human behaviors. I use “occult” to refer to 
secretive magic that has an immoral proclivity. For a 
working definition of magic in Buddhist studies, see 
Schaik 2020.
to be depicted in an unflattering light, 
mainly as overly passionate wives or 
licentious seducers. One of the most 
influential works providing a negative 
view of fox spirits is the anthology of 
Chinese folk tales, Strange Tales from a 
Chinese Studio (聊齋誌異, liaozhai zhiyi) 
by Pu Songling (蒲松齡; 1640–1715). 
Eighty-three of 491 stories contain 
plots about a fox spirit acting as a major 
protagonist (Barr 1989: 501–517; Kang 
2006: 90–92). In these stories, fox spirits 
are depicted as seducers. In a patriarchal 
environment, the excessive beauty of 
the fox spirit was perceived as dangerous 
and subversive; the female fox would 
bewilder male humans and come to 
dominate their relationship. Later, 
fox spirits were worshiped by many 
Chinese to gain advantages in love 
affairs and interpersonal relations. In 
my extensive research in Thai-language 
materials, I have found no examples 
of these Chinese conceptions of the 
Nine-Tailed Fox; it appears that the 
Nine-Tailed Fox is unknown among 
most Tai-speaking people.7  
	
This article, instead of analyzing the 
internal characteristics of Thai religious 
practices, uses the fox amulet to examine 
Chinese perceptions of and influence 
7 The closest link between the Nine-Tailed Fox and 
contemporary Thai culture is probably in Japanese 
anime. The idea and image of the Nine-Tailed Fox 
is well-preserved as a yōkai (妖怪, a class of super-
normal and strange beings described in the Japanese 
folklore) and appears in many Japanese anime series, 
such as Naruto (NARUTO -ナルト- , 2002–2007). In 
the anime series, the protagonist, Naruto Uzumaki 
(うずまきナルト), is the human host of the 
Nine-Tailed Fox. When I discussed the Nine-Tailed 
Fox amulet with Thai youngsters, Naruto is often the 
image that they have in mind. However, the yōkai 
Nine-Tailed Fox largely differs from the Chinese fox 
cults. 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 4 ---
78
in Thai amulet culture. Scholars of Thai 
religions have long moved away from 
understanding Thai religiosity only 
through the lens of institutionally- 
endorsed Buddhism to look at the larger 
religious sphere including, for instance, 
the amulet trade and spirit cults 
(e.g., White 2014; Siani 2018; Brac de La 
Perrière & Jackson 2022). In Thailand, 
a Theravada Buddhist country, one can 
encounter the worship of diverse figures 
well outside of the Buddhist pantheon. 
Worshipped objects include past Thai 
kings and nobles, various spirits and 
ghosts (ผี, phi), Chinese celestials, and 
Hindu deities. The diverse and fluid Thai 
religious field has been characterized 
and theorized differently in terms of 
syncretism, hybridity, repertoire, and 
most recently, kalathesa (กาลเทศะ, time-
and-place).8 The fox amulet is notably 
different from other popular Thai 
religious practices as it is produced in 
Thailand but generally not owned or 
worshipped by Thai people. Thus, it 
is safe to say that the Nine-Tailed Fox 
amulet is a Thai amulet invented exclu-
sively for the foreign market, targeting 
8 Since the 1960s, the theoretical conundrum of sum-
marizing the Thai religious field has been to provide 
a comprehensive theory explaining both the variety 
and unity of Thai religiosity. Scholars have gradually 
acknowledged that the Thai religious and belief 
system should not be simply characterized as the 
conjunction of various distinct religious systems (for 
instance, the elite, scholarly Buddhism vs. the popular, 
animistic Buddhism). To emphasize the internal 
coherence of Thai religiosity, scholars have employed 
theories such as repertoire and kalathesa. Introduced 
by Nidhi Eoseewong and expanded by Peter Jackson, 
kalathesa refers to Thai religious activity and ritual 
that specifically adapts to the social context and 
cultural setting, allowing Jackson to capture the 
diversity and unity of the Thai religious field. For 
details on the kalathesa theory, see Jackson 2020 and 
2021: 89–90, 131–159.
ethnic Chinese who, amongst them-
selves, have a shared cultural conception 
of the Nine-Tailed Fox.9 Thus, the emer-
gence of the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet 
reflects the Chinese perception of Thai 
amulets and Buddhist magic and may be 
used as a case study to understand such 
perceptions as well as the intercultural 
dialogues which inform them.
	
Understanding the popularity of 
Thai amulets among the Chinese, taking 
the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet as a case 
study, requires understanding different 
cultural codes, conventions, and pre-
conceptions. These include the Thai 
supranormal worldview, the perception 
of Thai Buddhism amongst Chinese 
people, and trends and conventions in 
the Thai amulet market. Firstly, the 
capitalist development of the Thai 
amulet market makes Thai magic 
commercialized and customizable. This 
market is not only open to Thai nationals 
but also to foreign customers. Secondly, 
the Thai pantheon is fluid and inclusive, 
absorbing deities and spirits from 
different cultural traditions. As Peter 
Jackson writes, Thais “acknowledge the 
mystical potency, and the ontological 
reality, of more than one set of religious 
or cosmological forces” (2021: 139). It is 
the acceptance of the Chinese cultural 
lore of the Nine-Tailed Fox into Thailand’s 
diverse and fluid religious pantheon 
that has enabled the invention of the 
fox amulet. 
	
Thirdly, Thai Buddhism provides a 
unique discourse so that a skillful ritualist 
9 Most of the potential Chinese buyers of Nine-Tailed 
Fox amulets I have encountered (more than 20 
individuals) felt shocked when hearing the Thai fox 
amulet was only invented for the Chinese market. 
Many presume that Thai people indigenously venerate 
the fox spirit as is true in Chinese culture.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 5 ---
79
who takes refuge in the Triple Gems can 
subdue and transform wild and malicious 
spirits into potent, benign, and 
protective spirits.10 Thai ritual masters, 
from a Chinese perspective, possess 
this unique ability to utilize spirits to 
maximize one’s personal gain.11 In the 
case of the fox amulet, many Chinese 
customers believe that Thai ritualists 
can effectuate a special bond between 
the worshiper and the worshipped. The 
devotee transfers merit to the minor fox 
spirit who suffered a bad death and the 
fox spirit, in return, helps the devotee 
with its supranormal powers. Chinese 
acknowledge the vital role of key 
Buddhist concepts, such as karma, 
merit, and merit transference, to explain 
the rationale and efficacy of Thai amulets. 
	
Moreover, the popularity of the 
Nine-Tailed Fox amulet suggests the 
rise of “cults of charisma”12 among Thai 
10 Buddhist doctrines, such as karma, merit, and 
demerit, play vital roles in explaining the efficacy 
of assorted Thai magics. For instance, the possessor 
of an amulet must accumulate merit to secure the 
amulet’s efficacy. Those who worship spirits who 
have suffered a bad death must transfer their own 
merit to a spirit. Achan Meng’s biography states that 
he acquired magic techniques from famous Buddhist 
monks and applied Buddhist moral principles, such 
as loving-kindness, during his life. Achan Meng 
visited temples and made merit frequently. Buddhism, 
as a discourse, often provides the doctrinal basis and 
moral legitimacy to many popular cultic practices in 
Thailand.
11 Belief in the particularly powerful craft of Thai ritual 
masters likely stems from the enduring Chinese 
perception of Thailand as a land of mystics which has 
a particularly “exotic” form of Buddhism. 
12 The concept of “cults of charisma” derives from the 
idea of “cults of wealth”, as discussed by scholars of 
Thai popular religion like Pattana Kitiarsa (2012) and 
Peter Jackson (2022). While “cults of wealth” refer 
to ritual devotions aimed at increasing one’s wealth, 
I apply the concept of “cults of charisma” to describe 
rituals and devotions designed to enhance one’s 
personal charm, beauty, affection, and allure―a 
amulet collectors. Since the late 2000s, 
Chinese patrons have been keen to utilize 
Thai amulets to become charismatic, 
affectionate, and popular. New Thai 
amulet models, such as Achan Meng’s 
Nine-Tailed Fox amulet and Kruba 
Krissana’s (ครูบากฤษณะ; b. 1954) Butterfly 
amulet were intentionally invented to 
enhance one’s charisma (เสน่ห์, sane).13 
According to this rationale, someone 
venerates charming mythical animals 
and deities to become more attractive 
and socially popular, quickly acquiring 
new customers and earning more 
money.14 Charisma, particularly for 
contemporary Chinese buyers of Thai 
amulets, become a highly desirable 
growing trend among amulet collectors. This use of 
“charisma” should not be confused with the Weberian 
concept of “charismatic leadership”, which distin-
guishes the leader from ordinary followers. Stanley 
Tambiah (1984), in his studies of Thai magic monks 
and amulets, followed Weber’s theory, suggesting 
that Thai amulets embody the charisma of Buddhist 
saints. This interpretation remains valid, as Buddhist 
amulets are believed to inherit the charisma of their 
maker, the ritual master, and the venerated deity.
13 The Sarika bird (นกสาริกา), known as the magpie in 
English, is considered an auspicious bird in Thailand 
and a common motif in Thai amulet and yantra 
design. However, Kruba Krissana innovatively created 
his unique Butterfly pattern by depicting two Sarika 
birds face-to-face. These Sarika birds are said to 
represent the incarnations of Lord Śiva and his wife 
Pārvatī. The amulets are reportedly made from a 
selection of 108 sacred materials, including flower 
powder, holy grasses, and incense remains. Kruba 
Krissana’s Butterfly amulet is believed to grant the 
wearer qualities of affection and charisma, attract 
wealth and fortune, and help overcome business 
obstacles. The core belief is that charisma and socia-
bility enable one to achieve their desires. Nattakarn 
& Somrak (2023) explore the amulet’s popularity in 
Singapore.
14 The cults of charisma do not supersede the cults 
of safety and wealth―the idea of charisma enhance-
ment does not conflict with these other purposes, 
such as self-protection and wealth-making, but 
encompasses these older discourses.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 6 ---
80
quality that generates wealth, fortune, 
safety, and prosperity. 
	
After 
providing 
some 
general 
information about my sources, this 
article discusses the Nine-Tailed Fox 
amulet in three parts. The first section 
provides a biography of Achan Meng 
to contextualize his practices and 
his adaptation of the Nine-Tailed Fox 
beliefs. The second part offers a history 
of Achan Meng’s fox amulet and related 
methods of worship. The final section 
provides three diverging narratives 
explaining the efficacy of the Nine-
Tailed Fox amulet claimed respectively 
by Achan Meng and his disciples, his 
business opponents, and fox amulet 
traders. 
Sources
Most of the information presented here 
about Achan Meng comes from interviews 
conducted between September 2023 and 
May 2024 with his disciples (ลูกศิษย์, luk 
sit) and customers (ลูกค้า, luk kha). For 
ethical and privacy concerns, I shall 
not disclose their names or private 
information. The two most important 
informants are Khun A and Khun B. Both 
informants have been close disciples 
of Achan Meng for more than 10 years. 
Khun A, a Chinese national from Guangdong, 
is not an amulet trader but a ritualist 
who took tutelage under Achan Meng. 
He works as a religious tutor guide 
and sometimes as a ritual master.15 
15 According to Achan Paeng, Khun A is one of only 
two certified Chinese dhamma heirs of Achan Meng. 
Throughout the year, Khun A has repeatedly brought 
customers to the Minburi office and was a key 
associate of Achan Meng’s business in China and 
Hong Kong. Khun A participates in important annual 
events (e.g., the consecration of the Nine-Tailed Fox 
Khun B, a former Singaporean and now 
a naturalized Thai citizen, is a business-
man with a diverse portfolio of invest-
ments in the kingdom. He owns a Thai 
amulet shop and receives online orders. 
When his customers have certain 
requests but cannot come to Thailand 
in person, he serves as the middleman 
to contact the correct Thai masters and 
secure the appropriate activation ritual. 
Both informants speak colloquial central 
Thai and often serve as Mandarin– 
Cantonese–Thai interpreters. 
	
These disciples and others recom-
mended many valuable sources. The 
most important is a self-published 
Thai–Chinese bilingual catalog of Achan 
Meng’s fox amulets, published in 2014 
and covering his first ten batches 
(รุ่น, run) [Table 1].16 The catalog not 
only provides historical details about the 
making and consecration of each amulet 
batch, 
but 
also 
contains 
graphic 
information for authentication purposes 
(Meng 2014).17 
	
Achan Meng’s disciples also informed 
me that Taiwanese news media had 
come three times to shoot TV shows 
about Achan Meng and his fox amulet. 
amulets) and perform the rituals. Khun A states that 
he is deeply interested in Daoism and other occult 
practices.  
16 Table 1 is based on the information from this 
catalog, which is not properly edited, professionally 
published, or generally available. Only a limited 
number of printings were distributed to amulet traders 
as a reference tool. After receiving permission, I made 
an electronic copy.
17 As I will consider briefly below, Achan Meng’s 
business suffered greatly from the production of 
counterfeit Meng products. In 2023, most fox amulets 
sold at Thai amulet markets, such as at Tha Phra Chan, 
are neither made nor authorized by Achan Meng. His 
disciples therefore have established rules of authenti-
cation. They also encourage followers to come to the 
Minburi office in person to avoid buying counterfeits.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 7 ---
81
In one episode of the popular Taiwanese 
show EBC Apocalypse, Achan Meng was 
portrayed positively as a knowledgeable 
and miraculous ritual master.18 Since 
this episode was uploaded onto YouTube 
in June 2020, it had already attracted 
more than 210,000 views at the time of 
writing. A few other interview videos 
shot by Thai influencers depict Achan 
Meng as a ritual master with minimal 
reference to his fox amulet. 
18 This episode 909 of EBC Apocalypse first aired on 
16 June 2013. The TV show has been uploaded by the 
program on YouTube. See: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=3WHnvbPjACc (accessed 29 July 2024).
	
To understand the stories surrounding 
Achan Meng, including some of the 
controversial debates, I reviewed internet 
writings in both Thai and Chinese. One 
important resource is Achan Meng’s 
Facebook page.19 Facebook posts are 
usually written in Thai, but when dealing 
with some distinct topics (such as the 
Nine-Tailed Fox amulets), the contents 
are usually written in Simplified Chinese. 
Since the death of Achan Meng, his 
social media pages have been run by 
19 See: https://www.facebook.com/piyasawahumtid 
(accessed 9 June 2024).
Amulet Batch       Consecration Date	   Editions Issued	
            Pieces Consecrated 
 
No. 1	
	
    5 Sept. 2010	 	
   4: two locket editions	            	         212  
	
	
	
	
	
   and two tablet editions 
No. 2	
	
    Untraceable	 	
   2: two locket editions	            	         300 
No. 3	
	
    Untraceable	 	
   1: small locket edition	            	         200 
No. 4	
	
    Untraceable	 	
   4: two locket editions	            	         207  
	
	
	
	
	
   and two tablet editions 
No. 5	
	
    Untraceable	 	
   4: two locket editions	            	         600  
	
	
	
	
	
   and two tablet editions 
No. 6	
	
    5 May 2012	
	
   6: three special editions         	         500 
	
	
	
	
	
   and three standard editions 
No. 7	
	
    26 Aug. 2012	 	
   3: one special edition and      	         610 
	
	
	
	
	
   two standard editions 
No. 8	
	
    2 Sept. 2012	 	
   3: one crystal edition,	            	         137 
	
	
	
	
	
   one tablet edition, and 
	
	
	
	
	
   one locket edition 
No. 9	
	
    3 Nov. 2012	
	
   2: one white edition 	            	         700 
	
	
	
	
	
   and one black edition	 
No. 9bis	
    28 Nov 2012	 	
  1: Golden New Year           	
         300  
   	
	
    to 1 Jan. 2013		
  edition 
No. 10	 	
    16 April 2013		
   3: one locket edition,	            	         350  
	
	
	
	
	
   one blue special edition,  
	
	
	
	
	
   one golden special edition	
    
Table 1: The first ten batches of Achan Meng’s fox amulets (Meng 2014)
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 8 ---
82
his son, Paeng. Therefore, these posts 
are considered official statements and 
narratives supported by Achan Meng, 
Achan Paeng, and their disciples. I have 
also extracted information from various 
Facebook amulet trading groups, where 
pre-owned amulets made by Achan 
Meng have been posted for sale.20 These 
posts, though somewhat scattered, help 
us understand Achan Meng’s past better. 
In addition, amulet traders from China 
frequently post advertisements and 
promotional materials on WeChat, the 
most popular social media in China, 
material that is only viewable by added 
friends which I use here selectively.
A Biography of Achan Meng 
Achan Meng Khunphaen was born in 
the Hua Lamphong area, Bangkok, in 
1957. Like many other Sino–Thais, his 
parents immigrated from southeastern 
China and settled in the Teochew 
neighborhood in Chinatown Bangkok. 
His Chinese surname is Lim (林; ลิ้้˞ม). One 
of his Chinese disciples, who comes 
from the Teochew city (潮州,Chaozhou), 
told me that, judging by his accent, 
Achan Meng’s family probably came 
from the Chenghai district (澄海區) of 
Shantou (汕頭). Achan Meng reportedly 
often communicated in the Teochew 
language with his Chinese disciples and 
insisted on his Chinese roots. From 2015 
to 2021, he posted greeting videos for 
every Chinese New Year while wearing 
traditional Chinese dress. 
	
According to his official biography, 
as a little boy Achan Meng became 
20 Some Facebook groups specialize in the trading of 
Achan Meng’s items. For example, see: https://www.
facebook.com/groups/1110410606363324 (accessed 
1 November 2023).
interested in making merit (ทำ�บุุญ, tham 
bun), occult practices (เรื่่˛องศาสตร์์ลี้้˞ลัับ, 
rueang satlilap), and dark magic (ไสยเวทย์์, 
saiwet).21 These interests motivated him 
to learn magic spells and seek tutelage 
under well-known masters. At 14 years 
old, he studied dark magic under Achan 
Chalaem (แฉล้้ม; n.d.) who specialized in 
rak yom (รัักยม), and kuman thong (กุุมาร
ทอง)―two traditional Thai dark magic 
practices that involve the worship of 
mummified infants.22 Achan Meng was a 
smart and diligent student. He soon 
mastered these ritual techniques and 
decided to leave his first teacher, from 
whom he felt that he had nothing new 
to learn. Upon his departure, Achan 
Chalaem gave him a final moral lecture 
and let Meng swear to never harm 
anyone’s parents. Achan Meng thus 
realized the purpose of magic was not to 
enhance one’s physical strength and 
abilities with powers such as invulnera-
bility, but to help others with loving-
kindness (เมตต
า, metta). 
	
In the following years, Achan Meng 
became an itinerant student of magical 
practices. His teachers included Luang 
Tia (หลวงเตี่่˛ย; n.d.), from Wat Klangna 
21 For the full version of Achan Meng’s Biography, 
see: 
https://www.facebook.com/piyasawahumtid/
posts/1066827646801166/ (accessed 29 July 2024).
22 Rak yom and kuman thong are two popular Thai talis-
manic objects whose origin stories relate to the 
worship of mummified infants and children. Rak yom 
refers to the amulet of based on the legend of twin 
brothers, Rak and Yom. Usually, the ritualist carves 
special types of woods to make their figurines and 
soaked in phrai oil (น้ำำ�มัันพราย)―supposedly derived 
from a human corpse―in a small bottle as the method 
of worship. A kuman thong (literally “golden prince”) 
refers to a mummified aborted fetus or dead infant. 
At present, a human fetus is rarely used but a small, 
gilded statue of a young boy is substituted; this is said 
to host the spirit of the kuman thong.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 9 ---
83
(วััดกลางนา), in Bangkok,23 Luang Pho 
Noi (หลวงพ่่อน้้อย; n.d.), from Wat Samtho 
(วััดสามไถ),24 and Luang Pho Mi Khem- 
thammo (หลวงพ่่อมีี เขมธััมโม; 1911–2000) 
from Wat Marawichai (วััดมารวิิชััย) in 
Ayutthaya.25 Witnessing his remarkable 
perseverance and dedication, all three 
monks taught Achan Meng rigorously 
and conferred upon him their secretive 
ritual techniques. Achan Meng therefore 
acquired expertise in concentration 
techniques, yantra pattern design 
(especially animal yantra patterns, such 
as butterfly and scorpion), and the 
khatha (คาถา) for the Phra Khun Phaen 
(พระขุุนแผน, phra khun phaen) amulet.26
23 The name of the temple has now changed to Wat 
Bangmot Sotraram (วััดบางมดโสธราราม). Luang Tia, 
also known as Phra Khru Sangkha Rakphonsing 
(พระครููสัังฆรัักษ์์พงษ์์สิิงห์์) was a monk known for his 
proficiency in magic practices who used to serve as 
the abbot of Wat Klangna. He made various types of 
amulets, such as Phra Phrom (พระพรหม) as well as 
amulets based on his own image (รููปเหมืือนปั๊๊ˡ ม, rup 
muean pam). He was allegedly an exorcist who could 
easily expel or subdue evil spirits. After the 
subjugation of these spirits, Luang Tia would transfer 
merit to them.
24 Luang Pho Noi is a lesser-known magic monk from 
Ayutthaya. He allegedly was famous for his concen-
tration techniques (สมาธิ, samathi) and yantra tattoos. 
25 For information on Luang Pho Mi, see: https://
www.khaosod.co.th/newspaper-column/amulets/
news_3047476 (accessed 16 August 2024). Luang Pho 
Mi is arguably the most famous Buddhist master 
under whom Achan Meng studied. Luang Pho Mi was 
ordained at the age of 21, stayed in the monkhood 
(fully ordained) for about 60 years, and was a disciple 
of the famous Luang Pho Chong (หลวงพ่่อจง; 1872–
1965). He received a lower-rank royal title, Phra 
Ratchathana Sammasak (พระราชทานสมณศัักดิ˦), in 1964. 
Throughout his years he served as the abbot of many 
temples, had regional administrative titles and was 
the preceptor of many monks. As a magic monk, his 
most famous sacred items are yantra cloth and takrut. 
He trained many monastic students and helped them 
pass their Pali examinations. 
26 The Phra Khun Phaen amulet, derived from the 
Siamese legend of Khun Chang Khun Phaen, is a classic 
Thai amulet known for providing safety and invinci-
	
Beyond this, discrepancies start to 
emerge 
between 
Achan 
Meng’s 
authorized biography and what my 
informants told me. Achan Meng’s 
authorized biography does not give 
details about his life but emphasizes his 
magical lineage and expertise. It states 
briefly that, after the death of Luang 
Pho Mi in 2000, Achan Meng continued 
to study esoteric magic under the 
Burmese teacher Sayagyi (ဆရာာကြီးëးŰ; 
n.d.), who initiated him into the produc-
tion of Burmese auspicious charms and 
techniques of loving-kindness medita-
tion. The authorized biography then 
ends by affirming the skillfulness of 
Achan Meng. 
	
Achan Meng’s authorized biography 
notes that he studied under Sayagyi 
after the death of Luang Pho Mi, but his 
disciples supplied me with yet another 
narrative. In the 1980s and 1990s, Achan 
Meng was a freelance ritual master and 
amulet trader traveling between Chiang 
Mai, his wife’s hometown, and Penang, 
Malaysia. Achan Meng befriended many 
magic monks and lay ritualists in 
northern Thailand. He was primarily an 
amulet trader who attempted to sell 
northern Thai amulets to Malaysian and 
Singaporean Chinese. In an interview 
given to a Thai YouTuber, Achan Meng 
claimed to have spent 12 to 13 years sell-
ing amulets and performing rituals in 
Malaysia and Singapore.27 During this 
period, he practiced the Burmese occult. 
He did not settle in the current Minburi 
office in Bangkok until 1997. His earliest 
amulets, mostly of Phra Khun Phaen, 
were also made around 1997. Based on 
bility. See also the article by Saran Suebsantiwongse, 
this Special Edition.
27 See: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HY6ydU 
vke5s (accessed 16 August 2024). 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 10 ---
84
this narrative, Achan Meng practiced 
Burmese magic in the early 1990s and 
not after 2000.
  	 In the 2000s, Achan Meng began to 
enjoy some modest success. He was 
sometimes invited to perform rituals 
for local Thai devotees but, as he states 
in a video interview, most of his customers 
were ethnic Chinese foreigners. Up 
until this point, Achan Meng was a 
normal Thai ritualist who had a foreign 
customer base. His invention of the 
Nine-Tailed Fox amulet in 2010, however, 
was an instant hit, eventually making 
him a renowned yet controversial 
figure. From 2010 to 2021, Achan Meng 
issued and consecrated 55 batches of 
necklace fox amulets, some fox yantra 
cloths, and a handful of batches of fox 
statues (รููปปั้้˞ น, rup pan).28 On average, 
every year five batches of wearable fox 
amulets―more than 1,500 pieces―
were consecrated and put up for sale 
[Figure 2]. Based on the Thai traditional 
animal yantra patterns (e.g., lizard, 
28 The yantra cloths are machine-woven and printed 
with a fox image and Burmese scripts. Typically, the 
Burmese scripts are Buddhist stock phrases and moral 
admonitions, such as encouragement for upholding 
precepts and making donations. Each piece of cloth is 
sold at the office for 500 THB. Sometimes, those who 
purchase a fox amulet can get a free fox yantra cloth.
Figure 2: Achan Meng consecrating amulets in the meditation posture,  
3 May 2021, Minburi © Khun B
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 11 ---
85
crocodile), Achan Meng also designed 
fox yantra patterns for yantra cloths and 
tattoos. 
	
Since the drastic deterioration of his 
health in 2015, Achan Meng often had 
to live with an oxygen concentrator. He 
continued his business in Bangkok until 
he passed away on 27 September 2021. 
Two contending narratives explain the 
rapid decline in the master’s health. 
Achan Meng’s disciples noted that his 
death at age 64 came too soon. They 
attributed this early demise to three 
reasons. First, he had to confront vicious 
business competitors who attacked him 
via black magic. Second, he was such 
a benevolent person that he depleted 
his energy to help his followers. His 
body and spirit consequently became 
vulnerable. 
Third, 
because 
Achan 
Meng had not mastered all of the 
rituals which he had performed in his 
earlier days, some spirits from his earlier 
imperfect ritual experiments later came 
to cause him chronic illnesses. Despite 
his chronic condition, Achan Meng 
continued to help his disciples and 
eventually forecasted the date of his 
own death. According to this narrative, 
he willingly shortened his life to benefit 
his followers.
	
The second narrative, asserted by 
Meng’s detractors and competitors, is 
simpler. Achan Meng’s untimely death 
is a sign of his profanity and illegitimacy.29 
29 The most extreme example of an article which 
disputes Achan Meng’s legitimacy is one posted in 
2021 by Ren Huangtao (壬黄桃). See: http://www.bili-
bili.com/read/cv13914613 (accessed 16 August 2024).
The latter claims that Achan Meng faked all his magic 
lineages except his short period as a monk under 
Luang Pho Mi. Based on this narrative, Achan Meng 
did not go through arduous training and soon disrobed. 
After business failure and bankruptcy, he got 
ordained again for a short period of time. Ren notes 
From this perspective, Achan Meng 
deserved his early death because he 
did not sincerely take refuge in the 
Triple Gems. He knew some methods to 
manipulate haunting spirits for personal 
benefit, but these methods were 
dangerous 
and 
morally 
dubious, 
involving magical pollution and other 
side effects. The amulet possessors, as 
well as their maker, would suffer 
negative repercussions. The most severe 
case of such negative repercussions is 
none other than Achan Meng’s death. 
Thus, buyers should sharpen their eyes 
and keep away from Achan Meng and 
the amulets he produced. 
	
Regardless of disputes over Achan 
Meng’s death, his office has run conti- 
nuously until the present. After his 
son, Achan Paeng, inherited the family 
business in 2021, the number of 
devotees 
who 
visited 
the 
office 
diminished 
considerably.30 
Achan 
Paeng claimed to have inherited and 
perfected all the rituals from his 
father―the biological father-son rela-
tionship is deemed as irrefutable proof 
of his connection to Meng’s lineage, 
efficacy, and orthodoxy. Currently, 
that, even if all the claims about his Buddhist lineage 
are true, Achan Meng only learned from celibate 
Buddhist monks who had neither romantic relation-
ships nor sexual behaviors with females, since the 
Thai Theravada tradition forbids monks from touching 
women. So, Ren asks, how did Achan Meng acquire 
his techniques of sexual attraction?
30 Past disciples of Achan Meng complained to me 
about the decline of Minburi office. On the one hand, 
some followers think Achan Paeng is not as skillful 
and masterful as his father, since Paeng is relatively 
young and has not gone through thorough Buddhist 
trainings as his father did. On the other hand, the 
current Thai amulet market has a great variety of 
Nine-Tailed Fox amulets, made by other magic monks 
and lay ritualists, unlike in the early 2010s when 
Achan Meng was the only famous master for fox amulets.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 12 ---
86
Achan Paeng’s most popular services 
are fortune-telling (ดูดวง, du duang) and 
yantra tattoos [Figure 3].
 
The Nine-Tailed Fox Amulet
Since the first batch on 5 September 
2010, Achan Meng consecrated a total of 
55 batches of fox amulets, an average of 
five batches every year. There are two 
main types of fox amulets. The first is 
the conventional pressed tablet made 
from a mixture of different consecrated 
minerals, powders, and plants. On the 
front, a picture of the worshipped fox 
spirit is displayed with printed fonts 
stating, “Nine-Tailed Fox Queen Goddess, 
Achan 
Meng 
Khunphaen’s 
Office” 
(นางพญาจิ้้˞งจอกเก้้าหาง สำ�นัักอาจารย์์เม้้ง
ขุุนแผน, nang phaya chingchok kao hang 
samnak achan meng khunphaen). Depending 
on the specific model, gems, attraction 
oils (สีีผึ้้˞ง, si phueng), or other small sacred 
items (such as ตะกรุุด, takrut) are inlaid 
in the back.31 Achan Meng would also 
write sacred Burmese script around the 
amulet. This type of amulet does not 
have any physical case or cover and the 
owner must find or make a suitable case 
to wear it around their neck. The second 
is the “locket” type which is smaller 
than the conventional type. 
	
These come ready to wear with a 
locket case.32 Both types were not hand-
made by Achan Meng but contracted 
out to external factories and this is still 
the case. Achan Meng and his disciples 
are only in charge of implanting sacred 
objects, writing sacred scripts, and con-
ducting consecration rituals [Figure 4].
	
As claimed by Achan Meng and his 
business associates, the fox amulet has 
the efficacy of sexual attraction and 
charisma enhancement. If the amulet 
owner is single, they will soon fall in love 
with a suitable person. For those who are 
in a relationship, their partner will not 
only love them but also remain faithful. 
The amulet helps to rejuvenate love for 
31 Si phueng is a type Thai magic wax or oil. One 
applies si phueng on the face, usually on cheek, 
forehead, or lips, to gain the power of attraction. 
Takrut refers to Thai tube-shaped amulets that 
usually contain yantra scrolls. Takruts have existed at 
least since the early Ayutthaya period and are used as 
magic tools for self-protection.
32 Both locket and tablet types have different sizes. 
The most popular ones are 4.5 cm x 3 cm and 5.5 cm 
x 4 cm, which are the typical sizes for new models 
of Thai amulets, such as the Butterfly and Mae Nak 
amulets. The larger model has a slightly higher price 
because it allegedly contains more magic materials.  
Figure 3: A Yi Koh Hong statue in  
Achan Meng’s Minburi office,  
27 September 2023 © Guanxiong Qi
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 13 ---
87
married couples. If the relationship is 
broken, worshipping the fox spirit will 
bring your former partner back. If one’s 
job often requires interpersonal 
communication, the Nine-Tailed Fox is 
also the best choice. The amulet would 
not only attract the owner’s potential 
love interests, but also customers and 
business partners. With enhanced 
charisma, business negotiations will be 
smoother. If one runs a small business, 
such as opening a restaurant, more 
customers will come. This understanding 
of the fox spirit as an agent for helping 
with love and attraction magic thus 
dovetails with the Chinese idea of the 
fox celestial (狐仙, huxian) (Kang 2006: 
57–71). Achan Meng perhaps deliberately 
created his Nine-Tailed Fox amulet with 
an understanding of how his Chinese 
customers perceived the Chinese fox cult. 
 	
Once the devotee receives a fox amulet, 
the practice of worshipping the amulet, 
according to Achan Meng, has four 
rules. First, one must respect and hold 
strong faith in the Nine-Tailed Fox 
Queen Goddess as well as in the amulet 
maker, Achan Meng. Second, one should 
strive to be an upright and moral person. 
Third, one needs to choose the right 
offerings. The fox spirit possesses 
unparalleled beauty and thus loves 
perfumes and cosmetics. Devotees can 
bring sweet snacks because sweetness 
can result in a “sweet” life for the wearer. 
Lastly, one must use the special katha 
or verse: i-ma-suk-tawa-i-mama, อิ-หมา-
ซุก-ตะหวา-อิ-มะมะ (Meng 2014: 2–3).33 
At home, one needs to set up an altar 
to venerate the fox spirit. The offerings 
should be placed on the altar. Whenever 
one attempts to make a wish or offering, 
one should hold the fox amulet in the 
hand or place the amulet on the altar 
and recite this katha nine times. The 
offering and recitation should be done 
daily. After the ritual, the devotee can 
consume the offerings by oneself and 
consider that the offerings are shared 
by the fox spirit and the devotee.
	
It is hard to accurately estimate the 
profitability of Achan Meng’s fox amulet. 
During its heyday (early 2010s), as Khun B 
claims, Achan Meng’s fox amulet was 
“a license to print money”. After the 
release of a new batch, Achan Meng 
could earn more than a million baht in 
just a few days. Each amulet, depending 
on the batch and edition, roughly ranged 
from 10,000 to 30,000  THB.34 Based on 
33 Nicolas Revire suggests that this verse is a Pali 
incantation, though it appears improperly transcribed 
into Thai and lacks coherent meaning. A tentative 
reconstruction could be *imaṁ suttaṁ tava imaṁ me 
(อิมํ สุตฺตํ ตว อิมํ เม), which roughly translates to: “This 
sutta is yours, this [one] is mine”.
34 The estimated price of fox amulets at Achan Meng’s 
Minburi office varies between 10,000 THB to 25,000 THB. 
In-network retailers usually get these amulets at 
a lower price. Some of the famous early batches 
(e.g., the first three, the 6th, and the 9th New Year 
Figure 4: Achan Meng consecrating a 
new batch of fox amulets, 7 August 2019, 
Minburi © Khun B
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 14 ---
88
my modest estimation, from 2010 to 
2021, the total earnings of Achan Meng’s 
office from the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet 
would be at least 60 million THB.35 
	
The immediate commercial success 
of the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet gave rise 
to a considerable counterfeit market. 
Around 2011, fake amulets, accredited to 
but never actually consecrated by Achan 
Meng, proliferated. Some other ritual 
masters competed with Achan Meng and 
launched similar fox amulets.36 Achan 
Meng, while making these amulets, 
intentionally left some authentication 
Edition), have a much higher price, normally no less 
than 50,000 THB. The most expensive that I encoun-
tered sold for 160,000 THB. Some Chinese sellers 
further claim extremely rare pieces are sold for more 
than 500,000 THB, though I have been unable to 
ascertain whether this is true. Khun B told me that 
the first batch’s original printed image of the Nine-
Tailed Fox Queen Goddess was sold to a Shanghainese 
actor for one million baht. In contrast, other than the 
Nine-Tailed Fox amulet, such as Phra Phrom and Phra 
Khun Phaen, Achan Meng’s amulets range from 500 
to 3,000 THB on average.
35 To make a rough estimate of the total value of 
Achan Meng’s amulet market, first, collectors’ private 
second-hand trading as well as the counterfeit market 
must be disregarded. Second, I can only estimate 
wholesaler profits, which means the gross earn-
ings of Achan Meng’s office. Retailers set different 
prices based on different markets. Third, an overall 
sales rate—the percentage of Achan Meng’s amulets 
sold out from his office to customers and retailers—
must be estimated. Accepting these three proposi-
tions, based on my interactions with amulet retailers, 
I suggest the wholesale price of Achan Meng’s fox 
amulet mostly ranges from 2,000 THB to 5,000 THB. An 
average would be around 3,500 THB. These amulets 
are in high demand which is the reason why so many 
batches were issued. I thus adopt a 90% retail rate. On 
average, each batch provides approximately 350 pieces. 
Therefore, the total gross earnings would be 3,500 x 0.9 
x 350 x 55, which comes to a total of 60,637,500 THB.
36 To list a few contemporary monks and ritualists 
who followed Achan Meng and started making fox 
amulets: Kruba Krissana, Achan O (อาจารย์อ๋อ; alive, 
n.d.), Achan Pricha (อาจารย์ปรีชา; alive, n.d.), and 
Achan Subin (อาจารย์สุบิน; alive, n.d.).
marks on his. All models consecrated 
by the master have Achan Meng’s 
signature―the Chinese character of 
his name, Ming (明)―as proof of their 
authenticity. Moreover, Achan Meng’s 
office issues authentication guides to 
 accompany all new batches. Nonetheless, 
newer models of Thai amulets are easy 
to counterfeit since they are mostly 
manufactured at externally contracted 
factories; the fox amulet is no exception. 
The competition is fierce; Achan 
Meng had to secure an extensive and 
profitable amulet traders’ network to 
ensure authenticity. Such in-network 
amulet retailers usually get a large 
portion of overall sales.37 
	
Besides the wearable fox amulets, 
Achan Meng also produced four batches 
of Nine-Tailed Fox statues and a few 
different fox yantra cloth designs 
[Figures 5–6]. These items are not as 
popular as necklace amulets. Another 
popular service is the Nine-Tailed Fox 
tattoo. On some auspicious days, two 
to three disciples of Achan Meng would 
make fox yantra tattoos all day and night 
for devotees.38 
37 The overseas Thai amulet business model deserves 
some attention. In Thailand, one can “rent” amulets 
from temples or masters directly. However, the selling 
of Thai amulets in foreign countries largely relies on 
retailers. Retailers, depending on their status and 
relationship with amulet makers, typically obtain 
amulets at a fixed price. When they make a sale, they 
earn the margin between the price they made up and 
the buy-in cost. Some retailers generate an exuberant 
profit, sometimes ten times the original buy-in price. 
Some retailers took tutelage from Achan Meng and 
Achan Paeng as their disciples. Some foreigners are 
more akin to the business associates of Achan Meng. 
They would come to Thailand to visit the master, 
receive the amulets, and bring them back to their 
home country for retailing.
38 A small fox pattern yantra tattoo produced by Achan 
Paeng and his cohorts usually costs about 2,000 THB.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 15 ---
89
	
The value and proclaimed efficacy 
of different batches and editions are 
determined by various conditions. 
Special editions are more expensive 
because they contain more potent 
materials than standard versions. The 
batches which have undergone more 
grand and splendid rituals and which 
have been consecrated on auspicious 
dates are considered more efficacious 
and hence are more costly. One example 
is batch no. 6, consecrated on the fifth 
day of the fifth month in the Thai 
Buddhist Calendar year 2555 (2012 ce). 
After Achan Meng’s death, Achan Paeng 
inherited the family business and occa-
sionally made amulets using his father’s 
leftover materials for better potency 
and a higher price. Up until September 
2024, Achan Paeng has issued 12 batches 
of fox amulets [Figure 7].
Contending Narratives and Discourses
Achan Meng’s disciples and Chinese 
amulet sellers provided me with three 
different explanations of the nature 
of the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet. These 
explanations are all clearly developed 
from the Chinese conception of the 
fox spirit. But each narrative involves a 
slightly different rationale for the Nine-
Tailed Fox Queen Goddess’s power. 
	
Achan Meng and his disciples 
support the first narrative, claiming 
that the Nine-Tailed Fox is a virtuous ce-
lestial. Achan Meng, in the foreword of 
his 
self-published 
amulet 
catalog, 
claimed that the Nine-Tailed Fox Queen 
Goddess is a mighty deity who gained 
her prominence through thousands of 
years of perseverance and self-practice 
(Meng 2014: 2–3). This idea fits with the 
Figure 5: Amulets of the Nine-Tailed  
Fox Queen Goddess and other sacred 
objects sold at Achan Meng’s Minburi  
office, 2023 © Guanxiong Qi
Figure 6: A batch of Nine-Tailed  
Fox yantra cloth ready to sell, 
 2016 © Khun B
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 16 ---
90
Figure 7: Promotional material for a new batch of fox amulet, 2024 © Khun B
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 17 ---
91
Chinese imaginaire that any being who 
absorbs enough cosmic energy (气, qi) 
shall acquire intelligence and supranor-
mal abilities. Some could even become 
low-ranking celestial bureaucrats (Chan 
1998; Huntington 2003; Kang 2006: 
127–137). Essentially, these fox amulets 
become a ritual apparatus by which to 
worship the Nine-Tailed Fox Queen 
Goddess, a righteous deity who acquired 
her divine status through arduous 
self-practices. Because the Fox Queen 
Goddess has shapeshifting abilities, she 
manifests her form in many different 
guises. Different batches of Achan Meng’s 
amulet depict different manifestations 
of the Nine-Tailed Fox Queen Goddess, 
but the venerated deity is the same.
	
Achan Meng’s disciples have put 
tremendous effort into arguing that 
this fox deity is a virtuous goddess. 
Although many Chinese presume that 
the fox spirit is a seducer and deceiver, 
the disciples argue that the Nine-Tailed 
Fox was understood as an auspicious 
being in ancient times. During my 
interviews, Khun A explained in a 
detailed, scholarly manner the history 
of Chinese people’s belief in fox spirits 
and contemporary fox cults.39 The most 
well-known ancient record mentioned 
by Khun A comes from the Spring and 
Autumn Annals of Wu and Yue (吳越春秋, 
wuyue chunqiu; 1st ce) (Kang 2006: 15).40 
39 Khun A was the scholarly representative among 
Achan Meng’s disciples. When I asked questions 
about the origin and legitimacy of the fox amulet, the 
disciples would always refer to Khun A and quote him 
as the most knowledgeable and authoritative person. 
The following accounts are provided by Khun A. The 
interview was principally conducted during the 
second death anniversary of Achan Meng on 27 
September 2023. 
40 Written by Zhao Ye (赵晔), this is an unofficial 
history about the Spring and Autumn period (ca. 770 
to 481 bce). 
Accordingly, when the unmarried Yu 
the Great (大禹, dayu)―a mythological 
Chinese king and one of the founders 
of Chinese civilization―turned 30, he 
encountered a white fox at the mythical 
place named Qingqiu (青丘). The incident 
was interpreted as an omen of his 
forthcoming marriage and momentous 
political achievements. Other examples 
include the popular fox cults of late 
imperial northern China (16th to 20th ce), 
in which the fox was believed to be a god 
of wealth and fortune. When described 
by Khun A, the fox spirit sounds akin to a 
Chinese national totem. The Nine-Tailed 
Fox, whose image traces back to the 
mythic Classic of Mountains and Seas, as 
seen above, is supreme among different 
fox spirits and by no means malicious.
	
Khun A then debunks what he holds 
to be “misconceptions” about the fox 
spirit. According to him, the Chinese 
perception of foxes was influenced by 
Ming–Qing novels and exaggerated by 
modern mass media. This stereotype 
can be most clearly seen in the character 
of Daji (妲己), the favorite consort of 
King Zhou of the Shang dynasty (商紂王, 
Shang Zhouwang; 11th c. bce). In the 
Ming dynasty novel, Investiture of the 
Gods (封神榜, fengshen bang; 17th c. ce), 
the decline and the collapse of the 
Shang Dynasty are blamed on Daji, who 
was identified as an evil Nine-Tailed Fox 
spirit who corrupted King Zhou’s mind 
(Kang 2006: 137–141). Khun A insists 
that a fox spirit is charming, attractive, 
and potent and the fox spirit per se does 
not cause any misfortunate or calamity. 
Rather, fox spirits are simply the scape-
goats of unwise rulers and imprudent 
men. According to this narrative, painting 
the fox spirit as virtuous, the contempo-
rary Chinese perception as an immoral 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 18 ---
92
seducer evolved during the later imperial 
period. 
	
Given that the Nine-Tailed Fox is 
regarded as a virtuous celestial being 
in traditional Chinese belief, why would 
Chinese individuals opt for amulets 
from Achan Meng, a ritual master based 
in Thailand? Khun A gives two reasons. 
First, he claims that esoteric knowledge 
and rituals are universal to all human- 
kind, regardless of one’s cultural 
background and country of origin. If a 
deity “exists”, there must be a proper 
method of worship. In addition, culture 
is fluid and transmits freely. All beliefs 
and rituals have certain historical, 
geographical, and cultural roots, but it 
would be wrong to think that a “Chinese” 
goddess can only be venerated by “the 
Chinese”. Second, Achan Meng was 
known as a powerful ritual master who 
was equipped with proper skills and 
supranormal energy. Achan Meng is said 
to have started making the Nine-Tailed 
Fox amulet after the Queen Goddess 
appeared in a dream and instructed him 
to do so. The making of the Nine-Tailed 
Fox amulet was thus a request from the 
Nine-Tailed Fox Queen Goddess herself.
	
Yet another narrative completely 
rebuts the legitimacy of the fox amulet.41 
Controversy has existed since the initial 
release of Achan Meng’s fox amulet 
in 2010. First, this opposing narrative 
claims the fox amulet does not worship 
the Nine-Tailed Fox Queen Goddess 
but wild, haunting fox spirits. The first 
narrative of the Nine-Tailed Fox was, 
41 A number of online blogs and amulet traders 
hold this point of view. Some comments usually 
circulate widely in Chinese in different online 
discussion forums and spark controversies. For one 
example, 
see: 
https://cn.cari.com.my/forum.
php?mod=viewthread&tid=3234632.
according to his detractors, simply faked 
by Achan Meng and his disciples for 
marketing purposes.42 Second, only 
the first few batches of Achan Meng’s 
fox amulet are genuinely perceived as 
efficacious. The later mass-produced 
amulets are categorized as “commercial 
amulets” (商業牌, shangye pai) which are 
purely 
promoted 
for 
commercial 
purposes by Achan Meng’s business 
associates. Third, Achan Meng is 
portrayed as a morally corrupt amulet 
dealer. In Achan Meng’s younger years, 
his interests were occult practices such 
as fostering ghost children (i.e., kuman 
thong), 
making 
corpse 
oil, 
and 
manipulating vicious spirits. Despite 
having acquired some magic techniques, 
Achan Meng lacked rigorous discipline 
and a sincere faith in Buddhism. 
	
According to this opposing narrative, 
early batches of fox amulets are potent 
due to the rationale of “bad death”. 
Bernard Formoso (1998) writes that, 
long before the arrival of Buddhism, 
Tai ethnic groups believed that a bad 
death engenders a powerful spirit. 
This belief in the power of spirits 
who had died a violent death was 
inherited by Buddhist Tai groups and 
re-conceptualized in a Buddhist world-
view based on the concept of karma 
(กรรม, kam) and merit (บุญ, bun). In Thai 
Buddhist discourse, the Lord Buddha 
taught the dhamma to achieve ultimate 
salvation for all sentient beings. Thus, 
these haunting spirits also desire merit 
42 I also encountered a previous female patron of 
Achan Meng who was extremely unsatisfied with 
the ultimate outcome. She claims that one of Achan 
Meng’s retailers promised to repair her sexual 
relationship with her husband, but the amulet did not 
work at all. She was angry and asked for a refund, a 
request which was rejected. 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 19 ---
93
for a good rebirth; ritual practitioners 
can utilize the power of the Triple Gems 
to assist these ghosts. Under the same 
rationale, the most famous ghost, Mae 
Nak (แม่นาค), and ghost tamer, Somdet 
To (สมเด็จ โต; about 1788–1872), in 
Thai Buddhist history are discussed by 
Justin McDaniel (2011). In short, in the 
Thai religious field, Buddhist rituals and 
clergies are deemed to have the 
capability to subdue bloodthirsty 
ghosts via the powers of Buddhist 
teachings and merit. 
	
Using a similar logic, the fox amulet 
is thought to be efficacious because it 
propitiates troubled and dangerous fox 
spirits who suffered a bad death. Achan 
Meng used ritual techniques to trap fox 
spirits in the amulets and forcefully 
manipulate them. To empower these 
amulets, he made magically potent oils 
containing some body parts of a dead 
fox. These ritually modified body parts 
provide a sympathetic relationship 
between the amulet itself and the 
venerated fox spirit. Due to its bad death, 
the fox could not properly reincarnate. 
The fox spirit was thus haunting and 
malicious until Achan Meng subdued it 
and trapped it in the amulet containing 
its body parts. Using the instructed 
ritual routines, the fox spirit would 
assist its worshipper. Nonetheless, 
because the fox amulets entrap mali-
cious fox spirits, they could be dangerous 
for certain people, since not everyone 
has enough energy to subdue such spirits 
and follow the ritual routines. Thus, by 
venerating fox spirits, some devotees 
might receive unpleasant side effects or 
suffer misfortunes.
	
However, according to this narrative, 
only the early amulet batches contain 
stimulating materials such as bone 
pieces and hairs from a dead fox which 
are considered genuinely powerful. 
After the commercial success of the 
initial batches, Achan Meng started to 
massively produce fox amulets containing 
no magical ingredients. These amulets 
were said to have no magical efficacy 
because Achan Meng could not find 
enough haunting fox spirits to make 
enough fox amulets to meet the growing 
demands of his Chinese patrons. Some 
argue that, from 2012 to 2021, Achan 
Meng yearly issued at least 1,500 fox 
amulets, while it is almost impossible 
to find 150 wild fox spirits every year. 
Thus, the volume production of the fox 
amulet was simply a scam, according to 
his detractors.
	
This narrative further claims that, 
when doing business, Achan Meng 
had neither moral principles nor 
working ethics. For example, he some-
times promised to consecrate an exclu-
sive batch of sacred items to Malaysian 
customers. However, the same model of 
amulet was produced and sold to Hong 
Kong, Taiwan, and China, as presumably 
his Malaysian business partner would 
not notice the broken promise of 
exclusivity. Thus, the creation of the fox 
amulet was purely a for-profit venture. 
The story of Achan Meng’s auspicious 
dream is fabricated. The first batch of 
the 
Nine-Tailed 
Fox 
amulet 
was 
designed by a Chinese amulet dealer 
who offered them to Achan Meng for 
consecration. The designer was supposed 
to have the exclusive rights for mar-
keting and distribution. Each amulet 
was priced at 1,500-baht wholesale and 
3,000-baht retail. Unexpectedly, the fox 
amulet enjoyed an overnight success 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 20 ---
94
and so Achan Meng broke his deal with 
the original designer and produced 
many more pieces. 
	
The third narrative, and perhaps the 
most interesting one, inherits partial 
claims from both the first and second 
narratives.43 It agrees with the second 
narrative in that the Nine-Tailed Fox 
amulet is used only for venerating lesser 
fox spirits and is not related to the Nine-
Tailed Fox Queen Goddess. Following 
this narrative, Achan Meng was never 
a righteous Buddhist master, but a lay 
occultist who made “vicious amulets” 
known as yin pai (陰牌). Khun B, who 
specializes in Southeast Asian occults, 
emphasizes that Achan Meng was an 
occult master and notes that the first few 
rituals that Meng learned were rak yom 
and kuman thong―two of the darkest 
Thai occult practices. His magic did 
not rely on good morality or appeasing 
virtuous deities. Instead, Achan Meng 
mastered ritual techniques to subdue 
and control vicious spirits. That his 
amulets are for venerating the Nine-
Tailed Fox Queen Goddess is nothing 
but a façade, an easy explanation and a 
white lie for those who know little about 
Thai magic. 
	
According to this narrative, fox 
amulets are used to worship solitary 
fox spirits who died in an untimely or 
bad way. There is a widespread belief in 
Chinese communities that it is difficult 
to invite a mighty god to be attached 
to an average human, especially when 
the desired outcome is morally dubious. 
43 This view can often be found in the product descrip-
tion section of various e-commerce sites and is sup-
ported by Khun B. See also: https://www.facebook.
com/102673667803926/posts/163068815097744/, and 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DNbEvCIlOp8 
(accessed 16 August 2024).
Achan Meng, the most well-known expert 
on subjugating vicious spirits, seemingly 
used the correct magical compounds to 
trap the troubled fox spirit in the amulet. 
The amulet possessor uses rituals to 
sustain a mutually beneficial relation-
ship between him or herself and the 
troubled fox spirit. The human worships 
and eventually transfers merit to the 
fox spirit. Then the pleased and nour-
ished spirit helps its owner magically. 
According to some of his disciples, the 
possessor should have no worries about 
magical pollution or negative conse-
quences as long as the worshipper keeps 
to the ritual routine as instructed by 
Achan Meng. 
	
None of these three narratives, how-
ever, is definitive. From an outsider’s 
perspective, any truth claim about 
Achan Meng’s Nine-Tailed Fox amulet 
is questionable. The popularity of the 
fox amulet is contingent on multiple 
social and cultural factors while these 
narratives are given from emic, insider 
perspectives. However, analyzing them, 
we may focus on three points. First, 
the Chinese popular perceptions of fox 
and fox spirit―as cunning, charming, 
seductive, and intelligent―sympatheti-
cally link to the claimed effects of Achan 
Meng’s fox amulet. This cultural under-
standing of the fox is strengthened by 
Chinese fox cults and utilized by Achan 
Meng for the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet. The 
logic is that one worships a glamorous 
spirit to gain charisma and become 
more attractive. 
	
Second, Thai Buddhism, especially 
the notion that one can transfer merit, 
plays a vital role in explaining the magic 
efficacy of the Nine-Tailed Fox. Achan 
Meng allegedly received tutelage under 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 21 ---
95
three Buddhist masters and learned 
techniques of concentration and loving- 
kindness. Many of his patrons believe 
that by relying on Buddhist rituals, 
Achan Meng was able to tame wild spirits, 
letting these tamed spirits bring personal 
benefits to his devotees. Based on this 
rationale, the amulet possessor trans-
fers merit to the tamed fox spirit and 
the fox spirit then assists the possess-
or via its supranormal abilities. Beliefs 
in the efficacy of the Nine-Tailed Fox 
are often predicated on key Buddhist 
concepts, such as karma, merit, and 
merit transference. Chinese devotees 
recognize these Buddhist principles― 
especially the rationale of the merit 
transference to subdued spirits―as the 
primary explanatory model for the 
efficacy of Thai amulets.
	
Third, taking the popularity of fox 
amulets as an example, contempo-
rary Chinese collectors of Thai amulets 
tend to overstep the Thai traditional 
pantheon and modes of worship. 
In a recent study of Singaporean 
Chinese customers of Thai amulets, 
Nattakarn & Somrat make similar 
remarks, “[some Thai monks] are 
willing to produce amulets according 
to the aesthetic tastes and demands 
of Chinese–Singaporean devotees […] 
Some amulet designs are seen as non-
Buddhist amulets in Thailand but are 
immensely 
popular 
in 
Singapore” 
(2023: 907). Unlike contemporary Thai 
magic cults which usually seek safety, 
well-being, luck, and wealth, a significant 
portion of Chinese customers pursue 
affability (人缘, renyuan) and charisma 
(魅力, meili) with Thai amulets. Many 
Chinese customers culturally understand 
charisma as the most desirable quality 
as it generates wealth and fortune. 
Since the late 2000s, Thai ritualists 
started customizing Thai amulets that 
aim to enhance one’s charisma, such 
as Kruba Krissana’s Butterfly amulet, 
Achan Meng’s Fox amulet, and various 
new types of charismatic takrut. In this 
sense, the invention and popularity of 
the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet signify the 
gradual ascendence of “cults of charisma”. 
Increasingly more patrons of Thai amulets 
identify charisma as the most desirable 
quality and new types of amulets have 
been correspondingly invented with 
untraditional iconographies.
*********
As I was leaving Achan Meng’s second 
death anniversary in Minburi, Khun A 
was talking to some Chinese patrons. 
He complained about the rampant 
counterfeit market and all of the many 
lies and slanders against Achan Meng. 
He told his listeners that if one seeks the 
most powerful magic, one must hold an 
unshakable faith in a ritual master and 
come to Thailand in person. There is no 
way to avoid a fake amulet, except by 
visiting the master yourself. Later that 
day, Khun A accompanied other Chinese 
customers to the Tha Phra Chan amulet 
market to encase their new amulets. 
Afterward, they rushed to Suvarnabhumi 
Airport to catch their flight back home.
	
The success of Achan Meng’s fox 
amulet is by no means an accident. 
Achan Meng’s Sino–Thai identity and 
previous amulet-trading endeavors in 
Malaysia and Singapore helped him 
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 22 ---
96
Figure 8: A human-size figurine of the Nine-Tailed Fox Queen Goddess with a few 
smaller fox statues in Achan Meng’s Minburi office, 2023 © Guanxiong Qi
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 23 ---
97
tremendously to develop networks 
among ethnic Chinese. Achan Meng’s 
kindly appearance―an elderly man 
wearing glasses with a white beard, 
similar to a benevolent Chinese uncle―
also likely facilitated a closer relationship 
with his Chinese customers. The rise 
of the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet is also 
built from an extensive Thai Buddhist 
ritual repertoire (e.g., sutta chanting, 
yantra tattoos) and aspects of a 
supranormal worldview present in 
Thailand and inflected by Buddhist 
ideas 
(e.g., 
spirits, 
karma, 
merit 
transference). In addition, the popularity 
of the fox amulet stems from Chinese 
cultural idioms and myths about the 
fox and well-established marketing 
and profit-making mechanisms of the 
Thai amulet marketplace. 
	
To conclude, through an examination 
of Chinese myths and perceptions and 
how these have come to engage with the 
Thai religious field, we might carefully 
(re)consider Thai Buddhism and popular 
religion under the gaze of its Asian 
neighbors. We should be aware that the 
image of rational, civilized, and modern 
Thai Buddhism seldom exists in the eyes 
of Chinese people from, for instance, 
Kuala Lumpur and Guangzhou. Thailand 
is rather consistently perceived as a 
land of exotic Buddhism and potent 
black magic (Yee 1996; Johnson 2016). 
This article, in a sense, testifies to the 
inclusivity and contextuality of the Thai 
religious field.44 Aspects of a culture, 
just as Khun A claims, transmit across 
boundaries. 
Perhaps 
Achan 
Meng’s 
invention of the Nine-Tailed Fox amulet 
marks the introduction of the Queen 
Goddess 
into 
the 
Thai 
pantheon 
[Figure 8]. In the world of Thai 
Buddhism, the making of sacred objects is 
particularly innovative and progressive. 
The openness and inclusivity of the Thai 
religious field, the influx of foreign 
cultures, and the global expansion 
of the Thai amulet business inspired 
and motivated the invention of new 
models of Thai amulets. Whether we 
consider him a master amulet enchanter 
or a gifted opportunist, may the spirit of 
Achan Meng rest in peace.
44 This case study of Achan Meng and his amulets 
also testifies how Chinese migrants have integrated 
into the Thai religious milieus. Achan Meng, similar 
to earlier Chinese migrant lay figures (e.g., Sian Pae 
Rongsi), upholds his dual Sino‒Thai identity and suc-
ceeded in the Thai Theravada religious sphere. For 
more on Sian Pae Rongsi, see Thomas Bruce’s article, 
this Special Edition. 
44 This case study of Achan Meng and his amulets 
also testifies how Chinese migrants have integrated 
into the Thai religious milieus. Achan Meng, similar 
to earlier Chinese migrant lay figures (e.g., Sian Pae 
Rongsi), upholds his dual Sino‒Thai identity and 
succeeded in the Thai Theravada religious sphere. For 
more on Sian Pae Rongsi, see Thomas Bruce’s article, 
this Special Edition.
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my sincere 
gratitude to Paul McBain, organizer of 
the PBIC Thai Amulets Conference in 
June 2023, for inviting me to contribute 
to this Special Edition and for providing 
valuable feedback and edits on earlier 
drafts. I am also deeply indebted to 
my informants for their support in 
facilitating my research. Khun A kindly 
reviewed an earlier draft and offered 
insightful comments on my narration 
of Achan Meng’s life. Khun B arranged 
several 
meetings 
and 
generously 
granted permission for me to use 
his photographs of Achan Meng. 
I am also grateful to the JSS 
editorial team for their tremendous 
assistance in facilitating the publication 
of this article. Any remaining errors are 
my own.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition

--- Page 24 ---
98
References
• Barr, Allan. 1989. Disarming Intruders: 
Alien Women in Liaozhai Zhiyi. Harvard 
Journal of Asiatic Studies 49(2): 501–517. 
• Brac de La Perrière, Bénédicte & Jackson, 
Peter A., eds. 2022. Spirit Possession in 
Buddhist Southeast Asia: Worlds Ever More 
Enchanted. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
• Chan, Tak-hung L. 1998. The Discourse 
on Foxes and Ghosts: Ji Yun and Eighteenth-
Century Literati Storytelling. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press. 
• Formoso, Bernard. 1998. Bad Death 
and Malevolent Spirits among the Tai 
Peoples. Anthropos 93(1‒3): 3–17.
• Huntington, Rania. 2003. Alien Kind: 
Foxes and Late Imperial Chinese Narrative. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Asia Center. 
• Jackson, Peter A. 2020. Beyond 
Hybridity and Syncretism: Kala-Thesa 
Contextual Sensitivity and Power in 
Thai Religious and Gender Cultures. 
Journal 
of 
Anthropology, 
Sirindhorn 
Anthropology Centre 3(1): 1–37.
―――. 2021. Capitalism Magic Thailand: 
Modernity with Enchantment. Singapore: 
ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute.
• Johnson, Andrew Alan. 2016. Dreaming 
about the Neighbours: Magic, Orien-
talism, and Entrepreneurship in the 
Consumption of Thai Religious Goods 
in Singapore. South East Asia Research 
24(4): 
445–461. 
https://doi.
org/10.1177/0967828X16672771.
• Kang Xiaofei. 2006. The Cult of the Fox: 
Power, Gender, and Popular Religion in Late 
Imperial and Modern China. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
• Kieckhefer, Richard. 2019. Rethinking 
How to Define Magic. In The Routledge 
History of Medieval Magic, ed. by Sophie 
Page & Catherine Rider, 13–25. London: 
Routledge. 
• McDaniel, Justin. 2011. The Lovelorn 
Ghost and the Magical Monk: Practicing 
Buddhism in Modern Thailand. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
• Nattakarn Naepimai & Somrak 
Chaisingkananont. 2023. Globalizing 
Thai Amulets: The Chinese–Singaporean 
Role in Commoditizing Objects of Faith. 
Inter-Asia Cultural Studies 24(5): 898–912. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14649373.2023.
2242154. 
• Pattana Kitiarsa. 2012. Mediums, Monks, 
and Amulets: Thai Popular Buddhism Today. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
• Schaik, Sam van. 2020. Buddhist Magic: 
Divination, Healing, and Enchantment 
through the Ages. Boulder: Shambhala 
Publications.  
• Siani, Edoardo. 2018. Stranger Diviners 
and Their Stranger Clients: Popular 
Cosmology-Making and Its Kingly Power 
in Buddhist Thailand. South East Asia 
Research 26(4): 416–431. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0967828X18816145.
• Tambiah, Stanley J. 1984. The Buddhist 
Saints of the Forest and the Cult of 
Amulets: A Study in Charisma, Hagiography, 
Sectarianism, and Millennial Buddhism. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
• White, Erick. 2014. Possession, Professional 
Spirit Mediums, and the Religious Fields 
of Late-Twentieth Century Thailand. 
PhD Dissertation. Ithaca: Cornell 
University. 
• Yee, Shirley. 1996. Material Interests 
and Morality in the Trade of Thai 
Talismans. Southeast Asian Journal of 
Social Science 24(2): 1–21.
Journal of the Siam Society, Vol. 112, Pt. 2, December 2024
Special Edition