# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2024-payne-hayes-oxford-handbook-of-tantric-studies.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 14:05:29
# Total Pages: 1273
# File Size: 160.89 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 2696.3 chars/page, total chars: 3,432,444)
# Editors: Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
# Publisher: Oxford University Press, 2024
================================================================================

# TABLE OF CONTENTS AND CHAPTER INDEX:

- p.   1 | Cover
- p.   4 | The Oxford Handbook of Tantric Studies
- p.   5 | Copyright
- p.   6 | Dedication
- p.   8 | Contents
- p.  14 | List of Contributors
- p.  16 | Introduction
- p.  22 | Reflections, Acknowledgements, and Collective Efforts
- p.  24 | List of Abbreviations
- p.  26 | 1. Tantric Studies: Issues, Methods, and Scholarly Collaborations
- p.  52 | Part I. Action
  - p.  54 | 2. Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism
  - p.  78 | 3. The Inner and Outer Worship: The Rhythms of Domestic and Temple Practice in Nepālī Tantra
  - p. 100 | 4. On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss: Buddhist Thought and Tantric Practice
  - p. 126 | 5. Goryū Shintō Goma: Tantric Foundations
  - p. 150 | 6. Homa in Jain Traditions
  - p. 176 | 7. The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice
- p. 200 | Part II. Transformations: Soteriology, Astrology, Alchemy, and Healing
  - p. 202 | 8. Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology in the Works of Abhinavagupta
  - p. 222 | 9. Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems
  - p. 250 | 10. Transforming the Body by Mastering the Elements, Some Tantric Sources
  - p. 274 | 11. Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan
  - p. 298 | 12. Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan
  - p. 326 | 13. Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy
- p. 346 | Part III. Gender, Cosmogony, Embodiment, and Power
  - p. 348 | 14. Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions: A Critical Historiographic Essay
  - p. 372 | 15. The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism
  - p. 394 | 16. Three Shades of Tantric Yoga: Chapter 20 of the Netra Tantra
  - p. 420 | 17. Generative Buddhahood: Enlightened Plants and Trees in Japanese Tendai Esoteric Buddhism
  - p. 434 | 18. Embodiment and Subjugation: Exoteric-​Esoteric Buddhist Practice in Medieval Japan
- p. 450 | Part IV. Extraordinary Beings: Deities and Founders
  - p. 452 | 19. “Hard-​Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava in Java
  - p. 478 | 20. Timeless Symbolism: An Early Dzogchen Patriarch’s Hagiography and Scriptures
  - p. 497 | 21. The Twin Miracle: The Two-​Headed Aizen Myōō [Ryōzu Aizen] in Exorcistic Shugendō Practice at the Japanese Tantric Buddhist Complex of Kōyasan
  - p. 514 | 22. A Dharma Protector in a Transcultural Tantric Buddhist Context
  - p. 532 | 23. The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra
- p. 556 | Part V. Imagery: Art, Architecture, and Visual Expressions
  - p. 558 | 24. The Tantric Temple: Rule-​Bound Beauty
  - p. 582 | 25. Mandalas and Landscape in Maritime Asia
  - p. 606 | 26. Mandalas and Monarchs: Tantra and Temple Architecture in Buddhist Southeast Asia
  - p. 704 | 27. Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī
  - p. 728 | 28. Imagery Practice in Tantric Buddhism
  - p. 756 | 29. Attention, Memory, and the Imagination: A Cognitive Analysis of Tantric Visualization
- p. 778 | Part VI. Language, Literature, Words, and Metaphor
  - p. 780 | 30. Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Texts
  - p. 812 | 31. Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation
  - p. 836 | 32. Jain Tantra: An Overview
  - p. 864 | 33. Tibetan Tantric Buddhist Literature
  - p. 878 | 34. The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra
- p. 894 | Part VII. Social Organization and Institutions
  - p. 896 | 35. What the Kālamukhas Can Tell Us about Identity, Institutions, and Community in the Early Medieval Deccan
  - p. 940 | 36. The Total Revelation Tantra: The Geopolitical Origins and Significance of the Name, Nepālī Sarvāmnāya Tantra
  - p. 978 | 37. The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism
  - p.1008 | 38. Singing Tantra: Aural Media and Sonic Soteriology in Bengali Esoteric Lineages
  - p.1040 | 39. From the Fringes to Center Stage: Hijṛās and Fertility Rituals in Kāmākhyā
- p.1058 | Part VIII. History and Historiography: Events, Memory, and Recollection
  - p.1060 | 40. Śaiva Tantra: Toward a History
  - p.1082 | 41. On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras
  - p.1108 | 42. Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti
  - p.1134 | 43. Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity: Late Nondual Śaivism on the Emanation and Contemplative Reabsorption of Time
  - p.1160 | 44. Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna
  - p.1178 | 45. Modernity and Neo-​Tantra
- p.1198 | Glossary
- p.1218 | Index

================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
The Oxford Handbook of 
TANTRIC STUDIES

--- PAGE 3 ---


--- PAGE 4 ---
The Oxford Handbook of 
TANTRIC 
STUDIES
Edited by
RICHARD K. PAYNE 
and 
GLEN A. HAYES

--- PAGE 5 ---
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education
by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University
Press in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2024
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Payne, Richard K., editor. | Hayes, Glen Alexander, 1952– editor. 
Title: The Oxford handbook of tantric studies / edited by Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes. 
Description: New York, NY, United States of America : Oxford University Press, [2024] | 
Includes bibliographical references and index. | 
Identifiers: LCCN 2024022887 (print) | LCCN 2024022888 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9780197549889 (hardback) | ISBN 9780197549919 | ISBN 9780197549902 (epub) 
Subjects: LCSH: Tantrism. 
Classification: LCC B L 1283 . 84 .O94 2024 (print) | LCC B L 1283 . 84 (ebook) | 
  DDC 294 . 5/514—dc23/eng/20240709 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024022887
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024022888
DOI: 10.1093/​oxfordhb/​9780197549889.001.0001
Printed by Integrated Books International, United States of America

--- PAGE 6 ---
Saying thank you here can only begin to express my gratitude to my wife, 
Bonnie, for her unwavering support, encouragement, and understanding 
over the entire course of my career, from part-​time adjunct through living 
in Japan for doctoral research, decades of administrative duties, uncounted 
conferences, and now to professor emeritus.
—​Richard K. Payne
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my wife Julie for her 
kindness, patience and support throughout this decades-​long process: from 
graduate school, to research trips to India, through a college teaching career, 
and to proofreading my own chapters for this current volume.
—​Glen A. Hayes

--- PAGE 7 ---


--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents
List of Contributors 
xiii
Introduction 
xv
Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
Reflections, Acknowledgements, and Collective Efforts 
xxi
List of Abbreviations 
xxiii
	 1.	 Tantric Studies: Issues, Methods, and Scholarly Collaborations 
1
Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
PART I.  ACTION
	 2.	 Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism 
29
Ronald M. Davidson
	 3.	 The Inner and Outer Worship: The Rhythms of Domestic and 
Temple Practice in Nepālī Tantra 
53
Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
	 4.	 On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss: Buddhist Thought and 
Tantric Practice 
75
Paul B. Donnelly
	 5.	 Goryū Shintō Goma: Tantric Foundations 
101
Richard K. Payne
	 6.	 Homa in Jain Traditions 
125
Ellen Gough
	 7.	 The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice 
151
Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov

--- PAGE 9 ---
viii      Contents
 
PART II.  TRANSFORMATIONS: SOTERIOLOGY, 
ASTROLOGY, ALCHEMY, AND HEALING
	 8.	 Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology in the Works of 
Abhinavagupta 
177
Sthaneshwar Timalsina
	 9.	 Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems 
197
Glen A. Hayes
	10.	 Transforming the Body by Mastering the Elements, 
Some Tantric Sources 
225
Lubomír Ondračka
	11.	 Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan 
249
Anna Andreeva
	12.	 Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan 
273
Jeffrey Kotyk
	13.	 Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy 
301
Patricia Sauthoff
PART III.  GENDER, COSMOGONY, 
EMBODIMENT, AND POWER
	14.	 Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions: A Critical Historiographic Essay 
323
Anna A. Golovkova
	15.	 The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism 
347
Judith Simmer-​Brown
	16.	 Three Shades of Tantric Yoga: Chapter 20 of the Netra Tantra 
369
David Gordon White
	17.	 Generative Buddhahood: Enlightened Plants and Trees in Japanese 
Tendai Esoteric Buddhism 
395
Matthew D. McMullen
	18.	 Embodiment and Subjugation: Exoteric-​Esoteric Buddhist Practice 
in Medieval Japan 
409
Eric Haruki Swanson

--- PAGE 10 ---
Contents      ix
 
PART IV.  EXTRAORDINARY BEINGS: DEITIES 
AND FOUNDERS
	19.	 “Hard-​Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava in Java 
427
Andrea Acri
	20.	Timeless Symbolism: An Early Dzogchen Patriarch’s Hagiography 
and Scriptures 
453
Georgios T. Halkias
	21.	 The Twin Miracle: The Two-​Headed Aizen Myōō [Ryōzu Aizen] 
in Exorcistic Shugendō Practice at the Japanese Tantric Buddhist 
Complex of Kōyasan 
472
Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
	22.	 A Dharma Protector in a Transcultural Tantric Buddhist Context 
489
Vesna A. Wallace
	23.	 The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra 
507
Michael Slouber
PART V.  IMAGERY: ART, ARCHITECTURE, 
AND VISUAL EXPRESSIONS
	24.	The Tantric Temple: Rule-​Bound Beauty 
533
Libbie Mills
	25.	 Mandalas and Landscape in Maritime Asia 
557
Peter Sharrock
	26.	Mandalas and Monarchs: Tantra and Temple Architecture in 
Buddhist Southeast Asia 
581
Swati Chemburkar
	27.	 Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī 
679
Ellen Gough
	28.	 Imagery Practice in Tantric Buddhism 
703
David L. Gardiner
	29.	Attention, Memory, and the Imagination: A Cognitive Analysis of 
Tantric Visualization 
731
Sthaneshwar Timalsina

--- PAGE 11 ---
x      Contents
 
PART VI.  LANGUAGE, LITERATURE, WORDS, 
AND METAPHOR
	30.	Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending in Vaiṣṇava 
Sahajiyā Texts 
755
Glen A. Hayes
	31.	 Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation 
787
Ben Williams
	32.	 Jain Tantra: An Overview 
811
Christopher Key Chapple
	33.	 Tibetan Tantric Buddhist Literature 
839
Paul Hackett
	34.	 The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra 
853
David B. Gray
PART VII.  SOCIAL ORGANIZATION 
AND INSTITUTIONS
	35.	 What the Kālamukhas Can Tell Us about Identity, Institutions, 
and Community in the Early Medieval Deccan 
871
Jason Schwartz
	36.	 The Total Revelation Tantra: The Geopolitical Origins and 
Significance of the Name, Nepālī Sarvāmnāya Tantra 
915
Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
	37.	 The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism 
953
Iain Sinclair
	38.	 Singing Tantra: Aural Media and Sonic Soteriology in Bengali 
Esoteric Lineages 
983
Carola Erika Lorea
	39.	 From the Fringes to Center Stage: Hijṛās and Fertility Rituals 
in Kāmākhyā 
1015
Sravana Borkataky-​Varma

--- PAGE 12 ---
Contents      xi
 
PART VIII.  HISTORY AND HISTORIOGRAPHY: 
EVENTS, MEMORY, AND RECOLLECTION
	40.	Śaiva Tantra: Toward a History 
1035
Dominic Goodall
	41.	 On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras 
1057
Tsunehiko Sugiki
	42.	Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti 
1083
John Nemec
	43.	 Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity: Late Nondual Śaivism 
on the Emanation and Contemplative Reabsorption of Time 
1109
David Peter Lawrence
	44.	Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna 
1135
Sam van Schaik
	45.	 Modernity and Neo-​Tantra 
1153
Hugh B. Urban
Glossary 
1173
Index 
1193

--- PAGE 13 ---


--- PAGE 14 ---
Contributors
Andrea Acri, École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE), PSL University
L. S. Akshunna, Lambakarna Bhatta Institute of Tantric Studies
Anna Andreeva, Universität Heidelberg
Sravana Borkataky-​Varma, University of Houston
Christopher Key Chapple, Loyola Marymount University
Swati Chemburkar, Jnanapravaha, Mumbai
Ronald M. Davidson, Fairfield University
Paul B. Donnelly, Northern Arizona University
David L. Gardiner, Colorado College
Anna A. Golovkova, Lake Forest College
Dominic Goodall, École française d’Extrême-​Orient
Ellen Gough, Emory University
David B. Gray, Santa Clara University
Paul Hackett, Columbia University
Georgios T. Halkias, The University of Hong Kong
Glen A. Hayes, Bloomfield College of Montclair State University
Jeffrey Kotyk, University of Bologna
Maria Kozhevnikov, National University of Singapore
David Peter Lawrence, University of North Dakota
Jeffrey S. Lidke, Berry College
Carola Erika Lorea, Institute for the Study of Religions
Matthew D. McMullen, Nanzan Institute for Religion and Culture
Libbie Mills, University of Toronto

--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv      Contributors
 
John Nemec, University of Virginia
Lubomir Ondračka, Charles University
Richard K. Payne, Institute of Buddhist Studies
Geoffrey Samuel, University of Sydney
Patricia Sauthoff, Hong Kong Baptist University
Jason Schwartz, Stanford University
Peter Sharrock, SOAS University of London
Judith Simmer-​Brown, Naropa University
Iain Sinclair, The University of Queensland
Michael Slouber, Western Washington University
Tsunehiko Sugiki, Hiroshima University
Eric Haruki Swanson, Loyola Marymount University
Sthaneshwar Timalsina, Stony Brook University
Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley, Independent Scholar
Hugh B. Urban, The Ohio State University
Sam van Schaik, The British Library
Vesna A. Wallace, University of California, Santa Barbara
David Gordon White, University of California, Santa Barbara
Ben Williams, Naropa University

--- PAGE 16 ---
Introduction
Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
The Oxford Handbook of Tantric Studies is designed to explicitly address some of the 
obstacles to the study of tantra; to facilitate scholarly discourse; to address the problems 
of category, definition, and origins; and to facilitate collaboration between scholars 
working on different forms of tantra.1 For this reason, instead of employing sectarian, re­
gional, or disciplinary categories, this Handbook is organized topically. Thus, rather than 
viewing tantra as a subset of Śaiva, or Śākta, or Vaiṣṇava, Jain or Buddhist traditions, the 
chapters demonstrate how tantra can be autotelic—​located within these traditions in 
complex symbiotic relations, practitioners pursue their own ends, interacting with the 
thought and practice of the tradition with which they are affiliated. At the same time, the 
Handbook views tantra as a religious phenomenon best studied from multiple disciplinary 
perspectives, using different strategies of interpretation. Crossing the boundaries of lan­
guage and religious culture, the tantric traditions that extended from South and Southeast 
Asia, through Central/​Inner Asia and East Asia, today constitute part of the global reli­
gious culture. The range of academic specializations involved—​sectarian, linguistic, tex­
tual, and cultural—​has required input from scholars working in several different fields of 
scholarship, and who offer a plurality of perspectives on the shared object of study.2
The editors have divided the Handbook into eight sections. The categories and 
themes that structure the collection emerge directly from the content of the tan­
tric traditions themselves, rather than imposing any of the more typical academic 
structures, such as regions, historical periods, textual genres, or sectarian categories. 
In tantric traditions, all the topics discussed in the first seven sections are intercon­
nected with one another. Many traditions are characterized by transformative actions 
grounded in gendered notions of cosmology, by complex dynamics involving extraor­
dinary beings, or by the efficacy of extraordinary language—​often in some combina­
tion. These characteristics are in turn creatively expressed through visual and sonic 
art forms and through a great variety of literature and linguistic devices, supported 
by—​and given legitimacy through—​a range of social organizations and institutions. 
Finally, the eighth section addresses both the historiographies of modern scholar­
ship as well as the traditional notions of time sequences based on divine revelation 
and lineages of great teachers and disciples. More specifically, these sections allow for 
an expansive and systematic approach to the study of tantric traditions, starting with 
dialectical reflections on the concept of action (part 1) and the goals of transformation

--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi      Introduction
 
(part 2), which themselves are contextualized by concepts of gender, cosmogony, em­
bodiment, and power (part 3), as well as by beliefs in extraordinary beings (part 4). 
Next are representations in imagery and architecture (part 5) and language and sound 
(part 6), followed by considerations of the social order and institutions (part 7) that 
maintain and perpetuate all of the above. In the last section we consider the complexity 
of the subject overall by exploring etic and emic understandings of the histories of the 
traditions (part 8). This structure works to reflect what is important for members of 
the traditions themselves and places what scholars expect (e.g., contextualizing histor­
ical location) last, thus highlighting the contrariness of tantra for being understood in 
Western religious studies.
Part I. Action
Engaging in significantly transformative action—​broadly conceived—​is one of the 
most prominent features of tantra. Action may involve any of myriad possibilities: 
performing a ritual, practicing meditation, chanting, embarking on a pilgrimage, or 
reenacting moments from a sacred text. The goal of any action is not only to confirm 
the actor’s current place in the cosmos, but more importantly to connect and embed 
that actor within a larger soteriological framework. The practitioner’s location in this 
larger framework has cosmological, epistemological, sociological, psychological, and 
political ramifications. To explore these topics, the opening section includes chapters 
on initiation ceremonies, devotional practices at home and in temples, connections be­
tween thought and practice, and the importance of offertory fire rituals. This section 
also includes a chapter on how ongoing studies in neuroscience help us to understand 
the dynamics of tantric practices.
Part II. Transformations: Soteriology, 
Astrology, Alchemy, and Healing
Essential to tantric traditions is some form of transformation, which may also be 
considered the raison d’être of many philosophies or religions. The chapters in this 
section examine the cosmology, esoteric physiology, soteriology, embryology, al­
chemy, and magical processes of transformation. Tantra offers to transform human 
experience, consciousness, or existence into transhuman, transcendent, or cosmic 
forms, as well as having manifest effects in the world. There are almost limitless var­
iations on this foundational tantric process, expressed in diverse systems of thought 
(philosophical, literary, soteriological, epistemological, cosmological) and action 
(ritual, yoga). These chapters provide details and examples of these important tan­
tric endeavors.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction      xvii
 
Part III. Gender, Cosmogony, 
Embodiment, and Power
In addition to valorizing the human body, tantra is also notable for its complex and pro­
found embrace of gender and sexuality—​and the resultant implications, consequences, 
and iterations. Cosmic power is both an embodied and gendered power, and there are 
distinctive expressions of both male and female sexual power, resulting in intriguing 
ritual, symbolic, conceptual, and textual traditions. The numerous goddess traditions 
central to much of tantra are perhaps the foremost example of this development. This is 
also closely integrated with conceptions of esoteric physiology and the various cosmic 
energies that circulate in the body, connecting it to the wider cosmos. Such gendered 
cosmophysiologies are, however, subject to external forces of control and subjuga­
tion, and thus techniques are developed to protect the body and consciousness of the 
practitioner. This often involves powerful protective female divinities, and the help of 
transgressive female beings such as yoginīs and ḍākinīs. Finally, the active domains of 
consciousness can range well beyond that of humans and other creatures, extending to 
the liberation of plants and trees. Thus, cosmogony, gender, embodiment, and power 
constitute a wide range of tantric concerns and practices.
Part IV. Extraordinary Beings: Deities 
and Founders
Extraordinary beings of many types play a key role in both tantric cosmology and soteri­
ology. Rather than being dualistically either good or evil, as tends to be the case in mon­
otheistic traditions, the extraordinary beings of the tantric cosmos are polyvalent. These 
run the gamut from cosmic deities, such as Śiva, to local and territorial deities, to humans 
who attain extraordinary status during life (founders, gurus, thaumaturges, siddhas), to 
those who become extraordinary after death (spirits), to astrological, calendric, and direc­
tional deities, and to guardians and wrathful protectors. Chapters in this section explore the 
roles of goddesses, founders of lineages, and complex figures who straddle the worlds of the 
human and divine as they reveal, disseminate, and protect essential tantric teachings.
Part V. Imagery: Art, Architecture, and 
Visual Expressions
While the trope of sacred sound, expressed in chants, mantras, and literature, is found 
throughout tantric traditions, visual imagery is just as essential to the tantric path. Also,

--- PAGE 19 ---
xviii      Introduction
 
the comparative study of aesthetic programs, symbolic systems, and architectural styles 
has provided an important new perspective on the historical relationships connecting 
the entire span of tantric Asia. Tantra incorporates complex traditions of temple archi­
tecture and ritual settings, as well as precise cosmological diagrams and designs known 
as “mandala,” “yantra,” and other terms.3 These forms relate to visualization, which is 
a major cognitive pathway of the transformative cosmological processes of tantra. To 
explore these areas, this section includes chapters on art history and architecture, along 
with specific essays on image consecration and tantric diagrams, and a theoretical dis­
cussion of the cognitive functions of such imagery.
Part VI. Language, Literature, Words, 
and Metaphor
Tantric literatures, produced in a wide variety of Asian languages, employ metaphors 
and other linguistic devices, often in complex and intertwined fashions. And the inter­
pretation of texts often depends on whether they are to be understood as metaphorical 
or literal, or more specifically contexts for such understandings. Much of the literature is 
oriented toward the performance of rituals, and does not reflect the categories of scrip­
ture, narrative, and doctrinal exegesis expected of religious literature as understood in 
Western religious studies.4 Also distinct from the understandings of Western religious 
studies are tantric conceptions of the power of extraordinary language, such as mantra 
and dhāraṇī. These ideas are widely found in Indic religious culture, but also spread via 
tantra to Central/​Inner, Southeast, and East Asia. This section provides chapters on the 
uses of metaphors and conceptual blending in ritual texts, the importance of mantras 
and phonemes as cosmological devices, overviews of Jain and Tibetan tantric literature, 
and a focused study of a particular Buddhist tantra, the Cakrasaṃvara.
Part VII. Social Organization and 
Institutions
Although the history of tantra is replete with solitary practitioners performing 
austerities and engaging in psychophysical techniques, the development and dissemina­
tion of tantra has generated a wide variety of social organizations and institutions—​from 
small groups of teachers and students, to larger public assemblies, as well as monastic 
institutions. Perhaps the most important social aspect of the tantric tradition involves 
the initiation of novices into a teaching and practice lineage through the efforts of an ex­
perienced and qualified master. Known by a variety of terms such as abhiṣeka, dīkṣā, and 
so forth, this process is most often deemed necessary to allow the individual to progress

--- PAGE 20 ---
Introduction      xix
 
along the tantric path. Not all tantric groups are secret, and some that begin secret 
evolve into public institutions. Other tantric institutions have always been public, such 
as those associated with kings or emperors. And in other cases, the socially marginal 
status of tantric practitioners, such as eunuchs (hijṛā), long kept them out of public—​or 
at least scholarly—​attention. This section includes chapters on the complex dimensions 
of social organizations in medieval India, the geopolitical dynamics of the formation of 
tantric traditions in Nepal, soteriological functions of monasticism in Buddhist tantra, 
oral traditions in contemporary Bengali tantric communities, and the emerging roles of 
gender fluidity in modern Assam.
Part VIII. History and Historiography: 
Events, Memory, and Recollection
Only in recent decades have scholars been able to construct some basic academic 
histories of the major tantric traditions, as such efforts can require extensive language 
skills, access to surviving manuscripts and oral traditions, and successful fieldwork. As 
discussed in Chapter 1, there is still debate about the exact historical origins of tantra—​
although recent scholarship demonstrates that the earliest texts likely emerge from Śaiva 
Hindu ascetic communities. Beyond these larger issues, scholars have revealed impor­
tant historical developments involving tantra and specific sociopolitical complexes, 
especially during the dynamic medieval phases of Asian history.5 But beyond these 
excellent histories and historiographies, which operate on what might be termed the 
ordinary level, we find within tantric traditions very different kinds of histories, time 
and event sequences, and types of recollection and reenactment. Both categories receive 
their own chapters in this section, with essays on more traditional historiographies, the 
chronology of the textual corpus of Buddhist tantra, as well as commentarial traditions 
and revelatory texts. This section concludes with an exploration of the transformation of 
tantra in the modern world as “Neo-​tantra.”
Notes
	1.	 As noted below in Chapter 1, we are using the lowercase form “tantra,” as opposed to the 
uppercase “Tantra,” as the latter suggests some underlying unity and essence, or a singular 
transcendent entity. We prefer the former as there are so many variations of the category 
that any monolithic or essentialist view tends to obscure more than it reveals. This volume 
itself illustrates some of the many manifestations of tantra throughout South, Central/​
Inner, Southeast, and East Asia—​as well as in a global setting since the nineteenth century. 
In explaining the traditional etymology of “tantra,” André Padoux (2017, 7) notes that from 
“the verbal root TAN, which means ‘to extend,’ ‘to spread,’ hence ‘to spin out,’ ‘weave,’ ‘dis­
play,’ ‘put forth,’ and ‘compose’ [the term comes by extension to mean] ‘system,’ ‘doctrine,’ or

--- PAGE 21 ---
xx      Introduction
 
‘work.’ A Tantra is thus a work, a text—​any text.” Hence we find the subsequent meanings of 
a discourse “woven” with the “threads” of words and thought.
	2.	 This is conceptually congruent with Peter Sharrock’s notion of a “coherentist hermeneu­
tics.” This is the use of complementary sources of evidence, as is intended by the multi-​
faceted nature of this collection. See Sharrock 2006, 287.
	3.	 Since Sanskrit terms such as maṇḍala and yantra have become commonplace in English for 
some time, in this volume we will not use the diacritical marks on these widely used terms.
	4.	 Although not addressed directly in this collection, one of the problems for tantric studies 
generally is the ephemeral nature of ritual manuals used in daily practice. Bibliographers, 
librarians, and collectors—​both in Asia and the West—​did not recognize the potential his­
torical importance of such works, and consequently an unknown number have been lost. In 
this regard the Tenri collection discussed by Payne in his chapter seems fairly unique in its 
collection of ritual manuals.
	5.	 The usage of “medieval” does not identify a single historical period across the entire range 
of cultures discussed in this collection. Likewise, use of the term should not be taken to 
imply equivalence, either chronological or cultural, with the European medieval period. It 
is intended to suggest a period of cultural florescence created by urbanization and trade, but 
prior to the conjoined rise of mechanized manufacturing, colonialism, and capitalism.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Reflections, Acknowledgements, 
and Collective Efforts
This volume was conceived in 2019, just prior to the outbreak of COVID-​19, and the 
structure and basic table of contents were developed as the world went into lockdown. 
Lives were upended by the virus and its many consequences, including the teaching, 
research, and travel plans of many possible contributors—​not to mention the lives and 
health of so many. Numerous colleagues who had hoped to contribute to the volume 
were thus unable to dedicate the time to crafting chapters, as others somehow found 
some solace in developing the chapters that you now have before you. Our editor at 
Oxford University Press, Robert Repino, was gracious, understanding, and patient 
throughout this process, as we of necessity had to keep extending the deadlines for 
drafts and revisions. Victoria Harris and Olivia Kier were the development editors for 
this project over several years, and managed the day-​to-​day work of moving chapters 
from the editorial to the production phase.
This effort is thus a pandemic book in so many ways. We wish to thank the many 
contributors, as well as those who were unable to complete submissions, for their resil­
ience and support for what we hope is a generational collection of tantric studies. Some 
of the intended sections developed in ways alternate to our original plans, but in the end 
we feel that our goals have been suitably met.
As Volume Editors, we are also grateful for the superb efforts of our colleagues who 
served as an advisory board for this project: Gudrun Bühnemann, Paul Donnelly, 
Sthaneshwar Timalsina, and Loriliai Biernacki. Each of them helped to review and shape 
the numerous chapters in this volume, sharing their own expertise in areas outside our 
own specializations. In addition, several scholars kindly reviewed sections or versions, 
providing additional perspective and helping us to avoid errors or oversimplifications. 
These include Ronald Davidson, Shaman Hatley, Tony Stewart, Bruce Sullivan, David 
White, Paul Hackett, and Charles Orzech. William Phipps, from Parsons School of 
Design, The New School, provided invaluable guidance in early stages of the cover de­
sign process and with other graphics.
We are indebted not only to the several dozen scholars whose fine work appears in this 
volume, but also to their own social networks of friends, families, and colleagues who in 
turn supported them as the pandemic unfolded. Many traditions of tantra emphasize 
the dynamic and often turbulent forces of the cosmos and its iterations in human na­
ture. But it also teaches about the human ability to master and perhaps overcome those 
very profound forces. In some small way, we feel that this volume might express our own

--- PAGE 23 ---
xxii      Reflections, Acknowledgements, and Collective Efforts
 
contemporary engagement with such larger forces, and hope that it contributes to the 
ongoing development of tantric studies.
In these first decades of a new millennium, tantric studies can offer a useful field for 
considering a fuller range of human experiences and formations of identity found by 
expanding the study of religion, ranging from the cognitive to the behavioral, from the 
individual to the social, across the complete range of gender identities, through creations 
of visual, sonic, architectural, and literary art forms, to speculations on ontology, episte­
mology, and soteriology. Tantra may have developed more than a millennium ago, but 
its content—​and the informed study of that content—​can help us to reappraise our own 
current situations as human beings.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Abbreviations
Ch.	 Chinese
Jpn.	 Japanese
Skt.	 Sanskrit
Tib.	 Tibetan

--- PAGE 25 ---


--- PAGE 26 ---
Chapter 1
Tantric Studies
Issues, Methods, and   
Scholarly Collaborations
Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
“Tantra” identifies a category of religious thought and practice originating in early 
medieval India, which has spread throughout Asia and in the modern era globally. It 
was influenced by many concepts and techniques from diverse yogic, ritual, political, 
sociological, artistic, intellectual, and cosmological traditions found in the Indian sub­
continent during the first millennium ce, including the Vedic ritual tradition even then 
dating back more than two millennia. Drawing on that religious culture, the early me­
dieval period saw the creation of sets of practices and teachings that were increasingly 
textualized and codified into sectarian forms. Looking at this variety, tantra is extremely 
complex and requires a variety of methodologies for its study. At the same time, how­
ever, as this volume demonstrates, intriguing underlying themes and common concerns 
emerge when an academic perspective is taken. One of the persistent concerns of schol­
arship results from the quest for origins.
To what degree do the themes and concerns shared by the complex variety of tan­
tric traditions reflect a unitary common source? Or are these similarities due to older 
and deeper shared influences, or to borrowing between traditions, or perhaps to some 
other historical or cognitive process(es)? Scholars have thus had lively debates re­
garding the category and historical origins of tantra,1 as well as the many dimensions 
and interpretations of tantra as it developed into Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain forms in the 
subsequent centuries. Tantra continues in lived traditions throughout Asia, and since 
the nineteenth century, it has also appeared in numerous global contexts, especially in 
the prolific modern yoga movements. These topics are all addressed by the authors of 
the chapters in this volume.

--- PAGE 27 ---
2      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
Academic Debates on Origins and 
Interactions
Along with the growth of the field of tantric studies over the past several decades (see 
Appendix), dynamic academic debates have developed regarding the possible origins 
and earliest forms of tantra. One approach involves what some scholars regard as non-​
sectarian “pre-​tantric” influences that existed across South Asia early in the first mil­
lennium ce. For example, recent research by Davidson, Acri and Rosati, White, and 
other scholars2 suggests that, prior to the development of tantric traditions within 
Śaiva Hinduism and Mahāyāna Buddhism, there was an extensive range of popular 
“pre-​tantric” beliefs and practices. These included rituals to the autochthonous serpent 
spirits (nāga) seeking rains, cemetery practices, skull carrying, raising the dead, fer­
tility, and other magical practices. Although evidence is difficult to evaluate, many of 
these rituals were likely associated with very ancient shamanistic traditions, local and 
rural cults, and other popular “folk traditions.”3 These scholars argue that such “pre-​
tantric” influences played a major role in the subsequent development of Hindu and 
Buddhist tantric traditions. Other scholars, for example, Alexis Sanderson (1995, 2001) 
and Dominic Goodall (see chapter in this volume), would not agree that later Hindu 
and Buddhist tantric traditions originate from diffuse non-​sectarian magical practices 
and folk traditions.
Davidson argues for a socio-​political influence behind the development of sec­
tarian tantric Buddhism, with the “pre-​tantric” era of magical and divinatory practices 
at the end of and following the decline of the classical era of the Gupta-​Vākāṭaka age, 
which had lasted from approximately 320 to 550 ce.4 Sanderson (2009), however, has 
demonstrated the gradual formation of sectarian tantra among Śaiva Hindu ascetics, 
who transformed the system of the Atimārga (“the path beyond”) into the tantric system 
known as the Mantramārga (“the path of mantras”).5 The key issues under debate here 
involve the creation of specifically tantric texts, among which communities, and when 
they were written. Sanderson and his colleagues have argued that the first tantric texts 
were composed by Śaiva Hindus between the mid-​fifth to sixth centuries and subse­
quently exerted a pronounced influence on the development of Buddhist tantra, as is 
most clearly evident in the case of the Yoginītantras (see Hatley 2016a, 2016b; on the 
chronology and categories of Buddhist tantras, see Dalton 2004 and 2005).6 Reflecting 
a different point of view on these important matters, Davidson (2002) challenges these 
early dates and the direction of influence. Among the Indian Buddhist Mahāyāna mo­
nastic communities, Davidson (2017b) argues that the challenges of interacting with 
surrounding lay communities and polities led to the development of new genres of texts 
dealing with empowered spells known as dhāraṇī. As Davidson observes,7 “from the 
fourth to the seventh century, dhāraṇī Buddhist texts constitute our best record con­
cerning the involvement of Buddhist monks and laity with the spectrum of Indian ritual 
systems.” Jacob Dalton has resuscitated the category “proto-​tantric” by emphasizing the

--- PAGE 28 ---
Tantric Studies      3
 
ritual use, rather than conceptual significance, of dhāraṇī (2016, 200). His argument 
may be taken to support our problematizing of the sharp distinctions some historical 
analyses have attempted to impose.
These major developments in both Śaiva Hinduism and Mahāyāna Buddhism would 
lead to what scholars now call “Hindu tantra” and “Buddhist tantra,” although it must be 
emphasized that the details are contested by different schools of scholarship, as we have 
seen. Tantric ideas and practices also interacted with the Jain tradition, an influence that 
continues into the present (Gough, 2021 and this volume; Chapple, this volume).
Sanderson has established an influential body of scholarship related to the historical 
origins of tantra (particularly important instances are 1995 and 2009, and Goodall 2015). 
The central focus of his research has been the textual record of the Śaiva traditions. 
Extensive and nuanced, Sanderson’s work is effectively impossible to summarize 
here. The impression that many scholars seem to have been left with, however, is that 
tantra begins within the Śaiva tradition and that the early history of tantra is bounded 
by the corpus of Śaiva texts. On this basis, the rise of other forms of tantra, such as 
Buddhist, has been interpreted to be derivative—​a consequence of borrowing, adapting, 
appropriating, and renaming. Often presented in abbreviated form, this impression has 
been further propagated by other scholars as well (e.g., English 2002).
The specific understanding that Śaiva tantra has this originary status has, how­
ever, been challenged by several scholars, perhaps most consistently and effectively by 
Davidson (2017a, 2017b, 2021, 2023). In contrast to an elite, literate, and already sectarian 
tradition, Davidson has pointed to sources outside defined sectarian categories as im­
portant contributors to the early history of tantra. Davidson also calls into question the 
impression that the influence has been unidirectional—​from Śaiva outward to other 
traditions. Similarly, Gudrun Bühnemann has demonstrated that the Hindu tradition 
borrowed deities and mantras from the Buddhist (1999, 2000).
Perhaps unsurprisingly, such divergence of scholarly opinion has created sev­
eral contesting narratives, and not a little scholarly opprobrium. In his study of early 
Buddhist tantra, for instance, Christian Wedemeyer has strongly rejected claims 
of sources outside literate, elite, and monastic traditions (2013).8 This in turn has not 
gone unchallenged, with several scholars weighing in to highlight a more complex and 
extended context not only in the high-​Sanskrit cultures of medieval India but in the 
broader religious cultures of South and Southeast Asia (Acri and Rosati 2023).
Recent scholarship by Sanderson, Goodall, Isaacson, and others argues that among the 
Śaiva Mantramārga schools, the earliest known tantric text is the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā 
(“compendium on principles of exhalation”), portions of which they have dated to the 
mid-​fifth to sixth centuries and likely no later than the seventh century (see Goodall, this 
volume).9 This dating, while somewhat uncertain, is contested by other scholars, such as 
Bakker (2014, 9, n. 30), who believes that the earliest material developed in the sixth 
century. The dating of early Buddhist tantric texts is also vigorously debated. Davidson 
(2011, 23) suggests that the earliest datable Buddhist tantric text is the Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha 
(“collection of magical spells”), which, based on Chinese court records, dates to 654 ce. 
Davidson believes that this text, however, clearly relies on even earlier material. Another

--- PAGE 29 ---
4      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
early text identified by Davidson (2011, 24) is the Amoghapāśamahākalparāja, which is 
largely a compendium of ritual practices (sādhanas) and precepts (vidhis), itself based 
on the Amoghapāśahṛdaya, which was translated in 587 ce by Jñānagupta (Meisezahl 
1962). All of these early Buddhist tantras feature magical systems and describe the ac­
tivities of supernatural beings (vidyādharas), and they also reflect the “pre-​tantric” 
influences of the earlier dhāraṇī texts. Finally, other scholars of early Buddhist tantra 
also cite the Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka, estimated to date from the early seventh century, while 
the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi tantra is more definitely dated to the mid-​seventh century 
(see Sugiki, this volume; Gray 2016, 2023). Textual chronology remains an essential area 
of inquiry. Despite the importance of this line of scholarly inquiry, however, the long-​
standing idea of a specific original text (Urtext), whose primacy gives that hypostatized 
text authority, is now largely outmoded by more complex understandings of textual 
development. Looking beyond texts, the historical record also includes archeological, 
epigraphic and art historical sources (see the chapters in Part 5 of this volume). To sum­
marize, the earliest history of tantra remains indeterminate due to the lack of surviving 
evidence and the ambiguities of the evidence that does survive.
Another point of contention among scholars of tantra involves the possible mutual 
interactions between early Hindu and Buddhist tantra, as well as the directions of these 
influences. Sanderson’s painstakingly detailed and compelling argument (2001) is that 
specific Vajrayāna works (such as the late 8th or early 9th century Cakrasaṃvara tantra 
in particular) silently incorporate text from known Śaiva tantras. Davidson, however, 
argues against interpreting this to mean that Buddhist tantra is derivative from Śaiva 
tantra: “One line of argument has been that tantric Buddhism is ‘Śaivized Buddhism’, 
meaning that the rituals and practices of Śaivism were taken over into Buddhism with 
little change, yielding tantric Buddhism” (Davidson 2021, 5; see also Davidson 2017a, 
2017b; Slouber 2023). Davidson (2021, 5) argues for a more cautious approach here: 
“Without contesting that both tantric Śaivism and Brahmanical ritual were very im­
portant in the maturation of tantric Buddhism, it may be observed that the early ar­
chive has not been explored to date, so that it appears premature to posit such sweeping 
conclusions.”
We are left then with multiple and conflicting academic perspectives on the historical 
origins of tantra, the composition and circulation of texts, and the directions of influ­
ence.10 Stepping back, it is perhaps inevitable—​and a sign of growth—​that such dynamic 
debates have been happening in the field of tantric studies. It is possible that ongoing 
discoveries of early Buddhist tantric texts in Tibetan, Sanskrit, Chinese, or Japanese 
archives may challenge the supposed dominant influence of Śaiva Hindu tantra upon 
Buddhist tantra—​or perhaps not.11 The religious communities in the Gupta and post-​
Gupta periods were very dynamic, and along with the possible influence of diverse “pre-​
tantric” beliefs and practices, it is likely that various Hindu and Buddhist practitioners 
were in constant interaction, negotiating with each other and producing hybrid and syn­
cretic results. Much of this exciting research remains to be conducted, and it promises to 
expand the field of tantric studies going forward.

--- PAGE 30 ---
Tantric Studies      5
 
Matters of Category and Terminology
One of the major issues facing the field of tantric studies remains the very category of 
“tantra.” At the first conference of the Society for Tantric Studies in 1987 (see Appendix), 
the participants gathered for a “brainstorming” session, seeking to clarify the category; 
and a version of those results was eventually published in Douglas Renfrew Brooks’ 
study of Hindu Śākta tantrism.12 Following Jonathan Z. Smith’s discussion (1982, 4; em­
phasis in original text) of a “polythetic mode of classification,” Brooks argued that the 
term “tantra” may also be considered “polythetic” in that it has many different char­
acteristics, but specific manifestations of “tantra” may only have some (but not all) of 
the total number of characteristics. Among the ten characteristics identified by Brooks 
(narrowed down from perhaps twenty-​five or more at the conference) included an 
“extra-​Vedic” character; special esoteric forms of cosmophysiology and yoga, spanning 
both theism and philosophical nondualism; valorizing sound and mantras as soterio­
logical devices; and employing symbolic visual designs such as yantras and mandalas. 
Payne has argued, however, that not only is there no single defining characteristic of 
tantra but polythetic attempts to list characteristics often disagree, reflecting the idio­
syncratic orientations, interests, and judgments of the scholar compiling the list (2006; 
see also Hatley 2020, 2–​3).
When asked about these issues, our colleague Tony K. Stewart reflected on the episte­
mological aspects at some length. Because of the clarity and cogency of his response, we 
quote it in full here.
Rather than working from a fixed definition, which can have the unintended effect 
of essentializing tantra, one might be better served to examine what it is that tantra 
in any specific historical context attempts to accomplish. The a priori determinations 
of a formal definition impose constraints on the perception of the scholar attempting 
to interpret the phenomena of tantra as they appear on the ground or in texts, for it 
leads one to look for preconceived salient features that may well obscure what any 
particular historical form actually reveals. At times tantra can manifest independ­
ently, creating its own autotelic universe. It may also be present parasitically, de­
pendent on some preexisting tradition, but not recognized by it. In other instances 
it can function in symbiosis to a tradition, offering an embedded alternative path 
of religious experience within a mainstream doctrine and practice, or even repre­
sent the esoteric pinnacle of a tradition—​a realm of discipline reserved for the adept 
practitioner. Because few of these tantric turns will furnish a comprehensive state­
ment of intent, and because tantra often only sparingly reveals its ultimate trajectory, 
even to the point of adopting strategies of overt secrecy and disinformation, the her­
meneutics of this exercise depend on abductive reasoning (see Douven 2021). The 
scholar must draw out critical features of that particular religious expression from 
what can be known through text and ritual, and then attempt to fit those elements 
into a comprehensible image of practice and/​or doctrine that fills lacunae with 
reasonable prospects. All the while, the scholar knows that the interpretation can

--- PAGE 31 ---
6      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
never be absolute, but is instead a plausible understanding within a range of pos­
sible interpretations. The set of issues particular to any given form of tantra, in turn, 
dictates the pragmatic interpretive strategy, an approach which most of the essays in 
this volume have implicitly adopted. However tempting it may be to compare dif­
ferent strategies to develop a composite approach, the result of the comparison will 
not constitute a definition. On the contrary each example remains unique to its par­
ticular historical configuration.
(personal communication, April 22, 2023)
In addition to unique historical configurations being an obstacle to efforts at definition, 
the complexity of the historical origins of tantra makes the entire project of defining 
tantra problematic.
The historical origins of tantra are not only complex and obscure, but the plurality 
of contributing sources makes for additional problems. Instead of a single unitary or­
igin, the wide range of pre-​sectarian sources means that diversity of beliefs and practices 
is an inherent characteristic of the traditions retrospectively grouped together as “tan­
tric.” Historiographies that presume a diffusionist model in which a single original form 
diverges into different forms over time, or more narrowly unilinear and unidirectional 
development of influences and borrowings are inadequate to the study of the subject. 
Tantra is simply far too complex and diffuse to be treated as a unitary phenomenon. 
Our goal in this volume has instead been to allow an understanding to arise from 
the materials presented—​though such an approach will no doubt be dissatisfying to 
scholars accustomed to beginning from clear definitions.
A comprehensive review of recent scholarly definitions of tantra is beyond the scope 
of this volume. Many of them seek to be descriptive definitions, and, given the com­
plexity of tantra, such approaches are ultimately less than useful for our purposes 
here. However, in the foundational anthology Tantra in Practice (White, 2000), David 
Gordon White provides a representative “working” definition of tantra which identifies 
some important aspects:
Tantra is that Asian body of beliefs and practices which, working from the principle 
that the universe we experience is nothing other than the concrete manifestation of 
the divine energy of the godhead that creates and maintains that universe, seeks to 
ritually appropriate and channel that energy, within the human microcosm, in crea­
tive and emancipatory ways.
(p. 9)
White notes that this definition would need to be modified depending on the pre­
cise context of a tradition. And, indeed, it has been seen by some critics as a highly 
constricted “definition” that reflects only one strain (Shaman Hatley, personal commu­
nication, April 10, 2023). For just one example, “divine energy of the godhead” is prob­
lematic for Buddhist and Jain tantric schools. But White’s working definition can be 
seen as representing work within the parameters of the polythetic approach suggested

--- PAGE 32 ---
Tantric Studies      7
 
by Brooks. At the end of the day, however, there is frankly no single “definition” that can 
serve as a useful hermeneutic for our study of tantra. Approaches and strategies other 
than definitions may be more valuable for delineating the subject of study.13
Perhaps the one clearest marker is bibliographic, that is, the existence of texts called 
“tantras,” which constitute the textual corpus to which adherents of the traditions refer. 
Describing tantra by reference to a bibliographic category does not create a definition 
with sharp, absolute boundaries but rather itself points to the fuzziness of historical 
realities (see Burchett 2019, 30).14 For the historiography of tantra, however, it is im­
portant to emphasize that texts are not fixed, unitary, homogenous, or unchanging. 
Philological studies reveal that, despite our efforts as scholars—​such as the editing of 
critical editions—​texts are unstable, malleable, blended, and contingent. Employing 
bibliographic categories is more suggestive than definitional. For example, the term 
“tantra” was applied to texts outside the religious usage, and many clearly tantric 
traditions, such as the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās of Bengal (see Hayes chapters, this volume), 
produced a large number of texts without specifically referring to them as “tantras.” 
Other bibliographic terms used for what are reasonably considered tantric texts include 
kalpa, āgama, and saṃhitā. In the Buddhist tradition, some texts are categorized both as 
sūtra and as tantra.
These considerations regarding texts, taken together with the controversies described 
above, indicate that the search for an adequate definition that would clearly delimit the 
complex histories and ranges of tantric traditions is itself problematic. Examining the 
category “religion,” Talal Asad has argued, “that there cannot be a universal definition of 
religion, not only because its constituent elements and relationships are historically spe­
cific, but because that definition is itself the historical product of discursive processes” 
(Asad 1993, 29). Even a cursory glance over the definitions of tantra proposed in the 
last century and a half by modern academic scholars demonstrates that they are them­
selves “the historical product of discursive processes” (Asad 1993, 29). The same applies 
equally to the much longer history of definitions offered by sectarian scholars. The dis­
tinction between academic and sectarian scholars is itself fuzzy, and is more appropriate 
to identifying different contexts and purposes of scholarship than individual scholars.
Since the earliest encounters between tantric traditions and Western scholars of reli­
gion, tantra has posed a challenge. As detailed by Hugh B. Urban (2003, 3) in his useful 
study of the “complex genealogy of the category of Tantra in the history of religions,” ini­
tial colonial Western encounters with tantra tended to regard it as obscene and depraved, 
an abhorrent distortion of the more philosophical interpretations of Hinduism and 
Buddhism just being discovered at the time. In 1817, for example, the Baptist missionary 
William Ward argued that tantric rituals involved the obscene worship of the naked fe­
male body, in which men “behave towards this female in a manner which decency forbids 
to be mentioned.”15 The representation of tantra, whether in Bengal, Tamilnadu, Tibet, or 
Japan, has tended to emphasize the antinomian, decadent, or demonic aspects, which, 
as attention-​grabbing as they were for audiences in the West, created a one-​dimensional 
understanding and hampered the academic study of the field for more than a century.16

--- PAGE 33 ---
8      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
Being the object of disdain also contributed to different traditions in different cul­
tural and linguistic regions being academically isolated from one another. Because of 
these academic divisions, someone working, for example, on Sanskrit literature may 
not readily encounter the work of a specialist in vernacular Assamese tantra, work that 
might shed light on otherwise obscure aspects of the literature they are studying. The 
detriments created by academic specialization are well known and not peculiar to the 
study of tantra but are no less detrimental for that reason. In many cases, the spread 
of tantra has been invisible because scholars have often understood tantra simply as 
a degenerate form of more positively valued traditions, and therefore something to 
be ignored—​or, lacking familiarity with the tradition, fail to recognize it when they 
see it. This relative valuation has been reinforced by Western scholars automatically 
privileging doctrinal studies (at times interpreted, for example, as philosophy or psy­
chology) and the study of doctrinal texts. Consequently, the study of practice and lived 
religion have frequently been marginalized. An example of the detrimental effects of 
this intellectual history, along with historical, political, and academic reasons, is that 
until only recently this preconception obscured the importance of tantric Buddhism 
and Hinduism in both Southeast and East Asia.
Being dominated by doctrinal studies, the Western study of religion has frequently 
simply replicated sectarian boundaries between different tantric traditions. Research 
tends to be sequestered according to different schools of South Asian, Central/​Inner 
Asian, and East Asian tantric traditions, as well as from across “Monsoon Asia” (Acri 
2023, 6). Thus, for example, specialists working in the Śaiva Siddhānta or Śākta or 
Vaiṣṇava form of tantra may not actively engage across those sectarian boundaries. 
Similarly, scholarship on the various Hindu forms tends to be separated from both 
Buddhist and Jain forms. More broadly, specialists in South Asian forms may have no 
venue in which to encounter the work of specialists in Central/​Inner or East Asian 
forms. Similarly, textual scholars may not be familiar enough with the methodologies 
of archeological, and art historical studies to include them in their work. In addition to 
these artificial academic boundaries, traditions that emphasize practice, such as ritual, 
meditation, breathing, visualization, and yoga, have tended to receive less attention than 
those which give doctrine primacy. Even within tantric traditions, study has often been 
focused on forms that have substantial doctrinal treatises.
Women, Gender, and Tantric Studies
Tantric studies is an important area of the modern academy not only because it explores 
the many traditions and themes found across tantra, but also because it is an important 
corrective to the hegemonic narratives of orthodoxy and orthopraxy which tend to be 
generated by and for male actors. Women and gender are central to many traditions of 
tantric praxis and ideology, not only as participants in ritual and social organization, 
but also as representing various forms of goddesses. In Tibet, women also established

--- PAGE 34 ---
Tantric Studies      9
 
tantric lineages of practice and founded tantric monastic institutions (Diemberger 
2007; Harding 2013).
It has long been recognized that goddess figures were important as symbolic 
embodiments of fertility and power in the civilizations of the Indus valley and elsewhere 
in Asia. However, with the rise of tantra in the early first millennium CE, goddesses 
gained new status. Scholarly attention to the development of tantric goddesses as cen­
tral figures in these Indic traditions has been late to develop. This belated recognition 
reflects that male academics have historically dominated the study of religion. This 
domination began to shift in the twentieth century, with increasing numbers of female 
scholars addressing the topics of women and gender within religious practices. The late 
twentieth century brought with it numerous studies of the importance of women in reli­
gious traditions across Asia, and of the roles that goddesses play in Indic and some other 
traditions beyond the subcontinent.17
Being an important subset of Asian religions as a whole, comparatively less study 
has been given to women and ideas of gender within tantric traditions. Earlier studies 
include Judith Simmer-​Brown (2002; see this volume) on the ḍākinī figure; Serinity 
Young’s 2004 study of sexuality and gender in Buddhism; Miranda Shaw’s (1995) pro­
vocative, if controversial, work on women in Buddhism; Loriliai Biernacki (2007) on 
conceptions of women and speech in Hindu tantra; Judit Torzsok (2014) on female 
spirits, women, and goddesses; Shaman Hatley (2016b) on yoginīs in tantric texts; and 
David Gordon White (2006) on the yoginī rituals and traditions. Gudrun Bühnemann 
has explored the iconography of Hindu and Buddhist tantric deities, many of whom 
are female (1999, 2000, 2000–​2001, 2016), and of ritual diagrams (mandala, yantra) in 
her edited volume Maṇḍalas and Yantras in the Hindu Traditions ([2003] 2007). Madhu 
Khanna wrote her doctoral thesis on the Śrīcakra Śākta diagram and the tradition of 
its worship (1986) and, more recently, a study of ritual manuals from the Mahāvidyā 
goddess traditions (2013). Tantric themes in Buddhist embryology have been explored 
in Central/​Inner and East Asian Buddhist traditions (e.g., Sanford 1997; Andreeva and 
Steavu 2015; Garret 2008). Indic tantric goddesses also were deployed for imperial 
purposes in medieval China (Rothschild 2021). The last several decades have also given 
us explorations of twentieth-​century tantric praxis in works by Neela Bhattacharya 
Saxena (2004) and June McDaniel (2002), in Holly Gayley’s 2016 study of a twentieth-​
century female Tibetan teacher, and in Corinne Dempsey’s 2005 work on a tantric Śrī 
Vidyā temple located in New York State.
These studies of the feminine in tantric traditions have gradually led us to where 
we are now in tantric studies: with an increasing number of both female and male 
scholars exploring myriad issues that reveal the dynamics and importance of women 
and goddesses in the history of tantra. This new research promises much insight as 
scholarship on these topics moves forward. This volume aims to augment this research 
with several chapters included here which consider the complexity of gender dy­
namics in domestic, social, political, and religious contexts. (See especially the chapters 
by Golovkova, Simmer-​Brown, Slouber, and Borkataky-​Varma.) As the chapter on 
eunuchs (hijṛās) by Borkataky-​Varma in this volume suggests, the full range of gender

--- PAGE 35 ---
10      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
fluidity that has always been part of our collective human history is now being acknowl­
edged and addressed by contemporary scholarship.
Ethnography, Lived Tantra, and 
Tantric Studies
Most of the research in tantric studies over the past decades has generally focused on 
the study of texts and textual traditions. Such an emphasis on historical texts and their 
ongoing interpretive schools and lineages is understandable, given the centrality that 
Western religious studies scholarship has historically given to sacred texts. The im­
portance of the Vedic texts and traditions, which is contested and even rejected not 
only by the Jain and Buddhist traditions generally but also by much of subsequent 
Hindu tantra, must be understood as a major context for the development of tantric 
ritual, cosmology, sociology, and soteriology. Within Buddhist tantric traditions, the 
legitimizing role of canonical texts was supplemented by new genres of Mahāyāna 
texts, beginning with dhāraṇī and other ritual texts, then the early tantras, and later 
compilations of extended Vajrayāna texts (Dalton 2016; Gray 2023). In Jainism, many 
key tantric beliefs and practices are expressed in major Jain texts, and they continue to 
hold authority in both tantric and non-​tantric Jain lineages. But such a valorization of 
textuality across Asia has also been reinterpreted through a Western lens, privileging 
it over questions regarding what tantrikas actually do. As suggested by Schopen 
(1991), this tendency of Western scholarship to seek an authoritative “sacred text” may 
be traced, in large part, to the influence on religious studies of a Protestant worldview. 
The primacy of orthodox belief for Protestant soteriology was reconstituted as the 
central concern for religious studies when the field was formulated in the nineteenth 
century. A focus on doctrine led to a focus on doctrinal texts, on those portions of 
texts that could be interpreted as doctrinal, and on doctrinal interpretations of ritual 
and devotional practices.
The problem with this privileging of textuality is that it has limited the study of 
tantra in significant ways. This is especially the case with contemporary communities 
within which a vibrant “lived tantra” is practiced without reference to doctrinal texts. 
And it is also true historically for communities that depended on oral and non-​literary 
traditions and for those outside the Vedic and mainstream institutions of legitimation. 
While recent decades have seen expansions into a variety of methodologies that com­
plement textual studies, we focus here on the much welcome growth in ethnographic 
studies of tantra. This growing trend has culminated in works such as The Ethnography 
of Tantra: Textures and Contexts of Living Tantric Traditions (2023), edited by Carola 
Lorea and Rohit Singh. Growing out of cultural anthropology, folklore, and other 
forms of fieldwork, these diverse ethnographic studies of tantra complement, ex­
tend, and in some cases can correct the insights of the dominant textual approaches

--- PAGE 36 ---
Tantric Studies      11
 
and methodologies. Some notable uses of ethnography and fieldwork-​based anthro­
pology of religion include Stan Mumford’s study of lamas and shamans in Nepal 
(1989), Jeanne Openshaw’s study of the Bāuls of greater Bengal (2004), Patricia Q. 
Campbell’s study of the ritual practices of two tantric centers in Toronto (2011), June 
McDaniels’ studies of Bengali popular religious traditions (1989, 2004), Cody Bahir’s 
several publications on modern Taiwanese tantric groups (2013, 2018, 2020, and 
others), and Jeffrey Lidke’s study of goddess traditions and mandala in Nepal (2017). 
Sthaneshwar Timalsina (2011) explores cross-​cultural aspects of tantric studies, while 
Sukanya Sarbadhikary (2015) combines fieldwork with textual studies in her exam­
ination of Vaiṣṇava traditions in Bengal, including groundbreaking interviews of 
members of contemporary tantric communities. Lorea (2017, 2018) uses fieldwork to 
raise issues regarding secrecy and textuality. The late Jarrod Hyam (2019) conducted 
fieldwork among indigenous healers in India, Sikkim, and Nepal for his doctoral dis­
sertation, while further fieldwork in Himalayan communities has been carried out 
by E. Halperin (2019) and Arik Moran (2018, 2021). Moran also helped to produce 
documentaries on Himalayan rituals and communities in the films Chidra (Moran 
and Harel 2018) and Avatara (Moran and Harel 2020). Anway Mukhopadhyay (2018) 
used fieldwork to examine the role of the goddess as a corpse in tantric traditions. 
Sravana Borkataky-​Varma (see ­chapter 39, this volume) has conducted extensive 
fieldwork among tantric communities in Assam, as has Hugh Urban (2018, 2019, 
forthcoming). These are indeed exciting times for such rich academic encounters with 
lived tantra as such studies promise to complement the many textual and historio­
graphic studies that have come before them.
Cognitive Approaches: Conceptual 
Metaphors, Neuroscience, and  
Other Recent Trends
Since the 1980s, very interesting methods for studying language, metaphor, and concep­
tualization have been developed within the field of cognitive linguistics, most notably 
the conceptual metaphor theory first proposed by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson 
(1980).18 Johnson (1987, xiv–​xv) argues that conceptual metaphor may be
conceived as a pervasive mode of understanding by which we project patterns from 
one domain of experience in order to structure another domain of a different kind. 
So conceived, metaphor is not merely a linguistic mode of expression; rather, it is 
one of the chief cognitive structures by which we are able to have coherent, ordered 
experiences that we can reason about and make sense of. Through metaphor, we 
make use of patterns that obtain in our physical experience to organize our more ab­
stract understanding.

--- PAGE 37 ---
12      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
Metaphor theory helps us consider the nuances and deeper meanings of tantric lan­
guage, as well as the embodied experiences of ritual practices expressed in such lan­
guage. In a number of works over the past several decades Glen Hayes (2003, 2005, 
2006, 2014; chapter 30 in this volume) has used conceptual metaphor theory to ex­
plore subtle-​body systems and cosmologies in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā ritual manuals. 
Conceptual metaphor theory was further developed into conceptual blending 
theory by Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner (2002), and Hayes has explored the 
application of this methodology to the study of tantric texts (2012b; chapter 30, this 
volume).19 Sthaneshwar Timalsina has used methods and concepts from a range of 
cognitive studies in his several recent works (2005, 2007, 2012a, 2012b, 2015a, 2015b, 
2016, 2020). Timalsina has also made innovative use of recent “attention theory” in 
the study of tantric visualization and meditative practices (this volume, ­chapter 29). 
Cognitive linguistics grew partly out of the “cognitive revolution” of the later twen­
tieth century (countering B. F. Skinner’s strict behaviorism) and the larger interdis­
ciplinary fields of cognitive science.20 Collaborations with anthropology, religious 
studies, and other disciplines led to the modern cognitive science of religion;21 and 
it is likely that we will see more cognitive studies being used by scholars in tantric 
studies in the future.
Neurobiology and neuroscience contribute another critical dimension to the 
recent cognitive science of religion.22 Many of these works come from the arena 
of the laboratory and “hard science.” Bringing these discoveries over into the 
humanities and social sciences is still in its early stages.23 Geoffrey Samuel and 
Maria Kozhevnikov (­chapter 7, this volume) exemplify how tantric studies is leading 
the way in bridging the natural sciences and the humanities. Patrick McNamara’s 
work in neuroscience (2001, 2009) partly inspired an essay by Hayes (2014) using 
neuroscientific concepts in the study of Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā texts. McNamara’s work 
was also the focus of an excellent symposium featuring Ann Taves, Jared Lindahl, 
Travis Chilcott, and Kelly Bulkeley (Taves et al. 2011). This dialogue, featuring 
four scholars who are doing groundbreaking work in the cognitive science of reli­
gion, illustrates some of the dynamics emerging as scholars of religious studies en­
gage with neuroscientists such as McNamara. Taves (2009) has also suggested new 
methods and perspectives for studying religious experience.24 Travis Chilcott (2015, 
2016) has used cognitive approaches to understand the dynamics of perception and 
self-​identity in Hindu devotionalism. Kelly Bulkeley (1994, 2004, 2005, 2017) has 
made extensive studies of dreams and the dream process, which can be applied to 
cognitive studies of religion. Loriliai Biernacki (2023) explores issues of conscious­
ness and panentheism in the work of Abhinavagupta, including tantric perspectives 
on information systems.
As with any dynamic growth of scholarship, there are many new publications and 
collaborations in the field of the cognitive science of religion, which we do not have time 
to fully survey here. At noted learned societies there are now established program units, 
such as the Cognitive Science of Religion Group at the American Academy of Religion

--- PAGE 38 ---
Tantric Studies      13
 
and smaller societies, such as the Society for Tantric Studies, have included panels on 
the cognitive science of religion in recent conferences. Readers could certainly add their 
own examples to this list.
There are a number of excellent academic journals dedicated to the cognitive science 
of religion, such as the Journal of the Cognitive Science of Religion, Journal of Cognitive 
Historiography, Journal of Consciousness Studies, Journal of Cognition and Culture, 
Religion, Brain, & Behavior, and the International Journal for the Psychology of Religion. 
Of special note is a recent issue of the Journal of Cognitive Historiography (Vol. 7, No. 1–​2, 
2022). This included an essay by Jed Forman (2022) on examining yogic perception and 
extramission using cognitive science; a study by Roman Palitsky, Isaac F. Young, and 
Ben Williams (2022) on applying cognitive insights from the renowned Śaiva polymath 
Abhinavagupta (ca. 950–​1016 ce) to an understanding of dramaturgy; and a study by 
Jared Lindahl, Willoughby Britton, and David Cooper (2022) on developing a cogni­
tive model of meditation and its associated emotions. These are just some of the many 
intriguing results of the collaboration between cognitive science, religious studies, and 
tantric studies.
Although intended for a general audience Niki Clements’ Religion: Mental Religion 
(2016) brings together many scholars of cognitive science and religious studies. 
This collection provides us with a good “snapshot” of the state of the field as of 2016, 
with chapters devoted to evolutionary psychology, cognitive linguistics, conceptual 
blending (Hayes 2016), neuroscience, entheogens, theory of mind, and dream states. In 
2018, an important volume on the study of religious language using a range of cogni­
tive approaches, Religion, Language, and the Human Mind, Paul Chilton and Monika 
Kopytowska, eds., was published, including an updated version of Hayes 2006 as well as 
chapters on metaphors in a range of world religions.
These developments and collaborations, including the chapters in this volume, dem­
onstrate that the broad range of cognitive studies of religion is indeed a promising 
avenue for emerging scholarly inquiry in the field of tantric studies. Incorporating cog­
nitive studies into tantric studies is based on this simple premise: some of the most in­
teresting domains of human experience can be investigated and analyzed using insights 
and methods from cognitive linguistics and cognitive science.
The tantric traditions are daunting in their complexity, posing a challenge to re­
search. Interdisciplinary methods and multidisciplinary projects are, therefore, not 
simply a nicety but instead a necessity. The cognitive study of religion exemplifies the 
benefits that an interdisciplinary approach to the study of tantra can yield. Even more 
broadly, philological studies—​long dominant in the study of Asian religions—​can no 
longer be relied upon as the sole method for the study of tantra. The complexity of 
the object of inquiry requires an equally complex approach, including ethnographic, 
ritual, art historical, architectural, genre, gender, sociological, medical history, psy­
chological, and economic methods. Such wide-​ranging inquiries will enable the field 
of tantric studies to continue to grow and develop with the vitality that the subject 
matter deserves.

--- PAGE 39 ---
14      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
Appendix
 Institutions and Collaborations for  
the Study of Tantra
Much of the inspiration for this volume can be traced back through the decades to 
fruitful interactions and collaborations with colleagues at numerous conferences and 
on publication projects. Following the growth of tantric studies in the latter half of the 
twentieth century, the Society for Tantric Studies (STS) was formed in the 1980s by 
James Sanford, Charles Orzech, and Glen Hayes (see Hayes 2011, 2012a; Payne 2004) in 
order to provide a collaborative venue for scholars of different tantric traditions (e.g., 
Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain), geographical regions (South, Inner/​Central, East, and 
Southeast Asia), and disciplines (e.g., history of religions, philology, anthropology, and 
sociology). As noted in an early draft of the bylaws from 1985 (Hayes 2011, 224),
The goal of the Society for Tantric Studies is to deepen the understanding of the his­
tory, nature, and dynamics of the tantric traditions, and to share this knowledge 
with academic colleagues. To accomplish these aims, the society shall: disseminate 
information and stimulate discussion by sponsoring or participating in appropriate 
panels and conferences; distribute to members such materials as membership lists, 
panel and/​or conference papers, and a bulletin; and in general further the interests of 
this field of study.
Beginning with the first conference in 1987 and continuing every few years down to the 
present time (2019 being the most recent as of this publication), the STS has allowed 
scholars from around the world to gather in order to share their individual research, 
debate matters of category, explore major issues in the field, and consider emerging 
methodologies and topics.25 These academic trends also led to the creation of tantric 
studies program units within the American Academy of Religion (AAR), beginning first 
with separate panels in the late 1980s and 1990s, leading to a seminar in tantric studies 
from 1995 to 2000, and eventually to an ongoing tantric studies program unit (recently 
renewed until 2027).26
For more than seven decades, the Institut Français de Pondichéry27 and École 
française d’Extrême-​Orient in Pondicherry,28 spearheaded by Jean Filliozat and now 
directed by Dominic Goodall, have made important contributions to tantric studies. 
These include enormous contributions by Pandit N. R. Bhatt and Hélène Brunner in the 
earlier decades of the institute’s history. The Collection Indologie book series29 is one of 
the most important resources in Hindu tantric studies.
Colleagues in Europe and elsewhere have also created invaluable venues and 
associations for collaborating on tantric studies. Beginning in 1995, the Asiatica 
Association in Italy published the International Journal of Tantric Studies, with Enrica 
Garzilli as the editor in chief. This journal ran to ten volumes, the last volume being 
2014.30 Also in 2014, the first issue of the journal was made available in both print and

--- PAGE 40 ---
Tantric Studies      15
 
Kindle formats on Amazon.31 The journal’s statement of its “aims and mission” specifies 
that “[p]‌articular attention is paid to the Trika schools of Kashmir.”
The University of Hamburg has established the Centre for Tantric Studies, under the 
leadership of Harunaga Isaacson.32 The teaching program of the Department of Indian 
and Tibetan Studies began offering courses of instruction on topics related to tantric 
studies in 2007; its doctoral program has resulted in many high-​quality theses in tantric 
studies. The center also makes e-​texts available online, which includes both Śaiva and 
Buddhist materials in the collection.33 Several conferences, as well as workshops have 
been organized by the center, and it actively maintains a number of research projects on 
topics such as the early history of tantra and specific texts.
The Austrian Academy of Sciences in Vienna has been a hub for research on 
Vaiṣṇavism, led by the late Gerhard Oberhammer and his former doctoral students. 
The academy publishes the ongoing project Tāntrikābhidhānakośa (“A Dictionary of 
Technical Terms from Hindu Tantric Literature”), co-​edited by Marion Rastelli and 
Dominic Goodall, which includes entries on key terms, written in English, French, and 
German, from a range of Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva tantric literature.34
Also in Vienna, there is the Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien 
(Association for Tibetan and Buddhist Studies), which is located in the Institute for 
South Asian, Tibetan and Buddhist Studies at the University of Vienna.35 Although 
tantra is not the central focus of the center, in its publication series—​Wiener Studien zur 
Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde (Vienna Series for Tibetan and Buddhist Studies)—​
it has published several volumes on topics related to tantric studies.36
In London, the School of Oriental and African Studies has the Centre for Yoga 
Studies,37 which has supported tantric studies through efforts such as the Hatha Yoga 
Project,38 organized by James Mallinson, Jason Birch, and Mark Singleton. The Oxford 
Centre for Hindu Studies,39 led by Gavin Flood, offers a variety of programs, confer­
ences, and projects dealing with tantric studies, among other subjects. Alexis Sanderson, 
now emeritus from All Souls College at Oxford, has for several decades produced foun­
dational works in the field, especially on Śaiva tantric texts; and his doctoral students 
have become leading scholars in the field. His successor, Diwakar Acharya, continues 
with important research and publications in tantric studies. In Paris, the École française 
d’Extrême-​Orient has supported major research in the field, especially that of Dominic 
Goodall, who contributed a chapter to this volume.40 These superb programs have de­
veloped many fine scholars of tantric studies who continue to support the growth of 
the field.
Another important area of development which supports tantric studies involves 
the preservation of manuscripts and making them, as well as translations, avail­
able on online databases. The Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project has for 
decades microfilmed and later digitized many tantric texts found in Nepal.41 Other no­
table efforts include the Göttingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages, 
which has many texts in Sanskrit and other languages, including many tantric texts;42 
the Muktabodha Indological Research Institute, which has been instrumental in 
making available editions of Śaiva tantras and transcriptions of unpublished tantric

--- PAGE 41 ---
16      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
manuscripts;43 the Buddhist Canons Research Database, which offers complete bib­
liographic information for the roughly five thousand texts contained in the Tibetan 
Buddhist canon;44 the 84,000 Project, which is undertaking translation of the Tibetan 
Buddhist collections known as the Kangyur and Tengyur;45 and the BDK International 
Tripitaka project, which is making available translations of this core collection of 
Buddhist texts.46 The latter two efforts are perhaps the greatest translation efforts in the 
modern period—​analogous to the Buddhist translation efforts from the fourth to the 
twelfth centuries but in a much narrower time frame.
Scholarship in tantric studies has also been nourished in a variety of other academic 
settings around the world, including, but not limited to, the following institutions: 
the University of California in Berkeley and Santa Barbara; the University of Virginia; 
Harvard University; the University of Chicago; the University of Pennsylvania; 
Columbia University; the University of Washington; the University of Colorado, 
Boulder; the Naropa Institute; Oxford University; the University of Hamburg; the 
University of Vienna; the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris; and the 
École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris. There are likely others (and apologies for any 
which we have missed), which we hope to learn more about. These institutions have 
offered courses, and in some cases specific programs in tantric studies; have faculty who 
are specialists in tantric studies; and have graduated students who have subsequently 
contributed to the field. All of the above scholarly efforts demonstrate that the field of 
tantric studies has found an enduring and important place in the modern academy and 
suggest that the future is most promising. We hope that this volume also contributes to 
the growth of the field and that it resonates with many of the exploratory efforts begun 
among an informal group of friends and colleagues back in the 1980s.
Notes
	1.	 We are using the lowercase form “tantra,” as opposed to the uppercase “Tantra,” as the latter 
suggests some underlying unity and essence. We prefer the former as there are so many var­
iations of the category that any monolithic or essentialist view tends to obscure more than it 
reveals. This volume itself illustrates some of the many manifestations of tantra throughout 
South, Central/​Inner, Southeast, and East Asia—​as well as in a global setting since the nine­
teenth century. In explaining the traditional etymology of “tantra,” André Padoux (2017, 7) 
notes that from “the verbal root TAN, which means ‘to extend,’ ‘to spread,’ hence ‘to spin 
out,’ ‘weave,’ ‘display,’ ‘put forth,’ and ‘compose’ [the term comes by extension to mean] 
‘system,’ ‘doctrine,’ or ‘work.’ A Tantra is thus a work, a text—​any text.” Hence we find the 
subsequent meanings of a discourse “woven” with the “threads” of words and thought.
	2.	 See Davidson 2017a, 2021, 2023; White 2021; as well as the edited volume by Acri and Rosati 
2023.
	3.	 On the categories of “folk” versus “elite,” see Acri and Rosati 2023, introduction.
	4.	 See Davidson 2021, 2.
	5.	 See Sanderson 1995, 2001, 2009. A useful overview of academic perspectives on the dating 
of tantra may be found in Hatley 2020. Regarding the origins and sectarian claims implicit 
in these terms, see Bisschop 2020.

--- PAGE 42 ---
Tantric Studies      17
 
	 6.	 As important as the Yoginitantras are, they are not the earliest Buddhist tantras or tan­
tric texts.
	 7.	 Davidson 2017b, 1. On the chronology of the Buddhist tantras, see Sugiki, this volume.
	 8.	 Wedemeyer’s conclusions should be understood in the context of the limitations imposed 
by his methodology and presuppositions. See Davidson 2015, 373; cf. Nemec 2014, 273.
	 9.	 See Goodall 2015 on this important text. This dating has been criticized by Davidson 2002, 
386, n. 105. A countercriticism may be found in Hatley 2016a.
	10.	 For the modern era, the model of unidirectional influence has been challenged in post-​
colonialist studies. See, for example, Strube 2022 and Tweed 2015. In Tweed 2015, he uses the 
term “translocative” to identify complex multidirectional influences between traditions.
	11.	 Shaman Hatley notes (personal communication, April 16, 2023) that “It’s also important 
to bear in mind that our manuscript record for early Śaivism is far more fragmentary than 
for Buddhism, partly due to the poor preservation of manuscripts in India on account of 
climate, and since its land of export was humid Southeast Asia rather than document-​rich 
China and climate-​favorable Central Asia. Still, Indonesia provides fascinating textual ev­
idence for the early-​medieval transmission of Atimārga and Mantramārga Śaivism.” See, 
for example, Acri and Rosati 2023.
	12.	 See Hayes 2011, 222. See Brooks 1990, 52–​72, and Smith 1982, 1–​8.
	13.	 For a brief overview of matters of approach and definition, see Hatley 2020.
	14.	 Regarding the matters of manuscript editions as markers of a textual corpus, David 
Gordon White (personal communication, April 18, 2023) notes: “When I was counting 
MSS of the Yoga Sutra several years ago, I was struck by the vast number of MSS under the 
heading of ‘Tantra’ in Indian archive collections. The majority of these MSS are short, often 
one-​ to two-​pages long, and are simply loosely connected sets of spells and accompanying 
rituals for some magical or sorcery-​related end. If one were to define ‘tantra’ on the quanti­
fiable basis of numbers of MSS pages, mumbo-​jumbo sorcery cum demonology would be 
the leading category. And this is the written tradition.”
	15.	 William Ward, A View of the History, Literature, and Religion of the Hindoos, London: 
Kingsbury, Parbury, and Allen, 1817, vol. 1, p. 247. Cited in Urban 2010, 125.
	16.	 See, for example, the discussions in Urban 2003, 2010.
	17.	 Relevant works are far too numerous to list here, but most notable are Stephanie Jamison 
1996 on women in the early Vedic tradition, Laurie Patton 2002 on women in early 
Brahminical traditions, Wendy Doniger 1982 and 1985 on ideas of women and sexu­
ality in a broad lens on Hindu traditions, Liz Wilson 1996 on early Buddhism, and Tracy 
Pintchman 1994 and 2001 on the goddess in India. This does not even begin to address the 
rather voluminous anthropological literature on women’s roles across Asian traditions.
	18.	 Notable works also include Lakoff 1987, 1993, 2008; Lakoff and Johnson 1999; Lakoff 
and Turner 1989; Lakoff and Nunez 2000. Useful overviews on metaphor theory and its 
applications may be found in Ortony 1993 and Gibbs 2008.
	19.	 See also Slingerland 2005 and 2018, who applies this method to Chinese religion.
	20.	 For a useful overview of cognitive linguistics, see The Bloomsbury Companion to Cognitive 
Linguistics (2015), edited by Jeannette Littlemore and John R. Taylor.
	21.	 Useful overviews may be found in The Oxford Handbook of the Cognitive Science of Religion 
(2022), edited by Justin Barrett, and in White 2021, which is an introductory textbook on 
the field.
	22.	 See, for example, the works of Ashbrook 1993; d’Aquili and Newberg 1993, 1999, and 2000; 
Gelhorn and Kiely 1972; Persinger 1987; Andresen 2000; Koch 2004; and McNamara 2001, 
2009, and 2016, among others.

--- PAGE 43 ---
18      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
	23.	 See Hayes and Timalsina 2017 for an overview of the uses of cognitive science and neu­
roscience in the study of yoga and tantra. This introduces a special issue of Religions: 
Cognitive Science and the Study of Yoga and Tantra, which includes innovative essays by 
Timalsina 2016, Lidke 2016, Payne 2016, Ozawa-​da Silva 2016, Biernacki 2016, Chilcott 
2016, and Ruff 2016.
	24.	 See also Geertz 2016 and Goldberg 2005, 2008.
	25.	 https://​www.tan​tric​stud​ies.org/​
	26.	 https://​pap​ers.aar​web.org/​pu/​tant​ric-​stud​ies-​unit
	27.	 https://​www.ifpin​dia.org/​resea​rch/​indol​ogy/​
	28.	 https://​www.efeo.fr/​base.php?code=​227
	29.	 https://​publi​cati​ons.efeo.fr/​en/​coll​ecti​ons/​col​lect​ion-​indolo​gie
	30.	 https://​m.faceb​ook.com/​p/​Intern​atio​nal-​Jour​nal-​of-​Tant​ric-​Stud​ies-​IJTS-​1000​6370​4731​
575/​?ref​src=​dep​reca​ted&_​rdr
	31.	 https://​www.ama​zon.com/​Intern​atio​nal-​Jour​nal-​Tant​ric-​Stud​ies-​Num​ber/​dp/​150​
0713​35X/​ref=​sr_​1_​1?crid=​2E8OXV​M5YL​0JP&keywo​rds=​Intern​atio​nal+​Jour​nal+​of+​
Tant​ric+​Stud​ies&qid=​167​7339​363&spre​fix=​intern​atio​nal+​jour​nal+​of+​tant​ric+​stud​
ies%2Caps%2C155&sr=​8-​1
	32.	 https://​www.tant​ric-​stud​ies.uni-​hamb​urg.de/​resea​rch/​proje​cts/​manj​usri​yamu​laka​
lpa.html
	33.	 https://​www.tant​ric-​stud​ies.uni-​hamb​urg.de/​resea​rch/​e-​texts/​etext-​ref​eren​ces.html
	34.	 https://​www.tant​ric-​stud​ies.uni-​hamb​urg.de/​resea​rch/​publi​cati​ons/​tantr​ikab​hidh​anak​
osa-​3.html. Three of the projected five volumes have been published (2000, 2004, 2013). 
The entries are in different languages because in the beginning of the project, Andre 
Padoux and Helene Brunner, the first editors, contributed entries written in French.
	35.	 https://​stb.uni​vie.ac.at/​
	36.	 https://​stb.uni​vie.ac.at/​pub​lika​tion​srei​hen/​wie​ner-​stud​ien-​zur-​tibe​tolo​gie-​und-​budd​
hism​usku​nde-​wstb/​
	37.	 https://​www.soas.ac.uk/​about/​resea​rch-​cent​res/​cen​tre-​yoga-​stud​ies
	38.	 https://​www.soas.ac.uk/​about/​event/​hatha-​yoga-​proj​ect-​unders​tand​ing-​hist​ory-​physi​
cal-​yoga
	39.	 https://​ochs.org.uk/​
	40.	 https://​www.efeo.fr/​index.php
	41.	 https://​www.aai.uni-​hamb​urg.de/​en/​forsch​ung/​ngmcp.html
	42.	 http://​gre​til.sub.uni-​goe​ttin​gen.de/​gre​til.htm
	43.	 https://​muk​tabo​dha.org/​
	44.	 http://​databa​ses.aibs.colum​bia.edu/​?sub=​about
	45.	 https://​read.84000.co/​
	46.	 https://​www.bdk​amer​ica.org/​tripit​aka-​list/​
References
Acri, Andrea. 2023. “Introduction.” In Tantra, Magic, and Vernacular Religions in Monsoon 
Asia: Texts, Practices, and Practitioners from the Margins, edited by Andrea Acri and Paolo E. 
Rosati, 1–​11. London and New York: Routledge.
Acri, Andrea, and Paolo E. Rosati, eds. 2023. Tantra, Magic, and Vernacular Religions in Monsoon 
Asia: Texts, Practices, and Practitioners from the Margins. London and New York: Routledge.

--- PAGE 44 ---
Tantric Studies      19
 
Andreeva, Anna, and Dominic Steavu, eds. 2015. Transforming the Void: Embryological 
Discourse and Reproductive Imagery in East Asian Religions. Leiden and New York: Brill.
Andresen, Jensine. 2000. “Meditation Meets Behavioral Medicine: The Story of Experimental 
Research in Medicine.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 7: 17–​76.
Asad, Talal. 1993. Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and 
Islam. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ashbrook, James B. 1993. Brain, Culture, and the Human Spirit: Essays from an Emergent 
Evolutionary Perspective. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Bahir, Cody. 2013. “Buddhist Master Wuguang’s (1918–​2000) Taiwanese Web of the Colonial, 
Exilic, and Han.” E-​Journal of East and Central Asian Religions 1: 81–​93. https://​doi.org/​
10.2218/​eje​car.2013.1.737.
Bahir, Cody. 2018. “Replanting the Bodhi Tree: Buddhist Sectarianism and Zhenyan 
Revivalism.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies 3rd series, no. 20: 
95–​129.
Bahir, Cody. 2020. “Taiwanese Tantra: Guru Wuguang’s Art of Yogic Nourishment and the 
Esoteric Path (1966).” In Buddhism and Medicine: An Anthology of Modern and Contemporary 
Sources, edited by C. Pierce Salguero, 137–​146. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bakker, Hans. 2014. The World of the Skandapurāṇa: North India in the Sixth and Seventh 
Centuries. Leiden: Brill.
Barrett, Justin L., ed. 2022. The Oxford Handbook of the Cognitive Science of Religion. Oxford 
and New York: Oxford University Press. Accessed June 27, 2023. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​
oxfor​dhb/​978019​0693​350.001.0001.
Biernacki, Loriliai. 2007. Renowned Goddess of Desire: Women, Sex and Speech in Tantra. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Biernacki, Loriliai. 2016. “Connecting Consciousness to Physical Causality: Abhinavagupta’s 
Phenomenology of Subjectivity and Tononi’s Integrated Information Theory.” Religions 7, 
no. 7: 87. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7070​087.
Biernacki, Loriliai. 2023. The Matter of Wonder: Abhinavagupta’s Panentheism and the New 
Materialism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bisschop, Peter C. 2020. “From Mantramārga back to Atimārga: Atimārga as a Self-​Referential 
Term.” In Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions: Essays in Honour of Alexis G. J. S. Sanderson, 
edited by Dominic Goodall, Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson, and Srilata Raman, 15–​32. 
Leiden: Brill.
Brooks, Douglas Renfrew. 1990. The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Śākta 
Tantrism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 1999. “Buddhist Deities and Mantras in the Hindu Tantras: I, The 
‘Tantrasārasaṃgraha’ and the ‘Īśanaśivagurudevapaddhati.’ ” Indo-​Iranian Journal 42, no. 4: 
303–​334.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2000. “Buddhist Deities and Mantras in the Hindu Tantras: II, The 
‘Śrīvidyārṇavatantra’ and the ‘Tantrasāra.’ ” Indo-​Iranian Journal 43, no. 1: 27–​48.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2000–​2001. The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities. Vol. 1, The 
Pantheon of the Mantramahodadhi, xxx, 280, 66; Vol. 2, The Pantheons of the Prapañcasāra 
and the Śāradātilaka, xviii, 389, 22. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2007. Maṇḍalas and Yantras in the Hindu Traditions. Rev. ed. New 
Delhi: D. K. Printworld. First published in 2003.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2016. The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities, 2 vols. Rev. ed. New 
Delhi: Aditya Prakashan/​Biblia Impex.

--- PAGE 45 ---
20      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
Bulkeley, Kelly. 1994. The Wilderness of Dreams: Exploring the Religious Meanings of Dreams in 
Modern Western Culture. SUNY Series in Dream Studies. Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Bulkeley, Kelly. 2004. The Wondering Brain: Thinking about Religion with and beyond Cognitive 
Neuroscience. New York: Routledge.
Bulkeley, Kelly. 2005. Soul, Psyche, Brain: New Directions in the Study of Religion and Brain–​
Mind Science. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bulkeley, Kelly. 2017. An Introduction to the Psychology of Dreaming. 2nd ed. New York: Praeger.
Burchett, Patton E. 2019. A Genealogy of Devotion: Bhakti, Tantra, Yoga, and Sufism in North 
India. New York and Chichester, UK: Columbia University Press.
Campbell, Patricia Q. 2011. Knowing Body, Moving Mind: Ritualizing and Learning at Two 
Buddhist Centers. New York: Oxford University Press.
Chilcott, Travis. 2015. “Directly Perceiving Kṛṣṇa: Accounting for Perceptual Experiences of 
Deities within the Framework of Naturalism.” Religion 45: 532–​552.
Chilcott, Travis. 2016. “Transforming Adverse Cognition on the Path of Bhakti: Rule-​Based 
Devotion, ‘My-​ness’ and the Existential Condition of Bondage.” Religions 7: 49. https://​doi.
org/​10.3390/​rel​7050​049
Chilton, Paul, and Monika Kopytowska, eds. 2018. Religion, Language, and the Human Mind. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Clements, Niki Kasumi, ed. 2016. Religion: Mental Religion. MacMillan Interdisciplinary 
Handbooks. New York: Gale; Cengage.
Dalton, Jacob. 2004. “The Development of Perfection: The Interiorization of Buddhist Ritual in 
the Eighth and Ninth Centuries.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 32: 1–​30.
Dalton, Jacob. 2005. “A Crisis of Doxography: How Tibetans Organized Tantra during the 8th–​
12th Centuries.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 28, no. 1: 115–​181.
Dalton, Jacob. 2016. “How Dhāraṇīs WERE Pro-​Tantric: Liturgies, Ritual Manuals, and 
the Origins of the Tantras.” In Tantric Traditions in Transmission and Translation, ed­
ited by David B. Gray and Richard Ryan Overbey, 199–​229. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press.
D’Aquili, Eugene G., and Andrew B. Newberg. 1993. “Religious and Mystical States: A 
Neuropsychological Model.” Zygon: Journal of Religion and Science 28: 177–​199.
D’Aquili, Eugene G., and Andrew B. Newberg. 1999. The Mystical Mind: Probing the Biology of 
Religious Experience. Minneapolis: Fortress.
D’Aquili, Eugene G., and Andrew B. Newberg. 2000. “The Neuropsychology of Religious and 
Spiritual Experience.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 7: 251–​266.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2011. “Sources and Inspirations: Esoteric Buddhism in South Asia.” In 
Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia, edited by Orzech, Charles D., Henrik H. 
Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, 19–​24. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2015. “Review: Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology, 
and Transgression in the Indian Traditions.” History of Religions 54, no. 3: 371–​375.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2017a. “Magicians, Sorcerers and Witches: Considering Pretantric, Non-​
sectarian Sources of Tantric Practices.” Religions 8: 188. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​8090​188.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2017b. “Studies in Dhāraṇī Literature IV: A Nāga Altar in 5th Century 
India.” In Consecration Rituals in South Asia, edited by István Keul, 123–​170. Leiden and 
Boston: Brill.

--- PAGE 46 ---
Tantric Studies      21
 
Davidson, Ronald M. 2021. “Esoteric Buddhism in the Matrix of Early Medieval India: An 
Overview.” In On the Regional Development of Early Medieval Buddhist Monasteries in South 
Asia, edited by Abhishek Sing Amar, Nicolas Morrissey, and Akira Shimada, 1–​40. RINDAS 
Series of Working Papers 34. Kyoto: Center for South Asian Studies, Ryukoku University.
Davidson, Ronald. 2023. “More Pre-​Tantric Sources of Tantrism: Skulls and Skull-​Cups.” In 
Tantra, Magic, and Vernacular Religions in Monsoon Asia: Texts, Practices, and Practitioners 
from the Margins, edited by Andrea Acri and Paolo E. Rosati, 12–​39. London and New York: 
Routledge.
Dempsey, Corinne. 2005. The Goddess Lives in Upstate New York: Breaking Convention and 
Making Home at a North American Hindu Temple. New York: Oxford University Press.
Diemberger, Hildegard. 2007. When a Woman Becomes a Dynasty: The Samding Dorje Phagmo 
of Tibet. New York: Columbia University Press.
Doniger, Wendy. 1982. Women, Androgynes, and Other Mythical Beasts. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Doniger, Wendy. 1985. Tales of Sex and Violence: Folklore, Sacrifice, and Danger in the Jaiminīya 
Brāhmaṇa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Douven, Igor. 2021. “Abduction.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by Edward 
N. Zalta. Summer 2021 ed. https://​plato.stanf​ord.edu/​archi​ves/​sum2​021/​entr​ies/​abduct​ion/​.
English, Elizabeth. 2002. Vajrayoginī: Her Visualizations, Rituals, and Forms. Boston: Wisdom 
Publications.
Fauconnier, Gilles, and Mark Turner. 2002. The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and The 
Mind’s Hidden Complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Forman, Jed. 2022. “Seeing Afar: Yogic Perception, Extramission, and Intellectual History.” 
Journal of Cognitive Historiography 7, no. 1–​2: 66–​88. https://​doi.org/​10.1558/​jch.22648.
Garrett, Francis. 2008. Religion, Medicine and the Human Embryo in Tibet. London and New 
York: Routledge.
Gayley, Holly. 2016. Love Letters from Golok: A Tantric Couple in Modern Tibet. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Geertz, Armin W. 2016. “Cognitive Science.” In The Oxford Handbook of the Study of Religion, 
edited by Michael Staussberg and Steven Engler, 97–​111. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gelhorn, Ernst, and William F. Kiely. 1972. “Mystical States of Consciousness: 
Neurophysiological and Clinical Aspects.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 154: 
399–​405.
Gibbs, Raymond W., Jr. 2008. The Cambridge Handbook of Metaphor and Thought. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Goldberg, Ellen. 2005. “Cognitive Science and Hathayoga.” Zygon: Journal of Religion and 
Science 40: 613–​629.
Goldberg, Ellen. 2008. “Cognitive Science.” In Studying Hinduism: Key Concepts and Methods, 
edited by Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby, 59–​71. London: Routledge.
Goodall, Dominic, ed. 2015. The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra. In 
collaboration with Alexis Sanderson and Harunaga Isaacson. Collection Indologie 128/​Early 
Tantra Series 1. Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry, École française d’Extrême-​
Orient, Asien-​Afrika Institut, Universität Hamburg.
Gough, Ellen. 2021. Making a Mantra: Tantric Ritual and Renunciation on the Jain Path to 
Liberation. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Gray, David B. 2016. “Tantra and the Tantric Traditions of Hinduism and Buddhism.” In The 
Oxford Encyclopedia of Buddhism, edited by Richard K. Payne and Georgios T. Halkias.

--- PAGE 47 ---
22      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​
9340​378.013.59.
Gray, David. 2023. The Buddhist Tantras: A Guide. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Halperin, Ehud. 2019. “Is the Goddess Haḍimbā Tantric? Negotiating Power in a Western 
Himalayan Sacrificial Arena.” International Journal of Hindu Studies 23: 195–​212. https://​doi.
org/​10.1007/​s11​407-​019-​09259-​y.
Harding, Sarah. 2013. Machik’s Complete Explanation: Clarifying the Meaning of Chöd. Ithaca, 
NY and Boulder, CO: Snow Lion Publications.
Hatley, Shaman. 2016a. “Śakti in Early Tantric Śaivism: Historical Observations on Goddesses, 
Cosmology and Ritual in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā.” In Goddesses in Tantric Hinduism: 
History, Doctrine, Practice, edited by Bjarne Wernicke Olesen, 16–​32. New York: Routledge.
Hatley, Shaman. 2016b. “Converting the Ḍākinī: Goddess Cults and Tantras of the Yoginīs be­
tween Buddhism and Śaivism.” In Tantric Traditions in Transmission and Translation, edited 
by David Gray and Ryan Richard Overbey, 37–​86. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hatley, Shaman. 2020. “Tantra (Overview).” In Hinduism and Tribal Religions, edited by 
Pankaj Jain, R. Sherma, and M. Khanna, 1–​11. Encyclopedia of Indian Religions. Dordrecht: 
Springer. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​978-​94-​024-​1036-​5_​336-​1.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2003. “Metaphoric Worlds and Yoga in the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Tantric 
Traditions of Medieval Bengal.” In Yoga: The Indian Tradition, edited by Ian Whicher and 
David Carpenter, 162–​184. New York: RoutledgeCurzon.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2005. “Contemporary Metaphor Theory and Alternative Views 
of Krishna and Rādhā in Vaishnava Sahajiyā Tantric Traditions.” In Alternative Krishnas: 
Regional and Vernacular Variations on a Hindu Deity, edited by Guy Beck, 19–​32. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2006. “The Guru’s Tongue: Metaphor, Imagery, and Vernacular 
Language in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Traditions.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist 
Studies 3: 41–​71.
Hayes, Glen A. 2011. “Tantric Studies: Issues, Methods, and Scholarly Collaborations.” The 
Journal of Hindu Studies 4: 221–​230. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​jhs/​hir​031.
Hayes, Glen A. 2012a. “Tantric Studies, Part 2, The Flagstaff Meetings: Issues, Methods, and 
Scholarly Collaborations.” The Journal of Hindu Studies 5: 137–​144. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​
jhs/​his​030.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2012b. “Conceptual Blending Theory, ‘Reverse Amnesia’, and the Study 
of Tantra.” The Journal of Hindu Studies 5: 193–​209.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2014. “Possible Selves, Body Schemas, and Sādhana: Using Cognitive 
Science and Neuroscience in the Study of Medieval Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Hindu Tantric Texts.” 
Religions 5: 684–​699. doi:10.3390/​rel5030684.
Hayes, Glen A. 2016. “Conceptual Blending and Religion.” In Religion: Mental Religion, edited 
by Nikki Kasumi Clements, 163–​178. MacMillan Interdisciplinary Handbooks. New York: 
Gale, Cengage.
Hayes, Glen A., and Sthaneshwar Timalsina. 2017. “Introduction to ‘Cognitive Science and the 
Study of Yoga and Tantra.’ ” Religions 8, no. 9: 181. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​8090​181.
Hyam, Jarrod. 2019. “The Transformational Body: Bāul and Jhākri Approaches to Embodied 
Healing.” PhD diss., University of Sydney.
Jamison, Stephanie. 1996. Sacrificed Wife/​Sacrificer’s Wife: Women, Ritual, and Hospitality in 
Ancient India. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, Mark. 1987. The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination, and 
Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 48 ---
Tantric Studies      23
 
Khanna, Madhu. 1986. “The Concept and Liturgy of the Śrīcakra based on Śivānanda’s Trilogy.” 
PhD diss., Oxford University.
Khanna, Madhu, ed. 2013. Śāktapramodaḥ of Deva Nandan Singh. New Delhi: D. K. Printworld.
Koch, Christof. 2004. The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological Approach. Englewood, 
NJ: Roberts and Company.
Lakoff, George. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the 
Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George. 1993. “The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor.” In Metaphor and Thought, ed­
ited by Andrew Ortony, 202–​251. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, George. 2008. “The Neural Theory of Metaphor.” In The Cambridge Handbook of 
Metaphor and Thought, edited by Raymond. W. Gibbs, Jr., 17–​38. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. https://​doi.org/​10.1017/​CBO97​8051​1816​802.003.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1999. Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its 
Challenge to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, George, and Rafael E. Nunez. 2000. Where Mathematics Comes From: How the 
Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Turner. 1989. More Than Cool Reason: A Field Guide to Poetic 
Metaphor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2016. “The Potential of the Bi-​Directional Gaze: A Call for Neuroscientific 
Research on the Simultaneous Activation of the Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nervous 
Systems through Tantric Practice.” Religions 7, no. 11: 132. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7110​132.
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2017. The Goddess Within and Beyond the Three Cities: Śākta Tantra and the 
Paradox of Power in Nepāla-​Maṇḍala. New Delhi: D. K. Printworld.
Lindahl, Jared R., Willoughby B. Britton, and David J. Cooper. 2022. “Fear and Terror in 
Buddhist Meditation: A Cognitive Model for Meditation-​Related Changes in Arousal 
and Affect.” Journal of Cognitive Historiography 7, no. 1–​2: 148–​171. https://​doi.org/​10.1558/​
jch.22807.
Littlemore, Jeannette, and John R. Taylor, eds. 2015. The Bloomsbury Companion to Cognitive 
Linguistics. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Lorea, Carola E. 2017. “The Difference between a Paṇḍit and a Wise Man: A Study of Bengali 
Songs as Literature against Literature.” Sanskrti Charcha/​Cultural Studies 1, no. 1: 8–​22.
Lorea, Carola E. 2018. “ ‘I Am Afraid of Telling You This, Lest You’d Be Scared Shitless!’: The 
Myth of Secrecy and the Study of the Esoteric Traditions of Bengal.” Religions 9, no. 6: 172. 
https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​9060​172. https://​www.mdpi.com/​2077-​1444/​9/​6/​172.
Lorea, Carola E., and Rohit Singh, eds. 2023. The Ethnography of Tantra: Textures and Contexts 
of Living Tantric Traditions. Albany: State University of New York Press.
McDaniel, June. 1989. The Madness of the Saints: Ecstatic Religion in Bengal. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
McDaniel, June. 2002. Making Virtuous Daughters and Wives: An Introduction to Women’s 
Brata Rituals in Bengali Folk Religion. Rochester: State University of New York Press.
McDaniel, June. 2004. Offering Flowers, Feeding Skulls: Popular Goddess Worship in West 
Bengal. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McNamara, Patrick. 2001. “Religion and the Frontal Lobes.” In Religion in Mind: Cognitive 
Perspectives on Religious Belief, Ritual, and Experience, edited by Jensine Andresen, 237–​256. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

--- PAGE 49 ---
24      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
McNamara, Patrick. 2009. The Neuroscience of Religious Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
McNamara, Patrick. 2016. Dreams and Visions: How Religious Ideas Emerge in Sleep and 
Dreams. New York: Praeger.
Meisezahl, R. O. 1962. “The Amoghapāśahṛdaya-​dhāraṇī: The Early Sanskrit Manuscript 
of the Reiunji, Critically Edited and Translated.” Monumenta Nipponica 17: 265–​328. 
Amoghapāśahṛdaya. D.682, 901, T.1093–​95.
Moran, Arik. 2018. “The Invisible Rite of Karma in a Himalayan Purificatory Rite.” Religions 9, 
no. 3: 78. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​9030​078.
Moran, Arik. 2021. “Encountering the Goddess in the Indian Himalaya: On the Contribution 
of Ethnographic Film to the Study of Religion.” Religions 12, no. 11: 1021. https://​doi.org/​
10.3390/​rel1​2111​021.
Moran, Arik, screenwriter, and Nadav Harel, dir. 2018. Chidra. Noprocess films. https://​www.
noproc​ess.com/​chi​dra.
Moran, Arik, screenwriter, and Nadav Harel, dir. 2020. Avatara. Noprocess Films. https://​www.
noproc​ess.com/​avat​ara.
Mukhopadhyay, Anway. 2018. The Goddess in Hindu-​Tantric Traditions: Devi as Corpse. New 
York: Routledge.
Mumford, Stan. 1989. Himalayan Dialogue: Tibetan Lamas and Gurung Shamans in Nepal. 
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Nemec, John. 2014. Review of Christian K. Wedemeyer, Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: 
History, Semiology, and Transgression in the Indian Traditions. South Asia Across the 
Disciplines Series. New York: Columbia University Press, 2013, in The Journal of Religion 94, 
no. 2: 271–​273.
Openshaw, Jeanne. 2004. Seeking Bauls of Bengal. New Delhi: Cambridge University Press.
Ortony, Andrew. 1993. Metaphor and Thought. 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ozawa-​de Silva, Brendan. 2016. “Contemplative Science and Secular Ethics.” Religions 7, no. 8: 
98. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7080​098.
Padoux, André Padoux. 2017. The Hindu Tantric World. Chicago and London: The University 
of Chicago Press.
Palitsky, Roman, Isaac F. Young, and Ben Williams. 2022. “Investigating and Contextualizing 
Dramaturgical Perspectives: Insights from Abhinavagupta and Social Psychology.” Journal 
of Cognitive Historiography 7, no. 1–​2: 89–​117. https://​doi.org/​10.1558/​jch.22403.
Patton, Laurie. 2002. Jewels of Authority: Women and Textual Tradition in Hindu India. Oxford 
and New York: Oxford University Press.
Payne, Richard K. 2004. “Editorial Note: Sign, Symbol, and Body in Tantra.” Pacific World: 
Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies 3rd series, no. 6: 151.
Payne, Richard K. 2006. “Introduction.” In Tantric Buddhism in East Asia, edited by Richard K. 
Payne, 1–​31. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Payne, Richard K. 2016. “Buddhist Ritual from Syntax to Cognition: Insight Meditation and 
Homa.” Religions 7, no. 8: 104. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7080​104.
Persinger, Michael. 1987. Neuropsychological Bases of God Beliefs. New York: Praeger.
Pintchman, Tracy. 1994. The Rise of the Goddess in the Hindu Tradition. Rochester: State 
University of New York Press.
Pintchman, Tracy. 2001. Seeking Mahādevī: Constructing the Identities of the Hindu Great 
Goddess. Rochester: State University of New York Press.

--- PAGE 50 ---
Tantric Studies      25
 
Rothschild, Norman Harry. 2021. “Heroic Śāktism with Chinese Characteristics: The Female 
Warrior Sovereign Prophecy, the Navarātri, and a Trio of Devīs of War in the Accession of 
Female Emperor Wu Zhao.” Hualin International Journal of Buddhist Studies 4, no. 2: 
300–​449.
Ruff, Jeffrey C. 2016. “Strange Bedfellows: Meditations on the Indispensable Virtues of 
Confusion, Mindfulness and Humor in the Neuroscientific and Cognitive Study of Esoteric 
and Contemplative Traditions.” Religions 7, no. 9: 113. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7090​113.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1995. “Vajrayāna: Origin and Function.” In Buddhism into the Year 2000. 
International Conference Proceedings, 89–​102. Bangkok and Los Angeles: Dhammakāya 
Foundation.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. “History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the 
Pañcarātra and the Buddhist Yoginītantras.” In Les Sources et le temps. Sources and Time, edited 
by F. Grimal, 1–​47. Publications du département d’Indologie 91. Pondicherry: IFP/​EFEO.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by 
Shingo Einoo, 41–​350. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, no. 23. Tokyo: Institute of 
Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.
Sanford, James. 1997. “Wind, Waters, Stupas, Mandalas: Fetal Buddhahood in Shingon.” 
Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 24, no. 1/​2: 1–​38.
Sarbadhikary, Sukanya. 2015. The Place of Devotion: Siting and Experiencing Divinity in 
Bengal-​Vaishnavism. South Asia Across the Disciplines Book 23. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Saxena, Neela Bhattacharya. 2004. In the Beginning Is Desire: Tracing Kālī’s Footprints in Indian 
Literature. New Delhi: Indialog.
Schopen, Gregory, 1991. “Archaeology and Protestant Presuppositions in the Study of Indian 
Buddhism.” History of Religions 31: 1–​23.
Shaw, Miranda. 1995. Passionate Enlightenment: Women in Tantric Buddhism. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Simmer-​Brown, Judith. 2002. Ḍākinī’s Warm Breath: The Feminine Principle in Tibetan 
Buddhism. Boston: Shambala Press.
Slingerland, Edward. 2005. “Conceptual Blending, Somatic Marking, and Normativity: A Case 
Example from Ancient China.” Cognitive Linguistics 16: 557–​584.
Slingerland, Edward. 2018. Mind and Body in Early China: Beyond Orientalism and the Myth of 
Holism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Slouber, Michael. 2023. “The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra.” In The Oxford Handbook of Tantric 
Studies, edited by Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes. New York: Oxford University Press. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​oxfor​dhb/​978019​7549​889.013.20.
Smith, Jonathan Z. 1982. Imagining Religion: From Babylon to Jonestown. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Strube, Julian. 2022. Global Tantra: Religion, Science, and Nationalism in Colonial Modernity. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Taves, Ann. 2009. Religious Experience Reconsidered: A Building-​Block Approach to the Study of 
Religion and Other Special Things. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Taves, Ann, Jared Lindahl, Travis Chilcott, and Kelly Bulkely. 2011. “Review symposium on 
Patrick McNamara, The Neuroscience of Religious Experience (2009).” Religion 41: 71–​89.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2005. “Meditating Mantras: Meaning and Visualization in Tantric 
Literature.” In Theory and Practice of Yoga: Essays in Honour of Gerard James Larson, edited 
by Knut Axel Jacobsen, 213–​236. Leiden: Brill.

--- PAGE 51 ---
26      Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes
 
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2007. “Metaphors, Rasa, and Dhvani: Suggested Meaning in Tantric 
Esotericism.” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 19: 134–​162.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2011. “Encountering the Other: Tantra in the Cross-​Cultural Context.” 
The Journal of Hindu Studies 4, no. 3: 274–​289.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2012a. “Reconstructing the Tantric Body: Elements of the Symbolism 
of Body in the Monistic Kaula and Trika Tantric Traditions.” International Journal of Hindu 
Studies 16, no. 1: 57–​91.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2012b. “Holographic Bodies and Metaphoric Limbs in Hindu Myths.” 
Zeitschrift für Indologie und Südasienstudien 2: 167–​186.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2015a. Tantric Visual Culture: A Cognitive Approach. New York: 
Routledge.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2015b. Language of Images: Visualization and Meaning in Tantras. 
New York: Peter Lang.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2016. “A Cognitive Approach to Tantric Language.” Religions 7, no. 12: 
139. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7120​139.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2020. “Meditation and Imagination.” In The Cambridge Handbook of 
the Imagination, edited by Anna Abraham, 783–​795. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Torzsok, Judit. 2014. “Women in Early Śākta Tantras: Dūtī, Yoginī, and Sādhakī.” Cracow 
Indological Studies 16: 339–​367.
Tweed, Thomas. 2015. “Toward a Translocative History of Occult Buddhism: Flows and 
Confluences, 1881–​1912.” History of Religions 54, no. 4: 423–​433.
Urban, Hugh B. 2003. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, and Power in the Study of Religion. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2010. The Power of Tantra: Religion, Sexuality, and the Politics of South Asian 
Studies. London: I. B. Tauris.
Urban, Hugh B. 2018. “Dancing for the Snake: Possession, Gender, and Identity in the Worship 
of Manasa in Assam.” Journal of Hindu Studies 30, no. 7: 1–​26.
Urban, Hugh B. 2019. “The Cradle of Tantra: Modern Transformations of a Tantric Center 
in Northeast India, from Nationalist Symbol to Tourist Destination.” South Asia 42, no. 2: 
256–​277.
Urban, Hugh B. 2024. The Path of Desire: Living Tantra in Northeast India. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2013. Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology, and 
Transgression in the Indian Traditions. South Asia Across the Disciplines Series. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
White, Claire. 2021. An Introduction to the Cognitive Science of Religion: Connecting Evolution, 
Brain, Cognition, and Culture. New York: Routledge.
White, David Gordon, ed. 2000. Tantra in Practice. Princeton Readings in Religions. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
White, David Gordon. 2006. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in its South Asian Contexts. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. 2021. Daemons Are Forever: Contacts and Exchanges in the Eurasian 
Pandemonium. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, Liz. 1996. Charming Cadavers: Horrific Figurations of the Feminine in Indian Buddhist 
Hagiographic Literature. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Young, Serinity. 2004. Courtesans and Tantric Consorts: Sexualities in Buddhist Narrative, 
Iconography, and Ritual. New York: Routledge.

--- PAGE 52 ---
P a r t I
 ACTION

--- PAGE 53 ---


--- PAGE 54 ---
Chapter 2
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in 
Indian Buddhism
Ronald M. Davidson
Abhiṣeka is a technical noun derived from the verbal root √sic-​ “to pour out” with the 
prefix abhi-​, which marks direction, “to or toward,” usually taken in the sense of pouring 
some liquid onto a person or image. In its pragmatic employment, abhiṣeka covers a va­
riety of meanings, uses, and ritual events, both before the advent of systems eventually 
identified as specifically tantric and later within self-​consciously tantric traditions, al­
though there are certainly functions common to both. In its most basic sense, abhiṣeka 
denotes the sprinkling of an item or person with water or some other viscous liquid, 
sometimes mixed with other materials employing the liquid as a solvent, whether this 
is performed in fact, in visualization, or in metaphor. In the Indian context, abhiṣeka 
brings to bear powerful symbols and systems of meaning that convey to the person and 
the surrounding community a sense of purification, transformation, or vivification of 
the entity/​person involved. However, neither the agent nor the object of the rite is im­
plied by the term, so it may designate self-​consecration, aspersion by another person, 
a divinity, or some other theological agent. This indeterminacy of agency and signifi­
cation allows the terminology and accompanying ritual to be employed by a variety of 
schools, traditions, and lineages for a range of purposes. As exercised especially by not 
only Buddhists, but also Śaivas, Vaiṣṇavas, and others, abhiṣeka was ritually invoked 
to proclaim the empowering of a person into a position of authority and authenticity 
within the specific sectarian system involved. This chapter examines the ritual from the 
perspective of Indian Buddhist texts, including factors that contributed to their forma­
tion in tantric Buddhism. The distinctive use of abhiṣeka in Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava, and other 
tantric traditions is outside of the purview of this investigation, as is the development 
of abhiṣeka in Tibet, China, and Japan, all of which are complex and in need of sep­
arate treatment.1 Instead, this essay outlines the precedents to abhiṣeka in India and 
Indian Buddhism in a manner not entirely explored before and outlines the two primary 
metaphors employed in abhiṣeka, which have not been well expressed previously. It 
also organizes and presents material found in disparate sources with the goal of having

--- PAGE 55 ---
30      Ronald M. Davidson
 
an overarching presentation of the basic systems and problems associated with Indian 
abhiṣeka rituals.
Primary Metaphors of Aspersion
Given the rich associations of liquids in Indian religious and intellectual history, we 
should not be surprised that the process of sprinkling has both literal and metaphor­
ical significance. The semantic associations of the verb employed—​√abhisiñc—​or its 
semantically related roots and their consequent nominal forms may be understood to 
denote primary varieties of meaning and central metaphors: purification and invigora­
tion. These metaphors change over time.
a.	 Purification or cleansing metaphors, generally associating abhiṣeka with the terms 
√(vi)śudh-​ or √avadā-​, are particularly important to those in South Asia, who have 
made personal hygene a cultural function without parallel in human history. The 
act may also be signified with the verbs √prokṣ-​ or √snā-​, whether this indicates the 
sprinkling of oneself or some other person or object in an act of sanctification. The 
astonishing varieties of cleansing in Indian religion confirms that no other great tra­
dition has accorded such ritual importance to the process of personal cleanliness. 
Cleanliness here is not exclusively physical, although we cannot discount the phys­
icality of Indian religion. Rather, cleanliness is also both spiritual and metaphysical, 
so that the person may be cleansed of transgressions or cleansed of pollution from 
death or disease or other problem conditions by means of bathing, snāna, usually 
at some specific holy bathing site (tīrtha). In some contexts, such as the bathing of 
an image in Matsyapurāṇa 267, the terms snapana and abhiṣeka have both been em­
ployed, so that there is decidedly a semantic intersection between them. So powerful 
is bathing in the Brahmanical system that the five greatest sins, the mahāpātakas, 
may be purified in the case of one undergoing a period of penance followed by a ritual 
bath, especially at sacred places like Vārāṇasī or Rāmeśvaram. Cleansing by water 
or bathing also marks ritual or existential transitions, notable in the rites of passage, 
as when a boy completes his study of the scriptures or his time of internship for a 
trade by taking a ritual bath. Gobhilagṛhyasūtra 3.4.10 requires the teacher to sprinkle 
the graduating student (samāvartana) with warm waters decocted with herbs and 
fragrances (sarvauṣadhiviphāṇṭābhir adbhir gandhavatībhiḥ śītoṣṇābhir ācāryo 
‘bhiṣiñcati), an early invocation of abhiṣeka as a rite of passage. In the Buddhist in­
stance, most hagiographies of the Buddha mark the birth of the bodhisattva by his 
being ritually bathed by the gods Indra and Brahmā.
b.	 Invigoration by water is sometimes overlooked, but the explicit similes of infusion 
and growth employing liquids are not lost on anyone spending time in the subtrop­
ical environment of the Indian plains. Particularly during the monsoon season, 
which follows the hot, dry period, the sudden appearance of water infuses the land­
scape with life and vitality, evident for both plants and animals. In Vedic texts, the

--- PAGE 56 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      31
 
verb most closely associating abhiṣiñc-​ with these meanings is √sū-​, indicating the 
vivification, quickening, or invigoration (Gonda 1965, 12), and some have noted the 
emphasis on varcas, power or splendor associated with Indra (Tsuchiyama 2005; 
Geslani 2018). In the Rājasūya rite in the Taittirīyasamḥita (1.8.14.f-​g), the abhiṣeka of 
the king invokes the gods, particularly Varuṇa, lord of the waters:
varuṇo devā dharmasuvaś ca ye | te te vācaṃ suvantāṃ te te prāṇaṃ suvantāṃ te te 
cakṣus suvantām te te śrotraṃ suvantāṃ somasya tvā dyumnenābhiṣiñcāmy agneḥ || 
tejasā sūryaṃsya varcasendrasyendreṇa mitravāruṇayor vīryeṇa marutām ojasā
Keith (1914, I.125-​26) translated this:
f.	 Soma, king Varuna, and the gods which instigate righteousness, may they insti­
gate thy speech, may they instigate thy breath, may they instigate thy sight, may 
they instigate thine ear.
g.	With the glory of Soma I besprinkle thee, with the brilliance of Agni, with the ra­
diance of the sun, with the power of Indra, with the strength of Mitra and Varuna, 
with the force of the Maruts.2
Earlier Buddhists had discussed the infusion of vitality from master to disciple, with the 
metaphor of water from one vessel into another, or the transfer of vitality in the teaching 
of Mahāyāna texts like the Suvarṇabhāsottama (pp. 70, 75 dharmaśravaṇasalilodaka-​
dharmāmṛtarasena . . . divyātmabhāvān mahātaujasā vivardhayet). In this regard, the 
invigoration of vitality via abhiṣeka probably informs the translation of the term into the 
Tibetan dbang-​bskur, often translated “empowerment,” rather than the sprinkling on the 
top of the head, as in the Chinese translation term guàn-​dǐng (灌頂).
Employment of Abhiṣeka in 
Pretantric Texts
a. The most important aspect of abhiṣeka was in the unction rites of kingship, where 
a king is first coronated (mahābhiṣeka) through being sprinkled by water and other 
substances—​especially ghee, curds, honey, liquor, barley, grasses, and later mud, 
milk, and others—​with priests invoking the gods in imitation of Indra’s coronation as 
the divine king, ladling the liquids from a camasa square wooden cup filtered through 
udumbara branch (Aitareyabrāhmaṇa viii.17-​18: Tsuchiyama 2005). The king is re­
peatedly likened to a tiger and sits on a tiger’s skin on a throne of udumbara wood, 
receiving by abhiṣeka the infusion of dominion and authority. The ritual is attested as 
a stand-​alone rite, but later folded into a soma ritual in the śrautasūtras as the “Royal 
Creation” or “Royal Birth” (rājasūya) rite. In this manner, the rite is interpreted as 
involving the birth of the king as either the son of the priests or the incarnation of 
Indra (Law 1919; Heesterman 1957, 117–​119; Gonda 1969, 18, 87–​96). Abhiṣeka is also

--- PAGE 57 ---
32      Ronald M. Davidson
 
conceived as a continuing event (punarabhiṣeka) in the life of the king, whether annu­
ally or even daily in some texts, although most, like the Nilamatapurāṇa or the Viṣṇu­
dharmottarapurāṇa, afford a specific ideology of the annual renewal (Inden 1981). 
Perhaps most interesting, the Aitareyabrāhmaṇa depicts the king first coronating 
himself in this annual rite before receiving it from the Brahmans (Aitareyabrāhmaṇa 
viii.5: sūyate ha vā asya kṣatraṃ yo dīkṣate kṣatriyaḥ san sa). This practice of repeated 
abhiṣeka, along with self-​consecration, is carried over in some Buddhist traditions, 
where abhiṣeka may be enjoined as a daily event or in the case of the violation of 
vows. Over time, the three-​fire soma or śrauta rite gave way in some traditions to a 
domestic-​type ritual (gṛhya-​vidhāna) that required only one fire and was much more 
modest in its implications (e.g., Ṛgvidhāna 4.106-​110; Baudhāyanapariśiṣṭa 1.23). 
Most tantric rituals that employ homa fire rituals are patterned on single-​fire rites, 
and this is no exception.
b. In both their cleansing and invigorating functions, abhiṣeka or other unction rites 
were extended throughout the domestic ritual syllabus, particularly noticeable in the 
later gṛhyasūtra, vidhāna, or pariśiṣṭa literature. So, the Ṛgvidhāna 1.89 declared that 
the verses ambayo yanti from Ṛgveda 1.23-​16-​2 also may be applied to the purposes 
of extending life, cure from disease, and the release from sin (āyuṣyās tāḥ pariproktā 
bhaiṣajyāḥ pāpamocanīḥ). This extension explains the application of abhiṣeka to 
the purification or invigoration of everything from ritual implements to medical 
procedures to domestic animals (Kauśikasūtra 64.27, 66.11-​20; Gonda 1965, 91, 96–​101; 
Mānavagṛhyasūtra 2.6; Baudhāyanapariśiṣṭa 1.14.1).
c. As a consequence of this general use of aspersion, abhiṣeka also becomes employed 
as a term denoting a variety of meanings: infusion of vitality from gods of the directions, 
the apotheosis of anyone receiving unction, acknowledgment of authority, honoring of 
the person/​divinity/​implement, and others (Davidson 2010; Tsuchiyama 2005). Because 
of these manifold uses, and in association with the increasing emphasis on personal 
gods in the post-​Vedic period, the kalaśa pot from which aspersion is done becomes it­
self a representation of divinity. It largely displaced other aspersion implements like the 
camasa, praṇītā, ghaṭaka, or prokṣaṇī, although its eminent position would be shared 
with the kumbha, with which it is sometimes equated.
Pretantric Buddhist Abhiṣeka Ideology
Central to the early Buddhist cultus practiced by both laity and clergy was the sprin­
kling of the bodhi tree, especially in festivals of the bodhi tree (bodhimaha). Legends of 
Aśoka include him vowing to anoint the tree, in part to revive it from the curse brought 
on by Tiṣyarakṣitā, his jealous queen (Aśokāvadāna, 93–​94), and the reputation of his 
behavior doubtless assisted the popularity of the practice among Buddhists. Anointing 
the bodhi tree extended to festivals associated with the Buddhas of the past as well, 
and there is mention of fragrant water offerings (gandhodaka) made to shrines of the

--- PAGE 58 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      33
 
previous Buddhas once these figures became popular in the Buddhist landscape. In this 
vein, offerings of water were sprinkled at the bodhi tree festival of Padmuttara by the 
Thera Gandhodaka and at the bodhi tree festival of Vipaśin by Thera Bodhisaññaka and 
others in the Apadāna (I.105-​6, 131, 249, II.391).
In their articulation of the bodhisattva path, Buddhists included the royal con­
secration as both an acknowledgment of the authority of the bodhisattva who had 
advanced along the path and an appropriation of the royal rite as a mythic event to 
be performed by Buddhas of the ten directions. In the first instance, the Mahāvastu 
includes the idea that, in a previous existence, Śākyamuni had received the prophecy 
for his eventual Buddhahood and at that time became recognized as a “crown prince” 
(yuvarājye cābhiṣikto; Mahāvastu I.2; Davidson 2010). The Mahāvastu also articulates 
an abhiṣekabhūmi, a level at which the bodhisattva can be assured his awakening, but 
in that case it is the entrance into the activity of his final birth (Mahāvastu I.142-​193). 
This is distinct from the usage of the Daśabhūmikasūtra, which articulates an elab­
orate scenario in which the bodhisattva becomes affirmed in the tenth level of the 
bodhisattva by all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions, who confer on 
him the Coronation of Great Gnosis (mahājñānābhiṣeka) by rays of light that enter 
the crown of his head (Daśabhūmika 181–​187). The Daśabhūmika is explicit that this 
is a Buddhist version of the coronation of a king, who will then go on to become a 
Universal Ruler (cakravartin) once he has performed all his acts; similarly, the tenth-​
level bodhisattva will go on to become Saṃyaksaṃbuddha once he performs the acts 
of the Buddha.
Documents in Sanskrit and Chinese from Central Asia and North China reveal yogic 
practices associated with meditative anointing by a range of figures, including by one­
self, by divine women, by the Hindu gods Brahmā, and others.3 In many instances, the 
anointing is by milk and suffuses the body with well-​being while dispelling diseases, 
afflictions, and defilements:
Tato ‘sya karunārtasya bhruvor madhye kṛṣṇataptaṃ piṭaka(m utpadyate) . . . 
mūrdhano niḥsṛtā strī kṣīradhārābhiḥ śarīram a(vasiṃcati) [y]‌āvad vedanopaśāmyati | 
tasmāc char(i)[rā]t kṣīradhārābhiḥ sarvasatvāsamudraḥ plāvyate |. . . . (tato 
naśyamānāṃ sarvasat)[v](ā)[n](āṃ) [ś](ā)r[ī]ramānasaduḥkhāṃ paśyati |
(Yogalehrbuch §148V1-​2)
Then [the yogin] oppressed by compassion [feels] a hot, black boil arise in the middle 
of his brow. . . . And from his head emerges a [mystical] woman who anoints his body 
with streams of milk until the feeling is pacified. Then from his body, the streams of 
milk emerge and inundate the ocean of all beings . . . so that the yogin see the physical 
and mental anguish of beings being thus destroyed.
The diverse nature of these meditations, as well as their richness and the explicit process 
of streaming into the fontanelle down to the base of his body, indicates a highly creative 
meditative tradition. The meditations doubtless stem from the subculture of the yogācāras, 
monks who were specialists in these practices in Gandhāra and Kaśmir, for they are

--- PAGE 59 ---
34      Ronald M. Davidson
 
mentioned in the surviving Sanskrit text, and the practices build on the analogous practices 
seen in the earliest Yogācārabhūmi, attributed to Saṃgharakṣa (Demiéville 1951). The visu­
alization of streaming of milky fluid through the body became a hallmark of the perfection 
process (niṣpannakrama) in eighth-​ to ninth-​century tantric Buddhism, even if the nature 
of the relationship between the Gandhāra yogācāras and the later tantrikas is as yet unclear.4
Pretantric dhāraṇī texts also employed abhiṣeka as rites of both purification and in­
vigoration, especially in the pacification (śānti) of problems, whether in the anointing 
of sites, persons, or implements in the Mahāyāna maṇḍalas. The Amoghapāśahṛdaya 
presents one early version of this ritual action:
Sarvakalikalahavivādābhyākhyāneṣu udakaṃ parijapya mukhaṃ prakṣālayitavyaṃ |  
parivi(ṣ)aya-​rājyarāṣṭropadravarakṣāsu pūrṇṇakalaśaṃ sthāpayitavyā śucinā 
śucivastraprāvṛtena mahatīṃ pūjāṃ kṛtvā vācayitavyaṃ mahāśāntir bhavati |  
tena codakena sektavyaṃ | sarvasatvānāṃ (rakṣā k)ṛtā bhavati | sarvety 
upadravopasarggāḥ praśāmyanti |. (Meisezahl 1962, 325–​326)
In the case of every discord, strife, dispute or calumny, having mantrified water 
(with the Amoghapāśahṛdaya), [the ritualist] is to purify his face [with the water]. In 
the case of protecting a kingdom surrounded by other polities or an impoverished 
kingdom, set up a kalaśa pot filled with water, the pure ritualist is to put on pure 
clothing, make a great offering and recite (the mantra) and [the danger] will be 
pacified. Then the area is to be sprinkled with that water and the protection of all the 
people will come to pass.
This was to prove to be an enduring ritual action, and the purification or pacification of a 
person in an earlier dhāraṇī text may be reinterpreted in later tantric exegesis as invoking 
the tantric initiatory process. In most of these early rituals, the emphasis in the rite was 
the abhiṣeka, not of the disciple, but of the master, who then performed the purification of 
others. The *Mūlamantra, said to be translated in the Liang Dynasty (502–​557 CE), attests:
復次當知其諸物等應入壇者香花飮食果子衣服。乃至灰土水火一切等物。皆
以此呪呪水灑上
(T. 1007.19.668a8-​10)
Moreover, you should know that all of the things brought into the altar—​the in­
cense, flowers, drink, food, small fruit, clothing, even including the dust and earth, 
water and fire—​each of these things, all of them are to be sprinkled on top with this 
consecrated water while reciting the [abhiṣeka] mantra for each.
Thus, abhiṣeka in the later dhāraṇī literature sometimes begins with the self-​
consecration of the master, then to the other accoutrements of the mandala, and finally 
to those guests or disciples who may wish to participate. This is actually in accord with 
the Aitareyabrāhamṇa (viii.5) section, mentioned above, in which the king consecrates 
himself first in the annual consecration and is only afterward consecrated by the purohita, 
and we see residual traces of a similar procedure much later in the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi

--- PAGE 60 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      35
 
(T. 848.18.6b7), the Hevajratantra (I.iv), and the Vajrāvalī (§ 44.2). Yet the abhiṣeka section 
in the *Mūlamantra will, by the time of Amoghavajra’s translation in the eighth century, be 
reinterpreted as an initiatory rite (T. 1005a.19.628a18-​24).
An anomalous abhiṣeka ritual found in an eponymous Chinese apocryphal work, the 
Consecration Scripture (Fóshuō guàndīng qīwàn èrqiān shénwáng hùbǐ bǐqiū zhòujīng; 
T. 1331) has been investigated by Michel Strickmann (1990), who argued that it was a 
fully tantric rite as it invoked the issue of the consecration of a disciple in the manner of 
a king. Consequently, he believed, it should be considered as a predecessor to the later 
tantric rituals. The text portrays the rite as like a king, it is true, but the goal is not—​as in 
normative tantric rituals—​the introduction to a mandala, but instead the transmission 
of the text of the apocryphal scripture. The ritual is short:
佛言若有受此護身神典者. 
先當禮敬十方佛. 
次禮經寶次禮聖僧. 
次禮度經之師. 
皆當專心一意. 
偏露右肩長跪合掌. 
師當右手持文. 
弟子以右手受之. 師以左手持法水灌弟子頂上. 阿難以是因緣故名灌頂章句. 
所以然者如王太子紹王位時. 法應以水灌其頂上. 然後統領治國之事我法亦爾.
(T. 1331.21.497b5-​12)
Buddha said, “If there one who is to receive this body-​protecting spirit scripture, then 
first he makes obeisance to the Buddhas of the ten directions. Then he pays homage 
to the jewel of this scripture (representing the Dharma) and then the Ārya Saṃgha. 
The he pays homage to the master of this perfection scripture. Then he should en­
tirely compose his mind into a single point. He bares his right shoulder, kneels down, 
and puts his hands together. The master then takes the text with his right hand, and 
the disciple also holds the text with his right hand. Then the master with his left hand 
takes the sanctified water and sprinkles it on the head of the disciple. Ananda, for this 
reason it is termed the Abhiṣekaparyāya. The reason is this: as when a crown prince 
is being transmitted the kingship, the ritual is that his head should be sprinkled with 
water, and then he is able to govern the affairs of state—​my ritual is like that.”
While this ritual is interesting, the taking of the text by the right hand in its transmis­
sion and the idea of sprinkling water with the left are anomalous by Indian standards. It 
appears that a Chinese author learned of the coronation rite from some source, written 
or oral, and elected to employ it as a vehicle for the transmission of a Buddhist text. So 
far as they are retained, Indian rituals operate in a substantially different manner, so it is 
doubtful that this anomalous tangent stands in a line from early rites of abhiṣeka and the 
full rituals of esoteric Buddhism.
Early Tantric Buddhist Abhiṣeka Rites
The transition between earlier dhāraṇī and later tantric uses of abhiṣeka in fact effected 
the transition between the mandala as a vehicle for the invocation and worship of the

--- PAGE 61 ---
36      Ronald M. Davidson
 
Buddhas and a mandala as a vehicle for the abhiṣeka as a gateway rite of the newly 
emerging esoteric Buddhism. The difference was not, in the earlier instances, the nature 
of the mandala itself. Rather, it was the fact that the mandala was suddenly to be hidden 
from anyone who had not received the abhiṣeka, so that access to and entrance into the 
esoteric system was limited by those who could receive the new rite. Abhiṣeka had effec­
tively transformed a purification ritual ensuring that anyone coming to the mandala did 
not bring defilement with them and from there turned it into a ritual that restricted who 
could see the mandala diagram and with whom they could discuss it. Because it was 
based on the political ritual of coronation, the tantric initiation brought with it oaths 
of loyalty between master and disciple—​as employing the abhiṣeka to mediate loyalty 
between feudal lord and his vassals was one of its uses—​and specific vows of behavior 
were then invoked. These vows were quite different from those employed in the trans­
mission of either the early Vinaya system or of the bodhisattva vows, meaning that the 
new abhiṣeka rite was the moment in which new vows were taken and, as a consequence, 
a new community was formed. Essential to the new vow structure was the invocation 
of secrecy, so that the “secret mantras” were analogous to the state secrets of the medi­
eval world, both designated guhyamantra. As a gateway rite to esoteric Buddhism, the 
abhiṣeka now gave access to not only the mandala of the tradition, but also the newly 
secretive literature of that tradition. Under the umbrella of secrecy, diverse tantras could 
form in a dynamic and extraordinary manner. All of this was made possible by the 
change of the significance of the abhiṣeka rite.
Arguably the earliest surviving tantric Buddhist work is the Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha (T. 
901), and its compilation and translation in 654 CE is attributed to Atikūṭa, a monk 
from Bodhgayā. The three most important abhiṣeka rites in that text are two focused on 
Tejorāśi Śākyamuni from the Uṣṇīṣa ritual system and a long abhiṣeka of Avalokiteśvara 
very similar in organization to that of Tejorāśi. Two of these have been studied in detail, 
the shorter early rite of Tejorāśi (Davidson 2012) and the much longer and more impor­
tant Tejorāśi ritual occurring toward the end of the text (Shinohara 2014, 205–​225; T. 
901.18.885b21-​890c14).
The longer ritual lasts seven days and nights, beginning with preparatory rituals 
of candidate selection and site preparation. As is usual in Buddhist abhiṣeka rites, the 
mandala preparation and construction take up the majority of the time: laying out the 
borders, digging out polluted elements from the ground, sanctification by water, and 
more. However, the mandala is envisioned on a grander scale than most, with different 
sizes dependent on the level of the patron, from 120 cubits for a king, down to 1 cubit 
for the least important persons, although at one point 12 or 16 cubits are mentioned; 
the recitations are sometimes similarly dependent on the status of the patron and 
candidates. At the gateways are lengthy banners with images of the Divine Kings on 
them. The candidates are interrogated as to their commitment to the procedure. At this 
point, the Four Divine Kings, Hayagrīva, Kuṇḍalin, and other protectors are invoked to 
protect the site.
The third day, the mandala is laid out with the usual string that is sanctified, and 
seven precious objects—​from gold to beryl—​are buried, marking the sacred status of

--- PAGE 62 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      37
 
the space, which is now the vajradhātu, and all the Buddhas are established there in the 
place where the Wheel of the Mahāyāna will be turned. The fourth day, the construc­
tion of the pavilion continues, with pillars and poles, and two subsidiary mandalas—​
a four-​cubit white mandala to the northeast and a four-​cubit abhiṣeka mandala to the 
southwest—​are constructed as well as a homa kuṇḍa to the southwest. The adornment 
of the main mandala is extraordinary and employs multiple large banners of different 
colors in the different directions.
The fifth day is devoted to marking off the specific sections within the principal man­
dala, sanctifying the space, and establishing the perimeters and gates. The sixth day is in­
volved with both the preparation of the candidates and the further ornamentation of the 
mandala, now sanctified by the recitation of Hayagrīva’s mantra. The candidates again 
are investigated as to their commitment, and each is investigated for positive omens 
by chewing willow branches that are deposited on the ground. They are also instructed 
to record their dreams for omens, which are interrogated the next day. Application of 
the powders to the mandalas where the deities are marked out—​with Tejorāśi in the 
center—​is finished and protected by the Kuṇḍalin’s rite.
Day seven is the time of the abhiṣeka per se. During the day, offerings are placed; 
Kuṇḍalin and Hayagrīva are invoked; deity and the abhiṣeka pots are prepared, the 
latter numbering one for each candidate; and the deities are invoked. In the night, the 
candidates are examined again, sanctified and enveloped with protective rites while 
musicians play. The eyes of the candidates are covered with yellow cloth, a flower is 
placed in their hands, and they are individually led into the mandala, where the flower 
is thrown, to land on a specific deity, which is recorded. The master then takes the cen­
tral deity’s pot and consecrates himself with it, using the abhiṣeka mantra and man­
dala. Each candidate is given a separate pot, from which he is given the abhiṣeka of 
the deity on which his flower landed. After the abhiṣeka proper is over, then a homa 
ritual is performed, featuring offerings to Prajñāpāramitā, Hayagrīva, eleven-​headed 
Avalokiteśvara, Vajragarbha, and others. Finally, there are the expiation for the 
committing of errors in the ritual, protection of the disciples, distribution of gifts, and 
final worship of the deities of the mandala. The mandala is then destroyed.
By the end of the seventh century, a need seems to have been felt for a synthetic ritual 
manual, and two were composed, albeit differently and probably independently at ap­
proximately the same time. The Guhyatantra identifies itself as the synthesis of 3500 
mandalas (D. 141a5; T. 897.18.760c13), doubtless a hyperbolic number but one that 
gestures at the explosive development of esoteric Buddhism in the seventh and early 
eighth centuries. Similarly, the Susiddhikāra proclaims that the scripture is the accom­
plishment of all of the mandala rituals of the three families (tathāgata, padma, and vajra) 
and all the three tantric karmas (śāntika, pauṣṭika, abhicāra; T. 893.18.603c4-​13). In both 
texts, there are four abhiṣekas, even though their typologies are different.
The Susiddhikāra articulates the abhiṣeka on the rite of anointing an image of the 
deity (T. 893.18.620a12-​28; Giebel 2001, 223) which is infused with power and efficacy 
in the process, and Śubhakarasiṃha’s translation makes this the model of the disciples’ 
consecration (T. 893.18.623c3-​5; Giebel 2001, 253). The rite for abhiṣeka into a mandala

--- PAGE 63 ---
38      Ronald M. Davidson
 
then has the ācārya consecrate himself, having constructed a main, three-​tier mandala 
between five and eight cubits, along with a half-​size separate abhiṣeka mandala at the 
west portal, which is the one gate to be open. A homa altar is also constructed, to the 
south of the west entrance. Flasks should be placed at the corners of the mandala and 
in the center, in the deity’s place, as well as at the entrance for the protector Kuṇḍalin. A 
homa is performed, directed to the goal of the abhiṣeka—​whether śāntika, pauṣṭika, or 
abhicāra. Curiously, the Susiddhikāra does not mention throwing a flower into the man­
dala in the abhiṣeka rite, but at the end, there are four abhiṣekas with four flasks, begin­
ning with that of Kuṇḍalin, in which the ritual assistant to the master actually performs 
the rite (T. 893.18.624b; Giebel 2001, 256–​257).
The fourfold abhiṣeka system in the Guhyatantra is different from that of the 
Susiddhikāra in that there are four purposes for candidates receiving the abhiṣeka, in 
some way similar to the statement by the Ṛgvidhāna above, that abhiṣeka may extend 
life, release from disease, and cure sin. However, the text also foreshadows some of the 
development of varieties of abhiṣeka seen in the later tantras, as mentioned below.
lha yi rigs rnams mthong ba las | dbang bskur ba ni rnam pa bzhi |
bla ma mnyam par gzhag pa yis | de dag shes nas ci rigs bya |
slob dpon go ‘phang thob pa’i phyir | dang po yongs su bsgrags pa yin |
rig sngags rnams ni bsgrub bya’i phyir | gnyis pa legs par bshad pa yin |
bgegs rnams rab tu gzhom pa’i phyir | gsum pa rab tu bsgrags pa yin |
bzhi pa ‘byor pa thob pa’i phyir | cho ga rgyas pa de bshad do |
Through seeing the families of gods [in the maṇḍala], there are four varieties 
of abhiṣeka; the master knows which is applicable based on his deep medita­
tion. First is the widely proclaimed abhiṣeka, to obtain the position of ācārya.  
Second is well explained as the abhiṣeka to practice the mantra rites.  
Third is well known for the purpose of defeating the obstacles (vighna).
Fourth is explained as the extensive rite to gather wealth.
(Guhyatantra D. 806.166a5-​7; T. 897.18.772a6-​8)
The Guhyatantra goes on to dispose of all but the ācāryābhiṣeka quickly, then dwelling 
on the circumstances for obtaining the level of the ācārya, whose qualities the text had 
dwelt on right at the beginning in detail. Here the issue is not the qualities of the ācārya, 
but the ritual systems under which one gains that lofty position and the benefits to be 
accrued to one who does so, as well as the penalties to a teacher who has not received 
the specific validation. The Guhyatantra states that, while initiation into the padma or 
vajra families allows one to be an ācārya of one or both, it is really abhiṣeka into the 
tathāgata family that allows the master access to the entire spectrum of rituals. The text 
also warns that, at one time, only one disciple should be consecrated in this manner, 
even if other disciples are consecrated for other reasons. (D. 806.167a5; T. 897.18.772c7-​
8). The text had already briefly discussed the ritual, which seems to employ a single pot 
for the abhiṣeka of however many disciples are allowed, so it differs from the other texts 
in that regard.

--- PAGE 64 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      39
 
The penchant for abhiṣeka classification extended to the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi, 
which mentions three types:
灌頂有三種　佛子至心聽　　　　
若祕印方便　則離於作業　　　　
是名初勝法　如來所灌頂　　　　
所謂第二者　令起作衆事　　　　
第三以心授　悉離於時方　　　　
令尊歡喜故　如所説應作　　　　
現前佛灌頂　是則最殊勝5　
There are three varieties of abhiṣeka, so the disciple should ardently listen. The first 
is conferred by means of mudrās without any other rituals or tantric karmas; it is 
the highest variety, the abhiṣeka bestowed by the Tathāgatas. The second is done 
by rituals and tantric karmas. The third is that received mentally, without regard to 
place or time. Because it pleases the teacher, then the abhiṣeka should be performed 
as taught. Then the abhiṣeka received is (as if) directly from the Buddha; this is the 
superior variety.
The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi thus picks up a theme that has been hovering about since 
the visualized texts of central Asia and the Daśabhūmika-​sūtra: the Buddhas will 
confer the best abhiṣeka based on the nature of the disciple and how advanced he 
may be.
The abhiṣeka rituals provided in these early texts, most of which call themselves 
sūtra but were later classified as tantra (the Guhyatantra is an exception, as it is clear 
that is part of its name—​jùxì tándànluó 瞿醯壇怛囉; T. 897.18.770b5), reflect an ex­
traordinary variation that runs like a thread through all the abhiṣeka rituals known 
to me. The elaborate directions in the Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha describe the elements of a 
temporary construction, similar to that invoked in the śrauta and soma rituals, al­
though it incongruously includes elements of permanent buildings, and Shinohara 
correctly suggested (Shinohara 2014, 206) that the text may have been adapted to 
reflect the actual abhiṣeka that Atikūṭa performed in China for his patrons, so that 
the text includes how that specific performance proceeded. The other works are less 
baroque and, as is usual in Indian works, make allowances for those who cannot af­
ford the gold-​silver-​copper vessels that are ideal, yielding to the reality that some, 
at least, of the ritualists may be impoverished; for them, even the roughest clay pots 
might have been difficult to obtain. Consequently, the abhiṣeka cannot be said to 
emulate exactly the coronation rites of medieval kingship, at least as found in the 
purāṇas or the gṛhyavidhāna literature. Instead, it is an image, a mirage, an aspira­
tion of kingship.
In the Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha we see that each candidate is accorded a separate pot, but 
royal abhiṣeka is done with multiple pots for a single royal person. The approximately 
contemporary Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa, for example, indicates that following the 
homa, the priest performs the multiple abhiṣekas of the king with mud, the five products

--- PAGE 65 ---
40      Ronald M. Davidson
 
of the cow, and water from the four various rivers and impregnated with herbs and other 
sources (Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa II.21; Inden 1981). The employment of a single pot 
for a single person may represent a temporary or idiosyncratic moment in the ritual 
because it is not normative for later rituals, which follow more closely the brahman­
ical procedures. The Susiddhikāra, for example, observes some comprehension of that 
program, with four pots for each candidate, as does the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi, which 
consecrates the disciples with the four flasks of the bodhisattvas (T. 848.18.23c19-​24a20). 
But the Guhyatantra is less profligate, with the abhiṣeka seemingly employing a single 
pot for all the persons, even if there are others scattered about in the doors and corners 
of the mandala.
Another factor seen for the first time in the Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha is the employ­
ment of possession (āveśa) as a vehicle for religious experience. Buddhists had been 
dealing with the issue of possession for centuries since it is ubiquitous in the Indian 
environment, as is well known. The older dhāraṇī texts, like the Saptabuddhaka and 
the Mahādaṇḍadhāraṇī-​śītavatī (Davidson 2014a, 2014b; Krug 2019), recounted 
episodes in which monks would become possessed and how the dhāraṇī spells would 
counteract that limitation. Then there is the well-​known employment of possession 
in a young girl to foretell the future (Subāhuparipṛcchā T. 895.18.741c24-​25; D. 805, 
131a7-​132b3). What is different in the Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha is the positive invocation of 
possession as a soteriological aid, first through the mantras associated with the pre­
vious Buddha Vipaśyin and the deity Indra (T. 901.18.799a8-​16), and later in mantras 
attached to Vajragarbha (T. 901.18.845a17), Vajraśṛṅkhalā (T. 901.18.846a6-​7), and 
Cāmuṇḍā (T. 901.18.883b11-​12, 883c3). This employment of possession is augmented 
in the Uttaratantra section of the Chinese translation of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi, 
with the appeal that the Buddha’s gnosis enter the person (sarvatathāgatajñānaṃ me 
āviśatu; T. 848.18.46b17; Giebel 2005, 237). This latter appeal found its way into the 
act of abhiṣeka, as found in the early sections of the Sarvatathāgata-​tattvasaṃgraha. 
There the master binds up the mudrā of the Adamantine Being (sattvavajrimudrā) 
and pronounces:
ayaṃ tat samayo vajraṃ vajrasatvam iti smṛtam |
āveśayatu te ‘dyaiva vajrajñānam anuttaraṃ ||
This is the pledge, the vajra, understood as Vajrasattva.
May it cause the highest adamantine gnosis to possess you just today!
(Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha 69; Giebel 2001, 76)
Possession during the process of abhiṣeka was to go from a marginal moment in the 
system into a major factor in the later tantric rituals.
By the mid-​eighth century, items that had been employed in the abhiṣeka were now 
being accorded their own abhiṣekas, even if they did not center on the performance of 
sprinking with pots. These were initially to be grouped into fives, following the iden­
tity of the five Jinas (Vairocana and the rest) or the five forms of gnosis (ādarśajñāna,

--- PAGE 66 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      41
 
etc.) (Isaacson 2006, 264). The most enduring group is reflected in the Bhagavan-​
Nīlāmbaradhara-​Vajrapāṇi-​tantra (fol. 166a7):
	
i.	 The udaka-​abhiṣeka, the water consecration from the kalaśa vase that is the most 
basic form of the aspersion ritual and was the primary focus until the mid-​eighth 
century.
	
ii.	 The mukuṭa-​abhiṣeka, the crown consecration, in which a crown is tied onto the 
disciple’s head by the master, signifying that the disciple has become the righteous 
king of the mandala, a term also signaling the political arrangement of medieval 
India (Davidson 2002).
	 iii.	 The vajra-​abhiṣeka, the scepter consecration, so that the disciple receives the 
scepter of Vajrapāṇi and, before him, of Indra, whose first abhiṣeka established 
the model for coronation in India, as we have seen.
	
iv.	 The ghaṇṭa-​abhiṣeka, the bell consecration, so that the disciple can ring the vajra-​
handled bell at the appropriate junctures in the performance of sādhana, the 
ritual invocation of the deities of the mandala.
	
v.	 The nāma-​abhiṣeka, the name consecration, reflecting the new name and identity 
of the disciple who has now been coronated.
These items had been part of the standard abhiṣeka ritual as it had developed in 
the early eighth century, and most of them appear in the list of mantras in the 
Sarvadurgatipariśodhana (pp. 150, 168, 190, 258, 270) for example, but were not 
identified as discrete members of an abhiṣeka grouping. The choice was selective, as 
there are many other items mentioned in these earlier tantras that were not immedi­
ately identified with a specific abhiṣeka, such as the wheel (Sarvadurgatipariśodhana 192: 
oṃ vajracakrābhiṣiñca huṃ bhrūm), or the gem, the lotus, the garland, and so on. As 
time goes by, however, some of them become identified as having their own abhiṣeka, 
and the entire category of abhiṣeka changes in the process, from a ritual of unction and 
aspersion to a ritual of the infusion of power and authority, passing from the master to 
the disciple, so that the liquid element becomes extended into a fluidity of power/​know­
ledge/​deity entering the candidate’s body.
Later Tantric Buddhist Abhiṣeka Rites
The development of later tantric Buddhist abhiṣeka rituals was generated through 
a number of factors, of which the circumstances are still obscure. Some may be 
surmised as derived from spirit cults, some from the magical traditions of medieval 
India (Davidson 2017), while others may be derived from sectarian systems, perhaps 
Śaivism or other systems. Irrespective of the sources, the development is best under­
stood to reflect inclusion of sacramental forms of sexuality, in which the sexual fluids are

--- PAGE 67 ---
42      Ronald M. Davidson
 
ingested and in which sexuality is ritualized in the consecration rite. The consequence of 
enumerating “lower” versus “higher” (or exterior vs. interior) forms of consecration is 
that the earlier forms became more formalized, so that the two systems were arranged in 
a hierarchical pattern, in which the now lower tantras were granted initiation through a 
specific program of ritual.
Generally it is accepted that the Guhyasamāja’s supplemental chapter (Samājottara), 
now often numbered ­chapter 18, articulates the inclusion of new forms of abhiṣeka and 
signals some of the issues that remained unresolved through much of the rest of tantric 
Buddhist history (Dalton 2004, 25; Isaacson 2006, 265):
abhiṣekaṃ tridhābhedam asmin tantre prakalpitam |
kalaśābhiṣekaṃ prathamaṃ dvitīyaṃ guhyābhiṣekataḥ |
prajñājñānaṃ tṛtīyaṃ tu caturthaṃ tat punas tathā ||
(Guhyasamāja 18.113)
Abhiṣeka is a three-​fold division, as set forth in this tantra.
The first is the flask abhiṣeka. Second is the secret abhiṣeka.
Third is the insight-​gnosis abhiṣeka. And the fourth is also like that.
The reality that the text unambiguously contradicts itself within three lines certainly 
signals that there was some uncertainty as to both the nature and the number of the 
new abhiṣeka typologies, and these were not entirely resolved through much of the sub­
sequent history of the tradition. In reality, while there are abhiṣeka chapters to many 
tantras, the rituals followed generally become those described in the texts discussing 
correct abhiṣeka practices (abhiṣekavidhi, maṇḍalavidhi), which proliferate from the 
late eighth century forward.
a. Lower Initiations. In the four-​fold division expressed in the Guhyasamāja and ac­
cepted in some form in the later tantric literature, the earlier abhiṣeka systems were 
categorized into the external or vase consecrations kalaśa-​abhiṣeka, the abhiṣeka 
employing a pot or flask for the anointing of the disciple. In some texts, this is referenced 
as the vajraśiṣya-​abhiṣeka, that is, the abhiṣeka by which the disciple is engaged, perhaps 
reflecting a division of motivation of those taking the consecration. Beyond the five­
fold division already seen, the kalaśa consecration includes other kinds of consecration, 
depending on the text. The Sekoddeśa, based closely on the Kālacakra-​tantra, articulates 
seven varieties of abhiṣeka to introduce the immature (8ab: ādau saptābhiṣeko yo 
bālānām avatāraṇam): abhiṣekas of water (udaka), diadem (mukuṭa), hero’s silk fore­
head band (vīrapaṭṭa), vajra, bell (ghaṇṭā), great askesis (mahāvrata), name (nāma), 
and permission (anujñā). The primary purpose of these seven is the purification of the 
potential disciple, and purification is a theme through all the descriptions of abhiṣeka in 
the Sekoddeśa (vv. 12–​17). However, the text does not classify these as among the kalaśa/​
kumbha-​abhiṣeka, which it includes in the four higher initiations (v. 15), making eleven 
initiations total.

--- PAGE 68 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      43
 
Most Yoginītantra tranditions have a menu of abhiṣekas, and eleven is the number 
sometimes provided for the lower initiations alone, as in the Abhiṣekaratnāloka of 
Prajñāśrīgupta, which survives in Tibetan:
Chu dang dbu rgyan rdo rje dang | dril bu ming dang de lnga dang | rigs gsum dam tshig 
yod pa ni | dbang ni brgyad du gyes pa gsungs | brtul shugs lung bstan skyabs sbyin ni | 
de dag gcu gcig gcig yin no |6
Water, crown, vajra, bell, name, these five, and the sacramental commitments (samaya) of 
the three families make eight, it is said. With the practice (vrata), prophecy (vyākaraṇa) 
and support (āśvāsa), together these are the one group of eleven.
While it seems that the number eleven was somehow important, after the five already 
mentioned that are ubiquitous, the rest are constituted by different items, which may 
reference abhiṣekas using flowers from garlands (mālābhiṣeka), nonregression on the 
path (avaivartikābhiṣeka), permission to teach (anujñābhiṣeka), prophecy (vyākaraṇa), 
and so forth in some combination and different order, although they tend to conclude 
with either prophecy or permission to teach.
The Vajrāvalī—​a later synthetic work of Abhayākaragupta from approximately 
1100 CE—​distributes consecrations even more widely, beginning with the conse­
cration of the statue as if it were a disciple (§§ 16–​17), which is similar to the rite in 
the Susiddhikāra, as mentioned above. Following this, there is the preparation of 
the area and the disciple, the entrance of each into the mandala and the disciples’s 
possession by Vajrasattva (§§ 20–​22), and then the consecrations of the actual dis­
ciples. They begin with the blindfolded disciple throwing the flower in the mandala 
to select the appropriate Buddha family of affiliation, then revealing the mandala by 
taking off the blindfold (§ 23 mālābhiṣeka). This is followed by the sprinkling of the 
disciple from the kalaśa vase (§ 24 udakābhiṣeka); placing a crown on the disciple’s 
head (§ 25 mukuṭābhiṣeka); touching the disciple’s heart, throat, and head with the 
vajra and placing it in his right hand (§26 vajrābhiṣeka); placing the bell in his left 
hand (§ 27 ghaṇṭābhiṣeka); conferring on him a name based on the place in the 
mandala that the flower fell (§ 28 nāmābhiṣeka); conferring the three commitments 
as part of the ācāryābhiṣeka (§§ 29–​30); showing a mirror and explaining that 
elements of reality are like reflections (§33 darpanābhiṣeka), all of which are sealed 
by the casting of six ritual arrows—​four in the cardinal directions and one up and 
one down (§ 34).
The many abhiṣeka manuals we have emphasize the relationship of the elements of 
these various kinds of abhiṣeka with the five Victors (pañcajina): Vairocana, Akṣobhya, 
Ratnasaṃbhava, Amitābha, and Amoghasiddhi, who symbolically preside over the 
Buddha families in the mandala, irrespective of whether they are included in the specific 
mandala into which the disciple is consecrated. The rituals are in each instance filled 
with Buddhist explanations featuring the relationship of the five Victors, the five forms 
of gnosis starting with the mirror, and the five aggregates, so that they may be collectively

--- PAGE 69 ---
44      Ronald M. Davidson
 
termed the “wisdom consecration” (Hevajrasekaprakriyā 25: ebyir abhiṣekaiḥ pañcabhir 
ādarśādijñānaviśuddhyā vidyābhiṣeka ity ucyate). By the time of the Vajrāvalī, these col­
lectively were a method for ensuring the transmission of the teaching, so that most often 
the six consecrations following that first five either included or were collectively termed 
the “master’s consecration” (ācāryābhiṣeka).
b. Higher initiations. The higher initiations were something quite different, for three 
of them may have involved sexual activity, and two certainly did so. If the vase consecra­
tion (kalaśābhiṣeka) was included in the higher initiations, which was unusual, it could 
mean presenting an available girl of twelve to twenty years of age to the teacher, who 
fondled her breasts (Sekoddeśaṭīkā 98). The guhyābhiṣeka—​the secret consecration—​
required the disciple to provide a willing young girl of the same age range, who would 
agree to copulate with the master. Following the copulation, the master was to ejacu­
late (or transfer the ejaculate) into the mouth of the disciple, with the understanding 
that the ejaculate was the physical “thought of awakening” (bodhicitta) that was being 
transferred to the disciple. Thus, the process sacramentalized both sexuality and its 
physical residue, so that the initiation required sacramental sexuality.
The prajñājñānābhiṣeka (consecration by the gnosis from the “insight” [a term for a 
woman]) is described as a ritual in which, under the guidance of the master, the disciple 
copulates with his consort while envisioning himself and her as indistinguishable from 
the divinity to which he is being consecrated. On ejaculation into the vagina of the con­
sort, the disciple licks the resulting fluids as the physical “thought of awakening.”
The “fourth consecration” is difficult to evaluate, not only because of the dispa­
rate descriptions of the ritual, but also because even its legitimacy is contested. Most 
consecration manuals, however, do acknowledge the rite, but very tersely. The 
Hevajrasekaprakriyā, for example, says: “After that (the prajñājñānābhiṣeka), having 
obtained the fourth consecration from the instruction of the teacher, one should give 
a gift again according to your ability” (Hevajrasekaprakriyā 31: tadanu gurūpadeśāc 
caturthasekaṃ labdhvā punar yathāśaktito dakṣiṇāṃ dadyāt). In the instances it is 
described, the language is philosophical and redolent of nondualism, so that the prajñā-
jñānābhiṣeka ritual is to be subsequently understood as an enactment of the nonduality 
of ultimate truth.
Controversies Concerning the Later 
Tantric Abhiṣekas
Given the extraordinary direction taken in the higher initiations by the yoga-​ and 
yoginītantras, it is not surprising that many controversies arose. Even then, with respect 
to these higher consecrations, three primary areas of disagreement occurred. First, and 
most obvious, was the question of sexuality, and these discussions focused on a single 
problem: Buddhist monks and nuns are forbidden to have sexual activity of any variety,

--- PAGE 70 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      45
 
although the lay participation was not uncomplicated, given the statements in the 
earlier texts on wholesome sexual conduct for upāsakas (laymen). Some of the rituals 
are explicit that the master is a layman, and he is to preside over the gathering along with 
his consort (saprajñaḥ), so that the culture bearers of Buddhism are now envisioned as 
laymen, a direction already apparent in the sixth century. But this did not settle the issue 
for Buddhist monasteries, which relied on the goodwill and financial investiture from 
those in the environment for their survival. The tantric antinomian practices threatened 
that survival. Isaacson (2006, 264) was doubtless correct that the sexual ritual circulated 
separately prior to its inclusion as a rite of consecration, as we find an early version of 
guhyābhiṣeka ritual in the eighth chapter of the Guhyasamājatantra, but with no con­
nection to abhiṣeka (Guhyasamāja, Matsunaga 1978, 24–​26). We can, however, also 
postulate that these rituals depended on at least two factors: the Indian medical under­
standing of the attributes of semen and the much older rituals of spirit seduction, in 
which a yogin can perform a rite and seduce a female spirit, which yields both personal 
satisfaction and overlordship of the celestial sorcerers (vidyādharacakravartin).
Engaging this controversy concerning sexuality, five solutions were fielded in the lit­
erature. First, there is the claim that ritual sexuality is not the same as other forms of sex, 
which are the topic of the Vinaya; thus, the prohibition does not apply to tantric sexu­
ality (e.g., Vajrāvali § 20.2-​3). Second, some authorities stated, as did Atiśa, that monks 
were still forbidden to engage the higher initiations as this is a violation of the monastic 
rule; consequently, they are allowed to practice all the meditations and yogic systems 
with having received only the lower initiations (Davidson 1995). Third, others demure: 
Tantric sexuality is a question of a specific population; those who are advanced may do 
so, but we see no persons now who are so well authenticated (Szántó 2015). Fourth, the 
issue is one of interpreting coded language; the discussion about sexuality is primarily 
for the purpose of ridding the disciple of clinging to words (Wenta 2018). Finally, a few 
authorities temporize: Visualization of the act with a visualized consort (jñānamudrā) 
rather than a physical consort (karmamudrā) was occasionally conceived as a way to 
satisfy the performance but without the debilitating consequences to monks of its phys­
ical performance. Consequently, we get a sense that the Buddhist tradition in India was 
involved in an internal conflict concerning sexuality overall, with these rituals being 
hallmarks of the change in approach to liberation. Whereas in the past sexuality had 
been understood as a catastrophic impediment, suddenly the forces of sexuality appear 
to have turned the tides, albeit in a manner that was both questionable and, in some 
sense, irresponsible, as it opened a door with few safeguards for the unwary.
The second primary controversy was the issue of yogic practice, particularly with ref­
erence to the “insight-​gnosis consecration” (prajñājñānābhiṣeka). This consecration, 
like the guhyābhiṣeka, was initially sacramental, so that the transfer of fluids was the pri­
mary purpose. But the Hevajratantra I.10 emphasized an interior yogic system, with four 
moments of experience (kṣaṇacatuṣṭaya) and the four blisses (caturānanda) that proved 
very influential. Two issues, however, immediately arose. First, how is it that many of 
the other yoginītantras did not have these yogic systems, given that the Laghusaṃvara 
and other previous scriptures also required this consecration? Second, given that there

--- PAGE 71 ---
46      Ronald M. Davidson
 
was some uncertainty in the order of the four moments and the attendant four forms of 
bliss, what was the proper sequence (Onians 2003, 331–​338; Hevajratantra, introduction 
32–​39; Isaacson and Sferra 2014, 97–​111)?
Finally, there was the question of the “fourth consecration” (caturthābhiṣeka): Was it 
actually discussed by the Buddha, and, if it was, what was its nature? It was evident from 
the confusing and contradictory statement in Guhyasamāja 18.113, quoted above, that 
the fourth consecration “and like that” description was not sufficient to understand any­
thing about it. Consequently, there were positions put as to whether there even was a 
fourth consecration, and, if it was necessary, what did it constitute? Seemingly, it began 
simply as an instruction of a teacher about the meaning of the others, but it took on 
a ritualized mandate over time, so that the fourth consecration had to be something 
communicable (Isaacson 2006, 268–​271; Onians 2003, 345–​347; Tattvaratnāloka vv.15–​
16; Abhiṣekaratnāloka 300a3–​303a4; Vajrāvalī § 44.1.6). These are but the most impor­
tant questions of ritual and yogic practice that were to consume the ritual manuals and 
the commentaries on the tantras for much of the balance of the history of Buddhism 
in India.
Conclusion and Contribution
The abhiṣeka as a gateway rite to the tantric Buddhist system was inaugurated in some 
measure to offset the perception that Buddhists were not going to offer rituals reso­
nant with the larger Indian world, which had become obsessed with politics and power. 
Abhiṣeka covered both, but also allowed Buddhist leaders to formulate a ritual system 
that integrated both politics and power into selected Buddhist communities. While the 
ingress was initially slow and emphasized purity, over time it mutated and turned into 
something different under the same name: a hierarchy of indelible authority surrounded 
by a mythology and cosmology of divine investiture. Added to this was the invocation of 
secrecy that built on the political model of state secrets, and the model could be brought 
to a rolling boil with the employ of sexual yoga, which it did from the eighth to the elev­
enth centuries.
This essay contributes to the understanding of abhiṣeka in Indian Buddhism by 
outlining the precedents to abhiṣeka in India and in Indian Buddhism in a manner not 
entirely explored before and by delineating the two primary metaphors employed in 
abhiṣeka, which have not been well expressed previously. It also organized and presented 
material found in disparate sources with the goal of having an overarching presentation 
of the basic systems and problems associated with Indian abhiṣeka rituals. It integrated 
a study of disparate documents from the dhāraṇī and Mahāyāna archive and placed 
them in a ritual frame of reference, for both what they said and what was not indicated. 
The essay also integrated recent work on abhiṣeka in Indian Buddhist studies, as well 
as discussed significant but understudied documents and how they configured them­
selves. Finally, it outlined significant areas of disagreement in late tantric Buddhism.

--- PAGE 72 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      47
 
Notes
	1.	 Abhiṣeka has been explored in a variety of venues. Important contributions include 
Snellgrove 1987, I, 213–​287; Davidson 2002, 123–​131; Onians 2003; Tsuchiyama 2005; and 
Davidson 2011. Focus on the rituals as performed in East Asia include Strickmann 1990; the 
essays in the volume edited by Orzech, Sørensen, and Payne 2011; Orzech 2011; the essays in 
Rambelli and Porath 2022. The variety of Tibetan consecration abhiṣeka rituals was touched 
on by Dalton (2016, 65–​77), but the baffling range and inflation of these, especially as pertains 
to the rNying-​ma tradition, should be subject to one or more rigorous investigations.
	2.	 We note that in other texts, √sū-​ is similarly employed (e.g., Śatapathabrāhmaṇa in 
the context of the abhiṣeka rite, 5.3.3.12 imaṃ devāḥ | asapatnaṃ suvadhvam itīmaṃ 
devā abhrātṛvyaṃ suvadhvam ity evaitad āha, 5.3.3.13 etā ha vai devāḥ savasyeśate | 
tasmāddevasvo nāma tadenametā eva devatāḥ suvate tābhiḥ sūtaḥ śvaḥ sūyate | ).
	3.	 The abhiṣeka meditations in these documents have been subject to significant study, begin­
ning with the publication and study of the untitled Yogalehrbuch. Schlingloff (1964, 41–​44) 
and Yamabe (1999) demonstrated their continuity with similar documents preserved in 
Chinese. Some of these were contextualized by Davidson (2010), with strong Indian back­
ground. The Chinese documents, not only their abhiṣeka content, have been studied in 
more detail by Greene (2021a), and two have been translated by Greene (2021b).
	4.	 Ruegg (1967, 162) suggested and Yamabe (1999) more directly proposed a relationship.
	5.	 T. 848.33a15-​21. Confer D. 494, fol. 208a2-​4: dbang bskur gsum du shes bya ste | de bas nan 
tan mnyan par gyis | phyag rgyas gang zhig dbang bskur ba | las dang bya ba spangs pa ste | 
skyob pa rnams kyi dbang bskur ba | de ni mchog ste dang po yin | gnyis pa las dang bya 
ba yis | kun nas bslang bar yang dag bshad | gsum pa yid kyis shes bya ste | yul dang du ni 
spangs pa’o | bla ma legs par mgu byas nas | phan par byed pa gang smras pa’i | dbang bskur 
‘di ni mchog yin par | rdzogs pa’i sangs rgyas rnams kyis bsgrags | (Hodge 2003, 275–​276; 
Giebel 2005, 153).
	6.	 Abhiṣekaratnāloka To. 1333, fol. 298a1-​2; compare the discussions in the Hevajrasekaprakriyā, 
pp. 27–​31.
Bibliography
Note: Entries for primary sources are identified by catalogue numbers with the following 
abbreviations:
D. Harrison, Paul, and Helmut Eimer. 1997. “Kanjur and Tanjur Sigla: A Proposal for 
Standardisation.” In Transmission of the Tibetan Canon: Papers Presented at a Panel of the 
7th Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies, Graz 1995, edited by Helmut 
Eimer, xi–​xiv. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
T. Takakusu, J., & Watanabe, K., eds. 1924–​1934. Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō. Tokyo: Taishō 
Issaikyō Kankōkai.
Abhiṣekaratnāloka. D. 1333.
Aitareyabrāhmaṇa. Āpṭe, Hari Nārāyaṇa. 1896. Ātareyabrāhmaṇam, Śrīmat-​Sāyaṇācār- 
yaviracitabhāṣyasametam. Ānandāśramsaṃskṛtagranthāvaliḥ 32. 2 parts. Pune, India: 
Ānandāśrama Press.

--- PAGE 73 ---
48      Ronald M. Davidson
 
Apadāna. Lilley, Mary E. 1925–​1927. The Apadāna of the Khuddaka Nikāya. 2 vols. London: Pali 
Text Society.
Aśokāvadāna. Mukhopadhyaya, Sujitkumar. 1960. The Asokavadana: Sanskrit Text Compared 
with Chinese Versions. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi.
Baudhāyanapariśiṣṭa. Sastri, R. Shama. 1920. The Bodhāyana Gṛihyasutra, 178–​376. Mysore, 
India: Government Branch Press.
Bhagavan-​Nīlāmbaradhara-​Vajrapāṇi-​tantra. D. 494.
Dalton, Jacob. 2004. “The Development of Perfection: The Interiorization of Buddhist Ritual in 
the Eighth and Ninth Centuries.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 32:1–​30.
Dalton, Jacob. 2016. The Gathering of Intentions: A History of Tibetan Tantra. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Davidson, Ronald M. 1995. “Atiśa’s A Lamp for the Path to Awakening.” In Buddhism—​In 
Practice, edited by Donald S. Lopez, 290–​301. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2010. “The Place of Abhiṣeka Visualization in the Yogalehrbuch and 
Related Texts.” In From Turfan to Ajanta: Festschrift for Dieter Schlingloff on the Occasion of 
His Eightieth Birthday, edited by Eli Franco and Monika Zin, vol. 1, 183–​196. Lumbini, Nepal: 
Lumbini International Research Institute.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2011. “Abhiṣeka.” In Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia, 
edited by Charles D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, 71–​75. Leiden, 
Netherlands: Brill.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2012. “Some Observations on an Uṣṇīṣa Abhiṣeka Rite in Atikūṭa’s 
Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha.” In Transformations and Transfer of Tantra in Asia and Beyond, edited by 
István Keul, 77–​97. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2014a. “Studies in Dhāraṇī Literature II: Pragmatics of Dhāraṇīs.” 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 77, no. 1: 5–​61.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2014b. “Studies in Dhāraṇī Literature III: Seeking the Parameters 
of a Dhāraṇī-​piṭaka, the Formation of the Dhāraṇīsaṃgrahas, and the Place of the 
Seven Buddhas.” In Scripture:Canon::Text:Context—​Essays Honoring Lewis Lancaster, 
edited by Richard K. Payne, 119–​180. Berkeley, CA: Institute of Buddhist Studies and 
BDK, 2014.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2017. “Magicians, Sorcerers and Witches: Considering Pretantric, Non-​
sectarian Sources of Tantric Practices.” Special Issue of the Society for Tantric Studies, 
Religions 8, no. 188: 1–​33;. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​8090​188
Daśabhūmika. Kondō, Ryūkō, ed. 1936. Daśabhūmīśvaro Nāma Mahāyānasūtraṃ. Tokyo: 
Daijyō Bukkyō Kenyō-​Kai.
Demiéville, Paul. 1951. “La Yogācārabhūmi de Saṅgharakṣa.” Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-​Orient 44, no. 2: 339–​436.
Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha. T. 901. Asc. Atikūṭa. Translated 654 CE.
Fóshuō 
guàndīng 
qīwàn 
èrqiān 
shénwáng 
hùbǐ 
bǐqiū 
zhòujīng. 
佛説灌頂七萬二千神王護比丘呪經. T. 1331.
Geslani, Marko. 2018. Rites of the God-​King: Śānti and Ritual Change in Early Hinduism. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Giebel, Rolf W. 2001. Two Esoteric Sutras: The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra, the Susiddhikara 
Sutra. BDK English Tripiṭaka 29-​II, 30-​II. Berkeley, CA: Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai and Numata 
Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.

--- PAGE 74 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      49
 
Giebel, Rolf W. 2005. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sutra. BDK English Tripiṭaka 30-​1. Berkeley, 
CA: Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai and Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
Gobhilagṛhyasūtra. 
Bhattacharya, 
Chintamani. 
1936. 
Gobhilagṛhasūtram 
with 
Bhaṭṭanārāyana’s commentary. Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing and Publishing House.
Gonda, Jan. 1965. The Sauvayajñas (Kauśikasūtra 60–​68): Translation Introduction 
Commentary. Amsterdam: N. V. North-​Holland.
Gonda, Jan.1969. Ancient Indian Kingship from the Religious Point of View. Leiden, Netherlands: 
E. J. Brill.
Greene, Eric M. 2021a. Chan Before Chan: Meditation, Repentance, and Visionary Experience in 
Chinese Buddhism. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Greene, Eric M. 2021b. The Secrets of Buddhist Meditation: Visionary Meditation Texts from 
Early Medieval China. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Guhyasamājatantra. Matsunaga, Yukei, ed. 1978. The Guhyasamājatantra. Osaka, Japan: Toho 
Shuppan.
Guhyatantra. Sarvamaṇḍalasāmānyavidhīnāṃ Guhyatantram. D. 806. T. 897.
Hevajrasekaprakriyā. Finot, Louis. 1934. “Manuscrits Sanskrits de Sādhana’s retrouvés en 
Chine.” Journal Asiatique 225:1–​86; Hevajrasekaprakriyā on 19–​48.
Hevajratantra. Snellgrove, David L. 1959. The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study, 2 parts. London 
Oriental Series, vol. 6. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heesterman, J. C. 1957. The Ancient Indian Royal Consecration: The Rājasūya Described 
According to the Yajus Texts and Annotated. Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Hodge, Stephen. 2003. The Mahā-​Vairocana-​Abhisaṃbodhi Tantra with Buddhaguhya’s 
Commentary. London: RoutledgeCurzon.
Inden, Ronald. 1981. “Ritual, Authority and Cyclic Time in Hindu Kingship.” In Kingship 
and Authority in South Asia, edited by J. F. Richards, 41–​91. Madison: South Asian Studies, 
University of Wisconsin.
Isaacson, Harunaga. 2006. “Observations on the Development of the Ritual of Initiation 
(abhiṣeka) in the Higher Buddhist Tantric Systems.” In Hindu and Buddhist Initiations 
in India and Nepal, edited by Astrid Zotter and Christof Zotter, 261–​279. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz.
Isaacson, Harunaga, and Francesco Sferra, eds. 2014. The Sekanirdeśa of Maitreyanātha 
(Advayavajra) with the Sekanirdeśapañjikā of Rāmapāla. Manuscripta Buddhica 2, Serie 
Orientale Roma Vol. 107. Naples, Italy: Università Degli Studi di Napoli ‘L’Orientale.
Kauśikasūtra. Limaye, V. P., R. N. Dandekar, C. G. Kashikar, V. V. Bhide, and S. S. Bahulkar, 
eds. 1982. Kauśikapaddhati on the Kauśikasūtra of the Atharvaveda. Pune, India: Tilak 
Maharashtra Vidyapitha.
Keith, Arthur Berriedale. 1914. The Veda of the Black Yajus School Entitled Taittiriya Sanhita. 2 
vols. Harvard Oriental Series, vols. 18–​19. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Krug, Adam C. 2019. “Buddhist Medical Demonology in The Sūtra of the Seven Buddhas.” 
Religion 10:255. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​0040​255
Law, Narendra Nath. 1919. “Ancient Hindu Coronation and Allied Ceremonials.” Indian 
Antiquary 48:84–​95.
Mahāvastu. Senart, Émile. 1882–​1897. Le Mahāvastu. 3 vols. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale.
Mānavagṛhyasūtra. Sastri, Ramakrishna Harshaji. 1926. Mānavagṛhyasūtra of the 
Maitrāyaṇīya Śākhā with the Commentary of Aṣṭāvakra. Baroda, India: Central Library.
Meisezahl, R. O. 1962. “The Amoghapāśahṛdaya-​dhāraṇī: The Early Sanskrit Manuscript of the 
Reiunji Critically Edited and Translated.” Monumenta Nipponica 17:265–​328.

--- PAGE 75 ---
50      Ronald M. Davidson
 
*Mūlamantra. T. 1007. Expanded in T. 1005-​06.
Onians, Isabelle. 2003. “Tantric Buddhist Apologetics or Antinomianism as a Norm.” PhD 
Dissertation, University of Oxford.
Orzech, Charles D. 2011. “On the Subject of Abhiṣeka.” Pacific World 3rd ser., 13:113–​128.
Orzech, Charles D., Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, eds. 2011. Esoteric Buddhism 
and the Tantras in East Asia. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Rambelli, Fabio, and Or Porath, eds. 2022. Rituals of Initiation and Consecration in Premodern 
Japan. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Ṛgvidhāna. Bhat, Muralidhar Shrinivas. 1987. Vedic Tantrism: A Study of Ṛgvidhāna of Śaunaka 
with Text and Translation. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Ruegg, David Seyfort. 1967. “On a Yoga Treatise in Sanskrit from Qïzïl.” Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 87, no. 2: 157–​165.
Sarvadurgatipariśodhana. Skorupski, Tadeusz. 1983. The Sarvadurgatipariśodhana Tantra: 
Elimination of All Evil Destinies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. Yamada, Isshi. 1981. Sarva-​Tathāgata-​Tattva-​Saṅgraha Nāma 
Mayāyāna-​Sūtra: A Critical Edition Based on a Sanskrit Manuscript and Chinese and Tibetan 
Translations. Śata-​Piṭaka Series, vol. 262. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture.
Sekoddeśa. Orofino, Giacomella. 1994. Sekoddeśa: A Critical Edition of the Tibetan Translations, 
With an Appendix by Raniero Gnoli on the Sanskrit Text. Serie Orientale Roma 72. Rome: 
Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Sekoddeśaṭīkā. Sferra, Francesco. 2006. The Sekoddeśaṭīkā by Nāropā (Paramārthasaṃgraha). 
Serie Orientale Roma 99. Rome: Istituto Italiano per L’Africa e L’Oriente.
Shinohara, Koichi. 2014. Spells, Images and Maṇḍalas: Tracing the Evolution of Esoteric Buddhist 
Rituals. New York: Columbia University Press.
Snellgrove, David. 1987. Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism. 2 vols. Boston: Shambhala.
Strickmann, Michel. 1990. “The Consecration Sūtra: A Buddhist Book of Spells.” In Chinese 
Buddhist Apocrypha, edited by Robert E. Buswell, Jr., 73–​118. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press.
Subāhuparipṛcchā. T. 895. D. 805.
Suvarṇabhāsottama. Noble, Johannes, ed. 1937. Suvarṇabhāsottamasūtra: Das Goldglanz-​
Sūtra, Ein Sanskrittext des Mahāyāna-​Buddhismus. Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz.
Susiddhikāra. T. 893. D. 807.
Szántó, Péter-​Dániel. 2015. “The Road Not to Be Taken: An Introduction to Two Ninth-​
Century Works Against Buddhist Antinomian Practice.” In Mārga: Paths to Liberation in 
South Asian Buddhist Traditions, edited by Cristina Pecchia and Vincent Eltschinger, 363–​
379. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press.
Taittirīyasaṃhitā. Weber, Albrecht, ed. 1871–​1872. Die Taittirīya-​Saṃhitā, 11–​12. Indische 
Studien
Tattvaratnāloka. Pandey, Janardan, ed. 1997. Baudhalaghugranthasaṃgrahaḥ, 81–​142. Sarnath, 
India: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies.
Tsuchiyama, Yasuhiro. 2005. “Abhiṣeka in the Vedic and Post-​Vedic Rituals.” In From Material 
to Deity: Indian Rituals of Consecration, edited by Shingo Einoo and Jun Takashima, 51–​93. 
Delhi: Manohar.
Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi. T. 848. D. 494.
Vajrāvalī. Mori, Masahide, ed. 2009. Vajrāvalī of Abhayākaragupta. 2 vols. Buddhica 
Britannica, Series Continua XI. Trink, UK: Institute of Buddhist Studies.

--- PAGE 76 ---
Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism      51
 
Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa. Kṛṣṇadāsa, Kṣemarāja, and Cāru Deva Śāstrī, eds. 1985. The Viṣṇu­
dharmottarapurāṇa. Delhi: Nag Publishers.
Wenta, Aleksandra. 2018. “The Making of Tantric Orthodoxy in the Eleventh-​Century Indo-​
Tibetan World: *Jñānākāra’s *Mantrāvatāra (Gsang sngags la ‘jug pa). Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 46:505–​551.
Yamabe, Nobuyoshi. 1999. “The Significance of the ‘Yogalehrbuch’ for the Investigation into the 
Origin of Chinese Meditation Texts.” Bukkyō Bunka 9:1–​75.
Yogalehrbuch. Schlingloff, Dieter. 2006. Ein Buddhistisches Yogalehrbuch. Sanskrittexte aus 
den Turfanfunden VII. Berlin: Akademie Verlag. Enlarged reprint, Jens-​Uwe Hartmann 
and Hermann-​Josef Röllicke, eds. Dieter Schlingloff: Ein Buddhistisches Yogalehrbuch—​
Unveränderter Nachdruck der Ausgabe von 1964 unter Beigabe aller seither bekannt 
gewordenen Fragmente. Buddhismus-​Studien 5. Düsseldorf: Hauses der Japanischen 
Kultur (EKŌ).

--- PAGE 77 ---


--- PAGE 78 ---
Chapter 3
The Inner and  
Outer Worship
The Rhythms of Domestic and  
Temple Practice in Nepālī Tantra
Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
Introduction
Nepālī Tāntrikas perceive themselves as abiding in a geopolitical territory that is 
enlivened with the energies of a host of gods and goddesses that dwell at once in the 
land itself, the temples that punctuate that land, the many shrines within the homes 
of the faithful, and, ultimately, within the bodies of the faithful engaged in worship 
(Dyczkowski 2004). Indeed, dating back to King Māṇadeva (464–​506 ce) the land of 
Nepal has been referenced by Nepālīs themselves as Nepāla-​Maṇḍala, a term that is rich 
with theological and ritual significance (Lidke 2017; Slusser 1982). Dating back to the an­
cient hymns of Ṛg Veda, mandalas have been identified as the sacred territories that arise 
from and are sustained by ritual practice, primordially by the gods themselves who set 
the paradigm for human behavior. Translated into the political sphere, mandalas were 
the regions of those righteous kings whose lands were viewed as extensions of their own 
beings (White 2000, 25). As a mandala in such a fashion, Nepal is a land whose history, 
politics, culture, and current religious practices are punctuated by the understanding 
that ritual practice is that which sustains the land, the nation, and its inhabitants.
In this chapter, our focus is on outlining the network of domestic and temple ritual 
practice detailed in the Kaula Tantric liturgical texts of the Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tra­
dition, as well as by the living adherents of these texts. Textual sources and living 
adherents alike understand ritual practice as a central means means by which one can 
come to experience one’s own consciousness as coexistent with the consciousness of 
the supreme goddess herself, Parā Śakti, who manifests not just in the singular but

--- PAGE 79 ---
54      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
as a multiplicity of gods and goddesses associated with the various regions, energies, 
elements, and powers of the cosmos (Timalsina 2007). This supreme goddess expresses 
herself as creation through the outward projection of her inner being. From the per­
spective of this tantric tradition, there is nothing actually outside the being of the 
Goddess. In reality, her outward expression is a projection within the expanse of her 
own infinite consciousness (cf. White 2003, 179–​180). That which is singular takes on 
the appearance of multiplicity by projecting outwardly into its own being at the time of 
creation. Conversely, dissolution, or the ending of creation, is the process by which the 
appearance of multiplicity, as the mandala-​of-​creation, is reabsorbed by the goddess 
back into a state of singularity. Ultimately, “inner” and “outer” are but relative terms. 
All is within the being of the goddess, whose internal being subdivides into an infinite 
array of beings who are all outside each other yet all within the being of the goddess 
who abides within all as the self-​of-​all (cf. Dyczkowski 1989, 2004, 2009; Sanderson 
1986, 1995). Conventional terms are used to make sense of a process by which creation 
arises and appears as somehow distinct from or outside the goddess, who in actuality 
gazes inwardly at the creation inside of her while beings within creation who look out 
into the expanse of space are looking from within the being of a goddess who is simul­
taneously said to dwell within all being as their inner nature. What, therefore is “inside” 
(antar) and what is “outside” (bahir)?
The Dialectic of Inner and Worship in 
the Domestic and Temple Rituals
Inspired by the nondual awareness of the goddess herself, the logic of Nepālī tan­
tric ritual practice is grounded in the understanding of a relative distinction between 
that which is “inside” and that which is “outside.” At a basic level, Nepāli tantric prac­
tice divides into two basic categories of domestic practice, which is labeled “internal 
worship” (antar-​yāga), and temple practice, which is labeled “external worship” (bahir-​
yāga). However, the dichotomy of domestic and temple worship is demarcated by a 
very thin, permeable line, such that the principles, deities, liturgies, and benefits of each 
impacts and mutually informs the other in an ongoing dialectical fashion.
Indeed, the Sanskrit terms antar (inside) and bahir (outside) can and are used var­
iously based upon their application in distinct contexts. In terms of distinguishing 
broadly between domestic practice engaged privately at home versus public practice en­
gaged in a temple, festival, or other shared social space, Nepālī Tāntrikas designate the 
former as “internal worship” (antar-​yāga) and the latter as “external worship” (bahir-​
yāga). However, the distinctions between these terms are not easily maintained. For 
example, although private practice done within one’s home is broadly categorized as 
inner worship (antar-​yāga), there are aspects of such practice that are drawn from the 
external worship (bahir-​yāga) liturgies. Similarly, although temple practice is generally

--- PAGE 80 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      55
 
labeled bahir-​yāga, elements of such practice are drawn from the procedures for antar-​
yāga practice. For instance, a priest engaged in practice inside the temple, behind closed 
doors, will integrate elements of antar-​yāga into his private worship of the temple icon 
in preparation for the practice done outside the temple, before a viewing audience, ac­
cording to the procedures of bahir-​yāga.
With regard to tantric spiritual practice (sādhana), the internal mental practice is 
generally termed “internal worship” (antar-​yāga) while the visible worship or practice is 
termed “external worship” (bahir-​yāga). Whether in domestic practice or at a temple, a 
complete practice is one that integrates both antar-​ and bahir-​yāga. As temples are often 
considered places of power, doing practices in its premises is believed to increase the ef­
fectiveness of all the tantric practices engaged within the sphere (mandala) demarcated 
by the network of temples in the region. People may seek to engage in yogic practice 
(sādhana) at a temple, but with the frequent visits of devotees to temples, the necessary 
individual concentration, contemplation, and isolation needed for practice and growth 
are hard for practitioners (sādhakas) to achieve.
Figures 3.1 and 3.2 illustrate the difference between the features of practice at home 
and that at temples. In figure 3.1, we see the respected Teacher of Tantra (Tantācārya), 
Vidyānāth Upādhyāya Bhaṭṭa, together with his wife, engaged in the practices of internal 
Figure 3.1.  Domestic practice, demonstrating antar-​yāga: Teacher of Tantra (Tantrācārya), 
Professor Vidyanath Upadhyaya Bhatta, together with his wife, Annapurna Upadhyaya Bhatta, 
doing his daily practice. Courtesy of Vidyanāth Upādhyāya Bhaṭṭa.

--- PAGE 81 ---
56      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
worship (antar-​yāga). Antar-​yāga practices are categorized by an internal, inward, medita­
tive focus grounded primarily in posture (āsana), breath (prāṇāyāma), internal muscular 
locks (bandhas), concentration (dhyāna), repetition of power-​syllables, (bījamantra-​
japa), and visualization (dhāraṇā) (Flood 1993, passim; Lidke 2005, passim).
Typically—​although not exclusively—​engaged in the privacy of one’s home, antar-​
yāga practices are designed to direct the individual’s consciousness inwardly toward the 
presence of the worshipped-​deities of tantric practice which are understood to reside 
within one’s own subtle body system (sūkṣma-​śarīra). Through this inward-​focused 
practice, one learns to harness the powers of the body and direct them toward desired 
outcomes in the context of one’s spiritual practice (sādhana).
While antar-​yāga practices are typically done privately in domestic spaces, with the 
eyes closed and the gaze directed inwardly, the practices associated with external wor­
ship (bahir-​yāga) typically occur in public spaces like temples and are conducted with 
the eyes open, engaged in practices that require the activation of the sensory organs—​
sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing—​in conjunction with the tantric rituals designed 
to invoke, install, feed, and honor the deities of the location in which one is worshipping. 
As seen in figure 3.2, the priest of Sarveśvara-​Kumbheśvara Temple, Madhav Shyam 
Sharma, engages the worship of the temple icon with his eyes open and all senses fully 
engaged, focused outwardly. In other words, whereas the directional flow of one’s con­
sciousness is inward in antar-​yāga practices, the directional flow of one’s conscious­
ness in bahir-​yaga is outward. And while antar-​yāga is predicated on the withdrawal 
Figure 3.2.  Temple practice: Priest Madhav Shyam Sharma Rajopadhyaya doing pūjā, 
Kumbheśvara-​Sarveśvara Temple, Patan. Courtesy of Shivesh Sharma Rajopadhyaya.

--- PAGE 82 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      57
 
and internalization of the sense capacities (pratyāhāra), bahir-​yāga is predicated on the 
outward expansion of the sense capacities through engagement with the tools of ritual 
practice. As seen in figure 3.2, the eyes focus on the image (mūrti) of the deity. The nose 
smells the aromatic senses from the incenses (dhūpa) used in worship. The tongue tastes 
the food and drink offerings made first to the deity and then consumed as a blessing 
(prasādam). The ears hear the bells and mantras that reverberate through the air while 
the hands touch the various objects of one’s worship. Through this open-​eyed, fully sen­
sual engagement with the embodied deity, one seeks to invite into the ritual space the 
presence of tantric deities, thereby establishing it as a power-​seat (śākta-​pītḥa). As a 
power-​seat, the space—​typically a temple—​thus becomes filled with a blessing power 
that benefits all those who come into contact with it.
However, this does not mean that temples are not appropriate for deep spiritual 
practice (sādhana) and that homes are; certainly, even at one’s own home there can 
be hindrances that make the practice difficult. So, both at home and in temples, doing 
sādhana may not be appropriate at all times due to different kinds of disturbances and 
hindrances. This is one of the reasons that, even when priests do have the privilege of 
doing their practice in private with the temple door closed, there is either a distinct 
tantric-​house (āgama-​ghāra) or a special tantric shrine room (āgama-​koṭa) into which 
no one except initiates is allowed to enter at any time. In these designated domestic wor­
ship spaces, the initiates engage the liturgies of both the antar-​ and bahir-​yāgas, under­
standing that both forms are necessary for the completion of tantric sādhana. Indeed, 
these inward-​gazing and outward-​gazing practices are understood to mirror the dyadic 
expression of the supreme goddess herself, who brings creation into being through the 
opening of her eyes only to withdraw creation again at the time of cosmic dissolution 
with the closing of her eyes. And yet here again what is “inside” and what is “outside”? 
That which the goddess projects is done so not outside herself but rather within herself 
as there is nothing that is outside that supreme consciousness which is the ultimate iden­
tity of the goddess. From the perspective of the goddess, all that is projected “outside” as 
the universe is in fact an unfolding of her own being within herself. Within the context 
of a nondual reality, inside and outside are just conventional terms. Nepālī Sarvāmnāya 
Tātrikas seeking the ultimate attainment of spiritual freedom (mokṣa) engage in “in­
ternal” and “external” ritual practices with the aspiration to see as the goddess does, in a 
nondual state in which the distinctions between “inside” and “outside” collapse into the 
singularity of nondual consciousness that is at once within oneself and also manifest ex­
ternally, not just in the tools of worship but the world at large.
Evoking and Installing the Deity
One of the prime differences between practice at home and at temple involves invoking 
(āvāhana) and installing (pratisthā) the deity for the specific practice (yāga). In home 
practice, āvāhana and pratisthā are done in the beginning and then at the end will be

--- PAGE 83 ---
58      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
dissolved back into one’s own formless (nirākāra) and attributeless (nirguṇa) internal 
“sky of consciousness” (cidākāśa). This process is not undertaken in temple practice be­
cause the deity is permanently installed in temples, which is why temples are understood 
to provide an ideal space for devotees to receive spiritual blessings and make progress in 
their respective sādhanas. Table 3.1 further clarifies the breakdown and overlap of prac­
tice between domestic and temple patterns of tantric worship.
Table 3.1  Temple and domestic practicea
Domestic practiceb
Temple practicec
	a.	 Worship at sunrise, noon, and sunset (sandhyā)d
	b.	 Worship of Śiva (śiva-​dhyāna-​pūjā)
	c.	
Śakti: Worship of root deity (mūla devatā pūjā)
1.	 Meditation (dhyāna) and instillation (nyāsa)
2.	 Cleansing and installing ritual vessels (sodhana, 
śaṃkha, argha thāpana)
3.	 Invitation and establishment of deities 
associated with animal sacrifice (bali pātra 
thāpanā, bali devatā āvahāna)
4.	 Yogic breathing, bodily installation of deities and 
mantra recitation (prāṇāyama, nyāsa, japa)
5.	 Worship of bell, ritual drum and ritual manual 
(ghaṇṭa ḍamaru pustaka pūjā)
6.	 Worship of deities of animal sacrifice (bali pātra 
devatā pūjā)
7.	 Invocation of main deity (āvāhana mūla devatā)
8.	 Installation of main deity (pratiṣṭha)
9.	 16 acts of worship (ṣoḍaśopacāra-​pūjā)
10.	 Sastiating deities of animal sacrifice (bali 
tarpaṇa)
11.	 Meditation (dhyāna)
12.	 Appraisal (śaṃkha, argha)
13.	 Forgiveness (kṣamā)
14.	 Consumption of blessed food (prasāda)
15.	 Dissolution of bali deities (bali visarjana)
16.	 Dissolution of main goddess (bhagavatī visarjana)
	d.	 Recitation of hymns: pāṭha–​kavaca, stotra, 
sahasranāma, etc.
	1.	 Cleansing inner chamber 
(garbhagṛhaśodhana)
	2.	 Instillation of deities (nyāsa)
	3.	 Establishment of ritual vessels 
(ardhapātra/​viśeṣapātra sthāpanā)
	4.	 Conviction of purpose 
(ardhyasaṃkalpa)
	5.	 Invitation to bali deities to receive 
offerings (balipātrāvāhana)
	6.	 Offerings of various liquids, including 
wine (pañcāmṛta, jala, raksi, śaṃkhāla, 
ardhya-​jala)
	7.	 Worship of main goddess (devipūjā)
	8.	 Empowerment (abhiṣeka)
	9.	 Worship of Ugracaṇḍa 
(ugracaṇḍa pūjā)
	10.	 Sword worship (khaḍga pūjā)
	11.	 Sacrificial feeding of deity, priest, and 
devotees (bhoga)
a  As the reader will note, there is not a one-​to-​one correspondence between the liturgies of the 
domestic and temple ritual systems. There are some important points of overlap in each respective 
sequence and each includes the evoking and establishing of the deities within the sanctified space.
b  This analysis of domestic practice is based on the daily practice of Guhyakālī by Vidayanath 
Upadhyaya Bhatta as explained to the author on numerous occasions.
c  This analysis of temple practice is based on the book Nepālapīṭha ra Guheśvarī by Diwakar Acharya 
(2018, 65–​66) in which he explains in detail the yāga of Guhyakālī that is done in the temple of 
Guheśvarī, Kathmandu, Nepal.
d  Religious acts need to be performed by twice-​born/​Brahmins at sunrise, noon and sunset.

--- PAGE 84 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      59
 
Regarding sacrificial feeding (bhoga), animal sacrifice (bali), and offering of 
purified foods (naivedya), Nepāli Tāntrikas integrate both the actual (pratyakṣa) 
offerings/​sacrifices1 as well as symbolic substitutions (anukalpa) within both their 
domestic and temple practices, like the one we see below in the practice of Tantra-​
Bhūṣaṇa,2 Dr. Jagman Gurung (figs. 3.3, 3.4, 3.5). This integration reflects the fact 
that Nepāli Sarvāmnāya tantra incorporates both the left-​handed path (vāma-​
mārga) and right-​handed path (dakṣiṇa-​mārga), making it properly a Kaula tantric 
tradition. For instance, the left-​handed tradition of the literal pratyakṣa offerings 
and sacrifices is predominant, which is why one sees animal sacrifice in most of 
the Śākta temples in Nepal. Indeed, animal sacrifice is an essential component of 
Figure 3.3.  Jagman Gurung doing his daily tantric pūjā, integrating both literal and symbolic 
elements in the context of engaging in both antar-​ and bahir-​yāga. Courtesy of Jagman Gurung.

--- PAGE 85 ---
60      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
the annual ritual cycle of both domestic and temple practice (Sapkota 2022, 280–​
288). Moreover, among many of the ethnic communities—​including Brahmins, 
Buddhist Newārs, Himalayan Buddhists, and Buddhist Gurungs—​emphasize the 
literal (pratyakṣa) offerings of the five transgressive substances (pañcamakāra) tra­
ditionally associated with left-​handed tantric practice—​madya (alcohol), māṃsa 
(meat), matsya (fish), mudrā (pounded grain), and sexual intercourse (maithuna) 
(Gurung 1974).
Figure 3.4.  Jagman Gurung in front of the Yāngjākot temple. Courtesy of Jagman Gurung.

--- PAGE 86 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      61
 
A Union of the Left-​ and  
Right-​Handed Paths
Yet, as a Kaula tantric tradition, one finds that there is flexibility in terms of the use of 
both literal and symbolic sacrifice and offerings in both domestic and temple practice. 
Many Nepālī Tāntrikas integrate both literal and symbolic elements to their practice. 
For instance, in Table 3.1, Dr. Jagman Gurung illustrates one of several ways that Nepālī 
tantric practitioners offer the five forbidden substances (pañcamakāra). In the bamboo 
tray (nāṅglo) one finds rakṣi, a local alcohol made from millet and corresponding to 
madya (typically identified as “wine”), as well as three more of the transgressive 
substances, including red meat (māṃsa), fish (matsya), and pounded grain (mudrā). 
Each of these four substances is literal and is offered by Gurung during his worship. 
However, the fifth element, “sexual union” (maithuna), is not literally present but rather 
is symbolically represented by an egg, the yellow yoke of which is “female” while the 
white outer layer is “male.” Additionally, the fruit on the tray represents the phallus 
(liṅga) while the flower represents the vagina (yoni). In this way the ritual combines 
the actual offerings (pratyakṣa) of four of the forbidden substances together with both 
the symbolic (anukalpa) and actual (pratyakṣa) of sexual union (maithuna) which, in 
addition to its symbolic representation through egg, fruit, and flowers, is embodied in 
literal form with the presence of Gurung’s wife. A Kaula tantric practitioner must have 
an actual consort and therefore literal ritual intercourse (pratyakṣa-​maithuna) typically 
occurs in private. Hence, it is not just in vain that it is said that a Kaula must be married. 
Figure 3.5.  Pūjā in Daśain at Yāngjākot temple. Courtesy of Jagman Gurung.

--- PAGE 87 ---
62      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
As is written in the Vivekavyākhyā of Tantrāloka (29.96), “Just as a Vedic practitioner 
must be with his wife in Vedic yajña-​yāga, so must he be a Kaulacārya with his wife in 
Kaula practice.”3
Daśain: The Preeminent Tantric 
Festival of Nepal
Additionally, it is important to see how the other communities of Nepal, beyond the 
Newārs of Kathmandu valley, operate and practice tantra in their respective temple and 
domestic lives. Doing so, one recognizes, for example, that the rhythms of domestic and 
temple practice observed in the village of Yāngjākot, where Jagman Gurung performs 
tantric worship (yāga) as the commander-​in-​chief (mir-​umarā-​mukhiyā),4 are structur­
ally similar to the ritual observances found in a majority of villages throughout Nepal.5 
One prime example would be the yāga practices associated with the festival of Daśain.
The festival of Daśain, which includes both the “nine autumnal nights” (śāradīya-​
navarātra) together with the “great victorious tenth day” (vijayā-​daśamī), is not only 
the most significant festival of Nepal but also the most important time for the worship of 
the tantric goddesses (śakti -​upāsanā). Consequently, each year, Jagman Gurung travels 
from Kathmandu to his village to lead the most important ritual sacrifice of the annual 
tantric ritual cycle, the sacrificial worship of the goddesses (śakti-​pūjā-​yāga) of Daśain 
as well as his ancestors (see fig. 3.5).6
A day before the first day of Daśain, on the dark moon night (auṃsī), as head of the 
village, Jagman Gurung engages first in the worship of musical instruments (nagarā-​
pūjā) at his home. Next, an assembled band (nagarcī) takes those instruments to 
the temple at the fort (koṭa) and then, while playing the instruments, circumam­
bulate the village informing everybody that the time of the great festival of Daśain 
has come. At night, Jagman Gurung sows barley (jamarā) in a soil kept on a tray 
made from the leaves of a Sal tree (shorea robusta); this barley grass is then used for 
the worship of the sacrificial animals (bali-​pūjā) on the eighth day (aṣṭami), called 
kālarātri, but mainly on the ninth day (navamī) at the Fort Temple of Goddess Durgā 
(koṭa-​durgā-​maṇḍir).
On the first day of Daśain, called the Establishment of the Water Pot (ghaṭa-​
sthāpanā), Jagman Gurung initially sows the barley to be used on the culminating 
tenth day (vijayā-​daśamī) for the blessing of all the villagers. He also establishes three 
main ritual vessels (kalaśas), respectively, for the goddesses Mahākālī, Mahālakṣmī, 
and Mahāsarasvatī, with an additional two kalaśas, one on each side for subsidiary 
deities to the right and left (aṅga tathā pārśva devatā). On the seventh day (saptamī), 
he establishes the goddess Durgā (Durgā-​sthāpanā) by placing large, decorated swords 
in the same place where the barley is kept and uses a copper utensil (pāthī)—​inscribed 
by the Kings of Nepal with special authority given to the forefathers of Jagman

--- PAGE 88 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      63
 
Gurung—​for the worship of the sword (khaḍga-​pūjā) and the attainment of the 
sword (khaḍga-​siddhi). On the eighth day, a goat is sacrificed and meat from the same 
sacrificed goat with wine is served to all those who have come to Jagman Gurung’s 
house for singing the Garland of Auspiciousness (mālaśrī7) hymns from the beginning 
day of the dark night of the moon (auṃsī).
On the ninth day, all the swords and ritual barley grass are taken to the fort-​temple 
(koṭa-​maṇḍir) from the fort-​house (koṭa-​ghar) of Jagman Gurung (see figs. 3.4, 3.5). 
Upon arrival a Brahmin of the Lamichhane family within the Garga Gotra lineage 
invokes an intention-​mantra (saṃkalpa-​mantra), establishing the aims of the worship. 
A Gurung (either Jagman Gurung or his son) from the indigenous community serves 
as the head of the village and as the officiant (kartā) of worship (yāga) who is holding 
the water in his hand in order to firmly establish the intention of the ritual (saṃkalpa). 
Metal smiths (kāmī) and musicians (damāi) from an occupational community (śilpī) 
come to contribute to the festival by sharpening the sword and playing the music. Both 
the ash-​gourd (anukalpa) and a literal (pratyakṣa) buffalo sacrifice are performed. 
Music is played and villagers gather to celebrate. In this way, the ritual integrates mul­
tiple ethnic identities in a shared celebration of the tantric goddesses that combines both 
Sanskritic and vernacular interpretations (Gurung 2010; Timalsina 2006).
On the tenth day (vijayā-​daśamī) a bullet is fired into the air and blessings with tika 
powder on one’s forehead and a jamarā on one’s head are received from Durgā Bhavānī 
and respected elders.
Within the Sarvāmnāya sequence of worship (sarvāmnāya-krama-yāga) associated 
with Durgā, there are two systems of ritual order (pūjā-​krama). The first ritual order 
consists of the following ceremonies: (1) Ekākṣarī Durgā, (2) Aṣṭakṣarī Durgā, (3) 
Jaya Durgā, (4) Navārṇa, and (5) Pañcadaśī. The second ritual order system includes 
(1) Mahākālī, (2) Mahālakṣmī, (3) Mahāsarasvatī, (4) Ugracaṇḍā, and (5) Pañcadaśī. 
Combined together, the entire system is called the Great Perfected Sequence (mahā­
pūrṇakrama).8 Jagman Gurung, who is an initiate (adhikārī) in the practices of Durgā 
from his earliest childhood understands Durgā to be the supreme goddess of the 
Total Revelation (sarvāmnāya-parādevī), especially in her form as Mahālakṣmī.9 The 
Puraścaryārṇava identifies Durgā as “she who is to be worshipped by all the revelations” 
(sarvāmnāyaprapūjitā)10 while the Hāhārāvatantram claims that she is the “great reve­
lation” (mahā-​āmnāya).11
The Three Modes of Tantric Worship
In addition to all the ritual activities of Daśain detailed in the previous section, Jagman 
Gurung additionally engages in the worship of his ancestors (kula-​pitṛ-​pūjā) as well as 
his tutelary deity (kula-​devatā), Śrī Jñāna Caturbhuja Mahākāla, a Buddhist form of Śiva 
specific to his tradition (see fig. 3.6). These rituals are typically conducted on the sev­
enth and eighth day (māhāṣṭami) and are done specifically according to the traditional

--- PAGE 89 ---
64      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
Gurung family method of practice.12 In this context, there is again the incorporation 
of both the symbolic and literal use of the five forbidden substances (pañcamakāra), 
reflecting again that Nepālī tantra is grounded in the Kaula tradition, which integrates 
both the literalism of the left-​handed way together with the symbolic interpretative 
tradition from the right-​handed way. Moreover, the ritual is engaged with an under­
standing of the important tantric concept of the three states of being (tri​bhāva) asso­
ciated with tantric worship. These three existential states are those of a fettered beast 
(paśubhāva), the hero-​state (vīrabhāva), and the divine state (divyabhāva) (Gupta, 
Hoens, and Goudriaan 1979, 72–​73).
Figure 3.6.  Jagman Gurung doing ancestor worship. Courtesy of Jagman Gurung.

--- PAGE 90 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      65
 
In paśubhāva, the sacrifice (yāga) is done with the mental attitude of duality 
wherein one sees oneself and the deity as distinct beings. In this mode, with de­
votion and discipline, one looks for the grace (anugraha) of the deity so that one 
overcomes the eight impediments of the bound condition (aṣṭapāśa)—​hate (ghṛṇā), 
doubt (śaṅkā), fear (bhaya), shyness (lajjā), abhorrence (jugupsā), clan (kula), ethics 
(śīla), and caste (jāti). In the paśubhāva, one is considered unqualified for the use of 
the literal (pratyakṣa) substances of the pañcamakāra and should only use the sym­
bolic (anukalpa) representations of the five forbidden substances. The emphasis at 
this stage of tantric worship is on the establishment of a high morality (śīla). Indeed, 
one of the most frequently consulted texts in Nepal, the Kulārṇava-​Tantra, warns 
that one must not smell, look at, touch, or eat and drink any meat or wine in the 
paśubhāva stage.13
Only when one is free from the eight impediments (aṣṭapāśa) is one qualified 
(adhikārī) to do the worship in a “heroic-​temperament” (vīrabhāva). In the heroic state, 
the pañcamakāra are utilized in both their literal (pratyakṣa) and symbolic (anukalpa) 
forms. Further, these substances are identified as establishing the seeds for bliss and 
enlightenment.14 In vīrabhāva, the temperament is that of duality-​within-​nonduality 
(dvaitādvaita) affirming both the dualistic and nondualistic perception of reality. In this 
state, the practitioner sees themselves in a nondual relationship with the deity, yet dis­
tinct from others. Indeed, the most predominant bhāva that one sees in Nepālī tantra is 
that of vīrabhāva.
In the highest stage of tantric worship, termed the “divine state” (divyabhāva), even 
the experience of “I” as a deity that distinguishes oneself from others does not remain. 
Instead, there is only the nondual (advaita) perception that everything is nondual and 
perfect in its essence (sarvaṃ sarvātmakam pūrṇah). There is neither necessity nor re­
striction of pañcamakāra in divyabhāva.
The practice of all these bhāvas in Nepal is exhibited in figure 3.7, a photo of the well-​
known practitioner and reputed master of all three bhāvas, Mohani Prasad Koirala, 
affectionately dubbed Viṣṇu Guru by his devotees (at right, with a ritual wine bottle in 
front of him). Specifically, the paśu-​bhāva is demonstrated through the focused med­
itative attention of the practitioners as they gaze into the fire and utter their mantras. 
Vira-​bhāva is represented by the incorporation of symbolic ritual elements such as the 
flowers and ritual vase. And the divya-​bhāva is represented by the literal (pratyakṣa) 
presence of the bottle of wine, highlighting that Koirala is in the highest state of aware­
ness and capable of integrating the literal five forbidden substances into his practice. 
In the state of divya-​bhāva, Koirala integrates both internal meditative practice (antar-​
yāga) with external worship (bahir-​yāga) to achieve the nondual state in which the 
distinctions between “inner” and “outer” collapse as the worshipper becomes the deity 
worshipped.
The practice of the three tantric states of consciousness (tri​bhāvas) in association 
with the five forbidden substances (pañcamakāra) is directly linked to the impor­
tance of the five elements (pañca-​tattvas), which are earth (pṛthvī), water (āpas), fire 
(agni), air (vayu), and space (ākāśa) (Woodroffe [1929] 2009, 553–​607). In the context

--- PAGE 91 ---
66      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
of tantric ritual practice, in which the practitioner seeks to experience his own body 
as a microcosm of the cosmos itself, which is composed of nothing more than the 
five elements, a correspondence (bandha) is set up between each of the five forbidden 
substances and each of the five elements: meat (māṃsa) represents earth (pṛthvī), fish 
(matsya) represents water (āpas), wine (madya) represents fire (agni), bread made 
from pounded grains represent air (bārā for Newārs sel-​roṭī for Gurungs), and finally 
the egg or fruit and flower are used as a symbol for sexual union (maithuna) which 
represents space (ākāśa). The practice of the pañca-​tattva with the direct usage of 
pañca-​makāra within one’s own body (which is made of pañca-​tattva itself) is foun­
dational for the establishment of the nondual state that is the highest aim of Nepālī 
Sarvāmnāya tantra. Further, it is precisely in this practice that kuṇḍalinī-yoga is highly 
developed in Nepal (Sapkota 2022; Lamichhane 2018).
The Fivefold Sequential Worship
Fundamental to all of these tantric practices, the fivefold system of practice (pañca-​
krama-​yāga) in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra is given a high significance. In fact, in the 
system of practice associated with Kālī, the Kālī-​Kula, it is of utmost importance. As 
one of the most predominant texts in Nepālī tantra, the Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā15 says of 
Guhyakālī: she is nondual (advaitāṃ), supreme bliss (paramānandāṃ), eternal (nityā), 
Figure 3.7.  Viṣṇu Guru (on right) with disciples at Guhyeśvarī temple. Courtesy of 
L. S. Akshunna.

--- PAGE 92 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      67
 
pure-​absolute (śuddhāṃ), and immaculate (nirañjanām). She is the Secret Kālī, 
Guhyakālī, nondistinct from the Supreme Goddess Parā Devī, having the nature of cre­
ation (sṛṣṭi), preservation (sthiti), destruction (saṃhāra), inexpressibility (anākhyā), 
and bhāsā (immeasurable potentiality) as her nature. She is understood to reside at 
the center of the fivefold process of creation (madhyastha-​pañca -​krama) (see fig. 3.8). 
Further she is identified as the essence of the Five Great Statements (pañcamahāvākya) 
of nondual Vedānta: i) “the supreme reality is all that is” (oṃ tat sat), ii) “I am that ul­
timate reality” (so’ham asmi), iii) “I am Brahman” (ahaṃ brahmāsmi), iv) “I am this 
truth” (tat sat ahameva), and v) “I am all this” (ahamevedaṃ sarvam).16 The Mahākāla-​
Saṃhitā17 further states that these great sayings (mahāvākyas) are the means for instil­
lation of the deity (nyāsa) and that this nyāsa is itself the means of worship (yāga). In 
other words, the essence of the practice is to achieve through direct bodily experience 
the perception of nondual awareness that is captured in the mahāvākyas themselves.
While engaging in the fivefold sequential worship, the Nepālī Sarvāmnāya Tāntrika 
seeks to cultivate qualities like integration (samanvaya), harmony (sahacāra), and com­
passionate equitability (samabhāva) in both domestic (antar) and temple (bahir) forms 
of practice. Nepal’s domestic and temple yāga practice bases its experiential rhythms on 
these five prime processes discussed above. Table 3.2 provides a summary of Nepālī yāga 
practice.
Figure 3.8.  Diagram of the Fivefold Sequential Sacrifice (pañca-​krama-​yāga). Courtesy of 
L. S. Akshunna.

--- PAGE 93 ---
68      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
The Integration of Kālī and 
Tripurasundarī in the Tantra of 
Nepāla-​Maṇḍala
With the prominence of Kālī-​Kula discussed herein, it would be inaccurate to assume 
that the Śrī-​Kula has no space in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantric practice. Indeed, the 
traditions of Śrī-​Kula, also known as Śrī Vidyā, are equally prevalent in Nepal and are 
so intimately integrated into Kālī-​Kula that for the majority of Sarvāmnāya Tāntrikas 
Kālī and Tripurasundarī are understood as just two names for one supreme god­
dess (Dyczkowski 1989; Lidke 2017). The Vaḍavānala-​tantra, for instance, states that 
there is no difference between Caṇḍayogeśvarī (Guhyakālī) and Mahātripurāsundarī, 
and that one who differentiates them will go to hell.18 In fact, even in the Parātantra, 
a recognized Kālī-​Kula text, the designation of “total revelation” (sarvāmnāya) is 
given to the goddess Mahātripurāsundarī of the Śrī Vidyā above all other deities. The 
reason for this is that Mahātripurāsundarī is identified with the Upper Transmission, 
the ūrdhvāmnāya, which is the scriptural transmission associated with the upper face 
or īśāna-​mukha of Lord Paśupati. The mantra of Īśāna can be rendered as “the lord 
of all knowledge, beings, study, and devotion”—​in other words it is the lord of all the 
āmnāyas (sarvaāmnāyaīśvara).19
At the Paśupatinātha temple, daily worship is conducted by the main Bhaṭṭa priest 
who uses blessed sandalwood to draw the preeminent symbol of the Śrī-​Kula, the 
śrīyantra—​identified as the supreme body (parārūpa) of Tripurasundarī (Brooks 
1992, 115)—​atop the formless īśāna-​mukha (upward face) of the five-​faced icon of Lord 
Paśupati (paśupati-​pañca-​mukhaliṅga). As it is strictly prohibited to take photos within 
the Paśupatinātha temple, figure 3.9 presents a photo from the Sarveśvara-​Kumbheśvara 
temple in Patan. In the photo, we see the placing of a copper śrīyantra cap upon the 
upper face (īśāna-​mukha) of the śiva-​liṇga. While this śrīyantra is not inscribed in san­
dalwood, as at Paśupatinātha temple, the ritual intention and statement here are the 
Table 3.2  Nepālī yāga practice
Krama
Yāga (sāmānya/​basics)
Pañcamakāra
Vidyā
1.
Sṛṣṭi
Mūla (mantra)
Māṃsa
Śāmbhava
2.
Sthiti
Nyāsa
Matsya
Mahāśāmbhava
3.
Saṃhāra
Dhyāna
Madya
Turiyā
4.
Anākhya
Kavaca
Mudrā
Mahāturiyā
5.
Bhāsā
Stotra/​Hṛdaya/​Upaniṣad
Maithuna
Nirvāṇa

--- PAGE 94 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      69
 
same. The point is to demonstrate that the Śrī-​Kula is to be identified with the Upper 
Transmission of the Sarvāmnāya system. The important ritual text, the Meditation on the 
Great Lord of the Beasts (Mahāpaśupati-​dhyāna), clearly states that the worship of the 
upward face of the śivaliṅga is to include the placing of a śrīyantra for its completion.20 
This practice of the Śrī Viydā tradition involving the śrīyantra is prevalent throughout 
Nepal, with its origins in the western region of the Khas kingdom and its roots deeply 
established in the Kathmandu valley (Lidke 2023; Maskarinec 1999). Indeed, the sixty-​
four-​fold initiation sequence (krama-​dīkṣā) practices of Śrī Vidyā are foundational to 
the entire system of Sarvāmnāya tantra.21
Conclusion
The interwoven rhythms of domestic and temple practice in Nepal operate under an in­
digenous logic of unity-​within-​multiplicity (bhedhābheda-​vāda), grounded in the the­
ological perception that one supreme goddess has manifested herself as an embodied 
cosmos (kula), replete with a multiplicity of tantric gods and goddesses who in turn are 
embedded in the lands, shrines, and homes of Nepāla-​Maṇḍala. Just as that Goddess 
projects creation internally onto the screen of her own being, thus playfully exhibiting 
Figure 3.9.  Śriyantra on the Ūrdhvāmnāya of the śivaliṅga of Sarveśvara (Kumbheśvara) 
Temple, Patan. Courtesy of Shivesh Sharma Rajopadhyaya.

--- PAGE 95 ---
70      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
that “inside” and “outside” are mutually interwoven, necessary, relative, and comple­
mentary facets of divine consciousness, so Nepālī tāntrikas intertwine internally fo­
cused meditative and visual practices (antar-​yāga) together with externally oriented 
liturgical exercises (bahir-​yāga) in both their domestic and temple contexts. Whether 
inwardly focused or outwardly focused, and whether in the privacy of their home 
shrine-​rooms or in public display in a temple courtyard or other communal ritual con­
text, these tantric practitioners—​be they lay adepts or temple priests—​share a common 
caste-​transcendent identity as adherents of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra, the Tantra of 
the Total Revelation, being the composite revelatory system of the six transmissions 
(ṣaḍāmnāya) associated with the six faces of their Lord Paśupati.
This historically grounded tradition is not simply the collection of texts at Nepal’s 
National Archives but a coordinated system of practices that interweave private 
and public ritual cultural patterns, enabling its adherents to perceive themselves as 
participants within a larger mandala of shared meaning—​one in which each of them is 
trained through ritual practice to recognize the essential teachings prescribed through 
the revelations found in their respective scriptural sources.
Nepal provides for scholars of tantra an invaluable opportunity to not just read care­
fully preserved manuscripts but also to meet, observe, and learn from living adherents 
of a genuine, fully developed tantric system. In Nepal, one finds initiated, informed 
tāntrikas engaged in a network of domestic and temple practices and committed to the 
preservation of their tradition, not just by passing it on to their own sons and daughters, 
but also to non-​Nepālīs who have sincere interest in the tradition. Just as the Supreme 
Goddess Parāśakti abides in a state of being transcendent to the dualistic ideologies that 
distinguish “internal” from “external,” so Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tāntrikas today recognize 
that the preservation of their cultural mandala necessitates the bringing of the inside out 
through the allowing of the outside in.
Notes
	1.	 To discuss whether animal sacrifice is just or not in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra and the dis­
course prevalent therein is not within the scope of this chapter. Hence, only how Nepālī 
practice the sacrifice is discussed here.
	2.	 This title “Ornamented by Tantra,” Tantra-​Bhūṣaṇa, was awarded to Jagman Gurung at the 
International Astrology and Oriental Heritage Conference 2012, jointly organized by Astro 
Council, Nepal, International Astro Federation, Nepal, and Viswa Jyotish Vidyapith, India, 
held on March 14–​16, 2012 in Kathmandu, Nepal.
	3.	 Brāhmaṇasya yathā patnī tayā saha yajenmakhe, evaṃ iti kulācārye jñeyā nityodite kule| 
(Tantrāloka vivekavyākhyā, 29.96).
	4.	 This system of ‘commander in chief/​head of the village’ (mir-​umara-​mukhiya) is no longer a 
formal national system but is still practiced in many villages on occasions like Daśain-​pūjā, 
typically within regional forts (koṭa). As Jagman Gurung’s forefathers were mir-​umara-​
mukhiya of Yāngjākot, that title is used for him as the domestic priest kartā (doer) for such 
ceremonies (yāgas).

--- PAGE 96 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      71
 
	 5.	 Though the traditions of performing and celebrating Daśain is similar in most of the 
villages, as a whole the tradition is endangered as only a few members of the new genera­
tions take part in it these days.
	 6.	 Gurungs have both their own indigenous traditional methods of Daśain celebration and 
also the adapted methods of Daśain practice. For instance, they have their own ancient 
system of ancestors and tutelary deity pūjā in Daśain whereas doing the pūjā of Durgā is 
an adapted one. Both practices are of tantric nature, including the yāga of pañcamakāra.
	 7.	 These hymns are specific to Jagman Gurung’s tradition and are sung in the melodic mode 
(rāga) of mālaśrī.
	 8.	 This list of Mahāpūrṇakrama is given by Pt. Kṛṣṇa Prasāda Bhaṭṭarāī (1968, 420).
	 9.	 This conclusion is based on multiple conversations with Jagman Gurung over the years. 
With regard to his understanding of Mahālakṣmī, Gurung cites ­chapter 2 of the Durgā 
Saptaśatī wherein the powers of all the gods are integrated into Mahālakṣmī.
	10.	 Kulabālā ca durgā ca sarvāmnāyaprapūjitā| [Bṛhat Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha 
Śāha Deva, published by Dhana Śamaśera Ja.Ba.Ra (1968, 17).]
	11.	 Mahāmnāyā durgādevī namostute || ( Hāhārāvatantram 49ba.4).
	12.	 Generally, Gurungs do this pūjā on saptamī (the seventh day); however, Jagman Gurung, 
due to his clan being that of Lama, does this on the eighth day (asṭamī).
	13.	 Madyaṃ māṃsaṃ paśūnāntu | “Do not consume wine and meat in paśūbhāva” 
(Kulārṇava-​Tantra 2.2124).
	14.	 Madyaṃ māṃsaṃñca matsyañca mudrāmaithunameva ca| Pañcatattvamidaṃ proktaṃ 
śāktānāṃ sukhamokṣadam || (Viratantra as cited in Sarvallāsa tantra 16.16).
	15.	 Advaitāṃ paramānandāṃ nityāṃ śuddhāṃ nirañjanām|sṛṣṭiḥ sthitiśca saṃhāro’nākhyā 
bhāsāpadābhidhām||vedāntavedyāṃkaivalyarūpāṃ 
nirvāṇakāriṇīm|guṇātītāmātmarūp
āṃprabāedhātītagāecarām || parānandāmṛtaghanāṃ turiyapada nirmalām| pratyagjyotiḥ 
svarupāṃ ca sākṣivācāmagocarām || śuddhacaitanyanirvāṇajñānānandamupeyuṣīm| 
pancakramasya madhyasthāṃ guhyakālī pareśvarīm || (Mahākāla Saṃhitā 1.97–​1.100)
	16.	 See Mahākāla Saṃhitā (1:152–​156).
	17.	 Anādi yanmahāvākyaṃ tannyāsamiti kathyate |
Nyāsa eva hi vijñayaḥ pūjāvidhiriha priye || (Mahākāla Saṃhitā Guhyakālī Khaṇḍa 1.151)
	18.	 Mahātrīpurasundaryāścaṇḍayogeśvarī parā| na tayorvidyate bhedo bhedakṛnnarakaṃ 
brajet|| (as cited by Dhana Śamaśera Ja.Ba.Ra 1989, 46).
	19.	 Īśānaḥ sarvavidyānāmīśvaraḥ sarvabhūtānāṁ brahmādipati brahmaṇo’dhipatir brahmā 
śivo me astu sadāśivom || (Kṛshṇa Yajurveda, Taittirīya Āraṇyaka 10.21).
	20.	 Urdhve 
jyotirmayaṃ 
vaktraṃ 
śikhākāraṃ 
tadantare 
| 
śrīcakrarāja 
cinhantu 
parabrahmātmakaṃ vibhūm || (Mahāpaśupati dhyāna as cited by Dhana Shumsher Ja.Ba.
Ra (1979, 110) in his book Kāmakalā Rahasya).
	21.	 The full list may be found in Pt. Kṛṣṇa Prasāda Bhaṭṭarāī (1968, 419–​420).
References
Acharya, Diwakar. 2018. Nepālapiṭha ra Guhyeśvarī. Kathmandu: Śrīpaśupati Arcanā 
Suvyavasthā Pratiṣṭhāna.
Bhaṭṭarāī, Kṛṣṇa Prasāda. 1968. “Śrīcakrakā saṃkṣipta vivaraṇa.” Kalyāṇa Upāsanā Aṅka Year 
42, no.1 (Full No. 494): 416–​420.

--- PAGE 97 ---
72      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
Brooks, Douglas Renfrew. 1992. Auspicious Wisdom: The Texts and Traditions of Śrīvidyā Śākta 
Tantrism in South India. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma, ed. & trans. 2002. Śrītantrāloka (with vivekavyākhā), Vols. I–​V. 
Vārāṇasī: Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2005. Svachanda-​Tantram. Vārāṇasī: Caukhambā Surabhāratī 
Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2009. Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā (Kāmakalākālī-​Khaṇḍa). Vārāṇasī: 
Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2014. Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā (Guhyakālī-​Khaṇḍa), Vol. I & II. Vārāṇasī: 
Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2016. Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā (Guhyakālī-​Khaṇḍa), Vol. III. Vārāṇasī: 
Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2018. Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā (Guhyakālī-​Khaṇḍa), Vol. IV & V. Vārāṇasī: 
Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 1989. The Canon of Śaivāgama and the Kubjikā Tantras of the Western 
Kaula Tradition. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 2004. A Journey in the World of the Tantras. Varanasi, India: 
Indica Books.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G., ed. & trans. 2009. Manthānabhairavantantram Kumārikākhaṇḍaḥ: 
The Section concerning the Virgin Goddess of the Tantra of the Churning Bhairava. 14 vols. 
Indira Gandhi National Centre of the Arts. New Delhi: D. K. Printworld.
Flood, Gavin. 1993. Body and Cosmology in Kashmir Śaivism. San Francisco, CA: Mellen 
Research University Press.
Gupta, Sanjukta, Dirk Jan Hoens, and Teun Goudriaan. 1979. Hindu Tantrism. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: E. J. Brill.
Gupta, Sanjukta, Dirk Jan Hoens, and Teun Goudriaan, ed. and trans. 2017. 
Devīdvayardhaśatikā. Kathmandu: Nepal Academy.
Gurung, Jagman. 1974 (2031 V.S.). “Guruṅa saṃskṛti ra paṃcamakāra.” Prajñā 4, no. 2: 90–​94.
Gurung, Jagman. 2010. Tamuvānako aitihāsika vṛttānta. Yāngjākot: Rajendra Jung Gurung 
and Jagat Jung Gurung.
Hāhārāvatantra. National Archives of Nepal. Reel No.: A 204/​4, Access no.: 5/​4799.
Lamichhane, Madhav, ed. 2018. Parātantra. Kathmandu: Rāṣṭriya Abhilekhālaya.
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2005. “Interpreting across Mystical Boundaries: An Analysis of Samādhi in the 
Trika-​Kaula Tradition.” In The Theory and Practice of Yoga: Essays in Honour of Gerald James 
Larson, edited by Knut Jacobsen, 143–​180. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2017. The Goddess within and beyond the Three Cities: Śākta Tantra and the 
Paradox of Power in Nepāla-​Maṇḍala. New Delhi: DK Printworld.
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2023. “Looking to the Hills: The Influence of Khas Culture on the Development 
of Sarvāmnāya Tantra in Nepal.” Tantram Journal of Tantric Studies 1: 1–​12.
Maskarinec, Gregory G. 1999. Nepal Shaman Oral Texts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Miśra, Paramahaṃsa, ed. & trans. 2002. Kulārṇava-​Tantram. Vārāṇasī, India: Caukhambā 
Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1995. “Meaning in Tantric Ritual.” in Essais Sur le Rituel III, edited by Anne-​
Marie Blondeau and Kristofer Schipper, 15–​95. Louvain. Belgium: Peeters.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1986. “Maṇḍala and Āgamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir.” In Mantra et 
Diagrammes Rituels dans l’Hindouisme, edited by Andre Padoux. Paris: CNRS.

--- PAGE 98 ---
The Inner and Outer Worship      73
 
Śamaśera, Dhana Ja.Ba.Rā, ed. 1968. Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva Part 
I. Kathmandu: Dhana Śamaśera Ja.Ba.Rā.
Śamaśera, Dhana Ja.Ba.Rā, ed. 1971. Bṛhat-​ Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva Part 
II. Kathmandu: Dhana Śamaśera Ja.Ba.Rā.
Śamaśera, Dhana Ja.Ba.Rā, ed. 1972. Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva Part 
III. Kathmandu: Dhana Śamaśera Ja.Ba.Rā.
Śamaśera, Dhana Ja.Ba.Rā, ed. 1974. Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva Part 
IV. Kathmandu: Dhana Śamaśera Ja.Ba.Rā.
Śamaśera, Dhana Ja.Ba.Rā, ed. 1979. Kāmakalā-​Rahasya. Kathmandu: Nepāla Ra Eśiyālī 
Anusandhāna Kendra.
Śamaśera, Dhana Ja.Ba.Rā. 1989. Kulārṇava Rahasya. Kathmandu: Nepāla Rājakīya 
Prajñā-​pratiṣṭhāna.
Sapkota, Sandip. 2022. “Baliḥ Śātrīya Vivecana.” In Tantra Carcā, edited by Sandip Sapkota, 
Kathmandu: Tantra Carcā Pariwār, pp. 280–​297,
Slusser, Mary Sheperd. 1982. Nepal Mandala: A Cultural Study of the Kathmandu Valley. 2 vols., 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2006. “Terrifying Beauty: interplay of the Sanskritic and vernac­
ular ritual of Siddhilakṣmī.” Journal of Hindu Studies 10: 59–​73. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s11​
407-​006-​9002-​8
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2007. “Metaphor, Rasa and Dhvani. Suggested Meaning in Tantric 
Esotericism.” Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 19: 134–​162.
White, David Gordon. 2000. “Introduction.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by David Gordon 
White, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp. 3–​40.
White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian contexts. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Woodroffe, John. [1929] 2009. Śakti and Śākta: Essays and Addresses on the Śākta Tantraśāstra. 
Leeds, UK: Celephaïs Press (electronic edition).

--- PAGE 99 ---


--- PAGE 100 ---
Chapter 4
On the Union of 
Emptiness and Bliss
Buddhist Thought and Tantric Practice
Paul B. Donnelly
What Is Buddhist Thought?
Buddhism thrived in India for more than a thousand years before its demise in the 
fourteenth century. By that time, it had spread to most of the surrounding countries 
of Central, East, and Southeast Asia. A body of thought, practice, and institutions 
that endured over such a long period of time and geographic and cultural expanse ob­
viously evinced a great deal of evolution and variety from its earlier forms, which are 
themselves more diverse than later tradition and modern understandings are often ac­
knowledged.1 The final major developments in India established tantric Buddhism, or 
the Vajrayāna, as the pinnacle of Buddhist thought, practiced by wilderness-​dwelling 
yogis and monastery-​dwelling scholar monks alike. While authoritative Vajrayāna texts 
and teachers would typically assert that these new doctrines and practices were as much 
grounded in the teachings of the Buddha as more familiar doctrines such as dependent 
origination, the Four Noble Truths and selflessness, even a cursory reading of the tantras 
and their attendant commentaries and practice manuals reveal a Buddhist worldview 
that can seem to the outsider difficult to reconcile with such core teachings.
In order to engage in an examination of Buddhist thought and tantric practice, we 
need to first establish a working sense of what these two elements, familiar Buddhist 
doctrines and less familiar tantric teachings, mean. Tantric practice is quite di­
verse across different tantric cycles and meditative systems such as Mahāmūdra and 
Dzokchen (rdzogs chen), not to mention unique lineages of teachers and subsequent re­
vealed teachings such as “treasure texts” (gter ma). We will have more to say about tan­
tric practice later, but for now it suffices to note that late Indian Buddhism and Tibetan 
Buddhism came to accept the complex yogas of the Highest Yoga Tantra consisting

--- PAGE 101 ---
76      Paul B. Donnelly
 
broadly of techniques to cultivate purified states of subjectivity such as the visualiza­
tion of oneself as an awakened tantric deity and techniques that meditatively worked 
with the subtle body consisting of “winds” or energies (prāṇa) in order to produce a 
blissful nondual subjectivity that takes the ultimate nature of things as its object and 
leads quickly to full enlightenment. The Mahāyāna path to Buddhahood is tradition­
ally said to comprise two components, method and wisdom, and these practices are the 
method side of this system.
The second component, wisdom, is the realization of ultimate truth, the direct gnosis 
of reality as it is. That which the mind of great bliss knows in nondual gnosis is what is 
taught in the numerous sūtras and śāstras of the Mahāyāna. In order to examine the re­
lationship between Mahāyāna Buddhist thought and tantric practice, we first trace the 
stages by which Mahāyāna thought developed, and the different ways of interpreting 
those developments.
Mahāyāna Thought
By the early centuries of the common era, numerous new texts (though their proponents 
would assert that they were not new) were circulating in the Indian Buddhist world. 
While accepting the Four Noble Truths, and so on, as legitimate as far as they went, there 
were now texts that asserted that those teachings were in fact a lesser vehicle or path 
(Hīnayāna) that were surpassed by new teachings that were greater–​the Mahāyāna.2 
This Mahāyāna, it was said, was the ultimate Buddhist path, the one that Śākyamuni 
himself tread and that took him to complete, perfect awakening. Many pages have been 
filled attempting to define, delimit, and explain what this greater path is and how it came 
to be, both in Buddhist texts and in modern works in Buddhist studies. Paul Williams’ 
volume (2009) is an authoritative and accessible overview of the modern scholarship 
on this very broad topic, but for our purposes I offer Joseph Walser’s (2018) concise set 
of themes typical of Mahāyāna thought: “there is a limited set of themes that recur in 
different combinations across time and space, coalescing around the term ‘Mahāyāna,’ 
namely: 1) emptiness, 2) mind-​only, 3) non-​discriminating or non-​cognizing awareness, 
4) ‘perfection of wisdom,’ and 5) bodhicitta” (Walser 2018, 10).
The five themes suggested by Walser are a good place to start in presenting, admit­
tedly briefly, core teachings of the Mahāyāna, which are considered to be fundamental 
to the Vajrayāna. Not all of them are pervasive through the major Mahāyāna Sūtras, or 
even the Perfection of Wisdom corpus itself, but between those sūtras, the Madhyamaka 
śāstras, the fundamental sūtras associated with a Yogācāra, the Dharmas of Maitreya 
(byams chos sde lnga),3 and their commentaries, they lay out and extensively develop 
these themes.
The well-​informed reader will likely notice that Walser does not include a few concepts 
that many introductory books on Mahāyāna and practitioner-​oriented works often in­
clude. For instance, there is no mention here of compassion, skillful means, an emphasis

--- PAGE 102 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      77
 
on devotion, and the highly developed system of bodies of the Buddha that arises from 
the Ornament of Realization (Abhisamayālaṅkāra) commentary on the Perfection of 
Wisdom corpus, and Yogācāra texts. The last one will be treated in what follows as it is 
important in Vajrayāna, but the previous ones, although important, will not be given 
much consideration given the time/​space constraints in a chapter of this kind. And, they 
are not as particularly pertinent for the subject matter examined in this chapter.
As tantric Buddhism considers itself to be Mahāyāna, these themes are similarly 
central to its thought and practice, and in a similar move to the Mahāyāna in regard 
to the “Hīnayāna,” Vajrayāna texts will claim to be the pinnacle of Buddhist thought 
and practice. As we will see, there are different strategies for this move: some assert that 
Mahāyāna doctrine is Vajrayāna doctrine (differing only in practice); others will say 
that while Mahāyāna thought is the foundation of Vajrayāna, its ultimate view is actu­
ally higher than Mahāyāna, or requires a unique understanding of Mahāyāna. It should 
be noted here that what follows will privilege the Mahāyāna sūtras and śāstras that are 
the most important to tantric Buddhism. This leaves out a great many texts that have 
been hugely influential across Asia, particularly East Asia. The Lotus Sūtra, the Flower 
Garland Sūtra, and the Pure Land Sūtras were not accorded a great deal of attention in 
tantric Buddhism, so they are not considered here.
Questions of Origin
As new texts arose, their adherents were in a position to have to defend their authenticity 
to those who did not accept them. The mere fact that they were unknown to most of the 
monks and nuns of the various Buddhist schools needed explaining. As mentioned in 
the previous section, the proponents of these new sutras did not regard them as new 
at all. They asserted that, at least in the case of the most important of these texts, the 
Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras, the explanation was that they were taught by the Buddha 
but fell out of favor due to their profundity and were lost to this world. According to 
Mahāyāna tradition and recorded in the histories of the great Tibetan historians Butön 
(Bu-​ston Rin-​chen Grub 1931, 122–​125), and Tārānātha (1980, 106–​108), Nāgārjuna 
recovered them from the serpentine beings, the nāgas, who had protected them in their 
realm beneath the sea. Not that a belief in the possibility of such things was unknown in 
early-​first-​millennium India, but one could imagine that the story would not have con­
vinced everyone. Modern Western scholarship has not found this explanation compel­
ling either. For the academic field of Buddhist studies finding the Mahāyāna’s origins has 
long been a desideratum, and an elusive one at that. Boucher (2021) noted that the two 
predominant theories are that it originated among lay communities based around tra­
ditional cultic centers or was the produce of monastic communities around particular 
scriptures of teachers.
Walser (2018) tackled this problem, and it is impossible to do the argument justice 
here, but in the introduction the author succinctly stated his thesis. “the Perfection of

--- PAGE 103 ---
78      Paul B. Donnelly
 
Wisdom was probably composed near the royal seat outside of Mathura sometime in 
the latter part of the first century ce by a Sarvāstivādin monk who was born and raised 
a Maitrāyaṇi Brahmin” (9). Walser argues that the puzzling doctrinal assertions in the 
opening verses of the eight-​thousand-​line Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra reflect concepts 
and turns of phrase that were prominent in the thought of that Vedic branch.
Walser has argued in his book and in a number of articles that the idea of “Buddhist 
Brahmins” was not seen as in any way contradictory or problematic in the early 
centuries of Buddhism, only becoming so much later.4 This willingness to push beyond 
the presuppositions held both by Buddhists and much of Buddhist scholarship is ad­
mirable, and hopefully signals a change in the prevailing winds. In his chapter in this 
volume, Payne urges “embracing the methodological orientation in which traditions are 
no longer conceptualized as closed systems, idealized in conformity with authoritative 
doctrine, and selectively represented by instances most closely adhering to that ideali­
zation. Moving away from decontextualized and ahistorical representations means also 
that the study of tantra can engage models of contact, interaction, and change.” This 
applies equally to the seemingly monolithic categories “Hinduism” and “Buddhism.”
Paradigmatic Mahāyāna Sūtras
The Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras became and have remained an important cata­
lyst for much of the subsequent developments of Buddhist thought in India and be­
yond. Conze (1975) established the model for how modern scholarship has seen how 
this corpus developed over time. After the 8,000-​line text, the texts expanded to larger 
versions of up to 100,000 verses and then there was a period of the production of more 
contracted versions from 2,500 verses, down to 300 (The Diamond Sūtra), to 25 (The 
Heart Sutra), all the way down to one syllable (“A”) (Conze 1975, xi). There have been 
some reconsiderations of this history of the corpus, but it still remains largely accepted. 
Conze also asserts that the first forty verses of the text (covering the first chapter 
and beginning of the second chapter) are the earliest portion, with the subsequent 
verses being gradually added later over time. This view too has been revisited but has 
remained widely accepted. New discoveries of texts or epigraphical evidence could of 
course change this.
It is often said that the central teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras is that of 
emptiness. Emptiness is said to be the extension of the non-​Mahāyāna teaching of self­
less to the skandhas that are the basis of the imputation of the putative “self” and further 
even to the dharmas that at least the non-​Mahāyāna Sarvāstivāda school considered to 
be the ultimately existent. They are “empty” specifically in the sense that they lack the 
intrinsic existence or own-​nature (svabhāva) that make them uniquely what they are. In 
Madhyamaka, literally “Middle Way” texts, which are considered to be the philosoph­
ical working out of this concept and which we will consider later, this comes to mean 
that everything, from selves down to dharmas, lack a causally independent ultimately

--- PAGE 104 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      79
 
real existence. As perhaps conceptually challenging as the preceding may be, it is clearer 
than what the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras themselves give us.
Emptiness is certainly expressed, but usually along with signlessness (ānimitta) and 
wishlessness (apraṇihita). That trio constitutes the “three doors of liberation” known also to 
the non-​Mahāyāna. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines opens with a discus­
sion between Subhūti, who speaks “by the Buddha’s might” and Śāriputra, who speaks from 
the perspective of the Abhidharma traditions of the early schools. Asked by the Buddha 
“what dharma does that word ‘Bodhisattva’ denote?” Subhūti responds “I do not, O Lord, 
see that dharma ‘Bodhisattva,’ nor a dharma called ‘perfect wisdom.’ What Bodhisattva 
shall I instruct and admonish in what perfect wisdom?” After identifying the true bodhi­
sattva as who is not terrified by this truth, Subhūti continues, “When a Bodhisattva courses 
in Perfect Wisdom and develops it, he should train himself that he does not pride himself 
on that thought of enlightenment (bodhicitta). That thought is no thought, since in its es­
sential original nature thought is transparently numinous” (Conze 1975, 83–​84).
In just these few opening verses of this paradigmatic sutra, we can see most of the 
themes that Walser sees as characterizing the Mahāyāna in general. The phrase “form 
is empty” appears later in the first chapter, but as something that the bodhisattva should 
not meditate on. The term “emptiness” does not appear until the second chapter, and 
there only appearing in a long list of ideas on which a bodhisattva “does not take a stand.” 
Three of the remaining four of Walser’s themes are expressed here in these first few verses. 
Subhūti’s not seeing can be understood to be nondiscriminating or noncognizing aware­
ness, perfect wisdom is a “thought that is no thought,’ and it seems that it is related, or 
equivalent to “that thought of enlightenment” (bodhicitta). Furthermore, the reason that 
thought is no thought is that it is “transparently luminous.” Walser translates the Sanskrit 
(prakṛtiś cittasya prabhāsvarā), “The original substance/​nature (prakṛti) of thought is 
clear light,” and observes, that “The introduction of the term prakṛti renders the thought­
less thought to be a kind of ‘original’ or even ‘foundational’ consciousness that is any case 
more fundamental than awareness as it is usually understood” (Walser 2018, 198).
“Mind-​only” is not explicitly stated here, but even the Madhyamaka author Bhāviveka 
presented both Madhyamaka and Yogācāra (sometimes called Cittamātra or “Mind-​
Only”), as grounded in a certain reading of the same core passages of the Perfection of 
Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines (Walser 2018, 116). Anyone acquainted with tantric 
Buddhist thought and praxis will find the term “clear light” or “natural luminosity” 
quite familiar. Though elucidated here, this concept will be greatly expanded on in the 
Yogācāra interpretation of the Perfection of Wisdom corpus, which is central to tantric 
thought and practice.
The other most important Mahāyāna sutra for the development of the Mahāyāna 
thought that undergirds Vajrayāna thought and practice is the Discourse Explaining 
the Thought (Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra). The text was probably composed between the 
second and fourth centuries and was the first attempt to develop a hermeneutic for 
interpreting the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras according to Yogācāra doctrine, which 
perhaps was developed by a community of practitioners particularly dedicated to med­
itation, as the name “Yogācāra” (practice of yoga) implies (Keenan 2000, 1). It has also

--- PAGE 105 ---
80      Paul B. Donnelly
 
been observed that Yogācāra developed against the backdrop of Abhidharmic analyses 
of mind and mental functions (Germano and Waldron 2006).
The Discourse Explaining the Thought is a relatively brief and systematic text that 
clearly demonstrates a self-​awareness of the novelty of Mahāyāna thought in the 
Buddhist world and explains exactly how and why the Buddha deployed different 
teachings over time to lead his followers stepwise according to their preparedness for 
the highest view. The Pali Canon sutta in which the Buddha teaches the foundational 
teachings of the Four Noble Truths Path is entitled The Setting in Motion of the Wheel 
of Dharma,5 and this metaphor of turning the wheel is found throughout Pali texts. In 
the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines, the gods exclaim that the Perfection 
of Wisdom teachings are a “second turning of the wheel of doctrine” (Conze 1975, 150–​
151) which, in typical Perfection of Wisdom style, the Buddha negates. Nonetheless, the 
Discourse Explaining the Thought assumes this and takes it further, saying that the first 
two Turnings of the Wheel were provisional and delivered for specific purposes, but 
that the Discourse is the Third Turning and is the final definitive teaching of the Buddha 
(Powers 1995, 139–​140; and Keenan 2000, 49).
Central to these assertions is the traditional division of the scriptures into those that are 
definitive (nītārtha) and those that are provisional (neyārtha). The Discourse Explaining 
the Thought says that the First Turning was given by the Buddha for those Aryan disciples 
on the Hearer (śrāvaka) vehicle. These teachings were “wondrous” but were in need of 
further elucidation (neyārtha) and could serve as a source of misunderstanding and dis­
pute. While they taught selflessness, they did not go far enough. From the Mahāyāna per­
spective these teachings could lead to an overly realist understanding of the fundamental 
constituents of the phenomenal world, the dharmas. The Second Turning, which includes 
the Perfection of Wisdom sūtras, was for Mahāyāna disciples. It was “more wondrous still,” 
but though it taught the emptiness of all dharmas, their being unarisen, unceasing, and 
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa, it too was in need of clarification (neyārtha). From the 
perspective of this text and the Yogācāra tradition, the problem with the Second Turning 
teachings was that there was the risk of overnegating and falling into nihilism, thus pro­
viding an easy target for refutation. The Third Turning was “exceedingly wondrous” and 
for those of all vehicles. It included all previous teachings but made fine distinctions that 
clarify them and established their definitive meaning (nītārtha) and could not lead to 
disputes. The Discourse itself is of course, in this category, but subsequent traditions would 
place other teachings into this category according to their doctrinal stance.
The teaching that is presented as definitive is a clarification and refinement of the 
statements about emptiness in the Second Turning that save those teachings from 
accusations of nihilism and truly lead to Buddhahood. This is the doctrine of the “three 
natures.” The first aspect, soteriologically but not ontologically, is the imagined or 
conceptualized nature (parikalpitasvabhāva). The world of experience consisting of 
subjects and objects is in fact constructed and imputed by conceptual thought. These are 
in fact “only perceptions” (vijñaptimātra). The dualistic, putative world of subjects and 
objects does not exist, but this does not mean there is literally and ultimately nothing at all.
Both the constructing, imputing perception, and its objects arise from the nondual, 
dependently arisen causal flow of dharmas. This is the second nature, called the

--- PAGE 106 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      81
 
dependent (paratantrasvabhāva). It is both “what remains” after the meditatively 
realized emptiness of the imagined nature is seen and the dependently arisen ground 
from which both bondage and liberation arise. It can’t be said to be “existent” or “nonex­
istent” (or anything else) as such dichotomous concepts are nothing but constructions 
of perception. The dependent nature tends toward the generation of ignorance and suf­
fering of the beings in it due to their ignorance of the true nature of things, but it also 
makes possible the eradication of ignorance and suffering through the realization of the 
absence of the imagined nature in the dependent nature. This absence, or rather its re­
alization, is said to be the perfected nature (pariniṣpannasvabhāva). It is emptiness. Put 
another way, the imagined nature and the perfected nature are the two possible experi­
ential orientations on the dependent nature. The ordinary experience of the dependent 
nature through the erroneous constructions of the imagined nature is saṃsāra, while 
the nondual experience of the flow free from those constructions, the perfected nature, 
is nirvāṇa. This idea of a nondual ultimate ground, along with the related Yogācāra idea 
of a storehouse consciousness (ālayavijñāna), is further developed in the śāstra texts, 
and is fundamental to much of tantric Buddhist thought and practice.6
The Treatises of the Two Openers of 
the Great Chariot Way
While the Mahāyāna Sūtras discussed previously were seen as the canonical texts 
establishing the core Mahāyāna doctrines in late Indian scholastic Buddhism and 
Tibetan Buddhism, these have nearly always been approached through the two exeget­
ical traditions of Madhyamaka and Yogācāra. These two textual traditions are frequently 
referred to in Tibetan Buddhism to this day as “the two traditions of the great chariot”; 
that is, the Mahāyāna and the two founders of these traditions are revered as almost 
as highly as the Buddha himself. The first, whom we have already encountered in the 
mythical origin story of the discovery of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras is Nāgārjuna. 
Nagārjuna’s treatises and their commentaries form the foundation of the Madhyamaka 
philosophical tradition.7 The other is Asaṅga. Asaṅga is the author of several seminal 
Yogācāra works but traditionally, he is even more important for his part in the revelation 
of the teachings of the future Buddha Maitreya, known as the Five Dharmas of Maitreya.
Nāgārjuna and the Madhyamaka 
Treatises
In addition to his legendary retrieval of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras from the nāgas, 
Nāgārjuna (second century ce) composed a number of texts that have been hugely in­
fluential across the Mahāyāna Buddhist traditions. According to Tibetan traditions,

--- PAGE 107 ---
82      Paul B. Donnelly
 
Nāgārjuna’s texts can be grouped into three collections: the collection of argumentative 
texts (rigs tshogs), the collection of advice (gtam thogs), and the collection of hymns (bstod 
tshogs).8 While the latter two are highly regarded by tradition and have attracted some 
modern scholarly attention, it is the argumentative works that are regarded as expressing 
the heart of Madhyamaka thought and have attracted extensive attention in modern 
scholarship. Among the argumentative works, it is the Root Stanzas on the Middle Way 
(Mūlamadhyamakakārikā, or MMK) that is generally regarded as Nāgārjuna’s mas­
terwork.9 The text is extant in Sanskrit, and was translated early on into Chinese and 
Tibetan. The opening salutary verse of Root Stanzas announces the text’s purpose:
I salute the Fully Enlightened One, the best of orators, who taught the doctrine of 
dependent origination, according to which there is neither cessation nor origination, 
neither annihilation nor the eternal, neither singularity nor plurality, neither coming 
nor going [of any dharma, for the purpose of nirvāṇa characterized by] the auspi­
cious cessation of hypostatization. (Siderits and Katsura 2013, 13)
The Root Stanzas consists of twenty-​seven chapters, each examining a core Buddhist 
doctrinal concept. In every case, the concept under consideration is assumed to be ul­
timately real by some rival Buddhist school, but it is revealed by Nāgārjuna’s argument 
to be without reality in any ultimate sense, being in fact nothing more than a conceptual 
construction. By revealing that each concept only exists dependently, it is declared to 
be empty (śūnya). The world appears to the senses and the mind as composed of real, 
independent entities, but although this might be true from the conventional perspec­
tive (samvrtti), it is revealed to be ultimately (paramārtha) false. Nāgārjuna states that 
distinguishing between these two modes of knowing is crucial to understanding the 
teachings of the Buddha and for understanding what Nāgārjuna is doing in the Root 
Stanzas. Realizing ultimate truth is what brings the attainment of nirvana.
Several of the early commentaries on the Root Stanzas were by important masters 
traditionally understood to belong to the Yogācāra school, so the very idea of exclu­
sive, competing philosophical schools should be treated cautiously.10 Only a few of the 
commentaries, however, endured and influenced the development of Madhyamaka 
schools of thought in China and Tibet. The extant Sanskrit text is embedded in 
Candrakīrti’s seventh-​century commentary, which was translated into Tibetan in the 
eleventh century. In Tibet, and in much of Western scholarship, Nāgārjuna’s text has 
been seen through the lens of Candrakīrti’s interpretation and frequently through the 
further interpretative lens of the commentaries of the Geluk sect of Tibetan Buddhism, 
though this is beginning to change with recent works on Madhyamaka as understood by 
important figures in Sākya, Kagyü, Nyingma, and Jonang orders.11
The final verse of an Indian treatise of this sort can also conclude or restate the pur­
port of all that came before it. Though the two major Indian commentators, Bhāviveka 
and Candrakīrti, take the current twenty-​seven-​chapter version of the MMK to be 
entirely composed by Nāgārjuna, some modern scholars have asserted that the final 
two chapters were later additions by another author. If this were so, the final verse of

--- PAGE 108 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      83
 
chapter twenty-​five, “An Analysis of Nirvāṇa,” should be expected to tell us about the 
intent of the work. “This halting of cognizing everything, the halting of hypostatizing, 
is blissful. No Dharma whatsoever was ever taught by the Buddha to anyone” (Siderits 
and Katsura 2013, 304). This verse clearly echoes the dedicatory verse, though the 
translation here obscures this slightly in that the same phrase (prapañcopaśamaḥ 
śivaḥ) appears in both verses. In the dedicatory verse, it is translated “the auspicious 
cessation of hypostatization.” This attainment of the blissful nonconceptual reality is 
nirvāṇa. Subsequent developments in Mahāyāna thought will elaborate on this idea, 
as will the Vajrayāna.
As we continue to establish the foundations of Mahāyāna thought upon which Vajrayāna 
thought and practice build, we can profitably return to Walser’s five themes to see which 
are developed in Madhyamaka, and specifically in the Nāgārjuna’s Root Stanzas. The reader 
will recall that “emptiness” is not treated in any developed way in the earliest portions of the 
Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines, but it is certainly consistent with Subhūti’s 
not seeing the dharmas “Bodhisattva” or “Perfect Wisdom.” It is pervasive in the Root Verses 
and the other argumentative works of Nāgārjuna that the Mahāyāna concept of emptiness 
takes on its fully developed sense. Nondiscriminating or noncognizing awareness seems to 
be expressed in Nāgārjuna’s praise of the Buddha as having taught the “auspicious or blissful 
halting of hypostatization.” Neither “perfection of wisdom” nor “bodhicitta” is discussed, or 
even mentioned in the Root Stanzas, and not surprisingly, “mind-​only” is never mentioned. 
More positive representations are found, however, in the texts in the collection of advice 
texts and the hymns. But these are not the texts that are most celebrated or most influential 
in most late Indian and Tibetan Buddhism. These traditions typically look to the teachings 
of the Five Dharmas of Maitreya and the commentaries (śāstras) of Asaṅga where these 
other, complementary themes are developed.
Asaṅga and the Five Dharmas  
of Maitreya
Like the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras, the teachings that are the foundation of Yogācāra 
thought were held by their proponents to be “word of the Buddha.” Unlike in the case 
of the “rediscovery” of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras from the Nāga realm, the Five 
Dharmas of Maitreya were not taught by the Buddha Ṡakyamūni but rather the fu­
ture Buddha Maitreya. In the widely known legend, Asaṅga longed to meet the future 
Buddha Maitreya in order to learn the teachings of the Mahāyāna, so he entered a cave 
to meditate. Not having had a vision after many years, Asaṅga gave up, but when he was 
overwhelmed by compassion for a suffering dog along the road, the dog was revealed 
to be Maitreya himself. Asaṅga’s perception had been purified by this act of kindness. 
Maitreya took Asaṅga in Tuṣita, where he was taught the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras, 
the Foundation for Yoga Practitioners (Yogācārabhūmi), and other Mahāyāna sūtras.

--- PAGE 109 ---
84      Paul B. Donnelly
 
He then asked Maitreya to compose a treatise to reveal the meaning of these texts, so 
Maitreya taught him the Five Dharmas.12
Butön’s fourteenth-​century account further says that at the time of the birth of Asaṅga 
(and his half-​brother Vasubandhu) the dharma was under attack in India, so their 
mother resolved to have sons to defend and spread it. The dharma in question is specif­
ically said to be “the Abhidharma which is the foundation of the teaching.” Tārānatha’s 
seventeenth-​century account does not foreground Abhidharma as explicitly but does 
say that his mother, because of her past life as a scholar monk, knew and understood the 
sūtras and Abhidharma and urged her son(s) to spread the doctrine. Asaṅga studied 
and understood the sūtras of the three piṭakas and most of the Mahāyāna sūtras but 
found it difficult to understand the Perfection of Wisdom sūtras. His quest for a vision 
of Maitreya was specifically to know the meaning of these texts. In Tuṣita, he learned the 
“real significance of the whole collection of sūtras,” culminating in the Five Dharmas of 
Maitreya.
European and American scholarship on Yogācāra has lagged behind that on 
Madhyamaka and the two schools of thought have largely been seen as rival Mahāyana 
movements, though this has begun to change in the last few decades.13 In East Asian 
scholarship, Yogācāra has received significantly more scholarly attention and has 
been seen as more continuous than discontinuous with Madhyamaka.14 Consistent 
with what traditional accounts suggest about Yogācāra, modern scholarship has 
largely contextualized it as being responsive to Abhidharmic and Madhyamaka 
developments, as well as systematizing a Mahāyāna path system and developing notions 
of Buddhahood. (Waldron 2013).
The heart of the revelation of the bodhisattva Maitreya to Asaṅga is considered by 
the Tibetan traditions to be the Five Dharmas (byams chos sde lnga).15 These traditions 
agree on the five texts that make up this corpus, but there are significant differences 
in how they fit together and what their final intent is. The idea of the “Five Dharmas” 
seems to have been established by the sixth century in India and to have taken root in 
China by that time, though with only partial agreement with the Tibetan traditions 
on which texts constituted the collection (Turenne 2015). Though it appears that 
only three of the five texts were known in Tibet by the end of the early propagation of 
Buddhism,16 the established collection of five was known early in the second propaga­
tion, was included in the Tibetan collection of the śāstras, the Tengyur (bstan ‘gyur). 
It became the topic of extensive discussion as to whether they formed a single work, 
they shared a common intent, and how they should be understood to be ordered 
(Turenne 2015).17 These texts are the Ornament of Realization (Abhisamayālaṁkāra), 
the Ornament of Mahāyāna Sūtras (Mahayānasūtrālaṅkāra), Distinguishing be­
tween the Middle and Extremes (Madhyāntavibhāga), Distinguishing Phenomena from 
their True Nature (Dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga), and Distinguishing the Jewel Lineage 
(Ratnagotravibhāga), which Tibetans more often refer to as the Supreme Continuum of 
the Mahāyāna (Mahāyāna Uttaratantra).18
The Ornament of Realization is understood to be an explication of the hidden meaning 
of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras by way of elucidating eight topics, which describe the

--- PAGE 110 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      85
 
Mahāyāna worldview with an emphasis on the path (Dreyfus 2003, 174–​182). While the 
contemporary curricula of the Nyingma, Kargyu, and Sakya sects include all five of the 
Maitreya texts,19 the Geluk sect studies only the Ornament of Realization.20 Furthermore, 
Tsongkhapa Lobzang Drakpa (tsong kha pa blo bzang grags pa, 1357–​1419), the founder 
of the Geluk (dge lugs) sect, accepted Haribhadra’s eighth-​century commentary as au­
thoritative, while most earlier Indian Buddhist scholars and the great scholars of the 
other Tibetan sects accepted the commentary of sixth century of Ārya Vimuktisena.21 
Makransky (1997) sees this rift as reflective of two different approaches to the Ornament 
of Realization and other Maitreya texts. The commentary by Vimuktisena, and those 
who follow in his way of thinking, is informed by what Makransky calls a “nondual 
yogic-​attainment perspective” while Haribhadra’s approach assumes an “analytical-​
inferential perspective.” Makransky argues that Ārya Vimuktisena reads the Ornament 
of Realization and the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras through Yogācāra doctrines, and 
more importantly praxis, while Haribhadra reads it through Madhyamaka, specifically 
a Madhyamaka that had been informed by the logico-​epistemological developments of 
Dignāga and Dharmakīrti.
The concept of an analytic and a yogic perspective (whether contrasting or comple­
mentary) is well-​known in traditional Tibetan Buddhist scholastic literature. The great 
nineteenth-​century Tibetan polymath Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö Tayé (‘jam gon koṅ sprul 
blo gros mtha’ yas, 1813–​1900) reports that there were two distinct lineages of the trans­
mission and practice of the Maitreya texts, one in accord with the common philosoph­
ical tenet systems (grub mtha’) and one “uncommon philosophical tenet system,” which 
remained with supreme disciples, who transmitted it orally (Koṅ-​sprul Blo-​gros-​mtha’-​
yas 2007, 250). The former was known as the “the tradition of hearing and reflection.” It 
was first associated with great translator Ngok Loden Sherab (rngog blo ldan shes rab, 
1059–​1109), and was carried on by Tsongkhapa and the Geluk sect.
The latter was known as “the meditative tradition.” It was passed down through the 
translators Zu Gawé Dorjé (gzus dga’ ba’i rdo rje) and Tsen Khawoché (btsan kha bo che, 
b. 1021) and further elucidated by the Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorjé (rang byung rdo 
rje, 1284–​1339), Longchenpa Drimé Özer, (klong chen pa dri med o zer, 1308–​1364), and 
others who “clearly maintained that this view was the final definitive meaning” (Koṅ-​
sprul Blo-​gros-​mtha’-​yas 2007, 396, n. 811). Kongtrul is appealing here to the authority 
of “hearing, reflection, and meditation,” which is a traditional Buddhist framework (e.g., 
Vasubandhu 1991, 911–​912 and Powers 1995, 183–​184) for arranging the three progressive 
ways that the dharma is to be understood, ascending from conceptual to nonconceptual 
realization.
Though many Tibetan scholars saw the Ornament of Realization as in accord with 
the Madhyamaka, since it is self-​evidently a commentary on the Perfection of Wisdom 
Sūtras,” Makransky argues that, “it functions like a grid to map a Yogācāra model of en­
lightenment on the Prajñāpāramitā sutras” (1997, 8). The Ornament of Mahāyāna Sūtras, 
Distinguishing between the Middle and Extremes, Distinguishing Phenomena from their 
True Nature all evince Yogācāra doctrines such as the three natures, the “transformation 
of the basis” or “fundamental transformation” (āśrayaparāvṛtti), and most importantly

--- PAGE 111 ---
86      Paul B. Donnelly
 
for the purposes of this chapter, the “three embodiments” (trikāya) of Buddhahood. The 
Supreme Continuum stands out among the Maitreya texts in its teaching of “buddha na­
ture” (tathāgatagarbha). The “nondual yogic-​attainment perspective” of these teachings 
was held to be central to tantric thought and practice by much of the late Indian and sub­
sequent Tibetan traditions (Makransky 1997, 365–​367). We turn now to a discussion of 
these last two crucial developments in Mahāyāna thought.
The Dharma Body
In the non-​Mahāyāna Sarvāstadādin Abhidharma texts, it is stated that the Buddha in 
whom Buddhists take refuge is not the physical body or mind of the Buddha (rūpakāya) 
but rather his undefiled, fully accomplished qualities (anāsrava aśaikṣa dharmāḥ). 
For the Sarvāstivādin abhidharma in particular, dharmas, the irreducible ultimate 
components of experience, were held to possess their own unique essence or identity 
(svabhāva) that defined them. The list of which qualities (dharmāḥ) those were varied 
for different Nikāya schools, but it appears that the collection of those qualities was un­
derstood to constitute what made a Buddha a Buddha. It was sometimes referred to as 
his dharmakāya. These qualities, since still conditioned, continue until that awakened 
being in question attains final, formless liberation (nirupadhiśeṣa nirvāṇa), at which 
point the awakened being passes beyond all conditionality and future birth into an eter­
nally liberated unconditioned state (Makransky 1997, 25–​28).
The Mahāyāna notion of the final awakened state expressed in the Perfection of 
Wisdom and other Mahāyāna sūtras is radically different than the nirvāṇa of the non-​
Mahāyāna. Makransky (1997, 85–​109) argues that the development of trikāya doctrine 
can be seen as a response to the problematic notion of nonabiding nirvāṇa (apratiṣṭita 
nirvāṇa), that is, the paradoxical notion that although nirvāṇa is an unconditioned 
state, it was to be attained for the purpose of acting in the conditioned world for others. 
Buddhahood seems to have both an unconditioned and a conditioned aspect, and the 
development of trikāya doctrine, with an ultimate, unconditioned embodiment in 
dharmakāya and two embodiments (sāṃbhogikakāya and nairmāṇikakāya) that con­
tinue to engage with sentient beings in the world, explains how that can be.
The term dharmakāya rarely appears in the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras, and when 
it does, it means something quite different from what is assumed in abhidharma. 
Perfection of Wisdom sūtras declare that the dharmas that abhidharma traditions hold 
to ultimately exist and possess an intrinsic nature (svabhāva) that makes them what they 
are, are in fact only conventional and thus ultimately empty. That emptiness is said to 
be the true nature of dharmas (dharmatā), and of course all the conceptually fabricated 
phenomena that they constitute. This realization is the perfection of wisdom, and is the 
ultimate defining quality of a buddha. The Eight Thousand Verse Perfection of Wisdom 
says, “But, monks, you should not think that this [physical] body is my actual body. 
Monks, you should perceive me through the full realization of the body which is dharma

--- PAGE 112 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      87
 
(dharmakāya). And one should see that this, the actual body of the Tathāgatas, is brought 
about (prabhāvita) by the limit of reality (bhūtakoṭiḥ), i.e., the perfection of wisdom” 
(Makransky 1997, 31). Makransky (1997) nicely summed this up: “The ultimate defining 
principle of a Buddha, whether referred to as ‘Tathāgata,’ dharmakāya, tathāgatakāya, 
‘enlightenment’ etc., is identified both with the perfection of wisdom and with the object 
it knows nondually (dharmatā, śūnyata, tathatā, bhūtakoṭi, dharmadhātu, etc.)” (38).
Makransky (1997) later says, “Buddhahood, as complete ultimate transformation 
(āsrayaparāvṛtti), is expressed through either one, or both, of the terms: nonconceptual 
gnosis (nirvikalpa-​jñāna) and purified thusness (tathatā-​viśuddhi, dharmadhātu-​
viśuddhi, or their equivalents)” (76). These two refer to a “subjective” and an “objective” 
pole of the experience, though this is understood to be a concession to our ordinary 
epistemological framework and means of expression. Ultimately, concepts and language 
cannot reach here. The preceding is drawn from the Ornament of Realizations, which 
many Tibetan scholars understood to be aligned with the Madhyamaka view. The other 
four of the Five Dharmas evince a Yogācāra orientation, and emphasize the innateness 
of this ultimate reality with the teaching of tathāgatagarbha.
Tathāgatagarbha
The doctrine of the three natures and the dharmakāya established the notion of a fun­
damental ground that is the ultimate source of Buddhahood and the phenomenal world 
of nirvāṇa and saṃsāra. The meditative stages of the Yogācāra serve to completely 
transform this base (āśrayaparāvṛtti) from a saṃsāric perspective to a nirvāṇic—​
from a bound sentient being to a Buddha. Whereas most of the Maitreya texts and the 
commentaries by Asaṅga and Vasubandhu are careful to point out that emptiness/​
nonduality does not itself possess svabhāva, some tathāgatagarbha texts use much more 
positive imagery and language, emphasizing the innate purity of sentient beings known 
as the tathāgatagarbha.22 This term literally means “womb or embryo of the tathāgata,” 
but “buddha nature” has come to be a common translation in English.
The earliest known text laying out this doctrine is the Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra. The rel­
atively short text teaches nine similes. In the first, the Buddha manifests the miraculous 
appearance of huge lotus flowers in the sky. In the calyx of each was a radiant seated 
Buddha. Then, all the petals of the lotuses became putrid and disgusting, but the radiant 
Buddhas were still seated there. The audience was somewhat puzzled, but the Buddha 
explains the meaning of this vision was the main message, which is summarized in an 
early verse. “Son of good family, the True Nature (dharmatā) of the dharmas is this: 
whether or not tathāgatas appear in the world, all these sentient beings contain at all 
times a tathāgata.” The foul, withered petals are the defilements and impurities of sen­
tient beings that obscure a fully awakened, perfect Buddha. The Buddha says that he has 
taught the Dharma to allow beings to destroy these defilements and reveal their Buddha 
within (Zimmerman 2002, 106–​107).

--- PAGE 113 ---
88      Paul B. Donnelly
 
This teaching of an innate, awakened essence is found in a number of important 
sutras including the Lion’s Roar of Queen Śrīmālā (Śrīmāladevīsaṃhanāda Sūtra), the 
Mahāyāna Great Nirvāṇa Sūtra (Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra), and the Descent to Laṅka 
Sūtra (Laṅkāvatāta Sūtra).23 The former explicitly equates the tathāgatagarbha with 
the dharmakāya and says that it is in reality permanent and unchanging. It is empty, 
but not in the Mādhyamika or Yogācāra sense of being devoid of an own-​nature. “The 
Tathāgatagarbha is void of all the defilement stores, which are discrete and knowing as non-​
liberated . . . the Tathāgatagarbha is not void of the Buddha dharmas which are nondiscrete, 
inconceivable, more numerous than the sands of the Ganges, and knowing as liberated” 
(Williams 2008, 106). These texts even explicitly characterize the tathātagatagarbha as Self 
(ātman). According to the Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra, “The dialecticians who are confused 
in the thicket / Of consciousness, lack the proper doctrine,/ And wish to propound a self / 
Just keep running here and there.// The self to be realized in one’s personal experience / 
Has the characteristic of purity./ This tathāgata heart [tathāgatagarbha]/ Is not the sphere 
of dialecticians.//... Naturally luminous mind / is the pure tathāgata heart,/ But this appro­
priation of sentient beings / Is free from limit and nonlimit” (Brunnhölzl 2014, 26).
Assertions of this sort led some Indian and Tibetan commentators to relegate sutras 
that utilized this kind of language to be instances of the Buddha’s “skillful means” 
rather than to be taken literally and assigned such sūtras to be of provisional (neyārtha) 
meaning, since “self” is traditionally held to be anathema to Buddhist thought.24 
Others, however, accepted them as definitive (nīthārtha). Regardless, tathāgatagarbha 
thought has been immensely influential in the Vajrayāna traditions of Tibet. As Douglas 
Duckworth (2013) has noted, “Arguably, the underlying philosophy behind the prac­
tice of deity yoga is the presence of buddha-​nature within being(s). That is, buddha-​
nature can be seen as the philosophical underpinning for the practices of tantra” (101). 
Makransky (1997) argued that “tathāgatagarbha thought “was the primary organizing 
perspective of tantric practice traditions of late Indian and Tibetan Buddhism” (366).
As is well known, one of the defining features of Tibetan Buddhism is its emphasis 
on the treatises (śāstra) rather than on sūtras, unlike in East Asian Buddhism. The 
tathāgatagarbha text that has been the most influential in Tibetan Buddhism is thus 
not these sūtras but rather a śāstra, the Distinguishing the Jewel Lineage, one of the Five 
Dharmas of Maitreya. Numerous commentaries on Distinguishing the Jewel Lineage 
were composed in Tibet, evincing various lines of interpretation of the meaning of the 
text and to which doctrinal “school” it belongs.25 Distinguishing the Jewel Lineage teaches 
the same basic ideas as the tathāgatagarbha sūtras and quotes many of them. Specifically, 
it reproduces the nine similes of the Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra. As we’ve discussed, the 
Distinguishing the Jewel Lineage, along with the other four Maitreya texts, were under­
stood by Tibetans to have been passed down in two different lineages: an analytic one, 
which generally privileged a Madhyamaka reading of the texts, and a meditative tradi­
tion, which allowed a more literal interpretation.
From the analytical perspective, using terms like “permanent,” “unchanging,” and 
“self” are typically declared to be provisional in order to make these texts consistent 
with a more dialectical approach. From the meditative perspective, these statements are

--- PAGE 114 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      89
 
direct expressions of nondual gnosis, which is not limited by the constraints of logic. 
From this perspective, the analytical approach is a preliminary to realization. It can be 
used to demonstrate that the dualistic world of seemingly real subjects and objects falls 
away under analytic examination. This paves the way for the higher realization of re­
ality itself. Texts that speak from that perspective do not need to be justified in terms of 
logical or doctrinal categories, because they are definitive. This emphasis on meditative 
expression over discursive analysis provides a fertile doctrinal ground upon which the 
Vajrayāna can be justified.
It is not insignificant that the Tibetan traditions hold that the Distinguishing the Jewel 
Lineage was revived in India by the siddha Maitripa (986–​1063) and heads the lineage 
by which it was brought to Tibet. Maitripa is one of the two most important scholar/​
siddha teachers (along with Nāropa) of the tantric Mahāmudrā traditions.26 At this 
time in Indian Buddhism, there were increasing efforts to integrate originally tantric 
teachings into more traditional mainstream Mahāyana thought. By the fourteenth cen­
tury in Tibet, this mutually informing of Mahāyāna (both Madhyamaka and Yogācāra/​
tathāgatagarbha) and tantric thought influenced nearly all of the major developments 
across the sects of Tibetan Buddhism.
Tantric Practice
Various aspects of this subject are covered in several other chapters in this volume: 
Sugiki is a study of the chronology the Buddhist tantras, Gray is an examination of 
the Cakrasaṃvāra tantra, Hackett surveys Tibetan tantric literature, and Gardiner 
discusses the visualizations of the generation stage of tantric practice. Though there are 
unique practice systems such as The Great Perfection (rdzogs chen), Mahāmūdrā, Path 
and Result (lam ‘dras), and so forth, the tantric practices shared by all these systems 
are based in one way or another on the class of tantric texts categorized by Tibetans as 
Highest Yoga Tantras (anuttarayogatantra).
Broadly speaking, the yogas are divided into two sequential stages: generation stage 
(utpattikrama) and completion stage (niṣpannakrama).27 In the generation stage, the 
meditator first dissolves away her ordinary self into emptiness and then engages in elab­
orate visualizations of herself as a fully awakened Buddha and her environs as a purified 
awakened realm. This stage purifies the meditator of coarse conceptual thought and 
identification with the limited putative self. “In the creation phase, one must abandon 
ordinary appearances, fixation, and apprehension of reality; the remedies whose 
features are antidotal are clear image, pride, and the conviction that what appears is 
illusory.” Through such practices, one enters pristine awareness (Koṅ-​sprul Blo-​gros-​
mtha’-​yas 2008, 60). A common feature of this stage is the meditative purification of 
death, intermediate state, and rebirth through identifying them with the three buddha 
bodies: dharmakāya, saṃbhogakāya, nirmāṇakāya. Generation-​stage practices prepare 
the meditator for completion-​stage yogas.

--- PAGE 115 ---
90      Paul B. Donnelly
 
Though again, there are many variant practices, in general, completion-​stage 
practices work with a concept of a subtle body made up of three channels through 
which subtle energies (prāṇa, rlung) flow. Ordinarily, they flow in way that causes 
us to experience the dualistic world of seemingly real appearances. Having purified 
that way of experiencing the world through the generation stage, meditations are em­
ployed that transform the psychophysical perspective allowing us to experience the 
blissful, nondual reality. “Once we are skilled enough to engage in the completion 
stage practices, such as the inner heat at our navel center, we will be able to bring all 
our energy winds into the central channel and cause them to dissolve in it completely, 
as they do in death. As a result the clear light wisdom of our fundamental mind will 
dawn” (Yeshe 2001, 131).
Note that the dissolving of the energies into the central channel results in a 
nonconceptual reality that is both gnosis and bliss. It is often remarked that this gnosis 
is common to Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna, but the generation of the mind of great bliss is 
unique to completion-​stage practices of Highest Yoga Tantra. Most Tibetan traditions 
are in agreement on this point. The yogas that cultivate this great bliss gnosis are the 
method component of the Vajrayāna path to Buddhahood. But method must be con­
joined with wisdom (i.e., the ultimate true nature of things). For most of the Tibetan 
traditions, that is expressed though the largely coextensive concepts of emptiness, 
dharmakāya, and buddha nature.
Tibetan Systemizations of Mahāyāna 
and Vajrayāna Thought
Tibetan traditions frequently refer to the Vajrayāna as the “resultant vehicle,” meaning 
that practice is undertaken assuming that the goal of the Buddhist path, Buddhahood, 
is already present in the body and mind of sentient beings as buddha-​nature. The path 
serves to uncover or reveal the pure, luminous essence. Every other vehicle is then re­
ferred to as the “causal vehicle” which takes practice to create the aspects of awakening, 
which is as yet still potential. Buddha-​nature resonates with the Vajrayāna rhetoric of 
nonduality of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, appearance and emptiness, and so on, and tan­
tric practice with its elaborate visualization of purified realms and oneself as an awe-​
inspiring awakened deity is made possible by the presence of the dharmakāya here and 
now. “The legendary quickness of the tantric path (full enlightenment attainable even in 
one lifetime) has assumed this very understanding, permitting a rapid progress on the 
path by revealing the intrinsic purity of deity and mandala as the actual, primordial na­
ture of oneself and one’s world” (Makransky 1997, 366). The completion-​stage practices 
that bring the vital energies into the central channel bring conceptual thought to a halt 
and reveal a blissful luminous, nondual subjectivity that are capable of fully realizing 
that primordial nature.

--- PAGE 116 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      91
 
“Other Emptiness”
As we have seen, the Mahāyāna sūtras and śāstras associated with the second and 
third turnings of the wheel of Dharma treat the subject of emptiness in very dif­
ferent terms. The perfection of wisdom sūtras, and even more so the Madhyamaka 
treatises of Nāgārjuna, present an emptiness that is expressed in negative terms such as 
phenomena’s lack of own nature (niḥsvabhāva) or freedom from conceptual elaboration 
(niṣprapañca). The Discourse Explaining the Thought and Maitreya texts also assert the 
emptiness of phenomena, but nuance that by saying that the conceptual overlay that is 
negated transforms, or reveals, the base, which is dependent arising itself. Knowing that 
is the perfected nature, reality, and awakening itself. By the fourteenth century in Tibet, 
the concern to interpret these two themes, as well as tantric practice, seems to have 
reached a critical mass, with several prominent masters, including the third Karmapa 
Ranjung Dorjé (rang byung rdo rje, 1284–​1339), Büton Rinchen Drup (bu ston rin chen 
grub,1290–​1364), the great Nyingma master Longchen Rabjampa (1308–​1364), and 
Dolpopa Sherab Gyeltsen (dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan, 1292–​1361), writing major 
works on this topic.
These figures either knew each other or shared many of the same teachers and disci­
ples and all were deeply involved in the practice and teaching of the Kālācakra tantra. 
It is Dolpopa who was arguably the most influential. He developed a radical and influ­
ential reinterpretation of Mahāyāna thought that “contains the most controversial and 
stunning ideas ever presented by a great Tibetan Buddhist master” (Stearns 1999, 2) 
and established a distinct scholastic tradition and esoteric lineage transmission, known 
as Jonang (Jo nang). The order thrived and spread for several centuries and formed 
institutional relations with the Sakya (Dolpopa’s own primary tradition), Kagyü, and 
Nyingma sects.28
The Mahāyāna textual sources that form the basis of this system of thought are 
the sūtras of the Third Turning of the Wheel of Doctrine, the Maitreya texts, and no­
tably, the corpus of hymns of Nāgārjuna, particularly the Praise to the Dharmadhātu 
(Dharmadhātu Stava).29 As mentioned earlier, there were two traditions of the inter­
pretation of the Maitreya texts that are held to be themselves explications of the hidden 
meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom sūtras. In the analytic tradition founded by Ngok 
Lotsawa, the emptiness asserted in those was a nonaffirming negation arrived at through 
logical inquiry. The other, the meditative tradition founded by Tsen Khawoché, was said 
to have been preserved and transmitted orally. This lineage took the positive statements 
about ultimate reality literally and as definitive. Sheehy and Mathes note, “The partic­
ular transmission linked to Sajjana via Tsen Khawoche interprets the Five Maitreya 
Works positively, emphasizing the effulgence of luminosity and the buddha-​nature they 
reveal. This became the touchstone hermeneutic for the zhentong (emptiness of other) 
philosophical and contemplative tradition (Sheehy and Mathes 2019, 31). Dolpopa was a 
master of these texts, which clearly influenced him deeply.

--- PAGE 117 ---
92      Paul B. Donnelly
 
Dolpopa was also a fervent practitioner of the Six-​branch Yoga (saḍaṅgayoga) of the 
Kālācakra tradition.30 A strong influence on Dolpopa’s view and one that he frequently 
cites is the Bodhisattva Trilogy which consists of a commentary on the Kālācakra 
tantra, a commentary on the Hevajra tantra, and one on the Cakrasaṃvara tantra.31 
It was during a retreat on the Six-​branch yoga that he had the realizations that led to 
his unique views of emptiness and Madhyamaka, though he waited five years before 
teaching them. What he began teaching was a complete reinterpretation of some fun­
damental assumptions about Buddhist thought, synthesizing texts and concepts of 
Madhyamaka and Yogācāra, and employing the particular vocabulary of the Kālācakra 
system (Dolpopa 2006, 68).
Dolpopa defended his views by relying on the Kālācakra commentary the 
Vimalaprabhā, which utilizes the Hindu concept of four ages (Kṛta, Treta, Dvāpara, 
and Kali). This widely held concept assumes a degeneration of beings and the world 
over time from an original age of purity, the Kṛtayuga, down to the dark Kali age in 
which we now exist. Dolpopa asserted that the pure teachings of the Buddha had been 
revealed in the ancient Kṛtayuga, but those teachings had gradually become tainted 
and misunderstood due to the flawed intellects of ordinary persons over time. The 
Vimalaprabhā says that only the Kṛtayuga teachings should be regarded as expressing 
the final intentions of the Buddha. Dolpopa identified his own tradition with those, and 
regarded many of the mainstream understandings of the Tibetan scholastic traditions as 
flawed and corrupt. The authentic Kṛtayuga teachings was said to include many of the 
highest tantras, the Bodhisattva Trilogy; the Ten Sūtras on Buddha Nature; The Ten Sūtras 
of Definitive Meaning; and the works of Maitreya, Asaṅga, Nāgārjuna, Vasubandhu, and 
the tantric siddhas Nāropa and Saraha (Stearns 1999, 81). Dolpopa says that the key doc­
trine in these authentic, definitive texts is “emptiness of other” (gzhan stong).
We have here a new (or Dolpopa would say rediscovered) sense of the meaning of 
perhaps the single most fundamental Mahāyāna concept: emptiness. In the argumen­
tative treatises, Nāgārjuna mounts argument after argument proving that any object of 
analysis is revealed to be empty of inherent nature or essence (svabhāva). Dolpopa calls 
this emptiness the “emptiness of self-​nature” (rang stong), which he correlates with con­
ventional truth and accepts that it is indeed true of all conditioned, dependently arisen 
phenomena. Nāgārjuna says that even the Buddha and nirvāṇa are empty of inherent 
existence. As noted previously, in the Maitreya texts’ explication of the Perfection of 
Wisdom sutras, emptiness is the true nature of phenomena (dharmatā) which is the 
perfection of wisdom, the perfect nature, the dharma body, the tathāgatagarbha, and so 
on. The nondual realization of this is the very essence of the Mahāyāna sense of awak­
ening. For Dolpopa and other Jonang thinkers, this sublime ultimate reality cannot just 
be the nonaffirming negation of svabhāva.
Dolpopa considered the buddha-​nature to be naturally luminous radiant light, which 
is synonymous with the dharmakāya, and a primordial, indestructible, and eternal state 
of great bliss inherently present as the ultimate essence of every living being. Beings are 
bound in saṃsāra because that essence is obscured by adventitious defilements, which 
are the product of the conceptual elaborations of countless lives in the cycle of birth and

--- PAGE 118 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      93
 
death. Those “stains” are empty of their own inherent existence and the tathāgatagarbha 
is empty of them, but it is not empty of its own nature as described above. It is empty of 
everything other than the luminous buddha-​nature as described above (Stearns 83).
Great Madhyamaka
Tibetan doxographical hierarchies nearly always place Madhyamaka at the top. Tibetan 
doxographers assert that “Madhyamaka” holds emptiness as ultimate truth. Cittamātra, 
or “mind only,” is below it. The term “mind-​only” indicates that this “school” accepts 
that mind is the ultimate truth. Even a brief study of the Maitreya texts and those of 
Asaṅga and Vasubandhu demonstrates that “mind only” does not accurately describe 
their doctrines. The four meditative concentrations encountered in Yogācāra literature 
describe a path that starts with the realization that external objects are actually “mind 
only,” but subsequent stages reveal that since mind depends on cognitive objects (that 
don’t exist), the subject is seen not to exist either. As Makransky concludes in his dis­
cussion of the four stages, “dualistic conception is abandoned, nonconceptual gnosis 
emerges, the nondual realm of reality (dharmadhātu) appears, and he attains the path 
that sees it directly (darśana mārga)” (Makransky 1997, 77).
Dolpopa accuses Tibetan doxographers of denigrating definitive teachings in 
their assignation of the treatises of Maitreya to the school of “mind only.” He says, 
“It emerges from the Kṛtayuga tradition that the three natures are the Dharma tra­
dition of only the Madhyamaka. Therefore, by not understanding that type of classi­
fication, and by mixing it up, the dregs of the view have arisen. Those Madhyamaka 
[treatises] which present the three natures of the fully established, and so forth, have 
been demoted to Cittamātra treatises. The great experts of the Great Madhyamaka 
who taught them have also been demoted to Cittamātra adherents” (Stearns 1999, 90) 
“Great Madhyamaka” (dbu ma chen po) includes Yogācāra, Tathāgatagarbha, and tan­
tric thought and texts, particularly the Bodhisattva Trilogy. This flies in the face of the 
widely accepted hierarchy of tenet systems which consisted of two “lower vehicle” doc­
trinal schools (Vaibhāṣika and Sautrāṇṭika) and the two Mahāyāna schools (Cittamātra 
and Madhyamaka). Dolpopa defended his radical reinterpretation of established tenet 
systems (siddhānta) by saying that Great Madhyamaka is not a tenet system but rather 
a view (darśana) connected to meditative experience and expressive of the awakened 
perspective (Broido 1989, 87).
Furthermore, with the notable exception of the Sūtra Mahāmūdra tradition in the 
Kagyü lineages and some forms of the Nyingma Great Perfection, most of the Tibetan 
traditions were in agreement with Dolpopa that this view and the path that it entails is 
fundamentally tantric. Dolpopa summarizes the essential points of his view:
Therefore, as long as delusion has not ceased it is impossible for the manifestation of 
delusion, the cycle of birth and death, to cease.

--- PAGE 119 ---
94      Paul B. Donnelly
 
As long as this circulation of the vital winds has not stopped, it is impossible for 
this stream of consciousness to stop.
While this stream of mind and mental events has not stopped, it is also impossible 
for this manifestation of delusion, the three worlds, to stop.
Therefore, with the wish to transcend the three worlds, whose nature is suffering, 
if you abandon all distractions and meditate upon the profound Vajrayoga, the sub­
lime nectar from the mouth of the excellent master, this circulation of vital winds 
and mind together will stop.
(Stearns 1999, 101).
Dolpopa is arguably the most influential teacher of “other emptiness.” Jamgön Kongtrul 
cites a few earlier masters as predecessors, such as the Sajjana, Tsen Khawoché, Zu Gawé 
Dorjé and Yumo Mikyö Dorjé (yu mo mi bskyod rdo rje), and claims some of Dolpopa’s 
contemporaries who held “other emptiness” views as well, namely the Third Karmapa 
Rangjung Dorjé and the Nyingma master Koṅ-​sprul Blo-​gros-​mtha’-​yas (2007, 250). 
The next most prolific and influential Jonang teacher of other-​emptiness was Tārānātha, 
whose collected works are contained in twenty-​three volumes.32 The “other-​emptiness” 
view was taken up, qualified, or refuted by the major thinkers of the established Tibetan 
sects.33 The great Sakya scholar Śākya Chokden (śākya mchog ldan, 1428–​1507) also de­
veloped his own unique sense of emptiness, and doxographical hierarchy, indebted 
to but also critical of Dolpopa. The same can be said of several of the major Kagyü 
hierarchs, including the Seventh Karmapa Chodrak Gyatso (chos grags rgya mtsho) and 
the Eighth Karmapa Mikyö Dorjé.34
Not surprisingly, other emptiness views were a source of controversy and incited 
polemic works from many of the most important scholars of the day, all primarily 
associated with the Sakya lineage. Butön Rinchen Drub (bu ston rin chen grub, 1290–​
1364), Gorampa Sonam Sengge (go ram pa bsod nams seng ge, 1429–​1489), Remdawa 
Zhonnu Lodrö (red mda’ ba gzhon nu blo gros, 1348–​1412), and his student Tsongkhapa 
all wrote refutations of Dolpopa and the other emptiness view. As polemics have a 
way of doing, refutations brought responses and other refutations for generations. 
Regardless of who “won” these debates, the matter was effectively settled in the late 
seventeenth century when the now reigning Geluk government, with the aid of an al­
liance of Mongol armies, forcibly converted Jonang monastery and installed a Geluk 
lama as the reincarnation (sprul ku) of Tārānatha, who had died seven years earlier. 
This marked the effective banning of other emptiness doctrine in central Tibet. The 
works of Jonang Tāranātha and Śākya Chokden were also banned at this time (Stearns 
1999, 62).35
Śākya Chokden nuanced Dolpopa’s other emptiness view, bringing it more into line 
with mainstream Sākya views, while remaining unique. Śākya Chokden too accepted 
the teachings of the Third Turning of the Wheel of Doctrine as definitive and included 
its sūtras and śāstras within the doctrinal category of Madhyamaka. He asserted that 
though the view the Dharmas of Maitreya was in agreement with that of the mantrayāna 
(i.e., tantra), “Because they assert that non-​dual primordial mind alone as the object

--- PAGE 120 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      95
 
of realization after the apprehended/​apprehender-​phenomena have been realized as 
empty” (Komarovski 2011, 259).
Nonetheless, Śākya Chokden considers Mantra Madhyamaka as a third type, beyond 
that of Nāgārjuna and Maitreya/​Asaṅga. “Pāramitā[yāna] has neither the method of re­
alization nor the object of realization of the uncommon view of Mantra[yāna]—​the in­
nate primordial mind. The mere freedom from proliferations (spros bral tsam) [taught 
by] Pāramitā[yāna] followers is not realized by primordial mind [taught in] Mantra; 
the emptiness realized [the path of] Mantra is subsumed under [the category] of the 
stainless great bliss (zag med bde ba chen po).” The highest view for him is one in which 
conceptual reasoning—​whether related to self-​ or other emptiness—​is not necessary 
to realize primordial mind. Tantric techniques such as the third tantric empowerment 
(shes rab ye shes kyi dbang, prajñājnānābhiṣeka) and completion-​stage yogas are neces­
sary and sufficient cause to actualize the great bliss gnosis (Komarovski 2011, 261). Thus, 
Śākya Chokden holds not just that tantric practice supersedes the preparatory realiza­
tion of emptiness through reasoning but also that the latter is not even necessary.
One can do without the negative reasoning approach of Nāgārjuna’s argumen­
tative works, but the view of the Dharmas of Maitreya is indispensable “because it 
comprises an inseparable part of the tantric view of reality” (Komarovski 2011, 262). 
Śākya Chokden’s formulation of Great Madhyamaka relies heavily and explicitly on 
tantric teachings to validate his inclusion of the view of the Dharmas of Maitreya into 
Madhyamaka (Komarovski 2011, 264). The views of Śākya Chokden were very influ­
ential for the great founders of the revitalization of the ancient practice traditions that 
would come in eastern Tibet.
Great Madhyamaka and other emptiness thought endured through a several 
hundred-​year-​prohibition in central Tibet, largely because of the degree to which they 
had made an indelible mark on the thinking of the non-​Geluk sects. In the nineteenth 
century, there was an efflorescence of scholarly activity across the Jonang, Sakya, Kagyü, 
Nyingma, and Bön orders in eastern Tibet. Emptiness of other and Great Madhyamaka 
came to be regarded as unifying ground for those developments. Deroche, defines the 
Rimé (ris med) movement, or “eclectic movement” as “a transsectarian activity of reve­
lation (gter ma), compilation, and transmission of Buddhist lineages and teachings, led 
by the spiritual trio of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo (‘jam dbyang mkhyen brtsa’i dbang 
po, 1820–​1892), Jamgon Kongtrul, and Chogyur Dechen Lingpa (mchog gyur gling 
pa, 1829–​1870).” Deroche continues, “the so-​called Rimé (ris med) movement of the 
nineteenth-​century in Eastern Tibet constituted a reaction and a renaissance of the an­
cient earlier orders including the Nyingma, Kagyu, Sakya, Jonang, and Bon” (Deroche 
2019, 323–​324). To accomplish this renaissance, the three great founders of Rimé col­
lected, taught, and preserved the teachings that they felt were in danger of fading 
away in Tibet. To that end, Jamgon Kongtrul composed his monumental Treasury of 
Precious Instructions,36 which details the “eight great chariots”37 that form the distinct 
lineages of spiritual practice that trace back to India. The “eight great chariots” are sys­
tems of tantric practice, unified by the view of emptiness of other and the tantric Great 
Madhyamaka.

--- PAGE 121 ---
96      Paul B. Donnelly
 
Like the great rebirth of the tantric practice lineages in Tibet in the nineteenth cen­
tury, in recent decades Western scholarship has begun to better recognize these 
developments and give them the attention they deserve. Scholarship on Madhyamaka 
has far exceeded that on Yogācāra, and the relationship between these two great chariots 
of the Mahāyāna has tended to see them as more in competition than as complemen­
tary, which has long typically been the perspective of Japanese scholarship. Western 
scholarship on Tibetan Buddhist doctrine has often uncritically accepted Tibetan 
doxographical categories, leading to a reification of conceptual boundaries such as 
“Madhyamaka,” “Yogācāra,” and “tantra.” The boundaries of each of these concepts have 
also largely been informed by the dominant Geluk understandings of them, perhaps be­
cause so many of the Tibetan informants available to scholars were associated with that 
sect. As we have seen, however, the other major sects and practice lineages were intellec­
tually thriving before the ascendancy of the Geluk government and though they some­
times seemed to be in danger of fading away, they endured and were revitalized through 
the extraordinary efforts of the great figures of the Rimé movement.
The sharp division between sūtra and tantra was really only observed in the Geluk 
sect and its monastic educational institutions. Similarly, the nearly exclusive emphasis 
on Madhyamaka over Yogācāra was not the dominant approach in Tibet, as evidenced 
by the centrality of the Five Dharmas of Maitreya among the other sects’ understanding 
of what constituted Mahāyāna thought (Dreyfus 2003, 98–​148). There are encouraging 
signs that our scholarship is evolving to call our received conceptions about these matters 
into question. The recent publication of several volumes of the Treasury of Precious 
Instructions and other works by Kongtrul is a major advance in Tibetan Buddhist studies, 
filling in our knowledge of the full range of Tibetan doctrinal and practice traditions. It 
is hoped that this contribution plays some small part in this direction in our endeavors.
Notes
	1.	 For example, there is a wide scholarly consensus that there are three bodies of texts that rep­
resent the earliest extent tradition: the Aṭṭhaka-​vagga (The Chapter of Eights), the Khagga-​
visāṇa-​sutta (The Discourse of the Rhinoceros Horn), and the Pārāyaṇa-​vagga (The Chapter 
on the Way to the Beyond). These texts do not discuss traditionally accepted core doctrines 
such as the doctrine of selflessness or the Four Noble Truths. See Shulman 2013, 2017a, 
2017b for an in-​depth study of these texts. Kate Crosby’s recent work demonstrates that an 
esoteric, somatic form of meditation was once-​dominant in Southeast Asian Theravādin 
cultures. See Crosby 2020.
	2.	 The Sanskrit word yāna can be taken to mean either “vehicle” or “path,” depending on the 
context. For a discussion of the term “Mahāyāna” in Buddhist, Jain, and Brahmanical texts, 
see Walser 2007.
	3.	 The Tibetan is given here in recognition of the fact that the concept of these five texts as 
comprising a set arose in Tibet. See Turenne 2015 for an examination of the grouping and 
the individual texts held to comprise it.
	4.	 See McGovern 2019 for a study of how this came to be.

--- PAGE 122 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      97
 
	 5.	 This sutta is in the Samyutta Nikaya 56.11. There are four authoritative translations on the 
Access to Insight website: www.acce​ssto​insi​ght.org.
	 6.	 See Germano and Waldron 2006 for a discussion of how the idea of the ālayavijñāna of 
Indian Yogācāra is developed by the Nyingma Dzokchen traditions into the idea of the pri­
mordial awareness.
	 7.	 See Donnelly 2017 for an overview of the Madhyamaka school.
	 8.	 See ibid. for an annotated bibliography of Nāgārjuna’s works and modern scholarship.
	 9.	 See ibid. for an annotated bibliography on this text and Siderits and Katsura 2013 for an 
authoritative translation.
	10.	 See Harris 1991 for an extensive argument for the continuity of Madhyamaka and 
Yogācāra.
	11.	 See, e.g., Brunnhölzl 2004; Cabezon and Dargyay 2007; Phuntsho 2005; and Shes-​rab 
rGyal-​mtshan 2006 for exemplary works on these sects.
	12.	 This traditional account is widely known in Tibetan Buddhism and is recorded in the 
histories of the great Tibetan historians Butön (Bu-​ston) and Tārānātha (Bu-​ston 1932–​1933, 
136–​142) and Tārānātha 1980, 154–​167).
	13.	 See Garfield and Westerhoff 2015 for an important recent contribution that reexamines the 
relationship between Madhyamaka and Yogācāra.
	14.	 See Nagao and Kawamura 1991 for an exemplary work representative of this approach.
	15.	 The Tibetan title is given here, since the particular group of texts and the idea that they 
comprise was formalized in Tibet.
	16.	 These are the Abhisamayālaṁkāra, the Mahayānasūtrālaṅkāra, and the Madhyāntavibhāga.
	17.	 See Brunnhölzl 2012, 21–​46 for a summary of the views of the major Tibetan scholars on 
this subject.
	18.	 A number of new translations and studies of the Maitreya texts have recently been 
published: https://​www.shambh​ala.com/​topic/​five-​maitr​eya-​texts/​.
	19.	 See Dreyfus 2003, 128–​132 for this curriculum.
	20.	 See ibid., 111–​114 for the Geluk curriculum.
	21.	 For a thorough and insightful examination of this and many surrounding issues on the 
Abhisamayālaṁkāra and other texts of the Maitreya corpus on the subject of the three 
embodiments (trikāya), see Makransky 1997.
	22.	 See Kapstein 2010 for brief examination of this doctrine.
	23.	 For an extensive discussion of these and other important Tathāgatagarbha texts, see 
Brunnhölzl 2014, 3–​52.
	24.	 While it has become widely accepted in popular and even scholarly Western discourse that 
not-​self (anātman) is a defining doctrine of Buddhism since its inception, some modern 
scholarship has called this into question. Peter Harvey (1995) has observed that “it is quite 
common to find that newcomers to Buddhist Studies see in ‘there is no Self’ a denial of 
any kind of self, metaphysical (Self) or empirical. This is plain wrong” (7). Joseph Walser 
(2017) has shown that taking anātman to be the doctrine that marks borderline between 
Buddhist and other Indian religions should be reexamined based on the textual evidence 
from the Pali Canon. Walser demonstrates that only 7.4 percent of the suttas teach the doc­
trine of anatta.
	25.	 See Mathes 2008, 49–​129 for an examination of Gö Lotsawa’s interpretation and those 
related to his. Brunnhölzl 2014 includes a discussion of the varying interpretations 
in Tibet, a translation of the Ratnagotravibhāga and of a number of important Tibetan 
commentaries.

--- PAGE 123 ---
98      Paul B. Donnelly
 
	26.	 See Jackson 2016 for an overview of this meditative tradition.
	27.	 See Lama Yeshe 2001 for an accessible traditional but modern discussion of the tantric 
path. For an extensive traditional presentation, see Koṅ-​sprul Blo-​gros-​mtha’-​yas (2008).
	28.	 For an annotated bibliography on the sect and its teachings, see Sheehy 2012.
	29.	 For a study of this text, with the commentary by the Third Karmapa Ranjung Dorjé, see 
Brunnhölzl 2007.
	30.	 For an annotated bibliography on the Kālācakra tantra, see Wallace 2010. For a description 
of the Six-​branch yoga, see Stearns 1999, 99–​101.
	31.	 These are the Vimalaprabhā by Kalkin Puṇḍarīka, the Hevajrapiṇḍārtha ṭīka by Bodhisattva 
Vajragarbha, and the Lakṣābhidhanād uddhṛta laghutantra piṇḍārthavivaraṇa by the 
Bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, respectively. Hopkins, cited in Dolpopa 2006, 62, says that the latter 
two commentaries were held to have been composed using the grid of the Kālācakra tantra, 
“so all three are Kālācakra related.”
	32.	 His important texts include his famed History of Buddhism (1980), the concise other empti­
ness text The Essence of Other-​Emptiness (2007), and “Tāranātha’s Twenty-​One Differences 
with Regard to the Profound Meaning: Comparing the Views of the Two Zhentong Masters 
Dolpopa and Shakya Chokden” (Mathes 2019).
	33.	 See ibid. for studies of other emptiness as developed by the other sects of Tibetan Buddhism.
	34.	 See ibid., 241–​302.
	35.	 See Stearns 1999, 70–​74 for a detailed account of this period.
	36.	 These texts are being published in association with the Tsadra Foundation by Shambhala 
Publications. The Tsadra website has a very useful overview of this monumental work: 
https://​dnz.tsa​dra.org/​index.php/​Main_​P​age/​
	37.	 These are Nyingma, Kadam, Sakya, Marpa Kagyu, Shangpa Kagyu, Chö and Zhijé, the Six-​
branch yoga of the Kālācakra tantra, and the Orgyan Nyendrup.
References
Boucher, Daniel. 2021. “Mahayana.” Oxford Bibliographies Online. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​
OBO/​978019​5393​521-​0018
Broido, Michael. 1989. “The Jo-​nang-​pas on Madhyamaka: A Sketch.” The Tibet Journal 
XIV: 86–​90.
Brunnhölzl, Karl. 2004. The Center of the Sunlit Sky: Madhyamaka in the Kagyu Tradition. 
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Brunnhölzl, Karl. 2007. In Praise of the Dharmadhātu: Nāgārjuna and the Third Karmapa, 
Ranjung Dorjé. Translated by Kark Brunnhölzl. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Brunnhölzl, Karl. 2012. Mining For Wisdom Within Delusion: Maitreya’s Distinction between 
Phenomena and the Nature of Phenomena and its Indian and Tibetan Commentaries. Ithaca, 
NY: Snow Lion.
Brunnhölzl, Karl. 2014. When the Clouds Part: The Uttaratantra and Its Meditative Tradition as 
a Bridge between Sūtra and Tantra. Boston, MA: Snow Lion.
Bu-​ston Rin-​chen Grub. 1931. History of Buddhism. 2 vols. Translated by E. Obermiller. 
Heidelberg, Germany: Otto Harrassowitz.
Cabezón, José Ignacio, and Geshe Lobsang Dargyay. 2007. Freedom from Extremes: Gampopa’s 
“Distinguishing the Views” and the Polemics of Emptiness. Boston, MA: Wisdom.
Conze, Edward. 1975. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines & Its Verse Summary. 
Bolinas, CA: Four Seasons Foundation.

--- PAGE 124 ---
On the Union of Emptiness and Bliss      99
 
Crosby, Kate. 2020. Esoteric Theravada: The Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of 
Southeast Asia. Boulder, CO: Shambhala.
Deroche, Marc-​Henri. 2019. “Along the Middle Path in the Quest for Wisdom: The Grat 
Madhyamaka in Rimé Discourses.” In The Other Emptiness: Rethinking the Zhentong 
Buddhist Discourse in Tibet, edited by Michael Sheehy and Klaus-​Dieter Mathes, 323–​350. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Dol-​po-​pa, Shes-​rab rGyal-​mtshan. 2006. Translated and introduced by Jeffrey Hopkins. 
Mountain Doctrine: Tibet’s Fundamental Treatise on Other-​Emptiness and the Buddha 
Matrix. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Donnelly, Paul B. 2017. “Madhyamaka.” Oxford Research Encyclopedias: Religion. https://​doi.
org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.013.191
Donnelly, Paul 2021. “Mūlamadhyamakakārikā.” Oxford Bibliographies Online. https://​doi.org/​
10.1093/​OBO/​978019​5393​521-​0066
Dreyfus, Georges B. J. 2003. The Sound of Two Hands Clapping: The Education of a Tibetan 
Buddhist Monk. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Duckworth, Douglas. 2013. “Tibetan Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna.” In A Companion to Buddhist 
Philosophy, edited by Steven M. Emmanuel, 99–​109. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Garfield, Jay L., and Jan Westerhoff. 2015. Madhyamaka and Yogācāra: Allies or Rivals. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Germano, David, and William Waldron. 2006. “A Comparison of Ālaya-​vijñāna in Yogācāra 
and Dzogchen.” In Buddhist Thought and Applied Psychological Research: Transcending the 
Boundaries, edited by D. K. Nauriyal, 36–​68. New York: Routledge.
Harris, Ian Charles. 1991. The Continuity of Madhyamaka and Yogācāra in Indian Mahāyāna 
Buddhism. Leiden, The Netherlands: E. J. Brill.
Harvey, Peter. 1995. The Selfless Mind: Personality, Consciousness and Nirvāṇa in Early 
Buddhism. London: RoutledgeCurzon.
Jackson, Roger R. 2016. Mahāmudrā in India and Tibet. Oxford Research Encyclopedias: 
Religion. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.013.184
Kapstein, Matthew. 2010. “Tathāgatagarbha.” Oxford Research Encyclopedias: Religion. DOI: 
10.1093/​OBO/​9780195393521-​0160
Keenan, John P. 2000. The Scripture on the Explication of the Underlying Meaning. Berkeley, 
CA: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
Komarovski, Yaroslav. 2011. Visions of Unity: The Golden Paṇḍita Shakya Chokden’s New 
Interpretation of Yogācāra and Madhyamaka. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Koṅ-​sprul Blo-​gros-​mtha’-​yas. 2007. Translated by Elizabeth Callahan. The Treasury 
of Knowledge: Book Six, Part Three: Frameworks of Buddhist Philosophy, a Systematic 
Presentation of the Cause-​Based Philosophical Vehicles. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Koṅ-​sprul Blo-​gros-​mtha’-​yas. 2008. Translated by Kalu Rinpoche Translation Group, 
Elio Guarisco, and Ingrid McLeod. The Treasury of Knowledge: Book Eight, Part Three: 
The Elements of Tantric Practice: A General Exposition of the Process of Meditation in the 
Indestructible Way of Secret Mantra., Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Makransky, John J. 1997. Buddhahood Embodied: Sources of Controversy in India and Tibet. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Mathes, Klaus-​Dieter. 2008. A Direct Path to the Buddha Within: Gös Lotsāwa’s Interpretation 
of the Ratngotra-​vibhāga. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Mathes, Klaus-​Dieter. 2019. “Tāranātha’s Twenty-​One Differences with Regard to the Profound 
Meaning: Comparing the Views of the Two Zhentong Masters Dolpopa and Shakya 
Chokden.” In The Other Emptiness: Rethinking the Zhentong Buddhist Discourse in Tibet,

--- PAGE 125 ---
100      Paul B. Donnelly
 
edited by Michael R. Sheehy and Klaus-​Dieter Mathes, 197–​234. Albany: State University of 
New York Press.
McGovern, Nathan. 2019. The Snake and the Mongoose: The Emergence of Identity in Early 
Indian Religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nagao, Gadjin, and Leslie Kawamura. 1991. Madhyamaka and Yogācāra: A Study of Mahāyāna 
Philosophies. Collected Papers of G. M. Nagao. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Powers, John. 1995. Wisdom of Buddha: The Saṁdhinirmocana Sūtra. Berkeley, CA: Dharma.
Phuntsho, Karma. 2005. Mipham’s Dialectics and the Debates on Emptiness: To Be, Not to Be, or 
Neither. London: Routledge.
Sheehy, Michael. 2012. “Jonang.” Oxford Research Encyclopedias: Religion. DOI: 10.1093/​OBO/​
9780195393521-​0097
Sheehy, Michael and Klaus-​Dieter Mathes. 2019. The Other Emptiness: Rethinking the Zhentong 
Buddhist Discourse in Tibet. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Shulman, Eviatar. 2013. “Early Buddhist Imagination: The Aṭṭhavagga as Buddhist Poetry.” 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 35, no. 1–​2: 363–​411.
Shulman, Eviatar. 2017a. “Polyvalent Philosophy and Soteriology in Early Buddhism.” 
Philosophy East and West 67, no. 3: 864–​886.
Shulman, Eviatar. 2017b. “Psychological Solutions to Metaphysical Problems in the Pārāyaṇa-​
Vagga.” Philosophy East and West 67, no. 2: 506–​530.
Siderits, Mark, and Shōryū Katsura. 2013. Nāgārjuna’s Middle Way: The Mūlamadhyamakakārikā. 
Somerville, MA: Wisdom.
Stearns, Cyrus. 1999. The Buddha from Dolpo: A Study of the Life and Thought of the Tibetan 
Master Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Tārānātha. 1980. History of Buddhism in India. Translated by Lama Chimpa and Alaka 
Chattopadhyaya, edited by Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya. Calcutta: Bagchi.
Tārānātha. 2007. The Essence of Other-​Emptiness. Translated by Jeffrey Hopkins. Boston: 
Snow Lion.
Turenne, Philippe. 2015. “The History and Significance of the Tibetan Concept of the Five 
Treatises of Maitreya.” The Indian International Journal of Buddhist Studies 16: 215–​233.
Vasubandhu. 1991. Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam, Volumes 1–​3. Translated by Leo M. Pruden and 
Louis de La Vallée Poussin. Singapore: Asian Humanities Press.
Waldron, William. 2013. “Yogācāra.” Oxford Research Encyclopedias: Religion.
Wallace, Vesna. 2010. “Kālacakra.” Oxford Research Encyclopedias: Religion. DOI: 10.1093/​
OBO/​9780195393521-​0083.
Walser, Joseph. 2007. “The Origin of the Term ‘Mahāyāna’ (The Great Vehicle) and its 
Relationship to the Āgamas”. Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 30: 
219–​250.
Walser, Joseph. 2017. “When Did Buddhism Become Anti-​Brahmanical” The Case of the 
Missing Soul.” Journal of American Academy of Religion 86, no.1: 94–​125.
Walser, Joseph. 2018. Genealogies of Mahāyāna Buddhism: Emptiness, Power and Question of 
Origin. New York: Routledge.
Williams, Paul. 2008. Mahāyāna Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations. New York: Routledge.
Yeshe, Lama Thubten. 2001. Introduction to Tantra: The Transformation of Desire: Revised 
Edition. Boston, MA: Wisdom.
Zimmerman, Michael. 2002. A Buddha Within: The Tathāgatagarbhasūtra: The Earliest 
Exposition of the Buddha-​Nature Teaching in India. Tokyo: The International Research 
Institute for Advanced Buddhology, Soka University.

--- PAGE 126 ---
Chapter 5
Goryū Shintō Goma
Tantric Foundations
Richard K. Payne
Introduction
Over the last half century, scholars have expanded methods for the study of reli­
gious traditions beyond the philological. This expansion of methods simultaneously 
implicates an expansion of theories regarding the object of study.
The idea that a religious tradition can be comprehended adequately solely on the 
basis of authoritative doctrinal texts was in part motivated by the rise of the philolog­
ical method in the nineteenth century when the modern study of religion was initiated. 
More fundamentally, it also reflects the theological idea that authoritative doctrinal texts 
reveal the timeless essence of a religion. These preconceptions have contributed to a his­
tory of the field of religious studies as in many instances being a kind of cryptotheology 
(Payne 2008, 2009, 2012/​2013). The academic study of tantra can, however, avoid that 
fate by embracing the methodological orientation in which traditions are no longer 
conceptualized as closed systems, idealized in conformity with authoritative doctrine, 
and selectively represented by instances most closely adhering to that idealization. 
Moving away from decontextualized and ahistorical representations means also that the 
study of tantra can engage models of contact, interaction, and change. From this per­
spective, traditions are not fixed and rigid but rather constantly changing, constantly 
adapting. In other words, traditions are processes in which practices, beliefs, and rituals 
are all fluid, which is another way of saying that the object of study is the lived tradi­
tion. And, as many scholars have noted, ritual practices are central to the lived tradition 
(Joshi 2006, 51; Magliocco 2014; Strathern and Stewart 2014).
This chapter examines a particular instance of tantric practice, the homa (Jpn. goma 
護摩). The homa is a votive offering that can be traced back to Vedic rituals that were 
transformed by tantric practitioners, probably in the early medieval period. As with the 
Vedic forms, the tantric fire is usually homologized with Agni, who purifies the offerings

--- PAGE 127 ---
102      Richard K. Payne
 
and transmits them to the deities (Payne 2016). Shared by almost all tantric traditions, 
the homa is a singularly important instance of tantric ritual. The theoretical issue 
motivating this study is ritual change, specifically, contributing to an understanding of 
the systematic ways in which rituals change when they are borrowed into a different 
tradition.1 In this case it is the Goryū Shintō tradition of medieval Japan that borrowed 
the tantric Buddhist goma ritual and adapted it for its own use. Pursuit of this under­
standing of the systematics of ritual change in the context of borrowing is initiated by 
adapting concepts, categories, and concerns from contact linguistics.
Methodology: Adapting Contact 
Linguistics to Study Ritual Change
Although he was writing specifically about the sociology of religion, Jens Kreinath’s ob­
servation that the field’s presumptions meant that “the interrelated nature of rituals was 
not recognized as a field or area worthy of study” (Kreinath 2020, 398) is more widely 
relevant. If we take change and interaction as the normal contexts in which tantric 
traditions have existed, then the study of ritual change as a result of interaction provides 
a valuable perspective on the histories of those traditions.
The similarities between ritual and language are extensive, so much so that the 
methods of linguistics have been fruitfully applied to the study of ritual (for an alterna­
tive method, see Dolce 2006–​2007). This does not mean, however, that those methods 
can be applied directly, that is, without methodological adaptation. Instead of taking the 
concepts, categories, and concerns of linguistics as fixed analytics and imposing them 
onto the phenomena of ritual, it is necessary to allow appropriate adaptations of lin­
guistic analyses to be made from the empirical evidence of rituals themselves (Payne 
2021). The linguistic analogy to the study of interaction between different traditions is 
the subfield of contact linguistics (Myers-​Scotton 2002). A useful terminological dis­
tinction made in contact linguistics is between “source language” and “recipient lan­
guage” (Winford 2020, 59; for other terminology for this relation, see Ross 2020, 123). 
We can adapt this to “source tradition” and “recipient tradition.” For our study here, 
Japanese tantric Buddhism, represented by Shingon, is the source tradition and Goryū 
Shintō is the recipient tradition (Gardiner 2018, 2019; Rambelli 2018).
A distinction central to theorizing contact is the question of “agentivity,” that is, 
whether to think about changes resulting from contact as social or individual in char­
acter. As noted by Peter Hans Nelde, it is “speakers or language communities, rather than 
languages on an abstract level, [that] are in contact with one another” (Nelde 2010, 373). 
And, in the same way, it is not religions or traditions or ritual systems in the abstract that 
are in contact but practitioners and groups. Donald Winford explains the emphasis on 
the individual person as the agent of change, noting that linguistically “contact-​induced 
changes originate as innovations in individual speakers’ language use” (Winford 2020, 57).

--- PAGE 128 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      103
 
The very notion of agentivity, however, would seem to privilege exactly the idea that it 
is the individual speaker who is the agent of change rather than change being effected 
within and by a social group. Whereas for this approach to contact linguistics the “ulti­
mate locus of contact” is the individual, ritual praxes are inherently social. This indicates 
one adaptation of contact linguistics needed for its application to the study of ritual. 
In one sense, agents of ritual change are necessarily the individual practitioners who 
decided to use a particular ritual, adapt it in particular ways, and create records of that 
new form, with a few suggestive exceptions, but those individuals may be invisible to 
us today, and in fact for our purposes here need not be identified. However, whoever 
those individuals were, it is an open question as to whether they considered themselves 
to be individual authorial persons (a preconception naturalized in modern individual­
istic societies). Instead, they were acting within a network of relations with both other 
individuals and institutions, a network that supported the adaptation of a ritual, a net­
work of shared ideas and preconceptions, and it is this social network that can be treated 
analytically as the location, rather than agent, of change.
For the social perspective on contact linguistics, change is often understood in terms 
of dominance and power relations between different language groups, relations that also 
change (Winford 2020, 61; see, for example, Langer et al., 2006). Winford distinguishes 
“borrowing” and “imposition” and claims that these two are the “major mechanisms of 
contact induced change” (Winford 2020, 66). He defines borrowing as referring to a
psycholinguistic mechanism by which speakers introduce materials from an external 
language into a language in which they are (more) proficient. In doing so, they tend 
to preserve the more stable (i.e., structural) domains of the recipient language. . . .  
It follows that most borrowings tend to be lexical.
(Winford 2020, 62)
In contrast, imposition involves “transfer from a linguistically dominant first language 
into a non-​dominant second language” (Winford 2020, 64). Winford identifies sev­
eral specific types of both borrowing and imposition. In Winford’s usage, borrowing 
places agency with the recipient language group, while imposition places agency with 
the source language group (Winford 2020, 57). The distinction between these groups 
can be employed for greater precision regarding interacting ritual traditions. As noted 
above, however, ritual change is being treated here as a social process, and therefore an 
additional adaptation of Winford’s formulations is that borrowing and imposition are 
best considered descriptive categories. In this way, they can be uncoupled from the psy­
cholinguistic theorizing that Winford wants to extrapolate from them.
Rather than lexical, Winford defines imposition as the use of grammatical structures 
known from one language in a second language. He argues that this can either be from 
a speaker’s first language to their second, while their first language is still dominant, or 
“backward” from a second language onto a speaker’s first language as the second lan­
guage becomes increasingly dominant. The difference reveals that these are descriptive 
of dynamic situations. Imposition from a first language to a second takes place as skill in

--- PAGE 129 ---
104      Richard K. Payne
 
the second language is developing. Alternatively, a first language may be in decline as a 
second language becomes more dominant, in which case backward imposition is more 
likely (Winford 2020, 66).
While linguistic borrowing may be characterized as involving a “psycholinguistic 
mechanism,” in the case of ritual, borrowing is more explicitly intentional. An ex­
ample of such borrowing is the homa for Jesus and the Saints written by Yogi Chen 
(Payne 2015). In this homa, Jesus and the Saints correspond to semantic elements 
inserted into the structure of a tantric Buddhist homa ritual. Rather than a “chief 
deity” (Jpn. honzon, 本尊) from the tantric Buddhist pantheon, this homa uses Jesus 
as the chief deity. The precise definition of borrowing employed by some contact lin­
guistics theorists can be adapted from being the work of an unconscious psycholin­
guistic mechanism into an intentional act by which ritual elements from one tradition 
are borrowed by members of another. This adaptation from contact linguistics is pos­
sible because the distinction between borrowing and imposition is itself an analytic 
artifact.
The context of the instance examined here is one in which there is a changing power 
relation—​newly institutionalizing Shintō groups gaining social standing and exerting 
greater agency. The Goryū Shintō goma can be understood, therefore, as an instance 
of borrowing. Despite the tantric ritual culture being dominant, ritual practices and 
structures were being actively used by the newly developing Shintō ritual culture de­
veloping within self-​identified sectarian institutions, as distinct from “traditional” local 
kami cult practices (Hardacre 2017, 147–​176). As discussed more fully in the next sec­
tion, medieval Shintō sects were creating both new institutional forms and a new ritual 
culture out of the older, local kami cults. The religious culture, however, was pervaded 
by tantric Buddhist praxis—​both practices and teachings.
Regarding a ritual tradition parallel to the Goryū, the Yoshida Shintō tradition, 
Bernhard Scheid has loosely suggested a linguistic metaphor to the effect that the tra­
dition has a Japanese Shintō phonology, a Chinese Daoist morphology, and an Indian 
Buddhist syntax (Scheid 2001, 184). Although Scheid’s metaphor is suggestive, he 
makes no further theoretical use of it. The linguistic analogy that we are employing in 
this chapter is not only more specific but an explanatory metaphor. The formulators 
of new Shintō rituals are like those employing grammatical structures from what is 
for them a second language in a cultural setting in which that language is dominant. 
Metaphorically, it is like they are speaking tantric Buddhist sentences while using Shintō 
lexical items. In such situations, as indicated by Winford, the use of a lexical item from 
one language in the grammar of another entails morphological and grammatical effects 
as well. Although framed in terms of groups, considerations of agency do enter into the 
choice between borrowing and imposition. Because the newly forming Shintō groups 
were actively creating new ritual forms on the basis of tantric Buddhist ones, the rela­
tionship implied by the category of borrowing is employed in this chapter. Thus, rather 
than treating Scheid’s suggestion as a reified framework, we instead intend here to adapt 
the framework of contact linguistics to ritual and employ appropriately adapted lin­
guistic categories such as lexicon, morphology, and syntax.

--- PAGE 130 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      105
 
Historico-​Cultural Context: The 
Influence of Tantric Buddhism on 
Medieval Japanese Culture
The influence of tantric Buddhist praxis (mikkyō 密教) on the Buddhist traditions of 
Japan is well recognized (Bowring 2005, 135–​152; Taira 1996). The influence of tantric 
Buddhism was not limited to doctrines but included a variety of ritual practices as well. 
The two primary forms of tantric Buddhism in Japan are Tendai mikkyō and Shingon 
mikkyō, known, respectively, as taimitsu (台密) and tōmitsu (東密), and the widespread 
presence of tantric Buddhist praxes throughout Japanese Buddhism can be historically 
traced back to one of these two. However, tantric Buddhist thought and ritual practices 
were also appropriated by the self-​identified Shintō traditions which formed in the late 
medieval period.2
A (Very) Brief History of the Homa: Crossing Cultural 
Boundaries
The history of the tantric Buddhist homa reveals that there has been an ongoing process 
of creativity and change. The earliest source for the Shingon goma practiced today is the 
Vedic tradition of India (Strickmann 1996, 354–​355). Vedic rituals were in turn based on 
earlier, Indo-​European practices, the historical link between the contemporary Shingon 
goma and Greek, Roman, and Persian practices as well (Payne 2002).
The use of three fire altars is normal for Vedic ritual (cf. Dange 1987). The domestic 
altar (gārhapatya) is circular, located at the east end of the ritual enclosure, and as­
sociated with the earth. It is there that the offerings are prepared. The southern fire 
(dakṣiṇāgni) is semicircular and associated with the intermediate atmospheric realm. 
And the offering fire (āhavanīya), located to the west, is associated with the celestial 
realms. It is square, and it is into this fire that offerings are made (Staal 1983, I:44, 1989, 
71–​72). Current research provides few details regarding the historical development of 
tantric homa from Vedic rites. It is, however, plausible that in the medieval period, the 
Vedic pattern of three fire altars became optional. The domestic rituals (gṛhya), such as 
the agnihotra (Payne 2004), use a single altar and may have provided the basis for new, 
tantric forms, which came to be practiced in Hindu, Jain, and Buddhist tantric traditions 
(Payne 2016). One of the few factors found in the majority of tantric traditions, or 
lineages of practice—​Hindu, Jain, and Buddhist, nondualistic and dualistic—​the homa 
is also geographically widespread. In Japan, the homa was part of the system of tantric 
praxis that came to pervade Japanese religion in the medieval period.
A predominant portrayal of medieval Japanese religious worldview is that it inte­
grated exoteric and esoteric ideologies (Jpn. kenmitsu shugi). This characterization

--- PAGE 131 ---
106      Richard K. Payne
 
of medieval Japanese religion is the work of Kuroda Toshio (1926–​1993), perhaps the 
most influential historian of Japanese religion in the twentieth century (Dobbins 1996). 
Attention to local praxes from a wider kenmitsu perspective have led to refining this un­
derstanding (Taira 1996, 440–​441).
The history of medieval Shintō is complex, and the identification of specific streams 
(ryū) does not reflect a uniform set of clearly demarcated boundaries. As a general cover 
term, we here follow the terminology employed by Anna Andreeva and refer to “esoteric 
kami worship” (Andreeva 2006, 349). The use of such terminology should help us avoid 
the presumption of two separate monolithic entities—​Buddhism and Shintō—​which 
interacted to create a syncretic or heterodox form. In other words, we are not looking 
at the interaction between two monolithic entities which can be identified in terms of 
a set of essential characteristics. Instead, they constitute sets of praxes—​the dialectic of 
doctrines and practices—​some of which, such as the homa, had been carried from India 
through China to Japan, and which continued to develop in new ways, including being 
reformulated as a ritual for a kami cult. Robert H. Sharf has noted that “for the most 
part, modern studies of medieval Buddhist doctrine [in China] are still framed in terms 
of interrelationships between discrete and autonomous historical entities” (Sharf 2002, 
10). This applies equally well to the way in which medieval Japanese religious praxes 
have been conceived. Consider, for example, Marius Jansen’s description of the status 
of Buddhism at the end of the Edo period: “Buddhism had become almost inextricably 
intertwined with Shinto” (Jansen 2000, 351). This implies that what was pulled apart in 
the Meiji reforms splitting Buddhism and Shintō (shinbutsu bunri, 神仏分離, 1868) was 
actually two different entities that had become entwined over the course of Japanese re­
ligious history. However, a different botanical metaphor, that of hybridization (Kirkland 
2000), provides a more useful way of constructing the discourse.
Modernizing nationalists in the Meiji era (1868–​1912) constructed the idea of Shintō 
as a continuous, primordial, singular, and archetypally Japanese religious tradition. As 
Allan Grapard notes:
[There was no] clear consciousness on the part of the Japanese of the classical period 
that there was a specific entity called Shintō. This does not mean, however, that there 
was nothing at all, for there was the practice of jingi sūhai, “worship of the kami of 
Heaven and Earth,” a matter inextricably linked to politics, court life, and shrine-​
temple multiplexes. (1992, 12)
In the medieval period, esoteric kami worship provided a pragmatic basis for the 
establishment of self-​identified Shintō traditions that did assert separate institutional 
identity. These self-​identified Shintō traditions include the Yuiitsu (or Yoshida), Ōmiwa, 
Sannō, Watarai, and Goryū Shintō lineages (Teeuwen 2000, 112). More generally, Tendai 
mikkyō gave rise to Sannō Shintō, while Shingon mikkyō contributed to the creation 
of “the Shintō of the two realms” (ryōbu shintō, 両部神道), a broad synthesis of eso­
teric Buddhism with the kami cults of the Ise Shrine. The “two realms” refer to the two 
mandalas of the tantric Buddhist tradition of Shingon, that is, the “dharma realm man­
dala” (dharmadhātu maṇḍala, taizōkai mandara 胎藏界曼荼羅) and the “vajra realm

--- PAGE 132 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      107
 
mandala” (vajradhātu maṇḍala, kongōkai mandara 金剛界曼荼羅), which were in turn 
homologized with the two shrines at Ise, the Inner Shrine and the Outer Shrine.
In addition to the ryōbu shintō associated with the Ise Shrine, several other Shintō forms 
were created. These do not adhere to a single, uniform organizing schema but include spe­
cific lineages with centralized authority, that is, the Yoshida (吉田, also known as Yuiitsu, 
唯一), streams associated with a specific temple, such as the Miwaryū (三輪流), and forms 
that appear in several different locations, such as the Goryū (御流) tradition, which claims 
a relation with the Imperial house. Fabio Rambelli has noted that Miwaryū and Goryū were 
the “most influential Shingon traditions within Ryōbu Shintō” (Rambelli 2011, 840). This 
chapter explores one particular ritual, a Goryū Shintō goma, as the site of interactions be­
tween local and translocal traditions, creating a new version of an existing ritual practice.
In medieval Japan, developing ritual practices was an ongoing creative process that 
drew on a shared pool of ritual praxes, some being more inflected as Shinto and others 
being more inflected as Buddhist. Jacqueline Stone has described the type of interac­
tion we are seeing here in terms of “the intersection of Buddhism as a pan-​Asian tradi­
tion with local religious culture” (Stone 2016, 5). Understanding that characterizations 
involving notions of true or authentic Buddhism are rhetorical dead ends, she suggests 
thinking of Buddhism as a “shifting repertoire of resources, one with porous boundaries” 
(Stone 2016, 5). The prominence of Buddhism is, in her view, the result of how Buddhist 
practitioners employ a “conceptual capacity to encompass disparate elements within a 
compelling, if not always internally consistent, ritual program” (Stone 2016, 5). While 
her focus is on Buddhist deathbed rituals, the image of a ritual system as having porous 
boundaries and being adaptable to changing conditions is applicable to the medieval 
Shintō traditions, as well as to tantric traditions more widely.
Relevant to this issue of avoiding outdated conceptions of religions as monolithic 
entities is our knowledge that some of the specific individuals involved in the creation 
of the new Shintō cults were themselves Buddhist priests. For example, along with other 
Tendai priests, Jien, fourth Patriarch of the Tendai sect, played an important part in the 
establishment of the cult of Sannō gongen at Hie Taisha, a shrine on the eastern foot of 
Mt. Hiei (Naumann 1994, 6; also Sugahara 1996). Similarly, the Miwa daimyōjin engi, 
which tells the origin tale of the deity of Mt. Miwa, was compiled by Buddhist priests 
“with a strong interest in esoteric Buddhism and kami worship” (Andreeva 2010, 247). 
Although we do know some of the individuals involved, this does not change the theo­
retical point made earlier that it is social groups that are the location of change—​making 
the distinction between agents and locations.
The Goryū Shintō Goma and the Fudō 
Myōō Soku Sai Goma
The following analysis draws on a published version of a Goryū Shintō Goma manual 
(Inaya 1993, 275–​296). There are many related manuals, including those in the rare book

--- PAGE 133 ---
108      Richard K. Payne
 
collection of the Tenri Central Library, one of which is also referenced at a key point in 
the following discussion. The Shingon ritual manual for the Fudō Myōō Soku Sai Goma 
is the one currently in use for training Shingon priests (Payne 1991).
Sources
The Tenri collection is a very extensive archive of medieval Shintō materials that evi­
dence the nature of the ritual practices in the interface of esoteric Buddhism and the 
newly established or radically revised Shintō institutions. This particular manual is part 
of a complete manuscript that includes three ritual manuals, a grouping that seems to 
have been shared among the Shintō schools. The full manuscript is entitled “Sōgen san 
dan shidai” (宗源三段次第, which can be glossed as “ritual manuals of the primordial 
three stages”).3 In what corresponds to a table of contents, the goma manual is named 
“Goryū Shintō ryōbu shūgō goma shidai” (御流神道兩部習合護摩次第, “goma 
manual of the imperial line of Shintō that integrates both parts”). The phrase “integrates 
both parts” refers to what we can call the interpenetration of the two mandalas of the 
Shingon tradition, the Vajra Realm (vajradhātu) and Womb Realm (garbhadhātu), 
which is the union of wisdom and compassion and at the same time a reflection of the 
honji suijaku theory regarding the relation of the kami and the buddhas (Hardacre 2017, 
158). The text itself is more simply referred to as “Shintō goma shidai” (神道護摩次第). 
There is no colophon, but the condition of the manual and its style of orthography sug­
gest that it is relatively late in the medieval or into the premodern period. For compar­
ative purposes, we also examine another goma manual from the collection of “Shingon 
Shintō” materials published by Inaya Yūsen (1993). This collection includes a goma ritual 
manual, simply identified as “Goryū Shintō goma” (御流神道護摩).
For the scope and intent of this chapter, however, one term of the comparison will 
be the Inaya manual for the Goryū Shintō stream, while the other is the Shingon Fudō 
Myōo Soku Sai goma (Payne 1991). Focusing on one manual from each tradition means 
that each is a representative stand-​in for the practices of the two traditions more gener­
ally. As a more focused study, this examination is able to go more deeply into the analysis 
of similarities and differences, and the import of those, than more general, impression­
istic studies can.
The first step in the following analysis details some of the semantic similarities and 
differences between the two goma. This is not meant to be comprehensive, but, based 
on previous research, is instead the author’s own evaluation as to which items are note­
worthy. Following that is an examination of the organizing structure, or ritual syntax, of 
the two gomas.
Ritual Semantics
The two gomas share a great deal of semantic content. Both the Goryū Shintō goma and 
the Shingon Fudō Myōō goma comprise five sets of offerings. In the course of the larger

--- PAGE 134 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      109
 
ritual, these offerings are made to different deities. If we compare the first of these from 
the Goryū Shintō goma with the first from the Shingon Fudō Myōō Soku Sai goma, sev­
eral similarities can be identified.
Physical Offerings
The same material offerings are made in both rituals, including oil, white rice, a mixture 
of five cereal grains, flowers, and incense. Both manuals refer to the oil as soyu—​which 
is the clarified butter (ghee) used in Vedic sacrifices—​another indication of the histor­
ical continuity from India to Japan. Although no substitute is indicated in the Goryū 
Shintō goma manual, sesame oil (goma abura 胡麻油) substitutes for clarified butter in 
the Shingon ritual.4 White rice is used in both rituals to represent the offering of food 
and drink.
Mudrā and Mantra
As is found throughout the tantric tradition, the Goryū Shintō goma directs the practi­
tioner to perform several ritual hand gestures (mudrā). Some of these have names dif­
ferent from those used in the Shingon goma. However, the Goryū Shintō goma does 
include the Agni mudrā, identified by that name as in the Shingon ritual and described 
in almost exactly the same fashion (for illustrations of the mudrā used in the Yoshida 
Shintō tradition, see Scheid 2001, 177). Although ritual performance of the Goryū 
Shintō Goma (Inaya) employs mudrā, the text includes no mantra. There is also no ref­
erence to visualizing Siddham seed (bīja) mantra, Siddham being the Sanskrit script 
widely employed in East Asian Buddhism for ritual purposes (see, for example, Hidas 
2014; and Robson 2008). Siddham continues to be used for ritual purposes throughout 
Japanese Buddhism. Visualizing seed syllables in the Siddham script is at the core of 
Shingon ritual performance, as seed syllables are identified with, and therefore make 
present, various deities and powers (Payne 2018, 98). For example, such bīja mantra 
visualization is done in the Shingon goma when the practitioner fans the flames of the 
goma fire: “Imagine the syllable haṃ on the surface of the fan; it changes, becoming a 
wind cakra” (Payne 1991, 113, modified). (See Williams, this volume, for Hindu uses of 
phoneme visualization.)
Visualization
Not only are Siddham bīja mantra not visualized in the Goryū Shintō goma, but there 
is no reference to visualization of any kind. Each pūjā offering in the Shingon goma is 
accompanied by a mantra, mudrā, and visualization (which constitute actions of body, 
speech, and mind). The offering of food and drink is an example:
Now taking up the small ladle used for offering food and grain, the practitioner 
scoops up an offering of rice from the closer bowl and pours it into the flames, reciting 
the mantra ON AGYANAU EI SENJIKYA SOWAKA once. He repeats this action 
three times. With the mudrā of Amida’s meditation, he is to visualize this offering as 
going into the mouth of Agni Deva, directly to the upper surface of the lotus in Agni 
Deva’s heart. It there transforms into the most pure and marvelous pūjā offerings. 
These then permeate the whole of his body, and emerge from the hair follicles on the

--- PAGE 135 ---
110      Richard K. Payne
 
surface of his skin as endless clouds and oceans of pūjā offerings which are offered to 
all Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, Pratyekabuddhas, Śrāvakas and worldly deities. (Payne 
1991, 299, corrected)
Ritual Identification
Except in some of its earliest stages, ritual identification with the deity, also known 
as “deity yoga,” characterizes Buddhist tantra (Tsongkhapa 2017). Jeffrey Hopkins 
explained the nature of identification in tantric practice, saying that “one learns in 
meditative experience to use the mind ‘realizing’ emptiness and the emptiness—​with 
which it is fused—​as a basis of imaginative appearance, in imitation of a Buddha’s 
ability to do this in fact” (Hopkins 2008, 61). In the Shingon goma, this is a threefold 
identification in which the mouth of the practitioner, the deity, and the altar-​hearth 
are visualized as identical with each other, forming a unitary whole. The flames of 
the goma fire, the digestive “fires” of the practitioner, and the wisdom fire of the deity 
are visualized as identical and are known as the Visualization of Three United (Payne 
1991, 293–​294). This is central to Shingon goma, both in the literal sense that it takes 
place in the third of the five offerings and in the sense that the practitioner becoming 
a buddha is central to the idea of awakening. None of this, however, is found in the 
Goryū Shintō goma.
Kami and Buddhas
It is unsurprising that there is no mention of any buddha or bodhisattva in the entire 
course of the Goryū Shintō goma, references to kami taking their place. This is found, 
for example, in the following comparison of the declarations made when offering 
food and drink. In contrast to the absence of mantras from the Goryū Shintō goma, 
declarations of intent are quite similar to those in the Shingon goma. Continuing with 
the offering of food and drink, the declarations of the two rituals are given here in 
parallel:
Goryū Shintō Goma (Inaya)
Fudō Myōō Soku Sai Goma
By now presenting
By now presenting
this wonderful offering
this wonderful offering
of food and drink
of food and drink
merely desiring the respected kami
merely desiring that Agni
accept this goma, and
accept this goma, and
divinely grant comfort.
perfect all siddhis.
There are two differences between the two declarations of intent: the Goryū Shintō goma 
asks for comfort rather than the perfection of siddhis, and it refers to “respected kami” 
rather than to Agni—​who is the deity evoked in the first stage of the Shingon goma from 
which this version is taken. Here we see what might be described as a “lexical” change—​
from Buddhist deities to kami—​leading to a “cascade” of further semantic changes at 
specific points in the ritual performance.

--- PAGE 136 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      111
 
An interpretative issue worth raising in more detail relates to the references to 
“the Fire God” (Katen 火天) made in both manuals. From the academic perspective, 
such as this chapter, the “Fire God” is the Japanese reflex of the Vedic Agni. However, 
practitioners do not need to understand this equivalence to perform the rituals. For the 
most part, they would no doubt perform these simply as rituals of their own tradition. In 
the present day, however, in addition to ritual training, most Shingon priests do receive 
formal academic education (e.g., at Kōyasan University). My interactions with other 
monks at the temple where I trained in the early 1980s, led me to understand that their 
education included the history of the Shingon tradition and its Indic origins—​so the re­
lation between the “Fire God” they encountered in performing the goma and the Vedic 
Agni would have been evident to them.
Ritual Implements
Material culture, in this case specifically the ritual implements employed, provides an­
other means by which continuities and changes can be identified. Some implements 
are found in both the Goryū Shintō goma and the Shingon tradition’s gomas. The texts 
both prescribe using a pair of ladles, large and small, to make offerings into the fire 
and a wand used to purify the altar-​hearth and offerings with water. In Shingon, the 
ritual implements include beads (nenju) and vajra (ritual implement representing a 
thunderbolt) in three different forms—​one, three, and five pronged—​and a vajra bell. 
The Goryū Shintō manual, however, makes no mention of any implements with vajra 
symbolism.5 One might be tempted to suppose that such symbolism was too strongly 
reminiscent of Buddhist esoteric practice to be employed in a Shintō context. However, 
within the broader range of esoteric kami worship traditions, such vajra implements 
are known. For example, illustrations related to the tradition of Yoshida Shintō 
(Grapard 1992, 49, 51), show vajra implements. Given the variety of esoteric kami wor­
ship lineages, and perhaps even variation from local practices at one shrine to another, 
the specifics of ritual implements and altar decorations may be unique to individual 
settings. Examining such details of material culture may provide ways of tracing his­
torical origins, connections, and interactions that are not otherwise clear from purely 
textual sources. The discussion of the arrangement of kindling that follows in the 
next section, “Scheduling,” is an instance of using material culture to trace historical 
connections.
Scheduling
Shingon practitioners will attend to a calendric pattern based on the Yijing and yin/​
yang principles of systematic change from light, warm, and dry to dark, cool, and 
moist. Each year on Mt. Kōya, an almanac based on these principles is published, and 
many activities are scheduled according to this almanac. This includes such events 
as when to begin a training sequence, as was the case for my own training. Similarly, 
the Goryū Shintō goma manual from the Tenri collection expressly distinguishes be­
tween actions taken on yin days and those taken on yang days. However, Shingon 
ritual manuals do not employ this specific distinction between yin and yang days,

--- PAGE 137 ---
112      Richard K. Payne
 
although practitioners may make choices about scheduling ritual activities based on 
the almanac.
The Kindling
One of the questions regarding the historical origins of the esoteric Shintō ritual 
practices that a detailed study of ritual manuals can contribute toward answering is 
whether the lineage of practice was more influenced by Shingon or Tendai. Both of these 
Buddhist traditions instantiated tantric practices in Japan and could have been influ­
ential in the development of the Goryū Shintō goma. While Shingon is entirely tantric 
(or esoteric, that is, mikkyō, 密教) in nature, Tendai maintains a twofold system of es­
oteric, pairing tantric practice with exoteric practice focused on the Lotus Sutra. Both 
Buddhist traditions have goma ceremonies, and to that extent, either could have been 
the progenitor of the Goryū Shintō goma.
A key detail is the arrangement of the sticks of kindling on the hearth. Gomas 
performed in the Tendai tradition generally use a triangular arrangement of the sticks 
of kindling in the ritual sequence, while Shingon always uses rectilinear arrangements. 
The Goryū Shintō goma manual illustrations show rectilinear arrangements of kindling 
(Inaya 1993, 278, 281, 284, 287, 290).6 These suggest that the primary model for the Goryū 
Shintō goma was the Shingon goma, rather than a Tendai one, a ritual detail answering an 
historical question.
The semantic differences examined here include the physical offerings, mudrā and 
mantra, visualization, ritual identification, kami and buddhas, ritual implements, 
scheduling, and kindling. Although speculative, we suggest that relatively easily made 
changes were used to mark the Goryū Shintō goma as “not” the Shingon goma. Other 
aspects, such as the structure of the rituals, seem to have been more resistant to change. 
We turn now to the issues related to ritual structure, that is, syntax.
Ritual Syntax: Metaphor and Structure
Identifying a basic metaphor employed as an organizing principle of ritual activity is 
one approach to the study of ritual. Identifying a structuring metaphor is of value be­
cause of the metaphoric entailments that follow from its use.
Ritual Metaphor as Basic Organizing Principle
In East Asia, a number of different ritual metaphors were available. One example is 
petitioning the celestial bureaucracy, as found, for example, in Daoist rituals (Lagerwey 
1987, 107).7 Both the Goryū and Shingon gomas share the ritual metaphor of feasting an 
honored guest. This metaphor is Vedic in origin, tracing forward into medieval tantric 
forms, including Buddhist ones, which were then in turn carried into East Asia. The 
Goryū Shintō goma displays the same structuring metaphor of feasting an honored 
guest as does the Shingon goma.

--- PAGE 138 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      113
 
Structure: Five Offerings to Five Deities
Like many contemporary tantric Buddhist gomas in the Shingon tradition, the Goryū 
Shintō goma manual published by Inaya comprises five sets of offerings. Each set is it­
self a (relatively) self-​contained ritual element in which a deity is invited into the altar-​
hearth, offerings are made to the deity, and then the deity departs. Also, like the Shingon 
goma, these sets of offerings are performed within framing actions at the beginning and 
end of the full ritual performance.
The first of the five deities in the Goryu Shintō goma examined is the Fire Deity (Ka 
Ten, 火天) (See Appendix). In the Shingon tradition this is the Vedic god Agni, who is 
almost always the first deity evoked in Shingon gomas. It is unclear from the manual, 
however, whether the association to an imported Indic deity is known or relevant for the 
Goryū ritual. The second deity is Fire Virtue Kami (Ka Toku Shin, 火徳神), the third is 
Wood Virtue Kami (Moku Toku Shin, 木徳神), the fourth is Metal Virtue Kami (Kin 
Toku Shin, 金徳神), and the fifth is Earth Virtue Kami (Do Toku Shin, 土徳神). These 
latter are four of the five phases of Chinese thought, leaving out water—​perhaps under­
standable in a fire ritual. This contrasts with the Indic five elements (earth, water, air, fire, 
space), which is employed in Buddhist contexts, such as the symbolism of five-​cakra 
stupas (Huntington Archive 2022).
In the case of the Shingon goma, the deities evoked are said to come from and return 
to their places in the mandala, which is identical with the actual nature of the cosmos 
itself. Although the Goryū Shintō goma makes no explicit mention of the mandala, the 
invitation and release both refer to the deities’ “original seats,” which in the Shingon 
goma is a reference to their location in the mandala.
Syntactic Diagrams
While ritual metaphors provide one way of examining the organization of rituals, syn­
tactic analysis is a more formalistic consideration of their structure. The idea of a formal 
syntactic analysis of ritual actions derives from the work of Frits Staal. Inverted tree 
diagrams, borrowed from linguistics, provide a visual representation of the organiza­
tion of rituals and can be an effective means of comparing two rituals. While we cannot 
here give complete diagrams of both the Goryū and Shingon gomas for comparison, 
figure 5.1 reveals the relation between the framing activities and the five sets of offerings 
for each of the two goma rituals; it shows the similarity in the structure of the two. In the 
“comparison of overall structures” (fig. 5.1), “offerings” is treated as a “node” for the five 
sets of offerings in each of the two gomas. This is because other gomas can have more or 
fewer sets of offerings placed within the framing actions.
At a more granular level, aligning the actions of the two gomas in the “analysis of first 
offering” (fig. 5.2) provides a preliminary analysis of the structure of the offerings of the 
Goryū Shintō and Shingon gomas.
The lines connecting actions from each list show where similar ritual actions exist. 
Because the level of detail recorded in different ritual manuals varies, in some cases one 
or two actions identified in one manual are identified as several in the other. For example,

--- PAGE 139 ---
114      Richard K. Payne
 
the Goryū Shintō goma simply lists “invitation” as a single action. This corresponds to 
three actions in the Shingon goma: requesting the presence of Agni, inviting the Four 
Embracing Wisdom Bodhisattvas, and again requesting the presence of Agni.
The syntax of the two first offerings reveals two interesting differences. The first is that 
the practical matter of arranging items on the altar comes before the invitation of the 
deities in the Goryū Shintō goma, while in the Shingon goma it comes after. Second, in 
the Shingon goma the kindling is laid and the fire lit before the deities are evoked; in the 
Goryū Shintō goma, the order of these is reversed. These may be incidental differences 
resulting from historical contingences, or there may be some other significance. Further 
research might be able to determine which is the case.
The analysis of ritual change, in this case from one tradition to another, can focus on 
a variety of different aspects. Doctrinal aspects are often at the forefront of such studies, 
a prominence reflecting the presumption that doctrine determines practice. More con­
cretely, however, analysis can focus on specific ritual elements, which according to the 
analogy with a linguistic approach, can be referred to as semantic changes. Semantic 
changes are often accompanied by morphosyntactic changes as well, seemingly driven 
Shingon Fudo Myoo Goma
R
Initial 
stage
Concluding 
stage
Agni 
(Fire God)
Lord of the 
Assembly,
Bodhisattva
Chief Deity: 
Fudo Myoo
Various Deities
Worldly Deities
Offerings
Goryu Shinto Goma
R
Initial
stage
Fire God
Fire Virtue 
Kami
Wood Virtue 
Kami
Metal Virtue 
Kami
Earth Virtue 
Kami
Concluding 
stage
Offerings
Comparison of Overall Structures
Prajña
Figure 5.1.  Comparison of Overall Structures.

--- PAGE 140 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      115
 
by differing associations with the ritual elements. The range of issues examined by con­
tact linguistics is broader than the aspects considered here, and so it can provide ana­
lytic tools for examining the variety of dimensions in which rituals change when being 
adopted and adapted from one tradition to another.
move wood
place sapwood
empower Three Classes
mudra  of the 3 Heavens
and Dual Lands
eight petalled mudra
Three Strong Powers
Ten Treasures mudra
invitation
wash the mouth
recitation
pile kindling
light kindling
fan the ﬂames
sprinkle water
oil
polished rice
ﬁve cereal grains
Fire God mudra
red spear mudra
three sticks of sapwood
Ten Treasures mudra
oil
Fire God mudra
release
empowerment of the
peaceful soul
Shingon goma
Goryu Shinto goma
empowerment of Mahavairocana
empowerment of the Chief Deity
visualization of the Three United
Ten Directions
mudra of the Fire God
shorter mantra of the Fire God
rearrange offerings to left
take up three pronged vajra
rearrange offerings to right
move wood
arrange kindling
light kindling
fan the ﬂames
purify the ﬁre
empower the ﬁre
request the deity: Agni
Four Embracing Wisdom 
Bodhisattvas
request the deity: Agni
wash the mouth
zuko incense
wood
food offerings
ﬁve cereal grains
 
ball incense
sanko incense
universal offering
Three Powers
aspiration
washing the mouth
release
Analysis of First Offering
ﬁve pronged  vajra & vajra bell
Clariﬁed butter/ oil
cut ﬂowers
clariﬁed butter / oil
ﬂower branch
ﬂower branch
ﬂower branch
inner ﬁst
Figure 5.2.  Analysis of First Offering.

--- PAGE 141 ---
116      Richard K. Payne
 
Conclusion
There is virtually no trace of esoteric Buddhist ritual practice to be found at Shintō 
shrines in the present day. This results from the extent to which the separation of Shintō 
from Buddhism during the Meiji period was successful. In terms of contact linguis­
tics, this corresponds to a situation in which social dominance of one linguistic group 
over another was suddenly reversed. In the event of this kind of reversal, intentionally 
expunging the linguistic traces of the once dominant group is unexceptional. By analogy 
here, the sudden reversal created by the Meiji reformation raising Shintō to the status of 
a state religion led to intentional expunging of not only rituals such as the goma but also 
of the symbolic universe of Buddhism from now exclusively Shintō institutions. If we go 
back to the medieval period, that is, prior to the rise of neo-​Shintō rhetoric (e.g., that of 
Motoori Norinaga), and examine the origins of the self-​identified Shintō traditions, we 
find that esoteric Buddhist practice was the very basis upon which Shintō practices were 
created.
Esoteric Buddhism transformed Japan’s religious culture, and also influenced 
Japanese culture more generally. I have long held that the extent and importance of the 
role of esoteric Buddhism in the formation of Japanese religious culture has gone un­
noticed for two reasons. First, it was clearly in the sectarian interest of other traditions 
to obscure the role of Shingon in forming their doctrine and practice. The drive for sec­
tarian autonomy was greatly stimulated by the Tokugawa attempts at systematizing and 
regularizing the sectarian nature of Japanese Buddhism. Second, Western researchers 
still tend to be less familiar with Shingon, or with esoteric Buddhism more generally, 
than with other more widely studied East Asian Buddhist traditions, such as Zen and 
Pure Land. To someone unfamiliar with esoteric Buddhism, any influence or appropria­
tion would be largely invisible.
In looking at ritual, the distinction between content (lexicon, semantics) and process 
(syntax) is of heuristic value. While the Goryū Shintō goma may appear very different 
from the Shingon goma when one focuses on some aspects of the content—​for example, 
the deities evoked—​other aspects of the content together with the structure of the ritual 
demonstrate how close the two are to one another. At least three of the Ryōbu Shintō 
lineages—​Yoshida, Omiwa, and Goryū—​created Shintō gomas. An examination of the 
Goryū Shintō goma reveals how extensively this lineage borrowed from Shingon for its 
ritual practice.
The use of the five phases in contrast to the five elements, together with the absence of 
mantra, of visualization of any kind, of ritual identification, and the other distinguishing 
differences between the two gomas, suggests the value that these semantic elements had 
as markers of identity. A plausible explanation is that they were changed as a means of 
transforming the appearance of the ritual performance from a Buddhist one to a Shintō 
one. As a means of semiotically marking the Shintō goma as distinct from a Buddhist 
one, such changes are relatively simple substitutions of elements. Structural changes, 
whether the basic metaphor or the syntax tend to be slower to change.

--- PAGE 142 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      117
 
A thread that runs throughout this volume, whether explicit or implicit, is the 
question of how we conceptualize tantra. The issue at the base of this is also largely 
the same for Shintō. Mark Teeuwen has noted that “Shinto is not something that has 
‘existed’ in Japanese society in some concrete and definable form during different his­
torical periods; rather, it appears as a conceptualization, an abstraction that has had 
to be produced actively every time it has been used” (Teeuwen 2002, 233). In other 
words, our own scholarly usages in the present are part of a very long line of usages, 
each implicating its predecessors, rather than being marked as distinct from historical 
usages by “insiders.”
Appendix
 First Offering Section of the Goryu Shintō Goma
(Inaya 1993, 277–​280. Numbers refer to line numbers ascribed by the translator to the text. 
The portion of the goma shidai that precedes this [i.e., lines 1–​33] form an introduction to 
the sequence of five sets of offerings. See discussion of “framing actions” in body of this 
chapter.)
	
34.	 Entering the Goma
	
35.	 First, take the wand (sanjo) from the corner of the kami altar, and place it to the left of 
the practitioner.
	
36.	 Next, where the wand had been, set fifteen sticks of sapwood.
	
37.	 Empower the Three Classes
	
38.	 Next, mudrā of the Three Heavens and Dual Lands
	
39.	 Eight-​petaled mudrā: two big fingers (i.e., thumbs) and two little fingers aligned with 
one another; right hand above, left below.8 This is also called the Eight Officials mudra.
	
40.	 Recite the three strong powers.
	
41.	 “Through the kami power of my practice,
	
	 “the power of shintō empowerment,
	
	 “the power of divine transformation and divine movement,
	
	 “expansively offering for nurturance and life.”
	
42.	 Next, Ten Treasures mudrā.
	
43.	 Form the inner (fist), beckon three times with the two big fingers.
	
44.	 “Good energy water virtue kami (genki mizu toku shin)
	
	 “Narrow country hammer deity (koku kyō tsuchi son)
	
	 “Net appearance woman deity (mō shō jo son)
	
	 “Triple heaven descending spirit deity (ten san kō tama son)
	
	 “Descend before (me) to this seat.”
	
45.	 Next, wash the mouth (of the altar-​hearth).

--- PAGE 143 ---
118      Richard K. Payne
 
	
46.	 “Sincerely presenting
	
	 “perfumed water for washing the mouth
	
	 “merely desiring the respected kami
	
	 “accept these burnt (offerings), and
	
	 “divinely grant comfort.”
	
47.	 Next, taking up the chopsticks, grasp the kindling (lit. altar wood), piling it in the 
hearth.
	
48.	 (illustration of order and arrangement of six pieces of kindling)
	
49.	 Next, with the chopsticks, grasp the pine (stick), put it into the fire of the light (offering), 
then place it into the kindling.
	
50.	 Next, fan the fire; take hold of the fan.
	
51.	 “Shinatobe no Mikoto and Shinatsuhiko no Mikoto”9
	
52.	 Next, sprinkle water.
	
53.	 “Heaven is originally pure,
	
	 “Earth is originally at peace,
	
	 “The Fire God is perfectly pleased,
	
	 “The three sublime altars are located,
	
	 “Within (a space) made pure.”
	
54.	 Next, clarified butter (ghee).
	
55.	 Large ladle three times, small ladle three times.
	
56.	 Next, throw a flower branch onto the altar.
	
57.	 “Merely desiring the respected kami
	
	 “descend to this seat in front (of me)
	
	 “compassionately accept
	
	 “the wonderful offering of this homa, and
	
	 “divinely grant comfort.”
	
58.	 Next, polished rice: small ladle three times.
	
59.	 “By now presenting
	
	 “this wonderful offering of food and drink
	
	 “merely desiring that the respected kami
	
	 “accept this goma, and
	
	 “divinely grant comfort.”
	
60.	 Next, five cereal grains: small ladle three times.
	
61.	 “By now presenting
	
	 “this wonderful offering of five cereal grains
	
	 “I only ask that the respected kami
	
	 “accept this goma offering, and
	
	 “divinely grant (us) well-​being.”
	
62.	 Next, Fire God mudrā. [Ka ten, i.e., the Vedic deity Agni]

--- PAGE 144 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      119
 
	
63.	 Grasp the right arm with the left hand, bend the big finger down into the middle of the 
palm, the remaining fingers straight up.
	
64.	 “Kagutsuchi no Mikoto”10
	
65.	 Next, throw a flower branch into the middle of the hearth.
	
66.	 “Merely desiring the respected kami
	
	 “descend to this seat in front (of me)
	
	 “compassionately accept
	
	 “this wonderful goma offering, and
	
	 “grant (us) well-​being.”
	
67.	 Next, red spear mudrā.
	
68.	 Mysterious family of the Tathāgata’s Wisdom Fist mudrā, (according to) oral tradition
	
69.	 “Heaven and earth, yin and yang,
	
	 “inner heaven, outer heaven
	
	 “cloud, ocean, country, land,
	
	 “various great households,
	
	 “everything all around.”
	
70.	 Next, three sticks of sapwood.
	
71.	 “By now presenting
	
	 “this wonderful offering of sapwood,
	
	 “I only ask that the respected kami
	
	 “accept this goma offering, and
	
	 “grant (us) well-​being.”
	
72.	 Next, Ten Treasures mudrā.
	
73.	 Form the inner (fist), beckon three times with the big finger.
	
74.	 “May the eight million deities descend to this seat in front (of me).”
	
75.	 Next: cut flowers, rice grains, incense chips, sesame seeds, medicinal mulberry, and 
vine seeds.11
	
76.	 All of the above is placed in the brazier. The formula to be recited is the same as for 
white rice and the five cereals.
	
77.	 Next, clarified butter.
	
78.	 Big ladle three times, small ladle three times.
	
79.	 Next, Fire God mudrā.
	
80.	 “Kagutsuchi no Mikoto”
	
81.	 Next, flower branch.
	
82.	 Next, leavetaking.
	
83.	 “Merely desiring that the honored deities
	
	 “return to their original seats.”
	
84.	 Next, empowerment of the peaceful soul.
	
	 [end of the first section]

--- PAGE 145 ---
120      Richard K. Payne
 
Acknowledgments
An earlier version of this chapter was presented in the “Matrices and Weavings: Expressions 
of Shingon Buddhism in Japanese Culture and Society,” Bulletin of the Research Institute of 
Esoteric Buddhist Culture (Mikkyō Bunka Kenkyūsho Kiyō), special issue II, October 2003.
My thanks to Lucia Dolce and Anna Andreeva for their guidance on understanding the 
streams of medieval Shintō.
And special thanks to Fabio Rambelli for his assistance with difficult points of the translation.
Notes
	 1.	 This was pointed out in relation to mantra by Frits Staal (1989, 254).
	 2.	 We specify “self-​identified” because this period marks a transformation from local 
kami cults into systematic traditions located at temples, and systems of temples (see 
Teeuwen 2002).
	 3.	 Tenri City, Japan; accession number 653556, number 42 ko (古), 58.
	 4.	 Although butter is available in Japan today, historically there was no dairy industry that 
would have provided butter for use in rituals. The substitution of sesame oil for ghee seems 
to have endured into the modern era, rather than having been displaced for clarified 
butter, which might be considered more “authentic.”
	 5.	 Unfortunately, the text at hand does not have any illustration of the altar-​hearth and 
implements that would allow for additional evaluation. Perhaps future research will locate 
such an illustration.
	 6.	 In the Tenri goma manual, there are ten diagrams of the arrangement of the sticks of kin­
dling, and they are all rectilinear (ms. ff. 7, 16, 23, 29, 34, 45, 51, 56, 59, 62).
	 7.	 During the discussion following the presentation of this paper at the conference in 
Honolulu, Poul Andersen pointed out “that in Taoist ritual, where the host-​guest meta­
phor definitely is in evidence, the more important metaphor seems to be that of having an 
audience with the supreme deities. I asked everyone present whether the latter also played 
a role in Japanese forms of ritual and was very interested to learn that this did not seem to 
be the case. However, I may conceivably have added that the existence of the (very general) 
host-​guest metaphor in two distant ritual traditions hardly is enough to link them his­
torically” (Poul Andersen, personal communication, January 14, 2003). Andersen’s latter 
point is relevant in that structural similarities or ritual metaphors alone cannot be taken as 
establishing historical relationships, similarity not establishing causality.
	 8.	 See illustration on Inaya 1993, 549.
	 9.	 This is the kami of the wind, who has two names.
	10.	 Name of the fire kami.
	11.	 Uncertain: 蔓種 the first kanji is read “tsuru” and refers to vines.
References
Andreeva, Anna. 2006. “Saidaiji Monks and Esoteric Kami Worship at Ise and Miwa.” Japanese 
Journal of Religious Studies 33, no. 2: 349–​377.

--- PAGE 146 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      121
 
Andreeva, Anna. 2010. “The Karmic Origins of the Great Bright Miwa Deity: A Transformation 
of the Sacred Mountain in Premodern Japan.” Monumenta Nipponica 65, no. 2: 245–​296.
Bowring, Richard. 2005. The Religious Traditions of Japan: 500–​1600. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Dange, Sadashiv Ambadas. 1987. “The Double Altar (Evolution).” Annals of the Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute. 68, no. 1–​4: 349–​358.
Dobbins, James C. 1996. “Editor’s Introduction: Kuroda Toshio and His Scholarship.” Japanese 
Journal of Religious Studies 23, no. 3–​4: 217–​232.
Dolce, Lucia. 2006–​2007. “Duality and the ‘Kami’: The Ritual Iconography and Visual 
Constructions of Medieval Shintō.” Cahiers d’Extrême-​Asie 16: 119–​150.
Gardiner, David L. 2018. “Tantric Buddhism in Japan: Shingon, Tendai and the Esotericization 
of Japanese Buddhisms.” In The Oxford Encyclopedia of Religion, edited by Richard K. Payne 
and Georgios Halkias. [Online]. New York: Oxford University Press. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​
acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.013.619
Gardiner, David L. 2019. “Tantric Buddhism in Japan: Kūkai and Saichō.” In The Oxford 
Encyclopedia of Religion. Richard K. Payne and Georgios Halkias. [Online]. New York: 
Oxford University Press. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.013.621
Grapard, Allan. 1992. The Protocol of the Gods: A Study of the Kasuga Cult in Japanese History. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Hardacre, Helen. 2017. Shinto: A History. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hidas, Gergely. 2014. “Two dhāraṇī Prints in the Stein Collection at the British Museum.” 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 77, no. 1: 105–​117.
Hopkins, Jeffrey. 2008. Tantric Techniques. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Huntington Archive. 2022. “The Stupa as Elements.” The Huntington Archive of Buddhist and 
Asian Art. https://​huntin​gton​arch​ive.org/​; https://​huntin​gton​arch​ive.org/​resour​ces/​ima​
ges/​budd​hist​Icon​ogra​phy/​yogi​cTra​nsfo​rmat​ion/​05.png
Inaya Yūsen, ed. 1993. Shingon Shintō Shusei. Osaka, Japan: Seizansha.
Jansen, Marius B. 2000. The Making of Modern Japan. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of 
Harvard University Press.
Joshi, Khyati Y. 2006. New Roots in America’s Sacred Ground. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press.
Kirkland, Russell. 2000. “Pure Land’s Multilineal Ancestry: A New Metaphor for 
Understanding the Evolution of ‘Living Religions’.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of 
Buddhist Studies Third Series, no. 2: 177–​189.
Kreinath, Jens. 2020. “Interrituality.” In The SAGE Encyclopedia of the Sociology of Religion, ed­
ited by Adam Possamai and Anthony J. Blasi, 398–​399. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Lagerwey, John. 1987. Taoist Ritual in Chinese Society and History. New York: Macmillan.
Langer, Robert, Dorothea Lüddeckens, Kerstin Radde, and Jan Snoek. 2006. “Transfer of 
Ritual.” Journal of Ritual Studies 20, no. 1: 1–​10.
Magliocco, Sabina. 2014. “Introduction: Ritual Creativity, Emotions and the Body.” Journal of 
Ritual Studies 28, no. 2: 1–​8.
Myers-​Scotton, Carol. 2002. Contact Linguistics: Bilingual Encounters and Grammatical 
Outcomes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Naumann, Nellie. 1994. Die einheimische Religion Japans: Synkretistische Lehren und religiöse 
Entwiklungen von der Kamakura–​ bis zum Beginn der Edo-​Zeit. Vol. 2. Handbuch der 
Orientalistik. Leiden, The Netherlands: E. J. Brill.

--- PAGE 147 ---
122      Richard K. Payne
 
Nelde, Peter Hans. 2010. “Language Contact.” In The Oxford Handbook of Applied Linguistics, 
2nd ed., edited by Robert B. Kaplan, 373–​381. Oxford : Oxford University Press. https://​doi.
org/​10.1093/​oxfor​dhb/​978019​5384​253.013.0025
Payne, Richard K. 1991. The Tantric Ritual of Japan: Feeding the Gods, The Shingon Fire Ritual. 
Śata–​Piṭaka Series, Vol. 365. Delhi, India: Aditya Prakashan.
Payne, Richard K. 2002. “Tongues of Flame: Homologies in the Tantric Homa.” In The Roots 
of Tantra, edited by Katherine Anne Harper and Robert L. Brown, 193–​210. Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Payne, Richard K. 2004. “Ritual Syntax and Cognitive Theory,” Pacific World: Journal of the 
Institute of Buddhist Studies Third Series, no. 6 (2004): 195–​227.
Payne, Richard K. 2008. “Traditionalist Representations of Buddhism.” Pacific World: Journal 
of the Institute of Buddhist Studies Third Series, no. 10: 177–​223.
Payne, Richard K. 2009. “How not to Talk about Pure Land Buddhism: A Critique of Huston 
Smith’s (Mis)Representations.” In Path of No Path: Contemporary Studies in Pure Land 
Buddhism Honoring Roger Corless, edited by Richard K. Payne, 147–​172. Berkeley: Institute 
of Buddhist Studies and BDK/​America.
Payne, Richard K. 2012/​2013. “Why ‘Buddhist Theology’ Is Not a Good Idea.” The Pure Land: 
Journal of the International Association of Shin Buddhist Studies New Series, no. 27: 37–​71.
Payne, Richard K. 2015. “Integrating Christ and the Saints into Buddhist Ritual: The Christian 
Homa of Yogi Chen.” Buddhist Christian Studies 35: 37–​48.
Payne, Richard K. 2016. “Homa: Tantric Fire Ritual.” In The Oxford Encyclopedia of Religion, 
edited by Richard K. Payne and Georgios Halkias. [Online]. New York: Oxford University 
Press. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.013.82
Payne, Richard K. 2018. Language in the Buddhist Tantra of Japan: Indic Roots of Mantra. 
London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Payne, Richard K. 2021. “A Pragmatics of Ritual: The Yoshida Goma at the Interface of Shintō 
and Shingon.” Religions 12: 884. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​2100​884.
Rambelli, Fabio. 2011. “Shintō and Esoteric Buddhism.” In Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in 
East Asia, edited by Charles D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, 835–​844. 
Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Rambelli, Fabio. 2018. “Buddhism and Shinto.” In The Oxford Encyclopedia of Religion, edited 
by Richard K. Payne and Georgios Halkias. [Online]. New York: Oxford University Press. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.013.612
Robson, James. 2008. “Signs of Power: Talismanic Writing in Chinese Buddhism.” History of 
Religions 48, no. 2: 130–​169.
Ross, Malcolm. 2020. “Syntax and Contact–​Induced Language Change.” In The Oxford 
Handbook of Language Contact, edited by Anthony P. Grant, 123–​154. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​oxfor​dhb/​978019​9945​092.013.1
Scheid, Bernhard. 2001. Der Eine und Einzige Weg der Götter: Yoshida Kanemoto und die 
Erfindung des Shinto. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Sharf, Robert. 2002. Coming to Terms with Chinese Buddhism: A Reading of the Treasure Store 
Treatise. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Staal, Frits. 1983. Agni: The Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar. 2 vols. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Staal, Frits. 1989. Rules without Meaning: Ritual, Mantras, and the Human Sciences. New York: 
Peter Lang.
Stone, Jacqueline. 2016. Right Thoughts at the Last Moment: Buddhism and Deathbed Practices 
in Early Medieval Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

--- PAGE 148 ---
Goryū Shintō Goma      123
 
Strathern, Andrew J., and Pamela J. Stewart (Strathern). 2014. “Creativity, Ritual, and the 
Mindful Body.” Journal of Ritual Studies 28, no. 2: 93–​94.
Strickmann, Michel. 1996. Mantras et mandarins: Le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine. Paris: 
Gallimard.
Sugahara Shinkai. 1996. “The Distinctive Features of Sannō Ichijitsu Shinto.” Japanese Journal 
of Religious Studies 23, no. 1–​2: 61–​84.
Taira Masayuki. 1996. “Kuroda Toshio and the Kenmitsu Taisei Theory.” Trans. Thomas 
Kirchner. In “Kuroda Toshio,” ed. James Dobbins, Japanese Journal of Religious Studies, spe­
cial issue, 23, no. 3–​4: 217–​232.
Teeuwen, Mark. 2000. “The Kami in Esoteric Buddhist Thought and Practice.” In Shinto in 
History: Ways of the Kami, edited by John Breen and Mark Teeuwen, 95–​116. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Teeuwen, Mark. 2002. “From Jindō to Shinto: A Concept Takes Shape.” Japanese Journal of 
Religious Studies 29, no. 3/​4: 233–​263.
Tsongkhapa. 2017. The Great Exposition of Secret Mantra, Vol. 2: Deity Yoga, edited and 
translated by Jeffrey Hopkins (rev. ed.). Boulder, CO: Shambhala.
Winford, Donald. 2020. “Theories of Language Contact.” In The Oxford Handbook of Language 
Contact, edited by Anthony P. Grant. [Online]. Oxford: Oxford University Press. https://​doi.
org/​10.1093/​oxfor​dhb/​978019​9945​092.013.2

--- PAGE 149 ---


--- PAGE 150 ---
Chapter 6
Homa in Jain Traditions
Ellen Gough
Jain Homas as “Tantric,” Not Vedic
Jainism in many ways developed as a rejection of the Vedic fire sacrifice. Many accounts 
in early Jain scriptures place Jain teachings in stark opposition to brahminical ritualism. 
In a famous narrative from the Śvetāmbara canonical text (āgama) the Uttarādhyayana 
(Utt.),1 a group of brahmins insult and encourage the beating of a Jain monk from a low 
birth and only repent and honor the monk after a king’s daughter intervenes, reminding 
the brahmins that the monk, through the power of his austerities, can “reduce the world 
to ashes” (Utt. 12.28, trans. Jacobi 1895, 54). The monk teaches the reformed brahmins 
the true meaning of sacrifice when he explains: “Penance is my fire; life my fireplace; 
right exertion is my sacrificial ladle; the body the dried cow dung; karma is my fuel; 
self-​control, right exertion, and tranquility are the oblations, praised by the sages, which 
I offer” (Utt. 12.44 trans. Jacobi 1895, 56).
Patrick Olivelle has argued that passages like this, which show an internalization of 
the Vedic sacrifice, wherein “the renouncer’s body . . . is equal to the fire altar where the 
Vedic rites are performed,” are more fully developed in brahminical texts than in Jain or 
Buddhist ones, as brahmins wished to show that asceticism emerged not as a rejection of 
the fire sacrifice but as a natural progression from it (Olivelle 1992, 69).
All Indian renouncers, both within and outside the Brāhmaṇical tradition, gave up 
ritual activities. They refused to use fire. It is only within the Brāhmaṇical tradition, 
however, that the renouncer’s abandonment of fire and rites became the focal point 
for the theology of renunciation. 
(Olivelle 1992, 71)
Early Jain texts do, however, focus on the abandonment of brahminical rites in de­
fining their path to liberation. Much of the language, and indeed motivation, for key 
early Jain teachings—​especially nonviolence and celibacy—​emerged directly as a

--- PAGE 151 ---
126      Ellen Gough
 
rejection of the foundation of “Vedic theology: sacrifice and marriage” (Olivelle 1992, 
23). Because of this, the abandonment of fire is a preoccupation in early Jain texts. One 
of the earliest Śvetāmbara texts, the Sūtrakṛtāṅga (Sū), for example, frames the Jain 
doctrine of nonviolence (ahiṃsā) in terms of the Vedic fire sacrifice. The Sūtrakṛtāṅga 
declares that “earth, water, fire, wind, grass, trees, and corn and the movable beings” are 
all living beings, so when someone injures one of these souls, they “do harm to their own 
souls, and will again and again be born as one of them” (Sū 1.7.1–​2, trans. Jacobi 1895, 
292). The examples of doing harm to these living beings, then, are brahminical rites. To 
show the importance of not using fire, the text explains:
Some leave their mother and father to live as śramaṇas, but they use fire; [Mahāvīra] 
says: “People are wicked who kill beings for the sake of their own pleasure.” He who 
lights a fire, kills living beings; he who extinguishes it, kills the fire. Therefore, a wise 
man who well considers the law should light no fire. Earth contains life, and water 
contains life; jumping (or flying) insects fall in (the fire); dirt-​born vermin (and 
beings) living in wood: all these beings are burned by lighting a fire
(Sū 1.7.5–​7 trans. Jacobi 1895, 56).
At the outset of this passage, the rejection of the use of fire is a way to define who is a true 
renunciant (śramaṇa). A brahmin man who has left his family to enter the third āśrama, 
becoming a forest-​dwelling hermit (vānaprastha) who retains his fire, is wicked. A true 
renunciant—​a Jain mendicant—​does not touch fire. Passages like these abound in early 
Jain texts, showing that the Jain doctrine of nonviolence, the definition of renunciation, 
and the ontology that even the elements have souls emerged in part as a rejection of the 
Vedic fire sacrifice.
It comes as a surprise, then, when some Jain mendicants in the medieval period did 
promote the Vedic sacrifice. Jinasena’s Ādipurāṇa (ĀP), a ninth-​century Jain history of 
the universe structured around the life story of the first tīrthaṅkara, Ṛṣabha (Ādinātha), 
is an often-​cited source of the “brahminization” of Jain rites. Multiple scholars have fo­
cused on ­chapters 37–​40, which outline life-​cycle rites (saṃskāra) for twice-​born males, 
all of which include a fire offering (von Glasenapp [1925] 1998, 452–​462; Williams 1963, 
274–​287; Jaini 1979, 292–​304; Dundas 1991, 273, 1998, 35). In Ādipurāṇa 47.351–​352, 
Jinasena even recommends that spiritually advanced lay Jains—​men who have taken 
a vow of celibacy—​daily perform what amounts to a śrauta sacrifice, lighting three 
fires with the same names as the three fires of a Vedic sacrifice—​the householder’s fire 
(gārhapatya), southern fire (dakṣiṇāgni), and offering fire (āhavanīya)—​at the three 
divisions of the day (saṃdhyā)—​morning, noon, and evening (von Glasenapp [1925] 
1998, 452).2 It is unknown, however, how influential this prescription was among lay 
Jains. Although more research needs to be done on Jain adoptions of Vedic paradigms 
from the medieval period to the present day, as of now, we can be sure that most of the 
Jain fire sacrifices that are promoted and performed publicly today do not follow a Vedic 
model, using Vedic mantras, being performed at regular intervals of the day and year, 
and requiring a twice-​born male to undertake the ceremony.

--- PAGE 152 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      127
 
Most medieval-​ to present-​day Jain fire-​offering rites (homa, havana, āhuti, yajña) 
align less with Vedic models and more with “tantric” homas that are performed along­
side, or to conclude, offerings made to ritual diagrams (mandala, yantra). Many Jain 
homas can be called tantric because their ritual structure conforms to tantric Śaiva, 
Vaiṣṇava, and Buddhist fire offerings performed to honor deities who have been invited 
into these ritual diagrams. Charles Orzech (2016, 261) has identified in Bodhiruci’s 
Scripture of the Mantra of Amoghapāśa’s Miraculous Transformations (707 CE), for 
example, an “emerging ritual synthesis” for mandala rites for esoteric Buddhists that 
requires a fire offering to conclude a mandala rite. This text outlines how deities should 
be invited into a mandala by the showing of mudrās, how the body and area of worship 
should be protected and sanctified through the recitation of mantras and the estab­
lishment of containers of water, and how the ceremony should conclude with a fire 
offering.
As we will see, many Jain homas present a similar ritual structure, and they are 
performed for similar occasions as their non-​Jain tantric counterparts. Digambaras 
today cite the Ādipurāṇa as the source of their fire-​offering rites, but the ceremonies are 
not performed by celibate men three times a day, as instructed in Ādipurāṇa. Instead, 
they are performed in the context of mendicant initiations into a mandala, temple 
image consecration ceremonies, and optional ceremonies to boon-​giving deities that 
generate health, wealth, and miraculous powers. For example, in the days leading up to 
their initiations as mendicants, Digambaras from the medieval period to the present day 
have offered coconuts to a ritual diagram called the Ring of Disciples (gaṇadharavalaya) 
constructed out of colored powder into which the mendicant disciples of the twenty-​
four jinas (gaṇadhara) are invoked. To complete this pūjā, the initiands perform a 
fire-​offering ceremony, reciting the mantra to the disciples of the jinas while offering 
camphor into the fire (Gough 2021, 50). Śvetāmbara monks of the highest rank (ācārya) 
also have laypeople perform fire offerings for them as part of their yearly propiti­
ation of the deities invited via mantras into the sūrimantrapaṭa, or the cloth diagram 
of the mantra of the mendicant leader (Gough 2021, 181–​185). In the Buddhist context, 
Tadeusz Skorupski (2016, 115) has explained that after Buddhists rejected homa rites for 
centuries, “with the emergence of esoteric Buddhism, they [were] adjusted and incorpo­
rated into tantric rituals.” The same process occurred in Jainism.
Jain “tantric” fire offerings do, however, differ from their Hindu and Buddhist 
counterparts in a few ways. As we will see, Jains attempt to mitigate the violence of a 
homa. In addition, Jains differ from Buddhists when it comes to the involvement of 
renunciants—​celibate monks—​in fire offerings. Unlike Buddhist mendicants who have 
undergone a tantric initiation, Jain mendicants uphold the earliest Jain definitions of 
nonviolence and renunciation and never perform the fire offering themselves. They 
will recite mantras for the homas while laypeople make the physical offerings. Jains 
also more commonly perform homas not for the supreme objects of worship for their 
tradition—​mendicants, especially the enlightened jinas— but for unenlightened, boon-​
giving deities who need to be pacified or pleased: goddesses, the nine planets, or pro­
tector deities. John Cort (2001, 207) therefore defines havana in the Jain context as a

--- PAGE 153 ---
128      Ellen Gough
 
“fire offering made to an unenlightened deity.” Jain homas are often made to gods and 
goddesses in lay optional rites for health, wealth, and worldly prosperity.
Fire offerings have, however, also been integrated into the Jain path to liber­
ation. Because they are made to conclude the ritual propitiation of a variety of ritual 
diagrams—​including those into which enlightened and liberated souls have been 
invited—​Jain homas are not strictly related to unenlightened deities. They are also not 
solely related to achieving mundane goals and are often part of key rituals of Jain men­
dicancy. The example of the worship of the gaṇadharavalaya in Digambara initiations 
is one such rite in which a homa is performed to honor mendicants and to promote 
worldly detachment. Jain texts on fire offerings take pains to show the ways in which the 
ritual use of fire does not undermine, but instead promotes, Jain teachings about asceti­
cism and achieving omniscience and liberation.
Two modern Gujarati manuals on fire-​offering ceremonies provide a sense of the di­
versity of homas for image-​worshiping (mūrtipūjaka) Śvetāmbaras. The Śvetāmbara 
monk Somasundaravijaya lists the fire pits, or kuṇḍas, required for different fire ceremo­
nies. For the male unenlightened deities Māṇibhadra, Ghaṇṭākarṇa, Nākoḍābhairava, 
and Bhomīyājī, a square kuṇḍa should be established, and for goddesses like 
Padmāvatī, Cakreśvarī, Ambikā, Pañcagulī, and Jvālāmālinī, a triangle-​shaped kuṇḍa 
should be constructed. For the three-​day optional ceremony for worldly well-​being 
(pauṣṭikavidhāna), an eight-​cornered fire pit of three levels, in a star shape, should be 
constructed. For the worship of the ritual diagram the nandyāvarta, performed as part 
of image consecration ceremonies, a six-​cornered kuṇḍa should be constructed. To 
make fire offerings to the goddesses of the mendicant leader’s mantra, the sūrimantra, 
triangle-​shaped kuṇḍas should be constructed (Somasundaravijaya 2007–​2008, 80).
Another modern Gujarati Śvetāmbara ritual manual, Ghaṇṭākarṇa-​Pratiṣṭhā-​
Vidhiḥ (GhPV), lists substances that should be offered to different objects of wor­
ship (see table 6.1) (GhPV, 65–​66). This list of substances should in no way be taken 
for hard-​and-​fast rules that all Jains accept. It indicates, however, that Jains make 
offerings to both unenlightened and enlightened souls. The five supreme beings—​the 
five principal objects of veneration in Jainism that are honored in the main mantra 
of Jainism, the Prakrit pañcanamaskāra—​the omniscient souls (arhat), liberated souls 
(siddha), mendicant leaders (ācārya), mendicant teachers (upādhyāya) and ordinary 
mendicants (sādhu)—​are the first objects of worship listed in this table. These two 
modern ritual manuals show that Jain fire offerings are often made for unenlightened 
deities in lay optional rites for mundane aims, but they are also offered to ascetics and 
enlightened souls, required to consecrate images of jinas, and are part of a mendicant’s 
yearly routine.
In this chapter, to provide a limited sense of the ways in which Jain homas, while 
attempting to remain nonviolent, are offered to both unenlightened and enlight­
ened souls, I focus on three Jain homas in which I participated in 2013 in Jaipur and 
Hastinapur. I examine a Śvetāmbara fire offering to the unenlightened deity Māṇibhadra 
and two Digambara homas undertaken to complete the consecration of jina temple

--- PAGE 154 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      129
 
images. These modern Jain practices developed in the medieval period as a response to 
the popularity of non-​Jain tantric rituals, and despite their appeals otherwise, they do, in 
some ways, contradict the fundamental Jain teachings of nonviolence. Because of this, 
several sects of Jainism did emerge in the early modern period to explicitly reject the 
use of fire—​including incense and lamps—​but other Jains have vigorously defended the 
practice, interpreting fire’s ritual use as rooted in early Jain texts and as a means of spir­
itual knowledge, destruction of karma, and progress toward liberation.
Table 6.1  Offerings Required for Different Objects of Worship according to the 
Modern Gujarati Śvetāmbara manual Ghaṇṭākarṇa-​Pratiṣṭhā-​Vidhiḥ
Recipient of Homa
Offerings
1.	 Five supreme beings
Sugar, ghee, rice pudding (Guj. dūdhpāk), sandal, 
wood from beechwood (Guj. sevan) and lebbeck  
(Guj. khījḍo) trees
2.	 The guardians of the ten directions
Ghee, jaggery, resin from the mukul myrrh tree  
(Guj. gugaḷ), milk pudding, sugarcane, wood from 
pipal and banyan trees
3.	 The twelve zodiac signs
Milk, ghee, wood from banyan and bael trees
4.	 The asterisms (nakṣatra)
Ghee, honey, lemon, fruit from the mukul myrrh tree, 
wood from pipal and banyan trees
5.	 The nine planets
Ghee, jaggery, milk, sugarcane, wood apple  
(Guj. koṭhuṃ), wood from a pipal tree
6.	 The sixteen spell goddesses (vidyādevī)
Ghee, sugar, milk pudding, sugarcane, wood from a 
pipal tree
7.	 The god Gaṇapati
Laddus (Guj. cūrmā lāḍvā), wood from a fig tree
8.	 The god Kārt[t]‌ikeya
Ghee, milk pudding, fruit of the oil-​nut tree (Guj. 
mahuḍo), wood from a pipal tree
9.	 The guardians of the area (kṣetrapāla)
Sesame-​seed laddus, wood from a thornapple tree
10.	 Tutelary deities of towns (puradevatā)
Ghee, jaggery, sugarcane, wood from a banyan tree
11.	 The four types of gods (bhavanavāsin, 
vyantara, jyotiṣka, and vaimānika)
Milk pudding, sugarcane, different fruits
12.	 64 yoginīs
Smoke, ghee, the Gujarati sweet dish lāpsī with 
almonds, dates, and grapes, wood from banyan, pipal, 
and jujube trees
13.	 52 heroes (vīra)
Jaggery, honey, sesame-​seed balls, wood of banyan, 
wood apple, and mango trees
14.	 8 bhairavas
Honey, frankincense, sesame seeds, chickpea rotis 
(Guj. puḍlā), the wood of a thornapple tree
15.	 The god Ghaṇṭākarṇa Mahāvīra
108 round sweets made from crushed walnut, 
coconut, almonds, sugar, and ghee; the wood from 
pipal and mango trees

--- PAGE 155 ---
130      Ellen Gough
 
The Śvetāmbara Unenlightened Deity 
Māṇibhadra Vīra
In February 2013, as part of a multiday consecration ceremony for a Tapā Gaccha 
Śvetāmbara temple in the Jawahar Nagar neighborhood in Jaipur, Rajasthan, I 
participated in four different fire-​offering ceremonies to goddesses and three pop­
ular protector deities: Bhomiyājī, Ghaṇṭākarṇa Mahāvīra, and Māṇibhadra Vīra. 
Here, I focus on the fire offering performed for Māṇibhadra Vīra, the protector deity 
(adhiṣṭhāyaka) of the Śvetāmbara monastic lineage the Tapā Gaccha since the early 
modern period. Like the mustached, bow-​yielding Ghaṇṭākarṇa, Māṇibhadra is under­
stood as one of the fifty-​two “heroes” (vīra), or protector deities, of the Tapā Gaccha 
(see item 13 in table 6.1), and both these deities are often found flanking the entrances 
to modern Tapā Gaccha temples. In typical modern representations, Māṇibhadra 
rides an elephant with seven tusks (airāvata), has a body of a man, either four or six 
arms, and a head of a boar that balances on his snout a Jain temple with footprints of 
the first tīrthaṅkara, Ṛṣabha, which represents the pilgrimage site Shatrunjay (Cort 
2020; Devluk 1997, 210).3 Both Māṇibhadra and Ghaṇṭākarṇa are known to be pleased 
by fire offerings,4 especially at Ghaṇṭākarṇa’s main shrine in Mahudi, in north Gujarat 
(est. 1898), and at Māṇibhadra’s three key shrines in Magarwada, Gujarat, where 
his lower body is established; in Aglor, Gujarat, where his torso is established; and in 
Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh, where his head is established (Devluk 1997, 215). The shrine 
at Magarwada remains especially important, with thousands of pilgrims, both Jain and 
Hindu, flocking to the site to participate in a homa on the fifth day of the bright half of 
each month of the Indian lunar calendar, meaning the fifth day of the first half of the 
month, when the moon becomes increasingly illuminated. The largest homa of the year 
for Māṇibhadra is performed not only at Magarwada but at Tapā Gaccha Śvetāmbara 
temples throughout India, on the bright fifth of the lunar month Āśvina (September–​
October), during the festival of Nine Nights, Navarātri. For these homas, pilgrims pray 
for health, wealth, and relief from worldly troubles by offering a coconut to a massive 
fire burning in the pavilion outside the main temple. After taking darśana of the main 
temple icon of Māṇibhadra, pilgrims receive his famous prasāda, the Gujarati sweet 
made from jaggery, sukhḍī.
The sites of Māṇibhadra’s three important shrines, the dates of these fire offerings, 
and the deity’s iconography all relate to Tapā Gaccha narratives that claim that 
Māṇibhadra is the reincarnation of Māṇekcand “Māṇek” Śāh, a lay devotee of Ācārya 
Hemavimalasūri (1463–​1529 CE), the fifty-​fifth leader of the Tapā Gaccha. These 
narratives all emphasize the superiority of the Tapā Gaccha’s teachings and practices 
over those of competing Śvetāmbara Jain monastic lineages. According to a modern 
Gujarati account by the Śvetāmbara monk Ācārya Candrānandasāgarasūri, Māṇek 
Śāh was born into a pious image-​worshiping Jain merchant family in Ujjain, Madhya

--- PAGE 156 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      131
 
Pradesh, in the fifteenth century (Devluk 1997, 193). As a young man, Māṇek became 
convinced by the preaching of a mendicant who followed the teachings of the fifteenth-​
century lay reformer Loṅkā Śāh, who saw temple worship as anti-​Jain.5 Māṇek decided 
to cease worshiping in his family’s temple, to the dismay of his mother and wife, who 
vowed to give up ghee for as long as he would not worship icons of the jinas (Devluk 
1997, 194–​195). Eventually, the monk Ācārya Hemavimalasūri, along with his mendi­
cant disciples, came to Ujjain, and Māṇek became impressed with Hemavimalasūri’s 
teachings. The monk convinced the merchant that image worship (mūrtipūjā) is not, 
as the followers of Loṅkā Śāh suggest, against the teachings of the early Jain scriptures 
(āgama). To show that temple worship is an integral part of Jainism, Hemavimalasūri 
provided a number of examples of Jain image worship from history and Śvetāmbara 
canonical scriptures (āgama), and Māṇek eventually became Hemavimalasūri’s lay fol­
lower (Devluk 1997, 198–​202).
On the morning of the fifth day of the bright half of the lunar month Māgha (Guj. mahā 
sud pāñcam), Māṇek Śāh adopted the twelve vows of a layperson (Guj. samyaktvamūlak 
bār vrat): the five minor vows (anuvrata) of (1) nonviolence, (2) telling the truth, (3) 
nonstealing, (4) chastity, and (5) limiting possessions, and the seven supplementary 
vows (śīlavrata) of (1) limiting action with regard to the directions, (2) limiting the con­
sumption of perishable and nonperishable objects, (3) avoiding unnecessary negative 
thoughts or actions, (4) regular performance of contemplation (sāmāyika), (5) limiting 
the duration of activities, (6) regular fasting, and (7) offering food and other possessions 
to mendicants.6 He also began performing the eightfold pūjā, offering eight substances 
to an icon of a jina, every day (Devluk 1997, 203).7
After Māṇek Śāh became a disciple of Hemavimalasūri, he followed the monk to 
Agra, where they stayed for the four months of the rainy season. During this rainy 
season retreat, in his daily lectures, Hemavimalasūri drew upon the Sanskrit pane­
gyric the Śatruñjaya Māhātmya to focus on the worldly and soteriological benefits 
of making a pilgrimage to Shatrunjay, the famous Śvetāmbara pilgrimage site in 
south Gujarat whose main temple is dedicated to the first jina, Ṛṣabha. Hearing these 
lectures, Māṇek Śāh became inspired to set out, on foot, for this pilgrimage site at the 
end of the rainy season, on Kārttika Pūrṇimā (Devluk 1997, 204–​206). On the way 
from Agra to the sacred hill, Māṇek stopped to rest in the jungle near Magarwada, 
in north Gujarat, with his mind focused on only one thought: “Praise to Ṛṣabha!” 
(Devluk 1997, 206). Thus lost in meditation, he did not hear the demands of money 
from an approaching band of dacoits, who in revenge slashed his body into three 
pieces: the head (Guj. māthuṃ/​mastak), lower body (Guj. pag/​piṇḍī/​ḍīṃcaṇ), and 
torso (Guj. dhaḍ). Because he died meditating on Ṛṣabha and the sacred pilgrimage 
site of Shatrunjay, Māṇek Śāh was reborn as the deity Māṇibhadra, who today bal­
ances a shrine to Ṛṣabha on his nose to represent his steadfast devotion to this jina and 
the pilgrimage site (Devluk 1997, 207).
Modern Gujarati accounts of what happened to Hemavimalasūri and his followers 
after Māṇek Śāh’s death differ slightly, but they all agree that Tapā Gaccha monks were

--- PAGE 157 ---
132      Ellen Gough
 
being tormented to death through the ritual propitiation of the deity Bhairava by 
Jain monks of competing mendicant lineages. According to the modern Śvetāmbara 
monk Pannyāsa Kalyāṇavijaya’s Gujarati account, Śvetāmbara monks from the lineage 
the Kharatara Gaccha worshiped the deity Bhairava, killing about five hundred Tapā 
Gaccha monks (Kalyāṇavijaya 1940, 209). According to Candrānandasāgarasūri, how­
ever, an ācārya of another Śvetāmbara mendicant lineage, the now-​defunct Kaḍavāmatī 
Gaccha, or Kaḍūāmatī Gaccha, became so jealous of Hemavimalasūri’s fame that he 
honored Bhairava with fierce (ugra) austerities; recitations (jāpa); and mantra, tantra, 
and yantra, and Hemavimalasūri and his fellow monks fell ill (Devluk 1997, 212). 
Māṇibhadra quickly arrived on the scene, challenged Bhairava to a fight, and promptly 
defeated him. Bhairava bowed at Māṇibhadra’s feet, devoting himself to the deity and 
promising that in the future, wherever there are worshipers of Māṇibhadra, he will 
be there as well. The ailing Jain monks were cured. Māṇibhadra cried out in praise of 
Hemavimalasūri and told the monk to establish his lower body right there, where he de­
feated Bhairava (Devluk 1997, 212).
On Vasant Panchami, the fifth day of the bright half of the lunar month Māgha, in 
January–​February, Hemavimalasūri established the lower body of Māṇibhadra at the 
spot where the god defeated Bhairava, just outside the village of Magarwada (Devluk 
1997, 212–​213). In 1490/​1491, Hemavimalasūri’s eventual successor, the fifty-​sixth leader 
of the Tapā Gaccha, Ācārya Ānandavimalasūri, commissioned a proper temple for this 
lower body of Māṇibhadra at Magarwada (Devluk 1997, 212). The bright fifth of every 
month, then, when worshipers today visit Magarwada to offer coconuts to Māṇibhadra 
via a homa, commemorates the moment when Māṇek Śāh, Māṇibhadra’s previous in­
carnation, adopted the proper beliefs of image-​worshiping Tapā Gaccha Śvetāmbara 
Jains. It also commemorates the moment when Māṇibhadra defeated Bhairava and 
Hemavimalasūri established the deity’s temple.
Ultimately, Māṇibhadra’s origin story shows that he is linked to fire sacrifice be­
cause he is a Jain response to popular medieval tantric practices, namely, the worship 
of the Śaiva deity Bhairava. Indeed, non-​Jain locals in Magarwada today still insist 
that Māṇibhadra’s shrine was built atop a temple to Bhairava.8 The modern worship 
of Māṇibhadra with offerings of coconuts into a fire should not be seen as an adop­
tion of a brahminical fire sacrifice but of a tantric fire sacrifice to powerful deities like 
Bhairava. To establish the superiority of the Śvetāmbara mendicant lineage the Tapā 
Gaccha over other Śvetāmbara lineages, Tapā Gaccha monks used the tantric ritual 
practices of non-​Jains to develop Māṇibhadra as a Jain equivalent to Bhairava who 
is particularly concerned with the needs of the supporters of Tapā Gaccha monks. In 
Jain ritual culture today, goddesses and gods like Māṇibhadra, who are seen as more 
powerful, pious Jain equivalents of non-​Jain deities, are some of the most common 
recipients of homa offerings. Using mantras and yantras, Śvetāmbara Jains per­
form homas for boon-​giving gods and goddesses at certain times and places linked 
to their origin stories and during image consecration ceremonies that establish their 
presences in temples.

--- PAGE 158 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      133
 
Details of the Homa to Māṇibhadra
The fire ceremony I witnessed for Māṇibhadra in Jaipur in 2013 corresponded in 
many ways to the prescriptions given in the modern Gujarati “Fire Offering Ritual,” 
Āhutividhān, provided in the collection of texts on Māṇibhadra edited by Nandlāl 
Devluk (1997, 561–​571). I observed the ritual along with a few dozen laypeople, but 
the main participants in the ceremony were two lay ritual specialists (vidhikāra), 
a local family that sponsored the ceremony, and a few Śvetāmbara nuns of the 
Tapā Gaccha. In the front courtyard of the temple, between a metal icon of a jina 
placed in a silver replica of the Jina’s Preaching Assembly (samavasaraṇa) and a 
square fire pit, the ritual specialists established an icon of Māṇibhadra, along with 
a metal yantra of him, in a metal plate (thāli) (fig. 6.1). Earlier that morning, the 
ritual specialists had worshiped the metal jina icon following the eightfold pūjā and 
had consecrated the ritual space by establishing a pot (kumbha) and lamp next to 
the icon.
The homa ceremony then began with the lay sponsors, wearing their pūjā clothes and 
crowns to resemble the ideal worshipers of the jinas, the kings and queens of the gods, 
indras and indrāṇīs, performing a ritual ablution of the yantra of Māṇibhadra.9 The lay 
worshipers and fire pit then had to be purified and protected, and Māṇibhadra had to 
be invited to join the ceremony. One ritual specialist, after reciting a Sanskrit mantra 
to ensure the purification of the ground on which the ceremony was to be performed 
(bhūmiśuddhi), recited the Sanskrit Vajrapañjarastotra, which combines the nine lines 
of the main mantra of Jainism, the Prakrit pañcanamaskāra, with Sanskrit pleas to create 
protective wear for different parts of the body (Balbir 2018, 283–​285). As the ritual spe­
cialist recited the hymn, the laypeople in attendance performed corresponding gestures, 
touching the respective parts of their bodies and visualizing the emergence of protective 
coverings. The ritual specialists then invited Māṇibhadra into the ritual space, reciting 
Sanskrit mantras and showing the corresponding hand gestures (mudrā) of invitation 
(āvāhanamudrā), establishment (sthāpanā), placing near (sannidhāna), asking to re­
main (sannirodha), and hiding (avaguṇṭhana) the ceremony from outsiders so that only 
participants are affected.10
After the ritual space was sanctified and the worshipers were protected, it was time to 
make offerings into the fire. The laymen who had sponsored the ceremony offered 108 
balls of dried fruit and herbs into the fire as the ritual specialists and nuns recited nine 
verses that request from Māṇibhadra a variety of benefits, including wealth, children, 
fame, kingship, protection for unborn babies, protection from childhood disease and 
accidental death, the removal of ghosts and malignant spirits, and general peace and 
well-​being (Devluk 1997, 567–​568). The ceremony concluded with the lay participants 
performing ārati by waving a flame in front of the icon of Māṇibhadra and singing a 
praise poem to him composed in 1808/​1809 by the lay poet Mādhavmās Dīpvijay 
(Devluk 1997, 659–​570). To complete the ceremony, the ritual specialists recited two

--- PAGE 159 ---
134      Ellen Gough
 
Sanskrit verses to dismiss Māṇibhadra from the fire pit and to ask for forgiveness for any 
wrongdoings (Devluk 1997, 570).
This homa for Māṇibhadra takes a structure common to tantric homas, which 
involves a deity being invited into a ritual diagram using mantras and mudrās, rites 
of protection and purification using visualizations and the placement of mantras on 
the body, offerings of oblations into a fire that are accompanied by the recitation of 
Figure 6.1.  The icon and yantra of Māṇibhadra Vīra established for his homa in a conse­
cration ceremony for a Śvetāmbara Tapā Gaccha temple in Jawahar Nagar, Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
February 2013.

--- PAGE 160 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      135
 
non-​Vedic mantras, and the final dismissal of the deity.11 However, the ritual manual for 
Mānibhadra’s homa repeatedly attempts to make the ceremony “Jain” by stressing the 
importance of nonviolence. For example, the wood for the fire, which should come from 
trees that produce a milk-​like sap (see the trees mentioned in table 6.1), should be com­
pletely dry and free from living beings. The fire offerings should also be vegetarian—​the 
108 balls offered into the fire should be made of ground saffron, musk, amber, valerian 
(Guj. tagar), bitter aloe (Guj. agar), camphor, dried rose petals, almonds, pistachios, 
almondette seeds (Guj. cāroḷī), walnuts, cashews, areca nuts, dried coconut, raisins, and 
ghee (in fig. 6.2, the seated, crowned layman in white holds the 108 balls of dried fruit on 
a circular plate (thālī)) (Devluk 1997, 562).
In addition to these nonviolent offerings, the ritual specialists, after establishing the 
fire pit, recited a mantra to ensure that no living beings would be harmed in the offering. 
They first recited a Sanskrit mantra typical to tantric homas that invites the fire deity 
Agni, using Vedic epithets, into the fire pit:
oṃ hrīṃ vaiśvānara jātaveda ihāvaha lohitākṣa sarvakāryāṇi sarvakarmāṇi sādhaya 
svāhā. (Devluk 1997, 565)12
Figure 6.2.  A ritual specialist, standing, instructs the seated lay sponsors of the homa to 
Māṇibhadra Vīra in a consecration ceremony for a Śvetāmbara Tapā Gaccha temple. On the left 
sits the icon of Māṇibhadra, and on the right, the seated crowned layman in white holds the 108 
balls to be offered into the square fire pit. Jawahar Nagar, Jaipur, Rajasthan. February 2013.

--- PAGE 161 ---
136      Ellen Gough
 
(Oh, Vaiśvānara! Jātaveda! Come here, come here, Red-​Eyed One! Fulfill all [my] 
actions, svāhā).
The ritual specialists then recited a mantra unique to Jain homas that requests that the 
ceremony not harm single-​sensed living beings (ekendriyajīva):
oṃ 
arhaṃ 
hrīṃ 
ayaṃ 
havanāgnir 
bhūyāt 
sadā 
śāsanadevadevīnāṃ 
sakalakalmaṣadahanāya jinaśāsanodyotanāya iha
oṃ agnayo’gnikāyā ekendriyā jīvā niravadyā jinaśāsanadevadevīpūjāyāṃ 
nirvyathāḥ santu niṣpāpā santu sadgatayaḥ santu na me asmākaṃ saṅghaṭṭanahiṃsā 
syuḥ ihārcane. (Devluk 1997, 565)
(May this homa fire for the Jain tutelary gods and goddesses be here always to burn 
all impurities [and] to illuminate the teachings of the jinas. May there be no harm  
to the single-​sensed souls of the fire. May there be no pain in the worship of the  
gods and goddesses of the teachings of the jinas. May there be no bad karma (pāpa). 
May there be good fortune. May there be no violence here for us in this worship).
Jain ontology places souls (jīva) into a hierarchy of five different categories: those with 
one, two, three, four, and five senses. While humans and some animals have five senses, 
plants and the elements of earth, water, fire, and air only have the sense of touch (Tatia 
1994, 41–​46). This mantra, then, recognizes that homas have the potential to harm not 
only the souls of the plants offered into the fire but also the fire itself. It draws on a long 
tradition of Jains using their words—​recitations—​to offset the karmic effects of their 
actions. If recitations are powerful enough to destroy bad karma, as early Jain texts and 
the main mantra of Jainism, the pañcanamaskāra, proclaim,13 then they should also 
be able to end violence. In this way, by promoting Jain teachings in the narratives and 
worship of Māṇibhadra, Tapā Gaccha Śvetāmbara Jains justify embracing a popular 
practice—​homa—​which is explicitly rejected in early Jain texts but benefits the tradition 
because its perceived ability to grant worldly success can attract lay followers to support 
Jain mendicants.
Fire Offerings for the Consecration  
of a Digambara Icon of a Jina
Digambaras also follow tantric models of homa to honor Jain ideals that have been 
invited into ritual diagrams, and they also attempt to validate the ritual use of fire by 
mitigating violence and interpreting homas as a promotion of Jain teachings. As is 
the case for Śvetāmbaras, modern Digambara image consecration (pratiṣṭhā) cer­
emonies are good places to see different types of homas, since they always involve 
multiple fire offerings. In his manual on image consecration the Pratiṣṭhāsāroddhāra 
(PrS), the thirteenth-​century lay Digambara Āśādhara even recommends that the lay

--- PAGE 162 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      137
 
participants in the ceremony bathe daily and make offerings into a fire, reciting mantras 
for pacification (śānti), to ensure that the ceremony is free from disturbance (PrS 1.140; 
Gulābcandra n.d., 83).
Many of the homas of Digambara image consecration ceremonies were developed 
in the medieval period in response to non-​Jain tantric image consecration ceremonies. 
Today, followers of one of the two main branches of Digambara Jainism, the Bīsapantha, 
adhere to the instructions in Nemicandra’s Pratiṣṭhātilaka, a Sanskrit manual com­
posed in Kanchipuram, Tamil Nadu, around 1200. Nemicandra’s Pratiṣṭhātilaka shows 
great influence from the “tantric” texts on image consecration of the Śaiva Siddhānta 
promoted by the Chola kings ruling at that time and place.14 Like manuals of the 
Śaiva Siddhānta and other tantric traditions, Nemicandra’s Pratiṣṭhātilaka and other 
Digambara image consecration handbooks require the construction of ritual diagrams 
to consecrate different types of temple image—​from deities to images of a liberated soul 
(siddha). To transform the stone or metal images into the sacred beings they embody, 
the qualities of these sacred beings must first be called into a diagram in the presence 
of the image, and the worship of these ritual diagrams concludes with a fire sacrifice. 
For the consecration of a jina, the yāgamaṇḍala must be constructed. Ritual specialists 
recite mantras to invite into the yāgamaṇḍala the seventy-​two tīrthaṅkaras of the pre­
sent, past, and future; the twenty tīrthaṅkaras permanently located on the island of the 
cosmos Videhakṣetra; thirty-​six qualities of a mendicant leader; twenty-​five of a mendi­
cant teacher; twenty-​eight qualities of a mendicant; and forty-​eight superhuman powers 
(ṛddhi) (Gough 2020, 590–​591).
In 2013, I participated in two Digambara image consecration ceremonies that cen­
tered on the worship of a yāgamaṇḍala and concluded with a homa. In January 2013, 
in Hastinapur, Uttar Pradesh, I attended the final two days of an image consecration 
ceremony led by disciples of the nun Āryikā Jñānamatī, a Bīsapanthī. Only a dozen 
laypeople participated in the homa—​the lay sponsors of the ceremony—​along with 
a nun, who did not make offerings but recited the mantras for the oblations. The cer­
emony followed the instructions given in Jñānamatī’s edition of Nemicandra’s 
Pratiṣṭhātilaka, and the concluding homa ceremony on the final day corresponded 
to instructions given in modern manuals on the yāgamaṇḍala like Śītal Prasād’s Yāg 
Maṇḍal evaṃ Pañckalyāṇak Vidhān (Prasād 2019). As is common for the concluding 
fire-​offering rites for the worship of Digambara ritual diagrams made of synthetic col­
ored powder (vidhāna, see fig. 6.3), three fire pits were constructed in a row in front of 
the yāgamaṇḍala: one triangular kuṇḍa, one square one, and one circular one. After 
auspicious and protective invocations were recited and Agni was invited into each of the 
fire pits via mantras, the laymen and -​women who sponsored the ceremony established 
themselves on either side of the kuṇḍas and offered camphor into the fire pits as the nun 
recited sets of Sanskrit mantras outlined below (fig. 6.4).
The following month, in February 2013, just outside Jaipur, Rajasthan, I attended a 
seven-​day festival attended by the monk Ācārya Vibhavasāgara for the consecration of 
a temple of the other main branch of Digambara Jainism, the Terāpantha. The lay ritual 
specialists leading the ceremony followed the instructions in the Pratiṣṭhāratnākara,

--- PAGE 163 ---
138      Ellen Gough
 
a late twentieth-​century handbook compiled by the Terāpanthī ritual specialist Paṇḍit 
Gulābcandra “Puṣpa” from various medieval Digambara image installation manuals, 
including Nemicandra’s Pratiṣṭhātilaka. On the final day of the ceremony in Jaipur, 
dozens of laywomen and -​men, crowned and dressed in orange to represent themselves 
Figure 6.3.  Digambara laypeople offer camphor into the three fire pits established in 
front of a siddhacakra diagram onto which coconuts have been piled. Viratnagar, Rajasthan. 
November 2010.

--- PAGE 164 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      139
 
as indras and indrāṇīs, completed the temple consecration by performing a homa that 
was advertised as a fire offering for world peace (viśvaśānti yajña). This fire offering 
did not simply conclude the worship of the yāgamaṇḍala but also completed the entire 
image consecration ceremony (fig. 6.5).
Lay ritual specialists (pratiṣṭhācārya) first established, purified, protected, and 
sanctified the fire-​offering platform (vedikā), on which the object of worship, a metal 
yantra called the vināyaka yantra, was established. The vināyaka yantra comprises a 
Figure 6.4.  For the homa to complete an image consecration ceremony, Digambara laypeople 
sit next to the three fire pits established in front of a yāgamaṇḍala diagram. Hastinapur, Uttar 
Pradesh. February 2013.

--- PAGE 165 ---
140      Ellen Gough
 
twelve-​petaled lotus, at the center of which sits the syllable oṃ surrounded by the first 
syllables of the names of the five supreme beings (pañcaparameṣṭhin) of Jainism, a si 
ā u sā: a for enlightened souls (arhat), si for liberated souls (siddha), ā for mendicant 
leaders (ācārya), u for mendicant teachers (upādhyāya), and sā for ordinary mendicants 
(sādhu). In the twelve petals sit Prakrit and Sanskrit verbal offerings (signaled by the 
term svāhā at the end) to the four auspicious entities honored in the popular Prakrit 
recitation the “Fourfold Maṅgala,” the cattārī maṅgala: the enlightened soul (arhat), lib­
erated soul (siddha), the mendicant (sādhu), and the dharma taught by the omniscient 
one (kevalin). These entities are called auspicious (maṅgala), supreme (loguttama), and 
a place of refuge (śaraṇa): (1) oṃ arahanta maṅgalāya svāhā, (2) oṃ siddha maṅgalāya 
svāhā, (3) oṃ sāhū maṅgalāya svāhā, (4) oṃ kevalipaṇṇatto dhammo maṅgalāya svāhā, 
(5) oṃ arahanta loguttamāya svāhā, (6) oṃ siddha loguttamāya svāhā (7) oṃ sāhū 
loguttamāya svāhā, (8) oṃ kevalipaṇṇatto dhammo loguttamāya svāhā, (9) oṃ arahantā 
śaraṇāya svāhā, (10) oṃ siddha śaraṇāya svāhā, (11) oṃ sāhū śaraṇāya svāhā, (12) oṃ 
kevalipaṇṇatto dhammo śaraṇāya svāhā.15
Then, after the ritual specialists used mantras to sanctify the vināyaka yantra, to 
purify and protect the space and participants, to invite Agni to the ceremony, and to 
establish an auspicious pot and lamp on the vedikā, laymen and -​women, seated in 
rows facing one another in front of the vedikā, with protective cords (rakṣāsūtra) 
Figure 6.5.  For the homa to complete an image consecration ceremony, Digambara laypeople 
make offerings of ghee and camphor. Jaipur, Rajasthan. February 2013.

--- PAGE 166 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      141
 
tied to their right wrists, performed the eightfold pūjā to the nine supreme entities of 
Jainism (navadevatā)—​the five supreme beings plus right view, knowledge, conduct, 
and austerities—​by transferring eight different substances from one plate to another 
(Gulābcandra n.d., 271–​273).16 The fire offering followed, using seven sets of mantras 
discussed below. With the pronunciation of “svāhā” that concluded each mantra, the 
laypeople would offer ghee and camphor to small individual fires burning in front of 
them. The ceremony concluded with the ritual specialist reciting a Prakrit invocation for 
peace, or pacification of negative influences (śānti): the pañcanamaskāra, the mantras to 
the four auspicious entities inscribed on the vināyaka yantra, plus a concluding plea for 
peace (Gulābcandra n.d., 280).
Both of the homas in Hastinapur and Jaipur, following Nemicandra’s Pratiṣṭhātilaka17 
and the Pratiṣṭhāratnakara, respectively, drew upon the instructions for fire offerings 
given in Jinasena’s Ādipurāṇa, the ninth-​century Jain history of the universe mentioned 
earlier. In describing the homa, the compiler of the Pratiṣṭhāratnakara, Paṇḍit 
Gulābcandra (n.d., 86 nn. 1–​2, 88 n. 1, 89 n. 2, 90 n. 1), explicitly references Sanskrit 
verses from ­chapters 38 and 40 of the Ādipurāṇa. The Ādipurāṇa tells the story of the 
first tīrthaṅkara, Ṛṣabha, and ­chapter 38 describes how Bharata, Ṛṣabha’s son and the 
universal emperor (cakravartin), having established himself as king in his capital, 
Ayodhya, lectures his subjects on the proper ritual actions of a lay Jain. In this narrative, 
Bharata insists that a twice-​born (dvija), a term that in brahminical texts designates a 
member of the three higher classes (varṇa) who have the right to perform the fire sac­
rifice, has two births: one from his mother and another from Jain ritual actions (kriyā). 
A true twice-​born performs 108 kriyā: fifty-​three rituals related to birth as a Jain layman 
(garbhānvayakriyā), forty-​eight rituals related to initiation and life as a Jain monk 
(dīkṣānvayakriyā), and the seven acts that occur only because of the fruition of merito­
rious actions (kartranvayakriyā) (ĀP 48.51–​53).18 Padmanabh Jaini (1979, 292), noting 
the brahminical influence on these kriyās, which include most of the sixteen brah­
minical rites of passage (saṃskara), explains that “the five essential elements of Hindu 
ritual—​presence of a deity, availability of a priest capable of invoking that deity, use of 
a holy chant or mantra, ritual offering, and, most important, holy fire—​were all made a 
part of [these] Jaina ceremonies.”
Chapters 38 and 39 of the Ādipurāṇa describe each of these kriyās, which essentially 
outline the Jain path to liberation by tracking the journey of a single soul from concep­
tion as a human to liberation from the cycle of rebirth. The “fruition,” or kartranavaya, 
ceremonies detailed in Ādipurāṇa 39.81–​200 are connected to the so-​called seven su­
preme stations, the saptaparamasthāna, or the stages through which a soul destined for 
liberation will pass:
	
1.	 Birth as a human male in a good family (sajjāti)
	
2.	 Being an honorable householder (sadgṛhitva)
	
3.	 Initiating as a monk (pārivrājya)
	 4.	 Birth as a god (surendratā)
	
5.	 Birth as a universal emperor (sāmrājya)

--- PAGE 167 ---
142      Ellen Gough
 
	 6.	 Achieving omniscience (paramārhantya)
	
7.	 Achieving liberation (parinirvāṇa) (ĀP 38.37)
Chapter 40 details the mantras one should use in each of the kriyās, grouping 
them into seven sets. It is these seven groups of mantras that the Pratiṣṭhāratnākara 
(Gulābcandra n.d., 276–​282), Nemicandra’s Pratiṣṭhātilaka (Jñānamati 2012, 70–​72), 
and the Hindi manual on the yāgamaṇḍala by the ritual specialist Śītal Prasād (2019, 
160–​164) prescribe for their homas. Each Sanskrit mantra ends in “svāhā,” indicating 
that its recitation should accompany an offering.
The seven groups of mantras are:
	
1.	 Pīṭhikā mantras (ĀP 40.10–​26): thirty-​six verbal offerings to Jain ideals, including 
the qualities of the soul (infinite knowledge, perception, power, bliss). These 
“foundation” (pīṭhikā) mantras act as an auspicious invocation and ensure that the 
results of the mantras are pure (Gulābcandra n.d., 86).
	 2.	 Jāti mantras (ĀP 40.26–​31): eight verbal offerings to Jain ideals, including praises 
to the three jewels (ratnatraya) that constitute the path to liberation: right view, 
knowledge, and conduct. The purpose of these “birth placement” (jāti) mantras 
is to ensure that proper thought arises in worshipers (Gulābcandra n.d., 86). 
Padmanabh Jaini (1979, 296), explaining that this set of mantras today among 
Digambaras “is typically recited during the celebration of a Jaina birth-​ceremony,” 
provides a translation of the mantras, which I have modified:
Oṃ, I take refuge in the one who is born [has realized] the truth, svāhā
Oṃ, I take refuge in the one who is born [has become] an arhat, svāhā
Oṃ, I take refuge in the mother [the enlightenment] of the arhats, svāhā
 Oṃ, I take refuge in the sons [the disciples] of the arhats, svāhā
Oṃ, I take refuge in those whose knowledge is infinite, svāhā
Oṃ, I take refuge in those who have reached the incomparable birth [liberation],  
svāhā
Oṃ, I take refuge in the three jewels, svāhā
O Sarasvatī! You who are the correct view, the embodiment of knowledge! Svāhā! 
May the fruits of this ritual the be the attainment of omniscience.19 May it elimi­
nate [the possibility of a] premature death. May it bring about a liberating death 
(samādhimaraṇa), svāhā.
	
3.	 Nistāraka mantras (ĀP 40.31–​37): eleven verbal offerings to Jain ideals, in­
cluding praises to different types of pious people (e.g., Jain laypeople 
[śrāvaka]). The purpose of these “liberating” mantras is to ensure that the cor­
rect thought that has arisen will not be momentary and will remain in the soul 
(Gulābcandra n.d., 86).
	 4.	 Ṛṣi mantras (ĀP 40.37–​47): fifteen verbal offerings to Jain ideals, including the five 
vows of a Jain mendicant and different Jain mendicants, like the disciples of the 
jinas (gaṇadhara). The purpose of these mantras to “sages” (ṛṣi) is to ensure that

--- PAGE 168 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      143
 
laypeople, having adopted the lay vows, will achieve a good birth placement where 
they can take the vows of a Jain mendicant (Gulābcandra n.d., 86).
	
5.	 Surendra mantras (ĀP 40.47–​56): thirteen verbal offerings to Jain ideals, including 
different types of gods (indra). The purpose of these mantras is to ensure that after 
becoming a mendicant, one’s soul is reborn as a god (surendra) devoted to the jinas 
(Gulābcandra n.d., 86).
	 6.	 Paramarājan mantras (ĀP 40.56–​63): nine verbal offerings to Jain ideals, in­
cluding, as in the surendra mantras, an invocation to the twenty-​second jina, 
Nemi. The purpose of these mantras of the “supreme king” (paramarājan) is to en­
sure that one’s soul will be reborn as a king who is devoted to Jainism and achieves 
worldly success (Gulābcandra n.d., 87).
	
7.	 Parameṣṭhin mantras (ĀP 40.63–​73): twenty-​three verbal offerings to the quali­
ties of spiritually advanced souls; the twenty-​first mantra praises the five supreme 
beings (parameṣthin) themselves. The purpose of these mantras is to ensure that 
one’s soul will be reborn as one of the supreme beings, a siddha, or liberated soul 
(Gulābcandra n.d., 87).
Here, we can see the connection between the “seven supreme stations” and each set of 
mantras. When laypeople recite these mantras and make offerings into the fire, Gulābcandra 
(n.d., 86) confirms, they establish the intention (saṅkalpa) that the fire offering will allow 
their souls to pass through these seven stages, eventually becoming liberated.
The Ādipurāṇa explains that the recitation of these mantras should accompany the 
homas and image worship that take place for all the different kriyās (ĀP 40.77). At 
the outset of each kriyā, a twice-​born should establish three fires—​the gārhapatya, 
āhavanīya, and dakṣiṇāgni—​which commemorate the fires that were used in the crema­
tion ceremonies of the tīrthaṅkaras, the disciples of the tīrthaṅkaras (gaṇadhara), and 
the other Jains ascetics who have achieved omniscience (kevalin), respectively (40.82–​
84). A twice-​born should also recite these mantras daily for his fire offering made at the 
three junctures of the day (saṃdhyā)—​morning, noon, and evening (ĀP 40.79).20 The 
man who maintains these three fires in his home, regularly performing this fire offering, 
is called an “āhitāgni” and “agnihotrī” (ĀP 40.85).
Digambara Jains to this day use these same names for the three fire pits established 
for the concluding worship of a ritual diagram (figs. 6.4, Gulābcandra n.d., 89).21 In Śītal 
Prasād’s manual on the yāgamaṇḍala, the Sanskrit mantras to be recited to establish the 
three fires identify them as follows:
	
1.	 Square fire pit: the pit that evokes the cremation of the tīrthaṅkaras 
(tīrthaṅkarakuṇḍa), into which the gāryapatya fire is invited.
	 2.	 Circular fire pit: the pit that evokes the cremation of the disciples of the 
tīrthaṅkaras (gaṇadharakuṇda), into which the āhvānīya fire is invited.
	
3.	 Triangular fire pit: the pit that evokes the cremation of other omniscient souls 
(sāmānyakevalikuṇḍa), into which the dakṣiṇāgni is invited (Prasād 2019, 159).

--- PAGE 169 ---
144      Ellen Gough
 
Prasād (2019, 155) confirms that these three fires should be established for the yāgamaṇḍala 
havana, but he recognizes that individual kuṇḍas (sthaṇḍila) made of earth can be used if 
the number of participants requires it; in the ceremony in Jaipur, this was the case (fig. 6.5).
The description of these fires in the Ādipurāṇa, in the words of Padmanabh Jaini 
(1979, 292), is “clearly brahminical.” Jinasena has defined an ideal Jain layman in essen­
tially brahminical terms, requiring him to undertake nearly all sixteen of the brahmin­
ical saṃskāras. This Jain “twice-​born” should be invested with the sacred thread in the 
fourteenth garbhānvaya ceremony and then maintain three fires in his home, making 
sure not to give the fires to anyone who has not undergone the proper saṃskāras (ĀP 
40.87). Jinasena even names this Jain layman an agnihotrī—​the Vedic term for one who 
performs the agnihotra śrauta sacrifice daily, at the morning and evening saṃdhyās, 
using the three fires22—​and an 1, “the householder who sets up the sacred fires and 
thereby gains access to the transcendent world of śrauta sacrifice” (Heesterman [1982] 
1988, 268).
However, Digambara Jain homas that are performed today do not conform to this 
Vedic paradigm. While Digambaras may have adopted Vedic terminology, they use the 
three fires in “tantric” ceremonies to complete the ritual propitiation of diagrams like 
the yāgamaṇḍala and vināyaka yantra. The laypeople who participated in the homa cer­
emonies were not required to undertake the saṃskāras and sacred thread investiture 
ceremonies. Indeed, unlike Śvetāmbaras, who do not allow female participation in the 
physical offerings, modern Digambaras permit both men and women to make offerings 
into the fire.
Digambara homas have also been made “Jain” in several ways. As in the Śvetāmbara 
homa to Māṇibhadra, the Pratiṣṭhāratnākara emphasizes the importance of nonvio­
lence. Paṇḍit Gulābcandra acknowledges that previous Jain ācāryas have dictated that 
the wood of certain special trees be used to start the fire, but because this pure wood is 
not always available, and living beings (jīva) can be found in some types of wood, the 
fire should be started with camphor to avoid harming any souls (Gulābcandra n.d., 83, 
273). And even more so than in the Śvetāmbara worship of Māṇibhadra, the Digambara 
homas in which I participated in 2013 were committed to promoting uniquely Jain 
teachings. From the spiritually advanced Jain ascetics honored in the vināyaka yantra to 
the connection between the mantras of the homa and the seven stages on the Digambara 
path to liberation, the components of these ceremonies show how Jain homas are 
not solely performed to appease unenlightened deities for mundane ends. Medieval 
Digambara Jains did not simply appropriate the tantric image consecration practices of 
non-​Jains; they integrated them into their path to liberation.
In Defense of Jain Homas
The homas documented in this chapter are, however, only two of the dozens of dif­
ferent types of fire offerings modern Jains regularly perform. Jain homas are much more

--- PAGE 170 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      145
 
common than the dearth of scholarship on the practice suggests. One might be sur­
prised to know how widespread the ritual use of fire is for modern image-​worshiping 
Digambaras and Śvetāmbaras, since Jainism is known for being based on the rejection 
of the Vedic sacrifice.
Some Jains, recognizing this contradiction, have actively rejected the ritual use of fire. 
One of these reformers plays a key role in the origin story of Māṇibhadra: Loṅkā Śāh, 
the fifteenth-​century founder of the Śvetāmbara mendicant lineage the Loṅkā Gaccha. 
Loṅkā repudiated image worship, arguing that it is not enjoined in the true canonical 
scriptures and contravenes the most fundamental of Jain teachings: nonviolence. Today, 
two groups of Śvetāmbara Jains—​Sthānakavāsīs and Terāpanthīs—​remain committed to 
aniconic worship practices and can trace their roots to the Loṅkā Gaccha (Dundas 2002, 
246–​262). In Digambara Jainism, lay reformers in Jaipur in the eighteenth century also 
noted the violence involved in using single-​sensed beings—​plants and the elements—​in 
temple worship and formed a new sect of Digambara Jainism, the Terāpantha, which 
rejected the ritual use of fire, lamps, and incense, among other practices. In his Buddhi 
Vilāsa from 1770, Bakhatrām Śāh, an important Digambara intellectual, documents 
the distinguishing practices of Terāpanthīs, emphasizing that “they do not use flowers, 
cooked food, or lamps when worshiping Jina images in temples, nor do they lustrate 
them” (Cort 2002, 64). Today, when performing the eightfold pūjā, Terāpanthīs transfer 
yellow-​colored coconut pieces from one plate to another to represent offering a lamp to 
the jinas, and they transfer cloves to represent incense.23
However, for as long as fire offerings have been a part of Jain ritual culture, there have 
been Jains who have defended the practice. In his introduction to the Pratiṣṭhāratnākara, 
Paṇḍit Gulābcandra (n.d., 84–​86) provides twelve citations from foundational 
Digambara Jain scriptures attributed to important ācāryas like Kundakunda and 
Pūjyapāda that enjoin the ritual use of incense, lamps, or fire. Padmanabh Jaini (1979, 
297), who notes that “Jinasena seems to have been the first śramaṇa ācārya to elevate 
fire to a ‘holy’ status,” has translated Jinasena’s definition and justification of Jain fire 
offerings in the Ādipuraṇa:
Fire has no inherent sacredness, and no divinity. But because of its contact with the 
divine body of the arhat [at the time of his cremation], it can be considered pure. . . .  
Such worship of the fire, like the worship of places made sacred by a saint’s having 
attained nirvāṇa there, is not in any way blameworthy.
(ĀP 40.88–​89)
For Jinasena, fire is not sacred because it is a deity, but because it is connected to the 
liberation of the enlightened founders of Jainism and thus can inspire Jains to follow in 
these teachers’ footsteps. In this context, fire becomes worthy of honoring not because 
the Vedas enjoin it but because it is connected to “something that is for Hindus ritually 
impure in the extreme: the funeral pyre” (Jaini 1979, 298).
While one might agree with the arguments of Loṅkā, the Terāpanthīs, and other Jains 
who have rejected fire sacrifice due to the violence of the ceremony, one must admit

--- PAGE 171 ---
146      Ellen Gough
 
that Jains have remained firm in their rejection of the brahminical fire sacrifice. Jain ac­
ceptance of homa ceremonies has become a way to recast common tantric practices as 
the promotion of Jain teachings. Therefore, for the many image-​worshiping Digambaras 
and Śvetāmbaras who regularly perform fire offerings without any inhibitions, criticisms 
of the ritual use of fire in early Jain scriptures can be seen less as a rejection of homa, per 
se, and more as a rebuke of brahminical hegemony.
Notes
	 1.	 I will transcribe all terms in Sanskrit, except the names of modern laypeople, the titles of 
Hindi and Gujarati books, and modern Gujarati terms.
	 2.	 von Glasenapp ([1925] 1998, 452) cites Ādipurāṇa 47.348, but in the edition I have cited, it is 
47.352. For the three Vedic fires, with an illustration, see Olivelle (1998, 16–​18).
	 3.	 For a collection of 152 photographs of Māṇibhadra, see Devluk (1997).
	 4.	 John Cort (2001, 164–​167) has written about the fire sacrifice Śvetāmbaras perform for 
Ghaṇṭākarṇa on the fourteenth of the dark fortnight of the month Āśvina (September–​
October), the night before the festival Diwali. For Ghaṇṭākarṇa, see also Cort (2000). 
While little has been written on Māṇibhadra in English, James Laidlaw (1995, 72 n. 7), in 
his ethnography of Śvetāmbaras in Jaipur, briefly mentions the popularity of worshiping 
Māṇibhadra with fire when he defines the deity as someone who “grants miracles, espe­
cially when worshipped with fire (hawan).”
	 5.	 On Loṅkā, see Flügel (2008).
	 6.	 For the twelve vows of a layperson, see Mahetā (n.d., 22–​68).
	 7.	 On the Śvetāmbara eightfold pūjā, see Cort (2001, 71–​91).
	 8.	 Personal communication, Eric Villalobos, November 2022.
	 9.	 On pūjā clothes, see Cort (2001, 80, 221 n. 22).
	10.	 The Gujarati manual (Devluk 1997, 567) on the fire ceremony requires añjalimudrā for 
avaguṇṭhana.
	11.	 Compare, for example, the steps in the homa to Māṇibhadra to those in the homa to 
Mañjuśrī translated by Payne (2000).
	12.	 For variations of this mantra in the Mahānirvāṇa tantra, see Avalon (1913, 128, 129 n. 3, 
131). For the mantra in the Śrīvidyā text the Paraśurāma Kalpasūtra, see Weber (2010, 426).
	13.	 The final portion of the Śvetāmbara image-​worshiping version of the pañcanamaskāra 
reads: eso paṃcanamoyāro savvapāvappaṇāsaṇo maṅgalāṇaṃ ca savvesiṃ paḍhamaṃ 
havai maṅgalaṃ (This fivefold praise destroys all bad karma and is the most auspicious 
thing among all auspicious things). See Roth (1986, 130). See also the Digambara text on 
mendicant conduct, the Mūlācāra (ca. fourth century CE), vv. 506, 513–​514: “Whoever 
with pure speech body and mind praises the five teachers . . . quickly achieves liberation. 
This fivefold praise destroys all bad karma and is the foremost auspicious thing of all aus­
picious things.”
	14.	 R. Nagaswamy, “Jaina Temple Rituals: Pratishtha tilaka of Nemicandra—​A Study,” http://​
tamil​arts​acad​emy.com/​journ​als/​volu​me2/​artic​les/​jain-​tem​ple.html.
	15.	 For an image of the vināyaka yantra, see Varṇī (2002, 360).
	16.	 On the Digambara eightfold pūjā, see Wiley (2009, 44–​45). For the Navadevatā Pūjā, see 
http://​www.jin​vani​sang​rah.com/​categ​ory/​अन﻿﻿्﻿﻿य-​वैक​ल﻿﻿्﻿﻿पक-​पूजाएँ-​anya-​vaikal​pik-​pooja​yen/​नवद​े
वता-​पूजा-​navde​vta-​pooja/​.

--- PAGE 172 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      147
 
	17.	 The third chapter of the Pratiṣṭhātilaka outlines the homa.
	18.	 For a list of these 108 rites, see ĀP 38.51–​62. On the kriyās, see also Williams (1963, 274–​
287) and Jaini (1979, 298–​304).
	19.	 Here my translation of “sevāphalaṃ ṣaṭparamasthānaṃ bhavatu” differs from Jaini’s. 
When a soul, passing through the “seven supreme stations,” the saptaparamasthāna, 
becomes omniscient, or an arhat, it reaches the sixth station.
	20.	 While sandhyā most often (but not always) refers to two times of day—​morning and eve­
ning (see Srinivasan 1973)—​Ādipurāṇa 47.352 explicitly says there are three sandhyās.
	21.	 For an image of how the three fire pits, gārhapatya, āhavanīya, and dakṣiṇāgni, should be 
constructed, see Jñānamatī (2012, 393).
	22.	 For the agnihotra śrauta sacrifice, see Kane (1941, 998–​1009).
	23.	 Modern Terāpanthīs have not fully rejected the ritual use of fire, however. Figure 6.5 shows 
Terāpanthīs using cloves and yellow rice in the eightfold pūjā yet still making offerings 
into a fire.
References
Primary Sources
Ādipurāṇa of Jinasena. Pt. 2. 1951. Edited and translated into Hindi by Pannālāl Jain. Benaras: 
Bhāratīya Jñānpīṭh Kāśī.
Ghaṇṭākarṇa-​Pratiṣṭhā-​Vidhiḥ. Accessed September 21, 2022. https://​jaine​libr​ary.org/​book-​
det​ail/​?srno=​020​345
Mūlācāra. Pt. 1. 5th ed. 2004. Edited by K. Śāstrī, J. Śāstrī, and P. Jain and translated into Hindi 
by Ā. Jñānamatī. Delhi: Bhāratīya Jñānpīṭh.
Sūtrakṛtāṅga Sūtra. 1895. Translated by H. Jacobi in Jaina Sūtras I, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 
22, 233–​435. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Uttarādhyayana Sūtra. 1895. Translated by H. Jacobi in Jaina Sūtras I, Sacred Books of the East, 
Vol. 22, 1–​232. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pratiṣṭhāsāroddhāra of Āśādhara. 1917. Edited by P. Manoharlāl Śāstrī. Bombay: Jaingraṃth 
Uddhārak Kāryālay.
Pratiṣṭhātilaka of Nemicandra. 2012. Edited by Ā. Jñānamatī as Śrī Nemicandra 
Saiddhāntikadeva dvārā racita Pratiṣṭhā Tilaka. Hastinapur: Digambar Jain Trilok Śodh 
Saṃsthān.
Secondary Sources
Avalon, Arthur 1913. Tantra of the Great Liberation (Mahānirvāṇa Tantra). London: Luzac.
Balbir, Nalini 2018. “The Jain Tradition on Protection and Its Means.” In Katā me rakkhā, katā 
me parittā [Protecting the Protective Texts and Manuscripts], edited by C. Cicuzza, 239–​304. 
Bankok: Fragile Palm Leaver Foundation.
Devluk, N. B., ed. 1997. Tapāgacchādhiṣṭhāyak Yakṣrāj Śrī Māṇibhadradev. Bhavnagar, India: 
Śrī Arihaṃt Prakāśan.
Cort, J. E. 2000. “Worship of Bell-​Ears the Great Hero.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by D. G. 
White, 417–​433. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cort, J. E. 2001. Jains in the World: Religious Values and Ideology in India. New York: Oxford 
University Press.

--- PAGE 173 ---
148      Ellen Gough
 
Cort, J. E. 2002. “A Tale of Two Cities: On the Origins of Digambar Sectarianism in North 
India.” In Multiple Histories: Culture and Society in the Study of Rajasthan, edited by L. A. 
Babb, V. Joshi, and M. W. Meister, 39–​83. Jaipur: Rawat.
Cort, J. E. 2020. “Nonliberated Deities.” In Brill's Encyclopedia of Jainism Online, edited by J. E. 
Cort, P. Dundas, K. A. Jacobsen, and K. L. Wiley. Consulted online on 20 June 2023 <http://​
dx.doi.org/​10.1163/​2590-​2768_​BEJO​_​COM​_​046​177>
Dundas, Paul. 1991. “The Digambara Jain Warrior.” In The Assembly of Listeners: Jains in 
Society, edited by M. Carrithers and C. Humphrey, 169–​186. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Dundas, Paul. 1998. “Becoming Gautama: Mantra and History in Śvetāmbara Jainism.” In 
Open Boundaries: Jain Communities and Cultures in Indian History, edited by J. E. Cort, 31–​
52. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Dundas, Paul. 2002. The Jains. London: Routledge.
Flügel, Peter. 2008. “The Unknown Loṅkā: Tradition and the Cultural Unconscious.” In Jaina 
Studies. Papers of the 12th World Sanskrit Conference, Vol. 9, edited by C. Caillat and N. 
Balbir, 181–​279. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Gough, Ellen. 2020. “Jain Maṇḍalas and Yantras.” In Encyclopedia of Jainism, edited by K. 
Jacobsen, J. E. Cort, K. Wiley, and P. Dundas, 585–​593. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Gough, Ellen. 2021. Making a Mantra: Tantric Ritual and Renunciation on the Jain Path to 
Liberation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gulābcandra “Puṣp,” P. n.d. Pratiṣṭhā Ratnākar. Edited by D. L. Koṭhiyā and J. “Niśānt.” Delhi: 
Prīt Vihār Jain Samāj.
Heesterman, Johannes Cornelis. 1988. “Householder and Wanderer.” In Way of Life: King, 
Householder, Renouncer. Essays in Honour of Louis Dumont, edited by T. N. Madan, 251–​272. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. First published 1982.
Jaini, Padmanabh S. 1979. The Jaina Path of Purification. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Jñānamatī, Ā., ed. 2012. Śrī Nemicandra Saiddhāntikadeva dvārā racita Pratiṣṭhā Tilaka. 
Hastinapur, India: Digambar Jain Trilok Śodh Saṃsthān.
Kalyāṇavijaya, P., ed. 1940. Śrī Tapāgacch Paṭṭāvalī. Pt. 1. Ahmedabad, India: Śrī 
Vijaynītisūrīśvarjī Jain Library.
Kane, Pandurang Vaman 1941. History of Dharmaśāstra: Ancient and Mediaeval Religious and 
Civil Law. Vol 2. Pt. 2. Pune, India: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
Laidlaw, James. 1995. Riches and Renunciation: Religion, Economy, and Society among the Jains. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Mahetā, D. D. n.d. Samyaktva Mūl Bārvrat. Surat, India: Śrī Jaindharm Prasāraṇ Trust.
Olivelle, Patrick., trans. 1992. Saṃnyāsa Upaniḍads: Hindu Scriptures on Asceticism and 
Renunciation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Olivelle, Patrick. 1998. The Early Upaniṣads: Annotated Text and Translation. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Orzech, Charles D. 2016. “Ritual Subjects: Homa in Chinese Translations and Manuals from 
the Sixth through Eighth Centuries.” In Homa Variations: The Study of Ritual Change 
across the Longue Durée, edited by R. K. Payne and M. Witzel, 143–​166. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Payne, Richard K. 2000. “Ritual Manual for the Protective Fire Offering Devoted to Mañjuśrī, 
Chuin Lineage.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by D. G. White, 489–​508. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.

--- PAGE 174 ---
Homa in Jain Traditions      149
 
Prasād, B. Ś. 2019. Yāg Maṇḍal evaṃ Pañckalyāṇak Vidhān. Bhopal, India: Śrāvak Saṃskār 
Sāhitya Kendra.
Roth, G. 1986. “Notes on Pamca-​Namokkāra Parama-​Maṅgala.” In Indian Studies: Selected 
Papers by Gustav Roth, edited by H. Bechert and P. Kieffer-​Pülz, 129–​146. Delhi: Sri Satguru.
Skorupski, Tadeusz. 2016. “Buddhist Permutations and Symbolism of Fire.” In Homa 
Variations: The Study of Ritual Change across the Longue Durée, edited by R. K. Payne and M. 
Witzel, 67–​125. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Somasundaravijaya, Gaṇi. 2007–​2008. Śrī Sūrimantra Mahāpūjan evaṃ Vardhamān Vidyā 
Mahāpūjan. n.p.
Srinivasan, Doris. 1973. “Saṃdhyā: Myth and Ritual.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 15, no. 3: 161–​178.
Tatia, Nathmal., trans. 1994. That Which Is: Tattvārtha Sūtra. San Francisco: HarperCollins.
Varṇī, J. 2002. Jinendra Siddhānt Koś. Pt. 3. 6th ed. Delhi: Bhāratīya Jñānpīṭh.
von Glasenapp, Helmuth. 1998. Jainism. An Indian Religion of Salvation. Translated by S. B. 
Shroti. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. First published 1925.
Weber, Claudia. 2010. Das Paraśurāma-​Kalpasūtra: Sanskrit-​Edition mit deutscher 
Erstübersetzung, Kommentaren und weiteren Studien. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Wiley, Kristi L. 2009. The A to Z of Jainism. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Williams, Robert. 1963. Jaina Yoga: A Survey of the Mediaeval Śrāvakācāras. London: Oxford 
University Press.

--- PAGE 175 ---


--- PAGE 176 ---
Chapter 7
The Neuroscience of 
Tantric Practice
Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
Introduction: Tantra, Meditation,  
and Neuroscience
The term “tantra” has been used to describe a wide range of practices and texts from 
South, Southeast and East Asia and the Himalayas. Our concern in this chapter is more 
specific, with tantric practice as part of a process of spiritual training or self-​cultivation 
within Buddhist and Hindu religious traditions. To quote Glen Hayes and Sthaneshwar 
Timalsina (2017, 1–​2):
Tantra may be regarded as historical systems of ritual practices in which an individual 
engages with a layered cosmology, utilizing diverse senses, cognitive capacities, and 
sexuality in order to achieve elevated states of consciousness and embodied liber­
ation. There are innumerable iterations of Tantra, ranging from theistic to nonthe­
istic, although most seek to “reverse” the flow of cosmic process and manifestation in 
order to lead the individual to some heightened, typically unitive, state.
This chapter is particularly concerned with Vajrayāna, a tantric tradition practiced in 
Tibet and the Himalayas.1 For Buddhist practitioners in the Vajrayāna tradition, the aim 
of their spiritual training is to attain culturally valued ideals of awakening, Buddhahood, 
and liberation. This is the Buddhist version of the unitive state mentioned by Hayes and 
Timalsina. Vajrayāna practice is thought to give special insight into the nature of reality 
to those who practice it successfully, and also to confer powers and abilities that may 
be used for the benefit of others. It also provides a training for a career as a tantric prac­
titioner. In Tibet, Bhutan, and other culturally related areas of the Himalayas, tantric 
practitioners perform rituals for laypeople or lay communities, intended to bring about

--- PAGE 177 ---
152      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
healing, prosperity, defense against misfortune, and the like. They may act as religious 
teachers and, in some cases, have secular authority within their communities.
Becoming a tantric practitioner does not necessarily involve permanently adopting a 
monastic or ascetic lifestyle, but it does require a commitment to sustained practice over 
many years, including prolonged periods of full-​time retreat, often as part of a commu­
nity of practitioners, and normally under the guidance of a tantric guru (in Tibetan, 
“lama,” bla ma2). A standard introductory retreat period in the Kagyü (Bka’ brgyud) and 
Nyingma (Rnying ma) traditions of Tibetan Buddhism is three years and two weeks (or 
three years, three months, three days) (Kongtrul 1994); full training might involve two 
or three such retreats.3 How does this training equip tantric practitioners for their future 
careers?
Like other forms of tantric and non-​tantric meditation and yoga practices (see, e.g., 
Farias, Brazier, and Lalljee 2021; Newcombe and O’Brien-​Kop 2021), Vajrayāna involves 
a systematic training of mind and body. Alternatively, and preferably, one might speak of 
the unified bodymind, since much of the training works across any imagined boundary 
between the two. Many of these yoga and meditation practices, along with secularized 
versions such as the so-​called mindfulness-​based interventions (Baer 2006; Purser et al. 
2016), have been studied in recent years using the methods of neuroscience as well as of 
psychology and other contemporary scientific disciplines.
One important question is whether, from a neuroscientific perspective, tantric 
practices such as those of the Vajrayāna differ systematically from other forms of yoga 
and meditation, and if so in what ways. The question is complicated by the wide variety 
of practices covered by terms such as “meditation” and “yoga” (see, e.g., MacDonald et 
al. 2013; O’Brien-​Kop and Newcombe 2021, 5–​8). We argue, however, on the basis of 
Kozhevnikov’s neuroscientific research, that the techniques of the Vajrayāna do, in 
fact, differ systematically from non-​tantric forms of meditation or yoga studied by 
neuroscientists. More specifically, the non-​tantric techniques studied so far generally 
involve activation of the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS; the so-​called relaxa­
tion response). Tantric (Vajrayāna Buddhist) techniques involve arousal,4 not relaxa­
tion, and do not primarily engage the PNS. This contrast links to specific features of 
tantric techniques, including their incorporation of physical activity (special types of 
breathing, physical movements) and specific types of cognitive activity, along with mul­
timodal imagery of one’s body transformations and associated emotional components.
Arousal-​based techniques are not unique to Vajrayāna Buddhism. While evidence so 
far is limited, a range of techniques used in Hindu tantric practice also appears to be­
long to this neurologically distinctive class of techniques. So do some Islamic and East 
Asian spiritual and self-​cultivation practices. All this points to a more complex picture 
of Asian meditative and contemplative practices than has been generally recognized.
The following sections of the chapter provide a short introduction to Vajrayāna 
Buddhism and to the experimental techniques of neuroscience. Later sections examine 
the growth of the neuroscientific understanding of meditation and of tantra, including 
the question of nondual awareness. The conclusion considers the current state of our 
knowledge and discusses possible future directions.

--- PAGE 178 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      153
 
Vajrayāna Buddhism within the 
Buddhist Tradition
In Tibetan Buddhist societies, Vajrayāna (Tibetan dorjé tekpa, rdo rje theg pa) is 
regarded as the primary mode of attaining Buddhahood and other high spiritual states. 
Other Tibetan Buddhist practices, whether or not aimed at attaining Buddhahood, 
frequently incorporate Vajrayāna (tantric) elements (Thurman 1985). However, by no 
means all Tibetan Buddhist practices are classified by Tibetans as Vajrayāna or tan­
tric.5 Vajrayāna practice is the summit of the spiritual path, not its totality. Most Tibetan 
scholastic systems understand it as the final stage of a three-​stage sequence of Hīnayāna 
(“Lesser Vehicle”), Mahāyāna (“Great Vehicle”), and Vajrayāna (=​ tantra). The first two 
stages may also be grouped together as “Sūtra practices.”
These three stages also correspond in general terms to the historical development of 
Buddhism in India; Vajrayāna’s known presence in the human world dates from the later 
stages of Indian Buddhism (ca. 650 CE onward). Tibetan Buddhist practices include 
Hīnayāna6 and Mahāyāna material alongside specifically Vajrayāna techniques.
Vajrayāna practices continue today as a central component of Buddhism in Tibet, 
the Himalayas (including Nepal and Bhutan), and Mongolia. Elsewhere in Buddhist 
Asia, they were also widely cultivated in the past and continue on a smaller scale in a 
variety of Buddhist and Buddhist-​related contexts (e.g., Crosby 2020; Gellner 1992; 
Hooykaas 1973; Orzech et al. 2011). The Vajrayāna is also increasingly popular in North 
America, Europe, and other regions outside Buddhist Asia. Vajrayāna Buddhism is a 
major form of Buddhist practice, understood by many Buddhists throughout much 
of the history of Buddhism as a central and essential part of the Buddhist path, par­
ticularly for serious and committed practitioners. For Tibetan and Himalayan 
practitioners, it remains central but continues to be seen as a difficult, a challenging, 
and an elite form of practice, to be undertaken after a thorough initial grounding in 
non-​tantric practice.
So far, scientific research on Vajrayāna practices has been limited. This is particularly 
true in relation to neuroscience. Kozhevnikov’s own work, which is discussed at some 
length in this chapter, represents the most substantial body of experimental work in 
neuroscience on Vajrayāna, or indeed on any tantric tradition.7 Instead, neuroscientists 
investigating meditation practices have focused on a limited range of non-​tantric 
techniques that originate from the so-​called Theravāda tradition, practiced in mainland 
Southeast Asia (Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia) and Sri Lanka, and on the clini­
cally defined mindfulness-​based interventions, such as mindfulness-​based stress reduc­
tion (MBSR; Baer 2006). In Tibetan terms, these correspond to Sūtra-​type practices. 
In neuroscientific terms, they generally involve the so-​called relaxation response (PNS 
activation, discussed below, also Benson 1976; Benson et al. 1974). We refer to them as 
“relaxation response-​based practices” or “relaxation-​based practices” for short. By con­
trast, central Vajrayāna practices are “arousal based.”8

--- PAGE 179 ---
154      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
Vajrayāna can be subdivided into two main variants, the Old tantra or Nyingma 
(rnying ma) and the New tantra or sarma (gsar ma). Both derive from late Indian 
Buddhism, but the former go back, at least in part, to the time of the Tibetan Empire 
(seventh to ninth centuries CE), while the sarma teachings were introduced from the 
tenth to twelfth centuries. The sarma schools are often subdivided into the Sakya (sa 
skya), Kagyü, and Geluk (dge lugs), the Geluk being the most recent in origin (early 
fifteenth century). The various schools today have individual versions of specific tan­
tric transmissions, passed on through defined teaching lineages and involving subtle 
differences both in practices and in how the aim of the practices is described and under­
stood (see, e.g., Samuel 1993).
The growth of the sarma schools led to further changes and reformulations among 
the Nyingma, much of it mediated through characteristic visionary techniques (Samuel 
1993, 294–​302, 461–​463, 515–​516). The Nyingma also developed a distinct set of practices 
known as Dzogchen (rdzogs chen) (e.g., Studstill 2005, 125–​171). Dzogchen has its own 
techniques and vocabulary, different from those of tantra proper, although it is generally 
undertaken only after extensive tantric training.
Many Vajrayāna practices are oriented to pragmatic ends such as healing, protec­
tion from illness or misfortune, or destruction of hostile forces or beings, reflecting a 
major aspect of the role of the Vajrayāna in Tibetan society. Others are primarily con­
cerned with the practitioner’s progress toward Buddhahood or awakening (Skt. bodhi). 
Although many techniques are shared between these types of practice, and practitioners 
generally learn both, it is the Buddhahood-​oriented practices on which we focus here. 
They form part of the Mahā, Anu, and Ati categories of the Old tantra (Nyingma, rnying 
ma) traditions, and the equivalent Supreme or Unexcelled, la mé (T. bla na med pa) or 
“Anuttarayoga”9 practices of the New tantra, sarma (T. gsar ma), traditions. The earliest 
known written versions of these various practices appeared in India in the eighth and 
ninth centuries CE (Samuel 2008, 229–​338).
Table 7.1 shows the relationship between these categories diagrammatically.
It is worth noting how Tibetan lamas characteristically contrast the Sūtra (=​ Hīnayāna 
and Mahāyāna) and tantric paths to Buddhahood. A typical formulation is that the 
Sūtra path is focused on the renunciation of ordinary life (Skt. saṃsāra, the “relative” 
dimension, “conventional truth”) and its passions (desire, anger, pride, etc.; Skt. kleśa, 
Table 7.1  Tibetan Classifications of Sūtra and Tantra
1, 2. Sūtra
1. Hīnayāna
2. Mahāyāna
3. Tantra (=​Vajrayāna)
3. Vajrayāna
3a. Vajrayāna (“lower” levels) –​ Kriyā, Carya, Yoga
3b. Vajrayāna (“advanced” practices)–​Mahā, Anu, 
Ati (Old tantra); Anuttarayoga (New tantra)

--- PAGE 180 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      155
 
also sometimes translated as “negative emotions”). Tantric methods, by contrast, make 
deliberate use of the passions to achieve Buddhahood. To quote the late Tibetan lama 
Chögyal Namkhai Norbu:
From the sutra point of view, the relative dimension is an obstacle to be renounced in 
order to realize the absolute level of voidness. But tantra uses the relative to fuel prog­
ress on the path that leads beyond it, and its attitude to the passions renounced at the 
sutra level is expressed in the tantric saying, “When there is more wood (passions) 
there is more fire (realization).”
(Norbu 2000, 49)
This does not mean that the tantric path is one of willful indulgence of the passions but, 
rather, that the passions are systematically employed as part of the practice. The overall 
contrast implied by Namkhai Norbu’s comments fits with the neuroscientific data, ac­
cording to which Sūtra techniques generally involve calming down the nervous system, 
while tantric techniques involve its deliberate arousal and redirection.10 Note too that 
the absolute level is expressed in terms of “voidness” (Skt. śūnyatā, also “emptiness”), 
a mode of engagement with the world which transcends ordinary dualistic thought. 
We will return to the question of nondual awareness, and to the wider question of the 
achievement of awareness and awakening, later in the chapter.
Neuroscience and the  
Relaxation Response
Neuroscientists have used a variety of experimental methods to study meditation. 
Among the most important is electroencephalography (EEG), first developed in the 
1920s to 1940s (Borck 2018). This involves recording the brain’s spontaneous electrical 
activity over time through multiple electrodes placed on the scalp. The most common 
method of EEG analysis used by meditation researchers relies on changes in EEG power 
in specific frequency bands, referred to by the Greek letter names gamma, beta, alpha, 
theta, and delta. Another important measure is EEG coherence, in other words whether 
two or more sensors exhibit similar oscillatory activity to each other. Changes in EEG 
power and/​or coherence in specific frequency bands have been associated by meditation 
researchers with different mental processes involved in meditative and contemplative 
states (e.g., Cahn and Polich 2006, Fell et al. 2010). Electrocardiography (EKG or ECG), 
the recording of the electrical activity of the heart from electrodes on the chest, was also 
developed during the 1920s to 1940s, and it provides further valuable information about 
internal processes related to meditative techniques. For example, heart rate variability 
(HRV) can be used to trace autonomic nervous system (ANS) activation (e.g., Amihai 
and Kozhevnikov 2014, 4–​6; Tyagi and Cohen 2016).

--- PAGE 181 ---
156      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
Further methods were developed from the 1970s onward, including functional mag­
netic resonance imagining (fMRI), which traces blood flow as an indicator of neural 
activity within the brain, along with other new methods such as arterial spin labeling 
and diffusion MRI. These new neuroimaging methods have been used to detect patterns 
of neural activation within the brain, including those associated with various kinds 
of meditative activity. Although, unlike EEG, the new neuroimaging methods have 
high spatial resolution, they have low temporal resolution, limiting their usefulness in 
tracking change over time. Generally, they allow us only to distinguish static patterns of 
brain activation averaged over the duration of an experiment.
It is important to note that data on neural activity alone rarely provide a clear and 
unambiguous view of mental processes. Data require interpretation through cognitive 
models, which are simplified representations of one or more cognitive processes for 
the purposes of prediction and comprehension (Forstmann et al, 2011; Forstmann and 
Wagenmakers 2015; Smith and Ratcliff 2004). Put otherwise, the field of cognitive neu­
roscience is model based.
The primary focus of neuroscience is the nervous system, including the brain. The 
nervous system is traditionally divided into the central nervous system (CNS; brain and 
spinal cord) and the peripheral nervous system, the nerves that branch out from the 
brain and spinal cord throughout the body. The ANS consists of neurons from the CNS 
and peripheral nervous system, and it monitors and regulates internal processes that are 
largely below the level of conscious awareness. There is also a close connection between 
the ANS and the endocrine system, and in human beings, at least, both are related at a 
subjective level to our emotions.
Langley (1921) introduced a distinction between two major aspects of the ANS, 
the sympathetic and parasympathetic, and that distinction was elaborated by subse­
quent authors (e.g., Cannon 1932; Hess 1957). Generally speaking, these early scientists 
thought of sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and parasympathetic nervous system 
(PNS) activity as contrasting and complementary. The SNS was understood to accel­
erate the heart rate, constricting blood vessels and raising blood pressure in order to 
enable a quick and mobilizing response, generally as a reaction to an immediate threat 
(“fight or flight,” in Cannon’s terms). The PNS was understood to slow down the heart 
rate, lower blood pressure, increase intestinal and gland activity, and relax sphincter 
muscles, facilitating rest and social interaction in situations that are safe from danger.
This tidy symmetry between SNS and PNS, fight or flight versus rest and relax, 
gave way from the 1980s onward to a more complex picture, to which we shall return. 
However, it provided the basis for the first major theoretical account of meditation prac­
tice; Herbert Benson’s “relaxation response” model was developed in the early 1970s on 
the basis of a study of transcendental meditation (TM; Benson 1976; Benson et al. 1974). 
Benson’s influential work saw meditation as primarily concerned with bringing about 
relaxation through the activation of the PNS. Jon Kabat-​Zinn’s development in the 
1980s of a Buddhist-​derived practice, originally called Stress Reduction and Relaxation 
Program but subsequently popularized as Mindfulness-​Based Stress Reduction 
(MBSR), provided further support for this approach (Kabat-​Zinn 1982; cf. also Britton

--- PAGE 182 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      157
 
et al. 2014, 65). The dominance of the relaxation-​response, stress-​reduction approach 
to meditation, along with the popularity and convenience of the mindfulness-​based 
interventions as research topics, has meant that most published meditation research has 
been on practices that fitted this pattern.
Alternatives to the  
Relaxation Response
By the 1990s, researchers had begun to appreciate that Buddhist meditation contained 
many different techniques of mind-​body cultivation, even within the more accessible 
versions of Buddhism. Many of these were quite different from the “mindfulness” ap­
proach popularized by Kabat-​Zinn (Purser and Milillo 2015; Samuel 2016a, 2020), and 
none of them appeared to be primarily aimed at stress reduction. On the practical side, 
these techniques started to be used increasingly as a complement or alternative to the 
“bare awareness” practices which dominated the early years of the “mindfulness move­
ment.” All this led to a need for taxonomies to encompass these various new techniques.
These new taxonomies were generally derived in a relatively uncritical way from 
Buddhist classifications or phenomenological research. Thus, one of the most 
widely used taxonomies of meditation practices distinguishes between “two broad 
categories” of meditation, focused attention (FA) and open monitoring (OM) (Lutz, 
Slagter, et al. 2008, 163). This derives from a traditional Buddhist distinction between 
samatha and vipassanā in Pali (śamatha and vipaśyanā in Sanskrit). However, as we 
will see later, we do not find systematic contrasts between practices classified as FA 
and OM either in cognitive neuroscience models of attention or in experimental 
work. Other newly introduced categories, such as LKM (corresponding to metta-​
bhāvanā—​e.g., Galante et al., 2016; Lippelt et al., 2014) or constructive versus decon­
structive (Dahl et al. 2015), suffer from similar difficulties.11 An ambitious typology 
by Antoine Lutz and others involves a matrix within which kinds of meditation 
are located along three axes, object orientation, dereification, and meta-​awareness 
(Lutz et al. 2015). The matrix helps to clarify the phenomenological categories un­
derlying the researchers’ understanding of various Asian practices, and the authors 
also attempt some neuroscientific interpretation in terms of various neural networks 
postulated from fMRI data, but this interpretation still remains phenomenological 
rather than grounded in experimental data.
The fundamental orientation of Buddhism is toward liberation from saṃsāra 
and toward the attainment of awakening (Buddhahood), a state clearly thought 
of as involving high levels of awareness. A key issue therefore is how one might find 
neuroscientific models for this process. The progressive development of a more sophis­
ticated understanding of the ANS and its relationship to brain activity opened up some 
possible answers.

--- PAGE 183 ---
158      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
Arguments along similar lines came both from experimental psychology and neu­
roscience. Scientists began to point to the existence of a more complex and modulated 
response to potentially threatening situations than was allowed for by the simple SNS-​
PNS contrast. Thus neuroscientist Stephen Porges located this more complex and in­
teractive response in a revised understanding of the ANS (e.g., Porges 2011, 20–​51), 
based on the role of the vagus nerve in mediating processes of SNS arousal. He distin­
guished a “freeze” response to threat, which he associated with phylogenetically older 
(reptilian) parts of the vagal system, from a more complex response associated with the 
later, mammalian parts of the system. In this more modulated response, humans and 
other mammals were able to inhibit the basic freeze response of the SNS in relatively safe 
situations and to develop more complex and adaptive forms of interaction, involving 
control of facial expression, vocal tone, and emotional state (Porges 2011, 57). Lazarus 
and Folkman came to similar conclusions through an examination of how human 
subjects appraised complex social situations (Folkman and Lazarus 1988; Lazarus and 
Folkman 1984). “Appraisal” allowed for situations within the subject’s coping capacity 
to be dealt with by a complex cognitive-​emotional response, rather than a simple fight-​
or-​flight reaction of the SNS.12 Both approaches pointed to a third, intermediate state 
between simple activation of the PNS or SNS.
This state, now generally referred to as autonomic arousal (also PNS withdrawal as­
sociated arousal) has by now been the subject of a number of studies (e.g., Aston-​Jones 
et al. 2000; Dosenbach et al. 2008; Kozhevnikov, Strasser, and Abdullah, 2022, 2). It is a 
state of high wakefulness, in contrast to the state of PNS dominance (relaxation), which 
is closer to the state of sleep. Autonomic arousal allows for a skilled and modulated re­
sponse to a complex situation.
These two states, autonomic arousal and PNS dominance, support different kinds of 
alertness. Although mental states during PNS dominance are associated with relaxa­
tion, they are not necessarily characterized by drowsiness and actual sleep and can occur 
concurrently with a specific type of attention, tonic alertness (i.e., vigilance or sustained 
attention of a relatively permanent character). States of autonomic arousal, however, 
are accompanied by a contrasting form of attention, phasic alertness, which implies the 
deployment of focused (selective) attention and occurs in response to arousing stimuli 
(Petersen & Posner, 2012). It is phasic alertness that allows for the complex, modulated 
response to events described by Porges (2011) and Folkman and Lazarus (1988).
Britton et al. (2014) suggested that, in emphasizing the importance of relaxa­
tion, researchers might be missing the point of Buddhist meditation practices. These 
practices were in fact aimed at the cultivation of tonic alertness, through developing 
a special state of relaxation during which a person remains alert. This changed focus 
would bring our understanding of meditation more into accordance with the Buddhist 
goal of awakening (Britton et al. 2014). In fact, the combination of alpha and occasional 
theta activity noted in Benson’s initial studies of TM and found in most EEG studies 
of meditation (Lomas et al. 2015) is a characteristic EEG marker for tonic alertness 
(Sadaghiani and D’Esposito 2015).

--- PAGE 184 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      159
 
These studies had however almost all been of relaxation-​response meditation 
techniques. Phasic alertness, the form of alertness associated with autonomic arousal, 
would seem a better basis for developing the wakefulness and fluid responsiveness asso­
ciated with Buddhist awakening. Were there other forms of meditation that were aimed 
more at cultivating phasic alertness? Specifically, could Tantric meditation be directed at 
the development of phasic alertness? In fact, there was already some evidence pointing 
in this direction.
Kozhevnikov’s Research on Vajrayāna
When Kozhevnikov published her first neuroscientific study of deity yoga in 2009, there 
was little substantial research on any Buddhist tantric practices; almost all the research 
had been on non-​tantric practices, including the mindfulness-​based interventions 
and various modernist Vipassanā practices. There had, however, been a number of 
small-​scale studies of Hindu tantra from the 1950s onward.13 In retrospect, some of 
these suggest what we might now interpret as autonomic arousal. They include studies 
by Das and Gastaut (1955)14 and Wenger and Bagchi (1961), each involving some re­
search subjects undertaking Kriya and similar tantric-​affiliated practices, and a third 
study which examined a breathing and mantra practice from the Ananda Marga, a 
modern group whose practices are also in part tantric-​derived (Corby et al. 1978). 
One early study of Tibetan Vajrayāna practice pointed in a similar direction. This had 
been carried out by Herbert Benson on the practice known as tummo (inner heat),15 
later studied by Kozhevnikov (2019). Benson’s initial study of tummo was primarily 
concerned with changes in body temperature (Benson et al. 1982, Benson and Proctor 
1985), but on a subsequent visit he collected EEG data from three monks in Sikkim. His 
data clearly showed increased SNS activity during tummo, though since this did not fit 
the relaxation-​response model he was unable to make much sense of his observations 
(Benson et al. 1990).
Kozhevnikov’s research on Vajrayāna was to take the “arousal” model much further. 
Her work grew out of a wider research agenda on neural mechanisms of visual cogni­
tion (see Kozhevnikov 2019). Motivated by the description of Vajrayāna practices in the 
texts as enhancing the mind and leading to states of high wakefulness, Kozhevnikov 
hypothesized that tantric practices generate the state of arousal and associated phasic 
alertness (focused attention), as contrasted with the “mindfulness” practices, which 
generate the relaxation response and tonic alertness.
Her Tibetan Vajrayāna studies have involved practices from the Kagyü and 
Nyingma traditions, which form part of the sequence of practices oriented to awak­
ening or Buddhahood. This sequence has a similar form in the two traditions, 
commencing with the visualization of a mandala of tantric deities and with self-​
identification with the central deity (yidam, yi dam).16 This stage is referred to in

--- PAGE 185 ---
160      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
English as the generation (also creation or development) stage, in Tibetan kyerim 
(bskyed rim), and it is followed by a second stage, the completion or perfection stage 
(dzogrim, rdzogs rim).17
The completion stage itself consists of two phases: (1) a series of practices working with 
the flow of an inner breath or lung (rlung =​ Skt. prāṇa) through an internally visualized 
network of channels and cakras, followed by (2) other less conceptual practices.18 In the 
Nyingma tradition, these two phases are called “with characteristics” (tsenché, mtshan 
bcas) and “without characteristics” (tsenmé, mtshan med) (e.g., Kongtrul 2007, 69). 
Here tsen19 implies conceptualization, reification, or mental labeling, and the aim is to 
go beyond the conceptual practices (tsenché) to the nonconceptual awareness of the 
tsenmé practices. Practices “with characteristics” in Nyingma tantra include tummo 
(gtum mo, see below).
Once the generation and completion stage practices are mastered, they are performed 
consecutively. Thus, the practitioner might typically perform a generation-​stage prac­
tice involving deity yoga, proceed to completion stage practices “with characteristics” 
such as tummo, and then undertake a practice “without characteristics” involving 
nonconceptual awareness, such as Mahāmudrā or Rigpa (table 7.2). The completion 
stage is the context for the achievement of the nondual awareness which is the insight 
into reality. This, as Elio Guarisco and Ingrid Mcleod note, following Jamgön Kongtrul, 
is “not a new state of mind developed through practice, but one already fully present in 
the mind stream of every being: the pristine awareness of luminous clarity, the union of 
bliss and emptiness” (Guarisco and McLeod 2008, 15).
Could tantric meditation be seen as enabling and facilitating this state of high aware­
ness? This is an issue that Kozhevnikov’s research has progressively explored, initially 
through studies of deity yoga (yidam practice), a central technique in the generation 
stage (Kozhevnikov et al. 2009) and of tummo (gtum mo) meditation, the well-​known 
“inner heat” completion-​stage practice on which Benson had done some preliminary 
research (Kozhevnikov et al. 2013). Kozhevnikov demonstrated that deity yoga brought 
about a dramatic, if relatively short-​lived, increase of visuospatial processing due to 
enhanced capacity for focused attention. She also showed that tummo practitioners 
were indeed able to generate an exceptionally high level of arousal, enabling control over 
Table 7.2  Generation and Completion Stages
Stage
Typical practice
1.	 Generation Stage
Deity yoga (visualisation of yidam 
deity and mandala)
2a.	 Completion stage, conceptually-​based 
practices (“with characteristics”)
tummo
2b.	 Completion stage, nonconceptual practices 
(“without characteristics”)
Mahāmudrā, Rigpa

--- PAGE 186 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      161
 
the ANS and the generation of a significant rise in the core body temperature (CBT). 
However, she noted that
temperature increases during tummo meditation are neither solely a by-​product 
of meditation nor its goal, but instead may be a means to facilitate the achievement 
of “deep meditative states.” The tummo meditators may use the CBT increases as a 
vehicle to enhance their attention and focus their meditative performance (which 
may in turn facilitate a further increase in their temperature through meditative 
visualization).
(Kozhevnikov et al. 2013, 11)
This is consonant with the Tibetan understanding of the purpose of these practices as 
part of a larger process and indicates that with practices such as deity yoga or tummo we 
need to look not just at what state of awareness is achieved in the practice itself but also 
at what the practice may enable the meditator to do in subsequent practices.
Kozhevnikov’s next study looked at this sequencing of practices directly, showing, 
through a study of deity yoga followed by rigpa (rig pa, a completion-​stage-​type practice 
“without characteristics”), that deity yoga generated a state of arousal (and high wake­
fulness), which was later employed in rigpa meditation. The research was carried out 
with nine long-​term Vajrayāna practitioners from Shechen monastery in Nepal, and ten 
long-​term Theravāda-​style practitioners from a temple in Bangkok. It used a four-​way 
comparison between the two Vajrayāna practices and two Theravāda practices (Amihai 
and Kozhevnikov 2014). See Table 7.3
Kasiṇa meditation is a classic Thai samatha-​type practice involving concentration on 
an element or color, generally represented as a disc. The practices were performed se­
quentially, with the Vajrayāna practitioners going from rest to deity yoga to rigpa, and 
the Theravādin practitioners going from rest to kasiṇa practice to vipassanā.
The EKG results confirmed that, while both Theravāda practices elicited the state of 
relaxation, both Vajrayāna practices brought about autonomic arousal. The EEG results 
for the Theravāda practices were typical of Sūtra-​type practices, and consonant with 
a relaxed state of tonic alertness, whereas those for the Vajrayāna practices indicated 
arousal, not relaxation. In a following series of visual tasks, the Vajrayāna practices led 
to a dramatic if short-​term boost in cognitive performance. On the basis of the EKG 
Table 7.3  Four-​Way Comparison Between Vajrayāna and 
Theravāda Practices
Vajrayāna practices
Theravāda practices
Samatha (FA)
Deity yoga (DY)
kasiṇa practice
Vipassanā (OM)
Open presence (rigpa)
Theravādin-​style vipassanā

--- PAGE 187 ---
162      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
data, Kozhevnikov concluded that this was indeed phasic alertness, as opposed to the 
tonic alertness brought about by the Theravāda practices, and that it was enabled by the 
arousal brought about by the Vajrayāna practices.
A further aim of the study was to show that the “relaxation response” and the FA/​OM 
taxonomy could not accommodate tantric practices. Kasiṇa meditation, as a samatha 
practice, is classified as FA, while vipassanā is OM. These were compared with Tibetan 
deity yoga (classified as FA), and rigpa (classified as OM). If the FA/​OM distinction 
were really to be valid across all meditation practices, one would expect to see similar 
contrasts between the FA and OM practices in the Theravāda and Vajrayāna cases, This, 
however, was not found, implying that the FA/​OM distinction did not hold up at the 
neurological level.
Overall, the four-​way study suggests the need for a substantial reconceptualizing of 
meditation. It establishes that the relaxation response is by no means universal, and that 
the FA/​OM contrast also cannot be assumed to be generally valid (see also Amihai and 
Kozhevnikov 2015).
Achieving Nondual Awareness
Rigpa, the Tibetan “OM-​type” meditation from the Nyingma-​Dzogchen context used 
in the four-​way study, is generally regarded as a form of nondual awareness (NDA; Lutz 
et al. 2007). Another form of NDA, Mahāmudrā, or chagchen in Tibetan (phyag chen), 
has a similar role in the New tantra (sarma) system (Dunne 2011; Jackson 2011). As noted 
above, these modes of awareness are believed to arise when the conceptualizing activity 
of consciousness is quieted, and to represent insight into the true nature of the mind and 
reality. NDA rose to prominence in the meditation research community through a se­
ries of articles by Zoran Josipovic, who had been involved in Kozhevnikov’s deity yoga 
study. Commenting on the FA/​OM distinction, Josipovic noted that
Both focused attention and open monitoring styles of meditation contain an essen­
tially dualistic orientation of “subject-​observing-​object.” Yet, there is another group 
of meditations that do not employ this strategy, but instead rely on accessing a level 
of awareness that is inherently free from this dualistic subject-​object construct. This 
non-​conceptual awareness has sometimes been termed nondual awareness, open 
awareness or open presence,
(Josipovic 2010, 1120)
NDA is a complex term to operationalize. There are many kinds of unitive awareness, 
theistic as well as nontheistic, described in the literature and aimed at by meditators 
(see Josipovic 2010, 2014, 2019, 2021, for further discussion). However, there is no doubt 
that NDA is significant within both Vajrayāna and Mahāyāna Buddhism, and that clas­
sical descriptions of Rigpa and Mahāmudrā place both in this category. Kozhevnikov’s

--- PAGE 188 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      163
 
most recent research (Kozhevnikov, Strasser, McDougal et al. 2022) has focused on 
Mahāmudrā, the New tantra version of NDA.
In the New tantra tradition in eighth-​ and ninth-​century India, the state of NDA 
known as Mahāmudrā was initially evoked through (physical or visualized) sexual 
practice, with the nonduality of male and female, and of “male” and “female” aspects 
within each individual, as an explicit model. These practices were not accessible to cel­
ibate practitioners, and a non-​tantric mode of access to Mahāmudrā, attributed to the 
Indian guru Maitrīpa (Kragh 2015; Mathes 2021), was developed in the eleventh cen­
tury. This practice (often known as “Sūtra Mahāmudrā”) was transmitted to Tibet and 
passed down among the new monastic lineages of the Kagyü and Geluk (e.g., Jackson 
2019; Rheingans 2017). In modern times, the sexual practices are rarely undertaken lit­
erally, being replaced by symbolic equivalents, so “Tantric Mahāmudrā” is available to 
both monastic and nonmonastic practitioners. However, the Vajrayāna traditions of the 
New tantra in Tibet have maintained both tantric and non-​tantric (Sūtra) routes to the 
achievement of Mahāmudrā.
Kozhevnikov designed an experimental procedure to examine whether the states 
associated with tantric and non-​tantric types of Mahāmudrā differ in terms of their 
neurophysiology. The research involved sixteen highly experienced Vajrayāna 
practitioners from several retreat centers in Bhutan, working under the guidance 
of H. E. Gyeltshen Trulku Rinpoche, a retreat master in the Drukpa Kagyu (Śākya 
Śrī) lineage. The practitioners performed Mahāmudrā meditation after a rest period, 
then undertook deity yoga, followed by a second Mahāmudrā meditation. This was 
followed by tummo for ten members of the group who were also experienced in this 
practice. The intention was to contrast the first Mahāmudrā period, undertaken di­
rectly from rest, with the second, which had been preceded by the “arousal”-​type 
practice of deity yoga. Kozhevnikov assumed that this might replicate the difference 
between tantric and non-​tantric Mahāmudrā practice and show whether they in fact 
involved neurologically similar states. This study showed clearly that the two forms 
of Mahāmudrā had quite different neurological signatures (Kozhevnikov, Strasser, 
McDougal et al. 2022). This implies that these two “NDA practices” involve different 
cognitive processes, and that NDA cannot be treated as a unitary category. The study 
also has consequences for the discussion of attention and its relationship to arousal 
(see Timalsina, this volume), though a consideration of these aspects would take 
us beyond the scope of this chapter (see Kozhevnikov, Strasser, and Abdullah 2022; 
Kozhevnikov, Strasser, McDougal et al. 2022).
Conclusion
Overall, Kozhevnikov’s research so far provides compelling evidence for tantric med­
itation forming a distinctive class of practices, based on the sequential use of specific 
techniques to achieve a degree of control over the ANS. More specifically, they involve

--- PAGE 189 ---
164      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
the creation and maintenance of autonomic arousal and facilitate high levels of phasic 
alertness. The ability to access such enhanced awareness might well be of practical use 
for tantric practitioners making decisions on behalf of clients, and needing to see com­
plex situations clearly and objectively.
At the same time, it is clear that there are many aspects of tantric practice we cannot 
yet model through the experimental techniques of cognitive neuroscience. Consider, 
for example, the so-​called subtle body,20 the complex internal “physiology” of channels 
and wheels or junction points (nāḍī and cakra in Sanskrit) through which flow inner 
air or breath and energetic substances (prāṇa, bindu in Sanskrit), which forms a cen­
tral part of tummo and other completion-​stage practices (see also Hayes, this volume). 
Hindu versions of this “subtle physiology” of tantra have been familiar in Europe, North 
America, and English-​speaking circles in India from the 1920s onward through the 
work of Sir John Woodroffe (e.g., The Serpent Power, first published in 1919; Woodroffe 
1974). More recently, Glen Hayes has described the related subtle body concepts of the 
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā textual corpus (2012, 2014). Similar procedures and ideas are found in 
many other spiritual traditions, Asian and Western (e.g., Pati and Zubko 2020; Samuel 
and Johnson 2013).
The possibility of a relationship between the internal “subtle physiology” of tantric 
yoga and the structure of the ANS, and so of a neurological interpretation of tantra, was 
already raised in the 1920s by the Indian scholar Vasant Rele in the context of Kuṇḍalinī 
Yoga, a Hindu tantric practice with close similarity to Vajrayāna completion-​stage 
techniques such as tummo (Rele 1931, xiii), and it has been suggested by a number of sub­
sequent writers (e.g., Loizzo 2016; see also Hayes 2014, 692). Both Hindu and Buddhist 
versions of these practices work with a similar visualized internal structure of channels, 
cakras, and flows. The flow through these channels, prāṇa in Sanskrit or lung (rlung) 
in Tibetan, is related to the breath, semen, and menstrual blood. In the Vajrayāna case, 
these male and female sexual substances are also homologized with bodhicitta, the fun­
damental altruistic motivational state that drives the attainment of Buddhahood.21
However, although we can certainly speculate about ways in which such concepts and 
the associated breathing techniques might help to focus mental visualization and facil­
itate control over the ANS (cf. Kozhevnikov et al. 2013; also Minvaleev et al., 2014), at 
this point we do not have concepts or models within the field of neuroscience which we 
could relate to the existence of chakras and channels.22
Future research might also develop a finer-​grained analysis of specific techniques. 
For example, there are many forms of deity yoga, both in the Buddhahood-​oriented 
practices and in those with more pragmatic purposes such as healing. They differ greatly 
in the appearance, color, attributes, prescribed emotional mood, and so on, of the deity, 
and the structure, complexity, and appearance of the mandala or mandala-​s. We are 
not yet in a position to evaluate the effects of these differences, but they are certainly 
regarded as significant within the tradition.
We should also consider the strong affective and devotional component to the 
training, beginning with the religious life most practitioners have experienced in 
families and village communities before entering tantric training, and explicit within

--- PAGE 190 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      165
 
the ngöndro (sngon ’gro) practices which are an essential preliminary for Vajrayāna 
practice. Although such factors cannot easily be incorporated into our current exper­
imental methods, there may be ways in which we can gradually work toward neuro­
science models that can incorporate them more fully. The connections between the 
ANS, the endocrine system, and the emotions (cf. Epel et al. 1998), for example, might 
provide ways to build in some of the affective dimensions of the practice situation. The 
latter might be particularly relevant if we are interested in possible applications of tan­
tric processes to promote good health through self-​regulation of physical and psycho­
logical processes. We are all limited by the neural habits we have acquired in the course 
of our lives; tantra may offer an opportunity to balance and restructure some of these 
habits.23 A significant direction for further research might be to examine some of the 
Vajrayāna practices oriented toward pragmatic goals such as good health and vitality 
(Samuel 2016b).
There are many other aspects that might be incorporated into a more developed 
analysis. Practices such as the tulkor (’phrul ’khor) exercises, which involve physical 
movements, breathing, and the directing of consciousness and provide a necessary 
preparation for advanced Vajrayāna practices, surely make an important contribution 
(Baker 2013; Chaoul 2007; Loseries-​Leick 1997). The elaborate monastic dances or cham 
(’chams) performed in many of these communities also contribute to the shaping and 
training of the practitioners’ body techniques and experience (Samuel and David 2016, 
13–​15).
Overall, it is evident that we are still in the relatively early stages of understanding 
tantric processes in neuroscientific terms. As with all research on Buddhist medi­
tation practices, there is a complex relationship between what we can measure, what 
participants experience, and what the practices are intended to bring about according to 
Buddhist sources. Applying the methods of cognitive neuroscience to the study of med­
itation will be a valuable development, among other reasons because it both enables and 
requires researchers to be more explicit about whether and how they are incorporating 
the experience of tantric practitioners and the purpose of the practices. Explicit models 
make it possible to go beyond simply measuring the changes in neural activity during 
different meditative practices, and allow us to begin to understand these changes within 
the parameters of the model.
To formulate such models, researchers need to work closely with practitioners to for­
mulate meaningful hypotheses about the neurophysiological and cognitive processes 
involved in tantric practices, which are aligned with contemporary cognitive psy­
chology and neuroscience theories on the one hand and Buddhist accounts on the other 
hand. We do not have direct access to the practitioner’s subjective experience, though it 
is possible that microphenomenological studies based on careful and detailed recording 
of meditators’ accounts of their subjective experience might take us somewhat further 
in this direction (cf. Bitbol and Petitmengin 2017), and so help meditation researchers to 
build more informed neuroscience models of meditative practices.
As for the purpose of the practices, the central goals of Vajrayāna as of other tantric 
processes can be represented only very approximately within English and other modern

--- PAGE 191 ---
166      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
European languages. However, we can start building neuroscientific models of the 
practices, within which we can specify in scientific terms what the practices and states 
might achieve. For example, tummo practice, in this model, could be seen as a practice 
that ideally leads to a full conscious control over the SNS, and therefore over the ANS as 
a whole. This already offers potential connections to, for example, Tibetan descriptions 
of awakening in terms of gaining control over the inner winds of the subtle body 
(cf. Samuel 2019: 780–​781, citing Yangönpa 2015, 73, 78).
Further work on Hindu forms of tantra is also clearly desirable. There are close his­
torical connections between Hindu tantra and Vajrayāna, and similarities between 
many of the practices. Thus various kriya practices described and taught by various 
modern teachers of tantric yoga such as Swami Satyananda (Satyananda 1985) or Swami 
Yogananda (Stevens 2013; Yogananda 1930) have resemblances to tulkor and completion-​
stage practices in the Vajrayāna. Much of this material probably goes back in some form 
to the period when Hindu and Buddhist tantric practitioners were part of a shared ascetic 
milieu in India. However, it is probably more difficult to find the kind of widely shared 
and clearly structured practice regimens available in Tibetan and Himalayan regions 
within the Hindu context. Charismatic twentieth-​century teachers such as Yogananda or 
Satyananda have generally put together their own systems on the basis of material from 
a variety of sources. However there are certainly Hindu practitioners in India and Nepal 
who have attained high levels of competence in tantric practice, and it would be good to 
know more about how their modes of practice compare with those of the Vajrayāna.24
To conclude, the neuroscience of tantric practice is still at a relatively early stage, but 
some significant and important results have been achieved which illuminate not only 
tantric practice in South Asia and the Himalayas but the wider field of meditation and 
mind-​body training processes in many cultures. It is already clear that the methods of 
neuroscience are a valuable complement to the more traditional textual and ethno­
graphic approaches to tantric practice, and that there is the potential for a close and mu­
tually enriching relationship between these different approaches. It is to be hoped that 
the traditional boundaries between academic disciplines do not obstruct the flourishing 
of such a relationship.
Notes
	1.	 Also among Mongolian populations, which had close historical links to Tibet. Tantric 
Buddhist traditions extended historically into Southeast and East Asia, and continue today 
in Japan and elsewhere. Consequently, while the term “Vajrayāna” is used here primarily to 
refer to a component of the Tibetan Buddhist tradition and to its Indian precursors, related 
practices also exist in other Buddhist societies. See Gardiner, this volume.
	2.	 Tibetan terms are given in phonetic transcription following the Tibetan and Himalayan 
Library system (https://​www.thlib.org/​refere​nce/​tran​slit​erat​ion/​phco​nver​ter.php). Wylie 
equivalents are given in parentheses at the first occurrence. Terms that are likely to be more 
familiar in Sanskrit are generally given in that language (e.g., tantra, Vajrayāna, Mahāmudrā 
rather than gyü, dorjé tekpa, chagchen).

--- PAGE 192 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      167
 
	 3.	 Interview by Maria Kozhevnikov with H. E. Gyeltshen Tulku Rinpoche of Kurizampa, 
Mongar, Bhutan, March 2021.
	 4.	 Note that the term “arousal” here is used in a technical sense, explained in the chapter, 
which differs somewhat from the colloquial meaning of the term.
	 5.	 In written and spoken Tibetan, “tantra” is a clearly defined category. The Tibetan term 
is gyü (rgyud) though synonyms such as dorjé tekpa (=​ Vajrayāna) or sang-​ngak (gsang 
sngags, “Secret Mantra”) are also often employed.
	 6.	 Hīnayāna (t’egmen, theg dman) for the Tibetans is normally a label for this initial stage 
of teachings and techniques within Tibetan Buddhism, not a term for other Buddhist 
schools. It should not be identified or confused with “Theravāda”. The Tibetan “Hinayāna”-​
level teachings derive historically from an early Buddhist school, the Sarvāstivāda. 
Contemporary “Theravāda” Buddhists, mostly in Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka, claim to 
continue another and different early Buddhist school, represented by the Pali Canon (see 
Skilling 2009; Skilling et al. 2012).
	 7.	 There has been other neuroscientific research carried out on Tibetan meditation, partic­
ularly by Richard Davidson and his colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, but also by 
other groups. However, this research generally refers to non-​tantric (Sūtra) elements of 
Tibetan practice (e.g., compassion meditation) or to generic effects of meditation prac­
tice, rather than focusing on the mechanisms of tantric practice (e.g., see Carter et al. 2005; 
Lutz, Brefczynski, et al. 2008; Lutz et al. 2004).
	 8.	 It has been suggested that some non-​tantric practices, for example, loving-kindness med­
itation (LKM), are not associated with a relaxed state of the body (e.g., Lumma, Kok, and 
Singer 2015). Although these practices do not appear to fall into the specifically tantric 
category of arousal-​based practices discussed here, they too suggest the need for a more 
complex categorization.
	 9.	 The term “Anuttarayoga,” though widely used in secondary and popular literature, is not 
clearly attested in extant Sanskrit sources and is probably incorrect (see, e.g., English 2002, 
5–​6; Sanderson 1994, 98 n.1).
	10.	 The same has been argued for Hindu tantra (see, e.g., Bäumer 2015, 103–​104, Wenta 2015, 
123–​125). At the same time, it should be kept in mind that there are very many different 
techniques associated with both Sūtra and tantra paths.
	11.	 In fact, both the FA/​OM distinction and the LKM category are less straightforward in 
the Buddhist literature than they appear. Śamatha and vipaśyanā, and their equivalents 
in other Asian languages, have been used quite variously across Buddhist traditions. 
LKM can also easily conflate practices involving quite distinct techniques, such as 
those based on metta (“loving-​kindness”), karuṇā (“compassion”), and the numerous 
Mahāyāna practices for the development of bodhicitta (the compassionate motivation for 
Buddhahood).
	12.	 While the “loss of control” mode predominantly involves the corticoadrenal system, re­
lated to increases in cortisol and decreases in testosterone, the “control” or coping mode 
involves the sympathoadrenal system, as characterized by increases in noradrenaline, 
gonadotropins, testosterone, and oxytocin (Cardinali 2018, 192–​194).
	13.	 These studies generally refer to “yoga” rather than “tantra,” but the practices mentioned 
include specifically tantric practices such as Kriya Yoga.
	14.	 We have been unable to obtain this reference, but Corby notes that Das and Gastaut 
“studied the meditations of seven highly experienced Yogis during Krya Yoga medita­
tion, and reported clear signs of autonomic arousal and EEG activation, most pronounced 
during the deepest meditations of the most experienced subjects. They concluded that the

--- PAGE 193 ---
168      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
techniques studied represented a state of intense concentration of attention that was prob­
ably not attained in Western students of Yoga” (Corby et al. 1978, 571).
	15.	 The word tummo (gtum mo) is the name of a goddess (Skt. Caṇḍalī) corresponding to 
Kuṇḍalinī, the coiled serpent goddess at the base of the spine in Hindu tantra (e.g., 
Silburn 1988).
	16.	 Although the term “visualization” is conventionally used, this process of imaginative re-​
creation is not restricted to the visual. It includes sound, hand gestures, incense, symbolic 
offerings, and so on, as well as the systematic evocation of devotional feeling and other 
emotional states.
	17.	 The generation-​completion sequence goes back to Indian Vajrayāna, and first appears 
in the context of the Guhyasamāja tantra tradition in around 800 CE. The two terms are 
discussed in a text, the so-​called Samājottara, which probably circulated independently 
as a supplement to the Guhyasamāja’s root text before eventually being incorporated as 
its final chapter. They also occur in the remarkable spiritual autobiography of the Indian 
teacher Jñānapāda (ca. 770–​820 CE), who may be responsible for originating or at any rate 
popularizing the sequence (Dalton 2019, 176–​181; Dalton and Szántó 2019).
	18.	 There are several sets of completion-​stage practices in various Tibetan traditions. Among 
the best known are the sets attributed to the Indian teachers Nāropa (Mullin 1997) and 
Niguma (Dalai Lama II, 1985, 92–​151), transmitted in the Marpa Kagyü and Shangpa 
Kagyü lineages, respectively, and the Ṣaḍaṅga or “six-​phased” yoga of the Kālacakra tantra 
(Wallace 2012).
	19.	 Variously translated as “characteristic,” “attribute,” or “sign.”
	20.	 Strictly speaking, “subtle body” began as a translation for one specific “body” of this kind 
in Hindu tradition (sūkṣma-​śarīra). We use the term here in a more generic sense (see, e.g., 
Samuel 2013a; Samuel and Johnston 2013).
	21.	 Similar associations are found in Hayes’s Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā material (e.g., Hayes 2000, 
314, 321).
	22.	 For some suggestions as to possible approaches to the subtle body concepts in tantra, see 
Samuel 2013b, 261–​263; Samuel 2019. See also Hayes’s chapters, this volume, on esoteric 
physiology and metaphors and conceptual blending theories and their applications to 
studying the subtle body.
	23.	 On emotion, psychological health, and the nervous system, see, e.g., Epel et al. 1998; 
Izard 1972; Porges 2011; and Samuel 2019, 785–​786. Samuel 2019 also explores Tibetan 
conceptualizations of mental illness as the result of a lack of balance within the 
subtle body.
	24.	 Arousal-​based practices are not necessarily limited to Hindu and Buddhist contexts. 
In collaboration with Yusuf Cakmak, Kozhevnikov carried out a small-​scale study 
of an Islamic practice from a Sufi context, the “turning” or “whirling” of the Mevlevi 
dervishes, which suggested that this might also involve autonomic arousal (Cakmak and 
Kozhevnikov 2016).
References
Amihai, Ido, and Maria. Kozhevnikov. 2014. “Arousal vs. Relaxation: A Comparison 
of the Neurophysiological and Cognitive Correlates of Vajrayana and Theravada 
Meditative Practices.” PLoS One 9, no. 7: Article e102990. https://​doi.org/​10.1371/​jour​nal.
pone.0102​990

--- PAGE 194 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      169
 
Amihai, Ido, and Maria. Kozhevnikov. 2015. “The Influence of Buddhist Meditation Traditions 
on the Autonomic System and Attention.” Biomed Research International 2015: Article 
731579. https://​doi.org.10.1155/​2015/​731​579
Aston-​Jones, Gary, Janusz Rajkowski, and Jonathan. Cohen. 2000. “Locus Coeruleus and 
Regulation of Behavioral Flexibility and Attention.” Progress in Brain Research 126: 165–​182. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​S0079-​6123 ( 0 0) 26013-​5
Baer, Ruth A., ed. 2006. Mindfulness-​Based Treatment Approaches: Clinician’s Guide to Evidence 
Base and Applications. Burlington, MA: Academic Press.
Baker, Ian A. 2013. “Embodying Enlightenment: Physical Culture in Dzogchen as Revealed 
in Tibet’s Lukhang Murals.” Asian Medicine 7: 236–​275. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​15734​218-​
12341​249
Baümer, Bettina Sharada. 2015 “Intensity of Emotions: A Way to Liberation in the Advaita Śaiva 
Āgamas and Their Exegetes.” In Emotions in Indian Thought-​Systems, edited by P. Bilimoria 
and A. Wenta, 102–​113. London: Routledge.
Benson, Herbert. 1976. The Relaxation Response. London: Collins.
Benson, H., J. F. Beary, and M. P. Carol. 1974. “The Relaxation Response.” Psychiatry 37, no.1 
(February): 37–​46.
Benson, Herbert, J. W. Lehmann, M. S. Malhotra, Ralph F. Goldman, Gregg D. Jacobs, J. 
Hopkins and M. D. Epstein. 1982. “Body Temperature Changes During the Practice of g 
Tum-​mo Yoga.” Nature 295: 234–​236.
Benson, Herbert, M. S. Malhotra, R. F. Goldman, J. Hopkins, and M. D. Epstein. 1990. “Three 
Case Reports of the Metabolic and Electroencephalographic Changes During Advanced 
Buddhist Meditation Techniques.” Behavioral Medicine 16, no. 2: 90–​95.
Benson, Herbert, with W. Proctor. 1985. Beyond the Relaxation Response. New York: 
Berkeley Books.
Bitbol, Michel, and Claire Petitmengin. 2017. “Neurophenomenology and the Micro-​
Phenomenological Interview.” In The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness, 2nd ed., edited 
by S. Schneider and M. Velmans, 726–​739. Chichester: Wiley.
Borck, Cornelius. 2018. Brainwaves: A Cultural History of Electroencephalography. Translated 
by A. M. Hentschel. London: Routledge.
Britton, Willoughby B., Jared R. Lindahl, B. Rael Cahn, Jake H. Davis, and Roberta E. Goldman. 
2014. “Awakening Is Not a Metaphor: The Effects of Buddhist Meditation Practices on Basic Wakeful- 
ness.” Annals of the New York Academy of Science 1307: 64–​81. https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​nyas.12279
Cahn, B. Rael, and J. Polich. 2006. “Meditation States and Traits: EEG, ERP, and Neuroimaging 
Studies.” Psychological Bulletin 132, no. 2: 180–​211. https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​0033-​2909.132.2.180
Cakmak, Yusuf O., and M. Kozhevnikov. 2016. “Sympathetic System Activation of Sufi 
Whirling Dervishes During Spinning Episodes.” Unpublished manuscript.
Cannon, Walter Bradford. 1932. The Wisdom of the Body. New York: W. W. Norton.
Cardinali, Daniel Pedro. 2018. Autonomic Nervous System: Basic and Clinical Aspects. Springer 
International. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​978-​3-​319-​57571-​1
Carter, Olivia Louise, D. E. Presti, C. Callistemon, Y. Ungerer, G. B. Liu, and Jack D. Pettigrew. 
2005. “Meditation Alters Perceptual Rivalry in Tibetan Buddhist Monks.” Current Biology 15: 
R412–​R413
Chaoul, M. A. 2007. “Magical Movement (’Phrul ’Khor): Ancient Tibetan Yogic Practices 
from the Bön Religion and Their Migration into Contemporary Medical Settings.” Asian 
Medicine: Tradition and Modernity 3: 130–​155. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​15734​2107​X207​245
Corby, J. C., W. T. Roth, V. P. Zarcone Jr., and B. S. Kopell, 1978. “Psychophysiological Correlates 
of the Practice of Tantric Yoga Meditation.” Archives of General Psychiatry 35, no. 5: 571–​577.

--- PAGE 195 ---
170      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
Crosby, Kate. 2020. Esoteric Theravada: The Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of 
Southeast Asia. Boulder, CO: Shambhala.
Dahl, Cortland J., Antoine Lutz, and Richard J. Davidson. 2015. “Reconstructing and 
Deconstructing the Self: Cognitive Mechanisms in Meditation Practice.” Trends in Cognitive 
Science 19, no. 9: 515–​523. https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.tics.2015.07.001
Dalai Lama II Dge-​’dun-​rgya-​mtsho. 1985. “The Tantric Yogas of Sister Niguma.” In Selected 
Works of the Dalai Lama II: Tantric Yogas of Sister Niguma, compiled, edited, and translated 
by G. H. Mullin, 92–​151. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Dalton, Catherine. 2019. “Enacting Perfection: Buddhajñānapāda’s Vision of a Tantric 
Buddhist World.” PhD diss., Buddhist Studies, University of California, Berkeley.
Dalton, Catherine, and Péter-Dániel. Szántó. 2019. “Jñānapāda.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of 
Buddhism. Volume II: Lives, edited by J. A. Silk, 264–​268. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Das, N. N., and Gastaut, H. 1955. “Variations de l’activité electrique du cerveau, du coeur et des 
muscles squelletiques au cours de la meditation et de l’extase Yogique.” Electroencephalogr 
Clin Neurophysiol 6 (Suppl.): 211–​219.
Dosenbach, Nico U. F., Damien A. Fair, Alexander L. Cohen, Bradley L. Schlaggar, and 
Steven E. Petersen. 2008. “A Dual-​Networks Architecture of Top-​Down Control.” Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 12: 99–​105. https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.tics.2008.01.001
Dunne, John. 2011. “Toward an Understanding of Non-​Dual Mindfulness.” Contemporary 
Buddhism 12, no.1: 71–​88. https:doi.org/​10.1080/​14639​947.2011.564​820
English, Elizabeth. 2002. Vajrayoginī: Her Visualizations, Rituals & Forms. A Study of the Cult 
of Vajrayoginī in India. Boston: Wisdom.
Epel, E. S., B. S. McEwen, and J. R. Ickovics. 1998. “Embodying Psychological Thriving: Physical 
Thriving in Response to Stress.” Journal of Social Issues 54, no. 2: 301–​322. https://​doi.org/​
10.1111/​j.1540-​4560.1998.tb01​220.x
Farias, Miguel, David Brazier, and Mansur Lalljee, eds. 2021. The Oxford Handbook of 
Meditation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fell, Juergen. Axmacher, and Sven Haupt. 2010. “From Alpha to Gamma: Electrophysiological 
Correlates of Meditation-​Related States of Consciousness.” Medical Hypotheses 75, no. 2: 
218–​224. https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.mehy.2010.02.025
Folkman, Susan, and Richard S. Lazarus. 1988. “The Relationship between Coping and Emotion: 
Implications for Theory and Research.” Social Science & Medicine 26, no. 3: 309–​317.
Forstmann, Birte U., and Eric-Jan Wagenmakers, eds. 2015. An Introduction to Model-​Based 
Cognitive Neuroscience. New York: Springer.
Forstmann, Birte U., Eric-Jan Wagenmakers, T. Eichele, S. Brown, & J. T. Serences. 2011. 
“Reciprocal Relations between Cognitive Neuroscience and Formal Cognitive Models: 
Opposites Attract?” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 15: 272–​279. https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
j.tics.2011.04.002
Galante, Julieta, Marie-Jet Bekkers, Clive Mitchell, and John Gallacher. 2016. “Loving-​Kindness 
Meditation Effects on Well-​Being and Altruism: A Mixed-​Methods Online RCT.” Applied 
Psychology: Health and Well-​Being 8, no. 3: 322–​350. https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​aphw.12074
Gellner, David N. 1992. Monk, Householder, and Tantric Priest: Newar Buddhism and Its 
Hierarchy of Ritual. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Guarisco, Elio, and Ingrid Mcleod. 2008. “Introduction to Jamgön Kongtrul.” 2008. In The 
Treasury of Knowledge. Book Eight, Part Three: The Elements of Tantric Practice: A General 
Exposition of the Process of Meditation in the Indestructible Way of Secret Mantra. Ithaca, 
NY: Snow Lion.

--- PAGE 196 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      171
 
Hayes, Glen A. 2000. “The Necklace of Immortality: A 17th-​Century Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Text on 
Ritual Sexual Intercourse and the Transformations of the Body.” In Tantra in Practice, edited 
by D. G. White. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hayes, Glen A. 2012. “Conceptual Blending Theory, ‘Reverse Amnesia’, and the Study of 
Tantra.” Journal of Hindu Studies 2012: 1–​17. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​jhs/​his​022
Hayes, Glen A. 2014. “Possible Selves, Body Schemas, and Sādhana: Using Cognitive Science 
and Neuroscience in the Study of Medieval Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Hindu Tantric Texts.” Religions 
5: 684–​699. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​5030​684
Hayes, Glen A., and S. Timalsina. 2017. “Introduction to ‘Cognitive Science and the Study of 
Yoga and Tantra’.” Religions 8: 181. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​8090​181
Hess, Walter Rudolf. 1957. The Functional Organization of the Diencephalon. New York: Grune 
& Stratton.
Hooykaas, C. 1973. Balinese Bauddha Brahmans. Amsterdam: North-​Holland [Verhandelingen 
der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afd. Letterkunde, Nieuwe 
Reeks, Deel 80.]
Izard, Carroll E. 1972. Patterns of Emotion: A New Analysis of Anxiety .and Depression. New 
York: Academic Press.
Jackson, Roger. 2011. “Mahāmudrā: Natural Mind in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism.” Religion 
Compass 5, no.7: 286–​299.
Jackson, Roger. 2019. Mind Seeing Mind: Mahāmudrā and the Geluk Tradition of Tibetan 
Buddhism. Boston: Wisdom.
Josipovic, Zoran. 2010. “Duality and Nonduality in Meditation Research.” Consciousness and 
Cognition 19, no. 4: 1119–​1121. https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.con​cog.2010.03.016
Josipovic, Zoran. 2014. “Neural Correlates of Nondual Awareness in Meditation.” Annals of 
New York Academy of Science 1307: 9–​18. https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​nyas.12261
Josipovic, Zoran. 2019. “Nondual Awareness: Consciousness-​as-​Such as Non-​Representational 
Reflexivity.” 
Progress 
in 
Brain 
Research 
244: 
273–​298. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
bs.pbr.2018.10.021
Josipovic, Zoran. 2021. “Implicit-​Explicit Gradient of Nondual Awareness or Consciousness as 
Such.” Neuroscience of Consciousness 7, no. 2: 1–​13. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​nc/​niab​031
Kabat-​Zinn, Jon. 1982. “An Outpatient Program in Behavioral Medicine for Chronic Pain 
Patients Based on the Practice of Mindfulness Meditation: Theoretical Considerations and 
Preliminary Results.” General Hospital Psychiatry 4: 33–​47.
Kongtrul, Jamgon. 1994. Jamgon Kongtrul’s Retreat Manual. Translated by Ngawang Zangpo. 
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Kongtrul, Jamgon. 2007. The Treasury of Knowledge. Book Eight, Part Four. Esoteric Instructions. 
A Detailed Presentation of the Process of Meditation in Vajrayāna. Translated and annotated 
by S. Harding (Kalu Rinpoché Translation Group). Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Kozhevnikov, Maria. 2019. “Enhancing Human Cognition Through Vajrayana Practices.” 
Journal of Religion and Health 58: 737–​747. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s10​943-​019-​00776-​z
Kozhevnikov, Maria., J. Elliott, J. Shephard, and K. Gramann. 2013. “Neurocognitive and 
Somatic Components of Temperature Increases during g-​Tummo Meditation: Legend and 
Reality.” PLoS One 8, no. 3: Article e58244. https://​doi.org/​10.1371/​jour​nal.pone.0058​244
Kozhevnikov, Maria., O. Louchakova, Z. Josipovic, and M. A. Motes. 2009. “The Enhancement 
of Visuospatial Processing Efficiency Through Buddhist Deity Meditation.” Psychological 
Science 20, no. 5: 645–​653.
Kozhevnikov, Maria., A. Strasser, E. McDougal, R. P. Dhond, and G. Samuel. 2022. “Beyond 
Mindfulness: Arousal-​Driven Modulation of Attentional Control During Arousal-​Based

--- PAGE 197 ---
172      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
Practices.” Current Research in Neurobiology. 3: Article 100053. https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.crn​
eur.2022.100​053
Kozhevnikov, Maria., A. Strasser, and M. A. Abdullah. 2022. “Accessing the States of Enhanced 
Cognition in a Gaming Context: The Importance of Psychophysiological Arousal.” Cognitive 
Science 46 (2022): Article e13106. https:doi.org/​10.1111/​cogs.13106
Kragh, Ulrich Timme., 2015. Tibetan Yoga and Mysticism: A Textual Study of the Yogas of Nāropa 
and Mahāmudrā Meditation in the Medieval Tradition of Dags po. Tokyo: International 
Institute for Buddhist Studies.
Langley, John Newport. 1921. The Autonomic Nervous System: Part One. Cambridge: Heffer.
Lazarus, Richard S., and Susan Folkman. 1984. Stress, Appraisal, and Coping. New York: 
Springer.
Lippelt, Dominique P., Bernhard Hommel, and Lorenza S. Colzato. 2014. “Focused Attention, 
Open Monitoring and Loving Kindness Meditation: Effects on Attention, Conflict 
Monitoring, and Creativity–​A Review.” Frontiers in Psychology 5: Article 1083. https://​doi.
org/​10.3389/​fpsyg.2014.01083
Loizzo, Joseph J. 2016. “The Subtle Body: An Interoceptive Map of Central Nervous System 
Function and Meditative Mind-​Brain-​Body Integration.” Annals of New York Academy of 
Science 1373, no. 1: 78–​95. https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​nyas.13065
Lomas, Tim, Itai Ivtzan, and Cynthia H. Y. Fu. 2015. “A Systematic Review of the 
Neurophysiology of Mindfulness on EEG Oscillations.” Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews 57: 401–​410. https:doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neubio​rev.2015.09.018
Loseries-​Leick, Andrea. 1997. “Psychic Sports –​ A Living Tradition in Contemporary Tibet?” 
In Tibetan Studies I & II: Proceedings of the 7th Seminar of the International Association for 
Tibetan Studies, Graz 1995, edited by H. Krasser, M. T. Much, E. Steinkellner, and H. Tauscher, 
Vol. 2, 583–​593. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Lumma, Anna-Lena, Bethany E. Kok, and Tania Singer. 2015. “Is Meditation Always Relaxing? 
Investigating Heart Rate, Heart Rate Variability, Experienced Effort and Likeability During 
Training of Three Types of Meditation.” International Journal of Psychophysiology 97: 38–​45. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.ijpsy​cho.2015.04.017
Lutz, Antoine, Julie Brefczynski-​Lewis, Tom Johnstone, and Richard J. Davidson. 2008. “Regulation 
of the Neural Circuitry of Emotion by Compassion Meditation: Effects of Meditative 
 Expertise.” PLoS One 3, no. 3: Article e1897 https://​doi.org/​10.1371/​jour​nal.pone.0001​897
Lutz, Antoine, John Dunne, and Richard J. Davidson. 2007. “Meditation and the Neuroscience of 
Consciousness: An Introduction.” In The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness, edited by P. D. 
Zelazo, M. Moscovitch, and E. Thompson, 499–​551. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lutz, Antoine, Lawrence L. Greischar, Nancy B. Rawlings, Matthieu Ricard, and Richard J. 
Davidson. 2004. “Long-​term Meditators Self-​Induce High-​Amplitude Gamma Synchrony 
During Mental Practice.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A 101: 16369–​
16373. https://​doi.org/​10.1073/​pnas.040​7401​101
Lutz, Antoine, Amishi P. Jha, John Dunne, and Clifford D. Saron. 2015. “Investigating the 
Phenomenological Matrix of Mindfulness-​Related Practices from a Neurocognitive 
Perspective.” The American Psychologist 70, no. 7: 632–​658. https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​a0039​585
Lutz, Antoine, Heleen A. Slagter, John Dunne, and Richard J. Davidson. 2008. “Attention 
Regulation and Monitoring in Meditation.” Trends in Cognitive Science 12, no. 4 (2008): 163–​9. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.tics.2008.01.005
MacDonald, Douglas A., Roger. Walsh, and Shauna L. Shapiro. 2013. “Meditation: Empirical 
Research and Future Directions.” In The Wiley-​Blackwell Handbook of Transpersonal 
Psychology, edited by H. L. Friedman and G. Hartelius. 1st ed., 433–​458. Chichester, West 
Sussex: Wiley-​Blackwell.

--- PAGE 198 ---
The Neuroscience of Tantric Practice      173
 
Mathes, Klaus-Dieter. 2021. Maitripa: India’s Yogi of Nondual Bliss. Boston: Shambhala.
Minvaleev, R. S., A. R. Bogdanov, R. R. Bogdanov, D. P. Bahner, and P. E. Marik. 2014. 
“Hemodynamic Observations of Tumo Yoga Practitioners in a Himalayan Environment.” 
The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine 20, no. 4: 295–​299. https://​doi.org/​
10.1089/​acm.2013.0159
Mullin, Glenn H. 1997. The Practice of the Six Yogas of Naropa. Translated, edited and 
introduced by G. H. Mullin. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Newcombe, Suzanne, and Karen O’Brien-​Kop, eds. 2021. Routledge Handbook of Yoga and 
Meditation Studies. London: Routledge.
Norbu, Namkhai. 2000. The Crystal and the Way of Light: Sutra, Tantra and Dzogchen.
Teachingsof Chögyal Namkhai Norbu. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
O’Brien-​Kop, Karen, and Suzanne Newcombe. 2021. “Reframing Yoga and Meditation 
Studies.” In Routledge Handbook of Yoga and Meditation Studies, edited by S. Newcombe and 
K. O’Brien-​Kop, 3–​12. London: Routledge.
Orzech, C. D., H. H. Sørensen, and R. K. Payne, eds. 2011. Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in 
East Asia. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Pati, George, and Katherine C. Zubko, eds. 2020. Transformational Embodiment in Asian 
Religions: Subtle Bodies, Spatial Bodies. London: Routledge.
Petersen, Steven E., and Michael I. Posner. 2012. “The Attention System of the Human Brain: 
20 Years After.” Annual Review of Neuroscience 35: 73–​89. https://​doi.org/​10.1146/​annu​rev-​
neuro-​062​111-​150​525
Porges, Stephen W. 2011. The Polyvagal Theory: Neurophysiological Foundations of Emotions, 
Attachment, Communication, and Self-​Regulation. New York: W. W. Norton.
Purser, Ronald E., David Forbes, and Adam Burke, eds. 2016. Handbook of Mindfulness: 
Culture, Context, and Social Engagement. New York: Springer.
Purser, Ronald E., and Joseph Milillo. 2015. “Mindfulness Revisited: A Buddhist-​Based 
Conceptualization.” Journal of Management Inquiry 24, no. 1: 3–​24. https://​doi.org/​10.1177/​
10564​9261​4532​315
Rele, Vasant. 1931. The Mysterious Kundalini: The Physical Basis of the “Kundali (Hatha) Yoga” 
In Terms of Western Anatomy and Physiology. 3rd rev. and enlarged ed. Bombay: D.B. 
Taraporevala Sons.
Rheingans, Jim. 2017. The Eighth Karmapa’s Life and his Interpretation of the Great Seal. 
Bochum, Germany: Projekt Verlag.
Sadaghiani, Sepideh, and Mark D’Esposito. 2015. Functional Characterization of the Cingulo-​
Opercular Network in the Maintenance of Tonic Alertness. Cerebral Cortex 25: 2763–​2773. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​cer​cor/​bhu​072
Samuel, Geoffrey. 1993. Civilized Shamans: Buddhism in Tibetan Societies. Washington, DC: 
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2008. The Origins of Yoga and Tantra: Indic Religions to the Thirteenth 
Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2013a. “The Subtle Body in India and Beyond.” In Religion and the Subtle 
Body in Asia and the West: Between Mind and Body, edited by G. Samuel and J. Johnston, 
33–​47. London: Routledge.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2013b. “Subtle Body Processes: Towards a Non-​Reductionist Understanding.” 
In Religion and the Subtle Body in Asia and the West: Between Mind and Body, edited by G. 
Samuel and J. Johnston, 249–​266. London: Routledge.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2016a. “Mindfulness Within the Full Range of Buddhist and Asian 
Meditative Practices.” In Handbook of Mindfulness: Culture, Context, and Social Engagement, 
edited by R. E. Purser, D. Forbes, and A. Burke, 47–​62. New York: Springer.

--- PAGE 199 ---
174      Geoffrey Samuel and Maria Kozhevnikov
 
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2016b. “Tibetan Longevity Meditation.” In Asian Traditions of Meditation, 
edited by H. Eifring, 145–​164. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2019. “Unbalanced Flows in the Subtle Body: Tibetan Understandings of. 
Psychiatric Illness and How to Deal With It.” Journal of Religion and Health 58: 770–​794. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s10​943-​019-​00774-​1
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2020. “Buddhist Meditation and Western Science: Progress Towards 
Mutual Understanding.” International Journal for the Study of Chan Buddhism and Human 
Civilization 7: 40–​49. http://​cbhc.crs.cuhk.edu.hk/​main/​jour​nal/​
Samuel, Geoffrey, and Ann R. David. 2016. “The Multiple Meanings and Uses of Tibetan Ritual 
Dance: Cham in Context.” Journal of Ritual Studies 30 no 1: 7–​24.
Samuel, Geoffrey, and Jay Johnston. 2013. “General Introduction.” In Religion and the Subtle 
Body in Asia and the West: Between Mind and Body, edited by G. Samuel and J. Johnston, 
1–​10. London: Routledge.
Sanderson, Alexis 1994. “Vajrayana: Origin and Function.” In Buddhism into the Year 2000: 
International Conference Proceedings. Bangkok: Dhammakaya Foundation.
Satyananda Satyananda, Swami. 1985. Kundalini Tantra. Gosford, NSW: Satyananda Ashram.
Silburn, Lilian. 1988. Kuṇḍalinī: The Energy of the Depths. Albany: State University of New York 
Press.
Skilling, Peter. 2009. “Theravāda in History.” Pacific World 3rd series, no. 11 (Fall): 61–​93.
Skilling, Peter, Jason A. Carbine, Claudio Cicuzza, and Santi Pakdeekham. 2012. How Theravāda 
Is Theravāda? Exploring Buddhist Identities. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books.
Smith, Philip L., and Roger Ratcliff. 2004. “Psychology and Neurobiology of Simple Decisions.” 
Trends in Neuroscience 27: 161–​168. https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.tins.2004.01.006
Stevens, J. C. 2013. Kriya Secrets Revealed. Lessons and Techniques Workbook. Snohomish, WA: 
Golden Swan.
Studstill, Randall 2005. The Unity of Mystical Traditions: The Transformation of Consciousness 
in Tibetan and German mysticism. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill Academic.
Thurman, R. A. F. 1985. “Tsoṅ-​kha-​pa’s Integration of Sutra and Tantra.” In Soundings in 
Tibetan Civilization, edited by Barbara N. Aziz and Matthew Kapstein. New Delhi: Manohar.
Tyagi, Anupama, and Marc Cohen. 2016. “Yoga and Heart Rate Variability: A Comprehensive 
Review of the Literature.” International Journal of Yoga 9: 97–​113.
Wallace, Vesna A. 2012. “The Six-​Phased Yoga of the Abbreviated Wheel of Time Tantra 
(Laghukālacakratantra) According to Vajrapāṇi.” In Yoga in Practice, edited by D. G. White. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wenger, M. A., and B. K. Bagchi. 1961. “Studies of Autonomic Functions in Practitioners of 
Yoga in India.” Behavioral Science 6, no.4: 312–​323.
Wenta, Aleksandra 2015. “Between Fear and Heroism: The Tantric Path to Liberation.” In 
Emotions in Indian Thought-​Systems, edited by P. Bilimoria and Aleksandra Wenta, 114–​133. 
London: Routledge.
Woodroffe, John George, Sir (Arthur Avalon). 1974. The Serpent Power, Being the Ṣaṭ-​Cakra-​
Nirūpaṇa and Pādukā-​Pañcaka. Two Works on Laya-​Yoga, Translated from the Sanskrit, with 
Introduction and Commentary. New York: Dover.
Yangönpa, Gyalwa 2015. Secret Map of the Body: Visions of the Human Energy Structure. 
Translated from the Tibetan and annotated by Elio Guarisco. Arcidosso, Italy: Shang Shung.
Yogananda, Swami. 1930. Kriya Yoga: Art of Super-​Realization. Initiation. Los Angeles: Yogoda 
Sat-​Sanga Society.

--- PAGE 200 ---
P a r t I I
 TRANSFORMATIONS
Soteriology, Astrology, Alchemy, 
and Healing

--- PAGE 201 ---


--- PAGE 202 ---
Chapter 8
Cosmic Process, 
Philosophy, and 
Soteriology in the Works 
of Abhinavagupta
Sthaneshwar Timalsina
The scope of this chapter is very wide and difficult to explain in limited space. What we 
can do is to extract the essential aspects in order to address Abhinavaguptian philos­
ophy. As the title suggests, in addressing the three domains of cosmology, epistemology, 
and soteriology, all that I can do is offer snippets from the works of Abhinavagupta, 
mostly by engaging contemporary scholarship, so that interested readers may dive 
deeply into the references. Even then, I would also like to stress the new ways of reading 
Abhinavagupta from an interdisciplinary approach, without reducing his life and work 
to one or another department of our contemporary scholarship. As one of the foremost 
philosophers of freedom (svātantrya), he himself exploited this freedom in breaching 
disciplinary boundaries when it came to addressing aesthetics, epistemology, mysti­
cism, and soteriology.
Before we enter the subject, let me briefly introduce the person. Born in Kashmir, 
Abhinavagupta (950–​1016 CE) was a great tantric yogin and mystic, as well as a great 
philosopher and aesthete. His major contributions lie in nondual Śaiva philosophy, 
especially his commentarial works on Utpala’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-​Vṛtti and Vivṛtti, 
and independent works such as Tantrāloka (TA), Paramārthasāra, and Tantrasāra. 
These would also include his semi-​independent texts that are rooted in some original 
Āgama texts but in fact are beyond mere expositions, such as Parātrīśikā-​Vivaraṇa 
(PTV) or Mālinīvijayavārttika. While the rest of his works are either commentarial 
or original, his work Paramārthasāra is a reworking on Ādiśeṣa’s text under the same 
title. Even though Abhinava’s contribution is central to the development of Trika phi­
losophy and Tantric mysticism, he is better known in Sanskrit literary works for his 
writings on aesthetics: Dhvanyāloka-​locana and the commentary Abhinavabhāratī on

--- PAGE 203 ---
178      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
the Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharata.1 Even though not all of his works have survived to this day, 
we can glean his prolific, multifaçade personality, based on his works, which expand 
across the disciplines of aesthetics, epistemology, metaphysics, poetry, theology, and 
dramatology. His originality does not come from creation ex nihilo, as he weaves his 
original ideas within the rubric of the words of his teachers and the texts that he closely 
read. Unlike other towering figures in the history of Hindu philosophy who worked 
across disciplines, Abhinava wrote from the margins of the tantric Kaula system, and 
his works underscore interdisciplinary thinking, with his writing style blending logical 
rigor with poetic expression. In this essay, I am not able to address Abhinavaguptian 
aesthetics—​the discipline for which he is primarily known in Sanskrit literature.2 Even 
then, the objective of the following paragraphs is first to introduce the central nuances 
of Abhinava’s thought that breach the boundaries of tantric mysticism and rigorous log­
ical thought and second to bring to life some of the lesser known domains of rituals and 
visualizations.
Abhinavaguptian Cosmology
Two texts central in addressing Abhinavaguptian cosmology are TA and PTV. Selected 
nuances of his cosmology involve the ideas that (1) the world is a playful expression of 
consciousness that is identified with Śiva or the self; (2) materiality is as much real as the 
absolute form of Śiva, as this is merely His extension; (3) the body is the mirror image 
of the cosmos; (4) speech and its reference are not diametrically opposed but rather 
are interwoven with the world, therefore containing the world in its seminal form; (5) 
phonemes are not merely symbols for words to describe the world but are themselves 
fields of energy and expression of the absolute; and (6) body and mind, matter and con­
sciousness, world and God, and all other dichotomies emerge due to ignorance or the 
cosmic veil imposed by Śiva or the self to maintain differentiation. What binds these 
apparently disparate thoughts together is his insight into freedom (svātantrya), and that 
the absolute is free in assuming the manifold, his pioneering metaphysics of dynamism, 
in which the absolute is intrinsically full of potential and constantly pulsating, in a sense, 
constantly unfolding with novelty. Rather than claiming originality for his thoughts, he 
cited the Āgamic testimonies that preceded him and traced the worlds of his preceptors.3 
New thinking, for him, did not come from a vacuum, and even a simple representation 
went beyond being a mere copy, bearing the marks of originality.
Abhinavaguptian cosmology is a synthesis of various Āgamas that rests on the sixfold 
courses (adhvan), divided into two triads of the course of time (kālādhvan) and that 
of space (deśādhvan). There are three categories in the provenance of time: phonemes, 
words, and sentences; and three nested in the course of space: aspects (kalā), princi­
ples (tattvas), and the spheres (bhuvanas). This metrification uniquely grounds pho­
netic expression as coextensive to the planes of manifestation, and the relation of the 
world extends beyond the word to sonic vibration. For Abhinava, the entire cosmos

--- PAGE 204 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      179
 
is an extension of “I-​am” (aham), the subjectivity that does not emerge in contrast to 
objectivity but as an acronym of all the phonemes that are coextensive to the totality 
of the manifest world. Accordingly, if our being equates with speech, our own subjec­
tivity (aham) reflects the totality, and individuation becomes an endless mirroring of 
the absolute, Śiva consciousness. Terms such as “fullness” (pūrṇatā), “total I-​am-​ness” 
(pūrṇāhantā), or the state of becoming Bhairava4 describe the final modes of realization 
wherein the absolute is equated with consciousness that is dynamic, that is constantly 
unfolding and folding, or that is constantly pulsating (spanda), with the manifold 
being the inherent nature of the singular. In Abhinava’s monistic cosmology, the first 
dyad of Śiva and Śakti constitute a singular reality of consciousness with inherent re­
flexivity, and this dyad circumscribes all the other dyads of subject and object, speech 
and reference, consciousness and matter, mind and the body, and so on.5 Unique to 
Abhinavaguptian monism is the metaphysical foundation that the absolute is inherently 
dynamic, and that the manifold is not erased even in the absolute singularity. In other 
words, one and many do not pose a dichotomy in this all-​embracing totality. That is, the 
inherent freedom of Śiva makes possible what is otherwise impossible in constituting 
and sustaining difference within the singularity of Śiva, which in turn is absolute con­
sciousness or the self, constantly pulsating and experiencing, constantly attaining nov­
elty. Śiva’s freedom exceeds a mere mirroring, as it articulates in the expression of the 
manifold an ever-​newness in every mode of manifestation.
In opposition to the extremes of reductionist materialism and subjective illusionism, 
Abhinava presents the world as an expression of Śiva—​an embodiment of pure con­
sciousness and being—​while also accepting the manifold as real modes of becoming. 
That is, the reality of becoming is not subordinate to that of being. Deeply rooted in 
Somānanda’s pantheism,6 Biernacki argued that Abhinavagupta adopted the model of 
panentheism that is centered on a foundational subjectivity or a single reality of Śiva 
that “unfolds out of itself the wonderful diversity of our world” and relates this model 
of cosmology with new materialism.7 Abhinava of course rejected the reductionist par­
adigm of inertia that explains consciousness, life, and subjective experiences relying 
on emergentism, the thesis that mind and mental world are nonexistent properties in 
matter that inexplicably emerge from inertia. At the same time, he did not succumb to 
the alternative route of subjective idealism or illusionism that results in either rejection 
of external reality and confirmation of the singular being and consciousness or rejecting 
both the structure and its foundation, leading to absolute emptiness (śūnyatā) of being 
and things. The world, for Abhinava, is not a mistaken identity, but rather an expres­
sion of the inherent potencies of the self or Śiva. The absolute, accordingly, is the resting 
ground for all the apparent dichotomies.
It would be foolhardy to cage Abhinavaguptian philosophy in one or another con­
temporary paradigm. To begin with, his works do not even strictly adhere to a single 
then-​existing model. He did not, however, relinquish traditional boundaries, as he 
was primarily explaining others’ works. His model of syncretism envelops varied tan­
tric schools of Kula, Krama, Trika, and Mahārtha or Spanda.8 But more than that, he 
borrowed ideas from Sautrāntika Yogācāra as readily as he did from the Upaniṣadic

--- PAGE 205 ---
180      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
corpus or from the philosophy of Bhartṛhari.9 Above all, his monism firmly stands on 
the early Āgamas and Siddhānta literature, and to read Abhinava in isolation of these 
foundational texts is akin to expecting rain without clouds. Unique to Abhinava is that 
he read all categories, including Śiva, within the fold of materiality, but at the same time, 
he opened the space for Parama Śiva, a transcendent category. Likewise, he explained 
the succession of becoming in a twelvefold wheel of Kālī, accepting in a sense that 
the absolute in itself is in succession, but at the same time, allows space for the tran­
scendent or the thirteenth category as presiding over the wheel of succession. If we 
follow Kṣemarāja’s gloss that “those following the system (tantra) consider the self as 
transcendent to the world. Those situated in the transmissions of Kaula etc. consider 
the self as immanent. And those following the philosophies such as Trika consider [the 
self-​essence] as both transcendent and immanent,”10 Abhinava’s works intersect with all 
these models. While some of the theoretical quagmire comes from the lack of serious 
studies of these intricacies, there is another domain of Abhinava, his mystical side, that 
does not demand the same coherence to be expressed in words. For him, deeper domains 
of consciousness resolved the apparent dichotomies that transcend everyday expression 
and conceptualization. This is to argue that, in order to understand Abhinava, one has to 
not only excel in logic but also needs to practice what he taught.
As I have suggested above, Abhinava’s cosmology is an elaboration on early Āgamas 
and the works of Somānanda and Utpala. For Somānanda, the world and Śiva are like 
the gold and its ornaments. That is, the manifold is not something imposed on Śiva, but 
it is Śiva as it is, in its very manifest form. Somānanda argued:
It is not mental construction that operates as regards this [universe] consisting of the 
Earth principle, etc., since the [Śiva principle] is formed precisely in this manner. If 
something is conceived of as different from what it is, then we can speak of mental 
construction. But is that [Earth, etc.] conceived of different from what it is? If 
[mental construction] concerns something real, then mental construction is just a 
word [without content].11
Common among the classical metaphors to describe causality include milk and yogurt, 
mirage, or that of rope and snake. If the first seeks a direct correlation between the cause 
and the effect, the second rejects what is being projected, whereas the third affirms the 
basis on which something is projected. Even though the example of gold and ornaments 
runs parallel to that of milk and yogurt, there is real change in the chemical structure 
when the milk turns into yogurt. Another common metaphor is that of the ocean and 
its tides, describing difference on the basis of conceptualization and articulation. If 
similar terminology, such as māyā, is to be found in this paradigm, that only describes 
the marvelous powers inherent in the absolute. The model of causality that Abhinava 
adopted is that of emergence or “manifestation” (abhivyakti), that is, traits that are in­
herent in the cause are not expressed in their latent state, but are expressed when the 
proper conditions are met. A sesame seed has the potential to become a plant and pro­
duce flowers and seeds and so does an apple seed. However, a sesame does not have the

--- PAGE 206 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      181
 
potential to become an apple tree and vice versa. Śiva or the absolute, on the other hand, 
possesses all potentials and therefore retains all latencies in their seminal form.
The “manifestation” (abhivyakti) model of causality in the Abhinavaguptian para­
digm contrasts two different theories: the Sāṅkhya12 model of satkārya, the concept that 
the effect is already in the cause or that an effect is merely a new arrangement and not 
a chemical alteration; and the early Ājīvika and the materialist models that utilize the 
concept to affirm some forms of reductionist materialism. This comes in dialogue with 
early Śaiva models and the Nyāya13 model of causality that considers God instrumental 
in creation. Even though Sāṅkhya and early Śaiva philosophies are dualistic, materiality 
and mutation in the Sāṅkhya paradigm are not mediated by a transcendent agent. In 
the process of refining Somānanda’s pantheism, a new model of causality, the model of 
manifestation (abhivyakti) enters the field, with the maxims that all the traits of what 
manifests are in causal form, and that there is no separation between consciousness 
and the matter. Śiva’s agency is not external to the material world, as Śiva resides within 
everything. Rather than confirming the claims of physicalist emergentism, this new ap­
plication of “manifestation” or emergence underscores the idea that something nonex­
istent cannot come into being, and there must be something within the existing entities 
that makes it possible for consciousness to emerge. Deviating from the Sāṅkhya under­
standing that materiality is an effect with a direct transformation of the guṇas, whereas 
consciousness or puruṣa is mirrored, intermingled without being affected on its own 
in this process of materialization,14 the “manifestation” in Abhinavaguptian perspective 
underscores the thesis that effect and the cause are not materially distinct for this does 
not explain the inherent traits that manifest in the effect that already exists in the cause. 
Most importantly, the central thesis here is that Śiva, the absolute itself, is (1) both the 
instrumental and material cause and both mind and the matter, and therefore (2) all the 
traits that are visible in the expressed forms are there in the seminal form in the cause. 
However, this is not an attempt to negate causality or to collapse effect into cause, as 
every event of expression introduces novelty, and every expression of being confirms 
the inherent freedom within the absolute. Accordingly, the inherent traits of Śiva are 
recognized in the full blossoming of all aspects in the manifold modes of expression, 
making “recognition” (pratyabhijñāna) a binary process of recognizing both plurality 
and singularity.
We are used to a dogmatic interpretation of the thesis that (1) Śiva is pure conscious­
ness, and that (2) the manifold worlds are expressions of materiality along the lines that 
consciousness is something sublime and immaterial or nonphysical. On the contrary, we 
come closer to understanding pure consciousness and its manifold manifestations if we 
think of a lump of clay with all the possible shapes that can be carved, the early metaphor 
of gold and ornaments, or the “mass of consciousness” as the “mass of ice” that melts and 
flows and turns into rivers and fills the lakes, and the flowing water as the manifold. Just 
as the singularity of the lump, gold, or ice does not contradict the endless manifestations 
of possible shapes, the manifold manifestation in the world does not pose a dichotomy 
with the singularity of Śiva. Our accustomed causality crumbles when engaged with 
the cosmology of thirty-​six principles, as there are nine principles (tattvas) above time

--- PAGE 207 ---
182      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
(kāla) in the metaphysics through which Abhinavagupta is working.15 In other words, 
temporal manifestation collapses to make sense above the categories after the collapse of 
time, so the issue of “when” Śiva and Śakti separated does not refer to a temporal when. 
Our understanding of “event” also needs critical examination, for the event of the col­
lapse of time, a nontemporal event of the stimulation of volition, or the emergence of the 
principles being separated from the singularity of Śiva cannot be described by relying 
on spatiotemporal concepts. At the same time, we lack any alternative paradigm to the 
categories of thoughts or forming concepts that escape the spatiotemporal parameters. 
Further complexity ensues, with the principle of time (kāla) itself falling under the 
“course of space” (deśādhvan); the time with which we are familiar or can conceptualize 
is the time that has already been spatialized. But this is just the beginning of touching on 
the esoteric heart of tantric cosmology. And without addressing the phonetic mysticism 
that is central to Abhinava’s PTV, we cannot decipher the esoteric domains of tantric 
cosmology.
Central to PTV are the concepts of (1) a dialogical constitution of reality (Timalsina 
2014), (2) phonetic coextension of categories, and (3) polyvalence of what it means to 
be the absolute or anuttara. From Abhinava’s perspective, the nontemporal dialogue 
between Śiva and Śakti not only constitutes our everyday reality, but also envelops the 
fivefold acts that covers emergence to grace within this primordial dialogue. This di­
alogue is a metaphor for another metaphor: of illumination (prakāśa) and reflexivity 
(vimarśa) that underscores the self-​aware nature of consciousness that is not only con­
stantly revealing the manifest entities, but also recognizing reality as it unfolds. This 
is neither a metaphysics grounded on inertia, nor metaphysics based on external cau­
sation. Underscoring dynamism, there is never suspension of dialogue between Śiva 
and Śakti. According to Abhinava: “If Śiva were to remain in a singular form [without 
any change], He would abnegate his Lordship and his essential character of pure con­
sciousness and be like a pot.”16 The primordial dialogue goes beyond metaphysics and 
addresses epistemology, underscoring a dialogical manifestation of intentional con­
sciousness. Moreover, this also addresses soteriology as the revelation of the words here 
that are in dialogue, and words embody the nature of the absolute. Yet again, creation 
and creator do not pose a dichotomy, even if the words and their agent expressing words 
are different entities. The intricate relation between word and meaning that underscores 
Bhartṛhari’s philosophy was further embellished by Abhinava with the expressed and 
the expression, where the meaning and the word constitute a singular body like con­
joined twins whose identity is not to be collapsed to a single person, but they also are not 
two separate entities. All polarities of word and meaning, of matter and consciousness, 
of body and mind, and of teacher and disciple are summed up in this singular consti­
tution of aham or “I am” that stands for Śiva and Śakti, the illuminating and reflexive 
modes of consciousness that embody the totality. Also central to this dialogue is the 
concept of “relation.” In both TA and PTV, Abhinava deemed it necessary to outline six 
levels of relations that mediate the revelation of the absolute, starting from the relation 
that seeks difference within singularity, extended all the way down to the relation that 
seeks unity between two manifestly different entities: Just as the transcendent (para)

--- PAGE 208 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      183
 
relation describes the inseparable identity of Śiva and Śakti where difference is imposed 
for the sake of dialogue, the sixth-​level dialogue at the bottom between a human teacher 
and a student, a “nondivine” (adivya) relation underscores the need for a homogeneous 
space between divergent subjectivities for the sake of dialogue. In all accounts, the hi­
erarchical relation in successive layers describes the manifestation of the same absolute 
in lesser degrees, similar to a lamp shrouded with multiple veils. But even then, all these 
relations mirror the “inseparability” (avinābhāva) between Śiva and Śakti.
We need to explore further the capacity of words, particularly articulated speech, in 
constituting and not just representing reality. For that, we need to engage the philosophy 
of Bhartṛhari, Kumārila, and Prabhākara that provide the basis for Abhinavagupta’s 
understanding of the word. Taking Bhartṛhari’s statement further: “The beginningless 
and endless word principle that does not change manifests (vivartate) in the form of 
meaning, wherein the process of the world begins” (Vākyapadīya I.1). Abhinava equates 
the word with the world and, even more, finds coextension between phonemes and 
expressed reality. The concept of the phonetic coextension of reality uniquely places 
Abhinavagupta’s philosophy within the domain of mysticism, rigorously defended by 
sharp Nyāya logic-​based epistemology. In Sanskrit, the first phoneme, a, and the final 
phoneme, ha, if combined as in an acronym, constitute “ah”; if combined with m, which 
symbolically stands for the union or coming together, which Abhinava graphically 
depicted as “banging together” (saṃghaṭṭa), constitute aham, which translates as “I” or 
“I-​am.” Underlying this phonetic symbolism is a twofold concept: the collective sub­
jectivity of Śiva and the individuated embodied subjectivity within the manifold. If the 
subjectivity of Śiva underscores the world as the body and the I-​am, thereby collectively 
expressing the totality, embodied subjectivity among the individuated beings extends 
throughout the epidermis. But what is noteworthy is, the subjectivity here, in accounts 
of both the divine and human subjects, is not in isolation of the world or the body. On 
the contrary, the world is the body, and the body is the world. Furthermore, even in its 
delimited state, consciousness or the essential subjectivity is not bereft of all the aspects 
of the absolute, and the modes of becoming, the individuated selves, are always free to 
reflect back and regain the identity with the totality.
Now comes the issue of grounding the absolute subject in this cosmology, and, for 
this matter, we need to revisit the concept of the absolute in terms of the “unsurpass­
able,” anuttara in Abhinavaguptian terms. Abhinavagupta playfully elaborated on this 
category as both the core of phonetic mysticism and the nature of the absolute in his phi­
losophy. This anuttara as a category explains the most esoteric and one of the most diffi­
cult concept in Abhinava’s philosophy that the absolute both transcends the totality and 
at the same time is manifest in each and every particle of the manifest reality. This para­
doxical nature of the anuttara is explicit in Abhinava’s sixteenfold etymology of the term 
anuttara. It will not be contextual to itemize all those etymologies for our current conver­
sation. However, what is essential for this conversation is that the concept of anuttara or 
the absolute, in a playful morphology of Abhinavagupta, acts to explain phonetic mysti­
cism, Trika epistemology, pantheism, panentheism, and varied forms of nondualism as 
embodied concepts within his all-​enveloping cosmology. With the etymology “of which

--- PAGE 209 ---
184      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
there is nothing more or exceeding” (na vidyate uttaram adhikaṃ yataḥ), Abhinava 
describes absolute consciousness as one with Bhairava that is absolutely free in being 
self-​manifest, with all the principles being dependent upon this absolute conscious­
ness for their confirmation. This absolute, in his paradigm (based on the tenth–​twelfth 
etymologies), transcends all the triadic structures, including the triad of the expression 
of speech in its forms of paśyantī, madhyamā and vaikharī or that of the deities in var­
ious groupings.17 Abhinava explains anuttara further to explain phonetic mysticism, 
highlighting “the transcendence of the phoneme a” (marked with a single drop “.”), 
where it reaches to the extent of visarga that is marked with double drops “:” (following 
the fifteenth meaning). In other words, the cosmogenesis in Abhinavaguptian paradigm 
is coextensive of phonogenesis, that the absolute expresses itself in the form of the first 
phoneme, which stands for pure consciousness, and its first articulation stands for the 
articulate bliss; it further expresses itself in the form of volition and so on, giving rise to 
embodied subjectivity that parallels the creation of the cosmos.18 These conversations 
repeatedly lead to the idea of something being transcendent, not merely immanent, that 
is self-​manifest and is endowed with the potencies to give rise to the manifold. If all is 
one and one is all, there is nothing that is not interlinked with the other. But at the same 
time, just like the singularity does not erase plurality, the manifest plurality does not 
contradict the absolute unity. In other words, if Abhinavaguptian mysticism is an at­
tempt to directly experience this multivalent reality that is simultaneously singular and 
plural, his epistemology is an effort to rationally explain everyday experience in light 
of this all-​encompassing experience that manifests in the modes of recognizing reality 
(pratyabhijñāna).
Abhinavaguptian Epistemology
While there are some crucial epistemic issues that Abhinava’s monistic metaphysics 
invites, some of the enduring issues, such as the gap between matter and consciousness, 
are already broached here. The same applies to self-​manifestation of consciousness, as 
the central Abhinavaguptian thesis is that of consciousness inherently having the bi­
nary nature of illumination (prakāśa) and reflexivity (vimarśa) where these two aspects 
are subsumed within consciousness as being its twofold modes. In other words, the 
Abhinavaguptian paradigm inverts the mainstream philosophical positions that rest on 
the aforementioned chiasm in explaining how the world is given to consciousness and 
how the dichotomy between the self and the other is maintained so that the transaction 
in the world becomes possible. The challenge here is not that of how the self reaches to 
the other or how consciousness grasps inertia, but rather how individuation is possible 
and how the distinction between subject and object is grounded, so that the worldly 
transaction becomes possible. In other words, the epistemological challenge here is 
not about breaching the gap between subject and object, but rather of constituting sub­
jectivity and objectivity in the field of singular consciousness. The categories such as

--- PAGE 210 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      185
 
“manifestation” (ābhasa) or “mirroring” (pratibimba) are overused, as the same terms 
are exploited in the contexts of Yogācāra Buddhism, the Advaita of Śaṅkara, and also in 
the philosophy of Abhinavagupta.19 A haphazard generalization certainly leads to mis­
interpretation of diverging concepts, for these terms are not referring to the same epi­
stemic process in recognizing reality. Mirroring, for instance, does not just describe the 
“mirroring of the external in the mind,” as it also stands for the process of assuming the 
manifold and maintaining externality. The metaphor here explains that, just as in each 
and every account of mirroring, the same entity is perceived as many, and the mirror 
image transcends what it is mirroring, every mode of manifestation stands uniquely, 
as if isolated from its singular source, the base consciousness. Consciousness, in this 
paradigm, has the challenge of escaping its singularity and projecting something to be 
external and something to be different, and the mirror metaphor is exclusively used for 
this purpose and not to reject the modes of manifestation as in Advaita or to reject its 
basis as found in Yogācāra. The same applies to the concept of “manifestation” (ābhāsa). 
Recognition (pratyabhijñāna), along these lines, is an epistemic process of grounding 
absolute consciousness in every single mode of its manifestation and not just describing 
a nontemporal self. In the act of recognition, the subject does not confront a merely ex­
ternal entity but rather blends this consciousness with what is primordially given in the 
prejudgmental state, which is the very self-​mirroring consciousness attaining the mani­
fold, manifesting as subject and object. In this account, memory is not just woven in the 
fabric of consciousness, as is the case of judgmental consciousness, but it is presented in 
the form of memory blended within the very presentation of immediate consciousness.
As Ratie (2017, 212) highlighted, central to the concept of mirroring here is that “con­
sciousness is capable of manifesting diversity while remaining unitary, just as a mirror 
can show multiple reflections without being shattered.” In the Abhinavaguptian para­
digm, the mirror metaphor primarily serves two purposes: the manifoldness of a sin­
gular entity and the incomplete or unfulfilled (apūrṇa) sense of the mirror image. The 
first, assuming the manifold, describes the plurality of subjects, just like the sun being 
mirrored and appearing manifold. Whether the mirror image is real is not an issue here, 
as the example is only used to describe the manifold. The second, the sense of incom­
pleteness, rests on the concept of “appearance” (khyāti), that everyday consciousness has 
the sense of incompleteness or that there is always some covering that blurs our vision of 
the absolute, and therefore, while the totality is always manifest, it remains as if hidden 
from the purview of everyday experience. Nemec (2012) and Rastogi (1986) thoroughly 
examined the issue of incomplete manifestation (apūrṇatākhyāti). What this “incom­
plete manifestation” theory of error underscores is an alternative to the premise that 
(1) all manifestations are real, and (2) all manifestations are unreal. Prabhākara, for in­
stance, maintained that what manifests during the mode of error is nonmanifestation 
(akhyāti) of the difference between memory and direct apprehension, which in turn 
gives rise to a conjoined entity of the commixture of memory and direct apprehension, 
basically leading to the conclusion that the entity being manifest is not unreal, only that 
the conceptual blending constitutes an erroneous object. Other philosophers broadly 
rejected the idea that what is being manifest during the mode of error is a real entity.

--- PAGE 211 ---
186      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
While other theories are applicable to explain objective errors, Abhinavaguptian error 
theory also applies to explaining subjective error, as individuated subjects have a deep-​
seated notion of incompleteness, striving in the world, seeking fulfillment by means of 
savoring external entities that gives a momentary sense of union and thus a sense of 
completeness.
As I have suggested previously, crucial to Abhinavaguptian epistemology is the con­
cept of freedom (svātantrya) that goes beyond explaining cosmogenesis to describing in­
dividuation, intersubjectivity, embodiment, and everyday modes of consciousness. The 
freedom inherent in Śiva or pure consciousness, including the delimited modes of con­
sciousness as encountered in everyday experience, also grounds difference and relation, 
central epistemic issues to bridge the chiasm between the subjective and objective poles. 
The concept of freedom helps us ground an epistemology that not only describes verid­
ical consciousness, but also provides a soteriology that distinguishes freedom of con­
sciousness from its determined and discrete emanations. Metaphysically, this describes 
the freedom of Śiva, or the freedom inherent in pure consciousness that constitutes 
absolute subjectivity (Śiva himself) that gives rise to the manifold. Epistemically, the 
same consciousness, even in its individuated state, performs the same acts of creation 
and dissolution, giving rise to a sense of externality and difference, maintaining the dis­
tinctness of entities as they are constituted or given to consciousness, and eventually 
dissolving difference in the very foundational consciousness. Given that this concept of 
freedom metaphysically underscores a shift from an earlier paradigm of stasis when it 
attributes dynamism to the absolute or the self, and also that subjectivity and sentience 
define the inherent freedom within the absolute, the epistemic issues such as the plas­
ticity of consciousness are simultaneously resolved to manifest in myriad forms, as in 
imagination and error or in everyday consciousness, all directed toward other subjects 
and objects. This concept of freedom likewise grasps the subjectivity of other subjects as 
well as recognizing objects as objects, maintaining difference at the phenomenal level 
while also stressing absolute homogeneity.20 Embedded within the concept of freedom 
is also the idea of intentionality or of consciousness being directed toward something 
external. As Ratie (2016) argued:
A consciousness that would not be free would not be conscious at all because it 
would be incapable of any extroversion (real or apparent) toward any Other: it would 
remain riveted to a self-​contained identity, incapable of being anything besides it­
self, and therefore incapable of any relationship with anything—​including the object. 
Intentionality entails the freedom not to remain confined to one’s own nature, the 
freedom that consists in not “being merely oneself (ātmamātratā) contrary to insen­
tient objects.”
Intertwined with the concept of freedom are the issues of memory and recognition. 
While freedom explains the reflexive nature of consciousness, that is, conscious­
ness does not depend on anything else, even second-​order consciousness, to grasp it­
self, this category helps to recontextualize memory and recognition, primarily by

--- PAGE 212 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      187
 
rejecting Dharmakīrtian arguments of reflexivity, memory, and recognition.21 From the 
Dharmakīrtian perspective, no permanent substrate (or the self) is required to explain 
memory, as residual traces (saṃskāra) or cognitive imprints (vāsanās) mediate between 
consciousness and memory. Even though this response does address the object, it fails 
to address the sense, the act of experiencing, that is evoked during the mode of recollec­
tion. If consciousness is self-​aware, it should also be merely the grasping and not that 
which is grasped. Accordingly, consciousness could never be a thing but would always 
remain a reflexive entity. As a consequence, memory would be about not only the past 
object but also the experience that is not terminated instantaneously. At the heart of this 
argument lies the thesis of “recognition’ (pratyabhijñā) that underscores the atemporal 
nature of reflexive consciousness that is inherently free. But this confirmation does not 
stand in negation of what manifests as temporal, the finality of past entities given to 
recognition and the contemporaneity of immediate experience. In other words, tem­
poral expression of consciousness remains unassailed, making everyday life intrinsi­
cally woven within the absolute. The concept of freedom in this paradigm underscores 
a shift from life as suffering to sport: Rather than the world being a miserable trap, being 
repeatedly reproduced and relived according to mental imprints and mental traces that 
one should escape at all costs, the world in this altered paradigm becomes a playful ex­
pression of the absolute self, and the manifold becomes an artistic expression of the sin­
gular reality. And indeed, playfulness appears deeply embedded within the inherent 
nature of sentient beings, and the struggles and pains occurring during these playful 
activities appear trivial.
The fundamental paradox that Abhinava’s philosophy faces is, on the one hand, he 
maintains that all is one; on the other hand, he advocates that there are real external 
objects and what we conceive of in everyday consciousness is not error or illusion or 
simulacra of momentary consciousness. Ratie (2011) thoroughly examined this argu­
ment, evaluating the debate between the Sautrāntikas and Utpala/​Abhinava. It is suf­
ficient to say here that the paradigm in which Abhinava rejected illusionism while also 
accepting externality as directly given underscores the philosophical position that calls 
into question both dualism and subjective illusionism. All the central issues in his philos­
ophy, (1) that consciousness is reflexive and it does not require second-​order conscious­
ness for its verification; (2) that externals are contingent on consciousness’ confirmation 
for their being; and (3) that consciousness is the absolute reality, and the externals are 
its “manifestation” (ābhāsa), “mirroring” (pratibimba), or emergence (abhivyakti); all 
lead to subjective idealism, and these claims are eerily close to the Yogācāra-​Sautrāntika 
arguments. But Abhinava redefined the categories and developed an epistemic system 
to overcome the above objections while at the same time adhering to his monistic phi­
losophy. While Abhinava had his own position to defend, he rejected the Sautrāntika 
argument that the externals do exist but are not apprehended, only that they are given 
inferentially. Abhinava argued an inferred cause must have been previously perceived. 
When we infer fire on the basis of smoke, the invariability of smoke and fire has been 
previously established during the moment when they are apprehended together. 
Sautrāntikas argued that there is no aforementioned invariability for we do see externals

--- PAGE 213 ---
188      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
by the instrumentality of the eyes without them being previously perceived. Utpala and 
Abhinava rejected this argument, saying that the instrumentality of eyes in perceiving 
color is not based on inference but on direct apprehension. The argument is that if the 
causality of the eyes were never directly apprehended, we also could never establish 
causality on the basis of inference. The argument with regard to externality of entities 
of perception is that anything that consciousness grasps as other than itself is given to 
consciousness as external, making “inside” and “outside” an epistemic game rather than 
a metaphysical position. In other words, anything that consciousness objectifies is ex­
ternal to consciousness. The internal-​external relation that applies to other entities, for 
example Russian dolls, is not the same with consciousness and its objects. In the case 
of consciousness and its objects, anything consciousness objectifies is “not conscious­
ness but something else,” while this does not apply to other inside-​outside relations: The 
entities that are inside a house are not the house, for example. This necessitates a two-​
tier analysis of consciousness where the absolute consciousness circumscribes all that is 
there, collapsing the boundaries of subject and object, whereas phenomenal conscious­
ness finds its horizon by means of externality, and at this level, it can grasp only what is 
an object or what is external to itself. But even then, what is given as utterly different, as 
fully external, is merely the way consciousness determines an entity to be. In a sense, the 
container metaphor for the analysis is extremely narrow, and this, as well as the inside-​
outside game, rest on the epistemology within the parameters of our biology, the way 
our body is cultured to grasp and interpret the ecology, rather than grounding episte­
mology on some disembodied or nonrelational metaphysics. Therefore, issues such as 
the phenomenology of pain are trivial here, as if when our consciousness grasps pain as 
external, it is external, but if it incorporates pain within the scope of subjectivity, pain 
then remains integral to consciousness.
Abhinavaguptian Soteriology
Many aspects of Abhinavaguptian soteriology are borrowed from early Siddhānta 
or dualistic Śaiva theologies. While it has been fashionable to read Abhinavagupta in 
isolation from the early Āgamas, the fact of the matter is that, like any other philoso­
pher and theologian, Abhinava was a product of his own history. His major works 
are commentarial, and even his independent treatises broadly rely on one or another 
of the Āgamas. Moreover, his was an approach of reconciliation, as is evident in his 
Bhagavadgītā commentary or in his independent treatise, Paramārthasāra. Pan-​Śaivite 
concepts that Abhinava addressed and integrated into his system include not only the 
broader concepts such as liberation (mokṣa) or self-​realization (ātmajñāna) or scrip­
tural authority or the requirement of a preceptor that intersects various traditions, but 
also the categories of initiation (dīkṣā) or the beliefs and practices surrounding mantras, 
or the concept of the emission of powers (śaktipāta), or the concept of grace (anugraha). 
Central to Abhinavaguptian soteriology is the praxis derived from Mālinīvijayottara

--- PAGE 214 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      189
 
(MVT), the threefold structure of the means (upāya) primarily based on the transfor­
mation of volition, cognition, and action, namely the śāṃbhava, śākta, and āṇava means 
of self-​realization.22 If the essence of the means of volition (śāṃbhava upāya) is the 
surge of pure will, the means of cognition (śākta upāya) rest on refinement of thought or 
an analytic process wherein correct reasoning (sattarka) helps one realize by cognitive 
means that the absolute is given in everyday reality. The final means, the means of action 
(āṇava upāya) accordingly rest on transformation of the powers of action.
MVT introduces threefold means in order to attain samāveśa: (1) an “entry into Śiva or 
pure consciousness,” the sought-​after altered state of consciousness that transforms lim­
ited gaze, and the course involves “penetration” (vedha) from the lower to higher states 
of consciousness or the surge of Kuṇḍalinī from the lower to higher centers, and (2) the 
experience is described as sudden (haṭha) intermingling or (3) harmony (sāmarasya), 
referring to the “coupled” (yāmala) state of Śiva and Śakti principles. The state described 
in graphically embodied terms is a means to the end of ending bondage that Abhinava 
described in terms of the bondage of the mind (bauddha) and the bondage of individ­
uality (pauṃsna). Rather than self-​realization being a sudden and single-​step process, 
this paradigm underscores it as a cumulative process wherein our bodily instincts and 
habits are inversed through external means, mental constructs are corrected, and proper 
vision is developed through analytical process; eventually pure will is generated to in­
vert the gaze from a determined and limited individuality to the pure being of bound­
less consciousness, described in terms of universal bliss (jagadānanda). The threefold 
means of absorption are directed toward cultivating proper will (icchā), refining the 
cognitive process by means of developing an analytical process that allows the mind to 
grasp the entire epistemic process of grasping objects (jñāna); recognizing embodied 
states as pure expression of being and consciousness; and transforming bodily being 
into Śiva consciousness (kriyā upāya).
While at times the three means based on volition, cognition, and action can be ap­
plied simultaneously or successively, it also appears that any of these means in isolation 
suffices to grant liberation. Moreover, there can be a means of no means (anupāya), for 
according to Abhinava, the self is of the nature of consciousness, which is metaphori­
cally described as light that does not depend on other lights for its manifestation. This is 
where the concept of absorption is intertwined with that of “the emission of powers by 
Śiva” (śaktipāta).
Overhyped and highly commercialized in modern times, the idea of śaktipāta relates 
to divine grace, that only Śiva is capable of retrieving his externalized gaze or reveal the 
essential nature. Most manuals of tantric practice integrate all the approaches grounded 
on the extension of volition, refinement of the analytical aspect of consciousness by 
means of successive gaze on thoughts from their most external to internal horizons, the 
refinement of motor functions of the breath and the body, and meticulous visualization 
practices. In some accounts, a single practice can be applied at different levels and relate 
to different means of absorption. For example, the Sūtra “by returning to the great lake 
[of consciousness], one experiences the vigor of mantras” (Śivasūtra I.22) is read in the 
section that relates to the means of volition and describes the state of merging into a

--- PAGE 215 ---
190      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
higher state of consciousness, but it also relates to refinement of thought processes, and 
at the same time, it also relates to mantric articulation.
Moving beyond pure volition, philosophical discussion, epistemology in particular, 
becomes part of the śākta upāya, as what it involves is a meticulous analysis of an emer­
gence of object-​directed consciousness and its retrieval to its primordial ground. Even 
this refinement by means of discursive thought rests on the “emission of powers”: If 
the will of Śiva or the absolute is to reveal His absolute nature, the refinement takes a 
proper course and one uses “reasoning” (tarka), the highest among the limbs of yoga, 
for turning the gaze inward from its external surge. Needless to say, all these means are 
identified not to discover something new or to create something original. The processes 
of rediscovering Śiva by means of pure will, refined thought, and purified action are all 
meant for revealing the intrinsic nature (svabhāva) of oneself as Śiva or pure conscious­
ness and to acknowledge one’s bodily being as a playful act of the totality, eventually 
harmonizing everyday life with liberation. It is while being in the world that the self 
is realized, and the self that is realized is not isolated from the body or the world. The 
world, accordingly, is not a miserable place that one should strive to escape by all means. 
Instead, one should strive to live a full life, acknowledging one’s own engagement in the 
world as the playful act of the absolute.
Tantric practices use mandala practice mostly for śākta and āṇava means. From the 
approach of the means of cognition, “the wheel of śaktis” (śakticakra) describes the ab­
solute at the center, with different cognitive and emotional states that all refer to the 
instances of luminous consciousness, manifest in varied forms, being placed in different 
circles. Mandala is a graphic representation of both mantra and the deity, and in visual­
ization practices, it becomes the template for the universe as well as the body. Entering 
into mandala or visualizing mandala, in this account, is engaging one’s own corporeal 
manifestation and cognitive and emotional states that are the metaphoric rays of the self 
that is the sun or the metaphoric ripples of the oceanic self. In all accounts, the layers 
in a mandala are not to describe a hierarchy based on dualities but rather a collectivity 
where different parts or aspects have different functions, while the collective constitutes 
a unique field not to be reduced into parts or their distinctive functions.
All the rituals and practices that can be observed relate to the means of action (āṇava 
upāya). This includes all forms of visualization, mantra practices, synchronization of 
mantra with breath (repeating the phonemes of mantra that match the temporal digits 
[mātrā] occupied in the process of breathing), and the localization or installation 
of different phonemes and mantras within the body. Even though the idea is to reor­
ient habitual tendencies that are deeply rooted in the nexus of the mind and the body, 
externalized practices allow the aspirants to recognize the fundamental characteristic of 
consciousness in order to constitute reality by means of visualization or imagination.23 It 
is in these graphic visualizations that we see a confluence of Abhinavaguptian aesthetics 
with tantric mysticism, and the rasa or aesthetic savoring merges here in the exhilarated 
bliss of experiencing fullness (pūrṇatā). As has been said, the image of Bhairava stands 
for the highest possible state of experiencing fullness, the exalted mode of experience 
that encompasses everything within while still maintaining the transcendent gaze.24

--- PAGE 216 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      191
 
In essence, the philosophy of Abhinavagupta that primarily rests on early Āgamas 
and the teachings of Somānanda and Utpala uniquely places itself in contrast to var­
ious forms of dualism and subjective illusionism. He demonstrated openness to em­
brace ideas from all fronts but at the same time critiqued the arguments that he deemed 
unwholesome. Abhinava succeeded in providing a philosophical framework for the 
Āgamic rituals, whereas Kumārila failed to do so for the Vedic ones. Accordingly, his 
philosophy exceptionally embraces emotions and embodied experience as part and 
parcel of the absolute, and views being in the world, savoring worldly pleasure, as not 
counterintuitive to self-​realization. He even considered that painful experiences have 
the same essential Śiva nature and engaged with the world through savoring sensory 
bliss as integral to the totality of our being. If there is poetry in his philosophical pre­
sentation, there is deep philosophical underpinning in his poetic expression. If he gave 
a rigorous analysis of mysticism, he mystified some of the most apparent practices. 
Resting on an all-​encompassing foundation, Abhinava argued for the sameness of all 
philosophies and all means of realization and all substances, and above all, the sameness 
of all beings of all conditions.25 But the final words on Abhinavagupta’s philosophy rest 
on both the centrality of freedom in his metaphysics and the concept of inherent dyna­
mism within the absolute that makes creativity and novelty possible in every level, be it 
phenomenal or absolute.
Notes
	1.	 For a detailed discussion of Abhinava’s life, works, and philosophy, see Pandey 1963.
	2.	 For an introduction to Abhinavaguptian aesthetics, read Pollock 2016. For the interconnec­
tion between aesthetics and tantric mysticism, read Timalsina 2007, 2015, 2020a, 2020c, and 
2021. For Abhinava on śānta rasa, see Raghavan 1975 and Timalsina 2020.
	3.	 Most noteworthy of this tendency is when he claimed: “There exists nothing [new] that does 
not exist in the Mālinīvijayottara” (na tad astīha yan na śrīmālinīvijayottare| Tantrāloka 
I.17ab, claiming his magnum opus to be an exposition of already existing concepts found 
in the Mālinī text. This tendency is equally visible in the Vivaraṇa on Parātrīśikā, where he 
cites Somānanda. Since the Vimarśinī texts on Īśvarapratyabhijñā are commentarial, there 
is no need for him to make such a claim. A general tendency here is to disavow originality. 
But at the same time, Abhinavagupta recognizes creative intuition (pratibhā) as revealing 
something constantly in new forms.
	4.	 Bhairava is a tantric deity. However, in the philosophy of Abhinavagupta, the term bhairava 
denotes the absolute, the ultimate state of consciousness, or the liberated state wherein the 
subject recognizes the totality as his own body while still having the transcendental gaze, 
thus making it possible for having the consciousness transcendent to the world (viśvottīrṇa) 
and immanent (viśvamaya).
	5.	 I have addressed elsewhere (2020b) in detail the Abhinavaguptian philosophy of subjec­
tivity and his analysis of aham.
	6.	 For discussion, see Nemec 2014.
	7.	 From the manuscript of Biernacki’s book, The Matter of Wonder: Abhinavagupta’s 
Panentheism and New Materialism. New York: Oxford University Press, 2023.

--- PAGE 217 ---
192      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
	 8.	 For different Śaiva schools, see Sanderson 2009.
	 9.	 For discussion, see Ferrante 2020.
	10.	 Viśvottīrṇam ātmatattvam iti tāntrikāḥ | viśvamayam iti kulādyāmnāyaniviṣṭāḥ| 
viśvottīrṇam viśvamayam iti ca trikādidarśanavidaḥ| In the autocommentary of 
Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya, Sūtra 8.
	11.	 Śivadṛṣṭi III.82cd-​83, translation, Torella 2014. For a detailed analysis of Somānanda’s pan­
theism, read Nemec 2014.
	12.	 For an introduction to Sāṅkhya philosophy, read Larson 2011. For an overview of the 
Ājīvakas, read Basham 1951.
	13.	 For an introduction to Nyāya, read Phillips 2021 and Ganeeri 2021.
	14.	 For further analysis of abhivyakti in Utpala and Abhinava’s philosophy, see Ratie 2014.
	15.	 The Sāṅkhya system accepts twenty-​five categories. In addition to these, the Trika system 
adds eleven new categories wherein Śiva as both the Absolute and pure consciousness in 
its role of illumination; Śakti, the divine consort and also the reflexive nature of conscious­
ness; Sadāśiva, again the divine form where five faces of Śiva assume a single iconic form 
but at the same time the state of consciousness wherein consciousness is both inward and 
outward, both reflecting on consciousness itself and also recognizing difference; Īśvara, 
the divine form as well as the state of consciousness that consolidates externality while at 
the same time experiences the totality; śuddhavidyā, or the pure wisdom where the rise 
of an event of consciousness is not determined by limited knowledge; māyā, or the illu­
sive power of Śiva as well as the force that delimits consciousness and makes it possible 
for being determined in objective forms; avidyā or ignorance; kalā or the determining 
aspects; raga or passion; kāla or time; and niyati or the restraining force that reflects the 
karmic collection of an individual in determining the course of embodiment and suf­
fering. Noteworthy in this list are the nine categories that are prior to the manifestation of 
the category kāla or time.
	16.	 Asthāsyadekarūpeṇa vapuṣā cen maheśvaraḥ| maheśvaratvaṃ saṃvittvaṃ tadatyakṣyat 
ghaṭādivat|| Tantrāloka III. 100cd-​101ab.
	17.	 Āgama texts and the philosophical works on Sanskrit grammar grade speech in varied 
degrees, and we can find this grading of speech central also to the works of Somānanda 
and Abhinavagupta. In brief, the expressed or articulated speech is called vaikharī. The 
inner vocalization without an external articulation is called madhyamā. The speech that 
manifests as if inseparable as word and meaning is identified as paśyantī, the speech that 
reflects both outward, toward externalization, and inward, the pristine form of conscious­
ness. There are some arguments regarding the status of the highest speech, but the Trika 
Śaivas unanimously accepted the fourth state of Parā. Here, this fourth speech needs to 
be distinguished from the goddess Parā. For discussion of different levels of speech, read 
Padoux 1990.
	18.	 Padoux (1990) best explicates phonetic mysticism.
	19.	 If we were to identify schools solely based on the term they use for cosmogenesis, all these 
three schools (Yogācāra, Advaita, and Trika) can be considered Ābhāsavāda. But what they 
mean by manifestation (ābhāsa) vastly differs among these schools. For the Yogācārin, 
the externals (and according to some, even the other minds) are merely the manifesta­
tion of momentary consciousness (kṣaṇika vijñāna). For the Advaita of Śaṅkara, the 
very singular Brahman of the character of pure consciousness is imagined to be many, or 
manifests (ābhāsa) as objects. For the Trika Śaivas, consciousness is inherently dynamic

--- PAGE 218 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      193
 
and to manifest into the manifold is intrinsically given to consciousness. It is just a brief 
overview, and it would take a book worth of commentary to address this issue properly.
	20.	 For the Śaiva concept of freedom, read Ratie 2016.
	21.	 Central to Dharmakīrtian arguments are nominalism, momentary nature of conscious­
ness as well as person, reality of the externals (the commentarial traditions differ in this 
account), and most importantly, the collapse between memory and consciousness, con­
sidering the character of memory as instance of consciousness itself (see Tillemans 2021). 
Significant for our context is that Abhinava utilized memory as a valid means of know­
ledge in establishing the recognition of the self. If memory were not reliable, so also would 
be recognition (pratyabhijñā), which integrates the direct mode of consciousness with 
memory. From the Dharmamīrtian account, since the person that experienced in the past 
is not identical to the person that experiences now, this identification and recognition of 
the self as a valid means of knowledge is flawed. Since Abhinava’s efforts through the en­
tire commentarial texts on Īśvara Pratyabhijñā rest on establishing “recognition,” one can 
argue that the central project of Abhinava is to reject the Dharmakīrtian thesis.
	22.	 For conversation on upāyas, see Marjanovic 2006.
	23.	 For the application of visualization and imagination in tantra, see Timalsina 2020b.
	24.	 For the symbolism of Bhairava from the Trika perspective, see Timalsina 2013.
	25.	 Read Torella 2015 for the Trika account of sameness, particularly regarding purity and 
impurity.
References
Primary Sources
Abhinavabhāratī. 1926–​1956. See Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharata, with Abhinavabhāratī by Abhinava. 
Edited by Ramakrishna Kavi, Gaekwad’s Oriental Series. Baroda, India. 4 vols.
Dhvanyāloka-​locana. The Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana, with the Locana of Abhinavagupta. 
1990. Translated by Daniel H. H. Ingalls, J. Masson, and M. V. Patwardhan, Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Mālinīvijayottara-​vārttika. Of Abhinavagupta. 1921. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul Sastri, Srin 
agar: Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, volume 31.
Paramārthasāra. With Vivṛtti of Yogarāja. 1916. Edited by J. C. Chatterji. KSTS 7, Srinagar.
Parātrīśikā-​vivaraṇa. ParāPartrParīśParikāPar-​vivaraṇāttrīśīkā-​Vivaraṇa of Abhinavagupta: 
The Secret of Triadic Mysticism. 1914. Ed. With translation, Jaideva Singh. Delhi, India: 
Motilal Banarsidas.
Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta. 1918–​1938. 12 volumes. Ed. M. R. Shastri (vol. 1) and M. S. Kaul 
(vols. 2–​12). Srinagar: Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies.
Tantrasāra. Of Abhinavagupta. 1918. Edited by M. R. Sastri. Srinagar: Kashmir Series of Texts 
and Studies.
The Vimarsiṇi Commentary of Abhinavagupta upon Īśvarapratyabhijñā—​Vivṛtti. 1943. Edited 
by M. S. Kaul. 3 vols. Srinagar: Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies:
The Vimarśinī Commentary of Abhinavagupta upon Īśvarapratyabhijñā-​kārikā of Utpala. 1938. 
With the Bhāskārī commentary of Bhāskarakaṇṭha. Edited by K. A. S. īyer and K. C. Pandey, 
Allahabad: Saraswati Bhavana Texts (volumes 70 and 85).

--- PAGE 219 ---
194      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
Secondary Sources
Basham, A. L. 2002 (1951). History and Doctrines of the Ājīvikas. 2nd ed. Delhi: Moltilal Banarsidass.
Biernacki, Loriliai. 2023. The Matter of Wonder: Abhinavagupta’s Panentheism and New 
Materialism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ferrante, Marco. 2020. Indian Perspectives on Consciousness, Language and Self: The School of 
Recognition on Linguistics and Philosophy of Mind. New York: Routledge.
Ganeri, Jonardon. 2021. “Analytic Philosophy in Early Modern India.” In The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by Edward N. Zalta. https://​plato.stanf​ord.edu/​archi​ves/​
win2​021/​entr​ies/​early-​mod​ern-​india/​.
Larson, Gerald James. 2011. Classical Samkhya: An Interpretation of Its History and Meaning. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas.
Marjanovic, Boris. 2006. “The Means and Practices of Non-​dual Kashmir Śaivism.” Annals of 
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 87: 175–​197.
Nemec, John. 2012. “The Two Pratyabhijñā Theories of Error.” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 40: 
225–​257.
Nemec, John. 2014. “The Evidence for Somānanda’s Pantheism.” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 
42: 99–​114.
Padoux, André. 1990. Vāc: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. New York: State 
University of New York Press.
Pandey, K. C. 1963. Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study. Vol. 1. Varanasi, 
India: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Studies.
Phillips, Stephan. 2021, Winter. “Epistemology in Classical Indian Philosophy.” In The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by Edward N. Zalta. https://​plato.stanf​ord.edu/​archi​ves/​
win2​021/​entr​ies/​epist​emol​ogy-​india/​.
Pollock, Sheldon. 2016. A Rasa Reader. New York: Columbia University Press.
Raghavan, V. 1975. The Number of Rasas. Adyar: Adyar Library.
Rastogi, Navjivan. 1986. “Theory of Error According to Abhinavagupta.” Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 14, no. 1:1–​34.
Ratie, Isabelle. 2011. “Can One Prove That Something Exists Beyond Consciousness? A Śaiva 
Criticism of the Sautrāntika Inference of External Objects.” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 39: 
479–​501.
Ratie, Isabelle. 2014. “A Śaiva Interpretation of the Satkāryavāda: The Sāṃkhya Notion 
of Abhivyakti and Its Transformation in the Pratyabhijñā Treatise.” Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 42: 127–​172.
Ratie, Isabelle. 2016. “Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta on the Freedom of Consciousness.” 
In The Oxford Handbook of Indian Philosophy, edited by Jonardon Ganeri (pp. 437–​468). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Ratie, Isabelle. 2017. “An Indian Debate on Optical Reflections and Its Metaphysical 
Implications—​Śaiva Nondualism and the Mirror of Consciousness.” In Indian Epistemology 
and Metaphysics, edited by Joerg Tuske, 207–​240. London: Bloomsbury.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the 
Early Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo. 
Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, 23, 41–​350. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo.
Tillemans, Tom. 2021, Spring. “Dharmakīrti.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited 
by Edward N. Zalta. https://​plato.stanf​ord.edu/​archi​ves/​spr2​021/​entr​ies/​dharm​akii​rti/​.

--- PAGE 220 ---
Cosmic Process, Philosophy, and Soteriology      195
 
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2007. “Metaphor, Rasa, and Dhvani: Suggested Meaning in Tantric 
Mysticism.” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion. 19, no. 1–​2:134–​162.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2013. “Contemplating upon the Image of Bhairava: A Study of 
Kṣemarāja’s Bhairavānukaraṇastava.” Journal of Indian Research. Ghazibad: Mewar. 
University Research Journal, 1:142–​152.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2014. “The Dialogical Manifestation of Reality in Āgamas.” Journal of 
Hindu Studies, 7, no. 1:6–​24.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2015. Tantric Visual Culture: A Cognitive Approach. New York: 
Routledge.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2020. “Abhinavagupta on Śānta Rasa: The Logic of Emotional 
Repose.” In Handbook of Logical Thought in India, edited by S. Sarukkai, 1–​18. New Delhi: 
Springer.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2020a. “Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Re-​engaging 
Abhinavagupta.” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 48, no. 4:767–​789.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2020b. “Meditation and Imagination.” In The Cambridge Handbook 
of Imagination, edited by Anna Abraham, 783–​795. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge 
University Press.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2020c. “Savoring Rasa: Emotion, Judgment, and Phenomenal 
Content.” In Emotions in Classical Indian Philosophy, edited by Maria Heim, Chakravarthi 
Ram-​Prasad, and Roy Tzohar, 255–​276. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2021. “Rasāsvāda: A Comparative Approach to Emotion and the Self.” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy and Religion. Volume 26, pages 115–​139.
Torella, R. 2014. “Notes on the Śivadṛṣṭi by Somānanda and its commentary.” Journal of Indian 
Philosophy, 42: 551–​601.
Torella, R. 2015. “Purity and Impurity in Nondualistic Śaiva Tantrism.” Proceedings of the 
International Conference of Religions: Fields of Research, Methods and Perspectives. Studia 
Religiologica, 48, no. 2:101–​115.

--- PAGE 221 ---


--- PAGE 222 ---
Chapter 9
Esoteric Physiology and 
Subtle Body Systems
Glen A. Hayes
Introduction
One of the central features of tantric traditions is the valorization of the human body 
and senses, which are generally viewed as necessary and helpful in the search for tran­
scendence and liberation. In the history of premodern tantric traditions, the general 
embrace of embodiment developed in contrast to the widespread views of ascetic and 
renunciate teachings that the physical body, senses, and emotions were obstacles to lib­
eration.1 In contrast to such ascetic inclinations, for tantra, the physical body, emotions, 
senses, gender, sexuality, and associated cognitive states have all been used to gen­
erate concepts of an alternative bodily system, which a practitioner can use in order to 
achieve liberation. This alternative body has been construed in many different ways, 
but it is typically of an esoteric nature, is accessed and inhabited via initiation and other 
ritual processes, is connected to breathing processes, reveals secret knowledge and 
magical powers, and is regarded as a microcosm. Issues of embodiment and transfor­
mation are thus key to any understanding of esoteric physiologies and revolve around 
the dynamics between humans “being” a body and also “having” a body. Questions 
thus develop not only about the nature of the “body” in its fullest range but also about 
the nature of that which has a body—​be it a self or some other form of consciousness. 
The matter of esoteric physiology is thus intricately connected to cosmology, ontology, 
epistemology, and soteriology. In this chapter, we consider a selection of the numerous 
systems of esoteric physiology—​often known as the “yogic body” or “subtle body”—​
and consider not only their distinguishing features but also the shared patterns be­
neath them.2 There have been so many different systems of esoteric physiology in the 
history of tantra that we can only examine a few selected examples in this short chapter. 
For details, readers will be directed to appropriate texts and studies. At the very least, 
this chapter will be able to demonstrate the complexity and creativity to be found in

--- PAGE 223 ---
198      Glen A. Hayes
 
these fascinating products of the tantric imagination and experience. Following some 
introductory observations, the selected systems of esoteric physiology in Hindu and 
Buddhist tantric traditions are considered.3 The conclusion considers recent studies 
of esoteric physiology from the disciplines of cognitive science and neuroscience and 
suggests future directions of research.
Much of the initial study of tantric subtle bodies in the modern world can be traced 
to the works of John Woodroffe, who published translations and studies of Śrīvidyā tan­
tric texts under the pen name of Arthur Avalon (1919). His works led to the continuing 
popularity of one system of the “wheels” (cakra), channels (nāḍī), and cosmic energy 
(kuṇḍalinī) in modern yoga and tantric communities—​although David Gordon White 
has identified no fewer than forty different systems in the history of tantra (see White, 
this volume). Woodroffe’s works were picked up by members of the Theosophical 
Society, such as Charles Leadbeater (1927), and the system of six cakras with the 
thousand-​petaled lotus (sahasrāradala padma) above them became widely shared.4 In 
India, Vasant Rele (1927) undertook a study of kuṇḍalinī, and argued for its connection 
to the physical body. The academic study of tantric physiologies developed further in 
the seminal work Yoga: Immortality and Freedom by Mircea Eliade (1958), which in­
cluded a notable study of the subtle body by an historian of religions. But it would take 
a number of decades, beginning in the 1980s, for enough scholars to develop the lan­
guage skills necessary to access the primary texts of tantra and produce translations and 
studies of Hindu and Buddhist tantric systems. Thanks to the efforts of scholars such as 
Sanderson (1986, 1988, 2009, 2013), Goodall (1998, 2004), Goodall et al. (2015), Goodall 
and Isaacson (2016), Flood (2006), Mallinson (2007a, 2007b, 2019, 2020), and White 
(1996, 2000, 2003, 2011, 2012), as well as my own works (Hayes 1985, 1988, 2000, 2003, 
2005, 2006, 2012a, 2015, 2022), scholars have recently been able to examine in detail the 
numerous systems of esoteric physiology, and some have begun to provide methodolog­
ical approaches to understanding them, including cognitive approaches (Hayes 2012b, 
2014; Timalsina 2015a, 2015b, 2016, 2020; Samuel & Kozhevnikov, this volume).
There have been many versions of the subtle body developed in the history of tantra, 
including Vaiṣṇava, Śaiva, and Śākta systems as well as within Indian and Tibetan 
Vajrayāna and Jainism as well.5 Gavin Flood’s The Tantric Body (2006) is an exemplary 
study which also provides a useful hermeneutical perspective involving what he calls 
the “entextualization of the body,” a method that applies equally to Hindu and Buddhist 
tantra. Flood demonstrates that the systems of the subtle body are not discrete ontolog­
ical entities (as often claimed by modern yoga practitioners) but rather the expression of 
cosmologies and ritual systems in specific texts. Flood (2006, 5) observes that “the body 
is the vehicle for imagining and conceptualising tradition and cosmos such that the 
structure of the cosmos, forms of language, and text and tradition are themselves under­
stood in terms of the body.”6 The earlier notions of the macrocosmic and microcosmic 
bodies originating from the Vedic systems are eventually adapted by tantric traditions, 
as “the body, the vedic body, is overwritten by the practitioner who constructs a tan­
tric body through a further superimposition of rites and the internalization of a tantric 
ideology” (Flood 2006, 13–​14). Brahmanical influences, especially those derived from

--- PAGE 224 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      199
 
the Vedic śrauta fire rituals and subsequent speculative systems, help to generally dis­
tinguish Hindu subtle body systems from those of Buddhist tantra, although there are 
some overlaps.7
Prior to the development of the various systems of wheels (cakras) and channels 
(nāḍīs), the Vedic system regarded the body of the ritual participant as connected to 
the universe via “bonds” (bandhu), which effectively embedded divine dimensions 
within the human body. The subsequent system of the rites of passage (saṃskāras) 
envisioned the gradual “construction” of the human body under divine command, thus 
entextualizing the Laws of Manu (Mānava-​dharma śāstras). In the Taittiriya Upaniṣad 
(II:1–​5, see Samuel and Johnston 2013, 33–​38), one can read of a hierarchical system of 
bodily “sheaths” (kośa), ranging from ones made of food (anna-​maya), breath (prāṇa-​
maya), mind (mano-​maya), intellect (vijñāna-​maya), and finally bliss (ānanda-​maya). 
In the Praśna and Maitri Upaniṣads, one can read of a set of five different types of breath 
(prāṇa) that are found in different aspects of respiration, digestion, and excretion.8
By the time of the Vedānta, a millennium after the Taittiriya, a layered body of three 
levels is mentioned: the “gross body” (sthūlaśarīra), made out of the sheath of food; 
the “subtle body” (sūkṣmaśarīra), made from the sheaths of breath, mind, and intel­
lect; and the “causal body” (kāraṇaśarīra), made from the sheath of bliss (Samuel and 
Johnston 2013, 34). This second body, the sūkṣmaśarīra, is the terminological basis of 
the subsequent uses of the general English term “subtle body.” However, the sense of 
embodiment in Vedānta is decidedly negative, one that views the physical body as an 
obstacle to liberation (mokṣa). All these systems are prior to, and different from, the 
types of subtle bodies later developed by tantra. The Vedāntic view focuses on a reli­
gious journey “without the body” (videha), while tantra valorizes a path “with the body” 
(saṃdeha). These pre-​tantric systems of esoteric physiology are not typically models 
of centers and networks of channels but rather layered cosmophysiologies based upon 
the entextualization of Vedic, Upaniṣadic, and Vedāntic texts. With the development 
of tantra by the middle of the first millennium ce, one finally can see elaborate eso­
teric physiologies connecting layers and segments of embodiment with cosmic realms, 
elements, and processes.
Esoteric Physiology in Vaiṣṇava 
Hindu Tantra
There have been many systems of esoteric physiology developed over the centuries 
within Hindu tantra, including Vaiṣṇava, Śaiva, and Śākta models. Flood has identified 
two basic processes that inform the generation of subtle bodies in tantra in general. The 
first, he noted (2006, 28), “is a hierarchical and emanationist cosmology in which lower 
levels emerge from higher: a movement from the refined and pure to the coagulated 
and impure, from refined matter to physicality.” Such cosmologies are widely developed

--- PAGE 225 ---
200      Glen A. Hayes
 
in tantra, originating in the earlier system of Sāṃkhya, although some philosophical 
traditions, such as the Trika of Kashmir, regard all reality as consciousness only, not 
even refined matter. Flood’s second process proceeds directly from the first (2006, 28), 
as “the body recapitulates this hierarchical cosmos; the body becomes a cosmography, 
a writing of the cosmos.” One consequence of these principles, Flood concluded (2006, 
28), is that “to achieve salvation is to trace a route back through the cosmos to its di­
vine source or the point at which its disembodied self became entangled with matter, 
which is also conceptualised as a journey through the body.” As we will see, the sys­
tems of wheels and channels effectively constitute the topography and roadway map for 
this journey, which is why we need to pay close attention to the details of each center 
and network of connections. But there is one more important consequence of these 
basic principles, involving the essential importance of context to subtle body systems: 
“this pathway back to the source is the mapping of the body in tradition-​specific and 
text-​specific ways through ritual and interior practice” (Flood 2006, 28). The next sec­
tion considers the subtle body systems of two forms of Vaiṣṇava tantra: the Pāñcarātra 
and the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā. The first emerges from Sanskritic Brahmanical traditions 
around 1000 ce, while the later derives from vernacular Bengali devotional movements 
in the sixteenth century. Each illustrates important aspects of Flood’s hermeneutic of 
entextualization of the body and demonstrates the tradition-​ and text-​specific nature of 
subtle body systems.
The “Divine Body” (divya-​deha) of 
Pāñcarātra Tantra
The Pāñcarātra is the better known of two Sanskritic Vaiṣṇava tantric traditions, the 
other being the Vaikhānasa, the latter being quite orthodox and in line with Vedic 
interpretations.9 Vaikhānasa thus sees itself as vaidhika, in contrast to the Pāñcarātra, 
which it regards as tāntrika and “non-​Vedic” (avaidhika). However, as Flood argues, 
Pāñcarātra in fact supports much of Vedic tradition, although it considers itself 
equivalent and supplementary to Vedic revelations. The foremost texts of the exten­
sive Pāñcarātra corpus are the Sāttvata-​saṃhitā, Pauṣkara-​saṃhitā, and the Jayākha-​
saṃhitā (JS).10 Pāñcarātra tantra makes extensive uses of public and temple worship 
and reveals complex uses of mantras in order to divinize the physical body. Another key 
feature of Pāñcarātra is the centrality of devotion (bhakti), as the texts outline a ritual 
construction of a “divine body” (divya-​deha) which is used in order to approach and 
worship forms of Viṣṇu as Nārāyaṇa and Vāsudeva.
As described in the JS, the deity Vāsudeva/​Nārāyaṇa creates the cosmos, which 
emanates into levels ranging from pure to impure, much along the lines of Sāṃkhya 
cosmology. The text outlines ritual patterns and sequences of purification of the 
body (bhūtaśuddhi), which will be divinized via the “placing” (nyāsa) of mantras and

--- PAGE 226 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      201
 
empowered to trace the route back to the unity of the cosmogonic moment (for an ex­
cellent discussion of bhūtaśuddhi and related beliefs and practices, see Ondračka, this 
volume). As the cosmology is mapped onto the physical body via such purificatory 
procedures, the lower levels of the cosmos are effectively absorbed into the higher levels. 
These procedures are specified in the JS, and thus the ritually entextualized body is ca­
pable of ascending to the highest levels of Vāsudeva. Flood translates a passage from the 
JS that nicely illustrates this dynamic process (2006, 111):
The practitioner should visualize a quadrangular, yellow earth, marked with the sign 
of thunder, connected with the five, sound, etc. [i.e. the five subtle elements śabda, 
sparśa, rūpa, rasa and gandha] and filled with trees and mountains, adorned with 
oceans, islands, good rivers and walled towns. He should visualize [that earth] en­
tering his own body from the outside with an inhaled breath, and uttering the 
mantra he should imagine it as tranquilized, pervading in due order from the knees 
to the soles of the feet by means of the retained breath, O best of twice born ones. 
Then, [the earth is] gradually dissolved in its own mantra-​form, and this mantra-​
king [dissolved] in the energy of smell. After that he should emit the energy of smell 
with the exhaled breath.
(JS 10.26–​10.30ab)
This ritually constructed esoteric physiology requires that similar procedures involving 
the inhalation and exhalation of all the cosmic elements take place, allowing the prac­
titioner to ascend to the top of the skull and exit via the fontanelle (brahmarandhra). 
Once all of the elements have been absorbed through mantras and the senses (Flood 
2006, 112),
the soul ascends in imagination up the central channel of the body (suṣumṇā) from 
the heart, through the levels of the cosmos (pada), to the Lord at the crown of the 
head. He is envisaged in his supreme body (paravigraha) as a mass of radiance 
(tejopuñja) standing within a circle of light; a standard identification of Nārāyaṇa 
with the sun.
Having reached this elevated state beyond the subtle elements and the gross body, the 
practitioner “should burn it with the fire arising from his feet, generated by the power 
of his mantra” (Flood 2006, 113). The ashes of the gross body are washed away by a 
flood of an ocean of milk, and a lotus emerges containing Nārāyaṇa. “The sādhaka’s 
body, identified with Nārāyaṇa, is purified, freed from old age and death and has the 
appearance of pure crystal and the effulgence of a thousand suns and moons” (113). 
With such a purified body, the soul (jīva) of the practitioner enters the inner lotus of 
the effulgent subtle body (puryaṣṭaka) and is ready to complete the final stages of the 
divinization of the body as well as mental sacrifice (mānasayāga) and external sacri­
fice (bāhyayaga).
The JS and the Lakṣmῑ tantra both depict complex visualization sequences of the 
inner worship of the enthroned Viṣṇu, surrounded by numerous lesser deities as

--- PAGE 227 ---
202      Glen A. Hayes
 
well as intricate cosmic processes. Flood summarizes this inner worship sequence as 
follows (118):
In this complex ritual process, the structure of the body is made to correspond to the 
structure of the cosmos: the body becomes an index of the cosmos, which, as we shall 
see, is itself conceptualised in terms of the body. But this is a representation always 
mediated by the text. The cosmos is represented in the text and the cosmos within 
the body is represented in the text. The enactment of this correspondence in daily 
ritual therefore makes the body conform to the text.
The final stage of this transformation of the esoteric body of Pāñcarātra involves a phys­
ical enactment of the sacrifice (yāga) which is also very much a traditional pūjā to a 
Hindu deity. The JS presents preparation of a mandala, as well as other standard features 
(e.g., mantras, offerings, and firepits), showing how the earlier vedic body has been 
“overwritten” by the entextualized tantric body. Although this is not like the cakra and 
wheel systems of Śaiva and Śākta tantra, it was very much a widespread type of eso­
teric physiology in the early medieval period. Of note is the dimension of devotionalism 
(bhakti), which, as we shall see, is a major aspect of another Vaiṣṇava tantric commu­
nity, the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās of seventeenth-​century greater Bengal.
Stepped Ponds and Crooked Rivers: 
the “Divine Body” (deva-​deha) of the 
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās
The Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās of greater Bengal (modern West Bengal, Bangladesh, and 
Assam) have not been as well studied by scholars as have Śaiva and Śākta tantric 
traditions, in part because they are primarily a vernacular, Bengali-​based tradition and 
also due to the enigmatic nature of their texts, composed in obscure and riddle-​like 
Middle Bengali verse.11 The precise origins of the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās remain unclear, but 
they emerged in the decades following the flourishing of the great devotional (bhakti) 
movement initiated by the renowned ecstatic leader Kṛṣṇa Caitanya (ca. 1486–​1533 
ce).12 This movement, also known as Bengali or Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, became a vibrant 
cultural and religious force in Bengal, competing with diverse Śaiva and Śākta traditions 
for popularity. Following Caitanya’s requests, a group of Bengali intellectuals, known 
as the Gosvāmins, were sent to recover the sacred spaces of the Kṛṣṇa Gopāla story in 
Vṛndāvana (in western India) and to compose texts (mostly in Sanskrit, at first) set­
ting up the foundations for the movement. These theologians and intellectuals, most no­
tably Rūpa Gosvāmin, reinterpreted the divine līlā of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā in the Bhāgavata 
Purāṇa in terms of levels of bhakti devotional practices suitable for earthly devotees.13 
Back in Bengal, a number of Bengali-​language hagiographies were composed, such

--- PAGE 228 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      203
 
as the Caitanya-​caritāmṛta of Kṛṣṇadāsa-​kavirāja14 outlining the major life events of 
Caitanya and suggesting that he was, in fact, the dual incarnation of the supreme god 
Kṛṣṇa and his beloved consort, Rādhā. This notion would prove to be very congenial for 
later tantric reinterpretation by Sahajiyā gurus.
These events in Bengal, supported by the theological and philosophical manuals of 
the Gosvāmins, led to the development of a range of external devotional ritual practices, 
known as “external” (vaidhi) bhakti, intended as preliminary to the more intense, in­
ternal, and emotional visualization “practices of passionate devotion” (rāgānugā-​bhakti 
sādhana).15 Part of this elevated practice was “maiden practice” (mañjarī-​sādhana), in 
which practitioners ritually and yogically adopted the personality and “perfected body” 
(siddha-​deha) of one of the mythical friends of Rādhā in Vṛndāvana, as presented in the 
classical Bhāgavata Purāṇa. In the classical narratives, these friends, the “milk maidens” 
(gopīs), assisted and beheld the love trysts of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They vicariously 
participated in the profound cosmic bliss and pure love (prema) flowing between the di­
vine couple. Guided by some sixty-​four types of external ritual practices such as singing 
devotional songs (kīrtana), playing musical instruments, and dancing, the practitioners 
effectively engaged in a type of “reverse amnesia” or “recollection” (smaraṇa) where they 
sought to identify themselves with the mythical characters, thus drawing close to the be­
loved presence of the couple. This “perfected body,” which was believed to be the true 
“essential form” (svarūpa) of the practitioner, is said by the Gosvāmins to be made out of 
a “particle of light” (jyotir aṃśa),16 and exists within and beyond the physical body.
At some point late in the sixteenth century or early in the seventeenth, Sahajiyās rad­
ically reinterpreted the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava approach.17 Blending an earlier tantric trope 
of the indwelling of both male and female essences with the notion of Caitanya’s dual 
incarnation, they argued that every ordinary man has the divine Kṛṣṇa as his true inner 
nature (svarūpa), while every woman has the divine consort Rādhā as her inner nature. 
Thus, rather than trying to worship the divine couple as they sported in the heavens, 
the Sahajiyās sought to effectively become the divine couple through “attribution prac­
tice” (āropa-​sādhana), which entailed making love as the mythical couple did. This 
combined the roles of the maidens with the identities of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā themselves, 
overlaying the basic dualism of bhakti devotionalism with a more monistic model from 
tantra. Thus, the Sahajiyā systems are a blend of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism as well as con­
temporary Saiva, Śākta, and haṭhayogic tantric traditions—​including selected aspects of 
their subtle body systems.18
Perhaps the most notable—​and earliest known—​Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā guru was known 
as Siddha Mukunda-​deva (or as Mukunda-​dāsa), who probably lived around 1600–​1650 
ce. As the renowned Bengali scholar Gopīnāth Kavirāja (1969, 1975) argues, Mukunda 
is said to have composed a collection of texts in Sanskrit, known as the Mukunda-​
muktāvalī (“The Collected Liberating Works of Mukunda”).19 Kavirāja put forth the 
argument that Mukunda-​deva’s disciples translated these works into Bengali, versions 
of three of which we do have, including the Amṛtaratnāvalī (AR, “The Necklace of 
Immortality”) by Mukunda-​dāsa (Hayes 2000).20 There is a lack of clarity on the dif­
ferent names associated with this guru, and scholars are divided on Kavirāja’s claim.

--- PAGE 229 ---
204      Glen A. Hayes
 
However, the AR is our best source for the most popular model of the subtle body in sev­
enteenth-​ to nineteenth-​century Sahajiyā texts.21
To begin with, the AR describes a subtle body consisting of four stepped ponds 
(sarovara),22 connected to the urethra of the male practitioner and to each other by a 
“crooked river” (bāṅkānadī). The text states (vv. 96–​100):23
96	
Through the ninth door is the Pond of Lust (kāma-​sarovara).
Thus has been proclaimed the story which all the scriptures discuss.
97	
There are the Pond of Lust (kāma-​sarovara) [and] the Pond of Egotism 
(māna-​sarovara);
The Pond of Pure Love (prema-​sarovara) [and] the Pond of Imperishability 
(akṣaya-​sarovara).
98	
The four Ponds lie within the heart.
If you have a body (deha), you can reach the other shore.
99	
The Pond of Lust is truly deserving of worship.
You must keep performing your practices (sādhana).
100	 The fully-​blossomed lotus [there] is adorned with leaves.
There are white-​colored lotus roots and red-​colored creepers.
The ascending sequence of lust (kāma), egotism (māna), pure love (prema), and imper­
ishability (akṣaya) is significant, as these concepts reflect the entextualization of major 
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava soteriological, epistemological, and cosmological principles. One 
of the key concepts involves the transformation of the base lustful desires (kāma) into 
the pure divine love (prema) for Kṛṣṇa —​a central feature of Gauḍīya theology. But in 
the Bhāgavata Purāṇa there is another, complex emotion experienced by Rādhā when 
she feels that her lover Kṛṣṇa has abandoned her: māna, which can be glossed as pique, 
resentment, jealousy, or self-​centeredness.24 As the mythic narratives and poems ex­
plain,25 only when Rādhā has been able to overcome this basic egotism could she prog­
ress to feeling the pure divine love for Kṛṣṇa. Thus the sequence of the first three ponds 
makes perfect sense in terms of Vaiṣṇava texts and traditions: the path begins with the 
universal human experience of lust and desire, which itself can lead to selfishness and 
egotism, resolving only when the ego is dropped in favor of selfless pure love. Kāma, 
mana, and prema hence encapsulate the initial stages of sādhana, and this sequence is 
often compared to alchemical metaphors of turning base metals into gold. And if the 
highest goal for the dualistic Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas is to reclaim their identity as a char­
acter in the eternal līlā of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in celestial Vṛndāvana, for Sahajiyās the 
highest realm is found in encountering these beings in the uppermost Pond: the akṣaya-​
sarovara, an imperishable region where one finds the lotus of one thousand petals, as 
well as the Place of the Hidden Moon (guptacandrapur). This is the highest level of the

--- PAGE 230 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      205
 
cosmos, the realm of Sahaja, literally the “together-​born” (saha-​ja) unitive state where 
all dualities—​male and female, Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā—​are conjoined in the cosmic bliss 
(ānanda) of what Sahajiyās call the Innate Person (sahaja-​mānuṣa).
When we look at how the AR depicts the channel connecting the ponds, and what 
flows through it, we see another major influence on the Sahajiyā subtle body system: 
Śaiva and Nāth Siddha haṭhayogic concepts of “reversal practice” (ulṭā-​sādhana) and 
the movements of fluids (bindu) through riverine channels.26 In the AR, the channel 
is called the “crooked river” (bāṅkānadī), and serves to convey the yogically reversed 
sexual fluids of the male (śukra, rasa) and female (rajas, rati) “upwards against the cur­
rent” (sroter ujāna) into the series of ponds. Of note is that this inner river leads to the 
highest cosmic realms (AR 179–​183):27
179	 The Village of Eternal Bliss (sadānanda grāma) is located along the far shores of 
the Curving River (bāṅkānadī).
The Curving River flows [to] the north.
180	 Its undulations are pleasing and well-​formed.
Its waters flow upwards against the current (sroter ujāna).
181	 To the west of that [Curving River] is the Village of the Innate (Sahajapur).
That eternal abode (dhāma) is [the place] of the Self-​Perfected Inner Person 
(svataḥsiddha mānuṣa).
182	 The connoisseurs of love (rasikas) gather [in] the Place of Eternal Bliss 
(sadānandapur).
The connoisseurs of love are youthful, and numerous.
183	 The people of the Innate Village [follow] the rituals (acara) [of] Sahaja.
The Innate Inner Person is the vessel of all fluids and experience (rasa).
Once the sexual fluids are “reversed” into the inner river, which flows near the celes­
tial realms of bliss, they become an empowered and transformative cosmic substance 
(vastu). This subtle substance, which can be regarded as a “power substance,” is used to 
generate the hierarchy of ponds, and thus provides access to the inner realms, Sahaja, 
and final liberation. Vastu is thus essential for generating the subtle body (AR 10–​11):28
10	
[Through the experience of] those fluids (rasa), you should gather within 
[yourself] the powers of the substance (vastutattva).
Indeed, the innate substance (sahaja-​vastu) and the powers of the fluids (rasa) 
must be treated like precious jewels.
11	
Influenced by the jewel [of innate substance], the fluids [assume] the shape of 
the inner body (rūpa).
The inner body was born [through] the rituals involving the fluids (rasa).

--- PAGE 231 ---
206      Glen A. Hayes
 
The structure and functions of the subtle body of the AR, reflecting the diverse traditions 
and texts available in seventeenth-​century Bengal, provide us with a quite distinctive 
and transgressive model of the subtle body. As with the models from the Pāñcarātra 
traditions, they demonstrate the richness of esoteric physiology in Vaiṣṇava tantra. This 
chapter now turns to the consideration of the subtle body in Śaiva and Śākta tantric 
traditions, which have their own diversity and complexity.
Subtle Body Systems in Śaiva and 
Śākta Traditions
There is a substantial history of development and variation in the subtle body systems 
within tantric Śaiva and Śākta traditions. Although the well-​known model of the six cakras 
plus the thousand-​petaled lotus appears by the time of the Kubjikāmata-​tantra (ca. eleventh 
century), there are numerous iterations of the subtle body found in the earlier mainstream 
Śaiva Siddhānta, as well as in the Trika and Pratyabhijñā schools of nondual Śaivism. We 
also find extensive systems of the subtle body in later Śrīvidyā and Śākta schools. Alexis 
Sanderson has commented upon these complex layers of subtle body systems (1986, 164):
In fact it [the system of six cakras] is found in none of the early traditions mentioned. 
Instead we find there a great variety in the division of the vertical line of the cen­
tral power (suṣumṇā). There are six “seasons,” five “knots” (granthayah), five voids 
(vyomānī) nine wheels (cakrāni), eleven wheels, twelve knots, at least three sets of 
sixteen loci (ādhārāḥ), sixteen knots, twenty-​eight vital points (marmāni), etc.
The renowned polymath Abhinavagupta (ca. 950–​1016 ce), in his voluminous works 
such as Tantrāloka and Tantrasāra, incorporates ideas from earlier texts and describes 
highly complex subtle body systems involving numerous deities, mantras, and bodily 
regions. It is important to remember, however, that all these systems represent the 
entextualization of the body, as all these are tradition-​ and text-​specific bodily systems.29
Flood discusses an interesting anonymous text belonging to the Krama tradition, 
the “Hymn to the Circle of Deities Located in the Body” (dehasthadevatācakrastotra).30 
This text presents the goddesses of the senses making offering to Śiva, who is described 
in sexual union with Śakti as Ānandabhairava and Ānandabhairavī. Of note is that this 
text, which describes a complex esoteric physiology, provides a visualization sequence 
in the context of a standard daily ritual. Many deities are placed on the circle, most no­
tably the eight mothers of Kaula tantric tradition, who also represent the senses.31 Flood 
observes (2006, 156) that “we see that the body becomes the text upon which the deities 
of the tradition—​the goddesses of the senses—​are inscribed. The body is inhabited by the 
circle of deities; this pantheon animates the body, which becomes the mandala wherein 
they reside.” Thus, we have another instance in which esoteric physiology is essential in not 
only entextualizing the hymn but homologizing the body with the cosmos and deities. The

--- PAGE 232 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      207
 
“circle” (cakra) here is not so much a bodily center but rather the pantheon of deities as the 
“clan” (kula), a term with great significance in subsequent centuries with Kaula traditions.
Tracing the history of the uses of the term cakra for a subtle body center is difficult, 
but White (2003, 224–​225) notes that the Bhāgavata Purāṇa (ca. 900 ce) mentions six 
“places” (sthāna): navel, heart, breast, root of the palate, between the eyebrows, and the 
cranium.32 Although the Śaivasiddhānta traditions mention different kinds of centers, 
as noted by Sanderson, these are “almost never cakras” (White 2003, 225). White 
argues that perhaps the earliest use of cakra specifically as a subtle body center is in the 
Kaulajñāna-​nirṇaya (KJnN), which lists eight cakras, each of which conveys magical 
powers (siddha) as they are visualized. He notes (225) that “we find in this source a juxta­
position of (1) the locations of the cakras; (2) the use of the term cakra; (3) a description 
of the cakras as being composed of spokes and leaves (but not petals); and (4) a portrayal 
of color-​coded divine maidens as dwelling in or on the spokes of these cakras.”
White (2003, 226) and others have shown how Abhinavagupta synthesizes structures 
from the Kaulajñāna-​nirṇaya as well as the ca. 800–​850 ce Netra Tantra (NT) in his own 
descriptions of the subtle body. His disciple Kṣemarāja composed a commentary on this 
material. In his comments on the seventh chapter of the NT, Kṣemarāja identifies two 
types of subtle body systems in the NT “as belonging to the ‘Kaula’ and “Tantric’ liturgies 
respectively” (226). White argues that, taken together:
The two systems presented in the text and commentary appear to be more direct 
forerunners of the later haṭha yoga system of Gorakṣanātha than do the KJnN and 
other works attributed to Matsyendranātha, who was Gorakṣanātha’s guru, ac­
cording to Nāth Siddha tradition. The Netra Tantra’s presentation of yogic practice 
combines breath control, meditation, “the piercing” of knots and the central channel, 
the raising of the “Śakti who is filled with one’s semen” the length of that channel, 
and the internal production of the nectar of immortality. At the same time, the Netra 
Tantra agrees with the KJnN on a number of subtle body locations.”
White concludes that many of the details of the subtle body from the KJnN are taken up 
by the very influential Kubjikāmata tantra (KM), which we now consider.33
Mallinson and Singleton’s comprehensive Roots of Yoga (2017) discusses the 
connections between the six-​cakra subtle body systems of the KM and later texts in 
the Śrīvidyā, Nāth Siddha, and haṭhayogic traditions. The KM is a foundational text of 
the Western Transmission (paścimāmnāya) of Kaula Śaivism, focusing on the manifes­
tation of Śakti as the hump-​backed goddess Kubjikā. It is this system which becomes 
dominant (but hardly universal) after the fifteenth century and eventually popularized 
by Woodroffe into today’s version. This KM model consists of the mūlādhāra, 
svādhiṣṭhāna, maṇipūra, anāhata, viśuddhi, and ājñā cakras, to which the subsequent 
sahasrāra of one thousand petals is added. Mallinson and Singleton summarize the his­
toric trajectory of this basic system (2017, 177):
Its six-​cakra system is subsequently found in texts of the Southern Transmission 
(dakṣināmnāya) of Kaula Śaivism associated with the cult of the goddess

--- PAGE 233 ---
208      Glen A. Hayes
 
Tripurasundarī, which later became known as Śrīvidyā. The Śrīvidyā Śivasaṃhitā 
provides very long and detailed descriptions of the lotuses . . . These connections 
enabled the subsequent popularization of the Kubjikāmatatantra’s system, because 
India’s two best-​known ascetic yogi lineages, those of the Nāths and Saṃnyāsīs, 
inherited the yoga traditions of the Western and Southern Transmissions respec­
tively. The popularity of the Kubjikāmatatantra’s six-​cakra system was subsequently 
reinforced by its ubiquity in modern representations of tantric and yogic eso­
teric anatomy, beginning perhaps with Arthur Avalon’s 1919 English edition of the 
sixteenth-​century Ṣaṭcakranirūpaṇa (“The Description of the Six Cakras”), a text 
of the Southern Transmission of Kaula Śaivism (Avalon 1919; see also Taylor 2001), 
whose detailed descriptions of the cakras resemble those of the Śivasaṃhitā.
When considering these historical transformations and continuations of the six-​cakra 
systems, it is important to keep in mind Flood’s hermeneutic of the entextualization of 
the body. All these Kaula, Śrīvidyā, and other texts presented subtle body systems that 
reflected the respective contexts of their scriptures: cosmological, epistemological, on­
tological, and soteriological. However, Csaba Kiss (2009) has identified an increasing 
tendency, by the time of the thirteenth-​century Matsyendrasaṃhitā, to deemphasize 
the sectarian nature of subtle body systems “that eventually produced the well-​known 
cakra-​centered haṭha-​yogic traditions devoid of any definite claim to belong to any early 
tantric cult” (22).34 This tendency, only strengthened by the twentieth century, as well 
as Woodroffe’s publications and the growth of global yoga movements, has resulted in 
the perception of the cakras as discrete ontological objects, separate from the texts and 
traditions that originally generated them as ritual practices.35 The actual supposed loca­
tion of the cakras may not be important at all, and the decoupling of the subtle body from 
specific traditions may not only account for this modern fixation on the six-​cakra system 
but also help to explain why there have been myriad systems over the centuries. Since the 
premodern subtle body systems emerged from textual and tradition-​specific contexts, it 
follows that there would be as many variations as there have been lineages and traditions. 
There indeed may be deeper cognitive forces supporting the basic wheels and channels 
of the subtle body (see “Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending in Vaiṣṇava 
Sahajiyā Texts” Hayes, this volume), but historical forces have likely led to both the com­
pression and differentiation of models of the subtle body. We must now turn to a consid­
eration of the networks of channels (nāḍī) that connect the bodily centers, as well as the 
energies (kuṇḍalinī-​śakti, prāṇa) and fluids (bindu) that move through the networks.
Channels (nāḍī), Serpentine Energy 
(kuṇḍalinī), and Fluids (bindu)
In another chapter in this volume, I discuss the underlying metaphorical processes that 
may be at play in the creation of the subtle body systems, using insights from modern

--- PAGE 234 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      209
 
cognitive linguistics. The wheels and other bodily centers function as “containers” for 
the subtle body, while the channels serve as “conduits” that connect the centers to the 
other parts of the body and, indeed, the cosmos. There is general agreement across many 
traditions that there is some form of a central channel, such as the suṣumṇā-​nāḍī, based 
upon the spinal column.36 There is also typically the belief in two side channels, the 
left (iḍā) and the right (piṅgalā). But beyond this, there is great variation concerning 
the total number of channels, with a frequent total of 72,000 being found.37 In systems 
using fluid-​based dynamics, such as the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās (see previous section), we 
more often find the channels described as “rivers” (nadī), and the central channel as the 
“Crooked River” (bāṅkānadī). The function and nature of the channels thus depends 
upon the overall structure and dynamics of the overall system, which will be text-​ and 
tradition-​specific. However, in the majority of systems employing wheels and channels, 
it is energy and breaths that move along the nāḍīs, especially the “coiled energy” of 
kuṇḍalinī.
White notes that the Kubjikāmata tantra mentions a coiled female serpentine energy, 
but variations of the term as kuṇḍalī (“she who is ring-​shaped”) appear even earlier, 
in the ca. eighth-​century ce Tantrasadbhāva Tantra (White 2003, 230). However, he 
identifies perhaps the earliest use of the actual term kuṇḍalinī in the tenth-​ to eleventh-​
century Jayarathayāmala, in which it is related to the origin of mantras emanating from 
the supreme god Bhairava (a manifestation of Śiva). This early form of kuṇḍalinī is pri­
marily a phonemic entity (White 2003, 232):
Māyā is the mother of the phonemes and is known as the fire-​stick of the mantras. 
She is the kuṇḍalinī Śakti, and is to be known as the supreme kalā [goddess of time]. 
From that spring forth the mantras as well as the separate clans, and likewise the 
Tantras.
Abhinavagupta and other nondual Śaiva philosophers developed this phonemic sense 
of kuṇḍalinī into a two-​phase process of the descent of a cosmogonic energy into the 
human microcosm, and the subsequent ascent of consciousness to a transcendent state 
of union with Śiva. Hatley (2022) points out the threefold scheme of distinguishing 
kuṇḍalinī employed by Abhinavagupta: (1) śaktikuṇḍalinī, the cosmogonic creative 
power; (2) prāṇakuṇḍalinī, the vital energy of living beings; and (3) parākuṇḍalinī, the 
ineffable power of the divine. With Abhinavagupta, we find another version of the model 
identified by Flood: an emanationist cosmology which is in turn retraced via the subtle 
body as a “reversal” of the cosmogony. Kuṇḍalinī exists in union with Śiva in the “point” 
(bindu) as creation commences, with the generation of the tattvas (ontic levels), and her 
descent results not only in the cosmos but also in the phonemes of the Sanskrit alphabet, 
which result in the salvific sets of mantras.38 Hatley (2022, 3–​4) nicely summarizes the 
ascent through the wheels:
At the level of the root chakra (mūlādhāra), the Word (vāc) exists in transcendent 
form (parā vāk) as undifferentiated phonic energy, containing the essence of

--- PAGE 235 ---
210      Glen A. Hayes
 
language. With kuṇḍalinī’s imperceptible ascent to the navel chakra, sonic vibra­
tion reaches the incipient stage of differentiation—​language in inchoate, potential 
form (paśyantī vāc). At the level of the heart chakra, this becomes particularized in 
intermediate form (madhyamā vāc) as the unexpressed inner dialogue of thought. 
Reaching the chakra of the throat, the Word attains expression as verbal utterance 
(vaikharī vāc), completing its movement from unmanifest to manifest.
In the Kubjikāmata tantra, kuṇḍalinī is identified with the central goddess of the text, 
Kubjikā, the “hunchbacked one.” Kuṇḍalinī continues to be a major feature of the subtle 
body in haṭhayogic and especially Śrīvidyā traditions, often viewed as the coiled fe­
male serpentine energy located at the base of the spine, in the root cakra, or in a “bulb” 
(kanda; Mallinson and Singleton, 2017, 178). She is coiled three and one-​half times 
around the “point” (bindu) of Śiva in the lowest wheel, her head blocking entry into the 
central channel. Using breath control (prāṇāyāma), mantras, and other forceful yogic 
means, she is eventually awakened and rises upward. Accounts of this process can vary, 
but the ascent of the kuṇḍalinī through the wheels, piercing the “knots” (granthi) is often 
extremely detailed. Hatley (2022, 6) provides a concise summary of the ascent in the 
seventeenth-​century Ṣaṭcakranirūpaṇa, which became influential due to Woodroffe’s 
publications:
Kuṇḍalinī reposes in the basal lotus (ādhāra-​ or mūlādhārapadma) of four 
petals situated between the anus and genitals at the root of the suṣumnā nāḍī. 
Downward facing, its four red petals have inscribed the Sanskrit syllables VA-​
ŚA-​ṢA-​SA in gold, and enclose a golden square in which the syllable of the earth 
element (LAṂ) is written in white. Presiding over the chakra are Brahmā, with 
an elephant as his vehicle, and the goddess Ḍākinī. In the center is a down­
ward triangle with the icon (liṅga) of Śiva known as Svayambhu in the middle. 
Radiant like lightening, the serpentine Kulakuṇḍalī coils around him three and 
a half times like the spiral of a conch, her gaping mouth covering the entrance 
to the suṣumnā nāḍī and the even subtler channels therein. With the mūlādhāra 
begin a series of lotuses or wheels: the svādhiṣṭhāna at the base of the penis (male 
anatomy is presupposed), maṇipūra at the navel, anāhata at the heart, viśuddha 
in the throat, and ājñā between the eyebrows, with a seventh lotus of a thou­
sand petals (sahasrāra) above, the pinnacle of the yogic body and abode of the 
supreme deity, Śiva. One established in the disciplines of yoga may awaken the 
serpentine śakti, “attacking with the vital air and fire” the liṅga around which she 
slumbers and causing her to enter the medial channel (v. 51). Ascending through 
the six chakras, piercing liṅgas in the heart (anāhata) and forehead (ājñā) and 
drawing the life-​essence (jīva) upwards with her, she unites with Śiva in the lotus 
of one thousand petals (sahasrāra), engendering the highest ecstasy. As kuṇḍalinī 
returns to the basal lotus she releases a flood of divine nectar. Perfected in this 
process, the yogi may attain liberation.
Among the many interesting details of this process, which are replicated and modified 
in myriad ways in modern yogic traditions (see Leland 2016), the concept of the descent

--- PAGE 236 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      211
 
of kuṇḍalinī resulting in a flood of “nectar” (amṛta) is noteworthy. Such fluidic imagery 
exists alongside the energetic and respiratory imagery. The dispersion of nectar leads to 
the experience of bliss (ānanda), and is a liberating experience. It parallels the Vaiṣṇava 
Sahajiyā notions of vastu, yogically reversed sexual fluids noted in the previous section. 
As far back as the Mahābhārata, we find the trope of collecting and preserving semen in 
a supposed reservoir in the cranium (Mallinson and Singleton 2017, 180). The goal was 
to prevent the emission of semen, as keeping the reservoir full guaranteed male vitality, 
a general concern found throughout South Asian history.39 Mallinson and Singleton 
discuss the importance of the fluidic imagery of seminal fluid as well, but the soteriolog­
ical status of the fluid is quite different to amṛta or vastu. In later haṭhayogic texts such 
as the Amṛtasiddhi,40 instructions are given to prevent the loss of bindu, including a type 
of urethral suction (ūrdvaretaḥ) which, combined with breathing exercises, prevents the 
“falling” of the vital seed into the lower fires of the sun, drying them up and lessening 
vitality (Mallinson and Singleton 2017, 181). In these haṭhayogic systems, the network of 
channels is still involved, but in this case they are conveying a substance, not an energetic 
breath. Thus, the subtle body continues to be used by tantric systems to entextualize spe­
cific traditions and texts, varying as the historical and cognitive situations vary. The next 
section finishes the survey of subtle body systems by considering their appearances in 
Buddhist tantric traditions.
Subtle Body Systems in Buddhist Tantra
The history of esoteric physiology in Buddhism, at least in its earliest stages, varies from 
the development of subtle body systems in Hinduism. Part of this is due to the relative 
lack of influence on Buddhism of Vedic and Upaniṣadic beliefs and practices, especially 
involving the ritual sacrifices (śrauta), caste, and ritual purity. But the central impor­
tance of meditation practices in Buddhism, as well as an awareness of the imperma­
nence of the body, led to techniques involving the body either directly or as a tool for 
achieving higher states of consciousness. As the body serves as the basic “location” of 
meditation (leading to higher/​inner states), it is not surprising that we find interesting 
developments leading to subtle body systems in later Buddhism.
In discussing the later importance of tantric rituals for the purification of the elements 
within the body (bhūtaśuddhi, dehaśuddhi), Flood (2006, 106–​108) argues that one pos­
sible origin may be early Buddhist meditation exercises (Pali: kṛtsna; Sanskrit: kasiṇa), 
connected to (107):
the cultivation of the meditative sign (nimitta) that leads into meditative absorption 
(dhyāna/​jhāna). Indeed, it is possibly here that we find the origins of the visualiza­
tion methods that were to become so important in the tantric traditions, both Hindu 
and Buddhist. These exercises are ten among forty objects of meditation objects 
described in Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga, although they also occur in the Pali

--- PAGE 237 ---
212      Glen A. Hayes
 
canon itself. The kasiṇas comprise the five elements and the five colours, focusing 
upon which leads into the higher levels of meditation. For example, the earth kasiṇa 
is a clay disk, an object that is concentrated upon until the image is internalized 
within consciousness without external support. In this way the kasiṇa is akin to the 
internally arising sign (nimitta), like an afterimage, which leads into jhāna. Traces of 
these practices can perhaps be found in the bhūtaśuddhi.
Although we will not find specific Buddhist systems of wheels (cakra) and channels 
(nāḍī) until the eighth century ce and the Caryāgīti and Hevajra tantra (White 2003, 
224), these objects of meditation41 require the body to be recognized as necessary and 
useful for achieving higher states of consciousness.42
Samuel (2008, 271) observes that “a striking innovation in both Śaiva and Buddhist 
traditions in the eighth to tenth centuries was a new series of yogic practices and 
techniques based on a subtle anatomy of the practitioner’s body.” White notes that the 
Caryāgīti and the Hevajra tantra both envision four wheels at the levels of the navel, 
throat, heart, and head. He notes (2003, 224) that these
cakras are identified with four geographical sites (pīṭhas), which appear to corre­
spond to points of contact between the Indian subcontinent and inner Asia: these 
are Kāmākhyā (Gauhati, Assam), Uḍḍiyāna (Swat valley?), Pūrṇagiri (Punjab?), 
and Jālandhara (upper Punjab). This tradition is repeated in numerous sources, in­
cluding those of the Nāth Siddhas, whose twelfth-​century founder Gorakṣanātha 
identifies the same set of pīṭhas with sites aligned along the spinal column within the 
yogic body.
The subtle body system in the Hevajra tantra includes thirty-​two channels and four 
wheels: the mahāsukha-​cakra at the head, the saṃbhoga-​cakra at the throat, the dharma-​
cakra at the heart, and the nirmāṇa-​cakra at the navel. (Samuel 2008, 285–​286). These 
are based on the ascending hierarchy of the “bodies” (kaya) of the Buddha, a concept 
that could only enhance notions of esoteric physiology in Buddhist history.43 In place 
of the term kuṇḍalinī, which we find in Śaiva and Śākta systems, the term used here is 
caṇḍalī (“fierce goddess”), although it functions in a similar way.44
There were major developments in Buddhist tantric textual and practice traditions 
occurring after the eighth century.45 Samuel notes (2008, 286):
There appears to be a gradual evolution from the tantras classed by the later tra­
dition as kriyā and caryā, which are primarily about “external” ritual practices, to 
the yogatantra (c.700-​c.750 CE) where the emphasis becomes much more on the 
achievement on inner purity, and we first find the identification of the practitioner 
with a tantric deity, a form of the Buddha.
Dalton (2004) has studied this gradual interiorization of Buddhist rituals, and the de­
velopment of the anuttarayoga tantra in the ninth century, including the Cakrasamvara

--- PAGE 238 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      213
 
tantra (see Gray, this volume) and the Hevajra tantra. Dalton (2004, 2, cited in Samuel 
2008, 286–​287) notes:
The tantric interiorization of Buddhist ritual was not a rejection of
ritual. Nor was it a psychologization [ . . . ]. This shift took place in the
physical realm. Its beginnings can be traced to the first half of the eighth
century, and the ritual technologies it spawned continued to develop
through the ninth century. By the end of these two crucial centuries,
a new ritual discourse of the bodily interior was in place. The tantric
subject had become the site for the entire ritual performance; the body’s
interior provided the devotee, the altar, the oblations, and the buddha to be
worshipped.
An intervening tradition of Buddhist tantra, the mahāyoga, appeared briefly between 
the early yoga and later anuttara (unexcelled) tantras (Dalton, 2004, 3). Dalton argues:
These works presented for the first time the ritualized sexual
practices for which tantra has since become so notorious. They focused
on the body’s interior, on the anatomical details of the male and female
sexual organs and the pleasure generated through sexual union. In this
way, three periods can be discerned in the development of tantric ritual,
each of which focused the Buddhist subject’s attention further inwards,
first from the external altar to himself, then to his physical anatomy
and embodied experience, and finally to the subtleties of his internal
physiological processes.
During this interstitial period, we find a number of transgressive practices, such as the 
ritual consumption of male and female sexual fluids, presented in mahāyoga (great 
yoga) tantric texts such as the Guhyasamāja and Guhyagarbha tantras. As discussed 
by Dalton and others (Davidson 2002), this involved a secondary “secret initiation” 
(guhyābhiṣeka) where the initiate consumed a drop (bindu) of the intermingled sexual 
fluids of the master and his consort (or of his own and his consort’s), assisting with the 
achievement of enlightenment. The sexual fluid is identified with the “aspiration to en­
lightenment” (bodhicitta), generating Buddha bodies out of the transformed seed.46 
Such transgressive ritual practices were thus grounded within a larger cosmological and 
physiological system.
As summarized by Dalton (2004, 7–​21), we find a range of elaborate ritual processes 
described in some of the mahāyoga texts unearthed in the Dunhuang cave complexes 
in inner Asia,47 a development that would prefigure the eventual Buddhist systems of 
wheels and channels. The ritual consisted of two stages: development and perfection. 
During the first, based on earlier yoga tantras, the practitioner visualizes an inner man­
dala, with himself at the center (eventually identifying with the deity and emptiness). 
It is during the perfection phase that the transgressive consumption takes place. In

--- PAGE 239 ---
214      Glen A. Hayes
 
versions where the practitioner is engaged in coitus reservatus with a female partner, he 
is instructed to maintain a drop of semen at the tip of the penis while he visualizes an­
other mandala and Buddhas. Then (2004, 10):
The practitioner is then instructed to worship the mandala, using the
blissful sensations flowing through his body. Such instructions seem to
reflect an early prototype of the subtle body systems that were articulated
in more complex forms in later works. The later systems involved
intricate arrangements of cakras and energy channels mapped across the body’s 
interior. In the early Mahāyoga texts, however, the technologies
are simpler, the descriptions limited to the energies associated with sexual
pleasure which rushes through the practitioner’s torso.
The ritual then proceeds, including visualizations, consumption of sexual fluids, and 
manifestations of Buddhas. The conclusion involves forms of blessing, and the dissolu­
tion of the visualized mandala. However, at the very end it seems that the practitioner 
applies the sexual fluids to the body. Dalton (2004, 16) notes:
The theory that the practitioner conferred his own sexual fluids upon
himself at the end of the perfection stage is made even more explicit in
yet another Dunhuang manuscript. Here the practitioner is engaged in the
sexual practice when he is advised:
	 At the time of practicing the samādhi, do not practice apart from the vajra emana­
tion. When the bodhicitta falls, say, “a la la ho,” imagining that the goddess is pleased. 
From between the vajra and the lotus, with the ring finger of the left hand, take the 
dew of the lotus, and offer it to the noble ones. Then oneself and the consort also 
receive the sacrament.
The Tibetan use of the Sanskrit term śākta (shad ta pa; 11) in the Guhyagarbha is unu­
sual, but suggests some early influence from Hindu tantric traditions. Dalton (2004, 11) 
concludes:
It would appear to reflect an early phase in the development
of the technologies of the subtle body that later became widespread
during the ninth century. No mention is made of the complex systems of
channels and energies that dominate later discussions of the perfection stage. The śākta 
of the Dunhuang manuscripts seems to be of an earlier
and more rudimentary variety, a raw physical force that is used to worship
and energize the buddhas.
There was obviously a dynamic situation within Buddhist traditions of yoga, 
mahāyoga, and anuttara tantra from the eighth through tenth centuries, one which 
would only later result in the development of full systems of wheels and channels in texts 
like the Hevajra tantra. Samuel, having discussed a range of sexual practices in India and

--- PAGE 240 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      215
 
China, speculates on these new systems and possible interactions with China in the pro­
cess (2008, 289):
One could read the development of the new system in either of two ways, as an indig­
enous inspiration suggested by continued yogic practice in mahāyoga style, or as a 
set of concepts and processes incorporated from another source into the more basic 
sexual yoga discussed here. To me, the second alternative seems more likely, espe­
cially given the presence of such ideas in the cognate Chinese practices. If Buddhist 
practitioners were already employing sexual yoga of the kind suggested here, the 
cakra systems would provide both a structure to aid practitioners in directing their 
sensations, and a grid through which associations could be built up with other 
elements of the symbolic world within which the practice was taking place.
The interactions between early Buddhist and Hindu tantric traditions remains an active 
area of ongoing scholarship,48 and the intricacies and varieties of subtle body systems 
illustrate the richness of those interactions.
Although it remains to be fully studied, esoteric physiology also developed with Jain 
tantra, as systems of bodily purification (bhūtaśuddhi) were developed to support Jain 
methods of meditation. Gough (2021) has examined these processes of purification, 
as well as some Jain subtle body systems (see, e.g., 111–​143), for example, in the tenth-​
century Tattvānuśāsana of Rāmasena, where we read about meditation diagrams 
sharing features of Hindu and Buddhist models (127):
An eight-​petalled lotus resides in the heart [of the meditator], situated in the middle 
of a four-​sided earth maṇḍala. On each petal the letters of the eight classes of the al­
phabet are inscribed. The pericarp has the name of the omniscient ones (arhats). It 
contains the Ring of Disciples (gaṇabhṛdvalaya) and is encircled three times by the 
seed syllable hrīṃ. It should be worshipped and meditated upon.
Although Rāmasena is presenting a specifically Jain subtle body segment here, it 
illustrates the cosmophysiological usefulness and efficiency of subtle body concepts. 
As Gough notes, much more research on Jain tantra awaits, and her two chapters in 
this volume (“Homa in Jain Traditions” and “Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess 
Padmāvatī”), as well as the chapters by Chapple and Slouber (in this volume) represent 
promising steps in this direction.
Concluding Thoughts and 
Future Directions
This chapter has examined the importance of esoteric physiology in a range of tantric 
traditions. Such systems—​and within them, the more specific models of the “subtle

--- PAGE 241 ---
216      Glen A. Hayes
 
body,” with wheels, channels, ponds, and rivers—​are a central feature of tantra due, in 
part, to the embrace of embodiment as a vehicle of practice (sādhana) and means of lib­
eration. Due to the complicated history of tantric traditions throughout Asia (and, more 
recently, globally),49 as well as the myriad teaching lineages and textual traditions, there 
have consequently been almost countless variations of esoteric physiology, including 
subtle body systems. While the Hindu tantric models emerged gradually, influenced by 
Brahmanical concepts of the interiorization of the Vedic ritual and philosophy, Buddhist 
models may have emerged from meditation practices focusing on specific objects, as we 
have seen. But from approximately the eighth through thirteenth centuries ce there was 
a proliferation of subtle body systems as Śaiva, Śākta, and Vajrayāna tantras underwent 
innovative and creative expansion. As Flood has argued, subtle body systems emerge 
from specific traditions and texts, so it follows that the medieval expansions of tantra 
would lead to greater diversity of subtle body systems. In this chapter, we have only been 
able to consider a few of these many models.
Beyond the translation and textual study of esoteric physiology that have been 
accomplished over the past century, a number of scholars have recently applied 
methods from the disciplines of cognitive science and neuroscience in the study of 
these systems. My other chapter in this volume has taken methods from contempo­
rary metaphor theory and conceptual blending theory and applied them to the study 
of Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā dehatattva. The chapter argues that there may be underlying 
somatic and cognitive features of subtle body systems that connect them to wider 
and deeper domains of human experience.50 Timalsina (2015a, 2015b, 2016, 2020) has 
also developed innovative methodologies from cognitive science and modern phi­
losophy in his recent studies of the tantric traditions of Nepal and India. Lidke (2016) 
has used concepts from consciousness studies in his exploration of Nepali tantra. 
Samuel and Kozhevnikov’s chapter in this volume uses concepts from neuroscience 
to consider some important aspects of ritual practices and experiences in tantra.
There have also been important developments in the discipline of the Cognitive 
Science of Religion (CSR), although the study of tantra in this field is still in its early 
phases.51 The field of consciousness studies has also been developing, especially 
connected to studies of meditation and altered states of consciousness,52 but again 
specific studies of tantric texts and traditions (apart from Tibetan Buddhism) are 
only gradually emerging. However, the Mind and Life Institute, involving the Dalai 
Lama, has been supporting many innovative studies, and this should result in our 
enhanced appreciation of subtle body systems.
To be sure, the future study of esoteric physiology and subtle body systems 
promises to be fascinating and will contribute to the growth of tantric studies, as 
exemplified by this volume. As noted in the Introduction to this chapter, such study 
raises profound issues about the human experiences of embodiment, imagina­
tion, sexuality, and transformation. The texts and traditions we have considered in 
this chapter have hopefully provided vivid glimpses into these fascinating ways of 
being human.

--- PAGE 242 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      217
 
Notes
	 1.	 These two views have been called “with the body” (saṃdeha) and without the body 
(videha).
	 2.	 On the problems with using the term “subtle body,” see Samuel and Johnson 2013, 2–​3. It 
is a direct translation of the Vedantic term sūkṣmaśarīra, and although there are problems 
using it, it has become standard in recent studies (along with “yogic body”) as a general 
term, especially for systems based on the “wheels” (cakra) and “channels” (nāḍī). I will use 
it as a general term in this chapter, along with “esoteric physiology,” the latter of which may 
not refer to bodily centers and channels.
	 3.	 There have been few focused studies on the subtle body in Jain traditions, according 
to Ellen Gough, personal communication July 29, 2022. The conclusion to this chapter 
addresses this issue.
	 4.	 On modern Western adaptations of the subtle body, see Leland 2016.
	 5.	 Scholarship on the subtle body traditions of Jain tantra are yet to be published, but Gough 
(2021) has studied the process of the “purification of the body” (bhūtaśuddhi) in Jain 
tantra. See the final section of this chapter.
	 6.	 Flood is specifically referring to Hindu tantra but, as we will see, this perspective applies 
broadly across many religious traditions and worldviews.
	 7.	 See Samuel 2008 and Samuel and Johnston 2013 on major features of Buddhist subtle body 
systems.
	 8.	 These are prāṇa/​inhalation, apāna/​exhalation, vyāna/​dispersion, samāna/​digestion, and 
udāna/​excretion. See Samuel and Johnston 2013, 34. This same pentad becomes a standard 
feature of many yogic and tantric systems down to the present day.
	 9.	 Flood 2006, 54.
	10.	 Ibid.
	11.	 For early studies of the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās, see Basu 1930, as well as his anthology of 
texts 1932 (in Bengali), Dasgupta 1969, and Bose 1986. Dāsa 1972 (Bengali) has annotated 
editions of four major Sahajiyā texts. The standard work remains Dimock 1966. I have also 
discussed numerous texts and aspects of the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās in my own publications: 
see, e.g., Hayes 1995, 2000, 2012a, 2022. I explore uses of metaphor theory and conceptual 
blending theory in the study of tantra in Hayes 2012b, 2014. Recent fieldwork by Sukanya 
Sarbadhikary 2015 shows that there are a number of modern Sahajiyā communities in 
West Bengal, although they seem to have little connection with the medieval schools in 
terms of subtle body systems. On the related traditions of the Bāuls, see Salomon 1995, 
2000, 2017, and Openshaw 2002. On another related tradition, the Kartābhajās, see Urban 
2001a, 2001b, 2003. For a study of devotional bodies in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, see Holdrege 
2015.
	12.	 Dimock 1966 discusses major aspects of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, but a standard 
work is De 1961.
	13.	 On the Gosvāmins, see De 1961. Rūpa’s major works were Bhaktirasāmṛtasindhu and 
Ujjvalanīlamaṇi.
	14.	 See Dimock and Stewart 2000 for an edition and translation of the Caitanya-​caritāmṛta. 
Stewart 2010 explores more issues involving Gauḍīya and Sahajiyā texts and interactions.
	15.	 For the details on rāgānugā bhakti sādhana, which involves the devotee ritually creating, 
and then inhabiting, a character in the celestial drama, see Haberman 1988.
	16.	 See Haberman 1988, 91. See also Stewart 2010.

--- PAGE 243 ---
218      Glen A. Hayes
 
	17.	 See Dimock 1966 on this appropriation of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism by Sahajiyās.
	18.	 See, for example, the Ānandabhairava of Prema-​dāsa, which makes extensive use of Śākta 
figures, concepts, and ritual sequences. See Hayes 2022 for a brief study of this text.
	19.	 Unfortunately, I have not been able to view a manuscript edition of this text. During a re­
search trip in 2007 I found that one copy held by the Bangīya Sāhitya Pariṣat archive in 
Kolkata was “missing.”
	20.	 On the issues regarding Mukunda-​deva/​-​dāsa and the three surviving texts attributed to 
him (Amṛtaratnāvalī, Bhṛngaratnāvalī, and Amṛtarasāvalī), see Hayes 1985, Czyżykowski 
2016, 2020, Stewart 2010, and Thāndār 2012.
	21.	 For details on the text and manuscripts of the AR, see Hayes 1985, 1995, 2000. I have 
added verse numbers to my translations based on mss. 595 (M1) and 6451 (M2), found 
in the Kolkata University archives, as well as the printed edition (P) found in Dāsa 
1972. My thanks to Archivist Tushar Mahapatra, and Department Heads Asit Kumar 
Bandhopadyaya and P. Dasa, who granted me access to these manuscripts in the 
Kolkata University archives during research in 1979–​1980. As these manuscripts are 
difficult for readers to access, I am providing Romanized Bengali passages of relevant 
verses.
	22.	 In the riverine environment of Bengal, many ponds are built with stone embankments 
and stone steps leading down to the water (ghaṭ). Sarovara are thus technically “stepped 
ponds,” not just natural ponds. We will just refer to them as “Ponds.”
	23.	 The Bengali (P:137, M1:5a, M2:4b) reads: 96. navama duyāre kāmasarovara haya/​ phukāriyā 
sei kathā sarvaśāstre kaya//​ 97. kāmasarovara āche mānasarovara/​premasarovara 
akṣayasarovara//​ 98. cāri sarovara āche hṛdaya bhitare/​āpanāra deha yadi pāra sādhibare//​ 
99. sakala ārādhya haya kāmasarovara/​avirata sādhana karibe nirantara//​ 100. praphullita 
padma haya vibhūsita pātā/​śvetavarṇa padmamūla raktavarṇa latā//​
	24.	 See Dimock 1966 on the pique of Rādhā.
	25.	 See Dimock and Levertov (1981) for poetic renderings of the loves and agonies of Rādhā 
and Kṛṣna.
	26.	 See Mallinson and Singleton (2017, 180–​182) on bindu and the circulation of fluids in the 
subtle body.
	27.	 The Bengali (P:144, M1:8a, M2:7b) reads: 179. sadānanda grāma sei bāṅkānadī pāra/​
bāṅkānadī vahe tāra uttara digedhāra//​ 180. tāhāra gamanabhaṅgi raṅgima suṭhāma/​
vahiche tāhāra jala srotera ujāna//​ 181. tāhāra paścimadige sahajapura grāma/​
svataḥsiddha mānuṣera sei nityadhāma//​ 182. rasikera gaṇa haya sadānandapura/​
rasika navingaṇa rasika pracura//​ 183. sahajapurera loka sahaja ācāra/​sahaja mānuṣa 
sava rasera bhāṇḍāra//​
	28.	 The Bengali (P:131, M1:2a, M2:1b) reads: 10. sei rase vastutattva milibe āpani/​sahajavastu 
rasatattva yena ratna khāni//​ 11. ratane ghaṭita rasa rūpera ākāra/​rūpera janma haila 
rasera ācāra//​
	29.	 For an informative discussion of various aspects of the subtle body in the Brahmayāmala, 
see Hatley (2018). I would like to thank Shaman Hatley for suggesting useful references for 
this section.
	30.	 Flood (2006, 154–​157).
	31.	 These are Brahmāṇī, Śāmbhavī, Kumārī, Vaiṣṇavī, Vārāhī, Indrāṇī, Camuṇḍā, and 
Mahālakṣmī. These goddesses appear throughout Hindu textual traditions, often as the 
“Seven Mothers” (sapta-​matṛkā). Flood (2006, 156).

--- PAGE 244 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      219
 
	32.	 White (2003, 224) notes that these six “places” are also found in the Caraka-​saṃhitā, 
suggesting connections to the medical systems.
	33.	 Buhnemann (2011) presents some details of the subtle body in the Śāradātilkatantra, a 
comparatively early (ca. twelfth century) text that predates the later haṭhayogic and Nāth 
Siddha texts. It also has the six plus one model.
	34.	 My thanks to Ben Williams of the Naropa Institute for bringing this essay to my attention. 
He presented this information in his 2021 American Academy of Religion Annual Meeting 
paper for the Tantric Studies unit.
	35.	 For a comprehensive treatment of the Western reception and adaptations of Asian tantric 
subtle body systems, see Leland (2016), which also includes timelines and illustrations of 
subtle body systems.
	36.	 On suṣumṇā, iḍā, and piṅgalā channels see Mallinson and Singleton (2017, 171–​198).
	37.	 Ibid.
	38.	 See also Flood (2006, 160–​162).
	39.	 See, e.g., Carstairs (1961).
	40.	 On the Amṛtasiddha, see Mallinson (2020).
	41.	 In addition to earth, the other nine are water, fire, air, blue, yellow, red, white, enclosed space, 
and consciousness. See Visuddhimagga Buddhaghosa, The Path of Purity (translated by Pe 
Maung Tin), 4.123–​126; 5.170–​172 (London: Pali Text Society, 1975), pp. 143–​146, 196–​198.
	42.	 See Crosby (2020) for an important exploration of the body-​based “old meditation” (borān 
kammaṭṭhāna) of Theravada Buddhism in Southeast Asia, traditions which have been 
marginalized by the reform movements since the nineteenth century. While not specifi­
cally tantric, these practices do involve various forms of somatic transformation, and were 
influenced by alchemy and Ayurvedic medicine. See ibid., esp. 141–​171).
	43.	 On the bodies of the Buddha, see Powers (2009, 2021).
	44.	 Some of the later Buddhist subtle body systems have the caṇḍalī rising to the uppermost 
wheel, while some have it then descend to the heart center. See, for example, Snellgrove 
(1959, 35–​46) for how caṇḍalī is described in the Hevajra tantra.
	45.	 On the Buddhist influence on a major text within haṭhayoga, the Amṛtasiddha, see 
Mallinson (2019, 2020).
	46.	 For a comprehensive study of the concept of bodhicitta, see Wangchuk (2007).
	47.	 On the Buddhist tantric texts found at Dunhuang, see Dalton and van Schaik (2006), 
Kapstein and van Schaik (2010), and van Schaik (2021).
	48.	 See, for example, Mallinson (2019, 2020).
	49.	 See Leland (2016).
	50.	 I began my study of the subtle body with my doctoral dissertation, Hayes (1985). On my 
uses of contemporary metaphor and conceptual blending theories in studying dehatattva, 
see Hayes (2003, 2005, 2006, 2012b, 2014).
	51.	 See White (2021) for an excellent overview of CSR.
	52.	 For an overview of recent developments, with bibliography, see Hayes and Timalsina (2017).
References
Avalon, Arthur [Sir John Woodroffe]. 1919. The Serpent Power: Being the Ṣhaṭ-​chakra-​nirūpaṇa 
and Pādukā-​panchaka. Two Works on Tantrik Yoga. Edited and translated. London: Luzac 
and Company.

--- PAGE 245 ---
220      Glen A. Hayes
 
Bose [Basu], Manindra Mohan. 1930. The Post-​Caitanya Sahajia [sic] Cult of Bengal. Reprinted 
1986, Delhi: Gian Publishing House.
Bose [Basu], Manindra Mohan. 1932 Sahajiyā sāhitya. Calcutta: University of Calcutta.
Buhnemann, Gudrun. 2011. “The Śāradātilakatantra on Yoga: A New Edition and Translation 
of Chapter 25.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 74: 205–​235.
Carstairs, G. Morris. 1961. The Twice-​Born, Study of a Community of High-​Caste Hindus. 
London: Hogarth Press.
Crosby, Kate. 2020. Esoteric Theravada: The Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of 
Southeast Asia. Boulder, CO: Shambhala.
Czyżykowski, Robert. 2016. “Selected Aspects of the Textual Studies on the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā 
Tradition in Medieval Bengal.” Cracow Indological Studies 18: 339–​366. https://​journ​als.aka​
demi​cka.pl/​cis/​arti​cle/​view/​1574
Czyżykowski, Robert. 2020. “The Mystical World of the Body in the Bengali Tantric Work 
Nigūḍhārthaprakāśāvalī.” Religions 11, no. 9: 472. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​1090​472
Dalton, Jacob. 2004. “The Development of Perfection: The Interiorization of Buddhist Ritual in 
the Eighth and Ninth Centuries.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 32: 1–​30.
Dalton, Jacob, and Sam Van Schaik. 2006. Tibetan Tantric Manuscripts from Dunhuang: 
A Descriptive Catalog of the Stein Collection at the British Library. Brill’s Tibetan Studies 
Library, 12. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Dasa, Paritoṣ. 1972. Caitanyottara prathama cāriṭi sahajiyā puṅthi. Calcutta: Bharati Book Stall.
Dasgupta, Shashibhusan. 1969. Obscure Religious Cults. 3rd ed. Calcutta: Firma K. L. 
Mukhopadhyay.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
De, Sushil Kumar. 1961. Early History of the Vaiṣṇava Faith and Movement in Bengal. 2nd ed. 
Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Dimock, Jr., Edward C. 1966. The Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic Mysticism in the 
Vaiṣṇava-​Sahajiyā Cult of Bengal. Reprinted 1989, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Phoenix Books.
Dimock, Edward C., Jr., and Denise Levertov. 1981. In Praise of Krishna: Songs from the Bengali. 
Reprint ed. Chicago: Phoenix Books.
Dimock, Edward C., Jr., and Tony K. Stewart, eds. and trans. 2000. Caitanya Caritāmṛta 
of Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja: A Translation and Commentary. Harvard Oriental Series, 56. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Eliade, Mircea. 1958. Yoga: Immortality and Freedom. Translated from the French by Willard 
Trask. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Flood, Gavin. 2006. The Tantric Body: The Secret Tradition of Hindu Religion. New York: I. B. 
Tauris.
Goodall, Dominic. 1998. Bhatta Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra. Vol. I: 
­chapters 1–​6. Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry; École française d’Extrême-​
Orient, Publications du Département d’indologie (PDI 86.1).
Goodall, Dominic. 2004. The Parākhyatantra. A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. Collection 
Indologie 98. Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry; Ecole française d’Extrême-​Orient.”
Goodall, Dominic, and Harunaga Isaacson. 2016. Tantric Studies. Fruits of a Franco-​German 
project on Early Tantra. Universität Hamburg, 305 p., 2016, Collection Indologie, Vol. 
131; Early Tantra Series 4. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry; Ecole française 
d’Extrême-​Orient; Asien-​Afrika-​Institut.

--- PAGE 246 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      221
 
Goodall, Dominic, and Harunaga Isaacson, Alexis G. J. S. Sanderson, Nirajan Kafle, Diwakar 
Nath Acharya. 2015. “The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā. The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra, Volume 
1.” In A Critical Edition & Annotated Translation of the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra & Nayasūtra, 
edited by Dominic Goodall. Collection Indologie 128 /​ Early Tantra Series 1. Pondicherry: 
IFP/​EFEO/​Asien-​Afrika-​Institut, University of Hamburg.
Gough, Ellen. 2021. Making a Mantra: Tantric Ritual and Renunciation on the Jain Path to 
Liberation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Haberman, David L. 1988. Acting as a Way of Salvation: A Study of Rāgānugā Bhakti Sādhana. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hatley, Shaman. 2018. The Brahmayamala Tantra or Picumata—​Chapters 1–​2, 39–​40, and 83 
(Volume 1). Paris: Institut Francais De Pondichery.
Hatley, Shaman. 2022. “Kuṇḍalinī.” In Hinduism and Tribal Religions (Encyclopedia of Indian 
Religions), edited by Jeffery D. Long, Rita D. Sherma, Pankaj Jain, and Madhu Khanna, 822–​
826. New York: Springer.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 1985. Shapes for the Soul: A Study of Body Symbolism in the Vaiṣṇava-​
sahajiyā Tradition of Medieval Bengal. Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 1988. “On the Concept of Vastu in the Vaiṣṇava-​sahajiyā Tradition 
of Medieval Bengal.” In Religions and Comparative Thought: Essays in Honour of the Late 
Dr. Ian Kesarcodi-​Watson, edited by Purusottama Bilimoria and Peter Fenner, 141–​149. Sri 
Garib Dass Oriental Series No. 62. Delhi: Śrī Satguru Publications/​Indian Books Centre.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 1995. “The Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Traditions of Medieval Bengal.” In 
Religions of India in Practice, edited by Donald S. Lopez, Jr., 333–​351. Princeton Readings in 
Religions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2000. “The Necklace of Immortality: A 17th-​Century Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā 
Text on Ritual Sexual Intercourse and the Transformations of the Body.” In Tantra in Practice, 
edited by David Gordon White, 308–​325. Princeton Readings in Religions. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2003. “Metaphoric Worlds and Yoga in the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Tantric 
Traditions of Medieval Bengal.” In Yoga: The Indian Tradition, edited by Ian Whicher and 
David Carpenter, 162–​184. New York: RoutledgeCurzon.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2005. “Contemporary Metaphor Theory and Alternative Views 
of Krishna and Rādhā in Vaishnava Sahajiyā Tantric Traditions.” In Alternative Krishnas: 
Regional and Vernacular Variations on a Hindu Deity, edited by Guy Beck, 19–​32. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2006. “The Guru’s Tongue: Metaphor, Imagery, and Vernacular 
Language in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Traditions.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist 
Studies 3, no. 8: 41–​71.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2012a. “Eroticism and Cosmic Transformation as Yoga: The Ātmatattva 
of the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās of Bengal.” In Yoga in Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 
223–​241. Princeton Readings in Religions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2012b. “Conceptual Blending Theory, ‘Reverse Amnesia,’ and the Study 
of Tantra.” Oxford Journal of Hindu Studies 5, no. 2: 193–​209.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2014. “Possible Selves, Body Schemas, and Sādhana: Using Cognitive 
Science and Neuroscience in the Study of Medieval Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Hindu Tantric Texts.” 
Religions 5, no. 3: 684–​699; https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​5030​684
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2015. “Exploring the Uses of the Term Sahaja in Hindu Tantra: 
Studying Selected Texts of the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās of Bengal.” In Sahaja: The Role of Doha and

--- PAGE 247 ---
222      Glen A. Hayes
 
Caryagiti in the Indo-​Tibetan Interface, edited by Andrea Loseries, 125–​137. Delhi: Buddhist 
World Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2022. “Prema and Śakti: Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Appropriations of Gauḍīya 
Vaiṣṇavism and Śāktism in the Ānandabhairava of Prema-​dāsa.” In Studies on Tantra in 
Bengal and Eastern India, edited by Madhu Khanna, 37–​57. London: Springer.
Hayes, Glen A., and Sthaneshwar Timalsina. 2017. “Introduction to ‘Cognitive Science and the 
Study of Yoga and Tantra’.” Religions 8, no. 9: 181; https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​8090​181
Holdrege, Barbara A. 2015. Bhakti and Embodiment: Fashioning Divine Bodies and Devotional 
Bodies in Krsna Bhakti. London: Routledge.
Kapstein, Matthew T., and Sam Van Schaik, eds. 2010. Esoteric Buddhism at Dunhuang: Rites 
and Teachings for this Life and Beyond. Brill’s Tibetan Studies Library, 25. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Kavirāja, Gopīnāth. 1969. Tantrik sādhana o siddhanta, vol. 1. Burdhwan, India: Bardhaman 
Visvavidyalaya.
Kavirāja, Gopīnāth. 1975. Tantrik sādhana o siddhanta, vol. 2. Burdhwan, India: Bardhaman 
Visvavidyalaya.
Kiss, Csaba. 2009. “Matsyendranātha’s Compendium (Matsyendrasaṃhitā), a Critical Edition 
and Annotated Translation of Matsyendrasaṃhitā 1-​13 and 55 with analysis.” DPhil. diss., 
Balliol College, University of Oxford.
Leadbeater, Charles Webster. 1927. The Chakras: A Monograph. Chicago: Theosophical Press.
Leland, Kurt. 2016. Rainbow Body: A History of the Western Chakra System from Blavatsky to 
Brennan. Lake Worth, FL: Ibis Press.
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2016. “The Potential of the Bi-​Directional Gaze: A Call for Neuroscientific 
Research on the Simultaneous Activation of the Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nervous 
Systems through Tantric Practice.” Religions 7, 11: 132. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7110​132.
Mallinson, James. 2007a. Ed. and trans. The Khecarīvidyā of Ādinātha: A Critical Edition and 
Annotated Translation of an Early Text of Haṭhayoga. London: Routledge.
Mallinson, James. 2007b. Ed. and trans. The Shiva Samhita: A Critical Edition and an English 
Translation. New York: Yogavidya.com
Mallinson, James. 2019. “Kālavañcana in the Konkan: How a Vajrayāna Haṭhayoga Tradition 
Cheated Buddhism’s Death in India.” Religions 10, no. 4: 273. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​
0040​273
Mallinson, James. 2020. “The Amṛtasiddhi: Haṭhayoga’s Tantric Buddhist Source Text.” In 
Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions: Essays in Honour of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson, edited by 
Dominic Goodall, Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson, and Srilata Raman, 409–​425. Gonda 
Indological Studies, 22. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Mallinson, James, and Mark Singleton. 2017. Roots of Yoga. London: Penguin Books.
Openshaw, Jeanne. 2002. Seeking Bāuls of Bengal. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Powers, John. 2009. A Bull of a Man: Images of Masculinity, Sex and the Body in Indian 
Buddhism. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
Powers, John. 2021. “The Body of the Buddha.” In Oxford Encyclopedia of Buddhism, edited by 
Richard Payne and Georgios Halkias. New York: Oxford University Press. https://​doi.org/​
10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​3719​868.013.745 [Online]
Rele, Vasant G. 1927. The Mysterious Kundalini: The Physical Basis of the “Kundali (Hatha) Yoga” 
according to Our Present Knowledge. Bombay: Taraporevala.
Salomon, Carol. 1995. “The Bāuls.” In Religions of India in Practice, edited by Donald S. Lopez, 
187–​208. Princeton Readings in Religion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

--- PAGE 248 ---
Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems      223
 
Salomon, Carol. 2000. “Bāul Songs.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 187–​
208. Princeton Readings in Religion. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Salomon, Carol. 2017. Trans. and eds. Keith Cantu and Saymon Zakaria. City of Mirrors: Songs 
of Lalan Sai. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1986. Comments in discussion at end of “Kubjikā’s Samayatantra and 
Its Manipulation in the Kubjikāmata,” by Teun Goudriaan, in Mantras et diagrammes 
rituelles dans l’hindouisme, edited by Andre Padoux. Equipe no. 249, L’hindouisme: textes, 
doctrines, practiques, 141–​167. Paris: Editions du centre national de la recherché scientifique.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World’s Religions, ed­
ited by Stewart Sutherland, Leslie Houlden, Peter Clarke, and Friedhelm Hardy, 660–​704. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Saiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Saivism during the 
Early Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, 
41–​350. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series 23. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture. 
University of Tokyo.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2013. “The Saiva Literature.” Journal of Indological Studies 24–​25: 1–​113.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2008. The Origins of Yoga and Tantra: Indic Religions to the Thirteenth 
Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey, and Jay Johnston, eds. 2013. Religion and the Subtle Body in Asia and the West. 
New York: Routledge.
Sarbadhikary, Sukanya. 2015. The Place of Devotion: Siting and Experiencing Divinity in Bengal-​
Vaishnavism. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Snellgrove, D. L. 1959. The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study. London: Oxford University Press.
Stewart, Tony K. 2010. The Final Word: The Caitanya-​caritāmṛta and the Grammar of Religious 
Tradition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, Kathleen. 2001. Sir John Woodroffe, Tantra, and Bengal: “An Indian Soul in a European 
Body”? Richmond, UK: Routledge Curzon.
Thāndār, Bimal Kumār. 2012. Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā kavi Mukundadāsa o Rasikadāsa. Calcutta: 
Vivekānanda Book Centre.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2015a. Language of Images: Visualization and Meaning in Tantras. 
New York: Peter Lang.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2015b. Tantric Visual Culture: A Cognitive Approach. New York: 
Routledge.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2016. “A Cognitive Approach to Tantric Language.” Religions 7, no. 
12:139. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7120​139
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2020. “Meditation and Imagination.” In The Cambridge 
Handbook of the Imagination, edited by Anna Abraham, 783–​795. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2001a. The Economics of Ecstasy: Tantra, Secrecy, and Power in Colonial Bengal. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2001b. Songs of Ecstasy: Tantric and Devotional Songs from Colonial Bengal. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2003. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics, and Power in the Study of Religion. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Van Schaik, Sam. 2021. “Dunhuang, Texts.” In Oxford Bibliographies Online. https://​doi.org/​
10.1093/​OBO/​978019​5393​521-​0045

--- PAGE 249 ---
224      Glen A. Hayes
 
Wangchuk, Dorji. 2007. The Resolve to Become a Buddha: A Study of the Bodhicitta Concept 
in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism. Studia Philologica Buddhica Monograph Series 23. Tokyo: 
International Institute for Buddhist Studies.
White, Claire. 2021. An Introduction to the Cognitive Science of Religion: Connecting Evolution, 
Brain, Cognition and Culture. New York: Routledge.
White, David Gordon. 1996. The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon, ed. 2000. Tantra in Practice. Princeton Readings in Religions. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Contexts. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. 2011. “On the Magnitude of the Yogic Body.” In Yogi Heroes and Poets: 
History and Legends of the Nāths, edited by David N. Lorenzen and Adrian Munoz, 79–​90. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
White, David Gordon. ed. 2012. Yoga in Practice. Princeton Readings in Religions. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.

--- PAGE 250 ---
Chapter 10
Transforming the Body 
by Mastering 
the Elements, Some 
Tantric Sources
Lubomír Ondračka
The elements (bhūtas), often called the great elements, material elements, classical 
elements, or gross elements (mahābhūtas; in Sanskrit plural mahābhūtāni), play a key 
role in all Indian doctrines that take a realist position, that is, those that consider the 
world around us to be real. According to such teachings, the elements are the basic 
building blocks of the world we perceive with our senses. Most schools assume the ex­
istence of five elements, four of which are universal (earth, water, fire, and air), while 
the fifth element (called “space” or “ether”) often has a special status and properties that 
sometimes exclude it from the list of material elements.
This brief description of the elements in Indian thought must sound familiar to an­
yone who has encountered the basics of ontology in Western philosophy. The notion 
that the elements are the building blocks of the world, their repertoire (fire, air, water, 
and earth), and even the addition of a fifth and always somewhat problematic element 
(ether)—​all these concepts appear already in early Greek philosophy, beginning with 
Empedocles, through Plato and Aristotle, to their followers (Ball 2004, 1–​20). The 
striking similarity between Indian and Western conceptions of the elements naturally 
raises questions about possible common origins or mutual influences (especially since 
the conception of the elements in classical China is different; Ikeda 1966; Mou 2009, 
161–​163), but these questions will not be addressed here. For our study, this similarity is 
simply useful because we do not need to explain in detail the basic principles of how the 
elements function in Indian thought.1
Even though the basic principles of the elemental doctrine in India are relatively 
simple, not all Indian philosophical and religious traditions share the same ontology 
and the same conception of the elements. Among realist schools, we can distinguish two

--- PAGE 251 ---
226      Lubomír Ondračka
 
quite different ontological models, one horizontal and one vertical (Halbfass 1992, 48). 
The horizontal model proposes that there are several independent entities, or distinct 
ontological categories, and that matter composed of the elements is one of these entities. 
The best example of this model is offered by the Vaiśeṣika school; it contains six ontolog­
ical categories (Potter 1977, 86–​91; for greater detail, see Mishra 1936). This teaching is 
shared by Vaiśeṣika’s close sister, the Nyāya school, and it was also adopted (and modi­
fied) by the Mīmāṃsā system, which had different interests and did not develop its own 
independent ontology. The Ājīvikas had a similar concept of elemental atoms (Basham 
1951, 262–​266), but surprisingly the Jains did not. They did not classify atoms according 
to the elements but instead taught that all atoms are of only one kind.
For our study, however, the second, vertical model is more important. In this onto­
logical system, the elements stand at the end of the evolutionary series of individual 
entities produced in the cosmogonic process. The prototypical example of this model 
is presented by classical Sāṃkhya (Larson 1979, 180–​188) and its variant, Pātañjala 
Yoga. The Hindu tantric traditions adopted this concept but had to modify it because 
the initial source of the evolutionary process in Sāṃkhya is primordial matter (prakṛti), 
whereas tantric systems are mostly theistic, so they had to place a deity at the beginning 
of their cosmogonic model. Different tantric traditions have dealt with this in different 
ways, and the process of modifying this model always took some time until the final doc­
trine was settled (Goodall 2016). Fortunately, however, we do not have to deal with these 
historical issues here, because the modifications to the Sāṃkhya model concerned the 
initial levels of cosmogony, whereas its final stage, the five elements, remained mostly 
unchanged.
While these two models, the horizontal and the vertical, are dominant in Indian re­
alist ontologies, they do not exhaust all the ways the elements can be produced. For 
example, the later theistic Vedānta schools combine both models: like Vaiśeṣika, they 
postulate a horizontal set of ontological categories (though their source is the ultimate 
reality, brahman, which is the highest God), but at the same time apply Sāṃkhya’s ver­
tical evolution in which one of the ontological entities is prakṛti, which is the source of 
the material world down to the level of the elements that combine with each other in a 
process called pañcīkaraṇa (literary “quintuplication”) to produce physical matter (see 
Srinivasa Chari 1988, 22–​26, 317–​323 for the Viśiṣṭādvaita position, and Narain 1986, 77–​
86 for the Dvaita teaching). Although the Viśiṣṭādvaita school is particularly relevant 
to the late doctrine of tantric Viṣṇuism because of its gradual fusion with the teachings 
of the Pāñcarātras, for the purpose of the doctrine of the elements we need not concern 
ourselves with it.
To understand how the elements function in tantric Buddhism, however, we must 
concern ourselves with the Buddhist concept of the elements. Unfortunately, unlike 
the realist Brahmanical schools, this doctrine cannot be briefly introduced because 
Buddhism offers a wide range of very different and contradictory ontologies, from realist 
Abhidharma (in which entities that are ultimately real exist) through idealist Yogācāra 
(where nothing exists except mental things) to skeptical Madhyamaka (in which every­
thing is just a conceptual construct devoid of any real essence or intrinsic nature). Even

--- PAGE 252 ---
Transforming the Body      227
 
the concept of the elements in Abhidharma, which at first sight looks similar to the ideas 
of the Brahmanical schools, is in fact quite different, for the elements here are not of 
a substantial nature. This doctrine is rather counterintuitive. The elements are not the 
building blocks of matter or particles, but only a particular occurrence of the inherent 
qualities proper to a given element (e.g., an atom of earth is merely the presence of so­
lidity at a given time in a given place; Siderits 2007, 113–​115). Tantric texts commonly 
speak of four (or less often five) elements, but since their doctrinal position is close to 
Yogācāra or Madhyamaka, their elements cannot be real substances. However, this weak 
ontological status of the elements does not prevent their use in Buddhist tantric rituals, 
where they are quite often invoked.
After this brief introduction, we can begin to explore the role of the elements in tan­
tric rituals. An exhaustive survey of this topic would require a monograph, so here I 
focus only on the techniques in which the elements are directly used for transforming 
the practitioner’s body. There are two such rituals: the purification of the elements and 
the mastering of the elements. I first briefly introduce the much better-​known ritual of 
purifying the elements, and then in the rest of the study I examine the technique of con­
trolling the elements.
The Purification of the Elements
This ritual is part of the preliminary purification techniques that formed over time in 
the Hindu tantric ritual manuals to create the set of “five purifications” (pañcaśuddhi; 
Goodall and Rastelli 2013, 360). Their form, order, and names are not fixed and differ 
not only in Śaiva, Śākta, and Vaiṣṇava works but also within texts of the same tradi­
tion. A typical Śaiva set consists of purifications of one’s self (ātmaśuddhi), the sacri­
ficial place (sthānaśuddhi), all the materials used in worship (dravyaśuddhi), mantras 
(mantraśuddhi), and the image to be worshiped (liṅgaśuddhi). In the Vaiṣṇava var­
iant, the last member is replaced by the purification of the deity image (beraśuddhi, 
bimbaśodhana), and sometimes the purification of the vessels (pātraśuddhi) is used 
instead of the purification of the mantras. This series of purification techniques must 
precede daily standard worship (nityapūjā), and therefore it is a necessary part of the 
regular tantric ritual (Gupta 1979, 134–​138).
There are two ways in which the purification of the elements (bhūtaśuddhi) can be 
placed in this set of five purifications. First, bhūtaśuddhi can be understood as a syn­
onym for the purification of one’s self (another common synonym is “purification of 
the body,” dehaśuddhi) or as only a part of the purification of one’s self, which consists 
of several techniques (Ganesan 2009, 70). In any case, bhūtaśuddhi always stands at the 
very beginning of a series of ritual acts.
There is a clear reason for this. Tantric ritual requires the sacrificer to identify with the 
deity to whom the offering is made. As the famous tantric dictum says: “Having become 
a god, he should sacrifice to the gods” (Dviveda 1992). Self-​deification is in fact the main

--- PAGE 253 ---
228      Lubomír Ondračka
 
characteristic that distinguishes tantric pūjā from non-​tantric pūjā (Bühnemann 1988, 
9, n. 14). Therefore, before a tāntrika can perform any proper ritual act, he must trans­
form himself into the deity he will worship. The purification of the elements is instru­
mental to this self-​deification and therefore stands at the beginning of the entire ritual.
The actual performance of the purification of the elements varies considerably from 
a relatively simple act to a very complicated procedure. However, the basic principle is 
common to all variants and is based on a doctrine that sees the cosmos and the body as 
composed of successively emanating planes of reality (tattvas), a teaching adopted from 
Sāṃkhya philosophy. The technique consists of two basic steps. First the material body, 
which is considered impure at that moment, is destroyed through the gradual dissolu­
tion of its constituent elements, and then it is recreated, this time from the purified indi­
vidual elements. The process of divinization is completed by placing deities on different 
parts of the body with mantras in a ritual called “placement” (nyāsa; or more specifically 
aṅganyāsa or dehanyāsa). The whole process is purely mental (although some of the 
actions may be accompanied by hand positions, mudrās). In the tantric worldview, the 
mental plane of reality is higher than the material.
The precise procedure of purification of the elements is rarely described in the re­
vealed tantras (mūlatantras); more detailed instructions are usually found in the ritual 
manuals (paddhatis). There are exceptions though. For example, the Jayākhyasaṃhitā, 
an early Pāñcarātra tantra that is regarded as one of the three most important texts 
(triratna) of this tradition, devotes an entire chapter to this technique (­chapter 10, which 
is more than a hundred verses long), which contains a fairly comprehensive explana­
tion.2 Simply put, the first stage of the bhūtaśuddhi consists of the gradual dissolution 
of one element into another. However, this does not happen directly. The earth element 
is first dissolved in its mantra form (mantramūrti), and this is dissolved into the energy 
of the corresponding subtle element (tanmātra), which is smell. The energy of smell 
(gandhaśakti) is exhaled and dissolved in the next element, which is water. Thus, the 
process continues with the other elements (fire, wind, and space) until finally the in­
dividual consciousness leaves the body. This empty body is then burned, and the ashes 
are washed away in all directions. Then comes the second stage, when the practitioner 
creates from the elements a new, purified body, identical with the supreme deity, into 
which the soul returns.
The Śaiva form of this ritual follows the same pattern (Davis 1991, 52–​60; Flood 
2002, 31–​33). However, its actual performance may be more complex because the 
Śaiva cosmos consists of thirty-​six planes of reality, whereas the Vaiṣṇavas op­
erate with only twenty-​five, and therefore the gradual dissolution of the elements 
into their original source and their subsequent re-​creation is more complicated. 
The Śaivas also tend to have a more complex concept of the yogic body, whose dif­
ferent elements (nāḍīs, granthis, cakras, etc.) can be involved in the performance of 
bhūtaśuddhi. Particularly in more Śākta-​oriented and Kaula texts, the kuṇḍalinī and 
its upward ascent may also play a role in this technique. But otherwise, the principle 
is the same: the sacrificer’s body must be transformed and deified so that he can pro­
ceed to worshiping the deity.

--- PAGE 254 ---
Transforming the Body      229
 
Today, the purification of the elements is part of the sacrifice wherever tantric ritual 
manuals are followed. Sometimes, though, it appears outside the direct tantric context. 
In Bengal, for example, where most Hindu rituals have their roots in medieval local 
Kaula-​Śākta works, some form of bhūtaśuddhi is practiced almost universally. If we 
consult the cheap ritual manuals for worshiping various deities sold in the bazaars of 
Bengal, we find that this procedure is perhaps found in all paddhatis, even those ded­
icated to clearly non-​tantric goddesses such as Sarasvatī. Even strongly anti-​tantric 
Caitanya Vaiṣṇavism has not escaped this influence; the purification of the elements 
occurs in various forms also in its texts and practice (Valpey 2006, 140–​142).
But it is not only in Bengal where bhūtaśuddhi is performed outside the tantric en­
vironment. In neighboring Orissa, which has a similarly strong tantric historical back­
ground, we find this ritual in a rather unexpected place, at the Jagannātha temple in 
Purī, the most famous pilgrimage site in the region. The presence of such a ritual in this 
temple is indeed surprising, as it is a very conservative Vaiṣṇava site with no connection 
to the Pāñcarātra tantric ritual tradition. Moreover, the form of bhūtaśuddhi outlined in 
the ritual manuals used in Purī is quite detailed and elaborate, as described in detail by 
Gayan Charan Tripathi (2004, 150–​172). Interestingly, to justify the tantric elements in 
the worship of Jagannātha, the ritual manuals proclaim that they draw from the works of 
Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra. But this is not true; in fact, the entire pūjā is heavily influenced by 
other tantric works popular in Orissa, such as the Śāradātilaka (Tripathi 2004, 122–​124), 
a rather eclectic Śaiva-​Śākta tantra.
We can conclude this brief introduction to the bhūtaśuddhi ritual by summarizing 
that it is the most common tantric ritual in which the body is transformed through 
mental practice working with the five gross elements. It is described in dozens of texts 
from various tantric traditions and is still practiced in everyday regular tantric pūjā and 
other tantric rituals, but as we have seen, it also appears outside the strictly tantric set­
ting (even in Jaina worship; Gough 2021, 168; see also Gough “Homa in Jain Traditions” 
and “Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī,” this volume). Yet, apart from 
the Jayākhyasaṃhitā, this purification ritual has not been thoroughly studied, so we 
do not know when and where it was formed (it is missing from the early corpus of the 
Śaivasiddhānta texts; Goodall and Isaacson 2016, 7) or the historical process of how it 
developed into its standard form. However, this study focuses on the second technique, 
where the elements are used to transform the body.
Mastering the Elements
The goal of the second technique, which will be explored in the rest of this chapter, is the 
mastery of the elements. As we shall soon see, control of the elements can pursue dif­
ferent goals, and its successful acquisition can have different consequences. I will focus 
on the results that relate to the transformation of the body. In other words, the central 
focus of our attention will be on the various bodily perfections (siddhis) that can be

--- PAGE 255 ---
230      Lubomír Ondračka
 
obtained through this technique. The goal of mastering the elements is obviously very 
different from that of bhūtaśuddhi, yet the two techniques are closely related, as they 
often share almost identical verses describing the basic characteristics of the elements.
The technique used to control the elements is yogic dhāraṇā, a practice that is found 
both in the Pātañjala system of eight auxiliaries (aṣṭāṅgayoga) and in the tantric sixfold 
system (ṣaḍaṅgayoga), so its description is most often seen in the yoga sections of the 
tantras. The term dhāraṇā is usually translated as “concentration,” but here it is better 
to use the more literal meaning of “holding” or “fixation,” as the most common prin­
ciple of this technique in its developed form is to hold the breath or mind (or both) in a 
certain place in the body for a specific amount of time. The doctrinal background is the 
idea that different parts of the body are the domain of particular elements (this concept 
is shared with the bhūtaśuddhi ritual; Davis 1991, 54–​56); therefore, to master a given 
element, one must perform a fixation at a particular place in the body. How the body is 
divided into the domains of the elements varies in different works, but the idea itself is 
common. Since most texts work with five elements, the whole practice is often called the 
“five fixations” (pañcadhāraṇā) by scholars (and in some haṭhayoga works).
There are two main contexts in which the mastery of the elements appears in the 
tantras. First, this technique can stand alone, as one member of a yoga system consisting 
of six auxiliaries (ṣaḍaṅga). This is its common placement (Brunner 1994, 441–​442). 
As shown in more detail later, though, it can also be part of the complex practice of 
mastering all planes of existence (tattvajaya), that is, all thirty-​six levels of the Śaiva 
cosmos. Since the gross elements stand at the end of the evolutionary process in the 
Sāṃkhya and tantric systems, their mastery (bhūtajaya) must stand at the beginning of 
the opposite process, that is, the upward progression through the levels to the original 
source.
Now we can look at how this technique is described in texts from different tantric 
traditions. To get a better idea of how this ritual developed, I will try to proceed chron­
ologically, although it is notoriously difficult to date tantric texts. However, especially 
thanks to Alexis Sanderson’s many years of research, at least a relative chronology of in­
dividual works is largely possible.
Śaivasiddhānta
Śaivasiddhānta literature contains a large number of revealed tantras, commentaries on 
them, ritual manuals, and other works (Sanderson 2013, 12–​29). But as Dominic Goodall 
has shown (1998, xxxix–​xlvii), only a smaller part of the vast corpus of revealed tantras 
belongs to the early (that is, pre-​tenth-​century) North Indian phase of this tradition. 
Since the practice of mastering the elements, as it is known in its classical form in later 
texts, first took shape in these early Śaivasiddhānta tantras, we begin our historical ex­
amination of this technique with texts from this tradition.
The earliest work is Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā. As the title suggests, it is a collection 
(saṃhitā) of several texts (namely, five) that probably took shape between the fifth and

--- PAGE 256 ---
Transforming the Body      231
 
seventh centuries (Goodall 2015, 71–​73). Fortunately, this corpus (apart from a single 
text) has recently been meticulously edited, translated, and annotated, which will 
greatly facilitate my analysis. The earliest piece in this collection (Mūlasūtra) is silent on 
the mastery of the elements, but the very next text, the Uttarasūtra, contains one impor­
tant verse (5.28). Unfortunately, the whole passage is full of ambiguities, and, moreover, 
the part of the manuscript containing this verse is damaged. The editors translate it as 
follows (ellipsis in the original): “Alternatively one should visualise . . . as having the form 
of fire, of wind, of earth, water, ether.”3 The verse is interesting for several reasons. First, 
it is part of a chapter that describes a yogic practice—​meditations on the various levels 
of the cosmos—​but its placement is out of the expected order, and moreover, elemental 
meditation is declared here to be only a variant (athavā) of the practice. Second, the 
verse enumerates five elements, whereas the vast majority of the early Śaivasiddhānta 
texts work with only four elements. Third, the order of the elements is unusual and 
differs from that found in other texts. Fourth, and finally, the term used for the earth 
element, mahendra, is quite rare and does not commonly occur in other texts of this tra­
dition.4 This technique produces quite general results; the following verse (5.29) states 
that the yogin “will be successful” (siddhyate) and “will attain identification with Śiva” 
(śivasāyojyatāṃ vrajet), that is, final liberation.
The next work in this collection, the Nayasūtra, contains a much more informa­
tive passage (3.1–​3.8). It describes a series of visualizations of the five elements (in the 
standard order: earth, water, fire, wind, and space), which perhaps represents the em­
bryonic form of the later classical group of the five dhāraṇās because one important 
characteristic of this developed set appears here: in the standard series of five fixations, 
each element is associated with a bījamantra. Here too a mantra is mentioned for each 
element, but these mantras are not mentioned by name, except the one for space. The el­
ement of space is associated with prakṛtibīja, which is the vowel ū. The editors of the text 
assume that the same mantra is associated with all the other elements (Goodall 2015, 75). 
That may seem a bit odd, but at this formative stage it was certainly possible.
There is one more interesting thing in this passage. In the classical series of five 
dhāraṇās, each element is associated with a particular color. Although this is not yet 
expressed systematically here, the element of earth is described as yellow (3.2c). This 
color is then characteristic of earth in all other texts. While no other element is assigned 
a color here, a few verses later (3.15–​3.16b) the colors are associated not directly with the 
gross elements (mahābhūtas) but with their corresponding subtle elements (tanmātras). 
Smell is yellow, taste is white, form is red, touch is black, and sound is colorless. These are 
the same colors normally attributed to the gross elements in the group of five fixations 
(yellow earth, white water, red fire, black wind, and colorless space).
What are the results of the visualization of each element? Earth brings the immobi­
lization of poisonous creatures and solidity or immobility. Water brings the destruc­
tion of poisonous beings, the absence of all calamities, and also the absence of dāgha. 
The exact meaning of this word is not clear. The translators believe it denotes “fever” 
or “thirst,” but it may also have a more literal meaning, namely, “burning.” Since in the 
previous verse it is said that all the limbs of the yogin’s body will be filled with water

--- PAGE 257 ---
232      Lubomír Ondračka
 
(jalapūritasarvāṃgaḥ, 3.4a), the ability not to be burned would be quite natural. On the 
other hand, in the later texts, this ability is the result of mastering the element of fire. 
Here the result of visualizing fire is somewhat unclear, since it is said that the practi­
tioner “will perform a thousand acts” (kuryāt karmmasahasrāṇi, 3.6c; perhaps “mag­
ical deeds,” as the translators say). The results of visualizing the last two elements are 
similarly vague. The wind brings success or power (siddhi, 3.7d) and amazing feats 
(āścaryakarmma, 3.7d), and space, various deeds (citrakarmāṇi, 3.8d; probably again 
miraculous feats).
This passage on the elements in the Nayasūtra is part of a section on cosmic levels 
and their conquest (tattvajaya). However, there is one more passage in this text de­
voted to the elements (4.115–​4.118), this time included in a comprehensive descrip­
tion of yoga. We learn some important information from these four verses. First, the 
terms used for individual fixations, except for earth dhāraṇā, called here māhendrī, 
are then commonly, almost standardly, found in later texts (vāruṇī, āgneyī, vāyavī, and 
ākāśadhāraṇā). Second, the individual elements are assigned different places in the 
body: wind to the left big toe, fire to the navel, earth to the throat, water to the uvula or 
tonsils, and space to the head. The order of the elements is admittedly strange here (we 
would expect the classical Sāṃkhya sequence beginning with the grossest element of 
earth, which Nayasūtra teaches in verses 2.15–​2.17b), but the very fact that different parts 
of the body are the domain of different elements is important and common in later texts. 
Third, it is possible to deduct from these verses how this technique should presumably 
be performed. Simply put, it is the holding (dhāraṇā) of the breath in a particular place 
of the body that is dominated by a given element. The yogin is to hold his breath until 
he feels asphyxiation, then there will come an “eruption” (udghāta) in which the breath 
rapidly expands into the head and then returns to its original place.5 The number of 
these eruptions is prescribed from one to five, perhaps beginning with one eruption 
during the first dhāraṇā (vāyavī) and ending with five during the last (ākāśadhāraṇā).
The results of successfully mastering the five fixations mentioned here are some­
what lackluster and overly general. There are no specific results assigned to the indi­
vidual dhāraṇās, except for the ākāśadhāraṇā, which is said “to bring all siddhis” 
(sarvasiddhikarī, 4.116b). Then we learn that through these fixations, attachment (rāga) 
and hatred (dveṣa) will disappear, and the yogin will be freed from all sins (sarvapāpāni). 
And that is all.
Skipping the next text, the Guhyasūtra, which has not yet been edited, we can look at 
the last work in the Niśvāsa collection, the Niśvāsamukha. Here we find some verses on 
dhāraṇā (4.57c–​4.61) in the passage describing the ṣaḍaṅgayoga. The practice explained 
here is quite different from the dhāraṇā of the yoga section in the Nayasūtra. First, there 
is no holding of the breath; instead, the technique is purely meditative and consists of 
visualizing the individual elements in different parts of the body. More precisely, the lo­
cation of the elements is specified only for wind (the tip of a toe) and water (uvula). Since 
the order of the first four elements is the same as in the Nayasūtra (air, fire, earth, and 
water), it can be assumed that fire and earth are also to be visualized in the same places 
as in that text. Surprisingly, however, the fifth element, space, is not mentioned at all,

--- PAGE 258 ---
Transforming the Body      233
 
so in this respect the Niśvāsamukha is closer to most of the other early Śaivasiddhānta 
tantras, which teach only four types of dhāraṇā.
Notable, though not entirely clear, are the results of individual fixations. The text says 
that a person who visualizes the elements of air, fire, and water will attain the nature or 
form of that particular element (vāyurūpa, vahnirūpa, and āparūpa, respectively). This 
is highly interesting, but it is not clear what exactly does it mean. Perhaps that the yogin 
acquires the qualities of a given element—​for example, lightness (wind), radiance (fire), 
and fluidity (water).6 Or will his body be made up of that element? Unfortunately, the 
term rūpa used here does not help answer this question because its semantic field is too 
broad. The answer is not to be found anywhere else in this text. Apart from these vague 
effects, meditation on the element of water removes sins.
I introduced the technique of elementary dhāraṇās in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā to 
show how this practice gradually formed in this earliest collection of the Śaiva tan­
tric texts. Most of the features that characterize fixations in their developed form are 
already present here, but they are not yet combined into a single whole. Although the 
bījamantras, the colors of the elements, the locations of the elements in different parts 
of the body, the retention of breath in these places, and so forth are mentioned here, all 
these features are scattered throughout different passages. Perhaps the best evidence of 
the formative nature of this practice in this collection is the fact that the concept of both 
four and five dhāraṇās is present here. The results of the practice are similarly diverse. 
They tend to be rather general and are only rarely more specific.
While the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā is considered by consensus to be the oldest among 
the early Śaivasiddhānta tantras, the other works in this corpus cannot be dated more 
precisely. However, Dominic Goodall has developed several criteria that allow us to es­
tablish at least a plausible relative chronology for these texts (Goodall 1998, xlvii–​lxxiv). 
I will follow his suggested chronology and discuss the passages on dhāraṇā in these 
scriptures. This time, however, the analysis will be rather selective in comparison with 
the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā.
Let us begin with a short passage in the Rauravasūtrasaṃgraha (7.6–​7.10). This text 
teaches four dhāraṇās (āgneyī, saumyā, aiśānī, and amṛtā), but only the names of the 
first two can be clearly associated with the elements. The fiery dhāraṇā is placed in 
the navel and burns the sins. The water-​fixation (saumyā) is located in the heart and 
strengthens (āpyāyana) the whole body.7 Aiśānī dhāraṇā is situated in the head, and it 
brings all siddhis and the rapid attainment of the highest place of Śiva. The final dhāraṇā, 
amṛtā, is placed in the whole body, brings bliss (or Śivahood, śivaṃkarī) and nourishes 
everything with the nectar of knowledge.
The four fixations taught in the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṃgraha are very similar to 
those in the Rauravasūtrasaṃgraha, but the passage it contains on dhāraṇās is much 
longer (20.4–​20.26) and describes their intricate mechanism in considerable detail. 
Since the whole technique has been perfectly summarized elsewhere (Vasudeva 2004, 
412–​418), we can focus on the effects of the individual fixations. Āgneyī destroys all sins 
(surprisingly, not only one’s own, but also those of others), removes the feeling of cold, 
and drives away snakes and enemies. Saumyā strengthens (or rejuvenates) and defends

--- PAGE 259 ---
234      Lubomír Ondračka
 
against heat and poison. The only effect of the aiśānī is the attainment of the highest 
place. Finally, amṛtā dhāraṇā gives the nectar of dharma and knowledge, and by it one 
masters both yoga and knowledge. It is worth noting that the technique described in this 
text contains breath-​holding, including eruptions (udghātas).
The Kiraṇatantra also teaches the four fixations in a relatively short passage (58.18c–​
58.26b), but in a different order and using slightly different terminology: vahni, saumyā, 
amṛtā, and parā. In a few places, it lists the same effects as in the previous texts, but 
sometimes it offers something new. For example, water-​fixation brings peace and 
nourishment (puṣṭi, which seems to correspond to āpyāyana in other texts) and 
removes calamities or, more probably, diseases (upasarga). Amṛtā, pervading the head, 
protects life, and the supreme (parā), placed on the forehead, even bestows immor­
tality. Eruptions are again part of this technique; the text defines two types, a general 
(sāmānya) and a special (viśeṣaka) eruption.
The section on the dhāraṇās in the Parākhyatantra is very important, as it teaches 
the five elemental fixations (in the standard order: earth, water, fire, wind, and space) 
in a fairly long passage (14.33–​14.49), where the various characteristics of the elements 
probably appear together for the first time. Each element is assigned a color, shape, and 
a few basic properties. Bījamantras are also mentioned, but these are never specified, 
although it is clear that each element has its own individual mantra (svabīja, nijabīja). 
Surprisingly, the locations of the fixations in the body (ādhārās) are not mentioned 
here, although they are announced in an earlier verse (14.15a). So, we are left uncertain 
as to which of the three systems found in the Saiddhāntika sources is taught here (the 
first dhāraṇā may be placed in the big toe, the navel, or the heart). No specific number of 
eruptions is assigned to each fixation, but at the end of the passage it is said that victory 
over the dhāraṇās can be obtained by performing one hundred udghātas.
As for the characteristics of the elements, earth is described as yellow and square, 
water as white and crescent-​shaped, fire as red and triangular, wind as smoky or dark 
(dhūmra) and round, and space as free from all characteristics. The effects of the 
fixations are related to the properties of the individual elements. Earth causes immo­
bility, water cools and heals, fire can burn anything to ashes (such as an enemy army), 
wind can drive away anyone (demons) or push anything away (trees or mountains), and 
space removes poison and can empty the entire universe. Although not all the details 
in this passage are entirely clear (as the translator’s copious and illuminating notes 
make evident), for the history of the formation of the concept of the five fixations the 
Parākhyatantra is certainly a seminal text.
The Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama, in the chapter devoted to the ṣaḍaṅgayoga, 
teaches four fixations (āgneyī, vāruṇī, aiśānī, and amṛtā) that are similar to those in 
the Rauravasūtrasaṃgraha and Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṃgraha, but much more de­
tailed (yogapāda 2.35cd–​2.65). The dhāraṇās are not associated with any color, shape, 
or bījamantra, but their visualizations are described quite comprehensively and some 
of their effects are interesting. For example, the fire-​fixation destroys sins, cold sensa­
tion, obstacles, and so forth, but it can also burn or even kill an enemy, and the amṛtā 
dhāraṇā destroys diseases, aging, and death. Besides this, the fourth and fifth chapters

--- PAGE 260 ---
Transforming the Body      235
 
of the yogapāda deal with the conquest of the planes of reality (bhūtajaya), beginning 
with the five elements, but this visualization practice is not called dhāraṇā here. As a 
result of mastering the elements, the yogin acquires extraordinary physical abilities that 
are associated with the corresponding subtle elements (smell, taste, shape, and touch). 
In addition, mastering the element of earth brings the first of eight classic extraordinary 
powers (siddhis), the ability to shrink to the size of an atom (aṇutva, 4.48c).
The last work in the corpus of early Śaivasiddhānta texts that we will look at is the 
Mṛgendratantra. Its yogapāda, which has just one chapter, contains a description of yoga 
with eight auxiliaries (to the classical ṣaḍaṅgas it adds the repetition of mantras, japa, 
and yoga itself).8 The passage on the five fixations is relatively short (33c–​44b) but infor­
mative. Each element is assigned a color, shape, function, sign, and place in the body (no 
bījamantras are listed). Earth is goldish, square, stabilizing, having a thunderbolt (vajra), 
and located in the heart. Water is white, semicircular, strengthening (or rejuvenating, 
āpyāyana), having a lotus, and located in the throat. Fire is glowing in color, trian­
gular, burning, having a flame, and placed in the navel. Wind is black, round, stimu­
lating, having a dot (bindu), and can be placed in different parts of the body depending 
on which type of breath the yogin wants to control. Finally, space is transparent, lotus-​
shaped, emptying, and characterized by void (śūnya) and can be located anywhere in the 
body where the yogin needs to overcome poison or some other difficulty. The effects of 
the other elements are very simple: the earth-​fixation solves a distracted mind, water-​
fixation quenches thirst, and fire-​fixation helps against weak digestion. The actual per­
formance of dhāraṇā consists of holding the breath in a particular place. In fact, the 
definition of fixation is based on prāṇāyāma: if a yogin multiplies the time the breath is 
held (kumbhaka) by twelve, then it is called dhāraṇā.
We see that the concept of fixations described in the corpus of early Śaivasiddhānta 
texts is very diverse. This can be partly explained by their historical development: these 
works span at least four centuries, and it is apparent that the later the text, the more com­
plex the concept of dhāraṇā becomes. At the same time, however, it seems that there 
must have been parallel different ideas about the practice of fixations in this tradition. 
This is best seen in the number of dhāraṇās. Although four fixations dominate, five also 
appear in some texts (which would later become standard in Hindu tantric and yoga 
works). The actual performance sometimes consists purely of the technique of visuali­
zation, but more often it involves holding the breath at a specific point in the body. The 
results of this practice are similarly diverse. Most often they are different tantric siddhis 
or, generally speaking, various bodily effects.
Non-​Saiddhāntika Śaiva Texts
Although, as we have just seen in the example of the dhāraṇās, the Śaivasiddhānta is not 
a completely unified tradition, it offers a relatively coherent teaching and ritual practice 
compared to the rest of the Śaiva and Śaiva-​Śākta cults, whose doctrines, pantheons, 
and rituals are much more diverse. There are different ways to classify the whole Śaiva

--- PAGE 261 ---
236      Lubomír Ondračka
 
milieu (Sanderson 2013), but I will use the simplest one, which divides Śaiva literature 
into the Śaivasiddhānta and all the rest, the non-​Saiddhāntika traditions. This includes a 
large number of texts, many of which have not yet been edited, so the following analysis 
is very selective and focuses on the most important works and on texts that have some­
thing substantial to say about the technique of mastering the elements.
One of the most popular non-​Saiddhāntika tantric cults was that of Svacchandabhairava. 
The text dedicated to him, the Svacchandatantra, mentions the five fixations in several 
places, but the two most important passages are taken almost verbatim from the Nayasūtra 
of the Niśvāsa collection.9 Therefore, the most detailed and original treatment of the 
mastery of the elements is found in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra of the Trika cult. This work 
was probably not very popular at the time of its composition, but because it was the subject 
of exegesis by Abhinavagupta, its teachings later became influential.
The mastery of the elements is described in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra in the 
chapters on yoga (which, unlike the previous Śaivasiddhānta tantras, are very compre­
hensive) in the sections on tattvajaya and ṣaḍaṅgayoga. The conquest of the levels of 
reality is in fact the core of the practice taught in this work; hence, its description is very 
detailed and takes up five chapters (12–​16). The actual performance is very complicated, 
but fortunately it is thoroughly explained by the translator of this text (Vasudeva 2004, 
293–​365). Tattvajaya naturally begins with the mastery of the five gross elements (in the 
standard order starting with earth). Although the technique used to conquer the indi­
vidual levels of reality is referred to as dhāraṇā, its actual form is much broader, for it 
involves the simultaneous use of other elements of the ṣaḍaṅgayoga system (dhyāna, 
tarka, and samādhi). The resulting complex visualization practice has several stages in 
which the yogin delves deeper and deeper into meditative absorption and which takes a 
very long time to master successfully.10
In the first stage of visualization, the yogin identifies his body with the given element, 
so the text indicates the characteristics of each element (its color, shape, and sign). These 
do not differ much from those found in the other texts. Earth is golden, square, and 
having thunderbolts; water is white, round (not semicircular as is more common), and 
cooling; fire is red, triangular, and having flames; wind is black, round, and having six 
drops; and finally, space is without characteristics. More interesting are the effects of the 
dhāraṇās, which can be quite spectacular. If we limit our focus to bodily effects, we will 
observe that the mastery of the element of earth will remove diseases, make the body 
heavy and stable, and turn it into a diamond body having the strength of nine elephants 
(12.23–​12.24). Conquest of the element of water will remove the diseases caused by the 
fire-​humor (pitta), moisten the body, and cause the hair to darken, which is a sign of re­
juvenation (13.3–​4). Āgneyī dhāraṇā removes the diseases caused by the humors of wind 
(vāta) and phlegm (śleṣma), gives the yogin the ability not to sleep, increases his appetite, 
reduces his excretion, and finally gives him the power to burn anything (13.22–​13.23). 
Mastering the element of air will remove the sickness caused by the humor of phlegm 
(kapha), and grant the ability to move like the wind and the power to move anything 
(13.35–​13.36). Finally, the mastery of the element of space will create protection against 
snake venom and remove all diseases, wrinkles, and gray hair. Later the yogin will

--- PAGE 262 ---
Transforming the Body      237
 
acquire a body that will have the properties of the sky (gagana), making it indestructible 
and able to take on enormous or, conversely, minimal dimensions (13.45–​13.47).
While the dhāraṇās in the tattvajaya practice include meditation and visualization 
but not breath-​holding, the principle of dhāraṇās in the ṣaḍaṅgayoga system is the re­
tention of breath in certain places of the body. The Mālinīvijayottaratantra teaches four 
fixations in a short passage (17.13c–​17.17), but only the first two are related to the elements: 
the fire-​fixation (śikhin) and the water-​fixation (ambu). The remaining two are īśā (or 
īśānī) and amṛtā, and therefore, they form the set we know from the Śaivasiddhānta 
tantras. Holding the breath using a varying number of eruptions should be done gradu­
ally in the navel, heart, palate, and the top of the head. The specific bodily effects of each 
fixation are not listed here.
The comprehensiveness and complexity of the conquest of the planes of reality 
described in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra have no parallel in other Śaiva and Śaiva-​
Śākta works, so there is no need to review them. As for the dhāraṇā, since it is part of 
the yoga system (both ṣaḍaṅga, which is more common in the tantras, and aṣṭāṅga), 
it is often described or at least mentioned in the texts. Sometimes, though listed 
among the auxiliaries of yoga, it is said to be just twelve times longer than withdrawal 
(pratyāhāra), so it is not described further and has no clear relation to the elements.11 
More often we find the set of four fixations known from the Śaivasiddhānta (with the 
first two elemental dhāraṇās), or some variant of it. The Matsyendrasaṃhitā, for ex­
ample, teaches only three dhāraṇās (6.1–​6.17): those of wind, fire, and nectar (amṛta). 
We also encounter redefinitions of dhāraṇā, such as in the Netratantra, where it is said 
(8.16) that dhāraṇā is “the constant holding of the supreme self” and the result is the de­
struction of the bonds of existence. Similarly, the Prapañcasāratantra also completely 
redefines dhāraṇā (19.22ab) in the list of the eight auxiliaries of yoga, but a few verses 
later (19.56–​19.57) it describes the visualization of the five elements in different parts 
of the body (along with their bījamantras) resulting in cheating death (kālavañcana) 
but does not call this technique dhāraṇā. And in the same chapter (19.52c–​19.53), this 
text enumerates the twelve bodily places of breath retention (dhāraṇā) from which 
one can leave the body for a time, enter another body, and return to one’s body again. 
Surprisingly, this list of bodily places is used in the Śāradātilakatantra (25.24–​25.25), a 
text that draws from the Prapañcasāra (Bühnemann 2011, 207–​208), to define dhāraṇā 
in its aṣṭāṅgayoga system, so this work teaches twelve fixations, but which have no re­
lation to the elements. These few examples demonstrate the diversity of the concept of 
dhāraṇā in the non-​Saiddhāntika Śaiva and Śaiva-​Śākta texts, and that the association 
of fixations and elements is not firmly and uniformly established in these works.
Pāñcarātra Tantras
The corpus of the Vaiṣṇava tantras of the Pāñcarātra tradition contains many texts, but 
it is difficult to use them in research on the historical development of some phenom­
enon because most of these works cannot be accurately dated (Sanderson 2001, 35).12

--- PAGE 263 ---
238      Lubomír Ondračka
 
Fortunately, at least a relative chronology of the early texts has been established (Rastelli 
2006, 49–​54). Of these, three works are considered to be the earliest, which have gained 
prestige over time and have been called the “three jewels” (Leach 2014). Therefore, my 
exploration of mastering the elements in the Pāñcarātra tantras begins with them.
The Jayākhyasaṃhitā, which I have already mentioned in the section on the 
bhūtaśuddhi ritual, is considered to be the oldest and is usually dated to the tenth cen­
tury.13 In the first part of the last chapter (33), which is entirely devoted to yoga, dhāraṇā 
is listed among the seven auxiliaries of yoga (the repetition of mantras, japa, is added 
to the usual tantric set of ṣaḍaṅgas), but its explanation is very brief and somewhat un­
clear. The text says: “Then dhāraṇā is to be kept to remove cold and heat; it is fivefold 
as before.”14 Marion Rastelli (1999, 338) believes that the purpose of dhāraṇā here is to 
hold in mind the object of meditation created in the previous step (dhyāna) and that 
the removal of cold and heat is only a side effect of this technique. That does not seem 
very likely. The text apparently prescribes the performance of all five fixations on the 
elements (described earlier in ­chapter 10 in the verses on bhūtaśuddhi), but it states their 
results very elliptically, mentioning only two effects (which are the common results of 
the elemental fixations described in other texts). Interestingly, the later Pārameśvara-
saṃhitā, which draws from the Jayākhyasaṃhitā, in a verse defining dhāraṇā (7.450ac), 
instead of the removal of cold and heat, speaks of the elimination of sins, which, as we 
have seen in the Śaiva tantras, is another common effect of mastering the elements.
The next early work of the “three jewels,” the Sātvatasaṃhitā, makes no interesting 
contribution to our subject, for it contains no chapter on yoga and mentions dhāraṇā 
in connection with the elements only in a brief passage on bhūtaśuddhi (7.17–​7.26). The 
last text of this trinity, the Pauṣkarasaṃhitā, does not bring anything substantial either. 
Although it contains a fairly comprehensive passage on the conquest of the levels of re­
ality (33.87–​33.130), its style differs substantially from the description of the tattvajaya 
in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra. Hence, we do not learn any details about the technique 
(dhāraṇā is not mentioned here), the characteristics of the elements, or the effects of 
conquering each level.
The later Pāñcarātra texts are more informative. An excellent example is the 
Pādmasaṃhitā (composed in the twelfth to the first half of the thirteenth century; 
Schwarz Linder 2014, 31), which is the only one of the edited works that is divided into 
four parts (pādas), following the model of some Śaivasiddhānta tantras. Its yogapāda, 
which has five chapters, contains a fairly detailed description of the yogic body and yoga 
practice. (See also the Hayes, this volume.) The Pādmasaṃhitā teaches the aṣṭāṅgayoga 
system, and its concept of dhāraṇā consists of the five elementary fixations (yp 4.13c–​
4.24). Each element is assigned a place in the body (starting from earth, whose area is 
from the foot to the knee), a color, a shape, a sign, and a deity (different forms of Viṣṇu). 
No bījamantras are listed here.15 The practice consists of holding the breath and mind 
in the place of a particular element for a specific time. The length of retention increases 
gradually, from five ghaṭikās or nāḍikās (twenty-​four minutes) in the case of earth to 
twenty for air (the length of retention for space is not specified). No effects of individual 
fixations are mentioned; only at the beginning of the whole passage it is said (yp 4.14cd)

--- PAGE 264 ---
Transforming the Body      239
 
that dhāraṇā is the means of rescue from the ocean of rebirth. On the other hand, in the 
previous chapter, in the passage on prāṇāyāma, the retention of the breath in various 
places of the body is described (yp 3.23–​3.28), which produces the effects known as the 
results of the fixations of the elements in other texts (e.g., the removal of diseases).
The most mature form of mastering the elements by dhāraṇā present in the 
Pāñcarātra works is contained in the Śrīpraśnasaṃhitā. Unfortunately, there is no con­
sensus on the date of this tantra. It is generally considered to be late, but exactly how 
late is not clear. It adopts verbatim large passages from earlier Pāñcarātra works, and 
the third chapter on yoga is almost identical with the Yogattvopaniṣad.16 Now, this 
longer form of the Yogattvopaniṣad is part of a collection of works that were composed 
in South India by an Advaitin scholar in the first half of the eighteenth century using 
older and shorter forms of the Upanishads and several haṭhayoga texts (Bouy 1994). 
The Yogattvopaniṣad itself draws from three earlier haṭhayoga works (Bouy 1990, 109). 
Consequently, the verses on the five fixations in the Śrīpraśna (3.71–​3.88) can be traced 
to the Yogayājñavalkya and Dattātreyayogaśāstra, via the Yogattvopaniṣad (83c–​103).17 
This passage is quite comprehensive and clearly structured. Various characteristics are 
assigned to the elements (including the bījamantras yaṃ, raṃ, laṃ, vaṃ, and haṃ), 
but the most interesting are the effects of the individual dhāraṇās. Simply put, mastery 
of a given element transforms the body so that it cannot be hurt or killed by that ele­
ment. As a whole, these five fixations bring to the yogi an immortality that extends even 
beyond the end (pralaya) of the universe.
Buddhist Tantras
Before concluding this overview of elemental control in tantric sources, I must at least 
briefly mention Buddhist tantras. In the introduction we saw that Buddhist ideas about 
the elements are diverse and differ from the realistic Sāṃkhya-​based model in Hindu 
tantras. However, this does not mean that Buddhist rituals do not involve the elements. 
While the ritual of purifying the elements (bhūtaśuddhi) is not found in Buddhist texts 
(Goodall and Isaacson 2016, 7), visualizing the elements along with their characteris­
tics in various places of the body is a common part of meditation practice in tantric 
Buddhism.
Fairly complex ideas about the elements in relation to visualization practice appear 
already in one of the earliest Buddhist tantras, the Mahāvairocanābhisambodhisūtra 
(often called Vairocanābhisambodhitantra), which was probably composed in the sev­
enth century (Hodge 2003, 14). Information about the characteristics of the elements is 
scattered throughout the text, but if we piece it together, we get quite a comprehensive 
picture. The Tantra teaches the four elemental mandalas placed in the body. The earth 
mandala is located in the lower part of the body (between the feet and the abdomen), 
is yellow, square, and connected to the bījamantra aṃ. In the chest area (from the ab­
domen to the heart) there is a water mandala, which is white, round, and associated with 
the mantra vaṃ. Above it (between the heart and the eyebrows) is a fire mandala, which

--- PAGE 265 ---
240      Lubomír Ondračka
 
is red, triangular, and associated with the bīja raṃ. Finally, at the top of the head is a 
wind mandala, which is dark (or black), semicircular, and associated with the syllable 
haṃ. This pattern of elemental mandalas is quite stable in the later Buddhist tantras, ex­
cept for the bījamantra set (the standard series being laṃ, vaṃ, raṃ, and yaṃ; Goodall 
and Isaacson 2016, 8) and the locations in the body (later tantras often associate these 
mandalas with the four cakras placed in the navel, heart, throat, and forehead; Wayman 
1977, 66–​67).
The Buddhists, however, did not use the elements only in visualization techniques. 
Like in the Hindu tantras, the elements played a role in Buddhist yoga practice. Buddhist 
tantras share the same ṣaḍaṅgayoga system found in Śaiva tantric sources, so their 
practice also includes breath retention and fixation. The first exposition of this yoga 
system appears already in the Guhyasamājatantra, though in its last eighteenth chapter, 
which was added to the text a bit later (perhaps in the second half of the eighth cen­
tury). From the verses on prāṇāyāma and dhāraṇā in this text (18.147–​18.152) and some 
of their commentaries (translated in Sferra 2000, 18–​20) we learn that the five types of 
breaths associated with the five elements need to be restrained, and this technique leads 
to the stabilization of the mind and the dissolution of one element into another, which 
is accompanied by various signs. The actual yoga practice in other Buddhist tantric 
lineages may take different forms, but the connection between breath control, fixation, 
and the elements is quite common.18
Conclusion
This survey of the techniques of mastering the elements in tantric sources,19 although 
necessarily selective, has revealed several facts. First, efforts to conquer the elements 
are present in some form in all traditions and in the vast majority of texts. Second, the 
techniques of mastering the elements formed over several centuries and never achieved 
any unified shape; even within a single tradition, different practices occur. Third, the 
mastery of the elements is most often a part of the yogic practice of a given tradition, 
using the fixation (dhāraṇā) of the ṣaḍaṅgayoga or aṣṭāṅgayoga system to achieve it 
(often in combination with breath control and visualization techniques). Fourth, and 
finally, control of the elements has diverse effects, mostly different tantric siddhis and 
various bodily perfections.
Although several tantras contain quite comprehensive descriptions of the tech­
nique of controlling the elements through fixation, the most mature form of this prac­
tice appears only in the later haṭhayoga works. This fact seems to have been accepted by 
some authors of tantric texts. When Rāghavabhaṭṭa, the learned commentator on the 
Śāradātilakatantra, addresses the verses on the twelve dhāraṇās, he quotes an extensive 
passage on the five breath retentions resulting in the control of the elements (p. 900–​
901). This passage lists their locations, colors, shapes, deities, bījamantras, and various 
effects. Rāghavabhaṭṭa states that it comes from the Vasiṣṭhasaṃhitā, but it is not found

--- PAGE 266 ---
Transforming the Body      241
 
in the edited text. However, these verses do occur in another early haṭhayoga work, the 
Vivekamārtaṇḍa (69–​75). Or, when in 1820 the Bengali author Rāmatoṣaṇa Bhaṭṭācārya 
compiled the extensive tantric compendium the Prāṇatoṣanī, on dhāraṇā he quotes 
verses on the five fixations (p. 418) taken from another haṭhayoga work, the Dattātreya-
yogaśāstra (112c–​122b). We have also seen that the passage on the five fixations in the 
Pāñcarātra work Śrīpraśnasaṃhitā also comes from the haṭhayoga texts. Maybe this is 
not so surprising. After all, dhāraṇā is a yogic technique, and it is therefore proper to 
take its practice from the yogic texts.
At the same time, it should be added that the technique of mastering the elements is 
not an innovation of the tantric authors, as it is found in several older sources. The con­
quest of the elements (bhūtajaya) is described in the Pātañjalayogaśāstra (3.44–​3.46), 
where the result is the eight extraordinary powers (commonly known as aṣṭasiddhi) 
and other bodily perfections that overcome the limitations imposed by the elements 
in the material world. Even older is the Buddhist practice of controlling the elements 
(Wilson 2003, 35–​36), which is systematized in Buddhaghosa’s work Visuddhimagga 
(4.22–​4.30, 5.1–​5.11, 5.24–​5.26). The results of the successful conquest of the elements 
described in this text are absolutely astonishing (12.87–​12.101). However, a thorough 
survey of the historical roots of the technique of mastering the elements would re­
quire a separate study.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Nicholas Orsillo, who has not only corrected my English but also helped me 
clarify several ambiguous formulations.
Notes
	1.	 Surprisingly, this important topic has not yet been adequately addressed. Useful overviews 
include the encyclopedic entry by Preisendanz 2010 and the chapter by Filliozat 1996. The 
most informative volume is Bäumer 1996, but the nature of the Kalātattvakośa series means 
that the individual chapters are commented relevant passages from Sanskrit texts, rather 
than comprehensive philosophical studies of the five elements. Another good volume is 
Burger and Schreiner 1999, where each element is discussed from a different perspective, 
which is inspiring, but the result is naturally fragmentary. The most comprehensive work, 
consisting of five volumes, is Vatsyayan 1995. However, the individual contributions are dis­
parate and of very uneven quality.
	2.	 This is probably why the bhūtaśuddhi ritual in this text is relatively well researched, espe­
cially by Gavin Flood (2002, 2006, 106–​113), who also translated the entire tenth chapter 
(2000). Marion Rastelli in her monograph on the Jayākhyasaṃhitā gives a detailed and 
richly annotated interpretation of this technique and places it within the ritual framework 
of this work (1999, 210–​238; in n. 901 on p. 210 she lists passages on bhūtaśuddhi in other 
Pāñcarātra texts).
	3.	 Uttarasūtra 5.28bcd: athavā vahnirūpiṇam, vāyurūpamahendrāpakharūpa–​–​–​cintayet.

--- PAGE 267 ---
242      Lubomír Ondračka
 
	 4.	 On the other hand, it is not as exceptional as the authors seem to believe (Uttarasūtra, 
394–​395). It appears in various forms (mahendra, māhendra, māhendrī) in lists of 
elements meaning earth in Śaiva texts (Tantrasadbhāva 28.25c, Śivasvarodaya 300a), 
Vaiṣṇava saṃhitās (Paramasaṃhitā 4.11c, Pādmasaṃhitā cp 3.27a, Viṣvaksenasaṃhitā 
4.7a), Kaula tantras (Phetkāriṇītantra 3.163a), and particularly in Buddhist tantric works 
(Guhyasamājatantra 13.66a, 84b and related texts: Pañcakrama 1.21c and 1.61a, Piṇḍīkrama 
222c; Samvarodayatantra 5.38c, 5.40c, 5.54c, 6.4c, 6.7c, 10.28c, 10.34c; Ṣaḍaṅgayoga, p. 123, 
l. 12).
	 5.	 This technique is variously described in tantric sources. A detailed analysis based on var­
ious texts has been elaborated by Somadeva Vasudeva (2004, 402–​409).
	 6.	 This interpretation would be supported by the verse about the fixation of earth. It has a 
different structure, does not explicitly mention the acquisition of the nature (rūpa) of el­
emental earth, and moreover is partly taken from another text (Niśvāsamukha 4.60ab ~ 
Nayasūtra 2.23cd), but says that the characteristic of earth is immobility (niścalalakṣaṇā). 
We have seen that in the bhūtajaya section of the Nayasūtra, due to earth meditation, the 
yogin “becomes immobile like the earth” (yathaiva vasudhā bhavet; 3.3d). Therefore, this 
series of dhāraṇās in the Niśvāsamukha could also describe how, by visualizing a given ele­
ment, the yogin acquires its qualities, or at least its dominant characteristic.
	 7.	 The exact form of this effect is not clear. The term āpyāyana is used in tantric texts in the 
sense of “strengthening” or “nourishment” (Brunner, Oberhammer, and Padoux 2000, 
198–​199). Somadeva Vasudeva translates it as “rejuvenation” in the context of dhāraṇās 
(2004, 414–​415), which sounds plausible, but he gives no explanation for his choice of this 
translation. The wording in this verse on saumyā may also be a conscious allusion to the 
Vedic ritual of āpyāyana, which causes the swelling of the stalks of soma before it is pressed 
(Sen 1978, 46–​47).
	 8.	 Alexis Sanderson has translated the entire chapter (along with Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha’s 
commentary) in an unpublished paper (1999), but the passage on dhāraṇās is included in 
Mallinson and Singleton 2017, 299–​301.
	 9.	 Svacchanda 7.299c–​7.303b =​ Nayasūtra 4.114–​4.118, Svacchanda 12.83c–​12.90b =​ Nayasūtra 
3.1–​3.8. Svacchanda (especially ­chapters 7 and 12) draws heavily from the Nayasūtra (see 
Goodall 2015, 72 table 2). Still, these verses are useful because we have Kṣemarāja’s learned 
commentary on them.
	10.	 The complete mastery of the fifteen dhāraṇās takes about seven years (Vasudeva 
2004, 150).
	11.	 pratyahāradviṣaṭkena jānīyād dhāraṇaṃ śubham (Sarvollāsatantra 15.27cd).
	12.	 At least 150 Pāñcarātra works are extant, of which about one quarter have been edited so 
far (Parampurushdas and Shrutiprakashdas 2002).
	13.	 However, this dating is not at all certain. It is based on the fact that Bhāgavata Utpala re­
peatedly quotes the Jayākhyasaṃhitā in his commentary on the Spandakārikā. His dates, 
however, are unknown, and the argument that he lived in the tenth century because he 
does not quote Abhinavagupta is (as Alexis Sanderson 2001, 35 rightly points out) not 
conclusive.
	14.	 dhāraṇā tu tato dhāryā śītadāhāpanuttaye, pañcadhā pūrvavat sā tu (Jayākhyasaṃhitā 
33.10ac).
	15.	 But in the passage on the technique of bhūtaśuddhi, which consists of the fixation of the 
four elements (cp 3.21–​28), the bījamantras are mentioned though not specified. For an ex­
planation and comparison of the two passages, see Schwarz Linder 2014, 251–​267.

--- PAGE 268 ---
Transforming the Body      243
 
	16.	 See the list of parallel verses in the Śrīpraśna edition on pp. lxiv–​lxvi.
	17.	 This way of borrowing is evident from the deities associated with the elements. The 
Yogatattvopaniṣad takes verses from the Yogayājñavalkya, including the standard set of the 
karaṇadevatās (Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara, and Sadāśiva), while the Śrīpraśna removes 
the Śaiva forms and creates a rather odd set (Brahmā, Nārāyaṇa, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Brahmā, 
and Vāsudeva). This implies that the present form of the Śrīpraśnasaṃhitā could not have 
taken shape before the second half of the eighteenth century. Although this may be dif­
ficult to accept for scholars who tentatively date the text to the fourteenth century, it is 
consistent with the information given by V. Raghavan in the preface to its edition (on page 
H): “I have heard that the Śrīpraśna is a very recent production . . . , is not to be counted 
with the earlier standard Saṃhitās and that its authority had also been some time back 
questioned in a court of law.”
	18.	 For the concept of dhāraṇā in the sources of the Kālacakra tradition, see Sferra 2000, 31, 
263–​265, 287.
	19.	 This survey is selective not only in terms of the texts of the individual traditions, but also 
in terms of the different lineages. For example, it does not discuss the tantras of the Gāruḍa 
tradition. For an example of the use of the five elements to control poison, see Slouber 2017, 
160–​161.
References
Primary Sources
Dattātreyayogaśāstra. The Dattātreyayogaśāstra. Edited and translated by James Mallinson. 
Collection Indologie, 153; Haṭha Yoga Series, 5. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de 
Pondichéry; Paris: École française d’Extrême-​Orient, 2024.
Guhyasamājatantra. The Guhyasamāja Tantra. Edited by Yūkei Matsunaga. Osaka: Toho 
Shuppan, 1978.
Jayākhyasaṃhitā of Pāñcarātra Āgama. Edited by Embar Krishnamacharya. 2nd ed. Gaekwad’s 
Oriental Series, 54. Baroda, India: Oriental Institute, 1967.
Kiraṇatantra. Draft of the critical edition of ­chapter 58 prepared by Dominic Goodall. 
Presented at the workshop Sanskrit Texts on Yoga: A Manuscript Workshop, SOAS, London, 
September 12–​16, 2016.
Mahāvairocanābhisambodhisūtra. See Hodge 2003.
Mālinīvijayottaratantra. See Vasudeva 2004.
Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (Kriyāpāda, Yogapāda et Caryāpāda): Avec le commentaire de 
Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha. Edited by N. R. Bhatt. Publications de l’Institut Français d’Indologie, 
65. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français d’Indologie, 1982.
Matsyendrasaṃhitā. The Yoga of the Matsyendrasaṃhitā: A Critical Edition and Annotated 
Translation of Chapters 1–​13 and 55. Edited and translated by Csaba Kiss. Collection 
Indologie, 146; Haṭha Yoga Series, 1. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry; 
Paris: École française d’Extrême Orient, 2021.
Mṛgendratantra. The Śrī Mṛgendra Tantram: Vidyāpāda & Yogapāda, with the Commentary of 
Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha. Edited by Madhusūdan Kaul Shāstrī. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, 
50. Bombay: Printed at the Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1930.
Nayasūtra. See Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā.

--- PAGE 269 ---
244      Lubomír Ondračka
 
Netratantram (Mṛtyuñjayabhaṭṭārakaḥ). Edited by Brajavallabha Dvivedī. Dillī, India: Parimal 
Pablikeśans, 1985.
Niśvāsamukhatattvasaṃhitā: A Preface to the Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra: (On Non-​Tantric 
Śaivism at the Dawn of the Mantramārga): Critical Edition, with Introduction & Annotated 
Translation: And an Appendix Containing Śivadharmasaṅgraha 5–​9. Edited and translated 
by Nirajan Kafle. Collection Indologie, 145; Early Tantra Series, 6. Pondicherry, India: 
Institut Français de Pondichéry, 2020.
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā. The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra. 
Edited and translated by Dominic Goodall, Alexis Sanderson, and Harunaga Isaacson. 
Collection Indologie, 128; Early Tantra Series, 1. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de 
Pondichéry, 2015.
Pādma saṃhitā (part I). Edited by Seetha Padmanabhan and R. N. Sampath. Pancaratra 
Parisodhana Parisad Series, 3. Madras, India: Pancaratra Parisodhana Parisad, 1974.
Pādma saṃhitā (part II) [caryāpāda]. Edited by Seetha Padmanabhan and V. Varadachari. 
Pāñcarātra Pariśodhanā Pariṣad Series, 4. Madras, India: Pāñcarātra Pariśodhanā 
Pariṣad, 1982.
Pañcakrama: Sanskrit and Tibetan texts critically edited with verse index and facsimile edition of the 
Sanskrit manuscripts. Edited by Katsumi Mimaki and Tōru Tomabechi. Bibliotheca codicum 
Asiaticorum, 8. Tokyo: Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies for Unesco, Toyo Bunko, 1994.
Parākhyatantra. The Parākhyatantra: A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. Edited and translated 
by Dominic Goodall. Collection Indologie, 98. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de 
Pondichéry; École française d’Extreme-​Orient, 2004.
Paramasaṁhitā, of the Pāñcharātra. Edited by Krishnaswami S. Aiyangar. Gaekwad’s Oriental 
Series, 86. Baroda, India: Oriental Institute, 1940.
Pārameśvarasaṃhitā. Śrīpāñcarātrāntargatā Śrīpārameśvarasaṃhitā. Edited by Govindācārya. 
Śrīraṅgam, India: Kalyāṇamudrālaye, 1953.
Pātañjalayogaśāstra. 
Vācaspatimiśraviracitaṭīkāsaṃvalitavyāsabhāṣyasametāni 
tathā 
Bhojadevaviracitarājamārtaṇḍābhidhavṛttisametāni Pātañjalayogasūtrāṇi. Edited by 
Kāśīnāthaśāstrī Āgāśe. Ānandāśramasaṃskṛtagranthāvaliḥ, 47. Puṇyākhyapattanam, 
India: Ānandāśramamudraṇālaya, 1904.
Pauṣkara Saṃhitā: Part II. Edited by Prabhakar Pandurang Apte. Rashtriya Sanskrit 
Vidyapeetha Series, 120. Tirupati, India: Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 2006.
Phetkāriṇītantra. In Tantrasaṅgrahaḥ: dvitīyo bhāgaḥ. Edited by Gopīnātha Kavirāja. Yogatantra-​
granthamālā, 4. Vārāṇasī, India: Sampūrṇānda-​saṃskṛta-​viśvavidyālaya, 1992.
Piṇḍīkrama. In Ācāryanāgārjuna-​praṇītaḥ Piṇḍīkramaḥ Pañcakramaśca. Edited by 
Rāmaśaṅkara Tripāṭhī. Bhoṭa-​bhāratīya granthamālā, 25. Vārāṇasī, India: Kendrīya-​
ucca-​tibbatī-​śikṣāsaṃsthānam, 2001.
Prāṇatoṣanī. Prāṇatoṣiṇītantra: Rāmatoṣaṇa Vidyālaṅkāra saṅkalita. Edited by Saumyānanda 
Nātha. Kalikātā: Nababhārat, 1991.
Prapañcasāra Tantra: With the Commentary Vivaraṇa by Padmapādācārya and 
Prayogakramadīpikā-a Vṛtti on the Vivaraṇa. Edited by Aṭalānanda Sarasvatī and Arthur 
Avalon. Reprint. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989.
Rauravasūtrasaṃgraha. In Rauravāgama. Edited by N. R. Bhatt. 2nd ed. Publications de 
l’Institut Français d’Indologie, 18. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français d’Indologie, 1985.
Ṣaḍaṅgayoga. See Sferra 2000.
Saṃvarodayatantra. The Saṁvarodaya-​Tantra: Selected Chapters. Edited and translated by 
Shiníchi Tsuda. Tokyo: Hokuseido Press, 1974.

--- PAGE 270 ---
Transforming the Body      245
 
Śāradātilakatantram: prācīnabhāratīyatantraśāstraśekharībhūtaṃ. Edited by Arthur Avalon. 
Reprint. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1982.
Sarvvollāsatantram: Śrīmadsarvvānandanāthaviracitam. Edited by Rāsamohana Cakrabartī. 
Kalikātā: Śrīherambacandra Bhaṭṭācāryya, 1953.
Sātvatasaṃhitā: Alaśiṅgabhaṭṭaviracitabhāṣyopetā. Edited by Vrajavallabha Dvivedī. 2nd ed. 
Pustakālaya-​durlabhagrantha-​prakāśana-​yojanā, 6. Vārāṇasī, India: Sarasvatībhavanapusta- 
kālayādhyakṣaḥ, Sampūrṇānanda-​Saṃskṛta-​Viśvavidyālayaḥ, 2001.
Śivasvarodayaḥ: A Critical Edition. Edited by Swami Maheshananda et al. Lonavla, India: 
Kaivalyadhama S.M.Y.M. Samiti, 2015.
Śrīpraśnasaṃhitā. Edited by Seetha Padmanabhan. Kendrīyasaṃskṛtavidyāpīṭhagranthamālā, 
12. Tiruppatistha, India: Kendriyasaṃskṛtavidyāpīṭham, 1969.
Svacchandatantra. The Svacchanda-​tantra, with commentary by Kshemarāja. Edited by 
Madhusūdan Kaul Shāstrī. 6 vols. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 31, 38, 44, 48, 51, 53, 56. 
Bombay: Printed at the Nirnaya-​sagar Press, 1921.
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṃgraha. Passages on the dhāraṇās are reedited in Vasudeva 2004.
Tantrasadbhāva. See Bang 2018.
Uttarasūtra. See Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā.
Visuddhimagga: The Path of Purification. Translated by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli. 4th ed. Kandy, Sri 
Lanka, Ceylon: Buddhist Publication Society, 1979.
Viṣvaksenasaṃhitā. 
Edited 
by 
Lakshminarasimha 
Bhatta. 
Tirupati, 
India: 
Kendrīyasaṃskṛtavidyāpīṭham, 1972.
Vivekamārtaṇḍa. Working edition by James Mallinson.
Yogatattvopaniṣat. In The Yoga Upanishads: With the Commentary of Sri Upanishad-​
Brahma–Yogin. Edited by Mahadeva A. Sastri, 363–​389. Adyar Library Series, 6. Adyar, 
India: Adyar Library (Theosophical Society), 1920.
Yoga-​Yājñavalkya: A Treatise on Yoga as Taught by Yogī Yājñavalkya. Edited by Prahlad 
C. Divanji. B. B. R. A. Society Monograph, 3. Bombay: Bombay Branch Royal Asiatic 
Society, 1954.
Secondary Sources
Ball, Philip. 2004. The Elements: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bang, Junglan. 2018. “Selected Chapters from the Tantrasadbhāva: Based on the Tradition 
of 11th Century Śaiva Sanskrit Manuscripts in Nepal.” PhD theses. Hamburg: Fakultät für 
Geisteswissenschaften der Universität Hamburg.
Basham, A. L. 1951. History and Doctrines of the Ājīvikas: A Vanished Indian Religion. 
London: Luzac.
Bäumer, Bettina, ed. 1996. Kalātattvakośa, Vol. III: Primal Elements–​Mahābhūta. New Delhi: 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, Motilal Banarsidass.
Bouy, Christian. 1990. “Matériaux pour servir aux études upaniṣadiques (I): un manuscrit san­
skrit de Tanjore.” Journal Asiatique 278, no. 1–​2: 71–​134.
Bouy, Christian. 1994. Les Nātha-​yogin et les upaniṣads: étude d’histoire de la littérature hindoue. 
Publications de l’Institut de civilisation indienne, série 8°, 62. Paris: Collège de France.
Brunner, Hélène. 1994. “The Place of Yoga in the Śaivāgamas.” In Pandit N. R. Bhatt Felicitation 
Volume, edited by P.-​S. Filliozat, S. P. Narang, and C. P. Bhatta, 425–​461. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Brunner, Hélène, Gerhard Oberhammer, and André Padoux, eds. 2000. Tāntrikābhidhānakośa 
I: dictionnaire des termes techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique. Beiträge zur

--- PAGE 271 ---
246      Lubomír Ondračka
 
Kultur-​und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, 35. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 1988. Pūjā: A Study in Smārta Ritual. Publications of the De Nobili 
Research Library, 15. Vienna: Institut für Indologie der Universität Wien.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2011. “The Śāradātilakatantra on Yoga: A New Edition and Translation 
of Chapter 25.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 74, no. 2: 205–​235.
Burger, Maya, and Peter Schreiner, eds. 1999. The Perception of the Elements in the Hindu 
Traditions. Studia Religiosa Helvetica, 4/​5. Bern, New York: Peter Lang.
Davis, Richard H. 1991. Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshiping Śiva in Medieval India. 
Princeton, NJ: University Press.
Dviveda, Vrajavallabha. 1992. “Having Become a God, He Should Sacrifice to the Gods.” In 
Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honour of André Padoux, edited by 
Teun Goudriaan, 121–​138. SUNY Series in Tantric Studies. Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Filliozat, P.-​S. 1996. “Bhūta-​Mahābhūta.” In Kalātattvakośa, Vol. III: Primal Elements–​
Mahābhūta, edited by Bettina Bäumer, 49–​101. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre 
for the Arts.
Flood, Gavin. 2000. “The Purification of the Body.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by David 
Gordon White, 509–​520. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Flood, Gavin. 2002. “The Purification of the Body in Tantric Ritual Representation.” Indo-​
Iranian Journal 45, no. 1: 25–​43.
Flood, Gavin. 2006. The Tantric Body: The Secret Tradition of Hindu Religion. London: I.B. 
Tauris.
Ganesan, T. 2009. Two Śaiva Teachers of the Sixteenth Century: Nigamajñāna I and His Disciple 
Nigamajñāna II. IFP-​Publications Hors Série, 9. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de 
Pondichéry.
Goodall, Dominic. 1998. “Introduction.” In Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the 
Kiraṇatantra: Chapters 1–​6, ix–​lxxvi. Publications du département d’Indologie, 86.1. 
Pondicherry, India: Institut français de Pondichéry; École Française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Goodall, Dominic. 2015. “Prolegomena.” In The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: The Earliest Surviving 
Śaiva Tantra, edited by Dominic Goodall, Alexis Sanderson, and Harunaga Isaacson, 19–​
136. Collection Indologie, 128. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry.
Goodall, Dominic. 2016. “How the Tattvas of Tantric Śaivism Came to Be 36: The Evidence 
of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā.” In Tantric Studies: Fruits of a Franco-​German Collaboration 
on Early Tantra, edited by Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson, 77–​111. Collection 
Indologie, 131. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry.
Goodall, Dominic, and Harunaga Isaacson. 2016. “On the Shared ‘Ritual Syntax’ of the Early 
Tantric Traditions.” In Tantric Studies: Fruits of a Franco-​German Collaboration on Early 
Tantra, edited by Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson, 1–​72. Collection Indologie, 131. 
Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry.
Goodall, Dominic, and Marion Rastelli, eds. 2013. Tāntrikābhidhānakośa III: Ṭ-​PH: 
dictionnaire des termes techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique. Beiträge zur 
Kultur-​ und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, 76; Sitzungsberichte (Österreichische Akademie 
der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-​Historische Klasse), 839. Vienna: Verlag der 
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Gough, Ellen. 2021. Making a Mantra: Tantric Ritual and Renunciation on the Jain Path to 
Liberation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 272 ---
Transforming the Body      247
 
Gupta, Sanjukta. 1979. “Modes of Worship and Meditation.” In Hindu Tantrism, edited by Teun 
Goudriaan, Dirk Jan Hoens, and Sanjukta Gupta, 121–​185. Handbuch der Orientalistik, 
zweite Abteilung, Indien, 4. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Halbfass, Wilhelm. 1992. On Being and What There Is: Classical Vaiśeṣika and the History of 
Indian Ontology. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Hodge, Stephen. 2003. The Mahā-​Vairocana-​Abhisaṃbodhi Tantra: With Buddhaguhya’s 
Commentary. London: RoutledgeCurzon.
Ikeda, Suetoshi. 1966. “The Origin and Development of the Wu-​Hsing (Five Elements) Idea: A 
Preliminary Essay.” East and West 16, no. 3–​4: 297–​309.
Larson, Gerald James. 1979. Classical Sāṃkhya: An Interpretation of Its History and Meaning. 
2nd rev. ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Leach, Robert. 2014. “The Three Jewels and the Formation of the Pāñcarātra Canon.” In 
Puṣpikā: Tracing Ancient India, through Texts and Traditions: Contributions to Current 
Research in Indology. Volume 2, Proceedings of the Second International Indology Graduate 
Research Symposium (September 2010, Cambridge), edited by Giovanni Ciotti, Alastair 
Gornall, and Paolo Visigalli, 121–​153. Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Mallinson, James, and Mark Singleton. 2017. Roots of Yoga. London: Penguin.
Mishra, Umesha. 1936. Conception of Matter According to Nyāya-​Vaiçeṣika. Allahabad, India: 
Selling agent: Krishna Das Gupta, Benares.
Mou, Bo. 2009. Chinese Philosophy A-​Z. Philosophy A-​Z: PAZ. Edinburgh, Scotland: 
Edinburgh University Press.
Narain, K. 1986. An Outline of Mādhva Philosophy. 2nd ed. Udayana Publications. New Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal.
Parampurushdas, Sadhu, and Sadhu Shrutiprakashdas. 2002. Catalogue of Pañcarātra saṁhitā. 
Amdavad, India: Swaminarayan Aksharpith.
Potter, Karl H., ed. 1977. Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology: The Tradition of Nyāya-​Vaiśeṣika 
up to Gaṅgeśa. Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, 2. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Preisendanz, Karin. 2010. “Mahābhūtas.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. II: Sacred 
Texts and Languages, Ritual Traditions, Arts, Concepts, edited by Knut A. Jacobsen, Helene 
Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha Narayanan, 806–​818. Handbook of Oriental Studies, 
Section Two, India 22/​2. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Rastelli, Marion. 1999. Philosophisch-​theologische Grundanschauungen der Jayākhyasaṃhitā: 
mit einer Einstellung des täglichen Rituals. Beiträge zur Kultur-​und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, 
33. Vienna: Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Rastelli, Marion. 2006. Die Tradition des Pāñcarātra im Spiegel der Pārameśvarasaṃhitā. 
Philosophisch-​Historische Klasse, 748; Beiträge zur Kultur-​und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, 
51. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1999. “Yoga in Śaivism: The Yoga Section in the Mṛgendratantra: An Annotated 
Translation with the Commentary of Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha.” Unpublished manuscript.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. “History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the 
Pañcarātra and the Buddhist Yoginītantras.” In Les sources et le temps =​ Sources and Time: A 
Colloquium, Pondicherry, 11–​13 January 1997, edited by François Grimal, 1–​47. Publications 
du département d’Indologie, 91. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2013. “The Śaiva Literature.” Journal of Indological Studies 24–​25: 1–​113.
Schwarz Linder, Silvia. 2014. The Philosophical and Theological Teachings in the Pādmasaṃhitā. 
Philosophisch-​Historische Klasse, 853. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften.

--- PAGE 273 ---
248      Lubomír Ondračka
 
Sen, Chitrabhanu. 1978. A Dictionary of the Vedic Rituals: Based on the Śrauta and Gṛhya Sūtras. 
Delhi: Concept Publishing.
Sferra, Francesco. 2000. The Ṣaḍaṅgayoga by Anupamarakṣita: With Raviśrījñāna’s Guṇabha-
raṇīnāmaṣaḍaṅgayogaṭippaṇī: Text and Annotated Translation. Serie Orientale Roma, 85. 
Rome: Istituto italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Siderits, Mark. 2007. Buddhism as Philosophy: An Introduction. Ashgate World Philosophies 
Series. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
Slouber, Michael. 2017. Early Tantric Medicine: Snakebite, Mantras, and Healing in the Gāruḍa 
Tantras. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Srinivasa Chari, S. M. 1988. Fundamentals of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta: A Study Based on Vedānta 
Deśika’s Tattva-​Muktā-​Kalāpa. Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass.
Tripathi, Gaya Charan. 2004. Communication with God: The Daily Pūjā Ceremony in the 
Jagannātha Temple. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts.
Valpey, Kenneth Russell. 2006. Attending Kṛṣṇa’s Image: Caitanya Vaiṣṇava Mūrti-​Sevā as 
Devotional Truth. RoutledgeCurzon Hindu Studies Series. London: Routledge.
Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2004. The Yoga of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra: Chapters 1–​4, 7, 11–​17. 
Collection Indologie, 97. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry.
Vatsyayan, Kapila, ed. 1995. Prakṛti: The Integral Vision. 5 vols. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts.
Wayman, Alex. 1977. Yoga of the Guhyasamājatantra: The Arcane Lore of Forty Verses: A 
Buddhist Tantra Commentary. Buddhist Traditions, 17. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Wilson, Liz. 2003. “Human Torches of Enlightenment: Autocremation and Spontaneous 
Combustion as Marks of Sanctity in South Asian Buddhism.” In The Living and the Dead: 
Social Dimensions of Death in South Asian Religions, edited by Liz Wilson, 29–​50. SUNY 
Series in Hindu Studies. Albany: State University of New York Press.

--- PAGE 274 ---
Chapter 11
Cosmology and 
Embryology in 
Medieval Japan
Anna Andreeva
Embryologic Notions and Metaphors 
in Premodern Asia
The religious traditions of premodern Asia had been attuned to the notions and themes 
of conception and embryological growth since early times. The surviving written 
sources are often fragmentary, and the exact historical pathways of these notions and 
themes across the vast spaces spanning what is now Central Asia, India, China, Tibet, 
Korea, and Japan remain difficult to define with precision. What is clear, however, is 
that for the best part of the past two millennia, the people inhabiting these spaces had 
a profound need for understanding the deeper mechanisms of life and death, and their 
own spiritual experience, in terms of reproductive metaphors and gestational patterns. 
In East Asia, several religious traditions and practices had adopted these metaphors and 
patterns at different times—​as doctrinal, ritual, or visual aids leading to a realization of 
higher truths, construction of distinct cosmologies, or acquisition of divine wisdoms. 
Prominent among these traditions were Buddhism (particularly, its esoteric variety) 
and Daoism, with premodern knowledge on medicine and healing closely following 
both. Medieval Japan serves here as an interesting study case, which brings to light an 
intermingling and mutual influence of several important strands: those of Buddhism, 
Shinto, medicoreligious thought, and literary practice.
Early India and China were both historically important for the development of East 
Asia’s tantric or esoteric Buddhist traditions. Before and during the first millennium, 
the notions of conception and embryological growth had been adopted there into 
a variety of oral and written sources. In India (including Sri Lanka), embryological

--- PAGE 275 ---
250      Anna Andreeva
 
narratives and motives appeared in the Garbhopaniṣad (Kritzer 2009: 73; Kapani 1989), 
the Mahābhārata and other Brahmanic texts (Couture 2009: 16–​19; Suneson 1991), and 
the Jātaka stories and Buddhist sutras spanning the Mahayana and Pāli or Theravāda 
traditions (McDermott 1999; Boisvert 2000; Kritzer 2009, 2014; Sasson 2009; McDaniel 
2009; Langenberg 2017), as well as in later Jain hagiographies (albeit with attitudes 
differing from those found in Brahmanic and Buddhist traditions, De Clercq 2009). In 
these early texts, the embryological metaphors and descriptions of gestational growth 
and death served a variety of purposes—​for example, as stern pedagogical and moral 
admonitions for the proselytization of religious truths, or as cosmological narratives, 
detailing the emergence of the universe and major divine or heroic figures.
In Brahmanic and Jain traditions, one motif that remains noticeable is that many of 
them contain an early Indian embryological theory, purporting that the mother and 
her unborn child are connected through their hearts (the state called dvaihṛdayya): the 
fetus is understood to have a capacity to influence the actions of its mother, although 
not the other way around (De Clercq 2009: 43–​44, 50–​52). Contrastingly, in some of 
the Purāṇic texts (Hara 1980) and early Indian Buddhist philosophical treatises, such 
as Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakośabhāsya, Buddhagosa’s Visuddhimagga (Sasson 2009: 
63–​64; LaVallée Poussin 1980; Bhikku Ñaṇamoli 1975) or the Garbhavakrantīsūtra 
(Sutra of Entry into the Womb), the fetus was described as completely dependent on its 
mother, and it was the mother’s behavior and actions that caused the fetus indescribable 
hardships and pain (Kritzer 2014: 51–​74; Langenberg 2017: 65–​69). In their less prescrip­
tive mode, these embryological metaphors and descriptions were adopted by medical 
literati and practitioners into the treatises on women’s health, as in the case with Indian 
Āyurverdic tradition and its most important medical works, such as Suśrutasaṃhitā, 
Carakasaṃhitā, and Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayasaṃhitā (Kritzer 2009: 77, 80–​81; Selby 2006: 266–​
271; Wujastyk 2003).
In early China, a separate cluster of such reproductive notions existed, recorded in 
medical manuscripts from Mawangdui 馬王堆, for example, the Taichan shu 胎産書 
(The Book of the Generation of the Fetus, c. 168 B.C.E.; Harper 1998: 372–​384), and 
adopted into medical literary classics, including the Yellow Emperor’s Canon (c. first cen­
tury B.C.E., Unschuld 2003). The early Chinese scriptures, such as Laozi 老子 (late third 
century B.C.E.) and Huainanzi 淮南子 (139 BCE), explained the emergence of the uni­
verse and the human kind through the interaction of yin and yang and circulation of qi; 
the latter, for example, stated that:
The one generates the two;
The two generates three;
The three generates the myriad things.
(Huananzi 7.2; trans. Harold Roth, 
Huainanzi 241; Choo 2012: 182)
Although the quote may appear deceptively simple, the Huainanzi also contained an­
other, more detailed description of human physical development during the ten months

--- PAGE 276 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      251
 
a fetus spent in utero until birth; it described the emerging fetus’s bodily parts and 
organs as linked to external cosmic phenomena, thus emplacing the human body within 
a larger universe as its smaller but complete reflection, a microcosm:
In the first month, the lard occurs (er gao 而膏).
In the second month, a lump develops (er die 而胅).
In the third month, an embryo forms (er tai 而胎).
In the fourth month, the flesh is produced (er ji 而肌).
In the fifth month, the muscles form (er jing 而筋).
In the sixth month, the bones develop (er gu 而骨).
In the seventh month, the fetus forms (er cheng 而成).
In the eighth month, the fetus starts to move (er dong 而動).
In the ninth month, its movements become more pronounced (er zao 而躁).
In the tenth month, the birth occurs (er sheng 而生).
The physical body is completed
And the five orbs (zang 臓) are formed.
(Huainanzi 7.2; Choo 2012: 183).
Translating this and other related passages from Huainanzi, the scholar of Chinese cul­
tural and religious history Jessey Choo has further pointed out that the five orbs (i.e., 
lungs, kidneys, gallbladder, liver, and spleen) were envisioned as “the conduits through 
which the qi of each individual human being is harmonized with the universe” (Choo 
2012: 184–​185). This idea would be further developed in medieval China and Japan.
Some similarly conceptualized ruminations on the origins of the universe and the 
humankind were seen in early Han-​dynasty cosmological scriptures such as Taiping 
jing 太平經 (Great Peace Scripture; Espesset 2016), or later, in meditative Daoist texts 
focusing on the acquisition of immortality (Choo 2012: 189–​190; Katō 2002) and in 
Chinese Buddhist and Confucian texts focusing on filial piety (Andreeva and Steavu 
2016: 19–​26). Both the “ten months” model, typical for early Chinese discourse on gen­
eration and procreation, as well as the week-​by-​week descriptions of pregnancy more 
often encountered in Indian Buddhist sources were known in East Asia. Moreover, the 
Chinese thinkers had developed further avenues of inquiry and imaginative interpreta­
tion, when it came to the ideas of formation of the human body.
For example, the Buddhist scholar Zhiyi 智顗 (538–​597) included the segments 
discussing a meditation on the emergence of a human being and the five viscera (Ch. 
wuzang 五臓, Jp. gozō) as well as their correlations to other pentadically ordered phe­
nomena in the ninth chapter of his treatise On Great Calming and Contemplation 
(Mohe zhiguan 摩訶止観, T. 1911, lines 0121a29–​0121b17; Swanson 2017: 1445–​1446) and 
other texts (Dolce 2016: 274). Zhiyi’s treatises came to be influential both in Chinese 
Tiantai and later, in Japanese Tendai schools of Buddhism. According to the aforemen­
tioned Mohe zhiguan passage, the first aggregate takes place in the womb, the embryo 
is endowed with basic consciousness and is able to generate a single thought through 
the power of past karma. But it is the mother’s conceptualization of colors, substances,

--- PAGE 277 ---
252      Anna Andreeva
 
tastes, and sounds and the mother’s qi which prompts the emergence of organs and 
bodily parts of the growing embryo.
Chinese medical literati of the Sui and Tang periods, including Wang Tao 王燾 
(675?–​770), also described the fetal gestation during the ten months of pregnancy and 
produced complex descriptions of linkages between the Five Phases (wuxing 五行), the 
five major internal organs, the five structural components of the human body (qi, blood, 
skin, bones, flesh), and the five tastes (Choo 2012: 191–​194; ten months of pregnancy in 
Wang Tao’s Waitai miyao 外台秘要, ibid., 215–​221). Similar, but briefer descriptions of 
the ten months of pregnancy and corresponding stages of fetal gestation were incorpo­
rated by the court physician Tanba no Yasuyori 丹波康頼 (912–​995) in Japan’s earliest 
surviving medical compendium, the Ishinpō 醫心方 (Essentials of Medicine, 984), 
which was predominantly (although not exclusively) based on the Sui and Tang Chinese 
medical sources (Andreeva and Steavu 2016: 27–​29; Khan 2016: 166–​185; Triplett 2019: 
78–​84). Separate traditions of embryological discourses and reproductive metaphors 
had been developed by religious and medical practitioners in Tibet (Garrett 2005, 2008, 
2009; Gyatso 2015) and in esoteric Theravāda traditions, for example, in Cambodia 
(Crosby 2000; Bizot 1976, 1992).
These diverse philosophical, religious, and medical texts espoused a variety of 
opinions on how exactly the bodies of the fetus, its mother, or the cosmos were 
connected, and how either of them influenced the other. This is to say that during the 
first millennium C.E., the religious and medical practitioners and thinkers in different 
corners of Asia were exposed to a multiplicity of ideas about gestation and fetal growth, 
not only in terms of cosmological but also physical phenomena, such as reproduction, 
conception, and birth, as well as women’s or children’s health. A more specific survey of 
premodern Asian sources regarding embryology in East Asian religious and medical 
texts can be found elsewhere (Sasson and Law 2009; Andreeva and Steavu 2016: 1–​50; 
Andreeva 2016).
Given these broader historic developments, it should come as little surprise that 
some reproductive metaphors, similar to those seen earlier in Chinese scriptures such 
as Laozi, Huainanzi, or Taiping jing, came to be adopted into the early Japanese cosmo­
logical narratives, known collectively as the “fascicles from the Age of Gods” (jindai no 
maki 神代巻), which survive as the opening chapters to Japan’s earliest mythohistorical 
records from the eighth century, Kojiki 古事記 (The Records of Past Matters, 712; 
Philippi 1968: 37–​38 and 47–​48) and Nihon shoki 日本書紀 (The Annals of Japan, 720; 
Aston [1896] 1972 I:1–​63, esp., I:1–​7). These two compendiums commissioned by the 
eighth-​century Yamato court and composed by Japanese literati also contained a few 
legends referring to fetal life and death (Law 2009: 261–​269). The already mentioned 
tenth-​century Ishinpō adopted a strand of Chinese classical medical writings on em­
bryological growth into its contents; this valuable knowledge on the prenatal stages of 
human life was composed and presented, again, for the imperial court’s consumption. 
However, this was not the only route by which the embryological discourses and re­
productive imagery from multiple continental traditions in Asia had reached Japan. 
Buddhism, with its rich scholastic and ritual customs, played a key role in this process.

--- PAGE 278 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      253
 
Linked to the continent by a conduit of the seas, Japanese isles were the terminus on 
a long-​ and short-​distance maritime and terrestrial routes connecting to the Silk Roads 
of Central, East, and Southeast Asia. Buddhism was introduced to early Japan’s polity 
from the Korean peninsula in the middle of the sixth century. Since then, Japan became 
one of the locations where Buddhist concepts, teachings, and practices found a partic­
ularly fertile ground, interweaving themselves into the domains of politics, economics, 
and cultural production. This assures premodern Japan’s position as an important 
case study for the dispersal of Buddhist ideas, especially, those of esoteric (or tantric) 
kind. Although the reproductive metaphors were adopted into early Japan’s cosmo­
logical discourses even before the arrival of esoteric Buddhist (mikkyō 密教) ideas and 
institutions in the ninth century, it is through the agency of Japanese Buddhist monks, 
specializing in this new form of Buddhism, that the embryological metaphors found 
their way into multiple discourses and religious practices in medieval Japan, where they 
appeared in a variety of texts, including esoteric ritual manuals, handbooks on child­
birth and women’s health, as well as literary and poetic texts. The next section outlines 
the role of Japanese monks, particularly those who specialized in the study and practice 
of esoteric Buddhism, in the adoption of such ideas.
From India and China to Japan
The Sanskrit terms outlining the key stages of human gestation, the arising of sensory 
faculties, emergence of organs, and different types of consciousness, were found in 
important Indian Buddhist sutras and treatises. These include the already mentioned 
Garbhavakrantīsūtra, the “Manobhūmi” chapter of the Yogacārābhūmi (c. first half of 
the second century) by the Indian scholar Saṃgharakṣa (Demiéville 1951; Schmithausen 
1987: 127–​128; Yamabe 2013), or the “Lokanirdeśa,” the third chapter of Abhidharmakośa 
bhāṣya by Vasubandhu (c. fourth–​fifth century C.E.) (de La Vallée Poussin 1980; Londrö 
Sangpo 2012, vol 2: 971–​972). The embryological terms used in these sources were nec­
essarily linked to the Buddhist philosophical discussions of rebirth, suffering, and 
karmic retribution. As all these important works were translated into Chinese, most of 
them, sometimes in several different renditions, had also reached Japan as a part of the 
broader processes of the transmission of Buddhism (Andreeva and Steavu 2016: 15–​19; 
Dolce 2016: 264–​270).
Some of these embryological notions initially formulated in Sanskrit and later 
rendered phonetically in Chinese, for example, kalala 歌羅羅, “the initial state of an 
embryo shortly after conception,” were known to the monastic community in Japan al­
ready since the eighth century. This was the time when Mahayana and Abhidharmic 
treatises, sutras, and commentaries to them were copied or studied within the scholastic 
seminars at Buddhist temples in Nara (modern Nara Prefecture in central Honshu). The 
monks residing there often combined a study of two or more of the Buddhist scholastic 
traditions. It is not surprising that many of them would have had to read or comment on

--- PAGE 279 ---
254      Anna Andreeva
 
the key philosophical issues discussed in major Buddhist scriptures, such as the Great 
Wisdom Treatise (Ch. Dazhi dulun 大智度論, Jp. Daichi doron, T. 1509), Mahāratnakūṭa 
sūtra (Ch. Da baoji jing 大寶積經, Jp. Daihōshaku kyō, T. 310), Apidamo jushe lun 
阿毘達磨倶舍論 (T. 1558, 1559; 1546) and Chengshi lun 成實論 (Jp. Jōjitsuron, T. 1646).
To give an example of these early engagements with Buddhist embryological dis­
course on a philosophical and scholastic level, let us take an example from one of the 
Japanese scholar-​monks based at Nara’s Daianji 大安寺 temple, Anchō 安澄 (763–​
814). He combined the study of Madhyamaka thought with esoteric teachings (mikkyō) 
and recorded personal “Notes on the ‘Commentary to the Madhyamaka śāstra’ ” (Jp. 
Chūronsho ki 中論疏記, T. 2255). This “Commentary” was most likely Jizang’s 吉藏 
(549–​623) Zhongguanglun shu 中觀論疏 (T. 1824), a commentary on Kumarājīva’s 
Chinese translation of Nāgarjuna’s Mūlamadhyamaka kārika (Ch. Zhongguanlun 
中觀論, Jp. Chūkanron), the first and most influential of the “Three Treatises” (Ch. 
Sanlun 三論, Jp. Sanron). Anchō’s “Notes,” cited below, quoted a slightly amended and 
shortened passage from another extensive Mahayana source with esoteric flavor, the 
Great Assembly Sutra (Sk. Mahāvaipulya mahāsaṃnipāta sūtra, Ch. Da fangdeng daji 
jing 大方等大集經, Jp. Daihōdō Daijikkyō, T. 397, lines 0169a29–​0169b07). The orig­
inal sutra passage found in the beginning of the twenty-​fourth fascicle, translated by 
Dharmakṣema, is considerably longer. It described the process of conception and emer­
gence of consciousness during an initial stage of embryonic development and followed 
by subsequent stages until birth. Its overall focus was on the idea of birth as a form of 
suffering.
The Great Assembly Sutra says: “Complying with the workings of cause and effect, 
[when] father and mother merge amicably, first, the consciousness is received. 
During the stage of kalala (initial stage of embryo’s formation shortly after con­
ception), its body now settles into forming an embryo. It does not inhale or exhale 
yet. Neither it has any cognisance of suffering or joy. It is not suffering, neither it 
experiences joy. It is separated from its previous material existence. Its later physical 
form is not yet provided. It does not exercise power, neither it has any desire. It does 
not manifest any vigour. It does not manifest any pride. The mind [which] first enters 
the embryo is called consciousness.
Anchō, “Notes on the ‘Commentary to the Madhyamaka śāstra’ ” 
(T. 2255, lines 0239c24–​28).
Anchō here seems to be interested in the ideas regarding the karmic predispositions 
and mechanisms of transmigration of souls, as he follows up this quotation by an ex­
planation of another key term, often seen in the Buddhist discussions of embryolog­
ical themes. This term, antarābhava (Ch. zhongyin 中陰, Jp. chūin), represents a state 
of “intermediate being” or an intermediate form of existence which takes place in be­
tween the moment of death and rebirth as another form of being. Although the source 
which Anchō quotes, the Great Assembly Sutra, contains tantric incantations (dhārāṇī 
陀羅尼) and has been described by modern scholars of Buddhism as fairly esoteric in 
character, no particular evidence has yet been seen of engaging the embryological ideas

--- PAGE 280 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      255
 
and metaphors within ritual practice at the Nara Buddhist temples during that stage 
(Mochizuki 1931–​1937, vol. 4: 3419–​3423).
This situation gradually begins to change from the ninth century onward. This was 
the time when the esoteric scriptures, translated by Chinese monks and containing 
discussions on the emergence of human consciousness, begin to be adopted and their 
knowledge systematized by scholar-​monks directly engaged in further constructing 
Japan’s own esoteric Buddhist traditions. Two such traditions, Tendai and Shingon, 
were established, respectively, by Saichō 最澄 (767–​822) and Kūkai 空海 (774–​835) in 
the early decades of the ninth century. As noted by multiple scholars, this was a process 
which often took place in circumstances of religious and political competition (Groner 
1984; Abè 1999; Chen 2009; Bogel 2009).
One important example here is Yixing’s一行 (683–​727) “Commentary on the 
Mahāvairocana sūtra” (Ch. Da Piluzhena chengfo jing shu大毘盧遮那成佛經疏, Jp. 
Daibirushana jōbutsu kyō sho, also known as Ch. Dari jing shu 大日經疏, Jp. Dainichi 
kyō sho, T. 1796). It was studied, copied, and lectured on at major esoteric Buddhist 
temples in Japan, especially those of the Shingon School, as the cornerstone of eso­
teric Buddhist teachings. Many minute details or notions appearing in this founda­
tional scripture subsequently took up particular cultural or religious significance in 
esoteric temple milieu of premodern Japan (for one example of the “human yellow,” 
Ch. renhuang 人黄, Jp. ninnō, a magical substance thought to be contained within 
a human head, see Iyanaga 2016: 344–​346; on another practice, “visualization of the 
five syllables on the practitioner’s body,” Jp. goji gonshinkan 五字嚴身觀, see Dolce 
2022: 284).
As part of the fundamental discussions on the arising of life, the abovementioned 
term kalala, together with other similar terms, can be seen not only in Yixing’s 
“Commentary” revered by the Japanese Shingon School. It also appears in the 
ninth-​century Japanese Tendai monks’ writings, for example, in the “Abbreviated 
Commentary on the Tantra on for All Wondrous Achievements in All Endeavours” 
(Jp. Soshitsuji katsuma kyō ryakusho 蘇悉地羯羅經略疏, T. 2227) by the founder 
of Tendai esoteric tradition and the Sanmon lineage Ennin 円仁 (794–​864); or in 
the Collection of Doctrines in the Tendai Lotus School (Tendai hokke shū gishū 
天台法華宗義集, T. 2366) by a chief disciple of Saichō, Gishin 義眞 (781–​833). 
Both went to study in Tang China and, subsequently, were engaged in the long-​term 
process of establishing the esoteric Tendai teachings, practices, and institutions in 
ninth-​century Japan. Overall, their aforementioned writings addressed the aspects 
of esoteric ritual practices more straightforwardly. However, the embryological 
themes sporadically seen in these early Japanese Tendai treatises still formed part 
of discussions on the arising of minds and bodies, and, most likely, were not yet 
actualized in ritual practice in any form.
For example, in Gishin’s collection, there is a following exchange on the initial stages of 
the embryo’s formation. The term “stages of name and form” (Ch. mingse wei, Jp. myōshiki 
i 名色位) already occurs in the aforementioned Chinese translations and commentaries 
to the Indian Abhidharmic and Yogacārā treatises, such as Apidamo da piposha lun

--- PAGE 281 ---
256      Anna Andreeva
 
阿毘達磨大毘婆沙論 (T. 1545), Yuqie shidi lun 瑜伽師地論 (T. 1579), Jushe lunji 
倶舍論記 (T. 1821), and Sanlun treatises (Dolce 2016: 262–​270; Licha 2016: 497). In his 
treatise addressed to the Japanese monastic audience, Gishin identified five such stages.
Question: In principle, how many “stages of name and form” (Jp. myōshiki i 名色位) 
are there?
Answer: There are five “seed stages” (goshui 五種位). After depositing itself in the 
womb, [the embryo] transforms itself once every seven days. In the first week, it is 
called kalala. In the second week, it is called arbuda 阿浮陀. In the third week, it is 
called peśī 閉手, and resembles short and small medicine pestle (yakusho 藥杵). In 
the fourth week, it is called ghana 伽耶 [sic], and resembles a warm stone (onjaku 
温石). In the fifth week, it is called praśākha 波羅奢呵, and [has] five blisters which 
open and expand. For thirty-​eight weeks it resides in the mother’s womb (botai no 
naka 母胎中). This time constitutes the “stages of name and form.”
Gishin, Collection of Doctrines in the Tendai Lotus School 
(T. 2366, lines 0273b26–​0273c02)
This passage from Gishin’s Collection may have been one of the earliest ninth-​century 
Tendai sources to act as a precursor for the subsequent development of a medieval 
theory known as the “five stages of embryo in the womb” (tainai goi 胎内五位, to be 
discussed in the next section). A few decades after Gishin’s work, the themes mentioned 
in it were employed by at least one scholar-​monk well-​versed in esoteric scriptures and 
doctrines, to a very different end. For example, the notions and terms associated with 
Buddhist philosophical discussions of arising of life and embryological growth were 
introduced by the ninth-​century systematizer of esoteric Buddhism, the Tendai monk 
Annen 安然 (841?–​880?) to a new form of Buddhist knowledge expertise—​on preg­
nancy, childbirth, and women’s reproductive health.
Embryology and Women’s Health in 
Ninth-​Century Japan
The full details of Annen’s life and thus the attribution of his authorship to certain es­
oteric texts, ritual manuals, and handbooks remain somewhat fragmentary, but 
Japanese and Western scholars agree that his role in the shaping and localizing of the 
ideas and practices of esoteric Buddhism in late ninth-​century Japan can hardly be 
underestimated (Groner 1987; Sueki 1995; Dolce and Mano 2011; Iyanaga 2016: 353–​
356, 393–​394n121, 398–​399 n.140, 400 n.144; Andreeva 2018). The scholar of medieval 
Japanese Buddhism Lucia Dolce has recently investigated Annen’s key role in the for­
mation of exegetical discourse on the Yugikyō 瑜祇經, one of the esoteric sutras, influ­
ential in medieval Japan (Dolce 2021: 5–​10, 22; to be mentioned further). As a scholar 
with access to the latest arrivals of Buddhist scriptures, translations, and ritual manuals

--- PAGE 282 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      257
 
imported from Tang China, Annen would have been in a perfect position to research 
the Buddhist literature arriving to Japan and, when necessary, compile his own treatises, 
ritual manuals, or specialized handbooks. Undoubtedly, among the Buddhist scriptures 
that passed through his hands were the Chinese translations of important Buddhist 
treatises and sutras which contained discussions or descriptions of conception, embry­
onic development, and childbirth, as well as the writings penned by the earlier Japanese 
Tendai school founders.
One of Annen’s most intriguing contributions in this respect was a production 
of a specialized handbook consisting of quotations from esoteric ritual manuals 
and Buddhist scriptures containing medical prescriptions, which was aimed at lay 
practitioners of Buddhism, specifically, high-​ranking aristocratic women of child­
bearing age. Although it is not entirely certain, if his authorship of this handbook 
can be accepted as it was within the Tendai school milieu by the mid-​twelfth century, 
Annen may have been the first to use the embryological ideas found in Indian Buddhist 
treatises and Chinese sutras in his own writings produced for scholastics and possibly, 
individual lay male patrons and their daughters, in ninth-​century Japan. In a hand­
book, titled Collection of Secret Methods on Conception, Pregnancy and Childbirth 
(Gushi nintai sanshō himitsu hōshū 求子妊胎産生秘密法集, Nihon daizōkyō 43: 191–​
198), attributed to him later by the scholar-​monks within the Tendai school, there are 
at least three quotations of earlier Chinese translations of Buddhist scriptures which 
dealt specifically with the theme of embryology. This handbook was arguably the first 
Japanese Buddhist practical treatise written by a Buddhist scholar-​monk for the ben­
efit of elite aristocratic women, with a specific aim of offering them concrete advice 
on ritual and medical matters related to procreation. The embryological sequences 
that Annen used for this first-​of-​its kind handbook derived from one of the Chinese 
translations of the Yogācārabhūmi (Ch. Xiuxing daodijing 修行道地経, Jp. Shūgyō 
dōjikyō 修行道地経, T. 606), the “Sutra of the Five Kings” (Ch. Wuwang jing 五王經, 
Jp. Goōkyō 五王經, T. 523), and the “Sutra on the Topics [of the Meditation on] 
Mindfulness in the Correct Dharma” (Jp. Shōbō nen[jo]kyō 正法念[処]經, T. 721). Two 
of these scriptures, Shūgyō dōjikyō (T. 606) and Shōbō nenjokyō (T. 721), explained the 
mechanics of rebirth, the work of the karmic forces, and the ideas of suffering, which 
were relatively well known already in the ninth-​century Japan as part of more general 
mainstream Buddhist teachings.
The “Sutra of the Five Kings” appears to be a Chinese creation; the precursor 
versions of it may have possibly been produced during the Eastern Jin dynasty (317–​
420 C.E.), but its existence is more reliably attested during the Liang period (502–​557) 
(Lin 2017: 124, 154–​155). This sutra, explaining the nature of the eight kinds of suf­
fering, together with a brief account of conception and gestation, was included in the 
Kaiyuan catalogue of the Buddhist canon (Kiyuan shijiao lu 開元釋教録, 730; T. 2154) 
by the Tang scholar Zhisheng 智昇 (669–​740) and a later revision of it (Zhenyuan 
xinding shijiao mulu 貞元新定釋教目録, 800; T. 2157) by Yuanzhao 圓照, a disciple 
of the prominent Tang esoteric master Amoghavajra (Ch. Bukong 不空, Jp. Fukū, 
705–​774). The “Sutra of the Five Kings” may have been imported to Japan during the

--- PAGE 283 ---
258      Anna Andreeva
 
eighth or early ninth century and so may have been used by Annen during his com­
pilation of his Collection of Secret Methods on Conception, Pregnancy, and Childbirth 
in the latter half of the ninth century. Late twelfth-​century handwritten copies of this 
Chinese sutra, although shorter and somewhat different in contents from the more 
mainstream version now included into the printed Buddhist canon (T. 523), had 
also been preserved in the temple archives of the Amano Kongōji 天野金剛寺 in 
Kawachi Nagano town of modern Osaka prefecture and Nanatsudera 七寺in Nagoya 
(Hayashidera 1989–​1991: 94–​99).
These three sutras had in principle yet little to do with esoteric Buddhist discourses 
being introduced to Japan, but their quotations in Annen’s work present the first 
occurrences of the embryological terms, translated from Sanskrit into Chinese, in rela­
tion to women and women’s health. These terms include the Chinese transliteration of 
the Sanskrit term kalala as well as the Indian ideas of fetal gestation, noted in the two of 
these sources, the Yogācārabhūmi translation (Shūgyō dōjikyō) and the “Sutra of the Five 
Kings,” as “thirty-​eight weeks,” thus presenting the Indian Buddhist ideas on gestation 
to lay patrons in Japan.
On the whole, however, Annen’s handbook dedicated to lay aristocratic women’s 
reproductive health introduced many other important Buddhist scriptures which 
bore the hallmarks of Indian and Chinese tantric or esoteric traditions. One of these 
was the Chinese translation of the Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa (T. 1191), possibly the oldest 
Indian sutra containing tantric elements—​specifically, its ninth chapter translated by 
the Chinese esoteric scholar Yijing 義浄 (635–​714) in 703, which circulated in Tang 
China as a separate “Sutra of the King of One Syllable Spells, Among the Store of Spells 
of Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī” (Ch. Manshushili pusa zhouzang zhong yuzi zhouwang jing 
曼殊師利菩薩呪藏中一字呪王經, T. 1182). Different but similar fragments from 
Yijing’s Chinese translation, containing medicinal formulas and rituals for women 
wishing to conceive children, were included by Annen in his Japanese handbook, as well 
as spells and instructions for ritual worship of the esoteric deity Hārītī (Jp. Kariteimo 
訶梨帝母, also known as Kishimo 鬼子母, the “Demon Mother”).
Hārītī, known already in Central Asia, India, and China, was introduced as a 
ritual icon and protective deity to aristocratic women of childbearing age in ninth-​
century Japan for the very first time. Although this otherwise dark and scary ogress 
(yakṣiṇī) was known to snatch and devour other people’ offspring (Iyanaga 2016: 
345, 355), in Annen’s handbook she was portrayed as a “maiden of golden color,” 
wearing beautiful attire and flower garland decorations, holding the auspicious 
pomegranate fruit in her hand, and surrounded by several children. Even though 
at times Annen’s handbook had repeated widely accepted Buddhist views on the 
inherent corruptibility of women’s bodies and on birth as a source of suffering, it 
nevertheless included instructions for esoteric empowerment rituals and offerings 
invoking Hārītī, which were recommended to women who suffered from infertility. 
Moreover, Annen’s handbook promoted the aspirational goal of becoming “compas­
sionate mothers” (jibo 慈母) of rulers and kings to the aristocratic women in ninth-​
century Japan (Andreeva 2018).

--- PAGE 284 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      259
 
Soteriological Possibilities 
for Women in Ninth-​ to 
Twelfth-​Century Japan
It is significant, that along with this process of introducing embryological ideas to a 
very limited audience of aristocratic patrons and their families, another process was 
underway—​that of introducing the Buddhist theories positively regarding the women’s 
bodies, within the same elite social strata. First researched by the Japanese scholar of 
gender and Buddhism Nishiguchi Junko and later translated and studied separately by 
American scholars of Japanese Buddhism Lori Meeks and Heather Blair, the Sutra on 
Transforming Women into Buddhas (Bussetsu tennyo jōbutsu kyō 佛説轉女成仏經) 
was most likely composed in ninth-​century Japan (Nishiguchi 2006, 2009, 2014; Meeks 
2010: 303–​304); in fact, it may have already been in use by the 880s (Blair 2016: 266). 
Although its title incorporates the term tennyo 轉女, literally meaning “transforming 
the female [body into male],” thus referencing an ample body of Buddhist canonical and 
Japanese vernacular literature, this sutra created in Japan focused instead on a rather 
different motif: that of women as the mothers of the buddhas.
The scholar of Japanese Buddhism Heather Blair, who has studied this overlooked 
source and its extant manuscripts in English, has proposed the term “reproductive so­
teriology” (Blair 2016: 275). She has argued that, overall, the Buddhist sources known in 
Japan have propounded at least three positions on the status of women: (1) what she has 
called the “impurity hypothesis,” describing the women’s bodies as inherently polluted, 
(2) the “emptiness argument” appearing in the Vimalakīrti nirdeśa sūtra (Ch. Weimo jing 
維摩經, Jp. Yuimagyō, T. 474, 475, 476), which refutes prejudices against women, and fi­
nally (c) the “polysemic”—​essentially, ambiguous,—​nature of Buddhist sutras, which 
conflate both earlier positions and “demand interpretive work from its lay and ordained 
audience” (Blair 2016: 269). She has argued that the Sutra on Transforming Women into 
Buddhas represented “one viable option among the many scriptural discourses [on 
women’s enlightenment] in the Heian period (795–​1185)” and was possibly created by 
and for elite lay practitioners (Blair 2016: 264, 285).
Indeed, it has often been pointed out that the Mahayana canonical Buddhist litera­
ture, contained multiple, at times conflicting, sources detailing the “transformation of 
women.” One of those most influential in East Asia was undoubtedly the “Devadatta 
Chapter,” the twelfth chapter of the Lotus Sutra, translated by Kumārajīva (Hokkekyo 
法華経, T. 262, lines 0034b23–​0035c26; Watson 1993). Although a detailed reading of 
the Devadatta episode is most likely to produce an ambiguous interpretation, in classical 
and medieval Japan it was often credited with being the very fountainhead of a theory 
urging women to seek enlightenment through a rebirth as a man. Other sutras with sim­
ilar titles, which were included in the Buddhist canon, such as the one on Transforming 
Women’s Bodies (Ch. Foshuo zhuan nüshen jing 佛説轉女身經, Jp. Bussetsu tennyoshin

--- PAGE 285 ---
260      Anna Andreeva
 
gyō, T. 564) attributed to Dharmamitra (act. 400), presented the idea of women’s bodies 
being inherently impure and corrupted to lay patrons even more forcefully (Triplett 
2019: 113–​120). Japanese and Western scholars have pointed out that the ninth century 
was a time when numerous religious traditions, including Confucianism, Buddhism, 
and Daoism, promoted the ideas of social subordination of women (Blair 2016: 267).
By contrast, the Sutra on Transforming Women into Buddhas offered and devel­
oped the idea of the woman’s bodies and their reproductive organs as cosmological 
repositories and matrices (Sk. garbha, Jp. zō 藏) where the buddhas and divine beings 
could be conceived and gestate. In Heian Japan, this idea may have been connected to 
the so-​called tathāgatagarhbha theory, which taught that all sentient beings possessed 
the seeds of enlightenment in the form of the “womb of tathagata” (nyoraizō 如来蔵) 
(Blair 2016: 275–​277; Paul 1979; Zimmermann 2002; Radich 2015). In Japan, this theory 
must have been known from the Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā (Sk. Śrīmālādevī siṃhanāda 
sutra, Jp. Shōmangyō 勝鬘經, T. 353), an early Mahayana scripture which was translated 
into Chinese in 435 (Wayman 1974; Paul 1979, 2004). Aristocratic lay patrons and later, 
the Buddhist monks, engaged with the Sutra on Transforming Women into Buddhas, by 
copying it, mostly for the benefit of the female members of their families (Nishiguchi 
2014: 260–​267; Blair 2016: 264). The proselytization of the tathāgatagarbha thought con­
tinued sporadically in medieval Japan, for example, within the medieval “Commentary 
on the Śrīmālādevī Sūtra” (Shōmangyō gisho 勝鬘經義疏, T. 2185), attributed to Japan’s 
very own Buddhist hero, Prince Shōtoku 聖徳太子 (574–​622) (Dennis 2011).
The increasing significance of esoteric Buddhist ideas, imagery, and practices in 
ninth-​ to twelfth-​century Japan hastened the process of linking them to the local 
realities, including the social and political practices and discourses. The Two Mandalas 
of esoteric Buddhism (ryōbu 両部 or ryōkai mandara 両界曼荼羅)—​the Adamantine 
Vajra Realm (Kongōkai 金剛界) and the Womb Realm (Taizōkai 胎蔵界) described in 
esoteric scriptures—​were understood to express the male and female principles at work 
within the divine cosmos. In Japanese Buddhist literature, the latter principle was some­
times linked to an explicitly feminine imagery, for example, that of the “jewel woman” 
(gyokujo or gyokunyo 玉女), understood to be a soothing consort of a ruling king in 
early medieval Japan. The American scholar of Japanese esoteric Buddhism Brian 
Ruppert has traced several kinds of such imagery, including the figures of female eso­
teric Buddhist divinities, such as Wheel-​Turning Kannon (Nyoirin 如意輪), Kichijōten 
吉祥天, and the Buddha-​Eye Buddha-​Mother (Butsugen Butsumo 仏眼仏母) (Ruppert 
2000: 206–​210; on the latter, see also Abé 1999: 353–​355; Grapard 2002–​2003; Payne 
2022). These female figures may have been understood as what Ruppert has called gen­
erative divinities, expressing and representing parts of dualist esoteric cosmology of the 
Two Mandalas. However, it remains a matter of debate to what extent the worship of 
such divinities had contributed to soteriological theories and practices aimed specifi­
cally at women during that time.
Very generally, although these fragmentary theories and practices often conflicted, 
or superseded one another, they may have been fitting together with the scholastic 
discussions of the esoteric term daihi taizō 大悲胎蔵 (“great womb of compassion”).

--- PAGE 286 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      261
 
This term, which can be linked symbolically to the properties of the women’s bodies, 
is seen in a number of major esoteric sutras and treatises, such as the Mahāvairocana 
sūtra (Ch. Dari jing 大日經, Jp. Dainichi kyō, T. 848), Yixing’s aforementioned 
“Commentary on the Mahāvairocana sūtra” (T. 1796), or the so-​called Yogin Sutra, 
known in Japan as Yugikyō 瑜祇經 (full Japanese title Kongōbu rōkaku issai yuga yugi 
kyō 金剛峰楼閣一切瑜伽瑜祇經, the “Sutra of All Yogas and Yogins of the Vajra 
Peak Pavillion,” T. 867). The latter was an esoteric scripture which may have been com­
posed in China but gained a great popularity and influence in medieval Japan (Vanden 
Broucke 1989–​1990; Dolce 2016: 293–​297; Dolce 2021; shortly to be discussed further). 
The term “great womb of compassion” was invoked and discussed sporadically by the 
Shingon and Tendai scholar-​monks in their commentaries, particularly those focusing 
on the Yugikyō, but these discussions rarely transcended the scholastic circles at esoteric 
temples, populated almost exclusively by men.
All of the above is to say that there were limited developments in ninth-​ to twelfth-​
century Japan, which allow us to trace the first tentative uses of embryological concepts, 
knowledge, and patterns stemming from Buddhist scriptures, some of which had clearly 
an esoteric flavor, or were included in the domain of esoteric knowledge in Japan during 
the Heian period (795–​1185). These introductions were made mostly by a very limited 
number of erudite scholar-​monks who specialized in the study and compilation of eso­
teric and more widely known canonical and extracanonical Buddhist texts. Such learned 
Buddhist figures were therefore able to introduce embryological notions to their elite lay 
aristocratic audience, albeit still along with the views denigrating women’s bodies. In 
other cases, it was the elite lay aristocratic practitioners, who created and copied new 
sutras expounding positive views of women’s reproductive capacities and praised the 
cosmological nature of their bodies.
Embryology and Esoteric Ritual in 
Medieval Japan
Most remarkable developments of the esoteric Buddhist ideas regarding embryological 
growth can be seen in medieval Japan, during the late twelfth to fourteenth centuries. 
The research on this fascinating aspect of medieval Japanese religiosity is still on­
going, with many handwritten manuscripts and previously unknown premodern texts 
resurfacing from Japanese temples, libraries, and private archives.
Japanese scholars of Buddhism have noted the presence of embryological notions 
and metaphors in esoteric Buddhist materials from medieval and early modern Japan 
already in the 1960s to 1980s, particularly, in the primary sources attributed to the 
Tachikawa lineage (Tachikawa-​ryū 立川流; Moriyama 1965; Kushida 1979; Mizuhara 
1981). However, due to the somewhat explicit nature of discussed topics—​for example, 
with male and female sexual organs reinterpreted cosmologically as the vajra (kongō

--- PAGE 287 ---
262      Anna Andreeva
 
金剛) and lotus blossom (renge 蓮華), or a particular ritual implement symbolizing a 
sexual congress or unity between the esoteric divinities Fudō 不動 and Aizen 愛染—​
the ritual materials related to the Tachikawa lineage were often labeled “heterodox” 
(literally, “deviant teachings,” jakyō 邪教) by later commentators, and therefore, were 
considered controversial and little suited for academic scholarship in Japan. The 
first English-​language analysis of the embryological notions and theme of gestation 
appearing in medieval Shingon texts was presented by the American scholar James 
Sanford who also coined the term “foetal Buddhahood” (Sanford 1997). Since then, both 
the Japanese and Western scholars began to draw increasing attention to these themes—​
especially, the notion of the “five stages of embryo in the womb” (tainai goi 胎内五位)—​
as they were discovered to be present more widely, not only within the sources produced 
by esoteric Buddhist temple milieux but also within medieval literary and poetic 
commentaries written by Japanese court literati and lay adepts of esoteric Buddhism, or 
in medieval Shintō texts penned by esoteric and mountain religious practitioners as well 
as Shinto clergy (Klein 1998, 2002; Manabe 1999; Faure 2000; Dolce 2006–​2007: 140–​
143). It was soon pointed out that the controversial Tachikawa lineage might not have 
exactly been as marginal as had been previously assumed (Iyanaga 2006, 2010), and that 
the key historical actors who had given the impetus to the production and subsequent 
spread of esoteric rituals and commentaries imbued with embryological theories and 
metaphors were to be sought precisely within the major Shingon and Tendai temples, 
the very establishments of esoteric Buddhism of medieval Japan.
There has since come a real breakthrough in scholarship, which is still ongoing. This 
breakthrough focuses on the key source for these multiple embryological and sexual 
discourses—​the Yugikyō, one of the major esoteric scriptures revered by Japan’s Shingon 
and Tendai schools. It is now understood that Japanese commentaries on this sutra, 
produced by esoteric scholar-​monks and ritual specialists from the ninth and more con­
sistently, from twelfth century onward, formed a whole indigenous exegetical tradition. 
According to the study of this phenomenon by Lucia Dolce, the aforementioned ninth-​
century Tendai scholar-​monk Annen played a special role in its emergence (Dolce 
2021: 6; 2022: 290–​298). Furthermore, medieval Japanese Buddhists’ search for novel 
ritual techniques for “enlightenment with this very body” (sokushin jōbutsu 即身成仏) 
created a fruitful environment for proliferation and spread of embryological and gesta­
tional metaphors found in the Yogin Sutra and other esoteric scriptures, such as the Sutra 
of Guiding Principle (Ch. Liqu jing 理趣経, Jp. Rishukyō, T. 243) and the “Commentary” 
to it (Ch. Liqu shi 理趣釋, Jp. Rishushaku, T. 1003; Astley-​Kristensen 1991), traditionally 
attributed to the Tang esoteric master and translator Amoghavajra (Ch. Bukong 不空, 
Jp. Fukū, 705–​74).
The Dutch translation of the Yogin Sutra had appeared in the 1990s (Vanden Broucke 
1989–​1990), and the key role of this scripture (particularly of its second fascicle) in the 
emergence of ritual embryologies in medieval Japan soon became briefly acknowledged 
(Sanford 1997: 6–​8; Yamamoto 1997: 86). The more fundamental critical investigations 
of this important sutra and its broader impact, together with other esoteric scriptures, 
on medieval Japan began to take place in the first two decades of the twenty-​first century.

--- PAGE 288 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      263
 
The Japanese and Western scholars of medieval Japanese literature and religions grad­
ually mapped out the networks of esoteric temples and subtemples involved in produc­
tion of the Yugikyō-​related embryological theories, for example, the Shingon temples 
such as the Sanbōin 三宝院 of Daigoji 醍醐寺 or Ninnaji in Kyoto, or the Tendai eso­
teric lineages, such as Anō-​ryū 穴太流 (Itō 2003; Yoneda and Abè 2010; Dolce 2006–​
2007, 2010, 2016, 2021: 6–​10). Ogawa Toyoo, the scholar of Japanese medieval literature, 
and Lucia Dolce, the scholar of Japanese medieval Buddhism, have separately analyzed 
a plethora of ritual, visual, and literary medieval Japanese sources on which the em­
bryological theories of the Yugikyō had a profound effect (Ogawa 2014; Dolce 2006–​
2007, 2010, 2016, 2021, 2022). In medieval Japan, the earliest such commentaries were 
attributed to the Shingon monk Jichiun 實運 (1106–​1160) and the Taimitsu scholar Enni 
Bennen 円爾弁円(1202–​1280), among many others following; the repercussions of 
such medieval exegetical tradition had continued to be seen within local temples until 
the Meiji Restoration (Dolce 2016: 293–​298, 2021, 2022).
Of special significance here were the discourses on the “merging of two drops, red 
and white” (niteki wagō 二滴和合), leading to a conception of an idealized human being 
or an esoteric practitioner-​to-​be, who passed the five ritual stages of gestation in the 
lotus womb (tainai goi), finally emerging to achieve a status of a vajrasattva (kongōsatta 
金剛薩埵) and obtaining the full unity with the cosmic divinity Mahāvairocana 
(Dainichi 大日). These discourses were adopted into a performative context of esoteric 
rituals in medieval Japan. The already mentioned pioneering research by Lucia Dolce 
has shown how the tainai goi imagery and the Yugikyō-​inspired ritual transmissions, 
particularly those focusing on the second, fifth, and seventh fascicles of this sutra, had 
emerged as part of a series of secret esoteric consecrations (Sk. abhiṣeka, Jp. kanjō 灌頂) 
within multiple esoteric and Shinto practices in medieval Japan (Dolce 2006–​2007, 
2010, 2016, 2021: 20–​22, 2022). These activities were not confined only to the scholar-​
monks supremely versed in esoteric ritual theories and secret traditions guardedly prac­
ticed at major esoteric temples. Dolce has shown that ritual transmissions based on the 
Yugikyō were accessible at least to some female practitioners (Dolce 2022: 314). Toward 
the second half of the thirteenth century, even nonelite esoteric practitioners were able 
to learn the less secret contents of the Yugikyō and further transmit them, along with es­
oteric initiations, to others (Andreeva 2020).
The embryological ideas, identical or similar to those linked to the Yogin Sutra 
or Sutra of Guiding Principle, also came to be known to late medieval court literati, 
as they made appearance in Japanese poetry consecrations, known as waka kanjō 
和歌灌頂 (Unno 2022: 417–​419), and the poetic treatises, such as Ise monogatari zuinō 
伊勢物語髄脳 (Klein 1998, 2002) during the Muromachi period (1136–​1573). Similar 
adoption of embryological metaphors and notions can be seen within the initiation 
rituals of the Sōtō Zen school of Buddhism and seasonal rites linked to mountain reli­
gion, Shugendō 修験道, in early modern Japan (Licha 2016; Sekimori 2016). The most 
detailed overview of these many consecration practices in Japan’s esoteric Buddhist 
traditions, including those featuring the embryological, generative, and reproductional 
symbols and metaphors, has recently been presented in a volume of scholarly essays

--- PAGE 289 ---
264      Anna Andreeva
 
edited by the scholars of Japanese medieval esoteric Buddhism Fabio Rambelli and Or 
Porath (2022).
A separate theme in medieval esoteric texts and practices was the emergence of 
human organs, or rather, in the monastic ritual context, a contemplation on the five vis­
cera (gozō 五臓). In addition to the aforementioned discussions by the Chinese Tiantai 
scholar Zhiyi, mentioned in one of the previous sections, Japanese esoteric monks had 
developed their own ritual ideas and strategies. Kakuban 覚鑁 (1095–​1043), the founder 
of the “New Shingon” movement (Shingi Shingon 新義真言), and Yōsai 栄西 (1141–​
1215), the founder of the Japanese Rinzai Zen 臨済禅 school, were among the early 
adopters of this theme and the idea of correspondences between the five Sanskrit seed 
syllables (written in Siddham script, a medieval Indic script now used only in East Asia), 
five elements, and the five viscera, considered to be the vital constituents of the human 
body (Van der Veere 2000; Rambelli 2000; Dolce 2006–​2007, 2016: 273–​275; Yoneda and 
Abè 2010; Yoneda 2015; Kameyama 2020). More remarkably, not only did these ideas 
come to be adopted in medieval Japan, but toward the end of the thirteenth century, 
they also became visualized in a genre of ritual writing now known as the “Mandala 
of the Five Viscera” (gozō mandara 五臓曼荼羅). This mandala and the Japanese 
commentaries to it (gozō mandara waeshaku 五臓曼荼羅和會釋) form a representa­
tion of a micro-​ and macrocosmic realm expressed through the template of the human 
body, which combined and presented in visual format the pentadic correspondences be­
tween the Sanskrit syllables, sensory faculties, viscera, tastes, colors, and the Five Agents 
(gogyō 五行). The earliest example of such a mandala and the commentary to it is dated 
1162 and preserved at Ōsu Bunko 大須文庫 temple archive in Nagoya. Other examples 
of this remarkable mandala had also been discovered at Kanazawa Bunko archive of the 
temple Shōmyōji 称名寺 near Yokohama and Shōren’in 青蓮院 in Kyoto (Dolce: 2016: 
275; Abè 2016). An item conceptually close to it, tentatively titled as the “Mandala of 
the Five Stages of the Embryo in the Womb” (tainai goi mandala 胎内五位曼荼羅) is 
preserved at the temple Amano Kongōji 天野金剛寺 in Osaka Prefecture. The visual 
tropes from the latter seems to have been adopted as a “ten months in the womb” (totsuki 
tainai 十月胎内) trope appearing in broader popular Buddhist discourses on rebirth 
and reproduction and later seen in the Edo-​period woodblock printed texts, such as 
Seika mibungo 生下未分語 and Kumano no gohonji 熊野の御本地 (Nakamura 1990; 
Yoneda 2018). Even the placenta, protecting the gestating fetus in the womb, had be­
come conceptualized as a whole cluster of deities, which were thought to be born to­
gether with the human being and accompany him or her as a kind of protective and 
morally unswayable surveillance deities (Faure 2016).
Conclusion
However difficult it may be to trace the precise pathways of esoteric ideas regarding em­
bryology throughout the vast spans of premodern Asia, the written and visual evidence

--- PAGE 290 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      265
 
from medieval Japan shows that the terms linked to conception and fetal gestation 
were adopted as important elements of monastic and secular debates on the nature of 
rebirth and Buddhist enlightenment. Scholar-​monks from varying backgrounds and 
temple affiliations, including those based at Nara, Shingon, Tendai, and Zen temples 
throughout central and eastern Japan, used the notions and imagery related to fetal life 
to explain the mechanisms of rebirth and arising of consciousness as well as posit new 
soteriological ideas and methods in the context of ritual initiations and performances. 
Some of the embryological vocabulary and terms conceptualizing pregnancy and fetal 
gestation, seen previously in Buddhist philosophical and religious treatises arriving to 
Japan as translations from China, were adopted into special handbooks on women’s 
health; cosmological notions, such as the tathāgatagarbha were utilized in locally 
produced scriptures assumed to provide women with equal opportunities for salva­
tion. The deified process of pregnancy and embryological notions deriving from eso­
teric Buddhist scriptures produced in East Asia thus served as conceptual templates, 
which offered an inspiration for constructing the gendered theories of salvation. These 
notions were also employed for creating entirely new indigenous methods for acquiring 
“sudden enlightenment with this very body” (sokushin jōbutsu) by male adepts 
practicing the Tendai, Shingon, Zen, Shinto, and Shugendo traditions in medieval and 
early modern Japan.
Acknowledgments
The research for this article has been conducted under the auspices of project “Buddhism, 
Medicine, and Gender in 10th–​16th century Japan: Toward a transcultural history of women’s 
health in premodern East Asia” (grant AN 1283/​1–​2), sponsored by the German Research 
Council (DFG), during 2017–​2021.
References
Abè Ryūichi. 1999. The Weaving of Mantra: Kūkai and the Construction of Esoteric Buddhist 
Discourse. New York: Columbia University Press.
Abè Yasurō 阿部泰郎. 2016. “Gokei saimon to Gozō mandara: Chūsei Nihon no shūkyōteki 
shintairon 
no 
keifu” 
五形祭文と五臓曼荼羅－中世日本の宗教的身体論の系譜. 
In 
Kagura 
to 
saimon 
no 
chūsei: 
Hen’yō 
suru 
shinkō 
no 
katachi 
神楽と祭文の中世－変容する信仰の形, edited by Saitō Hideki 斎藤英喜 and Inoue 
Takahiro 井上隆弘, 70–​92. Kyoto: Shibunkaku.
Andreeva, Anna. 2016. “Embryology in Buddhist Thought.” In Oxford Bibliographies, edited 
by Richard Payne. New York: Oxford University Press Online. Accessed October 4, 2021. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​OBO/​978019​5393​521-​0228.https://​www.oxfor​dbib​liog​raph​ies.com/​
view/​docum​ent/​obo-​978019​5393​521/​obo-​978019​5393​521-​0228.xml
Andreeva, Anna. 2018. “Devising the Esoteric Rituals for Women: Fertility and the Demon 
Mother in Gushi nintai sasnshō himitsu hōshū.” In Women, Rites and Ritual Objects in 
Premodern Japan, edited by Karen Gerhart, 53–​88. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.

--- PAGE 291 ---
266      Anna Andreeva
 
Andreeva, Anna. 2020. “Buddhist Temple Networks in Medieval Japan: Daigoji, Mt. Kōya, and 
the Miwa Lineage.” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 47, no. 1: 11–​41.
Andreeva, Anna, and Dominic Steavu. 2016. “Backdrops and Parallels to Embryological 
Discourse and Reproductive Imagery in East Asian Religions.” In Transforming the Void, ed­
ited by Anna Andreeva and Dominic Steavu, 1–​50. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Astley-​Kristensen, Ian, trans. 1991. The Rishukyō. Buddhica Brittanica Series Continua III. 
Tring, UK: Institute of Buddhist Studies.
Aston, William George, trans. (1896) 1972. Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times 
to A.D. 697. 2 vols. Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle.
Bhikku Ñaṇamoli. 1975. Path to Purification: Visuddhimagga. Kandy, Sri Lanka: Buddhist 
Publication Society.
Bizot, François. 1976. Le figuier à cinq branches: Recherches sur le bouddhisme khmer 
I. Publications de l’École de Française d’Extrême Orient 107. Paris: Ecole Française 
d’Extrême-​Orient.
Bizot, François. 1992. Le chemin de Lankā. Textes Bouddhiques du Cambodge 1. Paris: École 
Français d’Extrême-​Orient.
Blair, Heather. 2016. “Mothers of the Buddhas: The Sutra of Transforming the Women into 
Buddhas (Bussetsu Tennyo Jōbutsu Kyō).” Monumenta Nipponica 71, no. 2: 263–​93.
Bogel, Cynthea. 2009. With a Single Glance: Buddhist Icon and Early Mikkyō Vision. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press.
Boisvert, Mathieu. 2000. “Conception and Intrauterine Life in the Pali Canon.” Studies in 
Religion/​Sciences Religieuses 29: 301–​11. Accessed October 4, 2021, https://​doi.org/​10.1177/​
000​8429​8000​2900​303
Chen, Jinhua. 2009. Legend and Legitimation: The Formation of Tendai Esoteric Buddhism in 
Japan. Brussels: Institut Belge des Haute Études Chinoises.
Choo, Jessey J. C. 2012. “ ‘That ‘Fatty Lump’: Discourses on the Fetus, Fetal Development, and 
Filial Piety in China before the Eleventh Century CE.” Nan Nü 14: 177–​221.
Couture, André. 2009. “The Story of Saṃkarṣaṇa’s and Kṛṣṇa’s Births: A Drama Involving 
Embryos.” In Imagining the Fetus: The Unborn in Myth, Religion, and Culture, edited by 
Vanessa R. Sasson and Jane Marie Law, 11–​31. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crosby, Kate. 2000. “Tantric Theravāda: A Bibliographic Essay on the Writings of 
François Bizot and Others on the Yogāvacara Tradition.” Contemporary Buddhism 1, 
no. 2: 141–​98.
De Clercq, Eva. 2009. “The Great Men of Jainism in Utero: A Survey.” In Imagining the Fetus: 
The Unborn in Myth, Religion, and Culture, edited by Vanessa R. Sasson and Jane Marie Law, 
33–​54. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Demiéville, Paul, 1951. “La Yogacārabhūmi de Saṇgharakṣa.” Bulletin de l’École Franc﻿̧aise 
d’Extrême-​Orient 44, no. 2.
Dennis, Mark W., trans. 2011. Prince Shōtoku’s Commentary on the Śrīmālā Sutra. BDK English 
Tripiṭaka Series. Berkeley, CA: Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai America.
Dolce, Lucia. 2006–​2007. “Duality and Kami: The Ritual Iconography and Visual Constructions 
of Medieval Shinto.” In “Re-​Thinking Medieval Shintō,” edited by Bernard Faure, Michael 
Como, and Iyanaga Nobumi, special issue, Cahiers d’Extrême-​Asie 16: 119–​50.
Dolce, Lucia. 2010. “Nigenteki genri no gireika—​Fudō, Aizen to chikara no hizō” 
二元的原理の儀礼化－不動・愛染の力秘像. In Girei no chikara: Chūsei shūkyō no 
jissen sekai 儀禮の力－中世宗教の実践世界, edited by Lucia Dolce and Matsumoto 
Ikuyo 松本郁代, 159–​206. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.

--- PAGE 292 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      267
 
Dolce, Lucia. 2016. “The Embryonic Generation of the Perfect Body: Ritual Embryology 
from Japanese Tantric Sources.” In Transforming the Void: Embryological Discourse and 
Reproductive Imagery in East Asian Religions, edited by Anna Andreeva and Dominic 
Steavu, 253–​310. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Dolce, Lucia. 2021. “A (Presumably Chinese?) Tantric Scripture and Its Japanese Exegesis: The 
Yuqi jing 瑜祇經 and the Practices of the Yogin.” Studies in Chinese Religions. Accessed on 26 
May 2022. https://​doi.org/​10.1080/​23729​988.2021.2015​139
Dolce, Lucia. 2022. “The Abhiṣeka of the Yogin: Bodily Practices and the Interiorization of 
Ritual in Medieval Japan.” In Rituals of Initiation and Consecration in Premodern Japan: 
Power and Legitimacy in Kingship, Religion, and the Arts, edited by Fabio Rambelli and Or 
Porath, 275–​321. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Dolce, Lucia, and Shin’ya Mano. 2011. “Godai’in Annen.” In Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras 
in East Asia, edited by Charles D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, 768–​
75. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Espesset, Grégoire. 2016. “Prenatal Infancy Regained: Great Peace (Taiping) Views on 
Procreation and Life Cycles.” In Transforming the Void: Embryological Discourse and 
Reproductive Imagery in East Asian Religions, edited by Anna Andreeva and Dominic 
Steavu, 53–​86. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Faure, Bernard. 2000. “Japanese Tantra, the Tachikawa-​ryū, and Ryōbu Shintō.” In Tantra in 
Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 551–​56. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Faure, Bernard. 2016. “Buddhism Ab Ovo: Aspects of Embryological Discourse in medieval 
Japanese Buddhism.” In Transforming the Void: Embryological Discourse and Reproductive 
Imagery in East Asian Religions, edited by Anna Andreeva and Dominic Steavu, 311–​43. 
Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Garrett, Frances. 2005. “Ordering Human Growth in Tibetan Medical and Religious 
Embryologies.” In Textual Healing: Essays on Medieval and Early Modern Medicine, edited 
by Elizabeth Lane Furdel, 31–​52. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Garrett, Frances. 2008. Religion, Medicine, and the Human Embryo in Tibet. Abingdon, UK: 
Routledge.
Garrett, Frances. 2009. “Tibetan Buddhist Narratives of the Forces of Creation.” In Imagining 
the Fetus: The Unborn in Myth, Religion, and Culture, edited by Jane Marie Law and Vanessa 
Sasson, 107–​20. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Grapard, Allan. 2002–​2003. “Of Emperors and Foxy Ladies.” Cahiers d’Extrême-​Asie 13: 127–​43.
Groner, Paul. 1984. Saichō: The Establishment of the Japanese Tendai School. Berkeley Buddhist 
Studies Series 7. Berkeley, CA: Institute of Buddhist Studies.
Groner, Paul. 1987. “Annen, Tankei, Henjō, and Monastic Discipline in the Tendai School: The 
Background of the Futsū jubosatsukai kōshaku.” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 14, no. 
2–​3: 129–​59.
Gyatso, Janet. 2015. Being Human in a Buddhist World: an Intellectual History of Medicine in 
Early Modern Tibet. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hara, Minoru 原実. 1980. “A Note on the Buddha’s Birth Story.” In Indianisme et Bouddhisme: 
mélanges offerts a Mgr. Ettienne Lamotte, edited by D. Donnet, A. Bareau, and H. Bechert, 
143–​57. Louvain: Belgium: Institut Orientaliste, Université Catholique de Louvain.
Harper, Donald J. 1998. Early Chinese Medical Literature: The Mawangdui Medical Manuscripts. 
London: Kegan Paul International.
Hayashidera Masatoshi 林寺正俊. 1989–​1991. “Kongōji zō Goōkyō ni tsuite” 金剛寺藏 
「五王經」について. In Kongōji issaikyō no sōgōteki kenkyū to Kongōji shōgyō no

--- PAGE 293 ---
268      Anna Andreeva
 
kisoteki 
kenkyū 金剛寺一切経の総合的研究と金剛寺聖教の基礎的研究.Grant-​in-​
Aid Scientific Research (A) Research Report 15202002, vol. 1, edited by Ochiai Toshinori 
落合俊典, 94–​99. Tokyo: Kokusai bukkyōgaku daigakuin daigaku.
Itō Satoshi 伊藤聡. 2003. “Sanbōin-​ryū no gisho: Toku ni Sekishitsu wo megutte” 
三宝院流の偽書－特に『石室』を巡って. In Gisho no seisei 偽書の生成, edited by 
Nishiki Hitoshi 錦仁, Ogawa Toyoo 小川豊生, and Itō Satoshi, 197–​231. Tokyo: Rinwasha.
Iyanaga Nobumi 彌永信美. 2006. “Secrecy, Sex, and Apochrypha: Remarks on Some 
Paradoxical Phenomena.” In The Culture of Secrecy in Japanese Religions, edited by Bernhard 
Scheid and Mark Teeuwen, 204–​28. London: Routledge.
Iyanaga Nobumi 彌永信美. 2010. “Mikkyō girei to ‘nenzuru chikara’: Hōkyōshō no 
hihanteki kentō oyobi Juhōyōjinshū no ‘dokuro honzon no girei’ wo chūshin ni shite” 密
教儀禮と「念ずる力」－『寶鏡抄』の批判的検討および『受法要心集』の
「髑髏本尊の儀禮」を中心にして. In Girei no chikara: Chūsei shūkyō no jissen 
sekai 儀禮の力－中世宗教の実践世界, edited by Lucia Dolce and Matsumoto Ikuyo 
松本郁代, 129–​50. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
Iyanaga Nobumi 彌永信美. 2016. “ ‘Human Yellow’ and Magical Power in Japanese Medieval 
Tantrism and Culture.” In Transforming the Void: Embryological Discourse and Reproductive 
Imagery in East Asian Religions, edited by Anna Andreeva and Dominic Steavu, 344–​419. 
Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Kameyama, Takahiko 亀山隆彦. 2020. “The Doctrinal Origins of Embryology in the Shingon 
School.” Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 47, no. 1: 85–​102. https://​doi.org/​10.18874/​
jjrs.47.1.2020.85-​102
Kapani, Lakshmi, trans. 1989. “ ‘Upaniṣad of the Embryo’ and ‘Note on the Garbha upaniṣad.’ ” 
In Fragments for a History of the Human Body. Vol. 3, edited by Michel Feher, 176–​96. New 
York: Zone Books.
Katō Chie 加藤千恵. 2002. Furō fushi no shintai: Dōkyō to tai no shisō 
不老不死の身体：道教と「胎」の思想. Ajia bukkusu 48. Tokyo: Taishūkan shoten.
Khan, Mohammed Abdul Mujeeb. 2016. “Early Japan and the Continental Medical Literary 
Tradition. Tanba no Yasuyori’s Conceptualization of Medicine in Ishinpō.” PhD diss., 
University of Cambridge.
Klein, Susan Blakely. 1998. “Ise Monogatari Zuinō: An Annotated Translation.” Monumenta 
Nipponica 53, no. 1: 13–​43.
Klein, Susan Blakely. 2002. Allegories of Desire: Esoteric Commentaries in Medieval Japan. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kritzer, Robert. 2009. “Life in the Womb: Conception and Gestation in Buddhist Scripture and 
Classical Indian Medical Literature.” In Imagining the Fetus: The Unborn in Myth, Religion, 
and Culture, edited by Vanessa R. Sasson and Jane Marie Law, 73–​90. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Kritzer, Robert. 2014. Garbhāvakrāntisūtra [The Sūtra on Entry into the Womb]. With English 
translation and annotation. Studia Philologica Buddhica, Monograph Series XXXI. Tokyo: 
The International Institute for Buddhist Studies.
Kushida Ryōkō 櫛田良洪. 1979. Zoku Shingon mikkyō seiritsu katei no kenkyū 
続真言密教成立過程の研究. Tokyo: Sankibō busshorinkan.
Langenberg, Amy Paris. 2017. Birth in Buddhism: The Suffering Fetus and Female Freedom. 
Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de. 1980. L’Abhidharmakośa de Vasubandhu. 6 vols. Mélanges Chinois 
et Bouddhiques 16. Brussels: Institut Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises.

--- PAGE 294 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      269
 
Law, Jane Marie. 2009. “Out of Place: Fetal References in Japanese Mythology and Cultural 
Memory.” In Imagining the Fetus: The Unborn in Myth, Religion, and Culture, edited by 
Vanessa R. Sasson and Jane Marie Law, 259–​74. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Licha, Kigensan. 2016. “Embryology in Early Modern Sōtō Zen Buddhism.” In Transforming 
the Void: Embryological Discourse and Reproductive Imagery in East Asian Religions, edited 
by Anna Andreeva and Dominic Steavu, 479–​521. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Lin, Hsin-​Yi. 2017. “Dealing with Childbirth in Medieval Chinese Buddhism: Discourse and 
Practices.” PhD diss., Columbia University.
Lodrö Sangpo, Gelong. 2012. Abhidharmakośa bhāṣya of Vasubhandhu: The Treasury of the 
Abhidharma and Its Commentary. Translated by Louis de La Vallée Poussin [in French]. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Manabe Shunshō 真鍋俊照. 1999. Jakyō Tachikawa-​ryū 邪教立川流. Tokyo: Chikuma 
shobō.
McDaniel, Justin. 2009. “Philosophical Embryology: Buddhist Texts and the Ritual 
Construction of a Fetus.” In Imagining the Fetus: The Unborn in Myth, Religion, and Culture, 
edited by Jane Marie Law and Vanessa Sasson, 97–​101. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McDermott, J. P. 1999. “Abortion in the Pāli Canon and Early Buddhist Thought.” In 
Buddhism and Abortion. Edited by Damien Keown, 157–​82. Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press.
Meeks, Lori R. 2010. Hokkeji and the Re-​Emergence of Female Monastic Orders in Premodern 
Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Mizuhara Gyōei 水原堯榮. 1981. Jakyō Tachikawa-​ryū no kenkyū 邪教立川流の研究. Kyoto: 
Dōhōsha.
Moriyama Shōshin 守山聖真. 1965. Tachikawa jakyō to sono shakaiteki haikei no kenkyū 
立川邪教と其の社会的背景の研究. Reprint 1990, Tokyo: Rokuyaen.
Mochizuki Shinkō 望月信享, ed. 1931–​1937. Bukkyō daijiten 仏教大辞典. Tokyo: Bukkyō 
Daijiten Hakkōjo.
Nakamura Kazumoto 中村一基. 1990. “ ‘Totsuki tainai no zu’ no shisōshiteki tenkai” 
「十月胎内の図」の思想史的展開. Iwate Daigaku kyōiku gakubu kenkyū nenpō 
岩手大学 教育学部研究年報 50, no. 1: 23–​36.
Nishiguchi Junko 西口順子. 2006. “ ‘Tennyoshin gyō’ to ‘Tennyo jōbutsu kyō’: Tōkyo 
Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan zō ‘Tennyo jōbutsu kyō’ nit suite” 『轉女身經』と『
轉女成仏經』：東京国立博物館蔵『轉女成仏經』について. 
In 
Amadera 
monjo chōsa no seika wo kiban to shita Nihon no josei to bukkyō no sōgō kenkyū 
尼寺文書調査の成果を基盤とした日本の女性と仏教の総合研究 (Research Report 
14310165), edited by Oka Yoshiko岡佳子, 33–​41. Nishinomiya-​shi: Ōtemae Daigaku.
Nishiguchi Junko 西口順子. 2009. “ ‘Tennyo jōbutsu kyō’ kō” 「轉女成仏經」攷. Nihon 
bukkyō sōgō kenkyū 日本仏教総合研究 8: 1–​9.
Nishiguchi Junko 西口順子. 2014. “ ‘Tennyo jōbutsu kyō’ ni tsuite 「轉女成仏經」につ
いて. In Chūsei kaiga no matorikkusu 中世絵画のマトリックス, edited by Sano Midori 
佐野みどり et al., vol. 2, 254–​75. Tokyo: Seikansha.
Ogawa 
Toyoo 
小川豊生. 
2014. 
Chūsei 
Nihon 
no 
shinwa, 
moji, 
shintai 
中世日本の神話・文字・身体. Tokyo: Shinwasha.
Paul, Diana Y. 1979. “The Concept of Tathāgatagarbha in the Śrīmālādevī sūtra (Sheng-​Man 
Ching). Journal of American Oriental Society 99, no. 2: 191–​203.
Paul, Diana Y., transl. 2004. The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of Lion’s Roar. Berkeley, CA: Numata 
Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.

--- PAGE 295 ---
270      Anna Andreeva
 
Payne, Richard K. 2022. “Offerings for Prosperity to the Wish-​Fulfilling Jewel Cakra 
Avalokiteśvara.” In Jewels, Jewelry and Other Shiny Things in the Buddhist Imaginary, edited 
by Vanessa Sasson, 260–​88. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Philippi, Donald L., trans. 1968. Kojiki. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Radich, Michael. 2015. The “Mahāparinirvāṇa-​mahāsūtra” and the Emergence of 
“Tathāgatagarbha” Doctrine. Hamburg Buddhist Studies series, vol. 5. Hamburg: Hamburg 
University Press. http://​hup.sub.uni-​hamb​urg.de/​purl/​Ham​burg​UP_​H​BS05​_​Rad​ich
Rambelli, Fabio. 2000. “Tantric Buddhism and Chinese Thought in East Asia.” In Tantra in 
Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 361–​80. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rambelli, Fabio, and Or Porath, eds. 2022. Rituals of Initiation and Consecration in Premodern 
Japan: Power and Legitimacy in Kingship, Religion, and the Arts. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Ruppert, Brian. 2000. Jewel in the Ashes: Buddha Relics and Power in Early Medieval Japan. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center.
Sanford, James H. 1997. “Wind, Waters, Stupas, Mandalas: Foetal Buddhahood in Shingon.” 
Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 24, no. 1: 1–​38.
Sasson, Vanessa R. 2009. “A Womb with a View: The Buddha’s Final Fetal Experience.” In 
Imagining the Fetus: The Unborn in Myth, Religion, and Culture, edited by Vanessa R. Sasson 
and Jane Marie Law, 55–​72. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sasson, Vanessa R., and Jane Marie Law, eds. 2009. Imagining the Fetus: The Unborn in Myth, 
Religion, and Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schmithausen, Lambert. 1987. Ālāyavijñāna: On the Origin and Early Development of the 
Central Concept of the Yogacārā Philosophy. Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist 
Studies.
Sekimori, Gaynor. 2016. “Foetal Buddhahood: From Theory to Practice—​Embryological 
Symbolism in Autumn Peak Ritual in Haguro Shugendo.” In Transforming the Void: 
Embryological Discourse and Reproductive Imagery in East Asian Religions, edited by Anna 
Andreeva and Dominic Steavu, 522–​58.
Selby, Martha Ann. 2006. “Narratives of Conceptions, Gestation, and Labour in Sanskrit 
Āyurvedic Texts.” Asian Medicine 1, no. 2: 254–​75.
Sueki Fumihiko 末木文美士. 1995. Heian shoki bukkyō shisō no kenkyū: Annen no shisō keisei 
o chūshin to shite 平安初期仏教思想の研究：安然の思想京成を中心として. Tokyo: 
Shunjūsha.
Suneson, Carl. 1991. “Remarks on Some Interrelated Terms in the Ancient Indian 
Embryology.” Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens/​Vienna Journal of South Asian 
Studies 35: 109–​21.
Swanson, Paul L. 2017. Clear Serenity, Quiet Insight: T’ien-​t’ai Chih-​i’s Mo-​ho chih-​kuan. 3 vols. 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Triplett, Katja. 2019. Buddhism and Medicine in Japan: A Topical Survey (500–​1600 CE) of a 
Complex Relationship. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Unno Keisuke. 2022. “Kokin kanjō: Rituals and Conceptualizations.” In Rituals of Initiation and 
Consecration in Premodern Japan: Power and Legitimacy in Kingship, Religion, and the Arts, 
edited by Fabio Rambelli and Or Porath, 409–​420. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Unschuld, Paul U. 2003. Transl. Huang Di nei jing su wen: Nature, Knowledge, Imagery in an 
Ancient Chinese Medical Text. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Vanden Broucke, Pol, annot. and transl. 1989–​1990. Yugikyō. De Schriftuur van alle 
Yoga’s en Yogī’s van het Paviljoen met Vajra-​Top (T. 18, no. 867, pp. 253–​269). PhD diss., 
Reijksuniversiteit Gent.

--- PAGE 296 ---
Cosmology and Embryology in Medieval Japan      271
 
Van der Veere, Hendrik. 2000. A Study into the Thought of Kōgyō Daishi Kakuban: With a 
Translation of his Gorin kuji myō himitsushaku. Leiden, The Netherlands: Hotei.
Watson, Burton, trans. 1993. The Lotus Sutra. New York: Columbia University Press.
Wayman Alex, and Wayman, Hideko, trans. 1974. The Lion’s Roar of Queen Śrīmālā. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Wujastyk, Dominic. 2003. The Roots of Ᾱyurveda: Selections from Sanskrit Medical Writings. 
London: Penguin.
Yamabe Nobuyoshi. 2013. “Parallel Passages between Manobhūmi and Yogacārābhūmi of 
Saṃgharakṣa.” In The Foundation for Yoga Practitioners: The Buddhist Yogacārābhūmi 
Treatise and Its Adaptation in India, East Asia, and Tibet, edited by Ulrich Timme Kragh, 
596–​737. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Yamamoto Hiroko 山本ひろ子. 1997. “Chūsei ni okeru Aizen Myōō hō—​sono poritikkusu to 
erosu” 中世における愛染明王法－そのポリチックスとエロス. In Nihon no bijutsu, 
Aizen Myōō zō 日本の美術・愛染明王像, edited by Nedachi Kensuke 根立研介. Tokyo: 
Shibundō, 86–​98.
Yoneda Mariko 米田真理子. 2015. “Kissa yōjōki saidoku—​Yōsai ni yoru shuchō no dokusōsei 
to sono denshō” 『喫茶養生記』再読－栄西に夜主張の独創性とその伝承. In Hikaku 
shisō kara mita Nihon bukkyō 比較思想から見た日本仏教, edited by Sueki Fumihiko 
末木文美士, 55–​71. Tokyo: Sankibō busshōrinkan.
Yoneda Mariko 米田真理子. 2018. “Tainai goi mandara” 胎内五位曼荼羅.” In Amano Kongōji 
zenpon sōkan 天野金剛寺善本叢刊, second series, vol. 3, Girei ongaku 儀礼・音楽, ed­
ited by Gotō Akio 後藤昭雄, Yoneda Mariko 米田真理子, and Nakahara Kanae 中原香苗, 
473–​487, 603–​08.Tokyo: Benseisha.
Yoneda Mariko米田真理子 and Abè Yasurō 阿部泰郎. 2010. “Ninnaji-​zō Gochizō hishō 
honkoku” 仁和寺蔵『五智蔵秘抄』翻刻. In Chūsei shūkyō tekusuto taikei no fukugenteki 
kenkyū 中世宗教テクスト体系の復元的研究, edited by Abè Yasurō 阿部泰郎, 205–​214. 
Nagoya: Nagoya daigaku.
Zimmermann, Michael. 2002. A Buddha Within: The Tathāgatagarbhasūtra; The Earliest 
Exposition of the Buddha-​Nature Teaching in India. Tokyo: The International Research 
Institute for Advanced Buddhology, Soka University.

--- PAGE 297 ---


--- PAGE 298 ---
Chapter 12
Astrology and Astral 
Magic in Tantric Japan
Jeffrey Kotyk
Historical Background
The history of East Asian astrology requires that we understand a lengthy web of in­
tegrated elements that incorporate materials from diverse ancient and medieval 
sources. To begin, the astrology of India was originally separate from the systems of 
astrology that emerged in Mesopotamia and Egypt. Ancient Indian astrology was pri­
marily concerned with the movement of the moon relative to twenty-​eight lunar sta­
tions (nakṣatras), the full list of which first appears in the Atharva Veda (Yano 2004: 
333). Falk (2018: 532) suggests that the nakṣatras were originally used to estimate the 
time of delivery of infants, since the moon will pass through a nakṣatra ten times from 
the date of conception until delivery. Personal characteristics became associated with 
each of the nakṣatras and these varying features were assigned to people born under 
them. Another feature of the ancient Indian calendars are the periods of waning (kṛṣṇa-​
pakṣa) and waxing (śukla-​pakṣa) of the moon. Each of these periods comprise fifteen 
tithis (lunar days). Each tithi has its own unique hemerological features, which can be 
either auspicious or inauspicious. This model of lunar astrology did not incorporate 
the planets, such as Saturn, Jupiter, and so on. Astrology as it existed in Europe and the 
Islamic world was largely horoscopy (i.e., the casting of horoscopes). Horoscopes are ta­
bles that indicate the positions of the planets relative to zodiac signs (Aries, Taurus, etc.) 
at a given point in time, such as the time of a person’s birth, from which predictions are 
made, or alternatively to determine the optimal time to carry out an action. Horoscopy 
has its roots ultimately in Hellenistic Egypt, starting from the second century bce. 
Pingree (1992: 560) describes Hellenistic astrology as “a union of aspects of advanced 
Babylonian celestial divination with Aristotelian physics and Hellenistic astronomy.” 
Horoscopy requires not only systematic knowledge of planetary movements but also 
the mathematics to calculate the positions of stars relative to an exact terrestrial latitude.

--- PAGE 299 ---
274      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
Horoscopy was later transmitted to Sasanian Iran and India between the third to fifth 
centuries, although the exact details of how all this unfolded remain unclear in many 
aspects. Indian astrology amalgamated their autochthonous system of nakṣatras with 
the zodiac signs and doctrines of Hellenistic astrology (Pingree 1997).
Turning to China, it had its own unique model of astronomy and celestial omenology. 
Cullen (2011: 218–​223) points out that the Wu xing zhan 五星占 (Prognostics of the Five 
Stars), which appears to date to the Warring States period (475–​221 bce) and was discov­
ered in a tomb dating to 168 bce, “is the earliest surviving Chinese document showing 
clear evidence of systematic consideration of planetary motions.” The significations 
of the motions are also considered in order to prognosticate political and military 
developments. Such an interest in celestial omens fostered the development of astro­
nomical and calendrical sciences in later centuries, which came under the strict do­
main of imperial governments. Celestial omenology in ancient China, we must observe, 
was concerned chiefly with the affairs of state and not individuals, which is in contrast 
to horoscopy and nakṣatra astrology, both of which address the fate and character of 
individuals.
Chinese astronomy was oriented around a system of twenty-​eight lunar sta­
tions (ershi ba xiu 二十八宿) relative to the celestial equator. Although similar to the 
twenty-​eight nakṣatras, a point that has led some scholars to argue for a common or­
igin, these two models were, in reality, separate and developed independent of one an­
other as demonstrated by Pankenier (2014). The Chinese calendar, which should be 
characterized as pan-​Asian in character, follows a sexagenary cycle. This is a repeating 
cycle of sixty terms comprised of the earthly branches (dizhi 地支) and heavenly stems 
(tiangan 天干). This cycle records the passage of days and years. This system was 
utilized alongside a lunar-​solar calendar, which is comprised of twelve lunar months 
(i.e., months defined by lunar phases), recurring intercalary months, and twenty-​four 
solar terms (Wilkinson 2000: 176–​187). The first day of a month falls on the New Moon 
(shuo 朔). The fifteenth day falls on the Full Moon (wang 望). This model was replicated 
in Japan, where it is attested in the Nihon shoki 日本書紀, an early state history which 
was compiled in 720.
In the case of Buddhism, it is clear that, with few exceptions, Buddhists in India gen­
erally held a common belief in astrology, even though the deterministic premise of as­
trology technically contradicts the law of karma (e.g., outcomes are decided by one’s 
actions, not the stars, according to the basic theory of karma). Indian Buddhist litera­
ture in its various historical stages reflects the gradual incorporation and development 
of what were originally foreign astrological concepts, such as the zodiac signs (Kotyk 
2018a). The vinaya (monastic codes), several of which were translated into Chinese, pro­
hibited monks and nuns from practicing astrology, but this was not because of any chal­
lenge to the validity of astrology itself—​the main issue was that it was inappropriate for 
a renunciant to engage in such a worldly art (Kotyk 2017b). Early Brahmins shared neg­
ative sentiments toward astrology. Gansten (2011: 217) explains that “before the accul­
turation of horoscopic astrology proper, introduced from the Greek-​speaking world in 
the first centuries of the Common Era, practitioners of astral divination were described

--- PAGE 300 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      275
 
in not very flattering terms by the authors of religious codes of law.” Gansten highlights 
the Manusmṛti (3.162) and Baudhāyanadharmasūtra (2.2.15–​2.2.16) as texts that regard 
astrologers as lowly persons. The former expressly forbids upper-​caste astrologers from 
joining sacrifices, although divination itself was not regarded as invalid.
Indian astrology was initially introduced to China via translated Buddhist texts, in 
particular the Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna, although the astrological elements were relatively 
basic and impractical to implement without recourse to further material or experts, 
particularly since the astrometric definitions of the nakṣatras from India would have 
been alien to Chinese astronomers. The first version was translated by Dharmarakṣa 
(Zhu Fahu 竺法護; c. 239–​316), titled Shetoujian Taizi ershiba xiu jing 舍頭諫太子
二十八宿經 (Sūtra of Prince Śārdūlakarṇa and the Twenty-​eight Nakṣatras), which 
he translated sometime between 307 and 313. The other version is the Mātaṅga-​sūtra 
(Modengjia jing 摩登伽經). This translation is traditionally attributed to Lü Yan 律炎 
and Zhiqian 支謙 in the year 230.1 The style of translation and records in bibliographies, 
however, seem to indicate it was translated some time later, perhaps around the late 
fifth century by Guṇabhadra (Qiunabatuoluo 求那跋陀羅; 394–​468). Hayashiya (1945: 
541) already raised doubts about the traditional dating of the Mātaṅga-​sūtra. This 
point was further taken up by Kotyk (2017c: 28). Zenba (1952) examined the Mātaṅga-​
sūtra in detail and noted a number of anomalous features, in particularly its gnomonic 
measurements which when calculated would give a position beyond the frontiers of 
even northern India, suggesting a point of observation in Central Asia. The text also 
has a number of details and information not found in the earlier version of the Śārd
ūlakarṇāvadāna, such as planetary revolution periods, which indicates that it was 
translated from a significantly revised source text. The Mātaṅga-​sūtra foreshadows later 
practices of stellar worship (i.e., the worship of asterisms). For instance, the nakṣatra 
Kṛttikā (mao 昴) is presided over by Agni (Huo shen 火神) and yogurt (lao 酪) is to be 
offered to him (T 1300, 21: 404c10–​404c12).2 The astrological content of some sections 
in the Mahāsaṃnipāta (Dafangdeng daji jing 大方等大集經) has been examined 
by Zenba (1957) and Mak (2015). Therein the Candragarbha-​parivarta (Yuezang fen 
月藏分), translated by Narendrayaśas (Naliantiyeshe 那連提耶舍; 490–​589) in 566, has 
the Buddha tell Brahma about the planets and zodiac signs, and how he orders them 
to guard over countries and people (T 397, 13: 373a21–​373a29). Buddhist cosmology at 
this point in history was increasingly incorporating an active pantheon of astral deities 
including deified zodiac signs, which was unique to India (the zodiac signs were not 
deified elsewhere in antiquity). This development likely reflects growing interest in as­
trology among Buddhists. Buddhist cosmology, particularly that based on Abhidharma, 
regarded the sun and the moon as discs orbiting around Mt. Meru and the Four 
Continents, all of which was atop a flat disc-​shaped surface. Buddhists in India never 
appear to have adopted spherical-​earth cosmology.3
Although astrology was explained to an extent in some Buddhist scriptures, 
Buddhists did not have a pressing need to study astrology in detail until the advent of 
early Vajrayāna, in which the timing of a mandala and rituals became a key factor, in 
large part perhaps explained by a growing appreciation for astrology in Indian society

--- PAGE 301 ---
276      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
(Kotyk 2018b). The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi, which is an early example of this new system 
of Buddhist practices, dating to around the mid-​seventh century, incorporates some as­
trological lore (Hodge 2003, 14–​15: 88, 409). A copy of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi (the 
short title in Chinese is Dari jing 大日經) was acquired by the Chinese monk Wuxing 
無行 (b. 630) and this version was translated by the Indian monk Śubhakarasiṃha 
(Shanwuwei 善無畏; 637–​735) and Yixing一行 (673–​727) in 724 (Kano 2015; Kotyk 
2019e). Yixing compiled a commentary to this text sometime before his death in 727, 
based on the oral testimony of Śubhakarasiṃha. This commentary is titled Dari jing shu 
大日經疏 (Commentary the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi). The text includes a section that 
briefly outlines Indian astrology, primarily for timing the execution of rituals and the 
creation of a mandala (T 1796, 39: 617c22–​618a19), that is, a model of hemerology (the 
practice of selecting auspicious days). Kotyk (2018c) translates this section and argues 
that this explanation reflects the astrological knowledge current at Nālanda, given that 
the outline is likely the voice of Śubhakarasiṃha himself for the most part. The impor­
tance of astrology in the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi therefore highlights the growing incor­
poration of astrological concepts into early Tantric Buddhism.
The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi came as a package which included a mandala that 
depicted not only the principal Buddhist deities but also the planets, zodiac signs, 
and nakṣatras, albeit as minor figures located on the periphery. There are also unique 
mantras, mudrās, and seed syllables for each of these figures (Somekawa 2013: 170–​
239). These elements were preserved within Mikkyō lineages in Japan (i.e., Tōmitsu 
東密, denoting the “Esoteric Teachings” of Shingon, and Taimitsu 台密, denoting that 
of Tendai). The original icons of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi were preserved in an illus­
trated document titled Taizō zuzō 胎藏圖象 (Icons of the Womb Matrix), which is a col­
lection of illustrations of figures. The postscript explains that the Tendai monk Enchin 
圓珍 (814–​891) copied these illustrations in the year 855 at the monastery Qinglongsi 
青龍寺 in Chang’an in China. The first copy was produced in 1181, and another was 
created in 1194. The Taizō zuzō is therefore the third copy of the original brought by 
Enchin.4 These illustrations are possibly the closest versions we have to the originals 
produced under Śubhakarasiṃha’s direction around 724. The Taizō zuzō includes the 
planets and nakṣatras in anthropomorphic forms, as well as the zodiac signs (Sagittarius 
is a half-​man half-​horse bowman, which is the earliest known example of a creature 
resembling a centaur or satyr in China).5 These astral deities became part of the wider 
East Asian pantheon from this point in history. They became established in Buddhism 
and slightly later also in Daoism (for a discussion of the latter, see Kotyk 2021b).
The pressing need to understand foreign astrology with accessible materials and the 
growing importance of astrology itself for Buddhist purposes were likely the reasons 
underlying Amoghavajra’s (Bukong 不空; 705–​774) creation of the first authoritative 
manual of Buddhist astrology in China. This manual is generally known by its abbrevi­
ated title, Xiuyao jing 宿曜經 (Sūtra of Constellations and Planets). The full title in the 
modern Japanese Taishō Canon can be translated as Sūtra on Mañjuśrī Bodhisattva and 
the Sages’ Teaching on Auspicious and Inauspicious Times, Good and Evil Constellations 
and Planets (Wenshushili Pusa ji zhuxian suoshuo jixiong shiri shan’e xiuyao jing

--- PAGE 302 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      277
 
文殊師利菩薩及諸仙所說吉凶時日善惡宿曜經). Although the work is attributed to 
Mañjuśrī, there is little of anything specifically Buddhist in character within the text.
Zenba (1968) surveyed the version of this text in the Taishō Canon (T 1299) and 
pointed out that there is no extant Sanskrit original of it. Yano (2013) has demonstrated, 
however, that the version of this text in the Taishō likely postdates the Tang period, 
given its heavily modified content when compared to extant recensions which date 
back to the ninth century and were preserved in Japan. Yano also points to the monk 
Kakushō 覺勝 (n.d.) from Kōyasan 高野山, who collated the editions available to him 
and in 1736 compiled a critical edition of the Xiuyao jing. This edition is titled Sukuyō 
yōketsu 宿曜要訣 (Essential Key to Sukuyō). It was printed in 1897 by Wakita Bunshō 
脇田文紹 as a typeset edition, Sukuyō-​kyō shukusatsu 宿曜經縮刷 (Typset Xiuyao 
jing). This version was used for the Shukuyōkyō uranai shinden 宿曜經占真傳 (The 
True Transmission of Xiuyao jing Divination), which is the Xiuyao jing with a modern 
commentary, published in 1908 by Wakahara Yukitsune 若原敬經 (1854–​1926).
Amoghavajra and a team of assistants compiled the first version of the Xiuyao jing 
in 759. The preface explains that the text was subsequently revised in 764 to produce 
a version more easily understood by Chinese readers (Sukuyō-​kyō shukusatsu vol. 1: 
4). The first fascicle is the revised work, while the second fascicle is the former version. 
The Xiuyao jing provides a diversity of astrological lore, including material related to 
the nakṣatras, zodiac signs, and seven-​day week, but all of this was conceived within a 
flat-​earth model of Mt. Sumeru and the Four Continents (Kotyk 2021c). The Xiuyao jing 
appears to have been the first manual in Chinese to explain and discuss the seven-​day 
week in detail. The days of the week are given in Chinese, Persian, Sogdian, and Sanskrit 
to facilitate inquiries about the day of the week (the week was observed by foreign peo­
ples but not China at the time), but this also points to the likelihood of multicultural 
materials having been referenced (Yano 2013: 110). Enough information is given in the 
Xiuyao jing so that Chinese monks could determine, using their own calendar, auspi­
cious days to carry out specific types of rituals. The text, however, also introduced natal 
astrology—​that is, doctrines utilized to predict the fate and fortune of an individual 
based on their time of birth. In this case, the techniques do not constitute horoscopy, 
since a birth chart is not described (Kotyk 2018e: 11–​17). Nevertheless, astrology for the 
purposes of prognosticating the future of an individual was novel to China at the time, 
since the ancient form of Chinese celestial omenology was chiefly concerned with the 
state and realm.
Natal astrology prognosticates various aspects in a person’s life, including lifespan, 
misfortune, and hardship. In the decades following Amoghavajra, this concern 
about fate appears to have prompted interest in apotropaic practices to mitigate or 
ward off baneful events or otherwise to enhance longevity. The genesis of the cult of 
so-​called Tejaprabhā (Chishengguang Fo 熾盛光佛) is likely best explained by a 
growing interest in astrology among Buddhists in China. The first text in Chinese 
to introduce this figure is the Da shengmiao jixiang pusa shuo chuzai jiaoling falun 
大聖妙吉祥菩薩說除災教令法輪 (Disaster Eliminating Edifying Dharma-​Wheel 
as Taught by the Great and Holy Excellent Auspicious Bodhisattva), also titled

--- PAGE 303 ---
278      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
Chishengguang Foding 熾盛光佛頂 (*Tejaprabhā-​buddhōṣṇīṣa?). The colophon itself 
does not provide a date or translator but an editorial note in the Taishō text (T 966) 
records written remarks (okugaki 奧書) from the original manuscript. It is said that the 
“Indian monk, Tripiṭaka Master Śīlabhadra from Mahānālanda Saṃghārāma in Central 
India 中天竺國大那欄陀寺梵僧尸羅跋陀羅三藏,” in the year 796 translated the work 
(347, n. 20). This text includes a pūja (ritual), instructions for painting a mandala, and an 
array of mantras to be utilized when facing inauspicious astral omens.
The name “Tejaprabhā” is not attested in any extant Sanskrit source and was, it 
seems, devised by Nanjio Bunyiu (Nanjō Bun’yū 南條文雄; 1849–​1927) based on the 
Chinese titles of texts retranslated into Sanskrit, which he provides in A Catalogue of 
the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist Tripitaka (Nanjio 1883: 222; Kotyk 2019d: 612). 
Mak (2018: 241–​242, n. 64) shows that the typical mantra of this “Tejaprabhā” is re­
corded in the Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa, in which the mantra is called Jvāloṣṇīṣa (Blazing 
Tuft); thus Jvāloṣṇīṣa is possibly the original Indic name of the Tathāgata in question. 
A medieval Japanese source, the Byakuhō kushō 白寶口抄 (Oral Instructions on the 
White Treasure), recorded by Ryōson 亮尊 (taught by Ryōzen 亮禪; 1258–​1341), gives 
lo-​ka-​jva-​la in Siddhaṃ script as the Sanskrit name (TZ vol. 7: 243b23). This might be 
reconstructed as *Lokajvāla (i.e., Light of the World), but this name is not found in any 
other source and could be a translation from Chinese into Sanskrit. Modern scholarship 
in the Anglosphere and Japan continue to use the name Tejaprabhā.
Tejaprabhā became a widely worshipped deity across East Asia. One often cited 
example from the art record is a painting titled “Tejaprabhā Buddha and the Five 
Planets” (熾盛光佛并五星圖), which was painted by Zhang Huaixing 張淮興 (n.d.) 
in the year 897 (Stein no. Ch.liv.007, British Museum 1919,0101,0.31). An important 
ritual text of this cult was the Chishengguang daweide xiaozai jixiang tuoluoni jing 
熾盛光大威德消災吉祥陀羅尼經 (Great Venerable Disaster Eliminating Auspicious 
Dhāraṇī Sūtra of Tejaprabhā), whose translation is attributed to Amoghavajra. Liao 
Yang (2003: 329), however, points out that it does not appear in Tang-​era catalogs. Jōnen 
靜然 in the Gyōrin shō 行林抄 (Summary of a Forest of Practices), compiled in 1154, 
notes that this text was brought to Japan by a Chinese merchant in 907 (year 7 of Engi 
延喜). This date is noteworthy since the text was apparently unknown to the Shingon 
and Tendai monks who collected materials several decades earlier in China (T 2409, 76: 
84b19–​22).
The ninth century saw the translation of horoscopy into Chinese from Indo-​Iranian 
sources. One key Buddhist text in this regard is the Qiyao rangzai jue 七曜攘災決 
(Secrets of Seven-​Planet Apotropaism). This text does not appear in any Chinese canon 
or bibliography but was preserved in Japan and reproduced in the Taishō Canon. The 
Qiyao rangzai jue provides everything necessary to cast a basic horoscope and then in­
terpret it, including ephemerides (tables indicating the positions of planets over periods 
of time), descriptions of planetary orbits, a table of solar terms, and some general as­
trological lore. There is more to the text, however, than only astrology. Mantras for the 
planets are also given, as well as basic rituals with which one can ward off baneful plan­
etary influences. Two sets of planetary icons, which are to be drawn, are also described,

--- PAGE 304 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      279
 
yet these differ entirely from what we observe in the aforementioned Taizō zuzō. One 
set bears close resemblance to depictions of the planets in medieval Arabic and Persian 
manuscripts (e.g., Venus as a lute-​player, Mercury as a scribe, Saturn as an elderly 
hunched-​over man, and Mars as a red warrior). Kotyk (2017a) has suggested an Iranian 
heritage for these icons on the basis of comparative iconographical data, as well as the 
fact that Sogdian loanwords (the names of the planets) are given in the Qiyao rangzai 
jue, although firmly establishing a Sasanian origin is presently impossible due to the fact 
that no known representation of the planets from Sasanian times is extant. The paucity 
is due to the fact that Zoroastrianism viewed the planets as demonic in nature (Panaino 
2015). Kotyk (2017a, 2017c) also pointed out the strong parallels between the astral magic 
of the Qiyao rangzai jue and that of medieval Islamicate and European traditions. The 
same type of astral magic and astrology was adopted by Daoists but modified for their 
own purposes (Kotyk 2021b).
Shūei’s 宗叡 (809–​884) inventory also records one text, grouped together with the 
others related to astral science, titled Duli yusi jing 都利聿斯經. With regard to this text, 
the Xin Tang shu 新唐書 (59.1548), a revised history of the Tang compiled by Ouyang 
Xiu 歐陽修 (1007–​1072) and Song Qi 宋祁 (998–​1061) in 1060, explains that “during 
the Zhenyuan period [785–​805], the duli diviner Li Miqian transmitted it from Western 
India. A certain Qu Gong translated the text 貞元中, 都利術士李彌乾傳自西天竺, 
有璩公者譯其文. The Duli yusi jing is not extant, but Ishida (1950) first identified 
fragments of the text. Yano (2013: 160–​164) proposed that the Duli yusi jing might have 
been a translation of Claudius Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos from the second century ce. Mak 
(2014) convincingly demonstrated, however, that the Duli yusi jing was, in fact, most 
likely based on the work of Dorotheus of Sidon, a first-​century ce Hellenistic astrol­
oger. Kotyk (2018e) further documented some of the specific Hellenistic doctrines that 
are apparent in a variety of Chinese and Japanese sources, which stem from the Duli 
yusi jing.
Several other texts that deal with astral magic were composed during the late Tang, 
many of which were brought to Japan. One of the prominent texts is the Fantian huoluo 
jiuyao 梵天火羅九曜 (*Brahma-​hora-​navagraha), which is attributed to Yixing, who 
died in 727. The Fantian huoluo jiuyao gives mantras for the planets, illustrations, and 
astrological lore. The attribution to Yixing was already questioned by Chavannes and 
Pelliot (1913: 167), who suggested a date of 874 based on data in the colophon of the 
text. Osabe (1963: 256–​261) also questioned the attribution. Mollier (2008: 141), in con­
trast, refers to the Fantian huoluo jiuyao as Yixing’s “outstanding astrological treatise” 
and identifies it as “a synthesis of Chinese and Indian traditions.” Kotyk (2018f: 16–​20) 
argues for the existence of a historical Yixing that must be contrasted to a pseudo-​
Yixing. Various texts, including the Fantian huoluo jiuyao, were attributed to this 
pseudo-​Yixing. In any case, astrologers and clerics in the ninth century utilized this text 
as a means to ward off negative planetary influences, so the attribution was arguably 
only to enhance the prestige of the practice.
The other astral texts attributed to Yixing, all of which were preserved exclusively 
in Japan, include the Xiuyao yigui 宿曜儀軌 (Ritual for the Asterisms), Beidou qixing

--- PAGE 305 ---
280      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
humo fa 北斗七星護摩法 (Homa Ritual for the Seven Stars of the Big Dipper), and 
Qiyao xingchen bie xingfa 七曜星辰別行法 (Special Practices for the Seven Planets 
and Stars). The last one is particularly unique since it illustrates and describes thirty 
spirits which cause diseases on the day of the month assigned to each one. Moreover, 
asterisms are assigned to each of the spirits. The text explains measures to be carried out 
to halt the ill effects of these dangerous spirits. These include, for instance, offerings of 
alcohol and lamps. The names of these spirits in transliterated Chinese are of uncertain 
origin (they are not obvious transcriptions of Sanskrit, Turkish, Persian, or Arabic). The 
illustrations, which are connected to lunar stations, are unlike anything seen elsewhere 
in the earlier extant textual or iconographical record in China. The figures include var­
ious bestial and zoomorphic figures. However, illustrations of jinn, as found in Persian, 
Arabic, and Turkish manuscripts—​such as the Kitāb al-​Bulhān from the fourteenth-​
century example—​are similar to these.6 The figures illustrated in the Chinese text are 
often drawn with nails inserted into them. The text explains this practice as follows:
教人眼見諸鬼形, 於鬼形上下釘手, 明日收禁之. 患人當日差訖. 與出却其釘, 鬼
既得放更不敢到於門焉.
It was taught that if someone sees the figures of spirits with their eyes, they should 
nail the top and bottom of the figure of the spirit, and then the next day bind them. 
The victim will be healed [from the illness caused by the spirit] that day. Having 
removed the nails, the spirit will be released, and they shall not dare come to one’s 
home.
(T 1309, 21: 456c29–​457a2)7
The connections between these spirits and asterisms, as well as the utilization of nails to 
control and banish them, are elements similar to what is found in jinn lore. Omidsalar 
(2000) states that “the jinn are especially afraid of iron, and anyone who manages to 
insert an iron needle in their bodies or clothes, gains control of them because their 
great fear of iron prevents them from pulling the needle out of their persons or attire.” 
Although it is possible that the spirits in the Chinese text are based on jinn lore, their or­
igin remains uncertain.
The Introduction of Buddhist 
Astrology to Japan
The introduction of Buddhist astrology to Japan was preceded in earlier centuries by 
the Chinese system of astronomy (Jpn. tenmon 天文) and the related calendrical sci­
ence (Jpn. koyomi 曆). There appears to have been an earlier autochthonous system of 
timekeeping in preliterate Japan. One Chinese account of Japan from the third cen­
tury explains that the people simply followed a habit of plowing during spring and

--- PAGE 306 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      281
 
harvesting during autumn while remaining ignorant of the seasons as they would have 
been defined in the Chinese system. Tanisaki (2016) theorized that a solar calendar was 
originally used before the adoption of the lunar-​solar Chinese calendar.8 In addition, 
Goto (2021) has surveyed the extensive native star lore of the Japanese archipelago and 
demonstrated that rich skyscapes existed that did not stem from Chinese or Buddhist 
origins. In any case, these indigenous systems did not evidently affect later systems of 
astronomy and calendrical science in Japan in any significant way, which were based 
on the Chinese model (twenty-​eight lunar stations, years comprised of twelve lunar 
months plus intercalary months, etc.) with no reference to an indigenous system, al­
though Japanese names were assigned to the twenty-​eight lunar stations, so there likely 
existed names for some of the constellations associated with the lunar stations before the 
wholesale adoption of the Chinese calendar in Japan. The Wamyō ruiju shō 倭名類聚抄 
(Digest of Classifications of Japanese Words), a Japanese dictionary compiled around 
931–​938 by Minamoto no Shitagō 源順, gives the following definition of the kanji 昴 
(the Pleiades):
宿耀經云昴星六星, 火神也, 音與卯同. 和名須八流.
The Xiuyao jing states that the stars of Mao are comprised of six stars and that it is 
[associated with] the fire god. The pronunciation is the same as mao [Jpn. bō]. The 
Japanese pronunciation is Subaru. (1.3)
Subaru is the Japanese name for the Pleiades, which also is connected to one of the 
Chinese lunar stations. The Japanese appellation Subaru was naturally assigned to it. It 
is additionally noteworthy that the Xiuyao jing had an impact on early Japanese lexicog­
raphy, which demonstrates that the text was read outside Mikkyō circles (i.e., outside 
Shingon and Tendai).
With respect to the introduction of astronomy and calendrical science from the main­
land, the Nihon shoki (vol. 2: 179) records that in the year 602, the monk Gwalleuk (Jpn. 
Kanroku 觀勒) from Kudara (Baekje 百濟) arrived at the Japanese court and presented 
a calendar and works on astronomy. This arguably marks a significant point in history 
from which astronomy and also its associated practices of divination became a known 
part of aristocratic culture in Japan. Later, the Engi shiki 延喜式 (Procedures of the 
Engi Era; 16.4), compiled in 927, describes a vocation titled Tenmon hakushi 天文博士 
(Academician of Astronomy). They were to monitor the heavens for anomalous phe­
nomena. Japan already possessed a grasp of Chinese astronomy during the period when 
Buddhist astrology was introduced.
Buddhist astrology in Japan formally commences with Kūkai 空海 (774–​835), the 
founder of Shingon, when he brought back with him from China a copy of the aforemen­
tioned Xiuyao jing in 806. The text is listed in his inventory of items, which was recorded 
upon returning to Japan (T 2161, 55: 1062a23–​1062a24). We know that Kūkai read and 
understood the Xiuyao jing in detail, in light of an oral explanation of how to approach 
short months (months with twenty-​nine days) and intercalary months in relation to the 
lunar stations assigned to each day of the month. This explanation is preserved in the

--- PAGE 307 ---
282      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
Hino’o kuketsu 檜尾口訣 (T 2465; The Oral Testimony at Hino’o), which was compiled 
by Kūkai’s disciple Jichie 實慧 (786–​847) of Tōji 東寺 (T 2465, 78: 30c13–​30c26).
Not only was the Xiuyao jing necessary for the timing of rituals according to Buddhist 
astrological conventions as laid down by Amoghavajra, but the text also introduced to 
Japan the concept of the seven-​day week. Shingon scholars traditionally credit Kūkai 
with introducing the seven-​day week. The Kōya Daishi go kōden 高野大師御廣傳 
(Extensive Biography of the Kōya Great Master), written by Shōken 聖賢 (1083–​1147) in 
1118, explains that
before the Daidō reign era [806–​810], calendar experts did not know of Sunday. 
This is why there was confusion about astrological auspiciousness and inauspi­
ciousness. People often violated this. After the Great Master [Kūkai] returned to 
court, he transmitted this practice 大同以往, 曆家無知密日, 是故日辰吉凶雜亂, 
人多犯之. 大師歸朝之後, 傳此事.
(Z 8-​2: 661b14–​661b17; Yamashita 1990: 488)
This cultural memory likely reflects the reality that before the advent of Mikkyō, there 
was no compelling reason for Japanese clerics, or the court for that matter, to observe the 
seven-​day week (the civil calendar, in contrast, divides the month into three segments 
called jun 旬, each comprised of ten days). The concept of the week served in religious 
contexts, while the civil calendar based on the Chinese model remained mainstream in 
timekeeping.
Astrology was also important to the early Tendai tradition. Although Saichō 最澄 
(767–​822) does not seem to have taken an interest in the subject, Enchin records the 
Xiuyao jing in his inventory of items from China in the year 857 (T 2172, 55: 1098b8). 
Takada (1992: 40–​56) points out that Enchin wrote some titles related to the Xiuyao 
jing: Sukuyōkyō gishū 宿曜疑集 (Compilation of Concerns on Xiuyao) and Sukuyōkyō 
mondō 宿曜經問答 (Questions and Answers on the Xiuyao jing). Enchin also lectured 
on the Xiuyao jing at the age of thirty.
Astral Magic in Early Heian 
Period (794–​1185)
The inventory of items brought back from China by the Tendai monk Ennin 圓仁 (794–​
864) in 847 includes what appears to be an altar diagram for Tejaprabhā (Shijō dan yō 
熾盛壇樣) (T 2167, 55: 1084c8). Annen 安然 (b. 841) in his Sho ajari shingon mikkyō 
burui sōroku 諸阿闍梨真言密教部類總錄 (Mantrayāna Works of the Ācāryas) records 
that this item was brought by Ennin and lists it under diagrams of mandalas (mandara 
to 曼荼羅圖). The Asaba shō 阿娑縛抄, which is a Tendai compendium of Mikkyō 
practice and lore from the thirteenth century includes what appears to be a copy of this

--- PAGE 308 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      283
 
mandala (reproduced as image plate no. 13, fascicle 58 in Taishō zuzō 大正圖像 edition 
of Asaba shō). The Asaba shō also records that Ennin was responsible for establishing the 
practice of Tejaprabhā in Japan, explaining that in year 2 of Kashō 嘉祥 (849), Ennin—​
named Jikaku Daishi 慈覺大師—​carried out the related rituals at Sōji-​in 總持院 
(TZ vol. 9: 42a6–​42a9). Elsewhere in the Asaba shō we read, “It is said that this prac­
tice is secretly held by the mountain order [Enryaku-​ji]. It is a sacred treasure of the 
state. The [Shijū]chō ketsu states that the Tejaprabhā practice is not cultivated at Tō-​
ji 此法山門之祕揵, 國家之珍重也云々.帖決云熾盛光法東寺不修之云々” (TZ 
vol. 9: 24c3–​24c5). According to this statement, the longer form of the ritual involving 
Tejaprabhā was unavailable to Shingon. See discussion of astral magic in Yamashita 
(1996: 298–​305).
An important manual of astral magic is the Kuyō hiryaku 九曜秘曆 (Secret Calendar 
of the Nine Planets). This text includes both text and illustrations of the planets in both 
anthropomorphic and zoomorphic forms. The illustrations are of particular interest 
and small details can differ in the extant recensions. There is a typeset version with the 
accompanying illustrations in the modern Taishō zuzō (TZ vol. 7: 769–​773). There is also 
a copy by Sōkan 宗觀 (1125) held at the Metropolian Museum of Art, New York (item# 
1975.268.4) (see fig. 12.1). Another is in the ARC Collection, Ritsumeikan University, 
which was copied by Genpō 賢寳 (1333–​1398). Nakano (1969) surveyed a version stored 
at Kanchiin 觀智院 in Kyoto.
The Kuyō hiryaku provides mantras for each of the planets alongside lore regarding 
each of them, which also includes Rāhu and Ketu. The days of the week are discussed, 
as well as the specific activities to carry out or avoid on each one, given that a planet 
with specific characteristics rules over each day (e.g., Venus rules over Friday). Various 
procedures are described for each of the days of the week, in particular wearing 
clothing colored to match the planet presiding over the day. This practice highlights the 
Figure 12.1.  Leafs of Kuyō hiryaku. NYC Met. The Harry G. C. Packard Collection of Asian 
Art, Gift of Harry G. C. Packard, and Purchase, Fletcher, Rogers, Harris Brisbane Dick, and Louis 
V. Bell Funds, Joseph Pulitzer Bequest, and The Annenberg Fund Inc. Gift, 1975. 1975.268.4. 
https://​www.metmus​eum.org/​art/​col​lect​ion/​sea​rch/​45616

--- PAGE 309 ---
284      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
importance of the seven-​day week in Mikkyō. The content of the Kuyō hiryaku appears 
to be pieced together from multiple sources, but it is uncertain whether it is a Chinese 
or Japanese composition. Similar content is found in texts from the Tang period. The 
ritual for Saturn in the Kuyō hiryaku is similar to that found in the Qiyao rangzai jue, as 
well as the Daoist Chengxing lingtai miyao jing 秤星靈臺祕要經 (Scripture of the Secret 
Essentials of the Compass Spiritual Terrace). The latter is a fragmentary collection of ap­
otropaic spells to ward off planetary influences. It appears to have been compiled within 
a few decades after 898 (Kalinowski 2004: 337–​338; Kotyk 2021b: 95–​97).
Suffumigations of specific aromatics are utilized in these spells. The longer procedure 
for Saturn in the Kuyō hiryaku calls for burning kokkō 黑香, “black incense” (TZ vol. 7: 
772a28), but the other versions of the ritual give anxi xiang 安息香 (T 1308, 21: 449b2–​
449b12; DZ vol. 5: 30c2–​30c10; Kotyk 2017c: 53–​55). Although anxi 安息 can refer to 
Parthia—​it is a Chinese transcription of Aršak—​in this case it is better understood as 
“the incense which placates.” As to the identification of this aromatic, Laufer (1919: 464–​
465) wrote, “Under the term ṅan (or an)-​si hiaṅ 安西香 the Chinese have combined two 
different aromatics—​an ancient product of Iranian regions, as yet unidentified; and the 
benjoin [tree resin] yielded by the Styrax benjoin, a small tree of the Malay Archipelago.” 
Yamada (1976: 131) later noted the different Sumatran and Thai species. However, the 
resin of the tree Styrax benzoin (commonly called styrax) is indigenous to Southeast 
Asia, not India. When translating Indian sources, anxi xiang refers instead to either 
guggulu or bdellium, which are types of aromatic resins (Kotyk 2020b). As to whether 
styrax or bdellium was available in Japan, the use of imported incense in this context 
would have posed a problem in Japan, since it is uncertain how much of these aromatics 
would have been available. The Hishō mondō 祕鈔問答 (Questions and Answers on the 
Secret Digest) by Raiyu 賴瑜 (1226–​1304), for instance, states that anxi-​xiang is kurara 
久良羅 (T 2536, 79: 468a17–​468a19), which is Sophora flavescens or Sophora angustifolia, 
the shrubby sophora, in modern taxonomy.9 Kurara is unrelated to guggulu and Styrax 
benzoin, but it is a plant native to Japan. It seems likely, therefore, that substitutes were 
used, since the originally prescribed aromatics were largely unavailable in Japan. The 
use of substituted items in Japanese rituals can also be observed in other contexts.10
Another major astral deity in Japan was Myōken Bosatsu 妙見菩薩 (Skt. Sudṛṣṭi 
Bodhisattva), who personifies Polaris, the North Star. Sørensen (2011: 127) remarks:
Although this important astral god would appear to have an Indian identity, he exists 
in a variety of forms, some of which were evidently created in Heian Japan after the 
ninth century. The presence of Sudṛsṭi in China can be documented as far back as 
the middle of the Nanbeizhao, but no icons from this early period have yet been 
identified.
Myōken was more popular in Japan than in China, although Ennin in his travelogue 
to China, Nittō guhō junrei kōki 入唐求法巡禮行記 (Record of Travel to the Tang in 
Search of the Dharma) does record witnessing the painting of this deity in China (B18, 
no. 95: 18a5–​18a6). Aruga (2000) wrote a reliable and detailed study on Myōken.

--- PAGE 310 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      285
 
Horoscopy and Astral Magic 
in Japan: Sukuyōdō
Genji monogatari 源氏物語 (Tale of Genji), written by Murasaki Shikibu 紫式部 (c. 973–​
c. 1014), is an early witness to the tradition of Sukuyō 宿曜 as an identifiable community. 
They make predictions in chapters one and fourteen (vol. 1: 45; vol. 2: 106). The full name 
for this tradition is Sukuyōdō 宿曜道 (Way of Lunar Stations and Planets), which was 
comprised of astrologer-​monks from various sects. Murasaki conceivably had some con­
tact with these individuals during her life, which would have been an early stage in the 
history of Sukuyōdō. Momo (1969: 410) points out that the Nichū reki 二中歴 from the 
Kamakura period (unknown authorship) lists Hōzō 法藏 (905–​969) as the first Sukuyōshi 
宿曜師 (Sukuyō Master). It is important to note that neither Kūkai nor Enchin is included 
in this list, even though they were the early users of the Xiuyao jing (Jpn. Sukuyō kyō) in 
Japan. Sukuyōdō ought to be treated as separate from Shingon and Taimitsu, since it fell 
under neither sect. In light of this point, it is also a question whether Sukuyōdō would 
fall under Mikkyō. The lines of succession in Sukuyōdō were separate from Mikkyō 
(Kanechiku 1999). There is no consensus on whether Sukuyōdō falls under Mikkyō. There 
is, in reality, comparatively limited modern scholarship on Sukuyōdō, since it has often 
been discussed in its role as a counterpart to the better documented Onmyōdō 陰陽道 
(Way of Yin and Yang), or as a minor element in Genji monogatari and other novels.11
Sukuyōdō was primarily comprised of three aspects: the study of astronomy and 
calendrical science, casting of horoscopes, and practice of astral magic. There was no 
single or uniform calendar for calculating the positions of the planets. The Chinese 
state designed and implemented calendrical reforms, which usually included an adop­
tion of a new calendar altogether. Yixing, for example, compiled the Dayan li 大衍曆, 
which was in use between 729 and 761 in China. This same calendar was used in Japan 
between 764 and 862. There were, however, unofficial or popular calendars produced. 
One of these was the Futian li 符天暦 (Calendar which Tallies with Heaven) by Cao 
Shiwei 曹士蒍 (d.u.). The Xin Wudai shi 新五代史 (58.670), a history of the five post-​
Tang regimes compiled in 1053, records that during the Jianzhong 建中 (780–​783) era, 
Cao Shiwei compiled the Futian li, but that it only circulated among commoners. Cao 
Shiwei sometime thereafter created new material to accommodate Rāhu and Ketu (the 
ascending node of the Moon and, in this context specifically, the lunar apogee both 
treated as pseudo-​planets, although Ketu is normally the descending node of the moon). 
The reason for this was most likely an interest in astrology (Momo 1975: 14–​15; Kotyk 
2017c: 42–​43). Although the Futian li is not extant, Takesako (2016) has reconstructed 
its parameters based on available data from other sources. Also, the ephemerides in 
the Qiyao rangzai jue appear to be derived from the Futian li, based on their epochs 
(Yabuuchi 1982: 5–​6; Kotyk 2017c: 42–​43).
The Futian li is significant to Sukuyōdō because this was primarily the calendar which 
they employed, as already emphasized by Momo (1975: 17). The Futian li appears in

--- PAGE 311 ---
286      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
the Nihonkoku genzai sho mokuroku 日本國見在書目錄, titled Tō shichiyō futenreki 
唐七曜符天曆 (National Diet Library ed., 33). This bibliography of texts available in 
Japan was compiled by Fujiwara Sukeyo 藤原佐世 (847–​898) in c.891. The Futian li was 
therefore available in Japan sometime before 891, although it is uncertain who brought 
this edition and when (Momo 1969: 397). The first known Japanese expert to work with 
the Futian li was the monk Nichi’en 日延 (fl. 953–​957) of Tendai. Nichi’en left for China 
in 953, where he arrived in Wuyue 吳越 and studied the Futian li. He then brought 
this back in 957. He was also responsible for transporting Tiantai texts from Japan that 
had earlier been lost in China.12 His trip is documented in a text Daizaifu jinja bunsho 
大宰府神社文書, which was identified by Takeuchi Rizō 竹内理三 (1907–​1997) in 1954 
at Dazaifu Jinja 大宰府神社 in Kyushu (Takeuchi 1955; Momo 1969).
The aforementioned texts dealing with astrology and calendrical science were nec­
essary for the casting of horoscopes. Sukuyōdō was the exclusive lineage in Japan to 
offer this service. As Momo and Yamashita have explored, the primary sources used in 
horoscopy in Japan included the aforementioned Qiyao rangzai jue and Duli yusi jing. 
The Xiuyao jing was consulted, but since it does not discuss the casting of horoscopes, it 
does not appear to have been the main work used in Sukuyōdō. It is often assumed that 
Sukuyōdō must have been based chiefly on the Xiuyao jing (Sukuyō-​kyō in Japanese).
Shūei brought back to Japan with him copies of the Qiyao rangzai jue and Duli yusi 
jing, as well as ephemerides. Shūei lists these as “miscellaneous books” (zōjo 雜書) and 
comments, “Although they are not Dharma practices, they are held as important by 
the worldly 雖非法門世者所要也” (T 2174A, 55: 1111b20–​1111c1) (Yano 2013: 160). He 
expresses a clear awareness that these texts were not designed for awakening or specif­
ically Buddhist practice, but nevertheless their utility was recognized. Shūei was not a 
known expert in astrology. Sukuyōdō and the casting of horoscopes appears later on 
in Japanese history. Toda (2007: 46) observes that the early references to Sukuyōshi 
and Sukuyōdō in the private journals of aristocrats date to around the early to mid-​
eleventh century. Yamashita (1990: 508) notes that Sukuyōshi, mainly from Kōfukuji 
興福寺, became particularly active among the aristocracy starting from the late tenth 
century.
There are only two extant horoscopes with accompanying commentary from me­
dieval Japan, which were produced for clients born in the years 1113 and 1268, respec­
tively. These documents are titled Sukuyō unmei kanroku 宿曜運命勘錄 and Sukuyō 
go-​unroku 宿曜御運錄. Momo (1990: 131–​151) reproduced these in his volume on ca­
lendrical science but earlier had published a study on them (Momo 1975). The Sukuyō 
unmei kanroku was reproduced in the Zoku gunshoruijū 續群書類從 of the twentieth 
century, but it is beset with typographical errors and Momo’s critical edition is preferred. 
Yano (2013: 188–​197) and Kotyk (2018d: 59–​70) also discuss these horoscopes in detail 
and point out the astrological doctrines which were originally Hellenistic in origin. 
The scientific value of the 1113 horoscope was pointed out by Nakayama (1969: 60). The 
Japanese horoscopes can be further compared to a horoscope from Dunhuang (P. 4071) 
to better grasp how horoscopy was employed in East Asia. The main difference between 
Japanese and Chinese forms of horoscopy from this general period is that the Japanese

--- PAGE 312 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      287
 
used nine planets (the seven visible planets, Rāhu and Ketu), while the Chinese used 
eleven: the aforementioned nine plus Ziqi 紫氣 and Yuebei 月孛.13 These two, like Rāhu 
and Ketu, are immaterial “planets” used for astrological purposes. Ziqi tracks interca­
lary months while Yuebei is the lunar apogee (Kotyk 2018d: 71–​79).
These three extant horoscopes all discuss birth charts with an interest in predicting the 
future of the client in question. Various astrological doctrines are employed toward this 
end. However, the Japanese practice of horoscopy was not limited to prognostication. 
The horoscope of 1113 lists off the asterisms presiding over the chart in various capacities 
and then states, “Prayers and offerings should be constantly made 常可令祈供” (Momo 
1990: 134). This reveals that astrology was connected to a belief in sentient astral deities 
but also that fate could be negotiated through ritual means. Astral magic was clearly 
utilized alongside horoscopy.
Yamashita (1990: 488) observes that the Mikkyō interest in calendrical science 
around the mid-​tenth century stemmed from a move toward stellar worship. Yamashita 
(1996: 307–​308) also argues that increasing engagement in star worship was a response 
to the failing Ritsuryō 律令 (i.e., statist legal) system. This, in turn, led to uncertainties 
for both the ruling aristocracy and the Tennō (Emperor). There was another important 
catalyst which helps explain the development of Sukuyōdō. As Yiengpruksawan (2015) 
has pointed out, the Japanese (and the rest of the world) on May 1, 1006 witnessed one 
of the largest supernovae in history (SN 1006). This subsequently facilitated major cul­
tural and sociopolitical changes. It was within such circumstances that professional 
astrologers would have been especially important, especially if they could offer ritual 
services. Sukuyōdō was active throughout the Kamakura period (1185–​1333). Toda 
(2006, 2007, 2008) and Akazawa (2007) have explored Sukuyōdō and its evolution in 
this period. Sukuyōdō and the associated practice of horoscopy ceased to exist in Japan 
toward the late fourteenth to early fifteenth centuries, which is explained by the demise 
of their patrons (Yamashita 1996: 319–​368).
Astral Iconography
The production of illustrated icons of planets and asterisms were an element of star wor­
ship in Japan. One prominent example is a painting of Saturn (Doyō 土曜) as a single 
deity, held at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. Saturn is depicted as 
an old bearded Brahmin in sandals and a few layers of robes with a bull’s head for a 
cap (see fig. 12.2). This object dates to the twelfth century. Saturn holds a crook, the top 
part of which resembles a sickle, not unlike traditional depictions of Kronos in Greco-​
Roman antiquity. He holds a text in the other hand. This icon appears to be based on a 
set of Chinese drawings of the planets in anthropomorphic forms, which were devel­
oped based on earlier models. The document Kuyōtō zuzō 九曜等圖像, “Icons of the 
Nine Planets, etc.” held at Tōji (reproduced in TZ vol. 7: 737–​747) includes these figures. 
Saturn and the other planets are similarly depicted in Tangut Xixia representations from

--- PAGE 313 ---
288      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
Khara-​Khoto held in the State Hermitage Museum of St. Petersburg (for a survey, see 
Samosyuk 1997/​1998).
Another form of star worship, which was uniquely developed in Japan, was star 
mandalas (hoshi mandara 星曼荼羅), in which the planets, lunar stations, zodiac signs, 
seven stars of the North Dipper (hokuto 北斗), and/​or thirty-​six beasts (sanjūroku kin 
三十六禽) are depicted. These mandalas were either rectangular or circular in form. 
Aruga (2000: 32) notes that the rectangular originate in Tōmitsu (Shingon) between 947 
and 957, while the circular stem from Tendai between the late tenth and early eleventh 
Figure 12.2.  Iconographic drawing of Saturn (Doyō). 12th century, Japanese. NYC 
Metropolitan Museum of Art (1975.268.15). The Harry G. C. Packard Collection of Asian Art, Gift 
of Harry G. C. Packard, and Purchase, Fletcher, Rogers, Harris Brisbane Dick, and Louis V. Bell 
Funds, Joseph Pulitzer Bequest, and The Annenberg Fund Inc. Gift, 1975. https://​www.metmus​
eum.org/​art/​col​lect​ion/​sea​rch/​45617

--- PAGE 314 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      289
 
centuries. The foremost study on these is a monograph written by Takeda (1995). Ujiro 
(2012) discusses this form of mandala with particular reference to the examples of the 
Big Dipper. The Metropolitan Museum of Art possesses a circular star mandala (2020: 
391), which was studied by Kotyk (2019c) who argues that based on the irregular config­
uration of planets relative to the zodiac signs that this reflects a horoscope which would 
date to around October 3, 1225, but not all specimens reflect this type of configuration 
and instead simply represent the totality of asterisms (see fig. 12.3 for an example of the 
latter). This would presumably be the time of birth for the patron who commissioned 
the piece. The reason for this configuration was likely to facilitate rituals on behalf of 
the client. Kotyk furthermore points out that the lunar stations depicted therein are the 
Vedic deities (Śiva, Viṣṇu, etc.) traditionally associated with the nakṣatras.
The various astral figures became part of the core of Buddhist iconography in Japan. 
The Butsuzō zui 佛像圖彙 (Collected Buddhist Icons) by Tosa Hidenobu 土佐秀信, 
which was printed in 1690, includes all the asterisms, but caution must be exercised since 
the depictions of the lunar stations ought to be compared to those of the Goma rodan yō 
(Chn. Humo lutan yang 護摩爐壇樣; Fire Altar Specifications for the Homa). This text 
was brought to Japan by the monk Jōgyō 常曉 (d. 867) in 839. It contains a diverse array 
of information including astrological lore (Kotyk 2018e: 14–​16). The illustrations of the 
lunar stations and planets are also important iconographical examples of astral deities, 
with the former being based on Vedic deities (Aruga 2000: 50; Kotyk 2019c).
Later Developments
Although a robust and sizable practice of horoscopy with large texts continued to 
exist in China, none of the works from the Yuan and Ming periods seem to have been 
brought to Japan until the early modern period. Nevertheless, Sinological studies 
can gain much from comparing Chinese and Japanese materials, especially since the 
Japanese faithfully preserved much material—​textual and iconographical—​that was 
otherwise lost in China.14
In modern Japan, there is a popular tradition of astrology called Sukuyō, which is 
based largely on the Xiuyao jing. Following the printed editions of the Xiuyao jing by 
Wakita Bunshō (1897) and Wakahara Yukitsune (1908), there were published various 
explanatory manuals that often also touch on other divinatory practices. For example, 
Wakita Aiyama 脇田愛山 (1915) published Nijū-​hachi shuku kikkyō hōkan: katei 
nichiyō 廿八宿吉凶寳鑑: 家庭日用 (Precious Mirror on the Fortunes of the Twenty-​
Eight Lunar Stations: Daily Household Use). The postwar popular tradition of Sukuyō 
seems to have especially flourished after Komine Yumiko 小峰有美子 published in 
1982 a manual titled Sukuyō kyō nijūshichi suku senseihō 宿曜經二十七宿占星法 
(Divination Techniques for the Twenty-​Seven Lunar Stations of the Xiuyao jing). This 
was followed by a number of other books on the topic by different authors. These were 
published for popular consumption. These authors often trace their art back to Kūkai

--- PAGE 315 ---
290      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
Figure 12.3.  Rectangular star mandala. Undated. Wellcome Collection. Wellcome Library no. 
47129i. https://​wel​lcom​ecol​lect​ion.org/​works/​zs4v9​qzz

--- PAGE 316 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      291
 
and identify with Sukuyōdō, but their practice does not appear to be endorsed by 
Mikkyō lineages. There are no anthropological studies that document modern Sukuyō, 
although it is a noteworthy movement. Sukuyō has also grown on the internet where it 
has a significant presence.
Conclusion
The survey in this chapter has shown the significance of astronomy, astrology, calen­
drical science, and astral magic in the history of premodern Japanese Buddhism, in 
particular Mikkyō, which comes under the umbrella of “Tantric Buddhism” in schol­
arly discourse. Buddhists in India from early on incorporated into their practice some 
amount of native astral lore, which at the time was based on the nakṣatras. Later, as 
Indian astronomy was influenced by Hellenistic sources, Buddhists also adopted the 
zodiac signs and planets, both of which are unattested in early Buddhist literature. 
Following the advent of practices based on mantras or dhāraṇīs, Buddhists in India, 
perhaps following a wider trend, also came to view astrology as an essential component 
in the timing of their rituals.
Astrological lore originating from Indian sources was translated into Chinese in 
various stages from at least the fourth century ce, but it was only with Amoghavajra’s 
Xiuyao jing that the Chinese Buddhist world had access to an authoritative manual 
in Chinese that could be used for timing Buddhist rituals. Unlike earlier models of 
Buddhist practice, the new “tantric model” expressly required observance of astrology 
to determine when it was optimal to carry out the pūjas necessary for rapid awakening. 
The Xiuyao jing, in turn, spurred wider interest in other forms of astrology, especially 
horoscopy, and from this the gates opened to non-​Indian systems. Horoscopy inevi­
tably predicts calamities in a person’s life; hence there was clearly a contemporary in­
terest in any sort of ritual or magical means with which one could avert the disasters 
brought about by the planets.
Japanese monks in the ninth century who sought training in esoteric practices 
brought back with them texts such as the Xiuyao jing, but also other materials related 
to ritual practices directed at asterisms. The Sinicized systems of foreign astrology were 
transmitted to Japan and thereafter implemented relatively quickly, starting from at 
least the time of Kūkai in 806 when he returned to Japan. Astrology in this context also 
included the seven-​day week.
The texts and illustrations related to astrology became foundational for later Japanese 
developments, such as star mandalas, which were used in acts of worship, and extended 
rituals for astral deities, such as Tejaprabhā. The planets as members of the Buddhist 
pantheon also came to have a prominent role in Japan in large part due to astrology. 
In the late tenth century, we see the emergence in Japan of Sukuyōdō, a unique com­
munity of astrologer-​monks, who not only cast horoscopes for their clients but also 
offered guidance on the ritual means with which one could negotiate prognosticated

--- PAGE 317 ---
292      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
fate. Astrology, practiced in both Sukuyōdō and Mikkyō, became a prominent art 
throughout the Heian and Kamakura periods. These developments during the medieval 
period are still relevant today in Japan, although research is required regarding how, for 
example, astral deities are worshipped in modern Mikkyō, and how astrology is treated 
in practice in Shingon and Tendai today.
Abbreviations
DZ	
Daozang 道藏. Beijing: Wenwu Chuban, 1986.
T	
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 大正新脩大藏経. 100 vols. Takakusu Junjirō 高楠順次郎 
and Watanabe Kaigyoku 渡辺海旭 et al., eds. Tokyo: Taishō Issaikyō Kankōkai, 
1924–​1934. Digitized in CBETA (v. 5.2) and SAT Daizōkyō Text Database. (http://​
21dzk.l.u-​tokyo.ac.jp/​SAT/​satdb2​015.php).
TZ	
Taishō zuzō 大正圖像. 12 vols. Takakusu Junjirō 高楠順次郎 and Ono Genmyō 
小野玄妙, eds. Tokyo: Daizō Shuppan Kabushiki Kaisha, 1932–​1934. Digitized in SAT 
Taishōzō Image DB (http://​dzki​mgs.l.u-​tokyo.ac.jp/​SATi/​ima​ges.php).
Z	
Zoku gunshoruijū 續群書類從. 37 vols. Hanawa Hokiichi 塙保己一, ed. Tokyo: Zoku 
Gunshoruijū Kanseikai, 1923–​1943.
Notes
	1.	 The Kaiyuan Shijiao lu 開元釋教錄 (Bibliography of Buddhism in the Kaiyuan Era) of 730 
records that in Huanglong 2 (黃龍二年), Lü Yan translated four texts, which included the 
Mātaṅga-​sūtra, in the city of Yangdu 楊都 (T 2154, 55: 487c21–​487c22).
	2.	 For a study on the identification and uses of dairy products in East Asian Buddhism, see 
Kotyk 2021d.
	3.	 For a comprehensive survey of Buddhist cosmology, see Sadakata 1997. For a discussion of 
the celestial deities in relation to flat-​earth cosmology in Buddhism, see Kotyk 2021a. For 
further discussion of Chinese Buddhism and astronomy, see Kotyk 2020a.
	4.	 See E-​Museum Japan, accessed June 30, 2021. http://​emus​eum.nich.go.jp/​det​ail?lan​gId=​
ja&webV​iew=​&cont​ent_​base​_​id=​100​034&cont​ent_​part​_​id=​0&cont​ent_​pict​_​id=​0.
	5.	 See also comparable icons in Taizō kuzuyō 胎藏舊圖樣 (TZ vol. 2: 477–​566).
	6.	 Bodleian Library MS. Bodl. Or. 133. University of Oxford.
	7.	 Read shou 手 as zhi 之.
	8.	 This theory might explain the discrepancies between some regnal years in the Kojiki 古事記 
(compiled in 712) and Nihon shoki. Tanisaki argues that the compilers of these two histories 
likely struggled with converting over the earlier calendrical dates into a new model, fol­
lowing the introduction of foreign calendrical models, particularly starting from the Asuka 
Period (592–​710). This was a time when the Japanese court moved increasingly toward a 
Sinicized form of centralized government.
	9.	 See numerous encyclopedias available on https://​kotob​ank.jp/​.

--- PAGE 318 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      293
 
	10.	 Dairy products were available in Japan from the seventh century but appear to have 
vanished around the late Heian period. Buddhist rituals can call for the use of butter, milk, 
yogurt, and ghee, for which substitutes were used when dairy was unavailable. See Kotyk 
(2021d: 6).
	11.	 Momo (1964), Yamashita (1988), Kanechiku (1999), Toda (2006), Ujiro (2012), and 
Akazawa (2007) have specifically written on the history of Sukuyōdō in Japanese. Kotyk 
(2018d) was the first comprehensive study of Sukuyōdō in English. These studies ad­
dress the lineage development, practice of astrology, and rituals carried out by Sukuyōshi. 
Sukuyōdō has been mischaracterized in the past. Drakakis (2011, 684), for instance, claims 
that “Sukuyōdō intermingled with the already existing forms of Chinese astrology based 
on yin-​yang and five-​agents doctrines, but also with Daoist thought and practices. It is in 
this form that this complex of doctrines and practices was transmitted to Japan, where 
it was further developed.” A survey of the extant literature of Sukuyōdō would demon­
strate that there is little in the way of Chinese metaphysics or patently Daoist elements in 
their texts.
	12.	 For discussion of these Tiantai texts, see Momo (1968), Brose (2006: 53–​56), and Kotyk 
(2020c: 374–​375).
	13.	 For discussion of the Dunhuang horoscope, see studies by Jao (1984), Niu (2016), Isahaya 
and Lin (2017), and Kotyk (2018e: 79–​81).
	14.	 Horoscopy in China evolved, but to a large extent remained rooted in the doctrines that 
were introduced during the Tang period, many of which were also carried over to Japan. 
Reconstructing the horoscopy of the Tang period requires reference to both Japanese and 
later Ming sources. At the same time, grasping the doctrines employed in Japan requires 
reference to the extant Chinese sources in detail. For a survey of the history of horoscopy 
and its doctrines in Classical Chinese, see Kotyk 2018e. For an overview of astrology in the 
Ming period with a comparison to European, particularly English, horoscopy, see Kotyk 
2019a. For a survey of medical astrology in Classical Chinese, see Kotyk 2019b.
Further Reading
Barton, Tamsyn S. 1994. Ancient astrology. London: Routledge.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2017. “ Buddhist astrology and astral magic in the Tang Dynasty.” Ph.D. diss., 
Leiden University.
Orzech, Charles D., and James H. Sanford. 2000. “Worship of the ladies of the dipper.” In 
Tantra in practice, edited by David Gordon White, 383–​95. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
References
Primary Sources
Asaba shō 阿娑縛抄. TZ vol. 8: 743–​1106; vol. 9: 1–​946.
Beidou qixing humo fa 北斗七星護摩法. T 1310.
Byakuhō kushō 白寶口抄. TZ vol. 6: 343–​516; vol. 7: 1–​384.
Chishengguang daweide xiaozai jixiang tuoluoni jing 熾盛光大威德消災吉祥陀羅尼經. T 963.

--- PAGE 319 ---
294      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
Dari jing 大日經. T 848.
Dari jing shu 大日經疏. T 1796.
Da shengmiao jixiang pusa shuo chuzai jiaoling falun 大聖妙吉祥菩薩說除災教令法輪. T 966.
Engi shiki 延喜式. Waseda Library (ワ03_​01594). https://​arch​ive.wul.was​eda.ac.jp/​kosho/​
wa03/​wa0​3_​01​594/​.
Fantian huoluo jiuyao 梵天火羅九曜. T 1311.
Genji monogatari 源氏物語. 5 vols. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1958–​63.
Go shōrai mokuroku 御請來目錄. T 2161.
Goma rodan yō 護摩爐壇樣. TZ vol. 7: 816–​41.
Gyōrin shō 行林抄. T 2409.
Hino’o kuketsu 檜尾口訣. T 2465.
Hishō mondō 祕鈔問答. T 2536.
Kaiyuan Shijiao lu 開元釋教錄. T 2154.
Kōya Daishi go kōden 高野大師御廣傳. Z 8-​2: 607–​66.
Kuyō hiryaku 九曜秘曆. TZ vol. 7: 769–​73. See also copy by Sōkan 宗觀 (1125). The Metropolian 
Museum of Art, New York. Item# 1975.268.4. https://​www.metmus​eum.org/​art/​col​lect​ion/​
sea​rch/​45616.
Kuyōtō zuzō 九曜等圖像 TZ vol. 7: 737–​47.
Mahāsaṃnipāta (Dafangdeng daji jing 大方等大集經). T 397.
Modengjia jing 摩登伽經 (Mātaṅga-​sūtra). T 1300.
Nichū reki 二中歴. 13 fasc. Handwritten manuscript. National Diet Library (#830–​35).
Nihon biku Enchin nittō guhō mokuroku 日本比丘圓珍入唐求法目錄. T 2172.
Nihonkoku genzai sho mokuroku 日本國見在書目錄. by Fujiwara Sukeyo 藤原佐世. 
Manuscript from Tenpō 天保6 (1835). National Diet Library (025.22-​N685-​H).
Nihon shoki 日本書紀. 2 vols. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1965–​67.
Nittō gu shōkyō mokuroku 入唐新求聖教目錄. T 2167.
Nittō guhō junrei kōki入唐求法巡禮行記. CBETA B18, no. 95.
Qiyao xingchen bie xingfa 七曜星辰別行法. T 1309.
Shetoujian Taizi ershiba xiu jing 舍頭諫太子二十八宿經 (Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna). T 1301.
Shin shosha shōrai hōmon-​tō mokuroku 新書寫請來法門等目錄. T 2174A.
Sho ajari shingon mikkyō burui sōroku 諸阿闍梨真言密教部類總錄. T 2176.
Sukuyō go-​unroku 宿曜御運錄. Reproduced in Momo (1990, 142–​51).
Sukuyō unmei kanroku 宿曜運命勘錄. Z 31-​1: 429–​38. Reproduced in Momo (1990, 131–​42).
Taizō zuzō 胎藏圖象. TZ vol. 2: 191–​328.
Taizō kuzuyō 胎藏舊圖樣. TZ vol. 2: 477–​566.
Wamyō ruiju shō 倭名類聚抄. Print from 1617. National Diet Library of Japan (WA7-​102).
Xin Tang shu 新唐書. 20 vols. Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1975.
Xin Wudai shi 新五代史. 3 vols. Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju, 1974.
Xiuyao jing 宿曜經. T 1299.
Xiuyao yigui 宿曜儀軌. T 1304.
Secondary Sources
Akazawa Haruhito. 赤澤春彦. 2007. “Kamakura-​ki no sukuyōshi—​chōtei, bakufu, kuge buke 
shakai to sukuyōshi” 鎌倉期の宿曜師-​-​朝廷,幕府,公家・武家社会と宿曜師. Chūō 
Daigaku Daigakuin kenkyū nenhō 中央大学大学院研究年報 37: 1001–​20.

--- PAGE 320 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      295
 
Aruga Takumi. 有賀匠. 2000. “Hoshi mandara to Myōken Bosatsu no zuzōgaku-​teki kenkyū” 
星曼荼羅と妙見菩薩の図像学的研究. Mikkyō bunka 密教文化 204: 25–​63.
Brose, Benjamin. 2006. “Crossing thousands of li of waves: The return of China’s lost Tiantai 
texts.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 29, no. 1: 21–​62.
Chavannes, Édouard, and Paul Pelliot. 1913. “Un traité manichéen retrouvé en Chine.” Journal 
Asiatique 11, no. I: 99–​394.
Cullen, Christopher. 2011. “Understanding the planets in Ancient China: Prediction and divi­
nation in the Wu Xing Zhan.” Early Science and Medicine 16, no. 3: 218–​51.
Drakakis, Athanasios. 2011. “Onmyōdō and esoteric Buddhism.” In Esoteric Buddhism and the 
Tantras of East Asia, edited by Charles D., Henrik Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, 683–​90. 
Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Falk, Harry. 2018. “The Early Use of Nakṣatras.” In The Interactions of Ancient Astral Science, 
edited by David Brown, 527–​32. Bremen: Hempen Verlag.
Gansten, Martin. 2011. “Astrologers.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Hinduism, vol. III, edited by Knut 
A. Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha Narayanan, 217–​21. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Goto, Akira. 2021. Cultural astronomy of the Japanese Archipelago: Exploring the Japanese 
skyscape. London: Routledge.
Hayashiya Tomojirō. 林屋友次郎. 1945. Iyaku kyōrui no kenkyū 異譯經類の研究. Tokyo: 
Tōyō bunko.
Hodge, Stephen. 2003. The Mahā-​Vairocana-​Abhisaṃbodhi tantra with Buddhaguhya’s com­
mentary. New York: RoutledgeCurzon.
Isahaya Yoichi, and Lin Jyuh Fuh. 2017. “Entangled representation of Heaven: A Chinese div­
ination text from a tenth-​century Dunhuang fragment (P. 4071).” Historia Scientiarum 26, 
no. 3: 153–​71.
Ishida Mikinosuke. 石田幹之助. 1950. “Tori-​isshi-​kyō to sono itsubun” 都利聿斯經とその
佚文. In Tōyō ronsō: Haneda Hakushi shōju kinen 東洋史論叢: 羽田博士頌壽記念, 49–​62. 
Kyoto: Tōyōshi kenkyūkai.
Jao Tsung-​i. 饒宗頤. 1984. “Lun Qiyao Yu Shiyiyao” 論七曜與十一曜. In Xuantang jilin 
選堂集林, 771–​93. Taipei: Mingwen shuju.
Kalinowski, Marc. 2004. “Chengxing lingtai biyao jing 秤星靈臺袐要經.” In The Taoist Canon: 
A historical companion to the Daozang, vol. 1, edited by Kristofer Schipper and Franciscus 
Verellen, 337–​38. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kanechiku Nobuyuki. 兼築信行. 1999. “Chinyo to sono seikei” 珍誉とその世系. 
Kokubungaku kenkyū 国文学研究 129: 34–​46.
Kano Kazuo. 2015. “Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. I, edited 
by Jonathan A. Silk, 382–​89. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Komine, Yumiko. 1982. 小峰有美子. Sukuyō kyō nijūshichi suku senseihō 宿曜經二十七宿占
星法. Tokyo: Tōyō Shoin.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2019a. “Chinese and English horoscopy in the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries: The astrological doctrines of the Twelve Houses and Lot of Fortune in Xingxue 
dacheng 星學大成 by Wan Minying 萬民英 (1521–​1603) and Christian astrology by William 
Lilly (1602–​1681).” Brill’s International Journal of Divination & Prognostication 1: 3–​35.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2019b. “Indo-​Iranian and Islamicate sources of astrological medicine in me­
dieval China.” Asian Medicine: Journal of the International Association for the Study of 
Traditional Asian Medicine 14, no. 1: 30–​55.

--- PAGE 321 ---
296      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2019c. “Research note on Brahmanical deities in Mikkyō astrological art.” 
Journal of Asian Humanities at Kyushu University 4: 101–​08.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2019d. “Tejaprabhā.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, volume II  : Lives, edited 
by Jonathan A. Silk, 612–​15. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2019e. “Yixing.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, volume II  : Lives, edited by 
Jonathan A. Silk, 800–​05. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2018a. “Astrological determinism in Indian Buddhism.” Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 41: 145–​67.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2018b. “Buddhist astrology.” In Astrology through history: Interpreting the stars 
from Ancient Mesopotamia to the present, edited by William Burns, 61–​66. Santa Barbara, 
CA: ABC-​Clio.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2018c. “Early tantric hemerology in Chinese Buddhism: Timing of rituals ac­
cording to Śubhakarasiṃha and Yixing.” Canadian Journal of Buddhist Studies 13: 1–​29.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2018d. “Japanese Buddhist astrology and astral magic: Mikkyō and Sukuyōdō.” 
Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 45, no. 1: 37–​86.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2018e. “The Sinicization of Indo-​Iranian astrology in Medieval China.” Sino-​
Platonic Papers 282: 1–​95.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2018f. “Yixing and Pseudo-​Yixing: A misunderstood astronomer-​monk.” 
Journal of Chinese Buddhist Studies 31: 1–​37.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2017a. “Astrological iconography of planetary deities in Tang China: Near 
Eastern and Indian icons in Chinese Buddhism.” Journal of Chinese Buddhist Studies 
30: 33–​88.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2017b. “Can monks practice astrology? Astrology and the Vinaya in China.” 
In Rules of engagement: Medieval traditions of Buddhist Monastic regulation, edited by 
Susan Andrews, Jinhua Chen, and Cuilan Liu, 503–​17. Hamburg, Germany: Hamburg 
University Press.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2017c. “Iranian elements in Late-​Tang Buddhist astrology.” Asia Major 30, no. 
1: 25–​58.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2020a. “The Chinese Buddhist approach to science: The Case of astronomy and 
calendars.” Journal of Dharma Studies: Philosophy, Theology, Ethics, and Culture 3, no. 2: 
273–​89.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2020b. “On the identification and use of ānxī-​xiāng 安息香/​安悉香/​安西香 in 
medieval China.” In Quaderni di Studi Indo-​Mediterranei XII: A cent’anni da Sino-​Iranica: 
Tra Oriente ed Occidente, scambi di cultura materiale ed ideale, edited by Ephraim Nissan, 
519–​26. Milan, Italy: Mimemsis Edizioni.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2020c. “The medieval Chinese vision of Japan: Buddhist perspectives in the 
Tang and Song periods.” Studies in Chinese Religions 6, no. 4: 360–​85.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2021a. “Celestial deities in the flat-​earth Buddhist cosmos and astrology.” In 
Intersections of religion and astronomy, edited by Chris Corbally, Darry Dinell, and Aaron 
Ricker, 36–​43. New York: Routledge.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2021b. “Horoscopy in Tang Daoist astrology.” In Time in Daoist practice: 
Cultivation and calculation, edited by Livia Kohn, 84–​102. St. Petersburg, FL: Three 
Pines Press.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2021c. “Kanyaku Abidaruma ni okeru uchūron to Sukuyōkyō” 
漢訳アビダルマにおける宇宙論と『宿曜経』[Cosmology in Abhidharma litera­
ture in Chinese translation and the Xiuyao jing]. Taihō zasshi 対法雑誌 (The Journal of 
Abhidharma Studies) 2: 99–​106.

--- PAGE 322 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      297
 
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2021d. “Milk, yogurt and butter in Medieval East Asia: Dairy products from 
China to Japan in medicine and buddhism.” Religions 12, no. 5/​302: 1–​11.
Laufer, Berthold. 1919. Sino-​Iranica: Chinese contributions to the history of civilization in Ancient 
Iran, with special reference to the history of cultivated plants and products (Field Museum 
of Natural History, Publication 201, Anthropological Series, Vol. XV, No. 3). Chicago: Field 
Museum of Natural History.
Liao Yang. 廖暘. 2003. “Chishengguang Fo zaikao 熾盛光佛再考.” Yishu shi yanjiu藝術史研究 
5: 329–​69.
Mak, Bill M. 2018. “The Buddhist transmission of Grahamātṛkādhāraṇī and other planetary 
astral texts.” Pacific World: Third Series 20: 223–​56.
Mak, Bill M. 2015. “The transmission of astral science from India to East Asia: The Central 
Asian connection.” Historia Scientiarum 24, no. 2: 59–​75.
Mak, Bill M. 2014. “Yusi Jing—​A treatise of ‘Western’ astral science in Chinese and its versified 
version Xitian yusi jing.” SCIAMVS 15: 105–​69.
Mollier, Christine. 2008. Buddhism and Taoism face to face: Scripture, ritual, and iconographic 
exchange in medieval China. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Momo Hiroyuki. 桃裕行. 1990. “Sukuyō kanmon shū” 宿曜勘文集. In Momo Hiroyuki 
chosakushū 桃裕行著作集, vol. 8–​2, Rekihō no kenkyū 暦法の研究, edited by Tsuchida 
Naoshige 土田直鎮, 131–​62. Kyoto, Japan: Shibunkaku.
Momo Hiroyuki. 桃裕行. 1975. “Sukuyō-​dō to sukuyō kanmon” 宿曜道と宿曜勘文. Risshō 
shigaku 立正史学 39: 1–​20.
Momo Hiroyuki. 桃裕行. 1969. “Nichi’en no Futen reki seirai” 日延の符天暦齎来. In Ritsuryō 
kokka to kizoku shakai 律令国家と貴族社会, edited by Takeuchi Rizō 竹内理三, 395–​420. 
Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kōbunkan.
Momo 
Hiroyuki. 
桃裕行. 
1968. 
“Nichi’en 
no 
Tendai 
kyōseki 
no 
sōchi” 
日延の天台教籍の送致. In Taigai kankei to shakai keizai: Mori Katsumi hakushi kanreki 
kinen ronbun shū 対外関係と社会経済: 森克己博士還暦記念論文集, edited by Mori 
Katsumi 森克己, 101–​13. Tokyo: Hanawa Shobō.
Momo Hiroyuki. 桃裕行. 1964. “Futenreki ni tsuite” 符天暦について. Kagakushi kenkyū 
科學史硏究 71: 118–​19.
Nakano, 
Genzō. 
中野玄三. 
1969. 
“Kanchiin 
shozō 
Kuyō 
hiryaku 
ni 
tsuite” 
觀智院所藏九曜秘曆について. Tōkyō Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan kenkyūshi 東京國立s博
物館研究誌 218: 13–​24.
Nakayama, Shigeru. 1969. A history of Japanese astronomy: Chinese background and Western 
impact. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nanjio, Bunyiu. 1883. A Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist Tripitaka: The 
Sacred Canon of the Buddhists in China and Japan. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Niu, Weixing. 2016. “On the Dunhuang Manuscript P.4071: A case study on the Sinicization of 
Western horoscope in late 10th century China.” In The circulation of astronomical knowledge 
in the Ancient World, edited by John M. Steele, 527–​58. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Omidsalar, Mahmoud. 2000. “Genie.” Iranica Online. Accessed April 14, 2022. https://​www.
iranic​aonl​ine.org/​artic​les/​genie-​.
Osabe, Kazuo. 長部和雄. 1963. Ichigyō Zenji no kenkyū一行禪師の研究. Kobe, Japan: Kōbe 
Shōka Daigaku Keizai Kenkyūsho.
Panaino, Antonio. 2015. “Cosmologies and astrology.” In The Wiley Blackwell companion to zo­
roastrianism, edited by Michael Strausberg and Yuhan Sohrab-​Dinshaw Vevaina, 235–​57. 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.

--- PAGE 323 ---
298      Jeffrey Kotyk
 
Pankenier, David. 2014. “Did Babylonian astrology influence early Chinese astral prognostica­
tion Xing Zhan Shu 星占術?” Early China 37, no. 1: 1–​13.
Pingree, David. 1992. “Hellenophilia versus the history of science.” ISIS 83, no. 4: 554–​563.
Pingree, David. 1997. From astral omens to astrology: From Babylon to Bīkāner. Rome: Ist 
Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Sadakata, Akira. 1997. Buddhist cosmology: Philosophy and origins. Tokyo: Kōsei.
Samosyuk, Kira. 1997/​1998. “The planet cult in the Tangut State of Xi Xia: The Khara Khoto 
collection, State Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg.” Silk Road Art and Archaeology 5: 
353–​68.
Somekawa, Eisuke. 染川英輔. 2013. Mandara zuten 曼荼羅圖典. Tokyo: Daihōrinkaku.
Sørensen, Henrik H. 2011. “Central divinities in the esoteric Buddhist pantheon in China.” 
In Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras of East Asia, edited by Charles D. Orzech, Henrik 
Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, 90–​132. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Takada Yoshihito. 高田義人. 1992. “Rekike Kamo-​shi no keisei.” 暦家賀茂氏の形成. 
Kokushigaku 国史学 147: 33–​62.
Takeda, Kazuaki. 武田和昭. 1995. Hoshi mandara no kenkyū 星曼荼羅の研究. Kyoto, Japan: 
Hōzōkan.
Takesako, Shinobu. 竹迫忍. 2016. “Futen rekihō no fukugen” 符天暦法の復元. Sūgakushi 
kenkyū 数学史研究 223: 1–​33
Takeuchi, Rizō. 竹内理三. 1955. “Nyū Goetsu sō Nichi’en den” 入吳越僧日延伝. Nihon rekishi 
日本歷史 82: 58–​63.
Tanisaki, Toshiyuki. 谷崎俊之. 2016. “Wajin no koyomi wo sagaru: sūji kara yomitoku rekishi 
no nazo” 倭人の暦を探る: 数字から読み解く歴史の謎. Sūgaku seminā 数学セミナー 
55, no. 7: 1–​9.
Toda, Yusuke. 戸田雄介. 2006. “Sukuyō-​dō no inseiki: Chinga to Kyōsan wo chūshin ni” 
宿曜道の院政期: 珍賀と慶算を中心に. Bukkyō Daigaku daigakuin kiyō 34: 27–​40.
Toda, Yusuke. 戸田雄介. 2007. “Kamakura bakufu no sukuyō-​shi: toku ni chinyo ni tsuite” 
鎌倉幕府の宿曜師: 特に珍誉について. Bukkyō Daigaku daigakuin kiyō 35: 45–​59.
Toda, Yusuke. 戸田雄介. 2008. “Sukuyō-​dō saiki ni tsuite no ichi kōsatsu: Hokuto hon haiku 
to hokuto hō” 宿曜道祭祀についての一考察: 北斗本拝供と北斗法. Bukkyō Daigaku 
daigakuin kiyō 36: 33–​48.
Ujiro, Takafumi. 宇代貴文. 2012. “Enkeishiki hokuto mandara kō: Kōzan-​ji zō Sukuyō 
senmon shō wo megutte” 円形式北斗曼荼羅考: 高山寺蔵『宿曜占文抄』をめぐって. 
Bijutsushi ronshū 美術史論集 12: 91–​120.
Wakahara Yukitsune. 若原敬經. 1908. Shukuyō-​kyō uranai shinden 宿曜經占真傳. Kyoto, 
Japan: Kichūdō.
Wakita, Aiyama. 脇田愛山. 1915. Nijū hachi shuku kikkyō hōkan: katei nichiyō 
廿八宿吉凶寳鑑: 家庭日用. Osaka, Japan: Kishida Shoten.
Wakita Bunshō. 脇田文紹. 1897. Sukuyō-​kyō shukusatsu 宿曜經縮刷. 2 vols. Nagoya, Japan: 
Wakita Bunshō.
Wilkinson, Endymion. 2000. Chinese history: A manual, revised and enlarged. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Yabuuchi Kiyoshi. 藪內清. 1982. “Tō Sō Shii no Futenreki ni tsuite” 唐曹士蔿の符天曆について. 
Biburia Tenri Toshokan hō ビブリア 天理圖書館報 78: 2–​18.
Yamada Kentarō. 山田憲太郎. 1976. Tōa kōryo-​shi kenkyū 東亜香料史研究. Tokyo: Chūō 
kōron bijutsu shuppan.

--- PAGE 324 ---
Astrology and Astral Magic in Tantric Japan      299
 
Yamashita Katsuaki. 山下克明. 1996. Heian jidai no shūkyō bunka to onyō-​dō 
平安時代の宗教文化と陰陽道. Tokyo: Iwata Shoin.
Yamashita Katsuaki. 山下克明. 1990. “Sukuyō-​dō no keisei to tenkai” 宿曜道の形成と展開. 
In Kōki sekkan jidaishi no kenkyū 後期摂関時代史の研究, edited by Yamashita Katsuaki, 
481–​527. Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kōbunkan.
Yamashita Katsuaki. 山下克明. 1988. “Heian jidai ni okeru mikkyō seishinku no seiritsu to 
dōkyō” 平安時代における密教星辰供の成立と道教. Nihonshi kenkyū 日本史研究 
312: 37–​61.
Yiengpruksawan, Mimi. 2015. “Environment, contingency, and improvisation at the Heian 
court in the time of the Supernova.” Conference paper. Ecologies, Aesthetics and Histories 
of Art I, Kunshistorisches Institut in Florenz, Max-​Planck-​Institut, Florence, December.
Yano, Michio. 矢野道雄. 2013. Mikkyō senseijutsu: Sukuyōdō to Indo senseijutsu 密教占星術: 
宿曜道 とインド占星術. Tokyo: Tōyōshoin. Revised and expanded from 1986 work.
Yano, Michio. 2004. “Planet worship in Ancient India.” In Studies in the history of the exact sci­
ences in Honour of David Pingree, edited by Charles Burnett, Jan P. Hogendijk, Kim Plofker, 
and Yano Michio, 331–​48. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Zenba Makoto. 善波周. 1968. “Sukuyōkyō no kenkyū” 宿曜經の研究. Bukkyō daigaku 
daigakuin kenkyū kiyō 佛教大學大學院研究紀要 1: 29–​52.
Zenba Makoto. 善波周. 1957. “Daishū-​kyō no tenmon kiji—​sono seiritsu mondai ni kanren 
shite” 大集經の天文記事—​その成立問題に關連して. Nihon Bukkyōgakkai nenpō 
日本佛教學會年報 22: 101–​16.
Zenba 
Makoto. 
善波周. 
1952. 
“Matōga 
gyō 
no 
tenmonrekisū 
ni 
tsuite” 
摩登伽經の天文曆數について. In Tōyōgaku ronsō: Konishi, Takahata, Maeda san kyōju 
shōju kinen 東洋學論叢：小西高畠前田三教授頌壽記念, edited by Konishi Son’yū 
小西存祐, Takahata Kanga 高畠寬我, and Maeda Chōzui 前田聽瑞, 171–​214. Kyoto, Japan: 
Heirakuji shoten.

--- PAGE 325 ---


--- PAGE 326 ---
Chapter 13
Tantric Dimensions 
of Alchemy
Patricia Sauthoff
Introduction
In approximately the seventh century CE, Sanskrit medical, religious, and yoga texts 
began to make unambiguous references to mercury as an ingestible or topical agent 
which, when applied correctly, cured the timira eye disease, removed freckles, and 
was an ingredient in rejuvenative tonics (Wujastyk 2013, 18). Traditionally, mercury 
has been considered to have an even longer history with references to rasa in both the 
Carakasaṃhitā (first century CE) and Suśrutasaṃhitā (third century CE) as a substance 
that cures all diseases (Wujastyk 2013, 17). However, in Sanskrit, rasa can also refer to the 
sap or juice of plants, liquids or fluids, liquors, sugar cane, or various minerals or metals 
among its myriad definitions. The twelfth-​century commentator on the Suśrutasaṃhitā, 
Ḍalhaṇa, interprets rasa in this case to be mercury (Wujastyk 2013, 17) but there is no 
other evidence for medicinal usage of mercury at such an early stage of Āyurvedic de­
velopment. Further, there have been no local sources identified for Indian mercury, 
indicating that it was likely imported (Rapp 2009, 16).
Assuming then that mercury was introduced to India during the seventh century CE, 
its introduction occurs around the same time as the beginnings of tantric literary pro­
duction. Like medicinal uses of mercury, dubious efforts have been made to trace tan­
tric traditions to early periods, including the time of the Buddha and ancient Hindu 
sages and even as far back as the first settlements of humans in the Indus Valley (Gray 
2016, 1). The earliest references to tantric practitioners, called Pāśupatas, occur around 
the second century CE. The kāpālikas, skull-​bearing Śaiva tantric practitioners who en­
gaged in charnel ground rituals, first appear in the Prakrit poem Gāthāsaptaśati, written 
between the third and fifth century CE (Dyczkowski 1988, 26). A 423 CE stone inscrip­
tion from Gaṅgdhār describes tantras as ritual teachings as well as acknowledging the 
female ḍākinīs and mātṛs (Gray 2016, 7) which inhabit so much of the tantric world.

--- PAGE 327 ---
302      Patricia Sauthoff
 
A seventh-​century CE reference to a tantric practitioner suffering from the use of im­
properly purified mercury by the author and playwright Bāṇabhaṭṭa in his Kādambarī 
(White 1996, 49) reaffirms the dating of the introduction of mercury to India and 
demonstrates its early connection with tantra and tantric practitioners.
This chapter focuses almost exclusively on the alchemical tradition called rasaśāstra 
as it appears in Sanskrit literature. Tibetan and Indian vernacular traditions also in­
clude alchemical references, but the connections between these traditions and the 
Sanskrit corpus of rasaśāstra literature remain to date largely unexplored. Rasaśāstra 
in the Sanskrit tradition has itself long been underexamined. Of the nearly forty works 
Meulenbeld examines in his encyclopedic History of Indian Medical Literature (2000, 
583–​738), none have been critically edited and translated. Until this work has begun, 
cross-​cultural and cross-​language connections will remain elusive.
Defining Rasaśāstra
Though references in Sanskrit to medicinal ingestion of mercury date to the seventh 
century CE, rasaśāstra literature as works by alchemists on alchemy for alchemists ap­
pear beginning with the Rasahṛdayatantra, in approximately the tenth century (Sauthoff 
and Wujastyk 2021). This coincides with the development of the later Kaula tantric tradi­
tion, which deemphasized charnel ground practice, replacing it instead with a focus on 
eroticism, the attainment of supernatural powers through yoga, and initiatory practices 
(Sauthoff 2019, 1). These texts, especially Abhinavagupta’s Tantrāloka, pay minimal at­
tention to the long tradition of tantric medicine. From approximately the sixth cen­
tury on, Bhūta, Bāla, and Gāruḍa tantras focus on the treatment of a variety of illnesses 
ranging from demonic possession, pediatrics and childhood possession, and snakebites 
(Slouber 2016, 8–​9). These works utilize a combination of herbal and ritual treatments to 
provide medical cures. The ninth-​century Bhairava tantra, the Netra tantra (see White, 
this volume), does not offer herbal recipes but describes the use of mantra, mandala, 
and meditation to imbue medicines with healing power (Sauthoff 2022, 118). Scholars 
often focus on the philosophical developments of tantra but ignore its lasting influence 
in medicoreligion. Enter rasaśāstra, whose early works adopt the language of the tan­
tric Kaula, especially in their understanding and use of mantra as required for alchem­
ical success in mercurial operations, aurifaction (the transmutation of base metals into 
gold), and an increase in the effectiveness of plant and mineral medicines (Roşu 1986, 
251) At the center of worship we find Rasabhairava and Rasāṅkuśā, developed from the 
tantric deities Svacchandabhairava and Tripurasundarī (Sanderson 2014, 34).
The Rasārṇava (eleventh or twelfth century) places knowledge of mercury above all 
other learning, saying:
Excavational knowledge [that allows one to cross the ocean of poverty] is the lowest, 
portal knowledge [that uses mantras ritual to unlock seals to subterranean worlds],

--- PAGE 328 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      303
 
the middle. Mantric knowledge is highest and mercurial knowledge (rasavāda) 
the highest. Through knowledge of mantra, tantra, and rasayoga, transgressions 
disperse. Having destroyed all hells, one collects virtue. Knowledge of mercury 
(rasavidyā) is the highest knowledge in the three worlds, and very difficult to obtain 
because it produces enjoyment (bhukti) and liberation (mukti). Therefore, by joining 
these qualities, it gives [these results].
(RArṇ 1.44–​46)
The Rasārṇava also designates itself the highest and most difficult to obtain tantra be­
cause it teaches one to attain perfection and gives both enjoyment and liberation (RArṇ 
1.57). In addition to teaching the worship of the rasaliṅga, the text also uses the tantric 
archetypal model of a dialogue between Śiva and Pārvatī. At the beginning of the work, 
Pārvatī praises Bhairava (Śiva) as “leader of the Kaula, Mahākaula, and Siddhakaula, etc. 
lineages” (RArṇ 1.4), making a clear connection between tantra and alchemy.
Mercury as Sexual Fluid
Rasaśāstra texts present themselves as a largely indigenous tradition, including al­
most no references to non-​Sanskrit or even nonalchemical Sanskrit works, but it would 
be foolish to believe that there were no outside influences. The thirteen-​ to fifteenth-​
century Rasasāra (RS 9.2) explicitly states that the processes for coloring mercurial 
products (raṅgākṛṣṭi or raṅgadruti) were taught to the author by Tibetan Buddhists 
(Meulenbeld 2000, 690, 692). This and the translation of numerous Sanskrit works into 
Tibetan indicate a strong exchange of ideas and techniques.
There has been little scholarly work exploring the connections between Indian and 
Chinese alchemical traditions. The Chinese tradition of external alchemy (waidan), which 
deals with the creation of elixirs of immortality and includes mercurial recipes, predates 
rasaśāstra by centuries (Pregadio 2008, 1002–​1004). However, there is no textual evidence 
found thus far that indicates a direct transmission of mercurial knowledge from China to 
India. Further, waidan focuses largely on mineral and metal ingredients, while rasaśāstra 
relies heavily on the botanical knowledge found in Āyurveda. One major philosophical 
difference between the Chinese and Indian approaches presents itself: the connections be­
tween mercury, sulfur, and sexual fluids. In China, mercury is associated with menstrual 
blood and sulfur with semen. As a substance that dissolves and softens the mercurial fem­
inine, Yin is considered to have the physical properties of mercury while the sulfuric mas­
culine Yang dries and hardens (Svoboda and Lade 1995, 146). Conversely, in rasaśāstra, 
mercury helps a user produce semen when properly purified and is associated with the 
semen of Śiva, while purified sulfur cleanses blood and works to regulate menstruation 
and therefore is connected to the menses of the goddess (Svoboda and Lade 1995, 146; 
White 1996, 191, 193–​194). Further, cinnabar or mercuric sulfide is a divine manifestation 
of the sexual union between god and goddess in mineral form (White 1996, 194).

--- PAGE 329 ---
304      Patricia Sauthoff
 
In the Rasārṇava (Rarṇ) and Rasaratnasamucchaya (RRS) we find a mythological ac­
count of the birth of Skanda that teaches of the gods drinking mercury to attain immor­
tality. Fearful that humans too would use the substance for the same aims, Śiva makes 
mercury impure and therefore incapable of producing immortality. These texts also 
describe menstrual blood mixed with nectar (amṛta), which can be used in the calci­
nation and purification of mercury (White 1996, 192–​193). These gendered notions of 
substances continue in the practice of alchemy where a female assistant is required for 
mercurial operations.
Where the male alchemist must have attributes such as knowledge of mantras, 
bravery, devotion to Śiva and the Goddess, and patience (RRS 6.3–​4), the female alche­
mist is chosen for her physical attributes. She must have curly black [pubic] hair and 
lotus eyes and must be young, beautiful, and endowed with large, heavy breasts. Her 
vulva must appear like the leaf of the sacred fig tree. Furthermore, she should men­
struate in the waning half of the lunar month. If such a woman is unavailable, another 
woman, who too must be young and beautiful, may act as a substitute after she has been 
fed a mixture of sulfur and ghee each morning for three weeks (RRS 6.33–​37). Women 
are partners and assistants in ritual rather than core participants (Bose 2010, 138). As in 
tantra, women do participate directly in alchemical processes. As the mother/​wife/​as­
sistant, alchemy becomes part of the woman’s domestic life.
This archetypal female-​bodied alchemist participant (kālinī) has the attributes of the 
tantric goddesses. Her very real menstrual blood is both alchemical ingredient and al­
chemical product. She must possess the ideal goddess body. If that body is not deemed 
up to standard, she must ingest an unpleasant concoction of the mineral sulfur mixed 
with a stomach-​soothing dairy, here ghee.1
The text implies that this woman is postpubescent. Her breasts and pubic hair are full 
and she menstruates with regularity. The leaf-​like symmetry of her yoni is reminiscent of 
the tantric view of yoni as the mouth of the yoginī (yoginīvaktra). Where the vulva of the 
Kula yoginī offers knowledge during the initiation process (White 2003, 106) the kālinī’s 
vulva produces a tangible substance to be used in alchemical processes. Both tantra and 
rasaśāstra recognize the mystical power of the feminine as both woman and mother 
(Bose 2010, 70). The creative power of the feminine is harnessed through the inclusion 
of female sexual fluids in alchemical recipes.
Hatley has identified seven types of tantric sexual practices: love magic, desire fulfill­
ment, ritualized coitus, the tantric feast, initiatory coitus, sexual yoga, and individual 
sexual practice (2018, 196–​199). Of these seven, love magic and individual sexual prac­
tice are most prominent in rasaśāstra literature. Love magic involves ritual practices 
meant to attract (ākarṣaṇa) or subjugate (vaśīkaraṇa) a sexual partner while individual 
sexual practice involves the retention, collection, or elimination of sexual fluids.
Many alchemical works feature medical sections devoted to the suppression of ejac­
ulation (śukrastambha or vīryastambha) and the production of virility (vājīkaraṇa), 
including aphrodisiacs. These recipes often appear in chapters of their own or 
intermingled with prescriptions for women’s health, such as causing or preventing 
pregnancy, the removal of pubic hair, firming the breasts, and reducing menstrual

--- PAGE 330 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      305
 
pain (Sauthoff forthcoming). Some of the works that include virility recipes are from 
the fifteenth-​century Rasaratnākara (Rasāyanakhaṇḍa chapters six and seven) and 
Rasasaṃkelakalika (chapter four), sixteenth-​century Rasamañjarī (­chapter 9), six­
teenth-​ or seventeenth-​century Rasaprakāṡasudhākara (chapters twelve and thirteen), 
seventeenth-​century Rasaratnasamucchaya (chapter twenty seven), and eighteenth-​
century Rasendrasārasaṃgraha (chapter five).
Gender and Gems
Diamonds appear widely in the rasaśāstra corpus. When used in medicine, the 
diamond’s gender must conform to the gender of the user. The sixteenth-​ or seventeenth-​
century Rasaprakāśasudhākara (RPSudh) describes three subtypes: male (puṃvajra), 
female (strīvajra), and a third gender (napuṃsakavajra), which is described both as 
third or neuter (tṛtīya) and ṣaṇḍha: a person who does not neatly fit into the male/​fe­
male dichotomy.2 These gendered properties (guṇa) appear in all gems but are most 
notable in the diamond (RPSudh 7.20). The puṃ diamond is one that has eight edges 
and six angles and resembles a rainbow. Its eight surfaces are radiant, are beautiful, and 
contain no faults (RPSudh 7.23). The strī diamond is round, flat-​surfaced, and rough 
(RPSudh 7.24ab). Finally, the napuṃsaka diamond has blunt angles and lacks roundness 
(RPSudh 7.24cd).
The Six Acts
Recipes for the subjugation of women range from medical to mantric. The wide variety 
of methods can be found in the sixteenth-​century Rasamañjarī. While Meulenbeld 
describes the ninth chapter as one that “describes subjects usually dealt with in Tantric 
treatises about ṣaṭkarman”3 (1999, 637), only subjugation (vaśīkaraṇa) appears. The 
text gives recipes to “make a woman like a slave at night,” which include smearing 
ingredients such as honey, rock salt, camphor, quicksilver, saffron, and gold on the 
penis; preparations for either the man’s or the woman’s food, with sandalwood, valerian, 
long pepper, and tamarind; and bathing a woman’s genitals with embolic myrobalan 
after reciting a mantra seven times (RMañj 9.31–​38). Here we also find recipes for the 
aversion (dveṣa) of female sexual pleasure. These recipes call for ingredients such as the 
dust stirred by a donkey mixed with corpse ash and menstrual blood or simply the dust 
of two fighting dogs (RMañj 9.40–​43).
While the Rasamañjarī does not include most of the so-​called six acts (ṣaṭkarman), 
the fifteenth-​century Rasaratnākara does. In its Siddhakhaṇḍa (sometimes called 
Mantrakhaṇḍa) section, we find chapters on (1) the subjugation (vaśīkaraṇa) of all 
creatures, kings, women, and husbands; (2) attraction (ākarṣaṇa) and immobilization

--- PAGE 331 ---
306      Patricia Sauthoff
 
(stambhana) including of fire and water; and (3) delusion or bewildering (mohana), 
eradication (uccāṭaṇa), and killing (māraṇa) as well as causing illness (vyādhikaraṇa), 
impotence (ṣaṇḍhakaraṇa), sealing the vagina (bhagabandhana), and averting evil from 
the house (gṛhakleśanivāraṇa). Further chapters provide prescriptions for (4) conjuring 
(kautūhala), (5) acquiring a yakṣiṇī (yakṣiṇīsādhana), (6) invisibility (adṛśya) and the 
acquisition of magic shoes (pādukāsādhana), and (7) raising the dead (mṛtasaṃjīvana). 
Unfortunately, this section has not been critically edited and exists only in manuscript 
form, transmitted independently from the remainder of the text (Wujastyk 1984, 74). 
However, when compiling the Siddhakhaṇḍa, its author Nityanātha took many of its 
passages from the tenth-​century Śaiva Kakṣapuṭa, ascribed to Nāgārjuna Siddha 
(Wujastyk 1984, 75).
In the Kakṣapuṭa, we find a man who worships various yakṣiṇīs through mantric reci­
tation (japa) and offers various plants, honey, clarified butter, and milk to the goddesses 
who then gives the worshipper whatever he wishes (Yamano 2014 102–​103). In addition to 
granting him all his desires, the yakṣiṇīs also reward gifts of soups and mantras with food, 
long life, wealth, health, a serene mind, supernatural powers, a youthful appearance, im­
mortality, speech, revitalization of the dead, and good fortune (Yamano 2014, 103–​117).
Dealing with Death
The Kakṣapuṭa’s nineteenth chapter focuses on raising the dead (mṛtasaṃjīvana), 
knowing the time of death (kālajñāna), and cheating death (kālavañca sometimes 
also called mṛtyuvañcana or conquering death mṛtyuñjaya). Hindu tantras such as the 
Kubjikāmatatantra (Goudriaan 1983, 94–​96) and Mālinīvijayottaratantra, the Bhairava 
tantras, such as the Svacchandatantra and Netratantras (Sauthoff 2022, 10, 112, 129, 186 
n.50), and Buddhist tantras such as the Mṛtyuvañcanopadeśa, Mṛtasugatiniyojana, and 
Siddhisaṃbhavanidi (Yamano 2014, 25) include sections on each of these outcomes. In 
each of these works, one attempts to conquer death in order to attain liberation (mokṣa). 
As Yamano notes, the Kakṣapuṭa is interested only in worldly gains, making the aims 
of resuscitating, estimating the time of death, and cheating death a medical rather than 
spiritual treatment (2014, 26).4 It calls for the use of sage-​leaf alangium oil (aṅkola) and 
guḍūcī, common ingredients in both Āyurveda and rasaśāstra (Yamano 2014, 27).
In order to revive the dead, and in the Kakṣapuṭa (KS) this means one who has died 
from disease or snakebite, one must worship a liṅga that he ties to the aṅkola tree and 
recite the aghora mantra for three hours each day and night. He then fills a pot that is 
also tied to the tree with ripe fruit and worships it with perfume, flawless flowers, and 
other substances. He then places seeds smeared with borax into a wide-​mouthed clay 
pot made by a woman. The vessel is then placed upside-​down into a copper bowl and 
put to rest in the sunshine. Finally, he puts .55g (a half māṣa) of the prepared oil and the 
same amount of sesame oil into the nose of the corpse (KS 19.1–​9) In a second recipe,

--- PAGE 332 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      307
 
one mingles human semen and mercury with an equal part of the prepared oil to imme­
diately bring the corpse back to life (19.10).
That the Kakṣapuṭa contains both mantra and mercurial medicine is not surprising 
considering its connection to both the earlier or contemporary tantras mentioned above. 
In its first chapter, the Kakṣapuṭa lists several works that inspired it, including the tantric 
Svacchandatantra, Amṛteśvaratantra (also called Netratantra or Mṛteśvaratantra), and 
Gāruḍatantras, the rasaśāstra text the Rasārṇava, and the Vedic Atharvaveda, among 
others (KS 1.9). The mercury or quicksilver used in the resuscitating recipe would likely 
have gone through the purification process.
The tenth-​century Rasahṛdayatantra (RHT 2.1–​2; Meulenbeld 2000, 616–​621) 
describes in detail the first eight steps in the process of purifying mercury and lists ten 
more that lead to immortality.
	
1.	 Steaming (svedana)
	
2.	 Trituration (mardana)
	
3.	 Thickening (mūrchā)
	
4.	 Rising (utthāpana)
	
5.	 Letting fall (pātana)
	
6.	 Reviving (nirodha)
	
7.	 Fixing (niyamana)
	
8.	 Stimulating (dīpana)
	
9.	 Consumption of mica (gaganagrāsparamāṇa)
	 10.	 Amalgamation (cāraṇa)
	
11.	 Internal liquefaction (garbhadruti)
	
12.	 External liquefaction (bāhyadruti)
	
13.	 Calcination (jāraṇa)
	
14.	 Dyeing (rāga)
	
15.	 Blending (sāraṇa)
	
16.	 Penetration (krāmaṇa)
	
17.	 Transmutation (vedha)
	
18.	 Becoming fit for internal use (bhakṣaṇa)
Such purification is mythologically important because, as the story goes, during a long 
session of lovemaking with Pārvatī, Śiva spilled his semen (mercury) on the earth, 
causing its pollution. (White 1996, 281).
Because the Kakṣapuṭa directly references the Rasārṇava, we must question the 
dating of both. Yamano dates the Kakṣapuṭa to sometime around the tenth century 
(2015, 80). If this is correct, it moves up the date of the Rasārṇava from the widely ac­
cepted eleventh or twelfth centuries (Meulenbeld 2000, 685). However, many passages 
from the Rasārṇava are directly taken from earlier texts, such as the Aṣṭāṅgasaṃgraha 
and paraphrased in the Rasahṛdayatantra (White 1996, 149). White concludes, and I 
agree, that this provides evidence of an orally transmitted tradition of rasaśāstra and

--- PAGE 333 ---
308      Patricia Sauthoff
 
the use of common source materials (White 1996, 149). Perhaps Nāgārjuna Siddha 
encountered this early Rasārṇava as it was in the process of being composed.
To return to the use of mercury, we find references to mercury that has undergone 
various processes throughout early rasaśāstra literature leading to an immortal body or 
liberation while alive (jīvanmukti) (RHT 1.3, 1.15; RRS 1.42–​59; RArṇ 1.7–​17).
Aphrodisiacs
Aphrodisiacs have a long history in Indian medicine. The first-​century BCE to second-​
century CE Carakasaṃhitā’s sixth section, called Cikitsāsthāna (the section on 
therapeutics), contains a wide range of information on aphrodisiacs. The Cikitsāsthāna’s 
second chapter focuses its four parts on aphrodisiacs (vājīkaraṇa). First, it praises 
aphrodisiacs and describes the most attractive types of women. Second, it offers 
formulations involving substances of animal origin and a variety of aphrodisiac recipes. 
The third part gives recipes for nonanimal substances (excluding milk). Finally, the 
fourth section provides recipes and information on aphrodisiacs and improved sexual 
vigor in men (Meulenbeld 2000, 53–​54). Here we learn that one should use aphrodisiacs 
regularly as they are not just for sexual pleasure but also to bring virtue, wealth, fame, 
and sons (CS.Ci.2.1.3). Further, the best aphrodisiac is a beautiful, young, auspiciously 
featured, submissive woman (CS.Ci.2.1.4–​7). These recipes are for aphrodisiacs to be 
used solely by men in order to ensure their sexual excitement and prevent loss of erec­
tion or premature ejaculation. Typical ingredients include sugar, black gram, milk, 
ghee, bird and buffalo meats, eggs, the semen of various animals (sparrows, swans, 
roosters, peacocks, tortoises, and crocodiles), rice, and dozens of plants (CS.Ci.2.1.38–​
53, CS.Ci.2.2.3–​32, CS.Ci.2.3.3–​31, CS.Ci.2.4.3–​53).
Similarly, the Cikitsāsthāna portion of the Suśrutasaṃhitā, which was likely compiled 
over several centuries and finalized around the seventh century CE (Meulenbeld 2000, 
342–​344), also contains a chapter on aphrodisiacs. Again, we find both animal and 
plant materials used to produce virility in men. The third-​century CE Kamasūtra also 
deals with the subjugation of women and aphrodisiacs (KS 7.1.25–​51), again with similar 
ingredients. Other Ayurvedic works such as the early seventh-​century CE (Wujastyk 
2013, 18) Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayasaṃhitā Śārīsthāna 3.65–​67, and Uttarasthāna 40 contain 
references to sexual potency (vājīkaraṇa) recipes. Here again we find plants such as the 
pipal and shatavari, mixed with milk and ghee. Though the word does have an unam­
biguous reference to mercury (rasendra) and contains what is likely the first reference 
to the internal use of mercury (pārada) in rejuvenation therapy (AHS Uttarasthāna 
39.161) (Wujastyk 2013, 18), its chapter on aphrodisiacs uses the term rasa in its familiar 
meaning of “juice” or “sap.”
The fifteenth-​century Rasaratnākara’s Rasāyanakhaṇḍa’s chapters six and seven 
offer comprehensive recipes for mercurial and nonmercurial aphrodisiacs. The

--- PAGE 334 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      309
 
makaradhvaja recipe calls for a mixture of diamond, copper, mercury, mica, iron, and 
ashes cooked in a glass bottle buried in sand mixed with aloe and semal tree juice for 
three days. The sediment that remains after cooking is then boiled with kali musli, dia­
mond, copper, and milk for a day. Once crushed in a mortar, the concoction is steeped 
in a bhūdhara yantra, an apparatus in which a drum-​shaped container or crucible is 
buried in sand or clay and heated from above (Hellwig 2009, 74–​76). After a night of 
steeping, one then adds ground white sugar and indigo to the mix, eating one maṣa 
(approximately 1 gram). A man then drinks 1/​2 a pala (approximately 20 grams) of 
long pepper, kali musli, licorice, velvet bean, white sugar, and ghee in order to delight 
1,001 women who do not go astray (RRĀ RasKh 6.2–​6). Other recipes call for the use of 
red lotus petal and cannabis root with seeds (madanodaya), goat meat and sesame oil 
(madaneśvara), and calcinated talc (kāmakalā). (RRĀ RasKh 6.7–​21). Each aphrodisiac 
is meant to increase virility, delight many women, increase sexual desire and enjoy­
ment, and make a man like Kāmadeva. Save for one, called ratikāma, the aphrodisiacs 
appear to be specifically used by men. Here, at the beginning of a woman’s menstru­
ation, mercury that has been calcinated twelve times to be ash is crushed with equal 
parts oxidized copper, silver, and sulfur for a day. This is then combined with white 
sugar, honey, ghee, and gold, mixed with milk, and drunk to urge a woman’s pleasure 
(RRĀ RasKh 6.26cd–​28ab).
Aphrodisiacs found their way outside tantra and rasaśāstra in kāma literature, such 
as the fifteen-​ or sixteenth-​century Anaṅga Raṅga. Compiled for the Muslim court, this 
Sanskrit work presents simple recipes for eight aphrodisiacs. Though none use mercury, 
we do find a recipe that includes the powders of iron oxide, the three myrobalans, and 
licorice mixed with honey and ghee. Taken daily at sunset, a man “will be able to con­
quer the woman in the duel of love” (Ray 1964, 131). Where the text does utilize mer­
cury, it tends to do so externally rather than internally, such as several recipes to quicken 
the female orgasm and inhibit ejaculation. In such recipes, we lose our alchemical 
apparatuses and detailed instructions, which are replaced with simple recipes such as 
“If some rectified mercury be pounded with the juice of Jati (Jasminum Graniflorum) 
flower and applied into the yoni of a woman she will attain orgasm very quickly” (Ray 
1964, 123) or “The man who cohabits with a woman, having smeared his liṅga with a 
paste prepared of equal parts camphor, borax, and rectified mercury mixed with honey, 
can effect her orgasm within a very short time” (Ray 1964, 123).
Certainly aphrodisiacs are not tantric on their own and predate the religious devel­
opment of tantric ideas. However, the use of transgressive substances such as meat hint 
at tantric influence. Further, practices such as vajrolīmudrā, in which a male practi­
tioner draws up the sexual fluids through the urethra to attain control over ejaculation 
(Mallinson 2013, 7–​10), highlight the importance of the virile tantric hero, and ritualized 
tantric sex called “the sword’s edge observance” (asidhārāvrata, āsidhāraṃ, vratam, 
khaḍgadhārāvrata) in which the male practitioner experiences various temptations 
without completing the sexual act (Hatley 2016, 4) indicates some of the wide variety of 
tantric sexual practices that could benefit from alchemical aphrodisiacs.

--- PAGE 335 ---
310      Patricia Sauthoff
 
Alchemical Pediatrics
The treatment of children within tantric and alchemical medicine focuses on protection 
from a variety of female demons (rākṣasī, yoginīs, etc.) rather than through medicinal 
remedies. One of the earliest instances appears in the Buddhist Mekhalādhāraṇī, dating 
to approximately the first half of the seventh century (Slouber 2016, 36). In this so far un­
edited manuscript, we find the story of Buddha recounting a spell to ward off demonic 
possession to protect his son from female demons (Slouber 2016, 36).
Illness caused by spirit possession, and the medicalization of possession, appears 
in Sanskrit literature from a very early stage. The Ṛg Veda (10.162) calls on Agni to 
hear prayers and drive evil spirits from the body. This verse focuses on illnesses of 
possession that impact embryos and a woman’s womb, demonstrating a special risk 
of possession to women and fetuses (Smith 2006, 474). As Smith notes, there are two 
primary divisions of possession: involuntary and voluntary (Smith 2006, 421). The 
former is of concern to Āyurvedic and tantric healers, while the latter focuses on 
divination. Āyurvedic texts often associate madness (unmāda) and mental illness 
(mānasikaroga) with possession. The Carakasaṃhitā teaches that diseases caused 
by moral transgressions can be treated with pacification rituals (śānta), medicines 
(auṣadha), giving (dāna), the recitation of god’s name (japa), fire sacrifice (homa), 
temple offerings (arcana), and more (Smith 2006, 473). Within the rasaśāstra corpus, 
we are not given a reason for child possession (i.e., moral transgression in a previous 
life) but, instead, the symptoms and instructions regarding which goddess one must 
appeal to for healing.
Several tantric works, including Rāvaṇa’s Bālatantra and the pre-​eleventh-​century 
Kriyākālaguṇottara, are among two works that discuss possession pediatrics clearly. 
The term bālatantra itself is often translated “midwifery” but would be better 
translated as “childhood illness” as works that focus on rites of bālatantra rarely men­
tion the process of childbirth but instead highlight medicines before and after birth. 
Unfortunately, we do not have any texts that focus solely on children’s medicine; 
rather, we find references to possession within the tantric canon, especially in the 
Bhūta and Bāla tantras. Slouber points out that the Gāruḍa Purāṇa contains a spell 
used to protect children that closely matches that of the Kriyākālaguṇottara and 
Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati (Slouber 2016 112),
The sixteenth-​century alchemical Rasamañjarī continues this tradition, citing 
Rāvaṇa’s Bālatantra. A comparison of published editions of the Bālatantra attributed 
to Rāvaṇa find a very different list of yoginīs who must be appeased. Its list does, how­
ever, closely match those found in the Kriyākālaguṇottara (Sauthoff forthcoming). The 
Rasamañjarī does not give detailed instructions on how to appease the yoginīs but in­
stead gives the name, direction of offerings, and symptoms associated with them. These 
yoginī include Nandā, Sunandā, Pūtanā, Biḍalī, Śakunī, Śuṣkāśivā, Jṛmbhakā, Acintā, 
Kāpālikā, Lipsitā, Pītalī, Bhadrakālī, Tārā, Śarvarī, and Kumārī.

--- PAGE 336 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      311
 
Tantric Mantras
We know little of the domestic life of the alchemist. He does have a temple (maṇḍapa), 
laboratory (rasaśālā), and medicinal garden (Sauthoff forthcoming). This indicates 
that he is a householder (gṛhastha) with a wife and a home. The appliances (yantra) and 
ingredients for the alchemical preparations (yoga) can be costly. He would need to live 
near enough a town or city to procure ingredients. He also needs to attract clients and 
presumably house a small library of rasaśāstra instruction manuals. However, he also 
needs to be distant enough from a city—​or wealthy enough to have a large plot within 
a city—​to have a tract of land on which to build and work. The processes of alchemy 
are time-​consuming: ingredients churned for days on end, continually roasted over a 
flame, accompanied by the repetition of mantras. He is more holy man pharmacist than 
doctor. He has been initiated and must know the mantras.
Rituals related to medicine hold an ambiguous position in modern ayurveda and 
rasaśāstra. On the one hand, Indian-​published English-​language textbooks and 
translations acknowledge the role of mythology and mantra within the traditional 
canon, while on the other, they minimize these elements by emphasizing and justifying 
such connections as things of the past. Take V. A. Dole’s assertion in his 2015 translation 
of the Rasaratnasamucchaya, in which he says:
As has been said time & [sic] again that Rasaśāstra used to have a religious and 
philosophical base. It is but natural that its study should start with many religious 
rituals. (245)
Rather than ignore the religious instruction within the work, Dole brushes them away 
as a historical necessity that no longer applies. In describing the placement of deities in 
the laboratory, Dole and Paranjpe say: “one need not wonder about why such a peculier 
[sic] arrangement is advocated. Because all the Ancient sciences from Indian subcon­
tinent have religion and God as their base. Rasashastra is no exception to it” (Dole and 
Paranjpe 2016, 13).
As recently as 1926, Mookerji wrote,
Personally, I consider the chemical system of Indian medicine as of divine origin. It 
is not a science in the ordinary sense of the term. It is not a collection of experien­
tial truths or inductive generalizations, based on observation and experiment. It is 
a super-​science, and, and such, is based on something higher than observation and 
experiment—​call it inspiration, revelation, or what you will.
(Mookerji 1926, ix)
Despite this assertion, within his five-​volume Rasa-​Jala-​Nidhi, Mookerji rarely 
mentions prayer, mantras, or ritual. From these brief and fleeting references, one might 
think ritual and mantra had only passing importance within precolonial medicine.

--- PAGE 337 ---
312      Patricia Sauthoff
 
In fact, rasaśāstra works include countless references to deities and rituals at all 
stages of the alchemical process. Many conform to tantric rites of initiation, deity in­
stallation, and mantric recitation. Further, many works, such as the eleventh-​century 
Bhūtiprakaraṇa of Gorakṣasaṃhitā, eleventh-​ to twelfth-​century Rasārṇava, twelfth-​ 
to thirteenth-​century Ānandakanda, fourteenth-​century Kākacaṇḍeśvarīmata, 
and fifteenth-​century Rasamañjarī present themselves as divine revelation, 
taking the form of dialogue between the Śiva and the goddess. The approximately 
twelfth-​century Rasārṇavakalpa is part of the tantric Rudrayāmalatantra while 
the Gorakṣasaṃhitā’s Kādiprakaraṇa is closely related to the Kubjikāmatatantra. 
Within these and many other Śaiva rasaśāstra works we find verses in homage to 
various gods, including those outside the Śaiva milieu such as the Tīrthaṅkaras 
(Rasādhyāya, fourteenth century). Throughout these works, tantric mantras ap­
pear frequently. Where tantric works tend to use complex encoding to reveal their 
mantras, rasaśāstra literature either refers to the mantras by name or reveals them 
in fairly straightforward ways. The exception is the Ānandakanda, a unique work 
within the rasaśāstra canon as it retains many of the oblique characteristics of tan­
tric literature while providing an encyclopedic catalogue of alchemical terminology, 
ingredients, procedures, and more.
Several works, including the Rasendracūḍāmaṇi and Rasārṇava, describe the initi­
ation process in detail. In its second chapter, the Rasendracūḍāmaṇi describes the ini­
tiand as one who knows both the text and meaning of the text. He can come from any of 
the castes, though the śūdra is only suitable for initiation if no one from the three higher 
castes is available and he comes from a good, devoted family (RCūM 2.2–​4). During 
the initiation, the initiand constructs a pavilion in a forest, Śiva temple, or auspicious 
house in which he makes an eight-​petaled lotus inside a double bhūpura and places a 
vase adorned with gold and precious stones, garlanded with flowers and wrapped in 
two pieces of cloth containing mercury, water, and rice in the middle of the lotus 
(RCūM 2.15–​19). Once he has placed the deities, whether through mantra, visualization, 
or otherwise is not made explicit, on each petal and one in the center, he receives the 
Rasabhairava and Rasāṅkuśī mantras: aiṃ hrīṃ hrūḥ rasabhairavāya namaḥ and aiṃ 
hrīṃ śrīṃ hrīṃ klīṃ rasāṅkuśāyai svāhā (Roşu 1986, 253).
We then find a third, lengthy mantra, that pays homage to Śiva while including 
the tantric mantric phonemes oṃ, hrāṃ, hrīṃ, hrūṃ, hraiṃ, hrauṃ, hraḥ, 
huṃ, and phaṭ (RCūM 2.49–​50). Finally, we have the mantra for giving mercury: 
Oṃ huṃ phaṃ phaṃ hāṃ hīṃ hūṃ thaḥ thaḥ thaḥ mahārasāya bhairavāya 
śrīrasabhairavādidaivatāya paramāmṛtarūpāya kuru kuru amukasya sarvarogān 
hara hara jarāmṛtyuṃ vināśaya vināśayaa sarvārogyābhayapradāya. This means 
“oṃ huṃ, phaṃ, phaṃ, hāṃ, hīṃ, hūṃ, thaḥ, thaḥ, thaḥ” [Act, act to take away all di­
sease, destroy old age and death. Homage to Bhairava, to Mahārasa, to Rasabhairava, 
etc., who is the supreme nectar, who gives abundant health and safety, who is victo­
rious over death, and whose nectar is mercury]. One must recite it 100,000, 50,000, 
or 25,000 times. Having accomplished this initiation, one becomes similar to Śiva in 
an instant (RCūM 2.51–​52).

--- PAGE 338 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      313
 
In its chapter on initiation, the Rasārṇava presents similar mantras:
oṃ hrīṃ krauṃ kṣlaiṃ kṣlaṃ hrīṃ hrīṃ hrīṃ hrūḥ huṃ phaṭ raseśvarāya 
mahākālabhairavāya raudrarūpāya kṛṣṇapiṅgalalocanāya | avatara avatara 
avatāraya avatāraya jalpa jalpa jalpaya jalpaya śubhāśubhaṃ kathaya kathaya 
kathāpaya kathāpaya mahārakṣāṃ kuru kuru rasasiddhiṃ dehi ||
[To quicksilver, to Mahākālabhairava, to he who has the form of Rudra, to the dark 
red eyed one. Overcome, remove, speak, tell, [what is] pure and impure, name, recite 
[the name of] Mahārakṣā. Act. Give the perfection of mercury.]
(RArṇ 98).
Texts, including the Rasārṇava, mention the importance of the aghora and 
rasāṅkuśi mantras, which the Rasaratnasamuccaya gives as oṃ hrāṃ hrīṃ hrūṃ 
adyoratara prasphuṭa prasphuṭa prakaṭa prakaṭa kaha kaha śamaya śamaya jāta 
jāta daha daha pātaya pātaya oṃ hrīṃ hraiṃ hrauṃ hrūṃ aghorāya phaṭ and oṃ 
kāmarājaśaktibījarasāṅkuśāyai ājñayā vidyāṃ rasāṅkuśām, respectively (RRS 6.38). 
The aghoramantra is especially useful here in the installation of the rasaliṅga, a special 
mercurial liṅga made by combining 3 niṣkas (36g) of thin gold sheets, 9 niṣkas (108g) 
mercury, and acidic liquid. This is then cooked in a swing apparatus (dolāyantra) for a 
day with sour gruel (?sāranāla) (RRS 6.17–​18). Viewing the rasaliṅga removes the sins 
of killing a brāhmaṇa or cows, while touching the rasaliṅga frees one from saṃsāra. 
The rasaliṅga is to be placed in the southeast and worshipped with the aghoramantra 
while one imagines an eighteen-​handed, fair, five-​headed, blue-​necked Śiva who is 
accompanied by a single-​headed, four-​handed Pārvatī who holds a string of prayer 
beads (rudrākṣa), elephant hook, and noose, and holds her hand in mudrā of protection. 
She appears like heated gold and wears yellow (RRS 6.19–​23).
The Rasaratnākara gives a much more concise, and common, version of the 
aghoramantra as aghorebhyo ‘tha ghorebhyo ghoraghoratarebhyaḥ | sarvebhyaḥ 
sarvasarvebhyo namaste ‘stu rudrarūpebhyaḥ (RRĀ Rkh 1.32), which is to be chanted 
when processing mercury. According to the Ānandakanda, reciting the aghoramantra, 
and using the associated mudrā during processing gives mercury the perfected form of 
the deity (ĀK 1:23.413–​416).
The goddess Kālī also plays an important role in therapeutics and is associated with 
longevity. The Rasārṇava gives Kālī’s mantra as: oṃ hrīṃ śrīṃ kālikā kāli mahākāli 
māṃsaśoṇitabhojini | hrīṃ hrīṃ huṃ raktakṛṣṇamukhe devi rasasiddhiṃ dadasva me | 
śrīṃ hrīṃ aiṃ ramā śaktiś ca tārākhyo mantro’yaṃ sarvasiddhidaḥ (RArṇ 14.22–​23) [O 
Kālī, O Mahākālī, O eater of flesh and blood. O she who has a dark red mouth, O Devi, 
give me mercurial perfection. Pleasure, power, and appearance of silver, this mantra 
grants all perfections].
Mantras played an important role in the production of mercurial medicines in that 
they were considered a key element to the process of purifying mercury. According to 
the mythological account given in the first chapter of the Rasaratnasamuccaya, Śiva 
resides in the Himalayas in the form of mercury in order to protect the world. Glimpsing

--- PAGE 339 ---
314      Patricia Sauthoff
 
mercury is of the same merit as the horse sacrifice (aśvamedha) or donating 100,000 
cows, 1,000 gold coins, or bathing in all the auspicious and sacred rivers. Worshipping 
mercury destroys all sins, consuming mercury destroys disease, and maligning mer­
cury sends one to the most dangerous of hells until the end of the world (RRS 1.23–​
30). Because mercury is so powerful, Śiva gave it undesirable properties so that only 
through purification can it be used to bestow wealth, health, and immortality on its user. 
The wise pharmacist is warned again and again that without proper knowledge and use 
of the mantras, not only will his medicines not work but instead they will become the 
greatest of poisons.
Yantras of the Ānandakanda
In rasaśāstra, the term yantra has two meanings. In the ĀK, yantra refers to the diagrams 
familiar in tantra. In the vast majority of the rasaśāstra corpus, yantra is the term for the 
alchemical apparatus used in the making of medicines. These yantras are jars, bottles, 
ovens, and so on. The twenty-​first chapter of the ĀK offers a description of the treatment 
room (kuṭi) as a dwelling with twelve pillars, a strong roof, and walls of brick smeared 
with plaster (ĀK 21.2–​4). The text teaches the builder to place the doors at the cardinal 
directions and to install a ten-​armed Bhairava who resembles a black cloud; has flaming 
erect hair; holds a shovel, axe, drum, hook, sword, trident, the mudrā of granting 
wishes, a serpent, and a noose; and is ringing a bell. He has curved fangs, wears serpents 
as earrings and, as sacred threads, a gold bracelet on his upper arm, and conveys fear. 
Smeared in black unguents and adorned in many garlands of beads, Bhairava destroys 
death, venom, and so on, as well as fear. (ĀK 21.12–​16). The text goes on to describe in de­
tail the iconography of various forms of Śiva along with bīja mantras such as hrīm (ĀK 
20) and the building of yantras using eight, twenty-​six, and thirty-​two petals along with 
the letters of the alphabet (ĀK 21.23cd–​25ab). These yantra and mantra combinations 
provide medical treatment for eradicating misfortune; preventing sudden death (ĀK 
21.25bc), fear, disease, venom, fainting, and annihilation (32cd); preventing fever, con­
fusion, and death (37ab); and repelling poison, death, disease (44cd), leprosy, epilepsy 
(84cd), and other diseases. The one who receives rejuvenative therapy (rasāyana) within 
the hut is treated with both medicinal and mantric remedies for a complete treatment.
Deities
Recent translations of rasaśāstra works have deemphasized the importance of deities 
in alchemical operations by omitting chapters related to the gods in translations. In his 
commentary on his 2015 translation of the Rasaratnasamuccaya, Dole explains the ini­
tial benediction to Śiva by saying, “in the culture which was prevalent throughout the

--- PAGE 340 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      315
 
Indian subcontinent from ancient times, it was an established custom to salute God in 
the beginning of any book” (Dole 2015, 1). He further states that “as has been said time & 
again that Rasaśāstra used to have a religious & philosophical base. It is but natural that 
its study should start with many religious rituals” (Dole 2015, 245), implying that it no 
longer does. To his credit, Dole does reproduce much of the work and comments on the 
mantras, benedictions, and other references to mythology.
Many early rasaśāstra texts reproduce the narrative framing so familiar to readers of 
the tantric canon: that of dialogue between god and goddess. In its first chapter, the pos­
sibly eleventh-​century Gorakṣasaṃhitā’s Bhūtiprakaraṇa section tells of Svacchanda’s 
revelation of a 25,000-​verse rasatantra. This text then inspired other gods to write 
their own rasatantras, including Śiva, whose work is abridged in the Bhūtiprakaraṇa 
(Meulenbeld 2000, 603). The Bhūtiprakaraṇa itself is a dialogue between Śrīkaṇṭha 
and Śakti and includes numerous references to the worship of Śiva and gives various 
mantras, especially in its sixth and seventh chapters. Similarly, the eleventh-​ or twelfth-​
century Rasārṇava presents a dialogue between Śiva and Pārvatī, in which Śiva is 
exhaulted as the “God among gods, great God, incinerator of time and love, and pre­
ceptor of the Kaula, Mahākaula, Siddhakaula, and etc. lineages” (RArṇ 1.4). Śiva teaches 
that a twofold yoga of mercury and breath control are parallel practices for the attain­
ment of jīvanmukti, which he associates with eternal youth, immortality of the body, 
and the attainment of Śiva (RĀ 1.8–​9, 18). Further, he explains that those who indulge 
in liquor, flesh, and sexual intercourse will make it difficult to succeed in mercurial 
sciences (RArṇ 1.24) but that those who eat cow meat and drink the nectar of immor­
tality are superior experts (RArṇ 1.26). The RArṇ teaches that alchemy surpasses the 
six philosophical systems (ṣaḍdarśana), includes many tantric deities in its list of those 
to be worshipped, and makes frequent references to kapālins and kāpālikas, though it 
is unclear whether these terms refer to the alchemist or the Kāpālika sect, or that the 
alchemist is both (Meulenbeld 2000, 684). Other works that present themselves as di­
alogue include the probably twelfth-​century Rasārṇavakalpa, which itself is part of the 
Rudrayāmalatantra, twelfth-​ or thirteenth-​century Ānandakanda, fourteenth-​century 
Kākacaṇḍeśvarīmatatantra, and fifteenth-​century Rasamañjarī.
In addition to the dialogue structure, many works on rasaśāstra contain maṅgalas 
to deities such as the arhats (RAdhy 1.1); Bhairava, Bhāratī, and Vighneśa (RAdhy 1.10); 
Harihara, Śāradā, Gaṇapati, and mercury (RPSudh 1.1-​5); Śiva (RĀm 1.1-​3; RRS 1.1; 
RSK 1.1) and Śiva and Rāma (RCūM 1.1–​2); Raseśvara (RCūḍ 1.3); Rasāṅkuśī (RCūM 
1.5); the Kaulikas and their lords Īśvara and Maheśvara (RCūḍ 1.6–​12); and Caṇḍikā and 
Candraśekhara (RRĀ Rkh 1.1).
Though rasaśāstra is overflowing with references to deities, mantras, and mandalas, 
we need not confuse them with the tantric texts they clearly find inspiration from. The 
vast majority of verses focus on the scientific and medical preparations of cures for spe­
cific ailments and not on jīvanmukti. These are works that use mythology to explain 
the genesis of naturally occurring metals, minerals, gemstones, and plants, but al­
chemical knowledge does not end there. The works demonstrate a complex and deep 
understanding of these ingredients. For example, the approximately tenth-​century

--- PAGE 341 ---
316      Patricia Sauthoff
 
Rasahṛdayatantra, often cited as the first extant work of alchemy proper (Sauthoff and 
Wujastyk 2021), spends the majority of its nineteen chapters concerned with processing 
mercury, the amalgamation of metals and minerals, the extraction of ingredients, liq­
uefaction, stabilization of mercury, and the use of processed mercury for rejuvenative 
therapies (rasāyana), and only a few verses scattered throughout on the role and wor­
ship of deities.
Alchemy in Yoga and Tantra
Tracing the tantric dimensions of alchemy within the rasaśāstra corpus is fairly easy 
as the references are straightforward. However, finding alchemy in tantra, yoga, and 
other sources is more difficult. Within rasaśāstra, the word rasa unambiguously refers 
to mercury. These works describe the attributes and usages of mercury in such a way 
that there can be no doubt that they mean the chemical element Hg. Philosophical 
works from the early haṭhayoga and tantric corpora tend to focus less on the scientific 
aspects of alchemy and more on rasa as the procreative element of Śiva and Pārvatī. 
This means that the alchemical references tend more toward metaphor than the pre­
cise scientific language of rasaśāstra. For example, the eleventh-​century haṭhayoga 
text the Amṛtasiddhi uses alchemical terminology like Great Seal (mahāmudrā), 
Great Lock (mahābhanda), and Great Piercing (mahāvedha) to describe breath and 
body practices that change and purify bodily elements through heat (Mallinson and 
Szántó 2022, 20–​21). Like the Buddhist Kālacakratantra, also composed around the 
eleventh century, in the Amṛtasiddhi, we find an internal yogic practice of medita­
tion, visualization, mantra recitation, breath control, and postural practices that lead 
to special powers and cure disease (Sauthoff and Wujastyk 2021; White 1996, 71). As 
White (1996, 71, 148) notes, the Rasārṇava shares many linguistic and subject features 
with the Kākacakratantra. However, we must not assume that early works like the 
Rasendra Maṅgala attributed to Nāgārjuna Siddha or the Rasahṛdayatantra were once 
Buddhist. Instead, we see that Buddhist, Jain, and Hindu traditions appear to have 
shared material about the procedures of alchemy, each utilizing its own preexisting 
tantric metaphors in written works.
Like their tantric forerunners, rasaśāstra texts do emphasize the need for secrecy, men­
torship, and initiation. However, unlike Greco-​Egyptian and European alchemy, which 
saw alchemists writing in coded language to avoid detection (Principe and Light 2013, 
4), the language of rasaśāstra is clear and straightforward in most cases. In a brief period 
of time the corpus—​whether cited as divine revelation (Ānandakanda, Gorakṣasaṃhitā, 
and Rasamañjarī), compendium (Rasakāmadhenu and Rasaratnasamuccaya), or in­
structional (Rasādhyāya, Rasataraṅgiṇī, and Rasendracintāmaṇi)—​came to be laid out 
in a systematic, syllabus-​like manner. The reader is introduced to the gods from whom 
they will require assistance, the mythological origins of the ingredients they will work 
with, then perhaps rules of behavior and attributes, followed by chapter upon chapter of

--- PAGE 342 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      317
 
detailed classification, usage, methods, and the results of experimentation. Some works, 
such as the Rasendracintāmaṇi and Rasasaṃketalikā offer comments from the authors 
on their own experiments or the direct teachings of their gurus.
Conclusion
From the introduction of mercury as a medicinal ingredient in the seventh century to 
the first works of rasaśāstra in the tenth, we have little written evidence of mercurial 
practices. Tantric works rarely include healing recipes, instead opting to focus on rituals 
that bring about health. Although many of these rites found their way into rasaśāstra, 
the question of how alchemy developed remains unclear. As a highly toxic substance, we 
can assume that physicians and alchemists learned to process it through shared know­
ledge. Further investigation of tantric and alchemical works across languages may help 
us to find early recipes and experiments. However, the Sanskritic propensity toward 
stripping away historical markers means cross-​linguistic comparison will likely raise as 
many questions as it answers.
As scholars discover more alchemical metaphors outside the rasaśāstra corpus, I hope 
they will also look for tantric references and teachings within alchemy. This is especially 
important within mantric studies, where tantric mantras appear without encoding with 
rasaśāstra works. Connecting these mantras to their tantric counterparts will allow us to 
look for interdependence and tantric inspiration.
Abbreviations
AHS	
Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayasaṃhitā
ĀK	
Ānandakanda
CS	
Carakasaṃhitā
CS.Ci	
Carakasaṃhitā (Cikitsāsthāna)
KS	
Kakṣapuṭa
RĀm	
Rasamitra
RArṇ	
Rasārṇava
RAdhy	
Rasādhyāya
RCūM	
Rasendracūḍāmaṇi
RHT	
Rasahṛdayatantra
RMañj	
Rasamañjarī
RPSudh	
Rasaprakāśasudhākara
RRĀ RasKh	
Rasaratnākara (Rasāyanakhaṇḍa)
RS	
Rasasāra
RRS	
Rasaratnasamucchaya

--- PAGE 343 ---
318      Patricia Sauthoff
 
Notes
	1.	 In addition to the alchemical preparation to transform a woman into a kālinī, alchem­
ical works provide recipes for women’s health, such as the easing of heavy menstruation 
(RMañj 9.25).
	2.	 I hesitate to translate ṣaṇḍha according to dictionary definitions such as “eunuch” or “her­
maphrodite” due to their outdated status in modern-​day English. Further, translating 
ṣaṇḍha as “transgender” is also misleading as the word has a very specific sociobiological 
meaning in modern medicine and society.
	3.	 The lists of ṣaṭkarman vary and can include subjugation (vaśīkaraṇa), delusion (mohana), 
attraction (ākarṣaṇa), eradication (uccāṭaṇa), immobilization (stambhana), and liquida­
tion (māraṇa) or pacification (śānti), immobilization (stambhana), eradication (uccāṭaṇa), 
sewing dissent (vidveṣaṇa), and killing (māraṇa).
	4.	 The Mṛtyuvañcanopadeṡa also contains a more medically aligned treatment though it 
focuses as well on liberation.
References
Primary Sources
Ānandakanda. 1952. Edited by S. V. Radhakrishna Sastri. Srirangam: Sri Vilasam Press. (Digital 
Corpus of Sanskrit e-​text. Input by Oliver Hellwig.)
Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayasaṃhitā of Vāgbhaṭa. n.d. (Digital Corpus of Sanskrit e-​text. Input by Oliver 
Hellwig.)
Carakasaṃhitā. 1994. Edited by J. Trikamji. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan.
Kakṣapuṭa. 2014. Edited by Chieko Yamano. “Reviving the Dead and Knowing the Time of 
Death: Chapter Nineteen of the Kakṣapuṭatantra, Introduction, Critical Edition and 
Translation.” Journal of the International College of Postgraduate Buddhist Studies 18: 23–​73.
Kakṣapuṭa. 2015. Edited by Chieko Yamano. “Mantra-​Sādhana: Chapter One of the 
Kakṣapuṭatantra, Introduction, Critical Edition and Translation.” Journal of the 
International College of Postgraduate Buddhist Studies 19: 79–​152.
Rasamañjarī of Śālinātha. 1914. Edited by Tryambaka Gurunātha Kāle. Rasamañjarī. Pune: 
Mahādeva Sakhārāma Dāte
Rasamañjarī of Śālinātha. 1927. Rasamalināñjarī-​Vaidyaka. Bombay: Gaṅgāvishṇu Śrīkṛshṇadāsa
Rasamañjarī of Śālinātha. 1995. Rasamañjarī: bhāṣāṭīkāsahita. Varanasi: Caukhambā Saṃkṛta 
Pratiṣṭhāna
Rasamañjarī of Śālinātha. 2003. Edited by Siddhinanda Miśra. Rasamañjarī: Siddhipradā 
hindīvyākhyāsahita. Varanasi: Caukhambhā Oriyaṇṭāliyā
Rasārṇava. 1910. Edited by Praphulla Chandra Ray. Calcutta: Hitavrata Chattopadhyaya. 
(Digital Corpus of Sanskrit e-​text. Input by Oliver Hellwig.)
Rasādhyāya. 1930. Edited by Rāmakṛṣṇa Śarman. Benares: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series.
Rasendracūḍāmaṇi of Somadeva. Ed. Siddhinandan Miśra. Benares: Chaukhamba Orientalia. 
1999. (Digital Corpus of Sanskrit e-​text. Input by Oliver Hellwig.)
Rasahṛdayatantra of Govindabhagavatpāda. 1989. Delhi: Chaukhambha Orientalia. (Digital 
Corpus of Sanskrit e-​text. Input by Oliver Hellwig.)

--- PAGE 344 ---
Tantric Dimensions of Alchemy      319
 
Rasaprakāśasudhākara of Yaśodhara. 1940. Edited by Jīvrām Kālidās Śāstri. Goṇḍol: Rasaśālā 
auṣadhāśram. (Digital Corpus of Sanskrit e-​text. Input by Oliver Hellwig.)
Rasaratnākara of Nitya Nātha Siddha. 1939. Edited byVaidya Jādavjī Tricumjī Ācārya. Benares: 
Caukhamba Sanskrit Office. (Digital Corpus of Sanskrit e-​text. Input by Oliver Hellwig.)
Rasaratnasamuccaya of Vāgbhaṭa. 1890. Edited by Kṛṣṇaravasarman Vinayaka Bapat. Pune. 
(Digital Corpus of Sanskrit e-​text. Input by Wieslaw Mical, Som Dev Vasudeva, Anne 
Glazier; Oliver Hellwig.)
Secondary Sources
Bose, Mandakranta. 2010. Women in the Hindu Tradition: Rules, Roles, and Exceptions. New 
York: Routledge.
Dole, Vilas. 2015. Srī Vāgbhatāchārya’s Rasaratnasamuccaya. Varanasi, India: Chowkhamba 
Press.
Dole, Vilas, and Prakash Paranjpe. 2016. A Text Book of Rasashastra. Delhi: Chaukhamba 
Sanskrit Pratishtan.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 1988. The Canon of the Saivagama and the Kubjika: Tantras of the 
Western Kaula Tradition. State University of New York Press.
Goudriaan, Teun. 1983. “Some Beliefs and Rituals Concerning Time and Death in the 
Kubjikāmata.” In Selected Studies on Ritual in the Indian Religions: Essays to D.J. Hoens, 
Vol. 45. Numen Book Series, edited by Ria Kloppenborg, 92–​117. Leiden, The Netherlands: 
Brill. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​978900​4378​643_​006
Gray, David B. 2016. “Tantra and the Tantric Traditions of Hinduism and Buddhism.” In The 
Oxford Encyclopedia of Buddhism. Ed. Richard K. Payne and Georgios T. Halkias, n.p. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. https:doi.org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.013.59
Hatley, Shaman. 2016. “Erotic Asceticism: The Razor’s Edge Observance (Asidhārāvrata) and 
the Early History of Tantric Coital Ritual.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 79, no. 2: 1–​17.
Hatley, Shaman. 2018. The Brahmayāmala or Picumata. Volume I: Chapters 1-​2, 39-​40 & 83. 
Revelation, Ritual, and Material Culture in an Early Śaiva Tantra. Pondicherrry: Ecole 
fraçaise d’Extrême-​Orient.
Hellwig, Oliver. 2009. Wörterbuch Der Mittelalterlichen Indischen Alchemie. Vol. 2. Eelde, The 
Netherlands: Barkhuis. https://​doi.org/​10.2307/​j.ctt​2272​8hs
Mallinson, James. 2013. “Yoga and Sex: What Is the Purpose of Vajrolīmudrā?” Paper presented 
at the University of Vienna, Yoga in Transformation Conference, September 20. https://​
www.acade​mia.edu/​4652​312/​Yoga_​and_​Sex_​What_​is_​the_​Purp​ose_​of_​V​ajro​līmu​drā
Mallinson, James, and Péter-Dániel Szántó. 2022. The Amṛtasiddhi and Amṛtasiddhimūla: The 
Earliest Texts of the Haṭha Yoga Tradition. Pondicherry: École Française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Meulenbeld, Gerrit Jan. 2000. A History of Indian Medical Literature. Vol. 2A. Groningen 
Oriental Studies 15. Groningen, Germany: Egbert Forsten.
Mookerji, Kaviraj Bhudeb. 1926. Rasa-​Jala-​Nidhi: Or, Ocean of Indian Chemistry & Alchemy. 
Vol. 1. Varanasi, India: Srigokul Mudranalaya.
Pregadio, Fabrizio. 2008. The Encylopedia of Taoism. New York: Routledge
Principe, Lawrence M., and Laura Light. 2013. Alchemy. New York: Les Enluminures.
Rapp, George. 2009. Archaeomineralogy. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Ray, Tridibnath. 1964. Kalyanamalia’s Ananga Ranga: The Hindu Ritual of Love. New York: 
Citadel.

--- PAGE 345 ---
320      Patricia Sauthoff
 
Roşu, Arion. 1986. “Mantra et yantra dans la médecine et l’alcheimie Indiennes.” Journal 
Asiatique 274: 203–​268.
Sanderson, Alexis G. J. S. 2014. “Śaiva Texts.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism: Vol. 6, ed­
ited by K. A. Jacobsen, H. Basu, A. Malinar, and V. Narayanan, 10–​42. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Sauthoff, Patricia. 2019. “Kaula.” In Hinduism and Tribal Religions, edited by P. Jain, R. Sherma, 
and M. Khanna, 1–​4. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Sauthoff, Patricia. 2022. Illness and Immorality: Mantra, maṇḍala, and meditation in the Netra 
Tantra. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sauthoff, Patricia. Forthcoming. “Sexual and Reproductive Health.” In Indian Alchemy: Sources 
and Contexts, edited by D. Wujastyk. Oxford University Press.
Sauthoff, Patricia, and D. Wujastyk. 2021. “Rasaśāstra: A Timeline of Sanskrit Alchemical 
Literature. Ayuryog.org.” Retrieved June 13, 2022 from http://​ayur​yog.org/​Alch​emyT​
imel​ine
Slouber, Michael. 2016. Early Tantric Medicine: Snakebite, Mantras, and Healing in the Garuda 
Tantras. New York: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Frederick. 2006. The Self Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asian Literature 
and Civilization. New York: Columbia University Press.
Svoboda, Robert, and Arnie Lade. 1995. Tao and Dharma: Chinese Medicine and Ayurveda. 
Detroit, MI: Lotus Press.
White, David Gordon. 1996. The Alchemical Body. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Contexts. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wujastyk, Dominik. 1984. “An Alchemical Ghost: The Rasaratnākara by Nāgārjuna.” Ambix 31 
(Part 2): 70–​83.
Wujastyk, Dominik. 2013. “Perfect Medicine: Mercury in Sanskrit Medical Literature.” Asian 
Medicine 8, no. 1: 15–​40. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​15734​218-​12341​278.
Yamano, Chieko. 2014. “Reviving the Dead and Knowing the Time of Death: Chapter Nineteen 
of the Kakṣapuṭatantra, Introduction, Critical Edition and Translation.” Journal of the 
International College of Postgraduate Buddhist Studies 18: 23–​73.
Yamano, Chieko. 2015. “Mantra-​Sādhana: Chapter One of the Kakṣapuṭatantra, Introduction, 
Critical Edition and Translation.” Journal of the International College of Postgraduate 
Buddhist Studies 19: 79–​152.

--- PAGE 346 ---
P a r t I I I
GENDER, 
COSMOGONY, 
EMBODIMENT, 
AND POWER

--- PAGE 347 ---


--- PAGE 348 ---
Chapter 14
Śrīvidyā and Goddess 
Traditions
A Critical Historiographic Essay
Anna A. Golovkova
Śrīvidyā as the Object of Study
Śrīvidyā is a tantric (esoteric) initiatory1 ritual system of worship, centered on 
Tripurasundarī, who is seen as the supreme goddess granting the tantric practitioner 
both liberation and enjoyment in this lifetime. The worship of Tripurasundarī has 
been practiced in South Asia since the beginning of the second millennium CE at the 
latest and remains a vibrant tradition today in the Indian subcontinent and the dias­
pora. As the worship of local goddesses has become subsumed under the authority 
of Smārta2 brahmins, Tripurasundarī came to be seen as the esoteric essence of many 
local goddesses (see Golovkova 2012, 817). Śrīvidyā worship has been adopted by the 
Śaṅkarācāryas, leaders of major monastic and teaching institutions (māṭhas), which be­
came the nuclei of mainstream Hinduism. With the strong ties of Śaṅkara māṭhas and 
Śrīvidyā gurus with royal power and relationships of mutual legitimation between reli­
gious leaders and local rulers,3 it is not incidental that Tripurasundarī came to be referred 
to as Rājarājeśvarī (the Supreme Empress; literally the “Ruler of the King of Kings” or the 
“Empress of Emperors”). Furthermore, a widespread popular devotional worship of this 
goddess has emerged based on Purāṇic sources, in which she is often referred to as Lalitā 
(the Playful One). Devotional (bhakti) practice has become well established through 
chanting hymns to this goddess, particularly the Lalitāsahasranāma (One Thousand 
Names of the Goddess Lalitā), the Saundaryalaharī (the Wave of Beauty), and also the 
Khaḍga Mālā (the Garland of Swords)4 both within and outside initiation lineages.
While the worship of Tripurasundarī has been influential for the making of south 
Indian Smārta brahmanism, utilized for royal initiations, and practiced by initiated 
courtiers and literati and has given rise to a significant devotional movement, Śrīvidyā

--- PAGE 349 ---
324      Anna A. Golovkova
 
remains understudied, and the work that was accomplished in the previous century is 
due to be updated. This chapter outlines some of the major advances in textual schol­
arship on Śrīvidyā in the English language within the context of Hindu tantrism and 
goddess-​oriented traditions, beginning with the first introduction of English-​language 
audiences to Śrīvidyā by Sir John Woodroffe (also known as: Arthur Avalon). Woodroffe 
established Śrīvidyā as a sophisticated philosophical and literary tantric tradition 
worthy of Western scholarship, but he also solidified a pattern of tantric apologetics in 
scholarship, presenting a “deodorized” view of Śrīvidyā, which skewed toward the por­
trayal of the elite “high tantra” aspects of this tradition (to use the terms Hugh Urban 
and David Gordon White applied to tantra, respectively) (Urban 2003, 134–​164; White 
1998, 173–​174). The study of the Mahāvidyās is examined next, particularly the work 
of David Kinsley in popularizing scholarship on Hindu goddesses and highlighting 
advances in understanding of Ṣoḍaśī/​Tripurabhairavī within this subfield. The rele­
vant work on the Mahāvidyās accomplished since the publication of Kinsley’s Tantric 
Visions of the Divine Feminine is analyzed next, including Madhu Khanna’s philological 
work on the Śāktapramoda, while also calling attention to areas in need of future study. 
This is followed by examining major advances in textual scholarship on Tantric Śrīvidyā 
by André Padoux and Douglas Brooks, and outlining aspects that require revision and 
updating. In particular, gaps of knowledge need to be filled by studying texts that have 
not previously attracted scholarly attention (such as manuscript sources and texts of 
lesser literary quality that are important for their historical value), and by rereading 
texts that have been studied against the grain, in order to gain a better understanding 
of this tradition as dynamic, changeable, and far from monolithic. Following Alexis 
Sanderson’s seminal “The Śaiva Age” (2009), digitization and other advances made in 
twenty-​first-​century scholarship are examined. Particular attention is given here to 
Elaine Fisher’s consideration of public esotericism in sixteenth-​century south Indian 
Śrīvidyā. Directions for further study and suggestions for the best approaches to study 
Śrīvidyā as a diverse “text tradition”5 with at least ten centuries of history and a unique 
sectarian identity, reflecting on the shift away from Kaula practices to the establish­
ment of the Vedas as a valid source of knowledge, form the conclusion. Although this 
chapter’s primary focus is on textual historical studies, the conclusion of this chapter 
briefly highlights a body of ethnographic scholarship, as well as directions for further 
study through the anthropological lens.
Śrīvidyā, Tradition of the 
Auspicious Mantra, which Worships 
Tripurasundarī
Let us first define what exactly is meant by the term Śrīvidyā, before discussing the 
scholarship and relevant questions for understanding the making of Śrīvidyā as a

--- PAGE 350 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      325
 
Śākta Śaiva tradition. Although previously translated as “Auspicious Wisdom” (Brooks 
1992), “Tradition of the Auspicious Mantra” more accurately reflects the usage and sig­
nificance of the word vidyā in the term Śrīvidyā (Golovkova 2019, 120 n. 1).6 The term 
Śrīvidyā refers to both the tradition and the mantra of this tradition. Although vidyā 
most broadly refers to knowledge in classical Sanskrit, in tantric context it is used as 
a technical term for the mantra of a feminine deity (i.e., the esoteric knowledge of this 
deity).7 The first usage of the term “Śrīvidyā” that I have been able to track occurs in 
the context of the principal mantra in the Saubhāgyasudhodaya (a paddhati, i.e., ritual 
manual) and the Yoginīhṛdayadīpikā (a commentary on the Yoginīhṛdaya tantra), both 
by Amṛtānanda, a south Indian commentator from approximately the fourteenth cen­
tury (see Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava [1988] 2011 and Yoginīhṛdaya, 1988). Furthermore, the 
pride that the Śrīvidyā upāsakas (worshippers)8 take in the complex ritual and mantra 
system of this tradition and the unique form of the mantra, long and nonliteral, support 
a translation that highlights the mantra, i.e., the esoteric knowledge, of Tripurasundarī, 
rather than the generic meaning of “knowledge” for the translation of the word “vidyā.”
With regard to the first part of the compound, “Śrī,” Goudriaan and others have taken 
it to refer to Lakṣmī (Goudriaan 1981, 58). Although Lakṣmī is referred to as “Śrī,” there 
are few similarities and many distinctions between these goddesses, including their di­
vergent qualities, mantras, yantras, association with different consorts, colors, weapons/​
mudrās, and seats. While Tripurasundarī is associated with loveliness and auspicious­
ness, Lakṣmī symbolizes prosperity. Furthermore, their mantras and yantras are distinct, 
as are their consorts (Śiva and Viṣṇu, respectively, although there is also an historical 
association of Tripurasundarī with Kāmadeva, the god of love) (see Golovkova 2020). 
Tripurā is invariably clothed in red, while Lakṣmī usually wears shades of pink, yellow, 
or gold, although sometimes she is depicted in red garments. Tripurasundarī holds the 
goad, noose, bow, and arrows, the weapons of the god of love,9 whereas Lakṣmī’s ico­
nography is less stable. She is depicted holding one or two lotuses, sometimes a pot of 
gold or gold coins, streaming from her hands, a conch, discus or mace, or a combina­
tion of these weapons, associated with Viṣṇu. Lakṣmī’s hands may be forming mudrās 
(ritual gestures, literally “seals”), such as abhaya (dispelling fear), varada (conferring 
boons), or, sometimes, jñāna mudrā (of wisdom). Lakṣmī usually sits on a lotus, while 
Tripurā reposes on the prostrate form of Sadāśiva, which usually rests on the throne 
held up by Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, and Īśvara. Thus, both the ritual worship of these 
goddesses and their iconography strongly point to significant differences, which makes 
any similarities incidental. Most importantly, Lakṣmī is not the main focus of wor­
ship in Śrīvidyā, although she may be highlighted in a special pūjā (ritual worship) or 
homa (ritual performed with fire) for prosperity. Therefore, following Brooks’s correct 
understanding of “śrī” as an honorific, but reading “vidyā” as mantra, we can translate 
Śrīvidyā, when it refers to the tradition, rather than the mantra itself, as “Tradition of the 
Auspicious Mantra.”
The issues outlined above speak to the need for more depth of scholarship on Śrīvidyā 
and goddess traditions and the curiosity and attention to detail necessary for contem­
porary scholars to question established authorities. With all respect to the giants of

--- PAGE 351 ---
326      Anna A. Golovkova
 
the previous century, no one is immune to inaccuracies or mistakes, and it is only by 
revisiting and revising established information and filling existing gaps that we can fur­
ther the study of this tradition. Moreover, although some important scholarship has 
been accomplished, Orientalist biases have skewed our understanding of Śrīvidyā to its 
more philosophical and high-​brow registers and away from the complexity of its rituals 
and the reading of other types of texts that have not been considered worthy of study. To 
understand Śrīvidyā in its multifaceted complexity, we need more focused scholarly at­
tention and better cross-​pollination of ideas that will result in a more accurate and com­
prehensive body of knowledge.
Orientalism in the Study of Śrīvidyā 
and Tantric Apologetics
Our brief survey of existing scholarship on Śrīvidyā begins with the work of Sir John 
Woodroffe (a.k.a. Arthur Avalon), who was the first to bring Śrīvidyā to the attention 
of the English-​speaking audience. This allows us to examine an important trend for the 
study of this tradition—​that is, an emphasis on philosophical, highly literary texts that 
generally conform to the higher standards of grammar. That emphasis minimizes the 
importance of its ritual practice, particularly those aspects that may take away from the 
image of Śrīvidyā as a sophisticated elite tradition.
The academic study of Śrīvidyā within the context of the broader study of religion 
and Hinduism is a relatively recent phenomenon. The earliest translations of Śrīvidyā 
texts into English were published by Woodroffe at the beginning of the twentieth cen­
tury. Kathleen Taylor (2001) convincingly argues that Arthur Avalon was a kind of “legal 
fiction” behind a close collaboration of two friends and, likely, fellow disciples of a tan­
tric guru: Sir John Woodroffe, an Englishman and a Calcutta High Court judge, and 
Atal Behari Ghose, a Sanskrit paṇḍit and Bengali intellectual. Woodroffe, who began 
lecturing just two years after the publication of the first work under the pseudonym, 
lends the respectability of the British judge to the enterprise of rehabilitating tantra in 
the minds of Western Orientalist scholars and of the Bengali English-​educated public. 
Behari Ghose, on the other hand, provided Sanskrit expertise and deep intertextual 
knowledge that imbued the work published under Arthur Avalon’s moniker (and, sub­
sequently, under Woodroffe’s own name). Woodroffe acknowledged the anonymous 
contribution of Behari Ghose, at least to the work published under the name of Avalon, 
in the preface to Shakti and Shākta, explaining that he used the nom de plume for works 
that were written in collaboration with others, particularly with the help of a friend who 
Woodroffe claimed had insisted on remaining unnamed.10
Woodroffe’s position vis-​à-​vis his material is a fascinating blend of passionate and, 
likely, personal interest combined with the outward demeanor of scholarly detach­
ment.11 This is not surprising, given the harshly critical attitudes, mired in racism

--- PAGE 352 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      327
 
and cultural and religious superiority, toward tantra and Śāktism commonly held by 
early European scholars. Orientalists, who were often colonial officials and Christian 
missionaries who brought to the scholarship their own agendas and biases, overwhelm­
ingly preferred texts that were monistic rather than polytheistic and philosophical rather 
than those emphasizing ritual instruction. It is no wonder then that Arthur Avalon’s 
debut consisted of a translation of Mahānirvāṇa Tantra (1913), a text that eschewed the 
worship of the goddess for that of the parābrahman (the supreme brahman or Self) and 
privileged liberation as the goal of tantric practice. And this Western attitude toward 
texts and traditions, thoroughly assimilated by educated South Asians, has contributed 
to the elevated place Śrīvidyā has come to occupy among tantric traditions. (See Hayes 
chapter on Esoteric Physiology, this volume, on Woodroffe’s influence on the subtle 
body concepts of the six cakras.)
To represent Śrīvidyā as an exemplary tantric tradition, both scholars and 
practitioners overemphasized the importance of its philosophical nondualism and of its 
meditation practices. In addition, they minimized other aspects, both ignoring texts that 
are not particularly philosophical or literary and underemphasizing the ritual aspects of 
the tradition (e.g., the use of rituals for mundane results [prayogas]). To better under­
stand the creative process of the development of this tradition and the canonization of 
narratives about its nature and history, we must engage in careful historicized reading of 
those texts that have so far escaped scholarly attention and also study practices that have 
remained unexamined.12 Furthermore, when we do return to texts that have already re­
ceived some scholarly attention, we must examine the complicated network of agendas 
and biases that has been brought to this endeavor not only by previous and contempo­
rary scholars, but also by the authors, redactors, and commentators of the Sanskrit texts 
themselves.
Woodroffe’s first foray into Śrīvidyā was publishing the translation of Puṇyānanda’s 
hymn Kāmakalāvilāsa with the commentary by Naṭanānandanātha in 1922.13 
Kāmakalāvilāsa (ca. fourteenth century) is a poetic hymn to Tripurasundarī as the 
supreme Śakti, manifesting in the śrīcakra (the principal ritual diagram of Śrīvidyā). 
From Tripurasundarī’s union with Śiva in the innermost bindu (dot) in the center of the 
śrīcakra springs all creation, language, and cognition. Puṇyānanda’s south Indian initia­
tory branch (hādimata)14, whose principal vidyā (mantra of feminine deity) began with 
the phoneme hā, included Śivānanda and Vidyānanda, authors of commentaries on the 
Vāmakeśvarīmata, the earliest extant tantra from within the tradition, and Amṛtānanda, 
Puṇyānanda’s disciple, who frequently quoted Kāmakalāvilāsa in his commentary on 
the Yoginīhṛdaya (see Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava [1988] 2011 and Yoginīhṛdaya, 1988). Like the 
Yoginīhṛdaya and the commentaries of these south Indian authors, Kāmakalāvilāsa 
encodes the manifestation of the goddess and her retinue within the nine levels of the 
Śrīcakra with the philosophical nondualism of Pratyabhijñā.15 The choice of this text 
is not surprising for introducing early nineteenth-​century English-​language readers 
to Śrīvidyā, as it is poetic, metaphysical, and short, consisting of fifty-​five stanzas. 
Kāmakalāvilāsa extols Śrīvidyā mantra and yantra, describing the nature of the god­
dess as consciousness and speech. While the hymn mentions the structures of the

--- PAGE 353 ---
328      Anna A. Golovkova
 
Śrīcakra ritual, its emphasis is on soteriological and nonmundane benefits of worship. 
Particularly in Avalon’s translation, which leaves a lot untranslated and unexplained, 
Amṛtānanda’s language sounds mysterious and otherworldly. Again, this is under­
standable in a translation that seeks to rehabilitate tantra and present it in a way that 
is comprehensible and acceptable for Western readers and Western-​educated South 
Asians. Describing Śrīvidyā by emphasizing the otherworldly, metaphysical, and phil­
osophical aspects of the tradition remained prevalent in the twentieth century. Other 
important features of this earlier scholarship include deemphasizing transgressive 
ritual and presenting this tantric system as not entirely different from the more main­
stream strands of Hinduism, whose practitioners recognize the authority of the Vedas 
as preeminent.
The origins of tantric apologetics with reference to Śrīvidyā reach a lot further back 
than Orientalist scholarship. These apologetics can be seen already in the work of the 
south Indian commentators from the hādimata branch, mentioned earlier (Golovkova 
2017, 121, 128–​130, 134–​137).16 The Vāmakeśvarīmata described a Kaula17 tantric tradi­
tion, whose practitioners were more interested in prayogas (rituals for gaining mundane 
results) than in soteriology. Beginning in approximately the thirteenth century, and with 
the work of Śivānanda, many south Indian commentators preferred interpretations that 
deemphasized antinomian practices. And it is this particular strand of Śrīvidyā texts 
and practices that has received the most scholarly attention to date from both textual 
and ethnographic scholars. While south Indian exoteric Śrīvidyā is an important tra­
dition to study in both its historical and its contemporary settings, the reality is that 
tantric Śrīvidyā ritual has been practiced within diverse initiation lineages in a variety 
of settings and spaces from the North and Northeast to the southernmost tip of the 
Indian subcontinent during the last millennium. It is both esoteric and exoteric, as well 
as transgressive and mainstream. Only by embracing this diversity and variety can we 
come to a more accurate and realistic grasp of this tradition and its history.
A wonderful example of more recent tantric apologetics can be found in 
Shuddhānanda Bharati’s 1954 introduction to Ganesh and Co’.s reprint of Avalon’s trans­
lation of the Kāmakalāvilāsa, printed together with Avalon’s digest of Tantrarāja Tantra 
(Woodroffe, [1922] 1971). Bharati argues against the association of Tantra with trans­
gressive ritual practices, including consumption of alcohol, fish, and meat and the use of 
sex, and advocates for their metaphorical interpretation.
Tantra is wrongly stigmatised as a libidinous phallic necromancy. This is due to 
instances of the excesses of some misguided Vāmamārgins.18 The real Tantrika19 
is neither a cynic nor a cyronic [sic] hedonist. He is rather an eudaemonist than a 
slave to passions. The much-​ridiculed five M’s are only esoteric symbologies. Wine 
is the lunar ambrosia flowing from the Soma20 Cakra. Woman is the Kuṇḍalini 
Śakti21 sleeping in the lower plexus, Mūlādhāra. Matsya is the annihilation of “I” 
and “Mine.” Māmsa is the surrender of the limited human to the unlimited Divine. 
Mudrā22 is cessation from evils. Maidhuna23 [sic] is the union of the Śakti with the 
Śiva in man. In Tantras, woman is not considered as an object of animal passion and

--- PAGE 354 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      329
 
pleasure. Tāntrikas consider woman as Parāśakti.24 She is deified and adored. If there 
is one science that has explored the divine regions of man and woman, in detail, it is 
Tantra. If there is one method that enables man to rise Phoenix-​like from the dead 
ashes of the animal passion it is the irreproachable Tantra.
(Bharati 1954, xvii, in Woodroffe [1922]1971)
Analyzing Bharati’s perspective on tantric practice brings to the fore questions for the 
study of Śrīvidyā and goddess traditions that have not yet received sufficient attention 
and must be asked explicitly. Which Śrīvidyā is Bharati describing? Is it the Śrīvidyā 
tradition of one or both of the texts of the Ganesh & Co. reprint (i.e., Kāmakalāvilāsa 
and Tantrarāja Tantra, which are, in fact, quite different from each other)? Is it the tra­
dition taught to Woodroffe and Ghose by their guru and explicated by means of tex­
tual reading? And what, in fact, was the understanding of Śrīvidyā practice by Ghose, 
whose ghostly presence emerges from letters and other historical evidence uncovered 
by Taylor (2001)? Shuddhānanda Bharati’s passionate rejection of the antinomian ritual 
elements, which connect Śrīvidyā to its Kaula origins, provides a mainstream brahman­
ical perspective. This nontransgressive, ritually pure transmission of Śrīvidyā described 
in Bharati’s introduction is, in fact, similar to Puṇyānanda’s, at least based on the limited 
evidence that we have. It is also similar to the Śrīvidyā that was known to Woodroffe 
and Ghose. However, it is quite dissimilar to the tradition as recorded in other texts and 
commentaries. Asking these questions of provenance and examining the similarities 
and dissimilarities in distinctive texts and works of different authors uncovers a 
nuanced history of this tradition’s development. It is only through a careful study of 
the polyphony of voices from different chronological and geographical locations and 
perspectives that the complex symphony of Śrīvidyā can be elucidated. Bharati’s implicit 
assertion that what he provides is an accurate portrayal of Śrīvidyā at all times and in all 
places is mistaken. As any other religious tradition, Śrīvidyā is diverse, changeable, and 
lacks clear-​cut boundaries overlapping with other traditions.
Informed by historicizing analysis of texts in context, my own reading of Sanskrit 
texts intentionally separates the views of redactors of tantras from those of their 
commentators, as well as those insights that I have gained from the contemporary tra­
dition. However, this approach, which seems commonsensical, is relatively new in the 
study of tantras. While scholars of the academic study of religion have been advocating 
for years that we must consider religious traditions in their historical and geographical 
contexts, the study of Śrīvidyā has been bound up in Orientalist approaches, which did 
not account for changes over time or ask questions about agency and intentionality.
The worship of Tripurasundarī, Rājarājeśvarī, Lalitā, and so on, is distinct from the 
tantric traditions of Krama and Trika. The former goddesses, especially in the later tradi­
tion, are typically portrayed as lovely, beautiful, and benign. Although their descriptions 
are usually devoid of both mortuary imagery of cremation grounds and associations with 
fierce goddess cults, sexuality has played an important role in the development of Śrīvidyā 
and continues to do so now among some practitioners (see Golovkova 2019, 2020). It may 
very well be that the tantric practice of Shuddhānanda Bharati and his lineage excluded

--- PAGE 355 ---
330      Anna A. Golovkova
 
“libidinous” antinomian elements, such as the use of pañcamakāras (i.e., five substances 
and activities normally prohibited to brahmins). However, their use is well documented, 
and in most contemporary lineages minute amounts of alcohol continue to be added to the 
viśeṣārghya (special offering) during Śrīcakra navāvaraṇa pūjā (i.e., worship of the god­
dess within the nine enclosures of the Śrīcakra). Further work on contemporary practices 
of Śrīvidyā beyond south India is needed for a more nuanced understanding of attitudes to­
ward practices that violate brahminical norms of ritual purity and their prevalence (for this 
issue in contemporary Nepal, see Lidke and Akshunna, Chapters 2 and 35, this volume).
An important contribution to the critique of this “deodorized” view of Śrīvidyā has 
been made by David Gordon White. White challenged both historical and contempo­
rary interpretations of tantra. He critiques both the New Age distortion of “tantric sex” 
as well as Orientalist scholars and nineteenth-​ and twentieth-​century Hindu reformers 
who overemphasize devotional (bhakti) traditions. These emphases undermine the im­
portance of tantra on the Indian subcontinent. White argued that “Tantra has been the 
predominant religious paradigm, for over a millennium, of the great majority of the 
inhabitants of the Indian subcontinent. It has been the background against which Indian 
religious civilizations evolved” (White 2003, 3). Sanderson argued that “the early medi­
eval period, from about the fifth century to the thirteenth, saw a decline in the role of 
Śrauta sacrifice in the religious ceremonies undertaken by the Indian rulers” (2009, 41), 
and that this period was characterized by the “preponderance of Śaivism,” which had a 
profound influence on other religious traditions in South Asia (2009, 44). In compar­
ison to Avalon’s tantric apologetics, which minimized practices that transgressed main­
stream brahminical norms, White’s analyses of tantra have tended toward the opposite 
extreme, overemphasizing the importance of sexual practices and the transmission 
of Kaula knowledge by means of offering and consumption of sexual fluids as power 
substances. Viewing Śrīvidyā and Trika through this lens of “hard-​core” and “soft-​
core” practices,25 White characterized their later forms as “high Hindu tantra,” which 
sublimated Kaula practices and integrated “aesthetic and linguistic theory into their re­
interpretation of earlier theory and practice” (White 1998, 173–​174; see also White 2000). 
My research into the early historical development of Śrīvidyā, particularly the compar­
ison of the texts describing the antecedent Nityā cult, the earliest extant Śrīvidyā tantras 
(the Vāmakeśvarīmata and the Yoginīhṛdaya), and the thirteenth-​ and fourteenth-​
century south Indian commentaries on these tantras, supports White’s theory of do­
mestication and sublimation of antinomian elements. However, I believe that White’s 
emphasis on Śrīvidyā as the “high tantra” may have overstated the case. Because his 
analysis of Śrīvidyā textual sources primarily refers to later Vedicized south Indian texts, 
it has obscured the fact that the worship of Tripurasundarī has been and continues to be 
diverse and multifaceted. Furthermore, while Western scholarship on tantric traditions 
was, in fact, disproportionately overshadowed by that on bhakti (particularly, Vaiṣṇava) 
traditions, devotion to manifestations of the goddess has become an integral part of tan­
tric Śrīvidyā practice since at least the thirteenth century CE. I suggest that instead of 
unidirectional exotericization, we consider Śrīvidyā’s development as a complex multi­
faceted process, and its public esotericism (see Fisher 2017, discussed below), i.e., tantric

--- PAGE 356 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      331
 
practices within public exoteric contexts, as a Venn diagram of intersecting Kaula, tan­
tric, Vedic, and bhakti practices. Further research into many more unstudied texts and a 
significant amount of ethnographic scholarship with a wider geographical distribution 
are necessary for a more accurate understanding of this historical progression.
Mahāvidyās and the Popularization of 
Hindu Goddess Studies
David Kinsley’s work from the 1980s and 1990s is important for us to consider because it 
brought the conversations about Hindu goddesses26 into the realm of Western academic 
discourse and college classrooms. Kinsley’s scholarship is also of particular relevance to 
us since his writing on the Mahāvidyās, a group of ten goddesses that became popular in 
Northeast and East India, along a pattern analogous to the daśāvatāras (ten incarnations) 
of Viṣṇu. He synthesized information available at that time on Tripurasundarī, who was 
often referred to in the context of the Mahāvidyās as Ṣoḍaśī. The name Ṣoḍaśī evokes 
the sixteenth-​syllabled mantra central to Śrīvidyā and the age usually ascribed to the 
goddess is, by no coincidence, sixteen. The earlier Hindu Goddesses: Visions of the Divine 
Feminine in the Hindu Religious Tradition (1986), includes thirteen chapters dedicated to 
different goddesses and groups of goddesses, such as the Mātṛkās and the Mahāvidyās, 
reaching as far back as the Vedic period and even considering the goddesses of the Indus 
Valley. Hindu Goddesses briefly touches upon Tripurasundarī in a chapter titled “Tārā, 
Chinnamastā, and the Mahāvidyās” (Kinsley 1986, 163) and mentions two important 
Śrīvidyā hymns, the Lalitāsahasranāma and the Saundaryalaharī in the section on 
Mahādevī (Kinsley 1986, 133, 137–​143). However, at that point in his research, Kinsley 
was not aware that the hymns actually lauded the Goddess Tripurasundarī, also known 
under her popular Purāṇic name, Lalitā. Although these hymns most certainly depict 
the supreme goddess, without whom even Śiva is unable to act, as the famous first verse 
of Saundaryalaharī asserts, she is hardly the generic Mahādevī, as Kinsley suggests, but 
rather belongs to a specific bhakti (devotional) tradition that intersects with tantric 
Śrīvidyā.
Kinsley’s Tantric Visions of the Divine Feminine (1997) is a more mature work, which 
built upon the advances in the field of goddess studies in the previous decade and ele­
vated Purāṇic and tantric goddesses as worthy of scholarly attention. Unlike the broader 
focus of the Hindu Goddesses, Tantric Visions investigated specifically the Mahāvidyās, 
synthesizing a wealth of information that had not previously been available to a broad 
readership. In Tantric Visions, Kinsley’s understanding of Tripurasundarī has signifi­
cantly deepened. It is evident that Kinsley was indebted for this expanded insight into 
Tripurasundarī to Douglas Brooks’s work, although he does not say so explicitly. The 
fifty-​two endnotes on the short chapter on Tripurasundarī refers to Auspicious Wisdom 
(1992) and other texts cited in that volume twenty-​one times. Despite the expanded

--- PAGE 357 ---
332      Anna A. Golovkova
 
understanding of this goddess in Tantric Visions, the usefulness of information for a 
contemporary reader is limited because it is often presented without clear reference to 
specific historical and geographical contexts. Furthermore, Kinsley relies primarily on 
secondary sources and translations, with only a few references to primary sources and 
interviews with informants, whose background is not explained in detail.
For an illustration, let us look at the first paragraph in Kinsley’s chapter on 
Tripurasundarī and the two sources cited in the endnotes:
Tripura-​sundarī, who also appears in lists of the Mahāvidyās under the names 
Ṣoḍaśī, Lalitā, Kameśvarī, Śrīvidyā, and Rājarājesvarī, is often cited third, after Kālī 
and Tārā. She is also sometimes said to be, along with Kālī and Tārā, ādi (primor­
dial) Mahāvidyā, which suggests that she occupies a high place in the group, that she, 
like them, represents a complete vision of reality.1 According to other sources, she 
represents the penultimate vision of enlightened consciousness, a stage of conscious­
ness suffused with sattvic qualities but lacking the completeness of fully enlightened 
consciousness, represented by Kali, which is beyond all quality and form, nirguṇa.2
1 Rājeś Dīkṣit, Ṣoḍaśī Tantra Śāstra (Agra: Sumit Prakashan, 1991), p. I.
2 Interview with Swami Annapurnananda.
(Kinsley 1997, 112)
On reading this, the following questions arise: what are the sources for (1) the specific 
lists, (2) the description of Tripurasundarī as ādi śakti or “a complete vision of reality,” 
and (3) a characterization of this goddess as one who represents “a stage of conscious­
ness . . . lacking the completeness of fully enlightened consciousness.” Furthermore, do 
the texts on Tripurasundarī herself or the texts on the Mahāvidyās consider this goddess 
to be “a complete version of reality” or is it the view of Rājeś Dīkṣit cited in the first end­
note? Is Swami Annapūrṇānanda, cited in the second note, a devotee of Kālī or is he affil­
iated with the worship of the Mahāvidyās as a group? Similar to Woodroffe and Bharati, 
Kinsley synthesizes important information about the worship of Tripurasundarī, but 
without historical and geographical contextualization this view is flattened and lacks 
nuance. Although there is nothing unusual in this style of writing for the scholarship 
produced during the last century, these questions allow us to understand its limitations 
and consider what approaches may be more productive in the future.
Although much of his scholarship needs to be updated, Kinsley succeeded in laying 
down the groundwork for other scholars to develop the study of Mahāvidyās as a whole 
and of specific goddesses within the group further. Madhu Khanna’s edition and intro­
duction to Raja Deva Nandan Singh’s Śāktapramoda (2013) provides a useful updated 
edition of this fascinating paddhati (ritual manual) for the worship of the Mahāvidyās 
and five other deities. Śāktapramoda includes sections (designated as tantras) on the 
Mahāvidyā Tripurabhairavī and Bālā Tripurasundarī. Khanna’s unpublished doctoral 
dissertation from Oxford University, “The Concept and Liturgy of the Śrīcakra Based 
on Śivānanda’s Trilogy” (Khanna 1986), is another important contribution to the study 
of Śrīvidyā. The three short texts examined in the dissertation present devotional,

--- PAGE 358 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      333
 
doctrinal, and ritual information on the worship of the Śrīcakra as the embodiment of 
Tripurasundarī. It is unfortunate that this work has not been published and is hard to ac­
cess, but it has had an impact on the field.
Jae-​Eun Shin, particularly in her Change, Continuity, and Complexity (2018), has 
done other noteworthy work on the historical development of the Mahāvidyās.27 
Chapters of the Sacred Geography of Goddesses in South Asia (Singh 2010) provide new 
research on Mahāvidyās in specific geographic contexts. The two volumes of Gudrun 
Bühnemann’s The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities, which draw on the pantheon 
of the Mantramahodadhi, the Prapañcasāra, and the Śāradātilaka, provide an overview 
of the Mahāvidyās and iconographic descriptions of these goddesses. Further work 
on Tripurasundarī as a Mahāvidyā (i.e., one of the group of goddesses worshipped in 
East and Northeast of the Indian subcontinent in the later medieval period) is certainly 
needed and is a fruitful direction for future research.
Textual Advances in Tantric Śrīvidyā
Continuing the approach established by Woodroffe, late twentieth-​ and early twenty-​
first-​century scholarship on Śrīvidyā by André Padoux and Douglas Renfrew Brooks 
focused on texts of the highest literary quality that emphasized the philosophical, the 
metaphysical, and the otherworldly. In his digest of Hindu tantric literature in Sanskrit, 
Goudriaan (1981) correctly asserted that Śrīvidyā is characterized by an unusually high 
quality of texts within the corpus of tantric literature. Śrīvidyā tantras, unlike the tantras 
of many other traditions, usually conform to Pāṇinian grammar, eschew nonstandard 
aiśa28 (divine, belonging to Śiva) Sanskrit, and have been commented on by such bril­
liant polymaths as Jayaratha, Lakṣmīdhara, and Bhāskararāya. However, not all Śrīvidyā 
tantras or those relevant to the study of this tradition fit into this pattern, and there is 
much to be gained from studying those types of texts that have not yet attracted schol­
arly attention.
In my own work, I am filling the gaps in textual scholarship that has already been 
completed29 to uncover the development of the worship of Tripurasundarī as a late 
Kaula tradition, which followed and superseded the Nityā cult, an earlier and related 
tradition that worshipped Kāmeśvarī with Kāmadeva as her consort (see Golovkova 
2020, 2021). The texts describing the Nityā cult, the Nityākaula, the Siddhakhaṇḍa of the 
Manthānabhairava, and the Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya, are much less polished than 
those typically studied by textual scholars and abound in aiśa Sanskrit. However, their 
careful reading allows us to trace the Kaula elements that are at times harder to discern 
in mature Śrīvidyā by looking in the metaphorical cracks and interstices of these texts.
In the case of the pioneers in the contemporary study of Śrīvidyā, André Padoux 
and Douglas Brooks, it is the texts of the highest literary quality and of philosophical 
and metaphysical bent that have attracted their attention. From Vāc: The Concept of 
the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras (1990) to his French translation of the Yoginīhṛdaya

--- PAGE 359 ---
334      Anna A. Golovkova
 
with Amṛtānanda’s commentary (1994) to the subsequent study of the Yoginīhṛdaya 
translated into English (2013), André Padoux’s scholarship emphasized connections 
between language and consciousness and contemplative practices with soteriological 
aims. For example, in his analysis of the Yoginīhṛdaya, Padoux paid particular attention 
to the understanding of how cosmic consciousness manifests in the Śrīcakra and the 
yogic body and decoded a series of phonic meditations on the seed syllable hrīṃ and 
other kuṇḍalinī30 practices. While Padoux has already accomplished significant philo­
logical work on the Yoginīhṛdaya and its commentary by Amṛtānanda, in my own work, 
I have found it productive to return to this tantra and its commentary in order to ex­
amine the shift in Śrīvidyā toward Śaiva nondualism and how the tradition was con­
sciously shaped by this and other commentators through their interpretative patterns 
and intertextuality (see Golovkova 2019, 112–​118). Padoux’s work is foundational for an­
yone approaching the study of mantras, just as Brooks’s work, discussed below, is foun­
dational for anyone engaging in the study of Śrīvidyā.
Without a doubt, the most important contribution to bringing Śrīvidyā to the at­
tention of scholars and students of tantric studies, has been made by Douglas Renfrew 
Brooks. I will not go into detail in discussing The Secret of the Three Cities (Brooks 1990) 
and Auspicious Wisdom (Brooks 1992). Anyone seriously interested in Śrīvidyā and 
goddess traditions needs to study Brooks’s work for themselves, but I will provide an 
overview and commentary. In his first published book, Brooks translates the Tripurā 
Upaniṣad along with Bhāskararāya’s commentary on this text, which consists of sixteen 
verses, and provides an introduction to the Śrīvidyā tradition, as well as some general 
comments on Hindu tantra and further directions for tantric studies. As an “Upaniṣad,” 
the text is a fascinating blend of Vedic and tantric influences, and Brooks makes a con­
vincing argument for the need for further investigation of this and other relevant textual 
evidence. As a translation and study of a lesser known short work and, thus, more lim­
ited in scope, Brooks’s first book was overshadowed by his second, Auspicious Wisdom, 
which synthesizes, broadens, and updates information on the ritual details of this tra­
dition. Auspicious Wisdom sifts through a mountain of data to present Śrīvidyā ritual 
details and its self-​understanding. Although some of the information, such as, for ex­
ample, Brooks’s early dating of Śrīvidyā, resting on the too-​early date of the Tamil 
Tirumantiram, has been updated since these publications (see Golovkova 2012, 818), 
Brooks’s work remains essential in describing and cataloguing Śrīvidyā ritual structure. 
He also articulates the dynamics between the Vedic and tantric elements of Śrīvidyā, the 
vāmācāra (i.e., left-​handed practice that allows for the use of transgressive substances) 
and dakṣiṇācāra (which does not). Brooks draws on both textual study and interviews 
of south Indian Smārta initiates and gurus for their contemporary explication. His anal­
ysis of the commentaries by the fifteenth-​century Lakṣmīdhara and eighteenth-​century 
Bhāskararāya, in particular, brings these dimensions to the fore.
Brooks’s explicit goal in both of his books on Śrīvidyā was to study texts in light of the 
contemporary tradition. While this is helpful for understanding how Śrīvidyā initiates 
and gurus understand the history and interpretation of their practice, it is some­
what less helpful for the historian of religion, since the differences in how these texts

--- PAGE 360 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      335
 
were received, understood, interpreted, and reinterpreted by the practitioners are not 
clearly articulated. For example, Brooks’s explanation of the ritual structure of Śrīvidyā 
emphasizes nondual understanding of the identity of the three forms of the goddess 
(i.e., physical, mantra, and yantra). However, nondualism, be it Pratyabhijñā or Advaita, 
was not, in fact, characteristic of the early tradition and became part of Śrīvidyā doc­
trine only over time (Golovkova 2019, 111–​112). Viewing the tradition through the lens 
of its contemporary interpreters and applying the characteristics of several texts to the 
worship of this goddess in all times and places creates a flattened, noncontextualized, 
“timeless” view of the tradition, which was, in fact, shaped and reshaped over time by 
real people, whose dreams, motives, and aspirations can be understood from reading 
their work against the grain (see, e.g., Golovkova 2017, 121–​143).
Digitization and “The Śaiva Age”
One of the positive factors in facilitating textual research on tantric traditions in recent 
decades is a greater access to manuscripts and electronic texts, which, in turn, made 
critical editing of key early texts possible. The increase in access to manuscript sources 
through the Nepalese-​German Manuscript Cataloguing Project (formerly Nepal-​
German Manuscript Preservation Project) (see https://​www.aai.uni-​hamb​urg.de/​en/​
forsch​ung/​ngmcp.html https://​sakyar​esea​rch.org/​sour​ces/​94), as well as through other 
initiatives, has broadly impacted textual-​historical research in tantric studies, proving 
that although manuscript work is often slow and painstaking, a study of unpublished 
textual evidence is well worth the effort. Digitized access to manuscripts, which we need 
to continue to develop, advocate for, and support, has also brought home a well-​known 
fact that the majority of textual sources for the study of tantric traditions remain in un­
published manuscript form. This makes engagement with these sources a necessity for 
scholars who work on the history of Asian religions and have the training to access them 
and, in turn, can make them accessible to others through their research. In my own 
work, I have found access to Nepalese manuscripts an invaluable source for the study 
of a Nityā cult, which preceded Śrīvidyā. Although the Nityā cult has died out, its ritual 
system, goals of practices, and descriptions of deities provide important parallels for the 
study of the early development of Śrīvidyā (see Golovkova 2020).
The inflow of manuscripts and the production of critical editions has made historical 
analysis, relative chronologies, and dating of texts and authors more possible than ever 
before. In “The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir,” “The Śaiva Age—​The Rise and Dominance 
of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period,” and “The Śaiva Literature,” as well as his 
lectures, Alexis Sanderson has provided us with a valuable matrix from which to ap­
proach a historical study of Śaiva traditions. Sanderson’s work is dense, not easily ac­
cessible, but full of information that we will continue to unpack in the years to come. In 
his work, Sanderson devotes only a few sentences and footnotes to the discussion of the 
worship of Tripurasundarī and the antecedent Nityā cult within the context of Śāktism

--- PAGE 361 ---
336      Anna A. Golovkova
 
of the directional transmissions (i.e., classifications of late Śākta traditions that called 
themselves Kaula and were associated with the cardinal directions). My work unpacks 
these precious nuggets and investigates the texts relevant to the early history of Śrīvidyā. 
Sanderson’s timeline, which places these traditions within a larger context of Śaiva 
traditions, has also been a helpful starting point for the historical study of Śrīvidyā (for 
a graphic representation of classification of Śaiva doctrines, see, e.g., Golovkova 2017, 
App. A, 147). Furthermore, a close comparative reading of parallel passages, modeled 
on Sanderson’s close textual comparison of Śaiva, Buddhist, and Jaina sources, has been 
productive for my investigation of how Śrīvidyā ritual and exegesis has evolved over 
time in the early stages of its development (see Golovkova 2020, 87–​106).
Śrīvidyā as Tradition: Latest Findings 
and Considerations for Future 
Research
As we examine future directions of study, let us consider how thinking about Śrīvidyā 
as a tradition that was developed over time by human actors, can contribute to a more 
nuanced understanding of its history. The term “tradition” is, of course, ambiguous, and 
its utility here is worth examining. Referring to Hobsbawm and Ranger (1983), Hamsa 
Stainton points out that “Hobsbawm and the contributors to this volume are certainly 
right to chart the ways that traditions seek to manufacture links to the past. . . . At the 
same time, too much emphasis on the “invention” of traditions potentially obscures the 
revitalizing processes of all traditions. As Gadamer, Prickett, and many other scholars 
have discussed, all enduring traditions are dynamic, adaptive, and changing in their own 
ways” (Stainton 2019, 4). Stainton himself, in describing stotras as tradition, emphasizes 
continuity and innovation with which stotras engage with the past and “reform it to 
meet specific needs in the present” (Stainton 2019, 4).
Sanskrit commentaries on Śrīvidyā tantras, even more than other types of literature, 
are fruitful for studying tradition formation. Lawrence McCrea and Parimal Patil (2010, 
4) have proposed that instead of philosophical schools, we should think in terms of “text 
traditions” that share “a set of building blocks and common intellectual resources.” This 
concept of “text traditions” is particularly applicable when analyzing tantric exegesis, 
in which commentators use a similar set of tools, even though the context and the texts 
they are commenting on are distinct from the mainstream philosophical systems that 
accepted the authority of the Vedas. More than simply elucidating scriptural texts, in 
our case, the earliest extant Sanskrit tantras of Tripurasundarī, the Vāmakeśvarīmata 
and the Yoginīhṛdaya, commentators have used hierarchies of texts to establish their au­
thority, demonstrate intellectual belonging, and elucidate their specific locations within 
the broader religious milieu (e.g., Golovkova 2017, 80–​120).

--- PAGE 362 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      337
 
An examination of sources that these commentaries turn to is particularly revealing. 
The textual resources selected by Śivānanda in his Ṛjuvimarśinī (Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava, 
[1988] 2011), a commentary on the Vāmakeśvarīmata tantra, in particular, articulate the 
beginnings of a common language for Śrīvidyā, a tantric tradition that is neither static 
and monolithic nor ever completely new and invented. Significantly more so than in the 
case of philosophical treatises, which have had a long and densely populated intellectual 
history, with south Indian commentators of Śrīvidyā texts, one feels at times as if they 
are, indeed, inventing the tradition anew.
A fitting metaphor for these emergent intellectual frameworks is something that those 
of us who have shipped boxes of books from India can relate to. You rip open the cloth 
covering on a box, stitched by a tailor, showing signs of having been on a long journey. 
A fragrant mix of smells overpowered by turmeric wafts from the box. You rejoice at 
seeing your long-​coveted treasures and make room for them on your bookshelves. You 
wonder what happened to the other boxes you shipped at the same time. I get a similar 
feeling when reading the first south Indian commentaries. It seems that their authors 
are improvising with scant resources (a few boxes lost in transit), without the benefit 
of the existing exegetical tradition, unlike the Kashmirian Jayaratha, who effortlessly 
cites from a variety of texts in his library, many of them from within the discourse on 
the Goddess Tripurasundarī, to which south Indian Śivānanda and Vidyānanda do not 
appear to have access. Furthermore, a few details of ritual and some understanding of 
the technical terminology of the Vāmakeśvarīmata seem to have also been lost in trans­
mission. Śivānanda and Vidyānanda are clearly prevaricating in a number of places, in 
which the meanings of verses in the Vāmakeśvarīmata have obviously become obscure.
But how should we think about the formation of a unique sectarian identity and can 
models from other subfields of religious studies be helpful to our understanding? R. A. 
Markus discusses the cumulative nature of the process of identity formation:
a continuous biography is the core of our sense of personal identity. This is true no 
less of a group’s sense of identity. It needs to be able to recognize itself as one and the 
same group enduring through time, the heir of its own past.
(Markus 1998, 85)
Adam Gaiser (2016) provides a useful model to consider. In thinking through the 
intricate ways in which traditions accumulate among sectarian groups, Gaiser (2016) 
suggested that they “resemble (from the outsider’s perspective) an avalanche”:
at the beginning of any given sectarian movement events, passions, doctrines, and 
practices provide an impetuous: [sic] for the movement of the sectarian group down 
the proverbial mountainside of their history. As the movement gains momentum, 
much new material will be picked up along the way and mixed with the older ma­
terial that remains part of the group’s tradition. What began as a movement of rel­
atively modest proportions now carries along with it a tremendous and compelling 
force, but also one that churns and shifts depending on the terrain in which it finds

--- PAGE 363 ---
338      Anna A. Golovkova
 
itself. As such, what constituted this avalanche of tradition at its beginning point 
cannot be said to be the same as what constitutes it further down the slope of history; 
and yet the avalanche is still considered to be the same avalanche.
 (3–​4)
The shortcoming of this model, as Gaiser acknowledged himself, is that it does not 
take into account the agency of religious actors who shape their tradition. As in the case 
of the development of Islamic notions of martyrdom examined by Gaiser, so in the case 
of Śrīvidyā, the tradition itself does not act but is shaped by those who practiced and 
taught it. It is the people (redactors of tantras and later commentators) who molded, or­
ganized, reinterpreted, and codified the ritual, doctrinal, and philosophical knowledge 
of Śrīvidyā, finding meaning, building communities, and creating memories of this 
tradition, modeling it on what was accepted and practiced within their own lineages, 
backgrounds, and texts that were available and important for them. Whereas Śivānanda 
and Vidyānanda’s work had clearly showed the seams between the building blocks 
of their tradition, by Amṛtānanda’s time, south Indian Śrīvidyā acquired some of the 
richness and density that seemed to have been lacking in the earlier transmission. In 
Amṛtānanda’s Yoginīhṛdayadīpikā, this south Indian tradition is well established and 
clearly defined as a distinctly south Indian, tantric, Vedic, and bhakti Śrīvidyā.
Elaine Fisher has written brilliantly about new modes of religious identity in the 
late-​medieval/​early modern Smārta Śaiva religious culture known today as Tamil 
Brahmanism. Examining the work of Appayya Dīkṣita and his grandnephew Nīlakaṇṭha, 
Fisher points out that Smārta Śaivism did not appear ex nihilo, although she argues for its 
early modern origins (2017, 183). My own study shows that the kernels of the early modern 
tradition of Appayya Dīkṣita and Nīlakaṇṭha, a type of public esotericism, which places 
tantric teachings of Śrīvidyā within the context of Vaidika orthodoxy, was already evi­
dent in the exegetical and devotional compositions produced by a cluster of theologians 
within a south Indian guru lineage in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries: Śivānanda, 
Vidyānanda, and Amṛtānanda (see also Golovkova 2017, 11–12, 128–132).
The corpus produced by this influential group of south Indian exegetes includes 
commentaries, devotional compositions, and ritual manuals (paddhatis) and served 
as a vital step in the process of tradition formation, building upon the understanding 
of Śrīvidyā ritual from within their lineage, but also constituting their tradition in in­
novative ways by means of the exegetical process. Whereas in the earlier worship of 
Tripurasundarī, neither its ritual system nor interpretation had anything in common 
with the Vedic corpus or its mantras, Śivānanda, in particular, envisioned and articu­
lated a new tradition of worship, reimagining a ritual system of tantric virtuosos as part 
of an ancient exegetical framework going back to the Vedas, with a devotional, public 
side to complement its esoteric ritualism.
Remarkably, this development in the early south Indian exegesis of Tripurasundarī tantras 
is very much in line with how Śrīvidyā practitioners (upāsakas) constitute their tradition 
today—​as devotional, tantric, and Vedic. Over the years, I have sought out opportunities to 
discuss my understanding of Śrīvidyā history and practice with contemporary gurus and

--- PAGE 364 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      339
 
practitioners who propagate and practice initiatory, popular devotional, and officiant forms 
of this and related traditions in south India and North America. The picture of the earliest 
history of this tradition that arises from the more in-​depth conversations with these diverse 
contemporary informants and their public discourses is remarkably similar, despite their 
various locations within the tradition and a range of attitudes toward ritual purity, eligibility 
for initiation for lower-​caste, dalit,31 and female aspirants. This picture follows the trajectories 
that were already mapped out in the thirteenth-​ and fourteenth-​century south Indian ex­
egesis of Śivānanda and Amṛtānanda but leaves aside an earlier period of development, 
during which the worship of Tripurasundarī had nothing in common with the tradition that 
recognized the authority of the Vedas: not in its mantras, not in  its philosophical orientation, 
which was neither dualistic nor nondualistic, and not in the corpus of sources cited by such 
commentators as Jayaratha. The Vedicization of Śrīvidyā was part of a deliberate process, 
which I have begun to examine, but which needs further investigation.
Given how closely Śrīvidyā has been imbricated with political power and the brah­
manical establishment (from premodern to contemporary south India), it can no longer 
be regarded as wholly marginal, esoteric, or secret. However, despite its mainstream ap­
peal, Śrīvidyā continues to flourish in tantric initiation lineages, some of which break 
with south Indian Smārta exotericism. Given this complexity, I suggest that, instead 
of an ahistorical view, which paints a picture of a monolithic tradition, or even a di­
chotomous approach, which looks at it from two opposite poles of esoteric/​exoteric, 
tantric/​Vedic, and “hard-​core”/​“soft-​core,” we might consider Śrīvidyā as continu­
ously evolving within the context of ongoing tensions between tantrism and Vedicized 
Smārta Hinduism, keeping in mind that even these strands are neither unified nor 
stable. Viewed in this way, Śrīvidyā may be best described as made up of overlapping 
and ever-​changing spheres of tantric and temple ritual and popular practice, a dynamic 
multistranded tapestry that defies attempts to view it as a stable unchangeable tradition 
or its history as unidirectional domestication.
Conclusion
Throughout my work on this chapter, I have been seeing a recurrent image—​a sunlit 
ocean, sparkling with all the colors in the blue-​green-​gold of the spectrum, which is the 
vastness of this tradition; myself—​a figure with a little dipper, measuring its vast space of 
scholarship, texts, practices, memories, narratives, and stories. Other humans have come 
and gone or are laboring at other spots along the shore: Sir John Woodroffe, who brought 
Śrīvidyā to the attention of the English-​language readers ([1922] 1971), and David Kinsley, 
determined to gather all he could on the Mahāvidyās (1986, 1997), so that scholarship on 
Hindu goddesses would flourish. More recently, André Padoux poured out his love of lan­
guage to benefit our understanding of the Yoginīhṛdaya (1994, Padoux and Jeanty 2013); 
and Alexis Sanderson sketched the many-​layered labyrinth of tantric textuality (1988, 
2007, 2009, 2013, 2014), the complex balancing of chronology, with but a tiny double spark

--- PAGE 365 ---
340      Anna A. Golovkova
 
of the Nityā cult and Śrīvidyā twinkling in one corner of its vastness. Madhu Khanna’s 
study of three short works by Śivānanda is also part of this landscape (1986), as is Douglas 
Brooks’s retrospective view of the tradition’s past through the eyes of its contemporary 
practitioners (1992, 1990). David Gordon White’s corrective view of Śrīvidyā unpacked 
the sublimated meaning of sexual rites within such practices as Kāmakalā and painted 
the narrative of domestication of the goddess’s Kaula practices as “high tantra” (1998, 
2003). Elaine Fisher contributed an incisive view at Appayya and Nīlakaṇṭha Dīkṣita’s 
public esotericism (2017). Recently, Silvia Schwarz Linder (2022) published a study on the 
Tripurārahasya, analyzing the role of Tripurasundarī as a tantric and Purāṇic goddess in 
the later medieval period. There are several ethnographers whose contributions I was not 
able to give attention to in this chapter. These contributions include Corinne Dempsey’s 
outstanding account of a Śrīvidyā tantric temple in upstate New York, whose Srilankan 
Tamil founder blends tremendous attention to ritual detail with breaking conventions of 
gender and caste (2006). Jeffrey Lidke’s ethnographic study of Śrīvidyā in Nepal (2017) 
was supplemented with textual and historical research and insights from Sthaneshwar 
Timalsina in the “Preface” (2017). Timalsina also contributed a comparative chapter on 
mantra practice in Patañjali yoga and tantra, the latter including the Yoginīhṛdaya (2005). 
Mani Rao’s contribution on the “anthropology of mantra” in contemporary Andhra-​
Telangana (2019) includes an examination of Śrīvidyā as practiced at Devipuram, a site 
that has also been analyzed by Monika Hirmer (2021) and whose founder was the guru of 
the Rush temple’s founder, examined by Dempsey (2006). In addition, Maciej Karasinski-​
Sroka (2021) provided an exploration of Śrīvidyā as a link connecting tantric traditions 
of modern Kerala (2020), a textual-​ethnographic study of the Bālā cult (Karasinki-​Sroka 
and Sharman 2022), and Śrīvidyā healing practices in Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu (2021). I 
am excited about work that is being completed and look forward to future publications 
by these and other scholars, like Sunitha Das (2021) about to take up the work that was 
started by W. Norman Brown (Śaṅkarācārya and Brown 1958) and Francis X. Clooney 
(2005) on the Saundaryalaharī.
With so much work on Śrīvidyā already accomplished, what are we missing? Where 
are the broadest gaps that we must fill in future scholarship? My view is that the gaps 
are relatively vast; we have but scratched the surface in gathering data and analysis. 
Scholars of ethnography have been challenged by difficulties of access, making existing 
studies skewed toward more easily accessible sites, all located either in south India or 
among the south Indian/​Srilankan diaspora. Textual work on Śrīvidyā is painstaking 
and slow, making deeper large-​scope analysis a long-​term commitment. In addition 
to examining published texts, we need to consider more unpublished manuscripts and 
texts that have received little scholarly attention for various reasons (e.g., lack of com­
pleteness or adherence to Pāṇinian grammar), which slows the scholarship down fur­
ther. We need to also continue rereading texts that have already been studied to update 
our analysis and tease apart the views of their redactors and commentators, in order to 
build a more nuanced grasp of the differences between Śrīvidyā as practiced in different 
times and places. We must continue to be aware of our own biases and the biases that 
have distorted our understanding toward a monochromatic view of Śrīvidyā as an elite

--- PAGE 366 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      341
 
philosophical and literary tradition and have obscured the study of its rituals for mun­
dane results and the use of antinomian practices.
My own research aims to fill some of these gaps by recovering the early textual history 
of the worship of Tripurasundarī, its emergence from the Nityā cult, in which rituals for 
mundane results and sexual attraction predominated, the solidification of the ritual struc­
ture of the Śrīcakra and the principal mantra, and the first two waves of philosophical 
reinterpretation (Golovkova 2017). By approximately the eleventh century CE, Śrīvidyā 
legacy included the worship of the Śrīcakra and an early form of the principal mantra, 
recorded in the Vāmakeśvarīmata tantra. The first wave of philosophical and doctrinal 
reimagining of this ritual system, according to the nondual Śaivism of Utpaladeva, 
Abhinavagupta, and Kṣemarāja, was undertaken in thirteenth-​century Kashmir by the 
author of the earliest extant commentary on the tantras of Tripurasundarī, Rajānaka 
Jayaratha, and was supported by the redactors of the Yoginīhṛdaya, with which the 
Vāmakeśvarīmata is paired traditionally, and by later commentators. The next vital step 
in the development of Śrīvidyā sectarian identity consisted of a step toward public eso­
tericism, in which exegetes like Śivānanda, Punyānanda, and Amṛtānanda reimagined a 
medieval Kaula tantric cult as an esoteric and devotional ritual tradition that aspired to a 
broader influence within the emerging south Indian Smārta Śaivism.
I plan to fill in the gap of knowledge on the early development of this tradition, but 
more work is needed to connect the scholarship on Lakṣmīdhara, Appayya Dīkṣita, 
Nīlakaṇṭha Dīkṣita, and Bhāskararaya (Brooks 1990, 1992; Fisher 2017) and to an­
alyze the arc of Śrīvidyā development in the middle and end of the second millen­
nium. Further work is also necessary to study Ṣoḍaśī and other Mahāvidyās related 
to Tripurasundarī to understand how the initiatory tantric Śrīvidyā intersected with 
the worship of this group of goddesses and the dynamics of tradition formation in 
the northeast of the Indian subcontinent. Further scholarly work is also necessary on 
Śrīvidyā stotras to recover the textual history of bhakti in Śrīvidyā. We must also seek 
out epigraphic and other historical sources through which we can map the development 
of Śrīvidyā onto the dynamics of royal power. The work has but begun, and the sunlit 
shore is open for more dedicated scholars of every background and specialization to 
add their work to the brilliant kaleidoscope of color and motion that is the Śrīvidyā tra­
dition. Maybe besides working harder, we can also work smarter by exchanging ideas, 
sharing resources and expertise, and collaborating to continue the work begun by the 
previous generation of scholars in the twenty-​first century and beyond.
Notes
	1.	 That is, requiring an initiation ritual performed by a qualified teacher. Śrīvidyā pūrṇādīkṣā 
(i.e., the highest level of initiation) usually requires the performance of yajña (fire sacrifice, 
in which various items, including a bundle of wood, are offered to the goddess invoked in 
the fire), an abhiṣeka (i.e., ritual bathing of the initiate), and an initiation into the highest 
mantra practiced within the lineage (usually, mahāṣoḍaśī). For information about the ex­
traction of Śrīvidyā mantras, see Brooks 1992, 104–​113 and n. 126, 240–​241.

--- PAGE 367 ---
342      Anna A. Golovkova
 
	 2.	 Smārtas, an affiliation primarily used in south India, are orthodox brahmin adherents, 
who take their name from smṛti (i.e., texts considered to be of human authorship) and 
not śruti (i.e., the Vedas) as their scriptural inspiration. For more on south Indian Smārta 
Brahmanism, see Fisher 2017, 28, 86–​87.
	 3.	 For more information, on Śaṅkarācāryas and Śrīvidyā, see Fisher 2017, 77–​98.
	 4.	 For more on Śrīvidyā stotras (hymns), see Golovkova 2012, 820–​821.
	 5.	 McCrea and Patil use “text tradition” for theorizing tradition formation by means of exe­
gesis (2010, 4).
	 6.	 I discuss the explanation for different translations and the types of compounds in detail in 
Golovkova 2019, 120 n. 1.
	 7.	 The principal mantra for this tradition is highly distinctive, unusually long, consisting of 
fifteen or sixteen syllables, and entirely made up of phonemes with no literal meaning, 
each of the three groups of phonemes ending in a so-​called seed syllable hrīṃ. See Brooks 
(1992, 104–​113 and n. 126, 240–​241) for discussion of the two major transmissions of the 
mantra, hādi, the practice of which appears to have died out, and kādi (i.e., beginning 
with letters ha and ka), the fifteen-​and sixteen-​syllabled (pañcadaśākṣarī and ṣoḍaśākṣarī) 
forms, and the extraction of mahāṣoḍaśī, as well as other mantra variants.
	 8.	 The term upāsaka literally means “worshipper” and usually refers to a devotee, although in 
some Śrīvidyā contexts the initiates are meant.
	 9.	 Occasionally, we see a two-​armed form of Tripurasundarī, holding either the goad and 
noose or the bow and arrows. In most contemporary images and in many visualizations, the 
bow and arrows are made of sugarcane and flowers, an image originating in south India and 
identical to the weapons of Kāmākṣī of Kañcipuram. The only difference in the iconography 
of Tripurasundarī and Kāmākṣī is the presence of the parrot on the shoulder of the latter.
	10.	 See preface to the first and second edition of Shakti and Shākta (quoted in Taylor 2001, 150).
	11.	 On Woodroffe’s personal engagement with tantra, see Taylor 2001, e.g., 94–​114.
	12.	 I have done so with great interest by reading manuscripts relevant to the Nityā cult, which 
was antecedent to the cult of Tripurasundarī, and the earliest extant tantra of the cult of 
Tripurasundarī, the Vāmakeśvarīmata. See Golovkova 2020.
	13.	 The 1921/​1922 translation was reprinted in the Tantrik Texts series in 1953 and, together 
with the introduction to and summary of the Tantrarāja Tantra by Ganesh & Co., in 1971.
	14.	 For an explanation of hādimata and kādimata, see Brooks 1992, 87–​90.
	15.	 On reinterpretation of Śrīvidyā ritual in light of non-​dual Śaivism, see Golovkova 2019, 
111–​112. On elements of Pratyabhijñā in the Yoginīhṛdaya, see Golovkova 2019, 112–​118.
	16.	 I have developed this topic further in my book project tentatively titled “The Goddess for 
the Second Millennium.”
	17.	 For an explanation of the place of Śrīvidyā in Kaula traditions, see Golovkova 2020, 89–​90; 
for prayogas in the antecedent Nityā cult, see Golovkova 2019, 106–​107; for prayogas in the 
Vāmakeśvarīmata, see Golovkova 2017, 9, 27.
	18.	 That is, followers of a left-​handed tantric path, which incorporated ritual offerings 
considered “impure” by the mainstream tradition.
	19.	 That is, tantric practitioner.
	20.	 A cakra (energy or power center in various yogic systems, lit. wheel) associated with the 
moon and located either at or near the sahasrāra or ājñā cakras.
	21.	 Feminine energy understood to be coiled at the base of the spine and proceeding upward 
as a result of the aspirant’s spiritual awakening.

--- PAGE 368 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      343
 
	22.	 Brooks describes pañcamakāras (i.e., five items the names for which begin with the letter 
“m” in Sanskrit) as “five prohibited substances and activities that characterize Kaula-​
influenced Tantric ritual” (e.g., madya (wine), māṃsa (meat), matsya (fish), mudrā 
(fermented grain), and maithuna (sexual intercourse)) (Brooks 1990, 271). Mudrā typi­
cally refers to ritual gestures, but it is unclear what exactly is meant by this word in the con­
text of the pañcamakāras. I am not certain that the usual translation of “grain” or “parched 
grain” is convincing.
	23.	 Usually maithuna (i.e., sexual union).
	24.	 That is, the supreme energy, associated with divine femininity.
	25.	 White distinguishes the so-​called hard-​core tantra from the more conventional “soft-​core” 
as comprised of “elements of Tantric doctrine and practice that are not found anywhere 
else in the Asian religious traditions under study” (2000, 6), including, for example, ritual 
use of sexual fluids.
	26.	 For an excellent and brief review of the spread of goddess traditions, see Slouber 2021, 1–​10.
	27.	 For more information on recent scholarship, see the Oxford bibliography on the 
Mahāvidyās by Sundari Johansen Hurwitt (forthcoming).
	28.	 The word aiśa, a secondary derivational form from īśa (lord, Śiva), means divine, or, 
more specifically, belonging to Śiva. Aiśa Sanskrit was used in some of the scriptural texts 
framed as divinely revealed, rather than those composed by named human authors. For 
aiśa Sanskrit in the Nityākaula and Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya, see Golovkova 2021, 276–​
277. For aiśa Sanskrit in the Vāmakeśvarīmata, see Golovkova 2017, 20–​21.
	29.	 Mark Dyczkowski has argued that the cult of Tripurasundarī inherited several important 
features from the cult of the goddess Kubjikā (e.g., 2009, vol. 1, 2, 242). It is certain that the 
Nityā cult and the later cult of Tripurasundarī were closely connected with their Kaula 
sister-​tradition of Kubjikā and often drew on it.
	30.	 Kuṇḍalinī is a major element of the yogic and tantric understanding of the “subtle body,” 
visualized as energy coiled at the base of the spine. Kuṇḍalinī is understood to travel up the 
spine through the cakras (energy centers) as the practitioner reaches the higher states of 
consciousness (see Hayes, Esoteric Physiology, Chapter 8, this volume, on esoteric physi­
ology and subtle bodies).
	31.	 “The term “dalit” means oppressed, broken, or crushed to the extent of losing original 
identity. However, this name has been adopted by the people otherwise referred to as 
Harijans, or “Untouchables,” and has come to symbolize for them a movement for change 
and for the eradication of the centuries-​old oppression under the caste system. In legal and 
constitutional terms, dalits are known in India as “scheduled castes” (see https://​min​orit​
yrig​hts.org/​min​orit​ies/​dal​its/​).
References
Avalon, Arthur. 1913. Tantra of the Great Liberation (Mahānirvāṇa Tantra): A Translation from 
the Sanskrit, with Introduction and Commentary by Arthur Avalon. London: Luzac.
Bharati, Yogi Shuddhananda. 1954. “Preface.” In Tantrarāja Tantra: a Short Analysis, edited by J. 
Woodroffe. xvi–​xix. Madras: Ganesh.
Brooks, Douglas Renfrew. 1990. The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Śākta 
Tantrism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 369 ---
344      Anna A. Golovkova
 
Brooks, Douglas Renfrew. 1992. Auspicious Wisdom: The Texts and Traditions of Śrīvidyā Śākta 
Tantrism in South India. SUNY Series in Tantric Studies. Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2000. The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities. Vols. 1 & 2. Groningen, 
Germany: Egbert Forsten.
Ciñciṇīmatasārasamuccaya. National Archives, Kathmandu MS 1-​767, Nepal-​German 
Manuscript Preservation Project B157/​19: paper; Newari script; 1754 CE.
Clooney, Francis X. 2005. Divine Mother, Blessed Mother: Hindu Goddesses and the Virgin 
Mary. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Das, Sunitha. 2021. “Making a Case for the Further Exploration of the Saundaryalaharī.” 
Committee on the Study of Religion, PhD program, Harvard University.
Dempsey, Corinne G. 2006. The Goddess Lives in Upstate New York: Breaking Convention and 
Making Home at a North American Hindu Temple. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 2009. Manthānabhairavatantram: Kumārikākhaṇḍaḥ: the Section 
Concerning the Virgin Goddess of the Tantra of the Churning Bhairava. Vols. 1, 2, 3, 4. New 
Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts.
Fisher, Elaine M. 2017. Hindu Pluralism: Religion and the Public Sphere in Early Modern South 
India. Oakland: University of California Press.
Gaiser, Adam. 2016. Shurāt Legends, Ibāḍī Identities: Martyrdom, Asceticism, and the Making of 
an Early Islamic Community. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
Golovkova, Anna A. 2012. “Śrīvidyā.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism Vol. 4. Historical 
Perspectives, Poets, Teachers, and Saints, Relation to Other Religions and Traditions, Hinduism 
and Contemporary Issues, edited by K. A. Jacobsen, H. Basu, and A. Malinar, 815–​822. Leiden, 
The Netherlands: Brill.
Golovkova, Anna A. 2017. “A Goddess for the Second Millennium: Transgression and 
Transformation in the Hindu Tantric Worship of Tripurasundarī.” PhD diss., Cornell 
University, Ithaca, NY.
Golovkova, Anna A. 2019. “From Worldly Powers to Jīvanmukti: Ritual and Soteriology in 
the Early Tantras of the Cult of Tripurasundarī.” Journal of Hindu Studies 12, no. 1 (May) 
(Liberation in Hindu Culture): 103–​126.
Golovkova, Anna A. 2020. “The Forgotten Consort: The Goddess and Kāmadeva in the Early 
Worship of Tripurasundarī.” International Journal of Hindu Studies 24, no. 1: 87–​106.
Golovkova, Anna A. 2021. “Kāmeśvarī: Visualizing the Goddess of Desire.” In A Garland 
of Forgotten Goddesses: Tales of the Feminine Divine from India and Beyond, edited by M. 
Slouber, 267–​289. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Goudriaan, Teun. 1981. “Hindu Tantric Literature in Sanskrit.” In Hindu Tantric and Śākta 
Literature, edited by T. Goudriaan and S. Gupta, ix–​172. Wiesbaden, Germany: Harrassowitz.
Hirmer, Monika. 2021. “ ‘Devi Needs Those Rituals!’ Ontological Considerations on Ritual 
Transformations in a Contemporary South Indian Srividya Tradition.” Religions of South Asia 
14 (1–​2): 117–​149.
Hobsbawm, Eric., and Terence Ranger, eds. 1983. The Invention of Tradition. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Karasinski, Maciej. 2020. “A Goddess Who Unites and Empowers: Śrīvidyā as a Link between 
Tantric Traditions of Modern Kerala—​Some Considerations.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 
48, no. 4: 541–​563.
Karasinski-​Sroka, Maciej. 2021. “When the Poison Is the Cure—​Healing and Embodiment in 
Contemporary Śrīvidyā Tantra of the Lalitāmbikā Temple.” Religions 12, no. 8: 607.

--- PAGE 370 ---
Śrīvidyā and Goddess Traditions      345
 
Karasinski-​Sroka, Maciej, and G. Sudev Krishna Sharman. 2022. “The Young Goddess Who 
Dances through the Ordinariness of Life―A Study on the Tantric Traditions of Kerala” 
Religions 13, no. 7: 667.
Khanna, Madhu. 1986. “The Concept and Liturgy of the Śrīcakra Based on Śivānanda’s Trilogy.” 
PhD diss., University of Oxford.
Kinsley, David. 1986. Hindu Goddesses: Visions of the Divine Feminine in the Hindu Religious 
Tradition. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kinsley, David. 1997. Tantric Visions of the Divine Feminine: The Ten Mahāvidyās. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2017. The Goddess within and beyond the Three Cities: Śākta Tantra and the 
Paradox of Power in Nepāla-​maṇḍala. New Delhi: DK Printworld.
Markus, Robert A. 1998. The End of Ancient Christianity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
McCrea, Lawrence J., and P. G. Patil. 2010. Buddhist Philosophy of Language in India: 
Jñānaśrīmitra’s Monograph on Exclusion. New York: Columbia University Press.
Nityāṣoḍaśikārṇava: With Two Commentaries Ṛjuvimarśinī by Śivānanda and Artharatnāvalī 
by Vidyānanda. 2011. Edited by Vrajavallabha Dviveda. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. First 
published 1988.
Padoux, André. 1990. Vāc: the Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. Translated by 
Jacques Gontier. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Padoux, André, and Amṛtānandanātha. 1994. Le Cœur De La Yoginī: Yoginīhṛdaya, Avec Le 
Commentaire Dīpikā D’amṛtānanda. Paris: Edition-​diffusion De Boccard.
Padoux, André, and Roger-Orphé Jeanty. 2013. The Heart of the Yogini: Yoginīhrdaya, a Sanskrit 
Tantric Treatise. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rao, Mani. 2019. Living Mantra: Mantra, Deity, and Visionary Experience Today. Cham, 
Switzerland: Springer International.
Śāktapramodaḥ of Raja Deva Nandan Singh. Edited by and with an introduction by M. Khanna. 
2013. New Delhi: Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan.
Sanderson, Alexis G. J. S. 1988. “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World’s Religions, 
edited by S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke, and F. Hardy, 660–​704. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Sanderson, Alexis G. J. S. 2007. “The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” Mélanges Tantriques à 
la Mémoire d’Hélène Brunner/​Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, edited by D. 
Goodall and A. Padoux, 231–​442, and 551–​582. Pondicherry: Institut Français d’Indologie/​
École Française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Sanderson, Alexis G. J. S. 2009. “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during 
the Early Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism. Institute of Oriental 
Culture Special Series 23, edited by S. Einoo, 41–​350. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo.
Sanderson, Alexis G. J. S. 2013. “The Śaiva Literature.” Journal of Indological Studies 24 & 
25: 1–​111.
Sanderson, Alexis G. J. S. 2014. “The Śaiva Texts.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism Vol. 6: 
Indices, edited by K. A. Jacobsen, H. Basu, and A. Malinar, 10–​42. Leiden, The Netherlands: 
Brill.
Śaṅkarācārya, and W. Norman Brown, eds. 1958. The Saundaryalahari: or, Flood of Beauty. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

--- PAGE 371 ---
346      Anna A. Golovkova
 
Schwarz Linder, Silvia. 2022. Goddess Traditions in India: Theological Poems and Philosophical 
Tales in the Tripurārahasya. New York: Routledge.
Shin, Jae-Eun. 2018. Change, Continuity, and Complexity: The Mahāvidyās in East Indian Śākta 
Traditions. New Delhi: Manohar: Routledge.
Singh, Rana P. B. 2010. Sacred Geography of Goddesses in South Asia: Essays in Memory of David 
Kinsley. Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars.
Slouber, Michael. 2021. A Garland of Forgotten Goddesses: Tales of the Feminine Divine from 
India and Beyond. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Stainton, Hamsa 2019. Poetry as Prayer in the Sanskrit Hymns of Kashmir. Oxford University 
Press.
Taylor, Kathleen. 2001. Sir John Woodroffe, Tantra and Bengal: “An Indian Soul in a European 
Body?” SOAS London Studies on South Asia. New York: Routledge.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2005. “Meditating Mantras: Meaning and Visualization in Tantric 
Literature.” In Theory and Practice of Yoga: Essays in Honour of Gerald James Larson, edited 
by K. A. Jacobsen, 213–​235. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2017. “Preface.” In The Goddess within and beyond the Three Cities: 
Śākta Tantra and the Paradox of Power in Nepāla-​maṇḍala, edited by J. S. Lidke, xiii–​xviii. 
New Delhi: DK Printworld.
Urban, Hugh B. 2003. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics and Power in the Study of Religion. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
White, David Gordon. 1998. “Transformations in the Art of Love: Kāmakalā Practices in 
Hindu Tantric and Kaula Traditions.” History of Religions 38, no. 2: 172–​198.
White, David Gordon. 2000. “Introduction.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by D. G. White, 3–​38. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Contexts. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Woodroffe, Sir John. [1922] 1971. Tantrarāja Tantra: a Short Analysis. 3rd ed. Madras: Ganesh.
Yoginīhṛdaya. Yoginīhṛdayam: Amṛtānandayogikṛtadīpikayā Bhāṣānuvādena ca Sāhitam. 
1988. Edited by V. Dviveda. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

--- PAGE 372 ---
Chapter 15
The Ḍākinī in 
Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism
Judith Simmer-​Brown
The great nineteenth-​century Tibetan yogin Shabkar (Ricard 1994, 262) recorded an 
important vision that came to him just at dawn, while camping near a high mountain 
at Gongmo La at the Snow Grouse Pass. In the dream, he encountered a decrepit old 
woman lying on the side of the road, unable to move and begging for help. Filled with 
compassion, the yogin gently lifted her head and fed her nourishing tsampa (rtsam pa) 
roasted barley flour, butter, and tea and provided her with clothing. When she asked for 
his horse as well, the yogin also offered his packhorse.
At that moment, she jumped up joyfully and said, “You are said to be the most com­
passionate one of all, so I thought to see for myself. I have no need of a horse or any­
thing of that sort. Don’t you recognize me?” “No,” confessed the yogin. And she sang, 
“If you don’t recognize me, I am the Diamond Sow Ḍākinī. I shall bestow upon you re­
alization. If you have doubts, look at this!” Instantly she transformed herself into the 
blazing red form of the Diamond Sow Ḍākinī with wrathful expression, her flowing 
hair adorned with the small head of a black sow. The ḍākinī was naked and ornamented 
with bone jewelry and crown, garlands of dried and fresh skulls and the implements of 
a wisdom-​ḍākinī—​a hooked knife and a skull cup filled with blood, a khaṭvāṅga staff in 
the crook of her arm. Majestically, she danced. Her heart center emanated rays of light 
that penetrated Shabkar’s heart, bringing a clear and vivid experience of expansive bliss 
and emptiness. Handing him a cloth medicine bag crammed with thousands of silver 
coins, she whispered, “Here is yogic success. Give these coins to worthy beings so that 
they also can fly.” And she flew off into the sky. Astonished, Shabkar discovered he could 
fly. Shortly afterward, he awoke and marveled at the gift of this dream.
The Diamond Sow Vajravārāhī or Dorje Phagmo (rdo rje phag mo)—​aka Vajrayoginī 
or the Diamond Yoginī—​is the preeminent wisdom-​ḍākinī, the most significant class 
of enlightened female figures in Tibetan Buddhism. This recorded encounter is em­
blematic in the lore of the ḍākinī for the lives of Vajrayāna practitioners in Indo-​Tibetan 
tantra, lore that is a treasured account of the spiritual journey, realization experiences,

--- PAGE 373 ---
348      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
and the sacred transmissions of Tantric practice. Within the yogic communities of 
Vajrayāna practitioners, these encounters are considered semiotic, elusive messages that 
could easily be missed, misconstrued, or misjudged by the practitioner. While these ac­
counts emerge in the hagiographies or namthar (rnam thar) of lineage teachers in at 
least abbreviated form, their primary transmission occurs orally from guru to disciple 
in Tibetan Buddhism.
This semiotic quality permeates Western scholarship on the ḍākinī as well, and lack of 
agreement about her meanings and attempts to interpret her according to various biases 
are reminiscent of Shabkar’s mistake. Janice Willis (1987, 57) has observed:
[The ḍākinī] represents one of the most important, potent, and dynamic images/​
ideas/​symbols within all of Tantra. Yet, precisely owing to such dynamism and 
power, and to the all-​encompassing nature of this symbol, it is almost impossible to 
pin it down to or limit it to a single definition.
As a result, studies of the ḍākinī in Western scholarship have been diverse in method, 
focus, and conclusions about meaning.
Ḍākinī is a term originally derived from Indian regional Prakrit or possibly Sanskrit 
(Cape 2020, 354–​355), vulgar in connotation, attributed to a minor female demon in the 
pantheon of deities associated with indigenous pre-​Brahmanical traditions of India. 
Tantra in India had developments parallel with yoginī traditions where the flying 
ḍākinis were sometimes called “filthy birds of the night” (White 2003, 205), “invariably 
malevolent” contrasted with the milder yoginīs (Hatley 2016, 7), or “vampiric female 
spirits” (Hatley 2022, 9). David Gordon White (65) observed, “[T]‌he terms ḍākinī and 
yoginī are nearly synonymous in Tantric traditions, with Buddhist sources favoring the 
former and Hindu the latter.” David Gray (2007, 86) and others noted the first Buddhist 
text to portray ḍākinīs as non-​demonic is Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara, a 
“proto-​yoginītantra” that describes ḍākinīs in a positive light as spiritual beings but also 
retains the older image of them as nonhuman and dangerous (English 2002, 5, 12–​13; 
Hatley 2016, 14; Kalff 1978, 149–​150). The ḍākinī was assimilated to Buddhist Mahāyāna 
and Vajrayāna meanings, with the unlikely marriage of the Prajñāpāramitā formulations 
of the pristine female bodhisattva of wisdom with the transgressive nasty demonness 
dwelling in charnel grounds. Tantric Buddhism in India highlighted the ḍākinī in lore 
and liturgy, and after these traditions reached Tibet in the eighth and ninth centuries 
CE, the ḍākinī eventually became a unified though elusive symbol of realization in the 
Vajrayāna sense, sometimes called the ḍākinī principle (Simmer-​Brown 2001, 45–​53).
Etymology of the word “ḍākinī” is said to have derived from the Sanskrit root dī, to 
fly, translated “she who flies in the sky” referring to the powerful visionary form who 
finds her abode in the vast space of śūnyatā, emptiness of apparent existence. The 
Tibetan term khandroma (mkha’ ‘dro ma) expresses this meaning further: “she who 
enjoys the abode of the sky.” Kha refers again to śūnyatā (tongpa-​nyi, stong pa nyid) the 
nonconceptual realization of the dreamlike nature of all phenomena appearing in the 
skylike mind. In the oral tradition, dro refers to enjoying as the ḍākinī dances in this vast

--- PAGE 374 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      349
 
space. Her constant movement in the sky of experience points out the this nature experi­
entially (Simmer-​Brown 2001, 48–​52).
Orientalist Studies of the Ḍākinī
When Western scholars and spiritual seekers have encountered partial artifacts of the es­
oteric traditions of ḍākinīs, the potential for confusion and projection has proliferated, 
following orientalist habits that appropriate the ḍākinī for Western agendas. Those who 
longed for a sacred feminine seized on the gender of the ḍākinī as being most significant, 
indiscriminatingly appropriating her meaning as a divine savioress or a construction of 
patriarchal fantasy. The earliest gendered interpretations of the ḍākinī were influenced 
by psychoanalyst Carl Jung, who wrote “psychological commentaries” on newly dis­
covered Tibetan tantric texts implying that the ḍākinī is like the anima.1 The overt 
associations between the ḍākinī of Tibet and the Jungian anima were not explicit until 
1963, when Herbert Guenther (1963, ii–​iii) commented on the appearance of the ugly 
hag to the scholar Nāropa, surmising, “all that he had neglected and failed to develop 
was symbolically revealed to him as the vision of an old and ugly woman,” remarking 
in a footnote that “this aspect has a great similarity to what the Swiss psychologist C. G. 
Jung calls the ‘anima’.”
In critique of this depiction of the “fantasy of opposites,” neo-​Jungian James Hillman 
(1985, 7) reflected that there was a rich trade in which “smuggled hypotheses, pretty 
pieties about Eros, and eschatological indulgences about saving one’s soul through re­
lationship, becoming more feminine, and the sacrifice of the intellect” provided fertile 
ground for New Age appropriation of ḍākinīs for orientalist agendas. The most prom­
inent of these came from James Redfield’s appropriation of the ḍākinī in The Celestine 
Prophecy series (1999), where they were brought into service of a New Age movement 
that sports a journal and website linking with ecological, Christian, health, and so­
cial activism issues. When Jungian views combined with Western projections about 
tantric sexuality, ḍākinīs are considered sexually available, wild women with spiritual 
power. “Dakini trainings,” even those offered online, promise Ecstatic Awareness and 
Conscious Intimacy which may qualify one to be a “sexual priestess.” There are ḍākinī 
clothing companies, assuring the consumer that “ḍākinīs are ready for any adventure, 
big or small.”2 Additional appropriation is found in New Age utopian literature where 
there are ḍākinī oracle decks and fantasy novels featuring sexually free powerful women 
as protagonists.3
Building on Jung’s “fantasy of opposites,” orientalist feminist studies of the ḍākinī 
have fallen into two general contrasexual critiques: one extreme identified the fe­
male ḍākinī as a construct of patriarchy drawn by a primarily monastic Buddhist es­
tablishment in Tibet into service of the religious goals of the male practitioner only. 
June Campbell (1996) critiqued Tibetan Buddhist patriarchal monastic and religious 
systems, arguing that the ḍākinī is the secret, hidden, and mystical quality of absolute

--- PAGE 375 ---
350      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
insight required by men, a symbol of patriarchal Buddhism that guards male privi­
lege. Campbell concluded that the ḍākinī is an emblem of patriarchy, inaccessible to 
and even dangerous for the female practitioner, whether Tibetan or Western. German 
scholar Adelheid Herrmann-​Pfandt (1990) wrote a comprehensive study of the ḍākinī 
from South Asia to Tibet, influenced deeply by the Jungian models of contrasexuality 
found in German psychologist Eric Neumann’s work, The Great Mother: An Analysis of 
the Archetype (1983). The scope of her monograph was impressively broad, but her fem­
inist agenda following the reductionistic models of Neumann’s work shaped her orien­
talist conclusions about the ḍākinī, missing the spiritual significance and symbolism of 
the paradigm.
A second feminist perspective identified the ḍākinī as a goddess figure in an Indian 
gynocentric cult in which females were the primary cult leaders and males were their 
devoted students, asserted by Miranda Shaw (1994). She suggested that in India, women 
served as gurus and ritual specialists, but as Buddhism spread to Tibet, this role changed 
and women no longer played ritual or teaching roles. She argued that Tibetan patri­
archy shaped the ḍākinī symbol into an abstract patriarchal ideal which serves the 
spiritual paths of male yogins only, betraying her Indian historical roots. Both of these 
feminist critiques drew from orientalist agendas, seeking a sacred feminine to meet 
Western longings and measuring the ḍākinī against her relevance for the spiritual lives 
of Western practitioners.
Ḍākinī as Polysemic Symbol 
of Realization
Historian Caroline Walker Bynum (1992) cautions the religious studies scholar against 
assuming that a female goddesses or symbols could be interpreted accurately using 
feminist or sociological methods that may be more appropriate for analyzing texts and 
institutional structures. She found in her work on medieval Christian nuns that gen­
dered symbols say nothing predictable about social structures like patriarchy and an­
drocentrism and very little about the actual lives of women and men. She joins previous 
researchers who indicated that where a feminine symbol is lofty and idealized, patri­
archy is often firmly in place in society (Klein 1985b). She also asserts that all humans 
experience things in a gendered way, and that women often interpret symbols quite 
differently from men. In fact, gendered symbols often transmute gender even while 
referring to it (Bynum 1986, 1–​20). Particular nuance, skill in interpretation, and under­
standing of phenomenology of religious symbols as described by philosophers like Paul 
Ricoeur is required. Her observations are particularly helpful for scholars who work 
in tantric traditions of India and Tibet which valorize the feminine in symbol systems, 
preventing methodological mistakes in interpretation that can distort our work in the 
field of tantric studies.

--- PAGE 376 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      351
 
Gender studies perspectives challenge the orientalist assumptions of early studies, 
bringing the scholar to the phenomenological question of the meaning of ḍākinī for the 
traditions in which she is practiced. Janice Willis’s important 1987 essay opens the explo­
ration of the ḍākinī to broader methods of interpretation as she surveys the prevailing 
interpretations in Tibetan Buddhist scholarship, finding them inadequate to the task. 
Affirming the consistent “feminine” manifestation of the ḍākinī, Willis asserts that it 
is a mistake to assume that the ḍākinī is only female; Willis uses female pronouns in 
quotation marks throughout her essay. For Willis (1987, 58) the overall meaning of the 
ḍākinī can best be found as the embodiment of the genderless penultimate realizations 
of Vajrayāna meditation, “the direct, unmediated, and non-​conceptual experience of 
[śūnyatā, tongpa-​nyi] . . . ineffable reality itself.” She concludes her essay (58) with the 
suggestion that the ḍākinī be understood as a “feminine principle” and “the symbol par 
excellence,” suggesting that a full exploration of these seemingly conflicting features and 
their meaning would “require at least a book.”
My own research (2001) took on this task, analyzing the ḍākinī as “feminine prin­
ciple,” a central, polysemic paradigm of spiritual development in Tibetan Buddhism, 
drawing from Paul Ricoeur’s (1986, 9, 237; Gschwandtner 2020, 91–​93) approach to 
symbol, myth, and culture. The intention of this work is to identify the meaning of the 
elusive construct of the ḍākinī for Vajrayāna practice and realization as interpreted 
within Tibetan tantric culture. Drawing on interviews with Tibetan lamas, Vajrayāna 
sādhana and other ritual practices and their commentaries, narratives of ḍākinī lore 
from hagiographies (namthar) of the great practitioners, and iconographic materials, 
this research surveys the varieties of ways in which the ḍākinī is understood especially 
in Kagyü and Nyingma lineages of Tibet and interprets them with the help of a model 
suggested by a Mahāmudrā yogin, Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtsho (Simmer-​Brown 2001, 
69–​79). This model includes gendered and nongendered expressions of ḍākinī prin­
ciple, closely integrated in their meaning.
Dakini’s Warm Breath followed the construct of phenomenologist Paul Ricoeur 
(1967, 9, 237) who identifies three levels of a symbol, important for interpretations of 
meaning: primary, secondary, tertiary. The primary level is experienced preverbally 
through dreams and visions or through meditative realization and constitutes what 
Ricoeur called symbol. In this, her most essential aspect, the ḍākinī is called the formless 
wisdom-​nature of the mind itself at the heart of all Vajrayāna practice, overtly associated 
with her Indian roots in the Prajñāpāramitā literature. In its “tantric phase” (Conze 1973, 
201), the sūtra called Perfect Wisdom in One Letter distills the entire teaching into the syl­
lable A. This Sanskrit syllable becomes the representation of the formless ḍākinī, called 
by Nyingma master Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpa Nyima (1865–​1926) (Gyatso 1992, 185 n. 8) 
the “empty letter door that displays emptiness.” Sādhanas often invoke this meaning of 
the ḍākinī through the syllable A. Twentieth-​century Nyingma teacher Chagdüd Tülku 
Rinpoche (1930–​2002) explained, “Knowing the nature of emptiness nondualistically 
is liberation. Whether you call it emptiness, the absolute, or the ḍākinī makes no dif­
ference. All are liberating” (Chagdud 1989). On a primary level, ḍākinī also refers to 
the yogic subtle body network of channels and winds activated in the inner practices

--- PAGE 377 ---
352      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
of tantra. The esoteric name for the subtle body is ḍākinījāla, the invisible network of 
the ḍākinīs. Synchronizing body and mind through the subtle body (manomaya-​kāya) 
in tantric meditation generates powerful realization of the true nature (Simmer-​Brown 
2001, 172–​176, 290).
Arising from the experience of the primary, Ricoeur’s secondary level of a symbol is 
found in myth and ritual—​the narrative or poetic expressions or in ritual practice, one 
step removed from nonconceptual experience but often imbued with the power to evoke 
this primary experience. Records of mythic encounters appear in hagiographies or 
namthar like Shabkar’s, above, where she is depicted in a personified manner as an un­
predictable semiwrathful dancing spirit-​woman. Often her appearance is accompanied 
by the bestowal of realization, prophecy, or admonition, experienced somatically by 
the practitioner as nonconceptual bliss and insight. Her demeanor changes in various 
contexts: she may be playful, nurturing, or sharp and wrathful, especially when cutting 
through spiritual arrogance or protecting the integrity of tantric transmission. She is 
also a fierce protector who guards the most private details of the practice, so that only 
those with the purest motivation are able to penetrate their essence (Simmer-​Brown 
2001, 116–​121).
Visionary ḍākinīs also are important meditational deities or yidams (iṣṭadevatā) 
in tantric rituals or sādhanas or drup-​thap (sgrub thabs) that manifest the secondary 
level of the ḍākinī symbol, where they are deities in their own right, or they appear as 
consorts and members of the retinue of male yidams. The most famous of ḍākinī yidams 
is Vajrayoginī, also known as Vajravārāhī, who appeared to Shabkar in the dream above. 
While the ḍākinī counterparts, the wrathful male consort heruka “blood drinkers” or 
trak-​thung (khrag ‘thung) sometimes remain unnamed, all represent the wisdom di­
mension of enlightenment joined with masculine compassion and skillful means. Subtle 
body yoga practices in sādhana practice may include visualizations in deity yoga crea­
tion stage practice (utpattikrama, kye-​rim, bskyed rim), movement of energy through 
the channels of the body in completion stage practice (sampannakrama, dzog-​rim, 
rdzogs rim), and the practice of sexual yoga (karmamudrā, lekyi chag-​gya, las kyi phyag 
rgya) (Simmer-​Brown 2001, 216–​221). Tibetan Buddhism safeguards these aspects of 
advanced meditation, holding them private in the oral transmissions from the personal 
guru; the true meaning cannot be accessed nonconceptually without guidance from 
the guru.4 When ḍākinīs are invoked as deities in ritual practice, they represent the di­
rect realization of the innate wisdom mind, the authenticity of the guru lineages that 
transmit them, the methods of practice—​whether ritual, yogic, or direct—​by which the 
wisdom mind is uncovered.
Tertiary forms of the symbol take the form of theology, philosophical expres­
sion, or societal usages where they are influenced by conventional notions of gender 
imposed by culture. Appellations of ḍākinī status to human women fall into this cat­
egory of the symbol. As contemporary Nyingma lama Dzigar Kongtrul Rinpoche (b. 
1964) cautioned, attributing ḍākinī status to human women is “not really dharma, more 
like folklore” influenced by many factors of culture.5 In traditional Tibet, these women 
were often considered jetsünmas (rje btsun ma), an honorific title signifying powerful

--- PAGE 378 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      353
 
practice, great realization, and exemplary teaching. Whether as the mother, sister, or 
consort of a renowned guru or as a teacher in their own right, these jetsünmas popu­
late the history of the major yogic lineages of Tibet, demonstrating that the essence of 
the ḍākinī can be found in the lives of actual women. Generally restrained by patriar­
chal custom from the full monastic education, public teaching roles, or the recognition 
of being an incarnate tülku, these human ḍākinīs have nevertheless been revered and 
treasured in Tibetan Vajrayāna for the unique ways they have propagated the dharma.
Taken together, honoring the feminine and women are considered foundational in 
traditional Vajrayāna tantric commitments (samaya, damtsik, dam tshig). As patriarch 
Sakya Pandita (1182–​1251) (Willis 1987, 103) described as the fourteenth “root downfall” 
associated with samaya in classic fashion:
If one disparages women who are of the nature of wisdom, that is the fourteenth 
root downfall. That is to say, women are the symbol of wisdom and śūnyatā, showing 
both. It is therefore a root downfall to dispraise women in every possible way, saying 
that women are without spiritual merit . . . and made of unclean things, not consid­
ering their good qualities.
Honoring the ḍākinī paradigm on all these levels connects the practitioner more closely 
with Vajrayāna devotion and realization.
In summary, in Tibetan tantra the ḍākinī principle has at least four polysemic levels 
of interrelated meaning, correlating with various dimensions of transmission, practice, 
and realization. These levels of the ḍākinī symbol relate to the “spiritual subjectivities” 
of women and men, illuminating the intimacy of personal experience in meditation as 
the essence of its meaning. As the ḍākinī paradigm moves from “inchoate symbol to 
narrative myth to explicit articulation of doctrine” (Gschwandtner 2020, 92) diverse 
dimensions of her meaning can easily become confusing and tangled. This perspec­
tive sets the stage for analyzing contributions to understanding the ḍākinī in recent 
scholarship.
Sādhanas, Liturgies, and Teachings
As shown above, ḍākinīs are a primary class of meditational deity (yidam), central to 
ritual practices in which they appear as the primary visualized deity, as a consort, or in 
the retinue of the central deity. The practitioner visualizes the ḍākinī as a self-​ or front-​
visualization in female form as the personification of aspects of the wisdom qualities 
of Buddhahood. Vajravārāhī, the Diamond Sow, is the most famous of these yidams, 
but other deity figures such as the passionate Kurukullā, the wrathful Siṃhamukhā, the 
terrifying protector Ekajaṭī, and the bliss-​granting Yeshe Tsogyal are among important 
ḍākinī yidams. Each of these has their own cycles of sādhanas with detailed mandalas of 
their realms.

--- PAGE 379 ---
354      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
Several studies of the ḍākinī yidams have been published in the last two decades. 
Elizabeth English (2002) deftly translates the eleventh-​century Vajrayoginī sādhana of 
Umāpatideva, one of the collection of the Guḥyasamāja sādhanas, with analysis of the 
ritual dimensions and illustrated with stunning colored plates of Vajravārāhī thangkas 
and statuary. In addition, she briefly places the text in the context of the living cult of 
Vajrayoginī in classical India up to the present day. In a related work, the fine transla­
tion by David Gonsalez (2020) of the collection of sādhana and guru yoga practices of 
Vajrayoginī and the accessible commentaries by influential Geluk master Pabongkha 
Rinpoche (1878–​1941) have contributed to the traditions of Vajrayoginī practice. In spite 
of its title, The Extremely Secret Dakini of Naropa, the book openly publishes diagrams of 
visualizations and subtle body yoga that would be unthinkable in Kagyü and Nyingma 
circles of tantric lamas. Although it is listed as a restricted text, it is readily available from 
both the publisher and Amazon.
Many practitioner-​scholars are reticent to publicly publish translations and especially 
visualized ritual and subtle body yoga details of sādhanas of yidam practices, for they 
are considered esoteric and private, not appropriate for general distribution. Elizabeth 
English (2002, xxiii), for example, noted the “strict code of secrecy in imparting the 
instructions for her actual practice” that kept her from accessing practice instructions of 
Vajrayoginī sādhanas. Nevertheless, important contributions to understanding ḍākinī 
sādhanas continues with lineage blessings without violating secrecy. A precious little an­
thology (Kunsang et al. 2018) of Nyingma ḍākinī treasures and practices entitled Dakini 
Activity is a great example of available resources on the major ḍākinī yidams.
In 1985, Anne Klein (1985a) published a brief study of the sādhana practice of the 
Great Bliss Queen, Yeshe Tsogyal, from the Longchen Nyingthik Dzogchen traditions, 
included as the final chapter of one of her books (1995a, 2008). In the years since this 
essay was published, the renowned Adzom Paylo Rinpoche, one of the most important 
Dzogchen masters in contemporary Tibet, discovered a hidden treasure-​text in a vision 
at Yeshe Tsogyal’s sacred lake, which has become part of his treasure cycle, Luminous 
Heart Essence, Ösel Nyingthik. Treasure-​texts (terma, gter ma), one of two genres of 
source tantric texts, represent fresh revelations from Guru Rinpoche appropriate to con­
temporary changing times and hidden in physical locations or in the minds of realized 
yogins. They are discovered by these visionary yogins, called treasure-​discoverers 
(tertöns, gter ton), often supported by celestial or human ḍākinīs who are said to protect 
the treasures until the time is right. Rinpoche entrusted Klein, aka Lama Rigzin Drolma 
of Houston’s Dawn Mountain Temple, to teach this sādhana and give commentary, 
and she has offered this practice to qualified students.6 In a forthcoming book, Klein 
discusses and translates the two-​part terma—​a ḍākinī foundational practice (ngöndro, 
sngon ‘gro) centered on Yeshe Tsogyal, and a sādhana practice for becoming her. This 
book, part of Wisdom’s new House of Adzom series, unveils the layered richness of the 
sādhana and identifies different dimensions of experience to which the practitioner is 
invited by the practice, such as reflections on the feminine, on gender, and on what it 
means in modern times to have a relationship with the wisdom ḍākinī Yeshe Tsogyal.

--- PAGE 380 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      355
 
Klein’s work comes on the heels of fine translations of major biographies of Yeshe 
Tsogyal, eighth-​century queen of Tibet and the most prominent historical human 
ḍākinī in Tibetan tradition. The two independent namthar of Yeshe Tsogyal appeared 
as treasure-​texts after centuries of appearing as subnarratives in accounts of Guru 
Rinpoche. The treasure of Taksham Samten Lingpa (b. 1655), translated into English 
at least three times (Dowman 1984; Padmakara 1999; Tarthang 1983), depicts Yeshe 
Tsogyal’s miraculous birth, personal obstacles, and auspicious partnership with Guru 
Rinpoche. Drime Kunga’s namthar (Drolma 2017) of Yeshe Tsogyal from the fourteenth 
century is more abbreviated but still depicts her as “not exclusively human,” an emana­
tion of the mahāsattva Sarasvatī, goddess of wisdom (Angowski 2019, 15). In addition, 
a treasure revealed by Nyang Ral Nyima Oser (1124–​1192), entitled “The Questions and 
Answers of the Noble Lady” (Kunsang 1990), is a series of concise teachings given by 
Guru Rinpoche to his consort Yeshe Tsogyal on how to take the teachings to heart, mod­
eling the intimacy between guru and disciple, heruka, and ḍākinī. We are fortunate to 
have such extensive materials on Yeshe Tsogyal as a Tibetan woman from legend and 
history who became a ḍākinī meditational deity with her own cycle of practices.
Sarah Harding has translated the teachings of several revered human ḍākinī lin­
eage holders, contributing richly to understanding their teachings and practices. Her 
guru Kalu Rinpoche (1905–​1989) requested her to collect and translate teachings of 
Niguma, the elusive eleventh-​century Kashmiri genetrix of the Shangpa Kagyü lin­
eage, often referred to as the “secret lineage” because tradition has it that Niguma 
instructed Khyungpo Naljor to give transmission to only one person for seven gener­
ations. Niguma’s treasury of thirteen teachings (Harding 2010) from the Tibetan canon 
include her Six Yogas (Nigu Chödruk) teachings that parallel those of her brother or hus­
band, Nāropa, as well as general practice instructions for Mahāmudrā, sādhanas from 
Cakrasaṃvara and Hevajra cycles, and advice for practice in daily life. Niguma’s pre­
cious instructions on subtle body yoga are appropriately entitled “The Ḍākinī’s Personal 
Instructions” (183–​192). Harding’s translation foregrounds an endangered lineage of 
Tibetan Buddhism that has influenced all the other Kagyü schools.
Harding has also translated the treasury of teachings of Tibet’s most renowned 
yoginī, Machik Lapdrön (1055–​1149/​53), entitled Machik’s Complete Explanation 
(Machik Namshe) (Harding 2003). This Tibetan handbook provides the lineage his­
tory, practice, and view of the severance (chöd, gcod), the unique and innovative 
ḍākinī practice that cuts through ego-​clinging and fixations in contemplations of 
the charnel grounds (śmaśāna, turtrö. dur khrod) that invoke the realization of emp­
tiness and compassion. Harding’s additional translation of the fourteenth volume of 
Jamgön Kongtrul Lodro Thaye’s Treasury of Precious Instructions (Harding 2016) is an 
anthology of important source texts for Chöd practice, including rites of initiation, 
empowerments for the practice, and general instructions and guides for the practi­
tioner. With these three translated volumes and their informative and accessible 
introductions, Harding has proven herself to be a pivotal contributor to ḍākinī re­
search in the twenty-​first century.

--- PAGE 381 ---
356      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
Namthar—​Autobiography 
and Biography
With the expansion of Buddhist studies into Himalayan Buddhism in the last twenty-​
five years, methods of research exponentially contextualize understanding of the ḍākinī 
through translation, fieldwork, literary studies, ritual studies, art history, anthropology, 
and women’s studies, redressing the orientalist agendas of the past. Janet Gyatso cautions 
against using ahistorical paradigms to essentialize the female gender in her anthology, 
Women in Tibet (2007, 5–​6), identifying her study as concerned with historical women 
only. When the Tibetan ḍākinī paradigm is appropriated “to further Western feminist 
goals” such as in the assertion that all women are ḍākinī, elements of the ḍākinī are 
essentialized beyond cultural and historical circumstances; this is contested by Tibetans 
themselves who have repeatedly asserted that all women are ḍākinīs, qualifying that 
statement as not ontological and referring to intangible aspects of the nature of mind 
(Simmer-​Brown 2001, 202–​207). Also, as Dzigar Kongtrul reminds us, assertions like 
these are “not really dharma, more like folklore.” These perspectives share with Carolyn 
Walker Bynum the recognition that there is no direct correlation between the idealized 
symbols of the ḍākinī with the lives of Tibetan women specifically, and especially for 
non-​Tibetan women who might be ensnared by the orientalist enterprise.
In 1984, Tsultrim Allione published the first Western anthology of biographies of 
realized Tibetan women, based on the translations of biographies of six women from 
Tibetan lore identified as ḍākinīs; these “rough” translations were motivated by her 
own desire to support her own practice. Since then, Tibetan studies scholars have 
produced polished translations of hagiographies (namthar) and biographies of en­
lightened women, many of whom are identified in their Tibetan communities as incar­
nate ḍākinīs. This work reverses in part what Rita Gross (1993; Miles et al. 2006, 68–​70) 
called the “quadruple androcentrism” of historic Buddhist traditions: not only did in­
itial determinations of what was canonical favor the experience of men, subsequent 
choices of accounts favored hero accounts over those of women. In addition, Western 
Buddhist studies have been dominated by male subjectivity and power, and contem­
porary Buddhism in Asia and the West continues the androcentric habit. In redress 
of these omissions, many contemporary scholars have prioritized the retrieval and 
translation of the lives and teachings of realized Tibetan women, including recognized 
human ḍākinīs.
The sheer vitality of this strain of ḍākinī studies raises important questions about 
traditional Tibetan society, and for the contemporary Tibetans in Chinese Tibet and in 
exile, and their considering some notable women to be ḍākinīs. What does it mean to be 
a human ḍākinī? Does this refer to some innate ontological quality, and how does this 
not reify female sex and gender in ways that offend feminists, scholars, and Buddhists? 
While namthar of the great female practitioners emphasize the special qualities of

--- PAGE 382 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      357
 
incarnate ḍākinīs (zugpe khandroma, gzugs pa’i mkha’ ‘gro ma), born already enlight­
ened with auspicious physical marks, such idealized accounts also raise questions 
about the gap this fosters between ordinary women in Tibetan society and the elevated 
ḍākinī. How are the accounts of Tibetan yoginīs understood and interpreted in modern 
Tibetan society?
Tibetan sacred biographies share features found in exemplar accounts in every reli­
gion, where there is a creative tension between imitability on the one hand and distinc­
tiveness of the exemplar on the other. The body of literature associated with exemplars 
is commonly understood to derive from religious institutions meeting the needs of 
folk religion, animating the efficacy of the spiritual path in dynamic and engaging ways 
through inspiring narrative (Kieckeffer and Bond 1990, viii; Ray 1984, 3–​14). In these 
accounts, conferred sainthood, in order to be inspirational, must represent the lives of 
exemplars as imitable in some way, demonstrating the attainability of the goal. However, 
if these accounts are too ordinary in displaying intractable challenges, they may not suf­
ficiently depict the qualities of realization valued in the tradition. Generally speaking, 
Tibetan namthar locate themselves along a spectrum between these two extremes 
(Gyatso 1998, 105–​107).
Over the span of Indian and Tibetan history, previous lofty and miraculous accounts 
of the lives of ḍākinīs have become more humanized, adorned with personal challenges 
and societal obstacles that these remarkable women have overcome. The early 
biographies are often embedded within the namthar of great male herukas like Guru 
Rinpoche, or as fragments in anthologized namthar in sacred history (chöjung, cho 
‘byung) texts. Independent biographies emerge as terma texts centuries later, indicating 
the increasing importance of the human ḍākinī in Tibetan lore, and these biographies 
include emphasis on imitability. While accounts of ḍākinīs like Yeshe Tsogyal and 
Machik Lapdrön include unique challenges faced by women on the path of dharma—​
overcoming parental pressure to marry, resisting demands of impatient suitors, the sur­
liness of in-​laws and extended families about wifely responsibilities, and the suspicions 
surrounding the ḍākinī’s retreat practice—​there remains strong emphasis on the super­
human births and miracles as well as the remarkable realization of the wisdom-​ḍākinīs. 
The traditional accounts are filled with miraculous elements with rainbows at birth, or­
nate visionary material, auspicious signs on the ḍākinī‘s body, and plenty of flying, and 
so we can conclude that these historic ḍākinī namthar lean more heavily on the distinc­
tiveness of the ḍākinī‘s life than upon her imitability, but that imitable themes remain 
important. Elizabeth Angowski (2019, 300) concludes that these narratives are intended 
less as “proto-​feminist” narrative and more as inspiration for tenacity in one’s practice of 
the dharma.
The stunning translation and study by Sarah Jacoby (2014) of the autobiography of 
the twentieth-​century Sera Khandro (1892–​1940) more explicitly expresses the ḍākinī’s 
human conundrums shared with ordinary women. Sera Khandro’s first-​person ac­
count locates her as an accomplished woman entering a predominantly male religious 
calling, supported by visionary ḍākinīs constantly encouraging and guiding her. Under

--- PAGE 383 ---
358      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
Jacoby’s skillful moniker of “the ḍākinī dialogues” (­chapter 3), Sera Khandro’s autobiog­
raphy juxtaposes her inner human doubts stemming from her “inferior birth” (kyemen, 
skye dman) as a woman with vibrant visionary ḍākinīs who praise her, encourage her, 
and remind her of her ḍākinī destiny. This namthar exemplifies the rich literature in 
visionary ḍākinīs’ support for women’s practice, contesting earlier claims to the con­
trary. The dialogue between Sera Khandro and her ḍākinī mentors becomes what Jacoby 
calls “autobiographical ventriloquy,” which simultaneously affirms her lofty qualities 
and acknowledges the personal challenges she faces as a human ḍākinī. Sera Khandro’s 
importance in contemporary Tibetan renaissance cannot be overemphasized. Tsadra 
Foundation translator Ngawang Zangpo has published a collection of Sera Khandro's 
teachings in Refining Our Perception of Reality (2013), including a short autobiography 
translated by Christina Monson.
Fieldwork research has added a great deal of nuance to the way human ḍākinīs are 
identified and designated in modern and contemporary Tibetan communities. More 
time-​honored criteria derived from analysis of namthar appear to be miraculous 
elements at birth, such as distinctive physical marks or celestial events; personal reali­
zation through tantric practice; serving as a recognized tantric guru; family relationship 
with an incarnate lama (tülku, sprul sku)—​as wife, mother, or sister; and having devel­
oped realization power (siddhi, ngödrup, dngos grub) in a ḍākinī yidam practice.7 Tülku 
incarnations are discovered usually as children, reeducated, and formally empowered to 
continue the work of their former incarnation. Contemporary fieldwork has provided a 
more nuanced study of contemporary namthar with greater contextualization of social 
and historical factors. There appears to be no formal procedure or approval process at 
work; instead, regional male hierarchs or gurus from nearby monasteries develop an 
unspoken consensus in the matter, tying the ḍākinī designation directly to patriarchal 
structures.
In the case of contemporary Tibet, the ḍākinī designation is tied not only to dharmic 
criteria but also to regional and lineage social fabric, to the power of sacred places, and 
to the strength and inspiration of Tibetan dynastic history in a time of cultural and en­
vironmental degradation. The study of Golok’s Khandro Rinpoche (b. 1954) by Sarah 
Jacoby (2015) emphasizes “relational autonomy” in the ḍākinī’s life as her unwavering 
devotion to the dharma emerged in antireligious times during the Cultural Revolution. 
Her siblings and husband were Chinese officials, offering her wealth and status under 
Chinese rule, which she rejected in favor of a life of practice and patronage of Tibetan 
lamas and monasteries. After her first son was recognized as a tülku in utero, she 
contracted a mysterious illness that left her mute and turned her mind to the dharma. 
As she came to be recognized as a wisdom-​ḍākinī, she used her Chinese family contacts 
to finance and support endangered teachings and rebuild monasteries, cementing her 
ḍākinī role as protector and preserver of the teachings. Later in life, her many years of re­
treat in Vairotsana Cave identified her more fully with Tibet’s golden age and revitalizing 
the dharma in Eastern Tibet.

--- PAGE 384 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      359
 
Sexuality and Tibetan Buddhist Tantra
The tantric rite of sexual union has been part of Vajrayāna meditation from tantra’s an­
tinomian roots in Indian circles through its introduction to Tibet in the eighth century; 
it has been a practice associated with subtle body yoga, as harnessing the channels and 
winds fueled by sexual desire has been an intrinsic part of realizing the true nature of 
mind (White 2003, chaps. 3, 4). Compassionate intent has been considered central, and 
motivations for merely personal gratification have always been considered the greatest 
obstacle in the practice. Traditionally, there have been three ways to channel desire in 
tantric meditation. First, in creation-​stage practice, one visualizes the yidam deities as 
yab-​yum in sexual union. Second, one can generate internal heat (caṇḍalī, tummo, gtum 
mo) by moving the winds through the central channel of the subtle body in comple­
tion phase formless meditation. These first two methods are the primary ones practiced 
in celibate monastic communities and by most contemporary Vajrayāna practitioners. 
In a third way, one practices so-​called sexual yoga (karmamudrā, lekyi chaggya, las kyi 
phyag rgya) with a consort. Based on the experience of bliss that can become great bliss 
(mahāsukha, dewa chenpo, bde ba chen po), it is possible to more quickly remove emo­
tional and conceptual obscurations in one’s practice (Simmer-​Brown 2001, 216–​217). 
This third method is rarely taught because the transmissions have been lost in many 
lineages through misuses, societal controversy, and the rarity of its mastery. The ḍākinī 
has always been tied to karmamudrā—​symbolically as the network of subtle channels 
(ḍākinī-​jāla); as seed syllables of the sacred sites of the body mandala; iconically with 
a wrathful male yidam consort in visualizations in sādhana practice; or actually as co-​
consorts with male yogins. Tibetan tantra’s patriarchy has privileged the male perspec­
tive in this practice, often objectifying and denying agency to the female consort partner.
Recent research has shed additional light on the traditional practice of karmamudrā 
and the ḍākinī, showing that even in fourteenth-​century Tibet, it was not without con­
troversy. Kali Cape (2020, 353–​356) summarizes the “taxonomy” of consort types in her 
essay on the fourteenth-​century Dzogchen treasure-​text revealed by Pema Lendreltsal 
(1291–​1315/​17) and expanded by Longchenpa (1308–​1363) and students of the Third 
Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje (1284–​1339). The Ḍakki’s Path and Fruit (dakki lam ´bras 
skor) text is a manual by and for male adepts in heteronormative sexual yoga practice on 
352 variables to consider when choosing an appropriate consort, part of a genre of such 
texts in the corpus. This text warns of the dangers of the choice of an inauspicious con­
sort whose partnership might induce “interpersonal problems, social consequences, ec­
onomic consequences, shortening of one’s life span, grave soteriological consequences, 
and even sexually transmitted diseases” (Cape 2020, 364). Cape contextualizes these 
cautions in a tradition in which the general norm is renunciation of sexuality by 
speaking not only of negative consequences in personal karma and dharmic destiny but 
also of the disastrous social effects of inadvisable consorts. Nowhere are the intentions,

--- PAGE 385 ---
360      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
agency, or consequences for the woman considered, highlighting the patriarchal privi­
lege assumed in the treasure-​text.
Sera Khandro’s experience as a consort figures prominently in her autobiography, 
as she speaks candidly about her intimate relationship with her beloved guru Drime 
Özer as they entered extended retreat together and attained enlightenment through 
karmamudrā sexual yoga practice (chap. 4). She speaks of her final years with her guru 
as “the two, method and insight, actually merging into one taste” (296). Her rare first-​
person account also shows the challenges faced by a noncelibate yoginī in Tibetan 
communities where resisting unwanted advances from unscrupulous lama suitors, en­
during gossip and jealousy in the community, distinguishing between ordinary lust and 
passion that supports one’s practice, and establishing her own agency in her spiritual 
journey figure prominently in her narrative. Jacoby (2014, 191) remarks:
The candor with which Sera Khandro writes about such matters takes consort 
practices out of the distant, abstract, and highly symbolic frameworks in which they 
often appear in prescriptive, doctrinal and ritual Tantric texts and situates them 
within the specific context of twentieth-​century religious encampments in the no­
madic highlands of eastern Tibet.
Sera Khandro clarifies that the three purposes of karmamudrā—​what Jacoby calls 
“soteriological, hermeneutical, and pragmatic”—​apply to both yogins and yoginīs (2014, 
chap. 4). Sera Khandro’s skillful navigation of these perilous circumstances contributed 
greatly to her ascendance as a respected treasure-​discoverer and enlightened woman, 
but the anguish, indignities, and derision she experienced on the way “cast a pall on 
arguments that claim Buddhist Tantra is pro-​woman or sex-​positive” (248).
In these times of the #MeToo movement, fresh scrutiny is being brought to sexuality 
in Buddhist tantra, recognizing that even in Tibet the practice was misused for per­
sonal gratification and that even the most realized women were exploited by immoral 
lamas with libidinous intent, as we have seen with the accounts of ḍākinī Sera Khandro. 
According to Holly Gayley and Somtso Bum (2022), contemporary Tibetan short stories 
depict “fake” lamas who use tantric language as a pretext for taking advantage of young 
women (seduction, assault, or as a rationalization) including references to “secret con­
duct” (gsang ba’i mdzad pa), consorts (rig ma), and in one case ḍākinīs. The stories 
surface in the contemporary social critique of this exploitive behavior with greater com­
passion for women who are victimized than the previous scapegoating and gossip evi­
dent in accounts like Sera Khandro’s. One wonders about the distinction between “fake” 
lamas and any other kind, and how discernment might contrast beneficial engagement 
in secret conduct versus damaging ones.
Sexual abuse scandals have torn Western Vajrayāna communities apart, bringing 
open discussion about the power of the guru, the objectivization or agency of women, 
and the nature of tantric commitments. Holly Gayley addresses contemporary 
controversies about sexual abuse in Vajrayāna communities in light of the consort 
traditions of Tibet, scrutinizing the association between secrecy and sexuality. She notes

--- PAGE 386 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      361
 
that the tradition of the sang-​yum (bsang yum)—​“secret consort”—​privileges those in 
power “by compartmentalizing public accomplishments and private indiscretions” 
(Gayley 2018, 3). She asks whether the “perfect storm” of joining secrecy and sexu­
ality might be mitigated by an ethic of transparency, clearer education about the na­
ture of tantric commitments informed by the gender dynamics of power and privilege, 
and standards for ethical conduct endorsed by gurus and their communities (Gayley 
2018, 17–​18). Controversies like these would benefit from cross-​tradition tantric studies 
discussions, untangling the challenges for channeling desire in tantric practices without 
exploiting women or causing harm.
Ḍākinī Mothers of the Tibetan 
Renaissance
The remarkable work of Holly Gayley (2017, 2019) on a pair of modern renowned 
treasure-​revealers (tertöns) shows how the ḍākinī paradigm is supporting the regen­
eration of dharma on the eastern Tibetan plateau. Her study focuses especially on the 
ḍākinī Khandro Tāre Lhamo (1938–​2002) whose exchange of fifty-​six letters with her 
tantric consort Namtrul Rinpoche (1944–​2011) forged a powerful prophetic legacy 
for healing the damage of Chinese oppression and environmental degradation. Tāre 
Lhamo’s namthar, Spiraling Vine of Faith, depicts her as enlightened before birth, an 
emanation of Yeshe Tsogyal and Sera Khandro, tying her to a distinguished line of 
ḍākinī women, emblems of unmistakable enlightenment, protective care of the tantric 
teachings, and resilience in the face of obstacles. Gayley speculates that her identifica­
tion as a ḍākinī reflects the privilege of her birth into a family of treasure-​discoverer 
tertöns that gave her access to lamas and teachings that supported her spiritual and so­
cial status. Her typical namthar’s features have unique elements coming from the con­
text of the Maoist and post-​Maoist periods of occupied Tibet in which her teachers, 
husband, and three brothers were imprisoned under torture and died, and her only son 
died of illness. While she was condemned to a decade of manual labor, it is rumored that 
her powers as a ḍākinī helped her evade extended imprisonment, even though she was 
likely detained and briefly tortured. Throughout these years she practiced in secret and 
served as a resilient example and inspiration to a devastated community (Gayley 2017, 
38–​45, 2019, 6–​7).
It was here that Khandro Tāre Lhamo’s visionary example assumed a remarkable 
new role. On the heels of cultural trauma and environmental damage inflicted by the 
Cultural Revolution and inspired by prophetic visions, she initiated dynamic corre­
spondence with a young lama, Namtrul Rinpoche, who lived nearby in Golok. In their 
ongoing exchange of what Gayley calls “epistolary courtship,” they exchanged poetic, 
erotic, and prophetic visions for a more optimistic future for a devastated Tibet, drawing 
on inspiration of their past lives together. Their letters conjoined Guru Rinpoche’s

--- PAGE 387 ---
362      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
prophecy, their karmic connection, dharmic inspiration, and the promise of healing the 
damage of degenerate times. Tāre Lhamo (Gayley 2019, 97–​98) wrote:
Now, to obtain the inheritance of Padmasambhava,
The time has come for the entrustment of us pair of friends.
Now if we proceed according to his command, it is good.
In the vast casket of the inner sanctum of the mind
Is the heart certificate of the 100,000 mother ḍākinīs,
Expressly the means to reverse the strife of degeneration.
Motivated by compassion, the two together joined as visionary partners to reveal terma 
that drew on Tibet’s past glory and projected a regeneration in community life, dharma 
teaching and practice, and environmental repair that has been part of what has come to 
be known as the eastern Tibetan renaissance.
The charismatic Khenchen Jigme Phuntsok (1933–​2004) was the most important 
leader of this movement when he founded the Serta Buddhist Institute (aka Larung Gar) 
in 1980 (Gayley 2017, 96–​100, 2021, 17–​36; Germano 1998, 53–​94). His vision of the revi­
talization of the dharma included persuading nomadic herders to give up raising ani­
mals for meat, promoting vegetarianism, and engaging with scientific discourse. He also 
endorsed the uplift of women, encouraging nuns’ education at Larung Gar, and assumed 
ethical reforms for his entire Buddhist community. He died after cardiac surgery in a 
Chinese hospital in Chengdu in 2004. Khandro Tare Lhamo and Namtrul Rinpoche 
were encouraged by Khenchen to support the resurgence of the dharma through 
building monasteries and temples, revealing terma for the future of Tibetan Buddhism, 
and traveling through the region sharing their visionary teachings and inspirations. 
Altogether, their work has brought healing and renewed fervor for the dharma in Kham 
or Sichuan province (Gayley 2017, 221–​226).
Since Khenchen’s death, Larung Gar has continued as a vibrant community in spite 
of continued Chinese harassment, the largest Buddhist institution on the Tibetan 
plateau. Known for its dedicated and brilliant khenmos (mkhan mo), nuns who hold 
the highest monastic degree, new initiatives are contributing richly to the vitality of 
ḍākinī traditions. Motivated to promote the uplift of women in Tibetan communities, 
in 2011 a group of seven Larung nuns under the guidance of Jetsün Ani Mumtso, 
niece of Khenchen Phuntsok, resolved to gather and anthologize Buddhist women’s 
writing and hagiographies. The resulting voluminous text, Ḍākinī’s Great Dharma 
Treasury (Khandro Chödzö Chenmo), was published in 2013 by the Ārya Tāra Book 
Association comprising writings by and about more than two hundred different re­
markable Buddhist women in fifty-​three volumes. By 2016, the association had been 
formally incorporated into Larung Gar as part of its educational division. The in­
troduction to the series supplicated the “vast multitude of mothers (ma yum)” for 
blessing, meaning not only human mothers but the mother ḍākinīs and all Buddhist 
women, all powerful women, and for “future generations of Tibetan mothers and 
daughters” and “all women in the world” (‘Tsho & Jacoby 2021, 219–​221). When asked

--- PAGE 388 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      363
 
whether this was a feminist enterprise, the nuns said they didn’t want to debate gender 
equality and only wanted to “take concrete steps to improve women’s circumstances” 
(‘Tsho & Jacoby 2020, 6). To these ends, they prioritized improving the lives of women 
and girls, enhancing nuns’ education, and promoting Tibetan women’s history (‘Tsho 
& Jacoby 2020, 3).
Recommendations for Future Research 
on the Ḍākinī
Research on the ḍākinī has been informed by a variety of methodologies, at first 
dominated by orientalist Jungian and feminist perspectives and then with the methods 
of gender studies and phenomenology of symbols. Over the last three decades, able 
translators have retrieved and made available the biographies, textual teachings, and 
practices of ḍākinīs both visionary and human, further revealing the importance of the 
ḍākinī for Vajrayāna practice and realization. In the last decade, Tibetan-​Himalayan 
area studies have focused on contemporary translations of namthar of Tibetan women 
who have been recognized as ḍākinīs, providing cultural and historical context for 
what it means to be a ḍākinī in contemporary Tibetan society. Modern Tibetan human 
ḍākinīs have revitalized and reinterpreted Vajrayāna teachings for a degenerate time 
under Chinese oppression, serving as charismatic visionaries for personal and social 
awakening and repair of a damaged environment. However, the obstacles in the future of 
the field are evidence of several previously siloed and separated intellectual disciplines 
in religious studies.
For future research on the ḍākinī, three prospective directions would be fruitful. 
First, it is curious that there has been so little ongoing study of the symbolic meaning 
of the ḍākinī in Vajrayāna practice, given the central importance of levels of the symbol 
in Tibetan Buddhism. One of the major interests of contemplative studies as an aca­
demic field within religious studies is the investigation of contemplative practices 
in their cultural and historical contexts, including unpacking the meaning of symbol 
systems that guide them, in conversation with other contemplative practice traditions 
(Komjathy 2018, chap. 3). Contemplative studies valorize first-​person inquiry along with 
other scholarly approaches, validating the lived events of an experiencing subject and 
exploring the discoveries of the inner life. The ḍākinī is above all a unifying symbol that 
ties the realization of the true nature of mind; the integrated enlivening experience of 
embodiment; clarification about the nature of desire; and the visionary world of dream, 
insight, and compassion. Many aspects of the ḍākinī have nothing to do with gender, 
and this in fact informs the experiences of being in gendered bodies for women and men 
in no doubt interesting ways. Engaging in this manner, it would be helpful to explore 
contemplative dimensions of the ḍākinī symbol, discovering the relationship between 
creation stage and completion stage practices in ritual practice, including visualization,

--- PAGE 389 ---
364      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
subtle body yoga, breath, and formless practices and their integration through the 
symbol of the ḍākinī. The application of a gendered symbol as a guide has interesting 
parallels across traditions, as we have seen in the work of Carolyn Walker Bynum, and it 
would be fruitful to identify how women and men experience gendered symbol systems 
in their practice.
In the current research in Tibetan studies, it has been fruitful to include fieldwork 
research that investigates the experiences of contemporary Tibetan women as context 
for the translations of modern autobiographies of Tibetan women ḍākinīs. This corrects 
some of the exclusions generated by quadruple androcentrism of the tradition. However, 
insistence on historical women within Tibetan studies has sometimes focused research 
on the relationship between the ḍākinī paradigm and the struggles of women in patri­
archal society to the exclusion of other concerns. Within this focus, how has the reli­
ance on the ḍākinī paradigm changed over the history of Tibetan Buddhism? How is the 
current renaissance reformulating the ḍākinī paradigm in unforeseen ways? How is the 
ḍākinī understood in diaspora communities, and how does this relate to perspectives in 
Chinese Tibet? A priority of Tibetan studies is translating into Western languages the 
Ḍākinī’s Great Dharma Treasury compiled and published by the Larung Gar nuns of 
the Ārya Tāra Book Association as well as financially supporting the dissemination 
of the Tibetan anthology to Tibetan communities in China and diaspora. It will also 
be fruitful to listen deeply to these communities identifying the unfolding meaning of 
these ḍākinī treasures for their own lives.
A third priority for research is the collaboration of scholars working on tantric 
materials across cultural settings and religious traditions. Given the antinomian Indian 
origins of tantra and the diverse developments and appropriations of tantric contem­
plative, ritual, and textual traditions, the historical navigation of elements that societies 
often have considered degenerate could inform scholarly methods and attention to phe­
nomena that may otherwise be suppressed, ignored, or discounted. Tantra stimulated 
great creativity and innovation in cultures throughout Asia, and its gifts can be more 
fully appreciated and understood when scholars step out of the narrowness of their 
specializations and collaborate with others. The living, dynamic traditions of the ḍākinī 
hold splendid promise for revealing the contemplative depth, narrative wealth, and so­
cietal implications of a tantric vision.
As we have seen, the traditions of the ḍākinī are alive and well in contempo­
rary Tibetan Buddhism, both in Chinese-​occupied eastern Tibet and in diaspora 
communities, adapting and changing throughout history. They are especially playing 
a significant role in the revitalization of Buddhism in contemporary China for both 
women and men. In a place beyond time, ḍākinīs are said to have sworn on a visionary 
level to protect and sustain the dharma, extend the lives of the teachers, and inspire sin­
cere practitioners in dealing with obstacles on the path. Perhaps as with Shabkar, in 
these degenerate times the visionary Diamond Sow ḍākinī is favoring these leaders with 
magical pouches of silver to share realization with their devotees while gifting them 
with the ability to fly.

--- PAGE 390 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      365
 
Notes
	1.	 For example, in the third book of a trilogy, Jung was invited to write a “psychological com­
mentary” of a series of “translations” of the Bardo Thodrol (Evans-​Wentz, Samdup, and 
Lopez 2000, xxix–​lxiv). See a critique of Jung’s appropriation, Lopez 1998, 59.
	2.	 https://​dak​ini.com/​
	3.	 https://​www.goo​gle.com/​books/​edit​ion/​The_​D​akin​i_​De​ck_​B​ook/​ADuVz​QEAC​
AAJ?hl=​en
	4.	 For scholarly introductions to the subtle body across cultures, see Samuel and Johnston 
(2013) and Cox (2022).
	5.	 Personal interview with Dzigar Kontrul Rinpoche, Boulder, Colorado, March 15, 1991.
	6.	 Past retreats are recorded and available. For more information: https://​www.dawnm​
ount​ain.org/​dzogc​hen-​cyc​les/​. This cycle is also taught through Tara Mandala. Accessed 
February 7, 2022. www.tara​mand​ala.org.
	7.	 These five apparent criteria are analyzed in Simmer-​Brown (2001, 187–​207); classified a bit 
differently in Herrmann-​Pfandt (1990, 131–​135).
References
Allione, Tsultrim. 1984. Women of Wisdom. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion, 1984.
Angowski, Elizabeth. 2019. “Literature and the Moral Life: Reading the Early Biography of the 
Tibetan Queen Yeshe Tsogyal.” PhD diss., Harvard University.
Bynum, Caroline Walker. 1986. “Introduction: On the Complexity of Symbols.” In Gender and 
Religion: On the Complexity of Symbols, edited by C. W. Bynum, S. Harrell, and P. Richman, 
1–​20. Boston: Beacon Press.
Bynum, Caroline Walker. 1992. Fragmentation and Redemption: Essays on Gender and the 
Human Body in Medieval Religion. New York: Zone Books.
Campbell, June. 1996. Traveller in Space: In Search of Female Identity in Tibetan Buddhism New 
York: George Braziller.
Cape, Kali. 2020. “Anatomy of a Ḍākinī: Female Consort Discourse in a Case of Fourteenth-​
Century Tibetan Buddhist Literature.” Journal of Dharma Studies 3: 349–​371. https://​doi.
org/​10.1007/​s42​240-​021-​00094-​2.
Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche. 1989. “Dakini Wisdom” Recording. Junction City, CA: Chagdud 
Gompa Rigdzin Ling.
Conze, Edward. 1973. The Short Prajñāpāramitā Texts. London: Luzac.
Cox, Simon. 2022. The Subtle Body: A Genealogy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dowman, Keith, trans. 1984. Sky Dancer: The Secret Life and Songs of the Lady Yeshe Tsogyal. 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Drolma, Chönyi, trans. 2017. The Life and Visions of Yeshe Tsogyal: Autobiography of the Great 
Wisdom Queen. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
English, Elizabeth, trans. 2002. Vajrayoginī: Her Visualizations, Rituals, and Forms. Boston: 
Wisdom.
Evans-​Wentz, W. Y., K. D. Samdup, and D. S. Lopez, Jr. 2000. The Tibetan Book of the Great 
Liberation. 2nd ed. London: Oxford University Press.
Gayley, Holly. 2017. Love Letters from Golok: A Tantric Couple in Modern Tibet. New York: 
Columbia University Press.

--- PAGE 391 ---
366      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
Gayley, Holly. 2018. “Revisiting the ‘Secret Consort’ (gsang yum) in Tibetan Buddhism.” 
Religions 9, no. 6: Article 179. Doi:10.3390/​rel9060179.
Gayley, Holly. 2019. Inseparable across Lifetimes: The Lives and Love Letters of the Tibetan 
Visionaries Namtrul Rinpoche and Khandro Tare Lhamo. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Gayley, Holly. 2021. “Heart Advice for the Twenty-​First Century: Khenpo Jigme Phuntsok.” 
Voices from Larung Gar: Shaping Tibetan Buddhism for the Twenty-​first Century, edited by H. 
Gayley, 17–​36. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Gayley, Holly., and S. Bhum. 2022. “Parody and Pathos: Sexual Transgression by ‘Fake’ Lamas 
in Tibetan Short Stories.” Revue d’Etudes Tibetaines. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Germano, David. 1998. “Re-​membering the Dismembered Body of Tibet: Contemporary 
Tibetan Visionary Movements in the People’s Republic of China.” In Buddhism in 
Contemporary Tibet: Religious Revival and Cultural Identity, edited by M. C. Goldstein and 
M. T. Kapstein, 53–​94. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gonsalez, David, trans. 2020. The Extremely Secret Dakini of Naropa: Vajrayogini Practice and 
Commentary. Boston: Wisdom.
Gray, David. 2007. The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra (The Discourse of Śrī Heruka): Śrīherukābhidhāna: 
A Study and Annotated Translation. Treasury of Buddhist Sciences. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Gross, Rita M. 1993. Buddhism After Patriarchy: A Feminist History, Analysis and Reconstruction 
of Buddhism. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Gschwandtner, Christina M. 2020. “Wagering for a Second Naivete?: Tensions in Ricoeur’s 
Account of the Symbolism of Evil.” In A Companion to Ricoeur’s The Symbolism of Evil, ed­
ited by Scott Davidson,–​101. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Guenther, Herbert, trans. 1963. The Life and Teachings of Nāropa. London: Oxford 
University Press.
Gyatso, Janet. 1992. “Letter Magic: Peircean Meditations on the Semiotics of Rdo Grub-​chen’s 
Dhāraṇi Memory.” In Mirror of Memory, edited by Janet Gyatso, 173–​214. Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Gyatso, Janet. 1998. Apparitions of the Self: The Secret Autobiographies of a Tibetan Visionary. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gyatso, Janet., and H. Havnevik. 2007. Women in Tibet. New York: Columbia University Press.
Harding, Sarah, trans. 2003. Machik’s Complete Explanation: Clarifying the Meaning of Chöd. 
Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Harding, Sarah, trans. 2010. Niguma: Lady of Illusion. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Harding, Sarah, trans. 2016. Chöd: The Sacred Teachings on Severance, Compiled by Jamgön 
Kongtrul. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Hatley, Shaman. 2016. “Converting the Ḍākinī: Goddess Cults and Tantras of the Yoginīs be­
tween Buddhism and Śaivism.” In Tantric Traditions of Transmission and Translation, edited 
by D. Gray and R. R. Overbey, 37–​86. New York: Oxford University Press. https://​doi.org/​
10.1093/​acp​rof:oso/​978019​9763​689.003.0003
Hatley, Shaman. 2022. “Yoginīs.” In Oxford Bibliographies Online: Hinduism, edited by A. 
Hiltebeitel, 5. New York: Oxford University Press. www.oxfor​dbib​liog​raph​ies.com/​obo.
page.hindu​ism
Herrmann-​Pfandt, Adelheid. 1990. Ḍākinīs: Zur Stellung and Symbolik des Weiblichen im 
tantrischen Buddhismus. Bonn, Germany: Indica et. Tibetica Verlag.
Hillman, James. 1985. Anima: An Anatomy of a Personified Notion. Dallas, TX: Spring.

--- PAGE 392 ---
The Ḍākinī in Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism      367
 
Jacoby, Sarah H., trans. 2014. Love and Liberation: Autobiographical Writings of the Tibetan 
Buddhist Visionary Sera Khandro. New York: Columbia University Press.
Jacoby, Sarah H. 2015. “Relational Autonomy in the Life of a Contemporary Tibetan Dakini.” 
Revue d’Etudes Tibetaines 34 (Decembre): 79–​113.
Kalff, M. M. 1978. “Ḍākinīs in the Cakrasaṃvara Tradition.” In Tibetan Studies Presented at the 
Seminar of Young Tibetologists, edited by Martin Brauen and Per Kvårne, 149–​162. Zurich: 
Völkerkundemuseum der Universität Zurich.
Kieckhefer, Richard, and George D. Bond, eds. 1990. “Preface” and “Afterword”. In Sainthood: Its 
Manifestations in World Religions, vii–​xii, 243–​253. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Klein, Anne C. 1985a. “Nondualism and the Great Bliss Queen: A Study in Tibetan Buddhist 
Ontology and Symbolism.” Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion 1, no. 1: 73–​98.
Klein, Anne C. 1985b. “Primordial Purity and Everyday Life: Exalted Female Symbols and 
the Women of Tibet.” In Immaculate and Powerful—​The Female in Sacred Image and 
Social Reality, edited by C. W. Atkinson, C. H. Buchanan, and M. Miles, 111–​138. Boston: 
Beacon Press.
Klein, Anne C. 2008. Meeting the Great Bliss Queen: Buddhists, Feminists, and the Art of the Self. 
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Klein, Anne C. Forthcoming. Seeing and Being Yeshe Tsogyal: A New Treasure Distilling 
Dzogchen Practice. Boston: Wisdom.
Komjathy, Louis. 2018. Introducing Contemplative Studies. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Kunsang, Erik Pema, trans. 1990. Dakini Teachings: Padmasambhava’s Oral Instructions to Lady 
Tsogyal. Boston: Shambhala.
Kunsang, Erik Pema, M. Schmidt, et al., trans. 2018. Dakini Activity: The Dynamic Play of 
Awakening. Leggett, CA: Rangjung Yeshe.
Lopez, Donald. 1998. Prisoners of Shangri-​La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Miles, Margaret R., Virginia Burrus, Tazim R. Kassam, and Rita M. Gross. 2006. 
“Roundtable Discussion: Feminist Religious History [with Response].” Journal of 
Feminist Studies in Religion 22, no. 1 (2006): 45–​74.
Neumann, Erich. 1983. The Great Mother: An Analysis of the Archetype [Die große Mutter. Der 
Archetyp des grossen Weiblichen]. Bollingen Series. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. First published 1955.
Padmakara Translation Group. 1999. Lady of the Lotus-​Born: The Life and Enlightenment of 
Yeshe Tsogyal. Boston: Shambhala.
Ray, Reginald A. 1984. Buddhist Saints in India: A Study in Buddhist Values and Orientations. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Redfield, James. 1999. The Secret of Shambhala: In Search of the Eleventh Insight. New York: 
Warner Books.
Ricard, Matthieu, trans. 1994. The Life of Shabkar: The Autobiography of a Tibetan Yogin. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1986. The Symbolism of Evil. Boston: Beacon Press. First published 1967.
Samuel, Geoffrey, and Jay Johnston, eds. 2013. Religion and the Subtle Body in Asia and the West: 
Between Mind and Body. London: Routledge.
Shaw, Miranda. 1994. Passionate Enlightenment: Women in Tantric Buddhism. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Simmer-​Brown, Judith. 2001. Ḍākinī’s Warm Breath: The Feminine Principle in Tibetan 
Buddhism. Boston: Shambhala.

--- PAGE 393 ---
368      Judith Simmer-Brown
 
‘Tsho, Padma (Baimacuo), and Sarah Jacoby. 2020. “Gender Equality in and on Tibetan 
Buddhist Nuns’ Terms.” Religions 11, 543: Article 6. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​1100​543
‘Tsho, Padma (Baimacuo), and Sarah Jacoby. 2021. “Lessons from Buddhist Foremothers.” In 
Voices from Larung Gar: Shaping Tibetan Buddhism for the Twenty-​first Century, edited by H. 
Gayley, 219–​221. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Tulku, Tarthang, trans. 1983. Mother of Knowledge: The Enlightenment of Ye-​shes mTsho-​rgyal 
Berkeley, CA: Dharma.
White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Context. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Willis, Janice D. 1987. “Dākinī: Some Comments on Its Nature and Meaning.” In Feminine 
Ground: Essays on Women and Tibet, edited by Janice D. Willis, 57–​75. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Zangpo, Ngawang. 2013. Refining Our Perception of Reality: Sera Khandro’s Commentary 
on Dudjom Lingpa’s Account of His Visionary Journey. Translated by Christina Monson. 
Boulder, CO: Shambhala.

--- PAGE 394 ---
Chapter 16
Three Shades 
of Tantric Yoga
Chapter 20 of the Netra Tantra
David Gordon White
An important document for the history of “tantric yoga,” the ninth-​century Netra 
Tantra’s twentieth chapter (NT 20) on “threefold yoga” has received relatively little 
scholarly attention to date. This notwithstanding, its content may be viewed as an im­
portant corrective to widely held views concerning the nature of yoga itself, in both its 
tantric and non-​tantric iterations. The earliest scholarly account of NT 20’s content fig­
ures in Hélène Brunner’s (1974: 183–​187) pioneering survey of the entire work. More re­
cently, Somadeva Vasudeva (n.d.) has referenced the chapter’s ten opening verses in an 
unpublished paper;1 and both Olga Serbaeva Saraogi (2010: 72–​76) and myself (White 
2009: 162–​164) have interpreted selected verses (NT 20.27–​35) in earlier publications. 
Independent of its quite original content, the NT’s treatment of what it calls the three­
fold yoga (trividha yoga) is significant for the fact that it classifies these three dis­
parate bodies of tradition and practice as forms of “yoga.” As I will show, the NT’s 
“supreme yoga” (parayoga) closely resembles the “violent consorting” (haṭhamelaka) 
of tantric adepts with Yoginīs as documented in earlier tantric works, while its “subtle 
yoga” (sūkṣmayoga) is an elaboration on the technique of entering a foreign body 
(parakāyapraveśa) for the purpose of initiation or for more nefarious ends, and its dis­
cussion of “gross yoga” a guide to sorcery and countersorcery.
Supreme yoga is supreme in the sense that the total transformation the Yoginīs ef­
fectuate on their target is unequivocally salutary, regardless of the fact that it entails 
the death of their target’s body. In this respect, as the text relates, its effect is identical 
to that of tantric initiation. While its internal procedures are comparable to those of 
initiation, the NT and its commentary equivocate with respect to the effects of subtle 
yoga: when practiced for the good, it assures its target’s virtual salvation; when prac­
ticed to evil ends, the yogi or Yoginī turns their target into a sort of slave or involun­
tary “psycho-​mental organ donor.” Gross yoga generally involves external techniques

--- PAGE 395 ---
370      David Gordon White
 
that serve to manipulate and harm a target when used to evil ends, or to protect 
against the same when used for the good, in the practice of countersorcery. In su­
preme yoga, the Yoginīs internalize their victims by eating them; in subtle yoga, yogis 
and Yoginīs transform their targets from within; in gross yoga, good and evil Yoginīs 
and practitioners transform their targets from without. In all three cases, “yoga” is 
presented in the literal sense of “yoking,” which denotes one or another type of posses­
sion. This tantric usage of the yoga signifier was not unusual for a period in which the 
concept of yoga was very much in flux.
“Haṭha” and Aṣṭāṅga Yoga in the NT
Like many tantric scriptures, NT 20 is a shaggy dog of a text whose uneven prose; fre­
quent shifts in gender, number, and person; and occasional nonsequiturs show it to be 
more a compilation of fragments than a single cohesive composition. It nonetheless has 
a structure that, based on the core dynamic of “yoking” (yoga), subdivides the chapter 
into four parts: a general introduction, which provides the nondualist metaphysical 
context for what will follow, and three sections devoted, respectively, to para, sūkṣma, 
and sthūla yoga. This triad reprises a classificatory system introduced earlier in the 
work: the NT’s sixth, seventh, and eighth chapters are devoted to supreme, subtle and 
gross “meditation” (dhyāna), introduced in the opening verses of chapter six. Here, after 
announcing that he is about to reveal a secret teaching (rahasyam), and evoking the var­
ious ills that afflict humanity, Śiva explains
how all are saved, my darling, from the cruel conditions I mentioned earlier. Now, 
it (i.e., the secret teaching) is threefold, and its strategies the gross, the subtle, and 
the supreme. The gross [strategy involves] sacrifice, fire offering, the repetition of 
spells (japa), meditation together with seals (dhyānam samudrakam), devices for 
perplexing [demons], and the like. The King of Mantras forcefully effects [this]. 
The subtle [strategy] is effected [through] the yoking (yoga) of the cakras, etc., and 
by the rise through the channels (nāḍīs) of the phonematic particles (kalās). The 
supreme [strategy], which is, moreover, universally applicable, is Mṛtyujit, the 
bestower of liberation. (NT 6.6–​8)2
Mṛtyujit, the “Death-​Conqueror,” is the vibratory essence of the supreme deity of the 
NT, Amṛteśa, the “Lord of Immortality,” a form of Śiva popular in medieval Kashmir 
(Sanderson 2004: 240). It is He who, in His mantric form of OṂ JUṂ SAḤ, governs 
the motley assortment of beings, practices, “sealing techniques” (mudrās) and “spells” 
(mantras) that populate this sprawling treatise. As Brunner (1974: 127, 138) has noted, the 
NT is a heterogeneous compendium whose original “clusters” of instructions—​which, 
taken together, comprised a technical manual for the various optional (kāmya) rites 
of healing and magic practiced by tantric specialists (sādhakas, ācāryas, mantravids,

--- PAGE 396 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      371
 
daiśikas, etc.)—​“appear as so many brightly colored stones” held in place by the “grayish 
cement” of the all-​powerful Mṛtyujit-​Amṛteśa. As a tantric manual, the NT in its earlier 
redaction(s) was dualistic in its metaphysics, with a bright line separating the Creator 
from His creatures, to say nothing of the demonic beings that tormented and preyed 
upon them. In the work that has come down to us, however, all of these are shown to 
be internal to the universal Mṛtyujit-​Amṛteśa. It is this nondualist metaphysics that 
constitutes the work’s “grayish cement,” which, while providing a modicum of cohe­
sion to its variegated parts, requires no small number of philosophical pirouettes (if not 
contortions) on the part of its compilers to gel. Appearing in particularly high relief in 
the opening verses of ­chapter 20, this nondualist gloss is a leitmotiv for both the text and 
for Kṣemarāja’s learned eleventh-​century “Netroddyota” commentary, to which I will 
refer frequently, albeit not slavishly.
In addition to the divine person of Amṛteśa-Mṛtyujit, the semantic glue that holds 
this chapter together is its explicit usage of terms derived from the verbal root √yuj 
(yoke), which generates many of the nominal (yoga, yogi, Yoginī, yojanam, prayojanam) 
and verbal forms (niyukta, viyukta, upayukta, yojayanti) found therein. There can be no 
question that the expressed topic of NT 20 is yoga, or a triad of yogas, but as its accounts 
of them show, these “yokings” have virtually nothing in common with yoga as we know 
it, whether “classical,” haṭha, or otherwise.
With this in mind, I turn to the NT’s seventh chapter, as its contents offer a glimpse 
into the emerging subtle body systems that would begin to coalesce, two centuries later, 
into what is known as haṭha yoga (Birch 2011, 2019). To begin, the chapter opens by 
announcing that its teaching concerns “subtle meditation”—​or to use Gavin Flood’s fe­
licitous translation, “subtle visualizing meditation”3—​rather than the “subtle yoga” that 
will be described in NT 20. However, it is here, under the heading of sūkṣma dhyāna, 
that terminology denoting the components of the subtle or yogic body and the med­
itative raising of energy, consciousness, and the nectar of immortality is extensively 
employed.
The chapter’s opening verses (NT 7.1–​7.2) define sūkṣma dhyāna as a visualizing med­
itation on the six cakras, three objects (lakṣyas), five voids (vyomans), twelve knots 
(granthis), three Energies (śaktis), three domains (dhāmans), three channels (nāḍīs), 
and so forth. While the names of some of these are common to several contemporary 
and later texts and traditions, others—​beginning with the six cakras—​are not (NT 
7.28b–​7.29b). Named “birth” (janma), “illusion” (māyā), “tantric practitioner” (yogi), 
“cleaving” (bhedana), “splendor” (dīpti), and “mild” (śāntam),4 and situated in the 
“circle of channels,” navel, heart, uvula, the “place of the drop,” and “[place of the] rever­
beration,” respectively, these have little in common with what has come to be considered 
the canonical system of seven cakras as illustrated in Sir John Woodroffe’s The Serpent 
Power (1950: 317–​431).5 In fact, in my research on the topic, I have identified some forty 
different systems of “cakras” or “centers” from across Hindu, Buddhist, Sufi, and Jain 
sources. Of these, seven are four-​cakra systems; five are five-​cakra systems; twelve, like 
the NT, are six-​cakra systems; four are seven-​cakra systems, six are nine-​cakra systems; 
with the remaining eight featuring ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, and more.6 As for the

--- PAGE 397 ---
372      David Gordon White
 
names and locations of the individual cakras, these too are variable. To summarize: the 
names and locations of the NT’s six cakras are in no way nonstandard, because there 
never has been a standard system of cakras.
The seventh chapter’s treatment of subtle visualizing meditation comprises 
a set of instructions for the yogi to vividly cultivate the experience of rising 
through the yogic body, an ascent simultaneously realized on three registers: vi­
bratory (involving mantras), fluid (involving the generation of nectar, amṛta), and 
gnoseological (issuing in the gnostic realization of his identity with Śiva-​Amṛteśa-​
Mṛtyujit) (NT 7.50–​7.51). Many of the signal elements of haṭha yoga are present here: 
the identification of the practitioner as a yogi; the practice of breath control; the 
central suṣumnā nāḍī as conduit for the raising of consciousness, energy, and fluids; 
the identification of internal Energy as “She Who is Ring-​Shaped” (kuṇḍalā) (NT 
7.21b); the identification of various centers as the abodes of the high gods of Hindu 
theism (NT 7.26); the dynamic of “piercing”; the frequent recourse to lunar meta­
phor; the evocation of the “aviator’s seal” (khecarī mudrā) (NT 7.37a); and the ulti­
mate goal of immortality.
However, as the text declares, these are not instructions for the practice of subtle yoga 
but rather for subtle visualization meditation. Which begs the following question: if 
this chapter insists on referring to haṭhayogic body mapping and techniques as sūkṣma 
dhyāna, what account does the NT give, if any, of the meditative system of so-​called 
classical pātañjala yoga? The answer is provided in ­chapter 8, which, devoted to para 
dhyāna, “supreme meditation,” identifies its practice as the eight-​part yoga (aṣṭāṅga 
yoga) (NT 8.9). Nearly all resemblance to the Patañjalian system ends here, however, 
as the NT’s accounts of yama, niyama, and so forth generally deviate significantly from 
their descriptions in the Yoga Sūtras.7 So, for example, its description of āsana (pos­
ture), the third part of aṣṭāṅga yoga, has nothing to do with seated postures. Rather, the 
text declares that “taking refuge in the middlemost breath and holding both it and the 
indwelling Energy of Gnosis within the path [taken by] the in-breath and out-breath, 
one shall succeed in [the practice of] āsana” (NT 8.11). As we will see, dhyāna and 
dhāraṇā, the sixth and seventh parts of the eight-​part yoga, are brought into play in NT 
20’s treatment of “gross yoga,” while the Energy of Gnosis plays a crucial role in its ac­
count of “subtle yoga.” That chapter is the focus of this study.8
NT 20.1–​20.10: Introducing the 
Threefold Yoga
The Goddess said:
	 1.	 Everything I inquired about [earlier] has been addressed by the God. Now I wish to 
hear [something else]. This is the doubt remaining in my heart.

--- PAGE 398 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      373
 
	 2.	 [There are] the Yoginīs and, indeed, the Mothers. [There are also] the Śākinīs, [so] 
proud of their powers.9 How do they, in a moment, drain another [creature’s] body 
of its vital breaths?
	
3.	 And why are those ferocious ones without mercy? What, in fact, is their pur­
pose (prayojanam)? Thou alone, O Holy One, art capable of fully divulging all of 
that.
The Holy One said:
	
4.	 Listen, O Goddess. I shall declare a most wondrous secret: [namely,] how it is 
that they should seek to destroy the lives of creatures by the order of the Lord of 
Creatures.
	
5.	 Free from attachment or aversion, and without bewilderment or delusion, they 
rightly slaughter the God of God’s creatures for the purpose of sacrifice.
	
6.	 They do not [slaughter] out of confusion, nor for the sake of injury, nor indeed out 
of a desire to slay. They are [simply] following the command of the Very Fearsome 
One (Mahābhairava).
	
7.	 [It was] to that end [that] creatures were [originally] emitted by the Self-​
Generated One (Śvayambhu), all by himself. Victims are enjoyed as food 
(upayuktā) [by the Yoginīs, etc.] for the purpose of sacrifice to the Lord, and not 
otherwise.
	
8.	 And it is out of grace toward them,10 O fair-​faced one, that they release [their] 
victims from [their] sins. They11 slice off [their victims’] burden of sins.
	
9.	 The exalted station of creatures that have been [so] enjoyed as food is eternal; and 
so following Śiva’s command, they (the Yoginīs, etc.) “yoke” (yojayanti) them by 
means of the threefold “yoking” (yogena).
	 10.	 [It is] by means of supreme [yoga] alone, or else by means of the triad—​[i.e.,] by 
means of supreme, subtle, and gross [yoga—​that] they yoke with their power; but 
in no way do they kill.
NT 20.11–​20.21: Supreme Yoga
	
11–​12.	 He who is the supreme universal Self, the eternal, actionless, immaculate, 
all-​pervading, supreme master, the root cause of all that exists dwelling in 
the midst of every creature,12 the agent of all grace: those immaculate, inde­
fatigable [Yoginīs] are dependent (niyuktāḥ) on Him alone.
	
13a–​14a.	 Possessed of the state of oneness [with Him],13 they are in no way separate 
(viyuktāḥ) [from Him]; rather, they are absorbed into His Energy (śakti), 
abiding in the form of [the Energy of] Desire, the raising of [the Energy of] 
Gnosis [and] the descent of [the Energy of] Action. They are agitated by the 
yoking [of victims] to the sacrifice.14

--- PAGE 399 ---
374      David Gordon White
 
	 14b–​15b.	 Now, having become Him, those that [the Yoginīs] yoke (yojayanti) to His 
form are liberated. They have in fact become Śiva, caused by Śiva to rise by 
means of the Energy of Śiva; and by virtue of His power, they are indeed 
pure embodiments of Śiva.
	
16.	 In the same way that the state of being Śiva is realized by [the] yoking 
(yoga) [of an initiate, effected] in initiation—​so too, verily, do they (i.e., the 
victims) realize the state of being Śiva by means of the yoking of the Ones 
Who Yoke (yogiyogena).15
	
17.	 Even when the soul (of such a person whose body has been destroyed by 
vile deeds) is excessively defiled, they cause [his] purity to shine through.
	
18.	 They seek to destroy the triad of impurities by cutting them off at their very 
roots. The body of one who has been unyoked (viyuktasya) from the triad of 
impurities does not grow back.
	
19–​20.	 As in the case of a lamp,16 surely, the “yoking” (yojanam) of that victim is not 
killing. By means of His own all-​pervading form and by virtue of the power 
of His innate Energy, they [the Yoginīs] crunch the fetters of their victim, as 
a result of which the body perishes. By their destruction of the body, [there 
is] release from suffering existence. Assuredly, [this is] not killing.
	
21.	 The wise ones know that killing [by the Yoginīs] is actually a bound person’s 
(baddhasya puruṣasya) disconnection (viyoga) from a body, even when its 
fetter (pāśa) is massive, fully grown.17
In these two opening sections, NT 20 addresses a conundrum central to all monotheistic 
traditions. Theodicy, or the problem of evil, may be described as follows: (1) God alone is 
God, and He is wholly good and all-​powerful; (2) yet evil exists in the form of creaturely 
suffering, death, and so forth. Therefore, either (3) God is not alone, not wholly good, or 
not all-​powerful, or (4) the same all-​powerful God nonetheless allows for evil to exist 
in the world. The premier theodicy of the South Asian religious world is the doctrine of 
karma, which maintains that while God’s creation is good and perfect, any evil suffered by 
creatures is of their own making, the outcome of evil acts committed in past lives, or due 
to nescience in their present life. One can escape this trap and accede to liberation and re­
lease from suffering by leading a life (or several lives) of righteousness through devotion 
to a powerful, grace-​granting God; through the gradual attainment of gnosis; or through 
recourse to powerful expedients. The mṛtyuñjaya mantra is the preferred expedient of 
the NT, as its mention of aṣṭāṅga yoga in chapter eight makes clear: “Thence [through the 
practice of supreme meditation on Mṛtyujit, the yogi is] immediately liberated, and he 
shall not suffer rebirth; but he attains [that liberation] through the eight-​part yoga, and 
not otherwise.” However, the three yogas of the NT’s twentieth chapter (or, at least, the first 
two) may also be viewed as alternate means to the transcendence of the human condition.
Embedded in the broader Trika tantrism of medieval Kashmir, the nondualism 
championed in the NT’s final redaction further complicates the metaphysics of the­
odicy, inasmuch as it also maintains that the God who created the universe is the entire

--- PAGE 400 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      375
 
universe, and that every being, process, and apparent conflict within the universe is 
internal to Him (or, more properly speaking, to His consciousness of the universe 
as Himself). This is the issue that these verses of NT 20 seek to resolve. The chapter’s 
opening statement of the problem and proposed solution was significant enough for 
it to be taken as a proof text by Abhinavagupta, the great eleventh-​century polymath 
(and guru of Kṣemarāja, the commentator of our text), for the justification of sac­
rifice, the offering of one of God’s creatures, a part of God himself, to that same God. 
Abhinavagupta’s treatment of the issue, like that of the Vedic apologists before him, 
has a casuistic ring to it.18 Reducing the problem of evil to the problem of sacrifice in 
a nondualist Śaiva context, Abhinavagupta’s defense of tantric sacrifice, part summary 
part paraphrase of NT 20.1–​20.21, reads as follows:
This (i.e., sacrifice) is a great assistance to the sacrificial victim, though it appears to 
be disagreeable at that time. In this context the utilization of [caustic] medication 
and a [harsh] regimen in order to destroy disease can serve as an illustration. And 
it is taught in the venerable Mṛtyuñjaya [i.e., the NT]: When its bonds have been 
sliced off, a body does not grow back for the victim due to its unyoking from the 
three impurities (malas). It is agreed that the body falls away when the burden of 
[karmic] righteousness and unrighteousness has been sliced off. Therefore this is not 
killing but an extraordinary initiation. For killing is the disconnection of the vital 
energies from a person’s body, even when its fetter has fully grown, but this [sacrifice] 
is the conjunction of a bound person in the act of worshipping God.19
Abhinavagupta’s use of this passage notwithstanding, sacrifice is not so much the issue 
here as it is a rationalization for the underlying issue, which is, once again, the problem 
of evil. This is what the Goddess clearly states in the question she poses to Śiva, her sole 
contribution to this “semi-​dialogue”: What (or whose) purpose is served by killing? 
The Goddess’s turn of phrase is important here, because the agents of death, the beings 
that “drain another [creature’s] body of its vital breaths,” are identified as Yoginīs, 
Mothers, and Śākinīs. In the NT’s preceding chapter (NT 19) and elsewhere throughout 
the text and medieval South Asian tantra and demonology in general, these and other 
demonesses of their ilk are identified as the primary causes of virtually all untimely 
death and human suffering, and not merely death by sacrifice.20 Furthermore, whereas 
Abhinavagupta appropriated these verses to justify all tantric sacrifice, both animal 
and human, verse 21 of our chapter refers to the victim of the Yoginīs, Mothers, and 
Śākinīs as a puruṣa, a human person. In other words, these introductory verses are not 
merely referring to victims of animal (and in rare cases, human) sacrifice; rather, their 
referents are all humans as potential victims of the diseases, afflictions, and deaths that 
occur when Yoginīs prey upon them. However, as its discussion of supreme yoga makes 
clear, because the Yoginīs are “in no way separate from” Śiva, their yoking and eating 
of their victims is not killing but rather a means to liberation, which in this nondualist 
context connotes the realization, by those victims, of their intrinsic identity with Śiva, 
the sole being in the universe He created. As such, their yoking has the same salvific

--- PAGE 401 ---
376      David Gordon White
 
effect as tantric initiation, in which the guru, after fusing the channels (nāḍīsandhāna, 
nāḍīsaṃghaṭṭa) of his disciple with his own, ensures the former’s liberation.
How this is possible is explained in verse 18’s discussion of the “triad of impurities” 
(malatraya). According to Śaiva metaphysics, the three malas, which are also identified 
as the “fetters” (pāśas) that bind victims to suffering existence, are what differentiate 
Śiva (pati) from his creatures/​victims (paśus).21 With the removal of these impurities 
cum fetters, creatures realize their ontological identity with Śiva. According to the 
Mālinīvijayottara Tantra (MVUT 1.23b, in Brunner, Oberhammer, and Padoux 2000: 
182), the fundamental nature of the first of these malas is nescience (ajñāna), which is, 
as the following section of our chapter proclaims, overcome by the Yoginīs by virtue 
of their Energy of Gnosis (jñānaśakti). According to the dualist metaphysics of the 
Śaivasiddhānta school of medieval Śaivism, the destruction of the malas transforms a 
person into a second Śiva; that is, one becomes like Śiva, but because this is a dualist 
system, only Śiva can be Śiva. Not so in the nondualist contexts of the MVUT and our 
text, where those persons whom the Yoginīs yoke “have in fact become Śiva.” Once 
again, in a universe in which all is Śiva, it would be impossible for a being to not be Śiva.
Furthermore, as verse 16 proclaims, initiation and supreme yoga—​being eaten by 
Yoginīs—​are the prime means to that Self-​realization. This concept appears in a number 
of earlier tantric sources, which have been brilliantly analyzed by Olga Serbaeva Saraogi 
(2010, 2013, 2016). On the one hand, in tantric initiation, called yojanikā (yoking) dīkṣā 
in the Bhairava tantras,22 the guru’s actions are virtually identical to those of Yoginīs 
in subtle yoga (see below). In both cases, these active agents manipulate consciousness 
from inside the disciple’s or victim’s body with the same term, paśu, being applied to the 
passive targets of both of these interventions.23 However, the terminology found in these 
earlier sources differs from that of the NT: instead of para yoga, these favor the term 
haṭhamelaka, a tantric practitioner’s “violent consorting” with the predatory Yoginīs. 
Parallels between the two processes include (1) “possessing” the paśu’s body by entering 
into it and manipulating its channels in order to transform (or destroy) it from within; 
(2) the use of a series of specific mantras and/​or “hypnotizing or possessing” mudrās, 
which in these contexts refer to “complicated acts of mental concentration accompanied 
by particular body positions or movements . . . believed to provoke a modified state of 
consciousness in the practitioner himself or in another person, often without the agree­
ment of the latter” (Saraogi 2010: 68); (3) the ultimate transformation of the paśu into 
Śiva or Bhairava; and (4) a conceptual link between these practices and the special case 
of the “seven-​times born” paśu.24
NT 20.22–​20.37: Subtle Yoga
In drawing her parallels between tantric initiation and haṭhamelaka, Saraogi reads the 
following section of the NT, on “subtle yoga,” to be an account of the same, with the vam­
piric Yoginīs being the active agents of this “yoking” practice. NT 20.1–​20.21 appears

--- PAGE 402 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      377
 
to support her interpretation. The Goddess’s queries and Śiva’s responses all appear to 
single out the Yoginīs as the agents of the threefold yoga; and the introductory verses 
(22–​27) to this section, which presuppose the nondualist metaphysics of Śiva’s teaching 
on supreme yoga, specifically identify the Yoginīs as its agents. Yet, verse 10 gives pause: 
“[It is] by means of supreme [yoga] alone (pareṇaiva hi), or (tu) by means of the triad 
[i.e.,] by means of [supreme,] subtle, and gross [yoga that] they yoke with their power; 
but in no way do they kill.”25 Are the Yoginīs the actresses of the threefold yoga, or only 
of supreme yoga? Bearing in mind the NT’s composite nature, and in light of the fact 
that the agent of subtle yoga is always given in the masculine gender in the instruction 
portion of this section (vv. 28–​37), one might argue that these instructions on subtle 
“yoking” were originally intended for use by a male yogi.
	
20.22.	 Supreme [yoga] has thus been elucidated, and now subtle [yoga] is also 
proclaimed. Gnosis is subtle, comprised of Energy. Indeed, it is obtained by 
means of the Energy of Gnosis.
	
23.	 The airborne [Yoginīs] partake of that gnosis which, in conformity with 
the sonority of the sound (rāva) [produced] by a sonorous female being 
whose sound is not a sound, affords supernatural perfections (siddhis) to the 
Perfected Ones (Siddhas).
	
24.	 The gnosis of [their] victims is obscured by nescience. It remains laden with 
impurity, but those goddesses overcome that [nescience] with [their] pris­
tine gnosis.
	
25.	 And so, in the same way that a person who is awake can play with [the body 
of] someone who is asleep, [moving it] every which way, [or] in quite the 
same way that a drunkard can amuse himself, no matter where he is, by 
drinking liquors . . .
	
26.	 . . . or [in the same way that] a young child, due to his lack of autonomy [in 
the matter of mobility], will totter about in all directions; [or] that someone 
who is drunk can be pushed around by someone who is sober: in that [same] 
way victims . . .
	
27.	 . . . [are manipulated] by the Mothers and the Secretive Ones, each by means 
of her innate Energy and through her individual power of yoking. The vital 
principle (jīva) of [her] victims is swiftly drawn to her by means of her yogic 
virility (yogavīryataḥ).
	
28–​29a.	 Obtaining that [mantra] which is most excellent (yattatparamam), 
unmanifest, eternal, immobile and stable; entering [his target’s body] via the 
path of yoga; and becoming supreme on account of the supreme body [of 
God in his mantric form, the yogi] may, by means of his innate Energy, en­
velop [his target’s] vital principle with [his own] vital principle.
	 29b–​30.	 Attacking that [vital principle] which is verily situated in the heart, via its 
upper or lower opening[s]‌, and coalescing [with it] there, let him focus on 
[his target’s] identity. Then, betaking himself to the highest cause (paraṃ 
kāraṇam), let him focus on his autonomy.

--- PAGE 403 ---
378      David Gordon White
 
	
31.	 Let him then smash to smithereens [his target’s] Energy with his own all-​
pervading Energy. This [i.e., his own vital principle], having encapsulated 
that [i.e., his target’s vital principle], let him then slice off his Energy.
	
32.	 Thereupon, O Goddess, the connoisseur of yoga (yogavit), having recourse 
to [his target’s] very being (which has the form of his Energy), shall heat that 
up with the solar quality of [his own] consciousness, which is the manifesta­
tion of his own state of being.
	
33.	 And then, even as he is dwelling inside that other person, he shall melt the 
rays [of his target’s senses] in the same way as the sun [melts the rays of the 
moon] with [its] rays. [There,] in the heart, let him yoke (yojayet) all of that, 
as well as his [target’s] senses, the sense of sound, etc.26
	
34–​35.	 Having with his own consciousness taken full possession of all that has 
amassed in [his target’s] internal organ—​the [solid] elements, the fluid 
elements, and, indeed, the secondary elements—​let him then make his way 
into [that internal organ]. Hereupon, the yogi shall, after having attacked 
that fortress [of his target’s vital principle] from every side, quickly fetch 
back into his own body all that has been melted and seized.27
	
36.	 In that [same] moment, he shall, through the use of mudrās and mantras, 
fetch [his target’s] vital principle [back into his own body]. In this way, a yogi 
may practice subtle yoga.
	
37a.	 The connoisseur of yoga will instantaneously obtain all of that by means of 
subtle yoga.28
The rather cryptic language of verse 23 (“the . . . female being whose sound [or cry: rāva] 
is not a sound”) is a reference to an encoded vidyā, a “female” spell that quickens the 
Yoginīs.29 Kṣemarāja’s gloss qualifies this as a “simultaneously arising sound, a reflec­
tion of the primal vibration,” a description that could apply to both mantras, which are 
“male,” and to female vidyās. In fact, NT 15.26a declares that mantras are “embedded 
in the Energy of Gnosis” referenced in both verse 22 and in this verse (“the air­
borne [Yoginīs] partake of that gnosis”). Elsewhere, in his commentary on verse 39, 
Kṣemarāja, quoting the Vyomakuṇḍalinī, evokes another such spell, identifying it as the 
cry (rāva) uttered by the Yoginīs when they devour their victim.30 In their accounts of 
haṭhamelaka, the Tantrasadbhāva Tantra (TST), Jayadrathayāmala (JY), and other early 
sources identify a number of these unarticulated sounds with the cries of great birds 
(cillarāva) and jackals (śivārāva),31 and so one would expect Kṣemarāja’s reference to be 
of a similar sort, casting the Yoginīs as birds and beasts of prey. The identification of their 
cries with the howling of jackals is particularly intriguing, inasmuch as the term used for 
these creatures is śivā, the feminine form of the name of God. Given that the Yoginīs are 
identified in the NT and other works as “possess[ing] the state of oneness [with Śiva]” in 
the form of His Energy,32 jackals constitute their ideal mammalian form. Jackal behavior 
further supports this identification: they feed on their victims in packs (kulas) and are 
notorious for their howling (rāva). This is attested in several tantras, as well as in tantric 
art, including a medieval sculpture from central India, which depicts two jackal-​headed

--- PAGE 404 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      379
 
Yoginīs feeding on chunks of flesh.33 This notwithstanding, Kṣemarāja internalizes the 
same sky-​faring (khecaryaḥ) Yoginīs as “goddesses who move in the sky of conscious­
ness.”34 Once again, this is of a piece with the nondualist hermeneutic already observed. 
Saraogi (2016: 59, 63) offers a concise summarization of this process:
The fact that the JY links melaka with the mudrās makes it an important step in the 
process of interiorisation of the melaka: a process already embryonic in the TST, and 
which goes on to become a self-​evident reality in the works of Abhinavagupta . . . 
In becoming a practice for the expansion of consciousness, the melaka loses its vi­
sionary external tantric character and becomes rather a non-​dualistic philosophical 
expression of a quasi-​absolute state. . . . I would tentatively suggest that the haṭha 
variety of melaka can be defined as that mode of unity of consciousness between two 
beings in which one is sucked/​transported/​extracted and absorbed into the other; 
precisely the varieties of practices referred to in the Urmikaulārṇava 2 and NT 20.
As for the Siddhas referenced in the latter half of verse 23, Kṣemarāja identifies these 
as “the venerable Lord of the Birds (khagendra), etc.” Khagendra[nātha], “Lord of the 
Birds,” is also the name of the first of a group of four Siddhas, revered as the Kaula mas­
ters of the four ages (yuganāthas). The last of these, Matsyendra[nātha], is featured 
in the Kaulajñānanirṇaya, in which two passages describing the relationship between 
the Yoginīs and Siddhas appear to be addressing the same concept as that found here: 
the Kaula gnosis, which came naturally to the Yoginīs, was transmitted by them to the 
Siddhas through inarticulate sounds.35 The same gnosis (jñāna) affords the Yoginīs 
total control over their victims whose inherent gnosis is clouded over by nescience 
(ajñāna), by virtue of which they are able to manipulate them in the ways metaphori­
cally described in verses 24 to 27.
With verse 28, however, the perspective shifts, as the agent of subtle yoga is given in the 
masculine singular and called a yogi. In his commentary on this verse, Kṣemarāja relates 
it to a passage from the NT’s second chapter, concerning the “most excellent” (paramam) 
Death-​Conqueror mantra.36 It is this embodied mantra, as a source of “supreme strength 
comprised of consciousness,” that empowers the yogi to practice subtle yoga.37
Unlike its account of supreme yoga, the NT’s treatment of subtle yoga does not explic­
itly identify its outcome as identical to that obtained through tantric initiation. However, 
that initiation ritual as presented in the Svacchandabhairava Tantra (SBhT) and other 
earlier tantric texts serves as the blueprint for the sequence of actions the yogi will per­
form here; in fact, this and the eight verses that follow draw upon those prior sources 
more or less directly (Saraogi 2010: 69–​72).38 In his commentary, Kṣemarāja glosses 
“having entered” (praviśya) as “having co-​penetrated” (samāviśya), a term frequently 
employed in the tantras to denote the dynamic of initiation. In the oft-​referenced Śaiva 
initiation ritual called nirvāṇadīkṣā (Davis 1991: 99–​100), the guru penetrates the initiate’s 
body, drawing the latter’s soul into his own body. Following this, he raises their conjoined 
souls along the central channel up to the dvādaśānta located twelve finger-​breadths 
above his fontanel.39 This is the abode of Paramaśiva, with Whom the guru unites the 
initiate’s person, ensuring his release from the fetters that had previously bound him to

--- PAGE 405 ---
380      David Gordon White
 
suffering existence, and thereby ensuring his virtual identity with Śiva. In its discussion 
of the Cause Deities, the SBhT identifies the highest of these—​the para kāraṇa referenced 
in verse 30—​as none other than Paramaśiva, situated in the dvādaśānta.40 So, whereas 
the subtle yoga practiced by the Yoginīs, Mothers, and Secretive Ones issues in the direct 
subjugation of their victims (v. 27b), that of the yogi or initiating guru, detailed in verses 
28 through 36, requires a sequence of steps, and follows a more circuitous path.
Kṣemarāja’s commentary on verses 29 and 30 is also highly instructive, inasmuch as 
it describes the means by which the tantric guru is able to enter into and make his way 
through an initiate’s body. Here, citing the Tattvārthacintāmaṇi of Kallaṭa, he describes 
the “globule practice” (golakābhyāsa) by which a yogi concentrates his vital principle, 
fluid essence, volition, and consciousness into a single subtle droplet, by which he enters 
into his victim’s heart via either the fontanel or toes. Then, quoting from the Āmnāyadṛṣṭi, 
he goes on to describe how, lodged in his victim’s heart for the period of 100 measures and 
activating his breaths,41 the yogi is able to possess another body. So, even as the yogi’s sub­
sequent manipulation of his target’s body imitates that of the Yoginīs, its ultimate effect is 
salutary, the raising of his target’s vital essence or person up to God:
He sets the other person in motion. “The very thing that I do, this one (i.e., the other 
person) shall do that very thing.” Having realized identity with him, the one who 
is overpowering such a person “may overpower his autonomy,” [which means] “he 
shall hold back the one who is intending to go, he shall cause the one who is standing 
still to move.” Gradually, he shall make him dependent upon the movement of his 
own limbs. This has been said by the preceptors: “Stationed there [in the heart of the 
other], he shows himself to be a yogi when the result of his action—​total simultaneity 
of movement—​has been realized, whether he be eating, drinking, moving, standing 
or sleeping. After that, he may fetch him [to himself], let him go, bewilder him, open 
him up, enclose him completely, or cause him to reach the most excellent abode.”42
Kṣemarāja’s commentary (Shastri 1939: 230) on the mudrās evoked in verse 36 is also 
worthy of note, inasmuch as its set of five (karaṅkiṇī, krodhanī, lelihānī, khecarī,43 and 
bhairavī) is the same as that employed by the Ūrmikaulārṇava for both tantric initiation 
and the killing of a paśu (Saraogi 2010: 78). The first of these, the karaṅkiṇī (Skeletal 
Female), appears in the JY in the context of a specific melaka called the cillāsaṃyoga. In 
this practice of “consorting with the cillās,” the Yoginīs appear before the solitary practi­
tioner in the form of female kites (cillās), to whom he offers an oblation cut from the left 
side of his own body.44
NT 20.38–​20.66: Gross Yoga
Kṣemarāja’s commentary notwithstanding, NT 20.36–​20.37 clearly identifies the prac­
titioner of subtle yoga not as a female Yoginī but rather as a male yogi or “connoisseur

--- PAGE 406 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      381
 
of yoga” (yogavit). Now, as noted above,45 it may be that these verses are employing the 
masculine in order to denote either a male or a female agent, or that “yogi” was tan­
tric shorthand for Yoginī. More cutting and pasting appears in our chapter’s opening 
statements on gross yoga, with the agent of verse 38 being given in the singular and 
verse 39 in the plural. The language of the NT’s discussion of “gross yoga” appears to 
further show the hand of the work’s final redactors, who sought to decant three dis­
tinct bodies of practice—​involving human yogis, superhuman Yoginīs, and malevo­
lent beings, both human and superhuman—​under the single heading of a practice of 
yoga as undertaken by the Yoginīs alone. This is the gist of verse 40, whose second pada 
may be compared to NT 20.2a, in which it was the Śākinīs who were characterized as 
“proud of their powers.” As such, it would appear that the Yoginīs evoked in this verse 
are not supernatural embodied Energies of Śiva but rather malevolent human witches 
or sorceresses, in which case their victims are not liberated, freed from their existential 
fetters, but rather simply slaughtered. Referring back to verse 16, Kṣemarāja’s commen­
tary to this verse appears to support this distinction, referring to these female beings as 
flesh-​eating “mistresses of yoga” (yogeśīs), a term reserved for human witches in other 
medieval works.
As Brunner (1974: 185) has noted, verses 38 and 39 in fact comprise the entirety of 
the chapter’s account of gross yoga, which Kṣemarāja glosses as “this or that vengeful 
act [accomplished] through assorted vile tricks, poisoning, and so forth.” The sole form 
of gross yoga actually mentioned by name in these verses is the charnel ground-​based 
sorcery known as the “dust practice” (pāṃsava), for which our commentator provides 
a description based on revelations made by Śiva in the Gupta Tantra (Shastri 1939: 233):
O my darling! At daybreak on the dark seventh of the lunar fortnight, the Yoginī, 
who, whether she be skillful or not, is empowered by the application of mantras, shall 
always choose her target; firstly, [the corpse of] a woman who has come into view, as 
well as [that of] a man. Taking the left and right feet of these with her left and right 
hands, and removing the dust that is on the right foot of the man together with the 
dust of the left foot of the woman, she may always kill in my [i.e., Śiva’s] world.
The mention of dhyānayoga in verse 39 reopens the question of the applicability of the 
terminology of six-​ or eight-​part yoga to our text. If we are to follow Kṣemarāja once 
again, these have little in common, since he reads the term as referring to a Yoginī’s “ex­
traction of the five nectars” (pañcāmṛtākarṣaṇa) of her victim, a practice referenced 
above in verse 27 and dramatized in Bhavabhūti’s eighth-​century Mālatīmādhava.46
As Kṣemarāja indicates, verses 41 to 43 are devoted to the protection of potential 
victims from supreme yoga, and verses 44 and 45 for the protection of potential victims 
from subtle yoga. He then introduces verse 46 by noting that it and the verses that 
follow will treat of the release of a person who has been possessed (mudrita) through 
the workings of gross yoga. When his adversaries are employing supreme yoga, the tan­
tric practitioner must combat them through supreme yoga, that is, by deploying the 
Death-​Conqueror mantra. Once again, one cannot help but observe that there is an

--- PAGE 407 ---
382      David Gordon White
 
internal contradiction here, since it is the Yoginīs’ supreme yoga precisely—​which verse 
20 of our chapter characterized as effecting their victims’ “release from suffering exist­
ence”—​that the connoisseur of spells (mantravit) is called upon to counter here. The 
same conundrum obtains when our text sets out to describe the defense of potential 
victims from subtle yoga, in verses 44 and 45. Its not altogether satisfactory solution is to 
qualify its agents—​both male and female, human and superhuman—​as wicked (duṣṭa) 
and injurious (hiṃsaka). This is at variance with verse 6, in which Śiva had declared 
that the Yoginīs, Mothers, and Śākinīs “do not [slaughter] out of confusion, nor for the 
sake of injury, nor indeed out of a desire to slay.” Verse 66, which concludes this section, 
comprises a weak attempt to resolve this contradiction.
The final twenty verses on gross yoga provide a general description of the tantric 
specialist—​variously referred to as a mantravit, mantra master (mantrin), mantra 
master cum connoisseur of yoga (yogavinmantrin), or local practitioner (daiśika)—​and 
his practice.
	
37b.	 Subtle yoga has been fully recounted: gross [yoga] is now declared.
	
38.	 By means of it, one shall assuredly draw the target’s indwelling self toward 
one’s own body through the expedient of mudrās and mantras, as well as by 
means of the dust practice.
	
39.	 By the sole power of [their] “yoking meditation” (dhyānayoga47) targeting 
bodily features—​hidden markings, etc.—​they undoubtedly destroy the 
fleshly fortress of their victims.48
	
40.	 When the Yogi[nī]s who are proud of their powers49 wish to slaughter by 
means of the threefold yoga, O Goddess, then the Death-​Conqueror shall act 
in a way conducive to [their targets’] welfare.
	
41.	 The nature of supreme [meditation] is its pervasiveness. By means of that 
alone, the connoisseur of spells (mantravit) knows the Death-​Conqueror 
(Mṛtyujit) [mantra to be] the excellent immortal god (Amṛteśa) who has 
faces in every direction.50
	
42.	 The mantra master (mantrin), recognizing that (i.e., the Yoginīs’ wish to 
slaughter) to be supreme yoga shall, [by] pervading the [body-​]fortress of 
their [potential] victim, [and] standing guard over [it] with his Energy of 
Desire, defend the good life of [all] creatures.51
	
43.	 O glorious One! The mantra master cum connoisseur of yoga 
(yogavinmantrin), recognizing the subtle [yoga] of both [evil] yogis and all 
the aforementioned injurious ones (i.e., evil Yoginīs, Śākinīs, etc.) on the 
basis of its sequence [of procedures] . . .
	 44–​45.	 . . . shall, by the piercing of the aforementioned knots [and by] energetically 
entering into the cakras via the path of his own Energy through subtle med­
itation, liberate [potential victims] from every sort of wickedness. Indeed, it 
is never otherwise. Endowed with the powers [accrued] through the yoking 
of [the Energy of] Gnosis (jñānayoga), the connoisseur of yoga who is profi­
cient in mantra and tantra . . .

--- PAGE 408 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      383
 
	
46.	 . . . has his mantras perfected by the Death-​Conqueror. He is an ascetic 
whose senses have been controlled, and who is versed in the mantras of 
yoking meditation. He is resolute, knowledgeable, [and] powerful.
	
47.	 A supreme yogi, he is serene, devoted to the realization of the merits 
accruing from the performance of the sacred rites, entirely free of all pas­
sion and hatred and devoid of desire and delusion.
	
48.	 Fearless and unflinching, and having the promotion of goodness as his 
highest goal, O my darling, he shall be a liberator from the dread acts of 
wickedness mentioned above.
	
49.	 But the person who acts otherwise shall be self-​destructive, bringing on the 
ruin of his own line. That villain is assuredly cooked in hell.
	
50.	 Now, the spirit beings in their various forms—​the wicked injurious 
Mothers, the Yoginīs, the Secretive Ones, Yakṣas, [and] Flesh-​Eaters—​are 
difficult to overcome.52
	
51.	 [Among them are] those who are fond of tribute offerings, fond of killing, 
and likewise others who are fond of eating. Indeed, [there are also] those 
who are fond of sexual pleasures, as well as Skanda and his minions [and] 
the Brahma-​Guardians, who cannot be subdued.
	
52.	 Because they are infinite in number, they are terrifying; and, indeed, under 
no circumstances whatsoever is quarrel to be made with them by persons 
who, knowing nothing other than themselves (ātmajñaiḥ),53 are past mas­
ters in [promoting] their own interests.
	
53a–​54a.	 Nor is [quarrel] to be made by miserly or greedy persons, or glory-​
seekers. [Rather] one always should act out of compassion toward one’s 
own family—​children and so forth—​and toward kings, their sons, and 
their wives.
	
54b–​55a.	 In a country or kingdom in which a connoisseur of mantra-​yoking 
resides,54 the king and the [mantra-​]master in that place [shall] always 
[serve as] spiritual preceptors55 to persons in all four stages of life.
	
55b–​56a.	 When that is the case, those Mothers do indeed show mercy toward one 
who is living [there].56 In every case, those frightful ones pivot from [an at­
titude of] cruelty, as mentioned before, to [one of] pacification.
	 56b–​57b.	 And because those kings appease them with a tribute offering of food 
comprised of abundant sacrificial oblations, they are merciful to one and 
all. In no case is the Science of Mantras to be practiced by persons unfa­
miliar with Śiva.57
	
58.	 [Concerning] those fearsome ones that destroy the gross five-​element 
body through various strategies: hear [now] the [means to] their pacifica­
tion . . .
	
59a–​63a.	 through [the practice of] gross yoga: i.e., through the use of powders, in­
cense, and pastes and through the use of controlling devices and cir­
cular diagrams inscribed onto a support and likewise with life-​protecting

--- PAGE 409 ---
384      David Gordon White
 
charms, etc.; through the yokings of concentration and meditation (dhāra-
ṇādhyānayogaiḥ) and [the use of] perfected spells. In every case [gross 
yoga is to be practiced] by persons who are connoisseurs of mudrās and 
mantras [and] familiar with the [Ni]gamas and the Āgamas; by virtuoso 
herbal specialists who are conversant in the methods of the Tantras of the 
Spirit Beings (Bhūtatantras). [It is to be practiced by persons] who are 
self-​disciplined and vigilant, devoid of any defilement arising from inter­
mixture (of caste), [by persons] who have bathed and by whom worship 
has been accomplished,58 who are devoted to recitation and meditation, 
experts in the science of defining that which is to be defined, without 
desires, [and] highly skilled. The Science of Mantras (mantravāda) is to 
be practiced by persons who care about [other people’s] safety, and not 
otherwise.
	
63b–​64a.	 “If one should desire the highest supernatural enjoyment or guaranteed 
eternal liberation, then the Science of Mantras is not to be practiced.” Thus 
saith the Supreme Master (Parameśvara).
	 64b–​65b.	 It is to be practiced for the welfare of the households of mortal lords on 
earth by a person of good intent who is a local embodiment of Śiva’s 
grace.59 [But] if that person should [only] act occasionally [and] not con­
tinually, then he is utterly lost.
	
66.	 The mighty ones (the Yoginīs, etc.) who are predestined for [the consump­
tion of] Śiva’s offering do not forgive [such a person]. They are ever pure 
and without fear, respectful of Bhairava’s command.
Coda: NT 20.67–​20.75
The two Kathmandu manuscript witnesses to this chapter are more or less consistent 
with the Kashmir edition I have used here. However, those manuscripts end at verse 64, 
with their final two verses being absent from the Kashmir edition. While the final verses 
of the Kashmir edition, given below, provide further data concerning the mighty female 
beings that are the agents of gross yoga, they do not treat of gross yoga itself, nor do they 
provide any new information. They are little more than an encapsulation of NT 19.12–​
19.30, in which it is Śiva himself who recounts the events described here. It is for that 
reason that the discourse shifts from the third person to the first person between verses 
67 and 68. All that remains is for Śiva to declare, one final time, the irresistible power of 
the Death-​Conqueror mantra, which He does.
	
67.	 In a former time, they were commanded by me through the use of mudrās 
and mantras. They do not seek to destroy for their own individual sake. For 
that reason they are declared to be powerful.60

--- PAGE 410 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      385
 
	
68.	 Formerly, they were in fact emitted by Śiva, the supreme Self, the God who 
surpasses all the other gods. By his injunction, they deployed to the ten 
directions.
	
69.	 Fully imbued with his might, those victorious ones were exceedingly pow­
erful. At first, those very terrible ones were motivated by a desire to slay 
the gods.
	
70.	 And in that early time, seventy million Mantra-​[Beings], possessed of un­
failing energy, power and authority, were emitted by the Self-​Generated 
One (Svayambhu) [to be their] adversaries.61
	
71a–​73a.	 [Concerning] those wicked, terrible, excessively powerful ones that seek to 
kill [innocent] creatures: for the sake of their very pacification and for the 
protection of this world, the hundredfold, even thousandfold employment 
of the expedients (krīyayoga) of mantras and healing herbs was ordained by 
the Supreme Master. His purpose was the promotion of all of the Sciences 
of Mantras, with [such practices] not [constituting] a breach of [His] com­
mand or otherwise.
	
73b–​74a.	 And it is through His power that those [mantras] are powerful; and those 
mantras whose energy is unfailing are all augmented [in their power] by 
His virility. The other phonemes, however are simple (i.e., devoid of the 
power of mantras).
	 74b–​75b.	 And by virtue of that (i.e., His virility), it is called the Death-​Conqueror, 
the Master of All Mantras, the Mighty One; and no [male] Mantra-​Being 
or [female] Vidyā-​Being shall transgress His command. And through the 
remembrance [of the Death-​Conqueror] they—​like gazelles and other 
creatures before the lion—​do flee.
Conclusion
As is the case with the nondualist Hindu tantras in general, the NT is a gnostic system, 
with the attainment or realization of gnosis (jñāna)—​transformative esoteric insight 
triggering a sudden expansion of consciousness—​tantamount to the transcendence of 
the human condition. In these traditions, however, the attainment of said gnosis is less 
often realized through philosophical analysis than through active ingestion of either a 
Yoginī’s sexual or menstrual emission or the caru, a mixture of prohibited or polluting 
human bodily emissions; or through the penetration, even violation, of a passive body 
either by an initiating guru or by a Yoginī. This can take the form of possession, benign 
in the case of a guru but maleficent in the case of an evil yogi. It can also take the form of 
the total or partial consumption of one’s body by Yoginīs. Here, gnosis is weaponized, as 
it were, and wielded like a tooth, a claw, or a scalpel. In all cases, gnosis effects a sudden 
transformation of consciousness in its passive target, even if such can sometimes prove

--- PAGE 411 ---
386      David Gordon White
 
fatal. As Brunner (1975: 435) has opined, the sadhaka of our text would have been the 
direct descendent of “popular magicians versed in the sciences of spells . . . herbal 
concoctions, metals, and so forth.” Clearly, the NT’s twentieth chapter on the threefold 
yoga is a record of that legacy.
But what does that legacy have to do with yoga? Can the activities of the NT’s yogis 
and Yoginīs, figures whose names would indicate that they were the prime agents or 
practitioners of yoga, be reconciled with yoga in the proper sense of the term? Which begs 
the question: what is the proper sense of the term “yoga”? Contemporary scholarly con­
vention and popular opinion maintain that the Yoga Sūtras have defined “classical yoga” 
for some 1,500 years, with all that has followed tributary to Patañjali’s system. Compiled in 
the ninth century ce, the NT’s account of the threefold yoga dates from heart of the period 
in which the Yoga Sūtras were enjoying their greatest pre-​twentieth-​century popularity in 
India and the wider world (White 2014: 159–​171). Yet, as we have seen, even in the rare cases 
in which the NT references the Yoga Sūtras, its account of the work and the eight-​part yoga 
differ wildly from their referent. This tendency is not unique to the NT or to either tantric or 
non-​tantric scripture and commentary in general. Time and again throughout history, the 
Yoga Sūtras have been invoked only to be misrepresented. How are we to explain these per­
ennial uses and abuses of Patañjali’s so-​called foundational work?
A comparison with the role of the Veda as a touchstone of Hindu self-​identity may 
help to resolve this conundrum. As Brian K. Smith (1987: 45) has noted,
the great paradox of Hinduism . . . is that, although the religion is inextricably tied 
to the legitimizing authority of the Veda, in post-​Vedic times the subject matter of 
the Veda is largely unknown by those who define themselves in relation to it . . . The 
Hindus, it would seem, use only the “outside” of the Veda, oblivious to its “inside.”
In other words, the Veda, the language of whose mantras is incomprehensible to the 
Hindus who identify it as the foundation of their religion, is an empty signifier. The yoga 
subculture’s elevation of the Yoga Sūtras to the status of divine revelation (śrūti) on a par 
with that of the Veda has the same implications (White 2014: 212–​215). No matter that its 
aphorisms are incomprehensible to virtually all gurus and practitioners of postural yoga 
and only distantly related to their practice, it is the authority of that work that legitimizes 
their contemporary practice. As such, the authority of the Yoga Sūtras is for them an ar­
ticle of faith. While believers are entitled to their beliefs, scholars are not. The embrace 
by scholar-​practitioners of the yoga subculture’s contemporary belief system, over and 
against the historical record, is unacceptable.
Notes
	1.	 Vasudeva’s focus is TĀ 16.56b–​68b, with the commentary of Jayaratha (in Shastri 1933: 21–​28).
	2.	 My translation of NT’s rather opaque account of subtle meditation (NT 6.7d–​8b) takes 
its cues from Kṣemarāja’s commentary (in Shastri 1926: 126–​27). The Svacchandabhairava 
Tantra ([SBhT] 4.246, quoted in Vasudeva 2004: 247, n. 110) states that the kalās of a mantra 
“exist solely in the vital breath,” providing context for the expression kalānāḍī in NT 6.8a.

--- PAGE 412 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      387
 
	 3.	 In an online edition and translation of the NT’s seventh chapter, excerpted from Flood, et 
al. (forthcoming).
	 4.	 For a discussion of the related terms dīpta (“exposed to the sun”) and śānta (“away from 
the sun”) in South Asian augury, see White 1995: 292–​93.
	 5.	 These iconic plates accompany Woodroffe’s translation of the Ṣaṭ-​cakra-​nirūpaṇa, 
verses 1–​41.
	 6.	 Four cakra systems: Yoga Sūtra, Hevajra Tantra; Chinese Samādhi of Completion; Naropa’s 
“Six Yogas”; Satvata Saṃhitā; Yoga Kalandar; Amṛtaratnāvalī of Mukundadāsa. Five cakra 
systems: Ātmatattva; Laghukālacakra Tantra; Kubjikāmata (one of two systems); various 
Kashmirian Krama sources; Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta. Six cakra systems: Netra Tantra; 
Caraka Saṃhitā; Bhāgavata Purāṇa; Kubjikāmata (a second system); Śāradatilakam; 
Khecarīvidyā; Gorakṣaśataka; Śiva Saṃhitā; Dhyānabindu Upaniṣad; Rudrayāmala Tantra; 
Jñānapradīp of Saiyad Sultan; Bṛhat Tantrasāra. Seven cakra systems: Kaulajñānanirṇaya; 
Śrīmattotara Tantra; Vivekamārtaṇḍa; Ṣaṭcakranirūpaṇa. Nine cakra systems: 
Maṇḍalabrahmopaniṣad; Śārṅgadharapaddhati; Siddhasiddhāntapaddhati; Amṛtakuṇḍali; 
Saubhāgyalakṣmī Upaniṣad; various Śrīvidyā sources. Ten cakras: Yogamakaranda of 
Krishnamacharya. Eleven cakras: Kālīkulakramārcana of Vimalaprabodha. Twelve 
cakras: Siddha Sampradaya sources. Thirteen cakras: Amṛtānanda ad Yoginīhṛdayam; Jain 
Acharya Mahaprajna’s system. Twenty-​two cakras: Vairāṭa Purāṇa. Twenty-​eight cakras: 
Gorakṣanātha’s system. Thirty cakras: Shri Sabhapathy Swami’s system. Not all of these sys­
tems employ the term cakra. This list is representative, and by no means exhaustive.
	 7.	 Tantric scripture and commentary generally favor the six-​part (ṣaḍaṅga) yoga system over 
Patañjali’s eight-​part yoga; and when they mention Patañjali directly, they are often dis­
missive of his system. White 2014: 162–​69.
	 8.	 In their ongoing preparation of a critical edition and translation of the entire NT, Gavin 
Flood and Bjarne Wernicke have generated a partial edition of this chapter. The orig­
inal edition of the work, published as volumes 46 and 61 of the Kashmir Series of Texts 
and Studies (Shastri, 1926, 1939), was based on two manuscript witnesses from Srinagar, 
Kashmir. Flood and Wernicke’s edition is based on witnesses from Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Flood and Wernicke have kindly shared their draft with me, which constitutes chapter 
twenty-​one in their edition. There are relatively few divergences between the two editions, 
and while my translation is based on the KTTS edition (to which Kṣemarāja refers in his 
commentary), I will indicate those cases in which I have preferred Flood and Wernicke’s 
readings by underlining the altered word[s]‌ or clause, and providing the Sanskrit emenda­
tion in footnotes.
	 9.	 Following Flood and Wernicke, I have emended Shastri’s balavattarāḥ to balagarvitāḥ.
	10.	 Following Flood and Wernicke, I have emended Shastri’s yeṣām to teṣām.
	11.	 Following Flood and Wernicke, I have emended Shastri’s tān to tāḥ.
	12.	 Following Flood and Wernicke, I have emended Shastri’s antarāvasthaḥ to antarālasthaṃ.
	13.	 Following Flood and Wernicke, I have emended Shastri’s ekībhāvamanuprāpya to ekībhāv- 
amanuprāptā.
	14.	 In addition to the figurative sense of the term, “yoking” here would also refer to the literal 
fettering of the victim to a sacrificial post prior to its immolation, whether by decapitation, 
blood-​letting, or suffocation, a practice that, still current, goes back to Vedic times.
	15.	 Here, I follow Kṣemarāja, who in his commentary identifies the yogi in this compound 
with the Yoginīs, and their yoga with their consumption of the sacrificial offering. This 
shortening (from Yoginī to yogi) is of a piece with earlier usages of the term, as attested in 
the Siddhayogeśvarīmata and Brahmayāmalatantra: Kiss 2015: 47, n. 53.

--- PAGE 413 ---
388      David Gordon White
 
	16.	 This image is commonly employed to describe the reincarnation of the immortal soul, 
which passes from one body to another in the same way that the flame of one oil lamp can 
be used to light another, even as the original lamp is extinguished.
	17.	 Here, puruṣa denotes the soul, in the same way as does adhikārin in verse 17. The char­
acterization of the fetter as “fully grown” (praruḍha) extends verse 18’s metaphor of the 
threefold mala as a growing tree that the Yoginīs cut off at the roots.
	18.	 Abhinavagupta’s discussion is found in TĀ 16.56b–​68b (in Shastri 1933: 21–​27).
	19.	 Abhinavagupta, Tantrāloka 16.58b–​61a, translated in Vasudeva n.d.: 5–​6. I have slightly 
emended Vasudeva’s translation to more closely conform to my own reading of the terms 
in the NT verses that Abhinavagupta is parsing.
	20.	 Their vampirism is described in rather repetitious detail in TST 16.157–​220, a passage 
summarized by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on NT 19.55 (in Shastri 1939: 145–​46).
	21.	 Taken individually, these are the āṇava malam (fundamental impurity, pertaining to the 
soul), māyīyam malam (impurity of differentiated perception), and kārmaṃ malam (im­
purity of charged actions), discussed in NT 19.145b–​51b. Cf. Sanderson 1986: 190–​91.
	22.	 Yojanikā appears in the generic sense of “yoking, union” in Kṣemarāja’s introduction to 
NT 4.8b–​9b (in Shastri 1926: 114).
	23.	 The term appears throughout the NT’s fourth chapter, on initiation (dīkṣā). Cf. Saraogi 
2010: 67.
	24.	 Saraogi (2010: 69–​80, 2013: 201, 2016: 53–​55, 62–​63) cites and quotes several references to 
these parallel practices from the Jayadrathayāmala, Brahmayāmala, Svacchanda Tantra, 
Tantrasadbhāva Tantra, and Ūrmikaulārṇava. A chart at p. 81 of Saraogi 2010 provides a syn­
optic point-​for-​point comparison between initiation and the Yoginī practices. See also Kiss 
2015: 141, 255–​56. On mudrā, see Saraogi 2013: 68–​69, 76, 78. On the “seven-​times (re)born” 
paśu, see Saraogi 2010: 66–​67, n. 7; 2013, 201; and Vasudeva n.d.: 8–​10, quoting TĀ 16.65–​68a.
	25.	 However, see below, verse 40, which, employing similar language, unambiguously casts 
the Yoginīs as the agents of the threefold yoga.
	26.	 Kṣemarāja’s commentary is instructive: “Thereupon [the yogi who is] there precisely, in 
the other person, that is, stationed in the other person’s body, shall, with his own fully 
kindled [sensory] rays [comprised of] the eyes etc., cause to melt the rays of the eyes, etc. 
coming from that other person, in the same way that the sun causes the moon’s rays to 
flow, i.e., to liquify.”
	27.	 While “fortress” (puram) might be read as referring to the body of the yogi’s victim, the 
context of the preceding verses would indicate that it is the puryaṣṭakam (“that which 
is comprised of eight fortresses”), that is, the subtle body comprised of the mind and its 
faculties, which is denoted here. This is the opinion of Kṣemarāja, who refers to it in his 
commentary on verses 29a and 38a (in Shastri 1939: 227, 231).
	28.	 In his commentary (in Shastri 1939: 231), Kṣemarāja provides the motive for which the 
connoisseur of yoga or yogi would practice subtle yoga: “he quickly obtains ‘all of that’ 
[means] the attraction of [his victim’s] vital principle (jīvākarṣaṇa) and the fruit of the su­
pernatural enjoyment of that [body].”
	29.	 For example, Jayadrathayāmala 4.65.10b: evam aṣṭākṣarīrghorā rāviṇīrāvaṇārcitā. I am 
grateful to Olga Saraogi for this reference. Cf. TĀ 32.33d (in Shastri 1938: 318): rāvaṃ kṛtvā 
hyarāvakam. Elsewhere, Abhinavagupta’s discussion of the kāmatattva (TĀ 3.146a–​48a, 
in Shastri 1921: 147–​52) represents a later development: “the unvoiced syllable which, 
lodged in the throat of a beautiful woman, [arises] in the form of an unintentional sound,

--- PAGE 414 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      389
 
without forethought or concentration . . .” On this passage, see Brunner et al. 2004: 86, s.v. 
“kāmatattva”; and White 1998: 183.
	30.	 baddhvā saptaśikhāṃ mudrām āśikhāntaṃ halākṛtim . . . tadā grasanti yoginyo rāvaṃ 
kṛtvā śikhāntare.
	31.	 JY.2.2.97–​99: pañcadhākhararāvaṃ syāc cillarāvaṃ caturvidham/​ prosvaraṃ dṛśyate 
sarvair devīrūpasadāruṣ[?]‌aḥ //​tatas tu kaṃpate sarvaṃ brahmāṇḍaṃ kaulikaiḥ saha /​ 
śivārāva mahāghora kolāhalaravo mahān //​ khecaryaḥ śaktisaṃghātā bhūtavetālajātayaḥ /​ 
adṛśyaṃ devatāvṛndaṃ sarāvaṃ dharcayiṣyati //​. I am grateful to Olga Saraogi for sharing 
her edition of these verses with me. As she notes (2016: 66, n. 25), a dhyāna contained in the 
same ṣaṭka of the JY (2.15.243–​45) is that of a terrible goddess, “most probably Śivādūtī,” 
the name of a tantric “female jackal-​messenger.”
	32.	 See v. 13.
	33.	 The sculpture is held by the Berlin Museum für Indische Kunst (no. I 5922). http://​
www.smb-​digi​tal.de/​eMus​eumP​lus?serv​ice=​Extern​alIn​terf​ace&mod​ule 
=​
collection&objectId=​981462. A vivid description of a tantric goddess in jackal form is 
found in Kulacūḍāmaṇi Tantra 7.44b–​47b, 49b–​50b (in Vedantatirtha 1915: 46–​47). For 
further discussion of the Yoginīs as jackals and birds, see White 2020: 71–​75.
	34.	 Kṣemarāja ad NT 20.23b, in Shastri 1939: 224: [khecaryaḥ] samvidgaganacāriṇyo devyaḥ.
	35.	 Kaulajñānanirṇaya 16.49a–​51c, 22.7–​12, in White 2003: 103–​04. The four Siddhas are 
represented on a mandala described by Abhinavagupta in TĀ 29.27b–​33a (in Shastri 1936: 
22–​26), which Kṣemarāja references in his commentary on NT 12.1 (in Shastri 1926: 252–​53). 
See Dyczkowski (1988: 81) for an inverted  diagram based on this description.
	36.	 yattadityādi prāgvat /​ tatprāpya paraṃ cinmayaṃ balam. Apart from this verse, the ex­
pression yattatparamam only appears in NT 2.28, where it refers to the formation of the 
“Death-​Conqueror” mantra OṂ JUṂ SAḤ. The verses that follow, which constitute a glo­
rification of the mantra, all begin with etattatparamam “that is the most excellent.”
	37.	 The language of this verse is also evocative of the description of the supreme universal Self 
in NT 20.11. It is possible that this is Kṣemarāja’s referent, rather than NT 2.28.
	38.	 However, scriptural precedents for such practices, as undertaken by a male human 
practitioner for the purpose of offering his victim’s flesh and fluids to goddesses and to 
Kapalīśabhairava, are documented in the Brahmayāmala (3.198–​207) and other early 
works. These are also detailed in TĀ 16.36b–​51a: Sanderson 2009: 183–​84, n. 444.
	39.	 An account of nirvāṇadīkṣā appears in the sixth-​ to seventh-​century Uttarasūtra (4.46–​
51) of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (NTS), considered the earliest extant ritual compendium 
of the Śaiva Mantramarga: Goodall 2015: 174 (Sanskrit text), 384–​86 (English trans­
lation). However, in this work, the supreme form of Śiva is simply named Śiva, and the 
dvādaśānta is not mentioned. The earliest mention of the dvādaśānta appears in the 
Sārdhatriśatikālottara Āgama: Brunner 1994: 452.
	40.	 The SBhT’s ordering of the transfer from body to body via the dvādaśānta differs from that 
of nirvāṇadīksā: Saraogi 2010: 71–​72, nn. 22–​23. It would appear that by betaking himself 
to the highest cause, the yogi shuttles up to Paramaśiva a second time, following which he 
attacks his target’s autonomy.
	41.	 A measure or mora (mātra) has been defined as the time it takes for a sleeping man to 
breathe in and out once. Alternatively, it is the time it takes to clap the hands three times or 
to circle the knee three times with the palm of the hand and then snap one’s fingers: White 
1996: 502, n. 137.

--- PAGE 415 ---
390      David Gordon White
 
	42.	 Kṣemarāja ad NT 20.29b–​30b (in Shastri 1939: 227). A similar treatment is discussed in 
White 2009: 165–​66.
	43.	 See TĀ 32.26 (in Shastri 1938: 316) for a description of the karaṅkiṇī mudrā.
	44.	 Saraogi 2016: 58, 68–​69, n. 51, quoting JY 4.49.25d–​27d: . . . mudrāṃ baddhvā karaṅkiṇī //​ 
dhūpaṃ dāha tataṃ ratrau yāvat sādhakapuṃgavaḥ /​ tāvad āyanti yoginyaḥ cillārūpā 
mahābalāḥ //​ koṭiśo devadeveśi kṛtvā kālakalāravam /​ tāsāṃ arghaṃ pradātavyaṃ bhītvā 
vamāṅgam ātmanaḥ //​. The text also refers to this as a mahāmelaka, a “great consorting.”
	45.	 See NT 20.16.
	46.	 Mālatī-​Mādhava, Act 5, v. 1, discussed in White 2003: 209. In this, it also deviates from the 
usage of the term as found in the great bulk of Śaiva scripture and commentary. On this, 
see Vasudeva 2004: 367–​82.
	47.	 The term piṇḍa (lump) commonly denotes “body” in these traditions. The term’s repeti­
tion in this hemistich is glossed by Kṣemarāja (in Shastri 1939: 231) to mean “subtle body” 
and “gross body,” respectively.
	48.	 The “mystical points” (chummakas) evoked in this verse are identified in TĀ 29.37 (in 
Shastri 1936: 27) as the dvādaśānta, ūrdhvakuṇḍalinī, baindava, hṛd, nābhi, and kanda. 
Three of these correspond to the locations of the five voids (vyomans) as enumerated in 
NT 7.27. In his commentary (in Shastri 1939, 233), Kṣemarāja identifies the signs in ques­
tion as incisions made on the bodies of sacrificial victims.
	49.	 Following Flood and Wernicke, I have emended Shastri’s balavattarāḥ to balagarvitāḥ.
	50.	 This is at variance with the description of Amṛteśa’s appearance as attested in NT 3.20b: 
ekavaktra. I have followed Kṣemarāja (in Shastri 1939: 235) in interpreting pareṇa to refer 
to the supreme meditation detailed in chapter eight, rather than to supreme yoga. Because 
the Sanskrit syntax of this verse is impossible to render in grammatical English, I have pro­
vided an interpretation of its meaning, rather than a paraphrase of its wording.
	51.	 I have treated the challenging syntax of this and the preceding verse in the same way as 
Kṣemarāja, that is, by using the gerund jñātvā (recognizing) twice, once to refer to the 
mantravit and once to refer to the mantrin. The syntax of these and the verses that follow is 
further complicated by the poetic device of enjambment, in which the language of a prior 
verse or clause is completed by the first word of the following verse.
	52.	 This and the two verses that follow are a reprising of NT 19.8b–​9a and 30b–​31b.
	53.	 I am reading ātmajñaiḥ in the same pejorative sense as ātmopāsaka (devotee of the self), 
which appears in NT 8.30 with the commentary of Kṣemaraja (in Shastri 1926: 193); that is, 
as a plural form for the person who, believing he is worshiping Śiva, continues to view Him 
as different from his distinct and personal “self,” which is the self he is in fact worshiping: 
discussion in Brunner 1974: 146.
	54.	 This hemistich reprises NT 19.131b. Verses 55b–​56a summarize NT 19.132a–​134a.
	55.	 Here, I have emended guruḥ to the dual form, gurū.
	56.	 Kṣemarāja (in Shastri 1939: 240) glosses vartamānasya “of one who is living [there]” as “to­
ward one practicing the Science of Mantras” (mantravādam).
	57.	 Here, I have emended śivacintakaiḥ to read śivācintakaiḥ.
	58.	 While snāta may simply mean “bathed” as a preliminary to image worship, it more likely 
refers here to the state of being of a pupil who has concluded his Vedic education and initi­
ation as a twice-​born individual with a ritual bath.
	59.	 My translation of this clause is tentative. My interpretation of anugraha-​padasthena (“by 
. . . a local embodiment of Śiva’s grace”) is based in part on Kṣemarāja’s gloss (in Shastri 
1939: 244) “by a preceptor [ācāryeṇa] with regard to someone quite worthy of sympathy,”

--- PAGE 416 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      391
 
and in part on the Parātriṃśikāvivaraṇa of Abhinavagupta (p. 3, cited in Brunner et 
al. 2000: 120, s.v. “anugraha”), for whom the term denotes the grace obtained through 
śaktipāta. A preceptor living in the country would, by initiating members of the com­
munity and looking after persons worthy of sympathy, constitute a “local” (padastha) 
embodiment of Śiva’s grace. It is worth noting that NT 6.44 uses the term daiśika (coun­
tryman) to denote the ācārya, and that NT 16.113b and 19.138a use it as a synonym for 
the mantrin or practitioner of mantravāda. The language of NT 19.138 is reprised by 
Kṣemarāja in his commentary on this verse. On this, see Brunner, 1974: 141, 165, 180. 
However, Kṣemarāja elsewhere distinguishes between the ācārya, who acts for others, 
and the sādhaka, who acts solely on his own behalf: Kṣemarāja ad NT 5.3b (in Shastri 
1926: 119), quoted in Brunner 1975, 434, note 74.
	60.	 Here, I have emended verse 67b to read: ātmārthaṃ na jighāṃsanti /​ tena te balinyaḥ 
smṛtāḥ //​. Verses 67–​73 are an encapsulation of NT 19.12–​30, in which it is Śiva himself 
who recounts the events described here. It is for that reason that the discourse shifts from 
the third person to the first. NT 19.12–​30 is discussed in White 2021: 54.
	61.	 Following Kṣemarāja, I have emended dṛṣṭāḥ to read sṛṣṭāḥ. The repetition of the 
adverbs pūrvam and pūrā is pleonastic. All these events occurred in a former time. 
As recounted in NT 19.12–​20, Śiva first created the Mothers and other spirit beings to 
combat the Daityas. Having defeated them but still famished, they commenced to de­
vour other creatures including the gods. In order to combat and defeat these beings of 
his own creation, Śiva then emitted the seventy million male and female Spell Beings. 
These are the mantras and vidyās that mantrins and connoisseurs of mantras deploy 
against those same spirit beings when they attack creatures (especially those belonging 
to royal families).
References
Birch, Jason. 2011. “The meaning of Haṭha in early Haṭhayoga.” Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 131, no. 4: 527–​54.
Birch, Jason. 2019. “The Amaraughaprabodha: New evidence on the manuscript transmission 
of an early work on Haṭha-​and Rājayoga.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 47: 947–​77.
Brunner, Hélène. 1974. “Un Tantra du Nord: Le Netra Tantra.” Bulletin de l’École Française 
d’Extrême-​Orient 37, no. 1: 125–​97.
Brunner, Hélène. 1975. “Le sādhaka, personnage oublié du Śivaïsme du sud.” Journal Asiatique 
63: 3–​4: 411–​43.
Brunner, Hélène. 1994. “The place of yoga in the Śaivāgamas.” In Pandit N. R. Bhatt félicitation 
volume, edited by Pierre-​Sylvain Filliozat, S. P. Narang, and C. P. Bhatta, 425–​61. Delhi, India: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Brunner, Hélène, Gerard Oberhammer, and André Padoux, eds. 2000. Tāntrikābhidhānakośa 
I. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichishen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Brunner, Hélène, Gerard Oberhammer, and André Padoux, eds. 2004. Tāntrikābhidhānakośa 
II. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichishen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Davis, Richard H. 1991. Ritual in an oscillating universe. Worshiping Śiva in medieval India. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 1988. The canon of the Śaivāgama and the Kubjikā Tantras of the 
Western Kaula tradition. Albany: State University of New York Press.

--- PAGE 417 ---
392      David Gordon White
 
Flood, Gavin, and Bjarne Wernicke-​Olesen. forthcoming. The lord of immortality: An intro­
duction, critical edition, and translation of the Netra Tantra, vol. 1. London: Routledge. http://​
sakt​atra​diti​ons.org/​wp-​cont​ent/​uplo​ads/​2019/​11/​THE-​NETR​ATAN​TRA-​exam​ple.pdf.
Goodall, Dominic (in collaboration with Alexis Sanderson and Harunaga Isaacson), ed. 
2015. The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā. The earliest surviving Śaiva Tantra, vol. 1, A critical edition 
& annotated translation of the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra & Nayasūtra. Pondicherry, India: 
Institut Français d’Extrême-​Orient.
Kiss, Csaba. 2015. The Brahmayāmalatantra or Picumata, vol. II, The Religious observances and 
sexual rituals of the Tantric practitioner: Chapters 3, 21, and 45. Pondicherry, India: Institut 
Français de Pondichéry.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1986. “Maṇḍala and Āgamic identity in the Trika of Kashmir.” In Mantras 
et diagrammes rituels dans l’Hindouisme, edited by André Padoux, 169–​207. Paris: Éditions 
du CNRS.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2004. “Religion and the state: Śaiva officiants in the territory of the King’s 
Brahmanical chaplain.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 47: 229–​300.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva age—​The rise and dominance of Śaivism in the Early 
Medieval period.” In Genesis and development of Tantrism (Institute of Oriental Culture 
Special Series, 23), edited by Shingo Einoo, 41–​349. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo.
Saraogi, Olga Serbaeva. 2010. “When to kill means to liberate: Structure and meaning of 
two types of ritual actions in Vidyāpīṭha texts.” In Grammars and morphologies of ritual 
practices in Asia, edited by Axel Michaels and Anand Mishra, 65–​84. Wiesbaden, Germany: 
Harrassowitz.
Saraogi, Olga Serbaeva. 2013. “Can encounters with Yoginīs in the Jayadrathyāmala be 
described as possession?” In “Yoginī” in South Asia: Interdisciplinary approaches, edited by 
István Keul, 198–​212. London: Routledge.
Saraogi, Olga Serbaeva. 2016. “Varieties of melaka in the Jayadrathayāmala. Some reflections 
on the terms haṭha and priya.” In Goddess traditions in Tantric Hinduism. History, practice 
and doctrine, edited by Bjarne Wernicke Olesen, 51–​73. London: Routledge.
Shastri, Madhusudan Kaul, ed. 1926. The Netra Tantram, with Commentary by Kshemarāja, vol. 
1. Bombay, India: Tattva-​Vivechaka Press. https://muktalib7.com/DL_CATALOG_ROOT/
DL_CATALOG/TEXTS/KSTS/KSTS046/PDF/PDF.pdf.
Shastri, Madhusudan Kaul, ed. 1939. The Netra Tantram, with Commentary by Kshemarāja, vol. 
2. Bombay, India: Tattva-​Vivechaka Press. https://muktalib7.com/DL_CATALOG_ROOT/
DL_CATALOG/TEXTS/KSTS/KSTS061/PDF/PDF.pdf.
Shastri, Mukund Ram, ed. 1921. The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta with Commentary by 
Rājānaka Jayaratha, vol. 2. Bombay, India: Shri Venkateshvar Steam Press. https://muktalib7.
com/DL_CATALOG_ROOT/DL_CATALOG/TEXTS/KSTS/KSTS028/PDF/PDF.pdf.
Shastri, Mukund Ram, ed. 1933. The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta with Commentary by 
Rājānaka Jayaratha, vol. 10. Bombay, India: Nirnaya Sagar Press.
Shastri, Mukund Ram, ed. 1936. The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta with Commentary by 
Rājānaka Jayaratha, vol. 11. Bombay, India: Nirnaya Sagar Press.
Shastri, Mukund Ram, ed. 1938. The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta with Commentary by 
Rājānaka Jayaratha, vol. 12. Bombay, India: Nirnaya Sagar Press.
Smith, Brian K. 1987. “Exorcising the Transcendent: Strategies for defining Hinduism and reli­
gion.” History of Religions 27, no. 1: 32–​55.

--- PAGE 418 ---
Three Shades of Tantric Yoga      393
 
Vasudeva, Somadeva. n.d. “Bitter medicine: Abhinavagupta’s defense of sacrifice.” www.acade​
mia.edu/​44835​287/​Bitter_​Medicine_​Abhinavag​upta​_​s_​D​efen​se_​o​f_​Sa​crif​ice.
Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2004. The yoga of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra: Chapters 1–​4, 7, 11–​17. 
Critical edition, translation & notes. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry.
Vedantatirtha, Girisha Chandra, ed. 1915. Kulachûdâmani Tantra. Tantrik texts, vol. IV. 
Calcutta, India: Sanskrit Press Depository.
White, David Gordon. 1995. “Predicting the future with dogs.” In Religions of India in practice, 
edited by Donald J. Lopez, 288–​303. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
White, David Gordon. 1996. The alchemical body: Siddha traditions in medieval India. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. 1998. “Transformations in the art of love: Kāmakalā practices in Hindu 
Tantric and Kaula traditions.” History of Religions 38, no. 2 (November): 172–​98.
White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric sex” in its South Asian contexts. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. 2009. Sinister yogis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. 2014. The Yoga Sutra of Patanjali: A biography. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
White, David Gordon. 2020. “Were-​Creatures of the Eurasian ecumene: Variations on a 
theme.” Journal Asiatique 308, no. 1: 63–​83.
White, David Gordon. 2021. Dæmons are forever: Contacts and exchanges in the Eurasian pan­
demonium. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Woodroffe, Sir John (a.k.a. Arthur Avalon). 1950. The serpent power: Being the Shat-​Chakra-​
Nirūpana and Pādukā-​Panchakā. 4th ed. Madras: Ganesh & Co.

--- PAGE 419 ---


--- PAGE 420 ---
Chapter 17
Generative Buddhahood
Enlightened Plants and Trees in Japanese 
Tendai Esoteric Buddhism
Matthew D. McMullen
Becoming a buddha, the goal of Buddhist soteriology, is fundamentally a cognitive pro­
cess. Therefore, one would presume that sentience is a necessary component of enlight­
enment. But what about living things such as plants and trees, which are traditionally 
not considered to have sentience, or are marginally sentient?
The topic of the enlightenment of plants and trees, or that of enlightened plants and 
trees, is often discussed in the context of buddha-nature thought, and for good reason. 
The question of what is buddha-nature and to what extent it permeates sentient beings 
and the world around them is treated extensively in Chinese and Japanese Buddhist 
sources. Rather than add to an already extensive body of scholarship on the connection 
between buddha-nature and the sentience of plants and trees in East Asian Buddhism 
(see, e.g., Rambelli 2001; Sueki 2015), I would like to propose an alternative explanation 
that positions the development of this concept within the framework of Buddhist cos­
mology and the generation of buddha lands.
The view of the cosmos in Buddhism is complex and diverse. Because heavens, hells, 
and multiple rebirths in a variety of supernatural worlds were largely assumed as a part 
of the broader ancient Indian worldview, there is no definitive representation of the 
cosmos even in the earliest Buddhist sources (Gethin 1997, 186–​187). In China, Buddhist 
cosmology was fused with indigenous notions of the afterlife (Teiser 1994, 11–​20). In 
Japan, buddhas and other members of the Buddhist pantheon were paired with local 
deities, creating networks of sacred and celestial spaces, which included geographic 
formations such as mountains and waterfalls (Teeuwen and Rambelli 2003, 29–​30). 
However, despite this diversity of philosophical and cultural conceptions of the cosmos, 
Buddhist scholastics have tended to draw a parallel between the structure of world sys­
tems and abstract doctrines concerning the path to liberation.
This chapter examines an early and influential version of the discourse on the 
Buddhahood of plants and trees found in the writings of Annen 安然 (841 to 889, or

--- PAGE 421 ---
396      Matthew D. McMullen
 
915), a ninth-​century scholastic monk in the Japanese Tendai school and patriarch of 
Tendai esoteric Buddhism. Annen’s discussion of vegetal Buddhahood expanded on 
previous writings in Chinese Buddhism on the buddha-nature of plants and trees and, 
by extension, insentient objects.
In addition to addressing the classical discourse on the buddha-nature of things as 
inherited from his predecessors, Annen devised his own interpretation by situating 
the proposition that plants and trees can become buddhas within the cosmogony of 
buddha lands. This fusing of the path to becoming a buddha, which is a cognitive pro­
cess requiring sentience, with a cosmic typology, which is essentially spatial and mate­
rial, was fundamental to Annen’s notion of esoteric Buddhism.
Buddhist Cosmogony and the 
Generation of Buddha Lands
Among the Mahāyāna sutras, perhaps the most comprehensive and fantastic view of 
buddha lands can be found in the first chapter of the Vimalakīrti Sūtra. Unlike sutras 
such as the Sukhāvatīvyūha, which focus on the teachings of a single buddha in a partic­
ular buddha land, the Vimalakīrti Sūtra proposes a general theory of how buddha lands 
come into existence (Sadakata 2009, 113–​116). In the first chapter of the sutra, an at­
tendee named “Accumulator of Jewels” (Baoji 寶積) addresses the Buddha, asking him 
to explain how a buddha land is purified by a bodhisattva (Taishō no. 405, 14:538a15–​
14.538a18; McRae 2004, 75–​76). In his response, the Buddha explains how buddha lands 
are generated, stating that a bodhisattva obtains a buddha land according to the needs 
of the sentient beings who will occupy that land. Specifically, a bodhisattva purifies a 
buddha land depending on the discipline, wisdom, and faculties of the sentient beings 
they are assisting. Therefore, the generation of a buddha land is always contingent upon 
the interaction between sentient beings and the bodhisattva. The Buddha elaborates on 
the symbiotic nature of buddha lands, explaining to Accumulator of Jewels that these 
lands are the space in which a bodhisattva fulfills his vow to save sentient beings. Just 
as the teachings are adapted to the needs and capabilities of the individual, so too is the 
space in which these teachings occur. The lands are simply reflections of the sentient 
beings who are to be reborn in them (Taishō no. 405, 14:538a21–​14:538a23).
Although the Buddha explains buddha lands as a space for saving sentient beings, 
these lands are not necessarily located in a distant corner of the cosmos. Rather, they are 
the by-​product of the bodhisattvas’ perfection of their practices and vows. The Buddha 
tells his assembly that a bodhisattva purifies his land by cultivating a sincere and pro­
found mind, proclaiming:
Accumulator of Jewels, you should know that a sincere mind is the bodhisattva’s pure 
land. When a bodhisattva becomes a buddha, sentient beings who are not deceitful 
will be reborn in this land. A profound mind is the bodhisattva’s pure land. When a

--- PAGE 422 ---
Generative Buddhahood      397
 
bodhisattva becomes a buddha, sentient beings who are replete with merit will be re­
born in this land. Accumulator of Jewels, the types of sentient beings are the buddha 
lands of the bodhisattvas. Why? Because bodhisattvas obtain buddha lands in ac­
cordance with the sentient beings they transform.
(Taishō no. 405, 14:538b1–​14:538b4; McRae 2004, 76)
In other words, when bodhisattvas direct their minds toward the attainment of 
Buddhahood, they generate lands in which sentient beings can also develop minds to­
ward awakening. The Buddha continues to detail how bodhisattvas can purify their 
lands and become buddhas by cultivating a variety of Mahāyāna practices. The point 
of this passage, of course, is that cultivating these practices will assist sentient beings 
by causing them to be reborn in the appropriate buddha land where they, like the 
bodhisattvas, can perfect these practices under the guidance of a buddha.
For Chinese and Japanese exegetes, this brief passage in the Vimalakīrti Sūtra was 
central to how these lands function as loci for the path toward becoming a buddha. In 
the earliest commentary on the sutra, Sengzhao 僧肇 (384–​414), a member of the team 
that translated the Vimalakīrti Sūtra into Chinese, explains buddha lands as imperma­
nent mental constructions that are conditioned by the beings who reside within them, 
thus concluding that the distinction between buddha lands is completely subjective. A 
buddha land arises in response to the actions of sentient beings; it does not exist inde­
pendently (Taishō 38:327a27–​38:327b5; Chappell 1977, 22–​53; Sharf 2002, 37).
Sengzhao’s commentary inspired further exegesis of the buddha land passage in the 
Vimalakīrti Sūtra. The great Chinese scholastics of the sixth century, Jingyingsi Huiyuan 
淨影寺慧遠 (523–​592), Jizang 吉藏 (549–​623), and the founder of the Tiantai school 
Zhiyi 智顗 (538–​597) each developed complex taxonomies of buddha lands based on 
the above passage from the sutra (Mochizuki 1942, 107–​111). Zhiyi’s twenty-​eight fas­
cicle commentary on the sutra, the Weimojing Wenshu 維摩經文疏, is perhaps the most 
extensive treatment of the buddha land concept (Ōkubo 2004, 107–​127). According to 
Zhiyi, the sutra explains the circumstantial causes for attaining Buddhahood, rather 
than the direct causes—​such as practice, precepts, wisdom, and so on—​that must be cul­
tivated by the individual to attain rebirth in these lands. Therefore, not only do one’s di­
rect actions determine rebirth, and ultimately liberation from it, but the environment in 
which these actions occur also conditions the results. The world in which one inhabits, 
its contents (climate, vegetation, landscape, etc.), and the buddhas and bodhisattvas that 
share this space are an essential factor in attaining liberation.
Although buddha lands are theoretically infinite in number, Zhiyi, in typical scho­
lastic fashion, nonetheless takes it upon himself to categorize these infinite lands into 
four types. Although later commentators expand on his four-​part taxonomy (Chappell 
1977, 32–​36; Oda 1954, 749–​750), the basic model prescribed in the first fascicle of the 
Weimojing Wenshu can be summarized as follows:
	
1.	 Lands where worldlings and sages both reside (fansheng tongju tu 凡聖同居土) 
consist of both impure lands, like our Sahā world (the buddha land of Śākyamuni), 
and pure lands such as Amitābha’s Sukhāvatī, the difference being that the former

--- PAGE 423 ---
398      Matthew D. McMullen
 
includes the evil destinies of hell, animals, and hungry ghosts, whereas pure lands 
do not (Shinsan dai Nihon zokuzōkyō 27:864).
	
2.	 Lands of skillful means for those with remaining attachments (fanbian youyu 
tu 方便有餘土) are occupied by the “nonreturners” (buhuan 不還) specified in 
the Abhidharma treatises and bodhisattvas of the lower stages of the Mahāyāna 
path who have yet to eliminate all of their attachments to ignorant views and 
perceptions (Shinsan dai Nihon zokuzōkyō 27:864).
	
3.	 Lands of true reward without obstacles (shibao wuzhangai tu 實報無障礙土) are 
where advanced bodhisattvas become buddhas. Ignorance and obstacles are com­
pletely eliminated, negative actions cease, and, as a result, the bodhisattva attains a 
new body with all of the marks of a buddha (Shinsan dai Nihon zokuzōkyō 27:864).
	 4.	 The land of eternally quiescent radiance (chang jiguang tu 常寂光土) is the 
most abstract of these lands and, subsequently, it became the focal point of eso­
teric conceptions of buddha lands. In the third type of land the advanced bodhi­
sattva exits the cosmological structure entirely, becomes an awakened being, and 
generates a new buddha land. This land, however, is unoccupied, no one can be 
reborn in this land, and there is no mental activity. Zhiyi calls it the “nature of the 
Dharma as it is,” “the essence of the Buddha without form or land,” “the aspect that 
preaches through a body and in a land, but is neither the body nor the land.” In 
other words, “lands of eternally quiescent radiance” denotes the spatial dimension 
in which the path toward Buddhahood is complete and the entirety of the cosmos 
is comprehended from the perspective of a fully awakened buddha (Shinsan dai 
Nihon zokuzōkyō 27:865–​27:866). The form of the buddha abiding in the land of 
eternally quiescent radiance is typically referred to as the dharmakāya, or body of 
the Dharma.
Although somewhat recondite in detail, taxonomies of buddha lands such as the one 
outlined above are not merely scholastic wordplay. Rather, they have a soteriological 
objective. Zhiyi stipulates that there are two ways of understanding rebirth in the var­
ious types of buddha lands. The first is a hierarchical interpretation: as one perfects the 
practices of generosity and precepts, they are reborn in a pure land where they can fur­
ther advance the practices that will inevitably lead to being reborn in the third category 
of land where they finally attain Buddhahood. The second is a lateral interpretation; one 
can be reborn or become a buddha in any land depending on the vows and intention 
of the bodhisattva who generated that land at the moment of enlightenment (Shinsan 
dai Nihon zokuzōkyō 27:869). In the first interpretation, enlightenment depends on the 
cognitive activity and moral actions of the individual, but, in the latter, the land and 
its material content define the conditions by which its inhabitants attain Buddhahood. 
This two-​part hermeneutic is again based on the first chapter of the Vimalakīrti Sūtra in 
which the Buddha explains that the practices of generosity, precepts, and so on deter­
mine the structure, inhabitants, and environment of the bodhisattva’s purified buddha 
land (Taishō no. 405, 14:538b; McRae 2004, 76–​77). Zhiyi concludes that it is possible to 
be reborn in any of the lands because they are all generated from the awakened mind of

--- PAGE 424 ---
Generative Buddhahood      399
 
the Buddha. Therefore, from this perspective, the land of eternally quiescent radiance is 
none other than our Sahā world (Shinsan dai Nihon zokuzōkyō 28:1).
Mantra and Cosmogony in Japanese 
Esoteric Buddhism
Cosmogony also factored into how esoteric Buddhism was interpreted in Japan. 
Esoteric Buddhism in East Asia is difficult to define in simple terms. In the broad 
sense of involving rites concealed from the public or transmissions of teachings whose 
methods were closely guarded, the term “esoteric” can be applied to most religious 
traditions. However, if we limit the scope of usage, it specifically concerns the practice 
and transmission of reciting secret incantations. Therefore, simply put, in the Japanese 
context esoteric Buddhism denotes ritual, doctrinal, textual, and institutional traditions 
that take the recitation of mantra (shingon in Japanese) as their primary religious ac­
tivity (Matsunaga 1989, 15).
Defining mantra and their soteriological purport, however, is itself a rather complex 
issue and has been the topic of scholastic writings for a millennium. Interpretations of 
mantra are frequently associated with Kūkai 空海 (774–​835), the revered founder of the 
Shingon school who returned from China in 806 claiming to have been initiated into a 
lineage of Buddhism that he cryptically referred to as the “esoteric treasury” (mitsuzō 
密藏) (Takagi and Dreitlein 2010, 200–​201). In his catalog, the Shōrai mokuroku 
将來目錄, Kūkai links this esoteric treasury to translations and commentaries 
composed by Amoghavajra (705–​774), the Chinese-​born tantric master and pro­
genitor of his lineage. In particular, he highlights Amoghavajra’s translation of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha and its ritual manuals, collectively known as the Vajra 
Peak Sūtra (Jingangding jing 金剛頂經), which were new to Japan at the time. In his 
catalog and later works, Kūkai presents these texts, their associated rituals, and, in par­
ticular, their enclosed mantra as an esoteric form of Buddhism, which he distinguishes 
from the dominant Mahāyāna schools (Abé 1999, 180–​184).
Kūkai’s signature claim regarding the esoteric treasury, which later became the pri­
mary doctrine of the Shingon school, was that the teachings constituting the esoteric 
sutras, the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha and Mahāvairocana Sūtra, were originally 
expounded by the dharmakāya. On the one hand, this is a radical claim when con­
sidering that it was made in the context of a scholastic Buddhist tradition in Nara that 
traced the Buddhist teachings to various moments in Śākyamuni’s lifetime (Abé 1999, 
10). By definition, the dharmakāya is void of speech and mental activity and abides in 
a constant state of quiescent bliss (i.e., the fourth type of buddha land in Zhiyi’s par­
adigm). In other words, the dharmakāya was conceived of as the embodiment of en­
lightenment. Suggesting that it preaches, or even has the capacity to preach, negates the 
conventional notion that the dharmakāya as inconceivable to sentient beings. On the

--- PAGE 425 ---
400      Matthew D. McMullen
 
other hand, the fact that the buddhadharma originates with the dharmakāya, or is the 
teaching of the dharmakāya, is obvious. If one assumes that the words preached by any 
buddha are true regardless of the time, place, or form of the Buddha who preaches them, 
then these words must be from the dharmakāya (McMullen 2016, 3); or, as Kūkai states 
in his catalog, “The Dharma is originally beyond words, but without words it cannot be 
revealed” (Takagi and Dreitlein 2010, 12).
In his writing on sound and syllables (Shōji jissōgi 聲字實相義), Kūkai elaborates on 
this association between language and the dharmakāya. According to Kūkai, language 
consists of three components: (1) sound caused by vibrations in the air; (2) syllables that 
signify sounds; and (3) reality, which Kūkai equates with the dharmakāya. Language 
is the result of differentiating sounds, syllables, and reality to create meaning (Takagi 
and Dreitlein 2010, 84). Put another way, syllables are derived from differentiating 
sounds, and words are created by the arranging of syllables. The individual sounds and 
syllables themselves do not inherently have meaning, and the reality to which sounds 
and syllables point are the fact that they are empty of any inherent meaning. In Kūkai’s 
theory of language, this emptiness is personified by the dharmakāya. Thus, language, as 
a system of sounds and syllables, forms a “cosmic text,” which “is the ultimate scripture 
of emptiness” (Abé 1999, 15). This “scripture of emptiness” has been transmitted to our 
Sahā world in the form of mantra.
In contrast to Kūkai’s hermeneutics of mantra, which was intended to complement 
the scholastic schools in Nara (Abé 1999, 189), the Japanese Tendai school situated 
the esoteric teachings of mantra within the Tiantai/​Tendai doctrinal system. In this 
system, first proposed by Zhiyi and gradually systematized by subsequent generations 
of Chinese scholastics, the differences between multifarious teachings, sutras, practices, 
and buddhas only exist to the extent that they are adapted to the needs and capabilities 
of the individual. Therefore, for a bodhisattva with advanced abilities to comprehend 
the totality of the Buddha’s teachings, the teachings are ultimately identical; in the 
Tendai tradition this is called the “perfect teaching” (engyō 圓教) (Swanson 2018, 2030). 
However, Zhiyi and the Chinese patriarchs were unfamiliar with the esoteric teaching of 
mantra as expounded in the Mahāvairocana Sūtra and Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, 
and, as a result, they were not included in the classical Tiantai taxonomies of teachings. 
What distinguishes the Japanese Tendai school from its Chinese counterpart was an ef­
fort to incorporate the esoteric teaching of mantra into the Tendai system, which came 
to be known as the perfect-​esoteric (enmitsu 圓密) teaching. The person primarily re­
sponsible for this integration was an unrenowned Tendai scholar monk named Annen 
of Godaiin 五大院.
Unlike his predecessors in the Tendai school such as Saichō 最澄 (766–​822), Ennin 
圓仁 (794–​864), and Enchin 圓珍 (814–​891), Annen left behind few disciples to docu­
ment his biographical details. Based on the limited records available, he seems to have 
been rather isolated on Mt. Hiei and was not involved in the political jockeying for rank 
that was typical of scholar monks at the time. According to his biography in the Genkō 
shakusho 元亨釋書 (Dai Nihon Bukkyō zensho 101:183–​101:185), a fourteenth-​century 
collection of eminent monk biographies in Japan, Annen was in the lineage of Saichō

--- PAGE 426 ---
Generative Buddhahood      401
 
and studied under Ennin. He was consecrated as an ācārya in 884, probably under the 
tutelage of the famed Tendai ritualist and poet Henjō 遍昭 (816–​890). Despite the lack 
of historical information about Annen’s life, his writings were foundational to the de­
velopment of a Tendai esoteric tradition. His extant works include catalogs of imported 
esoteric texts and ritual implements, summaries of esoteric rites and their respective 
lineages, and doctrinal writings on the esoteric teaching of mantra (Dolce and Mano 
2011, 768–​769; Sueki 1995, 42–​63).
Unlike Kūkai’s view of esoteric Buddhism that emphasizes sound and syllables as the 
primary components of mantra, Annen situated mantra within the Tendai taxonomical 
system of teachings and practices to create a comprehensive interpretation of mantra 
and esoteric Buddhism. By Annen’s definition, the esoteric teachings are the culmina­
tion of all teachings preached by all buddhas in all conceivable locations throughout the 
past, present, and future (Taishō no. 2396, 75:374a). Thus, Annen applied Zhiyi’s four-​
part model of buddha lands to explain how the esoteric teaching of mantra is universally 
accessible to all beings in all buddha lands, including plants and trees.
The problem for Annen was not only that Zhiyi did not account for the esoteric 
sutras in his doctrinal system but that the esoteric sutras do not fit neatly into the 
buddha land paradigm. The Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, for instance, states that 
Mahāvairocana preaches to an assembly of all tathāgatas (sarvatathāgata), who in turn 
consecrate the bodhisattva Sarvārthasiddhi (Taishō no. 848, 18:207–​18:208; Giebel 
2001, 19–​25), and the Mahāvairocana Sūtra simply opens by stating that the Great 
Sun Tathāgata (Dainichi Nyorai, 大日如來, i.e., Mahāvairocana) preaches to a group 
of bodhisattvas and vajra-​wielding beings (Taishō no. 848, 18:1). Most sutras identify 
their location in the opening lines, which is set within Śākyamuni’s biography. Thus, 
the vast majority of sutras claim to have been preached in our Sahā world sometime 
during Śākyamuni’s lifetime. Although the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha takes place 
in the Akaniṣṭha Heaven (the highest meditative state in the realm of form), the sutra 
does not situate the Buddha’s teaching within a particular buddha land (Taishō no. 865, 
18:17a). Both texts describe Mahāvairocana as traversing conventional notions of past, 
present, and future. Therefore, the opening scenes of the esoteric sutras are, literally, 
not of this world.
To make sense of the esoteric sutras and their teachings, Annen employed Zhiyi’s 
four-​part buddha land paradigm. First, he uncovered two references to the land of the 
esoteric teachings. In the commentary on the Mahāvairocana Sūtra, the land in which 
Mahāvairocana preaches is identified as the buddha land of Secret Adornment (miyan 
fotu 密嚴佛土) (Zoku Tendaishū zensho 1:76b). This land is described in a relatively ob­
scure sutra by the same name, which describes this land as a land of “unlimited radi­
ance” and “has as its characteristic the adorning of all other buddha lands” (Taishō no. 
681, 16:723c8–​16:723c13). Applied to the taxonomy of buddha lands, this passage would 
suggest that the land of Secret Adornment is a title for the land of eternally quiescent 
radiance in Zhiyi’s typology. However, a passage in the Putixinlun 菩提心論, an au­
thoritative esoteric treatise translated by Amoghavajra, the land of Secret Adornment 
is where a bodhisattva is reborn before immediately attaining Buddhahood “without

--- PAGE 427 ---
402      Matthew D. McMullen
 
having to get up from his seat” (Taishō no. 1665, 32:574c19–​32:574c20). This description 
in the treatise suggests that the land of Secret Adornment is a land of true reward (i.e., 
the third type of land in Zhiyi’s paradigm), because it is the location in which a bodhi­
sattva becomes a buddha before generating a new buddha land.
This contradiction regarding the buddha land of Secret Adornment as the location of 
the esoteric teachings required explanation. Annen’s solution was that the land in which 
Mahāvairocana preaches the esoteric teachings is actually both types of land. Thus, the 
land of “the aspect of the Buddha that preaches through a body and in a land, but is 
neither the body nor the land,” that is the dharmakāya, is accessible in the land of true 
reward (Taishō no. 2396, 75:427c13–​75.427c16; no. 2397, 75:480b18–​75.480b24; Ōkubo 
2022, 87). Mantra are the language of the dharmakāya as manifested in lands inhabited 
by sentient beings. Therefore, Annen concludes, the mantra teachings of the esoteric 
sutras are the preaching of the dharmakāya.
Making a similar deduction to Kūkai’s theory of sound, syllable, and reality, Annen 
proposed that the preaching of the dharmakāya in the form of mantra is found in the 
various buddha lands. However, unlike Kūkai, his theory was not premised on the dif­
ferentiation of sound. Rather, according to Annen, the way in which this preaching is 
accessed depends on the conditions of the buddha land.
In a dialogic exchange in his compendium on the mantra teachings (Shingonshū 
kyōji gi 眞言宗教時義, or commonly known as the Kyōji mondō 教時問答), Annen 
addresses a question regarding the correlation between buddha lands and mantra 
from Ennin’s commentary of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, the Kongōchō daikyōō 
kyōsho 金剛頂大教王經疏. In his commentary, Ennin attempts to explain how the 
teachings of this esoteric sutra came to be documented in a written text if they were 
preached by the dharmakāya to the bodhisattvas. He reasons that these teachings only 
find their way into speech, and then written text, because in the Sahā world, our own 
buddha land, this is the primary form of communication. Then he writes:
In general, if words have sound, then they can be called mantra. In some cases, there 
are lands where one attains the path [to becoming a buddha] if touched by the di­
vine garments. In some cases, one attains the path upon seeing the radiance of the 
Buddha. In some cases, one attains the path by quietly discerning the mind without 
words. In this way, the fragrant lands take aroma as the deeds of the Buddha.
(Taishō no. 2223, 61:11a16–​61.11a20)
Annen poses the quote from Ennin’s commentary as a question, inquiring as to how 
there could be mantra in such lands in which sound is of less importance than our 
world. He responded by redefining mantra not just as oral utterances but as any perceiv­
able object.
Alluding to Kūkai’s theory of language in the Shōji jissōgi, Annen proposed that 
mantra have three components: (1) syllable, (2) sound, and (3) meaning. If any 
one of these elements is present, then it can be defined as mantra (Taishō no. 2396, 
75:417a19–​75:417a21). Therefore, even if there are no sound or written syllables,

--- PAGE 428 ---
Generative Buddhahood      403
 
mantra can be said to exist in that land if their meaning is accessible through some 
sensory means (Ōkubo 2022, 92).
Both Kūkai’s sound-​based theory and Annen’s application of buddha lands to the her­
meneutics of mantra have been consequential to the cosmogonic function of language. 
Kūkai’s theory of cosmic generation via the differentiation of sound harkened back to 
an ancient notion of language as progenitor of the cosmos found in the Vedas and, later, 
in Indian tantras (Payne 2018, 90). Annen’s model, however, went beyond language to 
include all phenomena as conditioned by the genesis of a buddha land. Sound is not the 
only vehicle for transmitting the esoteric teaching of mantra. Any of the senses can per­
ceive a mantra, and any object can transmit it: even plants and trees.
Esoteric Interpretations of Buddha 
Lands and Their Inhabitants
Annen formulated his discussion of the enlightenment of plants and trees as a re­
sponse to a question in a series of letters composed a generation earlier. In 844, 
Tokuen 徳圓 (b. 785), the interim abbot of Mt. Hiei and head of the Tendai school 
in Japan, sent a letter consisting of ten questions regarding esoteric Buddhism to the 
Chinese Tiantai master Zongying 宗頴 (d.u.) in the Tang capital of Chang’an. One 
of these questions concerned the possibility that insentient plants and trees could 
attain Buddhahood. In his letter, Tokuen asks, “Is it because the mind [seeking en­
lightenment] pervades [the space of] insentient objects that plants and trees become 
buddhas? Or, must plants and trees themselves cultivate the conditions to become 
buddhas? Or, is it because the direct reward [of becoming a buddha] encompasses 
the circumstantial reward [of generating a container world]” (Nihon daizōkyō 78:218–​
78:219)? In other words, Tokuen asks if plants and trees become buddhas on their 
own, which would require sentience, or if they become buddhas as a consequence of a 
bodhisattva generating a buddha land.
As with many of the other questions in Tokuen’s letter, Zongying never provided a 
direct response to his question. Rather, Zongying cited the opening chapter of the 
Vimalakīrti Sūtra in which the Buddha explains to the Accumulator of Jewels that 
all buddha lands are pure according to the purity of the mind of the bodhisattva who 
generates it (Taishō no. 405, 14:538c4–​14:538c5; McRae 2004, 78). Therefore, Zongying 
claims, the mind of the bodhisattva-​cum-​buddha and the land are ultimately indistin­
guishable. Referencing the sutra, he explains to Tokuen the purport of the buddha land 
doctrine, writing, “You should know that when an enlightened mind realizes [that the 
land and mind are the same], among all phenomena there is nothing that has not awoken 
[as a buddha].” Therefore, according to Zongying’s reckoning, the notion that plants and 
trees cultivate the necessary practices to become buddhas is absurd. One is deluded, 
he exclaims, if they seek to understand how plants and trees cultivate the practices

--- PAGE 429 ---
404      Matthew D. McMullen
 
necessary to attain Buddhahood in the Sahā world “like a man with poor eyesight trying 
to see fruit blooming from flowers in the sky” (Nihon daizōkyō 78:218–​78:219).
Annen’s theory of the enlightenment of plants and trees was an extended response to 
Tokuen’s inquiry. However, unlike Zongying, he did not merely dismiss it as a misun­
derstanding of Tiantai/​Tendai teachings. Rather, he situated this concept within Zhiyi’s 
taxonomy of buddha lands.
As previous scholarship has pointed out, Annen’s essay on becoming a buddha in 
one’s current body, Sokushin jōbutsu shiki 即身成佛私記, was seminal to the develop­
ment of the enlightenment of plants and trees discourse in Japan (Rambelli 2007, 31–​
32; Sueki 2015). In this essay, Annen frequently refers to Zhiyi’s taxonomy of buddha 
lands when discussing the structure of the Buddhist path. Those at the lower stages 
are rewarded by being reborn and dwelling in lands where worldlings and sages both 
reside, either the higher stages in the impure lands or in a pure land (i.e., type one of 
Zhiyi’s taxonomy). Those in the middle level of the path are rewarded by being reborn 
in lands where worldlings and sages both reside (type two). Those at the higher levels 
of the path are reborn in lands of true reward without obstacles (type three). Finally, 
ultimate awakening occurs when all people dwell in the land of eternally quiescent ra­
diance (type four). Thus, one’s stage on the path determines the type of buddha land 
into which they will be reborn. Universal Buddhahood is achieved when all beings 
become buddhas in the land of eternally quiescent radiance, which, as a result, means 
all phenomena—​including plants and trees—​likewise become buddhas. At the end of 
the essay, Annen asserts that if one grasps the teachings of the Lotus Sūtra, the primary 
scripture in Tendai, then one will understand that plants and trees become buddhas as a 
circumstantial result of these teachings. Like Zongying, he claims that it is not the case 
that plants and trees become buddhas on their own (Dainihon Bukkyō zensho 24:216). In 
other words, plants and trees are not in themselves sentient beings, nor do they have the 
capacity to become buddhas through their own efforts. Rather, they become buddhas as 
a by-​product of the Buddhahood process.
Although he relies on the same sutra passages as Zongying, Annen goes a step further 
than his Tiantai predecessors on the question of vegetal Buddhahood. Annen concludes 
his essay by asserting that one obtains “inconceivable” awakening by contemplating the 
“inconceivable” space of the fourth type of land, the land of eternally quiescent radi­
ance (Dainihon Bukkyō zensho 24:200a). According to Zhiyi’s paradigm, this land is 
uninhabited and lacks mental activity; hence, it is “inconceivable.” Annen, however, 
proposes that this land is conceivable. Moreover, it is accessible from within our own 
Sahā world, because “Sahā is identical with the land of eternally quiescent radiance” 
(Ōkubo 2022, 90).
Annen further developed this argument in his compendium on the awakened mind, 
the Bodaishingishō 菩提心義抄, which is ostensibly a commentary on the aforemen­
tioned Putixinlun. He first notes that, according to the Abhidharma treatises, a buddha 
body is generated when the container world becomes a buddha land. The buddha land, 
and the Buddha who governs it, are determined by the positive actions of sentient 
beings and the vow of the bodhisattva who generates this land. Annen then offers four

--- PAGE 430 ---
Generative Buddhahood      405
 
interpretations of how sentient beings and insentient objects, specifically plants and 
trees, become buddhas (Taishō no. 2397, 75:484b26–​75:484c27).
The first interpretation is a standard axiom in original enlightenment thought. 
Namely, because the container world was generated by the awakening of a buddha, all 
sentient beings in that world have the ability to become buddhas. Therefore, cultivation 
of a mind toward becoming a buddha depends on the internal processes of one’s own 
mind. In other words, when one commits themselves to positive actions, they set in mo­
tion the eventual result of liberation.
The second interpretation directly references the taxonomy of buddha lands. Annen 
argues that just as sentient beings become buddhas as a result of cultivating the path to 
enlightenment, all material contents of the buddha land become buddhas as an indi­
rect or circumstantial result of the enlightenment process. For example, he notes that all 
plants and trees become the body of the Buddha at the moment of Śākyamuni’s enlight­
enment. Citing a passage from the Ratnakūṭa Sūtra (Taishō no. 310, 11:150a7–​11:150a14), 
Annen asserts that “all mindless grasses, trees, and forests can generate the body and 
marks of the Tathāgata and preach the Dharma.” Therefore, cultivation of a mind toward 
becoming a buddha also depends on processes external to the mind, which is the gener­
ation of a buddha land and its inhabitants.
In the third interpretation, Annen argues that, in some cases, if a bodhisattva 
contemplates the nature of a buddha among plants and trees, these insentient objects can 
become sentient. In other cases, buddhas or bodhisattvas transform or guide plants and 
trees to become buddhas. In other words, the distinction between sentience and insen­
tience is determined when a bodhisattva generates a buddha land. However, depending 
on the vows of a buddha or bodhisattva, plants and trees may also become buddhas in 
order to assist sentient beings in those lands. Therefore, cultivation of a mind toward 
becoming a buddha depends on both the internal processes of one’s own mind and the 
external assistance of a buddha or bodhisattva (Taishō no., 2397, 75:484c12–​75:484c21).
Finally, in the fourth interpretation, Annen concludes that buddhahood can only be 
achieved when one realizes that there is no difference between the internal cognitive 
process of the path to liberation and the structure of the external cosmos. He states that 
the nature of the buddha is neither internal nor external, nor does it have a center or pe­
riphery; it exists in all places just like empty space. Therefore, it is not the case that sen­
tient beings independently possess the nature of a buddha within their own minds, nor 
is it the case that plants and trees exist as independent external manifestations of the na­
ture of a buddha. Furthermore, the nature of a buddha is not contingent on the fusing of 
the internal processes of sentient beings and external manifestation of insentient objects 
but pervades all cosmological space (Taishō no. 2397, 75:484c21–​75:485a5; Ōkubo 2022, 
62–​67). Like Zongying, Annen based his analysis on a passage from the Vimalakīrti 
Sūtra, concluding that the awakening of grasses and trees, like all phenomena, occurs 
when the bodhisattva purifies his mind and generates a buddha land (Taishō no. 2397, 
75:487c2–​75:489; Taishō no. 405, 14:547c20–​14:547c22; McRae 2004, 127).
Annen also accounts for how the teachings of a buddha may differ depending on the 
buddha land. In his other major compendium on the mantra teachings, the Shingonshū

--- PAGE 431 ---
406      Matthew D. McMullen
 
kyōji gi, he alludes to a passage in the tenth chapter of the Vimalakīrti Sūtra. This chapter, 
“The Buddha Accumulation of Fragrances,” begins with Śāriputra asking Vimalakīrti a 
practical question about lunch and how he intends to feed the assembly of bodhisattvas 
that have gathered to hear him preach. Admonishing his guest for invoking such a 
worldly desire as eating while he is trying to preach the dharma, he nonetheless fulfills 
Śāriputra’s request and vows to present him with a nutritious meal, which of course is 
the Buddhist teachings. This meal, however, is located in a distant buddha land called 
“Host of Fragrances.” In this land, the Buddha of Fragrances preaches to his assembly of 
bodhisattvas not in words but through the power of scent (McRae 2004, 149–​150).
Applying this episode from the sutra to the buddhahood of plants and trees, Annen 
implies that plants and trees do not inherently have minds or sentience themselves. 
Rather, they become sentient only in an alternative buddha land in which the bodhi­
sattva who generates this land in his mind determines to preach to the inhabitants of 
that land by means of plants and trees. He paraphrases the Vimalakīrti Sūtra, stating, 
“Some buddha lands generate the deeds of the Buddha through light. Some buddha 
lands generate the deeds of the Buddha through scent. Some buddha lands generate 
the deeds of the Buddha through taste. Some buddha lands generate the deeds of the 
Buddha through speech. Our Sahā world generates the deeds of the Buddha through 
speech” (Taishō no. 2396, 75:408c24–​75:408c27; Ōkubo 2004, 157).
For Annen, a mantra can be any manifestation of the buddhadharma and is not 
merely aural. In a buddha land that privileges smell, mantra is the preaching of the 
dharmakāya as scent; in a buddha land in which taste is the primary form of commu­
nication, mantra is the flavor of the buddhadharma. Therefore, it is possible to con­
ceive of a world in which the buddhadharma is transmitted via taste or smell rather 
than sound or written text (McRae 2004, 59). In such a world, one might find that 
the sutras consist of fragrant and tasty foods and begin with the savory expression of 
“Thus have I eaten.”
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have situated Annen’s theory of the enlightenment of plants and trees 
within a Buddhist cosmological framework. Specifically, I argue that the notion of 
buddha lands in the Vimalakīrti Sūtra and Zhiyi’s taxonomy of these lands in his com­
mentary informed Annen’s interpretation of Buddhahood and how plants and trees 
may obtain liberation. Rather than a statement on the ontological status of Buddhahood 
or an epistemological claim regarding insentient objects, Annen simply used the phrase 
“plants and trees” to denote the material world and all phenomena comprised within 
it. When a bodhisattva generates a buddha land as stated in the sutra, all beings and 
objects in that land become or potentially become buddhas. The logic behind this 
claim, as Zongying asserted in his response to Tokuen, is that the land and the mind are

--- PAGE 432 ---
Generative Buddhahood      407
 
indistinguishable. Therefore, buddha lands are cosmic spaces in which even plants and 
trees can reach liberation.
References
Primary Sources
Dai Nihon Bukkyō zensho [大日本佛教全書]. 1913. 150 vols. Tokyo: Bussho Kankōkai.
Nihon daizōkyō [日本大藏經]. 1973–​1978. 100 vols. Tokyo: Suzuki Gakujutsu Zaidan.
Shinsan dai Nihon zokuzōkyō [新纂大日本續藏經]. 1975–​1989. 90 vols. Tokyo: Kokusho 
Kankōkai.
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō [大正新脩大藏經]. 85 vols. Edited by Takakusu Junjirō [高楠順次郎] 
and Watanabe Kaikyoku [渡辺海旭]. Tokyo: Issaikyō Kankōkai and Daizō Shuppan, 
1924–​1934.
Zoku Tendaishū zensho: Mikkyō 1 [續天台宗全書－密教1]. 1993. Tokyo: Shunjūsha.
Secondary Sources
Abé, Ryūichi. 1999. Weaving of Mantra: Kūkai and the Construction of Esoteric Discourse. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Chappell, David. 1977. “Chinese Buddhist Interpretations of the Pure Lands.” In Buddhist and 
Taoist Studies I, edited by Michael Saso and David W. Chappell, 22–​53. Asian Studies at 
Hawai‘i no. 18. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Dolce, Lucia, and Shinya Mano. 2011. “Godai’in Annen.” In Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras 
in East Asia, edited by Charles D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, 768–​
775. Leiden: Brill.
Giebel, Rolf W., trans. 2001. “The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra.” In Two Esoteric Sutras, BDK 
English Tripiṭaka 29-​II, 30-​II, 17–​107. Berkeley, CA: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation 
and Research.
Gethin, Rupert. 1997. “Cosmology and Meditation: From the Aggaññ-​Sutta to the Mahāyāna.” 
History of Religions 36, no. 3: 183–​217.
Matsunaga Yūkei [松長有慶]. 1989. Mikkyō: Indo kara Nihon e no denshō [密教—​
インドから日本への伝承]. Tokyo: Chuō Kōronsha.
McMullen, Matthew D. 2016. “The Development of Esoteric Buddhist Scholasticism in Early 
Medieval Japan.” Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley.
McRae, John, trans. 2004. “The Vimalakīrti Sutra.” In The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion’s 
Roar, The Vimalakīrti Sutra. BDK English Tripiṭaka 20-​I, 26-​I, 67–​181. Berkeley, CA: Numata 
Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
Mochizuki Shinkō [望月信亨]. 1942. Chugoku jōdo kyōrishi [中國浄土教理史]. Tokyo: 
Hōzōkan.
Oda Tokunō [織田得能.] 1954. Bukkyō dai jiten [佛教大辭典]. Tokyo: Daizō Shuppansha.
Ōkubo Ryōshun [大久保良峻]. 2004. Taimitsu kyōgaku no kenkyū [台密教学の研究]. Kyoto: 
Hōzōkan.
Ōkubo Ryōshun [大久保良峻]. 2022. Tendai kyōgaku to hongaku shisō [天台教学と本覚
思想]. new ed. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.

--- PAGE 433 ---
408      Matthew D. McMullen
 
Payne, Richard K. 2018. Language in the Buddhist Tantra of Japan: Indic Roots of Mantra. 
London: Bloomsbury.
Rambelli, Fabio. 2001. Vegetal Buddhas: Ideological Effects of Japanese Buddhist Doctrines on 
the Salvation of Inanimate Beings. Italian School of East Asian Studies: Occasional Papers 9. 
Kyoto: Scuola Italiana di Studi sull’ Asia Orientale.
Rambelli, Fabio. 2007. Buddhist Materiality: A Cultural History of Objects in Japanese 
Buddhism. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Sadakata, Akira. 2009. Buddhist Cosmology: Philosophy and Origins. Tokyo: Kōsei.
Sharf, Robert H. 2002. Coming to Terms with Chinese Buddhism: A Reading of the Treasure Store 
Treatise. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Sueki Fumihiko [末木文美士]. 1995. Heian shoki Bukkyō shisō no kenkyū: Annen no shisō 
keisei o chūshin toshite [平安初期仏教思想の研究—​安然の思想形成を中心として]. 
Tokyo: Shunjūsha.
Sueki Fumihiko [末木文彦士]. 2015. Sōmoku jōbutsu no shisō: Annen to Nihonjin no shizenkan 
[草木成仏の思想－安然と日本人の自然観]. Tokyo: Sanga.
Swanson, Paul L. 2018. Clear Serenity, Quiet Insight: T’ien-​tai Chih-​i’s Mo-​ho chih-​kuan. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Takagi Shingen, and Thomas Eijō Dreitlein. 2010. Kūkai on the Philosophy of Language. Tokyo: 
Keio University Press.
Teiser, Stephen F. 1994. The Scripture of the Ten Kings: And the Making of Purgatory in Medieval 
Chinese Buddhism. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
Teeuwen, Mark, and Fabio Rambelli, eds. 2003. Buddhas and Kami in Japan: Honji Suijaku as a 
Combinatory Paradigm. London: Routledge.

--- PAGE 434 ---
Chapter 18
Embodiment and 
Subjugation
Exoteric-​Esoteric Buddhist Practice 
in Medieval Japan
Eric Haruki Swanson
Introduction
The Buddhist Monk Jien, the Gukanshō, and Buddhist 
Ritual Practice
The Buddhist priest Jien (1155–​1225) is known as an exemplary literary figure of medi­
eval Japan and a prolific composer of waka 和歌, a form of Japanese poetry most com­
monly consisting of five lines to express feelings of the poet and reflect on the beauty 
of the natural world. Jien is particularly renowned for his composition of shakyōka 
釈教歌, a genre of waka that poetically expressed the Buddhist teachings (Tsukudo 
1942; Ishikawa 1998; Yamamoto 1999; Robert 2008; Ishikawa 2015; Yamamoto 2016). 
His most well-​known work, the Gukanshō (literally “Jottings of a Fool,” 愚管抄), is 
considered one of the first historical treatises that incorporated a Buddhist lens into its 
interpretation of Japanese history (Brown and Ishida 1979; Brownlee 1991; Hambrick 
1978; Marra 1985; Ozaki 2004; Fukazawa 2006). In writing the history of Japan, Jien 
carefully suggests that it is not enough to highlight the glorious past of the imperial 
family of Japan and brings the reader’s attention to how the rising military power of 
the Kamakura Shogunate poses a threat to the existing structures of authority held by 
the imperial and aristocratic families of the Heian capital. Jien carefully addresses the 
realities of the decline of imperial authority through the application of the notion of 
the Three Ages of the Dharma, which sees a deterioration of the Buddhist teachings 
across three periods: the True Dharma Age, the Imitation Dharma Age, and the Last

--- PAGE 435 ---
410      Eric Haruki Swanson
 
Dharma Age (Marra 1985). According to Jien, the gradual, yet dramatic shifts seen 
in political stability starting from the Hōgen Rebellion of 1156 were indications that 
Japan had entered the “Last Dharma Age” (mappō, 末法; Marra 1985). In composing 
the Gukanshō, Jien suggests that in order to counter the inevitable reality of the “Last 
Dharma Age,” it is necessary to reenvision a governing structure that is in accordance 
with the Principles (dōri, 道理) of the Buddhist teachings (Hambrick 1978; Marra 1985). 
While the Gukanshō is known today as a historical work, it is important to recognize 
how Jien’s presentation of history reflects his motivations as a Buddhist priest. In fact, 
Jien was an active practitioner of Buddhist rituals throughout his life, and served in 
the highest levels of administrative duties at Buddhist temples belonging to the Tendai 
school. By Jien’s time, the Tendai school, established by Saichō (767–​822), had devel­
oped into two rivaling factions, the Tendai Mountain Lineage (sanmon ha, 山門派) and 
Tendai Temple Lineage (jimon ha, 寺門派). The Mountain Lineage traced its group to 
Ennin (794–​864) and Enryakuji Temple 延暦寺, a monastery located on top of Mount 
Hiei, and the Temple Lineage traced theirs to Enchin (814–​891) and Onjōji Temple 
園城寺‎, located at the base of Mount Hiei (Adolphson 2000; Dolce 2012; Gardiner 2018; 
Groner 2000, 2002). Jien belonged within the Mountain Lineage, and this institutional 
rivalry between the two groups is clearly reflected in his written work, which often 
presents the Mountain Lineage in a more favorable light (Taga 1980, 95). Jien served 
four times as the abbot of the Tendai Mountain Lineage, overseeing institutional affairs 
at Enryakuji on Mount Hiei. In addition to his administrative duties, Jien performed 
various Buddhist rites for members of the imperial and aristocratic families of the Heian 
court, such as Buddhist rituals for the safe birth of a child of the imperial ruler and his 
consort. He established a particularly close relationship with Retired Emperor Gotoba, 
the de facto ruler of Japan, serving as his personal “protector monk” (gojisō, 護持僧) 
and performing rites at times when he fell ill (Taga 1980, 215–​227). In addition to his role 
as a practitioner of Buddhist rituals that supported the well-​being of members of the 
aristocracy, one of Jien’s greatest achievements was the construction of a ritual center 
at Sanjō Shirakawa bō 三条白川坊, present day-​Shōrenin Monzeki 青蓮院門跡 in 
Kyoto, a project that involved establishing an elaborate ritual program based on Tendai 
Buddhist rituals already in practice on Mount Hiei (Taga 1980, 147). This included 
reinterpreting existing rituals with strong associations to the Mountain Lineage, such 
as the Rite of Radiant Light (shijōkōhō 熾盛光法), which had already been viewed as 
effective rites to pray for the emperor’s longevity and, by extension, the protection of the 
state (Dolce 2012). In establishing his new ritual program, Jien reformulated the Rite of 
Radiant Light, renaming it the Rite of Great Radiant Light (dai shijōkōhō 大熾盛光法) 
and presenting this as a ritual effective specifically for the subjugation of vengeful spirits. 
Furthermore, he grounded this reenvisioning of the rite in a further articulation of the 
role of the practitioner’s body in these efforts to restore order in the world. Treatises 
composed by Jien, such as the “Origins of the Main Deity” (honzon engi, 本尊縁起) 
and “Questions and Answers Regarding the Commentary on the Main Deity” (honzon 
shaku mondo, 本尊釈問答) illustrate how Jien reinterpreted the relationship between 
the practitioner’s body and the enlightened figures of buddhas, bodhisattvas, and

--- PAGE 436 ---
Embodiment and Subjugation      411
 
vidyarajas (myōō, 明王; wisdom kings). In fact, upon close analysis, these treatises illus­
trate a concern of the future trajectory of imperial authority and its seemingly inevitable 
decline, which went hand in hand with the claim of the necessity of the intervention 
of Buddhist ritual practice in mitigating the further dismantling of the social order. In 
other words, whereas Jien’s Gukanshō presented a vision of history that explained the 
process in which society was falling into disorder, the Buddhist ritual program that Jien 
constructed at this site can be seen as an example of a concrete solution that would ad­
dress this problem. In explaining why imperial authority was experiencing decline in 
the Gukanshō, Jien suggested through his retelling of the imperial history that there was 
an underlying “principle of vengeful spirits” (onryō no dōri 怨霊の道理) at work that 
plagued the capital, and claimed that only the “principle of the buddhadharma” (buppō 
no dōri 仏法の道理) would be able to restore order.
Jien’s Ritual Project and the Problem 
of Vengeful Spirits
Jien’s envisioning of the ritual practitioner as seen in his writings should be viewed within 
the larger historical context in which they were presented. Jien’s project of establishing 
a new ritual center in the proximity of the Heian capital was an undertaking that took 
over two decades. In 1202, Jien first obtained permission to build two structures as offi­
cial prayer centers for the imperial family at the location of Sanjō Shirakawa, just to the 
east of the Heian capital. The structures built at these locations were collectively called 
the Temple of Great Repentance.
It is important to note that Jien’s ritual program at this new location was largely based 
on Buddhist rituals that were already in practice at Enryakuji, the headquarters of the 
Tendai school. Enryakuji was located on Mount Hiei northeast of the capital, the direc­
tion known as the “demon gate” (kimon, 鬼門). According to yin-​yang cosmology the 
demon gate was understood as the direction from which malevolent spirits entered the 
space of the capital. Rituals performed at Mount Hiei were presented as a form of pro­
tection for the capital, and the rituals established at Jien’s Temple of Great Repentance, 
following the model of those practiced on Mount Hiei, were also designed to fulfill the 
same purpose of providing protection for the capital, although now these rituals were 
performed in its immediate proximity. Interestingly, changes could also be seen in what 
were envisioned as the causes of the disorder, particularly as it pertained to the concerns 
felt by those involved in the politics of the Heian court. When Jien started the construc­
tion of his new ritual center in the proximity of the capital in 1206, he composed the 
“Articles Regarding the Establishment of Temple of Great Repentance,” which included 
a prayer in the form of a ganmon (願文), a liturgical genre of writing that poetically 
expresses one’s intentions and are dedicated to buddhas and kami as the recipients of 
their stated vows. In this short piece, Jien specifies vengeful spirits as the cause of the

--- PAGE 437 ---
412      Eric Haruki Swanson
 
problems of disorder that plagued the capital (Zen 2012) and emphasizes the necessity 
for the collaboration between the Imperial Court and Buddhist institutions: “ever since 
the Hōgen Rebellion [of 1156] until this day, it has been chaotic times. The vengeful spirits 
have permeated Heaven, and the dead soldiers occupy the four seas. I have yet to hear of 
a virtuous form of governance that can help to liberate [these beings from their suf­
fering]; there is also no sign of a revival of court ceremonies. In spring dreams, crimson 
tears flow down to my sleeves and in autumn slumber, my bare heart enflames my chest. 
The only thing that can liberate these vengeful spirits and bolster the Court is the Power 
of the Buddha Dharma” (Taga 1945, 841; emphases added).1 In addition to the general 
term used for the deceased, vengeful spirits (onryō, 怨霊) and “dead soldiers” (bōsotsu, 
亡卒), Jien specifies two historical figures, Emperor Sutoku (崇徳天皇, 1119–​1164) and 
Fujiwara no Tadazane (藤原忠実, 1078–​1162), who was, notably, Jien’s grandfather. Jien 
suggests that one of the main purposes of the Buddhist rites established at his new ritual 
center is to assist these two spirits toward liberation (Taga 1945, 841). The use of the term 
“vengeful spirit” here is significant.
When Jien pointed to vengeful spirits as the cause of social disorder in the capital, he 
was engaging with precedents set in the development of a larger discourse on vengeful 
spirits and court politics that dated back to the eighth century. In fact, stories of vengeful 
spirits in Japan arose in popularity alongside the development of the ancient capitals of 
Nara and Heian. As populations became more dense in these urban spaces, epidemics, 
as well as rumors of ill intent among members of the aristocracy were more easily 
spread among the populace. This, in combination with the heightened rivalry between 
competing aristocratic families, led to the popularization of the notion that natural 
disasters, and epidemics, were caused by the vengeful spirits of deceased members of the 
aristocracy and imperial family who had experienced untimely deaths as a result of po­
litical discord and exile from the capital (Kobayashi 2010; Stockdale 2015; Yamada 2014).
What was specific to Jien’s contribution to this discourse, however, was the way he 
incorporated these narratives of vengeful spirits into his retelling of history and made 
them a central concern for the ritual program he established at the Temple of Great 
Repentance. His claim, in other words, was that his Buddhist ritual program would pro­
vide a means of salvation for the vengeful spirits who haunted the capital and, through 
the liberation of these vengeful spirits, could restore order to it (Zen 2012). Importantly, 
both of the two aforementioned historical figures passed away at the location of their 
exile in the aftermath of the Hōgen Rebellion (hōgen no ran, 保元の乱), a political up­
heaval that occurred in July and August 1156. The conflict was between two factions 
within the imperial court, divided between Emperor Go-​Shirakawa (後白河院, 1127–​
1192) and the aforementioned Emperor Sutoku, over the question of succession to the 
throne and the extent to which the powerful aristocratic family of the Fujiwara clan 
exercised control as hereditary imperial regents. The conflict was brief and ended with 
the defeat of Emperor Sutoku, who was exiled from the capital. After his death, he came 
to be viewed as a vengeful spirit who caused strange misfortunes to happen in the capital 
as a form of revenge on his political enemies. Significantly, it was during this period of 
internal strife of the imperial court that samurai warriors were enlisted to help resolve

--- PAGE 438 ---
Embodiment and Subjugation      413
 
the conflict. In Jien’s view, the growing reliance on the warrior class to ensure social sta­
bility was a troubling sign that imperial authority was on the decline, and the emergence 
of the idea of the vengeful spirit of Emperor Sutoku was an ominous sign of growing 
disorder. The recognition of the untimely death of the historical figures in the aftermath 
of the Hōgen Rebellion and the claim that the purpose of the Buddhist rituals at this 
site was to liberate the spirits of the dead illustrates the way Jien’s understanding of the 
purpose of his ritual center was deeply intertwined with his retelling of history, as artic­
ulated in his Gukanshō.
The Gukanshō and Jien’s Discussion of 
the Principle of Vengeful Spirits
The Gukanshō was written around the year 1220, just before the advent of the Jōkyū 
Disturbance of 1221, in which Retired Emperor Gotoba famously attempted to over­
throw the Kamakura Shogunate. At this time, the forces of Retired Emperor Gotoba 
clashed with those of the Hōjō Clan, who were the regents of the Kamakura shogunate. 
Retired Emperor Gotoba’s forces were quickly quelled, and he was banished to the Oki 
Islands, from which he never returned. The repercussions of these actions by Retired 
Emperor Gotoba were harsh, with many of his family members also banished from 
the capital. The timing of the writing of the Gukanshō has led scholars to conclude that 
one of the driving motivations for composing a historical narrative was to try to con­
vince Retired Emperor Gotoba not to rise up against the military class. According to 
this view, Jien is portrayed as the “rationally minded” Buddhist historian who, with his 
extensive knowledge of past events, attempted to prevent the inevitable defeat of Retired 
Emperor Gotoba (Ozaki 2004). While this may have been part of Jien’s intentions in 
composing the work, this explanation does not take into account the extent to which he 
wove vengeful spirits into his historical narrative as agents who precipitated the decline 
of imperial authority. Jien begins his discussion of the history of Japan with the claim 
that the “period of the military class” (musha no yo, 武者の世) began with the advent of 
the Hōgen Rebellion of 1156 and points to this event as a turning point in which violence 
and disorder started to be seen occurring in the immediate proximity of the Heian cap­
ital. To explain how this unfortunate turn of events occurred, he suggests that there are 
both “good” and “evil” principles that govern the world. According to Jien, just as there 
is a principle (dōri, 道理) underlying good governance, there is also a principle behind 
the evil present in the world. He explains that vengeful spirits are an example of this evil 
principle and have a natural propensity to cause disorder. Importantly, the evil principles 
that cause disorder can be countered through the principles of the Buddhist teachings, 
which Jien describes as “extirpating sin and giving rise to goodness” (metsuzai shōzen, 
滅罪生善) and “removing evil and grasping the good” (shaaku jizen, 遮悪持善). This 
language found in the Gukanshō is similar to what is seen in the “Articles Regarding the

--- PAGE 439 ---
414      Eric Haruki Swanson
 
Establishment of Temple of Great Repentance” that Jien composed in 1206, indicating 
that the issue of the growing presence of vengeful spirits was an underlying theme across 
his writings. In the Gukanshō, vengeful spirits appear at certain points in Jien’s telling 
of imperial history as the result of the feelings of unresolved conflicts that occur as per­
sonal issues among members of aristocracy. Jien points to a number of historical figures 
who he claims have become vengeful spirits, including Fujiwara no Motokata, Fujiwara 
no Akimitsu, the Buddhist priest Raigō, and Emperor Sutoku, who are all members with 
close ties to the aristocratic society of the Heian capital. The ramifications of these his­
torical figures becoming vengeful spirits is that they, although in very subtle ways, neg­
atively impact the trajectory of history, as indicated in the decline of the effectiveness of 
imperial authority. Significantly, Jien stresses that if negative feelings that have arisen 
from these instances are not sufficiently addressed through the practice of Buddhist 
rituals, they will not only come to haunt the members of the families involved in these 
past instances but also eventually bring disorder to the entire capital. While natural 
disasters, such as droughts, fires, and earthquakes, that appeared after the exile of a po­
litical figure were viewed as a result of an unappeased spirit, Jien further emphasized 
that unresolved personal conflicts of individuals could have a continued influence on 
the actions of those in the present, with dire consequences to the future of the capital 
if they were left untended. The role of Buddhist ritual practice, in other words, was to 
subjugate harmful, vengeful spirits as a means to restore an ordered society governed 
with good principles supported by the Buddhist teachings. In other words, Jien effec­
tively drew attention to the lingering anxiety among members of imperial and aristo­
cratic families caused by their memories of past political conflicts such as the Hōgen 
Rebellion so as to highlight the necessity of Buddhist principles and ritual practice. Jien 
claimed that the Buddhist rituals at his center had the power to dissolve the negative an­
imosity associated with the conflicts of the past and would restore peace for the future of 
the capital.
This claim that Buddhist rites should be viewed as the solution to the problem of 
vengeful spirits continued to be central to Jien’s ritual program, even under the drasti­
cally changing political climate following what came to be the most dramatic political 
upheaval of his own lifetime, the Jōkyū Disturbance of 1221 (Taga 1980, 296). In 1222, just 
a year after the drastic turn of events of the Jōkyū Disturbance that ended in the defeat 
and exile of Jien’s main patron, Retired Emperor Gotoba, Jien composed another prayer 
that was dedicated to the buddhas and kami: “today, the disruptions in heaven are the 
same as they were in the past. Strange apparitions reveal their hidden forms. Is this not 
due to the lack of prayer? How is this not a sign of envy? How much more do we need the 
efficacious activity of the Radiant Light [shijōkō, 熾盛光]? In order to provide protec­
tion in these times of the Latter Dharma, we must remove the evils of the world through 
the merits of the Wondrous Lotus Sutra” (Taga 1945, 862; emphasis added). Here, Jien 
clearly states how he views his ritual program as contributing to restoring order. In 
this vow, he reiterates many of the points seen in his previous vows, emphasizing that 
“strange apparitions have revealed their hidden forms” and that both exoteric and eso­
teric rituals need be performed to provide protection in chaotic times. Jien also lays out

--- PAGE 440 ---
Embodiment and Subjugation      415
 
in more detail the content of his ritual program, referring to the two structures as the 
Exoteric Teaching Hall (kengyō dō, 顕教堂), built for the practice of the Rite of Lotus 
Repentance (hokke senpō, 法花懺悔), and the Mantra Hall (shingon dō, 真言堂), for 
esoteric rites such as the Rite of Great Radiant Light (daishijōkō hō, 大熾盛光法) and 
goma fire rituals. (See table 18.1.)
As for the purposes of these two categories of Buddhist rites that Jien specifies, he 
states that while the exoteric rites help to alleviate the suffering of the vengeful spirits 
and hungry ghosts, the function of the esoteric rites is to incinerate the obstructions 
and wipe away the influence of the harmful spirits on the Law of the Buddhadharma and 
the Law of the Emperor. Jien’s newly established ritual center exhibited an extensive 
exoteric-​esoteric ritual program that incorporated rites that were based on those al­
ready practiced on Mount Hiei (Dolce 2012; Fujii 1998; Stevenson 1986). An impor­
tant difference, however, is that Jien reconceptualized the purpose of these rites and 
presented the rituals as actions to be performed in the proximity of the capital in order 
to pacify not only evil spirits in the abstract sense but also, importantly, the individual 
spirits of historical figures who had passed away as a result of violent political clashes 
and remained embedded in the collective memory of the members of the Heian court. 
These included, as stated earlier, not only the soldiers who had died as a result of polit­
ical conflict that occurred in Jien’s own lifetime but also specifically the spirit of Retired 
Emperor Sutoku, who had been exiled in 1156 as a result of the Hōgen Rebellion. It is 
not hard to imagine that Jien, who had been the personal protector monk of Retired 
Emperor Gotoba, viewed Gotoba’s recent exile as a result of the Jōkyū Rebellion of 1211 
as resonating in ominous ways with the exile of Retired Emperor Sutoku in 1156. In other 
words, the historical reality of the Heian court and Jien’s own reflection on the history 
Table 18.1  Ritual Structures at the Temple of Great Repentance
Architectural 
structure
Ritual Space for Great Repentance 
(exoteric Buddhist practice)
Ritual Space for Rite of Blazing Light 
(esoteric Buddhist practice)
Specified 
practices
Daily practice of Lotus and Amida 
samadhi (hokke mida no sanmai 
法華弥陀之三昧)
Daily offerings from the practice of 
esoteric yoga
Daily eye-​opening rites (kaigen 開眼) 
for Fifteen Buddhist Deities
Successive days of doctrinal 
expositions of sutras (kaidai 開題)
Successive days of esoteric rites (kinrin 
金輪, butsugen仏眼, yakushi薬師, 
fudō不動, shijōkō熾盛光, hokke法華)
Successive days of goma rites: a) Goma 
Subjugation Rite of Fudō (fudō gōbuku 
goma 不動降伏護摩, b) Goma Rite 
of the Four Deities: (kinrin, yakushi, 
butsugen, fudō)
Annual Rites: a) Rite of Blazing Light 
(shijōkō), b) Rite of the Lotus (hokke)
Stated 
purpose of 
practice
To alleviate the suffering of the 
vengeful spirits (onryō 怨霊 and 
hungry ghosts (gaki 餓鬼)
To incinerate the inner and outer 
obstructions and absolve the “spirits of the 
Law of the Buddhadharma and the Law of 
Emperor” (buppō ōbō no rei 仏法王法之霊)

--- PAGE 441 ---
416      Eric Haruki Swanson
 
of the political affairs of the capital can be seen as informing and reforming the raison 
d’être of the Buddhist ritual practice of the Tendai school at the turn of the 13th century. 
It is within the broader discussion of the recognition of social disorder, the vengeful 
spirits as perpetuating the negative trajectory of history, and the call for the practice 
of Buddhist rites in order to restore order in the Heian capital that we see innovative 
interpretations of the function of Buddhist deities, as well as a reenvisioning of how 
these deities were embodied within the body of the practitioner through ritual practices.
Reinterpreting the Function of 
Buddhist Deities
A short text titled “Commentary on the Fifteen Deities of the Hall of Repentance” 
(senpōin jūgo son shaku 懺法院十五尊釈, hereafter “Fifteen Deities”), provides 
commentaries on the fifteen Buddhist figures who occupied the ritual space of the 
Great Repentance Hall at Jien’s ritual center. This short text is found in the fourth sec­
tion of the Monyōki 門葉記, which compiles records of ritual services. The Monyōki is 
a collection of temple records regarding rituals practiced at the Shōrenin temple from 
the 12th to 15th centuries. Although the authorship of “Fifteen Deities” is not specified, 
the short work contains themes and word uses that resonate with Jien’s other work and 
was likely composed by him around the time of the temple’s reconstruction efforts 
in the year 1222, when he composed “Vows for the Rebuilding of the Temple of Great 
Repentance.” As indicated in Jien’s dedicatory prayers introduced earlier, an integral 
part of his ritual program included the daily “eye-​opening” (kaigen, 開眼) ritual for 
the fifteen Buddhist deities. Although lacking in detail as to the actual ritual proce­
dure, “Fifteen Deities” provides interesting explanations of how the function of the 
Buddhist deities were reconceptualized to fit the goals of Jien’s ritual center, specifi­
cally how these deities might contribute to dealing with vengeful or malevolent spirits 
and help in efforts to reestablish political and social order. The short text begins with 
a list of the dates to which each of the fifteen Buddhist deities are allocated within the 
time period of a month. According to this text, the practitioners at this temple cycled 
through these fifteen Buddhist deities every month, with the eye-​opening for each 
deity performed on specific dates. (See table 18.2 for a list of the deities and the dates 
associated with each.)
In providing a description of each of these Buddhist figures, the text follows a two-​part 
structure, beginning with a brief explanation of the deity through the lens of the theory 
of the “three bodies [of the buddha]” (Sk. trikāya, Jp. sanshin 三身): the “truth body” 
(Sk. dharmakāya; Jp. hosshin 法身), the “reward body” (Sk. saṃbhogakāya; Jp. hōshin 
報身), and the “transformation body” (Sk. nirmāṇakāya; Jp. keshin 化身; Williams 
2008, 173–​186). This is followed by an explanation of how each deity may assist in 
reaching the goal of restoring order in the world and, in some cases, the goal of pacifying

--- PAGE 442 ---
Embodiment and Subjugation      417
 
vengeful spirits. A prime example of this is the description of the Immovable Wisdom 
King (Fudō Myōō, 不動明), a prominent wrathful figure in Japanese esoteric buddhism 
(Faure 2015; Payne and Witzel 2015). The text begins by listing the basic characteristics of 
this figure, as described in other esoteric Buddhist scriptural commentaries, as endowed 
with the ability to subjugate both inner and outer obstructions, and by referring to 
the recitation of his mantra as a method of realizing the enlightened mind (bodaishin, 
菩提心). These commonly seen attributes of Fudō Myōō are followed by a description 
of how the features of this deity’s ability to eliminate obstructions within the mind of the 
practitioner as described in the esoteric Buddhist scripture could also be applied to ad­
dress the problem of vengeful spirits:
because the eyes of compassion of the manifested form [of Fudō Myōō] sees all sen­
tient beings as equal and like his only child, he saves vengeful spirits and the souls of 
the dead by including them as equal to his only child. . . . This subjugation of the evil 
demons of the vengeful spirits ultimately leads them toward the path of enlightenment, 
and through this it is possible to destroy the delusions of the land. It will certainly open 
the gates to Virtuous Governance. . . . The merits obtained through the sword and rope 
[of Fudō Myōō] is “removal of evil and maintaining good” [shaaku jizen, 遮悪持善]. 
It is the prayers of the lords, ministers, and the people that will bring forth victory in 
the present and future. The function of the wisdom king [myōō, 明王] is to remove 
Table 18.2  The Fifteen Buddhist Deities and Their 
Correspondence to Days of the Month
Day
Deity
Daily
Shaka (釈迦, Śākyamuni Buddha)
2, 16
Kinrin (金輪, Ekâkṣara-​uṣṇīṣacakra)
3, 29
Bishamon (毘沙門, Vaiśravaṇa)
4, 19
Sonshō (尊勝, Uṣṇīṣavijayā)
5, 26
Miroku (弥勒, Maitreya)
6, 24
Jizō (地蔵, Kṣitigarbha)
7, 25
Monju (文殊, Mañjuśrī)
8, 20
Yakushi (薬師, Bhaiṣajyaguru)
9, 17
Jūichimen (十一面, Eleven-​Faced Avalokitêśvara)
10, 18
Senju Kannon (千手, Thousand-​Armed Avalokitêśvara)
11, 23
Fudō (不動, Acala)
12, 2
Butsugen (仏眼, Buddhalocana)
13, 22
Kokūzō (虚空蔵, Ākāśagarbha)
14, 27
Fugen (普賢, Samantabhadra)
15, 28
Amida (阿弥陀, Amitābha)

--- PAGE 443 ---
418      Eric Haruki Swanson
 
both inner and outer obstructions. The praises [for Fudō Myōō] twice a month is 
what all sentient beings should depend on.
(T. zuzō 12:29a–​b; emphasis added)
The text not only claims that one of the prime functions of Fudō Myōō to “subjugate 
evil” (gōma, 降魔) is applicable to the goal of pacifying vengeful spirits but also suggests 
that it is precisely the removal of the “evil demons of the vengeful spirits” that will lead 
to the restoration of a virtuous governance (tokusei, 徳政). The text also comments that 
the iconographical features of this deity, that is, the sword of wisdom in his right hand 
and the rope in his left, are visual expressions of the idea of “the removal of evil and 
maintaining good” (shaaku jizen), a term Jien specifically highlighted both in his his­
torical work, the Gukanshō, and in the dedicatory prayers he proclaimed at the time of 
the rebuilding of the Temple of Great Repentance. Furthermore, the section in “Fifteen 
Deities” concludes the commentary on Fudō Myōō by suggesting that this figure is the 
very embodiment of the “principle of the buddhadharma,” which Jien understood as 
the necessary antidote in countering the negative influence of the “principle of vengeful 
spirits.” In other words, an examination of this short commentary on Fudō Myōō reveals 
an attempt to reinterpret the iconography, functions, and activities of this deity in such a 
way as to address the specific problem of pacifying vengeful spirits. The explanations of 
all fifteen deities indicate how each offers specific methods to effectively counter, pacify, 
and ultimately liberate vengeful spirits as a way to restore order in the world.
Another underlying theme seen across Jien’s writings is an emphasis on the mutual de­
pendence of imperial authority (ōbō, 王法) and the buddhadharma (buppō, 仏法). The 
late historian Kuroda Toshio has argued that the political ideology of the mutual depend­
ence of imperial authority and buddhadharma occupied a central position in the medieval 
system of state and religion, allowing temple-​shrine complexes to assert their own polit­
ical autonomy and power. Kuroda has also noted that Jien’s Gukanshō was the first work 
to put forth a systematized treatment of the notion of this mutual dependence, suggesting 
that Jien played a crucial role in shaping the political ideology of religious institutional life 
in medieval Japan (Kuroda and Stone 1996, 279–​280). Discourse on this mutual depend­
ence is also provided in “Fifteen Deities,” articulated perhaps most clearly in the discussion 
of the deity Uṣṇīṣavijayā (sonshō, 尊勝). The text explains: “through the merit [attained 
through this figure], the evil thoughts of the vengeful spirits will be dispelled immedi­
ately, and the liberation of the dead soldiers will easily be achieved,” and the empower­
ment from the Victorious Buddha-​Crown Dharani (sonshō darani, 尊勝陀羅尼) will 
“remove the erroneous thoughts of the vengeful spirits . . . and realize peace in the land.” 
The text also emphasizes that the recitation of the Victorious Buddha-​Crown Dharani not 
only will ensure the removal of the erroneous thoughts of vengeful spirits but also will as­
sist in establishing peace in the land (T. zuzō 12:27b, 31c). Furthermore, in discussing the 
Thousand-​Armed Avalokitêśvara (senju kannon, 千手観音), a Buddhist deity associated 
with a universal compassion to save all sentient beings, Jien concludes his description of this 
figure by stating: “all the evil demons and vengeful spirits who obstruct the Buddhadharma 
and Imperial Law will be beckoned by the call of Avalokitêśvara and enter into the gate of

--- PAGE 444 ---
Embodiment and Subjugation      419
 
the universal teachings.” In terms of the connection between the pacification of vengeful 
spirits and the emperor’s role in restoring peace in the capital, this is most clearly articulated 
in the description of Ekâkṣara-​uṣṇīṣacakra (ichiji kinrin, 一字金輪): “a shallow interpre­
tation understands the Wheel-​Turning King of the Buddha Realm as the Wheel-​Turning 
King of the Human Realm. The profound secret is that they are [both] the bodies of the 
Buddha’s skillful means to bring benefit to all sentient beings . . . through the virtue of the 
Seven Treasures of the Wheel-​Turning King, the vengeful spirits and dead soldiers of this 
world will be healed and saved” (T. zuzō 12:26c; emphasis added). In this passage, the com­
mentary introduces the notion of the cakravartin, the ideal universal ruler in buddhism 
who is said to rule ethically and benevolently. By revealing the unity of bodies between the 
“wheel-​turning king of the human realm” and Ekâkṣara-​uṣṇīṣacakra, Jien suggests that the 
liberation of the vengeful spirits depends on the realization that the imperial body serves 
as an integral node in the soteriological activities of the universal buddha. This point is 
emphasized again in the commentary of the same figure in another section of the text:
the external manifestation of [the Universally Shining Tathāgata] is the position of 
the emperor. The bodhi of inner realization is the manifestation of the One Letter. 
Currently, prayers for [maintaining the balance of] principle and chaos in the land 
of Japan is done through the wheel-​turning king, and the activities of the Heian cap­
ital are done by the people. . . . If the Lord of the Buddha Realm does not assist the 
lords and ministers of the human realm, the beings of the human realm are unable 
to attain the benefits of the Buddha realm. Who will uphold the three jewels? Who 
will have faith in the Buddha’s words? Principles are necessary. I pray that there is no 
mistake in this.
(T. zuzō 12:30c–​31a)
As indicated here, Jien understood that the balance between order and chaos lay in the 
hands of the emperor of the Heian capital, and recognized that the maintenance of this 
social order depended on a collaborative relationship between the ruler and his subjects. 
The commentary highlights the importance of the emperor setting a clear example of 
the principles of the buddhadharma so that the benefits of its practices would spread 
across the capital and beyond. Furthermore, the notion seen here that the figure of the 
emperor serves as an integral node from which the soteriological activities of the uni­
versal buddha manifests can also be seen in how the relationship between the different 
bodies of buddhas and bodhisattvas are articulated. The idea of the interpenetration of 
the bodies of all Buddhist figures is seen most clearly in a discussion in the section on 
Śākyamuni Buddha, the first in the list of the fifteen deities. The short commentary for 
Śākyamuni Buddha offered here is based on an exegesis of a passage from the Parable 
Chapter of the Lotus Sutra:
Now this threefold world is all my domain,
And the living beings in it are all my children.
Now this place is beset by many pains and trials,
I am the only person who can rescue and protect [them]. (Watson 1993, 69–​70)

--- PAGE 445 ---
420      Eric Haruki Swanson
 
The commentary on this short passage divides this verse into three sections. The first line 
is interpreted as expressing the principle of the dharma-​body, the unchanging, eternal 
body of thusness (dharmakāya). The second line is seen as an expression of the wisdom 
of thusness that is in accordance with various capabilities and associated with the re­
ward body (saṃbhogakāya). The third and fourth lines are described as reflecting the 
benefits gained from the transformation body (nirmāṇakāya). Using the three-​bodies 
theory in the interpretation of this short passage from the Lotus Sutra, the commentary 
suggests that Śākyamuni Buddha is none other than the omnipresent, single dharma 
realm, while the various forms of all buddhas and bodhisattvas are distinct expressions 
of this single dharma that appear in various ways to address the different needs of those 
who are on the path to salvation. Referring specifically to the teachings of Godaiin 
Annen (五大院安然, 841–​889?)—​“one buddha as all buddhas” (ichibutsu issai butsu, 
一仏一切仏)—​the text presents Śākyamuni Buddha as the single, underlying unity of 
all buddhas and bodhisattvas. The distinct bodies of all other buddhas and bodhisattvas, 
including the other fourteen deities covered in this text, are understood here as none 
other than the distinct expressions of a single, universal truth-​body that subsumes all.
This vision of the mutual interpenetration and unity of all bodies of buddhas and 
bodhisattvas is also mentioned as a key feature of a ritual exegetical treatise composed by 
Jien, titled “Questions and Answers on the Commentaries of the Main Deity” (honzon 
shaku mondō 本尊釈問答). Here, Jien suggests that this vision of the interpenetrating 
bodies of all buddhas and bodhisattvas is also extended to the body of the ritual practi­
tioner. In other words, the practitioners of Buddhist rituals must view their own bodies 
as also inseparable from the interpenetrating bodies of all buddhas and bodhisattvas 
and understand that they, too, are part of the expansive network of nodes through which 
Buddhist salvation manifests in the world. Jien explains: “now, the body of the mantra 
practitioner is the body of the manifested form of Mahāvairocana Buddha. Is this any 
different from what you see in the ritual right in front of your eyes? The shallow and pro­
found understanding with regard to this awakening is clear. To enter into the profound 
interpretation and to closely observe this contemplation is what makes one a practi­
tioner of the Shingon Esoteric Teachings” (Abe 2019, 132; emphasis added).
According to Jien, the realization of the practitioner’s body as another node through 
which the buddhas and bodhisattvas are able to act is what distinguished the esoteric 
Buddhist methods of practice from other forms of Buddhist practices. To put it differ­
ently, the realization that the esoteric Buddhist practitioner embodies the vast network 
of the interpenetrating bodies of all buddhas and bodhisattvas was necessary for the 
practitioner to channel the salvific actions of enlightened figures and what allowed the 
ritual practitioner to successfully subjugate the obstructive vengeful spirits so as to re­
store order in the world. For the ritual practitioner, the embodiment of the universal 
Buddha Mahāvairocana and the participation within the vast network of buddhas and 
bodhisattvas was the meaning of “attaining enlightenment in this very body” (sokushin 
jōbutsu, 即身成仏), one of the defining doctrinal positions of esoteric buddhism as it 
developed in Japan (Hakeda 1972, 87; Yamasaki 1988, 106; Sharf 2003; Payne 2022). As 
articulated in these texts composed by Jien, it was through the embodiment of buddhas

--- PAGE 446 ---
Embodiment and Subjugation      421
 
and bodhisattvas that ritual practitioners were able to channel their salvific activities 
to pacify vengeful spirits and restore order in the world, and this assertion supported 
his claim for the necessity of the mutual dependence of imperial authority and the 
buddhadharma to ensure a stable future for the Heian court.
Conclusion
Reflecting upon the great political turmoil and the uncertainties of the future at the 
turn of the 13th century, the Buddhist monk Jien established a new ritual program with 
the support of Retired Emperor Gotoba. At this time, major Buddhist rites of Jien’s tra­
dition were transported from the mountainous regions in the outskirts of the capital 
to an urban space in close proximity to the imperial quarters for the purpose of pro­
viding protection to the state. In his efforts to establish this new ritual center, Jien ac­
tively reconceptualized the purpose of these ritual practices and its underlying Buddhist 
theories to address what he claimed was a burgeoning threat to state affairs caused by 
the malevolent influence of vengeful spirits that plagued the capital. The construction 
of a new ritual space in the proximity of the Heian capital provided Jien with the op­
portunity to bridge together various aspects of medieval religious culture: an ongoing 
concern with the pacification of vengeful spirits to maintain peace in the land and a 
reenvisioning of the relationship between imperial authority and the buddhadharma. 
Jien’s writings examined here illustrate the extent to which Buddhist deities were crea­
tively reimagined so as to respond to the social realities and deepening anxieties of the 
Heian court in 13th-​century Japan. A consideration of Jien’s articulation of the purpose 
of Buddhist rituals and his description of the relationship between the practitioner’s 
body and the Buddhist figures that occupied the ritual space of his temple illustrates the 
process by which buddhas and bodhisattvas were understood to act within the world 
and, importantly, how the body of the practitioner was viewed as the site through which 
the buddhadharma would be enacted to maintain social order in medieval Japan.
Note
	1.	 Unless otherwise indicated, translations are those of the author.
References
“T.” refers to the Taishō shinshū Daizōkyō canon.
Abe Mika 阿部美香. 2019. “Shiryō shōkai: Jien senjutsu honzon shaku mondō史料紹介： 
慈円撰述「本尊釈問答」.” Tokyo daigaku shiryō hensanjo kenkyū kiyō 29 (March): 
119–​132.

--- PAGE 447 ---
422      Eric Haruki Swanson
 
Adolphson, Mikael S. 2000. The Gates of Power: Monks, Courtiers, and Warriors in Premodern 
Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Brown, Delmer M., and Ichirō Ishida. 1979. The Future and the Past: A Translation and Study 
of the Gukanshō, an Interpretative History of Japan Written in 1219. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Brownlee, John S. 1991. Political Thought in Japanese Historical Writing: From Kojiki (712) to 
Tokushi Yoron (1712). Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Dolce, Lucia. 2012. “Taimitsu Rituals in Medieval Japan: Sectarian Competition and the 
Dynamics of Tantric Performance.” In Transformation and Transfer of Tantra in Asia and 
Beyond, edited by Istvan Keul, 329–​363. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Faure, Bernard. 2015. Gods of Medieval Japan. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Fujii Keisuke 藤井恵介. 1998. Mikkyō kenchiku kūkanron 密教建築空間論. Chūōkōronbijutsu 
shuppan.
Fukazawa Tōru 深沢徹. 2006. Gukanshō no uso to makoto: rekishi katari no jikogenkyūsei wo 
koedete『愚管抄』の〈ウソ〉と〈マコト〉—​歴史語りの自己言及性を超え出て. 
Tokyo: Shinwasha.
Gardiner, David L. 2018. “Tantric Buddhism in Japan: Shingon, Tendai, and the Esotericization 
of Japanese Buddhisms.” In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion, August 28. https://​
oxfor​dre.com/​relig​ion/​view/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.001.0001/​acref​ore-​978019​
9340​378-​e-​619.
Groner, Paul. 2000. Saichō: The Establishment of the Japanese Tendai School. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Groner, Paul. 2002. Ryōgen and Mount Hiei: Japanese Tendai in the Tenth Century. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Hakeda, Yoshito S. 1972. Kūkai Major Works: Translated, with an Account of His Life and a Study 
of His Thought. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hambrick, Charles Hilton. 1978. “The ‘Gukanshō’: A Religious View of Japanese History.” 
Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 5, no. 1 (March): 37–​58.
Ishikawa Hajime 石川一. 1998. Jien waka ronkō 慈円和歌論考. Tokyo: Kasama Shoin.
Ishikawa Hajime 石川一. 2015. Jien hōraku waka ronkō 慈円法楽和歌論考. Tokyo: Bensei 
Shuppan.
Kobayashi Shigefumi 小林茂文. 2010. “The Invention of the Discourse on the Vengeful Spirit 
of Imperial Prince Sawara [in Japanese]” 早良親王怨霊言説の発明. Shigaku 79, no. 3: 
211–​244.
Kuroda, Toshio, and Jacqueline I. Stone. 1996. “The Imperial Law and the Buddhist Law.” 
Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 23, no. 3/​4: 271–​285. http://​www.jstor.org/​sta​ble/​
30233​575.
Marra, Michele. 1985. “The Conquest of Mappō: Jien and Kitabatake Chikafusa.” 
Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 12, no. 4 (December): 319–​341.
Ozaki Isamu尾崎勇. 2004. Gukanshō no sōsei to hōhō愚管抄の創成と方法. Tokyo: 
Kyūko Shoin.
Payne, Richard K. 2022. “Ritual Identification and Purification in Esoteric Practice.” In The 
Oxford Handbook of Buddhist Practice, edited by Kevin Trainor and Paula Arai. Online ed., 
Oxford Academic, May 19. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​oxfor​dhb/​978019​0632​922.013.12.
Payne, Richard, and Michael Witzel. 2015. Homa Variations: The Study of Ritual Change across 
the Longue Durée. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

--- PAGE 448 ---
Embodiment and Subjugation      423
 
Robert, Jean-​Noël. 2008. La centurie du Lotus: poèmes de Jien (1155–​1225) sur le Sûtra du Lotus. 
Paris: Collège de France, Institut des Hautes Études Japonaises.
Sharf, Robert H. 2003. “Thinking through Shingon Ritual.” Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 26, no. 1: 51–​96.
Stevenson, Daniel B. 1986. “The Four Kinds of Samādhi in Early T’ien-​t’ai Buddhism.” In 
Traditions of Meditation in Chinese Buddhism, edited by Peter N. Gregory, 45–​98. Honolulu: 
University of Hawaii Press.
Stockdale, Jonathan. 2015. Imagining Exile in Heian Japan: Banishment in Law, Literature, and 
Cult. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Taga Munehaya 多賀宗早. 1945. Jien zenshū慈円全集. Tokyo: Nanajō Shoin.
Taga Munehaya 多賀宗隼. 1980. Jien no kenkyū慈円の研究. Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kōbunkan.
Tsukudo Reikan 筑土鈴寛. 1942. Jien: kokka to rekishi oyobi bungaku慈円： 国家と歴史及 
び文学. Tokyo: Sanseidō.
Watson, Burton, trans. 1993. Lotus Sutra. New York: Columbia University Press.
Williams, Paul. 2008. Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations. 2nd ed. New York: 
Routledge.
Yamada Yūji 山田雄司. 2014. Onryō toha nani ka: Sugawara no Michizane, Taira no Kiyomori, 
Sutokuin怨霊とは何か：菅原道真・平清盛・崇徳院. Tokyo: Chūōkōron Shinsha.
Yamamoto Akihiro 山本章博. 2016. Chūsei shakyōka no kenkyū—​jyakunen saigyō 
jien中世釈教歌の研究―寂然・西行・慈円. Tokyo: Kasama Shoin.
Yamamoto Hajime 山本一. 1999. Jien no waka to shisō慈円の和歌と思想. Tokyo: Taiyōsha.
Yamasaki, Taiko. 1988. Shingon: Japanese Esoteric Buddhism. Boston: Shambhala.
Zen Hiroaki 善裕昭. 2012. “Jien no daisenpōin to onryō metsuzai” 慈円の大懺法院と怨霊滅罪. 
In Myōkenron: nihonjin no seishinshi冥顕論—​日本人の精神史, edited by Ikemi Chōryū 
池見澄隆, 105–​124. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.

--- PAGE 449 ---


--- PAGE 450 ---
P a r t I V
 EXTRAORDINARY 
BEINGS
Deities and Founders

--- PAGE 451 ---


--- PAGE 452 ---
Chapter 19
“Hard-​Core” Tantric 
Traditions and the Cult 
of Bhairava in Java
Andrea Acri
Introduction
The etic umbrella term “hard-​core tantra” (White 2000, 6–​7, 31–​32; 2003, 13–​16), roughly 
corresponding to the emic Indic category of “left-​hand” or antinomian ritual practice 
(vāmācāra), includes the traditions stemming from the scriptural corpora of the Śaiva 
Bhairavatantras (the male-​oriented Mantrapīṭha and the Śakti-​oriented Vidyāpīṭha) 
and Kaulatantras, the (largely nontextual or scantily documented) Śaiva traditions of 
the Lākulas and Kāpālikas, as well as the Buddhist Yoginītantras/​Yoganiruttaratantras. 
These texts and practices may be contrasted to those of “soft-​core tantra,” corresponding 
to the “right-​hand” or orthodox ritual practice (dakṣiṇācāra) of the mainstream (and 
to various extents Brahmanized) Śaiva tantra, like the Śaivasiddhānta, or to main­
stream monastic Theravāda and Mahāyāna Buddhism and their textual canons. Here 
I define hard-​core tantric traditions as initiatory systems that tend to share a common 
emphasis on transgression of social norms and Brahmanical or monastic rules of pu­
rity, quick empowerment toward obtaining mundane and supramundane goals through 
magico-​ritual means (often including sexual elements), ontological and epistemolog­
ical nondualism (or nondualism in ritual practice, i.e., advaitācāra, rejecting the main­
stream Brahmanical opposition between pure and impure), worship of demonic and 
wrathful hypostases of Śiva (i.e., Bhairava) and the goddess, as well as transactions with 
ambiguous demonic entities inhabiting such inauspicious places as charnel grounds.1
Even though hard-​core tantric tradition occupied a relatively marginal position in 
the religious landscape of the Indian subcontinent throughout the post-​Gupta or medi­
eval period, they formed important realities at a regional level (for instance, in Kashmir, 
Odisha, Bengal, Assam, etc.), and contributed in various ways to the development of

--- PAGE 453 ---
428      Andrea Acri
 
Indic religious as well as cultural imaginary and ritual practice at both the elite and 
popular levels. Increasing evidence suggests that various traditions of hard-​core tantra 
reached Southeast Asia and contributed to shape local cultures through texts, icono­
graphic motifs, and magico-​ritual practices. As suggested by textual, archaeological, 
and art historical vestiges, hard-​core tantra played the role of a marginal undercur­
rent in Central Java from ca. ninth to tenth century, while in East Java, from ca. elev­
enth to fifteenth century, it became more prominent and widespread at the level of both 
the urbanized political elites as well as the religious communities in the countryside. 
After the rise to dominance of Islam from the late fifteenth century onward, motifs 
and behaviors associated with hard-​core tantra survived, in a vestigial form, into the 
nineteenth century and beyond as a radically monistic undercurrent in the doctrines, 
mythology, and textual sources of modern Javanese mysticism, as well as within an anti­
nomian group of performers at the Islamic court of Surakarta.
The Rise of Bhairava Cult in East Java: 
ca. Tenth–Mid-​Thirteenth Century
Most of the (rare) texts, inscriptions, and art historical remains dating back to the 
Central Javanese period reflect a mild form of mainstream, soft-​core tantric religi­
osity revolving around the benevolent masculine aspects of the Godhead—​Sadāśiva/​
Mahādeva for the Śaivas, and the Buddha Śākyamuni and/​or Vairocana for the 
Buddhists. The Śaiva speculative religious texts and ritual manuals in Sanskrit and Old 
Javanese that have survived and that might have been in circulation in some form in 
the Central Javanese period appear to have been based on the pan-​Indian mainstream 
Saiddhāntika corpus.2 However, it is likely that the practices and beliefs associated with 
adepts of hard-​core tantric traditions (whether real or imagined, for instance, through 
Brahmanical stereotypes associated with them) were part of the collective imaginary of 
the cultural and religious elites of that period, for we find rare references (often stereo­
typical, and formulated from the critical point of view of the mainstream or “orthodox” 
elites) to them in pre-​tenth-​century textual sources (see Acri 2022). These traditions 
would only become prominent in the later period, when the center of political and cul­
tural power shifted from Central Java to East Java in the tenth century, probably as a re­
sult of a natural catastrophe.
Although there is no incontrovertible evidence that the Kāpālikas themselves, or 
Kāpālika-​influenced traditions of the Bhairavatantras, reached Java by the ninth cen­
tury, there is no reason to assume that they did not either. But firmer evidence dates 
from a slightly later period: witness, for instance, a prob. ninth–​tenth-​century bronze 
skullcap unearthed in Central Java,3 as well as the brief references to adepts adhering 
to Bhairava and Kāpālika observances found in prose Sanskrit-​Old Javanese literature 
probably written in East Java between the late tenth and early eleventh century, shortly

--- PAGE 454 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      429
 
after the shift of political power from Central to East Java. For instance, the Udyogaparva 
(45.4) glosses the Sanskrit half-​verse (uttered by Yudhiṣṭhira) vayaṃ vadhena jivāmaḥ 
kapālaṃ brāhmaṇe vṛtam (“we live by murder; the skull-​bowl is the conduct of the 
Brahmins”) as “like if our food was a warrior dead in battle, that is called food and drink; 
when a Brahman adhering to the observance of the Kāpālikas begs what is used as his 
food [i.e., human flesh]” (45.4),4 thus reflecting an association between Brahmanical 
adepts carrying out the anthropophagic observances stereotypically associated with 
the Kāpālikas in Sanskrit sources from the Indian subcontinent. The Agastyaparva 
(385.7) defines the highest goal (muktapada) of the way of Bhairava as “the endless par­
amount [sexual?] bliss” (anantaparamānanda ṅaranya ri saṅ bheravamārga), and an 
analogous expression, “endless paramount bliss is the way of the illustrious Bhairava 
[practitioner]” (anantaparamānandana ṅaranira de saṅ bhairava), is found in the 
Sanskrit-​Old Javanese Buddhist manual Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan (Advayasādhana), 
b45, p. 51. While in this context the sexual connotation is not clear,5 it is still possible that 
this might reflect the trope of Bhairava-​worshiping Kāpālikas and Kaulas having a fe­
male consort, just like Śiva is accompanied by or (sexually) united with Umā.6
A clearly antinomian imagery is found in four stanzas (7–​10) of a long Sanskrit hymn, 
preserved in Balinese manuscripts, entitled Śivastava (Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971, 
290–​293). The stuti refers to transgressive behaviors of Śiva that would also be ap­
propriate for a Kāpālika or Bhairavika devotee acting like his elected deity (“He Who 
performs all these acts is Mahāśiva” [etāni sarvakarmāṇi, yaḥ karoti mahāśivaḥ]), 
namely, eating what cannot be eaten (abhakṣyabhakṣaṇaḥ), intoxicated by liquor 
(surāpānamadānvitaḥ), enjoying young women (yuvatīratisaṃyuktaḥ), singing, making 
noise and dancing (gītaṃ dhvanir nṛttam), and using sperm combined with phlegm, 
fat, excrement, and urine (kaphamedayutaṃ śukram, purīṣamūtrasaṃyutam); the final 
stanza declares that a person, whether impure or pure, and even when full of desires, 
should meditate on Īśāna (i.e., Śiva), thereby becoming pure outwardly and inwardly.7 
This passage calls to mind a Kaula ritual practice; indeed, the final verse adumbrates 
the analogous discourses on the enjoyment of impure/​forbidden substances as well as 
the practice of sinful behaviors by the adept, known in some traditions as svecchācāra, 
found in South Asian Śaiva and Śākta Sanskrit sources.8 Similar passages referring to 
a practitioner mastering the esoteric knowledge (niṣkalajñāna) as acting according to 
his own will (yathecchā) and performing both good and bad actions are found in the 
Sanskrit-​Old Javanese Śaiva text Bhuvanakośa (8.35–​8.36, 11.67–​11.70, 84–​86), a scrip­
tural source mainly reflecting a Saiddhāntika context. While both the Sanskrit hymns 
from Bali and the Bhuvanakośa preserve material of remarkable antiquity that may 
well go back to pre-​tenth-​century Central and/​or East Java, they are difficult to date 
firmly, and therefore a later East Javanese or Balinese origin for these passages cannot 
be ruled out.
What may be a turning point in the history of Java in terms of royal support to hard-​
core, Bhairava-​focused tantric traditions is the reign of King Bāmeśvara (ca. 1117–​1135) 
of Keḍiri. Albeit little is known about this sovereign, it appears that the candrakapāla 
motif, a representation of a skull eating a half-​moon that we find depicted on a number of

--- PAGE 455 ---
430      Andrea Acri
 
East Javanese monuments and statues from the early Kaḍiri period onward, constituted 
his official emblem. It is attested for the first time, both iconographically and textually, 
in two inscriptions of 1117 and 1120 ce from the early reign of this king (Brandes and 
Krom 1913, 159) and is also depicted on the four corners of a stone “bathtub” or sarcoph­
agus dating to the same period (1118–​1119), now preserved in the Airlangga Museum at 
Kediri (figs. 19.1a and 1b). If this imposing artifact is a bathtub (as suggested by the hole 
on the bottom), it could have been used for (royal?) consecration rituals; if it is a sar­
cophagus, it could have hosted the corpse of a prominent religious master, as in Hindu-​
Buddhist Java inhumation was reserved to saintly persons only.9 The candrakapāla has 
been interpreted as a Śaiva symbol connected with the gradual growth in popularity 
of Bhairava cults in East Java since that period (Hadi Sidomulyo in Robson and Hadi 
Sidomulyo 2021, 150–​151). This popularity is also attested by the earliest epigraphic men­
tion of a Bhairava royal priest (paṅajyan śrī mahārāja) “follower of the Nyāyadarśana, 
producing prosperity, following the way of the Bhairavas, leader among yogins”10 in the 
stone inscription of Ngantang dated to 1135 ce, at the beginning of the reign of Jayabhaya 
Dharmeśvara, Bāmeśvara’s successor. The royal priest, called an instrument or cause of 
prosperity (samṛddhikāraṇa), is mentioned after the king, suggesting that he retained a 
prominent role in the court.
While literary sources datable to this period are lacking, the kakavin Ghaṭotkacāśraya 
by Mpu Panuluh, ascribable to the reign of Kṛtajaya (1194–​1205 ce), is remarkable from 
the point of view of religious persuasion as it attributes a prominent position to Durgā 
in the narrative. It even devotes its hymn of praise (canto 31), proffered by Abhimanyu, 
to Durgā in her manifestation as Bhairavī, conceived of as the highest immaterial 
being and source of life for all beings. Just like other divinities of the Hindu pantheon, 
Durgā in the East Javanese period often takes on a demonic quality accentuating the 
fierce and bloodthirsty aspects known from the forms of the goddess, such as Kālī, 
Figure 19.1a.  Stone sarcophagus, Airlangga Museum, Kediri, East Java.
Figure 19.1b.  Detail of the candrakapāla motif carved on the sarcophagus.
Image courtesy of Hadi Sidomulyo.

--- PAGE 456 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      431
 
known from hard-​core tantric traditions of the Indian subcontinent.11 In canto 30.8 
of the Ghaṭotkacāśraya, Durgā partakes with excitement of the offering of human 
flesh brought by her devotee Karālavaktra; the goddess’s abode up on the mountain is 
characterized by a cremation ground ambiance (30.6cd). This passage contains echoes 
of the trope, found in Sanskrit literary sources, of the adept (usually a Kāpālika) offering 
human flesh to Bhairava or the Goddess in a charnel ground at night.12
A significant landmark in the religious iconography of East Java is the depiction of 
skulls (in relief) on the pedestal of the so-​called Boro Gaṇeśa statue from Blitar, which 
also holds a skull-​cup in his left hand; the statue is dated by an inscribed chronogram that 
can be interpreted as yielding a date between 1219 and 1259 ce, that is to the Kuṭa Rāja/​
early Siṅhasāri period (Edi Sedyawati 1994, 116). It is still debated whether the skulls 
carved on the pedestal of this icon are coeval with the icon itself,13 as statues belonging 
to the type “Gaṇeśa with skulls” can be mainly traced back to the reign of Siṅhasāri King 
Kṛtanagara (r. 1265–​1292 ce) of the Rājasa dynasty and its aftermath (figs. 19.2a, 2b, 
and 2c). However, this iconographic detail might very well have originated from 
the period preceding Kṛtanagara: if we match this visual evidence with the above-​
mentioned inscriptional and textual evidence, it does not seem unreasonable to 
assume that hard-​core tantric traditions revolving around the cult of Bhairava, and in­
spired by the “charnel ground” religious culture, existed as esoteric palatine religious 
undercurrents in that period, and influenced elite expressions of visual and literary 
Figure 19.2a.  Gaṇeśa brought over from Jimbe, pendopo pavilion, Boro, Blitar district, East 
Java 1219–​59.
Figure 19.2b.  Gaṇeśa of Candi Sinhgosari, East Java, now kept at the Leiden Museum of 
Ethnology.
Figure 19.2c.  Gaṇeśa, reportedly from the Surabaya region (fourteenth–​fifteenth century?), 
now kept at Museum Nasional Republik Indonesia, Jakarta.
Photo: Isidore van Kinsbergen, public domain. http://​hdl.han​dle.net/​10934/​RM0​001.COLL​ECT.453​770
Photo: author.

--- PAGE 457 ---
432      Andrea Acri
 
culture. Indeed, the Mūla Maluruṅ inscription issued by Viṣṇuvardhana in 1255 ce 
(Hadi Sidomulyo 2010, 107; plate III.b.3) mentions, apparently in a position of promi­
nence at court, the “great priest of the Bhairava religious denomination” (sthāpaka riṅ 
kabhairavan) Ḍaṅ Ācārya Astrarāja Patipati.
East Java: Siṅhasāri and Majapahit 
(ca. 1265–​Fifteenth Century)
Icons of Bhairava are found in East Java from the thirteenth century onward, in con­
comitance with the explosion in religious iconography of horrific aesthetic motifs asso­
ciated with the “charnel ground culture” of the Śaiva Bhairavatantras and the Buddhist 
Yoginītantras, as well as a progressive demonization of visual representations of divine 
figures in East Javanese art (figs. 19.3a, 3b, and 3c). The expansion and wider application 
of a demonic and transgressive set of iconographic features becomes dominant during 
the reign of Kṛtanagara, a sovereign of cosmopolitan outlook that was known to em­
ploy foreign (i.e., Newar and Eastern Indian) artists, as suggested by the inscriptions in 
Indian script engraved on several statues as well as their Indian/​Nepalese iconograph­
ical influences. The full manifestation of this peculiar iconography under Kṛtanagara 
may be due to reasons that may be mainly political in nature—​namely, his initiation into 
hard-​core currents of Buddhist and Śaiva tantra and the dissemination of statues across 
his reign (even as far as Central Sumatra) as a reaction to the diplomatic and military 
confrontation with Mongol Emperor Kublai Khan of the Yuan dynasty.
Among the statuary attributed to Kṛtanagara, some of the deities hosted at the Śaiva 
Candi Singhosari stand out for their exquisite craftmanship and their characteristic 
pedestals surrounded by eight skulls. Skulls are found in abundance especially in the 
icons of Bhairava (figs. 19.3a, 3b, and 3c) and Gaṇeśa (figs. 19.2a, 2b, and 2c)—​on hands, 
ear, and body ornaments: diadems, garments, and headdresses. Similarly, skulls are 
carved on several other statues of the Siṅhasāri and Majapahit periods, like the demonic 
guardians (dvārapāla) of Candi Singhosari and Candi Panataran, the colossal statue re­
ferred to as Totok Kerot, the Rāmāyaṇa reliefs of Candi Panataran, as well as some Kāla 
heads of East Javanese temples, such as Candi Singhosari, Candi Jago, and Candi Lima 
near Trowulan. Symbolizing death and the fear of death, as well as the wider religio-​
cultural complex of the charnel ground, the skull in India is considered inauspicious and 
impure, and yet powerful. Even if such pervasive depictions of skulls have few (if any) 
close parallels in the medieval art of the Indian subcontinent,14 the decorative use of 
skulls is a characterizing feature of the Bhairavatantras and the Buddhist Yoginītantras, 
like the Cakrasaṃvara, where it also symbolizes the mastering of death and the tran­
scendence of the mundane world (Gray 2005, 25). Thus, the flourishing of this peculiar 
iconography reveals an affiliation to transgressive, hard-​core tantric currents through a 
pervasive application of themes linked to the charnel ground culture and an associated

--- PAGE 458 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      433
 
ideology of power. Kṛtanagara’s conscious association with this ideology and ritual prac­
tice is further suggested by the fact that the Sanskrit inscription of Wurare dating from 
the late period of his reign (i.e., 1289), engraved on a statue of Mahākṣobhya (possibly 
representing the king himself: see Sinclair 2022), mentions the installation of this statue 
on the homonymous charnel ground (śmaśāne vurarenāmni, v. 13), which was already 
associated with the āśrama of the powerful royal guru and siddhācārya Mpu Bhāraḍa 
nearly three centuries before.15 From an impure and terrifying locale, the charnel ground 
of Wurare is here praised as an important seat of the sacred royal geography of East Java 
from the eleventh throughout the thirteenth century (see Chemburkar, this volume).
Besides reflecting these tantric ideals (and perhaps also resonating with local/​
indigenous belief), Kṛtanagara’s ideology and ritual praxis also had an eminently 
Figure 19.3a.  “Dancing Bhairava,” Candi Singhosari (thirteenth century), now kept at the 
Leiden Museum of Ethnology.
Figure 19.3b.  Statue of deity, holding the posture typical of a dvārapāla, identified as Bhairava 
(late thirteenth—​early fourteenth century?), East Java, now at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 
Frederick L. Jack Fund, Acc. Nr. 1972.951.
Figure 19.3c.  Mukhaliṅga with the demonic architectural element known as caviri in pre­
modern Java (corresponding to the kīrtimukha in India) and as the ritual mask barong in Bali; 
this is likely to be a “localized” theriomorphic manifestation of Bhairava. The liṅga, bearing 
the inscribed date 1283 śaka/​1361 ce, is reportedly from the Malang region, and is now kept at 
Museum Nasional Republik Indonesia, Jakarta.
Photo: author.
Photo: courtesy of the Museum of Fine Arts Boston, public domain

--- PAGE 459 ---
434      Andrea Acri
 
practical function (i.e., the protection of the state).16 This ideology and ritual practice, 
emphasizing protective and/​or aggressive violence, were the hallmarks of hard-​core tan­
tric traditions of the late phase of tantric Buddhism and were closely intertwined with 
the troubled political situation of the period. It needs, therefore, to be contextualized 
against the background of the coeval adoption of state-​protection tantric magic in many 
contemporary Asian kingdoms. Association of monarchs with antinomian and martial 
forms of tantric Buddhism was common from the twelfth to the fourteenth centuries 
and beyond across the Buddhist world.17 Various sovereigns appear to have been eager 
to be initiated into tantric systems dominated by wrathful and martial esoteric Buddhist 
deities like Mahākāla or Heruka/​Hevajra, which were worshiped as the protectors of 
various kingdoms and as powerful icons ensuring success on the battlefields.18
As argued by Hadi Sidomulyo (2010, 98), the major shift in religious orientation de­
tectable after Kṛtanagara’s accession to the throne noted by Hunter (2007, 38) “should 
probably be linked in part to the threat posed by the Mongol emperor Kublai Khan in the 
last quarter of the 13th century.” This concern is hinted at in passages of the Deśavarṇana 
(Cantos 42 and 43) by Mpu Prapañca, which praise the sovereign as “more and more 
energetic in his policy” (makin atiyatna riṅ naya) in view of the difficulty to protect the 
world in the age of Kali (kevәh iṅ bhuvanarakṣaṇa gavayәn i kālaniṅ kalī), as a result 
of which “he held fast to esoteric doctrines and observances” (nimittaniran aṅrәgәp 
samaya len brata) of the Buddhists (Robson 1995, 155). Kṛtanagara was deemed a “god-​
king” (devaprabhū), “very energetic in the rites for application of magic” (mahotsāheṅ 
prayogakriyā, 43.4).
Further evidence of Kṛtanagara’s eclectic adherence to both Śaiva and Buddhist tan­
tric systems for political purposes, and his interest in “war magic,” is provided by textual 
and epigraphic references. The Deśavarṇana makes clear that the fear-​inspiring “divine 
embodiment” of Kṛtanagara (kadevamūrtin, probably a statue of the sovereign, or a ref­
erence to his own persona as a “divine incarnation,” 41.5)19 was instrumental in the defeat 
of the Malay kingdoms of Sumatra (malayu). The Sukhāmṛta copper plate inscription 
(1296 ce; Poerbatjaraka 1940, 33–​49) mentions the manifestation of Kṛtanagara’s “divine 
nature” (kadevātmakan) as a powerful means to terrorize and subdue his enemies, and 
mentions an ācārya whose consecration name (mapuṣpapāta) was astrarāja (“Chief of 
Weapons”), which suggests that his duties included war rituals (Jákl 2020, 36).20 The 
same inscription refers to the special patronage accorded by Kṛtarājasa (aka Raden 
Wijaya, r. 1293–​1309) to Ḍaṅ Hyaṅ Astrarāja’s son, Mpu Kapat, a bhujaṅga priest of Śaiva 
persuasion (bhujaṅga śaivapakṣa) adhering to the Bhairava observance (bhairavabrata) 
bearing the court name (pañji) Patipati, whose father already served Kṛtanagara in the 
same capacity. Hunter (2007, 35–​36) argued that Kṛtanagara may have patronized the 
family of Patipati because of its role as instructors in Bhairavika Śaivism, which assisted 
the ruler in the art of warfare.
Another association with martial magical empowerment is suggested by an unu­
sual iconographical feature of the statues of deities facing the main directions at Candi 
Singhosari (i.e., Nandīśvara and Mahākāla [east], Durgā [north], and Gaṇeśa [west]—​
the ascetic Agastya [south] being the exception), namely, the short sleeveless “military

--- PAGE 460 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      435
 
jacket” (kavaca), which according to Stutterheim (1936, 308–​309), has a magically 
protective function. An analogous martial character may be detected in the Cāmuṇḍī 
group probably originating from Candi Singhosari, now preserved at the Trowulan 
Museum. This badly damaged group is interesting for preserving a Sanskrit invocation 
in Devanāgarī script identifying the deity as Cāmuṇḍī (instead of the more common 
form Cāmuṇḍā), one of the “Eight Mothers” (aṣṭamātṛkās) worshiped by Hindus in me­
dieval Northern India and Nepal, which is otherwise scantly attested in Javanese art; 
for including among the retinue of the central figure of the goddess what look like min­
iature replicas of the Singhosari Bhairava and Gaṇapati; and for a unique depiction of 
the guru Matsyendranātha, a figure associated with the Nātha-​Siddha lineage as well 
as Kaula Śaivism (Lunsingh Scheurleer 2008, 292, n. 21). Hariani Santiko (1997, 217), 
having noted that in Bengal Cāmuṇḍī was associated with vaśīkaraṇa (“subjugation”) 
rituals aiming at defeating enemies (śatrubali), hypothesized a connection between 
this sculptural group and analogous rituals directed toward Kṛtanagara’s archenemy 
Kublai Khan. Although speculative, this interpretation would not be out of place given 
the link between the religious and political sphere in Kṛtanagara’s milieu. Invocations to 
Cāmuṇḍā also occur in mantras associated with the tantric magical acts of vaśīkaraṇa 
and uccāṭaṇa (“expulsion”) in the Saṃvarodaya, a Buddhist tantra belonging to the 
Cakrasaṃvara cycle, in a context belonging to the cult of śmaśāna containing an invoca­
tion to the wrathful Mahākāla (Tsuda 1996, 102).21
Kṛtanagara and Kublai Khan may have been engaged in a ritual war that extended 
beyond the one they fought on the battlefields in the final years of their reigns. Kublai 
Khan received initiation into the Hevajratantra and other transgressive tantric sys­
tems revolving around wrathful deities associated with state-​protection Buddhism, 
and equated himself to one such fierce martial deity, for instance a form of Mahākāla 
(possibly a precursor of Gonpo Gur/​*Pañjaranātha) transmitted by the Tibetan Sakya 
Pa order. Kṛtanagara is likely to have received initiation into similar systems. The im­
portance of Mahākāla in the Buddhist system adhered to by Kṛtanagara is evidenced 
by a colossal statue found at Padang Roco in Central-​Western Sumatra, which has pre­
viously been regarded as a Bhairava or a “Buddhist Bhairava,” but which most likely 
represents a form of Mahākāla with some Śaiva iconographic contaminations (Acri and 
Wenta 2022). Having been associated with the Sumatran king of East Javanese pedi­
gree Ādityavarman (fl. ca. 1320–​1378), who consecrated an Amoghapāśa statue sent to 
Padang Roco by Kṛtanagara, it may be rather connected to Kṛtanagara himself in view 
of the iconographic resemblances with similar statues produced in East Java during 
the Siṅhasāri period.22 This icon, presenting some iconographic features that prefigure 
those of the “deification statues” of elite persons in the Majapahit period, might rep­
resent an early example of such statues, representing Kṛtanagara himself. The sover­
eign was also represented, postmortem, as a deified Śiva-​Buddha at Candi Siṅhasāri 
(Deśavarṇana 43.5), as a Buddha (jina) at Sagala, and as an Ardhanareśvarī-​cum-​
Bajradevī and Vairocana-​cum-​Locanā, and possibly also at Candi Jawi while he was 
still alive, as the Deśavarṇana (56.1) appears to say that he himself was embodied there 
in material form (sirāṅadhiṣṭita śarīra tan hana vaneh).23 The “syncretic” Candi Jawi,

--- PAGE 461 ---
436      Andrea Acri
 
where both Śaivas and Buddhists used to worship during Kṛtanagara’s reign, indeed 
hosted a Śiva statue with an Akṣobhya icon in the headdress above the crown, just like 
the Mahākāla of Padang Roco.
Old Javanese poems composed in the East Javanese period betray an interest in deities 
and motifs associated with hard-​core tantric traditions. A description, recalling the 
above-​mentioned episode of Karālavaktra and Durgā-​Brairavī in the Ghaṭotkacāśraya, 
of the Buddhist goddess Bhairavī/​Vidyutkarālī appearing to Prince Sutasoma 
meditating on corpses in a charnel ground is found in passage spanning cantos 9.5–​12.4 
of the Buddhist kakavin Sutasoma by Mpu Tantular, composed between 1365 and 1389 
ce. References to the fierce and demonic aspects of the goddess are occasionally found 
in Sanskrit stutis preserved in Balinese manuscripts. The Aṣṭakamantra/​Durgāstava, 
an impressive twenty-​four-​verse-​long Sanskrit hymn of antinomian character divided 
into three parts, is entirely dedicated to the fear-​inspiring manifestation of the Goddess, 
who is addressed as Kālī, Bhadrakālī, Kālarātrī, Kāpālinī, Karālī, Cāmuṇḍā, and Durgā, 
among other appellatives. While the hymn cannot be dated with certainty, it may be ei­
ther a product or an import of the Siṅhasāri-​Majapahit period.
The demonic form of Durgā is displayed in the reliefs of two temples built in the 
Majapahit period, Candi Tegowangi (Ni Wayan Ariati 2016, 120–​144) and Candi Sukuh, 
as well as in a small number of free-​standing statues, such as the one from Candi Rimbi 
(Lunsingh Scheurleer 2000, 197), and the one now kept at the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam 
(Lunsingh Scheurleer 1998, 421; fig. 7). The above-​mentioned reliefs are connected to the 
Middle Javanese text Sudamala, focusing on purification and exorcism (ruvat)—​a ritual 
practice that has survived in Java and Bali to today. In the story, Umā is cursed by Śiva 
for having committed adultery; having become the demonic Durgā, she was called Ra 
Nini and sentenced to reside in a cremation ground for twelve years along with her ret­
inue (Ni Wayan Ariati 2016, 130). Ra Nini may be a “localization” of one of the terrifying 
forms of the goddess known in Indian tradition: indeed, the mention of a twelve-​year 
expiation period is reminiscent of the twelve-​year funerary penance carried out by the 
Kāpālikas to recast the same observance performed by Bhairava to expiate the sin of 
Brahmanicide resulting from the cutting of Brahmā’s fifth head. Furthermore, the name 
of Ra Nini’s follower, Kālikā, corresponds to that of the manifestation of Durgā known 
from South Asian Sanskrit literature and may have been inspired by a Śākta, Bhairavika, 
or Kaula milieu. The figure of Kālikā conforms to that of a practitioner assuming the 
traits of its demonic iṣṭadevatā, having traits in common with a yoginī/​ḍākinī/​bhaginī 
type known from Sanskrit literature. In the Middle Javanese Calon Araṅ (ch. 3, p. 121), 
we find a description of a wild dance performed in a charnel ground by the witch Calon 
Araṅ and her disciples, along with a ritual in which she brings a corpse back to life. The 
witch washes her hair with the blood of the corpse and fabricates a necklace and caste-​
cord with its intestines of the corpse, then she cuts its head and offers it to the goddess 
(bhagavatī) to provoke an epidemic in the kingdom. These actions are reminiscent of a 
tantric black magical procedure (abhicāra).
Bhairava is a well-​codified figure in the East Javanese literary landscape. Kakavins 
often equate demons to Bhairava(s)—​using the adjectival or verbal form (m)abhairava,

--- PAGE 462 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      437
 
which according to Zoetmulder (1982, 249) means “frightful, terrible, terrifying”—​
and sometimes associate them with martial activities and war dances.24 In the 
Buddhist Sutasoma kakavin, Bhairava and his devotees are stereotypically linked to 
anthropophagic practices. For instance, the text characterizes the villain called Poruṣāḍa 
(the worldly counterpart of the Śaiva Mahākāla) as follows: “He grew more and more 
like a Bhairava as he devoured human beings and became king of the great demons” 
(makin ta ya mabhairavān maṅan ikaṅ nara makaratuniṅ mahāsura, 22.9b). In canto 
38.8, such practices as ritual worship and yoga, good and bad behavior (or pure and im­
pure practices, aśubhaśubhapravṛtti), along with the pure (or: purifying?) observances 
of the religious denomination adhering to the “Bhairavahood” (pakṣa bhairavatva), 
cause rebirth.
While the Sutasoma, loosely based on the Buddhist jātaka tale of the conversion 
of Poruṣāda, presents a moral and social critique of (stereotyped) hard-​core tantric 
practices involving cannibalism, violence, and so on, it also praises the ascetic and med­
itative practices carried out in charnel grounds.25 Its descriptions of those fear-​inspiring 
loci, like the one found in Canto 9.5bcd–​9.8ab, share the tropes that are commonplace in 
tantric sources from the Indian subcontinent, viz. practitioners meditating on Bhairava 
or Bhairavī amidst the remains of dismembered bodies and the wild animals feasting 
on them.26 Another passage of the same text (125.8–​125.11) describes the meditation of a 
Mahāyāna adept in a battlefield using a vividly gruesome imagery. This passage seem­
ingly hints at the tantric practice of vetālasādhana, namely, the supernatural power to 
resurrect corpses to use them as servants, as well as at the Buddhist practice, described 
in Sanskrit sources, of aśubhabhāvanā or “meditation on impurity,” to be conducted 
in the charnel ground (śmaśāna) by heroic renunciants (Gray 2006, 23). The monk’s 
sādhana is “not because he wishes to devour human flesh, not because he wishes to sat­
isfy himself with food and drink: his greatest concern is the oneness of the mind [ . . . ] 
his mind did not deviate as he waited for Lord Heruka to descend on earth.”27 The men­
tion of Heruka is noteworthy, as this wrathful deity—​emanating from Akṣobhya, and 
popular in the Cakrasaṃvara cycle—​is poorly attested in the Old Javanese corpus.
Besides the reference to a “religious official of the Śaiva order [following] the Bhairava-​
observance” (bhujaṅga śivapaksa bhairavabrata) in the above-​mentioned Sukhāmṛta 
copper plates (1296 ce) issued by Krtarājasa, other epigraphical and textual material 
suggested that the alliance between the political power and Bhairava priesthood con­
tinued from the Siṅhasāri to the Majapahit period. Interestingly, a religious official of 
the Bhairava denomination, Saṅ Ārya Vaṅśādhirāja, erected and consecrated a statue 
of Mañjuśrī in East Java (probably at or in the vicinity of Candi Jago) in 1343 ce (Kozok 
and van Rijn 2010, 142). Three religious figures, Ḍaṅ Ācārya Śivanātha,28 Smaranātha, 
and Agreśvara, are mentioned in the Manah-​i-​Manuk charter, issued under the reign of 
Hayam Vuruk (Śrī Rājasanagara, r. 1350–​1389), as being “of the Bhairava denomination, 
fully competent in the sciences of logic and grammar” (bhairavapakṣa nyāyavyākaraṇa-
śāstraparisamāpta; Pigeaud 1960, 104–​107).29
The popularity of the Bhairava cult is still detectable in the late Majapahit period 
and beyond. In the Koravāśrama (6, p. 60.33), an Old Javanese text probably composed

--- PAGE 463 ---
438      Andrea Acri
 
between the fifteenth and early sixteenth century, the Bhairava denomination is 
mentioned alongside boddha (Buddhism), sridanta (Śaivasiddhānta),30 maguru (=​ 
mahāguru?), and mahāpuṣpita, which I take to be a corruption for Mahāpāśupata, a 
term occurring in Sanskrit sources from the subcontinent as a synonym of Kāpālika, 
Kālamukhas, or Lākula Pāśupatas practicing the mahāvrata (Lorenzen 1991, 19, 107, 
151).31 The Tantu Paṅgәlaran, our best source of information on the Bhairava cur­
rent in Java from the fourteenth to the fifteenth century, documents an efflorescence 
of Bhairava cults that may have been the expression of the rural, noncourtly religious 
communities of the hermitages-​cum-​scriptoria known as mandalas and kabuyutans 
located in mountainous areas of Java.32 The text narrates that Śiva/​Bhaṭāra Guru 
manifested himself in the form of Mahāmpu Palyat, a bhujaṅga of the Śaiva denomi­
nation, who carried out tapas in a charnel ground in Kalyasәm on Mt Hyaṅ “according 
to the Bhairawa order, eating the corpses [of people]; he kept them cool and damp, 
and in the middle of the night he ate them.”33 Mahāmpu Palyat’s party meets the king 
of Galuh, carrying human meat: “The skull of people they used as a drinking cup, 
and bowls [ . . . ] served as their containers for keeping the corpses cool and damp.”34 
Disgusted by this view, the king vomits, and a priest of the king’s entourage advises 
him to put Mahāmpu Palyat to death, for “a wiku like that looks like a case of what 
is called brahmālokasanghāra, destruction of the realm of Brahmā.”35 But the ascetic 
reveals himself to be none other than God, and the king’s emissaries become his dis­
ciples. A similar episode is recounted with respect to the king’s elder son, who hears 
of a Brahmin of clerical rank (bhujaṅga) called Mpu Barang, following the Bhairava 
way, who eats corpses and drinks from people’s skulls in the Kalyasәm charnel ground 
(Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 2021, 53). The mention of the eating of human meat and 
drinking of human blood (among other impure bodily products) at night in a charnel 
ground is attested in Śaiva and Buddhist tantric sources from the Indian subconti­
nent as part of the “nocturnal-​vigilance” (niśāṭana or niśācāra—​the latter being also 
the name of a category of demonic beings, which were arguably “emulated” by the 
practitioners). Imaginal elements aside, these accounts agree remarkably well with co­
eval epigraphic evidence, and Hadi Sidomulyo sees them as preserving elements of his­
torical truth about the adoption of Bhairava traditions by the Javanese royalty from the 
Keḍiri period onward (Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 2021, 150–​151).
A visual and architectural expression of the same local reconfigurations of the 
Bhairava cult that informed the Tantu Paṅgәlaran may be the graphically erotic and 
transgressive fifteenth-​century Candi Sukuh and Candi Cetho on Mount Lawu on the 
border between Central and East Java (fig. 19.4). Both complexes are characterized by 
statues and reliefs of demons as well as deities—​Bhīma, Garuḍa, Gaṇapati, Durgā, and 
so on—​displaying demonic traits and a charnel ground ambiance (Duijker 2010, 219), 
as well as scenes based on the Sudamala and Calon Araṅ stories. This strikingly horrific 
iconography constitutes a unicum in Javanese art, and it probably reflects the icono­
graphical and architectural project of the temple, which revolves around the concept of 
purification and empowerment.

--- PAGE 464 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      439
 
Diagnostic of a “localized” Bhairavika Tantrism may also be the “Bhīma cult” that 
flourished in Java (and Bali) in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Stutterheim (1956, 
117–​118) identified the figure of Bhīma as a conflation between the demonic, skull-​
bearing ascetic Bhairava (of identical meaning, “the terrible/​frightful”) and the popular 
Pāṇḍava hero of the Mahābhārata.36 Bhīma is the protagonist of a cycle of ca. fifteenth–​
sixteenth-​century Middle Javanese narrative-​cum-​philosophical texts narrating his 
Figure 19.4.  Candi Sukuh, Central-​East Java, temple (top left) and details of reliefs.
Photo: author.

--- PAGE 465 ---
440      Andrea Acri
 
mystical journey toward self-​purification and enlightenment, such as the Navaruci 
(and the related Bhīmasuci) and the Bhīmasvarga (Aditia Gunawan 2019). This cycle 
constitutes a common plot for old as well as modern puppet (wayang) narratives and 
performances. In Javanese literature and wayang lore, Bhīma is associated with features 
that are remindful of demons in general, and of Bhairava in particular: for instance, he 
indulges in drunkenness and sexual promiscuity; he eats anything without discrimina­
tion; he speaks only the low register of Javanese language; he is said to have stayed in the 
Gaṇḍamayu cemetery, the abode of Durgā; his behavior is inclined to violence and rage; 
he wears snake-​bracelets and sports an erect penis (Stutterheim 1956, 124). A passage 
from the Navaruci describes the incarnation of Bhaṭāra Guru—​who is later revealed 
to be no one else than Bhīma indeed—​as having similar characteristics, for example, 
paying no attention to his diet, laughing violently, eating his own body, and drinking 
his own blood.37 The references to Bhīma as paying no attention to his diet—​veiledly 
hinting at anthropophagy—​and also practicing self-​anthropophagy call to mind the no­
torious dietary habits of the Pāśupatas and Kāpālikas.38
Vestiges of Hard-​Core Tantra in Early 
Modern Javanese Texts and Practices
The key themes of hard-​core tantric traditions discussed above, including transgres­
sion, power, and nondualism, were deeply engrained in Javanese society, in both the 
countryside and the centers of political power, so much so that they did not disappear 
after Islamization but survived as an undercurrent, in a reconfigured manner, through 
the Islamic period to the present. Even the symbolical association of the “left-​handed” 
(kiwa, pangiwa) with “bad, wicked, sinister, inherently condemnable” (as well as the 
pre-​Islamic, Hindu-​Buddhist order), as opposed to “right-​handed,” tĕngĕn, panĕṅĕn, 
associated with “good, virtuous, praiseworthy” (as well as the Islamic order: see Arps 
2019, 315, 317, 327) that is still recognized in Modern Javanese culture could ultimately 
reflect a convergence between the Indic dichotomy of vāma and dakṣiṇa, which is also 
applied to “left-​hand” and “right-​hand” tantric practices and an ancestral dualistic out­
look widespread among Malayo-​Polynesian language-​speaking societies of insular 
Southeast Asia.
Nineteenth-​century suluk mystical texts in Modern Javanese attest to the trope of 
mystics “acting like Bhairava” (mañjing ambirawa), that is, engaging in radical and an­
tinomian behaviors transgressing moral, social, dietary, and religious rules; behaving 
like madmen or ill-​mannered children and consuming forbidden foods; and upholding 
unorthodox monistic views, thereby becoming “one with Bhairava” and identifying 
with God (Acri 2019).39 Although these views do have counterparts in the Sufi traditions 
that influenced Javanese mysticism, they are too specific to constitute direct borrowings 
from Sufism and are rather to be viewed as survivals of pre-​Islamic tantric currents

--- PAGE 466 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      441
 
(Acri 2019; Zoetmulder 1994). Indeed, the form ambhairava is attested in Tantu 
Paṅgәlaran 118.11: ambhairava ta sira, siṅ paṅan tan ana linivatan denira, “He [the master 
Mpu Baraṅ] followed the way of life of a Bhairava (or: of the Bhairava sect), eating an­
ything without passing it over” (Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 2021, 284). It is also used 
in another premodern Old Javanese source, the Tutur Raṇayajña (probably composed 
or recompiled in Bali and containing material on rules of conduct and observances of 
men of religion), to describe an ascetic devoted to Bhairavī (viku bheravi) as “one who 
takes up/​behaves like one of the Bhairava denomination within the Buddhist religion” 
(ambhiravipakṣa kabhudayan [=​ kabuddhan?]), who performs a war-​dance (aśrama) in 
a charnel ground (śamasana) (p. 24). The expression mabharawa (=​ mabhairava) was 
still recorded by Lovric (1986, 73) to be in use in late-​twentieth-​century Bali to refer 
to the high level of spiritual elevation of a pedanda Siwa (Śaiva high priest) who took 
on “terrible and demonic powers” and reached the “transcendence of human nature, 
needs and motivation.” Such pedanda,40 before being ordained, had allegedly lay in a 
graveyard at night, assuming the form of the evil witch Rangda, and consumed a corpse, 
without fear. According to another source, a pendanda “had pursued the ‘left-​hand’ path 
(pangiwa) and had become bharawa, but had not deviated to the dangerous path of de­
struction” (Lovric 1986, 73).
The Tantu Paṅgәlaran may have played the role of a textual bridge between the Hindu 
and Islamic traditions in Java, for it contains various motifs that appear to have been 
reused in modern Javanese Islamic texts. These “threads of information” may “help us 
to establish a line of continuity, linking the age of the Hindu-​Javanese mandala with that 
of the early Islamic period” (Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 2021, 77–​78). For instance, 
the text relates the story of a certain Aji Uṇḍal of Daha who, refusing to acknowledge 
the authority of his religious superior, one night initiated a pupil, unaware that the cer­
emony was witnessed by a group of slaves accompanied by a black dog (note that the 
black dog is the vehicle, and symbol of, Bhairava). Each one of them, including the dog, 
became at once a devaguru, with the right to establish their own religious communities. 
The newly ordained vikus then “proceeded to attract disciples indiscriminately, 
imparting the message: ‘Do whatever you want; eat anything without exception; take a 
wife; there is no necessity to make offerings, to worship or fast, to know the scriptures 
or to be taught about anything, just think of yourself as the Lord’ ” (Robson and Hadi 
Sidomulyo 2021, 77).
The hedonistic and at the same time radically monistic message of the passage quoted 
above is in harmony with analogous teachings attributed to Kāpālikas and Kaulas 
practitioners in India, whose classical descriptions usually included derisive expositions 
of hedonistic doctrines “more suitable for a Cārvāka or Lokāyatika than a Kāpālika” 
(Lorenzen 1991, 47).41 It also echoes similar passages contained in the Old Javanese 
Śaiva text Dharma Pātañjala, where they represent the false teachings of an opponent 
(pūrvapakṣa). The opponent, introduced by the Lord as a teacher whose doctrines 
cause one to fall in hell, upholds the monistic position that any persons—​including 
those who fabricate liṅgas, build temples, organize assemblies, or organize food-​ and 
drinking-​feasts—​are the loci where the Lord in his manifest form resides, and death

--- PAGE 467 ---
442      Andrea Acri
 
equals liberation; this view causes one to transgress the customary rules of conduct.42 
Other passages of the same text relate a materialistic doctrine prescribing the enjoy­
ment of food, riches, and women as a mark of “purity,” as well as the abandonment of 
observances.43 Such materialistic and hedonistic doctrines are labeled the “knowledge 
of Kāla”—​Kāla being the fierce, Rudra-​ or Bhairava-​like embodiment that the Lord takes 
up when He destroys the universe. Indeed, the text adds that the appearance of religious 
men teaching such a doctrine in the future will be a sign that the time of the great cosmic 
dissolution is approaching.44 This view can be compared to the above-​mentioned viku 
brahmālokasaṅhāra, the cause of the destruction of the realm of Brahmā, in the Tantu 
Paṅgәlaran.
As noted by Hadi Sidomulyo (in Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 2021, 77), the Aji Uṇḍal 
episode in the Tantu Paṅgәlaran “points to the presence of a heterodox current, which 
ran counter to accepted norms and probably aroused a measure of disapproval from 
the Hindu-​Javanese religious establishment” and finds an intriguing parallel in the 
doctrines and activities of the controversial sixteenth-​century Islamic saint known as 
Siti Jĕnar or Seh Lĕmah Abang, whose radically monistic teachings—​which bear traces 
of Indian influences (Zoetmulder 1994, 306–​307)—​were held in contempt by the court 
of Demak. Siti Jĕnar was regarded as having deemed himself God (i.e., adhered to a doc­
trine proclaiming the identity between man and God), and as preaching that heaven and 
hell are already here and now, that there is no recompense in a future heaven, and that 
prayer and ritual are useless. These views which again call to mind similar views upheld 
by Indian materialists, who denied karmic retribution and the effectiveness of religious 
undertakings.
Siti Jĕnar himself, like Aji Uṇḍal in the Tantu Paṅgәlaran, is regarded as having been 
accidentally initiated during the ordination ceremony of Sunan Kalijaga by the saint 
(wali) Sunan Bonang, and transformed from a worm to a human being “upon inad­
vertently gaining access to the ‘Great Mystery of the Supreme Being’ ” (Robson and 
Hadi Sidomulyo 2021, 77). Also worthy of note is the fact that one of the two demons 
escorting the functionary Ki Kabhayan-​panglayar to the former hermitage of Mpu 
Baraṅ, who is later initiated by the former as he obtains divine favor and spiritual power, 
and is referred to as the “Lord Guru”, is called (Ki) Lĕmah-​bang, just like Lĕmah Abang/​
Siti Jĕnar (Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 2021, 54). Furthermore, Siti Jĕnar is sentenced to 
death by a synod for his heretical, radically monistic doctrines (as well as for having re­
vealed them indiscriminately), but his corpse transforms into a reddish/​brown dog and 
manifests itself as a multicolored light representing God,45 thus revealing that Siti Jĕnar 
was in fact God; this echoes the passages of the Tantu Paṅgәlaran related above about 
the death sentence issued by the king against Mahāmpu Palyat, who reveals himself to 
be God, as well as the episode of the bhujaṅga Mpu Barang following the Bhairava way 
who is also sentenced to death by two Buddhist monks, and who revives each time, in 
the end revealing himself to be Parameśvara.
This motif also finds a counterpart in the story, narrated in the Islamic Sĕrat Cabolek, 
around the (likely fictitious) character of Ki Bĕbĕluk, who was sentenced to death 
during the kingdom of Pajang. According to Soebakin Soebardi (1975, 30), this character

--- PAGE 468 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      443
 
provides an “archetypical continuity” between Seh Siti Jĕnar and two other antinomian 
figures, Pangerang/​Sunang Panggung (also known as Malang Sumirang), and Haji 
Mutamakin. The former, as narrated in the Babad Jaka Tingkir, is followed by his dog 
everywhere, even in the mosque, which provokes a stir;46 attended by his dog during his 
trial and execution, Malang Sumirang writes his testament in the midst of the fire, that 
is, the eponymous antinomian suluk, which is carried in the dog’s mouth from the fire.47 
The latter, Haji Mutamakin, is a quintessential “heretic” described in the Sĕrat Cabolek 
(1.2) who, just like Siti Jĕnar, “disclosed esoteric knowledge, and revealed the secrets of 
the Science of Reality” (Soebakin Soebardi 1975, 66), for which he is executed, and who 
also breeds dogs, naming them after prominent Ulamas.48
According to Soebakin Soebardi (1975, 38), Mutamakin is related to the figure of Ṛṣi 
Visrava, a pre-​Islamic ascetic who, as recounted in the Modern Javanese Sĕrat Suluk, 
“was cursed by the gods because he drew aside the [Divine] veil and proclaimed himself 
to be God.” Indeed, while these heterodox Islamic characters and their teacher Siti Jĕnar 
have often been linked to the radical doctrines expounded by Sufis, and in particular 
the Persian mystic al-​Hallaj, who was executed for blasphemy, the idea of a direct link 
with, and influence by, al-​Hallaj’s theology (and, possibly, even his biography) has been 
persuasively problematized by various leading scholars of Javanese Islam (Feener 1998; 
Headley 2006; Zoetmulder 1994). These figures admit a more nuanced interpretation, 
presenting as they reflect striking continuities with pre-​Islamic heritage and themes 
associated in the Javanese imaginary to the same constellation of ideas representing 
the continuation of a resilient tantric ideology grounded on transgression and radical 
monism (converted to pantheism), which is associated with Rudra-​ and Bhairava-​
worshiping practitioners in the Indic imaginary.
Nonliterary evidence of the existence and survival in Java of Kāpālikas are the myste­
rious canthang balungs, a category of antinomian, low-​status functionaries observed at 
the court of Surakarta in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, who Brandts 
Buys (1933, 259) described as “degenerate Brahmans” (gedegenereerde Brahmanen). Their 
name, meaning “rattling bones,” could be a “survival” pointing to their ancient status of 
Kāpālikas, who were indeed wearing ornaments made of bones and carrying musical 
instruments made of the same material.49 The canthang balungs worn strings of flowers 
adorning their naked bodies—​being reminiscent of the garland of flowers offered to 
the gods (nirmālya) worn by Pāśupata ascetics; performed dances and buffooneries; 
emitted dog’s cries (and imitated their mating), nonsensical interjections, and vehement 
laughter; superintended female dancers (taledhek) who also doubled as prostitutes, 
and engaged in obscene acts on stage during their plays; indulged in drinking liquor 
on stage; held a staff or a pike; executed mudrās during their performances; and origi­
nally possessed seals of office depicting a phallus (a liṅga?) inside a heart-​shaped vulva, 
which are remindful of the heart-​shaped pubic plaques worn by ascetics in East Javanese 
art—​a motif that is also represented at Candi Panataran/​Singhosari and at Candi Sukuh. 
The canthang balungs’ most un-​Islamic and highly transgressive practices, as well as 
their Indic insignia, all conspire to identify them as localized Javanese “descendants” of 
Kāpālikas or Kāpālika-​like groups.

--- PAGE 469 ---
444      Andrea Acri
 
Notes
	 1.	 My definition differs from that of White (2003, 13–​14), which privileges sexualized ritual 
practice as the sole truly distinctive feature of South Asian Tantric traditions.
	 2.	 Just like their Indian relatives, these texts are difficult to date; however, since they dis­
play archaic doctrinal features, they are likely to be early, and may have informed the 
form of Śaivism that was prevalent in Central Java by the eighth–​ninth centuries. See my 
Introduction in Dharma Pātañjala, pp. 13–​16.
	 3.	 See Stutterheim 1956, 125, n. 44; Jordaan 1996, 73. On the possibility of human sacrifice 
having been practiced at Lara Jonggrang—​perhaps in a consecration ritual—​see Jordaan 
1996, 11–​14, 71–​73, and Jordaan and Wessing 1996.
	 4.	 ikiṅ kadi saṅva saṅhulun kṣatriya si pəjah iṅ raṇa ya paṅan inum ṅaranya; yapvan saṅ 
brāhmaṇa kāpālikabratānasi pinakopahāranira.
	 5.	 Although in nondualist Śaiva (as well as Buddhist) traditions release can be conceptualized 
as a state of supreme bliss, the erotic connotation (ānanda in Sanskrit can also mean ‘sexual 
enjoyment’ or ‘orgasm’) is hinted at by a number of sources: for instance, the Kulārṇavatantra 
(Ullāsa 8) mentions paramānanda in the context of the gaṇacakra (“tantric feast”), in 
which sexual rituals took place. See also Lorenzen 1991, 47, paraphrasing Ānandagiri’s 
Śaṅkaradigvijaya: “the joy (ānanda) of sexual union is the true form of Bhairava”.
	 6.	 This can also be evinced from one of the Kāpālikas’ denominations (i.e., Somasiddhāntins), 
“those following the doctrine (siddhānta) of he [i.e., Śiva] who is [united] with Umā (sa+​
umā),” also implying that the Kāpālikas’ ultimate goal was conceived as the union between 
the liberated adept (identified with Śiva) and Umā (Lorenzen 1991, 82–​83, 90). Törzsök 
(2020, 34) considers this interpretation rather forced, while admitting that “it is possible 
that the Kāpālikas themselves intended to make full use the natural polysemy of the word 
Soma, although it is less likely that such polysemy was intended from the very beginning.”
	 7.	 aśucir vā śucir vāpi sarvakāmagato ’pi vā /​ cintayed devam īśānam sabāhyābhyantaraḥ 
śuciḥ //​ 10
	 8.	 Cf., e.g., Kubjikāmatatantra 9.62 and 11.85; Sarvācāra and Vīrāvalī (quoted in 
Tantrālokaviveka 12.24 and Parātriṃśikavivaraṇa 266); Svacchandatantra 7.247cd–​
7.249; Tantrāloka 15.553cd–​554; Yoginīhṛdaya 199cd–​200ab, as well as the Kaula scripture 
Kulārṇavatantra 8.61cd, 9.55–​9.58, etc. Compare the Buddhist Hevajratantra 1.vi.20–​vi.21.
	 9.	 Compare the two similar inscribed artifacts (No. Inv. 392 k/​5236/​ D 193 and No. Inv. 392 g/​
4010/​ D 192), originally from East Java and now kept at the Museum Nasional Republik 
Indonesia (Jakarta), dated to respectively the eleventh century (śaka year 968) and the 
thirteenth century (Crucq 1929, 261–​262). According to Arlo Griffiths (personal commu­
nication), several such artifacts may be found in East Java.
	10.	 Brandes and Krom 1913, 68: mpuṅku naiyāyikadarśana samṛddhikāraṇa bhairava­
mārggānugamana yogīśvara.
	11.	 An iconographical example of Kālī is the statue, originally hailing from Tulunggagung 
(Kediri, East Java) and stylistically ascribable to the Siṅhasāri period, of the goddess 
holding a skull on her left hand, now kept at the Museum Nasional in Jakarta (No. Inv. 
154a/​3630).
	12.	 Cf. Mālatīmādhava of Bhavabhūti, mentioning the Kāpālika Aghoraghaṇṭa preparing to 
offer the heroine Mālatī to the Goddess Karālā—​a form of Cāmuṇḍā. The epithet karālī 
(as well as kapālinī) is attributed to the goddess embracing Heruka in ­chapter 13 of the 
Buddhist Saṃvarodayatantra (Tsuda 1996, 103–​104).

--- PAGE 470 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      445
 
	13.	 Pott (1962) deemed the skulls to have been added later, and this idea is approved by 
Lunsingh Scheurleer (2000, 193–​194), also on the ground that the statue “does not show 
any of the other iconographic features of the Gaṇeśa of Singasari”; however, the skull-​cup 
would appear to be among such significant (tantric) features.
	14.	 See Verardi 2018, 342, 360.
	15.	 For the text of the inscription, see Poerbatjaraka 1922.
	16.	 While admitting the importance of skulls as an ancestor-​related artistic motif throughout 
the Archipelago, Reichle (2007, 184, 208, 214) also stresses the political role of this im­
agery and its intersection with tantric ideologies (ibid., 8–​10, passim). On the other hand, 
Lunsingh Scheurleer (2000, 202) stresses the local elements.
	17.	 See Bautze-​Picron 2014, 107, 123; Hunter 2015, 324–​327; Reichle 2007, 139; and 
Sharrock 2022.
	18.	 Acri and Wenta 2022; Bautze-​Picron 2014, 123; 2016, 180; Bryson 2017; Weirong 2008.
	19.	 Deśavarṇana 41.5cd, ed. Pigeaud 1960, 31; cf. Sinclair 2022, 33.
	20.	 Jákl (2020, 36) translates the compound ācāryāstrarāja as “Master of Divine Weapons,” 
while Zoetmulder (1982, 147) glosses astrarāja as “king of arrows.” Such “divine weaponry” 
(divyāstra), ordinary weapons mantrified by tantric ācāryas were a well-​known arsenal in 
Old and Middle Javanese texts (Jákl 2020, 36).
	21.	 One of the transmitters of the Cakrasaṃvara according to the Indo-​Tibetan tradition was 
Matsyendranātha, who was equated to the Buddhist Lūyipa (Mallinson 2019, 272 n. 35; 
White 2007, 106–​107). The Cakrasaṃvara, dominated by Heruka, betrays a characteristic 
“bricolage,” incorporating as it does Śaiva deities, including Cāmuṇḍī (alias Cāmuṇḍā). 
For the form Cāmuṇḍī (rather than Cāmuṇḍā), see also the Buddhist Ḍākārṇava (a prob. 
tenth–​twelfth century Eastern Indian or Nepalese Tantra; Sugiki 2018, 81), and the Śaiva 
Mahāgaṇapatividyā (Sanderson 2007, 199–​200 n. 16).
	22.	 This form of Mahākāla may have been introduced to East Java by one of the Buddhist mas­
ters who traveled from the Indo-​Tibetan and Himalayan regions to China and vice versa, 
like Gautamaśrībhadra, an Eastern Indian paṇḍita who was active in Tibet and China, 
where—​as an initiate in the Kālacakra and other tantric traditions—​he influenced the reli­
gious paradigm at the court of Kublai Khan. Gautamaśrī left an inscription in the Karimun 
Islands off Sumatra in the second half of the thirteenth century, to record his passage 
(Sinclair 2019); although we do not know his destination (either China or India), he or one 
of his followers might very well have visited East Java, a major political, cultural, and reli­
gious powerhouse of the time.
	23.	 My interpretation differs from that of previous translators, who read aṅadhiṣṭhita in 
the meaning of “superintend” or “erect” (compare Zoetmulder 1982, 17, “superintended, 
appointed; superintending,” but uniquely on the basis of this passage and a 1360 ce in­
scription), while I interpret it as having a meaning akin to that of the Sanskrit adhiṣṭhita, 
“inhabited,” as well as the cognate Old Javanese aṅadhiṣṭhāna, inadhiṣṭhāna, “(intr.) to 
take one’s place in st. material, embody os. in; (tr.) to give a material support to, make 
st. enter into st. material, give a visible form to”; paṅadhiṣṭhānan, “that in which st. is 
embodied or made visible.”
	24.	 Cf. the early eleventh-​century Arjunavivāha (16.7–​16.8); the prose Ādiparva (32.14 and 
150.15); the Smaradahana (second half of the twelfth century, 30.4b); the Ghaṭotkacāśraya 
(32.16ab and 19bc; and the kakavin Kuñjarakarṇa by Mpu Ḍusun (8.3).
	25.	 Cf. the mention of “pure observances according to the denomination of Bhairava-​ness” 
(brata śuci pakṣa bhairavatva) in canto 38.8, as having positive karmic consequences.

--- PAGE 471 ---
446      Andrea Acri
 
	26.	 Cf., e.g., Saṃvarodayatantra ch. 17 on the eight śmaśānas (vv. 43 and 45cd, trans. Tsuda 
1996, 99); Vetālapañcaviṃśatikā of Somadeva (=​ Kathāsaritsāgara 12.8.43–​12.8.45), ibid., 
98. Cf. Gray 2006, 22–​23.
	27.	 Sutasoma 125.9b, 125.10d: tan saṅkeṅ naramāṅśa tan saka riṅ ambәk anuvukana bhoga 
bhojana jñānekatva ginə̄ ṅniran [ . . . ] ndātan simpaṅ ike manahnira sumādhya ri turuna 
bhaṭāra heruka.
	28.	 This figure might correspond to the Saṅ Ārya Vaṅśādhirāja Ḍang Ācārya Śivanātha 
mentioned in the pre-​1350 Nglawang charter, as well as the Saṅ Ārya Vaṅśādhirāja of the 
Mañjuśrī statue.
	29.	 That the form bhairavapakṣa is not to be understood in compound with 
nyāyavyākaraṇaśāstraparisamāpta is suggested by the fact that the (punctuated) sequence 
saṅ āryya [ . . . ], bhairavapakṣa, nyāyavyākaraṇaparisamāpta occurs three times in the 
Sekar copper-​plate inscription (c. 1358 ce), qualifying a series of Śaiva masters (Krom 1911).
	30.	 I follow Zoetmulder (1982, 1820) in interpreting the word sridanta (and its cognate 
kasridanta[pakṣa]), occurring multiple times in the Koravāśrama, as a synonym of 
siddhānta (representing either a Middle Javanese “Sanskritism”, or a scribal mannerism).
	31.	 Another possible emendation could be mapuṣpapāta, which is found in Siṅhasāri-​ and 
Majapahit-​period sources as indicating the initiation name (after the ritual of casting the 
flower on the mandala); however, in the present context, I deem this possibility to be less 
likely, also because the initiation name does not appear after this word.
	32.	 See Robson and Sidomulyo 2021, 137–​140: “as the historical record seems to indicate, 
the influence and prestige of the ṛṣi communities tended to increase during the four­
teenth and fifteenth centuries, it would not be surprising to find them commissioning 
monuments and sculpture of a high standard, perhaps under royal patronage.” Compare p. 
74: “As already observed by Th. Pigeaud, the ascetic communities described in the T[antu]
P[aṅgәlaran] probably lay for the most part outside the sphere of court influence and had 
little interest in royalty.”
	33.	 Tantu Paṅgәlaran, p. 105: bheravapakṣa lkasnira, amaṅan śavaniṅ vvaṅ, inayǝmnira taṅ 
śava, tatkala tṅah vṅi siran panaḍah, trans. Robson, in Robson and Sidomulyo 2021, 47.
	34.	 Tantu Paṅgәlaran, p. 105: kaphalaniṅ vvaṅ pinakatahapanira lavan kaṇṭora [ . . . ] yata 
makavaḍahnirā ṅayǝm śavaniṅ vvaṅ, trans. Robson, in Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 
2021, 47.
	35.	 Tantu Paṅgәlaran, p. 106: sāskṣāt brahmālokasaṅhāra ṅaraniṅ viku maṅkana, trans. 
Robson, in Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 2021, 48.
	36.	 Pace Duijker (2010, containing a detailed study of the East Javanese Bhīma and its ico­
nography), I see no compelling reasons to cast doubt on Stutterheim’s view. On the cult of 
Bhīmasena identified as Bhairava in Nepal, see Bühnemann 2013.
	37.	 See, for instance, Navaruci p. 53.2–​53.10 (translated in Acri 2014, 50), a passage that the 
editor and translator Prijohoetomo deemed to be corrupt, arguably on account of its enig­
matic and sinister content.
	38.	 Cf. Pāśupatasūtra 5.32 and Pañcārthabhāṣya on 5.30 on the practice of feeding with what­
ever the adept may find—​that is, food acquired by chance (yathālabdha), in a charnel 
ground. The early thirteenth-​century East Javanese kakavin Sumanasāntaka 13.6 describes 
an ascetic practicing a concealed observance (viku gūḍha) as eating his food on a rubbish 
heap (mamaṅan tәḍa riṅ pahәhan) and declaring that “there is no food that is not pure—​
anything that can be eaten [is pure]” (tan tәḍa tan śuci ta pva sahanahananiṅ pinaṅan).

--- PAGE 472 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      447
 
	39.	 See, e.g., Leiden Cod. Or. 1795 II (Zoetmulder 1995, 228); Suluk Malang Sumirang, stanza 
3 (Acri 2019, 291); Sĕrat Cabolek, 11.7–​11.8; Suluk Linglung/​Suluk Seh Melaya II, 6.47–​6.48 
(Acri 2019, 293); Suluk Seh Amongraga, 4.22–​4.23 (Acri 2019, 295).
	40.	 Here the author is almost certainly referring to the famous Ida Pedanda Made Sidemen 
(1878–​1984).
	41.	 See also Lorenzen 1991, 48, 62, 68, 88, 89, 217.
	42.	 Dharma Pātañjala, 266.2–​266.9.
	43.	 Dharma Pātañjala, 252.3–​252.6; 304.20–​306.3; 332.16–​334.2.
	44.	 Dharma Pātañjala, 206.14–​208.2. A similar view, defining materialism as the “knowledge/​
doctrine of Kāla”, is found in the Sanskrit-​Old Javanese Śaiva text Mahājñāna, exegesis ad 
śloka 27 (which is, regrettably, corrupt beyond repair): “There is the knowledge of Kāla. 
The knowledge of the agitated among men, that is the knowledge of Kāla. That is the cause 
of experiencing [the cycle of rebirth]. There is the ignorance that makes men entitled to 
be in the cycle of rebirth, as they come back again and again in the world of incarnated 
beings” hana saṅ kālajñāna ṅaranya /​ vruhnya ri kagivaṅsaṅ puruṣa /​ yeka saṅ kālajñāna 
ṅaranya /​ nimittaniṅ manәmvakәn /​ hana ta ajñāna humādhikārākәn kasaṅsāran saṅ 
puruṣa /​ an pavalivali riṅ janmaloka.
	45.	 On the analogies of this image with descriptions of Śiva and the colors associated to his 
different faces or manifestations, see Acri 2019, 299–​301.
	46.	 Sĕrat Cabolek 22.35–​22.36, 23.2; cf. Florida 1995, 206–​207.
	47.	 Sĕrat Cabolek 34.5; cf. Florida 1995, 213, 368–​370.
	48.	 Sĕrat Cabolek 1.8–​9; 3.23–​24, 26, 4.36, 8.8.
	49.	 On the connection between the canthang balungs and Kāpālika or Pāśupata practitioners, 
see Acri 2014; Becker 2004; and Stutterheim 1956.
References
Primary Sources
Ādiparva. 1906. Âdiparwa: Oudjavaansch prozageschrift. Edited by Hendrik H. Juynboll. ’s-​
Gravenhage: Nijhoff.
Agastyaparva. 1933. “Agastyaparwa: Een Oud-​Javaansch proza-​geschrift.” Bijdragen tot de 
Taal-​, Land-​ en Volkenkunde [Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia 
and Oceania] 90: 329–​419.
Arjunavivāha. 2008. Arjunawiwāha: The marriage of Arjuna of Mpu Kaṇwa. Edited and 
translated by Stuart O. Robson. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Aṣṭakamantra/​Durgāstava. See Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971.
Bhuvanakośa. [1]‌ Forthcoming. draft of a critical edition by Andrea Acri based on Balinese 
palm-​leaf mss. [2] 1991. Roman transcript, with an Indonesian translation, by a team 
headed by I Gusti Ngurah Rai Mirsha, printed by Pusat Dokumentasi Budaya Bali, Dinas 
Kebudayaan Propinsi Bali, Denpasar.
Calon Araṅ: De Calon-​Arang. 1926. Bijdragen tot de Taal-​, Land-​ en Volkenkunde 82: 110–​180.
Deśavarṇana (Nāgarakṛtāgama). 1960. Java in the 14th Century: A Study in Cultural History. 
The Nāgara-​Kěrtāgama by Rakawi Prapañca of Majapahit, 1365 A.D. I: Javanese texts in 
Transcription, by Theodore G. Th. Pigeaud. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.

--- PAGE 473 ---
448      Andrea Acri
 
Dharma Pātañjala. [2011] 2017. Dharma Pātañjala. A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied 
in the Light of Related Old Javanese and Sanskrit Texts. Edited and translated by Andrea Acri. 
2nd ed. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Ghaṭotkacāśraya. 2016. TKakawin Ghaṭotkacāśraya. Edited and translated by Stuart O. 
Robson. Tokyo: Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo 
University of Foreign Studies.
Hevajratantra. 1959. The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study, Part 2: Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts. 
Edited and translated by David L. Snellgrove. London: Oxford University Press.
Koravāśrama. 1936. Korawāśrama: een Oud-​Javaansch proza-​geschrift, uitgegeven, vertaald en 
toegelicht. Edited and translated by. J. L. Swellengrebel. Leiden: Rijksuniversiteit.
Kubjikāmatatantra. 1998. Kubjikāmatatantra, Kulālikāmnāya Version. Edited by Teun 
Goudriaan and Jan Schoterman. Leiden: Brill.
Kulārṇavatantra. 1975. Edited by Tāranātha Vidyāratna, with an introduction by Arthur 
Avalon. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Kuñjarakarṇa kakavin. 1981 Kuñjarakarṇa Dharmakathana: Liberation through the Law of the 
Buddha; An Old Javanese Poem by Mpu Dusun. Edited and translated by Andries Teeuw and 
Stuart O. Robson. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Mahājñāna. 1962. Tattwajñāna and Mahājñāna (Two Kawi Philosophical Texts). Edited and 
translated into Hindi by Sudarshana Devi Singhal. New Delhi: International Academy of 
Indian Culture.
Navaruci. 1934. Nawaruci: Inleiding, Middel-​Javaansche prozatekst, vertaling, vergeleken 
met de Bimasoetji in Oud-​Javaansch metrum. Edited and translated by M. Prijohoetomo. 
Groningen: Wolters.
Pañcārthabhāṣya. See Pāśupatasūtra.
Parātriṃśikāvivaraṇa by Abhinavagupta. 1985. Il Commento di Abhinavagupta alla 
Parātriṃśikā (Parātriṃśikātattvavivaraṇam). Edited by Raniero Gnoli. Rome: IsMEO.
Pāśupatasūtra. 1940. Pasupata Sutras with Pancharthabhashya of Kaundinya. Edited by R. 
Anantakrishna Sastri. Trivandrum: The Oriental Manuscripts Library of the University of 
Travancore.
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan (Advayasādhana). 1910. Sang hyang Kamahâyânikan: Oud-​
Javaansche tekst met inleiding, vertaling en aanteekeningen. Edited by J. Kats. ’s-​Gravenhage: 
Nijhoff.
Sĕrat Cabolek. See Soebakin Soebardi 1975.
Śivastava. See Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971.
Smaradahana. 1931. Smaradahana. Edited by R. Ng. Poerbatjaraka. Bandoeng: A.C. Nix & Co.
Suluk Linglung/​Suluk Seh Melaya II. 1993. [1]‌ Suluk Linglung Sunan Kalijaga (Syeh Melaya). 
Romanized transliteration and Indonesian translation by M. Khafid Kasri et al., edited by K. 
W. Sanadji. Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.
Suluk Linglung/​Suluk Seh Melaya II. 1979. [2]‌ Bima suci. Kaimpun sarta kataliti [Bima Suci; col­
lected and studied]. Edited by Tanaya. Jakarta: Balai Pustaka.
Suluk Malang Sumirang. 1927. “Het document uit den brandstapel” [The document from the 
stake], by G. W. J. Drewes. Djawa 7, no. 2: 97–​109.
Suluk Seh Amongraga. [1] 1981. Seh Amongraga. Edited by M. Sastronaryatmo. Jakarta, 
Indonesia: Department of Education and Culture, Project for Publishing Indonesian and 
Regional Literature. [2] Website Alangalangkumitir. Accessed January 20, 2022. https://​
alanga​lang​kumi​tir.wordpr​ess.com/​categ​ory/​suluk-​seh-​mongr​aga/​

--- PAGE 474 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      449
 
Sumanasāntaka by Mpu Monaguṇa. 2013. Mpu Monaguṇa’s Sumanasāntaka: An Old Javanese 
Epic Poem, Its Indian Source and Balinese Illustrations. Edited and translated by Peter 
Worsley, Suryohudoyo Supomo, Thomas M. Hunter, and Margaret Fletcher. Leiden: Brill.
Sutasoma kakavin. 1975. Sutasoma. A Study in Javanese Wajrayana. Edited and translated by 
Soewito Santoso. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.
Svacchandatantra. 1985. The Svacchandatantram. With commentary “Uddyota” by 
Kṣemarājācārya. Edited by Vraj Vallabh Dvivedi. Delhi: Parimal.
Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta (with Tantrālokaviveka of Rājānaka Jayaratha). 1918–​1938. 
The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta; with Commentary by Rājānaka Jayaratha. Edited by 
Madhusudān Kaul Śāstrī. 12 vols. Allahabad: The Indian Press.
Tantu Paṅgәlaran. See Robson and Hadi Sidomulyo 2021.
Tutur Raṇayajña. Romanized transcription Leiden Cod. Or. 19085 of a palm-​leaf manuscript 
from Puri Kaleran, Tabanan, Bali.
Udyogaparva. 1993. Udyogaparwa. Teks Jawa Kuna. Edited by Petrus J. Zoetmulder. Yogyakarta: 
KITLV and Duta Wacana University Press.
Yoginīhṛdaya. 1988. Yoginīhṛdayam (with commentary by Amṛtānanda). Edited by 
Vrajavallabha Dviveda. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas.
Secondary Sources
Acri, Andrea. 2014. “Birds, Bards, Buffoons, and Brahmans: (Re-​)Tracing the Indic Origins of 
some Ancient and Modern Javano-​Balinese Performing Characters.” Archipel 88: 13–​70.
Acri, Andrea. 2019. “Becoming a Bhairava in 19th-​Century Java.” Indonesia and the Malay 
World 47, no. 139: 285–​307.
Acri, Andrea. 2022. “Horror, Transgression, and Power: The ‘Demonic Numinous’ in the 
Tantra-​Influenced Literatures and Visual Arts of Java and Bali.” Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême Orient 107, no. l: 137–​206.
Acri, Andrea, and Aleksandra Wenta. 2022. “A Buddhist Bhairava? Kṛtanagara’s Tantric 
Buddhism in Transregional Perspective (Thirteenth–​Fourteenth Centuries CE).” Entangled 
Religions 13, no. 7. DOI: https://​doi.org/​10.46586/​er.13.2022.9653
Aditia Gunawan. 2019. Bhīma Svarga: Teks Jawa Kuna Abad ke-​15 dan Penurunan Naskahnya. 
Jakarta: Perpustakaan Nasional Republik Indonesia.
Arps. Ben. 2019. “The Power of the Heart That Blazes in the World: An Islamic Theory of 
Religions in Early Modern Java.” Indonesia and the Malay World 47, no. 139: 308–​334.
Bautze-​Picron, Claudine. 2014. “Buddhist Images from Padang Lawas region and the South 
Asian connection.” In History of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra, II: Societies of Padang 
Lawas (Mid-​9th–​13th century CE), edited by Daniel Perret, 107–​128. Paris: Association 
Archipel.
Bautze-​Picron, Claudine. 2016. “Images of Devotion and Power in South and Southeast 
Bengal.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, 
edited by Andrea Acri, 163–​190. Singapore: ISEAS–​Yusof Ishak Institute.
Becker, Judith. 2004. Gamelan Stories: Tantrism, Islam, and Aesthetics in Central Java. Tempe: 
Program for Southeast Asian Studies, Arizona State University.
Brandes, J. L. A., and N. J. Krom. 1913. Oud-​Javaansche Oorkonden: Nagelaten transcripties. 
Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 60 (pts. 1 
and 2). Batavia: Albrecht and Nijhoff.

--- PAGE 475 ---
450      Andrea Acri
 
Brandts Buys, J. S., 1933, “Uit de pers. De tjaṇṭang baloeng’s.—​Javaansche en Balische 
kleppers.—​Beḍåjå ketawang.—​Édan-​édanan.” Djåwå 13: 258–​262.
Bryson, Megan. 2017. “Between China and Tibet: Mahākāla Worship and Esoteric Buddhism 
in the Dali Kingdom.” In Chinese and Tibetan Esoteric Buddhism, edited by Yael Bentor and 
Meir Shahar, 402–​428. Leiden: Brill.
Bühnemann, Gudrun. 2013. “Bhīmasena as Bhairava in Nepal.” Zeitschrift der Deutschen 
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 163, no. 2: 455–​476.
Duijker, Marijke. 2010. “The Worship of Bhīma: The Representations of Bhīma on Java during 
the Majapahit Period.” PhD diss., Leiden University, Amstelveen, EON Pers.
Edi Sedyawati. 1994. Gaṇeśa Statuary of the Kaḍiri and Siŋhasāri Periods. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Feener, Michael. 1998. “A Re-​Examination of the Place of al-​Hallaj in the Development of 
Southeast Asian Islam.” Bijdragen tot de Taal-​, Land-​ en Volkenkunde 154, no. 4: 571–​592.
Florida, Nancy K. 1995. Writing the Past, Inscribing the Future: History as Prophecy in Colonial 
Java. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Goudriaan, Teun, and Christiaan Hooykaas. 1971. Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and 
Vaiṣṇava) of Balinese Bauddha Brahmans. Amsterdam and London: North Holland 
Publishing Company.
Gray, David. 2005. “Eating the Heart of the Brahmin: Representations of Alterity and the 
Formation of Identity in Tantric Buddhist Discourse.” History of Religions 45, no. 1: 46–​99.
Gray, David. 2006. “Skull Imagery and Skull Magic in the Yoginī Tantras.” Pacific World: 
Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, 3rd Series, 8: 21–​39.
Hadi Sidomulyo. 2010. “From Kuṭa Rāja to Singhasāri: Towards a Revision of the Dynastic 
History of 13th Century Java.” Archipel 80: 77–​138.
Hariani Santiko. 1997. “The Goddess Durgā in the East-​Javanese Period.” Asian Folklore Studies 
56: 209–​226.
Headley, Stephen C. 2006. “Being a ‘Martyr’ [syahîd] in Java Today: A deformation of 
Sacrifice?” Paper presented at the conference on ‘Martyr(e) et suicide dans l’islam 
contemporain.’ Paris, March 6–​7, 2006, CNRS, EHESS. Accessed 16 January 16, 2022. https://​
secu​lar.hyp​othe​ses.org/​files/​2013/​07/​Being-​a-​mar​tyr-​in-​Java.pdf
Hunter, Thomas M. 2007. “The Body of the King: Reappraising Singhasari Period Syncretism.” 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 38, no. 1: 27–​53.
Hunter, Thomas M. 2015. “Sanskrit in a Distant Land: The Sanskritized Sections.” In A 14th 
Century Malay Code of Laws: The Nītisārasamuccaya, edited by Uli Kozok, 281–​379. 
Singapore: ISEAS–​Yusof Ishak Institute.
Jákl, Jiří. 2020. “The Figure of pañji in Old Javanese Sources: What Is in a Name?” Wacana 21, 
no. 1: 28–​41.
Jordaan, Roy E. 1996. “Candi Prambanan; An Updated Introduction.” In In praise of 
Prambanan: Dutch Essays on the Loro Jonggrang Temple Complex, edited by Roy E. Jordaan, 
3–​115. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Jordaan, Roy E., and Robert Wessing. 1996. “Human sacrifice at Prambanan.” Bijdragen tot de 
Taal-​, Land-​ en Volkenkunde 152, no. 1: 45–​74.
Kozok, Uli, and Eric van Reijn. 2010. “Ādityawarman: Three Inscriptions of the Sumatran ‘King 
of All Supreme Kings’. Translated and Annotated from H. Kern and F.D.K. Bosch.” Indonesia 
and the Malay World 38: 135–​158.
Krom, Nicolaas J. 1911. “De inscriptie van Nglawang.” Tijdschrift voor de Indische Taal –​, Land –​ 
en Volkenkunde, uitgegeven door het (Koninklijk) Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen 53: 411–​434.

--- PAGE 476 ---
“Hard-Core” Tantric Traditions and the Cult of Bhairava      451
 
Lovric, Barbara. 1986. “The Art of Healing and the Craft of Witches in a ‘Hot Earth’ Village.” 
Review of Indonesian and Malaysian Affairs 20, no. 1: 68–​99.
Lorenzen, David N. 1991. The Kāpālikas and Kālāmukhas: Two lost Śaivite Sects. 2nd ed. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 1998. “Over invloed, overname en samensmelting: een godin uit 
het Indisch subcontinent en haar Indonesische equivalent.” Bulletin van het Rijksmuseum 
46, no. 4: 410–​431.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2000. “Skulls, Fangs and Serpents: A New Development in 
East Javanese Iconography.” In Southeast Asian Archaeology 1998: Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference of the European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists 
Berlin, August 31–​September 4, 1998, edited by Wibke Lobo and Stefanie Reimann, 189–​204. 
Berlin: Centre for South-​East Asian Studies/​Ethnologisches Museum, Staatliche Museen zu 
Berlin, Stiftung Preußischer Kulturbesitz.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2008. “The Well-​Known Javanese Statue in the Tropenmuseum, 
Amsterdam, and Its Place in Javanese Sculpture.” Artibus Asiae 68, no. 2: 287–​332.
Mallinson, James. 2019. “Kālavañcana in the Konkan: How a Vajrayāna Haṭhayoga Tradition 
Cheated Buddhism’s Death in India.” Religions 10, no. 273: 1–​33.
Ni Wayan Ariati. 2016. The Journey of the Goddess Durga: India, Java and Bali. New Delhi: 
International Academy of Indian Culture/​Aditya Prakashan.
Pigeaud, Theodore. G. Th. 1960. Java in the 14th Century: A Study in Cultural History. The 
Nāgara-​Kěrtāgama by Rakawi Prapañca of Majapahit, 1365 A.D. I: Javanese texts in 
Transcription. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Poerbatjaraka, Raden Ng. 1922. “De Inscriptie van het Mahākṣobhyabeeld te Simpang 
(Soerabaya).” Bijdragen tot de Taal-​, Land-​ en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië 78: 
426–​461.
Poerbatjaraka, Raden Ng. 1940. “Oorkonde van Kṛtarājasa uit 1296 A.D. (Penanggoengan).” 
Inscripties van Nederlandsch-​Indië 1: 33–​49.
Pott, P. H. 1962. “Four Demonic Gaṇeśas from East Java.” Mededelingen van het Rijksmuseum 
voor Volkenkunde, Leiden 15: 123–​131.
Reichle, Natasha. 2007. Violence and Serenity: Late Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Robson, Stuart O., trans. 1995. Deśawarṇana (Nāgarakṛtāgama) by Mpu Prapañca. Leiden: 
KITLV Press.
Robson, Stuart O., and Hadi Sidomulyo. 2021. Threads of the Unfolding Web: The Old Javanese 
Tantu Panggĕlaran. Translated by Stuart Robson with a Commentary by Hadi Sidomulyo. 
Singapore: ISEAS–​Yusof Ishak Institute.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. “Atharvavedins in Tantric Territory: The Ᾱṅgirasakalpa Texts of the 
Oriya Paippalādins and Their Connection with the Trika and the Kālīkula. With critical 
editions of the Parājapavidhi, the Parāmantravidhi, and the Bhadrakālῑmantravidhiprakar
aṇa.” In The Atharvaveda and its Paippalāda Śākhā: Historical and Philological Papers on 
a Vedic Tradition, edited by Arlo Griffiths and Annette Schmiedchen, 195–​311. Aachen: 
Shaker Verlag.
Sharrock, Peter. 2022. “Heruka-​Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia.” In The Creative South: 
Buddhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, edited by Andrea Acri and Peter 
Sharrock, 126–​164. Singapore: ISEAS–​Yusof Ishak Institute.
Sinclair, Iain. 2019. “New Light on the Karimun Besar Inscription (Prasasti Pasir Panjang) and 
the Learned Man from Gaur.” NSC Highlights 11 (December 2018–​February 2019): 16–​17.

--- PAGE 477 ---
452      Andrea Acri
 
Sinclair, Iain. 2022. “From Melayu to Thamel and Back: The Transmigration of the Eight-​
Armed Amoghapāśa.” In The Creative South: Buddhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime 
Asia, edited by Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock, 9–​65. Singapore: ISEAS–​Yusof Ishak 
Institute.
Soebakin Soebardi. 1975. The Book of Cabolek: A Critical Edition with Introduction, Translation 
and Notes. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Stutterheim, Willem F. 1936. “De Dateering van Eeinge Oost-​Javaansche Beeldengroepen.” 
Tijdschrift van de Bataviaasch Genootschap 76: 249–​358.
Stutterheim, Willem. 1956. “A Thousand Years Old Profession in the Princely Courts on Java.” 
In Studies in Indonesian Archaeology, 91–​103. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2018. “Rethinking the Buddhist Discourse on Holy Sites in the Ḍākārṇava: A 
Critical Edition and a Translation of the Sanskrit Ḍākārṇava Chapter 50–​3,” WIAS [Waseda 
Institute for Advanced Studies] Research Bulletin (早稲田大学高等研究所紀要) 10: 39–​90.
Törzsök, Judit. 2020. “Why Are the Skull-​Bearers (Kāpālikas) Called Soma?” In Śaivism 
and the Tantric Traditions. Essays in Honour of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson, edited by Dominic 
Goodall, Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson, and Srilata Raman, 33–​46. Leiden: Brill.
Tsuda, Shinichi. 1996. “The Cult of Śmaśāna, The Realities of Tantrism.” In The Sanskrit 
Tradition and Tantrism, edited by Teun Goudriaan, 96–​108. Leiden: Brill.
Verardi, Giovanni. 2018. The Gods & the Heretics: Crisis and Ruin of Indian Buddhism. New 
Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Weirong, Shen. 2008. “A Preliminary Investigation into the Tangut Background of the Mongol 
Adoption of Tibetan Tantric Buddhism.” In Contributions to Tibetan Buddhist Literature. 
PIATS 2006, Tibetan Studies: Proceedings of the Eleventh Seminar of the International 
Association for Tibetan Studies, Königswinter 2006, edited by Orna Almogi, 315–​350. Halle 
(Saale): International Institute for Tibetan and Buddhist Studies.
White, David G. 2000. “Introduction. Tantra in Practice: Mapping a Tradition.” In Tantra in 
Practice, edited by David G. White, 3–​38. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
White, David G. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Contexts. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
White, David G. 2007. The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Zoetmulder, Petrus J. 1982. Old Javanese-​English Dictionary (with the collaboration of Stuart 
O. Robson). 2 vols. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Zoetmulder, Petrus J. 1994. Pantheism and Monism in Javanese Suluk Literature: Islamic 
and Indian Mysticism in an Indonesian Setting. Leiden: KITLV Press. First published in 
Dutch in 1935.

--- PAGE 478 ---
Chapter 20
Timeless Symbolism
An Early Dzogchen Patriarch’s Hagiography 
and Scriptures
Georgios T. Halkias
Introduction
In the Tibetan contemplative traditions of the Nyingma and Bön schools, the 
teachings of the Great Perfection or Dzogchen (Skt. Mahāsandhi; Tib. rdzogs chen) are 
considered the pinnacle of all instructions that lead to liberation.1 The arcane concepts 
of the Great Perfection are commonly traceable across two overlapping geograph­
ical regions: Uḍḍiyāna for the Buddhists and Zhang Zhung for the Bön. Apocryphal 
Tibetan narratives describe the supramundane origins and spread of Dzogchen often 
in symbolic terms, including hierophanies and kratophanies that we discern in an­
cient Mediterranean mystery cults, Neoplatonic, Kashmiri Śaiva, and other esoteric 
fraternities active along the ancient routes of communication and trade, the Eurasian 
Silk Routes.2 Despite similarities in the view and methods of Dzogchen in the Nyingma 
and Bön schools and the intersecting geography of Uḍḍiyāna (Swat valley) and the 
kingdom of Zhang Zhung extending to the northwest of the Indian subcontinent, each 
school features its own unique lineages of transmission formed in different historical 
periods and by different people. Theologically speaking, such competing claims are in­
consequential since both schools concur that Dzogchen is not the creation of a human 
founder or the outcome of an internal development within a philosophical tradition. 
Rather, the Great Perfection is the expression of the intrinsic nature of our mind (sems 
nyid) which has always been in a state of perfection or completion (rdzogs pa). When 
recognized for what it is, it becomes the basis of liberation (grol gzhi) from samsara. In 
the Nyingma School, the soteriological potential of this nature is known as “basis” or 
“ground” (gzhi) and is symbolized by Buddha Samantabhadra (Kun tu bzang po) who 
is set free in the recognition of the inner radiance of the ground prior to any distinction

--- PAGE 479 ---
454      Georgios T. Halkias
 
between buddhas and sentient beings. The default mode of straying into confusion 
during the presencing of the primordial basis (gdod ma’i gzhi) is the basis of illusion 
(’khrul gzhi) that obscures the recognition of phenomena that arise from the ground as 
self-​appearing.
In the early history of the Nyingma School, Śrī Siṃha occupies a central position be­
cause of the succession of his Indian and Tibetan disciples who brought the Dzogchen 
scriptures and practices to Tibet. According to the authoritative and often cited 
Extensive History of the Great Perfection of the Seminal Heart (Rdzogs pa chen po snying 
thig gi lo rgyus chen mo),3 the source of the Great Perfection lineage is Samantabhadra, 
followed by Garab Dorje (Dga’ rab rdo rje), the first human representative of the lin­
eage. Garab Dorje was succeeded by Mañjuśrīmitra, Śrī Siṃha, Jñānasūtra, and 
Vimalamitra.4 From Mañjuśrīmitra who was a Buddhist scholar of Brahmin origin, 
Śrī Siṃha received the entirety of the Great Perfection instructions arranged in three 
classes. He in turn transmitted the first two classes to his Tibetan disciple and translator, 
Vairocana of Pagor: the Mind Class (sems sde), which features the earliest Atiyoga texts 
dating back to the late eighth century (or later), and the lesser known contemplative 
practices of the Space Class (klong sde). He passed on the Pith Instruction Class (man 
ngag sde), the highest-​order commentary on Dzogchen philosophy, to Vimalamitra and 
Padmasambhava. The two principal hagiographical sources of the Great Perfection’s 
Seminal Heart (Snying thig) tradition, the Seminal Heart of Vimalamitra (Bi ma 
snying thig) and the Seminal Heart of the Ḍākinīs (Mkha’ ’gro snying thig),5 concur that 
Vairocana, Vimalamitra, and Padmasambhava, received the lineage of the Great 
Perfection from Śrī Siṃha.
The Narrative Appearance of a Mystic
Śrī Siṃha’s Tibetan hagiographies are post-​imperial texts shaped by esoteric Buddhist 
precepts and practices. They are not meant to be actual biographical accounts. They date 
several centuries after the latest period assigned to Śrī Siṃha as the teacher of the illus­
trious master Nubchen Sangye Yeshe (Gnubs chen sangs rgyas ye shes, c. ninth century) 
with whom he collaborated in the Tibetan translation of six Dzogchen texts.6 These 
hagiographies are commonly structured around pivotal events and contain hermetic 
archetypes and formulaic motifs that recur in the life stories of the early patriarchs of the 
Great Perfection. Common to these Great Perfection traditional narratives are: a) the 
centrality of charnel grounds as ideal places for meditation and for engagements with 
other-​worldly beings; b) encounters with celestial bodhisattvas and ḍākinīs who aid the 
yogis in their quest to find a teacher; c) the concealment, discovery, and reconcealment 
of esoteric scriptures; and d) striking photophanies that manifest during the passing 
away of the patriarchs who posthumously reappear in a luminous body to deliver final 
instructions to chosen disciples. Although some of these features are known from 
the life stories of accomplished Indian tantric masters,7 the distinct manner in which

--- PAGE 480 ---
Timeless Symbolism      455
 
the early patriarchs convert their bodies into light would appear unique to the Great 
Perfection narratives.8 These visible bodies of light (’od sku) attained through the ad­
vanced contemplative methods of tögel (thod rgal) contribute to the development of 
an embodied mythos and serve as a trademark of the wisdom-​tradition of the Great 
Perfection.9 Just as unusual is the symbolic mode by which these mystics impart to their 
chosen disciples their final instructions enclosed in miniature caskets made of precious 
jewels. These wisdom relics contain their quintessential teachings, their last testaments 
or zhelchem (zhal chems).10
The Life of Śrī Siṃha
According to the Extensive History (folia 110–​19), Śrī Siṃha was born in the town of 
Sokyam (So khyam) in China, fathered by Gewe’i Yitsen (Dge ba’i yid can) and mothered 
by Nangwa Selwa Raptukyenma (Snang ba gsal ba rab tu mkhyen ma).11 From the age of 
fifteen to eighteen he studied the five major fields of knowledge (Skt. pañcavidyāsthāna; 
Tib. rigs gnas che ba lnga)—​logic, medicine, arts and crafts, language, and religious or 
inner knowledge—​under the guidance of master Hastibhala (alias Haribhala). Attaining 
proficiency in these subjects, he sets out for Suvarṇadvīpa (Gser ling), the Land of Gold 
in the west.12 On his way to Suvarṇadvīpa, he has a numinous vision of the bodhisattva 
Avalokiteśvara who appears before him predicting that he must go in India to practice 
at the charnel ground of Sosadvīpa (So sa ling) in order to attain awakening in this life­
time.13 Śrī Siṃha decides instead to train in the tantras and heads for the Five Peaked 
Mountain (Ri bo rtse lnga).14 For seven years he studies the outer and inner doctrines of 
Vajrayāna under the tutelage of the outcast master Bhelakīrti. He ordains as a monk and 
observes the monastic discipline for thirty years. Again, Avalokiteśvara appears before 
him in a vision and repeats his past prediction before vanishing into space. To endure 
the strenuous journey to India, Śrī Siṃha commits to three years of intense yogic prac­
tice and attains the body of an awareness holder (rig ’dzin) and facility in speed walking.15
At the charnel ground of Sosadvīpa he meets his root-​teacher Mañjuśrīmitra who 
instructs him for twenty-​five years on Dzogchen before passing away in an extraor­
dinary display of light. Stunned by this event, Śrī Siṃha faints and falls to the ground. 
When he regains consciousness, he looks up and sees his master in a radiant sphere of 
energy. He weeps in distress: “Oh, alas, if my teacher, the light of the vajra, goes out who 
will remove the darkness of the world?” Mañjuśrīmitra stretches out his right hand and 
places in Śrī Siṃha’s hands a casket made of precious stones the size of a fingernail. 
It contains his last testament known as the Six Meditation Experiences (Sgom nyams 
drug pa). Thereafter, Śrī Siṃha gains irreversible confidence in the unchanging nature 
of reality.
Following Mañjuśrīmitra’s attainment of a body of light, Śrī Siṃha goes to Bodhgaya 
and extracts the Great Perfection teachings, which had been previously hidden by 
his teacher in a boulder and brings them to the Bodhi Tree in China. He arranges

--- PAGE 481 ---
456      Georgios T. Halkias
 
the teachings of the Pith Instructions, in four sections: outer (phyi), inner (nang), se­
cret (gsang), and utmost secret (gsang ba bla na med pa). He collects the outer, inner, 
and secret sections and conceals them in a copper box in the fourth pillar of the Bodhi 
Tree Temple. Following the advice of the ḍākinī Nampar Rolpe’i Gyen (Rnam par rol 
pa’i rgyan) he hides the utmost secret teachings (final order commentary on the Great 
Perfection), at the Chinese Temple of a Thousand Auspicious Gates (Bkra shis khri sgo). 
He seals them with supplications that they be rediscovered in the future and entrusts 
their guardianship to Ekajaṭī (Ral gcig ma), the fierce female protectress-​deity of the 
Secret Mantra. For the remaining days of his life, Śrī Siṃha goes on roaming around the 
cremation grounds where he assumes a multitude of guises and forms. Some of his disci­
ples see him riding naked on a tiger and a buffalo, covered in fat and blood and uttering 
different sounds, with loose matted hair carrying a sword in his right hand and a blood-​
filled skull in his left.16
Śrī Siṃha’s Indian and Tibetan Disciples
The lives of Śrī Siṃha’s two main Indian disciples, Jñānasūtra (Ye shes mdo) and 
Vimalamitra (Dri med bshes gnyen), are dealt with in the next section of the Extensive 
History (folia 119–​29). Here we read that in a prophetic vision, Buddha Vajrasattva 
appears before Jñānasūtra and Vimalamitra and explains to them that even though 
they were reborn as paṇḍitas during the last five hundred lifetimes, they have failed 
to realize the supreme goal of tantra. To do so, they must travel to the Chinese Bodhi 
Tree shrine and request teachings from Śrī Siṃha. Vimalamitra travels from India to 
China to study the Great Perfection corpus and stays there for twenty years. Upon his 
return, he persuades Jñānasūtra to embark for China to study with the master and he 
goes on to spend thirteen years in Tibet translating scriptures and teaching the precepts 
of the Great Perfection.17 Jñānasūtra received the highest Dzogchen initiations, for he 
served as Vimalamitra’s teacher bestowing on him his last posthumous testament, the 
Four Methods of Meditation (Bzhags thabs bzhi pa).18 Śrī Siṃha confers the transmis­
sion of all four sections of the Pith Instructions to Jñānasūtra before transforming his 
five aggregates into light, just as the previous Dzogchen patriarchs have done before 
him. The earth beneath him trembled and Jñānasūtra beheld Śrī Siṃha in a resplendent 
sphere of radiant light. Realizing that his teacher had passed beyond our phenomenal 
world, Jñānasūtra regains his senses and weeps, “Alas, alas, if my teacher the light of 
lamp goes out who will dispel the darkness of the world?” In his luminous form, Śrī 
Siṃha urges Jñānasūtra to go to the One Thousand Gates to retrieve the scriptures of the 
utmost secret essence and delivers in a jeweled casket his final testament, the Seven Nails 
(Gzer bu bdun ma).19
The trials of Śrī Siṃha’s two Tibetan disciples, Vairocana of Pagor and Legdrup 
(Legs grub) of Tsang, are also narrated in the first treasure-​text hagiography of 
Padmasambhava, the Copper Island Chronicle (Zangs gling ma).20 This text, redacted

--- PAGE 482 ---
Timeless Symbolism      457
 
by Nyangrel Nyima Özer (Nyang ral nyi ma ’od zer 1124–​92), details Vairocana’s and 
Legdrup’s long and perilous journey to India following the order of the Tibetan Emperor 
Trisong Detsen, in the latter half of the eighth century, in search of Buddhist teachings. 
In India, they inquire who was the most learned master of Dzogchen and they are told 
to find Śrī Siṃha. At Dhahena assembly hall (Dha he na ku sha ’du khang), Śrī Siṃha 
agrees to teach them and imparts two sets of texts, the twenty-​five tantras (rgyud nyi shu 
rtsa lnga) and the eighteen texts of the Mind Class (sems sde bco brgyad).21
In a later work, the Great Image: The Liberation Narrative of Vairocana (Be ro tsa na’i 
rnam thar ’dra ’bag chen mo),22 we read a similar account: because the Indians were 
possessive of their teachings, Śrī Siṃha instructs the Tibetans under the cover of night 
and in utter secrecy on the eighteen texts of the Mind Class that had been previously 
retrieved from Bodhgaya. On his way back to Tibet, Legdrup dies at the age of forty-​
four, but Vairocana stays behind and receives additional teachings, including the White 
(dkar po), Black (nag po), and Variegated (khra bo) instructions of the Space Class.23 
After completing his training and having mastered the siddhi of “swift-​footedness,” he 
returns to Tibet in seven days only to be discovered back in India that he had defied the 
king’s orders and stole their precious Great Perfection teachings.
In the Garland of Precious Jewels: History of the Seminal Heart of the Ḍākinīs (Mkha’ 
’gro snying thig gi lo rgyus rin po che’i phreng ba) Padmasambhava, the famous eighth-​
century tantric master from Oḍḍiyāna, is listed as Śrī Siṃha’s disciple, though he is com­
monly associated with the transmission of the Mahāyoga tantras. Padmasambhava, 
instructed by the wrathful Vajravārāhī, arrives at the charnel ground Parūṣakavana 
(Rtsub ’gyur tshal) where he meets Śrī Siṃha and receives instruction in all three classes 
of Dzogchen (Mind, Space, and Pith Instructions) and in the eighteen Dzogchen tantras 
that Śrī Siṃha had previously obtained from Garab Dorje at the Śītavana charnel ground 
at Rājagriha.24 Padmasambhava and Vairocana conceal the teachings they received as 
treasure-​texts with a prophetic mandate of their future rediscovery.25
Śrī Siṃha: The Scholar Author
There is little that can be said with certainty regarding Śrī Siṃha’s life. However, given 
the diverse number of texts attributed to him as author and co-​translator with Vairocana 
and Nubchen Sangye Yeshe, there is no reason to doubt his overall historicity. The pro­
cess of identifying his extant Tibetan works across various Tibetan collections is chal­
lenging given the different names and variant spellings he is listed by in the colophons.26 
Moreover, works attributed to him are not gathered uniformly across these collections. 
The following assessment of his works is based on a survey of the digital editions of the 
Kangyur (Bka’ ’gyur), the Tengyur (Bstan ’gyur), the Mtshams brag and Gting skyes 
editions of the Collected Tantras of the Ancients (abbr. NGB =​ Rnying ma rgyud ’bum), 
the Collected Tantras of Vairocana (abbr. BGB =​ Ba’i ro rgyud ’bum), and the Extended 
Teachings of the Nyingma (Rnying ma bka’ ma rgyas pa).27

--- PAGE 483 ---
458      Georgios T. Halkias
 
Three distinct texts composed by Śrī Siṃha are found only in the Tengyur. Two of these 
are of philosophical-​cum-​doctrinal interest: The Lock of the Awakened Mind (Thugs kyi 
sgo lcags), an early doxographical treatise divided into ten sections commenting on the 
nine Buddhist vehicles, and a tantric interpretation of the Heart Sūtra, a Commentary on 
the Secret Mantra Explanation of the Heart Sūtra (Sher snying ’grel pa sngags su ’grel ba). 
The third text, the Upadeśa on the Secret Mantra Sādhana of Uṣṇīṣavijayā (Uṣṇīṣa sngags 
kyi man ngag gi bsgrub thabs), offers apotropaic instructions for protection against sor­
cery, pandemics, hail, obstacles, and demonic influences in three ways: through the real­
ization of the view (non-​conceptual emptiness and the visualization of specific deities); 
through auspicious materials (mandalas made of rare substances and installation of 
ritual daggers); and through the writing and incantation of wrathful mantras.
In the Tengyur, there are also nine short texts of the Great Perfection authored by Śrī 
Siṃha. These works are grouped in two cycles: Cutting the Root of Saṃsāra (’khor ba 
rtsad nas gcod pa), which contains five Dzogchen texts cross-​listed in the BGB, and the 
cycle of Dharmadhātu (chos kyi dbyings), which features four texts included in the BGB 
and the NGB (Gting skyes edition).
In the Tengyur alone, Śrī Siṃha and Vairocana feature as the translators of two works: 
the *Ākāśasamadarśanatantrapañjikā (Lta ba nam mkha’ dang mnyam pa’i rgyud kyi 
dka’ ’grel rin po che sgron ma ’bar ba), a commentary on the Great Perfection by the 
first Dzogchen Patriarch Garab Dorje, and a short commentary, the *Nyāyasiddhyāloka 
(Rigs pa sgrub pa’i sgron ma) on pramāṇa by the late seventh-​century Indian layman 
scholar of Mahāyāna Candragomin. Furthermore, there are four Great Perfection 
commentaries attributed to Garab Dorje in the Tengyur and the BGB, which are 
translated by Śrī Siṃha and Vairocana.
Śrī Siṃha and Vairocana also feature as translators (or somehow involved in the 
transmission) of sixteen Dzogchen texts in the Collected Tantras of the Nyingma (Gting 
skyes edition) which are not found elsewhere. Furthermore, there are eighteen works 
listed in the Collected Tantras of the Nyingma and in the Collected Tantras of Vairocana: 
twelve texts translated by Śrī Siṃha and Vairocana and six by Śrī Siṃha and Nubchen 
Sangye Yeshe who is mentioned under his secret initiatory name Dorje Yang Wangter 
(Rdo rje yang dbang gter).
A total of twenty-​nine Dzogchen scriptures are attributed to Śrī Siṃha in the Gting 
skyes edition of the NGB. These have been grouped in categories devised by the NGB 
editors: eighteen texts of the Mind Class (sems sde’i skor), four texts of the Space Class 
(klong sde’i skor), and seven texts of the Instruction Class (man ngag sde phyi nang skor, 
spyi ti’i skor, & yang ti bram ze’i skor).28 Thus far, five unique texts have been identified 
(where each one is divided in several chapters) that are located only in the eighteenth-​
century edition of the NGB discovered at Tsadrak monastery (Mtshams brag dgon pa) 
in western Bhutan.
The BGB lists four texts not found in other collections. According to the colophon of 
the Precious Light of Wisdom Tantra (Ye shes rin po che ’od kyi rgyud, vol. 3, tsa, 309–​64), 
this work was translated by Śrī Siṃha and Vairocana at the Dhahena Assembly Hall. A 
second work authored by Garab Dorje and Mañjuśrīmitra, Practicing the Wheel of the

--- PAGE 484 ---
Timeless Symbolism      459
 
View (Lta ba spyod pa’i ’khor lo, vol. 5, kha, 155–​68), Śrī Siṃha translated in Tibetan with 
Vairocana. Vairocana and Śrī Siṃha participated in the transmission of a third BGB 
text, the Stirring the Pit of Samsara Tantra: Essence of all Tantras (Rgyud thams cad kyi 
snying po ’khor ba dong dkrug gi rgyud, vol. 6, ka, 1–​18). A fourth scripture on divination, 
the Instructions on Ground Drawing and Pebble Cycle (Sa ris dang rde skor gyi man ngag), 
lists Śrī Siṃha both as the author and co-​translator along with Vairocana.
Śrī Siṃha and Vairocana are acknowledged for their translation of the fundamental 
Dzogchen tantra of the Mind Class staged as a dialogue between Buddha Kunje Gyalpo 
and Sattvavajra. Known in brief as the All Creating King (Kun byed rgyal po), the full title 
of this work is given as All Creating King: The Mind of Awakening in the Great Perfection 
of all Dharmas (Chos thams cad rdzogs pa chen po byang chub kyi sems kun byed rgyal po). 
This seminal work is found in all known editions of the NGB and is the only Dzogchen 
text known to me that is listed in the Derge Kangyur (vol. 97, 4–​173).29
This preliminary survey confirms Śrī Siṃha’s range of scholarship and his Tibetan 
legacy as the most important of all patriarchs of the Great Perfection. Moreover, his 
influence extends beyond the scriptures we have just surveyed. In the early and later 
traditions of revealed scriptures of the Treasure tradition, there is a wide selection of 
Dzogchen texts attributed to Śrī Siṃha by some standing figures of the Nyingma tradi­
tion: Nyangrel Nyima Özer (Nyang ral nyi ma ’od zer, 1124/​1136–​92/​1204), Longchenpa 
(Klong chen pa, 1308–​64), Rigdzin Gödem (Rig ’dzin rgod ldem, 1337–​1408), Chogyur 
Lingpa (Mchog gyur gling pa, 1829–​70), and Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo (’Jam dbyangs 
mkhyen brtse’i dbang po, 1820–​92). In 1848 an apparition of Śrī Siṃha on a rock near 
Dzogchen monastery prompted Gyelse Zhenpen Taye Özer (Rgyal sras gzhan phan 
mtha’ yas ’od zer, 1800–​55/​1869) to build on the same spot the famous Śrī Siṃha College.
Śrī Siṃha: Where and When?
Śrī Siṃha’s place of origin has been the subject of debate, alternating for the most part 
between India, Central Asia, and China.30 The Extensive History situates his birthplace 
in China and this account is repeated in several works of a later date, like Padma Karpo’s 
History of Buddhism (Chos ’byung padma rgyas pa’i nyin byed; Pad ma dkar po 1527–​
92), Dudjom Jigdrel Yeshe’s History of the Nyingma School (Rnying ma’i chos ’byung; 
Bdud ’joms ’jigs bral ye shes 1904–​87), and more recently Nyoshul Kenpo’s History of the 
Great Perfection (Rdzogs pa chen po’i chos ’byung; Smyo shul mkhan po 1932–​99). But Śrī 
Siṃha is not the only early Dzogchen patriarch with ties to China. In a later edition (bka’ 
ma version) of the Great Image, we read that Vairocana went to China and met nine­
teen masters inquiring about their views on Dzogchen, however as noted by Karmay 
(2007: 28) all the Chinese masters bear Sanskrit names and there is no mention of a 
single Chinese place name. Moreover, tantric lore has it that after Vimalamitra attained 
the rainbow body (’ja’ lus) he decided to remain at Wu tai shan Mount in Eastern China 
for as long as the teachings of the Buddha endure. He promised to return to Tibet as

--- PAGE 485 ---
460      Georgios T. Halkias
 
an emanation once every one hundred years to expound the Seminal Heart teachings 
(Dudjom Rinpoche 1991: 555).
Sino-​Tibetan exchanges were commonplace at the times of the Tibetan empire 
(eighth to ninth centuries). Tibetans sought out Chinese Buddhist teachers and the im­
perial catalogue from the royal Palace at Phangthang lists eleven Chinese sutras and 
seven Chinese commentaries on the sutras that were translated from Chinese to Tibetan 
(Halkias 2004: 90). Moreover, the religious landscape of the Tibetan empire witnessed 
a sizable population of Chinese monks at Tibet’s first Buddhist monastery of Samye, 
and saw the popular rise of Chan orientations in Central Tibet and at the borders of the 
Tibetan empire in Dunhuang. While Tibetan polemical scriptures highlight the inferior 
position of Chan and stress its philosophical affinities with Dzogchen to tarnish the au­
thenticity of the latter, the question of influence between the two has occupied contem­
porary debates and discussions.31
In the Great Image and in the hagiographies of Vimalamitra compiled from the twelfth 
to the fourteenth centuries, Śrī Siṃha’s life is firmly rooted in India. Well-​known sources 
such as, Nyangrel’s Copper Island Chronicle, Longchenpa’s History of Buddhism (Klong 
chen chos ’byung), and both of the Deü Histories of Buddhism (Lde’u chos ’byung), make 
no mention of Vimalamitra ever traveling to China to meet Śrī Siṃha (Gruber 2016: 
419). In the colophons of the Tengyur and the Collected Tantras of the Ancients, Śrī 
Siṃha is consistently listed as an Indian scholar (rgya gar gyi mkhan po), and Dargyay 
([1977]1998: 19) rightly notes that the name Śrī Siṃha in all its variants can hardly be 
a Chinese name that has been Sanskritized. Furthermore, Śrī Siṃha’s teachers bear 
proper Sanskrit names and should any of them have been among those Indian masters 
who sojourned, or were active in China, we would have expected some mention in the 
Chinese records. The evidence is inconclusive. Śrī Siṃha was either an Indian master 
residing for some time in China proper or Central Asia or, as claimed by Germano 
(2002: 239), the Chinese story is a deliberate fabrication that originated in the Seminal 
Heart chronicles of the twelfth century. It was concocted as a defense against criticisms 
launched by the New Schools of Tibetan Buddhism that Dzogchen lacked an authentic 
Indian Buddhist source and therefore by implication, its doctrines did not reflect gen­
uine Buddhist teachings.32
Dating Śrī Siṃha is equally challenging. The timeline of the Great Perfection 
patriarchs is beset with a number of contradictions and difficulties (Hanson-​Barber, 
1984: 35–​38; Prats 1984; Germano 2002). Van Schaik (2004: 198) notes that the lineage 
arrangement of the early Seminal Heart teachers in the Collected Tantras of Vairocana 
is “awkward” and that it has been difficult to deal with it in the Great Perfection tradi­
tion which has invariably omitted some names and included others. Nevertheless, we 
can venture to speculate on Śrī Siṃha’s chronology by relying on Nyingma sources that 
enlist him as the teacher of Padmasambhava, Vairocana, Vimalamitra, and Nubchen 
Sangye Yeshe. The exact dates of his last identifiable Tibetan disciple and co-​translator 
of Dzogchen texts, Nubchen Sangye, are difficult to establish with certainty (Esler 2014: 
6–​7), but given that he was born in the Water Male Mouse Year this could refer either to 
772 or 832 according to Dudjom Rinpoche, or to 784 or 844 according to Rigdzin Padma

--- PAGE 486 ---
Timeless Symbolism      461
 
Trinley who gives the Wood Male Mouse Year as the date of his birth. It fits to accept an 
earlier birthdate for Nubchen Sangye, such as 772 or 784, for it supports accounts of his 
sojourns to India and Nepal where he could have plausibly met Śrī Siṃha during the 
reign of Emperor Tri Tsugdetsen (Khri gtsug lde bstan, reign c. 815–​38). It seems reason­
able to assume 838 as the latest date we can assign for Śrī Siṃha’s reported engagement 
with the Tibetans. Though there is a fair amount of uncertainty as to Vimalamitra’s actual 
dating and his alleged two visits to Tibet, his meeting with Śrī Siṃha could have taken 
place prior to the years 794–​96, for according to the Zha Lakhang (Zhva’i lha khang) in­
scription (Richardson 1985: 44), these are the dates that Vimalamitra was invited by the 
minister Nyang Tingdzin (Myang Ting nge ’dzin) to Tibet and later served as his teacher. 
Based on the above we could venture to date him between 750 and 840 C.E.
The Seminal Heart of the Ḍākinīs relates how Garab Dorje used secret symbols to 
transmit to Śrī Siṃha the essential meaning of the 6,400,000 tantras of Dzogchen. If 
their meeting is not a later interpolation inserted in the narrative, or a didactic account 
of transhistorical transmissions transpiring through pure visions (dag snang) between 
individuals who are centuries apart, it would imply that Śrī Siṃha and Garab Dorje were 
in fact contemporaries. Some western and Tibetan scholarship situates Garab Dorje as 
early as the first century C.E. Hanson-​Barber (1986) attempted to correct his dates by 
placing Garab Dorje in the mid sixth century, but this date is still too early to accord 
with Śrī Siṃha’s chronology based on the dates of his disciples.
The inconsistencies that plague these Tibetan sources are by no means conclusive 
that the Tibetans fabricated the Great Perfection lineages any more than the absence 
of Sanskrit Dzogchen texts proves that they were Tibetan concoctions of a later date. 
It is true that with the exception of Mañjuśrīmitra’s Meditation on Bodhicitta (Byang 
chub sems sgom pa)—​an early text of the Great Perfection preserved in the Tengyur 
(P. 3415) and listed in the Denkarma and Phangthangma Catalogues (Lalou 1953: 609/​610; 
Halkias 2004: 72)—​no other Great Perfection text seems to be included in the imperial 
records of imported Buddhist texts. Their omission is not unexpected given the pro­
hibition against the open translation and distribution of Tantric works in the earlier 
dates of the imperium. We know that separate lists were kept for the Tibetan translation 
of the inner tantras (sngags nang pa) (Halkias 2004: xx). Perhaps, we will never know 
if these “separate lists” were kept at Phangthang, or some other long-​forgotten place 
that housed the indices and the originals of the inner tantras. For Esler (2005: 45–​46), 
those casting doubts on the non-​Tibetan provenance of Dzogchen seem to ignore the 
fact that the Great Perfection teachings were transmitted orally in a constrained and 
secretive fashion prior to the eleventh century. The mention of Dzogchen texts in India 
and in China in the hagiographical narratives fuels an unsettled quest for discovering 
Sanskrit sources of Dzogchen, either because the Dzogchen teachings and instructions 
for practice were originally transmitted in a language other than Sanskrit (such as those 
languages in circulation in Uḍḍiyāna and Zhang Zhung) and in some scriptural form 
which is no longer extant, or simply because there never existed any systematic scrip­
tural collection of Dzogchen literature prior to its transmission, translation, and system­
atization in Tibet.

--- PAGE 487 ---
462      Georgios T. Halkias
 
The Symbolic Transmission of 
Awareness Holders
The Nyingma School asserts six major transmission lineages (brgyud pa) to account for 
the origins and spread of their secret teachings. The first three kinds of transmission 
are theoretically linked to the trikāya doctrine and the last three to the short transmis­
sion of treasure literature (nye brgyud gter ma).33 The semiotic order for the transmis­
sion of esoteric gnosis begins with the Wisdom Mind Transmission of Conquerors 
(rgyal ba dgongs brgyud pa). This is understood as a mind-​to-​mind transmission 
which, in the first instance, takes the domain of awakening as its own experience. It 
transpires in the identification of the wisdom mind of the Teacher with a retinue of 
disciples who are self-​arising reflections of his own realization. In the second instance 
of this transmission writes Tulku Thondup (1984: 5), the students who are not iden­
tical with the teacher “become ‘inseparable in mind’ from the Teacher by means of his 
blessings.”
The Wisdom Mind Transmission occurs in the timeless awareness of the dharmakāya, 
the mind’s own intrinsic nature, just as the Symbolic Transmission of Awareness holders 
(rig ’dzin brda brgyud pa) transpires during the outer radiance of the mind’s clarity in­
dicated by the saṃbhogakāya. Symbolic Transmissions express gnostic events that take 
place between awareness holders and bodhisattvas whose minds are inwardly clarified 
during the self-​arising nature of their own awareness (rig pa rang sar). The third mode 
of transmission transpires during the Oral Transmission of Individuals [passed on] 
Through Hearing (gang zag snyan khung brgyud pa). The Oral Transmission occurs at 
the time of the nirmāṇakāya and for Tulku Thondup (1984: 12), it depends on the “ap­
pearance of disciples rather than the actual nature of the transmitters” who may also in­
clude buddhas, bodhisattvas, and masters like Garab Dorje and Padmasambhava.
The next three transmission lineages are hidden teachings revealed in scriptural form 
or beheld through pure visions by mystics and visionaries, the treasure-​revealers (gter 
ston). The Transmission Empowered by Aspiration (smon lam dbang bskur gyi brgyud 
pa) is held by treasure-​revealers who redact teachings according to the wisdom-​intent 
of Padmasambhava. The Transmission of Words on the Yellow Scrolls (shog ser tshig gi 
brgyud pa) refers to previously concealed treasure teachings in the form of script on 
yellow paper. The last of the three, the Transmission of the Ḍākinī’s Seal of Entrustment 
(mkha’ ’gro gtad rgya’i brgyud pa) is a lineage of secret teachings kept under the protec­
tion of the sky-​walkers (Skt. ḍākinī; mkha’ ’gro ma) and guardians of the Dharma (Skt. 
dharmapāla; chos skyong).
The recorded history of the Great Perfection begins with the lineage of Symbolic 
Transmissions (brda brgyud pa).34 This descent is distinguished from the Wisdom Mind 
Transmission where the Great Perfection precepts are effortlessly communicated be­
yond time, place, and language by Buddha Samantabhadra to Buddha Vajrasattva who 
is identical in all aspects to himself. According to the Extensive History, the Dzogchen

--- PAGE 488 ---
Timeless Symbolism      463
 
transmission through symbols was revealed to humanity by Vajrasattva with the aid of 
the ḍākinīs.35 For the duration of the Symbolic Transmission, the teacher communicates 
gnostic events through indication, by means of visual forms and gestures (mudras), or 
through the utterance of sacred syllables (mantras).
In the teachings of the Great Perfection, the ritual use of symbols fulfills a vital 
gnoseological function. For example, it is common during traditional Dzogchen 
initiations for the teachers to use a mirror or crystal and a peacock feather as cere­
monial symbols. The mind’s nature accommodates all kinds of thoughts and emotions 
and is symbolically compared to a mirror or crystal which can reflect all sorts of 
appearances without being altered at their core. Likewise, the rings of five colors in the 
peacock feather symbolize the five aggregates manifesting in their most subtle form 
as kāyas of light and as expressions of the wisdoms of the five buddha families (Skt. 
pañcakula; rigs lnga).
In the Threaded String of Pearls (Mu tig phreng ba brgyud), a Great Perfection com­
mentary to the Blazing Lamp Tantra (Sgron ma ’bar ba’i rgyud), it is stated that “the se­
cret key point of secret mantra is realized on the basis of symbols.” It further explains 
that “in this way, since all names, syllables, and so on are designated in symbols, they do 
not transcend symbols. Since all appearances arise as symbols, everything arises as an 
intimate instruction on the meaning of symbols. Saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are realized in 
their entirety to be mere symbols” (Smith 2020: 56).
The gnoseological deployment of symbolic language in tantric literature serves a so­
teriological purpose. In the following extract from the Extensive History [smad cha, folia 
85–​88] we read an emic account on the hermeneutics of symbolic transmission.
(folio 85) Symbols (brda) are described in terms of their essence (ngo bo), defini­
tion (nges tshig), and types (dbye ba). Essence is understood as arriving at the key 
meaning of a symbol like the swift blazing of a fire. Its definition is just words used, 
ordinary sounds approximating the symbol, supports for ascertaining the nature 
of reality (chos nyid). The varieties of symbols are innumerable and are subsumed 
under natural symbols, those abiding naturally as descriptive symbols, and as those 
indicating a reason (folio 86). Furthermore, symbols are divided into body-​symbols 
(lus kyi brda) and mind-​symbols (yid kyi brda). Body-​symbols include deliberate 
hand gestures (Skt. mudrā), written syllables (bris yi ge), and representational or 
form-​based symbols (gzugs brnyan).
Buddhists understand hand symbols, but not others [outsiders], and since they 
are the cause for spiritual attainment individual sections of the tantras explain their 
practice. Written syllables vary and by depending upon them on attains freedom 
from self-​arising phenomena (folio 87). Relying on purifying syllables (dag bye yi ge) 
one attains untainted liberation from the three realms. By means of the transforma­
tive syllables (sgyur byed yi ge) the hidden reality becomes utterly evident even if it 
is not known to everyone. Through the purification of the syllables of gods, ḍākinīs, 
nāgas, Brahma, garudas and others, one understands the meaning, but not others. By 
connecting strings of syllables, one becomes proficient in the critical way of reciting 
mantras. Men and women rely on sense impressions for image symbols such as, brass 
butter lamps, and so forth, which produce certainty.

--- PAGE 489 ---
464      Georgios T. Halkias
 
Empowering blessings, feast gatherings and bali offerings (gtor ma) depend upon 
the teacher’s authentic realization and become mind symbols. With a mind of de­
votion and awareness they are liberated in a state of nondual union. This is the key 
point of fusion. These mind symbols (folio 88) arise from the teacher’s intrinsic real­
ization. The meaning of mind symbols is understood as those symbols which are not 
apparent.
Descriptive symbols (brjod pa’ brda) are of three kinds: those which arise from 
scriptures; those which arise from a yogi’s experiential understanding; and those 
intentionally caused during a definite time. Descriptive symbols in scriptures start 
with one’s set of precepts or samaya in respect to individual secret tantras which are 
unintelligible to others as if they were a foreign tongue. Those symbols which arise 
from a yogi’s experiential understanding produce liberation from the sufferings of 
others –​ interdependent origination, the fusion between cognition and phenomena, 
and so forth, are experiences joined with the field of conduct in oneself fall within the 
range of mahāsiddhas. Those symbols intentionally caused during a definite time are 
those expressed during a feast offering, or an empowerment, or the feast of ḍākas and 
ḍākinīs. Those are not dependent upon external elaborations but directly arise from 
within as the nature of reality.
 (folio 89) All these symbols are crucial for generating the experiences of tögel. 
Thus, comprehend the nature of the symbols, enter reality itself as they cut through 
the proliferation of words and letters.
If one was to ask how are we to understand this lineage of transmission?
It is the transmission lineage from Garab Dorje’s emanation.
By whom? It is the transmission of (Buddha) Vajradhara.
How does it operate as a path and means?
This transmission lineage relies upon all the symbols of the Secret Mantra.
What is a simile for this transmission lineage?
It is like pouring water from one full vase to another where neither are full nor 
falling short of water.
What is the purpose for this transmission lineage?
To make ultimate truth known to worthy individuals in the future.
What is the aim of this transmission lineage?
It is unmistaken buddhahood which is beyond imputation, speculation, and any 
kind of conceptualization.
Parting Reflections: The Invisible Visible
The hagiographies of the early Great Perfection patriarchs stem from a historiomythical 
tradition that relies on a lifeline of awakened mystics and their uninterrupted lineages 
of transmissions. Śrī Siṃha’s transhistorical apotheosis belongs to a symbolic kind of 
understanding supporting the Great Perfection’s grand teleology: self-​dissolution in 
a body of light. As stated in the previously quoted passage from the Extensive History 
(folio 89), symbols “cut through the proliferation of words and letters” and “are crucial

--- PAGE 490 ---
Timeless Symbolism      465
 
for generating the experiences of tögel” and “entering reality itself.” The primacy of 
figurative language is echoed in an episode from the life of the Indian mystic Saraha. 
Upon meeting his tantric teacher, the mahāsiddha Saraha asked if she is a fletcheress. 
She replied, “Noble son, the intent of the Buddha can be understood through symbols 
and actions, not through words and texts” (Schaeffer 2005: 21). Śrī Siṃha’s life story can 
be read not only as an idealized narrative of tantric life but as an interpretation on the 
prevalence of symbols as gnoseological methods at the service of the Great Perfection’s 
soteriology.
Notes
	1.	 Dzogchen is the highest system of contemplative practice in these schools in the full spec­
trum of spiritual paths divided into nine successive vehicles (theg pa rim pa dgu).
	2.	 There is room for more discussion concerning family resemblances shared by gnostic and 
other mystery cult movements in the West and the East. For a recent speculative explo­
ration of the multireligious landscape of Central Asia and the parallels between the Great 
Perfection and the Syriac Church of the East, see Tiso (2016).
	3.	 Hereinafter Extensive History. This work is said to have been authored by Zhang ston bkra 
shis rdo rje (1097–​1167). Tradition has it that it has been dictated in the middle floor of 
Samye monastery by Vimalamitra to the eminent Tibetan translators Ska ba dpal brtsegs 
and Cog ro klu’i rgyal mtshan. The narrative found in the Extensive History is reproduced 
in later Tibetan literature by Dudjom Rinpoche (1991: 497–​501), Tulku Thondup (1996: 103–​
105), Valby (2002: 27–​33), Pema Kunsang (2006: 133–​143), and Nyoshul Khenpo Jamyang 
Dorjé (2005: 39–​40), among others.
	4.	 A common line of early Dzogchen succession starts with Garab Dorje and ends with 
Vimalamitra. However, there are alternative accounts as to those masters in between. In the 
Be ro tsa na’i rnam thar ’dra ’bag chen mo, Buddhagupta is listed as Śrī Siṃha’s teacher, and 
according to the lineage preserved in the Mkha’ ’gro snying thig, Garab Dorje was also his 
teacher which would make him his contemporary.
	5.	 The Mkha’ ’gro snying thig, a two-​volume terma attributed to Padmasambhava and revealed 
in the thirteenth century by Padma Ledreltsal (Pad ma las ’brel rtsal), and the Bi ma snying 
thig, a three-​volume compilation attributed to the eighth-​century Indian Vimalamitra, are 
included in the Snying thig ya bzhi compiled by Longchenpa.
	6.	 For more on Nubchen Sangye Yeshe, see Dudjom Rinpoche (1991: 607, 610). Listed 
as one of the twenty-​five disciples of Padmasambhava, Nubchen Sangye Yeshe is best 
known for his doxographical work, the Lamp for the Eye of Contemplation (Bsam gtan mig 
sgron).
	7.	 Not unlike the hagiography of the Indian mahāsiddha Saraha, Śrī Siṃha’s life story is 
an exemplar for spiritual practice. As a lineage holder and authorizer of tradition, he 
is framed as an object of reverence, a source of blessings, and an eternal symbol of ab­
solute reality that may be encountered by all members of the tradition. See Schaeffer 
(2005: 15).
	8.	 Examples of signs involving lights, kāyas, unusual sounds, and earthquakes that occur 
when one’s awareness reaches full maturity are mentioned in the Tantra of Blazing Relics 
(Sku gdung ’bar ba’i rgyud).

--- PAGE 491 ---
466      Georgios T. Halkias
 
	 9.	 Karmay (2007: 193) notes that from the eleventh century onward, the notion of a light 
body has been, “fairly constant.” According to Tulku Thodup (1984: 192–​93), the light body 
attained by the Great Perfection patriarchs is one of the three major ways of dissolving the 
physical body through the practice of tögel, the final of the two major aspects of Dzogchen 
practice. The other two are the attainment of the rainbow body (’ja’ lus) through the prac­
tice of khregs chod and the rainbow body of great transference (’ja’ lus ’pho ba chen po) 
through the practice of tögel. With this distinctive Great Perfection practice of the great 
transference, an adept transforms his impure illusory body into a rainbow-​like body and 
lives for centuries without dying as long as he is of benefit to others.
	10.	 Zhelchem is a minor genre of Tibetan literature that deals with the final spiritual 
instructions of Buddhist masters delivered to their disciples before passing away. The final 
testaments of these early Dzogchen patriarchs are included in a collection known as the 
Four Final Testaments of the Vidyādharas (Rig ’dzin gyi zhal chems bzhi), or as the Four 
Posthumous Teachings of the Vidyādharas (Rig ’dzin gyi ’das rjes bzhi).
	11.	 The Seminal Heart of the Ḍākinīs gives the name Dge ldan bzang po for the father and 
Snang gsal ldan ma for the mother. In all cases, there is no pretense for providing a Sanskrit 
or Chinese name, for their names are given only in Tibetan. They were probably inserted 
in the narrative in ways that were intelligible and instructive to their Tibetan readers.
	12.	 References to a golden land appear across various ancient and classical texts of South Asia, 
yet none can provide details of its exact location. Naturally, interpretations have varied. 
Revire (2018: 168) asserts that “most scholars think that this generic toponym was used as a 
vague designation for an extensive region, located to the east of the Indian subcontinent.”
	13.	 The exact location of this cemetery is not known, but there are some stereotypical 
indications that it could have been west of Bodh Gaya. A variant story of Śrī Siṃha’s life 
is recounted in the Vajra Bridge (Rdo rje zam pa) of the Space Class lineage of teachings. 
Here, the scholars of Nālandā direct him toward Mañjuśrīmitra who could give him the 
ultimate teachings to attain awakening in one lifetime. However, to fulfill his quest, he 
must travel for six months underground, in darkness and with thr sole guidance of his 
inner light in search for his teacher. See Chögyal Namkhai Norbu and Clemente (1999).
	14.	 This is commonly identified with the Wu tai shan in Shanxi province of China, but not so 
for Powers and Templeman (2012: 638) who consider the attribution of Ri bo rtse lnga as 
Wu tai shan unlikely. They posit instead a Five Peaked Mountain in a region referred to as 
Tīrthapuri in Zhang Zhung in Western Tibet as a more plausible interpretation.
	15.	 This is probably referring to the power of swift-​footedness (rkang mgyogs). The siddhi of 
speed walking is often listed among the eight ordinary siddhis (Skt. aṣṭasādhāraṇasiddhi; 
thun mong gi dngos grub brgyad) attained by tantric adepts. In the Jātakas and in Jain lit­
erature, the term “awareness holder” (Skt. vidyāhara; rig ’dzin) designates a crossover be­
tween a human and divine sorcerer (Davidson 2017: 17), but in later Dzogchen contexts it 
has come to mean an accomplished spiritual practitioner, the one who abides in intrinsic 
awareness (rig pa).
	16.	 The image of the tantric mad siddha (grub thob smyon pa), a stereotype for the incompre­
hensibility of the awakened life, brings a fitting closure to Śrī Siṃha’s life story.
	17.	 These include 190 upadeśa instructions (man ngag gi yig brgya dgu bcu), the Seventeen 
Tantras of Dzogchen (rgya che ba rgyud bcu bdun), and the Wrathful Black Mother Tantra 
(Bka’ srung nag mo khros ma’i rgyud). See Dargyay (1988: 47). The Four Profound Scriptures 
of Vimalamitra (Bi ma la’i zab pa pod bzhi) were buried as treasure-​texts only to be later 
rediscovered by Lce btsun seng ge dbang phyug (c. tenth to eleventh centuries) in the

--- PAGE 492 ---
Timeless Symbolism      467
 
Chimpu caves at a mountain hill above the Samye monastic compound. They are divided 
into the Golden Letters (gser yig can), the Copper Letters (zangs yig can), the Conch Letters 
(dung yig can), and the Turquoise Letters (g.yu yig can). The Ornamented Letters (phra yig 
can) and the Copper Letters are usually grouped together. These four scriptures along with 
the eighteen tantras and the 190 upadeśa instructions constitute, according to ’Jam mgon 
kong sprul’s Gter rnam, the complete series of the Gsang ba snying thig chen mo ascribed to 
five treasure-​revealers (Prats 1984: 207).
	18.	 Gruber (2012) affirms that prior to his visit to Tibet, and for reasons that are unclear in the 
hagiographical sources, Vimalamitra was the recipient of “a slightly less profound aural 
lineage.”
	19.	 For an introduction and English translation of Śrī Siṃha’s Seven Nails, see Halkias (2021).
	20.	 A different story of Vairocana is told in the Bön historical sources according to which he 
was a Bönpo called Ba gor g.Yung drung gsas who embraced both Buddhism and Bön 
(Karmay 2007: 35–​36).
	21.	 Karmay (2007: 22) notes that according to some Tibetan sources, the name Dhahena refers 
to a place in Oḍḍiyāna.The titles of these texts seem to vary among sources. See Karmay 
(2007: 23–​24) for a list drawn from the Thimphu edition of the Rnying ma rgyud ’bum. The 
Paṇ sgrub rnams kyi thugs bcud snying gi nyi ma (Bai ro rgyud ’bum, vol. 1, pl. 1–​172) refers to 
the meeting between Śrī Siṃha and the Tibetans who receive six particular teachings; a list 
and discussion is found in Kapstein (2008: 276–​77). The colophon of the Tantra of the Great 
Luminosity of Wisdom (Ye shes rin po che ’od kyis rgyud, Bai ro rgyud ’bum, vol. 3, tsa, 309–​63) 
translated by Śrī Siṃha and Vairocana collaborates their meeting at Dha he na’i ’du khang.
	22.	 The Be ro tsa na’i rnam thar ’dra ’bag chen mo is included in the last volume of the Bai’ro 
rgyud ’bum; for an English translation, see Palmo (2004).
	23.	 The fundamental text of the Space Class, the Vajra Bridge, is attributed to Vairocana who 
transmitted it to his student Spang mi pham mgon po. After him, the transmission succes­
sion continued into one person at a time up until ’Dzeng Dharmabodhi (1052–​1168) who 
received the teachings from Bagom Yeshe Jangchub (Sba sgom ye shes byang chub) and 
disseminated them widely (Anspal 2005: 31).
	24.	 In the Seminal Heart of the Ḍākinīs account, Mañjuśrīmitra does not feature as Śrī Siṃha’s 
teacher. The Tibetan sources are clearly at odds with each other. In the Extensive History (f. 
114) it is said that 375 years after Mañjuśrīmitra granted his last testament to Śrī Siṃha, he 
reincarnated in western India at a place known the Ornament of the Golden Flower (Gser 
gyi me tog gis brgyan pa’i gling) and came to be known as the Later Mañjuśrīmitra who 
instructed Padmasambhava in the practice of the Secret Mantra.
	25.	 Given the dominant “treasure” themes in the hagiographical record, Germano (2002: 247) 
doubts that Padmasambhava had any historical connection with Śrī Siṃha, suggesting 
that their encounter was a later fabrication coinciding with the mythologization of 
Padmasambhava in the Treasure tradition.
	26.	 His Sanskrit name appears in variant spellings in the Tibetan sources, including: Śrīsiṃha, 
Śrīsiṃhaprabhā, Shri seng ge, Shri sing ha, and Shri sing nga. In Tibetan, his name is given 
as Dpal gyi seng ge, Dpal gyi seng ge mgon po, Dpal seng, and Senge dpal, among others.
	27.	 I am grateful for the TBRC (BDRC) whose online catalogues made this preliminary survey 
possible.
	28.	 Among Śrī Siṃha’s works in the Gting skyes edition of the Rnying ma rgyud ’bum, 
Germano (2002: 246, n. 62) counts twelve from the Mind Division, ten from the Space 
Division, and seven from the Pith Instruction Division.

--- PAGE 493 ---
468      Georgios T. Halkias
 
	29.	 Sections of this work are translated in English by Chögyal Namkai Norbu and Adriano 
Clemente (1999), and the “root-​tantra” (rtsa rgyud) by Neumaier-​Dargyay (1992).
	30.	 Various interpretations have been put forth by Tibetan and non-​Tibetan scholars con­
cerning the country of his origin that include India, China, Kinnaur, Central Asia, Khotan, 
Indonesia, and even Burma. In the edict of Zhi ba ’od, a Śrī Siṃha from Nepal is mentioned 
(Karmay 1998: 149) which may collaborate the tradition that states that he passed away 
in Li, which according to Powers and Templeman (2012: 638–​39) may also refer to Nepal 
in early texts. This reading accords with the hagiographical account where it is said that 
Śrī Siṃha met Padmasambhava and the Nepalese Hūṃkara. His birthplace is given ei­
ther as Shoshaling (Sho sha’i gling) or Sokyam (So khyam), neither of which can be ge­
ographically established or historically verified. Hansen-​Barber (1984: 38–​39) speculates 
that Shokyam is a description of the town’s function than a proper name. He interprets 
the word khyam (yard, courtyard, entrance) as “garrison” and conjectures that it refers to a 
border town between Central Asia and China.
	31.	 Affinities between the two have not passed unnoticed in academic studies. Tucci’s claim 
(1956: 60) that Dzogchen shared a genetic relationship with Chan has been criticized by 
Karmay (2007: 86–​106) and by Robertson and Tanaka (1992) who ascertained that there 
are two distinct systems. For a more reconciliatory approach to this subject, see van Schaik 
(2012). Although Chan and Dzogchen may share compatible views on their observations 
of the nature of mind, their exoteric versus esoteric methods of practice, respectively, for 
example, differ so widely to illustrate that they do not share common origins.
	32.	 The association of Śrī Siṃha with China originated as a Nyingma apology to account for 
the absence of Sanskrit Dzogchen scriptures because Śrī Siṃha, according to the Extensive 
History, had transported them from Bodh Gaya in India to the Bodhi Tree Temple in 
China. The places which Śrī Siṃha concealed his Dzogchen texts are named Byang chub 
shing (Bodhi Tree) and Bkra shis khri sgo (Auspicious Ten Thousand Gates). I am grateful 
to Dan Martin for bringing to my attention that Khri sgo, “Ten Thousand Gates” also 
refers to the walled city of Ch’ang-​an (Xi’an). The “thousand gates” referred originally to 
the Jianzhang Palace of the Han; see Nienhauser (2010: 66).
	33.	 In his commentary to the Assembly of the Supreme (Dpal chen ’dus pa) titled the Ocean of 
the Eight Herukas: A Guide to the Meditation on the Assembly of the Supreme (Dpal ’dus 
bsgom khog bka’ brgyad rgya mtsho, p. 463), the contemporary Tibetan scholar Lopön 
Tektsok (Slob dpon theg mchog, 1957–​present) draws from the mind-​terma (thugs gter) 
of Jigme Lingpa (’Jigs med gling pa 1730–​98) and adds an additional specific lineage of the 
actualization of meaning (bka’ babs don brgyud pa).
	34.	 The Tibetan term brda can be translated as “symbol,” “indication,” or “sign,” and brgyud pa 
as “lineage” or “transmission.”
	35.	 Tulku Thondup (1984: 7–​12) divides the appearance of all tantras by means of two kinds of 
Symbolic Transmission, among nonhuman “awareness holders” and among “both human 
and non-​human beings.”
Tibetan References
Klong chen pa dri med ’od zer (1308–​1364). Gsung ’Bum. 26 vols. Pecin: khrung go’i bod rig pa 
dpe skrun khang, 2009.

--- PAGE 494 ---
Timeless Symbolism      469
 
Klong chen pa dri med ’od zer. Rdzogs pa chen po snying thig gi lo rgyus chen mo. In Bkaʼ ma 
rgyas pa, vol. 45, 505–​660. Ed., Bdud ʼjoms ʼjigs bral ye shes rdo rje. Kalimpong: Dupjum 
Lama, 1982–​1987.
Klong chen pa dri med ’od zer. Snying thig ya bzhi. 11 vols. Ed., Trulku Tsewang, Jamyang and L. 
Tashi. Delhi: a ’dzam chos sgar par khang, 1970.
Pad ma las ’brel rtsal (1231–​1259). Mkha’ ’gro snying thig. Gangtok: lama dawa and sherab 
gyaltsen, 1984.
Padma dkar po (1527–​1592). Chos ’byung bstan pa’i padma rgyas pa’i nyin byed. 
Śatapiṭaka Series, no. 75, International Academy of Indian Culture. New Delhi: Lokesh 
Chandra, 1968.
Secondary Sources
Anspal, Sten. 2005. “The Space Section of the Great Perfection (rDzogs-​chen klong-​sde): A 
Category of Philosophical and Meditative Teachings in Tibetan Buddhism.” Master’s thesis, 
University of Oslo.
Chögyal Namkahi Norbu, and Adriano Clemente. 1999. The Supreme Source: The Fundamental 
Tantra of Dzogchen Semde, Kunjed Gyalpo. Boston: Snow Lion.
Dargyay, Eva M. 1977. The Rise of Esoteric Buddhism in Tibet. Reprint, Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1988.
Davidson, Ronald. 2017. “Magicians, Sorcerers and Witches: Considering Pretantric, Non-​
sectarian Sources of Tantric Practices.” Religions 8: 1–​33.
Dudjom Rinpoche. 1991. The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals and 
History. Trans. Gyurme Dorje and Matthew Kapstein. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Esler, Dylan. 2014. “On the Life of gNubs-​chen Sangs-​rgyas ye-​shes.” Revue d’EtudesTibétaines 
29: 5–​27.
Esler, Dylan. 2005. “The Origins and Early History of rDzogs chen.” The Tibet Journal 30, 
no. 3: 33–​62.
Germano, David. 2002. “The Seven Descents and the Early History of the Rnying ma 
Transmissions.” In The Many Canons of Tibetan Buddhism. PIATS 2000: Tibetan 
Studies, Proceedings of the Ninth Seminar of the International Association of 
Tibetan Studies, edited by Helmut Eimer and David Germano, 225–​86. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Gruber, Joel. 2016. “The Sudden and Gradual Sūtric (and Tantric?) Approaches of the RimGyis 
’Jug pa’i Bsgom don and Cig car ’Jug pa rnam par mi rtog pa’i bsgom don.” Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 39: 405–​27.
Gruber, Joel. 2012. “Vimalamitra.” Treasury of Lives, accessed February 18, 2020, http://​trea​
sury​ofli​ves.org/​biog​raph​ies/​view/​Vima​lami​tra/​9985.
Halkias, Georgios. 2021. “Śrī Siṃha’s Final UpadeŚa: Seven Nails That Strike the Essence of 
Awakening.” In Illuminating the Dharma: Buddhist Studies in Honour of Venerable Professor 
KL Dhammajoti, edited by Toshiichi Endo, 181–​94. Hong Kong: Centre of Buddhist Studies, 
University of Hong Kong.
Halkias, Georgios. 2004. Tibetan Buddhism Registered: A Catalogue from the Imperial Court of 
‘Phang Thang. The Eastern Buddhist 36: 46–​105.
Hanson-​Barber, A. W. 1986. “The Identification of dGa’ rab rdo rje.” The Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 9, no. 2: 55–​64.

--- PAGE 495 ---
470      Georgios T. Halkias
 
Hanson-​Barber, A. W. 1984. “The Life and Teachings of Vairocana.” PhD diss., University of 
Wisconsin-​Madison.
Kapstein, Matthew. 2008. “The Sun of the Heart and the Bai ro rgyud ’bum.” Revue d’études 
tibétaines 15: 275–​88.
Karmay, Samten. [1998] 2007. The Great Perfection (rDzogs chen in Tibetan), A Philosophical 
and Meditative Teaching of Tibetan Buddhism. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Karmay, Samten.1998. “A Discussion on the Doctrinal Position of rDzogs-​Chen from the 10th 
to the13th Centuries.” Journal Asiatique 263: 147–​56.
Lalou, M. 1953. "Les textes bouddhiques au temps du roi Khri-​sroft-​lde-​bcan. Contribution à la 
bibliographie du Kanjur et du Tanjur." Journal Asiatique, 241: 313–​53.
Neumaier-​Dargyay, E. K. 1992. The Sovereign All-​Creating Mind, the Motherly Buddha. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Nienhauser, William. 2010. “Chang’an on My Mind: A Reading of Lu Zhaolin’s ‘Chang’an, 
Thoughts on Antiquity.’ ” Sungkyun Journal of East Asia Studies 10, no. 1: 63–​91.
Norbu, Namkhai, and Andriano Clemente. 1999. The Supreme Source: The Fundamental Tantra 
of Dzogchen Semde Kunjed Gyalpo. Trans. Andrew Lukianowicz. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Nyoshul Khenpo Jamyang Dorje. 2005. A Marvellous Garland of Rare Gems: Biographies of 
Masters of Awareness in the Dzogchen Lineage. Jackson City, CA: Padma.
Palmo, Ani Jinba. 2004. The Great Image: The Life Story of Vairochana the Translator. Boston: 
Shambhala.
Pema Kunsang, Eric. 2006. Wellsprings of the Great Perfection: Lives and Insights of the Early 
Masters in the Dzogchen Lineage. Boudhanath, Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
Powers, John, and David Templeman. 2012. Historical Dictionary of Tibet. Lanham, MD: 
Scarecrow Press.
Prats, Ramon. 1984. “Tshe-​dbang nor-​bu’s Chronological Notes of the Early Transmission 
ofthe Bi-​ma snying-​thig.” In Tibetan and Buddhist Studies Commemorating the 200th 
Anniversary of the Birth of Alexander Csoma de Körös, edited by Louis Ligeti, 197–​209. 
Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó.
Revire, Nicolas. 2018. “Facts and Fiction: The Myth of Suvaṇṇabhūmi through the Thai and 
Burmese Looking Glass.” Trans-​Regional and National Studies of Southeast Asia 6, no. 2 
(July): 167–​205
Richardson, H. E. 1985. A Corpus of Early Tibetan Inscriptions. London: Royal Asiatic Society.
Robertson, Raymond, and Kenneth Tanaka. 1992. “A Chan Text from Tun-​huang: Implications 
for Chan Influence on Tibetan Buddhism.” In Tibetan Buddhism: Reason and Revelation, 
edited by Steven Goodman and Ronald Davidson, 57–​78. Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Schaeffer, Kurtis. 2005. Dreaming the Great Brahmin: Tibetan Traditions of the Buddhist Poet-​
Saint Saraha. New York: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Malcom. 2020. The Blazing Lamp Tantra and The Threaded String of Pearls: A trans­
lation of the Drönma barwai gyü and the Mutig trangwa gyüpa. Somerville, MA: Wisdom 
Publications.
Tiso, V. Francis. 2016. Rainbow Body and Resurrection: Spiritual Attainment, the Dissolution of 
the Material Body, and the Case of Khenpo A Chö. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1956. Minor Buddhist Texts, Part II. Rome: Is.M.E.O.
Tulku Thondup. 1984. The Tantric Tradition of the Nyingmapa. Marion, MA: Buddhayana.
Tulku Thondup. 1996. Masters of Meditation and Miracles: The Longchen Nyingthig Lineages of 
Tibetan Buddhism. Boston: Shambhala.

--- PAGE 496 ---
Timeless Symbolism      471
 
Valby, Jim. 2002. The Great History of Garab Dorje, Manjushrimitra, Shrisingha, Jnanasutra and 
Vimalamitra. Arcidosso, Italy: Shang Shung Edizioni.
Van Schaik, Sam. 2004. “The Early Days of the Great Perfection.” Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 27, no. 1: 165–​206.
Van Schaik, Sam. 2012. “Dzogchen, Chan and the Question of Influence.” Revue d’Etudes 
Tibétaines 24: 5–​19.

--- PAGE 497 ---
Chapter 21
The Twin Miracle
The Two-​Headed Aizen Myōō [Ryōzu Aizen] in 
Exorcistic Shugendō Practice at the Japanese Tantric 
Buddhist Complex of Kōyasan
Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
Ryōzu Aizen
Ryōzu Aizen 両頭愛染 is a tantric deity unique to Japanese Shingon Buddhism. This 
deity has destructive characteristics and appears to have been employed in possession 
and exorcism rites. Since its founding in the ninth century, Kōyasan 高野山 has been 
one of the headquarters of Shingon Buddhism. The thirteenth century was a period of 
conflicting claims there, and such rites were instrumental in assertions of legitimacy. 
During this time, Shugendō 修験道 mountain ascetic practice (lit. “the way to achieve 
miraculous powers through practice”) was at a height at this site, and its influence is ev­
ident in Ryōzu Aizen as well as in texts produced by one Shingon branch particularly 
engaged in claims to legitimacy, the Chūin branch (hereafter “Chūin-ryū”). To demon­
strate the meanings of Ryōzu Aizen at Kōyasan at that time, this chapter discusses the 
development of the icon and gives illustrations from a text produced by the Chūin-​ryū 
after one particular, and violent, instance of conflict.
There are two Wisdom Kings, Aizen Myōō (愛染明王; Skt. Rāga-​vidyārāja, lit. 
“Wisdom King Dyed in Lust,” hereafter Aizen) and Fudō Myōō (不動明王; Skt. 
Acalanātha–​vidyārāja, lit. “Immovable Wisdom King,” hereafter Fudō), that had been 
linked as a pair since the end of the Heian period (794–​1185). By at least the close of the 
twelfth century their identification was well developed in the Ono lineage (Ono-​ryū) of 
Shingon, especially in the Sanbō’in branch at Daigō-​ji in the Kyoto capital (Dolce 2006–​
2007; Faure 2015, 199–​234; Trenson 2018). Far less common, or still largely unknown, 
was a version of Aizen as a single-​bodied, two-​headed version: “Ryōzu Aizen.” This icon 
is a combination of Aizen and Fudō. Jitsu’un (實運 1105–​1160) of Daigō-​ji, who gave the

--- PAGE 498 ---
The Twin Miracle      473
 
first description of Ryōzu Aizen in his twelfth-​century Genpishō 玄秘抄), noted that its 
form is similar to that of Kongōsatta. He also noted that one of the faces of the icon is 
white, which symbolizes compassion, and the other red, symbolizing anger. There may 
be an even earlier origin. Kakuzen (覚禅 1142–​1213) mentioned in his late twelfth-​ to 
early thirteenth-​century Kakuzenshō 覚禅鈔, a text that focuses on the teachings of 
the Ono lineage, that Shōbō (聖宝 832–​909), founder of Daigōji and of the Ono lin­
eage, had described a statue with one body and two heads (Dai Nihon Bukkyō zensho 51; 
Goepper 1993, 52). Shōbō had identified the head on the left as that of Fudō and the one 
on the right as that of Aizen and stated that therefore Fudōō and Aizen were nondual. 
The Kakuzenshō also contains the earliest known image of Ryōzu Aizen. By the end of 
the Heian period, Fudō and Aizen had become paired and identified with the Womb 
and Diamond (kontai 金胎) realms of principle and wisdom (richi 理智). In around the 
thirteenth to fourteenth centuries, the fully nondual body in the form of Ryōzu Aizen 
emerged, a form of Fudō and Aizen that was now expressive of extreme violence and of 
explicit sexuality.
As a fusion of two Myōō, this icon has, then, largely been taken to be a sexual (and 
even heretical) icon. Jitsu’un’s description of Ryōzu Aizen is found in a section of the text 
with the title “the human-​shaped vajra” ningyō-​sho 人形杵: “This is the samaya form 
of the body of Aizen bosatsu. The form is one body with two heads” (Taishō 78, 390). 
This vajra, a tool used in ritual for purification, is also called a “vajra of sexual union,” 
wagōshō (和合杵). It is not “two headed” in the way that Ryōzu Aizen is, though the 
concept seems to be the same. It comprises opposing yet conjoined forces in the form 
of a five-​pronged vajra, which has the conventional appearance of such a tool with the 
“heads” of the vajra at each end but is made of two interlocking parts that can be de­
tached from each other. Since the vajra is specified as (being similar to) a “human form,” 
its construction is meant to symbolize sexual intercourse. The doubled bija “hhum” is its 
vocal-​sonic equivalent. There is also a “five-​pronged” mudra that similarly symbolizes 
intercourse and a mandala connected to the Tachikawa branch of Shingon that shows 
a human male and female connected in the same position as that represented by the 
vajra form. Both the vajra and the Ryōzu Aizen icon represent nonduality. In theory, this 
was meant to be that of Dainichi Nyorai (大日如来 Skt. Mahāvairocana), the central 
esoteric Buddha that unifies the Diamond and Womb realms, and from whom, it was 
understood, all phenomena emanated.1 As explained by Jitsu’un, Aizen as a one-​headed 
icon already had a samaya (symbolic) form as the anthropomorphic vajra, so the fact 
that his description of Ryōzu Aizen is found in this textual context suggests that Ryōzu 
Aizen is a full expression of Aizen in its symbolic form and carries his connotations.
Moreover, Aizen had long been used in rituals for attracting an object or person 
desired. He was already understood as embodying the resolution of the dichotomy of 
enlightenment and destructive afflictions (Skt. klesa; Jpn. bonnō 煩悩), especially those 
of desire in its general sense. This was an expression of the principle bonnō soku bodai 
(煩悩即菩提 “transgressions [worldly desires] are [identical to] enlightenment”), 
discussed below. When the icon became double, the seed-​syllable also did, into hhūm, 
which requires an elongated inhalation and exhalation.2 In its form as a written and

--- PAGE 499 ---
474      Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
 
visualized Siddham syllable, it extended vertically and comprises several extra brush 
strokes. Another version of the dual, palindromic textual, verbal, and breath forms of 
these sounds is found in early names for Ryōzu Aizen, such as “Aizen Zen’ai.” It is much 
like the mantra hamsa, which expresses nondualism in the form and enunciation of its 
“imaginary syllables” aham sah (“I am Him”) and so’ham (“He is me”), which constitute 
an in-​breath and an out-​breath (Padoux 2017, 109–​110). The same concept is expressed 
eidetically in the flashing back and forth between Aizen and Fudō that is required in 
their use in ritualized visualization (discussed below). This dissolution of difference is 
expressed in a mid-​thirteenth-​century Kōyasan Chūin-​ryū text: “Fudō is Aizen, Aizen 
is Fudō” (Abe 1983, 107).3 There is a prominent sexual element, which Lucia Dolce 
highlighted when she wrote that the process of Aizen and Fudō’s embodiment of “dif­
ferent stages of the union of opposites . . . was explicated by using other sets of opposites 
[like] . . . sexual elements such as the interaction between man and woman” (Dolce 
2006–​2007, 122). Both internal and external transformations functionally coexisted, 
and in ways that didn’t have only sexual meaning: Shingon exegeses and the rituals re­
lated to it emphasized “internal” (psychophysiological) change, but the possibilities 
offered by ritual actions of exerting external effects, including violence or exorcism, on 
the environment or on other beings, human or spirit, were by no means denied, as will 
be discussed below.
The Kakugen kudenshō is a collection of commentaries on the Yugikyō sutra (瑜祇経 
Taishō 867)4 from Kōyasan scholar monks Kakukai (覚海 [1142–​1223] of Daigō-​ji and 
Yūgen 融源 [1169–​?]) of Denbō’in. They commented that the form of Ryōzu Aizen is 
(equivalent to) the “the myōe in one body” (myōe ittai 冥会一体). This term can be 
found in a four-​part compound signifying the “profound state of unified mind,” the 
shinkyō myōe 心境冥会 used in a poem by Shingon school founder Kūkai (空海 774–​
835) (Shingon shū zensho 42).5 Like “the profound unity in one body,” this phrase, myōe 
ittai, is another expression of nonduality that was materially represented in Ryōzu Aizen.
There is, though, also an inner-​outer dynamism exhibited iconographically by Ryōzu 
Aizen and in the icon’s sexual aspects. These suggest the nondualism as well as an inner-​
outer conjunction that resonates with paradigms of possession and exorcism (Iyanaga 
2022, 17:n52).6 Similar views are found in the Henmyō’in Daishi Myōjin Go-​Takusen-​
ki (遍明院大師明神御託宣記 Record of the Oracle of Daishi Myōjin of Henmyō’in 
[Cloister]) (hereafter Takusen-​ki) (Abe 1983), a collection of “secret teachings,” and 
another Chūin-​ryū text concerned with the nature of nondualism, Niu Kōya Ryōsho 
Daimyōjin Hyōhyaku (丹生高野両所大明神表百; Invocation and Statement of Ritual 
Purpose to Niu and Kōya Ryōsho Daimyōjin) (Kōyasan monjo 3:453)7 written in 1319 by 
Kakuwa (覚和 c. 1260–​c. 1324).
Each of Ryōzu Aizen’s four hands grips a vajra and a bell, an arrow and a bow, and 
Fudō’s grasp his customary sword and lasso.8 These are paired and displayed as illustra­
tive examples of compassion/​principle and wisdom/​meditative concentration, aligned 
with the Womb and Diamond aspects of Dainichi Nyorai in the esoteric Buddhist tra­
dition. Here, the aspiration for the balance of these two might be understood as being 
neither so much for the enhancement of perception nor for the attainment of cognitive

--- PAGE 500 ---
The Twin Miracle      475
 
accuracy, but for ends more closely related to exorcistic procedures that drew as much 
on Shugendō practice as on Daoist yin-​yang principles and their balancing functions 
(Hori 1966, 1). Ryōzu Aizen’s attributes reflect the principles of duality-​nonduality al­
ready observed in Aizen (as embodiment of bonnō soku bodai). However, the tools 
in his many fanned-​out hands are arranged into six pairs, one of which in each set 
represents an active, forceful, outwardly projected energy (vajra, arrow, and sword) that 
corresponds to wisdom, and the other a receptive and yielding energy (bell, bow, and 
lasso) that corresponds to compassion.
Shingon, particularly from the thirteenth to fifteenth centuries, gendered the 
wisdom-​compassion binary, and the Chūin-​ryū monks at Kōyasan especially embraced 
this paradigm. They also frequently applied the “active energy/​passive energy” par­
adigm, which has both sexual and gendered aspects to it. The dynamic interplay be­
tween the two parts of the binary is most vividly represented by sexual union, but also 
suggests the attraction (inward force) and destruction (outward expelling force) that 
inform Aizen and Fudō’s functions (desire and destruction) as well as the process by 
which those functions are affected. This is expressed in the Takusenki. During a discus­
sion about suijaku and honji (an avataral system in which a kami [pre-​Buddhist deity] 
is understood to be the “manifest trace” of an “original ground,” that is, a Buddhist di­
vinity), the interlocutors of the 1251 oracle were informed—​following a passage that 
identified Fudō and Aizen with the Diamond and Womb worlds and introduced, in 
connection, the Kōyasan mountain goddess Niu Myōjin 丹生明神9 as the Womb—​that 
“the objects held by the two Myōō (bow and arrow and sword and lasso) are active en­
ergy and passive, holding energy” (Abe 1983, 107).10 Directly following is the statement: 
“Outside, [they] remove calamities, inside [they] obstruct and eliminate the hindrance 
[caused by] passions.” It is not that the objects are just sexualized; rather they represent 
“energies,” of which sex (as both biological condition and act) is one example. There 
then follows an explanation of the union of psychophysical energies as the very char­
acter of the manifest (suijaku) world of samsara:
Suijaku is the expression of the world of the manifest world [表世間 omote seken; 
literally “surface” world]. Also, [it is expressed] that, in terms of people of the world, 
men and women together maintain that world. Women are great sadness [pathos/​
compassion]; men judge right and wrong. The suijaku of the two [i.e., the Myōjin] 
are the expressions of this.
(Abe 1983, 106)11
The conjoined energy is here divided into emotion and reason (or judgment), which 
are respectively embodied by women and men. This appears to reflect a Daoist under­
standing of the world, particularly its yin-​yang principles. This was a worldview that 
had been absorbed into Shugendō or had perhaps been one of its original sources. It 
would have emerged from there into esoteric Buddhism since the incorporation of kami 
into the tradition included their associated yin-​yang principles (Dolce 2006–​2007, 119–​
150, 120). The objects held by Ryōzu Aizen that depict examples of “powers that push

--- PAGE 501 ---
476      Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
 
outward” and “powers that pull inward” are also illustrations of his function, of what 
he promises to his patron. For the targeting of a desired person, the forces of attrac­
tion and subjugation (“binding”) are called for. The attraction is represented by the in­
ward pull or receptivity of the objects that Ryōzu Aizen holds. For destruction of a target 
(for which Aizen was also ritually used), the forces of ejection (also involving subjuga­
tion/​binding) are necessary. This is represented by the outward force of the objects that 
Ryōzu Aizen holds.
In general, esoteric Buddhism in the medieval period was marked by a strong in­
terest in dualism and its transcendence, and Shingon Buddhism favored in particular: 
“the imagery of the unity of opposites that draws from the fundamental Tōmitsu12 idea 
of the interpenetration of the two mandalic realities” (Dolce 2006–​2007, 120). But the 
explanations in the Takusen-​ki regarding dualism (e.g., among numerous examples, the 
aforementioned discussion of honji and suijaku) employ language that suggests “inner” 
(or “inward”) and “outer” (or “outward”). These describe a binary that is dynamic 
rather than static. A similar view of dualism as not purely binary is found in an invo­
cation text: Niu Kōya Ryōsho Daimyōjin Hyōhyaku (丹生高野両所表白) by Kakuwa. 
Kakuwa was also a member of the Chūin-​ryū, and in his text he employed the meta­
phor of a box (interior) and a lid (exterior) to explain a series of dualisms. The mani­
fest world itself—​suijaku—​as described in the Takusen-​ki, is the world of the surface, 
of that which is exposed, visual, and tangible. Kakuwa’s text explains honji-​suijaku at 
Kōyasan. The honmon 本, or “honji gate,” is given as Taizōkai, and the shakumon 迹門, 
or “suijaku gate,” as Kongōkai. Thus, the “origin teaching” is the Womb World, and the 
manifest teaching is the Diamond World. This makes the two worlds (two mandalas) 
a honji suijaku construct. However, in Kakuwa’s text, these two worlds are then called 
naishō (内証; the inner realization of enlightenment), and this inner realization is 
further termed shōchi hōmi 聖智法味 the “taste” of the sacred and wise Dharma. The 
accompanying geyō (外用; outer action, or actions that manifest inner enlightenment) 
are equal to Niu and Kōya Myōjin. The harmonious fusion, or interdependence (wagō 
和合) of these is likened to a box and its lid, an internal and an external.
The emphasis on the transcendence of duality is readily seen in much Aizen-​related 
iconographical art at Kōyasan of this period, such as the sanzon (triptych of devotional 
icons) depicted on (and in) reliquaries, small cabinets (zushi 厨子), and paintings. The 
production and use of these flourished between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries. 
With its bicephaly, the new variant of Aizen, Ryōzu Aizen, represents a peak in the 
expression of this doctrine. The original single-​headed Aizen, in being bright red 
from head to foot, was already an immediate embodiment of the identity between 
transgressions and enlightenment. Aizen was enlightened even while thoroughly “dyed” 
with the origin of all destructive mental afflictions. Ryōzu Aizen, the two-​headed form, 
expressed duality even more forcefully by virtue of having a greater number of dualisms 
symbolically invested in and visually represented on it, but it varied from the original 
form since the flip side of desire/​attraction—​destruction—​was heightened through the 
fusion of Aizen (already possessing destructive powers) together with another Wisdom 
King, Fudō.

--- PAGE 502 ---
The Twin Miracle      477
 
Aizen and Fudō in Rites of 
Demonization and Exorcism
From early on in his employment in Japan, Aizen had been used for worldly and de­
structive ends within the realm of political machinations (and the link between tantra 
and state protection is common across pan-​Asian tantra), and demonology is also found 
in the form of subjugation and expulsion rites. He was brought to Japan by Shingon 
monks, including Kūkai (who also brought from China the Yugikyō, which describes 
Aizen [though as a single-​headed icon]). Aizen gained fame in elite circles after having 
been employed by Shingon priest and Ono lineage founder Seison (成尊 1012–​1074) to 
bring about the death of Emperor Go-​Reizei (後冷泉天皇 1025–​1068) (Hayami 1987, 
136–​139). Seison became the new emperor’s official “protector-​monk.” Subsequently, 
Aizen ritual performances became the domain of Ono-​ryū monks and were carried out 
for the purposes of the emperors and elites—​a prestigious and profitable monopoly.
Fudō, like Aizen, has destructive characteristics and demon-​subjugating powers. 
Conventionally, Fudō holds a sword in one hand and a lasso in the other, purportedly 
symbolic of his ability to slay (“cut” through) ignorance and to hurl a lasso around the 
existential drifters of the world. He is depicted as dwelling in the mountains, but he also 
has links with water, waterfalls, and serpentine nagas (Kurikara, a naga wound around 
a sword, is one of his forms). His pedestal is either a mountain or a rock surrounded by 
a stormy sea, representing Mount Sumeru, the divine axis of ancient Indian cosmology. 
Because of these dual meanings, he is the icon used in the mountain and waterfall ascetic 
practices of the Shugenja across Japan and is the tutelary deity in Shugendō. The demon-​
subjugating powers of Fudō are evident in his probable ancestry, and these merged with 
the work of the Shugenja/​monastic exorcists (genja/​geza 験者). In contrast to the ob­
scurity of Aizen’s origins, Fudō’s are clearer, but they also connect him to destruction of 
demons. Fudō has Indian roots. It is possible that he originated in Śiva in terms of shared 
epithets descriptive of “immovability” as well as iconographical connections (including 
the lasso, the coiled snake, and the production of fire) or Candamahārosana (Payne 1988, 
6–​14). He may also be a transmutation of Vajrapāni (“Vajra Holder”), who had once been 
a yakśa, a demonic nature spirit. Fudō was, then, originally a demonic spirit, converted 
into a protector (goho 御法, “Dharma Protector”). Fudō is specifically thought to be the 
(converted) wrathful form of Vajrapāni, Guhyapati Vajrapāni, “The Lord of [esoteric 
Buddhist] Secrets” who, like his Japanese descendent, is blue-​black in color.13 Vajrapāni’s 
attributes vary, but he often holds a lasso, an additional iconographical link with Fudō. 
Another of Fudō’s distinguishing features is his seat, which is a stylized heap of rocks 
(an abbreviated mountain) that appears in many examples to be a pile of colorful bricks. 
Connections can again be found as far back as the 700s in a Kashmiri bronze statue of a 
wrathful Vajrapāni in the collection of the Cleveland Museum of Art. Its stylized brick-​
like seat is narrowed at the center to indicate Mount Sumeru. The presence of mountain 
lions within a cave in the seat gives the meaning of Vajrapāni’s environment: The demon

--- PAGE 503 ---
478      Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
 
slayer has tamed wild beasts, and is even powerful enough to adorn himself with poi­
sonous snakes. Japan seems to have adopted this version of Vajrapāni, and he became 
the central Wisdom King of the “Five Great Wisdom Kings” (Godai Myōō 五大明王). 
Fudō’s function of binding with his lasso is one of the fundamental reasons he is prom­
inent within spirit exorcism practices (mononoke chōbuku no kaji kitō 物の気調伏
の加持祈祷)—​and this is attested to in certain works of art—​because it is a function 
(binding; baku 縛) shared by ally spirits (“Dharma Protectors”; gohō 護法) dispatched 
by exorcists to incapacitate demons inside possessed bodies.14 Historical accounts tell of 
possessed patients being alleviated through the use of Fudō by exorcist monks. Tendai 
priest Sōō (相応 831–​918) released an aristocrat’s daughter from the pain of being pos­
sessed by a demon (Gunsho ruiju 4:530). When priest-​exorcists performed demon sub­
jugation rites, they visualized Fudō crushing the demon’s head with his foot, as Yixing, 
in his Commentary on the Mahāvairocana Sutra 大日經疏 described (Taishō 1796).
Shugendō and Kōyasan
In Japan, as noted above, Fudō’s pedestal is either a mountain or a rock surrounded by 
a stormy sea and because of these dual meanings, he is the Shugendō icon used in the 
Shugendō mountain and waterfall ascetic practices. The halo of flames that surrounds 
him is sometimes pictorially indicated by a single flame flickering in the waterfalls used 
for ascetic Shugendō practices. Shugenja robes, and the rope tied around the waist of 
the practitioners, represented Kurikara. On completion of extreme practices, they 
considered themselves to have been reborn as a living Fudō.15 In addition to his signif­
icance in Shugendō at Kōyasan, one specific icon, Namikiri Fudō (the “wave-​cutting 
Fudō”) accrued, in the thirteenth century, fame and site-​specific significance to salva­
tion of the realm after repelling an invading foreign force.16
At Kōyasan, there was a rich Shugendō culture in the medieval period (Yamamoto 
2010, 78).17 Primarily a tradition of ritualized ascetic practice in the mountains, the es­
tablishment and development of the Kōyasan community in this environment made the 
character of its Shingon distinct from that of the important urban Shingon temples of 
the time based in the imperial capital, such as Tōji and Ninnaji. The boundary between 
Shugendō culture and that of the Buddhist institution was porous for much, if not all, 
of Kōyasan’s history. The Chūin-​ryū was deeply involved in Shugendō during the thir­
teenth century, and of this the texts and the visual materials produced by them provide 
ample evidence (Tinsley 2019, 196–​249, 326–​371). It was also from the latter part of the 
thirteenth century that the performance of ascetic practices in the mountains for the 
specific purpose of attaining supernatural powers truly flourished (Castiglione, Roth, 
and Rambelli 2020, 2). It is highly likely that Shugendō beliefs and practice played a part 
in the formation of Ryōzu Aizen. Without discounting the way in which the combina­
tion aligned with pre-​established systems of nondualism (including the system of honji-​
suijaku) that were being developed in high scholastic theory, Fudō—​a central object

--- PAGE 504 ---
The Twin Miracle      479
 
of worship for the Shugendō practitioner as well as the exorcist (the roles overlapped 
since Shugenja performed exorcisms)—​was also likely conjoined with Aizen to 
create the form of a deity for the power of the icon provided in the Shugendō system 
of praxis. Aizen and Fudō were gohō, necessary for these practices, as discussed below. 
Exorcistic-​possession practices, descriptions of which are found in the Chūin-​ryū’s 
Takusen-​ki,18 were used for the expulsion of enemies, whether those be spirits, states of 
mind, living beings, or environmental threats—​all understood as obstacles to mental 
or physical health or to political or personal advancement.19 In short, the Chūin-​ryū’s 
self-​legitimation involved Shugendō exorcistic methods. That these were familiar with 
them is quite evident in the production itself of the Takusen-​ki text, which originated in 
a spirit-​possessed child and that is also replete with descriptions of other possessions 
and exorcisms.
Ryōzu Aizen as icon and in ritual was first transmitted exclusively between the 
Daigō-​ji temple monks in the capital, Kyoto (then Heian-​kyō). It was taught to 
Kōyasan monks and became particularly popular for a time there as indicated by ex­
tant commentaries along with fine iconographical works made for the Kōyasan com­
munity, including an early Ryōzu Aizen statue dated to between the Muromachi 
(1392–​1573) and Edo (1603–​1868) periods and that had been transferred from Amano-​
sha (Kōyasan’s protective shrine where its kami were enshrined) and a painted work of 
the Kamakura period (1192–​1333). It has been suggested by historians of Asian religions 
that Ryōzu Aizen has no direct Chinese or Indian precedents and even to have been 
an entirely Japanese creation (Trenson 2018). Kagiwada Seiko proposed that the ritual 
and iconography of Ryōzu Aizen were probably developed by Japanese monastic 
ritualists (gyōja 行者) (Kagiwada 2012, 615). It is likely that the influence of Shugendō 
mountain practices in the tantric tradition played a part in this, especially those 
practices related to healing, spirit possession, and exorcism that were central to it, and 
to the practitioners who performed these rituals. These had emerged from another 
Shugendō-​rich and mountain-​based Shingon Buddhist culture at Daigō-​ji in the Kyoto 
capital, from which Kōyasan had received Ryōzu Aizen teachings, and they had de­
veloped within the Shingon of thirteenth-​century Kōyasan, where Shugendō practice 
was on the verge of forming into a discrete tradition. Connections between Daigō-​ji 
and the Chūin-​ryū, as well as with key Chūin-​ryū figure Dōhan 道範 (1179–​1252), and 
the Chūin-​ryū’s project of lineage maintenance may explain the significance of Aizen, 
Fudō, and Ryōzu Aizen to the Chūin-​ryū.
The Chūin-​ryū Legitimation Project
References to a fused form of Aizen and Fudō are found in the Takusen-​ki, and the de­
velopment of this variant Wisdom King may be understood as part of the Chūin-​ryū’s 
larger project of the time. It was within one of their other prized texts, the aforemen­
tioned Kakugen kudenshō, a collection of commentaries, including those of a past

--- PAGE 505 ---
480      Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
 
luminary of their own line, Dōhan’s teacher Kakukai of Daigo-​ji (and later Kōyasan), 
that the following information regarding the combination of Fudō and Aizen appears:
[I]‌t is true that in the Dainichi-​kyō there is no line that combines Fudō with Aizen’ō 
and explains their interconnection. Hence, this [combination of Fudō and Aizen] is 
the exclusive, ultimate secret teaching of our own school, the Shingon School.20
The combination of the two Wisdom Kings is not found in the Japanese tantric tradition’s 
canonical text, the Dainichi-​kyō (大日経; Skt. Mahāvairocana sūtra). But in this case, 
the Chūin-​ryū found no contradiction between the matter of correct transmission and 
that of allegiance to what they believed Kūkai had taught, and the absence of the com­
bination from the sutra appears only to have made it more special, for it proved that it 
was the “exclusive, ultimate secret teaching of our own school.” The school was Shingon, 
but the presenters of this claim included a master of the Chūin-​ryū. The Chūin-​ryū were 
an offshoot of the Daigōji Ono-​ryū, the lineage that had early on monopolized Aizen 
ritual for the state and that first described Ryōzu Aizen. The Chūin-​ryū’s branch main­
tenance and dominance at Kōyasan depended on the reinforcement of its connection 
to several of the most important patriarchs of Shingon and its branches, among these 
Kūkai and his Chinese master Keika (恵果 746–​805). They named themselves after the 
cloister believed to have been occupied by Kūkai (Chūin, the “Central Cloister”) and 
then by representatives of the branch as it developed in distinction to others within the 
originally unified community at Kōyasan. The branch also emphasized their ostensibly 
direct and authentic connections to the local Kōyasan mountain kami Niu Myōjin and 
Kōya Myōjin. These connections were naturally drawn since, with a unique claim to 
dharma lineage descent, including the transmission of teachings from Kūkai (from 
which they deemed others to have strayed), Kūkai’s relationships with the local deities 
were also their inheritance. These connections buttressed this branch’s practical legiti­
mization strategies, aided in the reformation and recreation of narratives concerning its 
origins and lineage and even aided its land expansion efforts. Thus, rewritten legends 
(and reformed iconography) concerning the early ninth-​century origins of the Buddhist 
community at Kōyasan and the relationship necessitated by shared occupancy be­
tween the new mountain residents and the old were produced by the Chūin-​ryū, and 
they emphasized in them their own branch leaders’ links to the local deities (Abe, 1983). 
This is exemplified in the sudden claim, in the thirteenth century, to the kami Daishi 
Myōijn 大師明神, who appears to have been a newly formed deity comprising the 
spirits of Keika, Kūkai, and the two mountain kami (Tinsley 2019, 250–​284). This amal­
gamate deity channeled via a possessed child the series of oracular pronouncements 
transcribed by Dōhan in the Takusen-​ki, who was the head of a cohort of scholar monks 
of the Chūin-​ryū and at that time the deputy head of Kōyasan. The Takusen-​ki became a 
prized Chūin-​ryū text, its own shōgyō (sacred text) and kept exclusively at Henmyō’in, 
the temple at which the possession had occurred, with the sole exception of borrowing 
rights for Dōhan. The text represented—​or proved—​their legitimacy as legatees of every 
sacred component of the Shingon school at Kōyasan, from patriarchs to local deities.

--- PAGE 506 ---
The Twin Miracle      481
 
The text opens with an account of a sectarian conflict that had taken place nine 
years previously. In 1242, a faction led by Dōhan set fire to the residences of their 
rivals, the monks of Denbō-​in cloister, who posed a threat to Chūin-​ryū dominance. 
In a bold statement to their community issued by the priestly fire starters on return 
from an exile imposed on them by the bakufu government as punishment for the act, 
the flames of the fire ritual for “Aizen-​Ō” were described as being “the body of the 
living-​body of the [two] Myōō” (Abe 1983, 107),21 indicating a familiarity with Ryōzu 
Aizen ritual. Furthermore, those whose property had been razed, it relayed, had been 
the very objects of the goma ritual, and they deserved nothing less than death. “The 
Denbō-​in [cloister] monks on this mountain, despite having had these particular de­
lusional attachments, are referred to at other places as ‘Kōya hōshi.’ Therefore, they are 
not entirely evil. Because we forgive [them], since this evil deserves a death sentence, 
shouldn’t they kill themselves?” (Abe 1983, 104).22 So suggested returnee priest Dōhan 
some nine years after the event, in the Takusen-​ki description of what had transpired 
that night. By explaining the arson attack as being connected to a goma (Skt. homa; fire 
ritual), the Takusen-​ki’s account lifts the 1242 incident and consequent punishment of 
the exiles from the level of the mundane and resituates them on that of the sacred. It is 
also presented as an example of ritual power, prowess, and efficacy: Regardless of the 
resultant exile, the ritual itself had been a success since total subjugation had indeed 
been achieved. The Denbō’in monks left the mountain as a group to settle elsewhere, 
expelled much like an invading army or a political rival.
The ritual performed was an “Aizen-​Ō goma” but the Aizen that features throughout 
the Takusen-​ki is almost always coupled, at times ritualistically interchangeably, with 
Fudō. In another description of a ritual that may be the same ritual as the one described 
in the opening of the text, a visualization carried out as part of the ritual requires the 
attributes of the two Wisdom Kings to repeatedly merge with each other, dissolving the 
reality of the other:
The flames of Fudō are Aizen Myōō. The fire of the wisdom of the Myōō burns 
the defilements and sins of sentient beings. Or, the flames are Fudō, and the body 
is Aizen. At such a time, the sword becomes an arrow, the lasso becomes the bow. 
And also, the sword becomes the bow, the lasso becomes the arrow. And also, the 
lasso becomes the arrow. Regarding the two ends of the lasso, one is a one-​pronged 
vajra, and one is a three-​pronged vajra. When Aizen becomes Fudō, the bow is the 
lasso, the arrow is the sword. Also, in the teaching of the one body when they are two 
Myōō, the bow is Fudō and the arrow is Aizen. Thus, the flames are the body of the 
living-​body of the [two] Myōō. In one teaching the five colors are used. However, 
practitioners of Shingon, when they face the fire [performing the ritual], they must 
dwell in this visualization.
(Abe 1983, X)23
The reference to “the teaching of the one body when they are the two Myōō” (ittai no 
narai ni oite ni Myōō no toki 於一体習二明王之時) is probably synonymous with isshin

--- PAGE 507 ---
482      Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
 
ryōzu 一身両頭, the “single body with two heads [of Fudō-​Aizen]” that, according to 
the Kakuzenshō, was first articulated by Shōbō.
The Chūin-​ryū and Possession-​Exorcism
Anna Andreeva’s observation that “Buddhist clerics based at local temples in Kantō, Ise, 
and central Japan, as well as their itinerant counterparts, hijiri and shugen practitioners 
travelling from one cultic site to another, shared the same body of concepts fusing eso­
teric deities, visual symbols, relics, and omnipresent kami” (Andreeva 2017, 240) is ap­
posite in explaining the spirit-​possession/​exorcism rites employed by medieval tantric 
Japanese monks. “Interpenetration” (nyūga ganyū 入我我入), for example, which is the 
core accomplishment of esoteric Buddhist rituals as a form of purification and means of 
“enlightenment in this very body” (sokushin jōbutsu 即身成仏), also characterizes the 
fusion of priest-​exorcist and powerful deity (the gohō or gohō zenjin 護法善神 “Dharma 
Protector Good Spirit”), which empowers the priest to invoke an attendant being to 
control and expel the invasive spirit (Iyanaga 2019, 1–​20; 2022, 12).
Dōhan himself noted in his commentary to the Yugikyō (Yugikyō kuketsu, in 
Shingon shu zensho 5, 129a12-​15) that “the method of the genja is said to be the method 
of the āveśa” (possession) (Iyanaga 2022, 4). Dōhan also described the functions of 
it, which include the elicitation of knowledge of “The Triple World of Three Times 
[Past, Present and Future]).” This is precisely how he and his cohort had made use 
of the possessed acolyte whose channeling originated the Takusen-​ki (Tinsley 2010, 
152–​153). In other words, these possession practices were known at Kōyasan, and the 
distinction between āveśa and genja-​led exorcisms was understood, but the methods 
were deemed equivalent. That Aizen is first described in the Yugikyō sutra about 
which Dōhan was commenting is significant, as is the fact that instructions for exor­
cism also appear. The syllables that punctuate the end of the longest Aizen dharani,24 
“jaku un ban koku” (Skt. jah hūm vam hoh) correspond to the Four-​Syllable Mantra 
(or the mantra of the Four Gathering Bodhisattvas), that is used in the twelfth to early 
thirteenth-​century Genja Sahō 験者作法 avesa ritual to bring the gohō into a child 
medium’s body for the purposes of diagnosing and healing a person afflicted by de­
monic possession (Iyanaga 2022, 11, 17:n52). Each sound expresses the tools of cap­
ture required to shift the demon from a deluded state to an awakened one: a hook 
(to capture), a rope (to haul in), and a chain (to bind). Texts that provided healing 
ritual instructions that employed the method of spirit possession (and concomitant 
exorcism) were “probably composed by some Shingon monk around the end of the 
twelfth century or the beginning of the thirteenth century” (Iyanaga 2022, 5) (al­
though it seems these had their oral origins in the Tendai school). These texts written 
or transmitted by Shingon monks broadly bracket the period in which Dōhan and 
his community of Chūin-​ryu members at Kōyasan were active. The texts Iyanaga has 
examined were of this period, suggesting a flourishing adoption of the rites during

--- PAGE 508 ---
The Twin Miracle      483
 
that time. In these ritual instructions, a gohō would be employed by the empowered 
priest-​exorcist to attend to the business of relocating the possessing spirit to the body 
of a medium and “binding” it so it could be cast out.
Dōhan and, later, his famed scholarly branch successor Yūkai (宥快 1345–​1416) were 
central in the project of dominance at Kōyasan, and both had an interest in Ryōzu Aizen 
concepts and worship. Descriptions of images of Ryōzu Aizen are found in several texts, 
including an iconographical scroll and three Daigō-​ji texts from the late thirteenth and 
early fourteenth centuries, roughly corresponding to Dōhan’s time (Andreeva 2017, 
138:n100; Goepper 1993, 48–​50). A rare ritual manual (shidai sho 次第書) for Ryōzu 
Aizen kept at Jimyō’in cloister at Kōyasan bears Yūkai’s name, although it accompanied 
a much earlier single-​headed Aizen Myōō icon of 1256,25 closer to Dōhan’s time, and 
has not been studied or dated yet. At Kōyasan, there were “secret” commentaries on 
the Yugikyō, including one attributed to the aforementioned Jitsuun (Yugikyō hiketsu 
(瑜祇経秘訣 “Secret Instructions on the Yugikyō”) as well as Dōhan’s own (Yugikyō 
kuketsu 瑜祇経口決) “Oral Instructions on the Yugikyō,” which contains the remarks 
on possession quoted above. It is possible that Dōhan developed the combinatory 
(Ryōzu?) Aizen goma and visualization described in Takusen-​ki based on the Yugikyō 
transmission he had received from Jikken at Daigōji. Indeed, he composed it in around 
1249, the year of Jikken’s death, and two years before he produced the Takusen-​ki.
Ideological Background
Although the imagery of aggression and related ritual for subjugating ends (chōbuku-​
hō or gōbuku-​hō) are far from unusual in the world of tantric Buddhism, the violence 
and sexual impulses embodied by the furious Aizen are, in scholastic tantric theory, 
the ones that could most effectively be transmuted into the state of enlightenment. 
This theory is encapsulated in the phrase bonnō soku bodai (“transgressions [worldly 
desires] are [identical to] enlightenment”). This famous phrase, while representing a 
Mahayana principle, is arguably the most representative of the esoteric Buddhist tra­
dition.26 It expresses the idea that the very suffering (caused by the “transgressions” or 
“defilements” (i.e., greedy, angry, or delusional motivational mental states; bonnō)—​
so-​called in Buddhist parlance as they impede the progress (i.e., make “impure”) of 
the development or emergence of Buddha consciousness; bodai)—​is itself a route to 
enlightenment. The phrase bonnō soku bodai has been understood as a radical expres­
sion of emptiness (Skt. śunyata; Jpn. kū) and of the overcoming of dualism. In fact, the 
tripartite phrase itself deftly also represents this. The transcendence of dualism was 
particularly characteristic of Shingon during the period in which the events examined 
in this chapter took place.27 Certainly, exorcistic practice was part of Aizen and Fudō 
worship from early on in Japanese history (Payne 1987, 53–​55). It was by the end of the 
Heian period that Aizen and Fudō were paired; it was also by the end of this period that 
exorcistic practices focusing on Aizen flourished (Faure 2015, 186). Although it had been

--- PAGE 509 ---
484      Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
 
mainly Ono-​ryū branch Aizen rituals that were practiced in connection to exorcism in 
the Heian period, exorcistic practices flourished during the medieval period. Percival 
Lowell’s observation in 1894 that there “proved to exist a regular system of divine posses­
sion, an esoteric cult imbedded in the very heart of the Japanese character and instinct” 
(Lowell 1894, 13) may hold true: The system seems to have pervaded society and culture 
beyond any particular religious group and was, arguably, the soil into which esoteric 
Buddhism took root.
Reflections on Issues of Tantric Studies
The relationship between tantra and state protection has long been recognized, but its 
links with exorcism have been less studied, especially in Japanese Buddhism, although 
the work of Komatsu Kazuhiko (1994), Michael Strickmann (2002), Bernard Faure 
(2015), and Nobumi Iyanaga (2019, 2022), among others, is significant. As suggested in 
this chapter, Shugendō, along with Ono-​ryū teachings (which may have been among 
those later deemed heretical by Kōyasan scholar monks), may be a key factor here, espe­
cially in the formation of Ryōzu Aizen with the addition of Fudō, its powerful demon-​
quelling tutelary deity. Violence and exorcistic practices have never been very unusual 
and may fall into the category of transgressive and antinomian acts that characterize 
Indian tantric Buddhism—​which are found in even very early (exoteric) Buddhist 
scriptures: Antinomian acts could provide mundane benefits and protections for people 
of both high (royal) social status and lower (Wedemeyer 2013, 186–​187). However, the 
role of Ryōzu Aizen has not been fully recognized in this way, so there is room for reas­
sessment of the icon.
Also, the subject of duality is raised by the very nonduality of this icon. Certainly, 
charges of (“un-​Buddhist”) violence exemplified by transgressive acts, such as that of 
the ritual-​arson attack, could potentially be resolved with a philosophical explana­
tion such as bonnō soku bodai. Wedemeyer noted that tantric Buddhist professionals 
involved with goma rituals, for example, were “confronted daily with the inherent 
problematic of attempting to reach an ultimate non-​dual goal by discursive, dual­
istic means. Incorporating a visceral reminder of nonduality and transcendence 
of convention into their otherwise dualistic rituals provided a means to digest 
performatively the anomaly of such a highly ritualized mode of Buddhist practice, 
so as to allow the maintenance of such a complex ceremonial without obvious self-​
contradiction” (Wedemeyer 2013, 191). More broadly, on tantric war in Indian tantric 
Buddhism, Iain Sinclair noted that “magical slaying, along with other transgressive 
acts enjoined in the higher tantras, can be sanctioned insofar as it is a manifestation 
of transcendence” (Sinclair 2016, 19).
The practice of the goma that is interiorized or inwardly directed (内 Jpn. nai-​; Skt. 
antar-​) and that which is exteriorized or outwardly directed (Jpn. 外 ge-​; Skt. bāhya-​)

--- PAGE 510 ---
The Twin Miracle      485
 
is one example of the dualism of ritual (transgressive or not). A similar approach was 
taken to the problem of exorcising demons in the medieval period. From the perspective 
of the Buddhist teachings regarding the core problem of suffering, they were considered 
as akin to spiritually deluded beings and treated with compassion (Iyanaga 2022, 522). 
They were (ideally) incorporated into a conventional Japanese Buddhist interpretation 
of a world inhabited by spirits and kami and thus were “purified”—​but they were also 
violently cast out.
The specific deities and motives of the monastic figures involved in the 1242 at­
tack are situated in written account as a case of “sacred violence.” The text as a whole 
provides a worldview since it is made up of various secret teachings about Kōyasan 
and thus a specific cultural context for the attack. A further step for tantric studies 
more broadly may be to trace various similar uses of attacks in cultural context across 
Asia in order to discern the nature of the different uses of exorcism in tantra and the 
transmissions and developments of the deities involved leading to a deeper under­
standing of Ryōzu Aizen.
Abbreviations
Jpn.
Japanese
Skt.
Sanskrit
Notes
	1.	 Kagiwada Seiko has opposed the contention that Ryōzu Aizen is mainly a sexual or heret­
ical icon, asserting that it was instead understood and employed on a psychological level 
to effect internal transformation (Kagiwada 2012, 57). But in contrast, Faure stated that it 
is “the most extreme expression” of the tandem roles Fudō and Aizen had come to occupy 
(Faure 2015, 199).
	2.	 Fudō, like Aizen, is the personification of both a dharani and a bija seed-​syllable (Fudō’s is 
Skt. hām, Jpn. kan); a double form of the latter (Skt. hāmmām, Jpn. kanman) was assigned 
to him also.
	3.	 Takusen-​ki vol. 1:79 (in Abe 1983).
	4.	 The Jingangfeng louge yique yuija yuqi jing 金剛峯楼閣一切瑜伽瑜祇経 (Jpn. Kongōbu 
rōkaku issai yaga yugikyō; Sutra of all yogas and yogīs of the Pavilion with the Vajra-​Top, 
often shortened to “Yugikyō.”).
	5.	 From the preface to Shamon Shōdō reki sanei genju hi hei jo 沙門勝道歴山瑩玄珠并序 in 
Henjōhokki shōryōshū 遍照発揮性霊集, vol. 2, compiled by Shinzei 真済. Date unknown.
	6.	 The pulling of the outer inward is characteristic of exorcism rituals.
	7.	 “Niu and Kōya Ryōsho Daimyōjin” signifies Niu Myōjin and Koya Myōjin.
	8.	 Sometimes there are a greater or fewer number of hands, but these ritual implements are al­
ways present.

--- PAGE 511 ---
486      Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
 
	 9.	 At Kōya-​san, there were two principle local kami (pre-​Buddhist indigenous gods) that 
were worshipped by the Buddhist community: a cinnabar goddess (known as Niu Myōjin) 
and a hunter god (known variously as Kariba Myōjin 狩場明神, Kōya Myōjin 高野明神, 
or Yōgō Myōjin 影向明神).
	10.	 Takusen-​ki vol. 1:79.
	11.	 In other words, local gods Niu and Kōya Myōjin’s suijaku or manifest forms are female and 
male and have the associated gender traits (as they were conceptualized historically and 
geographically). Takusen-​ki vol. 1:73.
	12.	 Shingon Buddhism, as opposed to Taimitsu, which signifies Tendai Buddhism, is the other 
major school of esoteric Buddhism in Japan.
	13.	 Guhyapati Vajrapāni raises one leg in a stamping gesture as in the Rubin Museum of 
Art’s Tibetan Vajrapāni Bhutadamara (“Demon-​Subduer”). Notably, the pose is also 
struck by the dynamic Japanese icon Zao Gongen 蔵王権現, who is perhaps even 
more central to Shugendō and its origin story than Fudō is since Zao Gongen was the 
demon-​slayer attendant to En no Gyōja, ascetic founder of Shugendō.
	14.	 The opening sentence to the classical Genja Sahō 験者作法, the late twelfth to early 
thirteenth-​century exorcism manual Iyanaga translated and analysed is: “The practice 
of āveśa means in the language of Tang the practice of “grasping and binding” (Ch. 
shefu/​Jp. shōbaku 攝縛).” Dōhan mentions this in his own commentary on the Yugikyō 
(Iyanaga 2022, 14, as well as note 13 and note 9). On baku, see also Iyanaga 2022, 3.
	15.	 At Hieizan, headquarters of the Tendai school of esoteric Buddhism, successful moun­
tain marathon practice (Jpn. kaihōgyō 回峰行) results in existence as a “living Fudō.”
	16.	 State protection rites—​Chingo kokka hihō (Secret Ritual for the Protection of the 
State)—​were, from early on, part of Fudō’s repertoire. This ritual, it is said, had 
been transmitted down the lineage of Shingon patriarchs by Vajrabodhi (671–​741). 
Namikiri Fudō was used in a late thirteenth-​century ritual to expel invading Yuan 
Dynasty military forces.
	17.	 A fully developed practice of nyūbu (入峰 lit. “mountain entry,” ascension of a high moun­
tain inhabited by spirits by Shugenja for ascetic practices) was already established by the 
twelfth century.
	18.	 See Takusen-​ki vol. 2:21 and 2:49.
	19.	 Distinctions drawn between these types of obstacles are a rather modern means of 
categorizing phenomena and dealing with life. Premodern Japan was, broadly, an ani­
mistic world, and even objects, not to mention natural phenomena such as storms, were 
often considered to be occupied by spirits.
	20.	 Trenson translation (Trenson 2018, 110).
	21.	 Takusen-​ki, vol. 1:81.
	22.	 Takusen-​ki, vol. 1:12.
	23.	 Takusen-​ki, vol. 1:81.
	24.	 “On makaraga bazorō shunisha bazara satoba jaku un ban koku” (Sk. Om mahāraga 
vajrosnīsa vajrasattva jah hūm vam hoh)
	25.	 Now in the collection of Nara National Museum.
	26.	 The concept and phrase sokushin jōbutsu 即身成仏 (“enlightenment in this very body”) is 
arguably as (or more) representative of the tradition as bonnō soku bodai is, although the 
latter can be understood as a variant of the former.
	27.	 The Shingon school meaning of bonnō soku bodai was discussed briefly by founder Kūkai 
in Jūju shinron, and taken up again later by Dōhan and Yūkai.

--- PAGE 512 ---
The Twin Miracle      487
 
References
Primary Sources
Dai Nihon Bukky ō zensho 大日本佛教全書. 150 vols. Tokyo: Bussho Kankōkai. 1913.
Gunsho ruiju群書類従. Edited by Hanawa Hokiichi 塙保己一. 19 vols. 1898–​1902. Tokyo: 
Keizai Zasshisha.
Shingon shū zensho 真言宗全書. 44 vols. 2004. Edited by Shingonshū Zensho Kankōkai 
眞言宗全書刊行會. Wakayama: Kōyasan Daigaku Shuppanbu.
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 大正新脩大藏經. 85 vols. 1924–​1934. Edited by Takakusu Junjirō 
高楠順次郎 and Watanabe Kaikyoku 渡辺海旭. Tokyo: Issaikyō Kankōkai and Daizō 
Shuppan.
Secondary Sources
Abe, Yasurō 阿部泰郎. 1983. Chūsei Kōyasan engi no kenkyū 中世高野山縁起の研究. Kyoto, 
Japan: Gangōji Bunkazai Kenkyūjo.
Andreeva, Anna. 2017. Assembling Shinto: Buddhist Approaches to Kami Worship in Medieval 
Japan. Harvard East Asian Monographs 396. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center.
Castiglioni, Andrea, Carina Roth, and Fabio Rambelli, eds. 2020. Defining Shugend ō: Critical 
Studies on Japanese Mountain Religion. London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Dolce, Lucia. 2006–​2007. “Duality and the Kami: The Ritual Iconography and Visual 
Constructions of Medieval Shintō.” Cahiers d’Extrême Asie, 16: 119–​150.
Faure, Bernard. 2015. The Fluid Pantheon: Gods of Medieval Japan. Vol. 1. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press.
Goepper, Roger. 1993. Aizen My ōō: The King of Lust, an Iconological Study. Museum Rietburg, 
Zurich: Artibus Asiae.
Hayami, Tasuku 速水侑. 1987. Jujutsu shūkyō no sekai: Mikkyō shuhō no rekishi 
呪術宗教の世界: 密教修法の歴史. Tokyo: Hanawa Shobō.
Hori, Ichiro. 1966. “Mountains and Their Importance for the Idea of the Other World in 
Japanese Folk Religion.” History of Religions, 6, no. 1:1–​23.
Iyanaga, Nobumi 彌永信美. 2019. “Indo, Chūgoku, Nihon ni okeru hyōrei shinkō wo megutte. 
Zōmitsu bunken no sekai e no iriguchi to shite.” インド、中国、日本における憑霊進行を
めぐって〜雜密文献の世界への入り口として〜. Nihon koshakyō kenkyūjo kiyō, 4:1–​20.
Iyanaga, Nobumi. 2022. “Healing by Spiritual Possession in Medieval Japan, with a Translation 
of the Genja sah ō.” Religions, 13, no. 6:522. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​3060​522.
Kagiwada, Seiko 鍵和田聖子. 2012. “Ryōzu Aizen mandara no seiritsu ni kan suru ichi kōsatsu: 
kontai funi no zuzōteki hyōgen o chūshin ni.” 両頭愛染曼荼羅の成立に関する位置考察〜 
金胎不二の図像的表現を中心に〜. Japanese Association of Indian and Buddhist Studies. 
60, no. 2:615–​618.
Komatsu, Kazuhiko小松和彦. 1994. Hy ō rei shink ō ron: y ō kai kenkyū e no 
kokoromi憑霊信仰〜妖怪研究への試み〜. Tokyo: Kodansha.
Lowell, Percival. 1894. Occult Japan, or the Way of the Gods (an Esoteric Study of Japanese 
Personality and Possession). Boston: Houghton Mifflin & Company.
Padoux, André. 2017. The Hindu Tantric World: An Overview. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 513 ---
488      Elizabeth Noelle Tinsley
 
Payne, Richard K. 1987. “Standing Fast: Fudō Myōō in Japanese Literature.” Pacific World, New 
Series. 3, Fall: 53–​55.
Payne, Richard K. 1988. “Firmly Rooted: On Fudō Myōō’s Origins.” Pacific World, New Series. 
4, Fall: 6–​14.
Sinclair, Iain. 2016. “War Magic and Just War in Indian Tantric Buddhism.” In War Magic: 
Religion, Sorcery, and Performance, edited by D. S. Farrer, 149–​164. New York: Berghahn 
Books.
Strickmann, Michel. 2002. Chinese Magical Medicine. Edited by Bernard Faure. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
Tinsley, Elizabeth ティンズリーエリザベス. 2010. “Hōraku no mondō: Chūsei Kōyasan ni okeru 
kōgyō rongi to jingi shinkō.” 法楽の問答〜中世高野山に置ける講経論議と神祇信仰〜. 
Otani Daigaku Daigakuin Kenkyū Kiyō, 27: 141–​172.
Tinsley, Elizabeth. 2019. “Dharma Possession: Daishi Myōjin and the Roles of Gods and Past 
Masters in the Preservation of Teachings at Premodern Kōyasan.” PhD diss., Columbia 
University.
Trenson, Steven. 2018. “A Study on the Combination of the Deities Fudō and Aizen in Medieval 
Shingon Esoteric Buddhism.” In Buddhist Encounters and Identities across East Asia, edited 
by Ann Heirman, Carmen Meinert, and Christoph Anderl, 108–​136. Leiden: Brill.
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2013. Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology, and 
Transgression in the Indian Traditions. New York: Columbia University Press.
Yamamoto, Yoshitaka山本義孝. 2010. “Amano o chūshin toshita Katsuragi Nyūbu iseki no 
kentō.” 天野を中心とした葛城入峰遺跡の検討. Sangaku Shugen, 46: 75–​92.

--- PAGE 514 ---
Chapter 22
A Dharma Protector in a 
Transcultural Tantric 
Buddhist Context
Vesna A. Wallace
Introduction
In Mongolian Buddhism, Jamsran is popularly known as a Red Protector (Ulaan 
Sakhius) and is included in a group of ten fierce Dharma protectors (Tib. chos skyong, 
Mong. choijin)—​Yamantāka, Vajrapāṇi, Yamarāja, six-​armed Mahākāla, Śrī Devī, 
Vaiśravaṇa, Brahmā, White Mahākāla, and four-​faced Mahākāla. In both Tibet and 
Mongolia, he is addressed as Begze Brother-​and-​Sister, or Yakṣa Brother-​and-​Sister 
(Yagchis Egch Düü), Red Yakṣa (Tib. Gnod sbyin dmar po; Mong. Ulaan Yagchis), the 
Red Lord of Life (Tib. Srog bdag dmar po; Mong. Ulaan Aminy Ezen), Vajrabhairava, 
and so on.1 In various texts, he is given the epithets “lotus dancer” and “murderer of 
the Ten Bodhisattva Grounds” due to having attained the Tenth Bodhisattva Ground. 
As a result, he also bears the name Dharmamega, the traditional name for the Tenth 
Ground (Skt. dharmameghā) or the “Clouds of Dharma,” which designates the apex 
of an attainment on the Bodhisattva path.2 He is also known for accomplishing the 
decrees of various other fierce deities, which are also the tenth-​stage bodhisattvas: 
Hayagrīva, Yamāntaka, Black Yamarāja, Mahādeva (or Maheśvara), and Ekajāti (or 
Mahācīnatārā), a protectress of secret mantras and Buddhist tantric teachings. In 
the Tibetan Sakya, Kagyu, and Nyingma traditions, Jamsran is the main protector of 
the Hayagrīva cycle of practice; this association with Hayagrīva also extends to the 
Mongolian Gèluk tradition. In the Gèluk tradition, he is most commonly associated 
with Yamāntaka and Mahākāla. As a result, many texts dedicated to Jamsran from 
Mongolia begin with an homage to either Hayagrīva or Yamarāja. These are found in 
a minor collection of works dedicated to Jamsran known as the Jamsran Beübüm (Tib. 
Lcam sring be’u bum).3

--- PAGE 515 ---
490      Vesna A. Wallace
 
The popularity of Jamsran as a Dharma Protector in both Tibetan and Mongolian 
forms of Buddhism is evidenced by the preponderance of prayers, sādhanas, and ritual 
texts related to this fierce deity. Such texts are found in the collected works (Tib. gsung 
‘bum; Mong. sumbum) of Mongolian and Tibetan authors of all the schools of Tibetan 
Buddhism, as well as in the above-​mentioned minor collections (Tib. be’u bum; Mong. 
beübüm) of works dedicated to Jamsran. A version of the Jamsran Beübüm published in 
Ulaanbaatar by Shambhala in 2005 contains forty-​seven texts in the Tibetan language, 
and fifty-​seven in Modern Mongolian.4 When compared with a Tibetan-​language ver­
sion reproduced in the Kyi monastery in Spiti, Ladakh, which contains forty-​two texts, 
the Mongolian collection appears larger and significantly different from the one from 
Spiti. Only three texts with the same title are found within both collections: (1) A Fierce 
Method of Accomplishing Yakṣa Lcam sring Together with Essential Exhortation (Gnod 
sbyin lcam sring gi sgrub thabs drag po gnad bskul dang bcas), which also bears the 
title A Mantra of the Red Lord Prāṇātma5 and is attributed to the fourteenth-​century 
Tibetan Sakya master Palden Senge (Dpal ldan Sengge); (2) An Exhortation to the Nine 
Divisions of Assassins (Shan pa dgu skor gyi bskul byang);6 and (3) The Essential Advice 
on the Red Protector Deity (Sgrol gying dmar po’i gnad).7 Special copies of the Jamsran 
Beübüm were traditionally kept in a sealed box, while the others were wrapped in 
cloth and sealed with three “seals,” marked at the end of the text with three symbolic 
syllables, rgya rgya rgya, and called “the seal of entrustment” (tushaakh tamga), “the 
seal of concealment (nuukh tamga),” and “the seal of disguisement” (daldlakh tamga) 
(Bayasgalan 2011, 364). The sealed collection is orally transmitted from a teacher to 
only one trustworthy disciple. As indicated by the colophons to nearly all the texts 
contained in the Jamsran Beübüm, these were received through oral transmission (lung 
thob) due to their secret nature. However, only some colophons to the texts inform us of 
the lineages through which they were transmitted. Some texts trace their transmissions 
all the way back to Padmasambhava, Marpa Lotsawa, and others. Two versions of the 
same text titled A History of the Red Yakṣa (Gnod sbyin dmar po’i lo rgyus) contained 
in the aforementioned copy of the Jamsran Beübüm tell us that the secrecy of these 
texts is due to the power of sādhana practices on Jamsran and his companions, which 
gives to the practitioners the ability to kill others by merely glancing at them or by 
getting angry at them. For instance, the Indian, non-​Buddhist master of evil mantras, 
ācārya Nyima Dragpa (Tib. Nyi ma Grags pa; Skt. Candrayaśas/​Candrakīrti), is said to 
have killed others in an instant by merely looking at them.8 Similarly, his son Paṇḍita 
Dawa Nagpo (Tib. Zla ba nag po; Skt. Kṛṣṇacandra) killed others in an instant by 
merely getting angry at them. In later years, one Nyang Lotsawa became renowned for 
the same ability, due to meditating on the assassins, or butchers (shan pa), of the Red 
Prāṇātma (Tib. Srog bdag dmar po; Skt. Lohitaprāṇātma), a protector of the assistants 
of the four-​faced Mahākāla. After several generations, the ācārya Deva (a teacher of 
non-​Buddhist heretics, who knew many heretical evil mantras), practiced the instruc­
tion of the above-​mentioned masters and transmitted it to one Deu (Tib. Mde’u). Then, 
the transmission passed to Tibet, culminating with Nyangchul (Gnyang chul) Lotsawa, 
who also became renowned for evil mantras (see Gnod sbyin dmar po’i lo rgyus 2005,

--- PAGE 516 ---
A Dharma Protector      491
 
325–​325 and 330–​331). We see here a concern that powerful ritual practices related to 
Jamsran may fall into the hands of non-​Buddhist heretics; Buddhist tantric masters 
were instructed to pass that knowledge only to initiates whose intention, we are told, 
was to save sentient beings, especially at the time of decline of the buddhadharma and 
to prevent the prevalence of those inimical to the Dharma. The secret nature of the 
Jamsran Beübüm is also emphasized by the assertion that it dwells hidden in the heart 
of Red Mahākāla (Bayasgalan 2011). In Mongolia the Jamsran Beübüm circulated in 
different versions, some larger than others.
Legends and Oral Accounts about the Origin of Jamsran
The existence of different accounts of Jamsran’s origin indicate his disparate identities. 
In one legend, he was already a tenth-​ground bodhisattva, who originally dwelt in 
Tuṣita heaven before being birthed from a red egg. According to another legend 
given in the History of the Red Yakṣa (Gnod sbyin dmar po’i lo rgyus), contained in the 
Jamsran Beübüm, he came into existence on account of his future parents’ prayers to 
Maheśvara and Ekajaṭī, for he is also considered to be the accomplisher of the decrees 
of these two deities. The legend says that at the time Jamsran was to descend from the 
Tuṣita heaven into his land of Maruce, the two eggs—​one coral and the other agate—​
appeared, from which two children were born to their father yakṣa, a fierce nature 
spirit, and mother demoness. Begze emerged from the red coral egg, whereas his sister 
came from the agate egg (Gnod sbyin dmar po’i lo rgyus 2005, 330–​331). Due to the 
fierce nature of his parents and the corresponding redness of his egg, his manifesta­
tion became that of a fierce, red yakṣa.
In another legend, A Legend of the Liberating Assassin, The Red Lord of Life (Shan pa 
sgrol byed srog bdag dmar po’i lo rgyus), also included in the Jamsran Beübüm, we find a 
somewhat different version of his origin. According to this version, a long time ago, the 
father yakṣa with copper hair and the bloody mother demoness were unable to control 
the eggs that soared to the sky and tamed the eight deities in the heavens and the eight 
planets in the intermediate directions. Then leaping downward, they pacified the eight, 
great nāga spirits of the earth. In fear, the father prayed to Maheśvara and Ekajaṭī. After 
Maheśvara and Ekajaṭī tamed the eggs, Jamsran emerged from the coral egg, and from 
the agate egg emerged a red-​faced girl. Maheśvara and Ekajāṭī then questioned Jamsran 
concerning his emanation, his name, his abode, and his share of food. Jamsran replied: 
“Mahādeva, I am an emanation (sprul ba) of Yamāntaka’s speech. My name is Man with 
The Color of Power (Skyes bu dbang gi mdog can), Red Prāṇātma (Srog bdag dmar po), 
and Red Yamshü (Yam shud dmar po). My abode is the palace of Maruce of the red, 
copper plain in the northwestern direction. As for the share of my food, they say, it is 
‘the fields of destruction.’ ” The red-​faced daughter answered the same questions posed 
to her by Ekajaṭī, saying: “Great Mother, Ekajaṭī, I am an emanation of the speech of a 
mātṛkā (Tib. ma mo), a fierce mother deity. My name is Red-​faced Daughter of an Ogre, 
Red-​faced Rigpey Lhamo (Rig pa’i lha mo), a powerful lady of a secret dance (Gsang

--- PAGE 517 ---
492      Vesna A. Wallace
 
mtshan gar gyi dbang phyug ma). My abode is in the northeastern direction; as for my 
share of food, it is the flesh, blood, and vital force of those hostile to Buddhism.” After 
that, Ekajaṭī bestowed empowerment on those two, offered her heart’s blood to each 
of them, and extracted an oath from them to protect the Buddha Dharma. From then 
on, they have protected the Dharma in India and in the countries of Ha shan and Li.9 
Protecting the teachings in India, they transformed into yakṣas; in the Ha Shan country 
of China, they transformed into war deities, and in the country of Li, they turned into 
the bodyguards of the cycle of teachings. Indian masters (Tib. slob dpon, Skt. ācārya) 
who held tenets different from those of the buddhadharma, and who intended to bru­
tally harm others, hid this in an Indian terma (Tib. gter ma), or “hidden treasure.” After 
this account, the text describes the powers of the previously mentioned, heretical tantric 
masters, Nyima Dragpa, his son, and others (Shan pa sgrol byed srog bdag dmar po’i lo 
rgyus 2005, 340–​342).
The Mongolian folk tradition contains different oral accounts concerning Jamsran. 
According to one account, Jamsran and Rigpey Lhamo (Mong. Regviilkham) are 
said to be each other’s consorts and the parents of the eight red assistants, who follow 
Jamsran in every battle. Another account tells of Rigpey Lhamo taking Sokdag (Mong. 
Srodag) as her consort during the time of Jamsran’s absence. Having discovered this 
betrayal through his clairvoyance, Jamsran punished Sokdag by making him ride a 
mad wolf, and he punished Rigpey Lhamo by making her ride a mad bear (Bayasgalan 
2011, 377). According to yet another Mongolian oral account, Jamsran was initially a 
harmful war deity imbued with the power and ability of shamans and shamanesses. 
Although subjugated and converted into a Dharma protector, his power did not di­
minish. In accordance with his vow to protect the buddhadharma, he passes through 
three thousand lands within a single moment, making the earth shake with his feet, 
terrifying enemies with his roar, and causing thunder, lightning, and hail with his 
wrath (Bayasgalan 2011, 347).
Jamsran’s Transcultural Identities 
and Functions
In a text contained in the Jamsran Beübüm titled The Exhortation of the Essence of a 
Retinue of the Red Prāṇātma10 (Srog bdag dmar po ‘khor bcas kyi gnad bskul), Jamsran is 
described as a transcultural deity that manifests with different identities and carries out 
different tasks in different regions of Asia. In this text, he is invoked in all the aforemen­
tioned forms: as a transgressor spirit (Tib. dam sri mdzad) of India; a war deity of the 
land of Hashan; a protector of the gods of Maruce; a great guardian spirit of the Dharma 
in the country of Li; a military officer of the mātṛkās of Tibet; a minister of the legion of 
a thousand yakṣas, the chief of all yakṣas; and a yakṣa with a copper ritual dagger (Tib. 
phur pa). With a sword in his right hand, he destroys the life of those who violate their

--- PAGE 518 ---
A Dharma Protector      493
 
religious pledges. He is exhorted in a prayer to follow the instruction of Mahādeva and 
accomplish the work of Yamarāja by cutting the aorta of those violators. On the right 
side of Jamsran is Lohitaprāṇātma, who is similar to Jamsran in appearance as a warrior 
wearing an armor and riding a rabid wolf. Prāṇātma holds a lasso and the head of an ad­
versary in his left hand, and with his right hand he holds a spear.11 In this and other ritual 
texts and sādhanas as well as in iconography, Jamsran is visualized and iconographically 
represented as having a red body and a red face, with three eyes spinning and blazing and 
a mouth showing four fangs. His head is decorated with five human skulls. He wields a 
fiery sword with his right hand, and with his left hand he holds the bow and arrow. He 
carries a victory banner under his armpit. He wears armor on his chest, a nine-​layered 
ceremonial scarf (Tib. kha btags) on his body, and a rosary made of fifty skulls around 
his neck that trickle blood. He is standing on a lotus supported by a sun disc in the center 
of an ocean of fire. He tramples with his feet the corpses of a human and a horse. Day 
and night, he watches the entire world in a mirror. When he finds an enemy antagonistic 
to the Dharma, he expels the enemy and cuts off their life. On the left side of Jamsran 
is his sister, Rigpey Lhamo, riding a mad bear. Her body is dark blue, and her red face 
has three eyes and a semiopen mouth with the four fangs. She wields a scorching sword 
with her right hand and with holds a ritual dagger in her left hand. On the right side of 
Jamsran is Sokdag, similar to Jamsran’s appearance of an armored warrior. While riding 
a rabid wolf, he holds a lasso and the head of an adversary in his left hand, and with his 
right hand he holds a spear.
Jamsran is also accompanied by eight assistants who carry daggers and twenty-​one 
assassins who wear the wet skin of their enemies. The assassins wield a dagger in their 
right hand, and with their left hand, they hold the enemy’s liver, heart, lungs, spleen, 
eyes, marrow, and scalp (with hair). They perform grisly tasks, including the unraveling 
of the enemy’s intestines, tearing off the enemy’s skin and flesh, trampling the ground 
with their feet, and jumping and leaping as they dance.
Numerous armies also accompany Jamsran. According to a short text titled A History 
of the Red Lord of Life, A Liberating Assassin (Shan pa sgrol byed srogs bdag dmar po’i 
lo rgyus), also included in the Jamsran Beübüm, Jamsran’s immense army consists of a 
thousand evil spirits who race in front of Jamsran and hurl red lassos at the enemy. On 
his right side are a thousand black demons who cut the enemies whose tantric pledges 
deteriorated. On Jamsran’s left side there are a hundred thousand mātṛkās, who give 
blood diseases and the like to the enemy. Behind him there are a thousand crawling 
assassins who cut off the life of the enemies of Dharma. Around him in the ten directions 
are a thousand yakṣas who take the life of hostile yogīs, while the billions of divisions of 
his murderous devils display various supernatural powers and disturb the three worlds. 
Together with their messengers and others, they all squash the enemies of Dharma. 
They wield fiery swords with handles in the shape of scorpions, and they hold the esoph­
agus and the heart of the enemy.12
These terrifying images of Jamsran, his army, and his realm of Maruce, which are 
visualized by the yogī who invokes Jamsran and his army and incites them to violent 
action, empower the yogī to overcome external enemies, whether ritually or in an actual

--- PAGE 519 ---
494      Vesna A. Wallace
 
battle. For such a yogī, the described images are not simply a metaphor for the elimina­
tion of negative mental states but also a conduit to victory over the external enemies of 
Dharma. As an archetype of a mighty and fierce warrior who can also be compassionate 
to his worshippers and to those who keep their pledges, Jamsran is put into both mili­
tary service and the service of accomplishing the various other tasks of a protector deity. 
Some of the duties assigned to him are those of protecting the worshipper from common 
dangers and are thus similar to those given to other, fierce tantric deities, like Vajrapāṇi 
and Bhairava. For example, in a short and untitled text composed by the Sixth Panchen 
Lama, Lobsang Palden Yeshe (Blo bzang dpal ldan Ye shes 1738–​1780) at the behest of the 
Venerable Zangpo Tenzin (Tshe dan ldan pa, Bzang po Bstan ‘dzin),13 there appears an 
abbreviated version of the offering of a so-​called golden drink (Tib. gser skyems, which 
is often an alcoholic drink in the offerings to a fierce deity) to Jamsran. In this text, the 
Panchen Lama addresses Jamsran as a devourer of the three worlds and commands him 
and his companions to smash a gang of bandits and create favorable conditions, such as 
freedom from the dangers of humans and nonhumans, famine, epidemics, and so on 
(Shashnyg Khamgaalach Nomyg Tetgeegch, Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm) 2005, 374).
The fierce nature of Jamsran and his assistants, and the violent tasks that they are ex­
pected to perform are reflected not only in their described appearance but also in the 
violent nature of their rituals. These incorporate mantras of killing, as well as fierce 
offerings such as tormas (Tib. gtor ma, a sacrificial dough offering) containing the blood 
and the flesh of a goat, a dog, a fox, or whatever else being one finds. Moreover, Jamsran 
and his wrathful army can also grant blessings, as seen in Jamsran’s Benediction (Lcam 
sring gi bkra shis) composed by the Second Dalai Lama, Gendün Gyatso (Dge ‘dun rgya 
mtsho, 1476–​1542), where Jamsran is identified with Mañjuśrī:
May there be blessing of the assistant Sokdag (Srog bdag) and his majestic, su­
preme consort (Rig pa’i lha mo), the eight dagger wielders, twenty-​one assassins, 
demons, yakṣas, rākṣas, mātṛkās, and others, accompanied by their retinues of their 
attendants! (v. 3)
May there be blessing of the Dharma protector Jamsran and his retinue, and of the 
ocean of the oath-​bound guardians of teachings, who with powerful lightning crush 
the rocky-​mountains of obstructive spirits, enemies, and hindrances! (v. 4)
May there be blessing of the Red Yakṣa Beg tse, who manifests a fierce appearance in 
order to tame the vicious, Mañjuśrī, the embodiment of wisdom and compassion of 
all the sugatas of three times! (v. 5)
May there be blessing of the Red-​faced goddess, who has a fierce appearance in 
order to cut the aorta of the vow violators, the Red-​faced emanation of Ekajaṭī! (v. 6). 
(Shashnyg Khamgaalach Nomyg Tetgeegch, Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm) 2005, 371–​373)
Viewed as an emanation of Yamāntaka, who is a fierce aspect of Mañjuśrī, Jamsran is 
also recognized here as an emanation of the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī. As we will see below, 
he is also praised as an emanation of Amitābha by ways of being also the emanation of 
Hayagrīva, who is a fierce aspect of Amitābha.

--- PAGE 520 ---
A Dharma Protector      495
 
The Worship of Jamsran in Mongolia
In works composed by Mongolian authors, we encounter Jamsran as a tertiary man­
ifestation of the Buddha Amitābha by virtue of being an emanation of Mahākāla, yet 
another fierce aspect of the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara and ultimately of the Buddha 
Amitābha. In the Saγang Sečen’s chronicle, the Precious Summary (Erdeni-​yin tobči 
1662), we read that when the Third Dalai Lama Sönam Gyatso (Bsod nams Rgya 
mtsho, 1543–​1588) was on his way to Kökenuur to meet with Altan Khan (of the Tümed 
Mongols) and Qutuɣtu Sechen Qung-​Taiǰi (of the Ordos Mongols) in 1576/​1577, he made 
a torma, offering to “the very powerful Begze Mahākāla, who listens to the commands of 
Hayagrīva.”14 Reminding him of his duties as a Dharma protector, and instructing him 
to follow the Dharma, the Dalai Lama dispatched him to corral and subjugate the deities 
and nāgas of the Mongol lands. That night, when the Dalai Lama arrived at the banks of 
the Gün river, all the spirits, deities, nāgas, demons, and ongods (Shamanic spirits) of 
the Mongol land were brought under his control. At that time, the Dalai Lama bound 
them all with a vow to serve the Dharma. Then, while Qutuɣtu Sečen Qung-​Taiǰi and 
Dayan baɣši, accompanied by three thousand people, were welcoming the Dalai Lama 
and making him many, costly offerings, the Dalai Lama appeared as the four-​armed 
Avalokiteśvara to Qutuɣtu Sečen Qung-​Taiǰi. The next day, while the Dalai Lama was 
traveling on his horse, the six syllables (oṃ mani padme hūṃ) of the mantra of compas­
sion appeared on the stones of the path trod by the Dalai Lama’s chestnut horse. Seeing 
this, everyone present developed great faith.15 This passage from the Precious Summary 
shows the Third Dalai Lama, considered by the tradition as a peaceful, earthly ema­
nation of Avalokiteśva, interacting with a deity that is a fierce emanation of the same 
Avalokiteśvara, and exerting authority over Jamsran by means of reverential offerings, 
and then employing him to tame the indigenous Mongolian deities and spirits that 
could be inimical to the spread of Buddhism in the Mongol lands.
It must have been under the influence of the Third Dalai Lama that Abatai Sain Khan 
(1554–​1588) of Khalkha began to worship Jamsran as his protector and Vajrapāṇi as his 
tutelary deity (yi dam) in Baruun Örgöö (Western Palace), which became a central fire 
hearth (gal golomt örgöö) palace of the Mongolian state that has its origin in the time 
of Chinggis Khaan (Bayasgalan 2011, 237–​238). During Abatai Khan’s rule, Mongolian 
officials and nobles swore an oath to Jamsran every year. After Abatai Khan’s time, the 
tradition of worshiping Jamsran was passed to the First Jebtsundampa, Öndör Gegeen 
Zanabazar (Blo bzang bstan pa’i rgyal mtshan, 1635–​1723), and sequentially to his later 
incarnations, such as the Eighth Jebtsundampa (Ngag dbang blo bzang chos rje nyi ma 
bstan ‘dzin dbang phyug, 1870–​1924), the religious and secular leader of the autono­
mous Mongol state. Soon after the establishment of the autonomous Bogd Khaan state 
in 1911, the Eighth Jebtsundampa, together with his queen Dongogdulam (1874–​1923), 
lit the ceremonial fire on the morning of first day of Mongolian New Year (Tsagaan Sar) 
in Baruun Örgöö. It was there, in front of the image of Jamsran, that state ministers,

--- PAGE 521 ---
496      Vesna A. Wallace
 
officials, and noblemen took an oath to wholeheartedly serve the Mongol state. Likewise, 
in 1903, at the establishment of the thirtieth division (aimag) of Ikh Khüre dedicated 
to the queen Dongogdulam and known as Ekh Dagini’s division, an image of Jamsran 
was placed in the queen’s temple for her protection. Among the thirty divisions of Ikh 
Khüree, all seven monastic colleges (datsan, Tib. grva tshang) that belonged to the 
seven divisions of Ikh Khüree—​including Ekh Dagini’s division—​worshipped Jamsran 
as their protector. Among these seven divisions, those that are worth mentioning are 
Tsetsen Toyin’s division, which was established between the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries; Dashdarlin (Tib. Bkra shis bstan dar gling) division, which was established in 
the late nineteenth century; Mahamaya (Tib. Ma-​ha ma-​ya) division founded by the fa­
ther of the Second Jebtsundampa; Puntsogtechenlin (Tib. Phun tshogs theg chen gling) 
division; Saingai division; and Namdolin (Tib. Rnam grol gling), also known as Dashilin 
(Tib. Bkra shis gling), division.
On November 20, 1919, at the time when Ikh Khüree was occupied by Chinese repub­
lican forces, Mongolian state officials, including the Minister of Finances, S. Danzan and 
others, swore an oath in front of Jamsran to fight for the independence of the country. 
A year later, they again swore the oath. From 1919 to 1924, the Mongolian Ministry of 
Defense worshipped Jamsran, until the Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party joined 
the Communist International (Comintern). Worshipped as a war deity with the ex­
traordinary power and ability to terrify the enemy and offer help to all beings, Jamsran 
become a protector of the Mongolian Ministry of Defense (Tsergiin Yam) and was 
summoned, appeased with offerings, and asked to secure the peace of the country and 
subjugate the enemy causing obstacles to the state.
Jamsran’s activities in Mongolia also played out through his medium, a renowned 
military general and leading figure in Mongolia’s fight for independence from the Qing, 
Khatanbaatar Sanagdorjiin Magsarjav (1878–​1927) from Sain Noyon Khan Province 
(aimag). Prior to leaping into battles, Magsarjav entered into a trance and brandished a 
gun and a sword. Within this trance state, his sword is said to have leaped out from its 
scabbard by itself, and bullets would leap out from their compartments. Having thus 
transformed into a ferocious warrior endowed with siddhis and gaining knowledge 
when and how to launch the offensive, he instilled confidence in his soldiers and was 
successful in every battle he waged. In 1912, together with other two military leaders, 
Manlaibaatar J. and Damdinsüren, S., Magsarjav led an army of more than two thou­
sand men (according to some accounts, five thousand men) into the city of Khovd, the 
last bastion of the Qing army. Prior to entering battle, he offered his large standard to 
Rashaant Mountain while a certain Dörvöd epic singer played his two-​stringed lute 
(tovshuur) and sang a heroic epic called Hundred Thousand Jewels (Bum Erdene). There, 
together with Jalkhanz Khutagt (whose current incarnation is considered Jamsran’s 
oracle) and his disciples, Magsarjav meditated on fierce activities, and in order to in­
cinerate the demons of foreign enemies, he participated in the ritual of exorcism, in 
which a model of a human skull made out of dough was placed on a pyramid-​like 
structure made of stalks of grain, to which were attached red, jagged, paper streamers 
representing the flames.

--- PAGE 522 ---
A Dharma Protector      497
 
From 1912 until 1921, Magsarjav fought some thirty battles, including those against 
Chinese incursions in Inner Mongolia and Chinese Republican forces under General 
Xu Shuzheng that occupied Ikh Khüree, and after joining the Mongolian People’s 
Revolutionary Party (MPRP) in 1921, he fought White Russian troops led by ultra­
conservative monarchist Baron Ungern (Roman von Ungern-​Sternberg, 1886–​1921), 
who used intimidation and brutality toward revolutionaries. Due to his bravery and 
victory in battle against the Qing forces and Chinese troops, Magsarjav received the 
honorary title of “Strong Hero” (khatanbaatar) from the Eighth Jebtsundampa and 
the rank of a beis, or a prince of the fourth rank. A year after joining the Mongolian 
revolutionaries, in 1922, he was appointed to the positions of Minister of the Western 
Frontier and then as the Minister of Defense. In 1924, he became an official member of 
the MPRP.
According to one account given by partisan Ts. Dovdoi, who fought along Magsarjav 
in Sülinkheer, on one occasion when Magsarjav sent some of his men to spy on a Chinese 
military encampment, a soldier returned unnerved by the size of the Chinese troops. 
Because of that, Magsarjav entered a trance, and while in trance, he beat his soldiers 
with a whip. After the trance, he instilled confidence in his men by recounting his vision 
of Chinggis Khan in a trance and assuring them that Jamsran was watching over them. 
In another account written by Khorlogiin Choilbasan (1939–​1957), a leader of the MPRP 
and a Marshal of Mongolian People’s Army from 1930 until 1957, Choibalsan wrote 
about Magsarjav, describing Magsarjav’s dealings with a killed enemy.16 After beheading 
the enemy, cutting his chest open, and taking out the enemy’s heart, Magsarjav 
worshipped his flag with the enemy’s heart and had his soldiers taste the blood drip­
ping from it. Magsarjav’s flag was decorated with a triple spear on the top, a skull with 
black tassles, and a ceremonial scarf (khadag). Prior to worshipping the flag, he installed 
it in the ground and tied it with ropes on three sides to balance it (Myagmarsambuu 
2011, 11–​12, 32–​39). When J. Boldbaatar wrote about Magsarjav in 1999, he tried to ex­
plain Magsarjav’s violent actions in a way similar to those in which the fierce deeds of 
Jamsran are justified in various works by stating: “Khatanbaatar Magsarjav was a tal­
ented general. During the war, he would remain in meditation internally, while exter­
nally manifesting ferocity, strengthening his soldiers, and providing the soldiers’ minds 
with great capacity to summon the good fortune” (Boldbaatar 1999, 33). Magsarjav built 
a monastery, between 1919 and 1920, that had about a hundred lamas, two monastic 
colleges, a large assembly hall, and a temple dedicated to Jamsran as the monastery’s Red 
Protector (Ulaan Sakhius). The monastery continued its prayer service to Jamsran until 
1930, when public ritual performances and tantric initiations were still possible before 
their prohibition by MPRP.
Jamsran has also been the object of ritual worship in Mongolia at various mountain 
sites, ovoos (stone cairns), and monasteries. One monastery famous for its ritual wor­
ship of Jamsran and for Jamsran mask dances (tsam, Tib. cham) was the large monastic 
center, Khüree of Erdene Khamba, which was located in a region now known as Khishig 
Öndör district in Bulgan Province. The monastery had four divisions (aimag), a large as­
sembly temple (tsogchin, Tib. tshogs chen), many smaller temples, a woodblock printery,

--- PAGE 523 ---
498      Vesna A. Wallace
 
and more than a thousand monks. According to Bayasgaalan, it belonged to the non-​
Géluk, “Red Tradition” (Bayasgalan 2011, 376). Jamsran also played a part in ritual mask 
dances held at other monasteries, such as Khamar Khiid in Ömnövgovi Province, Ikh 
Küree, the seat of the Jebstundmpas, and others. A Jamsran mask, which was used in a 
mask dance performance in Ikh Khüree held in the early 1930s, was made of approxi­
mately six thousand coral beads and weighing seventy kilograms at the end of the nine­
teenth century by a well-​known artist of Ikh Küree named Puntsog Osor (Bayasgalan 
2011, 381–​382).
Moreover, Jamsran, together with Mahākāla and Śrīdevī, was also worshipped as 
one of the three protectors of Usan Züil Khüree, located in the region now known as 
Govi-​Altai Province. When the Badam Yoga monastic college reopened in Geser (Tib. 
Gesar) temple in Ulaanbaatar in 2001, an image of Jamsran as a protector was placed 
in the temple to replace a human-​size statue of Jamsran, which had stood there be­
fore the ravages of the communist revolution, when it was destroyed. The association 
of Jamsran’s image with Geser temple, known also as Guandi temple, is based on the 
Mongols’ view of the epic hero Gesar (Tib. Ge sar) as an emanation of Jamsran, which 
is based on the Qing’s worship of the Chinese god of war, Guandi, as an emanation of 
Jamsran and a protector of the Géluk tradition.
Nowadays, in addition to various, smaller temples across Mongolia, Jasmran is 
worshipped at two mountain sites, one situated in the Büren district (sum) of Central 
Province (Töv aimag) of Mongolia; and he also continues to be worshipped at Khognu 
Khan Mountain, located in Bulgan Province.
Jamsran in Mongolian Writings
Various texts related to Jamsran, such as supplicatory and confessional prayers and 
eulogies and ritual texts of exorcism, as well as related commentaries on such works, 
continued to be produced in Mongolia until 1921. The aforementioned Öndör Geegeen 
Zanabazar, the First Jebtsundampa, composed a versified prayer of offerings to Jamsran 
in the Tibetan language, titled The Offering of Requisites, together with Offering Verses, to 
the Ferocious Dharma Protector Lcam sring (Chos skyong dregs pa lcam sring gi chas ‘dbul 
mchod ‘phreng bcas).17 In this prayer, he addresses Jamsran as a fierce deity arisen from 
the dance of gnosis of the greatly powerful Buddha Amitābha. Thus, Jamsran is here 
not a mundane deity converted to Buddhism but a manifestation of a buddha. There 
is also an extensive commentary on Zanabazar’s prayer, titled A Coral Necklace, the 
Ornament of Supreme Realization: A Commentary on the Offering of Requisites together 
with Offering Verses to the Ferocious Spirit Lcam sring, a Dharma Protector (Chos skyong 
dregs pa lcam sring gi chas dbul mchod phreng dang bcas pa’i ‘grel ba dam pa’i dgongs 
rgyan byi ‘ru’i do shal), which also begins with an homage to Amitābha. It was com­
posed by a monk named Nomgoni Dar Ekh Lam Agvaantsültemjamts, who was a great 
devotee of Zanabazar, and whom he extolls as “the essence of the Three Jewels, supreme 
refuge, and all pervading-​lord.”18

--- PAGE 524 ---
A Dharma Protector      499
 
Moreover, in his prayer to Jamsran, Zanabazar offers Jamsran a mighty sword 
(representing the blazing fire of gnosis); a bow standing for a sublime method and sim­
ilar to a vajra rock; an arrow of wisdom; a victory flag; an ocean of nectar of stainless 
gnosis; the offering substances, ornaments, and garments of pure ethical conduct; a 
coat of mail representing fearless patience; boots representing indefatigable effort; and 
a cushion of a corpse representing unwavering meditative concentration. To the the 
goddess “Great Consort” (Rig pa’i lha mo), he offers a blazing ritual dagger of meteoric 
iron, which cuts the enemies and destroys obstacles, and he offers her a fast-​running 
bear. To Red Sokdag, he offers a mad wolf that leaps swiftly like lightening, a copper-​
colored banner, and a red lasso that abolishes the hordes of māras. While weaponizing 
these three deities for the destruction of outer enemies, Zanabazar also sublimates their 
weapons in accordance with Jamsran’s ultimately sublime nature, one that can purify 
Zanabazar from his mental afflictions. Each verse of Zanabazar’s prayer is followed by 
a refrain that begins with “if you accept it” and ends with his command to this oath-​
bound protector to carry out all these tasks—​namely, to cut, pierce, and disperse those 
who scorn the Buddhist teachings and holders of the teachings, to vanquish Zanabazar’s 
own mental afflictions and obstacles, to expand Buddhist teachings in the ten directions, 
to increase the happiness of all beings, and to bestow good fortune to teachers like him­
self, disciples, and patrons—​so that they all may effect their own wellbeing and that of 
others. It is evident from the words of this prayer that Zanabazar was familiar not only 
with iconographical representations of Jamsran but also with the symbolic meaning 
of Jamsran’s implements. Like the authors of works contained in the Jamsran Beübüm, 
Zanabazar presents his offerings to Jamsran in a reciprocal or transactional manner. If 
Jamsran, as an oath-​bound protector, accepts the offering, he is, in turn, expected to 
follow the given injunctions in the same manner as nature spirits, nāgas, and the like. It 
is through both prayer and offerings that relationship with Jamsran is sustained.
Like Zanabazar, the Fourth Jebtsundampa (1775–​1813, Blo bzang thub bstan dbang 
phyug ‘jigs med rgya mtsho dpal bzang po) worshipped Jamsran and composed a eu­
logy to him, titled The Hero’s Roar: A Eulogy to the Dharma Protector, a King of Ferocity, 
with His Consort (Chos skyong dregs pa’i rgyal po stod ‘phrin chen po yum bcas kyi bstod 
phrin dpa’ bo’i nga ro). In this work, he calls upon Jamsran as “a powerful deity, akin to 
Amitābha, endowed with eight qualities of mastery” (dbang phyug brgyad ldan ‘od mtha’ 
yas ba’i lha dbang gi skyes bu lcam sring), to arise from the powerful, Fiercely Wrathful 
cremation ground (drag tu rgod pa).19
In various Mongolian prayers, we find statements that appeal to the previously 
mentioned two aspects of Jamsran’s nature and activity. For instance, in the following 
verses composed by Badamjalbuuzal, who calls himself “a yogī of Hayagrīva,” he 
describes Jamsran and his companions as blood thirsty warriors in this way:
I praise you, the one who seizes the lives of the adversaries and hindrances,
Who strikes a thunderbolt on the heads of those with deteriorated commitments,
And who grants the accomplishment of the supreme and ordinary siddhis
To those who merely recite your name! (v. 2)

--- PAGE 525 ---
500      Vesna A. Wallace
 
I praise you, military general and hero,
Who wages a war and flies a [victory] banner,
Who partakes of the lungs and hearts of the saboteurs in his mouth,
And wields a greatly blazing, copper knife against the adversaries. (v. 4)
I praise the ocean of beings who keep their oaths, who listen to the ordinance,
Who, liberating, support the actions of a yogī,
Who with delight ingest the blood and flesh of the adversary,
And manifest various, frightening, and magic manifestations! (v. 6)
You all, together with all your retinues,
Turn into dust the malevolent enemies of ours!
Please bring under my power
All the glory of the three worlds! (v. 7)20
On the other hand, Badamjalbuuzal also refers to Jamsran as an emanation of 
Hayagrīva’s mind, which accomplishes Hayagrīva’s decree, and as a tutelary deity (yi 
dam) of yogīs, who grants the accomplishment of the supreme and ordinary siddhis to 
those who merely mention his name. When summoning Jamsran, Badamjalbuuzal puts 
out this request:
Jee! Please come here from the upper realm, the primordially pure dharmadhātu,
Manifesting in a fierce appearance to accomplish the tasks!
Please partake of the bali offerings, tea, vodka, and the like, presented to a
Greatly ferocious demon from among the quarreling demons and devils. (v. 9)
This juxtaposition of Jamsran as both a deity abiding in the primordially pure 
dharmadhātu, who descends to the earth in order to carry out a requested task, and a 
greatly fierce spirit that dwells with quarreling demons and devils in the land of Maruce 
remains unexplained in this prayer. Badamjalbuuzal, like some other authors, seems to 
take for granted that Jamsran’s nature and activities should be understood from an ul­
timate point of view that breaks down dualities and negates all conceptions, a view in 
which there is no real difference between a yakṣa spirit and a highly realized bodhisattva.
This juxtaposition that we see with regard to Jamsran’s identity also appears in icon­
ographic images and textual references to Jamsran’s abode in the land of Maruce. He is 
depicted as dwelling in a quadrangular palace with four gates made of human skulls. The 
palace rests in the center of the terrifying land of Maruce, which is located northwest of 
Jambudvīpa. In this land, the sky is covered by red clouds of copper color, from which 
emerge the roaring sound of dragons, flashes of lightning, and showers of blood. In ad­
dition, the sounds of the strikes of raining iron spears and swords reverberate, blows 
that smash the skulls of the enemy. The copper mountains of Maruce are filled with the 
internal organs of oath-​breakers and are surrounded by the ocean of blood formed from 
the blood of enemies and animals. This is a place where dreadful and inauspicious birds, 
such as owls and the like, fly across the mountain valleys, and whose wings produce

--- PAGE 526 ---
A Dharma Protector      501
 
a frightening sound (see Bayasgalan 2011, 347–​349). Due to the fierce and red aspects 
of Jamsran’s body and Maruce, the best place for a meditation retreat on Jamsran is 
considered to be a land that has a red color or a mountain with red rocks.
This reference to the presence of owls in Jamsran’s Maruce land is also a reason for 
which the owl became associated with esoteric rituals related to Jamsran in Mongolia, 
and why thirteen owls are included in the ritual offerings to Jamsran. In some Jamsran-​
related rituals, the red torma and red, poisonous arrow sprinkled with blood are deco­
rated with feathers of an owl in order to increase the ferocity and efficacy of the ritual. In 
other secret rituals, the heart of an owl, referred to as a “liberating owl,” is placed into a 
black skeleton that is later destroyed at a burial ground while the antagonistic mantra is 
being recited (see Bayasgalan 2011, 377–​379).
Maruce is also home to red, blazing storms that can bring the entire world into tur­
moil. However, as previously noted, Jamsran’s abode is also the upper realm of a pri­
mordially pure dharmadhātu. This suggests that the dreadful land of Maruce—​just like 
Jamsran himself—​is understood as nothing more than a mere appearance, devoid of 
substantiality. From this perspective, there is no contradiction with regard to Jamsran’s 
dual identity or that of his dwelling place. Until Jamsran is invoked and summoned in 
prayers and rituals, he remains a mere potential for violence and anticipated possibility 
of victory over the enemy. But when he is ritually invoked, internalized through medita­
tion, and incited into an action, he is a powerful ally who can take on the form of a yakṣa 
spirit or be embodied in a human warrior.
In Mongolian works, Jamsran is most fierce of the yakṣas, whose anger causes thunder, 
rain, and hail; whose voice makes enemies’ hearts tremble; and who makes the entire 
earth shake when stamping the ground. As such, he pacifies the harmful demons, eight 
nāga kings, and oath-​breaking enemies. In an anonymous Mongolian prayer to Jamsran, 
titled The Offering to Red Protector (Ulaɣan sakiɣus-un takil-ɣa), Jamsran is summoned 
in his yakṣa form and told to come quickly in accord with the command of Victorious 
Vajradhara.21 It appears that Jamsran never acts on his own initiative but performs 
the tasks of an oath-​bound Dharma Protector through persuasion, summoning, and 
offerings, or when impelled by the mind of other Dharma protectors and Buddhas. 
Hence, Jamsran can be summoned and brought forth in meditation or in prayer in dif­
ferent ways. In the Jamsran Beübüm, there appear two common methods of summoning 
Jamsran; one is by summoning him directly from the land of Maruce, whereas the other 
involves bringing him forth from the heart of Hayagrīva into one’s own heart in med­
itation. Likewise, in correspondence with the red, blazing color of Jamsran’s body and 
his land of Maruce (which indicate his power of subjugation), a meditation on Jamsran 
is said to have the best results if practiced in the red region or in a place where there are 
red stones on a mountainside. But it can also be practiced in a crematorium or burial 
ground; at the confluence of rivers; or in a temple, a monastery, or a palace.
In addition to performing the activities of expelling demons, nāgas, land spirits 
(Mong. savdag, Tib. sa bdag), and enemies of Dharma, Jamsran is also deemed capable 
of performing other types of activities that support tantric yogīs, such as tantric rites for 
pacification and prosperity or long-​life rituals. The latter is accomplished by Jamsran

--- PAGE 527 ---
502      Vesna A. Wallace
 
warding off 404 diseases and inauspicious signs of untimely death, granting the attain­
ment of siddhis, and so on. According to a short, Mongolian text titled The Abbreviated 
Torma Offering to Jamsran (Jamsrang-​un baling ergükü tobči quriyaɣsan), composed 
by Mergen Gegeen Luvsandambijaltsan (Tib. Blo bzang bstan pa’i rgyal msthan, 1717–​
1786), after one summons Jamsran, displays on the altar an image of him, and makes 
the inner torma offering consisting of the red drink containing blood and flesh, one 
asks Jamsran to consume the offerings and to accomplish the given tasks in return. The 
prayer reads:
I pay homage to you, fierce yakṣa, who has the fierce, wrathful body, a command that is 
the sound of a fierce mantra, and a fierce mind free from conceptualizations.
I worship you and pray to you, O Protector. Be a safeguarding friend, protect me, 
and avert the demons of obstacle!
Thoroughly accomplish the tasks, especially the mentioned [tasks]! Purify the 
adverse circumstances and grant me the appropriate siddhi!
Glorious, precious guru, tutelary deity, ḍakiṇī, Dharma protectors, and great yakṣa, 
due to your kindness, may the Holy lama live longer, may the Dharma of the three 
Vehicles spread, and may my life and virtue increase!
May there be abundant blessings!22
In his poem called He (Tere min-​u), the famous Mongolian yogī of the nineteenth 
century by name Danzanravja (Bstan ‘dzin rab rgyas, 1803–​1856, the fifth incarnation in 
the line of Noyon Khutugtus of Gobi), who became an orphan in his early age, praises 
Jamsran as a deity that supports orphans, treats them with compassion, and can pre­
vent theft. The versatility of Jamsran’s activities reflects the condensation of the authors’ 
needs into a single deity. Part a yakṣa spirit and part divine, Jamsran embodies this mul­
tifaceted nature, while ultimately not being established anywhere.
Conclusion
In conclusion, Jamsran is a tantric deity with diverse origins. He represents emanations 
of different fierce deities worshipped in different Tibetan and Mongolian tantric 
traditions. These can be grouped into two main categories: a converted yakṣa deity 
and the fierce emanation of Amitābha. A precise answer to the question as to how 
and when this dual nature came about is difficult to determine. The question of doc­
trinal support for Jamsran’s simultaneous mundane and enlightened identities and 
activities is answered implicitly in texts that suggest that both of Jamsran’s identities 
can coexist because they lack a reified ontological basis. It seems that this lack of in­
herent nature allows for Jamsran to be culturally and religiously adaptable to different 
pragmatic roles—​social and religious—​assigned to him in different circumstances by 
Tibetan and Mongolian Buddhist tantric adepts. Jamsran’s dual identity seems to be

--- PAGE 528 ---
A Dharma Protector      503
 
programmatically re-​created in order to accomplish two types of activities—​one that is 
suitable only for a fierce, mundane deity that can intervene and rearrange social events 
and circumstances with any means necessary and the other that is compassionate and 
supportive of those in need.
As revealed by various ritual texts dedicated to Jamsran, in accordance with the dual 
aspects of his identity and the two, corresponding types of his activities, the frightening 
aspect of Jamsran’s image is at times interpreted semiotically, as a representation of one’s 
own, inner exorcism, in which, the enemy’s heart held in Jamsran’s hand is interpreted as 
one’s own ego-​grasping and mental afflictions. As we saw, at other times, Jamsran’s harsh 
activities are taken literally, especially in the ritual context of exorcism. His cruel deeds 
are justified in two ways. One is that he harms sentient beings in order to help sentient 
beings, for which reason he is called the “lord of life,” and the second is that his harsh 
deeds are justified by the idea that those sentient beings upon whom he inflicts harm or 
even death become purified from their negative karma and, as a result, obtain a favor­
able rebirth.
Notes
	1.	 See texts included in the Mongolian collection, Jamsran Beübüm, reproduced in Shashnyg 
Khamgaalach Nomyg Tetgeegch, Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm), 2005, like Beg tse lcam dral gyi 
gtor dbang gi yig chung; Srog bdag dmar po shan pa grit hogs kyi bsgub pa gnas lcags thog 
dmar; Gnod sbyin lcam dral gyi rjes gnang gi yig chung; Dmar po khrag gi mda’ ‘phen ma’i 
ngan sngags shan pa dma mo’i rgyud, Srog bdag mar po’i drag sdang bshan pa sgrol byed kyi 
rgyud, etc.
	2.	 The Dharmameghā is discussed in a number of Mahāyāna texts such as the Daśabhūmikā 
Mahāyāna Sūtra, Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra, etc.
	3.	 See Shashyg Khamgaalagch Nomyg Tetgegch Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm), translated by A. 
Samdan A. and B. Batsana (Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shambal Niigemgleg, 2005), which 
contains the copies of the original texts composed in Tibetan.
	4.	 Shashnyg Khamgaalagch Nomyg Tetgegch Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm) 2005.
	5.	 The text begins by giving a Sanskrit title Prāṇātmalohiteśamantranāma as well as a Tibetan 
version of the Sanskrit title, Srog bdag dmar po’i drag sngags (A Fierce Mantra of the Red 
Prāṇātma). It consists of six folios. See Shashnyg Khamgaalach Nomyg Tetgeegch, Ulaan 
Sakhius (Beübüm) 2005, 257.
	6.	 According to colophon, the text, coming from in succession from the lineage of Marpa’s 
disciple Tshur ston, was written down by Bsnub ston phug pa. The text has three folios. See 
Shashnyg Khamgaalach Nomyg Tetgeegch, Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm) 2005, 306–​308.
	7.	 Two such texts are the Srog bdag dmar po’i drag sngangs shan pa sgrol byed gyi rgyud and 
the Drag po btsan gyi rgyal ‘bud kyi yig chung gi yang yig chung, which are sealed with three 
seals: rgya rgya rgya; the other two texts—​the Pho rkyang du bsgrub pa gnod sbyin zhon yam 
shud dmar po’i sger sgrub and the Srog bdag dmar po shan pa gri thog kyi bsgrub pa gnam 
lcags thog dmar—​have certain sections sealed with three seals in the middle and at the be­
ginning of the text, respectively. The Srog bdag dmar po shan pa gri thog kyi bsgrub pa gnam 
lcags thog dmar also has two seals (kha tham kha tham) at the end of the text.

--- PAGE 529 ---
504      Vesna A. Wallace
 
	 8.	 The mention of Indian ācārya, Nyima Dragpa is given in the Gnod sbyin dmar po’i lo rgyus, 
where he is referred to as a master of evil spells who was able to kill an enemy by merely 
looking at the person, and his son as being able to kill someone by merely getting angry at 
the person. They are both also mentioned in the Shan pa skrol byed srog bdag dmar po’I lo 
rgyus. See Shashnyg Khamgaalagch Nomyg Tetgegch Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm) 2005, 325–​
237; 340–​342.
	 9.	 The country of Li (Tib, li yul) refers to Khotan. I am grateful to Professors Matthew King 
and Johan Elverskog for pointing out this fact. I have been unable to identify the country 
of Ha Shan (Tib. ha shan yul) with certainty. However, due to some similarity of the terms, 
ha shan yul and Mongolian term küšen, Ha Shan perhaps refers to Kucha, the area that 
now lies in Xinjiang, China.
	10.	 “One whose nature is life.”
	11.	 Srog bdag dmar po ‘khor bcas kyi gnod bskul, in Shashnyg Khamgaalach Nomyg Tetgeegch, 
Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm) (2005), 296, folios 1–​2b.
	12.	 A copy of the Tibetan manuscript of the text consists of three folios with two sides and is 
published in the Shashnyg Khamgaalagch Nomig Tetgegch Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm) 2005, 
340–​342. The text begins with homage to the Bhagavān Yamarāja.
	13.	 I was unable to identify this person.
	14.	 See Khaadyn Ündesnii Erdeniin Tovch (Qad-​un ündüsn-​ü erdeni-​yin tobči), the manuscript 
studied by M. Bayarsaikhan (Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shinjlekh Ukhaany Yam, 2011), 116–​
167: 75r01–​75r21 for original Mongolian version, and for Modern Mongolian version see 
93. See also Sagan Setsen, Erdeniin Tovch, prepared by M. Bayarsaikhan (Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia: Soyombo Printing, 2006), 147–​148.
	15.	 See Khaadyn Ündesnii Erdeniin Tovch (Qad-​un ündüsn-​ü erdeni-​yin tobči), the manuscript 
studied by M. Bayarsaikhan (Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shinjlekh Ukhaany Yam, 2011), 116–​
167: 75r01–​75r21 for original Mongolian version, and for Modern Mongolian version see 
93. See also Sagan Setsen, Erdeniin Tovch, prepared by M. Bayarsaikhan (Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia: Soyombo, 2006), 147–​148.
	16.	 K. Choilbasan, Khatanbaatar Magsarjav (Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: n.p., 1942), 40. Cited in 
G. Myagmarsambuu, Shashnyg Khamgaalagch Dogshin Choijin (Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: 
Batlan Khamgaalakhyn Ikh Surguuly, Batlan Khmgaalakhyn Erdem Shinjilgeenii 
Khüreelen, 2001), 36–​40.
	17.	 For the original Tibetan language version, see BDRC W2DB25419, scans 139–​145. A 
modern Mongolian translation prepared by Ven. Bulgan was published in Shashnig 
khamgaalagch nomig tetgegch Ulaan Sahius (Beübüm), (Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shambal 
Niigemleg 2005), 32–​35.
	18.	 The text consists of twenty-​one folios, and appears in the Khalhyn Jivzündamba 
Khutagtuudyn Zarim Zokhioluudyn Tailbaryn Emkhtgel (An Anthology of the 
Commentaries on Some Works of Khalkha’s Jebtsundampa Khutugtus), published in the 
volume titled Mongol Bilig Sünbüm VI Boti in Mongol Bilig series Byambaa (Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia: 2006), 425–​465; mchog gsum ‘dus pa’i snying po skyabs mgon zla med khyab bdag 
rje btsun dam pa chen pos mdzad pa’i chos skyong dregs pa lcam sring gi chas dbul mchod 
phreng dand bcas pa’i ‘grel bdam pa’i dgongs rkyun by ru’i do shal.
	19.	 Chos skyong dregs pa’i rgyal po stod ‘phrin chen po yum bcas kyi bstod phrin dpa’ bo’i nga 
ro, BDRC W3CN17673-​I3CN17675-​325-​335; folios 1–​4a. Byambaa R. in his Mongolchuudin 
tövd kheleer tuuvirsan mongol khelend orchuulsan nom züin bürtgel (The Bibliographical 
Guide to Mongolian Writers in the Tibetan Language and Mongolian Translators, Vol. 1,

--- PAGE 530 ---
A Dharma Protector      505
 
Mongol Bilig Series (Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Byambaa Ragcha), 151, lists another work by 
the Fourth Jebtsundampa, titled Establishing the Glorious Protector, the Great Lcam sring 
on This Basis (Dpal chos skyong lcam sring rten ‘dir brten pa) in 1811. According to Byamba, 
the text was printed in Ikh Khüree, and it consists of six folios, However, it does not appear 
in the Collected Works of the Fourth Jebtsundampa.
	20.	 My translation from the modern Mongolian, published in Ach avralt burkhan teskheerüüd, 
153–​154.
	21.	 Ulaan Sakhiusny Talhilga Orshvoi (Ulaɣan sakiɣus Jamsrang-​yin takilɣ-​a orusibui), 
Burkhany Nomyn Mongol Unshlagun Sudar: Ödör tutmyn Chukhal Kheregtei Sudruudyn 
Tsomorlig, edited by D. Gatanbaatar (Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Mönkhiin Üseg Grupp, 
2010), 85..
	22.	 Jamsrang-​un baling ergükü tobči quriyaɣsan, in Mongɣul ingsilɣ-​a-​yin sudur orosibai, Vol. 
14, pt. 3 (Khökhöt: University of Inner Mongolia, Center for Mongolian Studies, n.d.), 
folios 1064–​1065. According to the colophon, the text was remembered by Wangdui Toyin.
References
Bayasgalan, S. 2011. Arvan khangal burkhadyn takhilga. (Ikh Yuany Gürnees XXI Zuun). 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Interpress.
Boldbaatar, J. 1999. “Khatanbaatar S. Magsarjavyn Tsergee Zorigjuulj Baisan Arge Ukhaany 
Tukhaid.” In Khtanbaatar Darkha Chin Van Sandagdorjiin Magsarjav. Ardyn Khatanbaatar 
S. Magsarjavyn Mendelsnii 120 Jiliin Oid Zorioulsan Erdem Shingilgeenii Baga Khurlyn 
Material. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Baga Khural.
Gnod sbyin dmar po’i lo rgyus. 2005. In Shashnyg Khamgaalach Nomyg Tetgeegch, Ulaan 
Sakhius (Beübüm). Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shambal Niigemleg, 325–​327.
Heller, Amy. 1989. “Historic and Iconographic Aspects of the Protective Deities Srung-​
ma dmar-​nag.” In Tibetan Studies, Proceedings of the 5th Seminar of the Internaitonal 
Association of Tibetan Studies, Vol. 1, edited by I. Shoren and Y. Zuiho. Narita, Japan: 
Naritasan Shinshoji, 479–​492.
Jamsrang-​un baling ergükü tobči quriyaɣsan (n.d.). In Mongɣul ingsilɣ-​a-​yin sudur orosibai, 
Vol. 14, pt. 3. Khökhöt: University of Inner Mongolia, Center for Mongolian Studies.
Khaadyn Ündesnii Erdeniin Tovch (Qad-​un ündüsn-​ü erdeni-​yin tobči). 2011. Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia: Shinjlekh Ukhaany Yam.
Myagmarsambuu, G. 2001. Shashnyg Khamgaalagch Dogshin Choijin. Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia Batlan
Sagan Setsen. 2006. Erdeniin Tovch. Prepared by M. Bayarsaikhan: Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: 
Soyombo.
Shan pa sgrol byed srog bdag dmar po’i lo rgyus. 2005. In Shashnyg Khamgaalach Nomyg 
Tetgeegch, Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm). Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shambhal Niigemleg, 340–​342.
Shashnyg Khamgaalagch Nomyg Tetgegch Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm). 2005. Translated by A. 
Samdan and B. Batsana. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shambal Niigemgleg.
Srog bdag dmar po ‘khor bcas kyi gnod bskul. 2005. In Shashnyg Khamgaalach Nomyg Tetgeegch, 
Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm). Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shambal Niigemleg, 296–​298.
Srog bdag dmar po’i drag sngags shan pa sgrol byed gyi rgyud. 2005. In Shashnyg Khamgaalach 
Nomyg Tetgeegch, Ulaan Sakhius (Beübüm). Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: Shambal Niigemleg, 
327–​330.

--- PAGE 531 ---
506      Vesna A. Wallace
 
Stoddard, Heather. 1999. “The Tibetan Pantheon: Its Mongolia Form,” in Mongolia: The Legacy 
of Chinggis Khan, edited by P. Berger and T. T. Bartholomew. San Francisco: Asian Art 
Museum of San Francisco, 244–​246.
Takhilgt, G. Myagmarsambuu. 2001. Shashnyg Khamgaalagch Dogshin Choijin. Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia: Batlan Khamgaalakhun Erden Shinjilgeenii Khüreelen.
Teleki, Krisztina. 2011. Monasteries and Temples of Bogdiin Khüree. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: 
Institute of History, Mongolian Academy of Sciences.
Wallace, Vesna A. 2015. “What Do Protective Deities, Mongolian Heroes, and Fast Steeds 
Have in Common?” In Buddhism in Mongolian History, Culture, and Society, edited by V. A. 
Wallace. New York: Oxford University Press, 202–​220.

--- PAGE 532 ---
Chapter 23
The Goddesses of 
Jaina Tantra
Michael Slouber
Jainism is typically regarded as an ascetic religion, centered on a series of twenty-​four 
austere spiritual warriors of the past (jina, tīrthaṃkara) and those renouncers who 
follow in their footsteps. As is well known, nonviolence (ahiṃsā) is the central principle 
of the religion and one that renouncers uphold with remarkable dedication.
As for the religious paradigm we call tantra, it has been understood to refer to a wide 
variety of religious expressions, from pragmatic magical rites aimed at controlling and 
sometimes harming other people, to transgressive rituals involving sexuality and con­
sumption of impure substances, and to lofty philosophical insights into the nature of self 
and reality.
Last, regarding goddesses, India is unique in the world for preserving contin­
uous traditions of the feminine divine from prehistory down to the present. While 
conceptions of Indian goddesses are diverse and have varied a great deal over time, two 
popular motifs for the past two millennia pose goddesses as either fearsome, weapon-​
wielding warriors whom one might fear as much as admire or as beautiful, full-​bodied 
maidens or mothers who allure and nourish as representations of fertility and abun­
dance. Both types of goddess, and tantra in general, seem, on the face of it, to be “strange 
bedfellows” with Jainism. In fact, their union is ancient and natural, to the extent that we 
can bring nuance to preconceived notions of each topic, and examine more deeply the 
meaning of their convergence.
The Blurry Boundaries of Jainism
A central debate among scholars of Jaina traditions is the nature of the relationship be­
tween the ideal of Jaina renouncers and the lay community that supports them. Lay

--- PAGE 533 ---
508      Michael Slouber
 
Jainas take on few of the restrictions observed by renouncers and go about life in similar 
ways to their non-​Jaina neighbors. So what makes a layperson Jaina? Given that the lit­
eral meaning of Jaina is one who affiliates with Jinas, a starting point is to say that a Jaina 
is someone who venerates the Jinas and Jaina renouncers. Or, one can identify a Jaina 
by observance of vegetarianism, required of all laypeople in the community. But many 
non-​Jainas also venerate renouncers and observe a vegetarian diet. Internally, a Jaina is 
someone with a correct understanding (saṃyagdṛṣṭi) of the nature of existence and the 
detrimental role of violence in perpetuating our entrapment in the cycle of suffering. 
However, as nonrenouncers, lay Jainas may often value different things. They may be 
more concerned with health, wealth, and family and less with ultimate freedom from 
the bonds of karma. But does that mean laypeople are “less Jaina” than renouncers? 
Should scholars of Jainism focus less on what Jainas (lay or renouncer) do and more 
on the ideals espoused by the religion’s intellectual leaders? Scholarship on Jainism has 
tended to give much more attention to said ideals, whereas the past several decades 
have involved a broadening of this gaze to attend to beliefs and practices that were long 
obscured in normative accounts.
A related question is how one should understand the interrelationships between 
Jainism and other Indian religions (especially Hinduism). Some scholars focus on 
specific Jaina sources that are demonstrably based on Hindu exemplars. At its best, 
this approach can illuminate the context and methods of specific instances of bor­
rowing. Alexis Sanderson’s research into the Śaiva source of the important Jaina tantric 
ritual text Nirvāṇakalikā, attributed to Pādaliptasūri, demonstrated that the majority 
of it is copied, with minimal changes, from the twelfth-​century Śaiva ritual manual 
Siddhāntasārapaddhati, ascribed to Bhojadeva (Sanderson 2015). Knowing this is essen­
tial for anyone who seeks to understand the Nirvāṇakalikā in its historical context.
Focusing on Jaina incorporation of other religious traditions has, however, also been 
criticized in recent scholarship. Jonathan Geen, in his article “Jainism and Hinduism” 
in Brill’s Encyclopedia of Jainism, points to the 2,500 years of a common religious culture 
shared by most inhabitants in the region and how “crisp and consistent definitions of 
Jainism and Hinduism are problematic and elusive” (Geen 2020, 305). Likewise, Ellen 
Gough has cautioned that such a focus on Śaiva influence might lead to inattention to 
the ways particular groups modified the material to make it specific to their sect (Gough 
2012). Building on that point, consider the case of Sarasvatī (alias Śrutadevatā) in Jaina 
traditions. While most scholars think of Sarasvatī as “Hindu,” John Cort pointed out that 
her oldest known statue is Jaina (Cort 2020, 160). It would be erroneous to dismiss an in­
stance of a particular goddess as merely a Hindu or Buddhist borrowing, as Jae-​Eun Shin 
did concerning several Jaina mahāvidyā goddesses in her recent study of this goddess 
type in eastern Indian Śākta traditions (Shin 2018, 130–​133). Robert Zydenbos pointedly 
critiqued this sort of facile equivalence, saying: “All such explanations suffer from the 
same shortcomings on the part of their authors: insufficient familiarity with the mate­
rial, a disregard of the theological context and a desire to take intellectual shortcuts with 
regard to what is actually a highly intricate and subtle subject” (Zydenbos 1994, 136–​137).

--- PAGE 534 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      509
 
Rather than think of Jainism, Hinduism, and Buddhism as neat and tidy boxes into 
which we can drop particular deities, the evidence demands a more nuanced approach.
What Makes a Goddess Jaina?
Clearly defining the boundaries between divine identities is challenging. Given the 
thousands of years that Lakṣmī, for example, has been simultaneously a Buddhist, 
Jaina, and Hindu goddess, one needs to ask: Are we dealing with one goddess who takes 
multiple forms, or three (or more) goddesses who happen to share a name and sev­
eral attributes? The fact that Jainism has generally existed as a minority religion does 
not mean that Jainas always passively absorbed elements of the supposedly dominant 
Hindu religious cultures. Many Jaina goddesses seem to have been assimilated from 
pan-​Indian categories that pre-​date classical Hinduism, such as yakṣiṇī (nature spirit) 
and vidyā (spell goddess). Therefore, calling them Hindu is not only oversimplifying the 
matter, but also anachronistic.
Serious scholars would do well to tread cautiously through this complex terrain. The 
starting point should be that any goddess whom Jainas worship is, in some respect, a 
Jaina goddess. From this baseline, one can categorize the depth and nature of a given 
goddess’s Jaina identity based on her history and unique characteristics and the extent 
to which her devotees’ practices are tailored to the Jaina context. Granted, such an ap­
proach is not accepted by all scholars. Nalini Balbir described family or clan deities 
(kuladevatā) as well as the local goddesses known as mātās as not part of the Jaina pan­
theon, despite the fact that they are “elements in the lives of many Jains” (Balbir 2009). 
Her rationale is that “they are not given places in the Jain universe,” but I would point 
out that the theoretical structures that supposedly exclude these classes of deities were 
created by intellectuals before the categories in question (kuladevatā and mātā) even 
became current. Cort drew on a traditional tripartite hierarchy of goddesses—​which 
is probably what Balbir had in mind—​to structure his 1987 article on Jaina goddesses: 
Sarasvatī and Lakṣmī as existing in an “upper realm,” the vidyādevīs (spell goddesses) 
in a “middle realm,” and the śāsanadevatā (“deities [who protect] the teachings,” usu­
ally referring to yakṣiṇī/​yakṣī) as existing in a “lower realm” of the Jaina universe (Cort 
1987, which influenced Sanderson 2009, 243). However, scrutinizing the history of 
Jaina goddesses makes clear that vidyādevī and śāsanadevatā are categories with many 
shared members and much overlap. In a recent article, Cort presented a more grounded 
framing of the categories, explaining how “the categorization of nonliberated deities . . . 
is of very limited use in understanding the many roles of these deities in the daily life and 
annual ritual cultures of most Jains. When worshiping a nonliberated deity, only a small 
minority of Jains would be able to identify that deity according to the cosmographical 
schema” (Cort 2020, 143). So again, the boundaries one needs to navigate when thinking 
about this subject are significantly more blurry than one might initially expect.

--- PAGE 535 ---
510      Michael Slouber
 
How Jaina Are Goddesses?
Goddesses with strong connections to nature, fecundity, and motherhood appear to be 
a legacy of prehistory, as archeological records from the Indus Valley Civilization and 
elsewhere prolifically attest (e.g., Bose 2018, 2–​3; Tiwari 1989, 16). The earliest and most 
prominent Jaina example is the case of Ambikā, a yakṣiṇī nature goddess whose name 
literally means “mother” (not “little mother” as scholars have frequently mistranslated 
it).1 Ambikā is regularly depicted with children and sometimes shown with an expan­
sive midsection indicating pregnancy (Figure 23.1). Maruti Nandan Prasad Tiwari 
pointed out that the earliest sources referred to her as Bahuputrā or Bahuputrikā, 
names meaning “lady with many children.” She appears in Jaina statuary from Gwalior, 
Madhya Pradesh, from as early as the first century before the Common Era and was the 
most popular divine female in early Jaina literature (Tiwari 1989, 11–​19). Ambikā has 
continued to be popular to the present, particularly in northern India. In the south, she 
is known as Kuṣmāṇḍiṇī, and since the medieval period her role in Jaina ritual culture 
has increasingly had to be shared with other goddesses, such as Padmāvatī, Jvālāmālinī, 
and Cakreśvarī.
Fecund nature goddesses like Ambikā are part of a class of such non-​Vedic spirits 
(yakṣa-​yakṣiṇī) whose shrines were favored sites for Pārśva, Mahāvīra, and Gautama 
Buddha to frequent, stay at, and teach at. As Cort put it, these enlightened figures 
considered the worship of yakṣas to be a normal part of everyday religious practice (1987, 
241). While some modern scholars and community leaders seem to struggle with how 
to reconcile these goddesses as Jaina (or Buddhist as the case may be), by all accounts 
the ancient founders of these renunciation-​focused religions were content to assimi­
late them through narratives of conversion and protection and as symbols of the auspi­
ciousness of the enlightened beings they came to be associated with. If the renouncers’ 
emphasis on celibacy and cutting ties with family appears to be in contradiction to the 
prolific sexuality and maternity of Jaina goddesses, we can understand it as a testament 
to the practicality of the founding Jinas: They gave up sex and family themselves, but 
were levelheaded enough to realize that the majority would not. In that context, it makes 
more sense to orient such powerful forces toward supporting their transcendent goals 
and not to wage a battle that is doomed to fail by attempting to suppress them.
In terms of the incorporation of goddesses into Jaina cosmology and practice, it 
seems to have been a very gradual process that started in the early centuries before the 
Common Era. As noted, the first surviving Jaina statue of Bahuputrikā dates to the first 
century before the Common Era. The first reference to the Jaina yakṣī cult in south India 
is found in the Tamil classic Cilappatikāram, which mentions a yakṣī shrine associated 
with Jaina ascetics on the outskirts of Madurai (Desai 1957, 88; Parthasarathy 1993, 155).
Another very early set of references involves the category of goddesses known as 
vidyā, vidyādevī, or mahāvidyā, which, as mentioned above, include many goddesses 
who are also referred to as yakṣiṇīs. One of the oldest—​perhaps even older than the

--- PAGE 536 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      511
 
Cilappatikāram, but likely composed in northern India—​is the Vasudevahiṇḍī, a Jaina 
adaptation of Guṇāḍhya’s lost Bṛhatkathā epic. Most of the Jaina studies scholars whose 
works I reviewed date the Vasudevahiṇḍī to ca. 500 or 600 CE; however, a thorough 
evaluation of archaisms and other linguistic features by Ludwig Alsdorf (1936) pointed 
to it belonging to an era several centuries earlier. Following Alsdorf, Shaman Hatley and 
Andrew Ollett cited it as belonging to the early centuries of the Common Era (Hatley 
2007, 95; Ollett 2017, 70). The Vasudevahiṇḍī is significant because it not only refers to 
Jainas performing daily worship of Vidyādevīs (Jhavery 1944, 175), but also describes 
prototantric practices that are remarkably consistent with later tantric rituals. Hatley 
Figure 23.1.  Ambikā, sixth–​seventh century, Bihar, Shahabad District. Currently housed at 
the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
Image is in the public domain.

--- PAGE 537 ---
512      Michael Slouber
 
described how worship of spell goddesses (vidyā) in the Vasudevahiṇḍī narratives 
requires initiation, making offerings, and reciting the spell a large number of times to 
perfect it. The terminology for these practices is also identical to terms later used for the 
same rituals in classical tantra (Hatley 2007, 97–​98).
Many scholars assert that vidyās were originally thought of as impersonal spells, 
and over time they increasingly became understood as goddesses themselves (Cort 
1987, 239). This may be true, although vidyās are already referred to as goddesses one 
propitiates in the Vasudevahiṇḍī, which is as old as later sections of the Śvetāmbara 
canon, which was first written down in the fifth century of the Common Era. The 
earliest surviving canonical work from the Digambaras is also of similar antiquity to the 
Vasudevahiṇḍī (Balbir 2020, 759). Not surviving are the earliest body of fourteen exten­
sive scriptures of the Jainas, called the Pūrvas. According to lists of their contents, the 
entire tenth Pūrva was dedicated to the subject of vidyās (Balbir 2020). So the evidence 
is mixed on this question of how the vidyā goddesses were popularly understood be­
fore the early centuries of the Common Era. What we can assert with confidence is that 
both the yakṣiṇīs and the vidyādevīs became increasingly central to Jaina cosmology 
over the course of the first millennium. Several stories involving named vidyās in the 
context of Jainism are found in Vimalasūri’s Paümacariẏa, a Jaina retelling of the epic 
Rāmāyaṇa, dating to 473 CE (Cort 1987, 239; Dhaky 1997, 46). It is not until the age of 
early tantra in the seventh and eighth centuries that the set of sixteen mahāvidyās are 
named in Jaina sources, and the yakṣa-​yakṣī pairs come to be referred to as protectors 
of the Jaina teachings (śāsanadevatā) (Shah 1947a, 116–​119; Tiwari 1989, 11). By the tenth 
century, pairings of the yakṣas and yakṣīs with particular Jinas had become popular in 
the artistic record, and around the same time evidence of independent cults of the most 
popular goddesses like Cakreśvarī, Ambikā, Padmāvatī, and Jvālāmālinī began to sur­
face (Tiwari 1989, 11).
The Blurry Boundaries of Tantra: 
What Makes a Goddess Tantric 
in Jainism?
We now come to the third element of the nexus of Jaina tantric goddesses: tantra. At the 
outset, it is important to understand that the use of the word “tantra” in the sense of a 
discrete religious formation is a modern academic construct. It is a helpful neologism, 
but should be used self-​consciously and in a well-​defined manner. Sanskrit sources from 
this religious formation most commonly use the word tantra to refer specifically to tan­
tric scriptures, and never—​in the early medieval period at least—​to refer to the system 
as a whole. Sources like Abhinavagupta’s famous Tantrāloka should be translated as 
“Light on the Tantras,” not “Light on Tantra” as scholars continue to mistakenly render 
it.2 Moreover, these scriptures are not only called tantras, but also just as often other

--- PAGE 538 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      513
 
names like āgama, saṃhitā, mata, sāra, kalpa, and so on. The modern use of the adjec­
tive “tantric,” by contrast, is less distant from original usage since it is comparable to the 
most common meaning of tāntrika in tantric era Sanskrit.
When scholars of Jainism define goddesses and texts as tantric, they do so with a va­
riety of meanings in mind. Some regard any magical rites or supernatural powers as 
“Tantric,” including Umakant Premanand Shah and Jae-​Eun Shin (Shah 1947b, 840; 
Shin 2018, 130–​132). Similarly, Cort glosses Jaina mantra science (mantraśāstra) as “the 
main Jain variant of Tantra” (2020, 143). While magic, mantras, and powers are a prom­
inent component of many Jaina and non-​Jaina tantric texts, they certainly pre-​date the 
era in which the word tantra was associated with such things, so it is preferable to avoid 
the anachronism; in pretantric sources the most commonly used sense of tantra was as 
a generic word for “book” or “treatise,” as it is used, for example, in the titles of partic­
ular early Āyurvedic volumes. This generic meaning is essentially what the word con­
tinued to mean well into the tantric era. It was only with the astounding proliferation of 
thousands of such works that the word started to carry the more specific connotation of 
what we now mean by a “tantric” treatise, and later to refer to the whole gambit of topics 
taught in such treatises.
Since the 1980s scholarship of Alexis Sanderson, tantric studies scholars have gener­
ally understood tantra as the type of Śaiva esoteric literature (and associated religious 
patterns) called the Mantramārga in the earliest Sanskrit sources that are representative 
of this tradition and also to refer to its aftermath. The development of the Mantramārga 
is a circa fifth-​century landmark that involved the expansion of liberation-​granting 
Śaiva initiation to include laypeople. The earliest surviving Mantramārga/​tantric text 
is the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, which was the first to introduce the core religious patterns 
that grew into a huge array of early tantric literature over subsequent centuries. In my 
use of the term, tantra refers to any such literature affiliated with Mantramārga Śaivism, 
or any traditions that grow out of it, are inspired by it, or are copied from it. This includes 
a huge array of primary sources from Śaiva, Śākta, Saura, Vaiṣṇava, Buddhist, and Jaina 
traditions. Even though these types of sources cross religious boundaries, they are tied 
together by various shared ritual systems, specific varieties of mantra and vidyā, unique 
deity iconographies, worldviews, and technical vocabulary—​most of which cannot be 
found before the advent of Mantramārga Śaiva traditions. To be clear, pre-​Mantramārga 
Jaina traditions do have magic, ritual, and mantras/​vidyās; however, the character of this 
early Jaina tradition shifted to adapt to the new Mantramārga norms that were rapidly 
colonizing Indian religions in the latter half of the first millennium.
Already in 1944, Mohanlal Bhagwandas Jhavery defined tantra as a rather broad cat­
egory, over the course of several pages, in a manner that is in harmony with my own 
use of the term. To paraphrase, he said that it includes all manner of common beliefs 
and doctrines, myths about the origin of the world, natural laws, medicine, yoga, 
mantra, and more in texts called by various names and belonging to various schools 
and religions. Tantras (by whatever name and belonging to whatever religion) in­
clude common practices such as mantras, seed syllables, magical diagrams (yantra/​
cakra/​mandala), visualization of mantra deities in the body (nyāsa), rites to purify the

--- PAGE 539 ---
514      Michael Slouber
 
elements (bhūtaśuddhi), construction and consecration of temples and divine images, 
and practical magic (Jhavery 1944, 49–​51). I consider these broad characterizations of 
tantra as a whole to be useful and roughly accurate. However, I think it is more compel­
ling to link all of the aspects to the origin and spread of Mantramārga Śaivism, rather 
than pose it as a complex of shared features without reference to historical context.
In recent publications, Ellen Gough sought to deconstruct scholarly use of the termi­
nology “tantra” and “tantric”: “Jains have no category of scripture called tantra. There is 
no text within Jainism that can be identified as wholly ‘tantric,’ and there is no consistent 
definition of ‘Tantra’ in Jainism, or in any religion” (Gough 2020, 567). As explained 
above, the term tantra as referring to a religious movement is a scholarly construction, 
so in this sense Gough was correct on the first point, that Jainas have no such category. 
But, neither did any other religious group in premodern India. Again, the word tantra 
was originally used most often in the sense of a treatise and was interchangeable with 
the wide variety of other words for tantric scriptures, including kalpa, which is preferred 
in the titles of many Jaina texts of tantric character. As an artificial language in contin­
uous use for thousands of years, Sanskrit words very often have multiple meanings. V. S. 
Apte, in his The Practical Sanskrit-​English Dictionary, counted no less than thirty-​four 
separate meanings of “tantra,” which is not at all unusual in the Sanskrit lexicon (Apte 
1957, 759). Therefore, it makes little sense to insist that no religion has a consistent def­
inition. The meaning of a word has to be deduced from its context. Gough’s claim that 
there is no text within Jainism that can be called wholly tantric is confusing since she 
goes on to reference D. T. Shah’s estimate of five hundred such Jaina works (Gough 2020, 
568). Some of the early sources of this type that I reference in more detail below—​the 
Jvālāmālinīkalpa, Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, and Vidyānuśāsana—​are all wholly tantric, 
following Gough’s own definitions, as well as my own given above (material that is either 
based on or inspired by Mantramārga Śaivism in some identifiable way).
Art historians studying Jaina goddesses have used various criteria to classify a figure 
as tantric. As mentioned already, the prolific scholar U. P. Shah seemed to loosely un­
derstand (or rather misunderstand) anything having to do with magic as tantric (Shah 
1947b, 840). Another quality often associated with tantra is eroticism; Tiwari called 
erotic carvings at Jaina sites a gross violation of Jaina tradition and cited tantric influence 
as the cause (Tiwari 1989, 6). Eroticism in Indian religious statuary certainly predates 
the tantras, so attributing it to tantric influence is an oversimplification. Eroticism does 
have a notable place in some tantric sects, but it is in no way definitive or a signature 
of tantric influence. For example, the dozens of tantric medical texts I worked with for 
Early Tantric Medicine (2017) have no erotic content, with only a few exceptions.
Tiwari also links the feature of his subject (Ambikā) having more than two arms as 
indicating a tantric form (Tiwari 1989, 26). It is an intriguing theory that deities with 
multiple arms are a tantric innovation. Of course, there is precedence for divinity having 
multiple arms (and other appendages) in the famous Puruṣasūkta of the Ṛgveda and in 
Kṛṣṇa’s divine form revealed to Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gītā. However, these pretantric 
textual references do not seem to have significantly influenced the art historical record. 
It is only after the advent of Mantramārga Śaivism that we begin to see depictions of

--- PAGE 540 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      515
 
deities with multiple arms proliferate. Therefore, in this case Tiwari’s idea appears to be 
well founded.
What makes a goddess tantric in Jainism will depend on how one understands 
tantra. Certainly we would be misled to follow Shah and others in characterizing any 
goddess associated with ritual and magic as tantric and portraying the Veda and early 
Buddhism and Jainism as part of the tantric tradition because they include ritual and 
magic. Likewise, eroticism is no reliable marker of tantric influence. Instead, we must 
turn to the primary sources of Mantramārga Śaivism and traditions that grew out of it 
to determine whether particular features of iconography, ritual, mantra, and lore owe 
to its influence or not. The following two case studies focus on early sources from the 
Digambara tradition. The Śvetāmbara community has its own traditions of tantric and 
nontantric goddesses that have been less well studied.
Case Study 1:  Jvālāmālinī in the 
Jvālāmālinīkalpa
Perhaps the oldest Jaina text that is thoroughly tantric is the Jvālāmālinīkalpa (The 
Ritual Manual of Jvālāmālinī), a work in Sanskrit compiled in the Digambara com­
munity of southern India. Its date depends on the date of the original author, a figure 
named Helācārya or Elācārya, who may belong to the ninth century or possibly earlier; 
Shadakshari Settar believed Helācārya must pre-​date the Aihole image of Jvālāmālinī, 
which he dated to the eighth century. Therefore, he said Helācārya probably lived earlier 
than the seventh century (Settar 1969, 320). The received form of the Jvālāmālinīkalpa 
tells us that the work was originally taught by Helācārya and was handed down through 
a lineage of disciples,3 becoming corrupt (kliṣṭaṃ granthaṃ) in the process, and then 
fully restored and rendered in āryā meter by the monk Indranandin in Karnataka in ca. 
939 CE (1.22–​1.27). Notably, the published edition by Chandra Shekhar Shastri (1964) is 
itself full of corruptions, most likely because it was based on a single faulty manuscript; a 
new edition based on as many manuscripts as possible would be an important contribu­
tion to the study of early tantra.4
Helācārya is referred to as the leader of the Drāviḍa Sangha, an obscure and now ex­
tinct sect of Digambara monks purportedly founded by a monk named Vajranandin in 
Madurai in the fifth century (Dundas 1992, 105). The little that we know of this group, 
aside from what can be deduced from the Jvālāmālinīkalpa itself, comes from a ninth-​
century critique by Devasena, in which they are reviled for their supposed sedentary 
lifestyle and lax dietary practices (Dundas 1992, 105). One should not, however, too 
quickly accept allegations from a rival sect as fact.
Jvālāmālinī was evidently a local non-​Jaina goddess located on the Nīlagiri hill 
mentioned in the text (Dundas 1992, 1.10). Settar tentatively identified Helācārya’s 
village, called Malayahemagrāma, as the village now called Ponnur (1969, 310) in the

--- PAGE 541 ---
516      Michael Slouber
 
Tiruvannamalai district of Tamil Nadu. An inscription dated 1733 CE at the Ādinātha 
temple there specifies that its Jvālāmālinī image is to be taken in procession to the nearby 
Nīlagiri hill every Sunday when Helācārya is worshiped (Desai 1957, 47; Settar 1969, 
310). This hill may have been named after the famous Nilgiri Mountains in the Western 
Ghats. Aaron Ullrey discussed Nandi’s alternate identification of Malayahemagrāma as 
a village in southern Karnataka, to the south of Mysuru (Ullrey 2016, 373–​374).
That Jvālāmālinī was originally non-​Jaina can be deduced from two aspects of the 
text. First, the narrative at the beginning describes how Helācārya sought out the 
goddess’s temple in desperation; his learned female disciple Kamalaśrī was suffering 
from a dreadful case of possession by a malevolent spirit, and he did not know how to 
help her (Jvālāmālinīkalpa 1.9cd: “vyākulito ‘bhūt tatpravidhānakartavyatāmūḍhaḥ”). 
If the goddess was Jaina and known for healing possession, it does not make sense that 
Helācārya would have been confused about what to do. By contrast, if we assume that 
she was a non-​Jaina goddess, the narrative justifies Helācārya’s action by underscoring 
his desperation and compassion for his disciple.
The second aspect of the text that points to a non-​Jaina original context is that the vast 
majority of the mantras and ritual actions associated with the goddess in this source 
are plainly Śaiva and Śākta, with many specifically drawn from the Bhūta tantras and 
Kaula scriptures. Mantras to Khaḍgarāvaṇa—​a form of Śiva invoked in the Bhūta 
tantras to control or drive out evil spirits (Slouber 2007, 2017)—​are important parts of 
several chapters. The so-​called five arrow mantras (pañcabāṇa) of Kāmeśvarī from the 
Kaula Nityā sect abound in ­chapters 3 and 6, sometimes combined with Khaḍgarāvaṇa’s 
mantras. Moreover, a series of stanzas in the third chapter openly promote incorpora­
tion of Śaiva rituals and mantras, suggesting that one should simply replace the non-​
Jaina deity’s name in the mantras with that of the twenty-​third tīrthaṃkara Pārśvanātha:
Whatever the wise one thinks, let him make that authoritative in his realm. If a 
rite is not taught here [in Jaina sources], but is taught in full in the [Śaiva] Gāruḍa 
Śāstra, the mantra-​reciter who finds a difference should [know that] whatever 
words one says become a mantra. Whoever might be the object of worship, the 
mantra-​reciter should say it is to Pārśvajina himself. Observing the speech of an 
adept, whatever words he says are the mantra. Cutting, burning, dispatching, split­
ting, beating, binding, etc.—​if you say it is for Pārśvanātha, whatever words you 
say become a mantra.5
Aside from the centrality of exorcism in the Jvālāmālinīkalpa, and the corresponding 
popularity of the goddess and this text, we can also observe, following Panduranga 
Bhimrao Desai, that many inscriptions from medieval southern India refer to a teacher’s 
expertise in mantra and/​or exorcism. For example, Desai cited an inscription at 
Shravana Belagola about a teacher named Kalyāṇakīrti who was credited as “unrivaled 
in the art of exorcising the evil spirits like Śākinī” (Desai 1957, 74).
Cort proposed that evidence of her non-​Jaina origin can be deduced from the nar­
rative at the beginning calling her Vahnidevī (fire goddess), a name he suggested

--- PAGE 542 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      517
 
represents her non-​Jaina identity, whereas elsewhere in the text this name is not re­
peated and Jvālāmālinī (flame garlanded) is preferred (1987, 247). In fact, she is called 
synonyms of Vahnidevī, such as Śikhidevī and Śikhimaddevī, throughout the text. The 
use of closely related names with the same or similar meaning was most likely done to 
conform to the requirements of the meter and perhaps also for variety.
The Jvālāmālinīkalpa makes little reference to what later became the standard 
categories the goddess is said to belong to: śāsanadevatā/​yakṣa or vidyādevī. The terms 
Yakṣa/​yakṣī are mainly mentioned among a series of beings who possess people and in 
so doing become the targets of Jvālāmālinī’s spells. In only one place is she referred to as 
aṣṭamayakṣeśvarī, which probably means “eighth Yakṣa Queen” as the Hindi commen­
tary renders it and alludes to her association with the eighth Tīrthaṅkara Candraprabha 
that became standard in later sources. The Jvālāmālinīkalpa does not describe her as a 
vidyā, mahāvidyā, or vidyādevī; it uses the word vidyā to refer generically to any of the 
scores of spells (mantra/​vidyā) taught in her manual. The word typically used to refer to 
her is simply devī (goddess).
Jvālāmālinī’s appearance is described briefly (3.18–​3.21): One should visualize her in 
the middle of a lotus, surrounded by the eight Brahminical mothers (mātṛ); she bears 
the Jina Candraprabha with devotion on her head, resting on her diadem; she has a light, 
lotus-​like hue to her body, rides astride a water buffalo mount, wears shining ornaments, 
has three eyes, and is fearsome with her flame-​haloed body. She displays eight things 
in her eight hands: a lasso, trident, bow, arrow, salt,6 metal discus, fruit, and the boon-​
granting gesture.
The oldest art historical evidence for Jvālāmālinī is the statue in the vestibule of the 
Gaurī temple at Aihole (Figure 23.2). Settar spent much of his article analyzing every 
feature of this statue and its context. The seated Jina depicted on her crown makes her 
unambiguously Jaina, and most of the attributes she holds in her eight hands tally with 
those described in the Jvālāmālinīkalpa. The presence of flames arising from either 
side of the crown, as well as her buffalo mount, sealed the identification of the image 
as Jvālāmālinī for Settar (1969, 314), as well as for the present author. Settar praised the 
craftsmanship as among the finest examples of early Chalukya work and pointed out 
that the image was likely moved from its original temple, as the Gaurī temple where 
it is currently placed is of later construction. He also argued that this Jvālāmālinī and 
the male yakṣa figure in the nearby Jaina temple were originally housed together and 
“cannot be later than the eighth century [CE]” (Settar 1969, 320). A tourist booklet 
on Aihole published by the Department of Archaeology Museums and Heritage 
in Mysore mentions the Jvālāmālinī yakṣī as dating to the eleventh century along 
with the Gaurī temple itself (Betsurmath 2015, 51) but did not take into account her 
separated pairing with the Jaina yakṣa image or the possibility that she was moved 
as the result of a misidentification of her as a Hindu goddess (which persists to the 
present among locals who regard the image as representing Gaurī). If we accept that 
Helācārya was the first to bring Jvālāmālinī into the Jaina sphere of worship, he should 
pre-​date the Aihole statue.

--- PAGE 543 ---
518      Michael Slouber
 
Other, later, texts and oral lore about Jvālāmālinī exist, and some include 
narratives about her. Shadakshari Settar points out that Puranic literature in 
Kannada, such as the Candraprabha Purāṇa, includes vivid portrayals of Jvālāmālinī 
(Settar 1969, 317). Zydenbos also summarized several popular stories about her in his 
1994 article, including two narratives about her previous life as a Jaina woman. Ellen 
Gough briefly pointed out how Śvetāmbaras also adopted her worship, pointing 
to the undated Jvālāmālinīstotra from the Śvetāmbara community as an example 
(Gough 2020, 573).
Figure 23.2.  Jvālāmālinī in the Gaurī Temple at Aihole. Reprinted from Settar, S. “The Cult of 
Jvālāmālinī and the Earliest Images of Jvālā and Śyāma.” Artibus Asiae Vol. 31, No. 4 (1969), 
pp. 309–​320.
Used with the permission of the editors.

--- PAGE 544 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      519
 
Case Study 2:  Padmāvatī in the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa
Padmāvatī, known as the queen of snakes, is the most popular Jaina goddess today and 
seems to have held this position for most of the past 1,000 years (Figure 23.3). Cort captured 
her importance when he said that one can easily identify a Padmāvatī shrine by the rush 
of worshipers and the abundance of coconut offerings in front of it (2010, 2020, 149–​150). 
Her popularity even eclipses that of the Jinas at many Jaina sites, such as in the Digambara 
Lāl Mandir temple complex in Delhi, where crowds throng to have darśana (an auspicious 
sight) of her icon (Sethi 2020, 459). As Manisha Sethi explained, goddesses like Padmāvatī 
intervene in worldly affairs, which is something the Jinas cannot or do not do (2020).
The precise beginning of Padmāvatī’s rise to fame is difficult to pin down. Images of 
Pārśva with a multihooded cobra protecting him are found as far back as the first or 
second century before the Common Era. However, the earliest written sources do not 
refer to the male snake king as Dharaṇa or Dharaṇendra (Shah 1997, 35). By medieval 
times the story of Pārśva taking compassion on a pair of snakes was well known, and the 
snakes become identified as Dharaṇendra and his queen Padmāvatī (Shah 1997, 33–​34).
A female figure with serpentine associations begins to be found in proximity to statues 
of Pārśva in southern India as early as the seventh century (as in Figure 23.4). Dhaky had 
no qualms about identifying such figures as Padmāvatī; he noted that the Śvetāmbara lit­
erature has no mention of her until the early eleventh century, which indicates her origin 
in the southern Digambara tradition (1997, 66n22). On the other hand, Shah pointed out 
that Padmāvatī is not mentioned at all in canonical lists of the wives of Dharaṇendra and 
is not labeled as Padmāvatī until the tenth century before the Common Era (Shah 1975, 
80). He thought the female figures with Pārśva before 900 CE should rather be identified 
as another goddess associated with snakes, the mahāvidyā named Vairoṭyā (Shah 1975, 
80). By the tenth century, the inscriptions in southern India increasingly record ruling 
families styling themselves devotees of the goddess Padmāvatī (Desai 1957, 171). Cort 
reasonably interpreted this to mean that she may have started as the patron goddess 
(kuladevī) of particular powerful families who supported Jainism (1987, 243).
The earliest long work on Padmāvatī is Malliṣeṇasūri’s Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 
(“Fierce Padmāvatī’s Ritual Manual”), which dates to around the middle of the eleventh 
century.7 In her chapter in this volume, Ellen Gough objects to scholars who have posed 
the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa as important or central to Jaina tantric ritual traditions. 
Yet, as the first work dedicated to Padmāvatī and among the very earliest Jaina works 
heavily influenced by Śaiva-​Śākta tantras, it is in no way insignificant. The text opens 
with some verses praising Pārśvajina and asking for Padmāvatī’s protection. The third 
verse lists six names of Śaiva-​Śākta tantric goddesses, particularly affiliated with the 
Gāruḍa and Traipura traditions—​Totalā, Tvaritā, Nityā, Tripurā, Kāmasādhinī, and 
Tripurabhairavī—​and asserts that they are actually names of Padmāvatī. This verse

--- PAGE 545 ---
520      Michael Slouber
 
should be understood as setting forth the same principle as the verses I translated above 
from the earlier Jvālāmālinīkalpa: Readers may wonder about the propriety of non-​
Jaina spell goddesses and lore associated with a Jaina goddess, but that it is actually not 
a problem; Padmāvatī is their true identity. The author thus justifies the adaptation of 
non-​Jaina tantric material with the verse.
Over half of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa is devoted to coercive rites to control 
lovers (and potential lovers) and conquering enemies; the rest concerns other types of 
magical rites and methods for healing snakebite summarized from the Śaiva Gāruḍa 
tantras. The following are several interesting examples of the subject matter of the text:
To attract the desired woman, the original teachers say to draw a yantra on cloth, a 
skull, or a copper pot with ink made from Datura, betel, poison, etc. Within three 
days it will blaze like the flame of a lamp [and draw her near]. (6.3)8
Figure 23.3.  Padmāvatī statue from Sholapur, 12th century. CC BY-​NC-​ND 2.0.
Photo by Sandeepa and Chetan (https://​san​deep​ache​tan.com/​).

--- PAGE 546 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      521
 
Immediately following is a similar rite to lure an unwilling woman. The instructions read:
[Draw a woman and] inscribe the syllables oṃ hrīṃ and the elephant goad (kroṃ) on 
the lotus of her heart and on all of the joints of the limbs. Inscribe māyā (hrīṃ) on the 
breasts, and yūṃ on the genitals. Surround her with kroṃ syllables, and then provide 
her with a mantra garland on the outside of a Fire maṇḍala, situated on Wind and 
Earth maṇḍalas. After three days, she will be drawn by the flame of the lamp. (6.4)9
Figure 23.4.  Pārśva attended by Padmāvatī or Vairoṭyā and Dharaṇendra. Badami cave temple 
IV, seventh century of the Common Era.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 547 ---
522      Michael Slouber
 
In this case, the goddess invoked is Kṛṣṇamātaṅginī. As shown below, goddesses with 
names suggestive of outcaste women are a recurring theme in tantric love magic rites. 
Here is another colorful example from the fourth chapter:
One should write the mantra with sweet smelling substances on a piece of birch bark, 
tie it with a red thread, and put it in an unfired clay pot filled with honey. This will en­
chant the woman. If one draws the yantra in a female skull with hrīṃ in place of klīṃ 
and burns it with khadira wood morning, noon, and night, it would attract the lovely 
woman. If one writes the syllable huṃ in place of hrīṃ, and writes it with a mixture of 
poison and blood on human skin, burning it on an inauspicious lunar day, it would 
cause someone to be repelled. (4.4–​5)10
But what of magic rituals that have an even darker aim than enchanting an object of 
desire? Jainism and ahiṃsā are ostensibly inseparable. Nevertheless, some of the early 
Jaina tantric texts have numerous instances of mantras for killing enemies, driving 
them insane, and so on. The Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa’s fifth chapter begins with rites 
of stambhana (paralysis), which refers to immobilizing an enemy. This in itself seems 
mildly violent, but does not, on the face of it, entail loss of life. As the chapter continues, 
a darker side emerges:
One must cover [the aforementioned yantra] with clay from a potter and put it into 
a pot filled with water. One then worships Pārśvanātha on top of it—​this is the best 
procedure for divine paralysis. The syllable ya with the enemy’s name, the syllable ṭha 
with ma, la, va, ra, and yūṃ. Around that, an Earth maṇḍala surrounded by tridents, 
ghosts, and fierce animals. Surrounded by likenesses of the enemy being struck with 
swords in the hands of other enemies. One surrounds the image with the name of the 
enemy, that surrounded by the piṇḍa mantras. One writes the mantra oṃ hrūṃ hrīṃ 
klaiṃ glauṃ svāhā ṭha surrounding the names of the enemies, the horse, and the 
great elephant. (5.14–​5.16)11
The commentator Banduṣeṇa interjected here his extracted version of the mantra to 
recite while surrounding the symbolic victim on the yantra:
Oṃ hrīṃ O Goddess with a fierce form, O fierce wielder of the trident, pulverize the 
enemy’s army, pulverize! Shake! Shake! Split! Split! Eat! Eat! Cook! Cook! Devour! 
Devour! Kill! Kill! Huṃ phaṭ svāhā.
It does not sound at all like the Jaina way to solve a problem, but the way the passage 
continues suggests an explanation:
After surrounding the diagram with the mantra, one then draws a likeness of the 
enemy in the eight directions outside of an Earth maṇḍala. Alternatively, one can 
draw it on a cloth taken from the face of a corpse in the cremation grounds, or better 
yet, that of a warrior who died in battle on the eighth day of the dark fortnight. One

--- PAGE 548 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      523
 
day later, one should inscribe a strip of cloth carded by a virgin using a pen made 
from the Koraṇṭa plant (syn. vairī =​ enemy) with ink of yellow arsenic, etc. First 
one must fully worship Padmāvatī with yellow flowers, then tie the yantra-​cloth to 
a public pillar. Seeing it from afar, the entire enemy army will be overcome with fear 
and will fall out of their battle array and flee. (5.18–​5.22)12
A redactor’s hand is apparent in this passage. The rite began as one targeting a single 
person: writing an enemy’s name on a diagram and surrounding it with violent mantras 
and images. It sounds like a standard liquidation rite in black magic (abhicāra). But the 
text switches to speaking of multiple enemies and then a whole army that flees. What 
has happened, I assert, is that this passage has been adapted from a Śaiva exemplar and 
changed to lead to a nonviolent outcome: the enemy army fleeing. A possible source 
is the Śaiva rite called “Raising the Flag” (patākocchrayavidhi), which is described in, 
among other sources, the Tantrasadbhāva, an influential Śākta text dating to around 
the eighth century before the Common Era. It follows the same basic outline of the rite 
as described here and includes some details and phrases that are exactly the same. One 
inscribes a yantra on a cloth cut by a virgin, visualizes a fierce goddess on a corpse, draws 
an image of the enemy army in a skull, and recites a mantra with similar imperatives 
for the goddess to break and kill the enemy forces. On seeing this yantra mounted on 
a pole, the enemies lose their courage and are easily conquered.13 Thus, whereas the 
Śaiva version renders the enemy easier to kill, the Jaina redactor uses it to disperse the 
enemy’s army.
Many more interesting examples could be adduced from the Bhairavapadmāvatī- 
kalpa and other early Jaina tantras. In his landmark article “The Śaiva Age,” Sanderson 
pointed out one of the key differences between Śaiva and Jaina tantra: The Jainas incor­
porated the mundane dimensions of tantric traditions and for the most part rejected 
tantra as a new path to liberation. Whereas one might think that Jaina tantra was only 
of concern to laypeople, Sanderson rightly observed that monks produced the manuals 
and aided laypeople, including royalty, who sought to carry out tantric rituals. He said: 
“As in the non-​Jaina tradition the goddesses were put to work to serve the interests of 
rulers” (Sanderson 2009, 244).
Conclusions and Future Directions 
for Research
Academic knowledge about Jaina tantric goddesses is conspicuously limited when 
compared to the extensive archive available and the importance of these goddesses to 
the Jaina tradition. While not exhaustive, my own review of the scholarship turned up 
fewer than twenty secondary publications of direct relevance, and most of these fea­
ture only a few relevant pages or are tangentially related. Of the half dozen or so that are

--- PAGE 549 ---
524      Michael Slouber
 
wholly about Jaina tantric goddesses, several draw heavily on twentieth-​century schol­
arship for the bulk of the information they convey, as the present chapter also does.
In her 2020 review of Jaina tantric literature, Ellen Gough referenced the sur­
vival of some five hundred primary sources on Jaina tantra, most of which would re­
late to goddesses such as the ones discussed here. It appears that only a very limited 
number of these have been made accessible to scholars through publication. Even texts 
that are among the earliest and most extensive Jaina tantras (the Jvālāmālinīkalpa and 
Vidyānuśāsana, respectively) are very poorly edited; one would fare better with a manu­
script because of the large number of mistakes in these printed editions.
Many more sources on Padmāvatī, in particular, also await future study. Jhavery’s 
1944 tome gathers together in numerous appendices various other works, like the 
Adbhutapadmāvatīkalpa, Śrīpadmāvatīpūjana, Raktapadmāvatīkalpa, and others. 
Zydenbos pointed to another category of understudied works like the Kannada narratives 
of Padmanābha’s Padmāvatīmāhātmya, which he called the oldest of its class (1994, 138).
Currently, Ellen Gough is the leading scholar of Jaina tantra and has been engaging 
with a much wider range of primary sources than her predecessors. Her recently 
published book Making a Mantra: Tantric Ritual and Renunciation on the Jain Path to 
Liberation (2021) is the most substantial contribution to the study of Jaina tantra since 
the publication of Jhavery’s Comparative and Critical Study of Mantrasastra in 1944. 
The introduction discusses the scholarly construction of tantra and its application to 
Jaina sources as discussed above and offers the new idea that applying the term “tan­
tric” to ritual traditions is less problematic than speaking of broader traditions in this 
manner (2021, 7, 16–​19). The point is well received since tantric ritual is indeed the area 
most heavily drawn on and developed in Jaina tantric sources and practices. Yet ritual 
does not exist in isolation from other religious elements, such as shared pantheons, ico­
nography, and conceptions of the self, the powers, and liberation. Therefore, I would 
caution readers against assuming that ritual was the only element of the wider tantric 
movement that Jainas adapted. The very centrality of goddesses in Jaina tantric ritual 
texts originated at a time when goddesses were also proliferating in Śaiva-​Śākta tantric 
traditions.
Another methodological issue where I both agree and part ways with Gough’s 
published comments concerns the relevance of, and extent to which, Jaina tantras de­
pend on non-​Jaina sources. Concerning Alexis Sanderson’s work on Jaina tantra in 
“The Śaiva Age,” she remarked: “He has focused on these deities’ similarities to ‘tan­
tric’ Śaiva-​Śākta deities, but while the names and iconographies of these deities may be 
similar, their mythologies, mantras, and ritual diagrams differ considerably from their 
non-​Jain counterparts” (Gough 2020, 573). As I have argued above, even the authors of 
texts like the Jvālāmālinīkalpa and Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa are fairly transparent that 
their material is closely based on Śaiva-​Śākta sources. The epigraphical evidence that 
Sanderson gathered in that article also builds a strong case for his conclusions. Since 
that article he has provided even more evidence: His recorded and publicly available 
keynote lecture at the 2015 Jaina Studies Workshop presented incontrovertible evidence

--- PAGE 550 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      525
 
that most of the Nirvāṇakalikā—​arguably the single most influential Jaina tantric 
ritual text—​was copied from a Śaiva exemplar. Downplaying the significance of such 
influence closes the door to understanding specifics in these sources from their orig­
inal context. For example, it is impossible to make sense of the vidyā given in code 
in Jvālāmālinīkalpa 3.41–​3.42 without knowing the Śaiva technical terms for coded 
mantras, the fact that “Khaḍgairāvaṇa” is a mistake for Khaḍgarāvaṇa, the Bhūta tantra 
context of Khaḍgarāvaṇa’s ritual system, and the Śaiva and epic contexts of the reference 
to the legendary Candrahāsa sword in the vidyā. Broad learning that crosses religious 
boundaries and understanding of historical context are both essential for making sense 
of Jaina tantric sources.
Simultaneously, I agree with Gough’s point that it is inadequate and inaccurate 
to characterize the Jaina tantric tradition as a whole as something derivative (Gough 
2012, 4). While parts of the early tradition are derived from non-​Jaina sources, Gough’s 
scholarship has demonstrated the value of attending to particular aspects of Jaina tantra 
across time, the elements of host traditions that were not adopted, and the ways and 
reasons that Jainas actively innovated new mandalas, mantras, and deities over time.
In his 1987 article, Cort observed that, with few exceptions, past scholarship on Jaina 
goddesses has been written by art historians taking an iconographic approach, which 
has resulted in a limited range of questions being asked about the sources. For instance, 
historians of religion would want to know things like who worshiped the goddesses 
and what their motivations were (1987, 235). Scholars studying manuscript cultures, 
mantras, mandalas, medicine, magic, poetry, literature, realia, reception history, re­
ligious institutions, and so forth would all have different questions and would benefit 
from engaging with the prolific archive relating to Jaina tantric goddesses.
The two most promising areas of future growth are increased textual publication, 
translation, and study on the one hand and rich ethnographic accounts of tantric and 
nontantric Jaina goddesses on the other hand. Textual scholars with the requisite lan­
guage skills would do a great service by examining which aspects of pretantric Jaina 
mantra science (mantravāda) influenced tantric-era traditions. Further identification 
of textual dependencies—​both among Jaina tantric texts themselves and with non-​Jaina 
sources—​is critical for understanding the historical context and relationships that in­
form Jaina tantric texts. All such textual work will depend on close study of adequate 
editions and availability of manuscripts.
Notes
	1.	 Ambikā does not mean “little mother,” as Paul Dundas (1992, 183) and Wendy Doniger 
(2009, 390) rendered it. The -​ka/​aka/​ikā suffix has a range of meanings and most com­
monly does not change the basic meaning of the word at all, as in this case. See, for example, 
Whitney 1989, §1222. The same point applies to the synonym mātṛkā, which rarely carries a 
diminutive sense, in contrast to the way it has been rendered by Dominik Wujastyk (1999, 
263), Frederick Smith (2006, 531), Madhu Khanna (2018, 180) and others.

--- PAGE 551 ---
526      Michael Slouber
 
	2.	 For example, Flood 2008, Biernacki 2020, and Khanna 2020. Jayaratha glosses the title as 
“tantrāṇāṃ pārameśvarāṇām āloka iva ālokaḥ, tāni ālokayati prakāśayati iti” in his com­
mentary to Tantrāloka 1.245 (ed. Shastri 1918, 258).
	3.	 Aaron Ullrey counted four intervening figures in the lineage between Helācārya and 
Indranandin: Gaṅgamuni, Nīlagrīva, Gunanandi, and Kandarpa (2016, 375). However, the 
printed text appears to be corrupt: It is far from clear if all of the words are separate names of 
people in the lineage. It also names a young disciple called Viruvaṭṭa, whom Ullrey omitted, 
and additional names may be hidden behind the corrupt words. T. Surya Prakash counted 
five intervening figures between Helācārya and Indranandin, but did not name them, so it is 
unclear exactly how he is reading the corrupt passage. He said that inscriptions of the tenth 
and eleventh centuries furnished a list of all the Drāviḍa Sangha preceptors, but gave an in­
adequate reference to the multivolume Inscriptions of Andhra Pradesh in which this record is 
found (Prakash 2014, 124, 129n57). Jhavery, writing before the printed edition and so relying 
on manuscripts, counted six figures between Helācārya and Indranandin and named them: 
Gāṅgamuni, Vijābja, Āryā Kṣāntirasabbā, Viruvaṭṭa, Kandarpa, and Guṇanandi. He reckoned 
150 years between Helācārya and Indranandin, placing the former toward the end of the 
eighth century (1944, 309). The above references constitute an excellent example of the all too 
frequent problem of overreliance on poor quality editions confusing generations of scholars. 
Jhavery’s reading “Āryā Kṣāntirasabbā” not only clarifies the difficult-​to-​understand printed 
reading of 1.23 bhāryākṣāntarasabbā, but also brings to light the interesting fact of an apparent 
female head of the Drāviḍa Sangha in the ninth century.
	4.	 Settar noted the existence of a palm-leaf manuscript “in the Kannada Research Institute 
of Karnataka University with Kannada commentary” on each verse (1969, 314). It is 
cataloged as KRI #857. Currently, the National Mission for Manuscripts database lists eight 
others under the title Jvālāmālinīkalpa, one titled Jvālinīkalpa and another under the title 
Jvālinīmata. Thus, at least eleven manuscripts survive and would contribute greatly to our 
understanding if used to re-​edit the text.
	5.	 Jvālāmālinīkalpa 3.56–​3.59: yad yac cintayati budhas tat tac codyaṃ karotu bhuvi. yat 
karma nātra kathitaṃ śāstreṣu gāruḍe sakalaṃ. tadbhedam āpya mantrī yad vakti padaṃ 
tad eva mantraḥ syāt. yad yac codyaṃ kuryān mantrī kathayatu tad ātmapārśvajināya. 
pātraṃ niśamayya vaco yad vakti padaṃ tad eva mantraḥ syāt. chedana dahana preṣaṇa 
bhedana tāḍana subandha māṃdya manyadvā. pārśvajināya tad uktvā yad vakti padaṃ 
mantra syāt.
	6.	 The word ūṣa means salt in Sanskrit, but this seems doubtful in the context. The Hindi 
commentary glosses the word as machlī (fish), whereas to my knowledge the Sanskrit 
word ūṣa never means fish. According to Settar, one manuscript reads jhuṣa here, which 
he translated as fish; however jhuṣa does not appear to be a Sanskrit word. It is not found 
in any of the Sanskrit works in my digital archive. Problems such as this call for exami­
nation of all available manuscripts to determine the correct word and how the mistaken 
words came about.
	7.	 Several scholars give the precise date of 1057 CE for Malliṣeṇa’s Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa; 
however, they did not cite any reference for where this date comes from (Cort 1987, 245; 
Sanderson 2009, 243; Gough 2020, 573). The last two are likely following Cort. Jhavery 
pointed out that the only text of Malliṣeṇa that included a date in its colophon is his 
Mahāpurāṇa, with the date 968 in the Śaka era (=​ 1046 CE) (Jhavery 1944, 300).
	8.	 Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 6.3: iṣṭāṅganākarṣaṇam āhur ādyā dhattūratāmbūlaviṣādilekhyam. 
yantraṃ paṭe kharparatāmrapatre dinatraye dīpaśikhāgnitaptam.

--- PAGE 552 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      527
 
	 9.	 Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 6.4: oṃ hrīṃ hṛtkamale gajendravaśakaṃ sarvāṅgasandhiṣv 
api māyām āvilikhet kucadvitayayor yūṃ yonideśe tathā. kroṃkāraiḥ pariveṣṭya 
mantravalayaṃ dadyāt puraṃ cānalaṃ tadbāhye ‘nilabhūpuraṃ tridivase dīpāgnināk
arṣaṇam.
	10.	 Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 4.4–​4.5: bhūrje surabhidravyair vilikhya pariveṣṭya raktasūtreṇa. 
nikṣipya sulvabhāṇḍe madhupūrṇe mohayaty abalām. strīkapāle likhed yantraṃ 
klīṃsthāne bhuvanādhipam. trisandhyaṃ tāpayed rāmākṛṣṭiḥ syāt khadirāgninā. 
māyāsthāne ca huṃkāraṃ vilikhen naracarmaṇi. tāpayet kṣveḍaraktābhyāṃ pakṣāhāt 
pratiṣedhakṛt.
	11.	 Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 
5.14–​5.16: 
tatkulālakaramṛttikāvṛtaṃ 
toyapūritaghaṭe 
vinikṣipet. pārśvanātham uparistham arcayed divyarodhanavidhānam uttamam. 
ripunāmānvitamāntaṃ malavarayūṃkārasaṃyutaṃ ṭāntam. tadbāhye bhūmipuraṃ 
triśūlabhūtogramṛgaveṣṭyam. pratirūpahastakhaḍgair nihanyamānārirūpa pariveṣṭyam. 
śatror nāmāntaritaṃ samantato veṣṭayet piṇḍaiḥ.
	12.	 Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 
5.18–​5.22: 
mantreṇa 
veṣṭayitvānena 
tato 
‘rātivigraho 
lekhyaḥ. aṣṭāsu dikṣu bahir api māhendraṃ maṇḍalaṃ dadyāt. pretavanāt 
saṃcālitamṛtakamukhojjhitapaṭe ‘thavā vilikhet. kṛṣṇāṣṭamyāṃ yuddhvā tyaktaprāṇasya 
saṃgrāme. kanyākartitasūtraṃ divasenaikena tat punar vītam. tasmin haritālādyaiḥ 
koraṇṭakalekhinīlikhitam. padmāvatyāḥ purataḥ pītaiḥ puṣpaiḥ purā samabhyarcya. 
yantrapaṭaṃ badhnīyāt prakhyāte cāntare stambhe. taṃ dṛṣṭvā dūratarān naśyanti 
bhayena vihvalībhūtāḥ. viracitasenāvyūhāt saṃgrāme ‘śeṣaripuvargāḥ.
	13.	 Tantrasadbhāva 20.91–​20.102: athānyaṃ saṃpravakṣyāmi patākā cocchrayo vidhiḥ. 
sainyabhaṅgaṃ bhavatyāśu tacchṛṇuṣva samāsataḥ. kanyākartitasūtreṇa paṭaṃ 
kṛtvā ghanaṃ pṛthum. tatra madhye parāṃ likhya śavāsanavyavasthitām. vikarālā 
mahākāyāmaṣṭahastāṃ 
subhīṣaṇām. 
adhastāt 
tu 
nyaset 
sādhyaṃ 
nirbhinnaṃ 
mūlakena tu. grasamānāṃ mahāmāyāṃ parasainyaṃ samaṃ tataḥ. kapālasthaṃ 
likhetsarvaṃ parasainyaṃ parāparām. evaṃ likhya tato devīṃ paścāt pūjāṃ tu kārayet. 
bhakṣabhojyānnapānaiśca tarpayet sarvato diśi. kadalairaṣṭabhiḥ kuryāddevyāpīṭhaṃ 
suśobhanam. 
tatrasthāṃ 
pūjayeddevī 
gandhadhūpapavitrakaiḥ. 
puṣpaiśca 
śobhanairmāṃsaiḥ surāsavasamanvitaiḥ. evaṃ pūjāṃ tataḥ kṛtvā baliṃ datvā subhāvitaḥ. 
ānayed aṣṭaveśyās tu gatavayāḥ subhāvitāḥ. tarpayenmadyamāṃsena yāvatprītyā 
bhaviṣyati. nagnā muktaśikhāyāstu mantramevaṃ samuccaran. hana bhaṃjāpade dve 
gṛhṇa gṛhṇeti māraya. kandalaṃ vāmahastasthaṃ ekaikāyā varānane. dhāvante grasato 
devyaḥ sainyasyābhimukhā sthitāḥ. tāṃ dṛṣṭvā naśyate sainyaṃ patākādarśanena tu. 
gatalajjābhimānaṃ tu vimukhaṃ naśyate priye. jitvā sainyaṃ varārohe śataguṇaṃ cāpi 
sādhakaḥ.
Works Cited
Primary Sources
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. Cited below under Jhavery 1944.
Cilappatikāram. Cited below under Parthasarathy 1993.
Jvālāmālinīkalpa. Cited below under Shastri 1964.
Tantrāloka with commentary of Jayaratha (Tantrālokaviveka). Cited below under Shastri 1918.
Vidyānuśāsana. Cited below under Gunadharanandi 1990.

--- PAGE 553 ---
528      Michael Slouber
 
Secondary Sources
Alsdorf, Ludwig. 1936. “The Vasudevahiṇḍī, a Specimen of Archaic Jaina Māhārāṣṭrī.” Bulletin 
of the School of Oriental Studies, University of London 8, no. 2/​3: 319–​333.
Apte, V. S. 1957. The Practical Sanskrit-​English Dictionary. Poona, India: Prasad Prakashan.
Balbir, Nalini. 2009. “Deities.” In Jainpedia. Accessed September 15, 2021. https://​www.jainpe​
dia.org/​the​mes/​practi​ces/​deit​ies.html.
Balbir, Nalini. 2020. “Scripture, Canonicity, and Commentary.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of 
Jainism, edited by John E. Cort, Paul Dundas, Knut A. Jacobsen, and Kristi L. Wiley, 756–​
782. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Betsurmath, C. G. (Ed.). 2015. Aihole. Mysore, India: Heritage Series of the Department of 
Archaeology, Museums, and Heritage.
Biernacki, Loriliai. 2020. “The Body and Wonder in Tantra.” In Contemplative Studies and 
Hinduism: Meditation, Devotion, Prayer, and Worship, edited by Rita D. Sherma and 
Purushottama Bilimoria, 132–​142. London: Routledge India.
Bose, Mandakranta. 2018. The Oxford History of Hinduism: The Goddess. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Cort, John. 1987. “Medieval Jaina Goddess Traditions.” Numen 34, no. 2: 235–​255.
Cort, John. 2010. “The Goddesses of Sravana Belgola.” In Svasti: Essays in Honour of Prof. Hampa 
Nagarajaiah for His 75th Birthday, edited by Nalini Balbir, 346–​353. Krishnapuradoddi, 
India: K. S. Muddappa Smaraka Trust.
Cort, John. 2020. “Nonliberated Deities.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Jainism, edited by 
John E. Cort, Paul Dundas, Knut A. Jacobsen, and Kristi L. Wiley, 141–​163. Leiden, 
Netherlands: Brill.
Desai, Panduranga Bhimarao. 1957. Jainism in South India and Some Jain Epigraphs. Sholapur, 
India: Gulabchand Hirachand Dosh, Jaina Saṁskṛti Saṁrakṣaka Sangha.
Dhaky, Madhusudan Amilal. 1997. “Arhat Pārśva With Dharaṇendra in Hymnic Literature.” 
In Arhat Pārśva and Dharaṇendra Nexus, edited by Madhusudan Amilal Dhaky, 45–​67. 
Ahmedabad, India: Lalbhai Dalpatbhai Institute of Indology.
Doniger, Wendy. 2009. The Hindus: An Alternative History. New York: Penguin Press.
Dundas, Paul. 1992. The Jains. London: Routledge.
Flood, Gavin. 2008. “The Śaiva Traditions.” In The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism, edited 
by Gavin Flood, 200–​228. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-​Blackwell.
Geen, Jonathan. 2020. “Jainism and Hinduism.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Jainism, edited 
by John E. Cort, Paul Dundas, Knut A. Jacobsen, and Kristi L. Wiley, 305–​329. Leiden, 
Netherlands: Brill.
Gough, Ellen. 2012. “Shades of Enlightenment: A Jain Tantric Diagram and the Colours of the 
Tīrthaṅkaras.” International Journal of Jaina Studies (Online) 8, no. 1: 1–​47.
Gough, Ellen. 2020. “Jain Tantric Literature.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Jainism, edited by 
John E. Cort, Paul Dundas, Knut A. Jacobsen, and Kristi L. Wiley, 567–​576. Leiden, 
Netherlands: Brill.
Gough, Ellen. 2021. Making a Mantra: Tantric Ritual and Renunciation on the Jain Path to 
Liberation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gunadharanandi (Ed.). 1990. Vidyānuśāsana. Jayapura, India: Sri. Di. Jaina Divyadhvani 
Prakasana.
Hatley, Shaman. 2007. “The Brahmayāmalatantra and Early Śaiva Cult of Yoginīs.” PhD thesis, 
University of Pennsylvania.

--- PAGE 554 ---
The Goddesses of Jaina Tantra      529
 
Jhavery, Mohanlal Bhagwandas. 1944. Comparative and Critical Study of Mantrasastra With 
Special Treatment of Jain Mantravada, Being the Introduction to Sri Bhairava Padmavati 
Kalpa. Ahmedabad, India: Sarabhai Manilal Nawab.
Khanna, Madhu. 2018. “Here Are the Daughters: Reclaiming the Girl Child (Kanyā, Bālā, 
Kumārī) in the Empowering Tales and Rituals of Śākta Tantra.” In The Goddess, edited by 
Mandakranta Bose, 173–​198. New York: Oxford University Press.
Khanna, Madhu. 2020. “Śrīvidyā: A Śākta Model of Esoteric Sādhanā of the Śrīcakra.” In 
Contemplative Studies and Hinduism: Meditation, Devotion, Prayer, and Worship, edited by 
Rita D. Sherma and Purushottama Bilimoria, 123–​131. London: Routledge India.
Ollett, Andrew. 2017. Language of the Snakes: Prakrit, Sanskrit, and the Language Order of 
Premodern India. Oakland: University of California Press.
Parthasarathy, R. 1993. The Cilappatikāram/​The Tale of an Anklet. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Prakash, T. Surya. 2014. “Jaina Institutions.” Journal of Indian History and Culture no. 20 
(September): 113–​131.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by 
Shingo Einoo, 41–​349. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2015. “The Jaina Appropriation and Adaptation of Śaiva Ritual.” Keynote 
lecture with handout delivered to as the 15th Annual Jaina Lecture at SOAS, University 
of London on 19 March, 2015. Accessed September 15, 2021. https://​www.yout​ube.com/​
watch?v=​zGFD​JynF​6CI.
Sethi, Manisha. 2020. “Gender and Women in Jainism” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Jainism, ed­
ited by John E. Cort, Paul Dundas, Knut A. Jacobsen, and Kristi L. Wiley, 453–​469. Leiden, 
Netherlands: Brill.
Settar, Shadakshari. 1969. “The Cult of Jvālāmālinī and the Earliest Images of Jvālā and Śyāmā.” 
Artibus Asiae 31, no. 4: 309–​320.
Shah, Umakant Premanand. 1947a. “Iconography of the Sixteen Jaina Mahavidyas.” Journal of 
the Indian Society of Oriental Art XV: 14–​177.
Shah, Umakant Premanand. 1947b. “A Peep into the Early History of Tantra in Jain Literature.” 
In Bhārata Kaumudī: Studies in Indology in Honour of Dr. Radha Kumud Mookerji. Part 2, 
edited by the Radha Kumud Mookerji Lectureship Committee. Allahabad, India: Indian 
Press, 839–​854.
Shastri, Chandra Shekhar (Ed.). 1964. Śrījvālāmālinīkalpa. Surat, India: Digambara Jaina 
Pustakālaya.
Shah, Umakant Premanand. 1975. “Beginnings of Jaina Iconography.” Jain Journal 9, no. 
3: 69–​81.
Shah, Umakant Premanand. 1997. “The Historical Origin and Ontological Interpretation of 
Arhat Pārśva’s Association With Dharaṇendra.” In Arhat Pārśva and Dharaṇendra Nexus, 
edited by Madhusudan Amilal Dhaky, 29–​43. Ahmedabad, India: Lalbhai Dalpatbhai 
Institute of Indology.
Shastri, Mukund Ram. 1918. The Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta. Kashmir Series of Texts and 
Studies Vol. 23. Allahabad, India: Indian Press.
Shin, Jae-​Eun. 2018. Change, Continuity, and Complexity: The Mahāvidyās in East Indian Śākta 
Traditions. New Delhi: Manohar.
Slouber, Michael. 2007. “The Cult of Khaḍgarāvaṇa.” Master’s thesis, University of California, 
Berkeley. Master’s thesis. Archived online: https://​crossa​sia-​rep​osit​ory.ub.uni-​hei​delb​erg.
de/​1966/​.

--- PAGE 555 ---
530      Michael Slouber
 
Slouber, Michael. 2017. Early Tantric Medicine. New York: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Frederick. 2006. The Self Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asian Literature 
and Civilization. New York: Columbia University Press.
Tiwari, Maruti Nandan Prasad. 1989. Ambikā in Jaina Art and Literature. New Delhi: Bharatiya 
Jnanpith.
Ullrey, Aaron Michael. 2016. Grim Grimoires: Pragmatic Ritual in the Magic Tantras. PhD 
thesis, University of California, Santa Barbara.
Whitney, William Dwight. 1989. Sanskrit Grammar. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. First published 
in 1924.
Wujastyk, Dominik. 1999. “Miscarriages of Justice.” In Religion, Health, and Healing, edited by 
John Hinnells and Roy Porter, 256–​275. London: Kegan Paul.
Zydenbos, Robert. 1994. “Jaina Goddesses in Kannada Literature.” In Studies in South Asian 
Devotional Literature: Research Papers, 1988–​1991 presented at the Fifth Conference on 
Devotional Literature in New Indo-​Aryan, edited by A. W. Entwistle and Francoise Mallison, 
135–​145. New Delhi: Manohar.

--- PAGE 556 ---
P a r t V
 IMAGERY
Art, Architecture, and Visual 
Expressions

--- PAGE 557 ---


--- PAGE 558 ---
Chapter 24
The Tantric Temple
Rule-​Bound Beauty
Libbie Mills
The Tantric Temple
The tantric temple could be delimited in any of three ways: first, as the temple marked 
with a founding inscription that designates it as part of a tantric tradition; second, as 
the temple in which the ritual practice is tantric, that is, as prescribed in the tantras; 
or, third, as the temple that those tantras describe. The first might sound a dry study, 
but see Leslie Orr (2019), where she points out that: “we should think of inscriptions 
as agents, as participants in the experiential and social worlds of temple life” (Orr 
2019: 201). The second is a field with scope for rich work, while requiring caution in 
regard to reading the present into the past (Sanderson 2019: 6), and an awareness 
of distinctions between lay practice and the initiatory practice handed down in the 
tantras. Scholarship, such as that of S. A. S. Sarma (2017, 2019), which combines in­
vestigation of ritual practice alongside the textual record, is particularly valuable. The 
present study, though, chooses to adhere to the third route, to the textual side, in order 
to target the underlying conceptions and intent behind the initial construction of a 
tantric temple. The study will work outward from a single tantra textual account of 
the temple built for tantric practice, using it to set out the temple’s purpose, its design 
and construction, and the ensuing ritual practices and management that concern the 
temple structure itself.
Within the tantra record is a class of treatise that treats pratiṣṭhā, that is, treatises that 
are specifically concerned with the construction, installation, and consecration of the 
tantric temple and the image within it. This material will be the primary focus of the 
study. The text around which the study will be based is a pratiṣṭhā of a relatively early 
date, and, for the purposes of a wider study of the temple, of a usefully mixed pedigree: 
the Piṅgalāmata, a northern, pre-​tenth-​century (Mills 2019) pratiṣṭhā text that is Śaiva, 
but which also acknowledges association with the Śākta-​Śaiva text, the Brahmayāmala.

--- PAGE 559 ---
534      Libbie Mills
 
(The chapter colophons read: Chapter xxx in the Brahmayāmala Piṅ galāmata under 
the authority of Jayadratha.) In using this text, a close watch will be placed on what it 
is that is given in material of this kind that is not treated in building manuals (termed 
śilpaśāstra or vāstuśāstra) outside the tantric traditions. Here in the pratiṣṭhā accounts 
we learn about more than the form of the built structure: we learn how that structure 
is understood and used; what it is about the tantric temple that is more than just a 
building. On occasion, the Piṅgalāmata does not cover a topic that needs addressing 
here. In those cases, other tantras will be drawn from, to complete the picture, and in so 
doing, provide some rebalancing of voice across the tantric traditions.
To be clear, the tantras do not outright state that they describe “the tantric temple.” 
Rather, they refer simply to “the temple.” They are tantric texts, describing the temple 
within that system. The information that they offer on the temple can be used to form a 
picture that holds broadly true across the traditions that fall within the tantra bracket, 
and across time and place. But, of course, there are also differences between the ac­
counts: differences of deities and associated visualizations and ritual methods; dis­
tinctive features associated with region; shifts in practice over time; plus differences 
of detail, of inclusion, and of omission. The texts themselves address their differences, 
warning that one should work within the textual record of a single tradition, without any 
blending (saṅkara) of teachings. As an example, here is the advice of the Kāmikāgama, a 
southern, twelfth-​century text:
One should proceed according to the measurements given in the āgamas that are 
the Kāmika, etc. Among them, if what is to be done is not described in one [āgama], 
[the information should be obtained] from another. And if it is not described in all 
the Siddhānta, then the Garuḍa, etc. [āgamas] should be used. If it is not described 
there either, one should turn to vāstuśāstra. Best is what is taught by a single teacher. 
Middling is [what is taught by] a single tantra. Lesser [is what is taught in] a single 
lineage. And least of all [is what is taught in] a mixture of lineages. If even that is 
lacking, it should be despised. Knowing thus, one may proceed.1
Given that advice, it feels a clumsy thing to try to describe the tantric temple, this subtly 
multiple thing, as a single entity. But there are, nonetheless, some strong commonalities 
that one can discern. The telling of the Piṅgalāmata will be observed for what it holds 
that is general to tantra, and for what is particular to its case. In doing that, the aim will 
be to relate the principles that are held in common, while also indicating the breadth be­
yond them.
From the textual record, one can look at extant temple examples that fit that record 
in terms of design, temples that are beautiful, whether in the simplicity of a minor 
shrine, as seen in figure 24.1, the mid seventh-​century Bōricā Sūrya/​Śiva temple, near 
Porbandar, Gujarat, or the grandeur of an imperial edifice designed for public use, as in 
the twelfth-​century Tribhuvana temple, at Kumbakonam, Tamilnadu, figure 24.2. These 
elegantly composed buildings, shaped to stand apart from what is around them, will 
have always drawn attention, and they retain that impact still.

--- PAGE 560 ---
The Tantric Temple      535
 
The attention of modern scholarship can be traced back to the 1834 Essay on the 
Architecture of the Hindus of Ram Raz, who wrote his illustrated essay to give access, for 
readers in English, to the temple textual record held in four śilpaśāstra building texts (the 
Mānasāra, Mayamata, Kāśyapa, and Vaikhānasa) and, by means of illustrations, to link 
the prescriptions of these texts to the forms of extant temples of Tamilnadu. While Raz used 
the order presented in texts to understand temples on the ground, based on their analysis 
of what they saw on the ground, others ordered them in their own fashion, early examples 
of such orderings coming from James Fergusson2 and Gabriel Jouveau-​Dubreuil.3
More recent work has benefited from the publication of editions of śilpaśāstra and 
tantra manuscript materials, permitting scholarship to return to the mode of Raz, in 
using the order presented in the written prescriptions to understand extant buildings 
and their function. The multivolume Encyclopaedia of Temple Architecture (Meister and 
Dhaky 1983) stands out for its thorough assay of temples, using the technical vocabulary 
Figure 24.1.  The mid-​seventh-​century Bōricā Sūrya/​Śiva temple, near Porbandar, Gujarat. 
Mills 2012.

--- PAGE 561 ---
536      Libbie Mills
 
of building texts that are contemporary with the temples themselves. Adam Hardy 
(2007) offers the reader an essential connection between written record and built form, 
and an understanding both of the manner in which the elements of that built form relate 
to one another, and also of the sequencing of temple series described in the texts.
Beauty and Suitability
The beauty that draws scholars’ attention is spoken of in the tantras, too. Chapter 6 the 
Piṅgalāmata sets out the features of twenty-​six types of temple, regularly distributing 
Figure 24.2.  The twelfth-​century Tribhuvana temple, at Kumbakonam, Tamilnadu. Mills 2019.

--- PAGE 562 ---
The Tantric Temple      537
 
references to beauty to the larger temples at the beginning of the list (Piṅgalāmata 
6.206c–​210). These twenty-​six are: Meru, Mandara, Kailāsa, Sarvabhadraka, Vimāna, 
Nandana, Nandivṛddhi, Garutman, Siṃha, Kumbha, Gaja, Vṛṣabha, Padma, Caturaśra, 
Aṣṭāśra,Ṣoḍaśāśra, Gvāvṛkṣa, Vardhamāna, Śrivatsa, Bhadra, Haṃsa, Nalina, Śrῑnaga, 
Gṛharāja, Gṛhārdha, Valabhῑ, plus those classified as Miśraka (mixed). The Meru and 
Mandara are “beautified” (upaśobhitaḥ, yathāśobhaṃ prakartavyaḥ), and the Kailāsa 
and Sarvatobhadra are “very beautiful” (suśobhana). After that, the compliments di­
minish in fulsomeness as the temples diminish in size, but discussion of adornment is 
sustained (Piṅgalāmata 6.214–​315).
Thus beauty is noted, but expressions of the artistry of the temple are always couched 
in its purpose: this is an artistry achieved in order to render the building, and each of its 
composite parts, beautiful (śobha) in that it is auspicious and suited to its task (śubha). 
Piṅgalāmata ­chapter 6 makes repeated comment on suitability for the task, from the 
choice of temple location to the final consecration. And that task is twofold. The first 
requirement is that there be a benefit to the patron. The temple is raised to achieve par­
ticular gains, siddhis, for the patron, whether they be in this life or after it, or both. The 
temple design is chosen with his particular goals in mind. A successful construction will 
permit him to achieve his goals, but an unsuccessful one will have a countereffect. This is 
a concern right from the very beginning, from the selection of a location onward:
[The temple should be located] at an auspicious kṣetra, upakṣetra, saṃdoha, 
upasaṃdoha, pῑṭha or upapῑṭha; or on a river bank, on a mountain-​top, at an ocean 
shore; in a city, village or settlement; by an isolated tree; in a cremation ground; or at 
the confluence of rivers; at a place where three, four or five roads meet; in a cave or 
thicket; or in a place suitable to the patron, according to his desire.4
Here we see temple locations that range from auspicious: the kṣetra, upakṣetra, saṃdoha, 
upasaṃdoha, pῑṭha, and upapῑṭha (these are designations of areas of ritual effect around 
a liṅga) and river bank, to inauspicious: the lone tree and cremation ground. The impli­
cation is that an auspicious location is suited to a beneficent purpose such as wealth or 
many children, while an inauspicious one is apt for a maleficent one, like the defeat of an 
enemy. So, the first concern is the requirement of the patron. The second requirement is 
that the temple be a suitable vessel for the deity to inhabit. And it is here that the rules 
begin in earnest.
Order
The rules begin at the site. As the base for a temple in which the deity will take up resi­
dence, the site (vāstu) for the construction should be chosen with care and aligned to the 
cardinal directions. Once the site has been chosen, the preparation of the ground has three 
elements to it. First, there is the preparation necessary for any sound foundation, which

--- PAGE 563 ---
538      Libbie Mills
 
begins with a ploughing up of the land, proceeds to the laying down of stable materials, 
and ends with their compaction. Second, there is treatment of the auspicious and inaus­
picious, with a careful removal from the ground of inauspicious objects, and attention to 
augury events. Third, there is ritual preparation of the site, which is treated as a domain 
inhabited by a human figure, termed the “man of the site” (vāstupuruṣa) and, on top of 
him, a set of deities mapped onto the square site in a grid of smaller squares marked out 
by threads (sūtra). The Piṅgalāmata (Piṅgalāmata 8.44–​73b) gives a vivid account of the 
descent of the vāstupuruṣa: snake divinities (nāga) were terrifying and murdering people 
and other divine beings, who turned to Indra for help. Indra struck the nāgas down in 
battle, and they fell to earth. The earth was overcome and its supports, Śeṣa and others, 
were crushed. They let flow poison, blood, and warm tears. The earth, smelling the poison, 
was overcome and fainted. After just a moment’s swoon, it emitted a great hot wind on 
which the poison rose. There was a great opening full of poison, which was a demon body. 
The body had no fixed edges. It hid the everything on the earth and in the sky. The gods did 
not shine in the sky, and on earth, the sages and deities stopped their rituals. Together they 
went to Śiva, praising him, reciting the Vedas, and asked for his help. Śiva said:
“O gods make firm the ropes!” “Be strong! Strike hard! Then I can control him.” 
Hearing the Lord’s words, all were delighted and eager. Then, through meditation, 
noble Bhairava released the mighty Rudra whose powers of illusion were great. 
Having sought approval, he set to at once. He pulled the great demon’s topknot. 
Pulling his hair, he forced him to his knees before Bhairava. Then, spread out on his 
back, his arms and legs folded, his body was bent to fit into the site and fixed with 
sticks and ropes. Overcome with fear, all the deities took up places there.5
Thus is the upstart demon forced to the ground, with his body bent up to fit the site, his 
head at the northeast, in a position established as early as the sixth-​century Bṛhatsaṃhitā 
52.51. He is tied down, and the deities who had sought Śiva’s help in quelling him take up 
positions over his body, in the sūtra-​marked squares of the site, as the deities of that site. 
I have given this story, long as it is, to indicate the depth of the footing in mainstream 
Brahmanical religion that underlies the tantric temple. There is a long history in this 
deity layout. The formation is, again, at least as old as the Bṛhatsaṃhitā, and is repeated 
from text to text, in building texts of all kinds—​tantric and not—​with minimal varia­
tion, with Brahmā in the center, at the belly of the vāstupuruṣa, and the other deities fil­
ling the grid of the site around him.
From the point of view of the Piṅgalāmata, the deities of the Brahmanical world, care­
fully propitiated, form a plug of safety over the poison of the vāstupuruṣa’s body be­
neath. But it is a plug with a demon fringe, since immediately outside the vāstu area are 
eight demons, stationed in the cardinal and intercardinal directions:
Outside, at the northeast corner, is Carakī; in the southeast is Vidārī; in the southwest 
is Pūtanā; in the northwest is Pāparākṣasī. Outside, to the east is Skanda; to the south 
is Aryaman; moreover, to the west is Jambha; and to the north is Pilapiṃcchaka.6

--- PAGE 564 ---
The Tantric Temple      539
 
These demon characters are fierce: as an example, Pūtanā features as a member of 
Skanda’s troop of grahas, “seizers,” against whom averting remedies are given in the 
medical treatise the Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya at Uttarasthāna ­chapter 3, on countering child 
snatchers. So, construction is commenced on a bed of propitiated deities, overlaying a 
vāstupuruṣa demon, and with an outer border beyond which no building should take 
place, inhabited by more demons.
Even within the safety of the site, there are places of danger. The sūtra lines that mark 
out the deities are also the basis for a map of vulnerable points (marmans) in the site. 
Marmans are to be carefully avoided during the site preparation. Any encroachment on 
a marman at the time of preparation for building is harmful to the patron. Piṅgalāmata 
8.30–​40 states the harm to be incurred at each type of marman, ending with the sum­
mary statement:
The breaking of the rules of marman brings all these results. So one should not en­
croach upon a deity or a demon, O virtuous one. If one should occasion to do so, one 
should worship the deities and offer an offering (bali), for the deities that bring good 
and bad are appeased when worshipped. An intrusion always brings great danger 
for the king, the kingdom, the patron and the officiant. So one should not encroach.7
A further vulnerability for the site is impingement by shadows. Certain shadow 
impingements are particularly harmful. I have not found a treatment of this problem 
in the Piṅgalāmata, but it is seen widely elsewhere, for example, at the pre-​mid-​twelfth 
century (Mills 2019: 65–​72) Śaiva Bṛhatkālottara prāsādalakṣaṇapaṭala 132–​133b, where 
we learn that temples should not be impinged on by the shadows of other temples, or 
trees, wells, devotee residences (maṭhas), or monuments (caityagṛhas). Bṛhatkālottara 
prāsādalakṣaṇapaṭala 119 makes clear that temples and so on that are not impinged 
upon do not bring harm. But if they are impinged upon, harm arises for the patron and 
worshipper. Shadow impingement is avoided by building at a suitable distance with re­
spect to height. At Bṛhatkālottara prāsādalakṣaṇapaṭala 118cd, the instruction is to build 
at a distance of twice the height of the object that might impinge.
On this baseline of a secured site, free from impingements, considerable ritual care 
is required before construction can begin. Here, as a pratiṣṭhā tantra, the Piṅgalāmata 
concerns itself with things that śilpaśāstras do not. Piṅgalāmata 6.66–​106 details 
the ritual, from the initial laying of the central support (Ādhāraśakti) through the 
positioning of eight altars (vedī) in the four cardinal and four intercardinal directions 
and a ninth one in the center, and the installation of the Brahma stone, the Śiva Śakti, 
the eight deities of the directions, the three Tattvas and Tattva deities, the many tattvas, 
the four bhāvas and their opposites, the eight mūrtis and mūrtidevatās to the final bali 
offering.8 This last act completed, we are told: “Having offered the bali, the building 
of the temple should go well. Otherwise, vināyaka demons will bring about serious 
impediments.”9
The site ritually prepared, construction itself is described with a careful prescription 
for correct proportions and measurements. The measurements are based on the same

--- PAGE 565 ---
540      Libbie Mills
 
square vāstu site, but with an entirely new set of sūtra divisions, a set for construction 
work as opposed to ritual preparation. From this constructive set of sūtra markings, the 
building rises, with each built part assigned a size by proportion to the whole, and each 
measurement tested by means of āya formulae to ensure that they are auspicious and 
therefore suitable for use.10 The layout for the building is given in a steady sequence, 
first in terms of the plan and then of the elevation. The plan is detailed from the center 
outward; the elevation is given from the bottom up. Every element of the building is 
enumerated, with a limited range of options for variation set out, in order that the re­
sult should be suitable and also beautiful. The alignment to the cardinal directions is 
carefully maintained, and possible materials are listed: wood, brick and stone, coated in 
plaster. Altogether, this is a beauty of safety, order, symmetric balance, and proportion, 
founded on a protected site, bordered by walls, away from impinging shadows, and with 
every part of the building under tight control to ensure benefit.
The precision is clear, and so too is the sense of pattern and flow, expressed by the 
term chandas (meter). Chandas, a word usually thought of in terms of the rhythm of 
verse is instead used here to denote the pulse of a building. The solidly linear sequencing 
that characterizes meter in verse is here conceived of in three-​dimensional architecture 
(see Mills and Scott forthcoming). The pulse of a building will have a voluminous na­
ture. However, the instructions for this three-​dimensional rhythm of form are always 
delivered in planar format, in terms of the rhythm of the plan (talacchandas) and of the 
elevation (ūrdhvacchandas). The plan rhythm waves out from the very center of the 
site, in circuits of wall-​bordered space. The elevation rhythm stacks up from the outer 
walls, narrowing back to the center at the summit. The chandas patterns are analyzed 
into categories. In the case of the Piṅgalāmata, the categories are those of the twenty-​six 
temple types listed earlier, which by implication are regarded as pure (śuddha), as op­
posed to the mixed (miśraka) category, which is labeled according to the nature of the 
jaṅghā, which is the portion of the building from the base of the door to the base of the 
superstructure:
From Meru to Valabhī, [these are the temples], one by one, in terms of name and 
shape. One should apportion everything as has been told from beginning to end. 
And there are mixed (miśraka) temples. Their name[s]‌ come about according to the 
degree of their resemblance to one or the other, or difference. The mixed [temple] is 
named according to the type of its jaṅghā.11
It is important to note that the delivery of these metrics is itself made in metric form, 
since all these architectural instructions come in śloka metric verse, the predictable 
beat of which is suited to ease of memorization and communication. At this point, one 
might want to check in on where this communication is going. The śilpaśāstra materials 
hand down plans for the construction and management of built items, with instructions 
that appear to be directed to the builders themselves, the śilpins, or their supervisor, 
the sthapati. The tantras, on the other hand, are specifically the teachings handed down 
within a ritual tradition, and are directed at the ritual officiants of that tradition. Thus

--- PAGE 566 ---
The Tantric Temple      541
 
the tantric teachings properly focus on ritual activity. However, where that ritual activity 
concerns the installation and consecration of a material item for ritual—​a temple or an 
image—​the officiant will need to know enough about the building of that item in order 
to judge that it is being correctly carried out. Thus the tantras necessarily include details 
on correct construction.
In the initial construction of a temple, ritual officiants will be heavily engaged in 
ensuring the correctness of every step. The textual accounts record the patterned order 
of the construction to raise the temple as a thing of beauty in rectitude. The technical 
vocabulary shifts, somewhat, both from text to text, and also from verse to verse of the 
same text. Here I will give the terms seen most commonly in the Piṅgalāmata treatment, 
with the understanding that there are other possibilities. In terms of basic elements, the 
pīṭha is the base or plinth upon which the structure is built, wider than the temple itself. 
Upon it, the elements of the plan radiate out from the center, which is the locus of the 
temple deity. The deity is installed in the innermost chamber of the temple (garbhagṛha).
In every temple, there is an ambulatory passage around the deity within the 
garbhagṛha. Some temples have a second walled ambulatory, termed the andhāra, 
around the outside of the garbhagṛha. The outer walls (bhittis) are shaped into broad 
convexities, minor offsets on either side of these broad projections, and corner 
elements and recesses, known, respectively, as rathas, uparathas, koṇas, and praveśas. 
Occasionally, concavities acting as water channels (jalamārga) and latticed win­
dows (jālas) are set into the walls. Columns, pillars, and pilasters, collectively termed 
stambhas, serve as supports and ornaments. In the case of northern temples, as is seen 
in the northern Piṅgalāmata record, an outermost wall (prākāra) surrounds the temple 
enclosure. Southern texts describe grand gateways (gopura) to mark the temple entrance 
at plural concentric encircling boundaries of the site. Around the garbhagṛha of the cen­
tral deity, other shrines may be arranged, for further deities. In the pañcāyatana design, 
four peripheral shrines surround the central one (described at Piṅgalāmata 6.173–​176c). 
In the navāyatana one, there are eight peripheral shrines (described at Piṅgalāmata 
6.176d–​177b). Also described is the Aṣṭottaraśata design, of 108 shrines (described at 
Piṅgalāmata 6.177c–​189).
The elevation divides into two parts: the jaṅghā and the śikhara. The jaṅghā is the 
portion of the temple between the base of the doorway and the base of the śikhara. One 
or more pillared halls (maṇḍapas) may adjoin this structure. The śikhara is the super­
structure, a highly peaked roof, over the jaṅghā. The superstructure tapers as it ascends, 
in either a gradually increasing curve or a straight line. The highest point of the temple is 
vertically aligned directly over the deity in the garbhagṛha far below.
As an early and northern tantra, the Piṅgalāmata describes a śikhara of the type par­
ticular to that time and place. Each face of the śikhara is divided into horizontal levels 
(āghāṭa). Arrayed along these āghāṭas there are moldings that resemble miniature 
buildings (bhūmikās). The number of bhūmikās decreases as the āghāṭas ascend and the 
śikhara narrows. At the top, a finial termed āmalasāraka, placed directly above the icon 
at the center of the temple, completes the śikhara. See figure 24.3 for an example of this 
form of śikhara, seen in the early seventh-​century Visāvāḍā Old temple/​Śaṅkha-​dēruñ,

--- PAGE 567 ---
542      Libbie Mills
 
near Porbandar, Gujarat. Later texts, and those based in the south, record śikhara 
arrangements of their region and time period.
In all cases, with its heavy base lidded by a tapered śikhara, the temple building barely 
lets in light. At the center of the temple, the garbhagṛha remains in deep darkness except 
for perhaps once a day, when a low angle of the sun would allow light through an east-​ or 
west-​facing doorway to illumine the deity at the heart of the building. The built form thus 
creates a contrast of light without, and dark within, with accompanying cool and quiet.
Residence
In that dark, the temple building houses the deity in a vessel at the center. The vessel may 
be anthropomorphic or not. It may also be man-​made or not: a distinction is made be­
tween the vessel that comes about by its own accord, as a self-​arisen form (svayambhuva); 
the man-​made (mānuṣya) vessel; and the vessel made by some higher being, whether a 
sage (ārṣa), or a divine being (daiva). The ritual officiant installs the deity into the vessel 
by means of installation (pratiṣṭhā) practice. (See Einoo and Takashima 2005 and Keul 
2017. Keul includes an examination by Marko Geslani of the early presentation of con­
secration given in the Bṛhatsaṃhitā, a study of the pratiṣṭhā of the liṅga in the early 
mantramārga by Dominic Goodall, a chapter by Anna Ślączka on Ratnanyāsa in the 
Devyāmata, one by Marzenna Czerniak-​Drożdżowicz on consecration in Pāncarātrika 
sources, and S. A. S. Sarma’s analysis of reinstallation in the ritual literature of Kerala.) 
The Piṅgalāmata details the installation procedure in ­chapter 11. Upon installation, the 
temple becomes a container, a body, in fact, for the deity, as is expressed, for example, in 
the twelfth-​century12 southern, Pāñcarātra Īśvarasaṃhitā:
The image, its pīṭha, the temple and the innermost chamber of the temple, with the 
superstructure over it (garbhamandira): This set of four is (samam) the body of the 
god of gods.13
From there, from that temple body, the deity will exert power over a kṣetra, a range, 
around the vessel. That kṣetra is measurable, and differs according to the nature of the 
icon. According to the Suprabheda, a twelfth-​century (Sarma 2017: 229, n. 7) southern 
Śaiva text, the measurements of the kṣetra around a vessel for Śiva are as follows: “The 
Śiva kṣetra extends 150 hastas on all sides of the liṅga. He who dwells there attains the 
Śivaloka. This is the size of the kṣetra taught for a man-​made liṅga. In the case of a 
svayaṃbhuva one it is 1000 [hastas], and half that in the case of one made by sages.”14
The hasta is a measurement taken from the size of the patron himself, being the dis­
tance from his elbow to tip of his middle finger. The kṣetra extends well beyond the 
temple site, which does not go beyond 50 hastas. The temple, then, animated by the 
deity, forms a hub of sustenance for those within its range, sustenance for other lives. 
Not only is the temple enlivened by its deity, as a permanent resident, it is also alive with

--- PAGE 568 ---
The Tantric Temple      543
 
the comings and goings of other beings, both human and not, benign and not. These 
comings and goings will be the next thing to look at.
Entry and Exit
The temple is a focus of attentive service of the deity from the officiants and devotees 
that it sustains. Ritual—​whether daily, occasional or special; whether of act, sound, or 
mentation—​is maintained within the temple, ritual for which officiants and devotees 
Figure 24.3.  The early-​seventh-​century Visāvāḍā Old temple/​Śaṅkha-​dēruñ, near Porbandar, 
Gujarat.

--- PAGE 569 ---
544      Libbie Mills
 
will require access into the boundaried temple site. Yātrā procession of the deity may 
take place beyond borders of the temple, within the kṣetra range, requiring the deity 
to travel beyond the temple site. (Such processions are seen recorded in southern tan­
tric material, which dates from the twelfth century on, but it is not seen in pre-​twelfth-​
century tantric records. For more on the earliest sources for the Śaiva procession, see 
Goodall 2019.) There is, then, a porosity to the site borders, which means that, besides 
devotees, contaminating factors may enter the temple, too.
To counteract the ill effects that result from the entry of these contaminants, a pro­
cedure for remediation (prāyaścitta) is performed. When it comes to prāyaścitta 
procedure, corruptions in the different parts of the temple plan require different 
levels of remediation. A good account of the matter may be seen at ­chapter 69 of the 
Vimānārcanakalpa. As this is a southern text, it works with a temple plan of multiple 
concentric circuits of wall around the temple, which permits a staged mapping of the 
severity of corrupting events. Here one sees that not only does the nature of the contam­
inant matter, from mouse to criminal, so also does the duration of the contamination 
and its degree of proximity to the center of the temple—​whether the corrupting item 
is outside the temple, or, moving inward, within the third, second or first enclosure, or 
within the garbhagṛha itself, at the very center. Corruptions in these different circuits of 
degree of fault, proximity and duration require different levels of remediation. Lesser 
corruptions, in the periphery, and for a short time, require only a prāyaścitta purifica­
tion process. More serious corruptions at the center, and for a lasting period, require 
purification followed by a major pratiṣṭhā reconsecration, going right back to the very 
beginning, with the initial ploughing of the ground prior to laying a foundation. The 
chapter also details the remediation necessitated by contact with an item that has come 
in contact with a contaminant, and that necessitated by contact with an item that has 
come in contact with that, until, at the third degree of contact, there is no harm from it.
Maintenance
The remediation rules with their graded ranking of peril, whereby the same contami­
nant item causes a greater degree of contamination the nearer it is to the temple center, 
until one reaches the vessel hosting the deity itself, raises the question: What happens 
if even that is entered by a contaminating factor? This question, too, is addressed in 
the tantras, in chapters titled jīrṇoddhāra, which cover all aspects of the maintenance, 
repair, and replacement of the temples and images that are the vessels for the deity, 
when they have become damaged or corrupted, right up to the problem of them being 
squatted in by maleficent beings.
The meaning held by the title jīrṇoddhāra is that of a removal (uddhāra) of what is 
old (jīrṇa). Of course, replacement will follow removal, and much attention is paid in 
jīrṇoddhāra literature to how that is carried out, but it is the removal of the corrupting 
force of an old item that is given principal importance in the labeling of the procedure. 
The emphasis on the removal side of renovation, as opposed to the replacement side,

--- PAGE 570 ---
The Tantric Temple      545
 
holds sense when one reads accounts of the great harm that comes from an old object 
if it is not removed and disposed of. An example of such an account can be seen in the 
Bṛhatkālottara chapter on jīrṇoddhāra at verses 20c–​24b, which explain that malevolent 
entities will enter a worn-​out or damaged liṅga, bringing harm to those who serve it:
The liṅga which is aged or corrupted is considered a domicile for beings (bhūta). 
When malevolent beings (mahābhūtas, piśācas, and brahmarākṣasas) have taken up 
residence there, there are afflictions of terrible fever, convulsion, etc., famine, pesti­
lence, poor sleep, bad auguries, affliction in children, affliction in pregnancy and af­
fliction of the king, among twice-​borns, and hazard from hurricanes, and high-​winds, 
and snakes etc. arise in the area. Risk of hurricanes, high winds, etc. arises in the area. 
Meteor strike occurs, and there is destruction in every direction all around. These and 
other such evils prevail. Therefore one should remove the old liṅga, with every care.15
Any part of the temple vessel may, through age or damage, become corrupted, and prey 
to entry by malevolent forces, at which point it should be removed. The jīrṇoddhāra 
teachings give instruction on how to avert this harm.16 The temple is the deity’s body, and 
like all bodies, the temple faces decay, requiring ongoing maintenance (anukarman) and 
repair (sandhāna) in order that it remains a suitable vessel for the deity, with occasional 
need for a fuller removal (and ensuing replacement) of what is old (jīrṇoddhāra). The 
topic is covered by the twelfth chapter of the Piṅgalāmata, beginning with an explanation 
that it is the vessel, the body, that is disposed of (and replaced), not the deity within:
Piṅgalā asked: Now, how is [the word] removal (uddhāra) used in association with 
the word old (jīrṇa)?
The blessed Bhairava said: The word “old” or “not-​old” is in regard to the material 
vessel, and not at all about the being [within it]. Nor is the removal of an old material 
item such that any beings die. Just as there is no activity in a corpse, in the same way 
the arrival [of the deity] in the liṅga is unseen.17
The seriousness of the need for repair and the degree of attendant ritual correction cor­
relate to the proximity to the temple center, in a continuation of the pattern that was 
seen in the case of prāyaścitta reparation. A distinction is made between minor defects 
(to plaster, to peripheral parts of the temple, to outer shrines of the temple) and major 
ones (to the entire temple, to the liṅga, image, and pedestal). In the case of a minor de­
fect, there may be a repair with prāyaścitta ritual. But in the case of a major defect, there 
must be a rebuild and a full pratiṣṭhā reinstallation.
Not only must the vessel remain in good order, it must also remain in use, receiving 
worship. Ongoing worship is necessary to safety, as is pointed out by the Mohacūrottara, 
a Śaiva pratiṣṭhā text composed prior to the latter half of the eleventh century (Mills 
2019: 65–​72):
The old, etc. item that is worshipped kills. That which is not worshipped [also] kills.
Therefore he who knows the teachings should remove that liṅga according to the 
procedure.18

--- PAGE 571 ---
546      Libbie Mills
 
When there is a serious fault in a part of a temple, whether of wear or of failed worship, it 
must be removed. The Piṅgalāmata begins by discussing the removal of a faulty image:
The liṅga or piṇḍikā base that is burnt, broken, misshapen, lacking parts, hosting 
something living, too thin, too small, too big, too thick, crooked, ruined, cracked, 
broken, split open, or utterly dreadful: one should fully remove that ruined item. In 
this regard, the same is true for anthropomorphic images. The same is true, too, for 
images that are partially anthropomorphic (vyaktāvyakta)19. [Anthropomorphic 
images] without ears, nose or fingers, or with flawed limbs, are [to be] removed. O 
shapely one! O lovely-​limbed one! Destructive to all who live in the area, to officiant, 
patron and builder, those [images] should be abandoned. There would be great harm 
from their corruption. Therefore one should fully remove them.20
As to the procedure for the removal of unwanted material, most detail is given in the 
case of the removal of the image itself, in particular that of the liṅga which, being heavy 
and embedded in the ground, requires the strength of a bull to heave it out:
[The officiant] should tie [the liṅga] with a golden rope to the shoulders of a bull. The 
officiant, with those in attendance, should then lead it away. He should say: “Let there 
be Śiva.” The removal procedure has been described.21
As to the disposal of the spent material: “One should take [the icon] to the south of the 
city, village, hamlet or settlement. Then one should throw a stone [icon] into water, one 
should smelt a metal one, and one should burn up a wooden one.”22
The removal, then, is a thorough disposal, so that the material may not be reused. 
The same is the case for spent material from a damaged part of the temple. This case is 
discussed next in the Piṅgalāmata:
And when a temple is old, a removal should be performed then, too. [The officiant] 
should carefully transfer into a sword the mantra directed to [the deity] and the 
entire collection of tattvas, and then maintain daily worship. He should establish 
[the sword] to the south of the liṅga, and perform a 1000-​fold fire offering (homa). 
A fine protective cover of wooden boards is placed over the liṅga. The removal is 
[done] gently, O wise lady. One should set down a [first] brick. And, using the same 
measurements and shape as before, one should build using stone in the case of stone, 
and brick in the case of brick. In the case of something made of wood or clay, one 
should use baked brick and stone. It should be made better than before. It should not 
be made worse than before. That made of stone is known to be best and that made of 
brick is middling, my dear. That made of wood is lesser. That made of clay is the very 
least. Wood is a hundred times the worth of clay. The worth of brick is thousands of 
times more. Stone is millions of times the worth of brick. When it is time for [re-​]
entry of the deity into the icon, one should unfasten and take him from the sword. 
An effective pratiṣṭhā installation should be carried out according to the procedure 
given above, granting entry into grahalūla. When the removal of the old is done in 
full, one attains the highest reward.23

--- PAGE 572 ---
The Tantric Temple      547
 
Thus is the deity transferred to a safe location, and the icon protected in a wooden box, 
while the temple is repaired around them. Importantly, from the ritual point of view, 
what is being preserved, even as the temple is repaired or rebuilt, is a proper and uncor­
rupted vessel for the deity. The deity must be permitted to move from a failed vessel into 
a restored or replacement one, just as the soul moves from the dead body into a new one. 
And, for making this transition possible, one is rewarded.
Rule-​Bound Beauty
The reward comes from following procedure. This is a world of order. The temple 
building is, as we have seen throughout this account, designed to achieve a beauty of 
suitability and order; a beauty that comes from a controlled balance between the push of 
its active state and the pull of its boundaries.
The temple makes an active push outward in terms of built form: the structure grows 
out from its center and is often crowded with lively ornament. The form of the temple 
changes over time, too, with a tendency to increase in both size and ornament. Hosting 
the principal deity, plus other deities around that, the temple is ritually alive, with a 
kṣetra of power around it. The temple is also a hub of human activity, and can harbor 
other beings, too, some harmful to those humans.
As a consequence, the temple body requires ongoing attention to protection from cor­
ruption. The pull, back inward, on the temple begins with avoidance of the inauspicious 
and impingement by items at the periphery. The built site is strictly limited, walled away 
from the demons at its edges. Access is restricted—​access of light, of people, and of other 
beings that may or may not meet the temple’s purity gauge. Usage of the temple is firmly 
regulated, in act and sound and mentation. And the temple’s purpose is also under con­
trol. It is built for a purpose, a particular advantage (siddhi), for the patron. Like all living 
things, the temple body faces decay and death, countered by repair and replacement. In 
all these ways is this beautiful vessel for god ordered into shape.
More scholarly work lies ahead, largely in terms of the edition of the many pratiṣṭhā 
tantra texts available to us in manuscript form, and the analysis of what they tell us 
of their thinking about, and proposals for, the temples of their distinct traditions and 
times. This work of opening up the textual tradition to modern scholarship, in associa­
tion with ongoing examination of extant materials—​of temples and the inscriptions that 
mark them, and the practices conducted within them—​will enrich the understanding of 
the tantric temple, and of its role in tantra as a whole.

--- PAGE 573 ---
548      Libbie Mills
 
Apparatus markings
em. marks small emendations to the text, the ones that seem very obvious and un­
likely to be argued.
conj. marks larger emendations that slide into the zone of conjecture, ones more likely 
to provoke argument.
[–​] marks a character that is missing and the absence of which is marked in the MS.
[[]‌] marks a character that a scribe has deleted from the MS.
{} marks material inserted into the text from the margin.
Notes
	1.	 Kāmikāgama Pūrvapāda 58.23c–​26:
kāmikādyāgamoktena pramāṇena samācaret|| 58.23cd
tatrāpy ekena kartavyaṃ noktaṃ ced anyaśāstrataḥ |
siddhānte noditaṃ cet tu gāruḍādyaṃ pragṛhyatām || 58.24
tatrāpi noditaṃ cet tu vāstuśāstraṃ samāśrayet |
vaktraikyaṃ uttamaṃ proktaṃ tantraikyaṃ madhyamaṃ bhavet || 58.25
adhamaṃ srotasāmaikyaṃ srotomiśraṃ tu nīcakam |
tadabhāvān nikṛṣṭaṃ syād evaṃ budhvā samācaret || 58.26
	2.	 “My endeavour from the first has been to present a distinct view of the general principles 
which have governed the historical development of Indian architecture, and my hope is that 
those who pursue the subject beyond the pages of the present work, will find that the prin­
ciples I have enunciated will reduce to order the multifarious details, and that the details in 
turn will confirm the principles.” (Fergusson 1899: vii).
	3.	 “Il importe non seulement de faire voir les choses, mais de les faire comprendre, de 
dégager des idées générales, de découvrir des principes. Pour cela il faut surtout comparer 
les monuments, en donner une classification systématique et faire ressortir les lois selon 
lesquelles ils ont été construits. Il importe de faire l’anatomie et la paléontologie des 
édifices. . . . Nous essayerons de faire la science des monuments en recherchant les lois 
générales par l’étude comparée des motifs d’ornementation.” Jouveau-​Dubreuil 1914: 1.4.
“Il est possible de retrouver dans les anciens monuments Dravidiens l’origine de tous les 
motifs d’ornementation qui caractérisent les styles modernes et, en résumé, l’art Dravidien 
a changé de lui-​ même. Nous exprimerons cette idée en disant qu’il a changé par ‘voie 
d’évolution naturelle.’ ” Jouveau-​Dubreuil 1914: 1.6.
	4.	 Piṅgalāmata 6.4–​6c:
puṇyaṃ kṣetropakṣetraṃ ca saṃdohaṃ pῑṭham eva vā |
upapῑṭhopasaṃdohe nadyobhayataṭe ‘pi vā || 6.4
nagāgre tv abdhitῑre vā nagare grāmakheṭake |
ekavṛkṣe śmaśāne vā nadῑnāṃ saṃgameṣu ca || 6.5
tricatuḥpañcaśṛṅgāṭe kuhare gahvare tathā |
kāmike vā svadigbhāge | 6.6abc

--- PAGE 574 ---
The Tantric Temple      549
 
4a puṇyaṃ] A; puṇya BC • kṣetropakṣetraṃ] AC; kṣe[[kṣe]]tropakṣetrañ B
5a nagāgre] AB; nagrāgre C • abdhitīre vā] A; abdhirevā[–​] C; abdhirevā B
5d nadīnāṃ] AC; nadīnā B
6d bhūmiṃ] AC; bhūmi B • parīkṣayet] BC; parikṣayet A
	5.	 Piṅgalāmata 8.67c–​73b:
bho mahendrāḥ prakurvadhvaṃ dṛḍhavaśāś ca rajjavaḥ || 8.67cd
sthirasattvā balaṃ vadhvaṃ yenedaṃ saṃyamāmy aham |
svāminaś ca vacaṃ śrutvā hṛṣṭāḥ sarve manotsukāḥ || 8.68
tato dhyānena saṃcintya bhairaveṇa mahātmanā |
rudraṃ cātibalaṃ nāma mahāmāyaṃ sa sṛṣṭavān || 8.69
anujñāṃ prārthayitvā tu mahāmāyāgato bhṛśam |
tenākṛṣyordhvavṛttiṃ mahādaityasya suvrate || 8.70
keśair ākṛṣya jānubhyāṃ bhairavāgre nipātitaḥ |
tatottāne śarῑre tu karau saṃkocya jānukau || 8.71
datvā vaṃśaṃ tathā rajjuṃ viṣkambhasadṛśῑkṛtaḥ |
vaikṛtaṃ tu śarῑredaṃ kṣetre vā kṣetravad bhavet || 8.72
bhayojjitamanāḥ sarve devās tatropatiṣṭhitāḥ | 8.73ab
68a devyāś] A; devyā BC 67c mahendrāḥ] em.; mahendrā BC; marendrāḥ A
67d vaśāś] BC; vaśāc A 68c vacaṃ] C; vaca AB 68d hṛṣṭāḥ] C; hṛṣṭā AB
• manotsukāḥ] em.; mano{tsu}kāḥ C; manocchukāḥ AB
69b mahātmanā] B; mahātma{nā} C; mahātmanāḥ A
69c cātibalaṃ] AB; cātībalaṃ C 69d sa] AB; saḥ C 70b gato] A; gatā BC
71c tatottāne] AB; tatojñāne C • śarīre] conj.; śaśiras A; saśiras C; sasiras B
71d jānukau] B; jānukauḥ A; jānugau C 73a manāḥ] AC; manā B
	6.	 Piṅgalāmata 8.84–​85:
carakῑśe bāhyataḥ koṇe vidāryagnidiśas tathā |
pūtanetidiśābhāge vāyavyāṃ pāparākṣasῑ || 8.84
pūrvādig bāhyataḥ skando aryamā dakṣiṇe tathā |
jambhāpye ca tathā bhūya uttare pilapiṃcchakaḥ || 8.85
84a carakīśe] AB; caraṇīśe C 85a bāhyataḥ] BC; bāhyata A
85c jaṃbhāpyeca] A; jaṃbhāpyeva BC 85d pilapiṃcchakaḥ] BC; pilapiṃcchakā A
	7.	 Piṅgalāmata 8.38–​40:
marmopadharmasaṃbhinne sarvaṃ phalam ihāvahet |
na pῑḍayet tathā devān rākṣasāṃś caiva suvrate || 8.38
tatkāle pūjayed devān baliṃ caiva pradāpayet |
pūjitāḥ pātitā hy ete sukhaduḥkhakarāḥ smṛtāḥ || 8.39
rājño rāṣṭrasya kartuś ca sthāpakasya ca nityaśaḥ |
mahābhayakaro vedhas tasmād etān na pῑḍayet || 8.40
38b ihāvahet] AB; ihābhavet C 39c pātitā] BC; pātitāḥ A 40a kartuś] BC; karttuṃś A
40c vedhas] AC; vedhaḥ B 40d etān] A; etan BC
	8.	 Twenty-​three tattvas (principles) are ritually installed in the stones (PI 6.73–​75b). These 
principles are:

--- PAGE 575 ---
550      Libbie Mills
 
23: buddhi intellect; 22: ahaṃkāra self-​identity; 21: manas mind; 20: śrota ears; 19: tvac 
skin; 18: cakṣus eyes; 17: jihvā tongue; 16: nāsā nose; 15: vāc organs of voice; 14: pāṇi 
hands; 13: pāda feet; 12: pāyu anus; 11: upastha reproductive organs; 10: śabda sound; 9: 
sparśa touch; 8: rūpa form; 7: rasa taste; 6: gandha smell; 5: ākāśa ether; 4: vāyu air; 3: 
tejas fire; 2: ap water; 1: pṛthvī earth. The order from 23 to 1 is sṛṣṭikrama (in the order of 
creation). The order from 1 to 23 is saṃhṛtikrama (in the order of destruction). 1–​5 are 
the 5 mahābhūtas, gross elements. 6–​10 are the 5 tanmātras, subtle elements. 11–​15 are the 
5 karmendriyas, faculties of action. 16–​20 are the 5 buddhīndriyas, faculties of sense. In 
the course of ritual, one sees the 23 tattvas grouped into 3 broader categories which are 
again called Tattvas. I use a capital T for the 3 broader Tattva categories, to distinguish 
them from their constituenttattvas. The three Tattvas are the Ātmatattva, the Vidyātattva 
and the Śivatattva. In the accounts of śilānyāsa given in the texts treated here, the Tattvas 
are assigned tattvas as follows: The Ātmatattva is composed of tattvas 1–​10 (pṛthivī to 
śabda). The Vidyātattva contains tattvas 11–​21 (upastha to manas). The Śivatattva consists 
of tattvas 22 and 23 (ahaṃkāra and buddhi). Each of the three Tattvas has an Īśa (lord). 
Brahmā is the Tattveśa of the Ātmatattva; Viṣṇu is the Tattveśa of the Vidyātattva; and Śiva 
is the Tattveśa of the Śivatattva.
Next (PI 6.76–​78), the set of four bhāvas (dharma, jñāna, vairāgya and aiśvarya and 
their four opposites (adharma, ajñāna, avairāgya, and anaiśvarya) are installed, in the 
intermediate and cardinal directions, respectively. Then (PI 6.80c–​84b), the eight mūrtis 
(forms of Śiva) and the eight mūrtīśas are installed in worshipper, sun, water, air, moon, 
and ether. Their eight mūrtīśas are Śarva, Paśupati, Ugra, Rudra, Bhava, Īśāna, Mahādeva, 
and Bhīma. Finally (PI 6.84c–​85), the guardians of the directions (lokapālas: Indra, Agni, 
Yama, Rakṣeśa, Varuṇa, Vāyu, Soma, and Īśāna) are installed, with their weapons, in the 
eight pots, in the directions, from east to northeast.
	 9.	 Piṅgalāmata 6.104c–​105b:
datvā baliṃ śubhāvāptir bhavet prāsādakalpanā || 6.104cd
anyathā tu mahāvighnaṃ prakurvanti vināyakāḥ | 6.105ab
	10.	 A common presentation is of 6 sets of āyas: āya, vyaya, ṛkṣa, yoni, vāra, and tithi or aṃśa. 
There are twelve āyas in a list of twelve items beginning with siddhi; ten vyayas in a list of 
ten items beginning with śikhara; twenty-​seven ṛkṣas in a list of the twenty-​seven lunar 
mansions; eight yonis in the list of eight that is dhvaja, etc.; seven vāras in a list of the seven 
days of the week; thirty tithis in a list of the thirty lunar days in a month; and nine aṃśas in 
a list of nine items beginning with taskara. In each list, some members are regarded as aus­
picious, some as inauspicious. The measurement to be tested is multiplied by a set number. 
The product of that multiplication is then divided by the number of items in the āya set. 
The remainder is checked against the corresponding āya in the set to determine whether 
the measurement is suitable or not.
	11.	 Piṅgalāmata 6.316–​318b:
valabhyantaṃ tu mervādi pṛthak saṃjñāsvarūpataḥ |
kathitaṃ sarvaṃ etaṃ tu ādyantaṃ tu vibhāgayet || 6.316
anyonyasaṃnikṛṣṭas tu etāvat tu vibhāgaśaḥ |
prāsādā miśrakās te ‘tra tatsaṃkhyā saṃprajāyate || 6.317
yasya rūpaṃ bhavej jaṅghā tasyoccāryaṃ tu miśrakam | 6.318ab

--- PAGE 576 ---
The Tantric Temple      551
 
316a tu mervādi] AB; tamevādi C 316d ādyantaṃ] A; adyaṃtan B; adya{nta}n C
317b etāvat tu] conj.; etādyaṃ tu C; etādyantu AB 317cd te ’tra tat] BC; tetatrat A 318a 
jaṅghā] AC; jaghā B
	12.	 The date of the text is debated: see Matsubara 1994: 27–​31 and Dębicka-​Borek 2015: 585. The 
material used in this study is taken from the chapter on jīrṇoddhāra which, in its use of a 
temporary temple, shows itself to be twelfth century or later.
	13.	 Īśvarasaṃhitā 19.76:
pratimā caiva tatpīṭhaṃ prāsādo garbhamandiram |
vigrahaṃ devadevasya catuṣṭayam idaṃ samam ||
	14.	 Suprabheda kriyāpāda 20.37–​38:
liṅgād dhastaśataṃ sārdhaṃ śivakṣetraṃ samantataḥ |
yasya tatraiva vāsitvaṃ śivalokasya kāraṇam || 20.37
yat tu mānuṣakaṃ liṅgaṃ kṣetramānam idaṃ smṛtam |
svayaṃbhūte sahasraṃ syād ārṣe caiva tadardhakam || 20.38
	15.	 Bṛhatkālottara chapter on jīrṇoddhāra 20c–​24:
jīrṇaṃ ca doṣadūṣṭaṃ ca liṅgaṃ bhūtālayaṃ matam || 20cd
tam āśritya mahābhūtāḥ piśācā brahmarākṣasāḥ |
vyādhayaś caiva durdhārājvarāpasmārakādayaḥ || 21
durbhikṣaṃ tathā mārīṃ duḥsvapnaṃ durnimittakam |
prajāpīḍā garbhapīḍā nṛpapīḍā dvijātiṣu || 22
nirghātavātasparśādibhayaṃ deśe prajāyate |
ulkāpātaṃ prajāyate diśāṃ nirghātam eva ca || 23
evamādīni cānyāni doṣāni prabhavanti ca |
tasmāt sarvaprayatnena jīrṇaliṅgaṃ samuddharet || 24
21b mahābhūtāḥ piśācā brahmarākṣasāḥ] em.: mahābhūtāḥpiśācābrahmarākṣasā J; 
tathānāmatathānāmabhayādikam H 21c vyādhayaś] J; vyādhakaś H
	16.	 Valuable work has been done on these jīrṇoddhāra materials by, in particular, Brunner-​
Lachaux (1963, 1968, 1977, 1998), von Rospatt (2013), Tom (2013), Czerniak-​Drożdżowicz 
(2014, 2017), Sarma (2017, 2019), and Colas (1996, 2019). The edition and translation of the 
Somaśambhupaddhati by Brunner-​Lachaux includes analysis of this early Śaiva text’s ac­
count of jīrṇoddhāra. Von Rospatt, in a chapter considering jīrṇoddhāra with regard to 
the Svayambhū caitya of Kathmandu, notes that texts, both across time and also across the 
Buddhist and Hindu traditions present similar instruction on jīrṇoddhāra, with distinctions 
necessitated by differences of deity and associated mantra. Tom looks at jīrṇoddhāra in the 
context of the case of the Chovvallur Śiva temple in Kerala, which in 1997–​2001 under­
went the removal and replacement process using the instructions of the fifteenth-​century 
Tantrasamuccaya. Czerniak-​Drożdżowicz examines jīrṇoddhāra in Pāñcarātra sources. 
Sarma observes the connections between the textual record and the continued practice of 
jīrṇoddhāra in Kerala in the modern period. Colas considers the prescriptions for the man­
agement of the man-​made icon as taught in the Vimānārcanakalpa.
	17.	 Piṅgalāmata 12.1ab and 12.2–​3:
piṅgalovāca

--- PAGE 577 ---
552      Libbie Mills
 
jīrṇaśabdaprayukte ’ta uddhāraḥ kriyate katham | 12.1ab
śrībhairava uvāca
jīrṇājīrṇas tu yaḥ śabdaḥ sa piṇḍe cātmano na hi |
uddhāraḥ sthūlajīrṇasya yadvat kecin mriyanti ca || 12.2
mṛte kriyāvihīnas tu yathā loke ca saṃsthitaḥ |
tathātrāpi ca liṅgasya dṛkśūnyā āgamakriyā || 12.3
1a prayukte] B; prayuje A 3b saṃsthitaḥ] B; saṃsthitāḥ A
	18.	 Mohacūrottara 5.349:
jīrṇādyaṃ pūjitaṃ hanti nihanti tad apūjitam |
tasmāt tad uddharel liṅgaṃ śāstravid vidhipūrvakam ||
	19.	 The term liṅga, in verse 5, refers to nonanthropomorphic images, and in verse 6 pratimā 
indicates an anthropomorphic image, while vyaktāvyakta indicates an image that is half and half.
	20.	 Piṅgalāmata 12.4–​8b:
dagdhaṃ śīrṇaṃ kriyāhīnaṃ vyaṅgaṃ garbhānvitaṃ kṛśam |
hīnamānātirekaṃ ca sthūlaṃ vakraṃ ca dūṣitam || 12.4
sphuṭitaṃ khaṇḍitaṃ caiva karālaṃ cātibhīṣaṇam |
liṅgaṃ vā piṇḍikā vātha yad duṣṭaṃ tat samuddharet || 12.5
pratimānāṃ tathaiveha vyaktāvyaktaṃ tathaiva ca |
karṇanāsāṅgulair hīnā vyaṅgapūrvais tathoddhṛtāḥ || 12.6
tyājyās tās tu varārohe śrīsukhāṅge vināsikāḥ |
taddeśavāsisarveṣāṃ sthāpakakartṛśilpinām || 12.7
mahaddoṣavikāraṃ syāt tasmād etāḥ samuddharet | 12.8ab
6d vyaṅgapūrvais] A; vyaṅgaṃ pūrvas B • tathoddhṛtāḥ] em.; tathoddhṛtā AB
7b vināśikāḥ] B; vināsikā A
	21.	 Piṅgalāmata 12.15b–​16b:
pāśayed dhemarajjunā |
vṛṣaskandhaṃ nayet paścāj janaiḥ sārdhaṃ ca deśikaḥ || 12.15bcd
śivam astv iti vaktavyam uddhāravidhiś coditaḥ | 12.16ab
16b uddhāravidhiś] em.; uddhāravidhi B; uddhāryavidhi A
	22.	 Piṅgalāmata 12.16c–​17:
nītvā tu dakṣiṇabhāge nagare vātha grāmake || 12.16cd
kheṭake vā pure caiva jale śailaṃ vinikṣipet |
lauham āvartya saṃsthāpyaṃ dārujaṃ nirdahet tu tat || 12.17
	23.	 Piṅgalāmata 12.23c–​32b:
prāsādaś ca yadā jīrṇaḥ uddhāraḥ kriyate tadā || 12.23cd
tadgataṃ caiva mantraṃ ca tattvavrātam aśeṣakam |
khaḍge caiva susaṃkrāmya pūjayen nityam eva hi || 12.24
liṅgasya dakṣiṇe sthāpya homaṃ kṛtvā sahasrakam |
liṅgasyordhve kṛtaṃ yantraṃ kāṣṭhapaṭṭāntaraṃ śubhaṃ || 12.25
uddhāro ‘sya śanaiḥ prājña iṣṭakāṃ cāvatārayet |
punas tena pramāṇena rūpeṇaiva tu tādṛśam || 12.26

--- PAGE 578 ---
The Tantric Temple      553
 
śailaṃ ca kartavyam iṣṭakaṃ ceṣṭakena tu |
kāṣṭhe ca mṛnmaye vāpi pakveṣṭaṃ śailajaṃ kuru || 12.27
pūrvahīnottamaṃ kāryaṃ hīnaṃ naivottame purā |
uttamaṃ śailajaṃ jñeyaṃ madhyaṃ pakveṣṭajaṃ priye || 12.28
kāṣṭhārabdhaṃ bhavet kanyaṃ mṛnbhavo ‘tīva kanyasam |
mṛdā śataguṇaṃ dāru tasmād aiṣṭaṃ tu lakṣadhā || 12.29
pakveṣṭhāc chailajaṃ puṇyaṃ koṭikoṭiguṇādhikam |
samāpte dehasaṃyoge khaḍgād utkīlya kārayet || 12.30
pūrvajena vidhānena pratiṣṭhā samudāpikā |
kartavyā tu varārohe grahalūlaniveśanam || 12.31
maulikaṃ phalam āpnoti jīrṇoddhāre kṛte sphuṭam | 12.32ab
23d uddhāraḥ] A; uddhāraṃ B 24b hi] A; hiḥ B 28d madhyaṃ] B; madhye A
31b samudāpikā] B; samudāpikāḥ A
References
Primary Sources
Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya of Vāgbhaṭa, with the commentaries of Aruṇadatta and Hemādri. 1982. Aṇṇā 
Moreśvara Kuṇṭe, Kṛṣṇa Rāmacandra Śāstrī Navare, and Hariśāstrī Sadāśiva Parāḍakara. 
Vārāṇasī: Caukhambā Oriyaṇṭāliyā.
Kāmika. 1975, 1988. Edition of Pūrvabhāga and Uttarabhāga. Published by C. Swaminatha 
Gurukkal. Madras: South Indian Archaka Association.
Piṅgalāmata, manuscripts. “A” British Library OR 2279. Newari on palm-​leaf, dated Nepal 
saṃvat 313 (1193 C.E.), in reign of Śrīlakṣmīkāmadeva. 7 lines to a side. “B” National Archive of 
Kathmandu (NAK) 3.376. Nepal-​German Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP) reel 
number A42/​2. Palm-​leaf, 42.5x6cm. 125 folios. Newari. 7 lines to a side. Dated Nepal saṃvat 294 
(1173/​74 C.E.), in reign of Rudradeva. “C” NAK 5-​1929. NGMPP reel number A166/​65. Material 
not specified, 35x15.5cm. 70 folios. Devanāgarī. 13 lines to a side.] C NAK 5-​1929. NGMPP reel 
number A166/​65. Material not specified, 35x15.5cm.70 folios. Devanāgarī. 13 lines to a side.
Bṛhatkālottara, manuscripts: “H” NAK 4.131. NGMPP reel number A43/​1. Palm-​leaf, 
29.5x5.5cm. 324 folios. 5 lines to a side. Pāla script. Dated 1169 C.E. “J” NAK 5.778vi. NGMPP 
reel number A42/​8. Palm-​leaf, 31.5x5cm. 333 folios. 6 lines to a side. Newari. Dated saṃvat 
738 (1618/​19 C.E.), rule of Jyotirmalla. NAK 5.4632. NGMPP reel number B118/​7. Paper, 
31.5x12.5cm. 308 folios. 9 lines to a page. Devanāgarī.
Bṛhatsaṃhitā. 1968. Bṛhatsaṃhitā of Varāhamihira with the commentary of Bhaṭṭotpala. 
Edited by Avadha Vihārī Tripāṭhī. Varanasi: Varanaseya Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya.
Mohacūrottara, manuscripts. n.d. NAK 1.1633. NGMPP reel number B26/​29. Palm-​leaf, 
30x4cm, 101 folios. 3 to 4 lines to a side. 1125 C.E. See colophon below. NAK 5.1977. NGMPP 
reel number A182/​2. Paper, 32x12.5cm, 47 folios. Devanāgarī. 9 lines to a side.
Vimānārcanakalpa. 1926. Śrīprayāgadāsajī (Mahant at Śeṣācala [=​ Tirupati] [patron of the edi­
tion], Va. Raghunāthacakravarti Bhaṭṭācārya and Śrīsetumādhavācārya, [Tirupati].
Suprabheda. 1931. Edition of the Devakottai Series, Devakottai: śivāgama siddhānta paripalana 
saṅgham.
Somaśambhupaddhati. 1963, 1968, 1977, 1998. Hélène Brunner-​Lachaux, ed. and trans. 
Somaśambhupaddhati. Publications de l’Institut Français d’Indologie No. 25. Pondicherry 
Institut Français de Pondichéry.

--- PAGE 579 ---
554      Libbie Mills
 
Secondary Sources
Colas, Gérard. 1996. Viṣṇu, ses images et ses feux. La métamorphose du lieu chez les vaikhānasa. 
Paris: Presses de l’École française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Colas, Gérard. 2019. “Icons, Troubled and Troubling: Some Observations from the 
Vimānārcanakalpa.” Cracow Indological Studies 21, no. 1: 41–​68.
Czerniak-​Drożdżowicz, Marzenna. 2014. “When Gods Get Broken—​The Theory and Practice 
of the Jīrṇoddhāra and Navīkaraṇa in the Pāñcarātra Sources.” Cracow Indological Studies 
16: 51–​86.
Czerniak-​Drożdżowicz, Marzenna. 2017. “At the Crossroads of Art and Religion: Image 
Consecration in the Pāncarātrika Sources.” In Consecration Rituals in South Asia, edited by 
István Keul, 171–​97. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Dębicka-​Borek, Ewa. 2015. “To Borrow or Not to Borrow? Some Remarks on 
Vaibhavīyanarasiṃhakalpa of Sātvatasaṃhitā.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 43, no. 4/​5: 
581–​600.
Einoo, Shingo, and Jun Takashima. 2005. From Material to Deity: Indian Rituals of Consecration 
New Delhi: Manohar.
Fergusson, James. 1899. History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. London: Murray.
Goodall, Dominic. 2019. “Damanotsava: On Love in Spring, on What Jñānaśambhu Wrote, 
and on the Spread of Public Festivals into the Mantramārga.” In Tantric Communities in 
Context, edited by Mirnig, Nina, Vincent Eltschinger, and Marion Rastelli, 385–​423. Vienna: 
Austrian Academy of Sciences Press.
Hardy, Adam. 2007. The Temple Architecture of India. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Jouveau-​Dubreuil, Gabriel. 1914. Archéologie du sud de l’Inde, vol. 1 Architecture. Paris: Librairie 
Paul Geuthner.
Keul, István, ed. 2017. Consecration Rituals in South Asia. Leiden, The Netherlands. Brill.
Matsubara, Mitsunori. 1994. Pāñcarātra saṃhitās & early Vaiṣṇava theology, with a Translation 
and Critical Notes from Chapters on Theology in the Ahirbudhnya samhita. 1st ed. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Meister, Michael W., and Madhusudan A. Dhaky. 1983. Encyclopaedia of Indian Temple 
Architecture. New Delhi: American Institute of Indian Studies.
Mills, Libbie. 2019. Temple Design in Six Early Śaiva Scriptures: A critical Edition and 
Translation of the prāsādalakṣaṇa Portions of the Bṛhatkālottara; the Devyāmata; the 
Kiraṇa; the Mohacūrottara; the Mayasaṃgraha; and the Piṅgalāmata. IFP/​École Française 
d’Extrême-​Orient. Collection Indologie 138.
Mills, 
Libbie, 
and 
Jamie 
S. 
Scott. 
Forthcoming. 
“A 
Drop 
Falls 
from 
the 
Sky: 
Nāgara 
Architectural 
Metre 
and 
Three 
Ontario 
Hindu 
Temples.” 
The Journal of the Society for the Study of Architecture in Canada.
Orr, 
Leslie 
C. 
2019. 
“Biographies 
of 
South 
Indian 
Temple 
Inscriptions.” 
South Asian Studies (Society for South Asian Studies) 35, no. 2: 193–​205.
Raz, Ram. 1834. Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus. London: Published for the Royal Asiatic 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland, by John William Parker.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2019. “How public was Śaivism?” In Tantric Communities in Context, edited 
by Mirnig, Nina, Vincent Eltschinger, and Marion Rastelli, 1–​46. Vienna: Austrian Academy 
of Sciences Press.
Sarma, S. A. S. 2017. “ ‘Re-​Installation’ of Idols Replacing Damaged Ones, with Special 
Reference to the Ritual Literature of Kerala.” In Consecration Rituals in South Asia, edited by 
István Keul, 223–​40. Leiden, Netherlands. Brill.

--- PAGE 580 ---
The Tantric Temple      555
 
Sarma, S. A. S. 2019. “Mātṛtantra Texts of South India with Special Reference to the Worship 
of Rurujit in Kerala and to Three Different Communities Associated with this Worship.” In 
Tantric Communities in Context, edited by Nina Mirnig, Vincent Eltschinger, and Marion 
Rastelli, 539–​69. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press.
Ślączka, Anna A. 2017. “The Ratnanyāsa (Placing of Gems) Ritual in the Devyāmata, an Early 
Śaiva Pratiṣṭhātantra.” In Consecration Rituals in South Asia, edited by Keul, István, 85–​112. 
Leiden, The Netherlands. Brill.
Tom, B. 2013. “Jīrnoddharana: The Hindu Philosophy of Conservation.” In Asian Heritage 
Management: Contexts, Concerns, and Prospects, edited by K. D. Silva and N. K. Chagain, 
35–​49. London: Routledge.
von Rospatt, Alexander. 2013. “Buddhist Strategies of Keeping Its Sacred Images and Shrines 
Alive: The Example of Svayambhu-​caitya of Kathmandu.” In Art of Merit: Studies in Buddhist 
Art and its Conservation, edited by David Park, Kuenga Wangmo, and Sharon Cather, 275–​
85. London: Courtauld Institute of Art.

--- PAGE 581 ---


--- PAGE 582 ---
Chapter 25
MANDALAS and Landscape 
in Maritime Asia
Peter Sharrock
Outside India, Buddhist tantra texts and the rituals that evolved from them opened 
new and influential positions to esoteric Buddhists in the courts along the southern 
coast of Asia. Recent archaeological and iconographic evidence points to a direct appli­
cation of Buddhist mandalas in the landscape in ways that were first envisaged in tan­
tric texts but remained mostly at some distance from the royal courts. In the 8th–​11th 
centuries under the Pāla dynasty, when feudalism took on new, decentralized forms as 
populations dispersed, the great monasteries of the Ganges Valley were devising elabo­
rate mandalas of the supramundane sphere of buddhas as key soteriological aids to ac­
celerated access to buddhahood. The mandalas eventually included powerful and fierce 
Heruka forms of the supreme buddhas in the Vajrayāna (“thunderbolt vehicle”), yet the 
monastery leaders did not seize on the similarities of these mandalic structures to en­
gage with the evolving mundane feudal dependencies of the political systems Davidson 
calls “sāmanta feudalism” (2002: 137).1 Their ritual technologies for supernatural effects 
were not put at the service of their royal patrons at the intersection of the religious and 
political domains, as they were by the politically engaged contemporary Śaivas.
But outside the Indian subcontinent, in Sri Lanka, Śrīvijaya, Java, China, Korea, 
and Japan, the early “thunderbolt” technologies were molded into varied platforms of 
“state protection” Buddhism, anchored in two major mandalas that were promoted 
by the widely traveled esoteric Buddhist patriarchs Vajrabodhi from Kāñcīpuram and 
Amoghavajra from Samarkand and their Chinese, Javanese, and Japanese disciples. 
By the 12th century, when the Ganges Valley monasteries faced extinction by Islamic 
armies, the Buddhist masters in the courts of maritime Asia fully adapted the insights of 
the mature Indian monastic vehicle to the language and ritual of political imperialism, 
developing a symbiotic relationship with royal power, as well as with Śaivism.
Sanderson’s seminal 2009 study “The Śaiva Age” traces the steady absorption (and 
direct lifting) of Śaiva and Śākta texts into the esoteric Buddhist Yoginītantras. He

--- PAGE 583 ---
558      Peter Sharrock
 
detects the transfers primarily from Śaiva texts already embedded in Brahmanical 
court rituals:
now, this co-​existence of Buddhism and Śaivism under royal patronage was surely 
facilitated by the fact that the form of Buddhism adopted and developed was one 
that had equipped itself . . . with a repertoire of Tantric ceremonies that paralleled 
that of the Śaivas and indeed had modelled itself upon it, offering initiation by in­
troduction before a Maṇḍala in which the central deity of the cult and its retinue 
of divine emanations . . . through the use of Mantras, Mudrās, visualization, and 
fire-​sacrifice (homaḥ); and this was presented not only as a new and more powerful 
means of attaining Buddha-​hood but also, as in the Śaiva case, as enabling the pro­
duction of supernatural effects (siddhiḥ) such as the averting of danger (śāntiḥ), 
the harming of enemies (abhicāraḥ), and the control of the rain (varṣāpaṇam and 
ativṛṣṭidhāraṇam). . . . The latter is particularly important from the point of view of 
Buddhism’s relations with its royal patrons, since such rituals enabled it to match 
the Śaivas by promising kings more tangible benefits than the mere accumulation of 
merit through the support of the Buddha, his teaching, and the Saṅgha.
(Sanderson 2009: 124)
The supernatural powers embedded in mandalas were deployed for leveraging 
intrastate legitimization after regime change as well as interstate confrontations. The 
supramundane hierarchy captured in the mandala proffered weaponized defense 
mechanisms for interstate struggles, which found a more responsive audience outside 
the subcontinent and notably in the conflicts between the neighboring Khmer and Cam 
domains in the 12th century, between China and Java in the 13th century, as well as be­
tween Java and Śrīvijaya in the 13th and 14th centuries. The Buddhist strategists of the 
Pāla dynasty conveyed in texts an aspiration to overlay a Heruka mandala on Śaiva holy 
sites so as to implement a local form of “state protection Buddhism” that would rival the 
hold of Śaivism over the courts, but it only materialized outside India.2
This article brings together the patches of evidence scattered over the wide and varied 
geography of the southern seas to trace this royal rebirth of the Herukas in maritime 
Asia. It attempts to describe the final seaward journey of the history of fierce Buddhist 
deities that Rob Linrothe (1999) traced across the subcontinent. He concluded with 
these notable remarks on the 8-​headed, 16-​armed Heruka “Hevajra”:
if there was a Hevajra cult, it seems to have thrived in Southeast Asia. . . . Seemingly 
removed from his yogic and monastic origins, Hevajra was utilized in the royal cult, 
not as in the Ming court, to improve relations with Tibet, but as part of an attempt at 
local legitimization. . . . It appears that despite the earlier origin of the texts and ideas 
behind the Hevajra imagery, they were not influential enough to generate a lasting 
impact until the 11th or 12th century. By that time, however, the ideas and images 
quickly flowed in eastern, southern and northern directions. Islam alone proved an 
impenetrable barrier.
(Linrothe: 274)

--- PAGE 584 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      559
 
In the 11th and 12th centuries, it is possible to discern a long-​term eclectic strategy 
by Khmer Buddhists to bring the established state Śaivism under a parasol of eso­
teric Buddhism—​perhaps on the model defined in the tantras relating to the Herukas 
Hevajra and Cakrasaṃvara, who then first began to figure in Khmer temple iconog­
raphy. In the late 12th century King Jayavarman VII, probably Angkor’s greatest king, 
underpinned this drive for the broader population with a tantric Buddhist triad 
headed by Bhaiṣajyaguru, Master of Medical Remedies, who presided over the world’s 
first state health system in an empire-​wide network of 102 hospitals that were free for 
all. His strategy succeeded in turning the Khmer state definitively to Buddhism. Acri 
observes that parallel Buddhist politico-​religious strategies—​though without the med­
ical innovations—​thrived in their localized adaptations in Java and Sumatra until the 
15th century (Acri 2016: 8).
Traces of such royal Heruka cults in the states of the southern seas have been detected 
for a century, but their major importance to rulers and the ways they were deployed 
is only now emerging more clearly. Few texts have survived in the tropics, so the his­
torical data is much thinner than in China, Korea, and Japan, but some recent icon 
recoveries and close studies of temple ruins have brought some clarity for example to 
a 12th-​century dispute between the Khmer empire and neighboring Campā, as well 
as to interstate confrontations some decades later on the islands of Java and Sumatra.3 
They furnish indications that the Buddhists in the south attempted to replicate the 
system of Vidyāpīṭha Śaivism, whereby Śaiva masters drew authority and supernatural 
powers to support kings from potent, networked holy pilgrimage sites. This is sketched 
in words as an aspirational strategy in two Yoginītantras, where Buddhist Bhairavas or 
Herukas are superimposed on the Śaiva Vidyāpīṭhas in a series of mandalic semicircles 
descending from Mount Kailāsa . (The aim was to create and sustain supramundane 
fields of merit over Buddhist royal domains. The compilers of the Hevajratantra and the 
Saṃvarodayatantra include the maritime polity Suvarṇadvīpa (“Golden Isle,” probably 
Sumatra) in the outer mandalic circle.4
The Hevajra System in Maritime Asia
J. J. Boeles (1966: 26) wrote an influential analysis of two Khmer Yoginī bronzes 
from Thailand and, noting Grünwedel’s (1900: 63) work on Kublai Khan’s Hevajra 
abhiṣeka, joined earlier scholars who pointed to signs of a significant royal role for the 
Hevajratantra beyond the subcontinent: “the cult of Hevajra, though its most impor­
tant rites were secret, was by no means confined to an obscure sect. It must at one time 
have been of great importance throughout the Far East. In 1261 the great Khublai Khan, 
the ruler of most of Asia and part of Europe, was consecrated as Hevajra by means 
of abhiṣeka rites exactly like those expounded in the Hevajrasekaprakriyā [ceremony 
manual]” (see Finot 1934). Heruka icons played a role on both sides of a long dispute 
over Vijaya, a new Cam deep water port and a new capital that the Cams and Khmers

--- PAGE 585 ---
560      Peter Sharrock
 
collaborated in building so both their economies would benefit from the burgeoning 
Song dynasty maritime trade. A Cam prince named Vidyānandana was brought to 
the Khmer court by King Jayavarman VII, who had won his own spurs fighting along­
side a Cam king in Campā for several years in his early life. The martial prowess of 
Vidyānandana emerged when he put down the most serious Khmer insurrection 
against Jayavarman soon after the king seized power in 1182 CE. He was then chosen 
to lead a Khmer army to recover control of the Vijaya port, where a faction opposed 
the Khmer presence. He successfully fought to install a Khmer prince on the Vijaya 
throne and took up a vassal king position further south. When Cam rebels overthrew 
the Khmer prince within a year, Vidyānandana came up to end the rebellion but then 
broke with his patron in Angkor and proclaimed himself King Sūryavarman of Vijaya 
and Pāṇḍuraṅga.5 After defeating another Khmer force sent against him, he erected a 
Buddhist temple to Heruka in 1194 CE at the major Cam Śaiva mountain temple com­
plex of Mỹ Sơn. The Heruka icon is lost, but the 3 × 3 m brick base of his “mansion” 
survives in Mỹ Sơn along with the stela numbered C. 92B by French epigraphy that 
recounts his life. His Heruka jinābhiṣekaḥ presumably transmitted a message of defi­
ance and perhaps respect to Jayavarman in Angkor.
Heruka in the Bayon
Vidyānandana’s defiance was eventually overcome, and he was forced into exile by a 
third Khmer army.6 With Campā again closely aligned with Angkor, Jayavarman raised 
his own 3.6 m Heruka in a sanctuary at the main eastern entrance to the Bayon, ac­
cording to experts now working on the monument. Wear marks from the Heruka’s large 
pedestal have been identified on the sandstone floor. Such findings lend support to a 
claim by Bautze-​Picron that “Hevajra is the protector the State in Cambodia and per­
haps also Campā whereas it is Mahākāla who assumes this role in the Yuan Empire” 
(Bautze-​Picron 2014: 107). After discussing the erection of Heruka statues in war in this 
case, Ācārya Malcolm Smith, at a conference in 2018 on tantra at the Victoria and Albert 
Museum in London, said similar confrontations involving a mix of sacred consecra­
tion and political expediency are known in Tibetan history, when the message was that 
both parties had attained participation in the supreme Heruka/​Vajrasattva state of being 
that was way beyond violence, so this should be reflected in the microcosm between the 
earthly rivals. War often followed, however. Jayavarman’s response was to send a third 
Khmer army over the mountains to Vijaya, which defeated Vidyānandana in 1203 and 
drove him into exile. Raising Heruka in the Bayon could then have been the ceremonial 
high point of Jayavarman’s indrābhiśeka, or second coronation, the Indic consecration 
that confers cakravartin status following a foreign acquisition.7
Reconstructing the great Heruka of the Bayon that countered that in Vidyānandana’s 
Mỹ Sơn mansion has taken almost a century. Some of the difficulty of uncovering the 
story of the statue, which must have been known to all Angkorians in the 13th century,

--- PAGE 586 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      561
 
lies in the absence of a Bayon dedication stela, which may have identified the original 
pantheon of the builder. Plus, the large stone Hevajra was dismembered and some of the 
parts dumped in the forest outside the city. With the scattered pieces mostly reunited, 
Cunin produced a computer simulation of the whole statue as it was erected at the Bayon 
main entrance (fig. 25.1).8
This huge stone Heruka erected in a prominent exoteric position in the state temple 
faced east across the mountains to Mỹ Sơn and Vijaya, where Vidyānanda had raised his 
Heruka. Ācārya Smith took the view that only people initiated into the Heruka would 
thenceforth be allowed to pass into the temple. He suggested a samaya or pledge cere­
mony with water would be required. This could be the explanation long sought by art 
historians for why so many bronze conch-​holders, embossed with the Hevajra mandala 
of the deity in a circle of eight Yoginīs, were discovered in Angkor and reached museum 
collections around the world. At least a dozen are in the material record, and they would 
have more than supplied the samaya needs of the citizens residing around the temples 
Jayavarman built in Angkor (Sharrock 2009: 112).
The bust (see fig. 25.2) was sold to the New York Metropolitan Museum in 1937, and 
the legs, arms, and broken hands were left in the forest. The feet were finally recovered 
from a pond in front of the temple and later identified by Cunin.
Later in the 13th century, the Yuan Emperor Kublai Khan of China (Willemen 
[1983] 2004: 16) and the East Javanese King Kṛtanagara both underwent Heruka 
consecrations ahead of Kublai’s eventually unsuccessful seaborne invasion of Java. A 
FIGURE 25.1.  Simulation of the archaeological reconstruction of the Hevajra (DCA.751) and 
Lokeśvara (Ka.1695) statues erected in adjacent sanctuaries at the main eastern entrance to the 
Bayon temple. The image combines Cunin’s computer restitution of the icon with a 3D scan by 
photogrammetry of the floors of the towers.
Courtesy of Olivier Cunin

--- PAGE 587 ---
562      Peter Sharrock
 
pattern thus emerges in interstate confrontations in which supramundane esoteric 
Buddhist mandalas were invoked to underpin imperial strategies in the mundane 
sphere. I will argue that resurgent Khmer Buddhists of the 11th and 12th centuries cast 
a ritual mantle over the temple landscape that had established a Śaiva state over the 
preceding three centuries, and that this would contribute to a definitive Khmer turn 
to Buddhism. The supernatural powers conceived as embedded in mandalas were 
deployed for leveraging intrastate legitimization after regime change as well as in inter­
state confrontations. The supramundane hierarchy captured in the mandalas proffered 
weaponized defense mechanisms for interstate struggles, and such strategies found 
a more responsive audience outside the subcontinent, where the Buddhists were be­
coming gradually more isolated from the courts and the people. But these mechanisms 
were adopted outside India for direct application in realpolitik—​as may be discerned 
in the conflicts between the neighboring Khmer and Cam domains in the 12th century, 
between China and Java in the 13th century, and between Java and Śrīvijaya in the 13th 
and 14th centuries.
FIGURE25.2.  Broken bust of Hevajra in Metropolitan Museum of Art, Khmer Gallery, New York.
(Photo by Peter Sharrock)

--- PAGE 588 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      563
 
Although these royal invocations of supernatural power were based on metaphysics 
rather than physics, a modern reader may find some value in comparing them with 
the 20th-​century Cold War nuclear standoff between the United States and the Soviet 
Union. Bade (2016: 155) glosses the Kublai-​Kṛtanagara confrontation in these terms: “as 
a technique for obtaining power and control over the world, Tantric Buddhism—​and 
especially its rituals—​came to occupy the same place in 13th and 14th century Asian 
societies that science and technology occupies in our own time. The advocates of sci­
entific method, like the advocates of Tantric Buddhism, have claimed that this method 
alone leads to knowledge and that knowledge is power.” The power of the new technology 
is touched on in the fifth opening line in the Chinese version of the Hevajratantra: “there 
is great power in this learning by which one is capable of various performances, viz. 
subjugating, petrifying, or driving away the army of others” (Willemen [1983] 2004: 35). 
Though a far cry from what is known of early Buddhism and Śākyamuni’s 5th-​century 
BCE call in Magadha for withdrawal from normal family life into a saṅgha focused on 
meditation and study, both contexts shared a claim to breakthrough mechanisms to at­
tain a new, applicable, and efficacious form of knowledge. The later esoteric Buddhist 
state protection mechanisms may seem to run counter to the spirit of Emperor Aśoka’s 
standing down his army after the brutal 261 BCE battle for Kaliṅga, its earth plowed 
with salt, and then governing the Mauryan state through personalized Buddhist edicts, 
administered by civilian envoys (Thapar 1961: 62). But Aśoka’s remarkable accomplish­
ment barely survived his reign, and the saṅgha leaders were soon faced with the return 
of conquering Buddhist kṣatriyas.
The propagation of the mandala knowledge is recorded in the 7th century in the 
journeys of learned and enterprising monks over the land silk routes. It expands in 
the 8th century from the monasteries and courts of south India and Sri Lanka to Java, 
Śrīvijaya, and then Tang China (with disciples later moving to Korea and Japan). The 
texts of the Yogatantras and the Womb-​realm and Vajra-​realm mandalas they defined 
would soon be impacting the design of impressive and unprecedented ceremonial 
centers being built by a series of expanding rice empires in the south, and were captured 
in Chinese translations, conserved in state archives, and reflected in state rituals.9
Sanderson (2009: 125) notes that the “monarch is not mentioned in the 
treatments of initiation given in the Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi [MVS] and 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha [STTS], the two great Tantras that were translated into 
Chinese in the early eighth century and formed the basis of the Way of Mantras there 
and in the Japanese Shingon and Tendai sects.” The focus was on soteriology for the 
monastic community. Yet Amoghavajra (Chinese name Bukong), the renowned trans­
lator monk from Sogdiana, who perhaps met his preceptor Vajrabodhi (Chinese name 
Jin’gangzhi) at a young age in Java (Abé 1999: 222–​223; Sundberg, Jeffrey, and Rolf 
Giebel 2011: 30) became deeply involved in imperial state protection through esoteric 
ritual. Amoghavajra’s official biography shows him being called on to resolve crises 
of the Tang emperors—​bringing rain to end droughts, repelling a Tibetan army at the 
border, helping to restore the Tang after the An Lushan rebellion and then consecrating 
Emperor Suzong as cakravartin (Lehnert 2012: 262), and holding extended faith

--- PAGE 589 ---
564      Peter Sharrock
 
propagation ceremonies for thousands of courtiers and army officers.10 Charles Orzech 
(1998: 138) reaches the conclusion that the Buddhists’ “teachings were shaped both by 
their particular religious ideologies and by imperial needs. Chinese Esoteric Buddhism 
in the eighth century was driven by political utility.”
With their entry at court level in maritime Asia, the Buddhists’ teachings in cos­
mology, soteriology, and ritual technology found expression in large royal ceremonial 
centers, the remnants of which form the bulk of the material record that has come down 
to us. In addition, the diaries of traveling Indian, Chinese, and Korean monks open rare, 
illuminating windows into how Buddhist courts and communities along the sea lanes 
were linked into an interactive network.
By the 10th century, images took a tantric turn to represent the fierce protagonist 
deities of the later esoteric Buddhist Yoginītantras, which had developed in Ganges 
Valley monasteries and in Bengal under the Pāla dynasty. By the time the Sena kings 
replaced the Pālas in 1070 CE, resplendent Heruka deities dancing on māra (demons) 
had been erected in monasteries in southern Bengal, Nālandā, Ratnagiri (Odisha), 
and Sarnath. No known inscription, however, links these icons to royal patronage. The 
long infusion of tantric techniques into Buddhist scriptures was manifested in saṃsāra 
terms only in fierce-​eyed deities, carved into monastery walls, with fangs, skull chaplets, 
flourishing vajras (thunderbolt ritual instruments), and grasping khaṭvāṅga (skull 
staffs), like those at Śubhapur (Comilla) and the funerary stūpa at Ratnagiri (Odisha).11 
Sanderson sees the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara as marking the beginning 
of the full appropriation of Vidyāpīṭha Śaivism into the Yoginītantras.12
First, [the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara] introduces or brings 
to the fore the cult of the deity Heruka with an iconography inspired by that of 
the Bhairavas of the Vidyāpīṭha with their accoutrements and attributes of the 
cremation-​ground dwelling Kāpālika Śaiva ascetic. According to the visualization 
given by Ānandagarbha he has four faces and eight arms, emerging as the transfor­
mation of a dark blue flaming Vajra, itself a transformation of a dark blue syllable 
HRĪḤ. The central face is fierce (raudram), those to its right and left expressive 
of delusion and erotic passion, and that behind open-​mouthed to devour. In his 
two uppermost hands he holds the freshly flayed skin of Bhairava over his back, in 
the two below a bow and arrows, in the third right in descent he shakes a blazing 
three-​pronged Vajra, and in the fourth a skull-​bowl filled with human blood 
(mahāraktam). In the third left in descent he brandishes the Kāpālika’s skull-​staff 
(khaṭvāṅgaḥ), topped with a three-​pronged Vajra and adorned with bells, and in 
the fourth a skull-​bowl filled with human flesh (mahāmāṃsam).
(Sanderson 2009: 148)
The fierce emanations of the supreme buddhas sharing features with tantric Śaiva-​Śākta 
deities signaled the incorporation into the monastic setting of a range of intense, se­
cret rituals, which included antinomian actions, taboo substances, and sexual yoga. 
Sanderson claims the first monks who specialized in the new rituals had already ac­
quired expertise and practice as Śaiva initiands.

--- PAGE 590 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      565
 
The Khmer Empire
The Yogatantras reached the Khmer domains in the 10th century when the liberal King 
Rājendravarman II returned the capital to Yaśodharapura (Angkor) from Koh Ker. 
This Śaiva monarch permitted a Buddhist revival through his polymath minister-​
general-​architect Kavīndrārimathana, who in c. 953 CE built the Bat Cuṃ shrine at the 
heart of the new city on the eastern edge of Angkor and dedicated it to the Buddha, 
Vajrapāṇi, and Divyadevī (Prajñāpāramitā). Thereafter Rājendravarman’s son and suc­
cessor, the Buddhist King Jayavarman V, financed a string of āśramas for the study of 
the root Yogatantra STTS and Śākyamitra’s learned 9th-​century ṭīkā (commentary). 
Jayavarman’s ācārya (preceptor) Kīrtipaṇḍita had them brought to Angkor after “having 
searched in a foreign kingdom.”13 Jayavarman’s Takeo state temple, however, was dedi­
cated to Śiva, in line with the Brahmanical tradition from the founding of the state in 
802 CE. Religious tolerance and eclecticism seem to have come easily to the Khmers (see 
Sanderson 2004: 233, 435).
Phimai
The closing decades of the 11th century saw religious and political regime change in the 
Khmer domains. The esoteric Buddhist Mahīdharapura dynasty seized power, guided 
by the Śaiva strategist and rājaguru Śrī Divākarapaṇḍita (fig. 25.3), who would crown 
three kings (two Buddhist, one Vaiṣṇava). This religious pivot brought a northern vassal 
ruler to the throne as King Jayavarman VI in 1080 CE (Briggs [1951] 1999: 188). Within a 
century the dynasty would make Angkor one of the largest cities outside China.
In Phimai, Divākarapaṇḍita would have been steeped in both Vidyāpīṭha Śaivism as 
well as Yoginītantra strategies developed in the monasteries of 10th-​ and 11th-​century 
Pāla-​Sena Bengal and Bihar and adopted in the Buddhist revival in Tibet. Davidson 
(2005: 41) sees this in Tibet as a Buddhist counterstrategy that consisted in overlaying 
the Cakrasaṃvara mandala on the established 108 Śaiva Vidyāpīṭha holy sites in India. 
He published a hand-​drawn map titled “Sites of Indian Buddhist Tantric Activity 10th–​
11th Centuries” in which the Heruka emitted by the supreme Buddha Vajrasattva/​
Vajradhara held the center of the mandala on Mount Kailaśa above three concentric and 
roughly semicircular rings of pīṭhas (sacred sites) with eight Bhairavas each (fig. 25.4): 
“adapted from a story articulated in such yoga-​tantra works as the Sarvatathāgata-​
tattvasaṁgraha, Cakrasaṃvara proponents maintained that the eternal Buddha 
Vajradhara emanated a form, Heruka, to control Maheśvara (Śiva) and his twenty-​
four Bhairavas, along with their consorts. Maheśvara was eventually humiliated and 
destroyed, and Heruka took his place on top of Mount Sumeru, with the 24 Bhairavas 
controlling the 24 pilgrimage sites of India” (Davidson 2005: 241). This Buddhist

--- PAGE 591 ---
566      Peter Sharrock
 
aspirational model for a new sacred geography for absorbing and eventually dominating 
the subcontinent’s long-​implanted Śaiva holy pilgrimage sites was propagated through 
the widely distributed Hevajratantra itself, which lists the 24 targeted sites in the man­
dala (I.vii 13–​16):
Uḍḍiyāna*
Mālava*
Munmuni
Kulatā*
Harikela
Kaliṅga
Pretapuri*
Jālandhara* Sindhu*
Kāruṇyapāṭaka
Arbuda*
Lampāka
Suvarṇadvīpa* Gṛhadevatā*
Paurṇagiri*
Nagara
Devīkoṭa*
Godāvarī*
Kāñcika*
Kokaṇa
Kāmarūpa*
Karmārapāṭaka
Himādri
Saurāṣṭra*
The sites with asterisks are also named in the Saṃvarodayatantra (Tsuda 1974: 252).
FIGURE 25.3.  Presumed portrait of rāja-​hotā Śrī Divākarapaṇḍita, architect of the Mahīdharapura 
dynasty, being carried by Śaiva ascetics in the military parade of Sūryavarman II, the third king he 
crowned, on the southern bas-​relief of Angkor Wat. This was the only Khmer guru in history to be 
given the title Dhuli Jeng (“dust of the feet” [of the god]), normally reserved for kings.
(Photo by Peter Sharrock)

--- PAGE 592 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      567
 
FIGURE 25.4.  Sites of Indian Buddhist Tantric Activity 10th–​11th Centuries. Source: Davidson 
(2005: 39).
(Map courtesy of Ronald Davidson and Columbia University Press)

--- PAGE 593 ---
568      Peter Sharrock
 
Interestingly, the pīṭhas targeted by the tantric masters in both of these texts include, 
in the outer ring, Suvarṇadvīpa (“Golden Isle,” for Sumatra or the adjacent Thai/​Malay 
peninsula). “Because of its interest in sacred geography, some Indian masters of the 
Cakrasaṃvara were well aware that sacred sites existed outside India as well as inside 
it, and the list includes Suvarṇadvīpa, a medieval kingdom variously located in Burma 
[probably Suvarṇabhūmi, ‘land of gold’] or Indonesia” (Davidson 2005: 241).14
In the burgeoning Khmer empire of the late 11th century, Divākarapaṇḍita was 
the leading religious advisor (rājaguru) to a Buddhist usurper, who became King 
Jayavarman VI, the founder of the Mahīdharapura dynasty that would, within a cen­
tury, take Angkor to its apogee.15 The young brahman would have been instrumental in 
selecting such a Heruka-​mandala concept of alignment with established major religious 
centers as a means of asserting the new dynasty’s support for the long-​embedded Śaiva 
holy sites of the kingdom. Sanderson records, on the basis of inscription K. 194 (A9–​
B17), how the wealth bestowed on Divākarapaṇḍita for the coronation of Sūryavarman 
II was personally borne by the guru to key religious sites in the form of gifts to Śiva from 
the new (Vaiṣṇava) king:
Divākarapaṇḍita . . . is said to have followed this practice as Vraḥ Guru under 
Jayavarman VI (r. 1080–​1107), Dharaṇīndravarman I (r. 1107–​1112) and Sūryavarman 
II (r. 1113–​c. 1150). We are told that after he had performed the royal consecration 
of Sūryavarman II, given him Śaiva initiation, taught him the Śaiva scriptures and 
other branches of learning, and been invited to perform the Koṭihoma and other 
annual brahmanical sacrifices for him, he was given golden palanquins and many 
other valuables so that he could visit various sacred sites around the kingdom and 
give these to the deities installed there. . . . At each of these he had a water-​reservoir 
excavated, founded a hermitage, gave it slaves and villages and made an endowment 
to provide for worship.
(Sanderson 2004: 420)
The iconography of Phimai, constructed in the reign of Jayavarman VI, is truly note­
worthy. The most striking image is a Khmer Heruka on the eastern lintel that appears to 
be an unorthodox, multiheaded, eight-​armed martial representation of Cakrasaṃvara, 
bursting out of a bloodied elephant hide of illusion and trampling crowned māras 
on the elephant’s head. The elephant hide is key to his identification here. In his 2007 
translation of the Śrīcakrasaṃvara-​nāmā-​mahāyoginī-​tantra-​rāja, or Laghusaṃvara, 
David Gray (2007: 36) translates the name Cakrasaṃvara as “the binding of the wheels” 
of kāyavākcitta (body, speech, mind). As the representation of a spiritual embrace of 
the entire human saṃsāra (“wandering through phenomena”), this could have poten­
tial application in the political world, and perhaps in the manner achieved by Guru 
Divākarapaṇḍita. Divakārapaṇḍita’s plan to extend a new sacred Buddhist geography 
across the sacred sites of the empire was first applied with circumspection. Based in 
Phimai, a traditionally Buddhist region in the northwestern wing of the empire, rather 
than in Brahmanical Angkor, the caution of the king and his guru may have reflected

--- PAGE 594 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      569
 
trepidation at the response of the Śaiva landowning establishment. Angkor remained 
under the sway of Śiva in the stately Baphuon pyramidal temple, set beside the palace. 
It would take another century before another esoteric Buddhist king—​Jayavarman 
VII—​would plant Heruka in the center of Angkor within the first Buddhist state temple. 
Yet religious tolerance was the norm in the ancient Khmer domains. It was possible for 
Divākarapaṇḍita, the most eminent Śaiva master of his time, to officiate over the coro­
nation of two Buddhists and one Vaiṣṇava king, and to do this with the traditional 802 
CE Śaiva cakravartin coronation ritual called devarāja.
In an unpublished lecture at a London colloquium Hiram Woodward observed a 
parallel between the stepped Greek cross base of the Bayon in its early phase (1.13), 
recorded by archaeo-​architect Olivier Cunin (see fig. 25.5), and the stepped base of a 
well-​known gilt bronze Hevajra icon in the National Museum of Cambodia (fig. 25.7). 
The Bayon was built first as a set of sanctuaries around a central tower on a raised base 
in the shape of a Greek cross (fig. 25.5). Giant faces as tall as a person are carved as 
addorsed heads on the stone tower that rises 43 m over the city (fig. 25.6). The bronze 
FIGURE 25.5.  Computer reconstruction of the first phase of the Bayon.
(Courtesy O. Cunin)

--- PAGE 595 ---
570      Peter Sharrock
 
mandala with a stepped Greek cross base is set in a miniature sanctuary (Dalsheimer 
2001: 268), which frames the dancing deity in a circle of his eight dancing Yoginīs 
(fig. 25.7). The bronze Hevajra with 8 yogini dancing around the deity is 20cm tall. 
It has a temple-​like structure set over the figures on a stepped base in the shape of 
a Greek cross. Woodward pointed out that the first phase of building the Bayon, re­
vealed by Cunin, was a central sanctuary bearing giant faces with smaller sanctuaries 
set round it also in the shape of a Greek cross, raising the question whether the Bayon 
is a blown-​up rendering of the supreme Buddha Hevajra/​Vajrasattva in architectural 
form. Bruno Dagens (2003: 243) considered that “it is the invention of the face towers 
that makes architecture slide towards monumental statuary and temples towards di­
vine image.”(my translation). T. S. Maxwell (2007: 86) said the face-​towers turned the 
FIGURE 25.6.  The Bayon central sanctuary.
(Photo by Peter Sharrock)

--- PAGE 596 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      571
 
temple into a god: “in terms of architectural theory, the new method of depicting the 
four faces on the towers of Jayavarman’s temples appears to represent . . . a sweeping 
liberalization of architecture and iconography, because this method abandons the ca­
nonical distinctions between vāstu [architecture] and śilpa [sculpture]. . . . The Khmer 
temple was therefore no longer merely a devagṛha, the traditional Indian ‘house of 
God,’ it became itself a God.”
Projecting the mandala of state in architecture was not confined to the capital. The 
first tower with giant faces was constructed at the old Buddhist temple of Preah Khan 
of Kompong Svay, east of the capital. Cunin records 59 face-​towers at the Bayon, after 
he tracked the stones bearing parts of carved faces from the collapsed towers (2005: 
FIGURE 25.7.  Gilt-​bronze Hevajra mandala in a palace structure on a stepped Greek cross base.
(Photo by Peter Sharrock)

--- PAGE 597 ---
572      Peter Sharrock
 
83–​85), and 47 at Banteay Chhmar, 110 k northwest of the capital under the Dangrek 
mountains. From the viewpoint of sacred geography, the temples with the face-​
towers fit into a circle centered on Angkor and appearing to define a new Buddhist 
mandala of state (fig. 25.8) that implants the face-​tower deity across the kingdom, 
somewhat in the way Amoghavajra created the state as a field of merit on Mount 
Wutai in 767 (as noted earlier). If the face-​towers project a Heruka mandala over 
the formerly Brahmanical Khmer state, Jayavarman can be seen as maintaining the 
Divākarapaṇḍita strategy.
FIGURE 25.8.  Map of Cambodia with locations of the Angkor site, Preah Khan of Kompong 
Svay, and Banteay Chhmar.
(Courtesy of Olivier Cunin)

--- PAGE 598 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      573
 
East Java
A political confrontation between Java and China that included “supreme buddha 
consecrations” occurred half a century later when the Siṅhasāri king Kṛtanagara (r. 
1268–​1292 CE) underwent a consecration after receiving and injuring an envoy of the 
Yuan emperor, Kublai Khan (r. 1260–​1294 CE), who had constructed a large fleet and 
was threatening a naval invasion. Thomas M. Hunter’s reading of the Sanskrit inscrip­
tion on the base of the so-​called Joko Dolog statue of the Jina Akṣobhya, now in a park 
in Surabaya, commemorates both the reunification of Java by his father and his own 
second consecration of this image of Akṣobhya in 1289 CE:
this second consecration of the image of Akṣobhya was accompanied by a ritual 
in which Kṛtanagara was initiated according to the rites of Mahākṣobhya. . . . As 
scholars have largely agreed since the idea was first advanced by J. L. Moens (1924: 
544), Kṛtanagara’s consecration into the ritual path of Akṣobhya (and hence the 
Guhyasāmaja Tantra) appears to have been intended to counteract the ritual power 
gained by the Yuan emperor Kublai Khan through his consecrations in 1264 and 
1269 as Hevajra, the central Jina of the Hevajra Tantra. This connects the event with 
Kṛtanagara’s earlier gift to Mauliwarmadewa, for this monarch controlled the Melaka 
Straits, which was the linch-​pin in the all-​important international sea trade, and an 
obvious point that needed to be defended at all costs from the expansionist politics 
of Kublai Khan.
(Hunter 2007: 40)
The Yuan emperor’s empowerment in Hevajra was performed by Tibetan Sakya 
master Phakpa and inaugurated a century of Tibetic Buddhism as the official religion 
of China under Mongol rulers; before the Sakya transmission it was deemed heter­
odox under the Ming (1368–​1644 CE; Elacqua 2017: 1304). David Bade, in his reading 
of the Kublai-​Kṛtanagara confrontation, argues that both rulers turned to the esoteric 
Buddhists for a new vision when they were faced with international issues of a scope 
and complexity unknown in their own cultures. They put their trust in a compelling 
image of a cakravartin at the pinnacle of a mandala that mirrored the organization 
of the macrocosm. Lokesh Chandra (Lokesh Chandra and Sudarshana Devi Singhal 
1995: 156) sees Kṛtanagara’s response as aimed both to arrest the Mongol threat “and 
to pay homage to the Mongol Emperor.” Paying homage seems aligned with Ācārya 
Smith’s view (in 2018, see above) that participation in the supreme Heruka/​Vajrasattva 
state of being took initiates beyond violence and that this should be reflected in mun­
dane interstate actions.
Kṛtanagara was killed in 1292 CE before the huge Mongol fleet landed, but the in­
vasion failed (as the others did in Japan and Vietnam), and the East Javanese dynasty 
“was restored in 1294 CE by [Kṛtanagara’s son-​in-​law] Raden Wijaya, who tricked 
Kubilai’s invading forces into attacking [his rival] Jayakatwang, then turned on them

--- PAGE 599 ---
574      Peter Sharrock
 
and destroyed them as they celebrated victory” (Hunter 2007: 28).16 Hunter attributes 
the ongoing esoteric Buddhist tradition in Java and Sumatra to the lasting impression 
made by Kṛtanagara’s fusion of Śaivism and Buddhism to attain political and spiritual 
unity both in Java and in his growing empire. In 1292 CE Kṛtanagara was enshrined at 
Candi Jawi in a single Śiva-​Buddha image after his “release into the realms of Śiwa and 
Buddha (mokteng siwa-​buddha-​loka)” (Hunter 2007: 41).
FIGURE 25.9.  Ādityavarman’s Bhairava with Akṣobhya above the crown, Jakarta national Museum.
(Photos by Peter Sharrock)

--- PAGE 600 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      575
 
Sumatra
Andrea Acri sees the esoteric Buddhist cults of Jayavarman VII, Kṛtanagara, and 
Kublai Khan as a “second wave” that long remained vital in maritime Asia (2016: 
8, 19–​22). In the early 11th century, the collapsing Pāla dynasty in northern India 
led to an exodus from the Ganges Valley monasteries in Bengal and Bihar. The fu­
ture Tibetan Buddhist patriarch Atīśa (982–​1054 CE) undertook the sea passage to 
Śrīvijaya, where he studied at the feet of the guru Dharmakīrti from 1013 to 1025 CE, 
presumably at the pīṭha named Suvarṇadvīpa (Land of Gold) in the lists cited in the 
Hevajratantra and the Saṁvarodayatantra. Tibetan archives credit Dharmakīrti with 
a commentary on the tantra. Schoterman ([1986] 2016: 115) notes campaigns from 
Kabul in 1018 by Mahmūd of Ghaznī “almost reaching Benares (which he plundered 
in 1033) and attacking Somnāth (Kathiawar) in 1024.” For a time Suvarṇadvīpa 
FIGURE 25.10.  Ādityavarman’s Bhairava with Akṣobhya above the crown, Jakarta national Museum.
(Photos by Peter Sharrock)

--- PAGE 601 ---
576      Peter Sharrock
 
emerged as a haven for Buddhist study. But this was soon to change. The Cōḻa army 
marched from south India to the north and then became the first Indian dynasty to 
expand its empire by sea. In 1025 CE the Cōḻa fleet attacked and largely destroyed 
Palembang and Jambi on Sumatra, as well as Kedah on the Malay peninsula. Months 
before this, Atiśa returned to Bengal to become abbot of Vikramaśīla, before being 
eventually being invited to Tibet in 1040 CE to begin the celebrated reform mission 
of his remaining 14 years.
During the subsequent expansion of the Majapahit golden age under King Hayam 
Wuruk (r. 1350–​1389 CE), celebrated today as setting the bounds of modern Indonesia, 
one of the king’s cousins moved to Sumatra as King Ādityavarman (c. 1347–​1379), 
securing control the gold mines and the trade through the Melaka Straits. He even­
tually asserted autonomy within the now sprawling empire by adding an epigraph 
rededicating to himself the Amoghapāśa stela that King Kṛtanagara had sent to Sumatra 
decades earlier to celebrate a marriage alliance. At Sungai Langsat King Ādityavarman 
raised Indonesia’s largest known statue, a 4.4 m Bhairava with bulging eyes and a 
knife at his chest, standing on a Siṅhasāri-​style skull pedestal and with Akṣobhya in 
bhumisparṣamudrā set in his huge ball of ascetic hair (figs. 25.9 and 25.10). The image 
is quite unlike any made in Sumatra and may one day be identified as King Kṛtanagara’s 
final Śiva-​Buddha image erected in Candi Jawi, his mortuary temple, which is defined 
thus in a courtly poem:
And within there was a splendid Shiva-​image, its beauty fitting, without parallel
(With) an image of Aksobhya above the crown, of that there can be no doubt.
(Robson 1995:131; Deśawarnana [Nāgarakṛtāgama] 56.2)
This brings to an end the overt signs of the long “second wave” of royal esoteric cults 
in maritime Asia. The ritual technology of the Heruka-​mandalas, the fruit of a histor­
ical fusion of Indic tantric Śaiva and Buddhist ideologies, attained its political flores­
cence not in the subcontinent, where its long-​term application was cut short by the rise 
of armed Islam, but in the politico-​religious strategies of the royal courts of maritime 
Asia from Phimai to Angkor to Mỹ Sơn to Singhasāri and Sumatra over more than three 
centuries.
Notes
	1.	 Herukas are a class of fierce deities emitted into the saṃsara by the supreme buddha form­
less Vajrasattva or Akṣobhya, head of the vajra clan and Jina of the eastern universe. Their 
manifestations, appearing first in the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara, include 
Cakrasaṃvara and the 8-​headed, 16-​armed Hevajra, who is the principal Heruka of Khmer 
esoteric Buddhism found in the material record. See de Mallmann 1986: 182, and Dasgupta 
1950: 98: “this Vajra-​sattva, the Lord Supreme of the Tantric Buddhists, is found in the 
Buddhist Tantras bearing many other names of which the most important are Hevajra and 
Heruka.”

--- PAGE 602 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      577
 
	 2.	 The Hevajratantra was widely disseminated and is dated to the late 8th century by 
Snellgrove (1959: vol. 1, 14), to the late 9th century by Samuel (2008: 285), and to the 9th–​
10th centuries by Davidson (2005: 51). See the list of the target holy sites in Hevajratantra 
I.vii 13–​16. Griffiths (2014) recently found textual evidence for the presence of this 
text in Sumatra, which appears likely from the fact that the reputed teachers Atiśa and 
Dharmakīrti, both expert in this text, studied together for 12 years in Sumatra in the early 
11th century.
	 3.	 The loss of libraries meant the loss of these kinds of records from China and Japan: “in 767, 
Amoghavajra initiated the ordination of 37 monks for repeated performances of rituals on 
Mount Wutai to ‘establish the state as a field of merit’ ” (T.2120.52.835b17–​c9). Significantly, 
this number refers to the 37 central deities of the vajradhātumaṇḍala (Lehnert 2012: 263).
	 4.	 Tanaka’s position underlines the significance of this text: “the Sakya school of Tibetan 
Buddhism . . . is based on the Hevajratantra . . . . The Hevajratantra was one of the most 
popular tantras in late tantric Buddhism, and consequently many commentaries were 
written” (Tanaka 2018: 224).
	 5.	 C. 92B, line 8 (Finot 1904: 972).
	 6.	 Schweyer summarized his story thus: “when he reneged on his relationship with 
Jayavarman VII, king Sūryavarman turned to emperor Long Cán of the neighbouring Đai 
Việt for acknowledgement of his legitimacy, which was granted in 1199. But the extraor­
dinary military career of the Cam king was to end in disaster. Vietnamese records show 
that after Jayavarman sent yet another army to defeat him in 1203, Vidyānandana fled and 
requested asylum in the Đai Việt. He was rejected and disappeared without trace. His pa­
ternal uncle, called in the inscriptions yuvaraja Oṅ Dhanapati-​grama, became a governor 
under the Khmer authority from 1203 to ca 1220, when the Khmer army withdrew after 
Jayavarman’s death” (Schweyer 2009: 327). See also Finot 1904: 168–​169; Jacques 2015: 
142–​144.
	 7.	 A mason’s informal inscription in Khmer on the unfinished Northern Gallery of the Bayon 
reads: “śānti buvana bphon hon stac vanodesa nā stac thve vraḥ indrābhiṣeka” (“the peace 
of the whole universe. Then the king retires into the forest at the time when he celebrates 
the holy indrābhiṣeka”) beneath a sketched relief of the king going into the mountains on 
an elephant (Cœdès 1932: 74).
	 8.	 Cunin presented his findings in Cunin (2018).
	 9.	 Hudaya Kandahjaya’s analyses reveal how the architects of Borobudur were inspired, 
in their geometrical and arithmetical computations for the construction of the monu­
ment, by key elements within both the vajradhātumaṇḍala and the garbhadhātumaṇḍala 
(Kandahjaya 2022).
	10.	 “In the third year of Ta-​li [768], the master [Amoghavajra] held a ceremony at the [Ta-​]
hsing-​shan monastery. He was given [by the emperor] 12 quilts of embroidered brocade 
and 32 embroidered gauze banners, the value of which was 10 million cash. In addition, he 
was given enough provisions to permit the crowd to remain at the ceremony for 14 days. 
The eunuch attendants, the ministers, and all the commanders of the imperial army were 
ordered by the emperor to receive abhiṣeka at the ceremony. Altogether more than 5,000 
monks and laymen attended” (Orlando 1981: 144).
	11.	 See Linrothe 1999: figs. 180, 188. “The saṃsāra is Heruka’s phenomenal aspect, and he is the 
Lord, the saviour of the world. . . . His eyes are red with compassion; his body is black to in­
dicate friendliness; his four legs symbolize the four means of conversion . . . his eight faces 
the eight releases and his sixteen arms the sixteen voids. The Five Buddhas are represented

--- PAGE 603 ---
578      Peter Sharrock
 
by the symbolic adornments, and he is wrathful for the subduing of the evil-​disposed.” 
Hevajratantra 10–​12 (Snellgrove 1959: 117).
	12.	 The origin myth of the Vidyāpīṭha pilgrimage sites around India holds that Śiva took the 
body of his wife, the goddess Satī Dākṣāyaṇī, who entered a great sacrifice of the gods to 
which she and Śiva had not been invited and committed suicide. Śiva entered and took her 
body on his shoulders and began a dance of rage that threatened to engulf the cosmos. So 
the gods caused Satī’s body to disintegrate, and the pīṭhas marked the spots where pieces 
of the body fell to earth (see the entry “pīṭhā,” Encyclopaedia Britannica, https://​www.bri​
tann​ica.com/​tec​hnol​ogy/​pitha, accessed January 23, 2022.
	13.	 See Tadeusz Skorupski’s translation of the Sanskrit inscription K. 111 of Wat Sithor of 980 
CE, with references to the STTS and Śākyamitra’s ṭīkā, in Sharrock (2012: 205).
	14.	 Davidson (2005: 41) elaborates on the map as follows: “while the exact number of deities 
in individual maṇḍalas differed, each featured Cakrasaṁvara (as Heruka) in the center 
and three concentric rings of eight Bhairavas per ring progressing out from the center, 
representing the maṇḍalas of mind, speech and body.”
	15.	 “Jayavarman seems to have been an ambitious prince and his ambition was apparently 
fired by a young brahman named Divākara whom he met early in his career. Taking advan­
tage of the unsettled state of affairs, Jayavarman seems to have raised the standard of revolt 
and proclaimed himself king in the north” (Briggs 1999 [1951]: 178).
	16.	 Munoz (2006: 260–​274) says the Chinese, battered and running short of supplies, cut their 
losses and left rather than wait months for the winds to turn.
References
Abé, Ryūichi. 1999. Weaving of Mantra: Kūkai and the Construction of Esoteric Buddhist 
Discourse. New York: Columbia University Press.
Acri, Andrea. 2016. “Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk 
Routes, 7th–​13th Century AD.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks 
of Masters, Texts, Icons, ed. Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS: 1–​25.
Bade, D. 2016. “(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-​Century Asia? International Relations, the Balance 
of Powers, and the Tantric Buddhism of Kṛtanagara and Khubilai Khan.” In Esoteric 
Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, ed. Andrea Acri. 
Singapore: ISEAS: 141–​159.
Bautze-​Picron, Claudine. 2014. “Buddhist Images from Padang Lawas Region and the South 
Asian Connection.” In History of Padang Lawas II. Societies of Padang Lawas (Mid-​9th–​13th 
Century CE), ed. Daniel Perret. Paris: Cahiers d’Archipel: vol. 43: 107–​128.
Boeles, J. J. 1966. “Two Yoginīs of Hevajra from Thailand.” In Essays Offered to G. H. Luce by His 
Colleagues and Friends in Honour of His Seventy-​Fifth Birthday. Vol. 2: Papers on Asian Art 
and Archaeology: Artibus Asiae. Supplementum, ed. Gordon Hannington Luce, Ba Shin (U.), 
Bha Rhaṅ (Bhuil’ mhu), Jean Boisselier and Alexander B. Griswold. vol. 23. Zurich: 14–​29.
Briggs, L. P. [1951] 1999. The Ancient Khmer Empire. Bangkok: White Lotus.
Cœdès, George. 1932. “Études Cambodgiennes XXVIII. Quelques suggestions sur la méthode 
à suivre pour interpréter les bas-​reliefs de Bantéay Čhmàr et de la galerie extérieure du 
Bàyon.” Bulletin de l'École française d'Extrême-​Orient 32: 71–​112.
Conlan, T. D. 2011. Sovereign to Symbol: An Age of Ritual Determinism in 14th Century Japan. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

--- PAGE 604 ---
MANDALAS and Landscape in Maritime Asia      579
 
Cunin, Olivier. 2005. “De Tà Prohm au Bàyon: contribution à l’histoire architecturale du 
temple de Bàyon.” PhD diss., Institut National Polytechnique de Lorraine.
Cunin, Olivier. 2018. “About Some Missing Images of the Bayon Temple.” Lecture at sympo­
sium Exploring Angkor, Asian Civilisations Museum, Singapore, May 2018.
Dagens, Bruno. 2003. Les Khmers. Paris: Éditions les belles lettres.
Dalsheimer, Nadine. 2001. Le collections du musée national de Phnom Penh. Paris: EFEO 
Magellan & Cie.
Dasgupta, S. B. 1950. An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism. Archaeological Survey of India, 
University of Calcutta.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2005. Tibetan Renaissance: Tantric Buddhism in the Rebirth of Tibetan 
Culture. New York: Columbia University Press.
Elacqua, Joseph P. 2017. “Vajrayāna (Buddhism).” In Encyclopedia of Indian Religions: Buddhism 
and Jainism, ed. K. T. S. Sarao and Jeffery D. Long. Dordrecht: Springer: 1299–​1308.
Finot, M. L. 1904. “Les inscriptions.” In Le cirque de Mĩ-​Sợn (Quang-​Nam), ed. Henri 
Parmentier and Louis Finot. Hanoi: F.-​H. Schneider: 83–​173.
Finot, M. L. 1934. “Manuscrits sanskrits de sādhana retrouvés en Chine.” Journal Asiatique 
225: 1–​85.
Gray, David B. 2007. The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra (The Discourse of Śri Heruka): Study and 
Annotated Translation. New York: Columbia University Press.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. “Inscriptions of Sumatra III. The Padang Lawas Corpus Studied along 
with Inscriptions from Sorik Merapi (North Sumatra) and from Muara Takus (Riau) 
INSCRIPTIONS OF SUMATRA III.” In History of Padang Lawas II. Societies of Padang Lawas 
(Mid-​9th–​13th Century CE), ed. Daniel Perret. Paris: Cahiers d’Archipel: vol. 43: 211–​237.
Grünwedel, Albert. 1900. Mythologie des Buddhismus in Tibet und der Mongolei. Leipzig: 
Brockhaus.
Hunter, Thomas M. 2007. “The Body of the King: Reappraising Singhasari Period Syncretism.” 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 38, no. 1: 27–​53.
Jacques, Claude. 2015. “The History and Inscriptions.” In Banteay Chhmar: Garrison-​Temple of 
the Khmer Empire, ed. Peter D. Sharrock. Bangkok: River Books: 135–​150.
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. 2022. “The Scheme of Borobudur.” In The Creative South: Buddhist and 
Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, ed. Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock. Singapore: 
ISEAS: 55–​73.
Lehnert, Martin. 2012. “Tantric Threads between India and China.” In The Spread of Buddhism, 
ed. A. Heirman and S. P. Bumbacher. Leiden: Brill: 247–​276.
Linrothe, Rob. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-​Tibetan Esoteric 
Buddhist Art. London: Serindia.
Lokesh Chandra and Sudarshana Devi Singhal. 1995. “The Buddhist Bronzes of Surocolo.” In 
Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 4., ed. Tara Chandrika. New Delhi: International Academy of 
Indian Culture/​Aditya Prakashan: 121–​147.
Mallmann, Marie-​Thérèse de. 1986. Introduction à l’iconographie du Tântrisme bouddhique. 
Paris: Librairie d’Amérique et d’Orient.
Maxwell, T. S. 2007. “Religion at the Time of Jayavarman VII.” In Bayon: New Perspectives, ed. 
Joyce Clark. Bangkok: River Books: 72–​135.
Moens, J. L. 1924. “Het Boeddhisme op Java en Sumatra in zijn laatste bloeiperiode.” 
Tijdschrift van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kānsten en Wetenschappen 64: 521–​579.

--- PAGE 605 ---
580      Peter Sharrock
 
Munoz, Paul Michel. 2006. Early Kingdoms of the Indonesian Archipelago and the Malay 
Peninsula. Singapore: Editions Didier Millet.
Orlando, Raffaello. 1981. “A Study of Chinese Documents Concerning the Life of the Tantric 
Buddhist Patriarch Amoghavajra (A.D. 705–​774).” PhD diss., Princeton University.
Orzech, C. 1998. Politics and Transcendent Wisdom: The Scripture for Humane Kings in the 
Creation of Chinese Buddhism. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Robson, Stuart trans. 1995. Désawarnana (Nāgarakṛtayama) by Mpu Prapañca. Leiden: KITLV 
Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2008. The Origins of Yoga and Tantra: Indic Religions to the Thirteenth 
Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2004. “The Śaiva Religion among the Khmers (Part I).” 
Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-​Orient 90–​91: 349–​462.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early 
Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, ed. Shingo Einoo. University of 
Tokyo Special Series, 23. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture: 41–​350.
Schoterman, Jan. [1986] 2016. “Traces of Indonesian Influences in Tibet” [Indonesische sporen 
in Tibet] pamphlet, trans. Roy Jordaan and Mark Long. In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval 
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, ed. Andrea Acri. Singapore: ISEAS: 113–​122.
Schweyer, Anne-​Valérie. 2009. “Buddhism in Campā.” In Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces of 
the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cam Sculpture, ed. Trần Kỳ Phương, Vo Văn Thắng and Peter D. 
Sharrock. Bangkok: River Books: 71–​78.
Sharrock, Peter. 2009. “Garuḍa, Vajrapāṇi and Religious Change in Jayavarman VII’s Angkor.” 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 40, no. 1: 111–​151.
Sharrock, Peter. 2012. “Kīrtipaṇḍita and the Tantras.” Udaya 10: 203–​237.
Snellgrove, David L. 1959. The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study. London: Oxford University 
Press.
Sundberg, Jeffrey, and Rolf Giebel. 2011. “The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi as 
Chronicled by Lü Xiang 呂向: South Indian and Śrī Laṅkān Antecedents to the Arrival of 
the Buddhist Vajrayāna in 8th Century Java and China.” Pacific World, Third Series, 13 (Fall): 
129–​222.
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2018. An Illustrated History of the Maṇḍala: From Its Genesis to the 
Kālacakratantra. ebook distributor Simon and Shuster. New York: Wisdom Publications.
Thapar, Romila. 1961. Aśoka and the Decline of the Mauryas. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tsuda, Shinichi. 1974. The Saṁvarodaya-​tantra: Selected Chapters. PhD diss., Australian 
National University.
Willemen, C., trans. [1983] 2004. The Chinese Hevajratantra. The Chinese Hevajratantra: The 
Scriptural Text of the Ritual of the Great King of the Teaching, the Adamantine One with 
Great Compassion and Knowledge of the Void. New Delhi: Motilal Barnarsidass. Originally 
published by Peeters, Leuven, 1983.

--- PAGE 606 ---
Chapter 26
Mandalas and Monarchs
Tantra and Temple Architecture in 
Buddhist Southeast Asia
Swati Chemburkar
Introduction
Mandala: Origin, Meaning, and Ritual Importance
The idea of a mandala with the central figure representing a supreme deity and di­
rectional figures as subordinate aspects closely reflects the idea of a supreme king 
surrounded by vassals who are expected to play local landlords rather than independent 
rulers (Davidson 2002; Samuel [2002] 2014). This very nature of a mandala serves as 
a perfect hierarchical plan of political and social structure, offering a visual device for 
arranging space, a portable model (Smith 1978: 292) of the perfect world that can be 
used in various contexts and across geographies.
Works on Indian tantric Buddhism have identified the individual practitioner’s 
pursuit of kingship and dominion as the central defining metaphor of the tantric 
literature (Davidson 2002; Samuel ([2002] 2014). From this perspective, mandalas 
symbolize not only spiritual enlightenment but also a model used to realize a polit­
ical ideology. While painted mandalas may normally be used for meditation, they 
also emplace ritual magic serving the sovereignty. How then are ritual experience 
and belief inextricably linked with notions of power and ideology promoted by state 
religion and architecture?
Acri (2016a: 13) sees the construction of several monuments during the 7th to 10th 
centuries across maritime Asia as the “first wave of Buddhism.” These monuments 
embedded the Garbhadhātu, Vajradhātu mandalas or their modified versions in their 
architecture, as seen in northeast India, Bangladesh, Central Java, and Vietnam. They

--- PAGE 607 ---
582      Swati Chemburkar
 
propagated images, texts, and practices associated with deities such as Avalokiteśvara, 
Mañjuśrī, Vajrapāṇi, Jina Buddhas, Vairocana, Tārā, and Prajñāparamitā.
After the sudden decline of royal support around the mid-​9th century, tan­
tric Buddhism gained momentum again in the 11th century and remained in force 
through the next two centuries across maritime Asia. The “second wave of Esoteric 
Buddhism” made way for construction activity in East Java, Sumatra, Thailand, and 
Cambodia (Acri 2016a: 13, 19). These monuments propagated images, texts, and 
practices related to the ferocious forms of Vajrapāṇi, Vajrasattva, Heruka, Saṃvara, 
and Hevajra.
The architectural contexts of monuments across maritime Asia constructed on the 
basis of mandalas has hardly been examined. While textual studies have been pri­
mary, this article focuses on “common architectural language” and linkages between 
monuments built across wide geography as a valid and necessary source of evidence 
and follows a “comparative-​coherentist” approach. It remains attentive to textual and 
epigraphical evidences as well as living traditions of the Garbhadhātu and Vajradhātu 
mandalas in Japan and Tibet.
The Architectural and Ritual Elements of a Mandala
The representation of mandalas in various media, especially in paintings (see fig. 26.1), 
is the hallmark of tantric Buddhism. The outer enclosure is normally a circle or a square 
border that encloses the sacred space of a mandala. Demons, snakes, marginal beings, 
a circle of flames, or eight cemeteries marked this border, symbolizing fear of death, 
which the adept has to overcome to be admitted to the center. A T-​shaped gate is placed 
in the middle of each side of the border, and a protecting wall joins all the four gates. A 
canopy protected by marine monsters rises above these gates.
Supreme Buddha sits at the center of a mandala. The other Buddhas and bodhisattvas 
live within the proximity of this center. They assume their positions based on the 
Buddha’s will and through his power of bestowing coronation on them. They reflect 
his entourage in their own segmentary entourages and ultimately dissolve into him. 
Practitioners who receive this coronation gain explicit authority to engage and manipu­
late phenomenal existence. Thus, a mandala represents a spiritual state but also suggests 
its inevitable political application. Davidson (2002: 131) has argued that the distinctive 
use of mandalas in tantric Buddhism is a product of the loss of patronage in medieval 
sāmanta feudalism and the growing importance of the imperial metaphors of the “su­
preme overlord” (rajādhirāja) or “universal ruler” (cakravartin).
When this highly complex symbol in paintings is transformed into architecture, it 
follows a simple iconographical frame. The fundamental design is a fourfold symmet­
rical building with a dominating inaccessible or accessible central structure built on 
receding terraces inside a symmetrical enclosure. The terraces confine circumambula­
tory paths that are often adorned with narrative reliefs. The main deity of a mandala

--- PAGE 608 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      583
 
resides in the central structure like a king or queen, accompanied by subordinate deities 
installed in surrounding shrines.
Mandala paintings have limitations, since they represent a three-​dimensional ob­
ject in a two-​dimensional format, but the painters try to solve this problem by drawing 
a combination of elements in the ground plan and in the elevation perspective, as 
observed by Brauen (1997: 52). The vocabulary to read the painted mandala is related to 
palace construction and not a temple building, making the royal metaphor of a mandala 
clear. The several terms assigned to the residences of the mandala divinities are those 
Figure 26.1.  Mandala of Mañjuvajra, late 14th century, Tibet. Metropolitan Museum, New 
York, acc. no. 1977.340. https://​www.metmus​eum.org/​art/​col​lect​ion/​sea​rch/​37804.

--- PAGE 609 ---
584      Swati Chemburkar
 
employed for palaces and pavilions in Indian medieval architectural manuals such as 
Mayamata (Dagens 1985: 119, 148, 176, 203).1
The Template in Architecture: Mandala on the Move
Mandalas have a centrally oriented hierarchical relationship between the different seats/​
fields occupied by the Buddhas, and their distance from the center. Buddhas occupying 
different seats are less important than to the central seat itself and its hierarchical re­
lation to other seats. The Buddhas are interchangeable and sometimes accommodate 
non-​Buddhist deities too (Tucci 1961: 35) The theme of the domestication of a deity from 
non-​Buddhist outsider to Buddhist insider plays a major role in the development of the 
mandala. Thus, we find various themes, including: to tame, to subdue, to conquer, to cul­
tivate (waste land?), to civilize (the nation?), to educate, to discipline, and to punish. All 
these terms relate to the Buddhist quest for cultural and religious hegemony, a project 
described in the rhetoric of “cultivation” and “domestication,” serving imperial interests 
in organizing political and social landscapes (Samuel 1993: 218).
The mandala is an abstract topography that can be imposed upon various kinds of so­
cial spaces, acting as a mold for architecture. In considering the role of the Garbhadhātu 
and Vajradhātu mandalas in the Buddhist world, it is crucial to understand how ter­
ritory was transformed into something recognizably Buddhist in order to create 
palimpsestuous architectural landscapes across the Buddhist world.
Earliest Architectural Mandalas in Northeastern India
The strong position enjoyed by Buddhists during the Gupta period (320–​550 CE) in 
India underwent major change during the medieval period. Internal military situations 
and conflicts within India led to new kinds of patronage towards monastery complexes. 
Davidson (2002: 166) sees the new institutional tantric Buddhism creating new termi­
nology in architecture and ritual systems in response to the rise of feudalism in the 7th 
century. The sūtras of Mahayāna tradition were replaced by ritual works or tantras, in 
which the Buddha was depicted as a king wearing a crown and in full regalia; the monks 
received the coronation ritual and became divine in the process, and they presented 
dharma as a means of state protection. They performed the rituals to bring peace to

--- PAGE 610 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      585
 
the war-​stricken lands, wealth to the poor, control from chaos, and destruction to the 
enemies of religion. Here, they envisioned the spiritual state filled with Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas, worldly beings, divine families, and their dwellings, a vision that found 
concrete expression in the form of mandalas.
Around this time, the four Buddhas of otherworldly realms were added to stūpas 
as the feature of Buddhist sites (Chakrabarti 1995: 200). The earliest tantric Buddhist 
mandalas—​Garbhadhātu and Vajradhātu—​arranged four Jina Buddhas (Amitābha, 
Akṣobhya, Ratnasambhava, and Amoghasiddhi) around the central Vairocana to 
become the principal pentad of the mandalas. The arrangement of four chapels is 
seen at the 8th ​century Kesariya stūpa/​mandala in Bihar (figs. 26.2–​4) and some of 
the important monastic sites in Odisha. Even though the cruciform arrangement is 
visible at the topmost stūpa level of Kesariya, the exact iconographic program relating 
to any specific mandala is difficult to ascertain given the partly excavated nature of 
the site.2 Along with the four Buddhas, eight bodhisattvas are known to have played 
an important role in the formulation of the Garbhadhātu mandala.3 The standard 
group of eight bodhisattvas was established by the middle of the 7th century in India 
(Tanaka 2018: 31).
Figure 26.2.  Aerial view of Kesariya stūpa.
Photo courtesy Yves Guichand.

--- PAGE 611 ---
586      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.3.  Arrangement of four chambers around the topmost stūpa.
Drawing by author.
Figure 26.4.  Detail of one of the chambers attached to the topmost stūpa.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 612 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      587
 
Many remains relating to these two mandalas are found in Odisha and western 
India. Iconographic material at chapels 4 and 5 of the Ratnagiri monastery (figs. 
26.5–​8), the cruciform stūpa at Udayagiri4 (figs. 26.9–​13), and caves 11 and 12 at 
Ellora are some of the examples. But the systematic incorporation of the central 
pentad of the mandalas into architecture is seen at the Somapura monastery in 
northeastern India.
Figure 26.5.  Avalokiteśvara at Ratnagiri chapel 4.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 613 ---
588      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.6.  Vairocana in southwest corner of Ratnagiri chapel 4.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.7.  Vajrapāṇi at Ratnagiri chapel 4.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 614 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      589
 
Figure 26.8.  Vairocana surrounded by eight bodhisattvas from Ratnagiri chapel 5, now kept at 
the Archaeological Museum Ratnagiri.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.9.  Udayagiri, monastery I stūpa with arrangement of four shrines.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 615 ---
590      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.10.  Jina Akṣobhya in the east accompanied by Maitreya (right) and 
Sarvanivaraṇaviṣkambhin (left) at Udayagiri monastery I stūpa.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.11.  Jina Ratnasambhava in the south accompanied by Samantabhadra (right) and 
Akāśagarbha (left) at Udayagiri monastery I stūpa.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 616 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      591
 
Figure 26.12.  Jina Amitābha in the west accompanied by Avalokiteśvara (right) and Vajrapāṇi 
(left) at Udayagiri monastery I stūpa.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.13.  Vairocana in the north accompanied by Mañjuśri (right) and Kṣitigarbha (left) 
at Udayagiri monastery I stūpa.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 617 ---
592      Swati Chemburkar
 
Founded at the end of the 8th century by the Pāla king Dharmapāla (775–​810 CE), 
Somapura soon became a tantric center (Bhattacharya and Haque 2000: 434; Das and 
Chattopadhaya 1980: 111; Dikshit 1938: 15; Dutt [1962] 2003: 374; figs. 26.14–​16). The 
imposing cruciform brick structure in the center of the monastery is raised on three 
receding terraces with circumambulatory paths and a flight of stairs on the north side.5 
Four shrine halls extend at cardinal directions on the second terrace from a hollow, in­
accessible shaft that probably held the Buddha statues and ritual activities. The shaft 
would have served as a base for the superstructure (Dikshit 1938: 14; Chakrabarti 2001: 
115; Mayer 1961: 30). Hevajra fragments and a bronze Buddha torso were recovered from 
the site (Breuil and Gill 2007: 129), but none of the Jina-​Buddhas of Garbhadhātu or 
Vajradhātu mandalas were found during the excavations. However, two of the four 
Jina-​Buddhas and Vajrasattva were found in the Maināmatī region, which houses 
monasteries with an identical architectural layout.
Figure 26.14.  Aerial view of Somapura Vihāra at Pahārpur, Bangladesh.
Photo: https://​en.wikipe​dia.org/​wiki/​Soma​pura​_​Mah​avih​ara#/​media/​File:Paha​rpur​_​Bud​dhis​t_​Bi​har.jpg.

--- PAGE 618 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      593
 
Figure 26.15.  Architectural plan of Somapura Māhāvihāra showing the arrangement of four 
chambers around the topmost stūpa.
Drawing by author.
Figure 26.16.  Somapura Vihāra-​ detail of one of the 4 chambers attcahed to the topmost stūpa 
Photo courtesy Robin Kuri. https://​www.fli​ckr.com/​pho​tos/​robink​uri/​3728​7253​040/​in/​phot​ostr​eam.

--- PAGE 619 ---
594      Swati Chemburkar
 
Based on the mandalic ground plan of Somapura, one of the theories developed by 
S. and M. Hoque (2004) is the placement of five Jina-​Buddhas in the central cruciform 
structure of the monument following the Vajrayāna philosophy.
For many years the Somapura stūpa was the only one of its kind known in South 
Asia, but several such structures have since been uncovered at Maināmatī (Salban 
vihāra, Bhoja vihāra, Ananda vihāra, Rupban vihāra), in present-​day Bangladesh, and 
at Anticak (Vikramaśīla mahāvihāra) in North Bihar (Gill 2007: 194; Imam 2000: 133). 
The peculiarity of all these structures is the central stūpa/​sanctuary, with the cruciform 
arrangement of shrine halls, the terracotta reliefs along the circumambulatory path, and 
the quadrangular monk’s cells enclosing the courtyard.
The senior Bangladeshi scholar Imam (2002: 616) commented on these temples: 
“it appears that at one stage the entire architectural concept of a Buddhist temple 
was changed in Samataṭa [present-​day eastern Bangladesh and Myanmar] and the 
cruciform design, probably with terraces, was introduced . . . for their religious 
architecture—​why and how it is difficult to say.” It would not be incorrect to say that 
Buddhist monasteries began to resemble one another much more closely than before 
in their architectural development. The layouts of Nāgārjunakonda, Sānci, Taxila, and 
Ellora show a wide variety of regional architectural forms,6 but the megastructures of 
Somapura, Maināmatī, and Antichak show a remarkable uniformity (fig. 26.17). The 
development at Somapura appears to resemble a Buddhist version of “neoclassical of­
fice building” in its repetitive systematization (Davidson 2002: 107).
Figure 26.17.  Monastic establishments showing identical architectural layouts. Top row from 
left: Salban Vihāra, Ananda Vihāra, and Rupban Vihāra, Bangladesh, 7th century. Bottom row 
from left: Bhārat Bhāyna vihara, Bhasu Vihāra, Bangladesh; Vikramśīla Vihāra, Antichak, Bihar 
(all dated to 7th century). Far right: Somapura mahāvihāra, Bangladesh (8th century).
Image: Google Satellite view.

--- PAGE 620 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      595
 
Does the similarity in layout indicate the same function? What were these 
monasteries teaching/​propagating? How does one understand the central cruciform/​
fourfold structure and its ritual purpose? Two conditions seem to be necessary, in 
fact, for a new form to arise in religious architecture, which more usually progresses 
by evolution or by borrowing: architectural intention on one hand and symbolic ref­
erence or ritual motives on the other. The conjunction of both of these factors is what 
must be established.
Textual Basis: The Garbhadhātu and Vajradhātu Mandalas
Four directional Buddhas and eight Bodhisattvas appear in late Mahāyāna texts, but the 
systematic development of the five-​Buddha-​family and eight bodhisattvas is traced by 
Snellgrove (1987: 189, 198) through the various texts such as the Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa 
(MMK), Susuddhikara sūtra (SKS), Mahāvairocanāsaṁbodhi sūtra or Mahāvairocana 
sūtra (MVS) and Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha (STTS) and through the related bodhi­
sattva rituals by Giebel (2011: 27–​36).
The STTS and its explanatory Tibetan Sarvadurgatipariśodhana tantra (SDPS; 
Skorupski 1983: 32, 174) describe Siddhārtha’s entry into the five-​Buddha family, re­
ferred to as fivefold wisdom, via the process of abhiṣeka. Transforming himself into 
Mahāvairocana using the same process, he then constructs the great mandala with 
the other four Buddhas of the central assembly. Through a series of abhiṣekas, he then 
transforms a number of bodhisattvas—​beginning with Samantabhadra.7 The ritual pro­
cess of abhiṣeka is seen as a reproduction technology for the Buddhas. This is the central 
and defining metaphor for tantric Buddhism, where an individual can assume nondual 
reality —​a union with the ultimate Buddha and exercise his powers. These tantras con­
tain the most explicit references to kingship. Snellgrove’s overall conclusion (1959: 206) 
is that Vairocana, as cakravartin-​Buddha, holds the central position in the mandala 
during this developmental period in Buddhist thought.
The two mandalas, Garbhadhātu and Vajradhātu,8 from the middle phase of tan­
tric Buddhism, found their way into the architecture, giving a concrete arrangement of 
deities, on a basic fourfold or fivefold model (figs. 26.18, 26.19): Buddha Akṣobhya to 
the east; Ratnasambhava to the south; Amitābha to the west; and Amoghasiddhi to the 
north, along with Vairocana or Mahāvairocana in the center. Along with this pentad, 
attendant bodhisattvas, offering goddesses, guardian figures, and 1,000 Buddhas of 
the Bhadrakalpa all found their place in the architecture (Snodgrass 1988: 634). The ar­
rangement of eight bodhisattvas inside a square forming a nine-​grid pattern was carried 
via the Vajradhātu mandala to the late Tantric Buddhist mandalas such as Guhyasamāja 
tantra (Tanaka 2018: 37–​39).

--- PAGE 621 ---
596      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.18.  Garbhadhātu mandala of the Japanese Shingon tradition, Kamakura period, 
13th century.
National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne. https://​www.ngv.vic.gov.au/​expl​ore/​col​lect​ion/​work/​52870/​.

--- PAGE 622 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      597
 
Figure 26.19.  Vajradhātu mandala of the Japanese Shingon tradition, Kamakura period, 13th 
century.
National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne. https://​www.ngv.vic.gov.au/​expl​ore/​col​lect​ion/​work/​52871/​.

--- PAGE 623 ---
598      Swati Chemburkar
 
In some manner or the other, the mandalic elements of these two mandalas were 
eventually embedded in the Buddhist structures of Southeast Asia.
The Architecture of the Garbhadhātu and 
Vajradhātu Mandalas
The Garbhadhātu mandala represents ultimate reality in this world, whereas the 
Vajradhātu mandala represents reality in the Buddha realm. According to Snodgrass 
(1988: 85), each mandala is powerful in its own right but achieves its zenith when paired 
with Buddha’s compassion and wisdom. The combined interdependence of the two 
mandalas is believed to have been devised in the 8th ​century Chinese capital of Chang’an, 
within the religious circle of the tantric Indian masters Śubhākarasiṁha (637–​735), 
Vajrabodhi (671–​741), and Amoghavajra (704–​774). This triad inspired various interna­
tional pupils and built a strong network of Chinese (Huilang, ?–​781; Huiguo, 746–​806), 
Japanese (Kūkai, 774–​835; Ennin, 794–​864), and Javanese (Bianhong, late 8th century) 
Buddhist monks. They worked on specific texts such as the MVS, SKS, and STTS, their 
commentaries, associated mandalas, and ritual practices which traveled to Southeast and 
East Asia, marking the first wave of tantric Buddhism (7th to early 10th century CE).9
The fundamental pairing of the two mandalas was important during ceremonies 
such as ordination, commemoration, memorial rites, and the initiation of a new 
temple building, which can be seen in the central sanctuary of the early 9th century 
Tōji temple in Kyoto, where two scrolls that were carried to Japan by Kūkai, the dis­
ciple of Huiguo, hang facing each other. The central altar served for the daily fire 
rituals during initiation ceremonies. Around the same time, a somewhat similar ar­
rangement is seen translated in the architecture of the Central Javanese temples of 
Mendut-​Pawon-​Borobudur.
By the 7th century, Java was an important Buddhist center, and there was inten­
sive interaction between the Chinese and Indonesian Buddhists (Miksic 2006: 187). 
Bianhong was already initiated into the Vajradhātu mandala before arriving in China 
(Sinclair 2016: 33–​34), but his particular interest in the tantric initiation systems of 
Garbhadhātu, as well as Saptaratnābhiṣeka (Seven Treasure Initiation), possibly led 
him to Chang’an. Possession of seven jewels by a cakravartin king is not per se tan­
tric, but Sinclair (2016: 53) observes that “particular Tantric means for endowing 
the saptaratna were brand new in the Tang.” News of Amoghavajra’s endowment of 
cakravartirājya-​saptaratnābhiṣeka to the Tang emperor Suzong must have reached 
Bianhong’s homeland (Sinclair 2016: 39). His Ritual Manual for Initiation into the

--- PAGE 624 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      599
 
Great Maṇḍala of the Uṣṇīṣa-​Cakravartin, written in China, demonstrates sound 
knowledge of the twin mandalas and specifically deals with cakravartin initiations, 
following Amoghavajra’s methods.10 Whether he returned or was allowed to travel to 
Java is not known,11 but the late 8th-​ or early 9th century Javanese work Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Kamahāyānan Mantrayana deals with the same subject matter as Bianhong’s manual 
(Sinclair 2016: 49), and the architecture of Mendut-​Pawon-​Borobudur indicates the 
knowledge of the twin mandalas in Central Java.
The First Wave of Tantric Buddhism 
(7th to Early 10th Centuries)
Spatial visualization plays a powerful part in architecture, and the mandalas circulating 
in the Buddhist world would have served as blue prints for the builders to map the ge­
ography. Central Javanese monuments were carefully positioned in the landscape, and 
their architecture was determined by sociopolitical, religious, and economic factors 
(Degroot 2009: chap. 1). Harmony between the human and spirit worlds is created by 
constructing a stone version of the deities’ celestial dwellings. As Bade argued (2016: 
155), “tantric Buddhism, with its imagination of a just and universal world ruler bringing 
about a state of affairs on earth that would mirror heavenly state of affairs—​was not just 
a fantasy world of escape for monks and a useful mask hiding ugly realities for kings; it 
was a powerful motivating force that shaped political and social conditions throughout 
Southeast Asia” and led to construction of some of the Buddhist monuments. The 
temples of Borobudur, Mendut, Sewu, Bubrah, Lumbung, Kālaśan, and Plaosan, as well 
as the Abhayagiri monastery on the Ratu Boko plateau near Yogyakarta in Central Java, 
embedded mandalic elements in their architecture, though it’s sometimes difficult to 
pin them down to a specific mandala.
Central Java and Campā
The fourfold arrangement of Buddhas displaying specific mudrās on the square terraces 
of Borobudur (fig. 26.20) accords with the four Jina Buddhas—​Akṣobhya (fig. 26.21), 
Ratnasambhava (fig. 26.22), Amitābha (fig. 26.23), and Amoghasiddhi (fig. 26.24), of the 
Garbhadhātu and Vajradhātu mandalas. The three circular terraces above them house 
72 Buddhas in wheel-​turning (dharmacakra) mudrā inside the stūpikās (fig. 26.25).

--- PAGE 625 ---
600      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.21.  Akṣobhya in the east side niches at Borobudur.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.20.  3D model of Borobudur kept at the site museum displaying iconographic 
programme of the structure.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 626 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      601
 
Figure 26.22.  Ratnasambha in the south side niches at Borobudur.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 627 ---
602      Swati Chemburkar
 
Kandahjaya (2016: 111) argues that Borobudur’s broad base terrace would have 
functioned as an offering altar during initiation rituals. Observing the correlation be­
tween the epigraphic sources and certain numerical configurations of Buddha images, 
he further expands: “the number of Buddha statues on each floor is designated in ac­
cordance with the figure in the series calculated following Amoghavajra’s grid formula 
for the construction of the Garbhadhātu mandala.”12
Figure 26.23.  Amitābha in the west side niches at Borobudur.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 628 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      603
 
Figure 26.25.  Vairocana in the central 72 stūpikas of the circular terraces, at Borobudur.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.24.  Amoghasiddhi in the north side niches at Borobudur.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 629 ---
604      Swati Chemburkar
 
Based on the geometrical perforations on the stūpikas of the three circular terraces 
of Borobudur and the 504 Buddhas of the square terraces, Chandra argues (1980: 
28) that these are not the five Jina Buddhas but the 1,000 Buddhas of the Vajradhātu 
mahāmaṇḍala: “the Vajradhātu becomes a mahāmaṇḍala because of the thousand 
Buddhas, which is its unique and contradistinctive attribute in the world of Tantric 
maṇḍalas. The Vajradhātu mahāmaṇḍala added to the already existing five forms of the 
Buddhas a sixth one with the dharmacakra mudrā. These six forms of Buddhas were re­
peated 168 times to the auspicious number 1008. That is why there are 504 Buddhas, and 
the niches and stūpas enclosing these 504, symbolically make up the requisite double 
number: 504 x 2 =​ 1008.” Archaeological finds dating from the 9th century suggest tan­
tric practices at Borobudur (Griffiths 2014c: 178).
The temple of Mendut (fig. 26.26), aligned with Borobudur, houses eight bodhisattvas 
on its external walls, along with Prajñāparāmitā, Cundā, and Avalokiteśvara (figs. 
26.27–​37). The arrangement of the triad—​Vairocana, Avalokiteśvara, and Vajrapāṇi—​
in the central sanctuary (fig. 26.38) is typical of the Garbhadhātu mandala along with 
the eight bodhisattvas in Japanese MVS as well as SDPS (fig. 26.39).13 However, as argued 
by Woodward (2004: 338), the mandala described in MVS is far more complex than 
what one sees at Mendut. The bodhisattva arrangement displayed on the external walls 
of Mendut and on the internal walls of Plaosan has parallels in the eight-​bodhisattva 
arrangement of the 7th-​century Aṣṭamaṇḍalaka sūtra, which was translated into 
Chinese by Amoghavajra (fig. 26.40).14 The tantric elements of Mendut need to be 
explored on the basis of a gold foil found at the Plaosan temple (Griffiths 2014c: 164–​
165) containing a section of the Kāraṇḍavyūha sūtra, a prototantric text. The same text 
also represents “Cundā’s spell as a proclamation of the obtaining wisdom,” as discussed 
by Woodward (2004: 337) with respect to the goddess’s image at Mendut. The Śailendra 
inscription does mention the building of Mendut to acquire merit and finally reach 
Buddhahood.15

--- PAGE 630 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      605
 
Figure 26.26.  Candi Mendut temple.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.27.  Candi Mendut, Central Java, Indonesia. Schematic plan by author. This struc­
ture has an arrangement of deities on the external walls; the letters and numbers in the floor plan 
correspond to the figs. 28–​37. The image at location 8 is missing.
All photos by the author.

--- PAGE 631 ---
606      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.29.  Maitreya (2).
Figure 26.28.  Sarvanivaraṇaviṣkambhin (1).

--- PAGE 632 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      607
 
Figure 26.30.  Samantabhadra (3).
Figure 26.31.  Kṣitigarbha (4).

--- PAGE 633 ---
608      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.32.  Vajrapāṇi (5).
Figure 26.33.  Mañjuśrī (6).

--- PAGE 634 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      609
 
Figure 26.34.  Ākaśagarbha (7).
Figure 26.35.  Cundā (A).

--- PAGE 635 ---
610      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.36.  Avalokiteśvara (B).
Figure 26.37.  Prajñāpāramitā (C).

--- PAGE 636 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      611
 
Figure 26.38.  Central sanctuary triad of Mendut displaying seated Bhadrasana Buddha in the 
center accompanied by Avalokiteśvara and Vajrapāṇi.
Figure 26.39.  Garbha mandala and eight bodhisattvas (after Tanaka 2018: 30). Schematic by 
author.

--- PAGE 637 ---
612      Swati Chemburkar
 
Pawon falls between Mendut and Borobudur and would have served as a homa 
temple belonging to Vajrānala, the presiding deity of homa.16 This probably explains the 
absence of any imagery on its inner walls and the presence of six small windows to evac­
uate the homa smoke (fig. 26.41).17 Homa ritual is a distinctive characteristic of tantric 
Buddhism.
Figure 26.40.  Eight bodhisattvas of the Aṣṭamaṇḍalaka sutra. Schematic by author.

--- PAGE 638 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      613
 
Figure 26.41.  Candi Pawon.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 639 ---
614      Swati Chemburkar
 
An important architectural change occurred in Central Javanese temples during 
the Śailendra period: the transformation of a central sanctuary from a square to a 
cruciform plan (Dumarçay 1986: 20), presumably to follow the fourfold structure 
of a mandala system. Some textual material derived from STTS, likely served to de­
marcate the ground plans of Central Javanese Buddhist monuments (Griffiths 2014c: 
159–​166).
The Śailendras installed Mañjughoṣa at Candi Sewu for the protection, prosperity, 
and welfare of the kingdom.18 Designed as a Dharmadhātuvāgīśvara mandala with 
Mañjuśrī as its main deity, Sewu underwent modifications, probably to accommodate 
the Vajradhātu mandala centered around Vairocana.19 Long’s study (2015: 13) convinc­
ingly correlates the number of niches available for the images at Sewu and the number of 
deities in the modified version of the Vajradhātu mandala. The surrounding shrines in 
the two successive rows (28 +​ 44) of Sewu’s central sanctuary make a total of 72, identical 
to the 72 perforated stūpas of Borobudur (figs. 26.42, 26.43).
Figure 26.42.  Arrangement of 72 shrines around the central sanctuary of Sewu. Drawing by 
author, based on the plan displayed at the site museum.

--- PAGE 640 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      615
 
Figure 26.43.  Seventy-​two perforated stūpikas placed on the circular terraces around the top­
most stūpa of Borobudur.
Drawing by author.
Originally, Sewu had four satellite temples (Bubrah, Asu, Kulon, and Lor) located 
on the cardinal points along with others, such as Lumbung, that possibly displayed 
sections of the main mandala of Sewu. Mañjuśrī would have been installed at Lumbung, 
exhibiting the nature of Trailokyavijaya, “Victor of the Three Realms,” and surrounded 
by the wrathful guardians of the ten directions.20 Based on the arrangement of 11 niches 
in the Lumbung’s central sanctuary, Long (2015: 18) argues that the temple was intended 
to represent a particular section of the Mañjuśrī mandala with Trailokyavijaya as a prin­
cipal deity. The importance of Mañjuśrī in the Javanese political sphere finds a parallel 
in the tantric Buddhism of Chinese Tang and Indian Pāla courts around the same time 
(Miksic 2006; Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 130).
It is necessary to note the evidence of Trailokyavijaya worship in Central Java 
during the late 8th century.21 The origin of Trailokyavijaya is explained in the 
Trailokyavijayapatala section of the STTS (Iyanaga 1985: 633–​745; Kwon 2002: pt. 2, 
chap. 6, 136–​156).

--- PAGE 641 ---
616      Swati Chemburkar
 
Along with the temples, the Śailendras re-​created the Sri Lankan Abhayagiri vihāra 
on Ratu Boko plateau, Central Java. The architecture of Javanese vihāra shared several 
common features with the Sri Lankan one, especially that of a building with raised 
double platforms (Sundberg: 2014; figs. 26.44–​47). The Javanese structure was in­
tended to house tantric Sinhalese Buddhist rag-​wearing monks (pāṃśukūlikas),22 
who were studying Buddhist Yogatantra texts. The structure had an extensive li­
brary of tantras, while mastery of the tantric rituals at Anuradhapura in Sri Lanka 
was also undertaken. Sundberg (2014: 104) argues regarding the function of the raised 
platforms: “the only role for this structure that seems plausible to me is that of an 
Abhayagirin consecration platform, either for initiates or for kings. . . . and I consider 
it not implausible that the Abhayagirins conducted rituals for the royalty in much 
the same manner, for example, as Amoghavajra. . . . Indeed, if the Abhayagirivāsins 
consecrated the Śailendra kings as cakravartins as Amoghavajra did for Suzong, there 
is circumstantial evidence.”
Figure 26.44.  The gate of Ratu Boko Abhayagiri vihāra, central Java.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 642 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      617
 
Figure 26.45.  Wall surrounding the double platform of Abhayagiri vihāra at Ratu Boko.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.46.  The double platform of Abhayagiri vihāra, inside the walled enclosure at 
Ratu Boko.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 643 ---
618      Swati Chemburkar
 
The Sri Lankan Abhayagiri monks played an important role in state coronation 
rituals, as discussed by Powell (2018: 3): “from the eighth to the eleventh centuries, 
Vajrayāna Buddhism, as represented by the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha and 
practices focused on its Vajradhātu-​maṇḍala, was widely practiced and studied in 
Sri Lanka. Consecration rituals featuring pañcabuddha Vajradhātu-​maṇḍalas were 
used to sacralise Buddhist sites as important as the Abhayagiri stūpa, and Sri Lankan 
practitioners were known to be experts in the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha—​so 
much so that Amoghavajra travelled to Anurādhapura, seeking out tantric teachers and 
manuscripts.”23 Column bases with the symbols of five Jina Buddhas and a gold plate 
inscription hinting at the cult of Vairocana are the archaeological finds from Ratu Boko 
(Degroot 2006: 72).
Figure 26.47.  The double platform of Girikaṇḍa vihāra at Tiriyāy in Sri Lanka. A similar one 
would have been built at Sri Lankan Abhayagiri vihāra.
Photo courtesy Sven Bretfeld.

--- PAGE 644 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      619
 
After the intense construction activity in Central Java, nothing noteworthy was 
built. In any case, the mid-​9th to late 10th century has been characterized as a “dark 
age for Buddhism” in China, Tibet, (Matsunaga 1978: viii) and Southeast Asia, with 
the single exception of the Đồng Dương temple in Campā (Woodward 2011: 33). 
Campā provided a stopover for the Indian monks on their long journeys to China 
as the navigation technologies of the period did not make the direct trip possible. 
Javanese and Indian influences were integrated into the distinctly Cam art of the pe­
riod (Schweyer 2009: 312). A 9th–​century An Thái inscription refers to a monastic 
meditation in which Vajrapāṇi is in charge of leading human beings “on the path of 
Vajra, the Vajrayāna” (Schweyer 2009: 314). Three levels (tridhātu) of meditation are 
mentioned in the inscription, along with the three Buddhas—​Vajrapāṇi, Lokeśvara, 
and Vajrasattva. No sculptural or architectural remains have been found to corre­
late the underlying philosophical system of the inscription, but Schweyer (2009: 315) 
argues for the close association of the inscription with the Javanese text Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Kamahāyānan Mantranaya.
A form of tantric Buddhism is evident in the construction of the 9th ​century 
Đồng Dương temple. The ground plan consists of an entrance, an assembly hall for 
congregational worship, a long approach, and enclosure I, which accommodated a 
four-​doored sanctuary and the primary image of the temple (fig. 26.48) (Parmentier 
1918; Baptiste and Zéphir 2005: 212–​232). A colossal bronze Buddha, now on dis­
play at Ho Chi Minh City Museum possibly welcomed the devotees. The head­
less, pendent-​legged Buddha was placed in the assembly hall accompanied by two 
bodhisattvas (figs. 26.49, 26.50). Originally, the temple gates were guarded by fero­
cious dvarapālas much like the gatekeepers of mandala paintings. (figs. 26.51–​53). 
Mahāvairocana in bodhyagrī mudrā was placed inside the four-​doored sanctuary 
of enclosure I (fig. 26.54) (Baptiste and Zéphir 2005: 213; Chuttiwongs 2005: 71, 
81). This mudrā is associated with Vairocana of the Vajradhātu mandala in tantric 
Buddhism. Installation of a female deity—​Lakṣmīndralokeśvara, as a primary image 
in the enclosure I, beyond Vairocana (figs. 26.55, 26.56) indicates the importance 
of goddess cults in Campā and suggests certain tantric practices at Đồng Dương.24 
Seven planetary deities were once placed around the enclosure I (numbered 1 to 7, 
one such example is fig. 26.57).

--- PAGE 645 ---
620      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.48.  Floor plan of Đồng Dương and its iconographic program. Schematic by author. 
This has an arrangement of deities, which correspond to the marked locations in the floor plan.
Figure 26.49.  Headless Buddha of the assembly hall, Da Nang Museum.
Photo courtesy Tran Ky Phoung.

--- PAGE 646 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      621
 
Figure 26.50.  Bodhisattva accompanying the assembly hall headless Buddha, Da Nang 
Museum.
Photo courtesy Tran Ky Phoung.

--- PAGE 647 ---
622      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.52.  Dvārapāla, or gatekeepers, of the first enclosure and assembly hall, Da Nang 
Museum.
Photo courtesy Tran Ky Phoung.
Figure 26.51.  Dvārapāla, or gatekeepers, of the first enclosure and assembly hall, Da Nang 
Museum.
Photo courtesy Tran Ky Phoung.

--- PAGE 648 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      623
 
Figure 26.53.  Dvārapāla, or gatekeepers, of the first enclosure and assembly hall, Da Nang 
Museum.
Photo courtesy Tran Ky Phoung.
Figure 26.54.  1.9 m tall Mahāvairocana in bodhyagiri mudra in private collection.
Photo: EFEO fonds Cambodge, ref. VIE00344. © EFEO Archive, Paris.

--- PAGE 649 ---
624      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.55.  Pedestal for the main deity Lakṣmīndralokeśvara, Da Nang Museum.
Photo Courtesy: Tran Ky Phoung.
Figure 26.56.  The main deity Lakṣmīndralokeśvara, 1.2 m tall bornze, Da Nang Museum.
Photo Courtesy: Tran Ky Phoung

--- PAGE 650 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      625
 
It’s impossible to identify specific mandalas in this location, but Schweyer (2009: 
319) suggests Borobudur’s influence. The pendent-​legged Buddha along with the 
bodhisattvas of the assembly hall would be similar to the central sanctuary triad of 
Candi Mendut. The epigraphy mentions people from Campā and India visiting the in­
tellectual Buddhist center of Java in the 9th century.25
Śailendra rule ended by the mid-​9th century, and Central Javanese power moved to­
ward East Java, marking the “second wave of Buddhism.” The artistic tradition and cul­
ture between the two regions continued, as is evidenced in the bronze mandala deities of 
this period. The 9th-​ to 10th-​century Surocolo and Ngañjuk bronzes from central and 
East Java are identified as part of large three-​dimensional Vajrasattva mandalas, while the 
East Javanese Ponorogo hoard is associated with the Vajrasattvakula mandala.26 Along 
with these statuaries, the various vajras, scepters, bells, mirrors, mandala statuettes, and 
inscribed foils of the Javanese shipwreck cargo appear to be the ritual paraphernalia typi­
cally used in mandalic initiations (Hall 2010: 15–​45; Miksic 2016: 259–​260).
Figure 26.57.  One of the seven planets that were once placed in enclosure 1. The Cleveland 
Museum of Art, Edward L. Wittemore Fund no. 1935.147. https://​www.cleve​land​art.org/​art/​
1935.147.

--- PAGE 651 ---
626      Swati Chemburkar
 
Narratives of the Vajradhātu Mandala and Its Appeal 
to Royalty
Why did these mandala initiations and this mandala architecture become impor­
tant to the ruling elites? The narratives of the SDPS introduce the basic cosmolog­
ical themes describing the way gods too are subjected to the law of karma, when they 
have fallen from heaven into hell. Śākyamuni then elaborates a list of horrific hells and 
rebirths the gods must endure to move toward the heavenly realms.27 So upset are the 
gods upon hearing their fate that they request Buddha to reveal the solution (SDPS 319; 
Skorupski 1983: 26). Buddha then promises that those who hear, utter, and perform the spells 
and enter the mandala correctly will acquire worldly benefits, never suffer the bad rebirths, 
and attain enlightenment in due course. He then prescribes specific homa rituals (SDPS 319–​
320; Skorupski 1983: 32) of pacification, augmentation, subjugation, and execution, associated 
with the specific deities one must invoke in order to climb the ladder to the heavenly rebirth.
Buddhist missionaries could use the ominous threat of a bad rebirth to impress upon 
potential converts the value of apotropaic rites that only Buddhists could provide. The 
Vajradhātu mandala is concerned with rectifying the lives of sinful kings, as is discussed in 
the second chapter of the SDPS. It is claimed that by drawing the mandala of the four great 
kings and performing the Indramahābhiṣeka and Pūrṇamahābhiṣeka, “not being a king (the 
uninitiated) becomes a king, being a king (the initiated) becomes a great king” (Skorupski 
1983: 19–​20). These abhiṣeka rituals are discussed by Thomas (1908–​26: 20). Javanese ac­
counts of mandalic rituals influencing architecture come from the 13th and 14th centuries.
The Second Wave of Buddhism 
(Late 10th to 14th Centuries)
East Java
The majority of the Buddhist structures in East Java are from the Siṅhasāri/​Mājapāhit 
reigns (1222–​1500 CE), when Hinduism and Buddhism merged into one religious be­
lief described as tantric.28 The 14th century Javanese text Deśavarṇana/​Nāgarkṛtāgama 
asserts the divine nature of kings who descended to earth for the prosperity of the 
kingdom and returned to the heavenly abode after completing their tasks.29
The Vajrayāna concept of a temporal king as a potential Buddha had an impact on the 
art and architecture of East Java. Worship of the god in a temple became the veneration 
of the deceased king in his deified form, and the East Javanese temples became ceremo­
nial mandala centers through which the union with the chosen deity was established.
Tantric Buddhism provided a perfect support for the East Javanese kingship, which 
was based on bloody battles of succession. Practices of eradicating all negative karma 
are common in the Buddhist tradition, but the ritual techniques explicitly eliminating

--- PAGE 652 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      627
 
the stain of negative karma are crucial to the tantric tradition. For example, in 
Vajrabodhi’s “Brief Explanation of the Production, Recollection, and Recitation of the 
Yoga of the Diamond Peak Scripture” manual we find, “both World Honoured Ones 
[i.e. Buddhas] and sentient beings who have committed great crimes are to be seen in 
this great maṇḍala of the Diamond Realm. And as for those who enter [this mandala], 
each and every one of all of their crimes and hindrances are removed” (Taishō canon T 
8666.224a3-​15, Trans. Goble 2016: 135).
The East Javanese temple architecture displays two distinct types—​a slender tower 
like the structure of Candi Kidal, Candi Jawi, and the terraced temples of Candi Jago and 
Candi Panataran—​but the cruciform plan for the central sanctuary remained constant 
for both.
Figure 26.58.  The terraced, cruciform temple of Jago.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 653 ---
628      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.59.  Amoghapaśa staute kept on the site of Candi Jago.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.60.  Śyāmatārā, Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 247b.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 654 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      629
 
Figure 26.61.  Bhṛkuṭī, Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 112a.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.62.  Sudhanakumāra, Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 247a.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 655 ---
630      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.63.  Hayagrīva, Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 76a.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.64.  Bhairava/​Mahakāla, in situ till 2004 but now missing.
(Photo: Kern Institute Collection, Leiden University Library, KITLV 161350 -​ https://​dig​ital​coll​ecti​ons. 
uni​vers​itei​tlei​den.nl.

--- PAGE 656 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      631
 
Figure 26.65.  Akṣobhya, Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 224a.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.66.  Ratnasambhava, Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 248a.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 657 ---
632      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.67.  Pānduravasinī, Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 225a.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.68.  Locanā, Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 248b.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 658 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      633
 
Figure 26.69.  Māmakī, British Museum, no. 1859,1228.171.
Photo by Peter Sharrock.
Figure 26.70.  Mañjuśrī replica at the Museum Nasional Indonesia. Original kept at the 
Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 659 ---
634      Swati Chemburkar
 
King Kṛtanagara (r. 1268–​1292) built Jago’s cruciform sanctuary on a terraced struc­
ture (fig. 26.58) to commemorate his father, Viṣṇuvardhana, as Amoghapāśa. The stat­
uary of Amoghapāśa, his four attendants—​four Jina Buddhas and their consorts—​house 
a total of 13 deities of the mandala in the architecture of Jago along with Arapacana 
Mañjuśrī, and Mahākāla.30 (See figs. 26.59–​70) for the iconographic program of the 
temple.) O’Brien’s (1993: 261–​279) study of the temple establishes the four quarters of 
the temple as the quarters of the Jina Buddhas of the Vajradhātu mandala. The texts 
STTS and SDPS, which described the Vajradhātu, have not been found in any form in 
Indonesia, but a small selection of verses from both these texts has been identified in 
the old Javanese Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantrayana, indicating knowledge of some 
of the key concepts embodied in these texts (Kandahjaya 2016: 70). The 13 deities of the 
Amoghapāśa mandala seen in the architecture of Jago were replicated in sculptures and 
bronzes of the deity, of which one composite stone sculpture was sent to Sumatra (as 
seen in fig. 26.81).
Along with Jago, there are three other religious establishments associated with King 
Kṛtanagara: the site of Wurare, a cremation ground; Candi Siṅhosāri; and Candi Jawi. 
The site of Wurare is not yet satisfactorily identified, but it is known that here the king 
was reconsecrated as Mahākṣobhya, a tantric form of Jina Akṣobhya, the Guhyasamāja 
tantra’s main deity.31
The cruciform temple of Siṅhosāri was built to serve the living king (fig. 26.71). 
Siṅhosāri images include Nandīśvara, the fearsome Mahākāla, the demonic Durgā, 
the skull-​bedecked Gaṇeśa, a bearded ascetic with a trident (figs. 26.72–​77); and 
an image of Bhairava was found in the vicinity bearing the Devanāgarī inscription 
cakracakra (fig. 26.78).32 The image depicts a naked dancing figure on a skull base 
wearing a skull garland and holding a skull cup and sacrificial knife. Bhairava is 
also represented on the few composite sculptures of Siṅhosāri which have been 
found. It seems that Kṛtanagara paid special attention to the Bhairava priests to 
cultivate the divine aspect of the god,33 useful in the course of military encounters 
and warfare.
Siṅhosāri is often referred to as the abode of Śiva-​Buddha, possibly indicating 
the place where King Kṛtanagara finally attained that dual status before his demise 
in 1292 while performing the tantric ritual. The extraordinary macabre traits of the 
skull decorations and sculptural components of Candi Siṅhosāri reflect the con­
cept of a cremation ground. The temple was rebuilt by the Majapahit prime minister 
Gaja Mada (1290–​1364) and dedicated it to the people who lost their lives during the 
Kings’ tantric ritual involving certain horrific cremation ground rites. (Slametmuljana 
1976: 28–​29).

--- PAGE 660 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      635
 
Figure 26.71.  Candi Siṅhosāri, east Java.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.72.  Candi Siṅhosāri-​Temple plan: https://​www.wikiw​and.com/​en/​Singha​sari​_​tem​
ple#Media/​File:Candi-​Singha​sari​_​Mal​ang_​pre1​912.jpg.

--- PAGE 661 ---
636      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.73.  Nandiśvara in the north side of the western entrance (b). National Museum of 
Ethnology, Leiden. RMV 1403-​1624.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 662 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      637
 
Figure 26.74.  Dūrga Mahiśasuramardinī in the northern chamber (c). National Museum of 
Ethnology, Leiden. RMV1403-​1622.
Photo by author.
Figure 26.75.  Gaṇeśa in the eastern chamber (d). National Museum of Ethnology, Leiden. 
RMV1403-​168.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 663 ---
638      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.76.  Śiva guru Agastya in the south chamber, in situ (e).
Photo by author.
Figure 26.77.  Mahākāla in the south side of the western entrance (f). National Museum of 
Ethnology, Leiden. RMV1403-​1623.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 664 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      639
 
At Candi Jajawa/​Jawi, a two-​story commemorative temple, Kṛtanagara ascended 
to the abode of Śiva-​Buddha (fig. 26.79) Krom (1931: 345) thought that the 
temple enshrined two statues: Śiva in the lower story and Akṣobhya in the upper. 
Poerbatjaraka (1917: 147) argued the likelihood of an installation in that temple of a 
Figure 26.78.  Bhairava found in the vicinity of the temple National Museum of Ethnology, 
Leiden. RMV1403-​1680
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 665 ---
640      Swati Chemburkar
 
Śiva statue with a small Akṣobhya image in his diadem. No such image has been found 
from the site, but two Mahākālas with Akṣobhya in their crowns have been found, one 
at Candi Jago (fig. 26.64) and the other at Pdanag Roco in Sumatra. The Padang Roco 
statue may have been installed at Jawi in relation to Kṛtanagara (fig. 26.80).34 At an­
other unidentified royal temple at Sagala, King Kṛtanagara was united with his queen 
in the same manner that Vairocana was united with his consort Locanā in the image of 
Ardhanārīśvari.35
Figure 26.79.  Two-​storied temple of Jawi.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 666 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      641
 
Some idea of royal Javanese rituals is given in Deśwarṇana/​ Nāgarakṛtāgama. The text 
draws analogies between the sisters of King Rājasanāgara/​Hayam Wuruk (Kṛtanagara’s 
great-​grandson) and the subtle body channels of “Pinggalā” and “Iḍā” and compares 
his wife to that of “Susumṇā,” indicating knowledge of tantric yogic practices.36 The text 
narrates an elaborate śrāddha (ancestral offering) ritual of Rājapatnī Gāyatrī, Hayam 
Figure 26.80.  Padang Roco Mahākāla/​*Pañjaranātha Mahākāla statue, 4.14 m tall. Museum 
Nasional Indonesia, no. 6470.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 667 ---
642      Swati Chemburkar
 
Wuruk’s grandmother, and Kṛtanagara’s daughter, indicating the merging of the queen 
with Prajñāparāmitā via the supratiṣṭha ritual:
Canto 64:3
Now the procedure for the royal ceremony was the ultimate in worship of the All-​
Knowing Buddha:
All the Buddhist priests adept in the Tantras were witnesses to the drawing of the 
sacred circle [mandala?].
Led by the Abbot, the chief court-​chaplain who is diligent in the foundation 
at Naḍī,
A man of established piety, very virtuous, righteous and completely imbued with 
the teachings of the Three Tantras . . . on the twelfth day the soul was invoked . . . 
by means of yoga and that night the Supratiṣṭha ritual was performed. (translation 
Robson 71; boldface added)
After completion of all the rites, including music, dance, and feasting, the queen 
was deified as Prajñāparāmitā, conceived as the mother of all Buddhas in tan­
tric thought. Candi Boyolangu was erected as the deification image of Rājapatnī 
Gāyatrī.37
Sumatra
Kṛtanagara’s composite Amoghapaśa statue replicating the Jago iconographic pro­
gram was sent to Sumatra in 1286 (fig. 26.81), to advance either his expansionist poli­
tics (Kulke 2009: 230) or an alliance with the Malayu king against Kublai Khan’s threat 
(Berg 1965: 99; de Casparis 1985: 247–​248). The motive behind this move is debatable, 
but the statue’s importance is undeniable, as even after sixty years, King Ādityavarman 
(1320–​1378) reconsecrated it as Gagaṇagañja at Rambāhan, Dharmaśraya, one of the 
key sites around the upper Batang Hari river. Gagaṇagañja appears in the Mañjuvajra, 
Dharmadhātuvāgīśvara, and Durgatipariśodhana mandalas (Bhattacharyya 1968: 86–​
87) as well as the Vajradhātu and Mahāvairocana mandalas (de Mallmann 1975: 164). 
The statue was possibly used to legitimize Ādityavarman’s rule by employing Buddhist 
imagery, as the inscription hints at the king being the incarnation of the god. It is impor­
tant to note that the base of the statue is carved with the seven jewels, or saptaratna, of a 
universal ruler.

--- PAGE 668 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      643
 
The statue found at Padang Roco—​a ferocious Mahākāla/​*Pañjaranātha Mahākāla—​
is associated with Kṛtanagara and Ādityavarman (fig. 26.80).38 Klokke (1994) suggests 
that it is a deification statue of Ādityavarman. Reichle (2007: 204–​209) and Kulke (2009: 
247) argue that it served as a symbol of royal political power. Hunter (2015: 308) assumes 
that the statue played a symbolic role in psychosexual rituals. Acri and Wenta (2022: 37) 
argue for the statue being a portrait statue of Kṛtanagara that was once housed in the East 
Javanese temple of Jawi and was possibly repurposed/​reconsecrated by Ādityavarman. 
The “made in East Java” statue was either sent to Sumatra by Kṛtanagara or brought by 
Ādityavarman to his kingdom.39
The extent of Ādityavarman’s political power is not known, but the memory of the 
king’s court was carried by the Minangkabau people for centuries in the west Sumatran 
highlands. A “Si Mandang Giri” dagger from the Minangkabau royal treasury displays 
male (possibly Mahākāla) and female images. Bosch (1930: 214, pl. 49a–​f) compares the 
Figure 26.81.  Amoghapāśa statue that was sent to Sumatra, 1.63 m tall. Seven jewels can be 
seen at the bottom. Museum Nasional Indonesia, no. 6469.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 669 ---
644      Swati Chemburkar
 
weapon held by the male figure to the Padang Roco and Candi Jago Mahākāla statues, 
suggesting the possibility of its use in the royal consecration rites. Similar weapons are 
also depicted on the reliefs of the Majapahit state temple of Panataran.
Sumatra’s significant place within tantric Buddhism from the 7th century onward 
is summarized by Miksic (2006), but most of the archaeological remains displaying 
fierce deities of later Tantric Buddhism belong to the 10th to 13th centuries. The largest 
concentrations of the remains are at Muara Takus, Muara Jambi, and Padang Lawas.
An inscribed gold disc found at one of the Muara Takus temples mentions how they 
were built by the “Vajradhara” sect in the 11th century (Schnitger 1937b). Two stone 
artifacts bearing Viśvavajra motifs and a mandala-​like diagram of seed syllables (ten­
tative reading by Griffiths 2014b: 236), might indicate tantric Buddhist culture (figs. 
26.82, 26.83). The arrangement of Nāgarī letters on the stone represents deities and their 
consorts. Kandahjaya’s (2016: 88, n. 61) revised reading finds a similar series of seed 
syllables in many tantric texts. Due to the restoration of these temples, the original ar­
chitectural design remains obscure.
Figure 26.82.  Stone with Nāgarī letters and vajra carvings found at Bungsu temple.
Photo: Kern Institute Collection, Leiden University Library, GD 13 1321

--- PAGE 670 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      645
 
Candi Gumpung (built in the 9th to 10th centuries and enlarged during the 11th and 
12th centuries), one of the largest temples of Muara Jambi, is a rectangular cella erected 
on a high plinth with projecting niches. Inscribed gold plates found during excavations 
name the deities belonging to either the Vajradhātu or Trailokyavijaya mandala, clearly 
indicating its incorporation in the temple architecture.40
Material remains of Padang Lawas display tantric Buddhist currents from the 11th to 
13th centuries. Several temples, stūpas, and large altars were constructed, of which Bahal 
I, II, III, Pulo, Si Pamutung, and Aek Sangkilon are the most important.
Figure 26.83.  Kandahjaya’s reading (2016: 88, n. 61) of the Nāgarī letters on the stone.
Schematic by author.

--- PAGE 671 ---
646      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.84.  Padang Lawas Heruka, Biaro Bahal II, 1.18 m tall. Now at the site museum, Biaro 
Bahal. Photo: John C. Huntington.
Courtesy of the John C. and Susan L. Huntington Photographic Archive of Buddhist and Asian Art. 
https://​dsal.uchic​ago.edu/​cgi​bin/​hun​ting​ton/​show​_​det​ail.py?Objec​tID=​30126​624.

--- PAGE 672 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      647
 
All these have suffered irretrievable loss with ruined sanctuaries, mutilated 
sculptures, and poorly preserved artifacts, but the 13th century epigraphy clearly 
indicates the importance of the Hevajra cult.41 Images of Buddha, Avalokiteśvara, 
Prajñāparāmitā, Vajrasattva (Schnitger 1937a: 22), fearful animal-​headed dancing fig­
ures (Berger 1995: 149–​152; Miksic 1992: 75), Heruka (fig. 26.84), and Mahākāla do shed 
light on the tantric background of the site as is highlighted by Bautze-​Picron (2014: 
107): “the images from Padang Lawas are integrated in a network which connects them 
to South Asia, East Java (Singasari), Central Sumatra (Malayu), Cambodia, and Campā 
in the 11th and 13th centuries. Evidence of various kinds is found in all of these regions, 
proving the existence of Vajrayāna in its latest phase as an integral part of the royal 
function: Hevajra is the protector of the State in Cambodia and perhaps also Campā, 
whereas it is Mahākāla who assumes the role in the Yuan Empire.” Despite the evidence 
of Heruka worship in Indonesia, the Padang Lawas statue is his only known image 
from the archipelago. Several 11th​ and 12th ​century images of Heruka and an analo­
gous entity—​Saṃvara—​from eastern Indian monasteries have been found, but there 
is no knowledge of how early the related rituals were exercised within the monasteries. 
The tantric deities worshipped within the Indian monastic contexts clearly found a 
place within the royal courts of Southeast Asia (Davidson 2002: 115; Linrothe 1999: 274; 
Sharrock: 2022).
Cambodia
Khmer monarchs viewed the employment of tantric rituals as a necessary adjunct to 
more conventional means of exercising power. The Buddhist dynasty of Mahīdharapura, 
presumably near Phimai in the Khorat plateau in modern Thailand, included a number 
of usurpers who all excelled at building state ceremonial centers.
One of the earliest examples of the royal worship of a Heruka-​type deity, Saṃvara, is 
seen at the 11th ​ to 12th ​century Phimai temple, the first major Khmer politico-​religious 
center (fig. 26.85).42 The tantric Buddhism of the Mahīdhara king, Jayavarman VI, is 
evident at the temple’s central sanctuary. The lintels showcase deeply carved reliefs 
of Saṃvara, a crowned Buddha under a tree, and a six-​armed, three-​/​four-​headed 
Vajrasattva in dhyāna mudrā seated in a celestial pentad in the center (figs. 26.86–​89). 
All the deities are accompanied by yoginīs dancing on corpses. Scholars have 
attempted different interpretations of the Vajrasattva figure.43 Based on a local Sab 
Bāk inscription (K. 1158 of 1066 CE), Conti (2014: 387) identifies it as the pentad of 
Akṣobhya (as Śrī Samāja): “I identify the central deity as Akṣobhya, with his four 
fellow Jinas. Akṣobhya is the Jina in the center of the Guhyasamājamaṇḍala and 
the supreme ‘deity.’ The Jinas in Prasat Hin Phimai fit the description given in the 
Guhyasamājatantra where they are described in their ‘vajra form’ as ‘three-​headed’ 
with ‘six arms’ and wearing a ‘crown.’ ”

--- PAGE 673 ---
648      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.85.  Phimai temple central sanctuary seen from the southeast.
Photo courtesy Olivier Cunin.

--- PAGE 674 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      649
 
Figure 26.86.  Schematic temple plan of Phimai Schematic by author.

--- PAGE 675 ---
650      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.87.  Lintel 1, Saṃvara and yoginīs.
Photo courtesy Pia Conti.
Figure 26.88.  Lintel 2, seated Vajrasattva and yoginīs.
Photo courtesy Pia Conti
Figure 26.89.  Lintel 3, standing Buddha in preaching posture and yoginīs.
Photo courtesy Pia Conti.

--- PAGE 676 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      651
 
The Khmer part of the inscription mentions the erection of Buddhist images 
on Abhayagiri hill by a tantric practitioner, Satyavarman, for the protection of the 
realm (Estève 2009: 442–​453, 541–​546; Prapadvidya 1990: 11–​14; Skorupski 2014: 
381–​383).
Another inscription (Cœdès 1924: 350) from the Phimai temple mentions the instal­
lation of a Trailokyavijaya image. Though no stone image of the deity has been found, a 
bronze kept at the National Museum Bangkok and one of the Phimai lintels might be the 
representation of the deity (Conti 2010: 9, 23; fig. 26.90).
Discussing the role of tantric Buddhist specialists during the coronation of 
Jayavarman VI at Phimai, Conti (2010: 17) points out a lintel illustrating the aśvamedha 
(horse sacrifice) ceremony, typically performed at the establishment of a new kingdom 
(fig. 26.91). It is difficult to know whether any tantric abhiṣeka was performed at Phimai, 
but a clear expression of the acquired siddhis via abhiṣeka rites is provided by the 11th-​
century Sdok Kak Thom inscription that presents Vīṇāśikha, an early Śaiva tantra text, 
as a key support of the Khmer state.44
Figure 26.90.  Possible depiction of Trailokyavijaya on an outer enclosure lintel.
Photo courtesy Olivier Cunin

--- PAGE 677 ---
652      Swati Chemburkar
 
Another Mahīdhara king, Jayavarman VII, made a greater break with tradition when 
he seized power in a military coup and made Buddhism the state religion for the first 
time in Angkor. His Buddhist creed was based on the Yoginī tantras. Boeles suggested 
(1966: 28) that by the early 12th century, the Hevajra cult had adherents in northeastern 
Thailand and a form of Vajrayāna originating from Phimai might have spread to Angkor. 
The earliest Khmer Hevajra bronze icons at Phimai are from the 11th century, but a large 
number of his images and associated ritual paraphernalia are found in Cambodia from 
Jayavarman VII’s reign. Given the overwhelming art historical evidence, there is no 
doubt that the Hevajra tantra was known to the Khmers.
Hevajra became truly a royal deity for Jayavarman VII. His statue was installed at Ta 
Prohm temple;45 two caitya pillars with Hevajra engravings were erected at the Preah 
Khan temple of Kompong Svay (Baptiste and Zéphir 2008: 441; 2013: 236), and then 
a huge cult image of the deity graced the entrance of the 13th century state temple of 
Bayon (fig. 26.94) (Cunin 2018; Sharrock 2022).
Bayon is constructed as a terraced, cruciform structure with the towering central 
sanctuary housing face towers in its architecture. The central sanctuary stands on a 
circular, lotus-​shaped base surrounded by eight chambers with face towers. The dark 
corridor around the sanctuary has four doorways at cardinal points (fig. 26.92). This ar­
rangement of structures resembles Hevajra mandala (fig. 26.93) and the face towers that 
stare out from the central sanctuary make it look like a multi-​headed icon. (fig. 26.95) 
(Maxwell 2007b: 86).
The close affinity between the temple’s sanctuary and the contemporary Khmer 
Hevajra bronze is remarkable (fig. 26.96). Eight yoginīs surround the deity inside 
Figure 26.91.  Depiction of horse sacrifice ceremony on a lintel.
Photo courtesy Pia Conti.

--- PAGE 678 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      653
 
Figure 26.92.  Bayon temple plan redrawn by the author based on Dumarçay’s plan published 
in 1967 (pl. III) with corrections and addition by Cunin 2004.). The highlighted central sanctuary 
displays some resemblance to the painted Hevajra mandala at the Metropolitan Museum, New 
York (fig. 26.93). It stands on a cruciform base. The eastern entrance sanctuary BY55 where a huge 
Hevajra statue would have been installed (fig. 26.94).
a palatial pavilion that stands on a cruciform base with four doors at the cardinal 
directions. Instead of Hevajra, Bayon’s central sanctuary housed the huge nāga-​
enthroned Buddha, but the base is adorned with female figures dancing in the same 
posture as the yoginīs.

--- PAGE 679 ---
654      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.93.  Hevajra mandala, 15th-​century Tibet. Metropolitan Museum, New York, 
no. 2015.551.

--- PAGE 680 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      655
 
Figure 26.94.  Virtual archaeological assemblage of the Hevajra statue placed at the eastern 
entrance (BY55) of the Bayon temple (Cunin 2018).
Courtesy Olivier Cunin.

--- PAGE 681 ---
656      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.95.  Central sanctuary of the Bayon temple, resembling multiple-​headed icon.
Photo by author.

--- PAGE 682 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      657
 
Figure 26.96.  Hevajra surrounded by his yoginīs inside a palace-​like structure standing on a 
cruciform base. National Museum of Cambodia, no. Ga.2494.
No specific mandala can be assigned to the Bayon, but the development is akin to that 
of the earlier mandala architecture. It is the only temple of the period with a circular cen­
tral sanctuary, similar to the yoginī temples and yoginītantra mandalas.
Linrothe (1999: 274) argues: “if there was a Hevajra cult, it seems to have thrived in 
Southeast Asia. . . . The transmission of the Hevajra teachings was probably reinforced 
through contacts along the maritime routes from island Southeast Asia and eastern India. 
Whatever the exact route, it clearly had considerable influence in the highest levels of so­
ciety. Seemingly removed from his yogic and monastic origins, Hevajra was utilized in the 
royal cult . . . as part of an attempt at local legitimization.” Hevajra was also important in

--- PAGE 683 ---
658      Swati Chemburkar
 
the 12th century Cam domain when Jayavarman VII’s close aide Vidyānandana celebrated 
the revolt against the king with the construction of the “Lord Heruka mansion.”46 There is 
no recorded precedent in Campā for the Heruka cult, strengthening the possibility that it 
was a direct export from Angkor, and therefore a reflection of Jayavarman’s Hevajra cult.
Banteay Chhmar, another important temple complex of Jayavarman VII, was built in 
northwest Cambodia. It consists of a central temple with three satellite structures at car­
dinal directions (fig. 26.97). The central sanctuary has friezes of the multiarmed Heruka-​
type dancing deities of the late tantric Buddhism, but due to its ruined nature the exact 
identification is difficult (figs. 26.98, 26.99). Along with these friezes, eight multiarmed, 
multiheaded tantric Avalokiteśvaras representing scenes from Kāraṇḍavyūha sūtra 
(Boisselier 1964: 73–​89) and 11–​headed, 22-​armed Prajñāparāmitās carved on the temple 
walls are enough to indicate the tantric features of the temple (figs. 26.100–​105).
Under Jayavarman VII, uniquely Khmer tantric forms of Prajñāpāramitā gained 
prominence (Chemburkar 2022) along with other tantric female images. Several 
bronzes of Vajradhara and Vajrasattva found from the kings’ reign indicate the impor­
tance of the last phase of Buddhist tantra.
Figure 26.97.  Banteay Chhmar temple plan redrawn by author after G. Groslier plan published 
in 1935 with additions by O. Cunin (2004-​2011).

--- PAGE 684 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      659
 
Figure 26.98.  Heruka-​type deities on the friezes of the central sanctuary of the temple.
Photos by author.
Figure 26.99.  Heruka-​type deities on the friezes of the central sanctuary of the temple.
Photos by author.

--- PAGE 685 ---
660      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.100.  Multiheaded, multiarmed Avalokiteśvara on the western gallery, south wing, 
in situ.
Photos by author.
Figure 26.101.  Multiheaded, multiarmed Avalokiteśvara on the western gallery, south wing, 
in  situ.
Photos by author.

--- PAGE 686 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      661
 
Figure 26.102.  Multiheaded, multiarmed Avalokiteśvara on the western gallery, south wing. 
National Museum of Cambodia, Phnom Penh Ka. 2859.
Photos by author.
Figure 26.103.  Multiheaded, multiarmed Avalokiteśvara on the western gallery, south wing. 
National Museum of Cambodia, Phnom Penh Ka. 2858.
Photos by author.

--- PAGE 687 ---
662      Swati Chemburkar
 
Figure 26.104.  Multiheaded, multiarmed Avalokiteśvara on the western gallery, south wing 
in  situ.
Photos by author.
Figure 26.105.  Multiheaded, multiarmed Avalokiteśvara on the western gallery, south wing, 
in  situ.
Photos by author.

--- PAGE 688 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      663
 
Tantra did influence every part of Southeast Asia at some point in history. The 
ritual appeal of these mandalas attained its apogee in the kingdoms of Central and 
East Java, Sumatra, Campā, and Angkor, where they were embedded within the sa­
cred architecture. To sum it up in Davidson’s words (2002: 168): “it is evident, how­
ever, that the maṇḍalas found in the [Indian] institutional works were accepted 
and supported by monarchs on the Indian borderlands, for they understood that 
Buddhist institutions had provided them with exactly the right combination of polit­
ical and religious authority.”
Conclusion
The pure enlightened world of mandalas served as blueprints for the temple architec­
ture, and as a validating feature to the sovereignty in the organization of the court. The 
correspondences among the mandala diagrams, royal ceremonies, and practices leave 
no doubt that mandalic architectural development must have been for ritual ceremonies 
rather than just worship.
Jñānamitra’s 7th-​ to 8th-​century commentary on Prajñāpāramitānayaśatapañcaśatikā/​ 
Prajñāpāramitānayasūtra/​ Adhrdyaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā (the 150-​line Perfection of 
Insight) provides an interesting mythological account of the preaching of the tantric 
scriptures and their transmission into the kingdom of King Indrabhutī (discussing the 
commentary, Davidson 2002: 243): “[Ācārya] Kukura divided up the queens and the 
court, each placed at physical direction in the maṇḍala. They and the princes and prin­
cesses all took their place on an enormous maṇḍala board, in a physical enactment of 
the Vajradhātu maṇḍala by the members of the court. Jñānamitra [the author of the 
commentary] assures us that, at the end, not only did Indrabhūti become a Vidyādhara 
but so did all the thousand members of the court . . . all became Vidyādharas.” Goble 
(2016: 124) provides an account of a ceremony held in the 11th century during a heav­
enly pacification. The Comprehensive Mirror for Aiding Government, produced by 
the court advisor Sima Guang (1019–​1086), depicts the following scene: “His Highness 
set up a maṇḍala (daochang 道場) in the Triple Hall (sandian 三殿) taking the Palace 
Women (gongren 宮人) to act as Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and the North Gate mili­
tary elite (beimen wushi 北門武士) to act as Vajra [pāṇis? -​sattvas?] and divine kings. 
He summoned the Grand Ministers (dachen 大臣) to prostrate to and circumambu­
late them (Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑒 222).” Incorporation of the Vajradhātu mandala and 
other successive mandalas in the construction of the royal monuments was a means of 
bolstering the political agendas of their patrons, particularly in periods of instability. 
Jayavarman VII in Cambodia (r. c. 1181–​1220), Kṛtanagara in East Java (r. 1268–​1292), 
Kublai Khan in China (r. 1260–​1294), and Ādityavarman in Java and Sumatra (r. ?–​1375) 
all followed the militant form of tantric Buddhism in building some of their key ritual 
centers. In the absence of literature on how these buildings were used, architecture 
becomes a common language to understand tantra and its development.

--- PAGE 689 ---
664      Swati Chemburkar
 
For example, no text explains Borobudur’s unique architecture, but its comparison 
to other mandalic monuments of the period provides some clues to the motives be­
hind its construction. Similarly, understanding Indian yoginī temples in relation to 
Śaiva/​Śākta texts has proven difficult, but they can be explained via common archi­
tectural elements.
Acknowledgments
My sincere thanks to Andrea Acri and Shivani Kapoor for all the helpful comments on drafts, 
to Gudrun Bühnemann for the Sanskrit language corrections, to Olivier Cunin for the helpful 
discussions on Khmer temples of Jayavarman VII, to Pia Conti and Tran Ky Phoung for the 
Phimai and Đồng Dương images, and to Richard Payne and Glen Hayes for useful suggestions 
as well as for being wonderful editors.
Notes
	1.	 When we compare the mandala ground plans with the temple and palace plans depicted 
in medieval architectural treatises such as Mayamata, the assosiation of Buddhist mandala 
terminology with palace architecture is evident. Nowhere in mandala discussion are found 
the desccriptions of a sanctum-​garbhagṛha of the temple or an assembly hall-​jaṅghā. The 
central deity of mandala resides in Kūṭāgāra and not garbhagṛha.
	2.	 Even though the arrangement of four Buddhas placed at the cardinal directions is seen at the 
main stūpa of Sanchi or Dekhināth stūpa at Gyāraspur, it does not follow any iconographic 
characteristics of the four Buddhas of the Garbhadhātu and Vajradhātu mandalas. At Sanchi 
all the four Buddhas are in meditation mudrā, and at Dekhinath, Buddhas display meditation 
(east), boon granting (south), dharma-​wheel (west), and meditation (north). These mudrās 
do not coincide with the two mandalas except for the boon granting mudrā of Ratnasambhava 
in the south. For the detailed analysis of Kesariya stūpa; Chemburkar 2016: 191–​210.
	3.	 Various combinations of the eight bodhisattvas are known, but the most popular in India 
is a group of Avalokiteśvara, Maitreya, Ākāśagarbha, Samantabhadra, Vajrapāṇi, Mañjuśrī, 
Sarvanīvaraṇaviṣkambhin, and Kṣitigarbha. See Bhattacharyya 1968.
	4.	 At Udayagiri a large brick stūpa houses four chambers on four cardinal directions that have 
images of the four Tathāgatas. The iconographic arrangement of the stūpa is interpreted 
by Japanese scholars as a combination of Vairocana, the main deity of the Garbhadhātu 
mandala, and the three of the four Buddhas of the Vajradhātu mandala. For the analysis 
of the Japanese scholarship and interpretation see, Tanaka 2018: 57, 58, images 2.12a, b, and 
c, and Donaldson 2001: 120. For the recent work on Udayagiri, see Mishra 2019: 230–​256. 
At Lagundi, they display meditation, fearlessness, earth touching, and meditation mudrā. 
There are several combinations of the five Buddhas in tantric Buddhism, but only the five 
Buddhas of the Garbhadhātu mandala include two single-​headed and two-​armed Buddhas 
in meditation mudrā as observed by Tanaka 2018: 59.
	5.	 For a detailed description of Somapura Vihāra, see Gill 2007: 176. Around 2,800 narra­
tive plaques have been recovered so far from the circumambulatory paths as noted by Gill 
2007: 184.
	6.	 Williams 1982: 157. Malandra’s study (1999) of Ellora and her commentary on other Buddhist 
sites establishes a base for this differentiation.

--- PAGE 690 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      665
 
	 7.	 For a facsimile edition and extensive introduction to Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha, see 
Snellgrove and Lokesh Chandra 1981: 5–​8; Abé 1999: 144–​146. For a recent discussion on 
STTS, see Do-​Kyun Kwon 2002: 22, 28, 29, and Weinberger 2003: 47, 61, 62, 72, 73, who 
has described the formation of the Vajradhātu mandala in STTS in the light of its Indian, 
Chinese, and Tibetan commentaries.
	 8.	 The Garbhadhātu mandala is derived from a version of theMahāvairocanābhisaṁbodhi 
sūtra translated from Sanskrit into Chinese by Śubhākarasiṁha (637–​735) in the 8th cen­
tury. The Vajradhātu mandala is based on the STTS translated by Amoghavajra (705–​774) 
in the 8th century. For a recent discussion on these mandalas in China, see Sinclair 2016: 
30, for Japan, see Snodgrass 1988 and ten Grotenhuis 1999.
	 9.	 Acri’s 2016a: 13 “ ‘First Wave’ of Buddhism” for this period is corroborated by the survey of 
tantric texts and a few mandala sketches as a part of manuscripts including Garbha man­
dala found at Dunhuang in China. See Sørensen 1991–​92: 285–​349.
	10.	 Sinclair 2016: 41, 47. For the erection of ritual consecration arenas for tantric initiations in 
the monasteries of Chang’an see Chen 2011: 289.
	11.	 The hypothesis that Bianhong returned to Java was first coined by Kandahjaya 2004: 165, 
251 and then supported by Woodward 2009: 25. However, Sinclair 2016: 35 finds no sup­
port in Chinese historical sources for this travel.
	12.	 Based on the Kaymwungan inscription (verses 11, 15) that describes a relationship between 
Śri Ghananātha and consecration of the vihāra, Kandahjaya 2016: 111 argues how cleverly 
the builders of Borobudur have represented “Śri Ghannātha” in the inscription mathemat­
ically and geometrically.
	13.	 Jan Moens [1951] 2007: 79, Chandra 1980: 17, and Chandra 1995a. Possible iconographical 
influence stemming from the later tantric phase of Ellora and other western Indian caves 
is suggested by Revire 2018: 279–​304. A similar arrangement is seen at Ratnagiri Chapel 4. 
See fig. 26.3.
	14.	 Another translation of the text was written by Puṇyodaya, who was active in Cambodia by 
the end of the 7th century. Bautze-​Picron 1997: 28 discusses the similarities between the 
iconography of eight bodhisattvas in Java, Shingon Buddhism, and 8th-​century Chinese 
texts. Also see Tanaka 2018: 31.
	15.	 Based on inscription no. 35 in Christie 2002–​4: “with the merit that he acquired by 
founding the abode of the Jina which is given the name illustrious Veṇuvana [Mendut], 
may he attain Sugatahood ten-​fold.” Degroot 2009: 99 argues: “the Hindu inscriptions 
found in Java do not mention temple building as a source of religious merit.” Kandahjaya 
2004: 127 gives a slightly different reading of the inscription.
	16.	 A Balinese stotra, Sarvāgneya shanikaramani samidha, mentions Vajranala. The phrase 
Shanti karama ni is an unambiguous reference to śāntika homa. See Hooykaas 1973: 86; 
compare Lokesh Chandra 1980: 35, 36.
	17.	 De Casparis 1950: 203 oddly thought it was used as a kitchen. Moens 2007: 68, 69 had 
assigned the openings in relation to the solar movement but with the different set of 
arguments has concluded it is a ritual structure.
	18.	 Sarkar 1971: vol. 1, 37, 45. Wayman 1981: 140 argues: “the Kelurak inscription is a glorifica­
tion of Manjughoṣa (=​ Mañjuśrī) as the paragon and prototype of knowledge-​beings, con­
sistent with the Tantric work Mañjuśrīnāmasaṅgīti in its Yoga-​tantra tradition.”
	19.	 Bosch ([1929]1961: 111) identified Sewu as a Vajradhātu mandala drawn from the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha. Chandra 1980: 8 has demonstrated in detail how a

--- PAGE 691 ---
666      Swati Chemburkar
 
Śailendra ruler, as an aspirant to the status of cakravartin, dedicated the temple to 
Vairocana. Kusen, Zaimul Azzah, and Gutomo 1993: 52, as cited in Miksic 2006: 190.
	20.	 Based on the word Vajradhṛk in the Saṅgrāmadhanañjaya inscription found near 
Lumbung, and Tibetan textual material, Wayman 1985: 31–​33 had argued that the des­
ignation Vajradhṛk could be applied to Vajrapāṇi as well as Trailokyavijaya. In the 
Niṣpannayogāvalī, the principal deity of the Vajrahūṁkāra mandala is given the epi­
thet of Trailokyavijaya exhibiting the Trailokyavijaya mudrā. He is surrounded by ten 
wrathful deities of the ten directions. The text also describes another mandala in which 
the central deity, Mañjuvajra, is surrounded by ten wrathful deities. See Bhattacharyya 
1949: 44, 58, 59.
	21.	 The Javanese evidence comes from epigraphic documents such as Ratu Boko gold foil and 
a lead plate inscription found from the west of Borobudur. See Griffiths 2014c: 183–​184, 
2014a: 32 and Acri 2016b: 323–​348. For an in-​depth study of the Trailokyavijaya cult in 
Central Java, see Gauvain 2022: 94–​133.
	22.	 The occurrence of the term saṃgūḍārtha, “tantric concerns/​secret meanings” (?), in both 
the Ratu Boko and Kelurak inscriptions is worthy of a mention. This could point to a tan­
tric Buddhist context. Sundberg (2014 [2015]: 96) aptly regards the Abhayagiri inscription 
as “the textual equivalent of the Barabuḍur stūpa” in that it is “superficially an expression 
of conventional Mahāyāna thought but endowed with a deep esoteric undercurrent.”
	23.	 The stone tablet unearthed from the Abhayagiri mahāstūpa was excerpted from the STTS’s 
second mandala, in which all of the peripheral vajra deities are female. Powell 2018 argues 
that the “practice of tantric Buddhism was anything but peripheral in eighth-​century 
Anurādhapura.”
	24.	 Woodward 2011: 39 suggests: “if Lakṣmīndralokeśvara is really Prajñāpāramitā, on the 
other hand, the Mahāvairocana sutra could indeed be relevant, especially if it is held that 
the text can be interpreted to mean that Prajñāpāramitā in fact belongs in a spot more 
prominent than the one she was given in the Japanese Garbhadhātu.”
	25.	 A 9th-​century Cam inscription (c. 149) records the ministers of the king of kings going 
twice to Java on diplomatic missions. See Huber 1911: 299, Jaques 1995: 273–​285, and 
Schweyer 2009: 316. A Javanese inscription that mentions pilgrims arriving from 
Gurjaradeśa refers either to Gujarat in western India, the Valabhī domain of the Maitrika 
kings, or to the kingdom of the Gurjara Pratihāras in central-​north India. See de Casparis 
1956: 188–​189.
	26.	 Lokesh Chandra and Sudarshana Devi Singhal 1995b: 97–​107 found that the Ngañjuk 
bronzes belonged almost entirely to the Vajradhātu mandala described in the 8th-​century 
STTS and SDPS as well as in the mandala of the Niṣpannayogāvalī. For the Surocolo hoard, 
both 1995b: 121–​147 assigned some statues to the Hevajra mandala. Sundberg and Giebel 
2011: 218, n. 173 argue that the Surocolo bronzes were derived from the Hevajra mandala. 
However, the presence of the drummer Mukuṇḍā in the Ngañjuk hoard is problematic, as 
it is not a part of the Vajradhātu mandala, and the principal deity of the Hevajra mandala is 
missing from the Surocolo hoard. See Woodward 2004: 344. For Ponorogo, see Matsunaga 
2017: 1–​21.
	27.	 The SDPS, an Indo-​Tibetan explanatory text of the STTS, probably originated in Java and 
described the Vajradhātu mandala; Tadeusz Skorupski, personal communication. For the 
narratives, see SDPS: 307, Skorupski 1983: 20.
	28.	 The 14th-​century Javanese text Sutasoma, canto 139, says “bhinneka tunggal ika,” which 
means that Śiva and Buddha are two, but at the same time they are one: see Zoetmulder

--- PAGE 692 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      667
 
1974: 341 and Santoso 1975: 5, 81. Arjunawijaya equates five Jina Buddhas to five 
manifestations of Śiva, as observed by Zoetmulder 1974: 327.
	29.	 See, for example, Nāgarkṛtāgama, canto 92 (Robson 1995: 93), which describes Hayam 
Wuruk as an avatāra of Śrī Girinātha (Śiva, the lord of the mountain); Pigeaud (1960–​63: 
vol. 3:110; vol. 4: 331, 335). See Kern 1917:219 for the 14th-​century Kubu Rajo inscription I, 
which considers Hayam Wuruk an avatāra of Śrī Lokeśvara.
	30.	 Identified as a Buddhist Bhairava by Bosch 1930a: 212–​213, Schnitger 1937a: 9, Kempers 
1959: 88, Reichle 2007: 198–​200, and Lunsingh Scheurleer 2008: 295. Bautze-​Picron 2014: 
113 identifies it as Mahākāla. The image displays a row of skulls above the head forming a 
crown and possibly carries Akṣobhya, which is now badly ruined.
	31.	 The inscription on the statue mentions that it was reconsecrated with devotion at the cem­
etery named Wurare in conformity with Mahākṣobhya. Kern 1910: 99–​108, Poerbatjaraka 
1922: 426–​461, Nihom 1986: 485–​501, and Chandra 1995a: 161 associate Mahākṣobhya with 
mahāyoga tantras and the deity with Guhyasamāja.
	32.	 Fontein 1990: 162. Scholars have emphasized the difficulty in differentiating between 
Śaivite Bhairavas and Buddhist demonic figures such as Mahākāla. The iconographic traits 
of these two deities are common, making it difficult to determine the identity especially 
during the Majapahit period, when Hinduism and Buddhism were fused in tantrism. 
Reichle 2007: 189 identifies it as Buddhist Bhairava. Hunter 2007: 36 hints the association 
of the cakracakra image to the divine Bhairava aspect.
	33.	 Pigeaud (1960–​63: vol. 1: 104–​107; vol. 2: 135–​136; vol. 3: 152–​153); Piegeaud 1924: 104–​128. 
Haryani Santiko 1995: 58. For a good discussion on the sect see Acri 2019: 285–​307.
	34.	 Reichle 2007, 85–​132 identifies Padang Roco statue as Bhairava. Bautze-​Picron 2014: 113 
identifies it as Mahākāla. While supporting Bautze-​Picron’s identification of the image as 
Mahākāla, Acri and Wenta 2021 associate it with a specific form, *Pañjaranātha Mahākāla, 
but keep the option open of iconographic contaminations from Bhairava. They argue that 
it represented a deified statue of Kṛtanagara, and tentatively suggest that its original lo­
cation might have been Candi Jawi. The Bhairava statue found at Jago was described by 
Schnitger 1937a: 9 as “with skull and dagger in his hands and with an Akṣobhya in his hair.” 
Sadly, the statue was badly broken and only the torso remained on site till 1990s but in 
2004 it was reported as stolen.
	35.	 Nāgarakṛtāgama, canto 43, see Robson (1995: 56) and Pigeaud (1960–​63: vol. 2:59; vol. 3: 
50). Chuttiwongs 2008: 102 argues that the image came from the temple of Jawi.
	36.	 See Nāgarakṛtāgama, cantos 6 and 7. Robson (1995: 27, 28, 99) suggests that the names 
are taken from the tantric system of yoga, while Pigeaud (1960–​63: vol. 3: 7, 8; 4: 542, 543 
discusses them specifically with respect to Kuṇḍalinī yoga. Acri confirms the presence of 
some Śaivite tantric yogic practices; email communication, September 7, 2021.
	37.	 The image was the symbol for the unity of the realm, as is argued by Schrieke 1957: 321, 
n. 32. See Nāgarakṛtāgama 68.5 and 74.1, Robson (1995: 73, 78) and Pigeaud (1960–​63: 
vol. 3: 81, 87).
	38.	 Suggesting its link with the damaged Mahākāla image of Candi Jago, Bautze-​Picron 
2014: 113–​114 argues for the image being of Mahākāla. Though it was assumed to be a 
portrait statue of Ādityavarman, Klokke 1994: 178–​201 has argued for the statue being a 
“deification image” that represents a deified mortal and a Hindu-​Buddhist deity at the 
same time.
	39.	 Based on the iconographic traits of East Javanese icons and the Padang Roco statue, 
Reichle 2007: 187, 191 suspects that it was made in East Java. Kulke 2009: 249 notes that this

--- PAGE 693 ---
668      Swati Chemburkar
 
stone was unknown in the kingdom of Ādityavarman. Moens 1924: 557 questions whether 
it was sent by Kṛtanagara along with the Amoghapāśa sculpture.
	40.	 The letters, inscribed on the gold sheet in Kawi script, appear to be from the mid-​9th to 
early 10th centuries, indicating the deposit as the plan of the original foundation of a mon­
ument that was enlarged later. The 21 inscribed gold plates contain names of 5 Tathāgatas, 
16 Vajrabodhisattvas, and 16 Vajratārā deities. Boechari 1982: 229–​143 had argued for the 
presence of the Vajradhātu mandala at Gumpung. Refuting Boechari, Nihom 1998: 245–​
254 has argued for the material belonging to the Trailokyavijaya mandala.
	41.	 A gold leaf found at Aek Sangkilon is studied by Griffiths 2014b: 228–​229. Reichle 2007: 
142 identifies the inscription with the Yamāri tradition. For a Saruaso inscription from 
Pagarruyung evoking Hevajranityasmmṛti, see Hunter 2015: 324–​327; Suleiman 1977: 5–​6. 
See Reichle 2007: 139, 142–​143, 201.
	42.	 Even though there were earlier smaller tantric Buddhist temples built by the Khmers, such 
as the 10th-​century Bat Cum or Phnom Trap, Phimai celebrated tantrism on a grand scale.
	43.	 Several scholars identify the central image of the pentad as Vajrasattva, while admitting the 
unusual iconographic scheme. See Boisselier 1966: 302; Dagens 1995: 19. Woodward 2004: 
351 sees the Phimai deity as three-​faced, six-​armed Mañjuvajra, a form of Vajrasattva. 
Jacques 2006: 75 sees a possible representation of the five-​Buddha system of the Śrīghana 
sect, which is mentioned in the 9th-​century inscription K. 1001, found during the renova­
tion of the temple, as well as a Sab Bāk inscription.
	44.	 Stanzas 26–​28 of the inscription mentions Hiraṇyadāma revealing a unique siddhi to 
the ruler by showing him the fourfold face of Tumburu to allow the ruler to understand 
the Śiraścheda, Viṇāśikha, Saṃmoha, and Nayottara. Inscription K. 235; see Finot 1915: 
53, Cœdès and Dupont 1943: 56, and Bhattacharya 2009: 123. For the translation of the 
Vīṇāśikha Tantra see Goudriaan 1985.
	45.	 Based on the two hands found by The Authority for the Protection of the Site and 
Management of the Region of Angkor (APSARA) and Archaeological Survey of India 
(ASI) in 2011, holding specific attributes, Olivier Cunin identifies them as a part of a 
Hevajra statue; personal communication on email dated to 6th June 2019. (My sincere 
thanks to him for sharing his 3D scans of the hands.) The statue would have been smaller 
than the Bayon one, based on the smaller size of the hands. Currently the hands are kept at 
the Preah Norodom Sihanouk Museum in Siem Reap, Cambodia.
	46.	 Today a small sanctuary stands at the Mỹ Sơn complex in Ɖà Nẵng. The Mỹ Sơn inscrip­
tion C92 B mentions “paṅap rumaḥ śrī herukaharmya” and provides a clear account of the 
Khmer-​Cam relations during the 12th–​13th centuries and the erection of the temple. See 
Finot 1904: 972 and Jaques 1995: 154.
Further Reading
Acri, Andrea. 2006. “The Sanskrit–​Old Javanese Tutur Literature from Bali. The Textual Basis 
of Śaivism in Ancient Indonesia.” Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici 1: 107–​137.
Acri, Andrea. 2018. “The Place of Nusantara in the Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis.” 
TRaNS: Trans-​Regional and -​National Studies of Southeast Asia 6, no. 2: 139–​166.
Chandra, Lokesh. 1995b. “The Jaka Dolog Inscription of King Kṛtanagara.” In Cultural Horizons 
of India, vol. 4, edited by Lokesh Chandra, 48–​166. New Delhi: International Academy of 
India Culture and Aditya Prakashan.

--- PAGE 694 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      669
 
Chandra, Lokesh, and Sudarshana Devi Singhal. 1995a. “Buddhist Bronzes of Surocolo.” 
In Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 4, edited by Lokesh Chandra, 121–​147. New Delhi: 
International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan.
Chou, Y. L. 1945. “Tantrism in China.” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 8, no. 3–​4: 241–​332.
Cœdès, Jeorge. 1941. “La stele du Práh Khan d’Angkor.” Bulletin de l’École 
Française d’Extrême Orient 41: 255–​302.
Cramerotti, Cristina, and Pierre Baptiste. 2017. Enquêtes Vagabondes, Le Voyage illustré d’Émile 
Guimet en Asie, Catalogue de I’exposition, Une coédition. Paris: Gallimard/​MNAAG.
Eliade, Mircea. [1907–​86] 1959. The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion. English 
translation by Willard R. Trask. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Ensink, Jacob. 1978. “Śiva-​Buddhism in Java and Bali.” Abhandlungen der Akademie der 
Wissenschaften in Göttingen 108: 178–​198.
Gail, A. J. 1999. “On the Mandalic Structure of the Paharpur Temple.” Journal of Bengal Art 4: 
131–​139.
Maxwell, Thomas. 2007a. “Religion at the time of Jayavarman VII.” In Bayon: New Perspectives, 
edited by Joyce Clark, 72–​122. Bangkok: River Books.
Shirukurodo dai bijutsu ten: Grand Exhibition of Silk Road Buddhist Art. 1996. Tokyo: Tokyo 
National Museum.
Skilling, Peter. 2007. “Geographies of Intertextuality: Buddhist Literature in Pre-​modern 
Siam.” Aséanie 19: 91–​112.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. 2003. “A Buddhist mantra recovered from the Ratu Baka plateau: A preliminary 
study of its implications for Śailendra-​era Java.” Bijdragen tot de Taal-​, Land-​ en Volkenkunde 
159, no. 1:163–​188.
References
Abé, Ryūichi. 1999. The Weaving of Mantra: Kūkai and the Construction of Esoteric Buddhist 
Discourse. New York: Columbia University Press.
Acri, Andrea. 2016a. “Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk 
Routes, 7th–​13th Century AD.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks 
of Masters, Texts, Icons, edited by Andrea Acri, 1–​29. Singapore: ISEAS.
Acri, Andrea. 2016b. “Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’: Magic, Realpolitik, and Bauddha-​
Śaiva Dynamics in Ancient Nusantara.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, edited by Andrea Acri, 323–​348. Singapore: ISEAS.
Acri, Andrea. 2019. “Becoming Bhairava in 19vth-​Century Java.” Indonesia and the Malay World 
47, no. 139: 285–​307.
Acri, Andrea, and Aleksandra Wenta. 2022. “A Buddhist Bhairava? Kṛtanagara’s Tantric 
Buddhism in Transregional Perspective.” Entangled Religions 13 (7). https://​doi.org/​
10.46586/​er.13.2022.9653.
Bade, David. 2016. “(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-​Century Asia? International Relations, the 
Balance of Powers, and the Tantric Buddhism of Kṛtanagara and Khubilai Khan.” In Esoteric 
Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, edited by Andrea 
Acri, 141–​163. Singapore: ISEAS.
Baptiste (fig. 26.48), Pierre, and Thierry Zéphir. 2005. Trésors d’art du Vietnam: La sculpture du 
Champa. Ve–​XVe siècles, edited by Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir, 212–​232. Paris: Musée 
des arts asiatiques Guimet.

--- PAGE 695 ---
670      Swati Chemburkar
 
Baptiste, Pierre, and Thierry Zéphir. 2008. L’Art khmer dans les collections du muse Guimet. 
Paris: RMN.
Baptiste, Pierre, and Thierry Zéphir. 2013. Angkor: Naissance d’un Mythe, Louis Delaporte et le 
Cambodge. Paris: Gallimard, Musée national des arts asiatiques Guimet.
Bautze-​Picron, Claudine. 1997. “Le Groupe des Huit Grands Bodhisattva en Inde: Genèse 
et Développement.” In Living a Life in Accord with Dhamma: Papers in Honor of Professor 
Jean Boisselier on His Eightieth Birthday, edited by Natasha Eilenberg et al., 1–​55. Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University.
Bautze-​Picron, Claudine. 2014. “Buddhist Images from Padang Lawas Region and the South 
Asian Connection.” In History of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra. II: Societies of Padang 
Lawas (Mid-​Ninth–​Thirteenth Century CE), edited by Daniel Perret, 107–​128. Paris: Cahiers 
d’Archipel.
Berg, C. C. 1965. “The Javanese Picture of the Past.” In An Introduction to Indonesian 
Historiography, edited by Soedjatmoko, Mohammad Ali, G. J. Resink and G. McT. Kahin, 
87–​117. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Berger, Patricia. 1995. “Buddhist Festivals in Mongolia.” In Mongolia: The Legacy of Chinggis 
Khan, edited by Patricia Berger and Terese Tse Bartholomew, 149–​152. New York: Thames 
and Hudson.
Bernet Kempers, A. J. 1959. Ancient Indonesian Art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh. 1949. Niṣpannayogāvalī of Mahāpaṇḍita. Abhayākaragupta, 
Baroda, India: Oriental Institute.
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh. 1968. The Indian Buddhist Iconography. Calcutta.
Bhattacharya, Gaurishwar, and Enamul Haque. 2000. Essays on Buddhist Hindu Jain 
Iconography and Epigraphy. Dhaka: International Centre for the Study of Bengal Art.
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar, in collaboration with Karl-​Heinz Golzio. 2009. A Selection of 
Sanskrit Inscriptions from Cambodia. Siem Reap: Center for Khmer Studies.
Boechari, M. 1982. “Ritual Deposits of Candi Gumpung (Muara Jambi).” In SPAFA, Final 
Report Consultative Workshop on Archaeological and Environmental Studies on Srivijaya, 
Appendix 7d, 229–​243. Bangkok: SPAFA.
Boeles, J. J. 1966. “Two Yoginīs from Thailand.” In Essays Offered to G. H. Luce, 2 vols., edited by 
Ba Shin, J. Boisselier, and A. B. Griswold, vol. 2, 14–​29. Ascona: Artibus Asiae.
Boisselier, Jean. 1964. “Précisions sur quelques images khmères d’Avalokiteśvara: Les bas-​
reliefs de Bantãy Čhmmàr.” Arts Asiatiques 11, 73–​89.
Boisselier, Jean. 1966. Asie du Sud-​Est. Le Cambodge. Paris: Éditions A. & J. Picard.
Bosch, F. D. K. 1930. “De Rijkssieraden van Pagar Roejoeng.” Oudheidkundig Verslag, 1930. 
201–​215.
Bosch, F. D. K. 1961. “Buddhist Data from Balinese Texts, and Their Contribution to 
Archaeological Research in Java.” In Selected Studies in Indonesian Archaeology, edited 
by F. D. K. Bosch, 109–​135. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. (Originally published in 1929 
in Mededelingen der Koninklinken Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afd. 
Letterkunde, ser. B, vol. 68: 43–​78.)
Brauen, Martin. 1997. The Mandala: Sacred Circle in Tibetan Buddhism. London: Serindia.
Breuil, Jean Yves, and Sandrine Gill. 2007. “New Research on Paharpur Buddhist Monastery 
(North Bengal).” In The Temple in South Asia, edited by Adam Hardy, 127–​137. London: 
British Association for South Asia.
Chakrabarti, Dilip. 1995. “Buddhist Sites across South Asia as Influenced by Political and 
Economic Forces.” World Archaeology 27, no. 2: 185–​202.

--- PAGE 696 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      671
 
Chakrabarti, Dilip. 2001. Ancient Bangladesh: A Study of the Archaeological Sources with an 
Update on Bangladesh Archaeology, 1990–​2000. Dhaka: University Press Ltd.
Chandra, Lokesh. 1980. “Borobudur as a Monument of Esoteric Buddhism.” Southeast Asian 
Review 5, no. 1: 1–​41.
Chandra, Lokesh. 1995a. “Chandi Mendut and Pawon.” In Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 4, 
edited by Lokesh Chandra, 32–​38. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and 
Aditya Prakashan.
Chandra, Lokesh, and Sudarshana Devi Singhal. 1995b. “Identification of the Ṅañjuk Bronzes.” 
In Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 4, edited by Lokesh Chandra, 97–​107. New Delhi: 
International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan.
Chemburkar, Swati. 2016. “Borobudur’s Pāla Forebear? A Field Note from Kesariya, Bihar, 
India.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, 
edited by Andrea Acri, 191–​210. Singapore: ISEAS.
Chemburkar, Swati. 2022. “Prajñaparamita and Khmer Esoteric Buddhism in the 10th to 13th 
Centuries.” In The Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion, edited by Rob Linrothe. Oxford 
University Press. Published online. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​9340​378.013.760.
Chen, Jinhua. 2011. “Esoteric Buddhism and Monastic Institutions.” In Esoteric Buddhism 
and Tantras in East Asia, edited by Charles D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard K. 
Payne, 286–​294. Leiden: Brill.
Christie, J. Wisseman. 2002–​4. Register of the Inscriptions of Java (from 732 to 1060 A.D.).It’s an 
unpublished draft.
Chuttiwongs, Nandana. 2005. “Le bouddhisme du Champa.” In Trésors d’art du Vietnam. La 
sculpture du Champa, edited by Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir, 64–​87. Paris: Musées 
Nationaux.
Chuttiwongs, Nandana. 2008. “Caṇḍi Singasari: A Recent Study.” In Interpreting Southeast 
Asia’s Past: Monuments, Image and Text, edited by Elisabeth A. Bacus, Ian C. Glover, and 
Peter D. Sharrock, 100–​122. Singapore: NUS Press.
Cœdès, Jeorge. 1924. “Études Cambodgiennes.” Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient 
24: 345–​358.
Cœdès, George, and Pierre Dupont. 1943. “Les stèles de Sdŏk Kŏk Thoṃ, Phnoṃ Sandak et 
Práḥ Vihãr.” Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient 43: 56–​134.
Conti, Pia. 2010. “The Khmer Temple of Phimai: Dawn of a New Political and Religious Era.” 
MA diss., School of Oriental and African Studies, London University.
Conti, Pia. 2014. “Tantric Buddhism at Prasat hin Phimai: A New Reading of Its Iconographic 
Message.” In Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology, edited by Nicolas Revire and 
Stephen A. Murphy, 374–​396. Bangkok: River Books.
Cunin, Olivier. 2004. “De Ta Prohm au Bayon, Analyse comparative de l'histoire architecturale 
des principaux monuments du style du Bayon.” PhD diss., I’Institut National Polytechnique 
de Lorraine.
Cunin, Olivier. 2018. “About Some Missing Images of the Bayon Temple.” Lecture delivered at 
symposium Exploring Angkor, Asian Civilisation Museum, Singapore, May 19.
Dagens, Bruno. 1985. Mayamata: An Indian Treatise on Housing Architecture and Iconography. 
New Delhi: Sitaram Bharatiya Institute of Scientific Research.
Dagens, Bruno. 1995. “Autour de I’iconographie de Phimai.” In Actes du Premier Symposium 
franco-​thaïlandais. La Thaïlande des origines de son histoire au XVème siècle, 17–​37. 
Bangkok: Silpakorn University.
Das, Sarat Chandra, and Alaka Chattopadhaya. 1980. Tibetan Studies. Calcutta: K. P. Bagchi.

--- PAGE 697 ---
672      Swati Chemburkar
 
Davidson, Ronald. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
de Casparis, Johannes. 1950. Prasasti Indonesia I. Bandung: A.C. Nix.
de Casparis, Johannes. 1956. Prasasti Indonesia II: Selected inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th 
centuries AD. Bandung: Masa Baru.
de Casparis, Johannes. 1985. “Srivijaya and Malayu.” In SPAFA, Final Report: Consultative 
Workshop on Archaeological and Environmental Studies of Srivijaya, 245–​258. Bangkok: 
SPFA.
Degroot, Véronique. 2006. “The Archeaological Remains of Ratu Boko: From Sri Lankan 
Buddhism to Hinduism.” Indonesia and the Malay World 34, no. 98: 55–​74.
Degroot, Véronique. 2009. “Candi, Space, and Landscape: A Study on the Distribution, 
Orientation and Spatial Organization of Central Javanese Temple Remains.” PhD diss., 
Leiden University.
de Mallmann, Marie Thérèse. 1975. Introduction à l’iconographie du tantrisme bouddhique. 
Paris: Adrien-​Maisonneuve.
Dikshit, K. N. 1938. Excavations at Paharpur, Bengal. Memoirs of the ASI no. 55. Delhi.: 
Archaeological Survey of India.
Donaldson, Thomas. 2001. Iconography of the Buddhist Sculpture of Orissa. New Delhi: Indira 
Gandhi National Centre for the Arts: Abhinav Publications.
Dumarçay, Jacques. 1967. “Le Bayon, histoire architecturale du temple: Atlas et notice des 
planches.” In EFEO Mémoires archéologiques, no. 3. Paris: Adrien-​Maisonneuve.
Dumarçay, Jacques. 1986. Temples of Java. Oxford-​Singapore-​New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Dutt, Sukumar. [1962] 2003. Buddhist Monks and Monasteries of India. London: Allen and 
Unwin.
Estève, Julia. 2009. “Étude Critique des Phénomènes de Syncrétisme Religieux dans le 
Cambodge Angkorien.” PhD diss., Université Paris-​Sorbonne.
Finot, Louis. 1904. “Notes d’épigraphie XI: Les inscriptions de Mi-​son.” Bulletin de l’École 
Française d’Extrême Orient 4: 897–​979.
Finot, Louis. 1915. “Notes d’épigraphie. XVI. L’inscription de Sdǒk Kăk Thoṃ [K. 235].” 
Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient 15, no. 2: 53–​106.
Fontein, Jan. 1990. The Sculpture of Indonesia. Washington, DC: National Gallery of Art.
Gauvin, Michel. 2022. “The Conqueror of the Three Worlds: The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java 
Studied through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains.” In The Creative South: 
Buddhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, 2 vols., edited by Andrea Acri and Peter 
D. Sharrock, 94–​133. Singapore: ISEAS.
Giebel, Rolf. 2011. “Taishō Volumes 18–​21.” In Esoteric Buddhism and Tantras in East Asia, ed­
ited by Charles D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne, 27–​37. Leiden: Brill.
Gill, Sandrine. 2007. “Spatial Organization of Paharpur Buddhist Establishment.” In 
Sacred Landscapes in Asia, edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray, 169–​198. New Delhi: India 
International Centre, Manohar.
Goble, Jeoffrey. 2016. “The Politics of Esoteric Buddhism.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval 
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, edited by Andrea Acri, 123–​141. Singapore: 
ISEAS.
Goudriaan, Ten. 1985. The Vīṇāśikhatantra: A Śaiva Tantra of the Left Current. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.

--- PAGE 698 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      673
 
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014a. “The ‘Greatly Ferocious’ Spell (Mahāraudra-​nāma-​hṛdaya): A Dhāraṇī 
Inscribed on a Lead-​Bronze Foil Unearthed near Borobudur.” In Epigraphic Evidence in 
the Pre-​modern Buddhist World: Proceedings of the Eponymous Conference Held in Vienna, 
edited by Kurt Tropper, 1–​36. Vienna: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische 
Studien.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014b. “Inscriptions of Sumatra, III: The Padang Lawas Corpus Studied along 
with Inscriptions from Sorik Merapi (North Sumatra) and Maura Takus (Riau).” In History 
of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra. II: Societies of Padang Lawas (9th c.–​13th c.), edited by 
Daniel Perret, 211–​262. Paris: Association Archipel.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014c. “Written Traces of the Buddhist Past: Mantras and Dhāraṇīs  in 
Indonesian Inscriptions.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 77: 137–​194.
Groslier, George. 1935. “Étude sur le temps passé à la construction d’un grand temple Khmer 
(Bantay Chmar), Troisièmes recherches sur les Cambodgiens: 1, BEFEO XXXV: 159–​206.
Hall, Kenneth. 2010. “Indonesia’s Evolving International Relationships in the Ninth to Early 
Eleventh Centuries: Evidence from Contemporary Shipwrecks and Epigraphy.” Indonesia 
90: 15–​45.
Hooykaas, Christiaan. 1973. Balinese Bauddha Brahmans. Amsterdam: North-​Holland.
Hoque, M. M., and Seema Hoque 2004. “Understanding the Paharpur Temple Architecture 
in New Perspective.” In Proceedings of the International Seminar on Elaboration of an 
Archaeological Research Strategy for Paharpur World Heritage Site and Its Environment 
(Bangladesh) 58–​66.
Huber, Edouard. 1911. “Etudes indochinoises.” Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient 
11: 259–​311.
Hunter, Thomas M. 2007. “The Body of the King: Reappraising Singhasari Period Syncretism.” 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 38, no. 1: 27–​53.
Hunter, Thomas M. 2015. “Sanskrit in a Distant Land: The Sanskritized Sections.” In A 14th-​
Century Malay Code of Laws: The Nītisārasamuccaya, edited by Uli Kozok, 281–​379. 
Singapore: ISEAS.
Imam, Abu. 2000. Excavations at Mainamati: An Exploratory Study. Studies in Bengal Art 
Series 2. Dhaka: International Centre for Study of Bengal Art.
Imam, Abu. 2002. “Samatata, Mainamati: Some Observations.” In Archaeology of Eastern India: 
New Perspectives, edited by Gautam Sengupta and Sheena Pania, 613–​623. Kolkata: Centre 
for Archaeological Studies and Training Eastern India.
Iyanaga, Nobumi. 1985. “Récits de la soumission de Maheśvara par Trailokyavijaya—​d’après les 
sources chinoises et japonaises.” In Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R. A. Stein, edited 
by Michel Strickmann, 633–​745. Brussels: Institut Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises.
Jacques, Claude. 1995. Etudes épigraphiques sur le pays cham de Louis Finot, Edouard Huber, 
George Coedès et Paul Mus réunies par Claude Jacques. Paris: Réimpression de l’Ecole 
française d’Extrême-​Orient 7: 273–​285.
Jacques, Claude. 2006. “The Buddhist Sect of Śrīghana in Ancient Khmer Lands.” In The 
Buddhist Legacies in Mainland Southeast Asia: Mentalities, Interpretations and Practices, 
Études thématiques 19, edited by François Lagirarde and Paritta Chlermpow Koanantakool, 
71–​79. Paris: EFEO, Sirindhorn Anthropology Centre.
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. 2004. “A Study on the Origin and Significance of Borobudur.” PhD diss., 
Graduate Theological Union, Berkeley.

--- PAGE 699 ---
674      Swati Chemburkar
 
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. 2016. “Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, Borobudur, and the Origins of 
Esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, edited by Andrea Acri, 67–​113. Singapore: ISEAS.
Kern, Hendrik. 1910. “De Sanskrit-​inscriptie van het Mahākṣobhya-​beeld te Simpang.” 
Tijdscrift vor IndischeTaal-​, Land-​en Volkenkunde 54: 99–​108.
Kern, Hendrik. 1917. “Het Sanskrit-​inschrift op den grafsteen van Vorst Ādityawarman te 
Kubur Raja (Menangkabau, ca. 1300 Çaka).” Verspreide Geschiedenis 7: 217–​221.
Klokke, Marijke. 1994. “The Iconography of the So-​called Portrait Statues in Late East Javanese 
Art.” In Ancient Indonesian Sculpture, edited by Marijke J. Klokke and Pauline Lunsingh 
Scheurleer, 178–​201. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Krom, N. J. 1931. Hindoe-​Javaansche Geschiedenis. Rev. ed. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Kulke, Herman. 2009. “Ādityavarman’s Highland Kingdom.” In From Distant Tales: 
Archaeology and Ethnohistory in the Highlands of Sumatra, edited by Dominik Bonatz. 
Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 229–​252.
Kusen, Zaimul Azzah, and Gutomo. 1993. Purna Pugar Candi Sewu. Semarang: Bagian Proyek 
Pelestarian/​Pemanfaatan Peninggalan Sejarah dan Purbakala Propinsi Jawa Tengah, Kantor 
Wilayah Jawa Tengah, Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan.
Kwon, Do-​Kyun. 2002. “Sarva Tathāgata Tattva Saṃgraha: Compendium of All the Tathāgatas.” 
PhD diss., School of Oriental and African Studies, London University.
Linrothe, Rob. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-​Tibetan Esoteric 
Buddhist Art. Boston: Shambhala.
Long, Mark. 2015. “An Eighth-​Century Commentary on the Nāmasaṅgīti and the Cluster of 
Temples on the Prambanan Plain in Central Java.” Nalanda-​Sriwijaya Centre Working Paper 
Series 20, Singapore: ISEAS-​Yusof Ishak Institute, 1–​24. https://​www.iseas.edu.sg/​ima​ges/​
pdf/​nscwps020_​commentary_​namasangiti_​and_​the_​cluster_​of_​temples_​on_​the_​pram​
bana​n_​pl​ain_​in_​c​entr​al_​j​ava.pdf.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2008. “The Well-​Known Javanese Statue in the Tropenmuseum, 
Amsterdam, and Its Place in Javanese Sculpture.” Artibus Asiae 68, no. 2: 287–​332.
Malandra, Geri. 1999. Unfolding a Mandala: The Buddhist Cave Temples at Ellora. New York: 
State University of New York Press.
Matsunaga, Yūkei. 1978. The Guhyasamāja Tantra: A New Critical Edition. Osaka: Tōhō 
Shuppan.
Matsunaga, Keiji. 2017. インドネシア新出密教遺跡・遺品の紹介/​ 松長恵史著 [The 
introduction of new-​found ruins and statues on esoteric Buddhism in Indonesia]. 
Mikkyōgaku kenkyū 49: 1–​21.
Maxwell, Thomas. 2007b. “The Stele Inscription of Preah Khan, Angkor.” UDAYA: Journal 
of Khmer Studies 8: 1–​114.
Mayer, Prudence. 1961. “Stupas and Stupa Shrines.” Artibus Asiae XXIV, I: 25–​34.
Miksic, John. 1992. Art of Indonesia. New York: Vendome Press.
Miksic, John. 2006. “Manjushri as a Political Symbol in Ancient Java.” In Anamorphoses: 
Homage à Jacques Dumarçay, edited by Bruno Dagens and H. Chambert-​Loir, 125–​226. 
Paris: Inde Savantes.
Miksic, John. 2016. “Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra, 7th to 13th 
Century.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, 
Icons, edited by Andrea Acri, 259–​260. Singapore: ISEAS.

--- PAGE 700 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      675
 
Mishra, Umakant. 2019. “Continuity and Change in Sacred Landscape of the Buddhist Site of 
Udayagiri, Odisha.” In Negotiating Cultural Identity: Landscapes in Early Medieval South 
Asian History, edited by Himanshu Prabha Ray, 230–​256 London: Routledge India.
Moens, Jan. 1924. “Het Buddhisme op Java en Sumatra in zijn laaste Bloeiperiode.” 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-​, Land-​en Volkenkunde 64: 521–​579.
Moens, Jan. 1951. “Barabuḍur, Mendut en Pawon en hun onderlinge samenhang.” 
Tijdschrift voor de Indische Taai-​, Land-​ en Volkenkunde 86: 326–​386. Translated by Mark 
Long as Barabudur, Mendut and Pawon and Their Mutual Relationship. (Leiden: KITLV 
Press, 2007). https://​asis​biz.com/​Indone​sia/​Barabu​dur-​Men​dut-​Pawon.pdf.
Nihom, Max. 1986. “The Identification and Original Site of a Cult Statue on East Java: The Kaka 
Dolog.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 106, no. 3: 485–​501.
Nihom, Max. 1998. “The Maṇḍala of Caṇḍi Gumpung (Sumatra) and the Indo-​Tibetan 
Vajraśekharatantra.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 41: 245–​254.
O’Brien, Kate. 1993. “Means and Wisdom in Tantric Buddhist Rulership of the East Javanese 
Period.” PhD diss., University of Sydney.
Parmentier, H. 1918. Inventaire descriptif des monuments Cam de l’Annam, tome II, Paris: Ernest 
Leroux.
Piegeaud, Theodore.1924. De Tantu Panggelaran. ’s-​Gravenhage: Nederland Boek en 
Steendrukkerij.
Piegeaud, Theodore. 1960–​63. Java in the 14th Century: A Study in Cultural History: The 
Nāgara-​Kertāgama by Rakawi Prapanca of Majapahit, 1365 A.D. 5 vols. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff.
Poerbatjaraka, R. Ng. 1917. “Het Beeld van Tjandi Djawa.” Oudheidkundig Verslag van de 
Oudheidkundige Dienst in Nederlandsch-​Indië 1917: 143–​151.
Poerbatjaraka, R. Ng. 1922. “De inscriptie van het Mahaksobhya-​beeld te Simpang 
(Soerabaya).” Bijdragen tot de Taal-​, Land-​ en Volkenkunde 78: 426–​461.
Powell, Kellie. 2018. “Ritual and Ruins: Recovering the History of Vajrayāna Buddhism in Sri 
Lanka.” MA diss., University of Berkeley.
Prapadvidya, Chirapat. 1990. “The Sab Bāk Inscription: Evidence of an Early Vajrayāna 
Buddhist Presence in Thailand [K. 1158].” Journal of the Siam Society 78, no. 2: 11–​14.
Reichle, Natasha. 2007. Violence and Serenity: Late Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia . 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Revire, Nicolas. 2018. “From Gandhara to Candi Mendut? A Comparative Study of Bhadrāsana 
Buddhas and Their Related Bodhisattva Attendants in South and Southeast Asia.” In India 
and Southeast Asia: Cultural Discourses, edited by Anna Dallapiccola and Anila Verghese, 
279–​304. Mumbai: K. R. Cama Oriental Institute.
Robson, Stuart. 1995. Deśawarṇana (Nāgarakṛtāgama) by Mpu Prapañca. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 1993. Civilized Shamans: Buddhism in Tibetan Societies. Washington, DC: 
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. [2002] 2014. “Ritual Technologies and the State: The Maṇḍala-​Form 
Buddhist Temples of Bangladesh.” In Paharpur alias Somapura Mahavihara: A World 
Cultural Heritage Site, edited by Enamul Haque, 388–​410. Dhaka: International Centre for 
Study of Bengal Art.
Santiko, Hariani. 1995. “Early Research on Sivaitic Hinduism during the Majapahit Era.” In 
The Legacy of Majapahit, edited by John Miksic and Endang Sri Hardiati Soekatno, 55–​70. 
Singapore: National Heritage Board.

--- PAGE 701 ---
676      Swati Chemburkar
 
Santoso, Soweito. 1975. Sutasoma: A Study in Javanese Wajrayana. New Delhi: International 
Academy of Indian Culture.
Sarkar, H. B. 1971. Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java. 2 vols. Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhya.
Schnitger, F. M. 1937a. The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Schnitger, F. M. 1937b. “The Quest for Mysterious Kingdoms in Sumatra: Pioneer 
Archaeological Discoveries in the Ancient Realms of Panai and Årivijaya, Whose Ruler in 
the Eighth Century Conquered Malva and Cambodia, and Delighted in a Silver-​Paved Pool 
Filled with Bars of Gold.” Illustrated London News, November 20.
Schrieke, B. 1957. Indonesian Sociological Studies; Ruler and Realm in Early Java. Pt. 2. The 
Hague: van Hoeve.
Schweyer, Anne-​Valérie. 2009. “Buddhism in Čampā.” Moussons 13–​14: 315–​316.
Sharrock, Peter. 2022 . “Heruka-​Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia.” In The Creative South: 
Buddhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, 2 vols., edited by Andrea Acri and Peter 
D. Sharrock, 126–​164. Singapore: ISEAS.
Sinclair, Ian. 2016. “Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China: 
Bianhong’s Manual on the Abhiṣeka of Cakravartin.” In Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval 
Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, edited by Andrea Acri, 29–​67. Singapore: 
ISEAS.
Skorupski, Tadeusz, trans. 1983. The Sarvadurgatiparishodhana Tantra: Elimination of All Evil 
Destinies, Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts with Introduction, English Translation and Notes. New 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Skorupski, Tadeusz. 2014. “Appendix 1: Sap Bak Inscription (K. 1158) Translation from Sanskrit 
based on Julia Estève’s Transliteration (2009: 541–​542).” In Pia Conti “Tantric Buddhism at 
Prasat Hin Phimai: A New Reading of Its Iconographic Message,” in Before Siam: Essays in 
Art and Archaeology, edited by Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. Murphy, 374–​396. Bangkok: 
River Books.
Slametmuljana, Raden B. 1976. A Story of Majapahit. Singapore: Singapore University Press.
Smith, Jonathan Z. 1978. Map Is Not Territory. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Snellgrove, David. 1959. “The Notion of Divine Kingship in Tantric Buddhism.” In La regalità 
sacra: Contributi al tema del VIII Congresso Internazionale de Storia delle Religioni, Roma, 
Aprile, 1955, Studies in the History of Religions 4, edited by Carl-​Martin Edsman, 204–​218. 
Leiden: Brill.
Snellgrove, David. 1981. Introduction to Sarva-​tathāgata-​tattva-​samgraha: Facsimile 
Reproduction of a Tenth-​Century Sanskrit Manuscript from Nepal, Śata-​Pitaka series, vol. 
269, edited by Lokesh Chandra and David L. Snellgrove, 5–​67. New Delhi: Sharada Rani.
Snellgrove, David. 1987. Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and Their Tibetan Successors. 
2 vols. London: Serindia.
Snodgrass, Adrian. 1988. The Matrix and Diamond World Mandalas in Shingon Buddhism. 
Vols. 1 and 2. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Sørensen, Henrik. 1991–​92. “Typology and Iconography in the Esoteric Buddhist Art of 
Dunhuang.” Silk Road Art and Archaeology 2: 285–​349.
Suleiman, Satyawati. 1977. The Archaeology and History of West Sumatra. Bulletin of the 
Research Centre of Archaeology of Indonesia, 12. Jakarta: Pusat Penelitian Purbakala dan 
Peninggalan Nasional, Departemen P & K.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. 2014. “The Abhayagirivihāra’s Pāṃśukūlika Monks in Second Lambakaṇṇa 
Śrī Laṅkā and Śailendra Java: The Efflorescence and Fall of a Center of Influence in Early

--- PAGE 702 ---
Mandalas and Monarchs      677
 
Esoteric Buddhism.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, 3rd ser.,12: 
49–​185.
Sundberg, Jeffrey, and Rolf Giebel. 2011. “The Life of the Tang Court Vajrabodhi as Chronicled 
by Lü Xiang (呂向): South Indian and Śrı Laṅkān Antecedents to the Arrival of the Buddhist 
Vajrayāna in Eighth-​Century Java and China.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute 
of Buddhist Studies, 3rd ser., 13: 129–​222.
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2018. An Illustrated History of the Maṇḍala: From Its Genesis to the 
Kālacakratantra. Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications.
ten Grotenhuis, Elizabeth. 1999. Japanese Mandalas: Representations of the Sacred Geography. 
Honululu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Thomas, F. W. 1908–​26. “Abhiṣeka.” In The Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, edited by James 
Hastings, vol. 1, 21–​24. New York: Scribner’s.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1961. Theory and Practice of the Maṇḍala with special reference to the modern 
psychology of the subconscious. Translated from Italian by Alan Houghton Brodrick. London: 
Rider.
Wayman, Alex. 1981. “Reflections on the Theory of Barabudur as a Mandala.” In Barabudur: 
History and Significance of a Buddhist Monument, edited by L. Gomez and H. W. Woodward, 
Jr., 139–​172. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Wayman, Alex. 1985. Chanting the Names of Mañjuśrī: The Mañjuśrīnāmasaṃgīti. Boulder: 
Shambala.
Weinberger, Steven Neal. 2003. “The Significance of Yoga Tantra and the Compendium of 
Principles (Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra).” PhD diss., University of Virginia.
Williams, Joanna. 1982. The Art of Gupta India: Empire and Province. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Woodward, Hiram. 2004. “Review Article: Esoteric Buddhism in the Light of Recent 
Scholarship.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 35, no. 2: 329–​354.
Woodward, Hiram. 2009. “Bianhong, Mastermind of Borobudur?” Pacific World: Journal 
of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, 3rd ser., 11: 25–​60.
Woodward, Hiram. 2011. “The Temple of Dong Duong and the Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra.” In 
From beyond the Eastern Horizon; Essays in Honour of Professor Lokesh Chandra, edited by 
ManjuShree, 33–​42. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Zoetmulder, P. J. 1974. Kalangwan: A Survey of Old Javanese Literature. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff.

--- PAGE 703 ---


--- PAGE 704 ---
Chapter 27
Jain Tantric Diagrams of 
the Goddess Padmāvatī
Ellen Gough
Scholarship on the “Main Tantra” 
of Jainism
In English-​language publications on tantric literature, two Jain texts are repeatedly 
mentioned: Indranandin’s Jvālāmālinīkalpa, completed in 939/​940, and Malliṣeṇa’s 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, completed in 1057 (1937, 1899, n.d.) (1966). Both texts are 
Digambara, come from south India, and describe the propitiation of goddesses using 
mantras and tantric diagrams (yantra) to achieve superhuman powers and worldly 
well-​being. Teun Goudriaan and Sanjukta Gupta’s important survey of tantric litera­
ture, Hindu Tantric and Śākta Literature (1981), names these manuals as representative 
of Jain tantric literature:
The Jainas contributed to Tantric literature with their Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa and 
Jvālinīkalpa. The first text was compiled about A.D. 1050 by Malliṣena of Mysore; 
the second was produced by a monk of the Drāviḍa order from the Rāṣṭrakūṭa cap­
ital Mānyakheṭa. The Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, devoted to Padmāvatī who is a Jaina 
pendant of Tripurā, is a digest in 308 stanzas written in a good Sanskrit style of Āryā 
metres predominating. Its main concern is the practice of magic rites with mantras 
and yantras of the goddess.
(Goudriaan and Gupta 1981: 111)
Goudriaan, Gupta, and other scholars highlight the influence of Śaiva–​Śākta 
traditions on these two texts. They focus on the similarities between the main goddess 
of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, Padmāvatī—​the tutelary deity of the twenty-​third 
tīrthaṅkara, Pārśva—​and the principle goddess of the Śaiva Kaula Śrīvidyā tradition, 
Tripurā/​Tripurasundarī (Sanderson 2011: 3–​4; Slouber 2016: 84).

--- PAGE 705 ---
680      Ellen Gough
 
The Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa has been promoted in this way in large part because 
of the work of two Śvetāmbara Gujarati men in the first half of the twentieth cen­
tury: Sarabhai Manilal Nawab, the prolific author, publisher, and promoter of Jain 
mantraśāstra, and Mohanlal Bhagwandas Jhavery, the solicitor and scholar. In 1937, 
Nawab’s printing press published the text of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa edited by 
K. V. Abhyaṅkar, along with a premodern Sanskrit commentary by an unknown au­
thor named Bandhuṣeṇa and a Gujarati translation by Nawab. He based his publica­
tion on nine different manuscripts, all found in Śvetāmbara collections in Gujarat: 
in Ahmedabad, Surat, Vadodara, Limbdi, Patan, and Sinor (Abhyaṅkar 1937: 5–​6). 
Nawab’s press then followed up in 1944 with the publication of Jhavery’s introduction to 
the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, Comparative and Critical Study of Mantrashastra, which 
Jhavery himself admits expanded far beyond “its original purpose of introducing the 
reader to the work” and became “an independent treatise” on an impressive range of 
topics related to mantraśāstra, Jain and otherwise (Jhavery 1944: 1). At the end of the 
book, Jhavery summarizes the contents of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa and cites the 
third verse of the first chapter of the text, which names Padmāvatī as Totalā, Tvaritā, 
Nityā, Tripurā, Kāmasādhinī, and Tripurabhairavī, to make the claim that “there 
is no doubt that the author identifies Śrī Padmāvatī with Śrī Vidyā alias Ṣodaśī,” or 
Tripurasundarī (Jhavery 1944: 295).
Jhavery’s extensive, if unwieldy, book went on to define the study of Jain tantric 
practices in English, with influential twentieth-​century European scholars like 
Agehananda Bharati (1965) and Teun Goudriaan (1978) relying on it as the sole source 
for Jain materials in their comparative studies of tantra. Goudriaan and Gupta (1981: 
111) and other scholars of tantra (White 2000: 23–​24) also relied on Ramendra Nath 
Nandi’s (1973: 145–​156) chapter on “The Jaina Goddesses of Tantric Association,” 
which focuses on two texts—​Nawab’s publication of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa and 
a manuscript of Indranandin’s Jvālinīkalpa from the Jain Siddhānt Bhavan in Arrah, 
Indore. It is no surprise, then, that the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, the Jvālinīkalpa/​
Jvālāmālinīkalpa, and similar medieval texts on the mantra-​based propitiation of 
goddesses have become understood as the principal Jain texts of the category of scrip­
ture called tantra. Aaron Ullrey (2016: xvii) focuses much of his research on these 
“two Jain tantras.” Travis Smith (2018) explains in his article on “Tantras” for Brill’s 
Encyclopedia of Hinduism that “there are also Jaina Tantras, a series of ritual manuals 
dedicated to the worship of fierce female ‘protector’ deities that attended upon the 
tῑrthaṅkaras.”1 And Agehananda Bharati (1965: 121) calls the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 
the “main tantra” of Jainism.
Jainism, however, has no category of scripture called tantra. As Michael Slouber 
notes in this volume with regard to non-​Jain traditions, “the word tantra was originally 
used most often in the sense of a treatise and was interchangeable with other words for 
tantric scriptures.” But Jains do not commonly use this term for their scriptures. The 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa and Jvālinīkalpa/​Jvālāmālinīkalpa are not “tantras;” they 
are two of the dozens, if not hundreds, of Jains texts called kalpa: ritual manual. From 
the medieval period to the present day, Jains of both the main image-​worshiping sects,

--- PAGE 706 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      681
 
Digambara and Śvetāmbara, have composed a variety of kalpa texts that outline the 
ritual propitiation of yantras, or diagrams on which mantras are inscribed, to invoke 
deities and ideals. Some of these kalpas outline rituals that remain hugely popular, for 
example various texts on the mantra that Śvetāmbara mendicant leaders (ācārya) to this 
day recite daily, texts called Sūrimantrakalpa (Jambūvijaya 1969: 1977).
Scholars have not, however, assessed the present-​day popularity of the 
Jvālāmālinīkalpa and the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. The texts certainly gained some trac­
tion in Jain communities between their compositions in the tenth and eleventh centuries 
and scholars’ promotion of them in the twentieth century. As noted, some manuscripts 
of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa include a Sanskrit commentary by an unknown author, 
Bandhuṣeṇa. In addition, a significant part of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa is contained 
in the later Digambara compilation of Jain texts on mantraśāstra, the Vidyānuśāsana, 
which is attributed to an unknown Matisāgara (Jhavery 1944: 303). The modest pres­
ence of the Jvālāmālinīkalpa and the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa in manuscript archives 
also speaks to their influence. In his survey of Jain manuscripts from archives in 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, and Pune, the Śvetāmbara monk Ācārya Jinendrasūri has listed 
at least five copies of texts called Jvālāmālinīkalpa/​Jvālinīkalpa that are attributed 
to Indranandin held at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute in Pune, and the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa is found even more commonly in manuscript collections 
throughout India, both Jain and non-​Jain (Jinendrasurishwarji n.d: 295). Importantly, 
the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa—​a Digambara text from Karnataka—​is quite often found 
in Śvetāmbara manuscript collections in north India—​in Rajasthan and Gujarat—​and 
Nawab, as noted, relied upon these collections for his publication of the text.
In some ways, the movement of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa from a Digambara 
context in Karnataka to Śvetāmbara places of worship in north India follows the same 
trajectory as the goddess Padmāvatī herself. Scholars have conjectured that this god­
dess initially rose to prominence as a kuladevī, or a family goddess, of a series of im­
portant royal families in Karnataka such as the Śīlahāras, Raṭṭas, and Śāntaras (Cort 
1987: 243; Desai 1957: 171). Through these families’ adherence to Digambara Jainism, 
she was eventually incorporated into the Digambara Jain pantheon, becoming the fe­
male attendant (śāsanadevī or yakṣī) of Pārśva sometime in the post-​Gupta medieval 
period (Shah 1959: 141–​143, 1987: 276–​285). Pārśva had been associated with snake 
deities (nāga) since an early period; reliefs of the twenty-​third Tīrthaṅkara from the 
early centuries C.E. from Mathura depict him with cobra hoods above his head (Shah 
1970: 305). Padmāvatī, as a snake deity (nāginī), could then be easily linked to him. 
The Digambara text on the history of the universe, Guṇabhadra’s Uttarapurāṇa (mid-​
ninth century), provides an early inclusion of Padmāvatī in the life story of Pārśva. 
Here, Pārśva saves a pair of snakes, Dhareṇendra and Padmāvatī, from the fires of 
an immoral Brahmin ascetic, and they are reborn as snake deities who later emerge 
from the underworld to shade him from distractions so he can meditate and achieve 
omniscience (Bollée 2007: 34–​35).2 Though Śvetāmbaras do not include her in their 
narratives of Pārśva’s life, only mentioning Dharaṇendra, by at least the time of the 
Nirvāṇakalikā (eleventh–​twelfth centuries C.E.), they had accepted Padmāvatī as

--- PAGE 707 ---
682      Ellen Gough
 
Pārśva’s female attendant deity (yakṣī), and she is now undoubtedly one of the most 
popular goddesses of both image-​worshiping Jain sects.
We can ask, then: What role has the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa played in defining 
Padmāvatī and launching her to her current exalted status?3 Has the text influenced 
modern Jain worship practices? One way to answer these questions is to determine 
how or if the yantras described in the text are commonly used today. Digambara and 
Śvetāmbara temples today are filled with different yantras, inscribed on metal and 
placed in shrines, painted on cloth or paper and framed on the wall of a temple or wor­
ship hall, or traced with foodstuffs or synthetic colored powder for special occasions like 
the consecration of a temple or a festival (Gough 2019). In pilgrimage sites and cities, 
shops that specialize in Jain ritual paraphernalia sell portable yantras that laypeople can 
establish in their personal shrines; most practicing Jains will have a shrine at home, and 
Jain shopkeepers will often establish metal or paper yantras on a wall or in a shrine in 
their shop. While practitioners can always commission special yantras, the readymade 
ones easily available at shops represent the most recognizable yantras today.
To gain some understanding of the relationship between the yantras of the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa and modern yantras of Padmāvatī, then, I will compare the 
eleventh-​century text to yantras available for purchase in two different shops: one 
shop in Jaipur that specializes in both Hindu and Digambara Jain yantras, Jain Yantra 
Udyog, and an online site that sells Hindu and Śvetāmbara Jain yantras run by a Jain 
astrologer in Mumbai, Rajendra Chopra Jain (rajendrachopra.com). I will rely on four 
different versions of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa that include images of the yantras 
described in the Sanskrit text. One of these versions is Nawab’s; he commissioned 
forty-​four images of yantras for his publication. The other versions are Digambara. 
The website of the International Digambara Jain Organization has archived scans 
of two manuscripts of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa from the Sri Dev Kumar Jain 
Oriental Research Institute (also known as the Jain Siddhānt Bhavan) in Arrah, Bihar: 
one of fifty-​two folios and another of twenty-​four. Both manuscripts should not date 
before the nineteenth century, are on paper, and contain the same forty-​four yantras, 
which differ only slightly from the yantras in Nawab’s publication. Another version of 
the text, with forty-​six images of yantras, was published in 1952 by Mūlcand Kisandās 
Kāpaḍiyā and translated into Hindi by Paṇḍit Candraśekhar Śāstrī (Śāstrī 1952). Using 
these images of the yantras as a reference, I will follow the text of Nawab’s edition 
(Abhyaṅkar 1937)4—​including Bandhuṣeṇa’s commentary—​to outline some yantras 
described in the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa and then compare them with modern 
yantras of Padmāvatī, both Śvetāmbara and Digambara.5 Much more research needs 
to be done to determine the real influence of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, but the 
examination of these yantras shows that there is little evidence that the text has had a 
profound influence on modern Jain mantraśāstra and on the worship of Padmāvatī. 
While many of the mantras and rituals of the Bhairavapadmāvatikalpa are common to 
the images and practices of Jain mantraśāstra, the text should not be seen as the “main 
tantra” of Jainism.

--- PAGE 708 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      683
 
The Yantras of the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa
The Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa contains ten chapters and a little over three hundred 
Sanskrit verses, depending on the manuscript or publication. The first chapter, after 
introducing the goddess Padmāvatī with the epithets discussed above (1.3), outlines the 
contents of the text (1.4–​1.5) and the qualities of a person who can undertake its practices 
(sādhaka or mantrin), which include being devoid of anger and bad karma (1.6–​1.7), 
needing to eat and sleep very little (1.8), having conquered the passions (1.9), and being 
devoted to a guru (1.10). The second chapter describes what it calls sakalīkriyā. The best 
known saklīkriyā/​karaṇa rites are the ones in Śaiva texts in which a practitioner must 
undertake visualizations and placements of mantras on his body to transform himself 
into Śiva before worshiping icons of Śiva (Davis 1992). In the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, 
it is a catch-​all term for the mantra-​based preliminary rites of protection and purifica­
tion a practitioner must undertake before propitiating the yantras described in the sub­
sequent chapters.
After bathing, the practitioner should wear red clothes and sit in a clean space (2.1). By 
reciting the syllables and touching his fingers, he then should place on his left hand the 
syllables hrāṃ, hrīṃ, hrūṃ hrauṃ hraḥ on his thumb, index finger, middle finger, ring 
finger, and pinky, respectively (2.2). To protect his body, he should touch five different 
body parts and recite an expanded version of the main mantra of Jainism, the Prakrit 
Fivefold Praise (pañcanamaskāra), which honors the five supreme objects of reverence 
in Jainism, the omniscient souls (arhat), liberated souls (siddha), and the mendicants 
on the path to becoming liberated: the mendicant leaders (ācārya), mendicant teachers 
(upādhyāya), and ordinary mendicants (sādhu):
oṃ ṇamo arahantāṇaṃ hrāṃ śīrṣaṃ rakṣa rakṣa svāhā
oṃ praise the liberated souls, protect my head
oṃ ṇamo siddhāṇaṃ hrīṃ vadanaṃ rakṣa rakṣa svāhā
oṃ praise the liberated souls, protect my body
oṃ ṇamo āyariyāṇaṃ hrūṃ hṛdayaṃ rakṣa rakṣa svāhā
oṃ praise the liberated souls, protect my heart
oṃ ṇamo uvajjhāyāṇaṃ hrauṃ nābhiṃ rakṣa rakṣa svāhā
oṃ praise the liberated souls, protect my navel
oṃ ṇamo loe savvasāhūṇaṃ hraḥ pādau rakṣa rakṣa svāhā
oṃ praise the liberated souls, protect my feet. (2.3–​2.4)6
The text requires the daily performance of this nyāsa, or placement of mantras on the 
body (2.4).
The sādhaka then should recite eight seed syllables to protect his space from ad­
verse influences coming from the eight directions (perform digbandhana; 2.5) and

--- PAGE 709 ---
684      Ellen Gough
 
perform bhūtaśuddhi rites—​visualizations of diagrams and seed syllables—​to purify 
the elements that constitute both the universe and his body. He should imagine a series 
of syllables—​the letter ha attached to each of the vowels (ha, hā, hi hī, hu, hū, etc.)—​
that are golden, standing twenty hands tall (2.6); he should then imagine a moat filled 
with water and the syllable kṣa attached to each of the vowels (kṣạ, kṣa, kṣā, kṣi, kṣī, kṣu, 
kṣū, etc.) (2.7) (see Williams, this volume). After imagining himself seated inside a fire 
diagram—​a triangle in which the seed syllable raṃ is inscribed—​he should imagine 
himself bathed by the mantra of immortality, the amṛtamantra,7 and by milk that the 
gods used to bathe the jina Pārśva on Mount Meru in celebration of his birth (2.8–​2.9). 
From these visualizations, the text claims, the practitioner will not be troubled by various 
potentially malevolent forces, including ghosts and planets (2.10). Seated cross-​legged, 
in paryaṅkāsana,8 having given himself a mark on his forehead (tilaka), with his pūjā 
offerings nearby (2.11), the sādhaka should visualize a red Padmāvatī, with three eyes, 
seated on a lotus, with her vehicle—​a snake with the head of a rooster (kukkuṭoraga)9—​
making a gesture of blessing (varadamudrā) with one hand and holding a goad, a noose, 
and a fruit in her other hands (2.12). Finally, to determine which invocations are effec­
tive for ritual use, the syllables of the names of the sādhaka and a mantra are divided and 
placed in a sequence, with some conferring positive results and others negative (for the 
details, see vv. 2.15–​22).
The Padmāvatī Yantra of Chapter Three
Chapter Three describes the construction of a yantra whose ritual propitiation can allow 
for the “six acts” (ṣaṭkarman) of pacification (śānti), causing enmity (dveṣa), gaining 
control (vaśya), stopping another person (bandha), attracting women (ākarṣaṇa), 
and immobilizing negative forces (stambhana). Which act is undertaken depends on 
a number of factors, including the substance offered to the yantra, the hand gesture 
performed, the sādhaka’s posture, and the color of flowers offered to the diagram (3.1–​
3.12). To construct the yantra, the practitioner, using a golden writing utensil, should 
trace with scented substances a diagram made of three concentric squares, with four 
doors placed in the cardinal directions (3.13). Outside each of the four doors, the fol­
lowing four Sanskrit mantras should be inscribed:
East: oṃ hrīṃ dharaṇendrāya namaḥ
South: oṃ hrīṃ adhacchadanāya namaḥ
West: oṃ hrīṃ ūrdhvacchadanāya namaḥ
North: oṃ hrīṃ padmacchadanāya namaḥ (3.14)
Then, inside the outermost square, in each of the eight directions and above and below 
the yantra, ten Sanskrit mantras should be inscribed to invoke the guardians of the eight 
directions, the dikpālas—​Indra, Agni, Yama, Nairṛtya, Varuṇa, Vāyu, Kubera, Īśāna—​
and the deities who protect from above and below (3.15–​3.16). Inside the second con­
centric square, in the cardinal directions, praises to masculine forms of the goddesses of

--- PAGE 710 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      685
 
victory, the jayādevīs—​Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, and Aparājitā—​should be traced.10 The ordinal 
directions should contain praises to masculine forms of the goddesses linked to the “six 
acts”: Jambhā (“Devourer”), Mohā (“Deluder”), Stambhā (“Immobilizer”), and Stambhinī 
(“Immobilizer”):
East: oṃ hrīṃ jaye namaḥ
Southeast: oṃ hrīṃ jambhe namaḥ
South: oṃ hrīṃ vijaye namaḥ
Southwest: oṃ hrīṃ mohe namaḥ
West: oṃ hrīṃ ajite namaḥ
Northwest: oṃ hrīṃ stambhe namaḥ
North: oṃ hrīṃ aparājite namaḥ
Northeast: oṃ hrīṃ stambhini namaḥ (3.17–​3.18)
An eight-​petaled lotus should sit at the center of the diagram. Each of the eight petals 
of this lotus should contain a mantra praising one of the eight messengers, or dūtikās, of 
Padmāvatī: Anaṅgakamalā, Padmagandhā, Padmāsyā, Padmamālā, Madanonmādinī, 
Kāmoddīpanā, Padmāvarṇā, Trailokyakṣobhinī:11
East: oṃ hrīṃ anaṅgakamalāyai namaḥ
Southeast: oṃ hrīṃ padmagandhāyai namaḥ
South: oṃ hrīṃ padmāsyāyai namaḥ
Southwest: oṃ hrīṃ padmamālāyai namaḥ
West: oṃ hrīṃ madanonmādinyai namaḥ
Northwest: oṃ hrīṃ kāmoddīpanāyai namaḥ
North: oṃ hrīṃ padmavarṇāyai namaḥ
Northeast: oṃ hrīṃ trailokyakṣobhiṇyai namaḥ (3.19–​3.21)
The center of the lotus should contain an image of Padmāvatī or mantras that invoke her 
presence. All the syllables of the Devanagari alphabet should be traced in the pericarp of 
the lotus (3.21). In the four cardinal directions should sit the following mantras:12
East: oṃ hrīṃ kṣāṃ padmāvatīdevyai namaḥ
South oṃ hrīṃ kṣīṃ padmāvatīdevyai namaḥ
West: oṃ hrīṃ kṣūṃ padmāvatīdevyai namaḥ
North: oṃ hrīṃ kṣaiṃ padmāvatīdevyai namaḥ (3.22–​23)
This is the key yantra to Padmāvatī in the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. She sits at the 
center of the lotus, surrounded by lower-​level deities, including her messengers, pow­
erful deities who can effect the “six acts,” and protectors. The text declares that this yantra 
should be worshiped regularly (nityam) and outlines the mantras and breath control 
the sādhaka should use to perform the five upacāras—​inviting the goddess into the di­
agram (āhvāna), establishing her there (sthāpana), having her remain in the diagram 
(sannidhīkaraṇa), having her accept scented substances and other offerings (pūjā), and 
dismissing her from the diagram after the worship is completed (visarjana) (3.23–​3.28).

--- PAGE 711 ---
686      Ellen Gough
 
Five mantras to be used in this worship of Padmāvatī are outlined:
Root mantra: [oṃ] hrīṃ hraiṃ hsklīṃ padme padmakaṭini  [namaḥ] (3.29)
Mantra of six syllables: [oṃ] hrīṃ hraiṃ hsklīṃ śrīṃ padme  [namaḥ] (3.31)
Mantra of three syllables: [oṃ] aiṃ klīṃ hsauḥ  [namaḥ] (3.32)
Mantra of one syllable: [oṃ] hrīṃ [namaḥ] (3.33–​34)
The text confirms that hrīṃ is the symbol of Pārśva and his tutelary deities: ha represents 
Pārśva, ra represents Dharaṇendra, and ī represents Padmāvatī (3.33).
Some Yantras of the Final Seven Chapters
While the elaborate yantra of Chapter Three should be worshiped regularly, the yantras 
of the subsequent chapters should be used in specific circumstances. Chapter Four 
details the construction of eleven13 different yantras, each of which should be worshiped 
for a different result, from deluding another person to ensuring that a woman has 
pleasant speech and actions. Each of these yantras is made up of a twelve-​petaled lotus. 
At the center of the lotus, the name of the person to be affected by the propitiation of 
the yantra should be inscribed in the pericarp. The name is surrounded by the mantra 
kṣmlrvyūṃ and flanked by a pair of seed syllables. What seed syllable flanks the name 
depends on the use of the yantra:
	
1.	 To delude: klīṃ (4.4)
	
2.	 To attract: hrīṃ (4.5)
	
3.	 To repel: huṃ (4.6)14
	
4.	 To create enmity: rya (4.7–​4.8)
	
5.	 To eradicate the bondage of an enemy: yaḥ (4.9–​4.10)
	
6.	 To eradicate the family of an enemy: ha (4.11–​4.12)
	
7.	 To force an enemy to wander the earth: phaṭ (4.13–​4.14)
	
8.	 To suppress an enemy: ma (4.15–​4.16)
	
9.	 To delude a woman: ī (4.17–​4.18)
	 10.	 To make a women lovely: kṣavaṣaṭ (4.19–​4.20)
	
11.	 To immobilize: laṃ (4.21)
In the twelve petals of the lotus, mantras to invoke the jayādevīs sit in the petals facing 
the cardinal directions, and mantras to invoke the goddesses linked to the “six acts” sit in 
the petals facing the ordinal directions:
East: oṃ jayāyai svāhā15
Southeast: oṃ jhmlrvyūṃ jambhāyai svāhā
South: oṃ vijayāyai svāhā
Southwest: oṃ bhmlrvyūṃ mohāyai svāhā

--- PAGE 712 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      687
 
West: oṃ ajitāyai svāhā
Northwest: oṃ mmlrvyūṃ stambhāyai svāhā
North: oṃ aparājitāyai svāhā
Northeast: oṃ hmlrvyūṃ stambhinyai svāhā (4.2)
Each of the remaining four petals contains three seed syllables: whatever seed syllable 
sits at the center of the lotus (klīṃ, hrīṃ, hūṃ, etc.) plus two repetitions of kroṃ. In this 
way, the yantras of Chapter Four do not directly invoke Padmāvatī, and they should be 
constructed for much more specific reasons than the yantra of Chapter Three.
The nine yantras outlined in Chapter Five have an even more specific use: They 
should be propitiated to immobilize (stambhana) adversaries, including water, snakes, 
birds, anger, and armies. The first yantra, which helps extinguish fires, is made up of 
an eight-​petaled lotus, at the center of which the name of the object to be immobilized 
should be inscribed, surrounded by the seed syllable glauṃ. In the eight petals, the fol­
lowing mantras should be inscribed: kṣmlrvyūṃ, mmlrvyūṃ, ṭhmlrvyūṃ, smlrvyūṃ, 
hmlrvyūṃ, pmlrvyūṃ, lmlrvryūṃ, and vmlvryūṃ (5.1). In a circle around the lotus, 
two mantras should be inscribed that invoke the goddess “Fire-​Extinguisher,” 
Agnistambhinī, along with other goddesses whose names confirm that they offer well-​
being: Pañcadivyottaraṇī, Śreyaskarī, Sarvakāmārthasādhinī, Analapiṅgalordhvakeśinī, 
and Mahādivyādhipatā (5.2).
Chapter Six focuses on five yantras that can attract women. Two yantras from this 
chapter stand out in the manuscripts, because they each feature an image of a female—​
the sādhaka’s desired woman. For the first of these yantras, on top of the image of the 
woman, oṃ hrīṃ should be written on her heart, kroṃ16 on her joints, hrīṃ on each of 
her breasts, and ryyūṃ on her genitals. The woman should be surrounded by multiple 
kroṃs, a ring of mantras (oṃ namo bhagavati kṛṣṇamātaṅgini, etc.),17 a triangle, a circle, 
and a square. The text confirms that propitiating the yantra with a lamp or flame for 
three days attracts the desired woman (6.4).
The nine yantras of Chapter Seven aid the sādhaka in gaining control (vaśya) of 
different situations and people, including women and fevers. The first yantra is an 
eight-​petaled lotus at the center of which sits the name of the object to be controlled, 
surrounded by the mantras haṃsaḥ, kṣmlrvyūṃ, and all the vowels of the Devanagari 
alphabet. The petals facing the cardinal directions also contain the mantra haṃsaḥ, 
plus a mantra honoring the omniscient soul, the arhat (arhaṃ): oṃ arhaṃ jhvīṃ kṣvīṃ 
haṃsaḥ svāhā. The petals facing the ordinal directions contain the syllable cluster 
kṣmlrvyūṃ (7.1–​7.2). After this yantra is traced on birch bark with scented substances 
and placed in new pot filled with water, an icon of Pārśva should be placed on top of a 
container of grains on top of this pot. This should allow for fevers to break (7.3–​7.4).
Chapter Eight describes different ways to use mantras to forecast the future, in­
cluding rites that use mirrors and lamps. In these divination rites, only three yantras 
are mentioned. The second one, for example, can be used to determine if the person 
will lose his home. It comprises a triangle surrounded by a circle, with kṣmlrvyūṃ, 
oṃ, fourteen vowels (all but ḷ and ṛ), and the name of a person at its center (8.24–​8.25).

--- PAGE 713 ---
688      Ellen Gough
 
Finally, Chapter Ten, devoted to rituals for controlling snakes and curing snake bites, 
describes three different yantras that can be effective in these pursuits. The key mantra 
of this chapter is commonly found in Jain and non-​Jain texts on controlling snakes 
(gāruḍatantra), “Garuḍa’s five syllables,” or the vipatimantra: kṣi pa oṃ svā hā. The first 
yantra of the chapter, for example, comprises a four-​petaled lotus, and in each of the 
petals of the lotus sit the syllables kṣi pa oṃ svā hā (10.6).18
Each of the yantras of these chapters should be constructed, stored, and propitiated 
in a specific way, and many of the instructions contain elements that starkly contradict 
the nonviolent, monastic teachings of Jainism. Some of the yantras should be traced on 
skulls, for example (4.5), using poison, ash, and even animal blood (4.11–​4.12, 4.15–​4.16). 
The first yantra of Chapter Four is to be traced with scented substances on a piece of 
birch bark, tied with a red thread, and placed in a golden pot filled with liquor. Simply 
doing this will delude the woman whose name is inscribed at the center of the yantra 
(4.4). Because many of these yantras are associated with practices that are banned 
for lay and mendicant Jains alike, one would not expect for them to be commonly 
found in Jain temples, or even commonly constructed by Jains. If one yantra from the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa were to be found in temple and home shrines, it would be the 
elaborate one outlined in Chapter Three, which contains Padmāvatī and her attendant 
deities and is prescribed to be worshiped regularly. However, this yantra is not popularly 
found in temples, home shrines, shops, or modern worship booklets.
Some Modern Yantras to Padmāvatī
In my fifteen years of documenting Digambara and Śvetāmbara yantras in 
temples, homes, and shops in north India, I have not encountered the yantras of the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa in places of worship.19 I have, however, seen dozens of dif­
ferent yantras to Padmāvatī, so it is impossible to discuss every type of Padmāvatī yantra 
used in worship today. Looking at the Padmāvatī yantras for sale in two shops—​the Jain 
Yantra Udyog shop in Jaipur and Rajendra Chopra Jain’s shop in Mumbai—​will there­
fore provide a focus for contextualizing the contents of as least a few of the modern 
yantras to Padmāvatī.
Śvetāmbara Modern Yantras
Astrologer Rajendra Chopra Jain’s online shop sells a variety of ritual objects, many 
of them related to astrology and vāstuśāstra, or the Indian system of creating an aus­
piciously organized space. He lists more than seventy different yantras for sale, made 
of copper or gold, most of which are explicitly Jain, although there are a handful of 
yantras to Rāma and Hanumān without any explicitly “Jain” imagery or mantras. 
Many of his yantras relate to pacifying the negative influence of planets and include

--- PAGE 714 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      689
 
images of the jinas associated with each of the planets (navagraha), but he also sells 
popular nonastrological Jain yantras that are found in Digambara and Śvetāmbara 
temples throughout India, including the Siddhacakra Yantra, Ṛṣimaṇḍala Yantra, 
and the Bhaktāmara Stotra Yantra. The Siddhacakra takes slightly different forms for 
Digambaras and Śvetāmbaras but is named after the liberated soul (siddha) (Gough 
2015). The Ṛṣimaṇḍala Yantra takes the shape of a forty-​eight-​petaled lotus, at the center 
of which sits a multicolored representation of the seed syllable hrīṃ on which images or 
the names of the twenty-​four Tīrthaṅkaras are placed (Gough 2012). The Bhaktāmara 
Stotra Yantra contains forty-​eight different diagrams that are each linked to one of the 
verses of the Bhaktāmarastotra, a medieval Sanskrit praise poem that praises the first 
Tīrthaṅkara, Ṛṣabha (Cort 2005). Jain’s list of yantras for sale also includes ones ded­
icated to Jain deities such as Ghaṇṭākarṇa Mahāvīra (Cort 2000), Nakoḍa Bhairava 
(Aukland 2010), Lakṣmī, and, of course, Padmāvatī.
Two types of Padmāvatī yantra are for sale: the more elaborate “The Great Yantra of 
Pārśva’s Goddess Padmāvatī with 108 Names,” 108 Nāma Yukta Śrī Pārśva Padmāvatīdevī 
Mahāyantram, and the slightly simpler “Great Yantra of the Goddess Padmāvatī, Who 
Fulfils all Desires,” Sarva Manokāmanāpūraka Śrī Padmāvatīdevī Mahāyantram, both 
of which the website confirms are supposed to ensure “health, wealth, fame, [and] love.” 
The more elaborate rectangular yantra that contains 108 names of Padmāvatī is nearly 
identical to a yantra I purchased in 2013 in a shop at the Śvetāmbara pilgrimage center, 
Palitana, in Gujarat (fig. 27.1).
As is quite common for Śvetāmbara yantras, the central images and mantras of the 
diagram are situated inside an auspicious pot (kalaśa). Ribbons are tied to either side of 
the pot, and two eyes emerge from the top of the diagram. At the center of the pot sits a 
four-​armed, ornamented Padmāvatī, holding a noose, a lotus, a goad, and a fruit. Her 
main object of devotion, Pārśva, balances, cross-​legged in a meditative posture, on top 
of her snakehead canopy, signifying that while the goddess is the main object of worship 
here, she still sits below him: she is spiritually inferior to the enlightened teacher. She 
sits in a posture of royal ease (lalitāsana), with her left leg tucked under her and right 
hanging down, on top of her vehicle, a snake with the head of a rooster. Two mantras are 
inscribed in a semicircle that curves over the goddess’s head:
oṃ hrīṃ śrīṃ padmāvati padmanetre padmāsane lakṣmīdāyini vāñchāpūrṇi ṛddhiṃ 
siddhiṃ jayaṃ jayaṃ jayaṃ kuru kuru svāhā
oṃ hrīṃ śrīṃ dharaṇendrapadmāvatīparipūjitāya śrī śaṅkheśvarapārśvanāthāya 
namaḥ
Padmāvatī! Lotus-​Eyed One! She Who Sits Cross-​Legged! Giver of Wealth! 
Fulfiller of Desires! Grant victory, prosperity (ṛddhi), success (siddhi). Praise 
to Śaṅkheśvara Pārśva, the one who is supremely adored by Padmāvatī and 
Dharaṇendra.
In a ring around Padmāvatī and Pārśva, Sanskrit praises to 108 epithets of 
Padmāvatī—​called the Padmāvatyaṣṭottaraśatanāmāvali—​are inscribed. Here, many

--- PAGE 715 ---
690      Ellen Gough
 
of her epithets indicate that she supports Jain teachings. She is called, for example, the 
goddess who is wholly devoted to Jainism (jinadharmaparāyaṇī) and the twelve limbs 
of the Jain canon (dvādaśāṅgaparāyaṇī), the one who is endowed with the three jewels 
of Jainism that constitute the path to liberation –​right view, knowledge, and conduct 
(samyagdarśanasampannā, samyagjñānaparāyaṇī, samyagcāritrasampannā)—​and 
the one who knows anekāntavāda, the Jain epistemological stance that every ob­
ject can be seen from multiple perspectives (anekāntātmatattvajñā). At the same 
time, she is homologized with non-​Jain, transregional goddesses of India, including 
Figure 27.1.  A metal Śvetāmbara Padmāvatī yantra called “The Great Yantra of Pārśva’s 
Goddess Padmāvatī with 108 Names,” 108 Nāma Yukta Śrī Pārśva Padmāvatīdevī Mahāyantram. 
Purchased in 2013 from a shop in Palitana, Gujarat.

--- PAGE 716 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      691
 
Mahādurgā, Gaṅgā, Kālarātrī, Mahālakṣmī, Sarasvatī, and four of the five names she 
is called in Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 1.3: Totalā, Nityā, Tripurā, and Kām[y]‌asādhinī 
(ll. 13–​16).20
In this way, this popular yantra to Padmāvatī refers to some understandings of the 
goddess found in the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. Her iconography is similar to that 
in Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 4.12, but here, instead of showing the varadamudrā, 
she holds a lotus.21 This diagram certainly represents the same goddess of the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, but it does not replicate any of the yantras described in 
the text.
Digambara Modern Yantras
Many modern Digambara Padmāvatī yantras share a number of iconographical features 
and mantras with their Śvetāmbara counterparts. In 2013, in a visit to the Jain Yantra 
Udyog shop in Jaipur that specializes in Digambara yantras, I purchased more than 
thirty yantras and took home a list of ready-​made yantras available for purchase. This 
list records 140 so-​called Vaiṣṇava yantras, which really means “Hindu,” since many of 
the diagrams are dedicated to “non-​Vaiṣṇava” deities like Śiva, Durgā, Cāmuṇḍā, and 
Kāmākṣī. It also lists eighty-​four Jain yantras for sale, including many of the yantras 
available at Rajendra Chopra Jain’s Śvetāmbara shop—​for example, the Siddhacakra 
Yantra, Ṛṣimaṇḍala Yantra, and Bhaktāmara Stotra Yantra. It also catalogues two 
yantras specifically devoted to Padmāvatī.
I was able to purchase one of these Padmāvatī yantras during my visit, a 5" x 5" copper 
diagram that contains an image of Padmāvatī, a basic Sanskrit mantra asking for her 
blessings, and a grid containing nine numbers (fig. 27.2).
The yantra depicts a crowned, twenty-​four-​armed version of Padmāvatī who offers a 
gesture that dispels fear (abhayamudrā) and sits on a lotus on top of her vehicle, a snake 
with the head of a rooster. As in the Śvetāmbara diagram with 108 names of Padmāvatī, 
here, too, a small Pārśva sits in a meditative posture on top of the goddess’s head. The 
mantra inscribed below the image of the goddess, in flawed Sanskrit, praises Padmāvatī, 
who transfixes everyone and performs all actions. It calls her the one who removes all 
the suffering and worries of the worshiper and who fulfills all desires.
Next to Padmāvatī sits a so-​called magic square—​a numerical grid in which the sum 
of the numbers in every row, column, and diagonal is the same. In English-​language 
scholarship, the numerical diagram (aṅkayantra) of this Padmāvatī yantra is called a 
“Magic Square of Three”; it is a three-​by-​three grid of the numbers one through nine in 
which the sum of the numbers in each row, column, and diagonal is fifteen (see fig. 27.3).
This square with the “magic sum” of fifteen is often found on modern Padmāvatī 
yantras. Indeed, it is inscribed on the Śvetāmbara “Great Yantra of the Goddess 
Padmāvatī who Fulfils all Desires” from Rajendra Chopra Jain’s shop, where it is called 
the “Fifteen Yantra,” the pañcadaśa yantra.

--- PAGE 717 ---
692      Ellen Gough
 
Magic Squares
Magic squares are not unique to Jain yantras. In India, non-​Jain amulets and diagrams of 
Hindu deities and planets often contain them, and they have been popular in other parts 
Figure 27.2.  A metal Digambara Padmāvatī yantra purchased in 2011 from the Jain Yantra 
Udyog shop in Jaipur, Rajasthan.
2
9
4
7
5
3
6
1
8
figure 27.3.  Magic Square of Three.

--- PAGE 718 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      693
 
of the world for at least two thousand years. A “Magic Square of Three” is discussed in 
Chinese texts as early as the first century C.E. (Hayashi 2008: 164; Cammann 1961). The 
Brahmin astrologer Varāhamihira in his Bṛhatsaṃhitā (sixth century C.E.) provides an 
early discussion of the diagrams from India (Hayashi 2008), and Arabic and Persian 
scholars also began writing about magic squares by at least the tenth century (Cammann 
1968: 189–​190, 1969).
Even so, Jains have become well known for their production of magic squares 
(Vijayaraghavan 1941). A four-​by-​four numerical diagram with the “magic sum” of 
thirty-​four that has been dated between the twelfth and thirteenth centuries is carved 
into the wall at the entrance to the Pārśva temple in Khajuraho (Andrews 1917: 124–​125). 
In 1315, in his text the Gaṇitasāra, the Jain lay scholar Ṭakkura Pherū became “the first 
in India [to treat] magic squares in a mathematical work” when he devoted nine verses 
to different types of magic squares (Hayashi 2008: 1252). And the Victoria and Albert 
Museum in London also houses a magnificent, nearly five-​foot-​tall cloth painting of 
an eighty-​one-​by-​eighty-​one numerical diagram with an elaborate painted border 
populated with deities and other auspicious images (Pal 1995: 225–​226). This painting 
is a so-​called Victory Banner (jayatrayantra) that was consecrated on Diwali in 1447 by 
a Śvetāmbara monk named Jinaprabhasūri.22 This type of yantra is still used in ritual 
today; both the Digambara Jain Yantra Udyog shop and the Śvetāmbara Rajendra 
Chopra Jain sell miniature versions of the Victory Banner.23
A magic square is also outlined in the Śvetāmbara Tijayapahuttastotra (1938), a 
Prakrit hymn that has been classified as one of the Śvetāmbara “Nine Remembrances” 
(navasmaraṇa), or nine powerful recitations that are often grouped together in pūjā 
booklets. The Tijayapahuttastotra contains fourteen verses that outline a five-​by-​five 
numerical diagram whose magic sum represents the maximum number of enlight­
ened teachers of Jainism, tīrthaṅkaras, who can reside in our universe at one time: 170 
(Kapashi 2007: 41). According to the hymn, the diagram is called “auspicious in every 
respect,” the Sarvatobhadra Yantra (v. 6), and when someone traces it with sandalwood 
paste and camphor on a wooden board and/​or one’s door, negative effects from illness, 
the planets, ghosts, enemies, and other malevolent forces are destroyed (vv. 13–​14). 
From top to bottom and left to right, the five syllables of the key Gāruḍa mantra, the 
vipatimantra, fill the squares of the middle horizontal and vertical rows: kṣi pa oṃ svā 
hā. The syllables ha ra huṃ haḥ sa ra su saḥ are repeated twice, from left to right, in the 
remaining squares (see fig. 27.4).
This yantra described in the Tijayapahuttastotra—​the Sarvatobhadra Yantra—​
remains popular to this day and is for sale at the Digambara Jain Yantra Udyog shop 
in Jaipur and by the Śvetāmbara Rajendra Chopra Jain. Not only this yantra, however, 
but the majority of yantras for sale at these shops feature at least one magic square. 
Like a full pot or the other commonly depicted eight auspicious objects of Jainism 
(Shah 1955: 109–​115), these representations of symmetry, balance, and perfection 
create positive changes in the world through their auspiciousness.
Therefore, modern Padmāvatī yantras usually contain at least one magic square, 
an image of Padmāvatī, and Sanskrit praises of the goddess that ask for generic 
worldly prosperity. They do not usually contain the components of the yantras of

--- PAGE 719 ---
694      Ellen Gough
 
the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. Indeed, the five mantras to be used in the worship of 
Padmāvatī outlined in Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 3.29–​3.33 are not often linked to the god­
dess. In Jain places of worship today, yantras that connect the goddess to hrīṃ are some­
times found (see Coomaraswamy 2003: 50), but due to the influence of the Ṛṣimaṇḍala 
Yantra, hrīṃ is much more commonly linked to the twenty-​four tīrthaṅkaras than to 
Padmāvatī, Dharanendra, and Pārśva. The Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa’s lack of influence 
on modern temple images suggests that its audience may have been limited.
Assessing the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa’s 
Influence
In the (nearly identical) Hindi introductions to his publications of the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa (Śāstrī 1952) and the Jvālāmālinīkapa (Śāstrī 1966), the 
Digambara layman and publisher Mūlcandra Kisandās Kāpaḍiyā provides some 
insights into the status of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa (and Jvālāmālinīkalpa) in the 
middle of the twentieth century. At the outset of his introduction, Kāpaḍiyā notes 
that among Jain texts on mantraśāstra, the Ṛṣimaṇḍalastotra, the yantras and mantras 
associated with the Bhaktāmarastotra, and the mantra-​based rituals related to the 
Kalyāṇamandirastotra are well known (Śāstrī 1952: 3). Here, Kāpaḍiyā references 
three famous Sanskrit Jain hymns (stotra) that are accepted by both Digambaras and 
Śvetāmbaras and connected with powerful mantras and yantras. The Ṛṣimaṇḍalastotra 
and Bhaktāmarastotra contain the components of the yantras discussed above, the 
Ṛṣimaṇḍala Yantra and Bhaktāmara Stotra Yantra. The Kalyāṇamandirastotra, 
which praises Pārśva, has a number of mantras and yantras associated with it, in­
cluding forty-​four yantras associated with each of its verses (Kapashi 2007: 171–​174). 
The diagrams associated with these three hymns are often found in Jain homes and 
temples and constructed out of foodstuffs or synthetic colored powder for special 
worship ceremonies.
25 ha
80
ra
kṣi
15 huṃ
50 haḥ
20 sa
45
ra
pa
30 guṃ
75 saḥ
kṣi
pa
oṃ
svā
hā
70 ha
35 ra
svā
60 huṃ
5 haḥ
55 sa
10 ra
hā
64 suṃ
40 saḥ
figure 27.4.  Sarvatobhadra Yantra.

--- PAGE 720 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      695
 
Kāpaḍiyā notes, however, that the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa is not well known, de­
spite its presence in Jain archives (Śāstrī 1952: 3). To rectify this problem and shed light 
on the text, around 1928, when stopping in Delhi on a family pilgrimage from his home 
in Surat, Gujarat, to the Jain pilgrimage site Sammet Shikhar, Kāpaḍiyā met with the 
scholar Paṇḍit Candraśekhar Śāstrī and offered to him for translation into Hindi copies 
of manuscripts he had collected of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, Jvālāmālinīkalpa, 
Ambikākalpa, and Jain texts on the grammar of mantras and meanings of seed 
syllables (bījakoṣa). Śāstrī, having accepted the project, decided to first work on the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, and two years later, they had already printed forty-​eight pages 
of the text when Kāpaḍiyā, realizing that there were a number of impure and violent 
prescriptions in the text, put a halt to the printing. For fourteen to fifteen years, the pub­
lication remained on hold while Kāpaḍiyā consulted with scholars, some of whom ad­
vised him not to publish it, and others who assured him that some impure topics will 
always arise in texts on mantraśāstra, so it was fine to move forward with publication 
(Śāstrī 1952: 3–​5). In 1952, Kāpaḍiyā did eventually publish the whole text, with Śāstrī’s 
Hindi explanation and his own introduction explaining the history of the project. In 
this introduction, Kāpaḍiyā confirms that the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa was not an im­
portant text for lay and mendicant Jains in the first half of the twentieth century. He 
recognizes that other Jain texts on mantraśāstra are much better known and established 
in Jain ritual culture, likely because they, unlike the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, do not 
contain impure, violent, “non-​Jain” elements.
The Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa should not, however, be seen as an anomalous text 
whose contents do not represent Jain beliefs and practices. Many of the deities, 
preliminary purificatory rites, and mantras of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa are 
common to other Jain texts and objects of worship. The text reflects ritual trends 
described in Śvetāmbara and Digambara texts that emerged between the tenth and 
twelfth centuries, and many of these trends persist in Jain ritual culture to this day. 
For example, the performance of sakalīkaraṇa outlined in the second chapter of 
the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa—​the use of mantras to place the five supreme beings 
on one’s body to protect it as part of the preliminary purification rites—​is common 
to tenth-​ and eleventh-​century Digambara texts on meditation, like Devasena’s 
Bhāvasaṅgraha (v. 434) and Rāmasena’s Tattvānuśāsana (v. 186 trans. in Dundas 
2012: 156). To this day, both Digambara and Śvetāmbara laypeople and mendicants 
recite mantras to place the five supreme beings on different parts of their bodies for 
protection at the outset of worship ceremonies (vidhāna, mahāpūjana) in which 
they make offerings of coconuts, and so on, to a ritual diagram made of synthetic 
powder or foodstuffs (Balbir 2018: 282–​287). Before they make offerings of vāsakṣepa 
to cloth ritual diagrams—​either the Vardhamānavidyāpaṭa or the Sūrimantrapaṭa—​
Śvetāmbara monks also undertake these purification rites daily, placing the supreme 
beings on the same five parts of the body as outlined in Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 
2.3–​2.4 (Gough 2021: 160–​190).
The snakebite-​curing vipatimantra mentioned repeatedly in the tenth chapter 
of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa is found in another tenth-​century Jain text,

--- PAGE 721 ---
696      Ellen Gough
 
Indranandin’s Jvālāmālinīkalpa (5.14–​5.15). It, too, remains popular to this day, being 
inscribed on the Sarvatobhadra Yantra. In addition, the same four goddesses of vic­
tory found in many of the yantras of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa—​Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, 
and Aparājitā—​are quite often invoked in Jain rituals. They are invoked in the mantra 
that promoted Śvetāmbara Jain mendicants to higher ranks, the vardhamānavidyā 
that is outlined as early as the eighth-​ to ninth-​century Mahāniśīthasūtra, and they 
to this day sit at the corners of many different Jain ritual diagrams used in worship 
today, including the Vardhamānavidyāpaṭa and Sūrimantrapaṭa (Shah 1941; Gough 
2021: 190–​195). These four goddesses are most popularly known as the “Sisters of 
Tumburu,” a manifestation of Śiva described in most detail in the seventh-​century 
text the Vīṇāśikhatantra. They are also, however, found in all sorts of other medi­
eval texts—​Buddhist, Jain, and Hindu—​from south, southeast, east, and central Asia 
(Goudriaan 1985: 1–​62). It is not unusual for a Jain text to name these goddesses of 
victory.
It is also not unusual for a Jain text like the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa to discuss 
another popular mantra of Śaiva and Jain texts, the so-​called navātmamantra, 
a mantra with nine syllables that ends in the cluster mlvyū plus an anusvara. 
Medieval Śaiva texts often refer to different forms, and different interpretations, 
of the navātmamantra. Having been mentioned in the earliest tantric Śaiva scrip­
ture, the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā 5.35, the navātman eventually found its way 
into a variety of traditions. In the Śaiva tantric text from about the eleventh cen­
tury, the Śāradātilakatantra, forms of the navātmamantra are associated with 
Tumburu (kṣmryūṃ), Jayā (jmryūṃ), Vijayā (bhmryūṃ), Jayantī/​Ajitā (smryūṃ), 
and Aparājitā (hmryūṃ) (Goudriaan 1985: 20, 50). In the Kaula cult of the goddess 
Kubjikā that emerged around the end of the first millennium, it is the mantra of the 
consort of Kubjikā, Navātma-​Bhairava, and is related to the nine important onto­
logical components of the universe (tattva) (Heilijgers 1994: 26–​27). A key text of 
the tradition, the Kubjikāmatatantra (ninth–​tenth centuries), presents the “most 
common form” of the mantra as shrkṣmlvyū-​auṃ (Heilijgers 1994: 26). Other forms 
are present in other Śaiva texts, including the Svacchandatantra (hrkṣmlvyūṃ) and 
Tantrāloka (rhrkṣmlvyūṃ) (Heilijgers 1994: 27). The Navātmamantra for the goddess 
Tripurasundarī eventually became kṣmlrvyūṃ, the form of the mantra that is quite 
often mentioned in the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa (Padoux 2011: 24).
I have not yet found a Jain interpretation of the syllables of the navātmamantra, but 
versions of the mantra are often found in Jain yantras; they are frequently used to in­
voke the eight goddesses of the classes of the Devanagari alphabet (vargadevī).24 Two 
of the most popular Jain yantras—​one accepted by both Digambaras and Śvetāmbaras, 
the Ṛṣimaṇḍala, and another principally used in ritual by Digambaras, the Kalikuṇḍa—​
contain the same eight variants of the navātmamantra. The Kalikuṇḍa yantra is ded­
icated to Pārśva, and its name references a story in Pārśva’s medieval biographies in 
which an elephant, having honored the Tīrthaṅkara at a lake (kuṇḍa) at the base of a 
mountain named Kali, eventually gains rebirth as a god because of his piety (Bloomfield 
[1919] 1985: 115–​116). At the center of the Kalikuṇḍa Yantra sits either an image of Pārśva,

--- PAGE 722 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      697
 
Padmāvatī, and Dharanendra, or a mantra for an omniscient soul, hrūṃ, surrounded by 
eight lotus petals. In each lotus petal, two oṃs are inscribed, each surrounded by swirls 
(anāhata). Each lotus also contains the same eight mantras that fill the eight petals that 
surround the central hrīṃ of the Ṛṣimaṇḍala:
	 1.	 a ā i ī hmlrvyūṃ u ū ṛ ṝ ḷ ḹ e ai o au ṃ ḥ
	 2.	 ka kha bhmlrvyūṃ ga gha ṅ
	 3.	 ca cha mmlrvyūṃ ja jha ña
	 4.	 ṭa ṭha rmlvrvyūṃ ḍa ḍha ṇa
	 5.	 ta tha dhmlrvyūṃ da dha na
	 6.	 pa pha jhmlrvyūṃ ba bha ma
	 7.	 ya ra la va smlrvyūṃ
	 8.	 śa ṣa sa ha kṣmlrvyūṃ (Varṇī 2002: 349, 350)
Here, the mantra associated with Tripurasundarī that is prominent in the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa—​kṣmlrvyūṃ—​is just one of eight versions of the 
navātmamantra linked to each class of the Devanagari alphabet. While scholars are 
right to note the influence of the Tripurasundarī cult on the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 
(Sanderson 2011: 3–​4), this influence is not prominent today. Tripurasundarī has 
not become intimately linked to Padmāvatī today, nor are the mantras of the cult like 
kṣmlrvyūṃ particularly significant in the most important Jain yantras.
Therefore, although the specific rituals and images of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 
are not commonly found in Jain places of worship today, the text—​especially the first 
three chapters—​is not a complete anomaly. The iconography of Padmāvatī and many 
of the rituals and mantras of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa are common to other Jain 
texts and images; the text is certainly not irrelevant for understanding the history of Jain 
mantraśāstra. The text’s peculiarities, however, do not seem to have influenced other 
texts and practices. There is no evidence that the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa transformed 
Jain mantraśāstra.
Suggestions for Future Research on 
Jain Tantric Practices
I look forward to more research being done on the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa and its 
influence—​Aaron Ullrey’s (2016) continuing work on the text will be of great interest. It 
is quite possible that further study of this text in comparison with other Jain and non-​
Jain texts and research on icons of Padmāvatī and collections of yantras in temples will 
indicate much more influence than this chapter has suggested. As research stands now, 
however, the text should not be introduced as the “main tantra” of Jainism. Rather than 
a continued focus on this text, students of Jainism would be better served by studies and

--- PAGE 723 ---
698      Ellen Gough
 
translations of some of the dozens of overlooked texts on Padmāvatī. A real contribu­
tion to scholarship could be made simply putting the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa into con­
versation with the contents and histories of the thirty-​one texts on Jain goddesses found 
in the appendices to Nawab’s publication of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa (Abhyaṅkar 
1937).
Jain texts on goddesses, however, are not the only sources of Jain tantric practices, 
which in Jain sources means the ritual use of mantras and yantras to achieve miraculous 
powers and eventual liberation. Padmāvatī, for example, is not found on popular yantras 
connected with recitations like the Bhaktāmarastora and the Tijayapahuttastotra or 
on other yantras commonly found in Śvetāmbara and Digambara temples (e.g., the 
Ṛṣimaṇḍala Yantra). Nor is she found on the main diagrams worshiped by Śvetāmbara 
mendicants, the Vardhamānavidyāpaṭa and Sūrimantrapaṭa.
Tantric rituals have been thoroughly integrated into Jain lay and monastic life, 
so many different types of text—​for example, hymns (stotra, stuti, aṣṭaka), ritual 
manuals (kalpa, pūjana, vidhāna, vidhi), narratives (kathā, carita, purāṇa), and 
texts on lay and mendicant ritual practices (śrāvakācāra, yatyācāra)—​have extensive 
discussions of the visualization of mantras, the purification of the body via mantras, 
and the construction and propitiation of diagrams on which mantras are inscribed. 
Naming only some of these texts—​those on the propitiation of powerful goddesses—​
as “tantras” skews our understanding of the history of Jains’ ritual uses of mantras. 
The Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, unlike other Jain texts that contain tantric elements, 
does describe tantric practices in each of its chapters, so naming it as a tantra signals 
the character of the text and puts it into conversation with similar non-​Jain texts. 
However, this text has been privileged for too long in studies of Jain tantric practices. 
To avoid privileging certain types of texts as representative of Jain tantric practices, 
it would be best to avoid calling the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, or, indeed, any Jain 
text, a tantra. The Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa should be called what it is: a kalpa, not a 
tantra.
Notes
	1.	 He cites an important article that highlights several texts on Jain goddesses beyond the 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa and Jvālinīkalpa (Cort 1987).
	2.	 This scene may have been depicted earlier in art than in text; a Digambara carving of 
Padmāvatī and Dharaṇendra’s role in Pārśva’s omniscience in the Jain caves in Aihole has 
been dated to the late sixth century (Shah 1970).
	3.	 A similar question should be asked of the Jvālāmālinīkalpa, but I do not have the space here 
to explore this text and topic.
	4.	 Jhavery (1944) includes this edition, with its images of yantras, as an appendix to his text.
	5.	 An English translation of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa is also included as Appendix Two of 
Ullrey (2016).
	6.	 Here, I have relied on Bandhuṣeṇa’s commentary, which explains the meaning of homa as 
svāhā and the meaning of pañcaśūnya as hrāṃ hrīṃ hrūṃ hrauṃ hraḥ.

--- PAGE 724 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      699
 
	 7.	 Bandhuṣeṇa’s commentary gives the components of this mantra.
	 8.	 For some Jain descriptions of paryaṅkāsana, see Bollée (2007).
	 9.	 Bollée (2007: 9 n.30) has a helpful note on sources on the kukkuṭoraga as the vehicle of 
Padmāvatī.
	10.	 BhP 3.16–​3.17 names these goddesses, but Bandhuṣeṇa’s commentary gives the mantras 
with their names in the masculine, and all the images of the yantras I consulted followed 
the commentary.
	11.	 For a discussion of the dūtikās of Padmāvatī, with slightly different names for these 
goddesses, see Shah (1987: 277).
	12.	 Verse 3.23 in the version edited by Abhyaṅkar calls these mantras the four wheels (cakra) 
of Padmāvatī. In the version edited by Śāstrī, the verse is 3.24, and it calls the mantras the 
four faces (vaktra) of Padmāvatī.
	13.	 While the title of the chapter declares it is dedicated to twelve rañjikā, the chapter only 
outlines eleven yantras.
	14.	 While Bandhuṣeṇa confirms that the seed syllable is huṃ, the depiction of this yantra in 
Abhyaṅkar’s edition (fig. 7) has ūṃ, while Śāstrī’s version (1952: 28) has hūṃ.
	15.	 In Bandhuṣeṇa’s commentary and in both the manuscripts, the names of these goddesses 
are written in their masculine forms, so that the mantras read “oṃ jaye svāhā,” etc.
	16.	 Here, the term for kroṃ is “controller of elephants,” gajendravaśaka, which Bandhuṣeṇa 
notes refers to aṅkuśa, the goad, which signifies the seed syllable kroṃ.
	17.	 This mantra comes from Bandhuṣeṇa’s commentary on 6.4.
	18.	 On the vipatimantra, see Slouber (2017).
	19.	 For Digambara yantras that can effect vaśya and stambhana, see Varṇī (2002: 360, 368).
These yantras do not correspond to any of the yantras of the Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa.
	20.	 For the Padmāvatyaṣṭottaraśatanāmāvali, see https://​astro.indiap​lus.co.in/​mata-​padmav​
ati-​ash​tott​ara-​shatan​amav​ali/​
	21.	 For a helpful chart on various texts’ differing stances on Padmāvatī’s iconography, see Shah 
(1987: 280–​84).
	22.	 For this image and more bibliographic references for the Victory Banner, see https://​coll​
ecti​ons.vam.ac.uk/​item/​O17​102/​vict​ory-​ban​ner-​unkn​own/​
	23.	 The originator of this magic square was a monk named Trivikramācārya, according to 
Kapashi (2007: 141).
	24.	 The yantra that is placed under Digambara icons in temples upon their consecration, the 
mātṛkāyantra, also has these eight versions of the navātmamantra on the eight petals of its 
central lotus. See Varṇī (2002: 356).
References
Primary Sources
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. 1937. In Śrī Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa Sacitra Gujarātī Bhāṣāntar, ed­
ited by K. V. Abhyaṅkar, 1–​74. Ahmedabad: Sārābhāī Maṇilāl Navāb.
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. 1899 (Vikram Samvat 1956). Manuscript on paper from the Oriental 
Research Institute in Arrah, Bihar. 52 folios.
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. n.d. Manuscript on paper from the Oriental Research Institute in 
Arrah, Bihar. 24 folios.

--- PAGE 725 ---
700      Ellen Gough
 
Bhāvasaṅgraha. 1987. Translated into Hindi by Lālārām Śāstrī. Solapur: Āryikā Sumatimatī 
Digambar Jain Granthmālā.
Jvālāmālinīkalpa. 1966. Translated into Hindi by Candraśekhar Śāstrī. Surat: Digambar Jain 
Pustakālay.
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā. 2015. Edited and translated into English by Dominic Goodall as The 
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā. The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra. Pondicherry: Institut Français de 
Pondichéry.
Tijayapahuttastotra. 1938. In Mahāprābhāvika Navasmaraṇa (sic), edited by Sārābhāī Maṇilāl 
Navāb, 255–​59. Ahmedabad: Sārābhāī Maṇilāl Navāb.
Secondary Sources
Abhyaṅkar, K. V., ed. 1937. Śrī Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa Sacitra Gujarātī Bhāṣāntar. 
Ahmedabad: Sārābhāī Maṇilāl Navāb.
Andrews, W. S. 1917. Magic Squares and Cubes. 2nd ed., revised and enlarged. Chicago: Open 
Court.
Aukland, Knut. 2010. “The Cult of Nākoḍā Bhairava: Deity Worship and Possession in Jainism.” 
MA thesis, University of Oslo.
Balbir, Nalini. 2018. “The Jain Tradition on Protection and Its Means.” In Katā me Rakkhā, Katā 
me Parittā: Protecting the Protective Texts and Manuscripts, edited by Claudio Cicuzzaa, 
239–​304. Bangkok: Fragile Palm Leaver Foundation.
Bharati, Agehananda. 1965. The Tantric Tradition. London: Rider.
Bloomfield, Maurice. (1919) 1985. The Life and Stories of the Jaina Savior Pārśvanātha. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bollée, Willem. 2007. “A Note on the Pāsa Tradition in the Universal History of the Digambaras 
and Śvetāmbaras.” International Journal of Jaina Studies (Online) 3, no. 2: 1–​60.
Cammann, Schuyler. 1961. “The Magic Square of Three in Old Chinese Philosophy and 
Religion.” History of Religions 1, no. 1 (Summer): 37–​80.
Cammann, Schuyler. 1968. “Islamic and Indian Magic Squares: Part I” History of Religions 8, 
no. 3: 181–​209.
Cammann, Schuyler. 1969. “Islamic and Indian Magic Squares: Part II.” History of Religions 8, 
no. 4: 271–​99.
Coomaraswamy, Ananda. 2003. Essays on Jaina Art. Edited by Richard J. Cohen. New Delhi: 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts.
Cort, John. 1987. “Medieval Jaina Goddess Traditions.” Numen 34, no. 2: 235–​55.
Cort, John E. 2000. “Worship of Bell-​Ears the Great Hero, a Jain Tantric Deity.” In Tantra in 
Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 417–​33. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cort, John E. 2005. “Devotional Culture in Jainism: Mānatuṅga and His Bhaktāmara Stotra.” In 
Incompatible Visions: South Asian Religions in History and Culture. Essays in Honor of David 
M Knipe, edited by James Blumenthal, 93–​115. Madison: University of Wisconsin Center for 
South Asia.
Davis, Richard. 1992. “Becoming a Śiva, and Acting as One, in Śaiva Worship.” In Ritual and 
Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, edited by Teun Goudriaan, 
107–​38. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Desai, P. B. 1957. Jainism in South India and Some Jaina Inscriptions. Sholapur: Jaina Saṃskṛti 
Saṃrakṣak Saṃgh.

--- PAGE 726 ---
Jain Tantric Diagrams of the Goddess Padmāvatī      701
 
Dundas, Paul. 2012. “A Digambara Jain Description of the Yogic Path to Deliverance.” In Yoga in 
Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 143–​61. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Goudriaan, Teun. 1978. Māyā Divine and Human. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Goudriaan, Teun. 1985. Vīṇāśikha Tantra: A Śaiva Tantra of the Left Current. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Goudriaan, Teun, and Sanjukta Gupta. 1981. Hindu Tantric and Śākta Literature. Wiesbaden, 
Germany: Harrassowitz.
Gough, Ellen. 2012. “Shades of Enlightenment: A Jain Tantric Diagram and the Colours of the 
Tīrthaṅkaras.” International Journal of Jaina Studies (Online) 8, no. 1: 1–​47.
Gough, Ellen. 2015. “Wheel of the Liberated: Jain Siddhacakras, Past and Present.” In Objects 
of Worship in the South Asian Religions: Forms, Practices, and Meanings, edited by Knut 
Jacobsen, 85–​108. London: Routledge.
Gough, Ellen. 2019. “Jain Maṇḍalas and Yantras.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Jainism Online, ed­
ited by Knut A. Jacobsen, John E. Cort, Paul Dundas, and Kristi L. Wiley (Eds.). Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill. Last modified 2019. http://​doi.org/​10.1163/​2590-​2768_​BEJO​_​COM​_​035​000
Gough, Ellen. 2021. Making a Mantra: Tantric Ritual and Renunciation on the Jain Path to 
Liberation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hayashi, Takao. 2008. “Magic Squares in Indian Mathematics.” In Encyclopaedia of the History 
of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-​Western Cultures, vol. 1., edited by Helaine 
Selin, 1252–​59. Berlin: Springer-​Verlag.
Heilijgers, D. H. 1994. The System of Five Cakras in Kubjikāmatatantra 14.16. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Jambūvijaya, Muni, ed. 1969. Sūrimantrakalpasamuccayaḥ. Pt. 1. Mumbai: Jain Sāhitya Vikās 
Maṇḍal (continuous pagination).
Jambūvijaya, Muni, ed. 1977. Sūrimantrakalpasamuccayaḥ. Pt. 2. Mumbai: Jain Sāhitya Vikās 
Maṇḍal (continuous pagination).
Jhavery, Mohanlal Bhagwandas. 1944. Comparative and Critical Study of Mantrasastra (With 
Special Treatment of Jain Mantravada). Ahmedabad: Sarabhai Manilal Nawab.
Jinendrasurishwarji, Acharya Shri Vijay, ed. n.d. The List of Hastalikhit Scritptures, pt. 1. 
Shantipuri, Gujarat: Shri Harsh Puyshpamrut Jain Granthmala.
Kapashi, Vinod. 2007. Nine Sacred Recitations of the Jain Religion (A Study of the Nine Smaranas 
and All Aspects Associated with Them). Mumbai: Hindi Granth Karyalay.
Nandi, Ramendra Nath. 1973. Religious Institutions and Cults in the Deccan, c. A.D. 600-​A.D. 
1000. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Navāb, Sārābhāī Maṇilāl. 1937. “Nivedan.” In Śrī Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa Sacitra Gujarātī 
Bhāṣāntar, edited by K. V. Abhyaṅkar, 1–​12. Ahmedabad: Sārābhāī Maṇilāl Navāb.
Padoux, André. 2011. Tantric Mantras: Studies on Mantraśāstra. London: Routledge.
Pal, Pratapaditya, ed. 1995. The Peaceful Liberators: Jain Art from India. Los Angeles, CA: Los 
Angeles County Museum of Art.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2011. “The Appropriation of Śaiva Sources and Models in the Production 
of Jain Ritual Paddhatis from the 10th to the 15th Century.” Lecture Handout, University of 
Hamburg, July 4.
Śāstrī, Candraśekhar, trans. 1952. Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa. Surat: Digambar Jain Pustakālay.
Śāstrī, Candraśekhar, trans. 1966. Jvālāmālinīkalpa. Surat: Digambar Jain Pustakālay.
Shah, Umakant P. 1941. “Varddhamāna-​Vidyā-​Paṭa.” Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Arts 
9: 42–​51.

--- PAGE 727 ---
702      Ellen Gough
 
Shah, Umakant P. 1955. Studies in Jaina Art. Varanasi: Pārśvanātha Vidyāpīṭha.
Shah, 
Umakant 
P. 
1959. 
“Introduction 
of 
Śāsanadevatās 
in 
Jaina 
Worship.” 
Proceedings and Transactions of the All-​India Oriental Conference, 20: 141–​52.
Shah, Umakant P. 1970. “A Parshvanatha Sculpture in Cleveland.” 1970. The Bulletin of the 
Cleveland Museum of Art 57, no. 9 (December): 303–​11.
Shah, Umakant P. 1987. Jaina-​Rūpa-​Maṇḍana. New Delhi: Abhinav.
Slouber, Michael. 2016. “Snakebite Goddesses in the Śākta Traditions: Roots and Incorporations 
of Tvaritā, Kurukullā and Bheruṇḍā.” In Goddess Traditions in Tantric Hinduism: History, 
Practice and Doctrine, edited by Bjarne Wernicke Olesen, 74–​95. London: Routledge.
Slouber, Michael. 2017. Early Tantric Medicine. Snakebite, Mantras, and Healing in the Gāruḍa 
Tantras. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Travis L. 2018. “Tantras.” Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism Online, edited by Knut A. 
Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha Narayanan (Eds.). Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill. Last modified 2018. http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1163/​2212-​5019_​BEH_​COM_​
2020​100
Ullrey, Aaron Michael. 2016. “Grim Grimoires: Pragmatic Ritual in the Magic Tantras.” PhD 
diss., University of California, Santa Barbara.
Varṇī, Jinendra. 2002. Jainendra Siddhānt Koś. Pt. 3. 6th ed. Delhi: Bhāratīya Jñānpīṭh.
Vijayaraghavan, T. 1941. “On Jaina Magic Squares.” Mathematics Student 9: 97–​102.
White, David Gordon. 2000. “Introduction.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by David Gordon 
White, 3–​38. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

--- PAGE 728 ---
Chapter 28
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN 
TANTRIC BUDDHISM
David L. Gardiner
Introduction
Both implicitly and explicitly, tantric Buddhist (Vajrayāna, or esoteric Buddhist) im­
agery and its practice embody a powerful critique of dichotomies such as subject/​ob­
ject, self/​world, body/​mind, and female/​male. Moreover, tantric Buddhist imagery use 
functions to proactively replace bifurcated, traumatized experiential frameworks with 
alternative, more integrated structures for living. The holistic worldview expressed 
in writings on Vajrayāna meditation constitutes an intentional assault on the funda­
mental patterns of ignorant self-​absorption that Buddhist teachings assert to be the 
source of sentient beings’ suffering. Central to this meditation practice is the sustained, 
creative engagement with religious imagery through visualization methods. These 
visualizations aim to transform the practitioner’s sense of self, both cognitively and so­
matically. Imagery is thus a central tool in the Vajrayāna Buddhist path to liberation, 
manifest not only in rich iconic diversity but also in sophisticated and sublime contem­
plative exercises that utilize creative visual elements. While the traditions of imagery 
use in tantric Buddhism are worthy of study from a variety of perspectives, their cen­
tral role within a clearly articulated soteriological context warrants particular atten­
tion. The Vajrayāna employment of imagery in both material and cognitive domains 
constitutes an ingenious technology that harnesses intention, imagination, and em­
bodiment in remarkable ways (cf. Timalsina, this volume). Elements of both tantric 
theory and method are consonant with recent insights into the body/​mind problematic 
and can support the development of effective methods of healing in the mental as well 
as the physical sciences. Theories of embodied cognition (or extended mind) find pow­
erful resonance in Buddhist tantric thought, just as discourses in the fields of literary 
theory, focusing on metaphor, poetry and narrative, also shed valuable light on the 
inspired creations of tantric visual practice. (See Hayes and Timalsina, this volume.)

--- PAGE 729 ---
704      David L. Gardiner
 
Studying the role of imagery in Buddhist tantra is a rich, interdisciplinary project that 
warrants multiple approaches.
Some nineteenth-​ and early twentieth-​century scholars viewed Vajrayāna Buddhist 
imagery disdainfully because of the wide and wild range of iconography that in­
cluded expressions of violence and sexuality. The tradition was commonly depicted 
as unethical and licentious and thus understood to be contradicting core moral and 
ascetic principles of the Buddha’s teachings (Lopez, 1999, 35–​38; Wedemeyer 2013, 
43–​50). These evaluations arose in ignorance of the symbolic and often metaphorical 
dimensions of the imagery. Loriliai Biernacki notes that “the topic of Tantra continues 
to elicit derision” due to a “persistent, particularly Western scholarly miasma of mis­
interpretation of Tantric images” (Biernacki 2018, 375). Recent scholarship indicates a 
range of interpretative approaches to the imagery, including “literal, symbolic, ‘higher’ 
literal, and yogic” (Jackson 1992), though scholars differ as to which approach they 
emphasize. At the same time, in popular culture, many self-​identifying Buddhists 
lean toward dismissing literal interpretations of sexuality in tantric texts and images. 
Instead, they favor sanitized metaphorical understandings present in the literature, for 
example, interpreting females as representations of wisdom (insight into ultimate re­
ality) and males as symbolizing compassion (skillful engagement with conventional 
reality). While these metaphorical interpretations have traditional grounding, they do 
not represent the historical breadth of available hermeneutics. Contemporary schol­
arship offers insightful treatment of the various roles images play in Buddhist tantric 
thought and practice (examples include Bühnemann 2005; Germano and Hillis 2005; 
Hatchell 2013; Tsomo 2018).1
The often very detailed and iconographically complex images in Vajrayāna are not 
simply pretty pictures that depict sacred figures or hold symbolic meanings derived 
from doctrine. Nor are they solely inspirational props for meditation. Their functions 
are multiple. Commonly understood to be sacred icons that hold divine powers, they 
also serve as catalysts for profound exercises that engage body, speech, and mind in 
visualization practices that aim to reorient the cognitive, emotional, and somatic 
foundations of a practitioner’s being in radically liberating ways.2 Material images (pri­
marily paintings and statues) are central to the practice because their visual form is 
the basis from which active, three-​dimensional visualized scenarios unfold. However, 
structured visualizations are only one part of an embodied ritual process that includes 
introductory prayers and prostrations to establish intention, preliminary visualizations 
to “clear the field” so the deity image can take center stage, and concluding practices that 
entail dissolving the visualized array into clear light before reciting prayers of dedica­
tion. The whole process utilizes imagery as an essential component of a path of spiritual 
transformation along specific Buddhist lines. Because Vajrayāna practice falls within 
the Mahāyāna Buddhist tradition, both an initial setting of intention and a final dedica­
tion serve to galvanize the practitioner’s compassionate bodhicitta vow to work for the 
benefit of all beings. Sandwiching, as it were, the central visualization between verbal 
and bodily gestures of intention and dedication creates a robust package of religious

--- PAGE 730 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      705
 
practice. The practice incorporates ritualized aspects embracing physical movement 
(e.g., prostrations, gestures of offering, and mudrā) and mantra chanting, along with a 
carefully choreographed visualization process.3
The term “tantric Buddhism” used here is synonymous with Vajrayāna, and this latter 
term finds its place in both the Indo-​Tibetan and the Japanese (Shingon) forms of eso­
teric Buddhism (both of which this chapter addresses). Kūkai 空海 (774–​835), the ninth-​
century founder of the Shingon school, frequently uses the Sino-​Japanese translation for 
Vajrayāna (kongō-​jō 金剛乗) to refer to Shingon esoteric Buddhist practice.
The phenomena surrounding tantric Buddhist imagery can be examined from many 
angles. One might look at sources of their material production; influences from and on 
other traditions; sponsorship of the artistic work; iconographic detail and diversity; 
symbolic meanings; correspondences between written texts and visual images; spatial 
placement in ritual locations; conceptions of images’ divine capacity to serve as agents 
of soteriological as well as of political work; and more. Research in all these directions 
continues to yield rich insights. While acknowledging the value of diverse avenues of in­
quiry, this chapter highlights the relatively less traveled road of investigating the extent 
to which the theory and practice related to imagery in tantric Buddhism offer coherent 
and innovative approaches to human development. Investigating dimensions of tantric 
image practice as being instrumental in a thoroughgoing process of “worldmaking” has 
the potential to reap valuable understandings that shed light on pressing contemporary 
issues, thereby aiding efforts to transcend the rigidity of widely accepted boundaries be­
tween religious and secular worlds. Two key factors are particularly relevant in this re­
gard: Vajrayāna Buddhism’s concentration on harnessing the transformative power of 
imagination and its insistence on fully engaging the body, not just the mind, in spiritual 
work. Imagery operates centrally on both these fronts. Fields of study that stand to un­
pack the complexity and richness of tantric imagery include:
Embodied cognition (and extended mind): focuses on body/​mind relations and 
rethinking structures of selfhood.
Phenomenology: aims to ground accounts of experience in embodied modes of 
perception.
Narrative theory: explores the power of “story” for creating meanings, including myth 
broadly conceived.
Poetics: examines the imaginative landscapes of possibilities provided by creative lan­
guage and imagery.
Contemplative neuroscience: investigates the function of visualization, among other 
processes, for molding new cognitive structures.
Positive psychology: affirms the salutary role of overcoming deficits of self-​esteem 
through creative means, including visualization.
Rather than separately listing contributions from these various methodological 
approaches, we can uncover their promise for studying tantric imagery thematically.

--- PAGE 731 ---
706      David L. Gardiner
 
Worldmaking: The Embeddedness of 
Myth and Narrative
Drawing from the wellsprings of Mahāyāna thought, tantric Buddhist imagery serves 
to frame and to vivify tantric practice. While the Vajrayāna tradition hails itself as of­
fering a more powerful and therefore speedy path to enlightenment (with its literal 
meaning of “vehicle of the thunderbolt or diamond”—​vajra has both meanings) than 
does mainstream Mahāyāna, both its inspiration and structure are firmly grounded 
in the Mahāyāna vision of the bodhisattva path. This path is viewed, or envisioned, as 
being rooted in a profoundly compassionate aspiration to attain perfect buddhahood 
in order to better serve all living beings. Many tantric meditation practices begin with 
the recitation of a standard Mahāyāna verse that says, “I take refuge in the Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha. By practicing giving and the other [five] perfections [eth­
ical conduct, patience, effort, concentration, wisdom], may I achieve Buddhahood 
for the sake of all beings.” This recitation is commonly followed, as it is in many 
Mahāyāna liturgies, by additional preliminary practices (there is a standard list of 
seven “branches/​limbs”), which include prostrations, verses expressing offerings to 
all Buddhas, regret for all one’s past harmful actions, praise for the virtuous actions 
of all awakened beings, requests that such beings never let go of their vow to bring aid 
to those still trapped in samsara, and dedicating the performance of these “branches” 
toward the liberation of all beings.4 In this way, the visualization practice that follows 
these preliminary ones is framed by a classical Mahāyāna vision. It is helpful to con­
ceive how such intentional envisioning, grounded in bodily performance, is a form 
of “imagery” in action. It calls to the practitioner’s mind—​to their imagination—​a 
conceptual and even somatic frame for holding onto (or simply remembering) the 
larger purpose of the practice. The practice is thus embraced by a narrative structure 
enlivened by the framework of the bodhisattva path.
Deity Yoga: Arising as an Image of 
Enlightened Being
When one turns to the mechanics of tantric visualization practice, the unambiguous 
manner that the meditation is “brought to life” by imagery is striking. Extensive details 
can be found in multiple sources (McMahan 2004; H. H. the Dalai Lama, Tsongkhapa 
and Jeffrey Hopkins 2016; Gyatso 1999; Yeshe 2014). The summary of key features 
common to many Vajrayāna meditations (sādhānas) presented below relies on these 
sources. This is an account of the “self-​generation” practice, in which one imagines one­
self to appear as an enlightened being, as opposed to the “front generation” practice,

--- PAGE 732 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      707
 
which imagines an enlightened being to appear in front, or outside, oneself. Both forms 
of generation practice are also known as deity yoga.
After reciting the preliminary prayers, one strives to manifest a “wisdom” conscious­
ness, one that knows the ultimate reality of emptiness. This is a profound awareness that 
transcends subject/​object duality by “seeing” ultimate reality directly, unmediated by 
conceptual thought. Achieving such a wisdom consciousness is not the equivalent of full 
enlightenment, but it is an essential component of that attainment. If one has already 
“experienced” it, or achieved wisdom (which attainment marks the sixth but not final 
stage of the bodhisattva path, the “path of seeing”), one accesses or generates that con­
sciousness from memory. If one has yet to reach that state, then one approximates it by 
“pretending” that both self and world have dissolved into the clear light of wisdom aware­
ness. This imaginative act entails generating an image of one’s body and its surroundings 
(gradually extended to include the entire physical universe) as actually dissolving into 
a unified, soft light, one often likened to the texture of skylight just before dawn. This 
dissolution process is aided by chanting the mantra Om svabhāva śuddha sarva dharma 
svabhāva śuddho ham, which means, “My own essence is pure, and all phenomena are 
pure, too.”5 Purity here, as in other Mahāyāna contexts, is synonymous with emptiness 
(Duckworth 2019, 79, 124; Shaw 1995, 184). This open, clear state that encompasses all 
existence is either a simulacrum of the wisdom aspect of a Buddha’s awareness or the 
real thing (fully embodied wisdom), depending on one’s previous attainments.
From within this all-​encompassing clear light (which is understood to be one’s own 
wisdom mind, not separate from anything else in the world), an image of a perfected 
being (buddha or bodhisattva) emerges or “arises.” This occurs in stages, not all at once. 
It emerges from the practitioner’s intention to make the image appear, though perhaps 
for an advanced yogi with extensive experience it might appear relatively spontane­
ously. It is imperative to understand that this image is not external to the practitioner, 
not something one “sees” from one’s seat as if it is seated across from you. Rather, one is 
reimagining or reconstructing the very fabric of one’s entire embodied experience in, 
literally, a new light. Prior to the emergence of the envisioned Buddha or bodhisattva 
(usually referred to simply as the “deity”—​ though not to be confused with a theistic 
entity) –​ one visualizes in the center of this vast field of empty existence the appear­
ance of a single mantric syllable (“seed syllable,” bīja-​mantra), which is understood to 
condense the qualities of the deity involved. For example, for the deity Tara it is Tāṃ 
and for Avalokiteśvara it is Hrīḥ. This syllable is also composed of clear light but in a 
form congealed from the expansive light and recognizable as a syllable. The image of the 
deity’s body then emerges from this “seed.” It, too, is made of clear light, though it is col­
orful and is likened to a rainbow in that one can see through it; it is not solid. Again, this 
image of the deity (as of the seed from which it sprouts) is not something seen as residing 
in front of oneself; it is not a separate entity. Rather, one’s own being—​one’s entire 
awareness—​has now become this light-​filled, enlightened being whose body is adorned 
with unique physical features as well as clothing, jewelry, and possibly implements.
A crucial element of the self-​generation practice is that the practitioner is so fully 
identified with the visualized deity (called yidam in Tibetan) that they should experience

--- PAGE 733 ---
708      David L. Gardiner
 
a “divine pride” that accords with possessing all the noble virtues of a buddha. Such pride 
is not a narcissistic arrogance. Rather, it is a buoyant confidence in the capacity that an 
awakened being possesses to exist completely free of all afflictive emotions and to en­
gage fully and effectively in the work of aiding others. The visualized deity is the mani­
festation of one’s holding firmly in mind (and body) all the positive potential that resides 
subliminally in one’s ordinary state. Some contemporary emic accounts of the practice 
affirm that the visualization can be understood as expressing an archetype of awakening 
that resides within one in embryonic form (Landaw and Weber 2006; Lhadrepa and 
Davis 2017; Yeshe 2014). Such a view, however, does not exclude the belief that the deity 
is also somehow an entity that is not merely symbolic of the practitioner’s potential but 
is an enlightened being in its own right. Thus, holding the symbolic and literal meanings 
together simultaneously is not contradictory: the deity is both an archetype and an 
awakened presence. The practitioner’s identification with it, their divine pride, flexibly 
encompasses both postures.
A final, essential component of deity yoga visualization practice is that the “self as 
deity/​deity as self” identity is not sustained throughout the entirety of one’s medi­
tation period. Shortly before concluding the meditation, one is instructed to allow 
the deity image to “dissolve back into clear light.” The image thus emerges from and 
returns to the clear light of the wisdom consciousness that knows ultimate reality 
directly. This gestural turn in the contemplative practice both represents a somatic 
reminder that all things, including enlightened beings, are ultimately empty of any in­
herently existing nature and serves as a caution against emotionally attaching to one’s 
newly constructed “ego.” It is a built-​in prophylactic to ward off inclinations toward 
megalomania.
Both the merging of one’s ordinary sense of self with the enlightened self-​image and 
the merging of all phenomena including one’s body into a clear light signify a breaking 
down of dualities that are otherwise, according to Buddhist psychology, ignorantly 
assumed to be established. This emphasis on the dissolution of boundaries is intrinsic 
to Vajrayāna thought. Naturally, it is also deeply indebted to Mahāyāna philosophical 
orientations that see all distinctions as, in the final analysis, conventions accepted as 
real only by consensus (and therefore as being ultimately empty). This embracing of 
emptiness (which is not nothingness) as the ultimate reality entails as well the relin­
quishment of taking as absolute the foundational distinction between the domains of 
nirvana and samsara—​of the freedom that awakening brings, on the one hand, and 
the experience of suffering that comes with conditioned, ignorant existence on the 
other. Hence, there emerged an affirmation of the so-​called non-​abiding nirvana as 
an ideal articulation of the Mahāyāna goal (see Makransky 1997, 319–​369). The bodhi­
sattva strives to exist neither in samsara, where suffering based on ignorance prevails, 
nor in a nirvana conceived as being apart from all suffering and thus as aloof. The 
“two wings” of wisdom and compassion preserve the non-​abiding, middle way op­
tion: wisdom frees one from samsara while compassion keeps one from “indulging” 
alone in a reified nirvana. Wisdom also enables one to see that no such nirvana can 
exist as an independent state, nor can an independent, permanent “being” exist there

--- PAGE 734 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      709
 
either.6 The deity that arises in the visualization practice is thus a very complex image: 
entirely free yet fully engaged.
The intricacies of the arisen image in deity yoga are galvanized by the incorporation 
of additional doctrinal elements. These elements are the theory of the Two Truths and 
the theory of bodies of a buddha. The Two Truths (or “realities”) are conventional and 
ultimate. Buddha body theories in Buddhist history are complicated, but a simplified 
version divides them into two: form body (rūpa-​kāya) and truth body (dharma-​kāya). 
A buddha’s form body is their participation in conventional reality, via skillful means, to 
assist beings in becoming free from suffering. This body is primarily understood to be 
the flesh and blood, walking and talking buddha (past, present, or future) who models 
awakened life and guides others toward it. Every buddha has a unique form body that is 
shaped by individual conditions. The truth body, however, is shared by all buddhas, and 
thus has no individuating qualities. The truth body is attained when one has realized 
emptiness (or ultimate truth) so completely that all dualities, all attachment, all igno­
rance and therefore all suffering are entirely uprooted. This is the “body” of complete 
freedom, and all buddhas share in it equally. A form body, on the other hand, is unique 
to each enlightened being, as it manifests in ways that accord, most skillfully, with the 
diverse (conventional) needs of all living beings within its reach.
A buddha’s form body is understood to be an expression of their having perfected 
compassion, while their truth body is a result of their perfect wisdom. In this way the 
two are aligned, respectively, with conventional reality and ultimate reality. This doc­
trinal framework helps galvanize deity yoga practice because the visualized image is said 
to be the product of both wisdom and compassion. The dissolution of one’s ordinary, 
dualistic experience into the clear light (Skt. ābhāsvara-​citta; Tib. ‘od gsal) is understood 
to be a manifestation of the wisdom that cognizes ultimate reality directly. When the 
practitioner rests, as it were, in this state prior to the emergence of the seed syllable (and 
later the deity image), they are partaking in the truth body of a buddha. Then, when the 
deity image arises out of this clear light, in its colored and articulated form, it manifests 
as a buddha’s form body. Significantly, the form body arises from the truth body; it 
is made from the very fabric of clear light. Thus, the visualized image that arises (or 
is constructed) within the practice of deity yoga unites the Two Truths in one entity. 
Ordinarily, the attainment of such a simultaneous union of the Two Truths is said to be 
only possible for a fully enlightened being. Even an advanced bodhisattva practitioner 
who has yet to complete the path to buddhahood must alternate between moments of 
seeing emptiness, or ultimate reality, directly and spans of time engaged as compas­
sionately as possible (but with remnant taints of ignorance) within the conventional 
world. The image cultivated within deity yoga practice thus perfectly replicates, via an 
embodied mimesis, the resultant state of buddhahood as a union of the Two Truths 
(see H. H. Dalai Lama et al. 2016, 62). It is for this reason that Vajrayāna practice is also 
known as the “result vehicle” (phala-​yāna, with phala also translated as effect, goal, or 
fruit) in contrast to the “cause vehicle” of nonesoteric Mahāyāna, also referred to as the 
“vehicle of the perfections” (pāramitā-​yāna), because the latter takes the practice of the 
six perfections (generosity, ethics, patience, effort, concentration, wisdom) as the cause

--- PAGE 735 ---
710      David L. Gardiner
 
for buddhahood. Through creative and intricate work with imagery, the complex visu­
alization practice of tantric deity yoga unites the practitioner’s body, speech, and mind 
with the perfect body, speech, and mind of an enlightened being, Vajrayāna deity yoga 
employs the resultant state of buddhahood as the instrument of the path.
Mandalic Imagery
Central to tantric Buddhist practice is the role of mandalas. The visible mandalas that 
are either painted on cloth to be hung, constructed with colored sand on platforms, 
or comprised of three-​dimensional figures, represent only one meaning of the word. 
The term is also used in Vajrayāna discourse to refer to the vast world of awakening 
that one visualizes in (and can realize through) meditation, as well as to the extensive 
corpus of teachings, written and oral, that convey the details of the practice. Many ex­
cellent studies exist on the iconography, production, and ritual use of material mandalas 
(Brauen 1997; Bühnemann 2005; Leidy and Thurman 1998 Ten Grotenhuis 1999), but 
few focus on the way the term is used to indicate the fantastic world of awakened life that 
one imagines—​so as to catalyze it into being—​within the ritual practice. This visionary 
meaning of mandala deserves study in itself, since it not only represents the primary 
spiritual impetus behind the material instruments, but also expresses powerful elements 
of tantric Buddhist thought in a unique way that highlights the tradition’s emphasis 
on the creative force of imagination and the vital connection all practice has to being 
grounded in the body.
The practitioner’s successful conjuring of the image of self-​as-​deity is not limited 
to their body alone, which has taken on the attributes of their chosen bodhisattva or 
buddha. Since the whole world beyond their body is also included in the process of dis­
solution into clear light, for all intents and purposes the initial arisen deity body is the 
entire world. The details of visualized imagery that follow from this (relatively simple) 
initial image vary greatly from sādhāna to sādhāna, with variations dependent upon 
both the deity in question and the “level” of initiation received. For example, in the 
higher level of “unexcelled yoga tantra” practices, the visualizations enter into processes 
such as untangling minuscule networks of energy channels imagined within the body 
(Wedemeyer 2021, 60–​65). But, in general the visualization practice involves both 
details of (and often within) the deity’s body as well as realms outside the body (Cozort 
1986; Shaw 1995; Thurman 1994). One essential aspect of visualizing domains beyond 
the deity body is to imagine the flow of perfected compassion as leaving the body, 
through every pore, in the form of light rays that touch beings throughout all realms of 
samsara thereby releasing them from suffering. This dramatic imagery represents a core 
function of the “result vehicle”: One is embodying the goal of the path by performing the 
liberative work of a buddha.7
The combined construct of self and world in this vast scenario is referred to as 
the mandala. Mandala in this sense means the idealized vision of a world in which

--- PAGE 736 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      711
 
enlightened beings work tirelessly to help others. The practitioner fully embodies this 
ideal world within the activated visualized image. In addition to visualizing the man­
dala, deity yoga also involves the recitation of mantras and the use of mudrās (ritualized 
hand gestures). The practices of these three are commonly said to represent the enlight­
ened body (mudrā), speech (mantra), and mind (mandala) of the deity. However, the 
boundaries of the three are also commonly understood to overlap, and it is legitimate to 
see the visualized mandala as also the represented “body.” After all, the entire world of 
existing things dissolves into the clear light of wisdom consciousness out of which the 
entire mandala, with the help of mantra, then emerges. Is this all mind, all speech, or all 
body? Since the practitioner is exhorted to cultivate a divine pride in the image of self-​
as-​deity, this pride must extend to the image of enlightened activity manifested in the 
mandala. The explicit aim of the practice is to transform one’s own being into the body 
(and speech and mind) of a buddha, and the envisioned world of light, inside and out­
side, is a vast cosmos of awakened beings, a cosmos that is not separate from one’s own 
physicality. Thus, the practitioner’s felt sense of the mandala as real must also be under­
stood as an aspect of body.
David McMahan recommends understanding aspects of the images employed in tan­
tric practice as a “concretization of doctrine” (2004, 182), He traces the role light plays 
in visualization back to pre-​tantric texts such as the Gaṇḍavyūha, where images of the 
whole world being “flooded with light” symbolize metaphorically the undifferentiated 
field that is the emptiness of all phenomena. He refers to related passages as examples 
of “symbolic visual imagery . . . [that] evoke a sensual presentation homologous with 
a cognitive concept. A specific doctrine or idea is concretized in a visual image.” Such 
concretization brings abstract concepts about how wisdom directly cognizes ultimate 
reality into embodied, perceptual form. He contends that there was an evolution in 
Buddhist thought “that involved a transition from doctrine and metaphor to imagery in 
the Mahāyāna sutras, and then from imagery to ritual in Tantra” (181). He suggests that 
the “construction of a mandala in the imagination” (183) is a ritual transmogrification 
of light metaphors embodied in a structured practice. If an imagined mandala world 
is a vast “body” composed of light tissue, then the entire ritual concretization is also a 
somatization.8
Body Image
Two monastics in the Tibetan tradition, Lama Thubten Yeshe and Matthieu Ricard, offer 
excellent insider descriptions and assessments of Vajrayāna imagery practice. Lama 
Yeshe (2014, reprint) asserts that it is not reasonable to criticize, as some have, the im­
agery of light-​filled space in tantric meditation descriptions as being a misrepresenta­
tion of the Mādhyamaka Buddhist philosophical view of emptiness. He says: “[T]‌his 
is a garbage argument. Why? Because such an intellectual approach to emptiness often 
becomes an obstacle to discovering the actual experience of emptiness.”9 Similarly,

--- PAGE 737 ---
712      David L. Gardiner
 
Yeshe rebuts the criticism that imagining oneself as a deity is pure fantasy. Based prima­
rily on Yogacāra theories of the mind, he argues that ordinary beings are almost always 
“emanating” themselves in one way or another. Visualizing oneself as an enlightened 
being is simply a healthy antidote to our routinely projected self-​images, which tend to 
exaggerate either too negatively or too positively based on a deluded perception of self as 
possessing an enduring, independent essence. He recommends the tantric visualization 
of one’s body being “pure” as an efficacious method to counter, in particular, negative 
self-​image.10
Matthieu Ricard (2006) also presents “the practice of Buddhist mental imagery . 
. . as a skillful means of replacing ‘impure,’ deluded perceptions—​which attach strong 
characteristics to the objects of the phenomenal world—​with a much more ‘fluid’ at­
titude that is attuned to the ever-​changing stream of consciousness” (71). In addition, 
Ricard asserts that training in the sustained practice of complex visualization—​where, 
he affirms, some adept practitioners can hold in their awareness with clarity of detail as 
many as seven hundred deity images in a mandala—​“really helps one to achieve a very 
profound mastery of the workings of the mind” (77). (See also Timalsina, this volume.) 
Both Yeshe and Ricard hold that tantric visualization practice offers a powerful path to­
ward overcoming afflictive states of mind by replacing them with embodied visions of 
healthier states.
Imagining the “body”—​whether just the flesh and blood portion or the full, cosmic 
extension—​in an enhanced state is thus a core element of tantric practice. With ref­
erence to the Cakrasaṃvara genre of tantric texts, David Gray (2021) writes that the 
“re-​imagining of the body as completely pure is strikingly apparent,” adding that in 
this tradition, “the deities of the mandala are mapped to one’s body, with one’s body 
thus visualized as their divine abode” (4). Describing the detailed nature of this map­
ping symbolism, Gray notes that it “represents a somewhat radical contemplative 
exercise, in which some of the most foul aspects of the body, including substances 
often considered impure such as blood, pus, urine and feces, are re-​imagined as pure 
divinities. This, naturally, takes the idea of the innate purity of all things to its logical 
conclusion” (5).
The distinction between purity and impurity of the body is dissolved by engaging 
with images of divine purity (symbolic of the realization of universal emptiness as being 
the ultimate purity). In the same way, the conventional understanding of sexual energies 
as being impure is transcended by symbolic visualizations that transmute carnal desire 
into the pure energy that is its basis and direct this energy to dissolving knots of igno­
rance and attachment at the subtlest levels. This tantric view of sexual desire, represented 
iconographically in images of couples in union (see fig. 28.1), is often explained in tra­
ditional texts as advocating an “alchemical” process of spiritual transformation (Gray 
2021, 7) that undermines the simple logic of duality.11
Nondualism is a steady theme in tantric practice. Moreover, scholars studying 
the visualization practices have noted the way they challenge some of the dualistic 
premises common to certain understandings of religious phenomena. One example 
is the tendency in modern scholarship to perceive an opposition between meditation

--- PAGE 738 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      713
 
(as being a still, quiet, private act) and ritual (as publicly involving voice and ges­
ture). This distinction would seem to follow from a perceived division between mind 
and body (and thus between inner and outer states). However, in tantric visualiza­
tion practice, the act of meditation is replete with imagery, movement, and sound. 
Therefore, some scholars note how textual descriptions of visualization often serve 
to bridge “the categories of ritual performance and meditation” (Sørensen 2022, 
307). Gyatso also urges us to avoid the tendency to “draw a strict line between med­
itation and ritual performance,” and reminds us that the visualizations are them­
selves internalized ritual practices that systematically move through a series of steps 
(Gyatso 1999, 117).
Figure 28.1.  Painting of Kālacakra.
Date and artist unknown. Photographed by the author.

--- PAGE 739 ---
714      David L. Gardiner
 
Gender fluidity is another striking feature of the Vajrayāna engagement with im­
agery (Shaw 1995, 186–​187; Tsomo 2018, 35). Both female and male deities are widely 
employed in practice. Prominent female deities include Tārā (especially in her green 
and white forms) and Vajrayoginī (English 2002; Mullin 1983) (see fig. 28.2 and 28.3). 
Male practitioners regularly visualize themselves as Tārā and as Vajrayoginī, just as 
female practitioners employ images of male buddhas and bodhisattvas for their own 
deity yoga practice. There are also deities that embrace both genders. This is not an­
drogyny but rather two bodies together seen as one deity. It is fascinating to note 
that when such an image of male and female united in sexual embrace is used for 
visualization—​such as with Vajradhara, Kālacakra, and Cakrasaṃvara with consort—​
the practitioner uses the image to create a self-​visualization that incorporates them 
both (Simmer-​Brown, 2001, 160). That is, whether the meditator is female or male, 
the image generated to replace their ordinary body/​self is the image of the male and 
female in union.(see fig. 28.4) Not only does this undermine the practitioner’s self-​
identification within a binary gender framework, but it also unsettles the preconcep­
tion of self as being singular.
Figure 28.2.  Painting of Vajradhara (divine manifestation of Buddhist teachings) with consort.
Artist and date unknown. Used with permission from the author’s personal collection.

--- PAGE 740 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      715
 
Healing Imagery
Loriliai Biernacki (2018) writes that “the historical effects of colonialism with its 
Protestant-​rooted moral guideposts condemning India’s vibrant Tantric practice 
as savage, revolting, and impure, have left a debilitating, indelible mark such that the 
Figure 28.3.  Painting of Green Tara, an enlightened female buddha, embodying compassion 
and wisdom.
Artist and date unknown. Used with permission from the author’s personal collection.

--- PAGE 741 ---
716      David L. Gardiner
 
topic of Tantra continues to elicit derision” (375) While Biernacki is referencing pri­
marily Hindu forms of tantra, she mentions Buddhist ones as well, and her assess­
ment is equally applicable to the Vajrayāna tradition. She urges a powerful revisioning 
of our image of tantric imagery, stressing that our understanding of mental images as 
merely representations “must be revised, fundamentally because the combination of 
memory and visualization makes the visualized deity come alive. It is a new encounter 
Figure 28.4.  Painting of White Tara, a counterpart to the Greet Tara, embodying health and 
longevity.
Artist and date unknown. Used with permission from the author’s personal collection.

--- PAGE 742 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      717
 
and not simply a rote exercise of mental capacity” (375). Such a view of the dynamics 
of Vajrayāna practice goes a long way toward comprehending the power the tradition 
accords itself and why it is called the “vehicle of the thunderbolt.” A radical shift of self-​
identity emerges from the intentional cultivation of a revised mapping of one’s own 
presence. Deity yoga visualization entails a full sensory reboot; it represents a vividly 
imagined somatic fresh start. From the envisioned dissolution of one’s body and its en­
vironment into the clear light of emptiness, the practice entails the “generation of a new 
identity of felt body image” within “visualization practices embedded in rituals where 
meaning is inscribed upon the (enminded) bodily processes” (Duckworth 2019, 119). It 
is no coincidence that capacities for healing are traditionally attributed to such practices 
(Shaw 1995, 106–​110). A revised view of these practices grasps “the role of embodi­
ment in Tantra, and the importance of enaction—​where mental images, body schemas, 
and performed utterances become the means to overcome rigid habits of perception, 
thought and action” (Duckworth 2019, 123). In tantric practice, emptiness “must be 
known . . . dramatically embodied, participatory and performative (not simply prop­
ositional)” (Duckworth, 2019, 125). The emphasis in tantric Buddhist practice on the 
somatic nature of its intended cognitions/​realizations finds resonance in contemporary 
theories of embodied mind, as exemplified in philosopher Mark Johnson’s view that 
“an embodied conception of mind . . . shows how meaning and thought are profoundly 
shaped and constituted by the nature of our bodily perception, action, and feeling.”12 
(See also Hayes & Timalsina, this volume.)
Considering that many Vajrayāna visualizations encompass ritual actions in the con­
text of a mandala of holy beings, it is possible to see the practices enacting what the 
texts describe, which is a “reorientation to a path of liturgical practice in a social space” 
(Orzech 2017, 20). In this way the practices “assume the presence of a congregation 
of vajra beings, Buddhas and other deities” so that the visualization “liturgy acts as a 
script through which practitioners can inhabit different subjectivities” (Orzech, 2017, 
20, 28). Such practice thus demonstrates the flexible nature of individual awareness and 
constitutes a palpable reminder that “subjective identity is not fixed; one’s orientation 
and comportment toward the world is malleable” (Duckworth, 2019, 119).
The mandalic orientation toward the world is a striking and explicit feature of the 
creative use of imagery in Vajrayāna visualization practice. Moreover, the mythical 
nature of the narratives embedded within the series of steps in visualization is unmis­
takable.13 As noted earlier, the ideal of the bodhisattva path frames Buddhist tantric 
practice. In many visualizations, the practitioner imagines themselves at the center of a 
circle of beings, making offerings and promises all expressly understood as productive 
of the practitioner’s progress toward buddhahood. The visualization culminates with 
the practitioner’s own body, speech, and mind imaginatively transformed into a buddha 
who engages in liberative activity aimed at helping others.14 That these imagined actions 
involve images of bodily energies such as radiating lights from all one’s pores that touch 
all beings to relieve them of suffering further testifies to the emphatically embodied 
nature of tantric practice. The visualizations comprise a “somatization of realization”

--- PAGE 743 ---
718      David L. Gardiner
 
(Gyatso 1999, 140). The practices seem to “carry realization into the body, simultaneously 
making the body self-​aware of its ontological emptiness and domesticating realization 
as something habitual, sensual, and lived” (Gyatso 1999, 141). Yet, since the mandalic 
image is not just of the single subject but of the entire expanse of beings partaking in 
a sacred drama of liberation, the embodied nature of such meditative experiences 
serves also to “carry realization into the world, rendering them [the experiences] dis­
cernible, transmissible, and finally intersubjective” (Gyatso 1999, 141). In this manner, 
dichotomies of self/​other and ignorant/​enlightened are dissolved as both the imagined 
ideal body and world are united in one perfected vision (Gray 2021, 13–​14).
The power that positive envisioning can have on the overall health of beings is 
affirmed in a plethora of contemporary medical and psychological research. In partic­
ular, the healing impact of cultivating sustained embodied experiences of well-​being 
has received significant attention.15 While scholarly writings on Buddhist thought and 
practice tend not to use the word “healing” to describe core elements of the ethos of 
the path, there are no solid grounds for avoiding this perspective. After all, the path is 
frequently summarized as targeting the sources of suffering within one’s mind to up­
root them so that freedom from suffering can be experienced. And, not only is the 
Buddha sometimes described as a skillful dispenser of “medicines” in accordance with 
the diversity of diseases, but the foundational teaching of the Four Noble Truths is com­
monly explained using a medical analogy (Gethin 1998, 63). Just as a doctor diagnoses 
the causes of one’s symptoms prior to prescribing a regime for alleviating them, so the 
Buddha identified deep-​seated craving (and the ignorance that supports it) as the chief 
source of sentient anguish and so prescribed a path of practice (encompassing ethical 
conduct, concentration, and insight) to uproot the source. The quandary regarding the 
suitability of seeing Buddhist practice—​the system of “three trainings” of conduct (śila), 
concentration (samādhi), and wisdom (prajñā)—​as a path of healing is conveyed clearly 
by Rupert Gethin: “If one were to define Buddhism . . . it would have to be as a prac­
tical method for dealing with the reality of suffering. Asked to define the meaning of the 
word religion, English speakers would probably not immediately suggest ‘a practical way 
of dealing with the reality of suffering’ ” (Gethin 1998, 64). Of course, in the case of many 
contemporary Western Buddhists who do not see their practice as being religious, this 
“practical method” view fits their understanding. Yet, if Buddhism is to be considered a 
religion, our concept of “religion” must expand to include such practical methods and 
their aims. Naturally, Buddhist practices incorporate many elements of devotion, ritual, 
cosmological constructs, institutional frameworks, and more, that bear clear likenesses 
to what is commonly recognized as religious. Still, the tradition’s foundational emphasis 
on the Four Noble Truths provides a template for viewing all these elements, including 
the three trainings, as oriented toward a goal of healing, whether this be understood in 
the more proximate context of easing the pains of saṃsāra or the more ultimate concern 
to uproot them at their source.16
Contemporary Buddhist monastics presenting an emic perspective are likely more 
inclined than are academics to stress the healing function of tantric visualization. Some 
write that it can help to “free your mind from disturbing emotions such as clinging

--- PAGE 744 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      719
 
attachment and anger” (Chodron 2005, 11), while others state that “through creative vis­
ualization, we can call upon inborn forces of healing.”17 And yet, an increasing number 
of Western scholars also emphasize not only this healing potential but, further, the de­
gree to which Vajrayāna theory and practice aligns with recent scientific and medical 
understandings of body-​mind relations (see Samuel and Kozhevnikov, this volume). 
Many psychotherapists are utilizing both the principles and the specific practices of 
Vajrayāna visualization to harness healing processes for patients traumatized by var­
ious ailments (Loizzo, Neale, and Wolf 2017). Emily Wolf writes that the visualizations 
constitute an art of self-​transformation with “profound healing methods,” citing mul­
tiple scientific studies to support her claim (Wolf 2017, 157). She elaborates that tantric 
“[v]‌isualization in the creation stage is a powerful means of regulating affect through 
the symbolically charged content of its imagery. Similar to a schema in cognitive sci­
ence . . . the transformative aspect of Tantric visualization is based on its implicit, depth-​
psychological meaning, which encodes healing insight and emotion through imagery” 
(Wolf 2017, 162). Similarly, writing about tantric imagery and trauma, Pilar Jennings 
states that “the process of evoking and communing with such images can offer another 
method for using one’s imagination and archetypal imprints for healing” (Jennings 
2017, 175). And Joseph Loizzo (who has both an MD degree and a PhD in Tibetan 
Buddhist studies) notes, considering that “embodied approaches to healing and change 
are no strangers to modern psychology,” both modern depth psychology and “Tantric 
science agree that the deepest, subtlest layers of the mind-​brain-​body drive processing 
at higher, coarser levels, and hold the imprints of reactive stress and trauma that con­
dition mental suffering” (Loizzo 2017, 202). Accounts such as these demonstrate an 
emerging scientific paradigm of body-​mind relations that acknowledges the power 
of engaging with positive imagery—​specifically tantric imagery—​for alleviating 
symptoms of traumatic suffering.
This emerging perspective not only appears among psychologists and psychiatrists 
applying Vajrayāna visualization methods in therapy, but derives also from other 
specialists who seek to overcome “the challenges [that] come from mind-​body du­
alism” (Loizzo 2017, 185). Insights from their research indirectly shed a revealing light 
on the wisdom of many of the imagistic elements of tantric practice. A tour de force 
in this regard is The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, Body in the Healing of Trauma 
(van der Kolk 2015). One passage conveys the message clearly: “We can now develop 
methods and experiences that utilize the brain’s own natural neuroplasticity” (van der 
Kolk 2015, 5). Van der Kolk emphasizes bottom-​up methods that allow “the body to have 
experiences that deeply and viscerally contradict the helplessness, rage or collapse that 
come from trauma” (van der Kolk 2015, 5). That deity yoga practice aims to facilitate 
such experiences by nurturing, through creative work with images, a fully somatic sense 
of well-​being is clear from Thubten Yeshe’s account:
The image of being diseased is released from the mind and replaced by an image of 
radiance and vitality. On many occasions this approach has proven effective even 
after doctors have given up all hope. The health of body and mind is primarily a

--- PAGE 745 ---
720      David L. Gardiner
 
question of our self-​image. Those people who think badly of themselves, for what­
ever reasons, become and then remain miserable, while those who can recognize 
and draw on their inner resources can overcome even the most difficult situations. 
Deity yoga is one of the most profound ways of lifting our self-​image, and that is why 
Tantra is such a quick and powerful method for achieving the fulfillment of our tre­
mendous potential.18
Furthermore, van der Kolk’s preface to Stephen W. Porges’s influential The Polyvagal 
Theory: Neurophysiological Foundations of Emotions, Attachment, Communication, and 
Self-​regulation points to yet another approach, emphasizing how Porge’s theory reveals 
that “physiological mind-​brain-​viscera communication is the royal road to affect regula­
tion,” and that it represents a “radical shift in our therapeutic approaches” (van der Kolk 
2011, xvi). He adds that “[t]‌he polyvagal theory legitimates the study of age-​old collec­
tive and religious practices” (van der Kolk 2011, xvii). Citing Porges’s theory, Loizzo also 
affirms the potential that research on the “smart vagus nerve” has for encouraging ther­
apeutic interventions that employ embodied methods as does deity yoga (Loizzo 2017, 
187–​188). Finally, psychologist Rick Hanson19 has explored in multiple publications (and 
workshops) the beneficial health impacts of cultivating embodied states with positive 
affect, with an emphasis on Buddhist meditative techniques (Hanson 2016). Famous for 
his phrase, “from state to trait,” Hanson emphasizes how neuroscientific research reveals 
the transformative power of familiarizing ourselves with positive states: “[T]he brain’s 
evolved negativity bias, which makes it like Velcro for the bad and Teflon for the good, 
creates a kind of bottleneck that blocks the conversion of positive mental states into pos­
itive neural trait” (Hanson 2016). Hanson urges practices that focus on “promoting key 
positive experiences that meet our core needs for safety, satisfaction, and connection 
[and] enriching and absorbing these experiences to install them in neural structure” 
(Hanson 2016). While Hanson’s work does not focus explicitly on Vajrayāna imagery, 
the engagement with nonesoteric Buddhist imagery practices to nurture states of posi­
tive affect is central to his approach.20 (See also Samuel and Kozhevnikov, this volume.)
Deity yoga’s approach to achieving such positive experiences is apparent in 
Wedemeyer’s depiction of the mandalic universe constructed within the imagination 
of tantric practitioners. He writes of the first stage of visualization called “body isola­
tion” that the practice “involves the cultivation of the insight that the entire world is not 
the unenlightened place we think it is, but the unfolding of a cosmic play entirely com­
posed of enlightened beings. Thus, [body isolation] is integral to the esoteric practice 
of the creation stage, that seeks to develop the ‘divine pride’ of oneself as an ‘always al­
ready’ enlightened being” (Wedemeyer 2021, 63–​64). In this way, Wedemeyer holds, the 
ritual practice of Vajrayāna visualization is “oriented toward manipulating the porous 
boundary between quotidian reality and the divine presence” (Wedemeyer 2013, 77). 
Duckworth explains that within this porosity, one sees “appearance not simply as illu­
sory but as divine. Divine pride, identifying with the deity, is the distinctive subjectivity 
taken up with Tantra” (Duckworth 2019, 148).21 Gray’s research on Indo-​Tibetan tantra 
also highlights the centrality of the “envisioning” function of the practice: “The buddha

--- PAGE 746 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      721
 
with whom the meditator in this tradition will identify in deity yoga practices pervades 
the entire universe, collapsing the distinction between self and other, the subjective and 
the objective . . . by portraying the body as a multi-​layered, complex entity that is deeply 
and profoundly interconnected with the universe” (Gray 2021, 8–​9). He adds that, con­
sistent with the nondualist approach of Vajrayāna, the tradition embraces
the notion that there is no essential difference between the deluded and awakened 
state, and the latter can thus be realized in and through one’s body and mind. The 
body is both the starting and end point, and, most notably, the instrument of 
the practice, that which acts and is acted upon. . . . This realization entailed a re-​
envisioning of the body and mind, and this is one of the major goals of [Vajrayāna] 
perfection stage practice, namely, realizing the gnosis of a buddha within our bodies. 
This requires a creative re-​engagement with the body, seeing it ultimately as the 
empty abode of radiant self-​awareness.
(Gray 2021, 13–​14)
Conclusion: Mandala as Body in 
Shingon Buddhism
Vajrayāna practice appeared in one form or another in nearly every land in Asia where 
Buddhism has flourished. In particular, the Shingon tradition in Japan has maintained 
continuous lineages of practice for over twelve hundred years. While some scholarly 
accounts suggest that contemporary Shingon practice does not focus on visualiza­
tion per se, and engages with icons primarily as agents of sacred power that consecrate 
ritual space (Sharf 2002, 119), the writings of the ninth-​century founder Kūkai display 
a steady appreciation for the profound liberative impact that Vajrayāna practice has for 
re-​envisioning one’s body and its place in the world. Both the material painted man­
dala and the imaginatively constructed mandala play central roles in these envisioned 
transformations.22 A few passages from Kūkai’s writings illustrate this plainly. In the 
document he sent to the imperial court upon his return to Japan after studying eso­
teric Buddhism in China, he expressed his view of the power of this new dispensation: 
“Former transmitters of the Dharma [merely] tugged at leaves and swam in tributaries, 
but what I now transmit unearths the root itself, and fully exposes the very well­
spring.”23 Describing the new painted mandalas he brought to Japan, in the same doc­
ument he wrote: “With a single glance [at them], one can attain Buddhahood” (Teihon 
kōbōdaishi zenshū, 1:131).24 However, Kūkai also wrote extensively about the awakened 
state derived from ritual meditation in which a practitioner unites their body, speech, 
and mind with that of the buddha through the “three mysteries” practice, referring to 
this state as the mandala: “The three mysteries of the dharma-​Buddha . . . is the original 
mandala of sentient beings. This is why Buddha Dainichi [Mahāvairocana] taught . .

--- PAGE 747 ---
722      David L. Gardiner
 
. in order to startle sentient beings from their long slumber” (Teihon 3:35). And in his 
Attaining Enlightenment in This Very Body, he expressed his view that the power of the 
three mysteries practice derives from adhiṣṭhāna, translated here as “empowerment,” 
in a startlingly somatic image. In Kūkai’s Chinese, “empowerment” is comprised of 
two words ka 加 and ji持, literally “to add” and “to hold,” as reflected in his individual 
glosses that follow:
“Empowerment” expresses both the great compassion of the Buddha and the faith-​
mind of a sentient being. The reflection of the sun of the Buddha[’s compassion] 
appearing in the mind-​water of a sentient being is called “adding.” The ability of 
the mind-​water of the practitioner to sense this [light of the] Buddha’s sun is called 
“holding.” If the practitioner is able to contemplate this principle, then the three mys­
teries [of the Buddha and of the practitioner] will unite. In the present body one will 
quickly obtain the originally existent three Buddha bodies. . . Just like the everyday 
terms to refer to “at this time” or “on this day,” the phrase “this very body” has the 
same meaning [that is, of immediacy].
(Teihon 3:28)
He adds a rich comment on the theme of embodiment:
“Body” here means my body, Buddha’s body and the bodies of all sentient beings. 
These we call “body”. . . All these bodies are multi-​layered, vertically and horizon­
tally, just like the reflected image of a lamp’s light enters into a mirror. Thus, that body 
is this body, and this body is that body. The Buddha’s body is the body of sentient 
beings, and the bodies of sentient beings are the Buddha’s body. They are not the 
same and yet the same; not different and yet different. All three are thus equal and 
without obstruction.
(Teihon 3:28)
Similarly, he equates this vast interrelated nexus that is “body” with the envisioned/​
realized mandala in his Treatise on the Ten Stages of the Secret Mandala. In this text, he 
establishes ten levels of spiritual attainment, the last four of which represent forms of 
Mahāyāna Buddhism, with Vajrayāna at the top:
The mind of secret adornment [the tenth stage] is to thoroughly awaken to the know­
ledge of the root source of one’s own mind and to realize, as it truly is, the multiplicity 
of one’s own body/​ies. This [abode] is none other than the oceanic assembly of the 
Womb Mandala, the assembly of the Diamond World Mandala, and the Eighteen 
Assembly Mandala of the Diamond Peak [Sutra].
(Teihon 2:307)
Finally, on the occasion of consecrating territory in the mountains designated for an 
esoteric Buddhist compound on Mount Kōya, Kūkai’s votive text conveys his vision of the 
mytho-​historical origins of Vajrayāna. He depicts the emergence of the esoteric teachings

--- PAGE 748 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      723
 
as being an eruption into our world of a new mandalic vision transmitted by a lineage of 
holy beings, likening this transmission metaphorically to the “tremble of thunder”: 
“Mahāvairocana Buddha, the great compassionate one, enjoying for himself the taste 
of equality that is enlightenment, was saddened by the plight of the beings in the six 
realms of rebirth. And so it was that the thunder of his wisdom that is one with re­
ality trembled throughout the Dharma realm and the secret mandala was thereby 
transmitted to our world. It was passed on to Vajrasattva, to Nagārjuna and down to 
the present without a break in continuity” (Teihon, 8:177).25
Together with other passages presented earlier, these texts encapsulate a vibrant por­
trait of Vajrayāna Buddhist practice as a method that employs dynamic, embodied im­
agery in the task of liberating beings from suffering, startling them from their slumber. 
They manage to: express an expanded sense of self, as if one’s body is coextensive with 
all other bodies; affirm the possibility of experiencing perfected union with the enlight­
ened state; depict the union in richly somatic imagery of a glowing orb of reflected sun 
that warms and brightens the mind/​body of a practitioner; describe this union in all its 
complexity as a mandala; and narrate the availability of these practices, as well as their 
goal, via an image of a powerful hierophany descending from the highest state of awak­
ening into this world, and thus into our bodies, likening it to a thunderous clap of wisdom 
resonating throughout all space. This is the imagistic, poetic world of Buddhist tantra. It 
is a hopeful vision of the world, one that by multiple accounts has potential for enlivening 
various modern, secular discourses on modalities for healing mind and body.
The phrasing that describes how “the secret mandala was thereby transmitted to our 
world” is pure poesis at work, inviting new modes of understanding via metaphor. So 
also is the image of the mandala as body (or as mind, depending on context), and the 
image of enlightened compassion reflected in the watery mind (body?) of the practi­
tioner. Here we meet not only the language of Vajrayāna texts but the practice itself as 
poetry. In the words of Douglas Duckworth, “it is in poetic and aesthetic theory” that 
we can observe “a resonance with Tantra . . . the generation of a new identity of felt 
body image.” He further muses how it is “with the magic of poetic language and thought 
that we discover the linguistic affordances of creative evocation: of worlds and modes 
of being-​in-​the-​world that destabilize and reenact our orientation as subjects within a 
world” (Duckworth 2019, 119).
A strikingly resonant view of poesis is expressed by philosopher Paul Ricoeur, when 
he says that poetic language changes “our way of dwelling in the world . . . [enabling] a 
new way of being in the world, of orienting ourselves in this world” (1991, 85). Ricoeur 
argues that when we assume that “metaphor reaches reality, we presuppose that we al­
ready know what reality is.” But, when we “assume that metaphor redescribes reality, we 
must assume that this reality, as redescribed, is itself novel reality.” (See also Hayes and 
Timalsina, this volume.) Therefore, he concludes, the strategy of poetic metaphor is “to 
shatter and to increase our sense of reality” (Ricoeur 1991, 85). Notably, we likewise find 
Kūkai also saying that “the mind of secret adornment [perfect enlightenment] is to thor­
oughly awaken to the knowledge of the root source of one’s own mind and to realize, as

--- PAGE 749 ---
724      David L. Gardiner
 
it truly is, the multiplicity of one’s own body/​ies. This [abode] is none other than the oce­
anic assembly of the Womb Mandala” (Teihon 2:307).26 He presents this mandalic image 
as a realizable embodied state, as an attainable “novel reality.”
Susanne Langer’s Philosophy in a New Key urged philosophers in her day to transcend 
the parochial view that all rationality must be “discursive” in nature. She juxtaposed the 
necessarily grammatical and sequential logic of verbal symbolism with the “representa­
tional symbolism” of art and music, emphasizing the immense value to human life that 
nonverbal forms of reasoning bestow: “[T]‌here is an unexplored possibility of genuine 
semantic beyond the limits of discursive language” (Langer 1957, 86 [emphasis in orig­
inal]).27 Regarding visual imagery, Langer wrote:
[V]‌isual forms . . . are just as capable of articulation, i.e., of complex combination, 
as words. But the laws that govern this sort of articulation are altogether different . . 
. visual forms are not discursive. They do not present their constituents successively, 
but simultaneously, so the relations determining a visual structure are grasped in one 
act of vision. (Langer 1957, 93, [emphasis in original])28
Kūkai’s catalog of items he brought back from China, cited above, included in its 
preface wording remarkably like that of Langer’s:
The Dharma is originally without words, and yet it cannot be expressed apart from 
words. . . . The esoteric teachings are very profound, and it is difficult to convey them 
in writing. Thus, they are provisionally revealed to the unenlightened via paintings. 
The myriad forms of sacred deportment and the myriad gestures have their origin in 
great compassion. With a single look [at them], one may realize Buddhahood. . . . The 
root source of the oceanlike assembly [that is, the mandala of deities] corresponds 
just to this.
(Teihon 1:31)
The two nearly identical phrases—​Kūkai’s “with a single look” and Langer’s “grasped 
in one act of vision”—​convey something remarkable about the power of visual experi­
ence: it is both physically and cognitively impactful.
Conjoining the insights of Kūkai’s Vajrayāna vision, Langer’s philosophy of sym­
bolism, and Ricoeur’s poetic sensibility, we can imagine the possibility of a novel and 
potent aesthetic methodology: the somatic-​semantic approach. Tantric Buddhism’s 
employment of visual images deftly straddles the commonly assumed gap between the 
domains of body and meaning. Duckworth’s pithy prose offers a fitting encapsulation of 
the potential for a somatic-​semantic approach to investigating Vajrayāna practice. He 
contends that deity yoga’s paradigmatic engagements with “mental imagery of felt shifts 
in experiential orientation—​that are constructed and dissolved—​offer a unique entry 
point to stage our felt bodily presences in new ways, akin to the ‘interventions’ of art and 
poetry, which can play a role in dismantling our ordinary senses of self and world. These 
practices can serve to rupture habitual patterns of identity by recreating them in delib­
erate and expressive ways” (Duckworth 2019, 123). This is a perfect distillation of the 
“art” of tantric Buddhist imagery.

--- PAGE 750 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      725
 
Notes
	 1.	 Greene has written an analysis of visualization in non-​tantric forms of Buddhism and 
other contexts in E. M. Greene, “Visions and Visualizations: In Fifth-​Century Chinese 
Buddhism and Nineteenth-​Century Experimental Psychology,” History of Religions 55, no. 3 
(2016): 290–​332.
	 2.	 Janet Gyatso argues persuasively that accounts of Tibetan tantric practice ought not dis­
miss the central role that “personal experience” plays for practitioners. See J. Gyatso, 
“Healing Burns with Fire: The Facilitations of Experience in Tibetan Buddhism,” 
Journal of the American Academy of Religion 67, no. 1 (March 1999): 113–​147.
	 3.	 On some of the ritual prayers involved, see Tsomo 2018 and Thurman 1994, esp. 59–​63. For 
fuller descriptions of the “sandwiching” of visualization between preliminary and dedi­
catory practices, see Chodron 2005, esp. 39–​45 and 59–​67 on preparatory, and 195–​198 on 
dedicatory.
	 4.	 For a discussion of the “supreme worship” formula, which includes these ritual expressions 
and emerged in early Māhayāna practice, see Śantideva’s Bodhicārya-​avatāra, translated 
by Crosby and Skilton 1995, 9–​13. For an example of its application in Vajrayāna practice, 
see Chodron 2006, 59–​64.
	 5.	 This mantra is common to the “dissolution” stage of many tantric deity yoga practices. An 
example can be found in Chodron 2006, p. 24 and 100.
	 6.	 See Thurman 1994, 59–​63 for comments on how accustoming oneself to aiming to abide 
neither in nirvana nor in samsara is a foundation for tantric practice.
	 7.	 A fine account of such a visualization is in text by the Fourth Panchen Lama, where he 
writes: “Rays of light emanate from your body purified into lama and Buddha. This light 
shines upon all living beings and purifies them. You should have the intense feeling that 
you are establishing all beings in the high position of lama and Buddha. This is said to be 
the special precept of the oral lineage of Wensa . . . the meditation that generates bodhi-​
mind through actualizing the path and its final goal.” From G. Wangyal, The Door of 
Liberation (Boston: Wisdom, 1995), 139 (Rev. ed.).
	 8.	 For an introduction to the theory of embodied cognition, see the pioneering F. J. Varela, 
E. Thompson, and E. Rosch, eds. The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human 
Experience (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017) (Rev. ed.).
	 9.	 At the time of writing, only a nonpaginated electronic version of Yeshe 2014 was available 
for reference. Hence, all notes will refer to the chapter and section but not the page of the 
citation. This quote comes from ­chapter 11, “Arising as a Deity,” section called “Dissolution.”
	10.	 Yeshe 2014, ­chapter 4, “Overthrowing the Tyranny of Ordinary Appearances,” section 
“Problems of Self-​Emanation.” David Gray also writes: “Tantric traditions accepted as a 
starting point the teaching expressed in works such as the Vimalakırti Sutra, namely, that 
our minds play a central role in the construction of our experience of reality, and thus 
advocate a transformation of one’s self-​identity, as well as the way that one perceives the 
world and the others who join us in inhabiting this world” (Gray 2021, 4) Although a broad 
philosophical exploration of topics in Buddhist ontology and epistemology, especially in 
Mādhyamaka and Yogacāra thought (as some of the texts cited here offer), is thoroughly 
relevant to these reflections, there is not space in this chapter for that.
	11.	 See similar comments on tantra’s nondualistic tendencies in Gyatso 1999, 140 and Shaw 
1995, 150. For a broader view on self-​world nondualism in Buddhism, Daoism, and 
Western philosophy, see R. H. Sharf, “Mind in World, World in Mind,” in What Can’t Be

--- PAGE 751 ---
726      David L. Gardiner
 
Said: Paradox and Contradiction in East Asian Thought, edited by Y. Deguchi, J. L. Garfield, 
G. Priest, and R. H. Sharf, 152–​171 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2017).
	12.	 M. Johnson, Embodied Mind, Meaning and Reason: How Our Bodies Give Rise to 
Understanding (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017), 7.
	13.	 For a sensitive treatment of the power of myth in religious imagination, see L. Sullivan, Icanchu’s 
Drum: An Orientation to Meaning in South American Religions (MacMillan, 1990), 22.
	14.	 Examples of the kinds of dramatic, mythical scenarios found in tantric textual narratives 
can be found in Orzech 2017, 20; Sorenson 2022, 299–​303; Wedemeyer 2013, 82.
	15.	 See, for example, references to scientific publications on “guided imagery” as a healing 
modality in the National Institute of Health’s affiliate organization, the National Center 
for Complementary and Integrative Health: https://​sea​rch.usa.gov/​sea​rch?affili​ate=​
nccih&page=​2&query=​Gui​ded+​imag​ery
	16.	 Thubten Chodron writes about both these aims in How to Free Your Mind: The Practice of 
Tara the Liberator (Shambhala, 2005), that Tara does “not exist mainly for temporal suc­
cess and healing but for the ultimate purpose of freeing you from all sufferings . . . and their 
cause . . . bringing you to the everlasting happiness of liberation and full enlightenment” (9).
	17.	 Yeshe 2014, ­chapter 4, “Overthrowing the Tyranny of Ordinary Appearances,” section 
“The Challenge Of Exploring Inner Space.”
	18.	 Ibid., ­chapter 4, section on “Problems of Self-​Emanation.”
	19.	 See 
https://​www.ric​khan​son.net/​calen​dar/​har​dwir​ing-​happin​ess-​from-​pass​ing-​sta​tes-​
to-​last​ing-​tra​its/​
	20.	 For a treatment of similarities between healing aspects of Tibetan Vajrayāna Western psy­
chology, see Samuel 2019.
	21.	 Heidi Koppl, Establishing Appearances as Divine: Rongzom Chokyi Zangpo on Reasoning, 
Madhyamaka, and Purity (Boulder, CO: Snow Lion, 2013).
	22.	 For a good example of the equation of body and mandala in Tibetan tantra, see Shaw 1995, 
106–​107.
	23.	 See another translation in Y. Hakeda, Kukai: Major Works (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1972), 143.
	24.	 See another translation in ibid., 145.
	25.	 See also Gardiner 2000 for a full translation.
	26.	 In addition to his language often being poetic, Kūkai composed poems and wrote Japan’s 
first extensive treatise (more like a carefully edited and originally arranged anthology) on 
the technicalities of Chinese poetics from Six Dynasties to the mid-​Tang periods. See R. 
W. Bodman, Poetics and Prosody in Early Mediaeval China: A Study and Translation of 
Kūkai’s Bunkyō Hifuron (Melbourne, Australia: Basel Quirin Press, 2020). Revised edition 
of 1978 Cornell University PhD dissertation.
	27.	 In S. Langer, Form and Feeling: A Theory of Art (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1953), 
Langer’s dimensional exploration of the semantics of artistic symbolism.
	28.	 Mark Johnson (2017, 7–​8) also urges a shift from the overly “linguistic” and “analytic” 
approaches to philosophy toward “constructing a positive account of human meaning-​
making and understanding that draws on the cognitive science of the embodied mind.”
References
Biernacki, Loriliai. 2018. “Review of Tantric Visual Culture: A Cognitive Approach by 
Sthaneshwar Timalsina, New York: Routledge, 2015, and of Language of Images:

--- PAGE 752 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      727
 
Visualization and Meaning in Tantras by Sthaneshwar Timalsina, New York: Peter Lang, 
2015.” International Journal of Hindu Studies 22, no. 2 (August): 374–​377.
Bodman, Richard W. 2020. Poetics and Prosody in Early Mediaeval China: A Study and 
Translation of Kūkai’s Bunkyō Hifuron. Melbourne, Australia: Basel Quirin Press.
Brauen, Martin. 1997. The Mandala: Sacred Circle in Tibetan Buddhism. Boston, MA: 
Shambhala.
Bühnemann, G. 2005. “Maṇḍalas: Buddhist Maṇḍalas.” In Encyclopedia of Religion, 2nd ed., 
Vol. 8, edited by L. Jones, 5641–​5646. Detroit, MI: Macmillan Reference USA. Gale eBooks. 
Accessed August 9, 2022, https://​link.gale.com/​apps/​doc/​CX342​4501​922/​GVRL?u=​color​
ado&sid=​bookm​ark-​GVRL&xid=​81bb8​992
Chodron, Thubten. 2005. How to Free Your Mind: The Practice of Tara the Liberator. Boulder, 
CO: Shambhala.
Chodron, Thubten. 2006. Cultivating a Compassionate Heart: The Yoga Method of Chenrezig. 
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Cozort, Daniel. 1986. Highest Yoga Tantra: An Introduction to the Esoteric Buddhism of Tibet. 
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Duckworth, Douglas. S. 2019. Tibetan Buddhist Philosophy of Mind and Nature. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
English, Elizabeth. 2002. Vajrayoginī: Her Visualizations, Rituals, and Forms. Somerville, MA: 
Wisdom.
Gardiner, David. 2000. “The Consecration of the Monastic Compound at Mount Koya by 
Kūkai.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by D. G. White, 119–​130. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Germano, David F. with Gregory Hillis. 2005. “Tibetan Buddhist Meditation”. In Encyclopedia 
of Religions. USA: Macmillan Reference.
Gethin, Rupert. 1998. The Foundations of Buddhism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gray, David B. 2021. “Bodies of Knowledge: Bodily Perfection in Tantric Buddhist Practice.” 
Religions 12, no. 2: 89. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​2020​089
Greene, Eric M. 2016. “Visions and Visualizations: In Fifth-​Century Chinese Buddhism and 
Nineteenth-​Century Experimental Psychology.” History of Religions 55, no. 3: 290–​332.
Grotenhuis, Elizabeth ten. 1999. Japanese Mandalas: Representations of Sacred Geography. 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Gyatso, Janet. 1999. “Healing Burns with Fire: The Facilitations of Experience in Tibetan 
Buddhism.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 67, no. 1 (March): 113–​147.
Hanson, Rick. 2016. “Hardwiring Happiness: From Passing States to Lasting Traits.” (work­
shop). https://​www.ric​khan​son.net/​calen​dar/​har​dwir​ing-​happin​ess-​from-​pass​ing-​sta​tes-​
to-​last​ing-​tra​its/​
H. H. the Dalai Lama, Tsong-​kha-​pa, and Jeffrey Hopkins. 2016. The Great Exposition of Secret 
Mantra, Volume One: Tantra in Tibet (Rev. ed.). Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Hatchell, Chris. 2013. “Buddhist Visual Worlds II: Practices of Visualization and Vision.” 
Religion Compass 7, no. 9: 349–​360. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s42​240-​018-​0011-​7
Jackson, Roger R. 1992. “Ambiguous sexuality: Imagery and interpretation in tantric 
Buddhism.” Religion 22: 1 (January): 85–​100.
Jennings, Pilar. 2017. “Imagery and Trauma: The Psyche’s Push for Healing.” In Advances in 
Contemplative Psychotherapy: Accelerating Healing and Transformation, edited by J. Loizzo, 
M. Neale, and E. J. Wolf, 174–​184. New York: Routledge.
Johnson, Mark. 2017. Embodied Mind, Meaning and Reason: How Our Bodies Give Rise to 
Understanding. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 753 ---
728      David L. Gardiner
 
Koppl, Heidi I. 2013. Establishing Appearances as Divine: Rongzom Chokyi Zangpo on 
Reasoning, Madhyamaka, and Purity. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Landaw, Jonathan, and Andy Weber. 2006. Images of Enlightenment: Tibetan Art in Practice. 
2nd Rev. ed. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Langer, Susanne K. 1953. Form and Feeling: A Theory of Art. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Langer, Susanne K. 1957. Philosophy in a New Key: A Study in the Symbolism of Reason, Rite, and 
Art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leidy, Denise Patry, and Robert Thurman. 1998. Mandala: The Architecture of Enlightenment. 
New York: Thames and Hudson.
Lhadrepa, K., and C. Davis. 2017. The Art of Awakening: A User’s Guide to Tibetan Buddhist Art 
and Practice. Boulder, CO: Snow Lion.
Loizzo, Joseph. 2017. “Embodied Practice, the Smart Vagus, and Mind-​Brain-​Body Integration.” 
In Advances in Contemplative Psychotherapy: Accelerating Healing and Transformation, ed­
ited by Joseph. Loizzo, Miles Neale, and Emily J. Wolf, 85–​103. New York: Routledge.
Loizzo, Joseph., Miles Neale, and Emily J. Wolf. 2017. Advances in Contemplative Psychotherapy: 
Accelerating Healing and Transformation. New York: Routledge.
Lopez, Donald S., Jr. 1999. Prisoners of Shangri-​La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Makransky, John J. 1997. Buddhahood Embodied: Sources of Controversy in India and Tibet. 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 319–​369.
McMahan, David D. 2004. “Transpositions of Metaphor and Imagery in the Gandavyuha and 
Tantric Buddhist Practice.” Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies 3, no. 6 
(Fall), 181–​194.
Mullin, Glenn H. 1983. Female Buddhas: Women of Enlightenment in Tibetan Mystical Art. 
Santa Fe, NM: Clear Light.
Orzech, Charles D. 2017. “Tantric Subjects: Liturgy and Vision in Chinese Esoteric Ritual.” In 
Chinese and Tibetan Esoteric Buddhism, edited by Y. Bentor and M. Shahar, 17–​40. Leiden, 
The Netherlands: Brill,
Ricard, Matthieu. 2006. “Buddhist Perspectives on Mental Imagery.” In The Dalai Lama at 
MIT, edited by Anne Harrington and Arthur Zajonc, 69–​114. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1991. A Ricoeur Reader: Reflection and Imagination. Edited by M. J. Valdes. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2019. “Unbalanced Flows in the Subtle Body: Tibetan Understandings 
of Psychiatric Illness and How to Deal with It.” Journal of Religion and Health 58, no. 3 
(June): 770–​794. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s10​943-​019-​00774-​1. PMID: 30788755; PMCID: 
PMC6522444
Śāntideva. 1995. Bodhicaryāvatāra. Translated by Kate Crosby and Andrew Skilton. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Sharf, Robert H. 2002. “Visualization and Mandala Shingon Buddhism.” In Living Images: 
Japanese Buddhist Icons in Context, edited by R. H. Sharf and E. H. Sharf, 151–​197. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press.
Sharf, Robert H. 2017. “Mind in World, World in Mind.” In What Can’t be Said: Paradox and 
Contradiction in East Asian Thought, edited by Y. Deguchi, J. L. Garfield, G. Priest, and R. H. 
Sharf, 152–​171. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shaw, Miranda. 1995. Passionate Enlightenment: Women in Tantric Buddhism. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.

--- PAGE 754 ---
IMAGERY PRACTICE IN TANTRIC BUDDHISM      729
 
Simmer-​Brown, Judith. 2001. The Dakini’s Warm Breath: The Feminine Principle in Tibetan 
Buddhism. Boston: Shambhala.
Sorenson, H. H. 2022. “Visualizing Oneself at the Cosmos: An Esoteric Buddhist Meditation 
Text from Dunhuang.” In Buddhism in Central Asia II: Practices and Rituals, Visual and 
Material Transfer, edited by Y. Kasai and H. H. Sorenson, 288–​312. Leiden, The Netherlands: 
Brill.
Teihon kōbōdaishi zenshū [定本弘法大師全集]. 1994. Koyasan: Mikkyō bunka kenkyūsho.
Thurman, Robert. 1994. The Tibetan Book of the Dead. New York: Bantam Books.
Tsomo, Karma Lekshe. 2018. “Imagining Enlightenment: Icons and Ideology.” Journal of 
Dharma Studies 1: 31–​43.
Varela, Francisco J., Eleanor Thompson, and E. Rosch. 2017 (Rev. ed.). The Embodied Mind: 
Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
van der Kolk, Bessel A. 2011. “Foreword.” In The Polyvagal Theory: Neurophysiological Foundations 
of Emotions, Attachment, Communication, and Self-​Regulatio, edited by S. Porges, xi–​xvii. 
New York: W. W. Norton.
van der Kolk, Bessel A. 2015. The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of 
Trauma. New York: Penguin.
Wedemyer, Christian K. 2013. Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology, and 
Transgression. New York: Columbia University Press.
Wedemyer, Christian K., trans. 2021. The Lamp for Integrating the Practices 
(Caryamelapakapradipa): The Gradual Path of Vajrayana Buddhism. Boston: Wisdom.
Wolf, Emily J. 2017. “Tantra, Imagery, and Integral Dynamic Therapy.” In Advances in 
Contemplative Psychotherapy: Accelerating Healing and Transformation, edited by J. Loizzo, 
M. Neale, and E. J. Wolf, 57–​173. New York: Routledge.
Yeshe, Thubten. 2014. Introduction to Tantra: The Transformation of Desire. Rev. ed. Boston: 
Wisdom.

--- PAGE 755 ---


--- PAGE 756 ---
Chapter 29
Attention, Memory, and 
the Imagination
A Cognitive Analysis of Tantric Visualization
Sthaneshwar Timalsina
In this chapter,1 I explore three key tantric categories: mantra or specific phonetic 
structures with explicit or implied meaning, mandala or the geometric forms, and mūrti 
or the deity image, in light of the cognitive categories of attention, memory, and imagi­
nation. We explore how an understanding of these devices, essential to tantric practices, 
can borrow insights from and enrich ongoing research. This could lead to an interdis­
ciplinary dialogue between tantric philosophy and cognitive science. There are limita­
tions to this type of dialogue, as cognitive science privileges empirical research, whereas 
the tantras are broadly theoretical and focus on practice. However, any open-​minded 
researcher might see the benefits of advancing such dialogue, as there are compelling 
theoretical overlaps and the possibility of providing substantial material for empirical 
inquiry. And I am not the first to make this argument. Neurophenomenological research 
has revealed the significance of subjective experience in the area of cognitive research 
that needs to be combined with neurological research. Since the structure of human 
consciousness is semantically established, research in cognitive linguistics is likewise 
central to understanding the categories outlined above and in the theories of metaphor 
and cognitive blending, championed by Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner (2002), 
Mark Turner (2014), and their application in tantric studies as explored by Glen Hayes 
(2012, 2014, 2016, and this volume) or Timalsina (2016)—​all of which offer sufficient 
insights to pursue the argument further. My objective here is to provide some examples 
in light of the latest research in these areas so that we can explore these thoughts further.
Not only are cognitive issues suffused with subjective perspectives, but also tantras 
are inherently private. Tantric practices are traditionally kept within the purview of 
a select few, and published texts and manuals resonate only in light of the preceptor’s 
teachings and guidance. Quite apart from private experiences, we can engage what 
we can glean from textual sources in pursuing this conversation. Likewise, the public

--- PAGE 757 ---
732      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
aspects of tantric practices provide examples that can be observed in public mandala 
and temple rituals, or in tantric dances, such as the Aṣṭamātṛkā or Bhairava dances or 
in the Buddhist Caryā dances. The cultural insights we can derive from these private 
and public tantric domains provide the bedrock for a deeper understanding of how 
cultures can determine the human limits of consciousness. A common thread linking 
all tantric discourse is its application of metaphor in mapping reality and infusing early 
meanings while deriving new insights. Equally noteworthy is the application of cogni­
tive blending, integrating different schema into the new emergent structure. Glen Hayes 
has extensively addressed these aspects in this volume, so I do not linger addressing the 
same issues. For our purpose, all that needs to be said is that these cognitive processes 
are integral to tantric discourse, and for us to have any meaningful conversation on 
tantric literature and practices, we need to read these cultural artifacts beyond what is 
given to the eyes. The main objective of this chapter is therefore to explore to what ex­
tent tantric literature can contribute to understanding the domains of consciousness. 
We can evaluate tantric practices on the basis of their applicability to understanding 
both the faculties of attention, memory, and imagination and exploring the possibility 
of cultivating these faculties to enhance the overall quality of human life. If we can learn 
from cognitive science how these faculties function or how they are interrelated, we can 
similarly deepen our knowledge of how they can be enhanced. Likewise, contempla­
tive practices in tantras have sought to explore human cognitive faculties and thus can 
be considered cognitive therapeutic devices, as they are primarily concerned not with 
what these faculties are, but rather with how we can better enhance these faculties to 
maximize our full potential. Unlike behavioral psychologists, tantrics envision human 
capacities as boundless. One general tantric dictum is that individuals are bound be­
cause they are unable to unravel limitless cognitive and psychological potentials. When 
we seek dialogue between tantra and cognitive science, we confront the fact that central 
to tantric practices, mantras or mandalas are used to focus and deepen attention, and 
these can be explained as devices for retaining certain forms in the mind (dhāraṇā) and 
concentration (dhyāna) practices. If mandalas are spatially extended, mantras are tem­
poral, as one can only explore duration and succession while focusing on the cluster of 
phonemes that constitute mantras. Tantras do not use these devices merely to extend 
the capacity of attention; they are also used for advancing the capacity of imagination. 
Tantras acknowledge the faculty of imagination (kalpanā) as the domain of conscious­
ness that needs to be explored and trained in order to develop complex tantric visualiza­
tion practices. And in all accounts of attention, memory, and imagination, visual images 
and speech forms are central: We can think, attend, remember, or imagine something 
even in isolation of one or the other in either image and speech, but we cannot perform 
any of these cognitive acts in the absence of both. If the visual devices that tantras use in 
the form of mandalas or deity images can help us understand the role that imagery plays 
in human cognition, mantras or speech forms with selected phonemes having explicit 
or implicit meaning provide the basis for cognitive linguistics and the ways that speech 
acts in the above modes of cognition. Both mantras and mandalas function as mne­
monic devices used to organize complex items such as temporal or spatial imagery in

--- PAGE 758 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      733
 
memory formation. In all these cognitive domains, there is conscious or subconscious 
editing of the inputs, and the study of tantric practices illuminates how such devices 
were used to extend the limits of human attention, memory, or imagination. In every 
successive stage of compressing information, we also find the role metonymy or meta­
phor plays, and in every stage of compression, cognitive blending also plays its role. As I 
mentioned above, the works of Fauconnier and Turner detail the cognitive mechanisms 
involved in the processes of cognitive blending as well as in metaphoric thinking. Glen 
Hayes has studied tantric literature in light of these theories, including in this volume. 
Noteworthy with tantric practices is that they do not leave all the processes to the sub­
conscious, as the manuals meticulously structure the content and progressively provide 
complex information that has been compressed in every new step of the practice. This is 
particularly vivid in the krama or successive initiatory rites that begin from simple deity 
forms and basic seed mantras and evolve into complex practices. The process of cogni­
tive blending is vivid every step of the way, be that in ritual application of mantras or in 
the visualization of images or mandalas. Each of these categories can occupy volumes 
that can be addressed extensively. This essay can only provide some preliminary insights 
in this programmatic chapter to encourage future research in this deserving area. 
Addressing three key cognitive categories of attention, memory, and imagination, anal­
ysis is in essence exploring the ways tantric practices integrate some of the processes 
that have recently been discovered in the field of cognitive science, and the objective is 
to encourage a meaningful dialogue.
Attention
The definition of attention that William James (1890, 404) gave is timeless:
It is the taking possession by the mind, in clear and vivid form, of one out of what 
seem several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought. Focalization, 
concentration, of consciousness are of its essence. It implies withdrawal from some 
things in order to deal effectively with others.
This definition appears foundational to many of the contemporary conversations on 
attention. Noteworthy in the definition is the selective role of attention, as to attend 
to something is to not only sustain the stream of consciousness focused on a singular 
object, but also suspend the rest of its intentional modes. Noteworthy contemporary 
works in this area are those of Carrasco (2014), Theeuwes (2014), Deubel (2014), and 
Yu 2014. There is a limit to what everyday consciousness can process simultaneously, 
and the mind has devised preattentively to select and edit the content so that there is 
no cognitive overload (Treisman and Gelade 1980). However, attention is not a single 
act temporally circumscribed in an instant; it demands duration, and sustained atten­
tion facilitates making the experience more vivid. Triesman (1996) argued that serial

--- PAGE 759 ---
734      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
attention is needed to integrate or “bind” features to object representation. This binding 
occurs when we cognize different properties and link these to a single entity. An entity 
established from all its horizons focuses attention and makes the object concrete. The 
concept of conceptual blending is the same as what Triesman argued for with binding. 
Extending the argument of binding further, Wolfe (2014) argued that if the observers 
are guided to search for specific features, this enhances attention and makes the binding 
process easier. The most general feature of guidance appears to be the contrast between 
the target of attention and its distractors. Likewise, more than a single feature can facili­
tate the guiding process.
Anybody with basic knowledge of tantric practices can read the above paragraph and 
say, yes, that is exactly what I do when I recite a mantra or visualize a mandala. A collec­
tive term for visualization practices is “retention” (dhāraṇā). A practitioner is supposed 
to retain a specific object as either speech structure or visual form and pay sustained at­
tention, making duration of the same object a primary cognitive act. The only difference 
is, in the cognitive analysis, the studies are making observations on the mechanisms 
behind attention, whereas in tantric practice, there is meticulous effort to create the field 
of visualization or to determine the extent of temporal object of visualization. Reciting 
a mantra is about not only repeating the same sentence again and again, but also more 
about suspending mental fluctuation to any other temporal object or thoughts in the 
form of logogens.
The same applies to mandala practice or visualizing a deity form, as these require 
suspending the rise of any alternate imagery. But more than mentally retaining the ob­
ject, the practice trains aspirants to suspend inner chatter and cancel the rise of other 
visual forms. Since an actual practice integrates both the image and mantra, tantric 
practice does not leave space for the mechanisms behind a thought process or image 
formation, as they seek to integrate both domains of cognitive activity. The yogic vocab­
ulary of “suspension” or nirodha (e.g., Yogasūtra I.2) epitomizes this very process. While 
some forms of yoga focus on a total suspension of the stream of thought, tantric visual­
ization practice is about suspending the rest of the chatter at the cost of the one that is 
being cultivated. It is evident that mandalas are devices for focalization, for the spatially 
extended object has concentric circles or squares, progressively leading to the central 
focal point (Timalsina 2015b, 13–​27).
Mantras demonstrate the same devices for focusing attention, but due to their tem­
poral nature, their concentric structure is not apparent. Even when mantras have explicit 
reference (bhāvārtha), reciting mantras is not solely about making the referent present. 
Primary to the practice is focus on a particular rhythm, particular cluster of phonemes, 
or particular sentences, facilitating the subject’s ability to cancel other mental chatter. 
Even when we focus on a single visual field, inner verbalization can continue, and 
mantras aim to suspend this inner or private mental conversation. The repetitive and 
rhythmic character of recitation makes it easy for the mind to sustain its flow, at the cost 
of the transient thoughts or emotional ruptures. Tantric practice of mantra recitation 
progresses from simple to complex structures: from the monosyllabic “heart” or “seed” 
mantras to successively longer mantras with hundreds or even a thousand phonemes,

--- PAGE 760 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      735
 
with combined syllabled bīja mantras or kūṭa mantras with multiple syllables.2 More 
importantly, visualization practice progresses using mantras like mnemonic devices, 
assigning manifold meaning to be visualized mentally while counting specific syllables 
within mantras (Timalsina 2005). Likewise, mandala practice starts from simple geo­
metric designs, such as a triangle or square, and progresses to integrate complex geo­
metric forms. In advanced visualization practices, the geometric structures incorporate 
multiple deity forms, with each deity having its own simple-​to-​complex structure, 
starting from a simple human representation to a deity with multiple arms and heads 
(Timalsina 2015b, 79–​101).
These mechanisms are not unique to Hindu tantras alone, as the Buddhist Vajrayāna 
deity images and mandala visualizations follow the same structure. These practices aim 
to achieve twofold objectives: to compress maximum content within a single cognitive 
field and to train sustained processing of the content with gradually increasing com­
plexity. Most common to these practices is the consistency of one element at the cost 
of other devices. So if the mantra is moving, the same deity image is the constant on 
which the mind focuses, and if the deity forms are changing in the field of gradually 
progressing mandala, the mantra functions as the constant due to its rhythmically repet­
itive character. Tantric visualization also demonstrates the role that cognitive “binding” 
plays, for when specific features of deities are projected in the field of perception, the 
narrative guidance continues with determined color prescriptions along with hand 
and face gestures. When different gestures are displayed while performing rituals or 
practicing visualizations, the meditation or ritual act becomes embodied, and some per­
fectly choreographed display of gestures gives the appearance of dance, as epitomized in 
the Vajrayāna forms of the Caryā dance.
Expanding on previous research, Lavie and Dalton (2014) demonstrated that percep­
tual processing becomes selective when the limits of perceptual capacity are reached, 
spontaneously filtering out task-​irrelevant information. This filtering process also 
relates to “attentional biases” related to the editing of unattained objects, voluntarily 
or reflexively (Nobre and Mesulam 2014). Filtering of information can go both ways: 
One can voluntarily bracket task-​irrelevant information, or the subconscious cognitive 
processes determine what is less relevant and leaves them out. Basically, this is to say 
that there are two covert and overt modes of attention, where we sometimes uninten­
tionally filter information in order to make it manageable, and at other times we ex­
ercise our capacity to actively filter what endures and what is removed. Expanding on 
James’s hypothesis, Carrasco (2014) analyzed two types of sustained and transient covert 
attention. Sometimes, we turn our gaze, or move our head to listen something clearly, 
a case of overt attention. But our cognitive life is filled with covert attention where the 
objects are passively presented to consciousness, leaving minimal traces for further re­
call. Some examples in everyday life become background noise heard when watching a 
show or bustling vehicles rushing every which way when we are driving. Covert atten­
tion is found to improve performance in various visual tasks. Since the filtering process 
could not occur prior to determining the field of visual perception, it becomes clear that 
within the single field of visual perception, some pieces of information are processed as

--- PAGE 761 ---
736      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
“to be edited” or are less attained in contrast to others. This can be explained by use of 
the metaphor of spotlight, where certain parts are attained in contrast to others (Posner 
1980) or where some objects are given as background for the focal object at the spotlight. 
The process of attentive selection is analyzed in two parts of pre-​attentive and attentive 
stages, where the first relates to the immediate contact with the visual field, whereas the 
second relates to the attentive visual perception where the focal object within the field 
has been determined (Theeuwes 2014). In visual perception, this attentive field can shift, 
based on the selective mechanisms, as the subject moves his gaze from one center to 
the next. Selective attention is thus credited for gatekeeping what stimuli are allowed to 
transit from parallel to serial processing (Eimer 2014).
Every aspect of tantric visualization is selective, as the process imposes on the mind 
a predetermined visual field or temporal object such as mantric speech or focusing the 
attentive gaze on a selected object. Peculiar to visualization is its active attentive bias; 
that is, the subject is consciously focusing on something and bracketing something else 
from within the radius of attention. In a mandala, the deities in the inner layers subsume 
aspects of the deities in external layers, progressively making the inner layers a focal 
object, ultimately leading to the central deity. Deities in different corners are given dif­
ferent colors, so it makes it easy to shift attention from one image to the next. The focal 
point in the temporal sequence is a bit different: The seed syllable, generally identified 
as the heart mantra (hṛdaya), is placed in the mantric sentence in such a way that it 
remains as if the only constant in the flux of mantric expression. For instance, aiṃ is 
considered the seed syllable for Sarasvatī, and in many of her mantras, all the other 
syllables are considered expendable, but not this one. Śrīṃ, for example, is considered 
the seed syllable for Lakṣmī, and while other syllables are expendable in new mantras, 
this syllable remains constant. And the list goes on. In many mantras, the deity name 
remains the focal point, eliciting a visual experience when reciting the mantra. The or­
ganization of spatiotemporal objects is one of the key elements of tantric visualization 
practices (Timalsina 2011). The key here in practice is about what remains constant 
versus what is in the flux: If the primary gaze is on visual imagery, the subject shifts 
his focal point from one center to the next in the mandala while running the mantra 
in an auto-​mode, but if the mantra is the focal point, the imagery remains as if in the 
background as the constant. In external rituals, subjects move their gaze, and voluntary 
filtering of the cognitive field becomes possible, determining what is filtered in the case 
of cognitive overload. But the idea is that repeated conscious filtering guides the sub­
conscious to filter the imagery as anticipated. This is therefore about working within the 
cognitive sphere of the subconscious. This is where the reflexive system takes over con­
scious filtering, but in the case of visualization, what is emphasized is the reflexive mode, 
the body and its response to the stimuli itself, with the sought-​after effect being the im­
agery enduring even when the active mental function is suspended. The metaphor of the 
spotlight is also essential in analyzing tantric visualization. Dual processing of cognitive 
information is vivid in Vidyāraṇya’s depiction, where he compares the cognitive field to 
a wall seen in daylight, with the intentional object highlighted with a mirror spotlight

--- PAGE 762 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      737
 
(Pañcadaśī 2021; Kūṭasthadīpa Chapter, verse 1). In Vidyāraṇya’s phenomenology, this 
is the body that is being twice projected. However, we can utilize the same metaphor for 
analyzing the way the tantric visualization functions by making one focal point, moving 
the mental gaze from one point to the next, either in the peripheral circles or from the 
periphery to the center. The peculiarity of tantric visualization is that there is no corpo­
real shift in voluntary gaze as the entire perception is mental. This makes a compelling 
case for its suitability for neurological research. In tantric visualization, the active gaze 
does not need to project an entity outside, as it can focus entirely on the aspirant’s body, 
making cakras from the base to the crown a mental journey (Timalsina 2012). This is 
where mental perception becomes primary to external perception.
Tantric practices, however, are more complex and intriguing than simple cognitive 
experiments. In a single visualization, a practitioner tracks through different cakras 
while continually reciting a mantra. He or she may also focus on different deity images 
in a progressive fashion in the meditative trip from the bodily base to the crown cakra. 
As each step is made more complicated as the practice progresses, we need sophisticated 
experiments to contextualize such practices. Experiments revealed that the distribution 
of attentional cues throughout different sensory modalities is responsible in dividing 
attention (Spence 2014). In order to replicate real experience, tantric visualizations syn­
chronize inputs from different sensory modalities, so the subject is not only “hearing” 
his own verbalization, but also visualizing the structure as directly bound with the audi­
tory input.
Also, we cannot address tantric visualization by merely analyzing object-​based at­
tention. The deity visualization, for example, is feature based: A single mandala can 
be populated with hundreds of deities, and they each are differentiated based on their 
features, such as color variations and differences in hand gestures, weapons, attire, and 
facial expression. Unlike attention on an external field, tantric visualization demands 
that these complex visual examples are mentally processed, making the act all the more 
challenging. There are some cues from the cognitive research in this regard. Scolari, 
Ester, and Serences (2014) addressed the issue of feature and object-​based attentional 
modulation. Interestingly, tantric visualization incorporates both modulations and 
makes a strong case for cognitive experiments. Finally, while the objects of tantric visu­
alization appear static, the fact of the matter is that a constant dynamism characterizes 
the way objects are visualized: Mantras are temporally moving objects, and visual­
ization on yantras within bodily cakra locations requires movement from either the 
periphery to the center or bottom to the top during the process. Even though these 
movements are purely subjective, what matters to the experiments on attention is that 
there is a constant change to either the visualized field or the visualized object. When 
the field is changing, the same mantra can be visualized in different corporeal centers, 
and when the object is changing, the deity images are changing in the same visual field 
of a mandala. Due to their temporal character, mantra meditation (Timalsina 2005) 
makes a case for dynamic attention, as can be found in the studies of Cavanagh, Battelli, 
and Holcombe (2014).

--- PAGE 763 ---
738      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
Memory
Central to tantric philosophy is the concept of “recognition” (pratyabhijñā), an infused 
cognition of memory and direct apprehension, and it is about regaining lost self-​
identity. There are several tantric premises on memory that contemporary cognitive 
science cannot engage, for instance:
	  (i)  survival of memory beyond the span of lifetime; or
	 (ii)  realized state of recall leading to pre-​individuated state, a collective universal 
consciousness.
But these should not discourage us from exploring a common ground or space for a 
dialogue, for memory is what defines who we are: both individually and collectively. 
And if cognitive science can help us understand the mechanisms of memory, tantric 
practices can have therapeutic applications. Tantras utilize the faculty of memory for 
two different purposes: to not only enhance retaining capacity for long-​term memory 
so complex visualizations become possible and memorized texts can be recalled, but 
also cultivate a desired structure of episodic memory, eventually in order to transcend 
our bodily identity and to shift self-​consciousness from its fragmented individuated 
state to nondifferentiated singularity of being and consciousness. We need to keep 
some memories vivid, while we also need to edit some unnecessary experiences from 
the stockpile of memory. While our retention is based on task priorities (Soto and 
Humphreys 2014), long-​term memory and cultivation of episodic memory require re­
taining some of the experiences that may not have any objective performance. Classical 
exercises on memory broadly viewed the mind as an archive, keeping alive in memory 
not only past events but also even the textual details. Tantric practice goes beyond Vedic 
modes of memorizing the texts, as in practices such as puraścaraṇa, when the same 
mantra is repeated hundreds of thousands of times.3 Subjects performing such practices 
report a background presence of the mantra when awaking or when passively gazing 
back to one’s mind in absence of any cognitive direction. This relates to intentionally 
planting memories, and meditation manuals give brief visualization practices wherein 
the aspirant recites the following text every morning:
I remember you, the highest divinity, in the morning with the glow of the rays
of the autumn moon, adorned with beads, [with] earrings shaped as
crocodile and decorated with gems, having one thousand arms [shining] blue,
distinguished with divine weapons.
(Timalsina 2015a, 34)4
Bringing something to mind, to give attention to something, to visualize, or to imagine, 
all cognitive aspects fall under this remembering (smaraṇa).5 This begs the question

--- PAGE 764 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      739
 
whether or not this active insertion of memory results in subjects actually organizing 
experiences in the fold of memory also thus replaces some undesired memories. 
Conversely, are there actual therapeutic applications to these transplanted memories? 
This makes a potential field for cognitive research, as the issue is not any more what 
memory is or its veracity, but about engineering memories. Since the publication of 
Freud’s Beyond the Pleasure Principle in 1920, trauma has remained one of the key issues 
of psychological research. Any traumatic experience repeatedly returns the subject to 
the original event’s situation. What if this pattern can be altered by planted memories? 
Ethnographic research suggested this is the case, and this makes a compelling case for 
neurological research. While we have a plethora of fictions in our generation that center 
planted memory (films such as Inception or the TV series Doll House, e.g.), we have 
yet to develop a scientific system of replacing memories. Setting aside its frightening 
aspects, altering traumatic memories with some pleasant memories has the potential 
of enhancing the quality of our life, and it is worth exploring how tantras have explored 
this possibility.
Anyone familiar with sequential Krama Śākta practices6 knows that tantric practices 
are not about holding on to one image on face value: These practices demand a sys­
temic progression in retention from simple to complex imagery. The practice, then, is 
more about retention and not about reserving the content to only a specific object; it 
is not about what to retain, but more about how to retain. This implies that visualiza­
tion practices cultivate new skills of remembering that also allow the subjects to filter, 
replace, and consciously bind different memories as desired. If we read the practice of 
retention in light of attention practices and engage cognitive studies of attention and 
memory, we learn further that closer attention gives intensity to experiences, that 
experiences have their depth, and intense experiences are woven into deeper fabric of 
our being, shaping our episodic memory and bodily response. From the tantric perspec­
tive, attention is similarly an acquired skill, and one can expand its capacity through a 
sustained visualization practice, as is the capacity or content of remembering.
This is not just about retaining information that requires attention, as it is evident 
that even the act of recall is actively infused with the act of focus on something while 
at the cost of filtering some other events or objects. This is what makes it possible to 
remember specific events or objects from the past (Kuhl and Chun 2014). Basically, 
even remembering is infused with the act of attention, and what we attend to during 
the mode of recall is brought to the fore with vivacity and force, while unattended con­
tent is suppressed, even when temporally or spatially interlinked. In essence, the act of 
remembering is also the act of generating a new incarnation, making something new, 
modifying not only past events but also the subject’s relation with the situation. This 
is about freedom from “memory, I hate you,”7 and about “I make my own memories.” 
Tantric visualizations are dedicated practices to enhance positive experience and repress 
and reject negative memories. These visualization practices are meant to constitute new 
pathways for brain activities. In order to understand the complex mechanism that is in 
play during or after the course of meditation, we need a collaboration with cognitive

--- PAGE 765 ---
740      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
and neuroscientists to determine the scope of such practices. By all accounts, tantric 
sādhanā or practice rests on our ability to create new structures, and it is worth saying 
in this context that the memories cultivated through these practices are overall pleasant. 
In a voluntary formation and organization of memory, visualized objects such as a man­
dala or a mantra function as mnemonic devices, assisting the subjects in remembering 
specific situations or events or conceptual objects. The core of these visualizations is to 
infuse attention and memory, as the practice is not about the content but about the ca­
pacity to attend or recall. This will be clear with a simple example of the course of mantra 
repetition. First, the subject memorizes the mantric sentence. He then uses beads to re­
peat the same mantra, for hundreds to several thousand times each day. And then he 
uses the fifty Sanskrit phonemes as the beads, mentally inserting a new syllable with 
each repetition. And when this practice comes to maturity, the aspirant learns to insert 
three syllables that in themselves are progressively revolving, such as “a-​kā-​ī,” “a-​khā-​ī,” 
and the like. And at this stage, subjects also learn to insert different deity names with 
each revolving set of phonemes. If the repetition of mantra is automated, the attentive 
gaze on phonemes as they progress makes practice complex and demands a total fusion 
of the faculty of memory with that of attention. These practices also push the boundary 
of what can be retained within the capacity of short-​term memory.
The underlying strategy of visualization practices is thus to actively educate our mind-​
body in all tasks of memory: It trains subjects what and how to “encode” the desired in­
formation from among its chaotic flow; it seeks to maximize the potential of retaining 
essential information for long-​term availability, ultimately archiving essential informa­
tion. But more than these, memory allows us to retain our self-​identity and relate us 
to our world of things and other subjects, helps us regulate emotion, and motivates us 
for future action (Alea and Bluck 2003). When reflecting on the above roles given to 
memory, what remains “essential” is not what the mind reflexively selects but what the 
subject educates the mind to determine as essential. Finally, it provides subjects with a 
bigger role in determining where to focus in a recall and how to organize the recalled 
pieces of information within the purview of a given teleology. And this active encoding, 
organization, and retrieval rests on a reconstitution of space and time. Tantric visu­
alization in a sense is therefore a process of creating a mental space and constituting 
mental objects within the limits of mental time. These reorganizations of time and space 
broadly follow the principle that time is structured vertically, with the bottom layers in 
the imagery representing shorter cycles and the higher layers, longer. And the organi­
zation of space follows the principle that the center in a mandala is where the subject is 
seated and its external horizons are the external limits of conceived space (Timalsina 
2015a, 73–​112). Just like Deleuze (1989, 81) came up with “crystal image” for imagining 
time, the mandala becomes a visual image in order to conceptualize time in tantras, and 
in the similar vein of Bergsonian time,8 tantrics constitute the past not after it once was 
present but at the same time. Every point in a mandala depicts both the past and present 
instants, as if the same instant was splitting into two. Borrowing one more category from 
Deleuze, we can also explain that tantric visualization of time and space is a journey 
through the virtual that is nonetheless real; as for tantric practitioners, the reality of an

--- PAGE 766 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      741
 
entity is determined primarily on not only its efficacy, but also the basis of it being given 
to consciousness as real. This helps organize the mythical events that are woven in the 
loop of time that fail to be chronologically organized. Things remembered as relating 
to the past, a chronological structuring of past events, and the events that we recalled 
as specifically linked with specific locales do not therefore rest on actual time, and this 
does not mean that their virtual presence makes them somewhat unreal. Time and 
space constituted in a mandala are the ways that time and space can be imagined and 
do not need to correspond to what we call actual. On the other hand, our corporeality is 
grounded on the sense of space and time that we regularly call real. This, however, is not 
the case that our limits to reshaping mental space and reorganizing temporal structure 
are biologically restricted—​at least tantras claim that this is not the case.
Primary cognitive processes in organizing events as temporal are the concepts of suc­
cession and simultaneity (Block 1990). We organize events in our memory as either hap­
pening one after another or as simultaneous. Tantras engage with memory by reverse 
engineering these mechanisms: By means of visualization practices, the practitioner 
exercises the freedom to choose the organization of succession and simultaneity. What 
seems to be a meticulously observed ritual order becomes arbitrary when we confront 
higher stages of practices: The succession from center to periphery identified as the 
order of creation (sṛṣṭi-​krama) now reverses, and we follow the reverse order, from the 
periphery to the center, the order of dissolution (saṃhāra-​krama). And even this new 
order shifts when the texts prescribe fivefold orders of succession. While retaining the 
sequence, meaning becomes less and less primary, and subjects can shift these orders so 
that the ritual of visualization does not become a routine act. In all accounts, there are 
some entities given as simultaneous, whereas others are successive. But the focus here 
is on infusing memory and attention, rather than simply recalling things. At this point 
of the conversation, cognitive research demonstrated that our experience of temporal 
depth and the sense of duration rests on both attention and memory (Zakay and Block 
1997). Deeper experiences endure over time, and when we recall, they shimmer with 
higher intensity than some less potent experiences. These experiences not only capture 
temporal extension but also retain the sense of depth. From the tantric perspective, even 
this cognitive faculty can be trained, enabling subjects to have deeper and more mean­
ingful experiences. Visualization practices demand a meticulous observation of the 
passing instants, with repetition required at certain intervals or with a shift of phonemes 
in accordance with the temporal gaps. These repetitions aim to cultivate a broader sense 
of felt time, the way time is experienced. Time consciousness is often conflated with 
space consciousness, where space and spatial metaphors9 become the placeholders 
for communicating time experience. Here, temporal markers are imagined as a con­
tainer, and the reality is mapped by eons of this spatialized notion of memory and time. 
Tantric visualization exploits these aspects, primarily in a bottom-​up model of image 
visualization, considering different strata with each having a different temporal order. 
Particularly noteworthy in this regard is the Guhyakālī visualization (Timalsina 2015a, 
73–​112). Her image, as well as her mandalic representation, aspires to integrate different 
divinities within a single mandala, and so invoking Kālī becomes very complex. Even

--- PAGE 767 ---
742      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
the most common visualization is overwhelmingly staggering, with the deity having ten 
heads and fifty-​four arms, with layered seats of divinities constituting her shrine. For 
instance, the deity Kṛṣṇa is always invoked with a discus, whereas Rāma is popularly 
depicted with his bow. In the visualization of Guhyakālī, she carries both gestures and 
many more. In order to integrate fifty-​four deities into a single deity image of Guhyakālī, 
all independent meanings are present, displayed and commingled as her powers. 
Basically, even when these practices retain their originality and independence, tantric 
texts and practices constantly seek a deeper understanding for such complex images.
While memory processes underlie our chronological sense of the past (Friedman 
2001), the organization is not entirely objective, and imagination, yet another cognitive 
faculty, plays a crucial role in the organizational process. Research on self-​knowledge 
helps us bind both memory and imagination, as they both play roles in shaping self-​
experience. If cognitive research considers the self as an organizing construct (Leary and 
Tangney 2014) or the self as a psychosocial processing system (Morf and Mischel 2014), 
tantras seek to analyze and deconstruct phenomenal self-​identity, assuming a tran­
scendental self within which all constructed identities are subsumed. In other words, 
tantric metaphysics rests on a twofold subjectivity where the embodied subject is culti­
vated and modified by the transcendent subject.10 It is not the case that the transcendent 
self is changeless. Nevertheless, it is seen as if changeless in relation to the everyday ego 
that is exposed to the worldly affairs and is subject to change and suffering (saṃsāra) 
as a result of its engagement with positive and negative experiences. If the premise of 
tantras is that this subject can be cultivated and modified and that tantric practices are 
meant to cultivate the anticipated sense of subjectivity, this process cannot be evaluated 
without engaging tantric practitioners, cognitive scientists and neurologists, and tan­
tric philosophers. While behavioral sciences stress the embodied ego, tantric practices 
underscore the primacy of base consciousness that transcends phenomenal subjectivity 
and makes the case for active engineering of the phenomenal self that, as a consequence, 
reorganizes the sense of the other. Since these processes of memory editing and organi­
zation rely mainly on the faculty of the imagination, it is contextual to address the ways 
that imagination plays a role in tantric visualization practices.
Imagination
From the cognitive perspective, imagination is linked mainly with the ability to form 
and manipulate mental representations in the total or partial absence of corresponding 
stimuli, visual or otherwise (for discussion, see Ganis and Schendan 2011). Rather than 
endorsing whether mental images that we play with are pictorial or analogue or whether 
they have semantic structure, tantric visualization seeks to exploit both the image-​like 
and speech-​like properties intrinsic to imagination, activating both domains with the 
aid of mantra speech and mandala image. Imagining here is not a passive formation 
of mental images but rather an active process of consciousness expressing one of its

--- PAGE 768 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      743
 
most intrinsic properties. Hayes, in this volume, addresses these concepts, analyzing 
selected examples to explain tantric metaphors. In all accounts, Kosslyn compared 
mental constructs to visual images, as both are embodied as spatially extended patterns 
of neural excitation caused either with or without sensory input, first in the case of visual 
experience, or the lack thereof, and secondarily in the case of imagination (Kosslyn 1981, 
1983, 1994). In order to avoid the dichotomy of internal and external, Pylyshyn (1973, 
1981, 2003) argued that mental imagery is a form of description. These insights not 
only help us locate the classical debate on mental imagery in tantric literature, but also 
these insights from visualization practices further aid in cultivating a theory of mental 
images and the imagination. For starters, tantras engage the visual domain of language 
(Timalsina 2015a, 16–​20) and break down imagery into speech by establishing corre­
spondence between form versus speech. Similar to the case of attention and memory, 
tantras are more concerned with “how” rather than what for they aspire to cultivate the 
faculty of imagination, rather than simply describe what it is.
Imagination makes things whole, and imagining makes life complete. Epistemically, 
our judgmental consciousness infuses horizons that include memory and fantasy, 
constituting an object of consciousness. Teleologically, our real life is composed of both 
actual events and what is fantasized; lived virtually, we can select one possibility among 
endless counterfactual alternatives.11 And the self we believe ourselves to be is a narra­
tive we tell to ourselves. We live in two different narratives: one a personal narrative and 
another that seeks its space in our collective narrative (Reese 2013). Without imagina­
tion, we cannot turn events that occur in actual time and space into a coherent narrative. 
Both the personal and collective narratives integrate memories from the past, and while 
doing so, they consciously or subconsciously blend the fantastic, when discrete facts are 
woven to make a meaningful narrative. Even without our conscious effort, imagination 
fills the lacunae, as in a gestalt, and horizons not immediately given to direct apprehen­
sion are infused from memory, or are part of pure imagination, with the potency to con­
stitute the whole. This approach provides a wider space for imagination, even though it 
is historically viewed with suspicion because of its unreliability. The more that psycho­
logical and cognitive studies on imagination emerge, the more we recognize the cen­
trality of imagination in human cognitive life.
One of the most common features of tantric practices is its play with visual images. 
Any tantric ritual begins with visualization (dhyāna), where an image of the deity is 
presented to the fore of the mind. Different attire and ornaments are closely seen in the 
course of visualization, as are the hands and weapons, as well as the seat of the deity and 
the background wherein the deity image is placed, such as Mount Kailash, a cremation 
ground, or a sacred grove. As the practice intensifies, the image is brought to life, and 
the ritual visualization directed to the image is the same as the host attending to a guest 
by welcoming, offering food, and bidding farewell. I have argued elsewhere (Timalsina 
2020b) that these tantric visualizations have tremendous similarities with everyday im­
agination, but with some differences. Just like in everyday imagination, the practitioner 
plays with images in visualization practices; the visualized object is given primarily a 
visual or auditory sensory presence; the images are also presented as imagined or as

--- PAGE 769 ---
744      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
real while in the mode of imagination; and the imagination can be guided following 
a text, ritual instruction, or spontaneous imagination. These visualization practices 
can be synthetic, borrowing inputs from multiple sources, or they can involve episodic 
content, engaging the subject’s personal life account as part of the object of visualiza­
tion. These practices stretch the faculty of imagination to its outer limits. The manuals 
of Abhinavagupta (ca. 950–​1016 CE) and Maheśvarānanda (thirteenth century), for ex­
ample, demonstrate a layered imagination with hierarchical structure, where the very 
initial act of imagination becomes the platform for another, making the act of imagina­
tion primary to actual external rituals (Timalsina 2020b, 784–​789).
A valid question arises: Is there any practical application of these ritual fantasies in 
our everyday life? Recent studies also revealed that imagination can play a crucial role 
in coping with chronic illness (Clark 2013), for healthy imagination is a requirement to 
live a normal life. Ironically, new psychological studies have introduced a category, “im­
agination disorder” (Crespi 2020), for too little or too much imagination. This has been 
discussed above—​that imagination is essential to establishing a narrative, and we now 
know that narratives can be tools to psychotherapy (Steele 2013). Most importantly, our 
personal identity rests on imagination, as it is by means of imagination that we find our 
personal identity, similar to but still distinct from other social agents. If bereft of the fac­
ulty of imagination, we would not be able to recognize other subjects as subjects like us, 
capable of being happy or feeling pain. Most importantly, our sense of personal identity, 
the sense of temporal continuity, cannot be solely constituted if bereft of imagination. 
In this regard, imagination is central to the recognitive mode of consciousness that not 
only creates the narrative self but also gives the sense of the duration of the lived time 
(Moore and Barresi 2013).
Tantras complement studies of the imagination in two essential ways: One, its epis­
temology provides a philosophical background for engaging imagination in everyday 
modes of consciousness, and two, the manuals for visualization practices and the ex­
alted experience of enhanced practitioners provide subjective accounts for the phe­
nomenology of imagination. The theory of recognition (pratyabhijñā) provides the 
groundwork for the ways imagination is infused in both direct apprehension and from 
memory, making it possible for the integral mode of consciousness in recognition to re­
main veridical consciousness, even while integrating not only memory but also fantasy 
in constructing the judgmental mode of consciousness. But tantra is more than a mere 
philosophical reflection, as its central focus is application. Both through philosoph­
ical reflection and visualization practices, tantra encourages the aspirants to transform 
both their subjective and objective affirmations: Subjectively, individuals are all pow­
erful and absolutely free, and objectively, the world of everyday experience is joyous, 
and our being in the world is to savor the lived moments. Grounded on these philo­
sophical maxims, tantric manuals teach aspirants to cultivate objects of imagination. 
One needs to note that these visualizations are not episodes of random daydreaming: 
These rely on a system of meticulous construction of the object of imagination, sim­
ilar to the way Jorge Louis Borges (1899–​1986 CE) captured imagination in his story, 
The Circular Ruins. Any tantric visualization, be it Śrīyantra, Guhyakāli, Kālacakra,

--- PAGE 770 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      745
 
or Cakrasaṃvara practices, demands that imagination lays the spatiotemporal foun­
dation on which subjects layer multiple structures, both geometric shapes and deity 
images, pushing the boundary of what can be imagined. During the mode of cultiva­
tion, these visualizations progress gradually, but on completion, an aspirant is trained 
to have a sudden and simultaneous gaze of all the objects within the field of attention. 
Yet again, what is evident is the centrality of attention during the mode of imagination. 
The mental journey through the landscape of mandala does not just demand viewing 
hundreds of deities, with each deity image having a lengthy description, with multiple 
hands, and carrying different weapons, since the practices do not stop there. The central 
deity image becomes progressively more complex, and the same deity with four arms 
and a single head is visualized in advanced stages with hundreds or thousands of arms 
and heads. But what is imagined in the process occurs not only through images but also 
mantric speech, which remains central to these visualization processes, and mantras act 
as active devices in encapsulating all that ought to be remembered during the course 
of recitation. The meaning of mantra here is not a linear sign reference-​based system, 
for mantras act as mnemonic devices to summon complex entities. At the same time, 
mantras act as the speech act, so when the subject recites the visualization verses, the 
act of visualization simultaneously occurs. Therefore, the medieval Śākta texts such as 
Yoginīhṛdaya outline a sixfold meaning of mantras (Timalsina 2005). Even when we en­
counter complexity in these manuals, which makes us wonder whether these are hu­
manly possible, the manuals are meticulous on starting from the simplest of the forms 
and progressively adding aspects and nuances to give rise to the complex structure.
Every step of tantric visualization is simultaneously suggesting new cosmologies 
while reconfiguring the subject’s place in the new paradigm. While directed toward 
altering the human ego, these practices transform the modes of the subject’s engage­
ment in society. As a consequence, it serves to alter the way the subject recognizes 
his or her own being in the world: The practice aims to uplift the subject’s assessment 
of the world of beings and things and make everyday experience as integral to the 
realized modes of experience. The ways fantasy and memory are integrated in visual­
ization practices are vivid even in the most common invocations, where they take the 
term for visualization (bhāvanā, bhāvayet) as synonymous to remembering (smaret, 
smaraṇa). Strikingly, several experiments showed neural and cognitive similarities in 
remembering the past, imagining or simulating the future, or playing with fantasies 
(Tulving 1985; Klein, Loftus, and Kihlstrom 2002). Tantras therefore not only ex­
plore the scope of imagination but also instruct how to imagine or draw the limits 
of positive imagination. One of the objectives of tantric practices is to cultivate ex­
otic mystical experiences. The objective of visualization in particular is supposedly 
to give an aspirant a direct encountering with the deity being visualized. Oriented 
toward actualizing this goal, tantric practice of imagination seeks to train subjects 
to be able to explore all the counterfactual possibilities necessary for practical judg­
ment. While the higher goal in tantras is oriented toward self-​realization, there are 
immediate applications that need to be further explored. Do these exercises have an 
application in training subjects for complex imagination, like in imagining a complex

--- PAGE 771 ---
746      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
building or imagining the interaction of subparticle structures in the dynamic field? 
We need empirical and neurological research to make any such claim toward this 
direction. What we can say theoretically is that learning to take control over the 
faculty of imagination is synonymous to bestowing power over self-​identity and 
self-​relatedness, having the ability to reshape memories and being able to edit the 
memories that are traumatic or undesirable. These arguments are in agreement with 
what Abraham (2020, 812) outlined: “Regardless of how transitory or enduring the 
imaginings, they can evoke emotional responses, action tendencies, and conceptual 
insights, which are instantiated in the present, in the here and the now.”
It is worth wondering if there is any practical application to these esoteric practices. 
New research demonstrated that some individuals have no experience of imagery at 
all, that their mind is completely blank of images: aphantasia (Pearson 2020). This lack 
of the capacity of imagination has a direct consequence to our mental health. Studies 
revealed that imagery can play a crucial role in many psychological and neurological 
disorders (Pearson et al., 2015). Additional findings showed that visual imagery is found 
to function as a weak form of visual experience, and that visual imagery can have a facil­
itative effect on visual experience (Pearson 2020). These examples are not meant to sug­
gest that the objective of tantric visualization is restricted to these goals. These exercises 
are more focused on gaining freedom over the faculty of imagination, about not only 
being able to imagine complex objects but also refining the objects of imagination or 
gaining control over what comes to occupy the space of our imagining mind. If an as­
pirant learns to create and maintain the landscape of his imagination, he also maintains 
his freedom to dissolve his fantasy world at will and come back to everyday life. If visu­
alization practices have the potential to make an educated imagination, it likewise can 
combat hyperphantasia. From the tantric perspective, to not have the capacity to build 
images, living with aphantasia with no ability of constituting an image-​like representa­
tion of reality (Zeman 2020) is a result of not awakening the dormant faculty of imag­
ination. In all accounts, tantras maintain that just like the skill of language, we need to 
learn the skill of imagination.
Conclusion
From within the parameters of cognitive research, we now have a better under­
standing of attention, memory, imagination, and the ways these faculties of con­
sciousness interact with each other. Tantric visualization practices suggest that these 
meticulous protocols in training our mind to be more attentive and better able to attend 
to what is more meaningful can also train the faculties of memory and imagination for 
maximizing the capacity of human consciousness. The above theoretical arguments are 
sufficient to emphasize that serious cognitive and neurological research is the need of 
the hour, as these practices appear to have therapeutic applications. If the field of tantric 
studies and in particular tantric practices can benefit by allowing objective evaluation

--- PAGE 772 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      747
 
of these practices, cognitive science and cognitive therapy also benefit by learning how 
these practices cultivate the faculties of attention, memory, and imagination, with an 
underlying assumption that these cognitive faculties are not predetermined or biolog­
ically fixed but are subject to cultural construction. What I find inspirational is, when 
reading many of the thought experiments for objective evaluation in cognitive research, 
I can see several parallels with the tantric visualization practices. The only difference is 
that tantric manuals do not present what is there but teach what can be there. In other 
words, if cognitive science can teach us about the mechanisms behind the processes in­
volved in attention, memory, or imagination, tantric visualization practices can give us a 
way to expand and structure these faculties.
Notes
	1.	 I would have never written this chapter if Glen Hayes had not encouraged me to read cogni­
tive science materials a decade ago.
	2.	 Tantric texts broadly distinguish bīja mantras or the seed syllables such as aiṃ, hrīṃ, and so 
on, which are considered the primary basis for the designated deity. For instance, aiṃ relates 
to the goddess of speech, Sarasvatī, or śrīṃ for Lakṭṭṣmī, or Hūṃ for the ferocious deities 
such as Bhairava or Kālī. Kūṭas, on the other hand, have more compression. Khphreṃ, for 
example, is the seed mantra for Kālī. These kūṭas are sometimes made as an acronym for the 
cluster of deities, for example, ḍa-​ra-​la-​ka-​sa-​ha-​yūṃ stands as a single kūṭa related to the 
Yoginīs: Ḍākiṇi, Rākiṇī, Lākinī, Kākinī, Śākinī, Hākinī, and Yākinī.
	3.	 One of the most common courses of tantric practice is puraścaraṇa, the acts dedicatedly 
performed in front of the deity. A general puraścaraṇa, for example of a nine-​letter mantra, 
equals a nine hundred thousand times repetition of the mantra, and accordingly, ninety 
thousand libations into fire, nine thousand times offerings of water while reciting the 
mantra, the act of washing the mantra, a ritual performance of writing the mantra on leaves 
and offering them into the stream of water, and finally giving donations or feeding nine 
Brahmin priests.
	4.	 This visualization of the goddess is available in the last page of the Durgāsaptaśatī, in the 
Gorakhpur 2021 publication.
	5.	 Not just the classical tantras, even tantras in the vernacular have maintained the centrality 
of smaraṇa practices. Hayes (2012), for example, detailed its application in the Gauḍīya 
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā practices.
	6.	 Let me offer two examples from most widely performed Śākta tantric rituals. First, from 
the Devīmāhātmya: The book rests on three primary goddesses and expands on some 
canonized goddesses within the rubric of eight Mātṛkās (mothers) and others, such as 
Śivadūtī or Cāmuṇḍā, who are epitomized in the ritual practices during the nine nights 
(navarātra) where nine different forms of Durgā are successively worshipped. Second, 
the practice of Tripurasundarī: The goddess is worshipped in the visual diagram of the 
Śrī Yantra, with over one hundred associate deities completing the successive wheel. The 
goddess herself emanates into sixteen deities, confirming the sixteenfold order of succes­
sion. These are just two examples of how Śāktism functions in practice, always in a group of 
deities and always in successive order.
	7.	 Deleuze and Guattari (1991, 168) cited Désormière for the statement: “Memory, I hate you.”

--- PAGE 773 ---
748      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
	 8.	 I am referring to the concept of duree, or duration, in contrast to the time that we measure. 
The measured time is not the real time for Bergson, as the moment we attempt to measure 
a moment, it is gone. Duration as such, for Bergson, is incomplete and continuously 
growing as its states are intermingling, and therefore they lack any clear beginning or 
ending. For further conversation, see Lawlor and Moulard-​Leonard 2022.
	 9.	 We need a bigger platform for addressing such technical aspects. For grounding metaphor 
theory in light of cognitive neuroscientists, consult works such as Turner 2014.
	10.	 Trika metaphysics makes the issue of subjectivity complex, integrating seven stages of 
subjectivity. The phenomenal subject or the daily ego that is encountered in ahaṃkāra, 
the transmigrating subject that maintains the embodied ego, and the absolute subjec­
tivity that transcends all forms of manifest subjectivity cannot be glossed in a single con­
cept of subjectivity. For discussion of this issue, see Timalsina 2020a, 767–​789.
	11.	 For the analysis of metaphors in the cluster of the counterfactuals, see Mark Turner 2011.
References
Abraham, Anna. 2020. “The Force of the Imagination.” In The Cambridge Handbook of the 
Imagination, edited by Anna Abraham, 811–​814. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Alea, Nicole, and Susan Bluck. 2003. “Why Are You Telling Me That: A Conceptual Model of 
the Social Function of Autobiographical Memory.” Memory 11: 165–​178.
Block, R. A. 1990. “Models of Psychological Time.” In Cognitive Models of Psychological Time, 
edited by R. A. Block, 1–​35. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Carrasco, Marisa. 2014. “Spatial Covert Attention: Perceptual Modulation.” In The Oxford 
Handbook of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 183–​230. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Cavanagh, Patrick, Lorella Battelli, and Alex O. Holcombe. 2014. “Dynamic Attention.” In The 
Oxford Handbook of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 652–​675. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Clark, Cindy Dell. 2013. “Imagination and Coping with Chronic Illness.” In The Oxford 
Handbook of the Development of Imagination, edited by Marjorie Taylor, 550–​560. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Crespi, Bernard. 2020. “The Psychiatry of Imagination.” In The Cambridge Handbook of 
the Imagination, edited by Anna Abraham, 760–​782. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1989. Cinema 2: The Time Image. Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Robert Galeta. 
London: Athlone.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. 1991. What Is Philosophy? Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and 
Graham Burchell. New York: Columbia University Press.
Deubel, Heiner. 2014. “Attention and Action.” In The Oxford Handbook of Attention, edited by 
Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 865–​889. New York: Oxford University Press.
Durgāsaptaśatī. Mūlabhāgapāṭhavidhisahitā. 2021. Gorakhpur, India: Gita Press.
Eimer, Martin. 2014. “The Time Course of Spatial Attention: Insights from Event-​Related 
Brain Potentials.” In The Oxford Handbook of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna 
C. Nobre, 289–​317. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fauconnier, Gilles, and Mark Turner. 2002. The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the 
Mind’s Hidden Complexities. New York: Basic.

--- PAGE 774 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      749
 
Freud, Sigmond. 1961 (1920) Beyond the Pleasure Principle. Trans. James Strachey. New York: 
Liveright Publishing Corporation.
Friedman, William J. 2001. “Memory Processes Underlying Human’s Chronological Sense of 
the Past.” In Time and Memory: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology, edited by Christoph 
Hoerl and Teresa McCormack, 139–​167. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ganis, G., and H. E. Schendan. 2011. “Visual Imagery.” Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews: Cognitive Science, 2, no. 3: 239–​252.
Hayes, Glen. 2012. “Conceptual Blending Theory, ‘reverse amnesia,’ and the study of Tantra.” 
Journal of Hindu Studies, 5, no. 2: 193–​209.
Hayes, Glen. 2014. “Possible selves, body schemas, and Sādhana: Using cognitive science and 
neuroscience in the study of Medieval Vaiṭṭṇava Sahajiyā Hindu Tantric texts. Religions, 5, 
no. 3: 684–​699. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​5030​684.
Hayes, Glen. 2016. “Conceptual Blending and Religion.” In Religion: Mental Religion, edited by 
Niki Kasumi Clements, 163–​178. New York: Macmillan.
James, William. 1890. The Principles of Psychology. New York: Holt.
Klein, S. B., J. Loftus, and J. F. Kihlstrom. 2002. “Memory and Temporal Experiences: The 
Effects of Episodic Memory Loss on an Amnesic Patient’s Ability to Remember the Past and 
Imagine the Future.” Social Cognition, 20: 353–​379.
Kosslyn, Stephan. 1981. “The Medium and the Message in Mental Imagery: A Theory,” 
Psychological Review, 88, no. 1: 46–​66.
Kosslyn, Stephan. 1983. Ghosts in the Mind’s Machine: Creating and Using Images in the Brain. 
New York: Norton.
Kosslyn, Stephan. 1994 [1980]. Image and Mind: The Resolution of the Imagery Debate. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kuhl, Brice A., and Marvin M. Chun. 2014. “Memory and Attention.” In The Oxford Handbook 
of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 806–​837. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Lavie, Nilli, and Polly Dalton. 2014. “Load Theory of Attention and Cognitive Control.” In The 
Oxford Handbook of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 56–​75. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Lawlor, Leonard, and Valentine Moulard-​Leonard. (Winter 2022 Edition). “Henri Bergson.” 
In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by Edward N. Zalta & Uri Nodelman. 
https://​plato.stanf​ord.edu/​archi​ves/​win2​022/​entr​ies/​berg​son/​.
Leary, Mark R., and June Price Tangney. 2014. “The Self as an Organizing Construct in the 
Behavioral and Social Sciences.” In Handbook of Self and Identity, edited by Mark R. Leary 
and June Price Tangney, 1–​20. New York: Guilford Press.
Moore, Chris, and John Barresi. 2013. “Imagination and the Self.” In The Oxford Handbook 
of the Development of Imagination, edited by Marjorie Taylor, 288–​302. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Morf, Carolyn C., and Walter Mischel. 2014. “The Self as a Psycho-​Social Dynamic Processing 
System: Toward a Converging Science of Selfhood.” In Handbook of Self and Identity, edited 
by Mark R. Leary and June Price Tangney, 21–​49. New York: Guilford Press.
Nobre, Anna C., and M. Marsel Mesulam. 2014. “Large-​Scale Networks for Attentional Biases.” 
In The Oxford Handbook of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 105–​151. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Pañcadaśī of Vidyāraṇya. 2021. English Translation with notes by Swami Swahananda. Chennai, 
India: Sri Ramakrishna Math.

--- PAGE 775 ---
750      Sthaneshwar Timalsina
 
Pearson, Joel. 2020. “Visual Imagination.” In The Cambridge Handbook of the Imagination, ed­
ited by Anna Abraham, 175–​186. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pearson, J., T. Naselaris, E. A. Holmes, and S. M. Kosslyn. 2015. “Mental Imagery: Functional 
Mechanisms and Clinical Applications.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 19, no. 10: 590–​602.
Posner, M. I. 1980. “Orienting Attention: The Seventh Sir Frederic Bartlett Lecture.” 
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32: 3–​25.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. 1973. What the Mind’s Eye Tells the Mind’s Brain: A Critique of Mental Imagery. 
Psychoilogical Bulletin, 80(1) 1–​24.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. 1981. The imagery debate: Analogue media versus tacit knowledge. 
Psychological Review, 88: 16–​45.
Pylyshyn, Z. W., Leonard, C. 2003. Inhibition of nontargets during multiple object tracking 
(MOT). Journal of Vision, 3: 585a.
Reese, Elaine. 2013. “Culture, Narrative, and Imagination.” In The Oxford Handbook of 
the Development of Imagination, edited by Marjorie Taylor, 196–​211. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Scolari, Miranda, Edward F. Ester, and John T. Serences. 2014. “Feature-​and Object-​
Based Attentional Modulation in the Human Visual System.” In The Oxford Handbook 
of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 573–​600. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Soto, David, and Glyn W. Humphreys. 2014. “Working Memory Biases in Human Vision.” In 
The Oxford Handbook of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 753–​776. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Spence, Charles. 2014. “Orienting Attention: A Crossmodal Perspective.” In The Oxford 
Handbook of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 446–​471. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Steele, Miriam. 2013. “Telling Stories: Accessing Narrative Imagination for Use in Assessment 
with Clinical and Typical Populations.” In The Oxford Handbook of the Development of 
Imagination, edited by Marjorie Taylor, 539–​549. New York: Oxford University Press.
Theeuwes, Jan. 2014. “Spatial Orienting and Attentional Capture.” In The Oxford Handbook 
of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 231–​252. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2005. “Meditating Mantras: Meaning and Visualization in Tantric 
Literature.” In Theory and Practice of Yoga: Essays in Honour of Gerard James Larson, edited 
by Knut Axel Jacobsen, 213–​236. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2011. “Materializing Space and Time in Tantric Images.” 
Zeitschrift für Indologie und Südasienstudien. 28: 145–​182.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2012. “Reconstructing the Tantric Body: Elements of 
the Symbolism of Body in the Monistic Kaula and Trika Tantric Traditions.” 
International Journal of Hindu Studies, 16, no. 1:57–​91.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2015a. Language of Images: Visualization and Meaning in Tantras. 
New York: Peter Lang.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2015b. Tantric Visual Culture: A Cognitive Approach. New York: 
Routledge.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2016. “A Cognitive Approach to Tantric Language.” Religions. 7, no. 
12:139. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​7120​139
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2020a. “Aham, Subjectivity, and the Ego: Engaging the Philosophy of 
Abhinavagupta.” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 48: 767–​789.

--- PAGE 776 ---
Attention, Memory, and the Imagination      751
 
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2020b. “Meditation and Imagination.” In The Cambridge Handbook of 
the Imagination, edited by Anna Abraham, 783–​795. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Treisman, A. M., and G. Gelade. 1980. “A Feature Integration Theory of Attention.” 
Cognitive Psychology, 12: 97–​136.
Treisman, A. M. 1996. “The Binding Problem.” Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 6: 171–​178.
Tulving, E. 1985. “Memory and Consciousness.” Canadian Psychologist, 26: 1–​12.
Turner, Mark. 2011. “Counterfactual Bends as Instruments of Research in the Social and 
Behavioral Science.” In Counterfactual Thought Experiments in World Politics, edited by 
Philip Tetlock and Aaron Belkin, 291–​295. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Turner, Mark. 2014. The Origin of Ideas: Blending, Creativity, and the Human Spark. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Wolfe, Jeremy M. 2014. “Approaches to Visual Search: Feature Integration Theory and Guided 
Search.” In The Oxford Handbook of Attention, edited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 
11–​55. New York: Oxford University Press.
Yu, Angela J. 2014. “Bayesian Models of Attention.” In The Oxford Handbook of Attention, ed­
ited by Sabine Kastner and Anna C. Nobre, 1159–​1197. New York: Oxford University Press.
Zakay, D., and R. A. Block. 1997. “Temporal Cognition.” Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 6: 12–​16.
Zeman, Adam. 2020. “Aphantasia.” In The Cambridge Handbook of the Imagination, edited by 
Anna Abraham, 692–​710. New York: Cambridge University Press.

--- PAGE 777 ---


--- PAGE 778 ---
P a r t V I
LANGUAGE, 
LITERATURE, 
WORDS, AND 
METAPHOR

--- PAGE 779 ---


--- PAGE 780 ---
Chapter 30
Exploring Metaphors and 
Conceptual Blending in 
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Texts
Glen A. Hayes
Approaching the Study of 
the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās
The term “Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā” refers to a number of Hindu tantric lineages, which have 
often employed transgressive ritual practices, dating back to perhaps the mid-​sixteenth 
century in the region of greater Bengal in northeastern India (modern West Bengal, 
Assam, and Bangladesh).1 They combined antinomian tantric practices and complex or­
thodox Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava2 devotional traditions centered on the god Kṛṣna and his divine 
consort Rādhā. Developing in the religio-​cultural context of deltaic Bengal, an ancient 
center of tantrism, the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās incorporated an impressive range of beliefs and 
practices from earlier Śaiva, Śākta, and Nāth traditions. They also adapted the aesthetic 
categories and ritual practices of traditional Indian aesthetics (rasa-​śāstra; see Ramanujan 
and Gerow 1974) as interpreted by Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava intellectuals. Developing prima­
rily after the time of the renowned Bengali religious figure Kṛṣna Caitanya (ca. 1486–​1533 
ce), they have throughout their history practiced complex and esoteric forms of sādhana. 
These practices included adulterous ritual sexual intercourse, which has drawn the ire 
of orthodox Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.3 According to Sarbadhikary (2015), communities of 
modern-​day Sahajiyās continue to practice transgressive rituals, although their current 
texts do not typically refer to the earlier Sahajiyā texts of the seventeenth to nineteenth 
centuries. In contrast to the textual traditions of much of tantric tradition (especially in 
Śaiva and Śākta schools), there are virtually no surviving written commentaries on these 
earlier texts—​if indeed there ever were any.4 Instead, due to the highly esoteric and trans­
gressive nature of these teachings, commentary was probably provided orally by gurus.

--- PAGE 781 ---
756      Glen A. Hayes
 
This is unfortunate for modern historians as most of the remaining vernacular Bengali 
texts, which number in their hundreds, are typically written in an enigmatic style. They 
use an obscure terminology and code-​like language that conceals, but for initiates reveals, 
a fascinating cosmophysiology and ritual system. Translating these curious texts has been 
akin to solving a puzzle, as a conventional literal translation of the mostly uninflected lan­
guage is difficult to understand, and the lack of commentary on technical terms is most 
frustrating. Rather than consigning these intriguing texts to the proverbial dustbin of his­
tory, this has led me to a translation methodology that seeks to identify the underlying 
metaphorical structures as a way to better understand the texts. Engaging conceptual met­
aphor theory was followed by discerning the nuances and dynamics of metaphorical en­
tailment known as conceptual blending. This approach, combining conceptual metaphor 
and conceptual blending, has helped me to better understand the otherwise-​inaccessible 
sādhanas presented in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā texts.
This chapter explores the vivid metaphorical language and conceptual blending of 
a major Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā text: the Amṛtaratnāvalī (“The Necklace of Immortality,” 
henceforth AR), a treatise on the subtle body (dehatattva) by Mukunda-​deva, also 
known as Mukunda-​dāsa (ca. 1600 ce).5 The term dehatattva, which can be translated 
as “principles” (tattvas) of the “body” (deha), is also examined in a range of tantric 
traditions in Hayes, “Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems” (this volume). To 
give the reader a taste of how seemingly obscure the AR can be and to suggest the utility 
of a hermeneutic based on metaphor and blending, here is a typical passage describing a 
portion of the divine inner yogic body (deva-​deha):6
162.	 The Pond (sarovara) should be visualized as having a pleasing shape.
	
I will tell you about it, so please pay attention!
163.	 That Pond is beautifully adorned with precious gems (māṇika).
	
This eternal realm (nitya dhāma) is inlaid with jewels (ratna).
164.	 In four directions, the four landing-​stairs (ghāṭ) lead to the path of the village 
leader (sarddā).7
	
These landing-​stairs are enveloped by the scents of musk, vermillion, and 
sandalwood.
(AR, vv. 162–​164)8
The subtle body system of the Sahajiyās differs from the better-​known system of 
cakras and kuṇḍalinī typically found in Śaiva, Śākta, and Buddhist traditions (See 
Hayes, “Esoteric Physiology and Subtle Body Systems,” this volume.). Instead of a 
cosmophysiology based on the fiery ascent of energies and vital winds into a network 
of channels and a system of floral wheels, the Sahajiyā system of the AR incorporates 
imagery and symbolism from the surrounding topology of riverine and deltaic Bengal. 
It is thus a hydraulic process of fluids ascending a “crooked river” (bāṅkānadī) within 
the physical body, which flows upward “against the current” (sroter ujāna) into a system 
of stepped ponds (sarovara) with landing stairs (ghāṭ). These are not just naturally 
occurring small bodies of water; landing stairs with steps have been constructed on 
the banks of the pond (as found throughout Bengal). There is probably a clever play on

--- PAGE 782 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      757
 
words here, as the Bengali word ghāṭ, “landing stairs,” is a pun with ghaṭ, “a pot made 
of clay or metal,” which could refer to the organs of the body. Whether deliberate or 
not this pun connects riverine imagery with more traditional yogic imagery.9 As we 
will see in greater detail, the primary underlying metaphor for both Śaiva/​Śākta and 
Sahajiyā traditions is that the subtle body is a container. Drawing upon topographical, 
contextual, cultural, and vernacular imagery produces a quite complex metaphor. For 
the Sahajiyās the subtle body is a watery network of stepped ponds and curving rivers, 
distinct from the network of channels, tubes, and floral circles for Śaivas and Śāktas (on 
the intricacies of esoteric physiology in a range of tantric traditions, see Hayes, “Esoteric 
Physiology and Subtle Body Systems,” this volume). This exploration of the uses of pri­
mary and complex metaphors in the expressions of the subtle body continues below.
In their quest for bodily transformation, the Sahajiyās made use of a wide range of 
practices. These included techniques from Indian alchemy (rasāyana),10 which essen­
tially involved the ritual and magical manipulation of fluids, substances, and fire in 
order to achieve bodily immortality (on alchemy, see Sauthoff, this volume). Also, sim­
ilar to Nāth traditions, they adopted the “practice of reversal” (ulṭā sādhana), in which 
the practitioner attempts to reverse the phenomenal flow of creation and embodiment. 
Reversal uses yogic powers to ascend “upwards against the current” (sroter ujāna) of 
emanation back to the underlying cosmic unity of Sahaja—​the “together-​born” (saha-​
ja) or “innate” unitive cosmic state.11 They also adapted tantric ritual sexual intercourse 
(maithuna), collecting male semen (rasa, śukra, retas), and female vaginal secretions 
(rati). Thus, the Sahajiyā system of dehatattva, based on fluidic metaphors, also assumes 
scatological dimensions by involving the ritual ingestion of the male and female sexual 
fluids.12 But following “reversal practice,” these fluids are believed to be yogically with­
drawn into the male urethra, into the “crooked river,” and on “up” through the stepped 
ponds until the attainment of Sahaja at the upper reaches of the river. It recalls a system 
of locks on a river system, and Sahajiyā traditions employ imagery of boating.13
For the Sahajiyās, once drawn into the rivers and ponds, the sexual fluids become a 
generative cosmic substance called vastu, literally “stuff.”14 The entire expansive subtle 
body is generated (nirmāṇa) from this yogic substance. This also results in the practi­
tioner acquiring incredible yogic power (śakti), and achieving an intense spiritual state 
(mahābhāva). Later, this chapter explores a range of primary metaphors involving the 
container, conduits, substance, and entities. The analysis continues by considering com­
plex metaphors and conceptual blending theory.
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Appropriations of 
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism
As already noted, the Sahajiyās may broadly be considered an interaction of intricate 
transgressive tantric yoga with Vaiṣṇava bhakti devotionalism, resulting in a quite 
distinctive vernacular Bengali tantric tradition. Sahajiyās appropriate and modify

--- PAGE 783 ---
758      Glen A. Hayes
 
classical devotional interpretations of Kṛṣṇa, transforming him from a supreme being 
(as Bhagavān, the “Bounteous Lord,” very distinct from human beings) into the inner 
cosmic form (svarūpa) of every human male. Rādhā is transformed from the milkmaid 
consort and hlādini-​śakti (“bliss emanation”) of Kṛṣṇa into the svarūpa of every woman. 
For Sahajiyās, in other words, the goal is not to worship Kṛṣṇa or imitate Rādhā and 
the cowherd maidens (gopī) in a modified dualistic way as Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas do (di­
vine above human)15 but rather to become Kṛṣṇa or Rādhā themselves, in a monistic 
tantric manner (human and divine together). Sahajiyās also expressed these alternative 
notions of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā in regional vernacular Bengali metaphors, language, and 
verse. They embedded these narratives in specific Sahajiyā teaching lineages, shifting 
the figures of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā even further from the Sanskrit-​based and classical 
formulations into the local cultural and cognitive realities of Bengali men and women of 
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Dimock (1966) and Stewart (2010) have shown that narratives involving Kṛṣṇa and 
his erotic encounters with Rādhā would have provided useful tropes for late medieval 
Sahajiyā tantrics to adapt as they sought to express the need to reverse the phenom­
enal flow of creation—​engendered as the “play” of male and female powers—​“upwards 
against the current” (sroter ujāna) back to the unitive state of Sahaja. The popular no­
tion of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava leader Kṛṣṇa Caitanya as himself the dual incarnation of 
both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, developed by Kṛṣṇa-​dāsa Kavirāja (ca. 1615 ce) in his renowned 
hagiography Caitanya-​caritāmṛta, was also taken up by the Sahajiyās.16 This was subse­
quently appropriated to their own belief that all Sahajiyās must themselves realize male 
and female powers within their own physical bodies. The metaphorical language and 
conceptual integration networks found in Sahajiyā texts are complex not only because 
they blend dualistic bhakti and monistic tantra but also because they orchestrate highly 
complex cosmophysiologies, ontologies, and soteriologies. The power of conceptual in­
tegration and metaphorical language facilitates the central goals of Sahajiyā sādhana.
Sādhana Is a Journey: Conceptual 
Metaphors and Cognitive Domains
Having briefly introduced the importance of metaphorical language and concepts in 
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā texts, we now more fully explore conceptual metaphor theory. The 
English word metaphor has its roots in the Latin metaphora, “carrying over,” and extends 
further back to the Greek μεταφορά (metaphorá), also glossed as “carrying over,” 
“moving across,” and “transferring.”17 Over many centuries, the word “metaphor” has 
acquired a range of rich and complex meanings, as well as myriad usages in systems of 
rhetoric, theology, philosophy, and literature.18 However, the modern sense of concep­
tual metaphor was first fully presented by linguist George Lakoff and philosopher Mark 
Johnson in Metaphors We Live By (1980) and later works19 and goes much deeper than 
earlier usages. Cognitive linguists and neuroscientists argue that the human brain and

--- PAGE 784 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      759
 
mind organize perceptions, cognitions, language, and behaviors using a vast web of cog­
nitive and neural connections. Conceptual metaphor is one form of such connective 
webs, along with metonymy, counterfactuals, analogies, and categorization.20 Though 
constrained by current limits on neural imaging and scanning technology, detailed em­
pirical evidence for these webs continues to be gathered. It is clear, however, that these 
networks or webs partly function by processes known as “cross-​mapping,” connective 
and associative projections that are established between mental spaces, image schema,21 
and neural assemblies. Johnson (1987, xiv–​xv) argues that conceptual metaphor may be
conceived as a pervasive mode of understanding by which we project patterns from 
one domain of experience in order to structure another domain of a different kind. 
So conceived, metaphor is not merely a linguistic mode of expression; rather, it is 
one of the chief cognitive structures by which we are able to have coherent, ordered 
experiences that we can reason about and make sense of. Through metaphor, we 
make use of patterns that obtain in our physical experience to organize our more ab­
stract understanding.
According to this approach, now known as conceptual metaphor theory (CMT), 
metaphors involve the dynamic interaction between a “target domain” (the abstract 
thing that the metaphor seeks to describe—​such as “life”) and a “source domain” (the 
concrete object or detailed thing providing structure to the abstraction—​such as 
“journey”) from which the target domain’s meanings and entailments derive. This can 
be visualized as two “mental spaces” (Target/​LIFE and Source/​JOURNEY), and the 
cognitive activity involves “cross-​domain mapping” between the two spaces. For ex­
ample, in the basic metaphor LIFE IS A JOURNEY,22 the more concrete experiences of 
journeying along a path, over surfaces, perhaps with companions, and facing obstacles 
may be applied to the rather abstract concept of “life.” We may not be able to fully com­
prehend what life is all about, but using the details derived from the concrete realm of 
journeys helps to make “life” seem less abstract. There is a remarkable complexity be­
hind such a seemingly simple metaphor, which can be discerned by considering the 
“entailments” or semantic implications of the metaphor. Thus, entailments of LIFE IS A 
JOURNEY might be expressed as “My life came to a crossroads,” “The country is going 
downhill,” or “I am on my way to graduation.” As one explores the uses of CMT, the 
entailments—​the nooks and crannies—​of many fascinating metaphors may be found. 
And, for our purposes in this chapter, these remarkable features of conceptual metaphor 
can be found in Sahajiyā and other tantric texts.
Categories of Metaphors
LIFE IS A JOURNEY is both an “orientational metaphor,” as it expresses spatial 
relationships (up/​down, in/​out, forward/​backward), and an “event structure” meta­
phor, expressing temporal and spatial sequences. This connects the journey metaphor

--- PAGE 785 ---
760      Glen A. Hayes
 
to another fundamental metaphor, STATES ARE LOCATIONS (Lakoff 1993, 220–​222). 
This involves projecting details of boundaries and spatiality onto otherwise-​diffuse 
states, such as consciousness, emotion, or transcendence. As one progresses through 
the journey (life), they pass in and out of sequences of bounded regions (life stages). 
Cognitive scientists believe an “event sequence schema” is based upon a very deep net­
work of body schema and prenoetic capacities which may be universal functions of the 
human mind and body. Kövecses (2015, 4) observes:
The system of metaphors called the Event Structure metaphor (Lakoff, 1993) includes 
submetaphors such as CAUSES ARE FORCES, STATES ARE CONTAINERS, 
PURPOSES ARE DESTINATIONS, ACTION IS MOTION, DIFFICULTIES ARE 
IMPEDIMENTS (TO MOTION) and so forth. Remarkably, in addition to English, 
this set of submetaphors occurs in such widely different languages and cultures as 
Chinese (Yu, 1998) and Hungarian
(Kovecses, 2005).
Event structure metaphor23 is clearly expressed in Sahajiyā texts. Some examples in­
clude SĀDHANA IS A JOURNEY, SAHAJA IS A PLACE, and THE SAROVARA IS A 
DESTINATION. We can reflect on Lakoff’s (2008, 30) observation that
primitive image-​schemas (e.g., container, source-​path-​goal, degree of closeness, di­
rection, and amount of force) are computed by brain structures that are either innate 
or form early. Action schemas and frames are structured using such primitive image-​
schemas. For example, putting in makes use of the container schema, the source-​
path-​goal schema, a force schema, a direction schema, and an aspectual schema.
For Sahajiyās, this directly relates to key aspects of sādhana: directing, or putting fluids 
into, one of the sarovaras.
The cognitive and neurobiological foundations beneath metaphor run deep, and in 
many different directions, such as with journeys. In the AR (v. 154),24 Mukunda-​dāsa 
states:
154  The path of sādhana is difficult to traverse, it is near-​yet-​far;
From a distance it seems close, from close up it seems distant.
Here we find an orientational metaphor about sādhana—​SĀDHANA IS A JOURNEY—​
based upon a number of basic metaphors, including PURPOSES ARE DESTINATIONS, 
CHANGE IS MOTION, and STATES ARE LOCATIONS. But this is itself based upon 
a more global metaphor: A PURPOSEFUL LIFE IS A JOURNEY. Lakoff and Johnson 
(1999, 60–​64) unpack some additional dimensions of this metaphor as follows:
A Purposeful Life is a Journey
A Person Living a Life is a Traveler
Life Goals are Destinations

--- PAGE 786 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      761
 
A Life Plan is an Itinerary
This may be applied to many cases of ritual transformation and pilgrimage in the his­
tory of religions, and certainly to Sahajiyā texts; the details may include entailments of 
surfaces, paths, companions, objects, obstacles, and destinations.
Based on the “event-​sequence” schema, there are countless entailments of the journey 
metaphor. For example, in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā traditions, the guru must first impart the 
initiatory “seed” (bīja) mantras25 to the disciple before the journey can even begin, and 
there are typically three distinct levels of practice, regarded as sections of the path (AR, 
vv. 14–​19): beginner (pravarta), accomplished (sādhaka), and perfected (siddha). The 
journey metaphor connects to the metaphor of destination, and in Sahajiyā texts we 
see many examples of adepts traveling to an inner realm of villages, rivers, ponds, and 
jungles—​destinations that must be reached in order to arrive at the ultimate destination 
of Sahaja. These realms are typically blissful realms of higher states of consciousness, 
where powerful beings and radiant colored lotuses are encountered, and where the ul­
timate state of the Together-​born Inner Being (Sahaja-​mānuṣa) may be attained. In the 
AR (vv. 42–​47) we read:26
42	 This teaching (dharma) is the purest, without division nor lust (kāma).
	
The transcendent realm (dhāma) is beyond the heavenly Virajā river.
43	 Along the far shores of the heavenly Virajā river27 is “The Place” (deśakhāna).
	
A Village (grāma) named Sahajapur is [a place of] eternal bliss (sadānanda).
44	 To the west of that [river] is [a village named] “Orissan Flower Bud” (Kaliṅga 
Kalikā);
	
The female partner (nāyikā) of that place is named “Magnolia Bud” (Campaka 
Kalikā).28
45	 [In that place are] the Tree of Emptiness (śūnya vṛkṣa), and lotuses of one hun­
dred and one thousand petals.
	
“The Place” surrounds that tree and the waters of the Pond (sarovara).
46	 To the north [of the Virajā river] is the Village of Ānandapur (“Place of Bliss”).
	
[In that place are] connoisseurs of love (rasikas), groves of rapture (rasera 
kuñja), and the realm (dhāma) of the god of Love (manmatha, or Kāmadeva).
47	 Forever blissful, forever overwhelmed, forever desirous,
	
the Together-​born Inner Being (sahaja-​mānuṣa) always makes [its] home there.
Reflecting the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava heritage, the text speaks of the need to travel to regions 
similar to Vaiṣṇava realms such as Vraja and Nitya Vṛndāvana—​mythical and celestial 
places associated with the life and loves of Kṛṣna and Rādhā. But the realization of the 
cosmic state of Sahaja is also presented as a destination, framing an otherwise-​abstract 
transcendent state of consciousness spatially and in a sequence. Thus, the transcendent 
state of the sahaja-​mānuṣa is found after taking a journey to the location of the village of 
Sahajapur (“the Together-​born Place”). However, this journey to such a cosmic destina­
tion must be undertaken in a yogic or subtle body, including passage through a series of 
interior bodily containers. The segments and connections of this inner body comprise a

--- PAGE 787 ---
762      Glen A. Hayes
 
crooked river, running “upwards against the current” (AR, v. 180, sroter ujāna) to celes­
tial realms and Sahaja, flowing through a series of connected stepped ponds (sarovara), 
within which are multi-​petalled lotuses. The basic structure is as follows (AR, v. 
97–​98):29
97	 There are the Pond of Lust (kāma-​sarovara) [and] the Pond of Egotism 
(māna-​sarovara);
	
The Pond of Divine Love (prema-​sarovara) [and] the Pond of Indestructibility 
(akṣaya-​sarovara).30
98	 The four Ponds lie within the heart.
	
If you have a body (deha), you can reach the other shore.
Sahajiyās conceive all of these concepts together under the term dehatattva, which 
means “principles of the body.” An understanding of conceptual metaphors can help 
us to better understand these esoteric processes and the cosmophysiology of Sahajiyā 
traditions.
Lakoff and Johnson (1980, 23–​29) have identified a number of categories of meta­
phor used in everyday speech—​most of which occur in Sahajiyā texts. In addition to 
orientational metaphors involving journey and destination, there are also “ontolog­
ical metaphors,” which would apply to entities and substances. Lakoff and Johnson 
(1980, 25) observe:
Spatial orientations like up-​down, front-​back, on-​off, center-​periphery, and near-​
far provide an extraordinarily rich basis for understanding concepts in orientational 
terms. But one can only do so much with orientation. Our experience of phys­
ical objects and substances allows us to pick out parts of our experience and treat 
them as discrete entities or substances of a uniform kind. Once we can identify our 
experiences as entities or substances, we can refer to them, categorize them, group 
them, and quantify them—​and, by this means, reason about them.
As we have seen, much of Sahajiyā dehatattva and sādhana involves the ritual manip­
ulation of powerful substances, such as sexual fluids, and their transformation into 
vastu, the cosmic substance out of which the inner devadeha is generated (see, e.g., 
AR, vv. 35, 114, 208).31 The metaphor allows the practitioner to engage with the ritual 
substances as discrete things, arranging them into a sequence of cosmophysiological 
achievements. The Sanskrit and Bengali term rasa can mean a rapturous religio-​
aesthetic experience, but it can also be semen (śukra), expressed through the substance 
metaphor as RASA IS SEMEN.32 As inherited from the classical tradition of Sanskrit 
aesthetics and writings of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theologians, rasa means to “taste” an 
elevated state of consciousness and aesthetic appreciation, achieved through the culti­
vation of various “moods” (bhava). But it is rendered a more immediate thing through 
the metaphor and is seen as experienced in the substance of semen.33 The Sanskrit and 
Bengali term rati also has a range of meanings, including the wife of the god of love, 
a “desirable woman,” sexual intercourse, or absorption of the mind. In the AR, it is

--- PAGE 788 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      763
 
mapped out by the metaphor of RATI IS UTERINE FLUID as ritualized female sexual 
fluid, again using entailments derived from a substance to express the concept of the 
female ritual partner (see, e.g., AR, v. 38).
Beyond metaphors involving substances, we find ontological metaphors involving 
entities. For example, the AR describes various kinds of divine feminine beings and 
powers regarded as “heroines” (nāyikā), arranged on the petals of an eightfold lotus 
flower in the stepped Pond (AR, vv. 239–​243):34
239	 The Pond of Egotism (māna-​sarovara) is located within the heart.
	
The construction of the system [of the Ponds] is [in] the human body (kalevara).
240	 The eight Heroines (nāyikā) were born in those eight petals.
	
They all came together in the limbs (aṅga) of all the gods.
241	 [Their names are:] Sulakṣanā, Sulocanā, Rambhā, Umā;
	
Rukmiṇī, Menakā, Tina-​umā [and] Satyabhāmā.35
242	 These eight Heroines are manifested in the eight petals.
	
Amidst the floating blue lotuses, yellow lotuses, and white lotuses.
243	 Then one gains perception (avagati) [of] the Heroines in the eight petals.
	
The eight Heroines who are in the eight lotuses are the embodiment (rūpa) of
	
the Goddess of Love (rati).36
The heroines are thus entities that embody not only the qualities of the goddess of love 
and wife of Kāmadeva but the more abstract concepts of erotic desire (rati), as in RATI IS 
A BEAUTIFUL WOMAN. The text also describes ascending levels of transcendent con­
sciousness, understood as a type of Being (mānuṣa): the Purified Being (śuddhasattva-​ 
mānuṣa; AR, vv. 149, 176), the Self-​perfected Being (svataḥsiddha-​mānuṣa; AR, v. 181), 
and the Together-​born Being (Sahaja-​mānuṣa; AR, v. 48). Using the entity metaphor 
of MĀNUṢA IS A PERSON, the Sahajiyās are able to facilitate the experience of these 
rarified and abstract states of consciousness.
Ponds and Rivers: Container and 
Conduit Metaphors
Lakoff and Johnson also identify “structural metaphors,” which help to organize and 
arrange our visual fields and experience of objects, space, and relationships. For the 
study of dehatattva, the most important structural metaphors are CONTAINER and 
CONDUIT. Lakoff and Johnson (1980, 29) observe:
We are physical beings, bounded and set off from the rest of the world by the surface 
of our skins, and we experience the rest of the world as outside us. Each of us is a con­
tainer, with a bounding surface and an in-​out orientation. We project our own in-​out 
orientation onto other physical objects that are bounded by surfaces. Thus we also 
view them as containers with an inside and an outside.

--- PAGE 789 ---
764      Glen A. Hayes
 
The container metaphor is perhaps one of the most fundamental of all embodied 
metaphors, as it most directly maps to our own experiences as skin-​bounded mammals. 
We find many less obvious uses of the container metaphor in expressions such as IDEAS 
ARE CONTAINERS, and statements like “He put all of his effort into his thesis,” “She 
is in love,” and “Many things are needed in that career.” But virtually all systems of the 
subtle body in tantra are based upon the metaphor of the cakras, padmas, and sarovaras 
as “containers,” which contain not flesh and blood but “vital breaths” (prāṇa), cosmic 
energy (kuṇḍalinī), or sexual fluids (rasarati). As containers of the subtle body, they 
are “made” of subtle “substances” such as vastu (and even light can be regarded as a 
substance), while they have specific appearances, shapes, colors, and properties. The 
“seed syllables” (bīja) often visualized in cakras or on the lotus petals serve as types of 
containers of attention and consciousness (see Timalsina, this volume). And although 
Lakoff focuses on things outside our skin surfaces, dehatattva is primarily concerned 
with visualized realms within the physical body. In the text we read (AR, vv. 237–​238):37
237	 The Container (ādharā) is the essence of everything, all of the gods, and 
samsara itself.
	
The Pond of Lust is created [by] the essence of lust (kāma).
238	 All of the gods, the Ponds, the God of Love (Kāmadeva), and Goddess of 
Love (Rati).
	
All of the gods are located in the lotus of eight petals.
Thus, the subtle body is a series of connected containers, with the stepped ponds linked 
by the rivers or channels, as one cakra or padma or sarovara leads to the next. Structurally 
and functionally, this of course requires openings in the containers and, importantly, 
connections or conduits leading into and out of each container.38 In the Śaiva and Śākta 
systems of cakras and padmas, these conduits are the nāḍīs (channels),39 a term also used 
in the Sahajiyā systems of tantric dehatattva, existing alongside riverine passageways 
such as the “crooked river” (bāṅkānadī). The floors of a building require stairways to con­
nect the levels and corridors to connect the rooms. In the same way, the channels and 
rivers of the subtle body, which are often said to be innumerable, are necessary to enter 
each sarovara and, ultimately, to achieve the highest state of consciousness in the akṣaya-​
sarovara. Although these ponds are rarified states of consciousness and liberation, the 
pathways connecting them are made a bit more accessible by the metaphors of journey, 
entity, substance, container, and conduit. The text states (AR, vv. 110–​112):40
110	 Within the physical body (śarīra) there are nine [major] yogic channels (nāḍī) 
and thirty-​
	
two crore [minor channels].41
	
Who is able to know where each of these are located?
111	
I will speak about all of these [channels]. Listen, all you devotees!
	
In the Pond of Lust (kāma-​sarovara) there are three kinds of channels.
112	 There are eight meditation huts (koṭā)42 in the eight lotuses.
	
Madanamohana (Kṛṣna) has cleverly concealed the channels and lotuses.

--- PAGE 790 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      765
 
All of these examples of the subtle body in tantra derive from the descriptions of 
visualized imagery in the texts, which raises the larger issue of a “visual field.” Although 
we are talking about an interiorized visual field in tantra, Lakoff and Johnson (1980, 30) 
make the following observation about ordinary visual fields:
We conceptualize our visual field as a container and conceptualize what we see as 
being inside it. Even the term “visual field” suggests this. The metaphor is a natural 
one that emerges from the fact that, when you look at some territory (land, floor, 
space, etc.) your field of vision defines a boundary of the territory, namely, the part 
that you can see. Given that a bounded visual space is a CONTAINER and that our 
field of vision correlates with that bounded visual space, the metaphorical concept 
VISUAL FIELDS ARE CONTAINERS emerges naturally.
At the different stages of Sahajiyā sādhana described in the texts we encounter varying 
scenarios such as that presented in the opening section: stepped ponds, lotus flowers, 
surrounding fields, trees, and beings. We might call this a “visualized field,” within which 
various objects exist and events occur (for details concerning the interplay between vis­
ualization, imagination, and attention in tantra, see Timalsina, “Attention, Memory, and 
the Imagination: A Cognitive Analysis of Tantric Visualization,” this volume). Lakoff 
and Johnson (1980, 30) note that “We use ontological metaphors to comprehend events, 
actions, activities, and states. Events and actions are conceptualized metaphorically 
as objects, activities as substances, states as containers.” Thus, the visualized stage of 
sādhana within a specific cakra or sarovara is viewed as a container, which exists in inner 
space and time, and has well-​defined boundaries. Lakoff and Johnson would regard this 
visualized experience as an instance of a CONTAINER OBJECT metaphor. The met­
aphoric container has within it participants (male and female beings), events like the 
ritualized entry into the realm (a metaphoric object), and the activity of achieving the 
particular cakra or sarovara (a metaphoric substance).
Crooked Rivers and Forest Groves: 
Primary and Complex Metaphors
Primary metaphors emerge from the basic dynamics of human embodiment and our 
experience of the surrounding world.43 Some of the most obvious ones include MORE 
IS UP, KNOWING IS SEEING, and STATES ARE LOCATIONS.44 Lakoff and Johnson 
(1999, 5) illustrate the semantic range of STATES ARE LOCATIONS as follows:
Subjective Judgement: A subjective state
Sensorimotor Experience: Being in a bounded region of space
Example: “I’m close to being in a state of depression and the next thing that goes 
wrong will send me over the edge.”

--- PAGE 791 ---
766      Glen A. Hayes
 
Primary experience: Experiencing a certain state as correlated with a certain location 
(e.g., being cool under a tree, feeling secure in bed).
Examples of many of these primary metaphors can be found in tantric language. And 
to the degree that all humans share roughly similar bodies and cognitive abilities, many 
such metaphors may be close to universal or, more precisely, global. Primary metaphors 
are thus connected to our neural processes and overall life experiences.
The primary metaphor of Sahajiyā sādhana, STATES ARE LOCATIONS, becomes a 
more complex metaphor SAHAJAPUR IS A LOCATION. Built on the primary meta­
phor, Bengali cultural frames and associations, as well as Sahajiyā soteriology, are added. 
For Sahajiyās, the basic MORE IS UP metaphor might be expressed in DEVADEHA IS 
UP, as it enhances the primary meanings of the location of the subtle body, with the 
placement of the stepped ponds not only “within” the physical body, but “upwards 
against the current” along the “crooked river.” It also expresses the verticality body 
schema.45 Keeping in mind the neural and sensorimotor implications of primary meta­
phor, we can appreciate how any tantric sādhana requires much time and effort. Well be­
yond the mastery of life in the ordinary world that children encounter, sādhana requires 
the creation and activation of entirely new and complex neural networks, which we will 
consider in the final section on conceptual blending.
As noted, although primary metaphors provide the basic foundation for the neural 
and cognitive processes, most of the actual metaphors we find expressed in tantric litera­
ture and ritual are “complex” or novel metaphors. Lakoff and Johnson (1999, 60) explain 
that complex metaphors are “built out of primary metaphors plus forms of common­
place knowledges: cultural models, folk theories, or simply knowledge or beliefs that are 
widely accepted in a culture.” Thus, the Sahajiyās combined primary metaphors such as 
THE BODY IS A CONTAINER and MORE IS UP with imageries from the local Bengali 
landscape, both geographical and cultural, to create their elaborate complex metaphors 
of the subtle body with its ascending series of stepped ponds, the crooked river, villages, 
and groves. Complex metaphors are not universal but are context-​specific, in this case to 
Bengal and to the individual histories and lineages of those experiencing the metaphor.
The system of the subtle body in the AR is thus an extremely complex cognitive 
product, fashioned as it is by a blending of primary metaphors such as THE BODY 
IS A CONTAINER, MORE IS UP, and STATES ARE LOCATIONS with imagery and 
concepts from tantric and bhakti traditions, as well as details from deltaic and riverine 
Bengal. It is notable that the system of stepped ponds and rivers is somewhat different 
from the system of cakras and channels (nadīs/​nadīs) found in many Śaiva and Śākta 
tantric systems. The underlying Sahajiyā dynamic involves manipulating fluids into the 
rivers and ponds, while the Śaiva and Śākta systems are based on the movement of ener­
getic breaths and kuṇḍalinī-​śakti. The metaphoric “world” of the Sahajiyās is thus more 
fluid based, while the Śaiva and Śākta systems are more energy based. Also looming 
large in the development of the complex metaphors of the dehatattva are imageries and 
frames from local vernacular Bengali culture and topography.
Different cultural frames might combine with a range of primary metaphors, giving 
rise to specific systems of complex metaphors. Thus, the prominence of footpaths,

--- PAGE 792 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      767
 
lotuses, rivers, stepped ponds, stairs, and boat landings, as well as villages, leaders, snakes, 
bumblebees, groves, and forests demonstrates the vivid nature of complex metaphors. In 
this way, the Sahajiyā system better expresses the realities of local Bengali life and culture. 
Although sharing the pan-​Indian valorization of lotuses with Śaiva and Śākta systems, 
the influence of deltaic and riverine Bengal overrides the drier climes and topography of, 
for example, western India. As noted by Ning Yu: “In other words, the question is how, 
exactly, the interplay between body and culture gives rise to conceptual metaphors that 
are universal, widespread, or culture-​specific” (2008: 248). In tantric studies, one might 
say that within specific teaching lineages (paramparā) there is likely to be a distinctive 
system of complex metaphors, which may share features within regions (e.g., Bengal and 
Assam) and larger traditions (e.g., Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism), but which are not 
global or universal (despite sharing primary metaphors that might be).
Lakoff and Johnson have summarized this complicated process as follows:
Inevitably, many primary metaphors are universal because everybody has basi­
cally the same kinds of bodies and brains and lives in basically the same kinds of 
environments, so far as the features relevant to metaphor are concerned.
The complex metaphors that are composed of primary metaphors and that make 
use of culturally based conceptual frames are another matter. Because they make use of 
cultural information, they may differ significantly from culture to culture (2003, 257).
To be sure, the local culture and community will inevitability filter which bodily 
experiences can be cross-​mapped and projected onto specific target domains. For example, 
Sahajiyās shared many beliefs and rituals regarding Kṛṣna and Rādhā (especially derived 
from the “external practices” or vaidhi-​bhakti, such as communal singing and dancing) 
with Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.46 However, since the Sahajiyās practiced a transgressive form of 
ritual sexual intercourse with a partner “belonging to another” (parakīyā),47 their practices 
conflicted with those of the orthodox. Thus the Sahajiyā dehatattva ends up using different 
complex metaphors because they were referring to very different experiences of the body 
and human sexuality. Citing Gibbs (1999, 155), Yu (2008, 253) notes that “in short, ‘social 
and cultural constructions of experience fundamentally shape embodied metaphor.’ ” The 
concluding section of this chapter considers these constructions of experience and how the 
resultant complex metaphors may be studied through conceptual blending theory (CBT).
Sahaja and Emergent Structure: 
Conceptual Blending Theory
The process by which complex metaphors are generated is known as conceptual 
blending.48 We have just considered how complex metaphors are generated out of more 
basic primary metaphors, blending in various cultural frames, imagery, and cognitive 
content. Although CMT helps to explore the nuances of complex metaphor, conceptual 
blending theory (CBT) allows us to more fully “unpack” this process on a granular level,

--- PAGE 793 ---
768      Glen A. Hayes
 
identifying the various “inputs” that create the specific and distinct complex (and novel) 
metaphor.
As useful as CMT has been, one of the questions involving the cross-​space mapping 
from Source to Target domains has been why only some aspects and details are projected 
but not others. This and other issues of basic conceptual metaphors led Fauconnier and 
Turner to expand the two-​space model of Lakoff and Johnson’s metaphor theory (target/​
source) to a four-​space (or more) model they called a conceptual integration network 
(CIN).49 (Such networks are often rendered in a graphic chart, as in fig. 30.1.) CBT does 
not reject CMT but rather elaborates upon it, finding added layers of entailments and 
dynamics. In his 2008 essay, Lakoff argues that all complex metaphors are generated 
using conceptual blending of the primary metaphors and other cognitive products. 
Complex metaphors and conceptual integration networks are indeed found in Sahajiẏā 
texts. CBT methodology can help us to better understand their imaginative cognitive 
networks and processes. Fauconnier and Turner devised schematic charts to help us vis­
ualize such otherwise-​abstract cognitive features. We will consider three charts.50
As shown in figure 30.1, basic CBT is visualized using a minimum of four spaces: a 
generic space, which contains a common structure or “frame” (a set of details present in 
all of the input spaces); two or more “input spaces,” which hold the contents and details 
of specific situations or ideas; and a blended or “emergent” space. This blended space 
includes the general structure from the generic space and selected elements from the 
different input spaces, which are cross-​mapped onto this novel space using properties 
called “vital relations.”
Cross-​space mappings and projections (e.g., an inner body of ponds and lotuses) em­
anate from the generic space, which here would be THE BODY IS A CONTAINER, 
Generic
space
Input
space
1
Input
space
2
Blended
space
Cross-space mapping
Selective
projection
Selective
projection
Figure 30.1.  Basic structure of conceptual blending. Credit: Mazle22222, CC BY-​SA 4.0 
https://​crea​tive​comm​ons.org/​licen​ses/​by-​sa/​4.0, via Wikimedia Commons.

--- PAGE 794 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      769
 
which implies a bounded region, with conduits and contents. The input spaces are mul­
tiple. These inputs are drawn from a range of traditions, including Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism 
and its aesthetics, Nāth and tantric lineages, and alchemy. The process of blending 
creates an “emergent structure” in the blended space. This emergent structure is essen­
tially the novel and creative end product of the imaginative cognitive process: a cosmic 
body and realms connected to Sahaja. While the root metaphor is common, this new 
structure of cosmophysiology is context-​specific to the Sahajiyās as Bengalis and helps 
the practitioner to conceptualize, and then actualize, the goal of embodied transcendent 
consciousness.
In figure 30.2, the generic space is that of the primary metaphors of the BODY IS 
CONTAINER, and REALITY IS CONTAINER. There are potentially numerous 
“inputs,” but I have chosen just two configurations to present for this chapter. In this 
case, one input involves the concept of the physical body (rūpa), which as we have seen 
may be experienced in tantra as a microcosm—​as an entire “world.” This input also 
involves the male and female, the penis (lingam) and vagina (yoni), as well as the sexual 
fluids (rasa and rati). The second input is that of the concept of the subtle body itself, 
which is experiencing an entire world “as body,” including the inner natures (svarūpa) 
of men as Kṛṣṇa and women as Rādhā, who sport in inner realms of lovely flowers, with 
noisy bumblebees collecting sweet honey (madhu). The cognitive feat of blending uses 
the “vital relations” (see below) of “compressing” together aspects of space, time, iden­
tity, change, and uniqueness to create an entirely new cognitive product: the “blended 
space” or “emergent structure” which is the novel Sahajiyā cosmophysiology. This is the 
blended cosmology of Sahajiyā/​Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava realms (dhāman), the subtle body 
system (dehatattva), and the cosmic substance (vastu)—​all of which practitioners be­
lieve will lead them to liberation in Sahaja.
“Generic Space”
Input 1: Physical Body
Input 2: Subtle Body
Blended Space/”Emergent Structure”
Reality is a Container
Body is a Container
Body as World Rupa
Male and Female Lingam/Yoni
Sexual Fluids (rasa-rati)
Dhaman Dehatattva Sahaja Vastu
“Compression” of Time, Identity,
Change, Uniqueness, Space
World as Body
Svarupas  Krsna/Radha
Bee/ﬂower Honey (madhu)
• • •
Figure 30.2.  Conceptual blending of Sahajiyā tantric sādhana involving containment.
Credit: Glen Hayes.

--- PAGE 795 ---
770      Glen A. Hayes
 
The Dynamics of “Vital Relations” in 
Conceptual Blending
When we consider the overall forces that propel the dynamics of these cognitive 
processes, Fauconnier and Turner (2002, 101) have identified a number of what they call 
“vital relations.” It is these vital relations that restrict why only some of the details from 
one domain/​input are selectively cross-​mapped to the other domains/​inputs and, hence, 
projected into the eventual blended space. These can include: change, identity, time, 
space, cause-​effect, part-​whole, representation, role, analogy, disanalogy, property, sim­
ilarity, category, intentionality, and uniqueness. Regarding these, they observe:
There are canonical patterns of compression over these vital relations that we will en­
counter again and again. Compression can scale Time, Space, Cause-​Effect, and 
Intentionality. Analogy can be compressed into Identity or Uniqueness. Cause-​Effect can 
be compressed into Part-​Whole. Identity itself is routinely compressed into Uniqueness. 
It is also a fundamental power of the way we think to compress Representation, Part-​
Whole, Cause-​Effect, Category and Role into Uniqueness. (101–​102)
Vital relations help to shape the nuances of our everyday experiences, but they are nei­
ther static nor uniform. Conceptual integration is a dynamic ongoing process that 
compresses and decompresses selected elements, which gives shape to the emergent 
meaning and allows for situational creativity. Compression is the process of combining 
various elements or qualities into one blended space, while decompression is the reverse 
process, selecting out specific elements and then projecting them into another space. 
Certain basic elements of cognitive architecture make blending and compression pos­
sible; for the Sahajiyās, these shape the vivid imaginative realms of Sahajapur, and the 
groves, flowers, and buzzing bees. Conceptualizing these vital relations is instrumental 
to the Sahajiyā ability to experience their human bodies as stepped ponds and villages, 
while they assume identities as characters in the cosmic drama of Rādhā and Kṛṣna, in­
cluding that of the friends of Rādhā, the “maidens” (mañjarī) who assist with her erotic 
trysts in the celestial realms.51 The maidens (mañjarī) and heroines (nāyikā) are female 
beings, seated on the lotuses of the stepped pond, facilitating the journey to the tran­
scendent status of the Sahaja-​mānuṣa, who “resides” beyond the shores of the upper­
most stepped pond, the Pond of Indestructibility (akṣaya-​sarovara). Thus, for Sahajiyās 
the emergent and blended realms of dehatattva, which from the outside of that system 
may seem to be cobbled together from different sources and local imagery, are both co­
herent and profound conceptual integration networks.
Fauconnier and Turner (cited in Lakoff 2008, 53–​54) observe:
Such integration networks are never built entirely on the fly nor are they preexisting 
conventional structures. Integration networks underlying thought and action are

--- PAGE 796 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      771
 
always a mix. On the one hand, cultures build networks over long periods of time 
that get transmitted over generations. Techniques for building particular networks 
are also transmitted. People are capable of innovating in any particular context. The 
result is integration networks consisting of conventional parts, conventionally struc­
tured parts, and novel mappings and compressions.
Sahajiyās have utilized conceptual integration networks from Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, 
Nāth, and various tantric traditions as they expressed their own experiences of 
dehatattva and Sahaja.
Types of Conceptual Integration 
Networks
CBT has identified a number of different types of conceptual integration networks—​
essentially the major configurations of mental spaces, frames, compressions, and 
emergent structure.52 For our purposes, and of greatest usefulness for Tantric Studies, 
we will consider what they call “single-​scope,” “double-​scope,” and “hyperblend/​
megablend” networks. Single-​scope networks are the two-​space models of basic con­
ceptual metaphors in CMT using the TARGET/​SOURCE domains such as SĀDHANA 
IS A JOURNEY, where the organizing frame of just one of the inputs (journey) is cross-​
mapped onto the other (sādhana). This basic metaphor generates source domain 
details, such as stages of practice, necessary companions, pitfalls along the way, im­
portant objects to have, companions on the path, and indices of success, which render 
the abstract nature of sādhana more conceptually concrete. The complex metaphors of 
SAHAJA IS A DESTINATION and KṚṢṆA IS A DIVINE LOVER also adopt powerful 
single-​scope networks, to extrapolate details regarding spatiality and topography onto 
the cosmic state of Sahaja, and anthropomorphic/​sexual/​emotional qualities are cross-​
mapped onto the god Kṛṣna.
The framing inputs of these basic metaphoric networks (e.g. journey, destina­
tion, divine lover) come replete with the practitioner’s cultural inflections, which 
individualizes and complicates the process. Each of the individual blendings often 
expands because several of the inputs may already be blends themselves, what Turner 
calls hyper-​blends (Turner 2014, 145). Reflecting cultural developments and specific 
sociohistorical contexts—​for example, developments in teaching, textual lineages, 
and esoteric language—​ certain advanced blends become entrenched in the cul­
ture of the lineage, always available as a source for new blends as each successive 
guru interprets the sādhana, modifying existing commentaries and composing new 
ones. The power of this cognitive network lies in its ability to evoke “emotions, seem­
ingly anchored in the trustworthy framing input, which feel to us as if they are all-​
clarifying” (Fauconnier and Turner 2002, 129). People can more readily understand

--- PAGE 797 ---
772      Glen A. Hayes
 
the more diffuse concepts of sādhana, Sahaja, or Kṛṣna because they project onto 
them, in the blend, things that are known from the SOURCE domain of framing 
(journey, destination, lovers). Above all, this cross-​mapping of an “inner-​space” re­
lation, “vital relation,” or property in the SOURCE input with the more diffuse or un­
knowable qualities in the TARGET input (sādhana, Sahaja, Kṛṣna) allows metaphors 
to do the cognitive and imaginative “heavy lifting” that they do, ranging from ordi­
nary language (“He tasted the experience.”) to more elaborate metaphors such as THE 
YOGIC BODY IS LIGHT or COSMIC SUBSTANCE IS SEMEN (cf. Fauconnier and 
Turner 2002, 129–​130, fig. 7.3). To Fauconnier and Turner, “this kind of projection is an 
imaginative achievement” (2002, 131).
Such complex forms of conceptual blending are known as “double-​scope” networks 
or “multi-​scope” networks. These have multiple inputs, while hyper-​blends have at 
least one input that is already a blend. According to Fauconnier and Turner, a complex 
blend has two or more or more “inputs with different (and often clashing) organizing 
frames and has emergent structure of its own” (2002, 131). In these networks, there are 
two or more inputs, as well as two or more organizing frames.53 However, only certain 
parts of each frame are “projected” into the blend, leading to a novel emergent struc­
ture or “new stuff.”
At this point, it is important to recognize that a fundamental property of concep­
tual blending, including metaphors, is the ability to render notions of vast cosmic 
dimensions and entities into what Mark Johnson calls “human scale.” This is essential 
for the human experiences of religion, and certainly for tantric beliefs and practices. 
Johnson observes (2014, 180):
The blending hypothesis takes the view that it is our ability for advanced blending 
that gives us the capacity to create vast mental webs with extended vital rela­
tions that are served by, organized by, and held together by blended scenes that 
are themselves at human scale. The scale of the mental web can be vast because 
it is served by a blend that is itself at human scale. The human-​scale blend that 
serves the mental web provides us with a platform—​a scaffold, a cognitively con­
genial basis from which to reach out, manage, manipulate, transform, develop, 
and handle the mental web.
As we have seen, the AR provides many examples of “blended scenes” such as the Ponds, 
Sahajapur, and the celestial realms of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā. Sahajiyā sādhana and dehatattva 
may thus be regarded, using Johnson’s terms, as cognitive platforms with scaffolding 
that allow the practitioner “to reach out, manage, manipulate, transform, develop, and 
handle the mental web” (ibid.).
We have considered how Sahajiyās appropriated and adapted the models and 
processes from Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava bhakti for specifically tantric uses. Such adaptations 
and modifications may be found in numerous tantric lineages and textual traditions, be­
cause the conceptual blending that underlies all of these beliefs and practices may itself 
be recursive: the blended cognitive products of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, for example, are

--- PAGE 798 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      773
 
used by Sahajiyās as inputs for their own blending processes. Johnson offers additional 
insights as to how this fascinating process can occur (2014, 180):
It is of utmost importance that once we have achieved a human-​scale blend, it can 
be used as an input mental space to a new blending web. So blending can work like a 
cascade. Achieving a blend at human scale extends our human-​scale knowledge. It’s 
as if we manufacture a stepping stone, place it ahead of us, and then step from where 
we are to that new stepping stone. And we can repeat the procedure, stepping from 
blend to blend. So what counts as human scale can be repeatedly extended, on and 
on. This can give us a cascade or sequence of blends, each depending upon previous 
blends. . . . What was once beyond human scale is now transformed to human scale.
The four ponds of the AR are very much like the “stepping stones” feature described by 
Johnson, as the path of sādhana leads from one Pond to the next, and also the vastness 
of the celestial realms. The hierarchical containers of embodiment, connected by the 
conduits and generated out of vastu, provided Sahajiyās with access to many things pre­
viously beyond “human scale.” In the concluding section, we will consider how the AR 
expresses cascades of blending that bring together the different traditions of bhakti and 
tantra, and how this is accomplished.
Tantra and Bhakti as Cognitive 
Frames for Conceptual Blending
The concept and process of “framing” has been instrumental in the development of cog­
nitive linguistics as an academic discipline. The role of framing is also fundamental to 
language in general, and is essential to the formation of metaphors, conceptual blending, 
and conceptual integration networks. There must be some type of order amidst the soci­
ological, linguistic, biological, and cognitive registers of lived human life. The primary 
metaphor of the body as container is central to the conceptual blending of dehatattva 
in Sahajiyā texts. In brief, this “container” provides the basic “framing” of the “generic 
space” of virtually all metaphors and blends involving embodiment (See fig. 30.2). This 
same approach will also enable us to better understand the blending of the two major 
“inputs” of tantra and bhakti in Sahajiyā texts.
One major problem in the academic study of the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās is the fact that 
they combine influences from both monistic tantra and largely dualistic bhakti.54 
Their blending of tantra and bhakti is what distinguishes them from most other tantric 
traditions, to the best of my knowledge.55 Thus, as shown in figure 30.3, there are two 
major input spaces: tantra and bhakti. The input from tantra provides the framing of 
the “body as a world,” while the bhakti input contributes “a body in a world” (such as a 
maiden in Vraja or Vṛndāvana). When reading Sahajiyā texts like the AR, one is struck 
by the apparent conflicts between descriptions of the subtle body that reveal a basic

--- PAGE 799 ---
774      Glen A. Hayes
 
tantric structure, such as the ascending series of stepped ponds, and then, a few verses 
later, a structure that is based upon Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava descriptions of the milkmaids 
(gopīs), dancing and beholding the love play of Rādhā with Kṛṣna in the forests—​
reflecting orthodox Vaiṣṇava mañjarī-​sādhana (“maiden practice,” more on this below). 
Instead, if one considers an earlier or later section of perhaps five to ten verses, one can 
discern a deeper metaphorical (not literal) consistency in the way the descriptions are 
progressing. For example, the following verses simultaneously describe ascent into the 
third stepped pond, ritual intercourse, the cosmic substance (vastu), controlling passion 
(rāga) and desire (rati—​as both a female partner and fluid), while also mentioning that 
the pond is where Kṛṣna lives. It blends tantric physiology (body as world) with a devo­
tional view (body in a world) of Kṛṣna (AR, vv. 253–​259):56
253	 That Pond (sarovara) of Divine Love (prema) is limned (khacita)57 with passion 
(rāga).
	
It is the churning of that passion (rāga) that filled the lake with Divine
	
Love.
254	 By adolescence, a girl has transformed into that very ocean of Divine Love,
	
and instinctively knows how Divine Love generates the taste of
	
Kṛṣṇa rasa, that enduring Cosmic Substance (nityavastu).
255	 Rādhikā is the guru of Passion (rāga), which in turn makes her the guru
	
of Divine Love.
	
From the sound of the “r”-​consonant [of Rādhikā] the author writes rati,
	
love’s liquid partner.
256	 That act of churning the liquid love partner (rati), generates the
	
experience of rasa.
	
When she is immersed in that liquid experience of rasa, she is
	
transformed into the image of beauty itself, Rūpavatī by name.
“Generic Space”
Input 1: Tantra: Body as a World
Input 2: Bhakti: Body in a World
Blended Space/”Emergent Structure”
Reality is a Container
Body is a Container
Sarovara Rupa
Male and Female Lingam/Yoni
Sexual Fluids (rasa-rati) Nayika
Sahaja realms Sahajapur Vastu
Place of the Hidden Moon
Sahaja-manusa
Vraja Svarupas Krsna/Radha
Bee/ﬂower Honey (madhu) Mañjari
• • •
Figure 30.3.  Blending of influences of tantra and bhakti into overall Sahajiyā tantric sādhana.
Credit: Glen Hayes.

--- PAGE 800 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      775
 
257	 Kṛṣṇa resides in every single drop of the Divine Love of that pond
	
(sarovara).
	
Kṛṣṇa’s liquid partner (rati) is the feminine (prakṛti) form of the love
	
experience (rasa).58
258	 He churns the partner of love (rati), whose churning generates the refined
	
essence (sāra) of liquid love (rati).
	
Following Passion (anurāga) night and day amazingly relieves grief,
	
vexation, and distress.
259	 Kṛṣṇa is the crown jewel of those connoisseurs of love’s pleasures (rasika)
	
who follow this Passion (anurāga).
	
and, as a result, Kṛṣṇa has remained in debt to the Divine Love of Rādhā.
The two different, yet somehow complementary, structures of bhakti and tantra are thus 
resolved through conceptual blending in verse 257, as cascades of blending are brought to­
gether. The Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā of the bhakti input shift into the male essence (puruṣa) and 
female essence (prakṛti) used by tantra.59 The practitioner initially uses the bhakti imagery 
of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā as a tool, but after Sahajiyā sādhana, the final experience of the reality 
of Sahaja takes place within the body. Conceptual blending aids in the transition from 
the goals of bhakti (e.g., being a maiden in Vraja, a body in a world) to the goals of tantra 
(e.g., entering the devadeha, the body is a world). The external world of rivers and ponds is 
homologized with the interior landscape, and the journey is realized using bhakti and its 
metaphors—​ not by going “somewhere else” like nitya-​Vṛndāvana, but through realizing 
the tantric model of internal consummation and the final unity of the “together-​born” 
state of Sahaja. Human scale is achieved. Spatially, and structurally, the bhakti realms of 
Kṛṣna become connected along paths to the stepped ponds of tantra, and the inner maiden 
(mañjarī) becomes a powerful type of female ritual partner (nāyikā). The rasa to be expe­
rienced as “liquid love” (rati) is connected to the bliss (ānanda) and semen (śukra) of the 
tantric input. The emergent structure of the Sahajiyā dehatattva effectively organizes the 
different frames and details by blending the inputs of both tantra and bhakti. This emer­
gent structure is integrated, combines topology, and is coherent. This occurs due to the 
cross-​mappings and complex projections of the vital relations across the inputs and into 
the blend. There is a compression of identity, uniqueness, and analogy across the two inputs 
into the blend, as vast mental webs are given human scale. There is thus a blending of ap­
parent cosmological, epistemological, and soteriological differences between the basic tan­
tric structure of “the body is a world” and the more dualistic bhakti structure of “the body 
is in a world.”60 That latter world is dominated by the figures of Kṛṣna, Rādhā, the gopīs and 
mañjarīs. We can see these kinds of differences in the following verses (AR, vv. 25–​29):61
25	 At the time one receives the mantra, one also gains the lineage of the guru.
	
You must [however] perform your sādhana according to the instructions of the
	
teaching master (sikṣāguru).
26	 The qualified one (adhikārī) will acquire the finest available body through 
sādhana.
	
Even older men and women can learn the principles of sheltering in love (bhāva).

--- PAGE 801 ---
776      Glen A. Hayes
 
27	 The divine body (devadeha) must be born within the [physical] body.
	
Through what kinds of practices may men and women learn these principles 
of love?
28	 Within the [physical] body there is a divine body (deva-​deha).
	
By [following] the teachings, the principles of the Cosmic Substance (vastu) 
may be learned.
29	 The woman of practice (sādhana prakṛti) will appear within the [physical] body.
	
When one’s inner nature becomes [additionally] that of a woman, then the 
experience of
	
rāga-​rati ensues.
The many meanings of the “woman of practice” reveal these differences (yet now 
connections) between tantra and bhakti. She can be the female ritual partner, a source 
of sexual fluids used to generate the system of ponds, part of the metaphoric struc­
ture of the body as a world. But, as she also appears within the body, she is the inner 
mañjarī, and thus a body in a devotional world. Using the vital relations, the tantric 
and bhakti inputs are cross-​mapped and projected into the emergent structure as a 
coherent blend.
In many tantric traditions, the human body is not just a world unto itself but usefully 
regarded as a mesocosm (an intermediate framing device) providing access to the infi­
nite microcosms within the body, as well as to the vast regions of the outer macrocosm 
of the sun, moon, planets, and stars. Again, blending based on the “body” allows for 
the transformation of vast cosmic dimensions into human scale. This is a quite partic­
ular form of layered cosmological structure, with consequences for epistemology (that 
knowing the body leads to transcendence), as well as soteriology (Sahaja is achieved only 
through mastery of the body). However, in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava devotional practices 
of vaidhi bhakti (external actions such as singing and dancing) and rāgānugā bhakti 
sādhana (“passionate” interiorized visualization), the goal is to ritually fashion the spir­
itual body of a “maiden” (mañjarī), made out of a “particle of light” (jyotir-​aṃśa).62 As 
discussed in detail by Haberman (1988) and Stewart (2010), mañjarī-​sādhana is an elab­
orate Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava process of visualizing oneself as a particular gopī or attendant 
involved in specific romantic interactions between Rādhā and Kṛṣna in the Vraja-​līlā. 
As developed by the intellectual and devotional leaders (Gosvāmin) of Bengal, this 
requires “her” to have a name, an outfit, a family history, and so forth.63 Far from re­
garding the body as a world in the tantric sense, the Gauḍīya view is that the ideal body 
of the mañjarī exists in the eternal realms of Kṛṣna-​līlā, and is just one of many beings in 
that realm. This is a very different cosmology, for which the epistemology requires many 
distinctive procedures, and the soteriology is very much driven by the salvific powers 
of the Divine Love (prema) Kṛṣna and Rādhā feel for each other, and for the mañjarī. 
As suggested in figure 30.3, only in the “blended space” of the “emergent structure” of 
the Sahajiyā dehatattva are these two seemingly incompatible systems brought together, 
using vital relations such as identity, role, representation, and analogy.
From the tantric input we get the system of the ascending stepped ponds (sarovara), 
the crooked river (bāṅkānadī), and the “reversed” (ulṭā) upward flow of the sexual

--- PAGE 802 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      777
 
fluids. From the bhakti input we get the visualized narratives of Kṛṣna and the gopīs, 
in the villages of Vraja, and out in the forests, with bees flitting among the flowers.64 
In these devotional realms, the flow is of the pure emotional divine love of prema, not 
bodily fluids. So how are these two inputs projected into the blended spaces, and how 
are these differences conceptually “resolved”? One way is to structurally, almost archi­
tecturally, reformat the spatial dimensions to blend together the tantric ponds and the 
bhakti villages. This would involve horizontal extensions from the ponds (containers) 
along paths (conduits) to Sahajiyā realms such as the Place of the Hidden Moon 
(guptacandrapur) and Sahajapur (containers and destinations). Another way, using the 
vital relations (such as role, representation, similarity, and analogy) in the process, is to 
connect—​via cross-​mapping—​the relationship between the physical body (rūpa) in the 
tantric model with the “inner essence” (svarūpa) in the bhakti model. As we consider 
the different details, such as the poetic Vaiṣṇava imagery, the transgressive Nāth reversal 
concepts, or the Bengali views of rivers and ponds, we can coax out the “vital relations” 
that are in play as these blends are created. And, as we have seen, using metaphor theory 
and conceptual blending can help us as scholars to conceptualize how Sahajiyās and 
other tantric practitioners use such vivid imagery to guide their sādhanas.
Concluding Thoughts
I trust that I have been able to suggest how using the methods of CMT and CBT can 
help in the translation and understanding of the complex sādhanas and dehatattva in 
the Amṛtaratnāvalī and, by extension, in many other tantric texts. Metaphors are not 
just lovely poetic devices; they express fundamental and profound cognitive processes 
that are essential aspects of being human. We envision and imagine ourselves and the 
world partly through the power of metaphors, and we experience the limitless varieties 
of consciousness thanks, at least in part, to the dynamics of conceptual blending. For 
scholars of tantric studies, using CMT and CBT can be challenging, especially when 
crafting the visual blending charts as I have provided in figures 30.1–​3. But, just as Lakoff 
and Johnson’s wonderful approach to metaphors opens up the richness and depth of 
even ordinary language, the fascinating layers and matrices of specifically tantric lan­
guage can be gradually revealed using methods from the conceptual blending theory of 
Fauconnier and Turner. Tantric language wonderfully illustrates the dynamic cascades 
and complexities of conceptual blending, allowing for the achievement of cosmic 
dimensions at a human scale. What I have offered in this chapter is but an initial and 
early step in this methodological adventure. To cite a trope from Zen Buddhism, this 
is an adventure where one always feels like a beginner. Given the accelerating pace of 
discoveries in cognitive science and neuroscience, especially how improvements in 
neural imaging are revealing how our perception, imagination, and process of construal 
work, we are sure to enjoy many new findings in the coming years. This chapter has 
considered how Sahajiyā sādhana is a journey; it is abundantly clear that Tantric Studies

--- PAGE 803 ---
778      Glen A. Hayes
 
itself will also continue to be a journey as well. This volume demonstrates that many 
of us, in our own ways, and in our own fields and areas of study, are fellow travelers in 
this exciting and rewarding academic pursuit. Solid steps have been taken, yet there are 
many more to go.
Notes
	1.	 Standard scholarly works on the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās in English are Dasgupta 1969, Basu 
(Bose) 1986, and Dimock 1966. Sarbadhikary 2015 examines contemporary Sahajiyā 
communities in West Bengal. Czyżykowski 2016 considers a range of medieval Sahajiyā 
texts. Scholarly works in Bengali include Basu (Bose) 1932; Dāsa 1972, 1978; and Kavirāja 
1969, 1975. A useful overview of Vaiṣṇavism in Bengal is found in Chakravarti 1985. My 
own works include Hayes 1985, 1988, 1995, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2012a, 2012b, 2014, 2015, 2018, 
2023. For a discussion of the history of Sahajiyā scholarship, including issues regarding the 
ethics of studying sex and secrecy, see Stewart 2019. Stewart also discusses the problematics 
of using the category of “tradition” with the Sahajiyās, who are not so clearly organized into 
larger groups. They are best understood in terms of “lineage” (paramparā), and Stewart 
favors the concept of a vertical lineage (vaṃśa) organization rather than a horizontal broth­
erhood or fraternity (147).
	2.	 Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are a major form of Vaiṣṇavism that developed in greater Bengal 
(Gauḍa) following the popular devotional movement inspired by the religious leader Kṛṣṇa 
Caitanya (1486–​1533 CE).
	3.	 On Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava views of the Sahajiyās, see Dimock 1966; O’Connell 1989, 1993, 2019; 
and Stewart 2010, 2019. For scholarship on other vernacular Bengali tantric traditions, es­
pecially the Bāuls and Kartā Bhajās, see Salomon 1995, 2017; Openshaw 2002; and Urban 
2001a, 2001b, 2003.
	4.	 The Nigūḍhārthaprakāśāvalī may be the exception. See Czyżykowski 2016 for related issues.
	5.	 On the issues regarding Mukunda-​deva/​-​dāsa and three of his surviving texts 
(Amṛtaratnāvalī, Bhṛngaratnāvalī, and Amṛtarasāvalī) see Hayes 1985 and 2000; 
Czyżykowski 2016 and 2020; Stewart 2010; and Thāndār 2012.
	6.	 My translation of the AR from the Bengali is based upon two manuscript editions found 
in the collection of the Department of Bengali at the University of Kolkata, mss. # 595 (M1) 
and #6451 (M2). There is also a printed version (P) found in Dāsa 1972, 131–​159. My thanks 
to Archivist Tushar Mahapatra, and Department Heads Asit Kumar Bandhopadyaya and 
P. Dasa, who granted me access to these manuscripts in the Kolkata University archives 
during research in 1979–​1980. I have added verse numbers, which are not present in the 
Bengali text, for convenience. I have generally rendered Bengali terms, such as prem and 
kām, into the more-​recognizable (to most readers) Sanskritic forms prema and kāma. As 
access to the manuscripts and printed version is difficult, I have provided the Romanized 
text of the relevant Bengali passages.
	7.	 Sarddā can also refer to the amorous male hero (nāyaka) in aesthetic narratives.
	8.	 The Bengali (P:143, M1:7b, M2:7a) reads: 162. sei sarovara haya nirmāna suthāma/​kahiba 
tāhāra kathā śuna sāvadhāna//​ 163. sei sarovara haya māṇika khacita/​ sei nityadhāma 
haya ratne jaṛita//​ 164. cāri dige cāri ghāṭa bāndhā sarddā pathe/​kasturī kuñkum malayā 
veṛā ghāṭe//​

--- PAGE 804 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      779
 
	 9.	 My thanks to Tony K. Stewart for identifying this pun. Personal communication, July 18, 
2022.
	10.	 On alchemy, see White 1996.
	11.	 On Sahaja as a term, see Kvaerne 1975; Hayes 2015; and Dimock 1966.
	12.	 Such transgressive ritual consumption of sexual fluids is also found in Buddhist tantra. See 
Dalton 2004. For such practices elsewhere in Hindu tantra, see White 2003a.
	13.	 On the imageries of boats and rivers in Sahajiyā texts, see Hayes 1989. The yogic with­
drawal of fluids into the inner body is different from the oral ingestion of fluids found else­
where in Sahajiyā and other tantric sādhana.
	14.	 On the concept of vastu, which may be translated as “cosmic substance,” as well as “onto­
logical substance,” see Hayes 1988.
	15.	 On the complexities of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava modified dualism, ‘incomprehensible differenti­
ation and non-​differentiation” (acintya bhedābheda) in bhakti theology, see Dimock 1966, 
124–​136; Stewart 2010,111, 201 n. 5; and De 1961, 254–​421. On the controversies between 
Sahajiyās and Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, see O’Connell 1993.
	16.	 See the edition, including an introduction and commentary, by Dimock and Stewart 
1999. The fruit of many years of labor by the late Edward C. Dimock, Jr. and his student 
Tony K. Stewart, this volume has become the new standard work in the field. An invalu­
able study of the Bengali Vaiṣṇava traditions and the study of religion is found in Stewart 
2010, including consideration of the nuances of “maiden practice” (mañjarī-​sādhana) and 
Sahajiyā appropriations of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism. Stewart 2019 examines the complexity of 
the academic study of the Sahajiyās.
	17.	 See The Cambridge Greek Lexicon 2021, II: 916.
	18.	 There have been many useful studies over the past few decades which examine metaphor 
and religious language from a range of disciplines, such as Pathak 2013. A classic collection 
of essays may be found in Metaphor and Thought (Ortony 1993). Another valuable collec­
tion is Sacks 1979. The URL for Mark Turner’s website on conceptual metaphor and con­
ceptual blending theory is https://​mar​ktur​ner.org/​blend​ing.html. This has many links to 
other related sites. On metaphor in folksong, see Toelken 1995.
	19.	 Notable works also include Lakoff 1987, 1993, 2008; Lakoff and Johnson 1999; Lakoff and 
Turner 1989; and Lakoff and Nunez 2000.
	20.	 See Gibbs, 2008, 6. Also useful is Gibbs 2005.
	21.	 On body and image schema, see Casson 1983; Palmer 1996; Johnson 1987; and Gallagher 
2005. For the views of a neuroscientist, see McNamara 2009.
	22.	 In modern metaphor studies, the upper case is used to designate any metaphor, as in LIFE 
IS A JOURNEY.
	23.	 For more on the event structure metaphor, see Lakoff 1993, 219–​222, in Ortony 1993.
	24.	 The Bengali (P:142, M1:7a, M2:6b) reads: 154. durgama sādhana patha dūradūra haya/​dūra 
haite nikaṭa nikaṭe dūra haya//​
	25.	 Expressing a plant/​organic growth metaphor.
	26.	 The Bengali (P:134, M1:3a, M2:2b-​3a) reads: 42. viśuddha dharma haya akhaṇḍa akāma/​
animitta nimitta virajā pāradhāma//​ 43. virajā nadīra pāra sei deśakhāna/​sahajapura 
sadānanda nāme sei grāma//​ 44. tāhāra paścimadige kaliṅga kalikā/​campaka kalikā nāme 
tāhāra nāyikā//​ 45. śūnyavṛkṣa śatadala sahasrakamala/​deśa veṛā sei vṛkṣa sarovara jala//​ 
46. tāhāra uttara dige ānandapura grāma/​rasika rasera kuñja manmathera dhāma//​ 47. 
sadānanda sadāmagna sadābhilāṣa/​sahajamānuṣa tāthe sadā kare vāsa//​

--- PAGE 805 ---
780      Glen A. Hayes
 
	27.	 This celestial river is mentioned in the Padma Purāṇa and the Caitanya-​caritāmṛta. It 
divides the material and spiritual realms.
	28.	 These obscure references to the flower buds may refer to female genitalia or to female 
ritual partners.
	29.	 The Bengali (P:137, M1:5a, M2:4b) reads: 97. kāmasarovara āche mānasarovara/​
premasarovara akṣayasarovara//​ 98. cāri sarovara āche hṛdaya bhitare/​[āpanāra deha 
yadi pāra sādhibare//​ Both M1 and M2 agree on 97b; P substitutes amṛtasarovara (Pond of 
Immortality) for akṣayasarovara. In verse 98, both M1 and M2 have cāri (four) sarovara in 
the first line; P has sapta (seven) sarovara-​-​probably a scribal error or an attempt to force 
the quaternary system of Mukunda-​dāsa into the septenary system usually found in Śākta 
tantric schools.
	30.	 See Hayes 1995 and 2000 on the terminology and sequence of the four ponds. The basic 
process requires mastery over the base emotions of lust (kāma), which leads to control of 
māna, often glossed as “pique” in Vaiṣṇava aesthetics, where Rādhā becomes angry with 
Kṛṣna for his apparent disregard of her. On such “pique,” see Dimock and Levertov 1981. 
Such restraint of “pique” or egotism leads to the state of pure Divine Love (prema), and fi­
nally to the highest pond of immortality, which is beyond destruction (akṣaya).
	31.	 Other bodily substances may be involved in sādhana, including feces, menses, and urine. 
See Sarbadhikary 2015, 136; Openshaw 2002; and Jha 1995.
	32.	 For more on rasa and its range of meanings, see Ramanujan and Gerow 1974; Hayes 1988; 
Dimock 1966; and Stewart 2010.
	33.	 Although, curiously, apparently not in male orgasm, since the Sahajiyā sexual sādhana 
is based on “reversal practice” (ulṭā-​sādhana) which is said to prevent ejaculation of the 
fluid. Instead, the fluid is yogically withdrawn into the urethra of the male practitioner and 
into the bāṅkānadī. This leads to the “inner birth” of the subtle body; ejaculation might re­
sult only in the birth of a fleshly body. There are interesting gender dynamics at play here, 
as this practice is a type of “inverse intercourse” where the female fluids are taken into the 
male body.
	34.	 The Bengali (P:150, M1:10a, M2:9b) reads: 239. hṛdaya mājhāre thāke mānasarovara/​
vidhira nirmāṇa sarovara kalevara//​ 240. sei aṣṭadale aṣṭa nāyikā janmila/​sarvadevāra 
aṅge sarvasaṅga karila//​ 241. sulakṣanā sulocanā ara rambhā umā/​rukmiṇī menakā tina 
umā satyabhāmā//​ 242. ei aṣṭadale aṣṭa nāyikā prakāśa/​nīlapadma pītapadma śvetapadma 
bhāsa//​ 243. tārapara aṣṭadale nāyikā avagati/​ aṣṭa nāyikāra padma aṣṭa haya rūpa rati//​
	35.	 These are also among the names of the celestial dancers (apsarās) of classical Hindu and 
Buddhist traditions.
	36.	 Rati is also the name of the wife of the god of love, Kāmadeva.
	37.	 The Bengali (P:150, M1:10a, M2:9b) reads: 237. sarvasāra sarvadevā saṅgsāra ādhāra/​
kāmasarovara kāma nimittaka sāra//​ 238. sarvadevā sarovara kāmadeva rati/​sei aṣṭadala 
padme sarvadevatāra sthiti//​ On the uses of container imagery in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, see 
Dimock 1966, 130–​136, 160.
	38.	 On the conduit metaphor, see Reddy in Ortony 1993, 162.
	39.	 A useful survey of the nāḍīs and other details of the yogic body may be found in Mallinson 
and Singleton 2017, 171–​227. Also see Samuel and Johnston 2013, 39–​42 and White 2003b.
	40.	 The Bengali (P:138, M1:5b, M2:5a) reads: 110. navanāṛī vatriśakoṭi āchaye śarīre/​konakhāne 
keva āche ke jānite pāre//​ 111. kahiba tāhāra kathā śuna bhaktagaṇa/​kāmasarovare āche nāṛī 
tina jana//​ 112. āṭapadme āṭakotā āchaye veṛiyā/​madanamohana nāṛī padma ācchādiyā//​
	41.	 Thirty-​two crore equals 320 million.

--- PAGE 806 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      781
 
	42.	 Both M1 and M2 begin with aṭpadme, “in the eight lotuses;” the printed version in Dāsa 
1972, 138 has ghāṭ padme, “in the stairs and lotuses.” The term koṭā, translated as “medita­
tion hut,” is an obscure technical term. Among Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, the term refers to small 
brick meditation huts surrounding the sacred Rādhākuṇḍa pond in Mathura, used during 
the practice of mañjarī-​sādhana. In Nepal, the similar term koṭhā also means “room” or 
“chamber.”
	43.	 See Lakoff 2008; Gibbs 2008, 26–​28.
	44.	 For a more comprehensive list, see Lakoff and Johnson 1999, 50–​54.
	45.	 However, within the system of the four ponds, the Pond of Lust could also be “down” in 
relation to the other ponds, while the Pond of Divine Love could be “up.” It is a dynamic 
system. See Jha 1995 on the concepts of the “four moons.”
	46.	 For a detailed exploration of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava beliefs and practices involving the “body,” 
see Holdrege 2015.
	47.	 On the concept of parakīyā sādhana as adulterous sexual relationships, as well as the com­
plex resultant emotions, see Dimock 1966, 200–​221. See Mallinson 2018 regarding overall 
views of sex and yoga.
	48.	 Conceptual blending theory (CBT) was first developed by Gilles Fauconnier and Mark 
Turner in their influential 2002 work. Parts of it were adapted by Lakoff in Gibbs 2008 and 
further developed by Mark Turner 2014. For a basic introduction to conceptual blending 
theory and religious studies, see Hayes 2016.
	49.	 See Fauconnier and Turner 2002.
	50.	 My thanks to Bill Phipps for graphically rendering these figures for use in this chapter.
	51.	 One recent neuroscientific laboratory experiment examined how participants in virtual 
reality situations experienced a type of “bodily transfer” of their regular physical body to a 
virtual body, based on manipulation of sensory inputs and other factors. We might specu­
late that similar underlying cognitive processes may be at play in Sahajiyā dehatattva. See 
Slater et al. 2010.
	52.	 Very basic networks are called simplex and mirror networks. On these see Fauconnier and 
Turner 2002, 120–​126. For a brief explanation of networks also see Hayes 2016.
	53.	 See Fauconnier and Turner 2002, 59–​62 for an interesting discussion of a modern philoso­
pher “having a discussion” with Kant—​which is actually impossible in a literal sense—​and 
how it can be illustrated using a blending chart.
	54.	 See Stewart 2010 on the modified dualism (acintya bhedābheda) of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava 
theology. On the importance of the concept of the “abode” (dhāman) of Kṛṣṇa, as well as 
notions of the realms of earthly Vṛndāvana and “eternal” (nitya) Vṛndāvana, see Dimock 
1966, 166–​180.
	55.	 For an informative recent study of the interactions between bhakti, tantra, yoga, and 
Sufism, see Burchett 2019.
	56.	 The Bengali (P;151, M1:10b, M2:10a) reads: 253. sei premasarovara rāgera khacita/​rāgera 
mathane haya premete pūrṇita//​ 254. premera samudra hailā kiśori āpane/​kṛṣṇarasa 
nityavastu prema kari jāne//​ 255. rādhikā rāgera guru premaguru tāra/​rakāre śabde rati 
haya rādhā prīti kāra//​ 256. rati mathane prema udbhava karila/​premasarovara nāma 
ihāte haila//​ 257. premabindu sarovare kṛṣṇera vasati/​sei kṛṣṇarati rasa rūpa prakṛti//​ 258. 
sei rati mathane manthane rati sāra/​anurāga niśi diśi akṣepa camatkāra//​ 259. sei anurāga 
kṛṣṇa rasika śiromaṇi/​ataeva rādhikā prema haya ṛṇi//​
	57.	 Khacita can also mean “filled,” but limned seems appropriate. Limnology is the study of 
the biological, chemical, and physical features of lakes and other bodies of fresh water.

--- PAGE 807 ---
782      Glen A. Hayes
 
	58.	 The text sets up the puruṣa (male)–​prakṛti (female) dyad or energizing spirit (male) 
coupled with the material world (female) without using the term puruṣa, but which is con­
sistent with the direction of Mukunda’s theology. Here is the important moment the text 
seems to shift from bhakti imagery to sahajiyā theology, effectively blending them into the 
emergent structure of Sahajiyā cosmology.
	59.	 Which is based on the earlier model from classical Sāṅkhya philosophy.
	60.	 Charles D. Orzech has noted that a similar set of structures is found in interactions be­
tween Pure Land and tantric traditions of Buddhism. Personal communication, July 15, 
2022.
	61.	 The Bengali (P:132–​133, M1:2b, M2:2a-​2b) reads: 25. mantrāśraya jei kāle gotrāntara haya/​
śikṣaguru upadeśe sādhana karaya//​ 26. sāra sādhya deha sādhanaya adhikārī/​bhāvāśraya 
tattva haya jarā puruṣa nāṛī//​ 27. devadeha dehāntara haibe janma/​sādhibe āśraya tattva 
kibā puruṣa nāṛī//​ 28. devadehe dehāntara haibe yatane/​tabe sikṣā vastutattva pāibe 
yatane//​ 29. āvirbhūta dehe habe sādhana prakṛti/​svabhāva prakṛti haile tabe rāgarati//​
	62.	 On the body of light, see Haberman 1988, 91. See also Holdrege 2015 for details of the devo­
tional body.
	63.	 For details see Stewart 2010, 222–​231.
	64.	 See, e.g., AR, vv. 118–​123, 133, 146, 199–​206.
References
Basu (Bose), Manindramohan. 1932. Sahajiyā sāhitya. Calcutta: University of Calcutta.
Blending and Conceptual Integration webpage. Accessed December 10, 2022. [https://​mar​ktur​
ner.org/​blend​ing.html
Bose, Manindramohan. 1986. The Post-​Caitanya Sahajia [sic] Cult of Bengal. Delhi: Gian 
Publishing House.
Burchett, Patton E. 2019. A Genealogy of Devotion: Bhakti, Tantra, Yoga, and Sufism in North 
India. New York: Columbia University Press.
Casson, Ronald W. 1983. “Schemata in Cognitive Anthropology.” In Annual Review of 
Anthropology, edited by Bernard J. Siegel, Alan R. Beals, and Stephen A. Tyler, 430. Palo Alto, 
CA: Annual Reviews.
The Cambridge Greek Lexicon. 2021. Edited by J. Diggle, B. L. Fraser, P. James, O. B. Simkin, A. 
A. Thompson, and S. J. Westripp. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chakravarti, Ramakanta. 1985. Vaiṣṇavism in Bengal: 1486–​1900. Calcutta: Sanskrit Pustak 
Bhandar.
Czyżykowski, Robert. 2016. “Selected Aspects of the Textual Studies on the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā 
Tradition in Medieval Bengal.” In Cosmopolitanism and Regionalism in Indian Cultural 
Dynamics, Cracow Indological Studies, vol. XVIII, edited by Cristina Bignami and Ewa 
Dębicka-​Borek, 339–​366. Krakow: Institute of Oriental Studies, Jagiellonian University.
Czyżykowski, Robert. 2020. “The Mystical World of the Body in the Bengali Tantric Work 
Nigūḍhārthaprakāśāvali.” Religions 11(9): 472. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​1090​472
Dalton, Jacob. 2004. “The Development of Perfection: The Interiorization of Buddhist Ritual in 
the Eighth and Ninth Centuries.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 32: 1–​30.
Dāsa, Paritoṣ. 1972. Caitanyottara prathama cāriṭi sahajiyā puṅthi. Calcutta: Bharati Book Stall.
Dāsa, Paritoṣ. 1978. Sahajiyā o gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma. Calcutta: Firma K. L. M. Private Ltd.

--- PAGE 808 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      783
 
Dasgupta, Shahshibhusan. 1969. Obscure Religious Cults. 3rd ed. Calcutta: Firma K. L. 
Mukhopadhyay.
De, Sushil Kumar. 1961. Early History of the Vaiṣṇava Faith and Movement in Bengal. 2nd ed. 
Calcutta: K. L. Mukhopadhaya.
Dimock, Edward C., Jr. 1966. The Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic Mysticism in the Vaishnava-​
sahajiyā Cult of Bengal. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Dimock, Edward C., Jr., and Denise Levertov. 1981. In Praise of Krishna: Songs from the Bengali. 
Reprint ed., Chicago: Phoenix Books.
Dimock, Edward C., Jr., and Tony K. Stewart. 1999. Caitanya Caritāmṛta of Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja: 
A Translation and Commentary. Harvard Oriental Series No. 56. Edited by Michael Witzel. 
Cambridge: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard University.
Fauconnier, Gilles, and Mark Turner. 2002. The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the 
Mind’s Hidden Complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Gallagher, Shaun. 2005. How the Body Shapes the Mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W., Jr. 1999. “Taking metaphor out of our heads and putting it into the cul­
tural world.” In Metaphor in Cognitive Linguistics, edited by R. Gibbs and G. Steen, 145–​166. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gibbs, Raymond. W., Jr. 2005. Embodiment and Cognitive Science. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond. W., Jr. 2008. The Cambridge Handbook of Metaphor and Thought. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Haberman, David L. 1988. Acting as a Way of Salvation: A Study of Rāgānugā Bhakti Sādhana. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 1985. “Shapes for the Soul: A Study of Body Symbolism in the Vaiṣṇava-​
sahajiyā Tradition of Medieval Bengal.” Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, June 1985.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 1988. “On the Concept of Vastu in the Vaiṣṇava-​sahajiyā Tradition 
of Medieval Bengal.” In Religions and Comparative Thought: Essays in Honour of the Late 
Dr. Ian Kesarcodi-​Watson, edited by Purusottama Bilimoria and Peter Fenner, 141–​149. Sri 
Garib Dass Oriental Series No. 62. Delhi: Śrī Satguru Publications/​Indian Books Centre.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 1989. “Boating upon the Crooked River: Cosmophysiological 
Soteriologies in the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Tradition of Medieval Bengal.” In Shaping Bengali 
Worlds, Public and Private, edited by Tony K. Stewart, 29–​35. South Asia Series Occasional 
Paper No. 37. East Lansing: Asian Studies Center/​Michigan State University.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 1995. “The Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Traditions of Medieval Bengal.” In 
Religions of India in Practice, edited by Donald S. Lopez, 333–​351. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2000. “The Necklace of Immortality: A 17th-​Century Vaiṣṇava 
Sahajiyā Text.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 308–​325. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2003. “Metaphoric Worlds and Yoga in the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Tantric 
Traditions of Medieval Bengal.” In Yoga: The Indian Tradition, edited by Ian Whicher and 
David Carpenter, 162–​184. New York: RoutledgeCurzon.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2005. “Contemporary Metaphor Theory and Alternative Views 
of Krishna and Rādhā in Vaishnava Sahajiyā Tantric Traditions.” In Alternative Krishnas: 
Regional and Vernacular Variations on a Hindu Deity, edited by Guy Beck, 19–​32. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.

--- PAGE 809 ---
784      Glen A. Hayes
 
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2018. “The Guru’s Tongue: Metaphor, Imagery, and Vernacular 
Language in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Traditions.” In Religion, Language, and the Human Mind, ed­
ited by. Paul Chilton and Monika Kopytowska, 186–​209. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2012a. “Eroticism and Cosmic Transformation as Yoga: The Ātmatattva 
of the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās of Bengal.” In Yoga in Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 
223–​241. Princeton Readings in Religions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2012b. “Conceptual Blending Theory, ‘Reverse Amnesia,’ and the Study 
of Tantra.” Oxford Journal of Hindu Studies 5, no. 2: 193–​209.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2014. “Possible Selves, Body Schemas, and Sādhana: Using Cognitive 
Science and Neuroscience in the Study of Medieval Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Hindu Tantric Texts.” 
Religions 5, no. 3: 684–​699. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​5030​684
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2015. “Exploring the Uses of the Term Sahaja in Hindu Tantra: 
Studying Selected Texts of the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās of Bengal.” In Sahaja: The Role of Doha and 
Caryagiti in the Indo-​Tibetan Interface, edited by Andrea Loseries, 25–​137. Delhi: Buddhist 
World Press.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2016. “Conceptual Blending and Religion.” In Religion: Mental Religion, 
edited by Niki Clements, 163–​178. New York: MacMillan Interdisciplinary Handbooks.
Hayes, Glen Alexander. 2023. “Prema and Śakti: Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Appropriations of Gauḍīya 
Vaiṣṇavism and Śāktism in the Ānandabhairava of Prema-​dāsa.” In Studies on Tantra in 
Bengal and Eastern India, edited by Madhu Khanna, 37–​57. London: Springer.
Jha, Sakti Nāth. 1995. “Cari-​Candra Bhed: Use of the Four Moons.” In Mind Body and Society: 
Life and Mentality in Colonial Bengal, edited by Rajat Kanta Ray, 65–​108. Calcutta, India: 
Oxford University Press.
Holdrege, Barbara A. 2015. Bhakti and Embodiment: Fashioning Divine Bodies and Devotional 
Bodies in Kṛṣṇa Bhakti. New York: Routledge.
Johnson, Mark. 1987. The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination, and 
Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kaviraja, Gopinath. 1969. Tantrik sādhana o siddhanta. vol. 1. Burdhwan, India: Bardhaman 
Visvavidyalaya.
Kaviraja, Gopinath. 1975. Tantrik sādhana o siddhanta. vol. 2. Burdhwan, India: Bardhaman 
Visvavidyalaya.
Lakoff, George. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the 
Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George. 1993. “The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor.” In Metaphor and Thought, ed­
ited by Andrew Ortony, 202–​251. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, George. 2008. “The Neural Theory of Metaphor.” In The Cambridge Handbook of 
Metaphor and Thought, edited by Raymond. W. Gibbs, Jr., pp. 17–​38. Cambridge University 
Press. https://​doi.org/​10.1017/​CBO97​8051​1816​802.003
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1999. Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its 
Challenge to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, George, and Rafael E. Nunez. 2000. Where Mathematics Comes From: How the 
Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Turner. 1989. More Than Cool Reason: A Field Guide to Poetic 
Metaphor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 810 ---
Exploring Metaphors and Conceptual Blending      785
 
Levin, Samuel. 1993. “Language, Concepts, and Worlds: Three Domains of Metaphor.” In 
Metaphor and Thought 2nd ed., edited by Andrew Ortony, 112–​123. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2015. Where Metaphors Come From: Reconsidering Context in Metaphor. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Kvaerne, Per. 1975. “On the Concept of Sahaja in Indian Buddhist Tantric Literature.” Temenos 
11: 88–​135.
Mallinson, James. 2018. “Yoga and Sex: What Is the Purpose of Vajrolī-​mudrā.” In Yoga in 
Transformation: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives, edited by Karl Baier, Philipp A. 
Maas, and Karin Preisendanz, 181–​222. Vienna: Vienna University Press.
Mallinson, James, and Mark Singleton. eds. and trans. 2017. Roots of Yoga. London: Penguin 
Classics.
McNamara, Patrick. 2009. The Neuroscience of Religious Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
O’Connell, Joseph. 1989. “Were Caitanya’s Vaiṣṇavas Really Sahajiyās? The Case of Rāmānanda 
Rāya.” In Shaping Bengali Worlds, Public and Private, edited by Tony K. Stewart, 11–​22. East 
Lansing, MI: Asian Studies Center.
O’Connell, Joseph. 1993. “Rāmānanda Rāya: A Sahajiyā or a Rāgānugā Bhakta?” 
Journal of Vaiṣṇava Studies 1, no. 3: 36–​58.
O’Connell, Joseph T. 2019. “Hybrid Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyās.” In Caitanya Vaiṣṇavism in Bengal, ed­
ited by Frances Roach and Catherine Sloan, 127–​154. New York: Routledge.
Openshaw, Jeanne. 2002. Seeking Bāuls of Bengal. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ortony, Andrew, ed. 1993. Metaphor and Thought. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Palmer, Gary B. 1996. Toward a Theory of Cultural Linguistics. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Pathak, Shubha, ed. 2013. Figuring Religions: Comparing Ideas, Images, and Activities. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Ramanujan, A. K., and Edwin Gerow. 1974. “Indian Poetics.” In The Literatures of India: An 
Introduction, edited by Edward C. Dimock, Jr., Edwin Gerow, C. M. Naim, A. K. Ramanujan, 
Gordon Roadarmel, and J. A. B. van Buitenen, 115–​143. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sacks, Sheldon, ed. 1979. On Metaphor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Salomon, Carol. 1995. “The Bāuls.” In Religions of India in Practice, edited by Donald S. Lopez, 
187–​208. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Salomon, Carol. 2017. City of Mirrors: Songs of Lālan Sẵi. Edited by Keith E. Cantu and Saymon 
Zakaria. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey, and Jay Johnston. 2013. Religion and the Subtle Body in Asia and the West. 
London: Routledge.
Sarbadhikary, Sukanya. 2015. The Place of Devotion: Siting and Experiencing Divinity in Bengal-​
Vaishnavism. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Slater, Mel, Bernhard Spanlang, Maria V. Sanchez-​Vives, and Olaf Blanke. 2010. “First Person 
Experience of Body Transfer in Virtual Reality.” PLoS One 5, no. 5: e10564. https://​doi.org/​
10.1371/​jour​nal.pone.0010​564
Stewart, Tony K. 2010. The Final Word: The Caitanya-​caritāmṛta and the Grammar of Religious 
Tradition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Stewart, Tony K. 2019. “The Power of the Secret: The Tantalising Discourse of Sahajiya 
Scholarship.” In The Legacy of Vaiṣṇavism in Colonial Bengal, edited by Ferdinando Sardella 
and Lucian Wong, 125–​166. London: Taylor and Francis.

--- PAGE 811 ---
786      Glen A. Hayes
 
Thāndār, Bimal Kumār. 2012. Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā kavi Mukundadāsa o Rasikadāsa. Calcutta: 
Vivekānanda Book Centre.
Toelken, Barre. 1995. Morning Dew and Roses: Nuance, Metaphor, and Meaning in Folksongs. 
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Turner, Mark. 2014. The Origin of Ideas: Blending, Creativity, and the Human Spark. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2001a. The Economics of Ecstasy: Tantra, Secrecy, and Power in Colonial Bengal. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2001b. Songs of Ecstasy: Tantric and Devotional Songs from Colonial Bengal. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2003. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics, and Power in the Study of Religion. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
White, David Gordon. 1996. The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. 2003a. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Contexts. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. 2003b. “Yoga in Early Hindu Tantra.” In Yoga: The Indian Tradition, 
edited by Ian Whicher and David Carpenter, 143–​161. New York: Routledge.
Yu, Ning. 2008. “Metaphor from Body and Culture.” In The Cambridge Handbook of Metaphor 
and Thought, edited by Raymond W. Gibbs, Jr., 247–​261. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

--- PAGE 812 ---
Chapter 31
Cosmogenesis and 
Phonematic Emanation
Ben Williams
Precedents
Speculation on the relationship between speech and the creative process of manifes­
tation has a pedigree in Indian thought, beginning in the earliest period of the Vedic 
religion. The Ṛg Veda glorifies speech (vāc) as a goddess, who praises herself through a 
Vedic seer in this way: “I pervade heaven and earth. It is I who give birth to the Father, 
on the summit of this [world]” (Padoux 1990, 8).1 The notion that speech deified is foun­
dational to the structure of reality and pervades everything explains the great reverence 
placed upon the hymns and formulas of the Vedic seers, which take the form of a col­
lection of mantras that comprise the Veda itself. It is in virtue of the goddess Vāc that 
the inspired poet-​seers were able to give voice to the Vedic hymns on sacrificial ground, 
conceived as an activity that “creates and sustains the cosmos” (Jamison & Brereton 
2014, 1603).
Another ancient premise subsequently elaborated in tantric cosmologies of word is the 
development of the signification of the syllable OM. By the time the Brāhmaṇas and the 
earliest Upaniṣads were originally compiled, OM had transcended its original liturgical 
function to assume a much broader meaning as a holistic symbol of Vedic revelation, a 
sound that permeates the universe, and a sonic emblem of absolute reality.2 The gener­
ative power of speech and language and its component elements of phoneme (varṇa), 
syllable (akṣara), and prosodic instance (mātrā), which are elaborated in hymns, are 
fundamental to the religion of the Vedas, broadly construed. As Gerety explains, “in the 
Vedic worldview, sacred sound is cosmogonic and universal: anterior to creation, it gives 
form to the cosmos and maintains the cosmic order” (Gerety 2015, 126–​127).
The notion of subtle language or vibration permeating and transcending the world 
sets a pattern that is amplified in the revealed literature of the tantras. That said, the 
intervening theories of the grammarian Bhartṛhari (ca. 400–​450 CE) permeate much

--- PAGE 813 ---
788      Ben Williams
 
of the basic vocabulary and conceptual repertoire of tantric linguistic mysticism. 
Bhartṛhari identifies “word” (śabda) as the essential principle of ultimate reality that is 
the ontological foundation of all human language and experience, and according to his 
“strong view,”3 the source of the universe. For Bhartṛhari, this word-​absolute includes 
the powers of time and space that order and structure the world (Aklujkar 2001, 463) 
and pervades all cognition and experience, from perception to the syntax of thought. 
This chapter provides recourse to the complex relationship of Bhartṛhari’s theories with 
tantric philosophies of language.
Tantric literature significantly expands upon these and other earlier notions of the re­
lationship between speech and reality in a number of domains: yoga, ritual praxis, cos­
mology, the visualization of deities, and theorization and deployment of mantras.4 This 
chapter primarily considers tantric streams devoted to Śiva and goddesses in which we 
encounter a variety of understandings on the relationship between divine speech, the 
emanation of sound, and cosmogenesis, employed toward distinctive religious ends and 
modes of empowerment.5
Earliest Speculations
As we will see, the tantric literature under consideration does integrate the syllable OM 
as a source of the world and all speech, as well as a mantra to be enunciated in the course 
of rites and yogic exercises. Tantric scriptures and commentaries also adopt and refor­
mulate Bhartṛhari’s term for the Word-​absolute, śabda-​brahma, his theory of sphoṭa, and 
the levels of speech. These notions are augmented by other concepts such as “supreme 
speech” (parāvāc), “speech goddess” (vāgīśvarī), the “source” (mātṛkā, also “mother,” 
“syllabary,” or “alphabet goddess”), “resonance” (nāda), the “coiled-​one” (kuṇḍalinī), 
and many more. These terms are polysemic in scriptural sources and often find them­
selves arrayed in models of sonic emanation and resorption that are mutually diver­
gent and sometimes even incommensurable, regardless of the vigorous systematizing 
efforts of commentators. One important feature that distinguishes mātṛkā, which 
will be central to this study, is its specific relationship to the symbolism of the series of 
phonemes that constitute the Sanskrit syllabary. That said, in what follows the syllable 
OM, Bhartṛhari’s philosophy, nāda or “divine resonance,” and the linguistic goddess 
Kuṇḍalinī will also be foregrounded.
The earliest extant textual record of Śaiva tantric revelation is the Niśvāsa corpus, the 
first three layers of which (Mūla-​, Uttara-​, and Naya-​sūtras) have been critically ed­
ited, translated, and annotated by Goodall, Sanderson, and Isaacson (2015). Already 
in the Uttarasūtra and the Nayasūtra, the vision of mātṛkā is elaborate and becomes 
a touchstone for subsequent tantric views on the cosmic powers and ritual potencies 
of language. But there are also some general formulations that are significant for our 
overall inquiry. To begin with, we find the idea that at the source of all scripture is a res­
onance (nāda),6 emerging from formless Śiva, which is then differentiated in a descent

--- PAGE 814 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      789
 
of scripture (tantrāvatāra)7 into diverse metrical texts. The idea that Śiva is not at this 
ultimate level a visible form but, rather, the source of an extremely subtle pulsation 
that blossoms into mantras and scriptures, is echoed throughout later Śaiva tantric 
scriptures.8 This paradigmatic conception of deity in tantric literature, as an embodi­
ment of mantra, is encapsulated in an oft-​cited dictum that is perhaps first recorded in 
the Niśvāsa corpus: “all deities have mantra as their nature and all mantras have Śiva as 
their nature.”9 The goddess of speech (vāgeśī) also makes a compelling appearance in the 
Mūlasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, where she is described as the “mother” of newly 
consecrated initiates. A similar concept is found in relationship to the Gāyatrī mantra, 
also described as the “mother” of a new initiate who is ritually reborn through the Vedic 
thread-​investiture ritual (Haas 2022, 146).
Törzsök (2016) diachronically traces the earliest development of mātṛkā, showing 
how the concept develops from an abstract representation of the syllabary—​the source 
of all phonemes and by extension mantras—​to an independent goddess. She elucidates 
the depiction of mātṛkā in the Uttarasūtra as the alphabet, consisting of eight groups of 
letters, identified as a female mantra (vidyā), and presented as the source of all words, 
scriptures, mantras, and languages (Törzsök 2016, 139). The Uttarasūtra also presents 
the ritual worship of mātṛkā, in which the practitioner places the consonants and 
vowels that constitute mātṛkā on the “right and left sides,” respectively, likely referring 
to the practitioner’s body (Törzsök 2016, 140).10 In the cult of mātṛkā, the deities are 
“worshipped in or as a vowel or a vowel group.” Given the way those vowels are presented 
as having distinct prosodical lengths, Törzsök speculates that the original derivation 
of mātṛkā may stem from the Sanskrit term for the relative length of a prosodical in­
stance or mora (mātrā). The tradition itself will offer the semantic analysis of mātṛkā as 
“mother,”11 which accounts for the way in which she is designated as the source (yoni) of 
languages, mantras, and eventually manifest world, and often translated with the cog­
nate term “matrix.” In the Uttarasūtra, mātṛkā is related to mantras identified with Śiva, 
and characterized as mātṛkāśiva, evidence that the concept has yet to achieve the status 
of a fully independent goddess (Törzsök 2016, 141).
In the next level of the Niśvāsa corpus, the Nayasūtra, there are teachings on mātṛkā 
related to a rare physical yogic discipline of manipulating the body to form the shape 
of different letters of the syllabary. Importantly, the Nayasūtra also includes a vision of 
mātṛkā and all the phonemes that constitute it (particularly the syllable A) as containing 
all levels of reality (tattvas). While not yet related to a theory of cosmogenesis, this 
connection of ontological levels to the phonemes of the Sanskrit syllabary is founda­
tional to later maps of the process of creation. In the Nayasūtra, the knowledge of these 
homologies12 is soteriological, since “he who recognizes the equivalences between 
his body, the letters, and the ontological levels of the universe is promised liberation” 
(Törzsök 2016, 141). The Nayasūtra also reports how such knowledge empowers a guru 
by granting them mastery over all mantras and, correspondingly, the capacity to liberate 
disciples.13
A few more details can be added to this summary. First, it is important to highlight 
that mātṛkā is paramount to the doctrine, ritual, and yoga of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā,

--- PAGE 815 ---
790      Ben Williams
 
and thus the earliest stratum of extant Śaiva tantric literature. Regarding the mantra 
system of the Uttarasūtra, it is based both theoretically and practically in mātṛkā 
(Goodall et al. 2015, 370). Consequently, the rite of liberating initiation (nirvāṇa-​
dīkṣā) utilizes mātṛkā, where there is an offering of oblations for each letter of the syl­
labary.14 The thrust of the entire Nayasūtra can be understood as an elaboration of the 
Uttarasūtra’s teaching on yoga and its focus on mātṛkāśiva (Goodall et al. 2015, 401), and 
this involves embodying the syllabary through a complex system of hand and bodily 
gestures. This practice warrants a few additional observations. The first is the novel in­
troduction of the script (North-​Indian Gupta)15 as a new visual medium of representa­
tion supplementing orality and effectively entextualizing the mantras (see Hayes, this 
volume).16 This use of graphemes to visually17 represent each phoneme of mātṛkā and 
serve as a guide for physical embodiment invites further theorization.18 This teaching 
on embodying the graphic representations of mātṛkā, a rare physical form of yoga in 
classical tantra, also requires more exploration as a background to the more body-​based 
yogic praxis of Haṭhayoga.19 Finally, mātṛkā, as the root of all mantras, with phonemes 
corresponding to ontological levels, and assimilable through yogic technologies of 
physical mimesis, is taught as bestowing a tantric yogi or guru power over all mantras, 
and much more. This exemplifies a salient principle of tantric systems: the ritual forging 
of connections between divine syllables, reality, and the body that “place the human or­
ganism into a relation of structural homology to the macrocosm . . . rendering mastery 
of the external universe” (Hatley 2007, 353).
In the next layer of the Niśvāsa corpus, the Guhyasūtra, we find mātṛkā first 
represented as an independent goddess and identified obliquely20 with the coiled divine 
power, kuṇḍalinī (who goes on to a rather robust and eclectic post-​tantric-​age career) 
(Törzsök 2016, 142–​143). Kuṇḍalinī as a mobile form of the alphabet goddess located in 
the body is developed further in the slightly later Niśvāsakārikā.21
Śaiva Siddhānta
The scriptures and postscriptural literature of the Śaiva Siddhānta, a relatively or­
thodox tantric tradition largely congruent with Veda-​based ritual norms, includes di­
verse models for the emanation of sound and an abundance of teachings on the integral 
relationships between language, scripture, mantra, and the world.22 Thanks largely 
to the scholarship of Goodall (1998, xlvii–​lxxiv), the extant Siddhānta scriptures that 
predate the twelfth century have been identified and also arranged into a relative chro­
nology. This rough chronology will be kept in mind in the following presentation of the 
emanation and nature of sound in Siddhānta scriptural sources. This analysis will also 
integrate insights of important contributions on this topic by Goodall and Sferra.
In the Siddhānta scriptures, the presence of mātṛkā is less prominent than in 
Śākta-​Śaiva sources, but there are a number of other concepts that recur, quite con­
spicuously resonance (nāda). One of the earliest of Śaiva Siddhānta scriptures,

--- PAGE 816 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      791
 
the Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, describes a deity who emerges from the absolute 
(brahman) identified with the word (śabda) as the collection of letters (śabdarāśi), 
a male counterpart to mātṛkā.23 This formulation of Śiva as Śabdarāśi, perhaps the 
earliest (Törzsök 2016, 153), is consistent with the tantric conception of deity as mantra 
and the transcendent aspect of Śiva set forth in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā. In the 
Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, this sonic nature of the deity encompasses all the syllables, 
the sixteen vowels (or “seeds” [bīja]) and thirty-​four consonants (or “wombs” [yoni]). 
The power of this supreme deity permeates the universe and is described as the universal 
cause (kāraṇa) of all revelation.24 Here the Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṅgraha characterizes 
the supreme reality as a formless causal deity that needs to be decoded and transcribed 
into scriptural teachings.
Another early scripture, the Sarvajñānottara, describes itself as emanating from a 
subtle resonance, and this nāda is said to issue from a transcendent and all-​pervasive 
deity who transcends all levels of reality.25 This subtle sonic form of scriptural wisdom 
is then said to penetrate and awaken a level of reality associated with bindu, which 
may here refer to the subtle seed of phenomenal reality.26 That nāda is then described 
as giving rise to the word (śabda), the pure language that constitutes all mantras, and 
which subsequently differentiates into the phonemes, which are presented as the source 
of all beings, both sentient and insentient.27 This emphasis on the dynamic role of the 
phonemes, both vowels and consonants, in relation to the world (carācara) is note­
worthy and is further magnified by the injunction to ritually worship the phonemes, 
the details of which follow this section. The exact relationship between nāda and the 
phonemes is not explicated in the earliest revelatory sources but will be explored by a 
later scripture, the Parākhyatantra, and more elaborately in Saiddhāntika commentarial 
literature. There we will find long-​standing philosophical controversies, particularly be­
tween the grammarians and Vedic exegetes (Mīmāṃsakas), entering the tantric milieu.
The Kiraṇatantra, another demonstrably early Saiddhāntika scripture, does feature 
mātṛkā in a chapter dedicated to her origin (mātṛkotpatti). In this section of the text, the 
scriptural interlocutor Garuḍa questions Śiva on how a unitary wisdom differentiates 
into diverse streams of knowledge.28 The Kiraṇa first threads multiple concepts to­
gether through the equation of (1) knowledge in the form of resonance (nāda), (2) a 
higher bindu, (3) supreme brahman, (4) the syllable OM, (5) the receptacle of syllables, 
which come to have fifty divisions, and are subsequently identified as (6) “the syllabary,” 
namely, mātṛkā.29 In introducing mātṛkā, the Kiraṇa supplies an answer to Gāruḍa’s 
query, for “like a mother” she is generative, propagating multiple knowledge sys­
tems while pervading them. This explains how an original unitary body of knowledge 
becomes diversified.30 Not only does subtle resonance, identified with the syllable OM, 
represent the source of all tantric revelation but also the phonemes of the Sanskrit lan­
guage, and by extension all language. Thus, the Kiraṇa features mātṛkā as the fount of 
major Sanskrit knowledge systems: texts on rational inquiry and debate (tarka), courtly 
poetry (kāvya), and the great epics (itihāsa),31 scriptural literature,32 and even regional 
songs.33 The Kiraṇatantra here adapts mātṛkā in a gesture that subsumes broader 
horizons of Sanskrit discourse to the prolific dissemination of this phonematic power.

--- PAGE 817 ---
792      Ben Williams
 
The Sārdhatriśatikālottara begins with an oft-​cited passage34 that examines nāda as 
the supreme seed (bīja) of all communication, including non-​Sanskritic languages, and 
the bestower of liberation and divine enjoyments.35 Knowledge of nāda is presented 
in three gradations, supreme, subtle, and outer, which exhibit a general overlap with 
Bhartṛhari’s tripartite levels of speech, visionary (paśyantī), middle (madhyamā), and 
articulated (vaikharī),36 particularly in the way that the outer/​articulated levels are 
audible, subtle/​middle are mental, and supreme/​visionary comprise a subtle source 
of language unconditioned by that discursive cognitive domain. This scripture also 
makes reference to kuṇḍalinī, characterizing the coiled goddess as an embodied power 
residing in the heart, connected to the three channels, and responsible for flooding the 
body with nectar.37
A verse from the Mṛgendratantra, frequently leveraged by later writers to rationalize 
their schema on the emanation of sound, teaches:38
From the divine power (śakti) arises nāda, then bindu, then the imperishable 
(akṣara), and finally mātṛkā, the original embodiment of Śiva that conforms to all 
that can be expressed in language.
The pairing of nāda and bindu here will become prototypical of the accounts given by 
Saiddhāntika exegetes, and śakti, the source of this process, is identified by the com­
mentator Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha as kuṇḍalinī, who further glosses her nature as parāvāc, su­
preme speech.39 In this account, mātṛkā serves as a threshold between these subtle sonic 
powers and the groups of letters that form mantras, words, and sentences.
Certain later Siddhānta scriptures feature a dialectical bent and draw significantly 
upon debates from diverse knowledge systems, quite prominently epistemology, 
grammar, Buddhist philosophy, Vedānta, Sāṅkhya, and Vedic exegesis.40 One such 
scripture is the Parākhyatantra. Its account of the emanation of sound rehearses earlier 
philosophical disputes between the grammarians and Mīmāṃsakas on how language 
denotes meaning, which comes to be an important preoccupation in Saiddhāntika ex­
egetical writing. In the Parākhyatantra, the primordial beginnings of mantra and lan­
guage involve Śiva birthing seed syllables from the bindu or the “drop,” through an act of 
will that incites it to generate the totality of sounds (śabdarāśi), which is then identified 
with mātṛkā, the ground of all communication and worldly discourse. This bindu is 
taught as the material cause of all phonemes that are inert, whereas Śiva serves as the 
efficient cause who is conscious. Here we have the initial stirrings of certain key theolog­
ical distinctions that will be foundation to a mature Śaiva Siddhānta ontology.
The scriptural interlocutor of the Parākhya, Pratoda, introduces a polemical tenor 
to the discussion by scrutinizing the account on the basis of the theory of sphoṭa as 
propounded by the grammarian-​philosopher Bharṭhari.41 Pratoda characterizes sphoṭa 
as an all-​pervasive and eternal power that, by manifesting through the phonemes, is 
the ultimate conveyor of meaning. He likewise dismisses the Mīmāṃsakas’ view42 
that phonemes serve as the meaning-​bearer, which he argues is untenable given their 
ephemerality.43 In the debate that ensues,44 the ultimate conclusion is that there is no

--- PAGE 818 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      793
 
independent entity known as sphoṭa beyond the phonemes themselves, which are ex­
clusively responsible for generating meaning. This final view will be contradicted by 
Rāmakaṇṭha (ca. 950–​1000), an authoritative Saiddhāntika commentator who presents 
the basic arguments for sphoṭa in the guise of nāda in the Nādakārikā, discussed below.
The earliest systematization of the Siddhānta position from the commentarial tradi­
tion is found in the Ratnatrayaparīkṣā of Śrīkaṇṭha (early tenth century).45 This text, 
whose teachings on the emanation of sound are elucidated in an article by Sferra (2007), 
provides a “standard series” that many subsequent authors follow: “bindu/​kuṇḍalinī =​
> nāda =​> bindu =​> śabdarāśi/​arṇa” (Sferra 2007, 446).46 The original bindu here is the 
“higher” or “unstruck” (anāhata) source, a level of sound that invites more synonyms, 
including kuṇḍalinī; nāda is the divine resonance whose presence in early Saiddhāntika 
scriptures is global; and this is then paired with yet another bindu, which gives birth 
to the collection of the phonemes (śabdarāśi/​arṇa) that scriptural sources also desig­
nate as mātṛkā. On the novelty of this sequence in commentarial sources, Goodall notes 
“there may in fact be no extant scriptural source that presents the emanation and na­
ture of sound in the way that the writers of the mature Kashmirian Śaiva Siddhānta do” 
(Goodall 2001, 328).
Regarding the emanation of mantra and language, Śrīkaṇṭha offers another model 
that expands upon and reframes Bhartṛhari’s levels of speech in Śaiva parlance, noting 
four levels of bindu as subtle (sūkṣmā), visionary (paśyantī), middle (madhyamā), and 
articulated (vaikharī). The addition of a fourth level of speech, although apparently con­
sonant with nondual Śaiva authors’ addendum of parāvāc, is here associated explicitly 
with a dualistic ontology. To explain, for Śrīkaṇṭha individual souls and Śiva are separate 
from all levels of language, and the latter is reduced to an insentient substance (Sferra 
2007, 452–​453).
In an interesting reversal of the Parākhyatantra’s proof of phonemes being the pri­
mary vehicle for denoting meaning, the Nādakārikā of Rāmakaṇṭha47 argues that it 
is nāda that makes possible the basic synthesis required for semantics. Recapitulating 
salient refutations of Kumārila’s phonematic view (varṇavāda) of linguistic cognition 
found in the Sphoṭasiddhi of Maṇḍanamiśra,48 Rāmakaṇṭha aims to logically establish 
the reality of nāda, particularly in a role that is equivalent to the concept of sphoṭa.49 He 
also follows Śrīkaṇṭha’s theorization of sonic emanation, equating nāda with a range of 
terms50 resonant with tantric meanings.
The earlier scriptures of the Śaiva Siddhānta trace a continuum between Śiva and 
nāda, which is then seen as birthing mantras, scriptures, languages, and, more rarely, 
the manifest world through a descending arc. But the commentarial phase, motivated 
by concrete theological concerns, extricates nāda, and related subtle linguistic elements, 
from Śiva and the innately liberated Self51 and relegates it to an ultimately insentient re­
ality.52 As we will see, this marks a contrast to the postscriptural theologies of the Śākta-​
Śaiva corpus, where the phonemes and their linguistic potential penetrate to the very 
heart of the deity (Torella 1987, 178), the unitary consciousness at the core of all reality. 
This consciousness is an infinite and unconstrained creative agency that differentiates 
into the world in virtue of being pregnant with the subtlest potencies of language, the

--- PAGE 819 ---
794      Ben Williams
 
catalogue of the phonemes, that serve as seeds of a diversifying unity. Before exploring 
this more philosophically robust view, we will track scriptural precedents in tantric lit­
erature centered on Bhairava and an array of goddesses and their retinues.
Non-​Saiddhāntika Śaiva 
and Śākta Tantra
In the foregoing survey of the Niśvāsa corpus and Śaiva Siddhānta sources, there have 
been allusions to divine speech, resonance, and the mass of phonemes pervading reality 
and corresponding to the ontological levels, which in other discussions serve as a map 
for the creative phase of the world’s emanation (sṛṣṭikrama) or cosmogenesis. This no­
tion, however, is articulated much more explicitly in the scriptural and commentarial 
literature of non-​Saiddhāntika tantric streams.53 Here too mātṛkā, and a related sylla­
bary sequence, mālinī, are completely deified into tantric goddesses. The following anal­
ysis, which is for the most part diachronic, combines original scholarship with reference 
to important studies by Padoux, Torella, Bäumer, Törzsök, and Vasudeva. In conso­
nance with our survey of the Siddhānta tantras, we will move from divergent schema of 
phonematic emanation and linguistic speculation in scriptural sources to the exegetical 
agendas of Śākta-​Śaiva commentators.
The Svacchandabhairava, an early tantra of the Bhairava stream, assigns eight mother 
goddesses to the groups of letters that emerge from mātṛkā (Törzsök 2016, 143–​144). In 
the Brahmayāmalatantra, the earliest scripture to focus on rites and sādhanas related to 
the cult of yoginīs, there is a description of the genesis of the fifty phonemes that coalesce 
into a retinue of mantra-​deities surrounding Kapālīśabhairava, the central deity. They 
all emerge from the volitional power of Śiva, described as avadhūtā śakti. Awakening 
bindu and nāda and described as a “coiled” power (kuṇḍalinī), this śakti then transforms 
into the syllabary.54 Hatley observes that “a number of passages in related literature 
share the theme of the formless, quiescent, supreme Śiva’s power of volition (icchā śakti), 
in the form known as kuṇḍalinī, awakening the primordial resonance or vibration (and 
giving rise to the Sanskrit phonemes in successive stages)” (Hatley 2018, 417). Before 
propagating the sixteen vowels, the coiled shape of kuṇḍalinī is envisioned as the loop 
of an early-​medieval grapheme55 for the letter A, another early piece of evidence for the 
tantric preoccupation with the visual representations of syllabary-​related goddesses.56 
The Brahmayāmala also maps the phonemes onto the tantric body, identifying the let­
ters with goddesses and inlaying them in a sequence of inner cakras (Törzsök 2016, 145). 
And we find a vivid description of Mālinī, the alphabet goddess “par excellence,” in the 
Trika Śākta lineage, envisioned by the Brahmayāmala as a “honey comb with its cells,” 
and the metaphor relates her to cosmogenesis, since “creation is effected by the shaking 
(kṣobha) the beehive” (Törzsök 2016, 145).

--- PAGE 820 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      795
 
The earliest tantra of the goddess tradition called the Trika, eponymous for the 
“triad” of goddesses that organize its tantric liturgy, is the Siddhayogeśvarīmata. This 
Śākta source develops teachings from the Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṅgraha (detailing the 
worship of Śabdarāśi in a cremation ground as Bhairava) (Törzsök 2016, 148–​149), the 
Svacchandatantra (describing eight mother goddesses who govern the eight groups of 
the syllabary) (Törzsök 2016, 147), and the Brahmayāmalatantra (elaborating Mālinī as 
an alphabet goddess and also referring to kuṇḍalinī). Kuṇḍalinī is therein described as 
the source of the world (jagadyoni) and the phonemes.57
Further comment is required on mālinī, who unlike mātṛkā, is represented in what 
has been generally considered a disarrayed sequence of Sanskrit phonemes, begin­
ning with NA and ending in PHA. Thanks to the astute decoding of Vasudeva (2007), 
we now know otherwise. Key to his breakthrough was noting the original pragmatic 
context of nyāsa, the purifying and empowering installation of each phoneme upon 
the body, which represents the corresponding portion the mantric form of mālinī. 
Vasudeva notes that there is a “flawless preservation, despite the frequent divergence 
of sequence, of the association of a corresponding phoneme and body part” (Vasudeva 
2007, 530). The reason for this “unexpected uniformity,” Vasudeva argues, is based 
upon the visual appearance of the graphemes, in the Gupta Brāhmī script, that corre­
spond to the shape of each body part, from the goddess’s topknot formed by the char­
acter NA down to her left foot, composed of the character PHA.58 Thus, the sequence 
is not jumbled but rather vertically arrayed to reveal the goddess herself, standing 
forth with a body of phonemes, offering a visual map for the ritual divinization of the 
body. This practice, Vasudeva contends, creatively blurs the mediums of sound and 
script, causing a fusion that forges a “synaesthetic icon” in the space of the body. This 
allows one to “see the alphabet as a goddess—​strikingly apt for the creative power un­
derlying and manifesting the universe” (Vasudeva 2007, 535). The Śākta scriptures that 
detail this practice include early Trika sources, primarily the Siddhayogeśvarīmata, 
Mālinīvijayottara, and Tantrasadbhāva, as well as scriptures devoted to the goddess 
Kubjikā that are indebted to the Trika.
Another important Śākta scripture, the earliest to focus upon the Goddess 
Tripurasundarī in a tradition subsequently named Śrīvidyā, is the Vāmakeśvarīmata. 
Tripurasundarī is introduced at the outset of this text through twelve benedictions that 
herald her as mātṛkā.59 This alphabet goddess is exalted as “the thread on which the 
three-​worlds are strung.”60 Further developing this cosmological reference, she is then 
described as taking the visual form of an inverted triangle, which is the shape of the 
grapheme used for the vowel E, envisioned as the source from which all worlds ema­
nate.61 This phoneme, and its corresponding shape in the script,62 comes to symbolize 
the downward triangle at the center of the śrīcakra (Padoux 1990, 265), the tradition’s 
central deity-​enthroning diagram. Within that triangle is a dot, termed the mahābindu, 
which comes to be understood as containing three bindus within it, comprising a subtle 
figure described as the kāmakalā cakra. This figure is formed by the seed mantra ĪṂ. 
In early post-​Gupta scripts, the grapheme for Ī is three dots, which thus serves as the

--- PAGE 821 ---
796      Ben Williams
 
visual representation of this theologically and symbolically laden image of the goddess 
(Khanna 1986, 122–​123).
In addition to the prominent place given to mātṛkā at the outset of this founda­
tional scripture, we also find a description of the female deity as the “coiled-​one” (i.e., 
kuṇḍalinī). In the Vāmakeśvarīmata, she flashes upward, pierces the sun that is Śiva, 
causes the orb of the moon to shower nectar, merges with the transcendent Self, and 
then returns to her original abode in the body63 after blissfully roaming the universe.64 
Less focused on phonematic emanation, this account models in nuce the kuṇḍalinī-​yoga 
further developed by this tradition and Haṭhayoga sources. Later Śrīvidyā texts, such as 
the Kāmakalāvilāsa, will map the phonematic emanation through four stages of speech, 
parāvāc, paśyantī, madhyamā, and vaikharī, and represent this as a process of cosmic 
unfolding (Khanna 1986, 143ff.).
Before moving to the postscriptural literature that is grounded in these non-​
Saiddhāntika scriptural streams, we must address one more Śākta scripture that is 
quite consequential in the history of phonematic emanation in tantric literature—​
the Parātrīśikā. Serving as the root text of the Anuttara Trika tradition devoted to 
the solitary Goddess Parā and her seed mantra SAUḤ, the Parātrīśikā presents, to 
my knowledge, the earliest fully explicit account of phonematic emanation as cos­
mogenesis. This is notwithstanding significant precedents in earlier tantric sources 
for mātṛkā or nāda being identified as the source of language, mantra, revelation, 
and the world, not to mention numerous correspondences between phonemes and 
reality levels (tattva).
The Parātrīśikā provides an “order of emission” (sṛṣṭikrama) by correlating the vowels 
to phases of time (tithi), and then moving sequentially through the consonants that are 
mapped to the tattvas.65 The group of sixteen vowels, exalted among the phonemes, 
comes to be understood as an ur-​movement within the highest level of reality, śiva-​
tattva. Therefore, the threshold of creation is really the transition point between vowels 
and consonants. The elaborated version of this theory of phonematic emanation is 
found in Abhinavagupta’s commentary (vivaraṇa) on the Parātrīśikā, as well as the 
analogous versions found in chapter three of his Tantrāloka and Tantrasāra. These ac­
counts are comprehensively documented in the scholarship of Bäumer (2011, 146–​157) 
and Padoux (1990, 233–​304). The latter comprises a chapter of a truly pioneering, thor­
oughly researched, and far-​ranging monograph on the reality of word, levels of speech, 
and phonematic emanation in tantric speculation.
One of the earliest Śākta-​Śaiva sources associated with a human author is the 
Śivasūtra or Aphorisms of Śiva, purportedly revealed to Vasugupta (ca. 825–​875) 
by either a siddha or the deity Śiva.66 The text begins with the thesis that the self is 
consciousness, and then proceeds immediately to provide an explanation of igno­
rance, which effectively conceals this inexorable truth. The source of ignorance is 
limited knowledge, which is grounded in mātṛkā.67 In his commentary, Kṣemarāja 
elucidates the inner workings of mātṛkā as a power of obscuration, noting how she 
generates conceptual notions that become the basis for limited identities, given 
that she permeates the mind with language that conditions and delimits one’s

--- PAGE 822 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      797
 
self-​conception.68 However, when recognized—​that is, when one awakens to the ma­
trix of all language that undergirds experience and the phenomenal world—​mātṛkā 
engenders liberating knowledge, as the Śivasūtras will go on to teach.69 Here we have 
an emphasis on an epistemic dynamic, wherein mātṛkā—​etymologically glossed 
by Kṣemarāja as the “unknown” mother (ajñāta construing the ka affix)70—​limits 
human beings when she is invisible, but awakens them to the vast dynamism of their 
own innate self when she is seen, and even more so, intimately known.71
This brings us to one of the most influential postscriptural authors on this topic, 
Abhinavagupta (fl. 975–​1025). Abhinava’s robust account of phonematic ema­
nation across his exegesis is not only explanatory on a metaphysical level but is 
situated squarely within a path to liberation through divine means (śāmbhavopāya). 
By mapping the phonematic emanation as the creative flux of a dynamic and self-​
differentiating awareness, he traces not only a map of emanation but also a pathway 
for self-​limiting consciousness to rediscover its own original freedom. This is ac­
complished not through physical or mental disciplines, or even conceptually 
rooted teachings, but by aligning with a precognitive impulse that spontaneously 
apprehends the phonematic nature of reality as one’s own creative freedom. This 
nonconceptual vision of reality is an act of recognizing oneself as the consciousness 
in which all the phonemes, and the realities they disclose, ultimately repose; in other 
words, the union of Śiva (A) and Śakti (HA), which combine to form the first-​person 
pronoun (AHAM).72 Since the syllabary begins and ends with these two phonemes, 
the sense of identity born of their union includes the divine power at the source of all 
language, all mantra, and, by extension, all reality. It is an experience of the totality of 
the universe arising subjectively, encompassed by an all-​embracing and all-​absorbing 
sense of Self.
Abhinavagupta views this inclusive awareness that is the material and efficient 
cause of the world as penetrated by the highest resonance (paranāda), the source 
of all phonemes.73 That said, at its heart, this resonance is “phonematic,” and here 
Abhinavagupta, as Torella (2004) demonstrates, departs from a Bhartṛharian notion 
of sphoṭa advocated by Rāmakaṇṭha with the term nāda. Instead, in alignment with 
the Mīmāṃsakas,74 Abhinavagupta opts for the view that the phonemes are the pri­
mary, irreducible constituents of the process of conveying meaning75 and are “the 
only reality which is not swallowed by supreme consciousness . . . because they are 
not a content of consciousness but consciousness itself, amounting to its energetic, 
cognitive aspect” (Torella 2004, 178–​179). It is precisely this divergence, between 
the dualistic Saiddhāntika’s nāda-​vāda and the nondual Śākta’s varṇa-​vāda, that 
helps us apprehend how each tradition conceived of language and its ultimate reach. 
The Śaiva Siddhānta exegetes are anxious to exclude the subtlest layers of language 
from the self and Śiva, which are ultimately distinct from the transformations in­
volved in the unfolding of the manifest world. By contrast, Abhinavagupta, in light 
of his “higher nonduality,” embraces supreme speech and its phonematic kernel as 
the inherent dynamism at “the very core of divine, and also human, consciousness” 
(Torella 2004, 186).

--- PAGE 823 ---
798      Ben Williams
 
Conclusions and Future Directions
In Śaiva and Śākta sources we find the word, and particularly the subtle resonance and 
sonic power that illuminates it from within, woven into the subtlest structures of reality. 
Often envisioned as originating beyond visible or audible form, this power unfolds and 
condenses in the proliferation of scripture, liberating mantras, and human languages, 
and in certain scriptural witnesses, the creation of all life and the totality of worlds. By 
virtue of pervading the universe and being endowed with extraordinary creative po­
tency, this sonic substratum is manipulated by tantric initiates, adepts, and gurus to 
release beings from all forms of limitation and transform them into living centers of 
reality-​altering power.
Mātṛkā, originally referring to the repository of phonemes, is a key concept for fur­
ther elaborating this motif, since it introduces the phonemes (essential to seed mantras), 
identifies them with goddesses, maps them into cakras, and correlates them to the emis­
sion of all ontological levels of reality. The Kiraṇatantra deploys mātṛkā as an explana­
tory key for how a unified body of knowledge pervades all literary genres, from the epics 
to dialectic philosophy, and the Sārdhatriśatikālottara conceives of nāda as underlying 
the communication of fish, cowherders, and even foreigners. Theorizing expands from 
here to the relationship between sphoṭa and the phonemes in argumentation on the phi­
losophy of verbal cognition (śābdabodha) in the Parākhyatantra, a prominent theme 
continued in the commentarial literature. We also find, across many of our sources, the 
central practice of nyāsa, the deposition of mantras on the body, which is extended to 
the syllabary goddesses Mātṛkā and Mālinī, and this practice continues to have a vibrant 
afterlife at the heart of tantric praxis.76 Not included in the foregoing exploration is a 
discussion of phonematic emission and emanation of sound in the Pāñcarātra,77 that is, 
tantric traditions devoted to Viṣṇu, and also significant parallels in esoteric Buddhism,78 
in both South and East Asia.
The scholarship tallied in this nonexhaustive study has many complementary virtues. 
To elaborate, the majority of studies cited are anchored to a single concept (i.e., mātṛkā), 
text (i.e., Parātrīśikā), or lineage (i.e., Śaiva Siddhānta), and the text-​critical character 
and close readings of the relevant sources provide a solid foundation for future re­
search. What it is missing is a more global perspective, which Padoux (1990) formidably 
achieves, but without tracing shifts in intellectual and conceptual histories, particularly 
between the milieux of scriptural redactors and later expositors. This brief study, by 
combining both approaches, gestures to a more synthetic approach in future scholar­
ship. It does so, in a preliminary and condensed fashion, by perusing the topic from 
a broader, interlineage perspective and arranging textual sources in an approximately 
chronological sequence with an eye toward generating historical insights.
Other ideas for future directions on phonematic emanation and cosmogenesis are 
also immanent in the above analysis, one being the need for a systematic appraisal of 
kuṇḍalinī in classical tantric sources79—​a project that could be aided by the citations

--- PAGE 824 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      799
 
collated above. This is a desideratum for a deeper appreciation of the way in which this 
micro-​ and macro-​cosmic power, closely associated with mātṛkā and phonematic ema­
nation, is creatively adapted in early and late Haṭhayoga texts, and yet again in colonial 
and postcolonial/​global settings. The other theme advanced above, also inviting further 
study, is the advent of the script and visual graphemes to represent mantras, goddesses, 
and sonic powers and the way in which this new technology of textualization mediated 
and transformed the character of tantric ritual worship and tantric yoga.
Notes
	 1.	 For a contrasting interpretation, see the reference to “summit” as the head of father sky, 
namely, Agni, in Jamison and Brereton (2014, 1603–​1605).
	 2.	 As demonstrated in Gerety (2015), particularly ­chapters 7–​9.
	 3.	 See Aklujkar (2001), which presents a strong and a weak view between which Bhartṛhari 
toggles in his “perspectivist” philosophy. The former sees language as the ontological 
source of the universe while the latter considers language as determining and pervading 
the way in which the world appears to us.
	 4.	 For an important albeit preliminary consideration of the significant continuities between 
Vedic and tantric philosophies of language, particularly related to the fourfold parti­
tion of speech, the intrinsic connection between language and breath, and the “logic of 
correspondences between humans, rites, and the cosmos,” see Padoux (1990, 20–​29).
	 5.	 What marks out a tantric religious context from a non-​tantric one is not often easy to 
delineate, but Padoux does a fine job of collating and elaborating a set of prototypical 
domains features. See Padoux (2017, chap. 1).
	 6.	 Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Uttarasūtra, 1.23: adṛṣṭavigrahe śānte śive paramakāraṇe | 
nādarūpaṃ viniṣkrāntaṃ śāstraṃ paramadurllabhaṃ.
	 7.	 Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Uttarasūtra, 1.24: sadāśivas tu vettā vai sa ca māṃ prati bodhakaḥ | 
nādarūpasya śāstrasya ahaṃ gr{anthanibandhakaḥ} (Now Sadāśiva understood it and he 
enlightened me; I redacted [this] scripture [that I had received] in the form of sonic energy 
into books). Translation by Goodall et al. (2015).
	 8.	 For parallels, see Goodall et al. (2015, 344).
	 9.	 Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Nayasūtra, 4.149cd: sarve mantrātmakā devās sarve mantrāḥ 
śivātmakāḥ. Goodall et al. noted that this influential idea “occurs verbatim” in 
Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 3.28ab. See Goodall et al. (2015, 502). Judit Törzsök also notes a few 
passages in demonstrably early Śaiva tantras that identify Śiva’s power with the efficacy of 
mantras without mentioning mātṛkā specifically. See Törzsök (2016, 137–​138), particularly 
her citations from the Vīṇāśikhatantra and Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha.
	10.	 The verse in question is Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Uttarasūtra, 2.8. Törzsök’s speculation 
about the body being the substratum is confirmed by Goodall et al. (2015, 351–​352: “What 
is plain from the first half of this verse is that the worshipper should join the consonants 
. . . to the right and the vowels to the left. But to the right and left of what? Until now, we 
have been speaking of the yāgabhūmi, but here, since the following half-​line begins with 
śivībhūtaḥ, it must rather be the worshipper’s body on which the alphabet is installed, thus 
identifying him with Śiva before worship begins, and this is confirmed, as Peter Bisschop 
has observed, by the parallel in the account of mātṛkāyāga in Dīkṣottara 9:86–​86c.”

--- PAGE 825 ---
800      Ben Williams
 
	11.	 See Goodall (2004, 322, n. 646): “Accounting for the name mātṛkā in this fashion is com­
monplace in such contexts: compare, for example, Kiraṇa 11:6a: māteva mātṛkā saiva; 
Pauṣkara 8:21cd sarvajñā mātṛkā jñeyā jagato mātṛvat sthitā; Pauṣkara 8:24cd jñānaśaktis 
tathā jñeyā mātṛkā lokamātṛkā.”
	12.	 It should be noted that homologies between the syllables of navātman mantra and levels 
of reality (tattva) are found in the Uttarasūtra, but without any explicit connection to 
mātṛkā. See Goodall et al. (2015, 339).
	13.	 Törzsök (2016, 142). It should be noted that the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā places great em­
phasis on empowerment and inner experience in the credentials of the guru who has the 
capacity to liberate others. See, e.g., Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Nayasūtra, 4.37–​42b.
	14.	 Goodall et al. (2015, 384), which translates Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Uttarasūtra, 4.46c–​47.
	15.	 For details on the script used in the Nayasūtra’s section on embodying mātṛkā, see Goodall 
et al. (2015, 36 & 406ff). See also where the authors note: “Emphasis on this visual aspect 
appears to have retained its importance in Tantric Buddhism, but its importance appears 
gradually to have waned in Śaivism, which stresses rather the sonic aspect of mantras and 
of their building blocks, the sounds of the syllabary” (8). This final point can be further 
nuanced, given that the visual aspects of script do indeed play an important role in Śākta 
tantric traditions rooted in Śaivism. A few examples will be furnished below.
	16.	 In appreciating the role and significance of the medium of script contra sound, I am in­
debted to conversations with Finnian Gerety, who theorizes this in Gerety (forthcoming, 
introduction and chap. 8).
	17.	 Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Nayasūtra, 1.29–​30: “Without knowing the tattvas [as] situated in 
the body, and all the letters as they are situated in the body, one cannot be liberated. All 
these I shall teach you [as they are] written visibly. Some have the shape of parts of the 
body; some have the shape of the [whole] body [arranged in particular ways].”
	18.	 Studies that initiate this process include Vasudeva (2007), Gerety (forthcoming), and 
Gough (2021).
	19.	 See Goodall et al. (2015, 74 n. 102): “If one were determined to find in the Niśvāsa a pre­
cursor for such a physical yoga, one could, as James Mallinson has pointed out to us, draw 
attention to the passage instructing the sādhaka to shape his body into the written form of 
all the letters of the syllabary in Nayasūtra 1:32ff.”
	20.	 Niśvāsaguhyasūtra 12.41: śivena na vinā mokṣo na vidyā lokamātṛkā | [ . . . ] khyate mātrā 
kuṭilā ūrdhvagāminī (Without Śiva there is no liberation; there is no vidyā [other than] 
mātṛkā, the creative source of the world. She is the coiled [goddess] that moves upwards). 
This translation is speculative, given the lacunae in the verse.
	21.	 Niśvāsakārikā 13.60–​63 yā sā kuṇḍalinī proktā mayā pūrvam udāhṛtā| nipatanti 
tridhābhūtā prakṛtiḥ sā parā matā || sāṇumātrā hṛdisthāne karṇasthā dviraṇusmṛtā | 
jihvāgre triraṇuṃ viddhi nisṛtāṃ mātṛkāṃ viduḥ || caturvidhā yā deveśi likhyate 
yāgrakuṇḍalī | likhyate paṭhyate naiva aṇur nādena veṣṭitaḥ || svarārdhasparśārdhañ ca 
śaktinātho ‘tha bindukam | śivatattvan tu boddhavyaṃ varṇe varṇe vyavasthitam.
	22.	 On the murky identity and some of the disparate forms of worship of Sadāśiva’s consort in 
the Siddhānta scriptures, see Brunner (1992, 20–​22). These orientations are compatible in 
many ways with the general features of brahminical orthopraxy mentioned above.
	23.	 Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṅgraha 5.1–​3: athādāv abhavac chabdaḥ kāraṇād akṣaraṃ tataḥ | 
kāraṇaṃ mokṣadaṃ brahman brahma brahmavido viduḥ || tasmāt sarvaprado devaḥ 
śabdarāśir iti śrutaḥ | navaparvaśatārdhātmā yonibījātmakaḥ paraḥ || akārādivisargāntaṃ 
bījaṃ tat ṣoḍaśākṣaram | śeṣā yoniś catustriṃśat avyayā hy akṣarātmikā (Now in the

--- PAGE 826 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      801
 
beginning there arose the word. From this [primordial] cause there was the [divine] syl­
lable. Those who know brahman understand that [primordial] cause as the absolute, 
brahman, which bestows liberation. Therefore, God, who gives forth everything, known 
[in this form] as the “mass of syllables,” has the nature of the fifty divisions [of the letters] 
characterized as both the supreme “womb” and “seed.” The “seeds,” beginning with the 
letter “a” and ending with “ḥ,” total sixteen letters. The remaining members [of the sylla­
bary], the “wombs,” consist of thirty-​four letters).
	24.	 Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṅgraha 5.5: vedādijñānabhedena śivajñānavibhedataḥ | cintāmaṇir 
ivātrāsau sthitaḥ sarvasya kāraṇam (This [God], existing like a wish-​fulfilling gem in this 
[world] as the different types of knowledge found in [scriptures] such as the Veda, [and] as 
the various types of the scriptural wisdom of Śiva, is the [divine] source of everything [or 
all scriptures]).
	25.	 Sarvajñānottara 1.8–​9: yo ‘sāv atīndriyo ‘grāhyas tattvātīto nirañjanaḥ |sarvajñaḥ sarvagaḥ 
śānto sarvātmā sarvatomukhaḥ || tasmāc chāstraṃ viniṣkrāntaṃ nādarūpaṃ nirāmayam 
| atyantagahanaṃ sūkṣmaṃ paramaṃ sarvakāmikam (From that immaculate reality 
[nirañjana], which is beyond the senses, inconceivable, transcending the reality levels, 
omniscient, all-​pervasive, quiescent, the ubiquitous self of all, the salutary scripture 
emerged in the form of resonance [nāda]. Exceptionally deep, subtle, and supreme, that 
fulfills all desires).
	26.	 Sarvajñānottara 1.10: praviśya baindavaṃ tatvaṃ bodhayitvā tu taṃ vibhum | punaḥ 
sadāśivāt prāptaṃ mamedaṃ sūkṣmalakṣaṇam (Upon entering into the ontological level 
of bindu, and awakening that divine reality, this [scripture] of mine whose characteristic is 
subtle was received from Sadāśiva).
	27.	 Sarvajñānottara 1.12–​13: babhūva paramo nādo nādāc chabdaḥ prajāyate | śabdamātrā 
smṛtā mantrā mantre mantrādhidevatāḥ || sarvān kāmān prayacchanti vidhinārādhitā 
yadā | svaravarṇasamāyogāt dṛśyādṛśyaṃ carācaram | tasmād upāsayed* varṇān svarasaṃ 
yogapūrvakam || [corr: tasmād ipāsayed] (That supreme nāda arose. From nāda, the word 
was born. The mantras are traditionally understood as nothing but that Word. In a mantra 
there are mantra deities that grant all desires when they are ritually propitiated. It through 
a connection to the vowels and consonants that animate and inanimate beings, both visible 
and invisible, exist. Therefore, in connection to yoga, one should worship the phonemes, 
according to their inclination).
	28.	 Kiraṇatantra 11.1: jñānam ekaṃ kathaṃ bhinnaṃ na jñātaṃ tat sphuṭaṃ mayā| etad brūhi 
mahādeva jñānamūlaṃ yato ‘khilam (How does the one scriptural wisdom become di­
vided? I do not clearly understand this. Teach this, O Śiva, since everything has knowledge 
as its root).
	29.	 These equations are noted in Sferra (2007, 444).
	30.	 Kiraṇatantra 11.6: māteva mātṛkā saiva saṃkhyājñānādibhedagā | tarkakāvyetihāsasthā 
sarvaṃ vyāpya vyavasthitā (That very [goddess] mātṛkā is like a mother inasmuch as she 
divides [herself] into such knowledge systems as Sāṅkhya, is present in logic, poetry, and 
the epics, and becomes determinate while pervading everything).
	31.	 Kiraṇatantra 11.6: māteva mātṛkā saiva saṃkhyājñānādibhedagā | tarkakāvyetihāsasthā 
sarvaṃ vyāpya vyavasthitā (That very [goddess] mātṛkā is like a mother inasmuch as she 
divides [herself] into such knowledge systems as Sāṅkhya, is present in logic, poetry, and 
the epics, and becomes determinate while pervading everything).
	32.	 Kiraṇatantra 11.7: śivajñānaprabhedena sthitaikā nāmabhedataḥ| bisinī yad yathā bhinnā 
rudrabhedāt parā satī (That unitary [mātṛkā] is present through the Śaiva revelatory

--- PAGE 827 ---
802      Ben Williams
 
knowledge based on the divisions of their titles just like [one] lotus [has many petals], 
since that supreme [matrix] is made diverse on the basis of the Rudra [and Śiva] divisions 
[of scriptures]).
	33.	 Kiraṇatantra 11.8cd-​9: gadyapadyādikāvyā ye geyā deśānugāś ca ye || bījapiṇḍakalākūṭam
antraśaktivinirgatā | śaktir vāgīśvarī tasya vāṅmayaṃ vyāpya saṃsthitā (Those poems in 
prose and verse that are the subject of song, corresponding to [various] regions, emerge 
from the power of the mantras, such as the seed, piṇḍa, kalā, and kūṭa mantras. That di­
vine power, the goddess of speech, is established as pervading [all] literature of that [uni­
tary wisdom]).
	34.	 For a list of texts that cite this passage, see Sferra (2007, 444 n. 3).
	35.	 Sārdhatriśatikālottara 1.5–​8: nādākhyaṃ yat paraṃ bījaṃ sarvabhūteṣv avasthitam | 
muktidaṃ paramaṃ kiṃ ca divyasiddhipradāyakam || tad viditvā mahāsena deśikaḥ 
pāśahā bhavet | āgopālāṅganā bālā mlecchāḥ prākṛtabhāṣiṇaḥ || antarjalagatāḥ sattvās 
te ‘pi nityaṃ bruvanti tam | sthūlaṃ sūkṣmaṃ paraṃ jñātvā karma kuryād yathepsitam 
|| sthūlaṃ śabda iti proktaṃ sūkṣmaṃ cintāmayaṃ bhavet | cintayā rahitaṃ yat tu tat 
paraṃ parikīrtitam (What is that reality called nāda, the ultimate source that is present 
in all beings that bestows liberation and divine attainments? Knowing that [nāda], O 
Kārttikeya, a teacher becomes empowered to dissolve limitations. Children, foreigners, 
speakers of local language, including cowherders and women, and even aquatic beings 
always articulate that [nāda]. By becoming aware of its outer, subtle, and supreme forms, 
one is able to perform any action as they desire. Outer resonance is “sound.” Subtle reso­
nance is permeated by thought. But that resonance, which is beyond thought, is supreme).
	36.	 On Bhartṛhari’s levels of speech, see Vākyapadīya 1.142 and the vṛtti on that verse, 
translated in Ferrante (2021, 65.
	37.	 Sārdhatriśatikālottara 12.1–​3, 12.5–​6ab: candrāgniravisaṃyuktā ādyā kuṇḍalinī 
tu yā | hṛtpradeśe tu sā jñeyā aṅkurākāravatsthitā || sṛṣṭinyāsaṃ nyaset tatra 
dvirabhyāsapaderitam | sravantaṃ cintayet tasminn amṛtaṃ sādhakottamaḥ ||[ . . . ] 
svadehaṃ cintayed vidvān divyarūpam anaupamam | yasya yatkarma coddiṣṭaṃ 
tatkarma paricintayet || idaṃ ca yo ‘bhyased evam amṛtaṃ sarvatomukham | acireṇaiva 
kālena sa siddhiphalabhāg bhavet (The primordial kuṇḍalinī, naturally connected to the 
moon, fire, and sun, should be known as abiding in the space of the heart in the form 
of a sprout. In that [kuṇḍalinī] one should install the creation [mantra OM], which 
is inspired by the supreme state through practice of both [breaths] . . . That wise one, 
contemplating his own body as an unparalleled divine form [filled with nectar] should 
reflect on the rite, which he was previously taught. The one who practices [visualizing] 
this nectar spreading in all directions, in no time comes to enjoy the fruit of extraor­
dinary powers). Note: clarifying concepts in brackets are supplied from Rāmakaṇṭha’s 
commentary.
	38.	 Mṛgendratantra, Kriyāpada 1.2: śakter nādo ‘bhavad bindur akṣaraṃ mātṛkā tataḥ | mūrtir 
ādyā maheśasya sarvavācyānuyāyinī. This verse is mentioned in passing, in Sferra (2007, 
444), and its translation is indebted to Brunner (1985, 5), who follows Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha on 
the list of terms in the nominative case arising in a sequence of causes.
	39.	 Mṛgendratantravṛtti, 
Kriyāpada 
ad 
1.2: 
śaktimataḥ 
praśāntasya 
bhagavataḥ 
parāvāksvarūpā yā kuṇḍalinī śaktiḥ tasyāḥ sakāśāt nāda ity anāhataparadhvanilakṣaṇaḥ. . . 
abhūt ([śakti] refers to kuṇḍalinī śakti, whose nature is supreme speech, belonging to the 
blessed Lord [Śiva], who is quiescent and the possessor of śakti. From her appearance, res­
onance (nāda) arises, characterized as the highest unstruck sound).

--- PAGE 828 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      803
 
	40.	 Watson (2006, 75): “In the Parākhya, the Mataṅga and the Mṛgendra the dialectical di­
mension becomes more pronounced, and we find the questioners putting objections from 
the point of view of non-​Śaiva traditions such as Buddhism, Sāṅkhya, Vedānta, Nyāya, 
Lokāyata and Mīmāṃsā.”
	41.	 For a clear description of the theory of sphoṭa across multiple grammarians, see Sato 
(2020, 80–​81). An illuminating metaphor for understanding this theory is found in Reich 
(2021, 53).
	42.	 For the view of Kumārila Bhaṭṭa, who elaborated Śabara’s view against Bhartṛhari’s under­
standing of sphoṭa, see Sato (2020, 84).
	43.	 Parākhyatantra 6.9: varṇānāṃ kṣaṇavidhvaṃsāt sphoṭo ‘rthapratipādakaḥ | varṇavyaṅgyo 
vibhūr nityaḥ so ‘rthaṃ sphoṭayate kila (since the phonemes must perish in an instant, 
sphoṭa must be that which effects the understanding of the meaning. This all-​pervading, 
eternal entity, manifestable by the phonemes, is, they say (kila), what makes the meaning 
clear). Translation by Goodall (2004, 324).
	44.	 Particularly, in Parākhyatantra 6.9–​18. See Goodall (2004, 325–​328) for a translation of this 
section.
	45.	 This date, which is admittedly imprecise, is based on the lineage chart provided in Goodall 
(1998), and making generational calculations from Rāmakaṇṭha II (ca. 950–​1000).
	46.	 The verse that teaches this is Ratnatrayaparīkṣā 22: jāyate ‘dhvā yataḥ śuddho vartate yatra 
līyate | sa binduḥ paranādākhyo nādabinduvarṇakāraṇam (The [reality] from which the 
pure path is born, in which it exists [and] dissolves, is bindu, called paranāda, the cause of 
nāda, bindu and arṇa). Translation by Sferra (1991, 465). In verse 70cd–​71 we find the fol­
lowing synonyms given for this initial bindu: śabdatattva, aghoṣā vāc, brahman, kuṇḍalinī, 
dhruva, vidyāśakti, supreme nāda, mahāmāyā, vyoman, and also anāhata.
	47.	 For a French translation of this text with the commentary (vyākhyā) of Aghoraśiva, see 
Filliozat (1984).
	48.	 On Rāmakaṇṭha’s indebtedness to the Sphoṭasiddhi, see Sferra (1991, 317 n. 27).
	49.	 Sferra (2007, 447 n. 21): “The nāda theory, as elabaorated by Rāmakaṇṭha, can be seen 
as the result of an attempt to assimilate the sphoṭa theory according to Śaiva Siddhānta 
tenets. As has already been noted, there are no radical differences between nāda and 
sphoṭa theories.”
	50.	 Nādakārikā 16cd–​17: tatsiddho nādaḥ paraḥ sumaṅgalā mālinī mahāmāyā || 
samanānāhatabindur aghoṣā vāg brahma kuṇḍalinī tattvam | vidyākhyaṃ tattvam ity 
uktaṃ tais tais tadāgameṣv ittham (Thus a higher nāda is established. In this way, in the 
scriptures, it is taught through various [terms] such as sumaṅgalā, mālinī, mahāmāyā, 
samanā, anāhata-​bindu, aghoṣā vāc, brahman, kuṇḍalinī, and the reality called vidyā).
	51.	 An interesting example of this diversion, which is conceded by Rāmakaṇṭha, is found 
in his commentary (vṛtti) to Kiraṇatantra 3.23cd, where he cites a number of scriptural 
sources, namely, Sārdhatriśatikālottara 1.6c–​7b, Vākyapadīya 1.66, Ṛgveda 1.164.45, and 
the Mahābhārata 14.12.16, only to disagree with them: “These hold that these [levels if 
speech] are necessarily merely inseparably connected with the soul (ātmasamavetāḥ); 
be we have shown in the ‘Proof of Sound’ [Nādakārikā] that because the soul is not sub­
ject to transformation, they are attendants (parigrahavartinyaḥ).” This entire section is 
translated, with extensive annotations, in Goodall (1998, 289–​296).
	52.	 Nādakārikā 19–​20: avikāry atrātmoktas tacchaktiś cāpy ato na yogyau tau | 
bahudhā sthātuṃ yadvā caitanyavinākṛtau vikāritvāt || tatpuṃśakter bhinno 
nādopādānakāraṇatvena | acid api śuddhatvān māyāto ‘py anyā tadūrdhvagā kathitā

--- PAGE 829 ---
804      Ben Williams
 
(The self as well as its power are taught as free of transformation in this [system]. For this 
reason, they are not fit to exist in [internally] diverse states or else they would be devoid of 
consciousness, because of being subject to transformation. Therefore, that [higher nāda or 
mahāmāyā] is different than the power of the self, because of being the material cause of 
[common] sounds. Although it is insentient, it is distinct from and higher than māyā, due 
to its purity).
	53.	 For a seminal characterization of the distinct “non-​Saiddhāntika” streams of tantric reve­
lation about to be treated, including the Bhairava tantras, Śakti tantras, and the Kulamārga, 
see Sanderson (1988).
	54.	 Brahmayāmalatantra 1.127cd–​133: tasyecchā nirgatā śakti jñānarūpā manonmanī 
|| pravartate nirābhāsā avadhūteti sā smṛtā || prabodhayati sānantā bindunādau 
kṣaṇena tu || kuṇḍalākṛtisaṃsthānā svarādau saṃvyavasthitā | caturbhāgavibhaktā 
sā caturbhāgavibhājitā ||evaṃ kuṇḍalinī śaktiḥ svaraiḥ ṣoḍaśābhiḥ sthitā || 
catuṣkapathakopetā pañcavyoma-​alaṅkṛtā || evaṃ pañcavidhā sā tu śakir ādyā 
manonmanī | navākṣaravidhānena punaś caiva prajāyate || svaravyañjanasaṃyuktā 
pañcāśākṣarasaṃyutā | avadhūtā mahādevi navabhedair vyavasthitā || atra devyo 
‘tha dūtyaś ca yoginy ucchuṣmamātaraḥ | sarvās tāḥ sṛjate devi śivecchām anuvarttinī. 
Translated in Hatley (2018, 417–​419).
	55.	 Hatley (2018, 418 n. 183) provides images of phonemes in protoregional scripts from 
Northern India inscriptions and copper plates that demonstrate the representative looped 
or coiled shape.
	56.	 See Hatley (2018, 418 n. 183), where he goes on to note that this is a “key theme in the par­
allel passage of Tantrasadbhāva 1.215–​29, which describes various forms of the śakti as the 
grapheme’s components.”
	57.	 The related verse from the Siddhayogeśvarīmata on kuṇḍalinī is cited in Tantrāloka 3.220cd–​
221ab: sātra kuṇḍalinī bījaṃ jīvabhūtā cidātmikā || tajjaṃ dhruvecchonmeṣākhyaṃ trikaṃ 
varṇās tataḥ punaḥ (That kuṇḍalinī is the seed, it is endowed with life and has the nature 
of consciousness. The [first] three [vowels], representing the “eternal” (A), creative im­
pulse (I) and expansion (U) arise from that [kuṇḍalinī]. From those, all the phonemes 
arise). In Jayaratha’s commentary (viveka) he cites another verse that he ascribes to the 
Siddhayogeśvarīmata: yā sā kuṇḍalinī sātra jagadyoniḥ prakīrtitā | tuṭirūpā tu sā jñeyā 
jīvabhūtā jagaty api || bījarūpā samākhyātā cidrūpāpi prakīrtitā (That which is kuṇḍalinī 
is taught here as the source of the word (jagadyoni). She has the form of the [sequence of] 
“moments” and is known as life itself in this world. She is described as having the nature of 
a seed and revealed also as the nature of consciousness). These references are mentioned in 
Wallis (2022).
	58.	 A reconstruction of the image of the goddess Mālinī, composed from the phonemes, can 
be found in Vasudeva (2007, 536).
	59.	 For an excellent study of this text and some of its antecedents, see Golovkova (2017).
	60.	 Vāmakeśvarīmata 1.5: yadakṣaramahāsūtraprotam etaj jagattrayam | brahmāṇḍādi­
kaṭāhāntaṃ vande tāṃ siddhamātṛkām (This triple world, from the realm of Brahmā 
down to the lowest hell, is threaded through with the great string that are Her syllables. I 
venerate that perfect syllabary [mātṛkā]).
	61.	 Vāmakeśvarīmata 1.6: yadekādaśamādhārabījakoṇatrayodbhavam | brahmāṇḍādi­
kaṭāhāntaṃ jagad adyāpi dṛśyate (Even today it is seen that the universe from the realm of 
Brahmā down to the lowest hell emerges from the triangle that is her eleventh supporting 
vowel).

--- PAGE 830 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      805
 
	62.	 Abhinavagupta also capitalizes on the shape of E in his description of phonematic ema­
nation, describing it as a triangle, whose three angles are correlated to the three powers of 
will, knowledge, and action. See Padoux (1990, 263–​264).
	63.	 Jayaratha glosses her original location in the body as a triangle within the janmādhāra, the 
base that is generative organ, whereas Śivānanda glosses it as the triangle in the center of 
the four-​petaled lotus located in the root center or mūlādhāra.
	64.	 Vāmakeśvarīmata 4.12ab–​15: yadollasati śṛṅāṭapīṭhāt kuṭilarūpiṇī || śivārkamaṇḍalaṃ 
bhittvā drāvayantīndumaṇḍalam | tadudbhavāmṛtaspandamadirānandananditā || 
kulayoṣitkulaṃ tyaktvā paraṃ puruṣam eti sā | nirlakṣaṇaṃ nirguṇaṃ ca kularū­
pavivarjitam || tataḥ svacchandarūpā tu paribhramya jagat punaḥ | tena cāreṇa saṃtuṣṭā 
punar ekākinī satī.
	65.	 Parātrīśikā 5–​9ab: athādyās tithayaḥ sarve svarā bindvavasānakāḥ | tadantaḥ kālayogena 
somasūryau prakīrtitau || pṛthivyādīni tattvāni puruṣāntāni pañcasu | kramāt kādiṣu 
vargeṣu makārānteṣu suvrate || vāyvagnisalilendrāṇāṃ dhāraṇānāṃ catuṣṭayam | 
tadūrdhve śādivikhyātaṃ purastād brahmapañcakam || amūlā tatkramāñ jñeyā 
kṣāntā sṛṣṭir udāhṛtā | sarveṣāṃ caiva mantrāṇāṃ vidyānāṃ ca yaśasvini || iyaṃ yoniḥ 
samākhyātā sarvatantreṣu sarvadā | caturdaśayutaṃ bhadre tithīśāntasamanvitam.
	66.	 For a survey of all the extant descriptions of the emergence of the Śivasūtra, see Williams 
(2017, 182ff).
	67.	 Śivasūtra 1.2: jñānaṃ bandhaḥ (Limited knowledge is binding); Śivasūtra 1.4: 
jñānādhiṣṭhānaṃ mātṛkā (The ground of that limited knowledge is mātṛkā).
	68.	 Śivasūtravimarśinī ad 1.4: tasya ādikṣāntarūpā ajñātā mātā mātṛkā viśvajananī 
tattatsaṃkucitavedyābhāsātmano 
jñānasya 
apūrṇo 
‘smi 
kṣāmaḥ 
sthūlo 
vāsmi 
agniṣṭomayājyāsmi ityāditattadavikalpakasavikalpakāvabhāsaparāmarśamayasya tattad­
vācakaśabdānuvedhadvāreṇa śokasmayaharṣarāgādirūpatām ādadhānā (The mother or 
source of that [limited knowledge] is mātṛkā, [the alphabet goddess] beginning with “A” 
and ending with “KṢA”. That [mātṛkā] who is [normally] unrecognized, is the mother of 
the universe. She is generating a cognition consisting of the shining forth of a given object 
of knowledge that is contracted. That cognition is itself an awareness of indistinct or con­
ceptual narratives such as “I am incomplete,” “I am thin or fat,” or (I am ritual performer of 
the Agniṣṭoma sacrifice.” That cognition, because it is permeated by language that denotes 
distinct [valences], takes the form of grief, surprise, joy, attachment and other states of 
being).
	69.	 Śivasūtra 2.7: mātṛkācakrasaṃbodhaḥ (Awakening to the wheel of mātṛkā).
	70.	 For other likely etymological meanings of the term mātṛkā, facilitated by the -​ka affix, see 
Vasudeva (2004, 52 n. 90): “The affix ka may denote not unknownness as noted above, 
but rather, following Pāṇini 5.3.76: anukampāyāṃ, it may have the sense of a diminutive 
or convey affection, eg. ‘little mother, dear mother’. Or, following Pāṇini 5.3.77: nītau ca 
tadyuktāt, the ka may denote the object by which compassion is shown, eg. ‘compassionate 
mother.’ This possible polysemy of mātṛkā should be borne in mind.”
	71.	 This echoes a principle taught in the earliest Veda; see Ṛgveda 10.71.4 uta tvaḥ paśyan 
na dadarśa vācam uta tvaḥ śṛṇvan na śṛṇoty enām | uto tv asmai tanvaṃ vi sasre jāyeva 
patyauśatī (In looking, one does not see Vāc, in listening, one does not hear her. To an­
other she reveals her beautiful form like a loving wife to her husband).
	72.	 Tantrāloka 3.203cd–​204ab: anuttaravisargātmaśivaśaktyadvayātmani | parāmarśo 
nirbharatvād aham ity ucyate vibhoḥ (This awareness of the all-​pervasive deity in the self 
which is the oneness of Śiva and Śakti consisting of the unsurpassable reality (A) and the

--- PAGE 831 ---
806      Ben Williams
 
[immanent] emission (H), is thus described as [the all-​embracing] “I” (AHAM), because 
of being complete).
	73.	 Tantrasāra ­chapter 3: āmarśaś ca ayaṃ na sāṅketiko ‘pi tu citsvabhāvatāmātranāntarīyakaḥ 
paranādagarbha uktaḥ sa ca yāvān viśvasyāvasthāpakaḥ parameśvarasya śaktikalāpas 
tāvantam āmṛśati (Furthermore, self-​reflective awareness is not based in conventions, but 
is inseparable from the innate nature of consciousness and is taught as pregnant with the 
supreme throb or resonance. This supreme nāda becomes aware of the way in which Śiva’s 
collection of powers bring this universe into being).
	74.	 For an even earlier concordance with Mīmāṃsaka views on language within 
Abhinavagupta’s own lineage, see Nemec (2019), which examines the way Somānanda 
defends the Mīmāṃsā doctrine that the relationship between speech and the object 
it denotes is real and permanent, even while subsuming this understanding within a 
nondual metaphysical framework.
	75.	 Torella (2004, 174): “To this old problem—​what is the vācaka?—​quite unexpectedly 
Abhinavagupta furnishes the oldest of the solutions, that of the Mīmāṃsā: ‘Ultimately, the 
power of verbal signification, consisting in the identification with meaning, only pertains 
to the phonemes’.”
	76.	 See, for example, Tantrāloka 15.117–​120 for a description of mātṛkānyāsa, further detailed 
in Jayaratha’s viveka, and Tantrāloka 15.121–​125ab for mālinīnyāsa. For more on this prac­
tice, see Padoux (2011, 71–​80).
	77.	 The Lakṣmītantra, translated by Sanjukta Gupta, includes references to śabdabrahma (chap. 
18), the origin of phonemes (chap. 19), the correlation of phonemes to the four vyūhas (chap. 
20), and the practice of mātṛkānyāsa (chap. 23). See Gupta (2000). Padoux (1990) also 
includes numerous references to this tradition, particularly the account of phonematic ema­
nation in ­chapter 16 of the Ahirbudhnyasaṃhitā. See Padoux (1990, 225–​227).
	78.	 One example is found in Payne (2018, 127–​130), which examines the fundamental prac­
tice of visualizing the syllable A in Indian, Tibetan, and Japanese tantric Buddhism, and 
the symbolic resonances of this syllable as the primordial seed of all language, the en­
capsulation of scriptural wisdom, and so on. See also Payne (2018, 61–​63), which touches 
on the identification of Buddhist deities with mantra in the Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa and the 
Abhisamayamañjarī. Another compelling parallel to the Śākta Śaiva sources collated in 
this paper is found in self-​generation stage in the Vajravārāhī Sādhana, which involves the 
visualization of the letter E. In north Indian post-​Gupta scripts, this letter is represented by 
an inverted triangle, and in the visualization it symbolizes the origin of all dharmas and is 
equated with the female sex organ or womb. See English (2002, 149).
	79.	 Such a study would do well to integrate the insights of Silburn (1988), which analyzes a 
number of passages in the Tantrāloka and other tantric sources, but without tracing 
the historical development of the concept, particularly in earlier Trika texts like the 
Siddhayogeśvarīmata, and importantly, the Tantrasadbhāva. Padoux (1990) does include 
an analysis of an important passage from the Tantrasadbhāva but does not treat or ac­
count for the divergences in the depictions of kuṇḍalinī across tantric lineages. The schol­
arship of Bang (2018), which edits and translates ­chapters 1, 3, 9, 18, 28, is an important 
resource to build upon in the study of this text and kuṇḍalinī’s role therein. Finally, Hatley 
(2016) offers what is probably the clearest discussion of the general features of kuṇḍalinī 
in classical tantric literature, mentioning some important early references, including the 
Sārdhatriśatikālottara; his short essay is an important resource for a more comprehensive 
text-​critical study of the early history of kuṇḍalinī.

--- PAGE 832 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      807
 
References
Primary Sources
Aṣṭaprakaraṇam. 1925. Edited by Kṛṣṇaśāstrī. Devakōṭṭai: Śivāgamasiddhāntaparipālan
asaṅgha (Tattvaprakāśa, Tattvasaṅgraha, Tattvatrayanirṇaya, with the commentaries 
of Aghoraśivācārya) and (Ratnatrayaparīkṣā, Bhogakārikā, Nādakārikā with the 
commentaries of Aghoraśivācārya, and Mokṣakārikā and Paramokṣanirāsakārikā with the 
commentaries of Rāmakaṇṭha II).
Bṛhaddeśī of Mataṅga. 1992. Edited and translated by Prem Lata Sharma with assistance of 
Anil Bihari Beohar. Indira Gandhi National Center for the Arts. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 
Publishers.
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya. Provisionally edited by Mark Dyczkowski on the basis of NAK 
MS no. 1-​767, NAK MS no 1-​245, and NAK MS no. 1-​145. Muktabodha Indological Research 
Institute.
Kālottara. Institut français d’Indologie T057, Paper transcript in Devanāgarī.
Kiraṇatantra. 1975. Maria Pia Vivanti, ed. and trans. Il “Kiraṇāgama,” Testo e Traduzione del 
Vidyāpāda. Napoli: Istituto Orientale di Napoli.
Kubjikāmatatantra. 1988. Edited by Teun Goudriaan and J.A. Schoterman. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Mataṅgaparameśvarāgama. 1977. Edited by N.R. Bhatt. Mataṅgaparameśvarāgama 
(vidyāpāda), avec le commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha. Pondichéry: Institut français 
d’Indologie.
Mṛgendrāgama. 1962. Edited by N.R. Bhatt. Mṛgendrāgama (Kriyāpāda et Caryāpāda) avec le 
commentaire (vṛtti) de Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha. Pondichéry: Institut français d’Indologie.
Nādakārikā. In Aṣṭaprakaraṇa. See also Filliozat 1984.
Netratantra. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. The Netratantra with Commentary by 
Kshemarāja. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 46, 61. Bombay: The Research Department 
of Jammu and Kashmir State, 1926, 1939.
Niśvāsakārikā. Institut français d’Indologie T.17. Paper transcript in Devanāgarī.
Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa of Abhinavagupta. 1918. Edited by Mukunda Rama Sastri. The Parātrīśikā 
with Commentary (vivṛti) by Abhinavagupta. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies volume 18. 
Bombay: Tatva Vivechaka Press.
Sarvajñānottara. Institut français d’Indologie T. 334. Paper transcript in Devanāgarī.
Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama. 1979. Edited by N. R. Bhatt. The Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama avec 
le commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha. Pondicherry: Institut français d’Indologie.
Śivasūtravimarśinī. 1911. Edited by Jagadish Chandra Chatterji and Rāmacandra Gadāri. 
Śivasūtravimarśinī being the sūtras of Vasugupta, with the commentary called Vimarśinī by 
Kṣemarāja. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, Volume 1. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press.
Svacchandatantroddyota. Edited by Madhusudan Shāstrī. The Svacchanda Tantram, with 
Commentary by Kṣemarāja. 6 vols. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 31, 38, 44, 48, 51, 56. 
Bombay: The Research Department of Jammu and Kashmir, 1921–​1935. Bombay: Nirnaya 
Sagar Press.
Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta. Edited by Mukund Ram Sastri (Vol. 1), Madhusudan Kaula 
Shastri (vol. 2–​12). The Tantrāloka with Commentary by Rājānaka Jayaratha. Kashmir Series 
of Texts and Studies 23, 28, 30, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52, 57, 58. Srinagar, 1918–​1938. Allahabad: 
Indian Press.

--- PAGE 833 ---
808      Ben Williams
 
Tantrasadbhāvatantra. Partially and provisionally edited by Mark Dyczkowski, Muktabodha 
Indological Research Institute.
Tantrasāra of Abhinavagupta. 1918. Edited by Mukund Ram Shastri. Kashmir Series of Texts 
and Studies 17. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press.
Ūrmikaulārṇava. Provisionally edited by Mark Dyczkowski on the basis of NAK MS no. 5-​5207 
and NGMPP reel no. B 115/​9. Muktabodha Indological Research Institute.
Vāmakeśvarīmata with the Commentary of Rājānaka Jayaratha. 1945. Edited by Madhusundan 
Kaula Shastri. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 66. Srinagar: Mercantile Press.
Secondary Sources
Aklujkar, Ashok 2001. “The Word Is the World: Nondualism in Indian Philosophy of 
Language.” Philosophy East and West 51, no. 4: 452–​473.
Bang, Junglan 2018. “Selected Chapters from the Tantrasadbhāva based on the tradition of 11th 
century Śaiva Manuscripts in Nepal.” PhD diss., Universität Hamburg.
Bäumer, Bettina 2011. Abhinavagupta’s Hermeneutics of the Absolute: Anuttaraprakriya. An 
Interpretation of his Paratrisika Vivarana. New Delhi: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 
Shimla, and D.K. Printworld.
Brunner, Hélène 1985. Mṛgendrāgama: Section des rites et section du comportement avec la vṛtti 
de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇakaṇṭha. Traduction, introduction et notes. Pondicherry: Publications de 
l’Institut Français d’Indology.
Brunner, Hélène 1992. “Jñāna and Kriyā: Relation Between Theory and Practice in the 
Śaivāgamas.” In Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, 
edited by Teun Goudriaan, 1–​60. Albany: State University of New York Press.
English, Elizabeth 2002. Vajrayoginī: Her Visualizations, Rituals, and Forms. A Study of the 
Vajrayoginī Cult in India. Boston: Wisdom.
Ferrante, Marco 2021. Indian Perspectives on Consciousness, Language and Self: The School of 
Recognition on Linguistics and Philosophy of Mind. New York: Routledge.
Filliozat, Pierre-Sylvain. 1984. “Les Nādakārikā de Rāmakaṇṭha.” Bulletin de l’École 
Française d’Extrême Orient 73: 223–​255.
Filliozat, Pierre-Sylvain. 1994a. “Bhartrhari and Tantra.” In Pandit N. R. Bhatt Felicitation 
Volume, edited by P-​S. Filliozat, C. P. Bhatta, and S. P. Narang, 463–​480. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Filliozat, Pierre-Sylvain. 1994b. The Tantra of Svayaṃbhū: Vidyāpāda with the Commentary of 
Sadyojyoti. Vol. 14. Kalāmūlaśāstra Series. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Gerety, Finnian McKean Moore. 2015. This Whole World Is Om: Song, Soteriology, and the 
Emergence of the Sacred Syllable. PhD diss., Harvard University.
Gerety, Finnian McKean Moore. Forthcoming. This Whole World Is OM: A History of the 
Sacred Syllable in Early India. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gupta, Sanjukta. 2000. Lakṣmī Tantra. A Pāñcarātra Text. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Golovkova, Anna A. 2017. “A Goddess for the Second Millenium: Transgression and 
Transformation in the Hindu Tantric Worship of Tripurasundarī.” PhD diss., Cornell 
University.
Goodall, Dominic. 1998. Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra. Volume I: 
Chapters 1–​6. Critical Edition and Annotated Translation by Dominic Goodall. Pondicherry: 
Institut français de Pondichéry, École française d’Extreme-​ Orient.

--- PAGE 834 ---
Cosmogenesis and Phonematic Emanation      809
 
Goodall, Dominic. 2001. “The Saiddhāntika Parākhyatantra, Its Account of Language, and the 
Interpolation of the Eighth Chapter of the Published Pauṣkarāgama.” In Le Parole e i Marmi, 
Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70◦ compleanno, edited by R. Torella, 327–​350. 2 vols. 
IsIAO: Serie Orientale Roma.
Goodall, Dominic. 2004. The Parākhyatantra: A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. Pondicherry: 
Institut français de Pondichéry, École française d’Extreme-​Orient.
Goodall, Dominic., with A. Sanderson and H. Isaacson. 2015. The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: The 
Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra: Volume 1. A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation of the 
Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra & Nayasūtra. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram Press.
Gough, Ellen. 2021. “When Sound Becomes an Image: Picturing Oṃ in Jainism.” 
Material Religion 17, no. 4: 463–​489.
Haas, Dominik A. 2022. “Gāyatrī Mantra and Mother of the Vedas: A Philological-​Historical 
Study.” PhD diss., Universität Wien.
Hatley, Shaman. 2007. “Mapping the Esoteric Body in the Islamic Yoga of Bengal.” 
History of Religions 46, no. 4: 351–​368.
Hatley, Shaman. 2016. “Kuṇḍalinī.” In Encyclopedia of Indian Religions, edited by A. Sharma. 
Amsterdam: Springer.
Hatley, Shaman. 2018. The Brahmayāmalatantra or Picumata: Vol I, Chapters 1–​2, 39–​40, & 83 
Revelation, Ritual and Material Culture in an Early Śaiva Tantra. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo 
Ashram Press.
Jamison, Stephanie W., and Joel P. Brereton, trans. 2014. The Rigveda. 3 vols. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Khanna, M. 1986. “The Concept and Liturgy of the Śrīcakra Based on Śivānanda’s Trilogy.” 
PhD diss., University of Oxford.
Nemec, John. 2019. “Somānanda on the Meaningfulness of Language.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 
62, no. 3: 227–​268.
Padoux, André. 1990. Vāc: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. Translated by 
Jacques Gontier. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Padoux, André. 2011. Tantric Mantras: Studies on Mantrasastra. Routledge Studies in Tantric 
Traditions. New York: Routledge.
Padoux, André. 2017. The Hindu Tantric World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Payne, Richard K. 2018. Language in the Buddhist Tantra of Japan: Indic Roots of Mantra. 
London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Reich, James D. 2021. To Savor the Meaning: The Theology of Literary Emotions in Medieval 
Kashmir. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sanderson, Alexis G. J. S. 1988. “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World’s Religions, 
edited by S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke, and F. Hardy, 660–​704. London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
Sato, A. 2020. “The Theory of the Sphoṭa.” In The Bloomsbury Research Handbook of Indian 
Philosophy of Language, edited by A. Graheli, 76–​107. London: Bloomsbury.
Sferra, Francesco. 1991. “Aspetti Della Speculazione Linguistica Nello Śaiva Siddhānta. Le 
Nādakārikā di Rāmakaṇṭha.” Rivista degli studi orientali 65, no. 3/​4: 311–​337.
Sferra, Francesco. 2007. “Materials for the Study of the Levels of Sound in the Sanskrit Sources 
of the Śaivasiddhānta.” In Mélanges tantrique à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner, edited by D. 
Goodall and A. Padoux, 443–​474. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram Press.
Silburn, Lilian. 1988. Kuṇḍalinī: Energy of the Depths. Albany: State University of New York 
Press.

--- PAGE 835 ---
810      Ben Williams
 
Torella, Raffaele. 1987. “Examples of the Influence of Sanskrit Grammar on Indian Philosophy.” 
East and West 37, no.1/​4: 151–​164.
Torella, Raffaele. 2004. “How Is Verbal Signification Possible: Understanding Abhinavagupta’s 
Reply.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 32: 173–​188.
Törzsök, Judit. 2016. “The Emergence of the Alphabet Goddess Mātṛkā in Early Śaiva Tantras.” 
In Tantric Studies-​Fruits of a Franco-​German Collaboration on Early Tantra, edited by D. 
Goodall and H. Isaacson, 135–​155. Pondicherry: Sri Aurobindo Ashram Press.
Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2004. The Yoga of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra, ­chapters 1–​4, 7, 11–​17. 
Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichery.
Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2007. “Synaesthetic Iconography: 1. The Nādiphāntakrama.” In Mélanges 
tantrique à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner, edited by D. Goodall and A. Padoux, 517–​550. 
Pondicherry: Institut Français d’Indologie /​ École Française d’Extreme-​Orient.
Wallis, Christopher. 2022. “The Real Story on Kundalini.” Accessed January 31. https://​hare​esh.
org/​blog/​2022/​1/​31/​the-​real-​story-​on-​kundal​ini
Watson, Alex. 2006. The Self’s Awareness of Itself: Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Arguments Against the 
Buddhist Doctrine of No-​Self. Vienna: De Nobili Research Library.
Williams, Ben. 2017. “Abhinavagupta’s Portrait of a Guru: Revelation and Religious Authority 
in Kashmir.” PhD diss., Harvard University.

--- PAGE 836 ---
Chapter 32
Jain Tantra
An Overview
Christopher key Chapple
The Ācārāṅga Sūtra and the 
Tattvārtha Sūtra
Two texts encapsulate core Jaina teachings and practices. The Ācārāṅga Sūtra, a Prakrit text 
recorded around 300 BCE, provides the earliest documentation of the Jain worldview (all 
beings want to live) and Jain ethics (adherence to nonviolence, truth, honesty, sensual re­
straint, and minimalization of possessions), told in narrative prose style (Jabobi 1884). The 
Tattvārtha Sūtra, a Sanskrit text composed in the fourth or fifth century of the Common 
Era by Umasvāti in the style of Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtra, delineates details of Jain cosmology 
and karma theory (Tatia 1994). In short, subtle particles of sticky, colorful karma adhere to 
the soul and occlude its radiant nature or life force (jīva). Every act in violation of the five 
precepts invites the accrual of new karmas. One enters a commitment to spiritual practice 
(adhyātma) that entails introspection and avoidance of afflicted actions, characterized in Jain 
texts as the poisons of anger, pride, deceit, and greed. This can stop the influx of new karma. 
Furthermore, through acts of repentance and expiation (pratikramaṇa), often accompanied 
with fasting, one can expel (nirjarā) lingering karmas, advancing the soul toward freedom 
(mokṣa). The Ācārāṅga Sūtra provides direct instruction on how to extirpate karma. The 
Tattvārtha Sūtra describes the fourteen-​fold path of quality stages (guṇasthānas) that lead 
to final liberation, as well as stops along the way that might be visited in the round of birth, 
death, and rebirth. These include seven hells; countless life forms as elemental particles, bac­
teria, plants, animals, human beings; and thirty-​two (or more) heavens.
The Yogabindu
In the sixth century, the Jain philosopher Haribhadra Virahanka composed the 
Yogabindu, a 527-​verse Sanskrit text that describes how the goal of freedom can only be

--- PAGE 837 ---
812      Christopher key Chapple
 
obtained through the practices of Yoga. This text provides a fivefold assessment of Yoga 
and highlights prayer (japa), worship (pūjā), and compassion as held in common across 
all the traditions of India.
3.	Because the purpose of Yoga is liberation,
	 there can be no splintering.
	 Since there is no difference in the final goal
	 there is no true difference between types of Yoga.
4.	Due to its goal of liberation,
	 Yoga is followed with effort by the intelligent ones.
	 This pure, true system, beneficial to one’s being,
	 should be sought with great longing.
5.	To the extent that a system results in
	 in joining one to one’s true nature,
	 such a Yoga connects one with
	 the most eminent of intentions.
6.	Due to the linking (saṃyoga) of the Self with the other (karma),
	 one remains trapped in saṃsāra.
	 Through disconnection (viyoga) from that (karma), one is indeed liberated.
(Haribhadra 1940; translations by author)
According to Haribhadra Virahanka, Yoga takes five forms, beginning with spiritu­
ality (adhyātma), leading, through repeated merit, to cultivation (bhāvanā). In the 
third phase: “One enters mind state regularly residing in purity, called meditation 
(dhyāna). It resembles an unflickering lamp. It endows a person with enjoyment of the 
subtle (sūkṣma)” (v. 62). In the fourth state, “equanimity (samatā) one abandons likes 
and dislikes . . . and cuts the thread of expectation” (verses [v.] 364–​365). Finally, in the 
culminating fifth phase, one “stops the behaviors (vṛtti) that result from involvement 
with karma (anya), destroys (saṃkṣaya) those karmas, and no longer re-​enters the 
form of existence. This indeed is liberative knowledge. Here one attains total freedom. 
One obtains liberation from all obstacles. One reaches [eternal] existence and bliss” (v. 
366–​367). Such a person ascends to a state beyond heaven known as the Siddha Loka, 
dwelling forevermore in abiding awareness.
The practitioner of Yoga is advised to perform worship:
117.	 In a spirit of purity and faith,
	 	 one should know how to do pūjā for the gods
	 	 with flowers (puṣpa), food offerings (bali),
	 	 garments (vastra), songs (stotra), and turmeric.
In addition, one should engage in prayer (japa) as the entry point to sustain spirituality:
381.	 Japa is said to be the initial practice
	 	 to attain spirituality (adhyātma).
	 	 From the essence of this limb arises divine grace (devatā anugraha).
	 	 Hence this is a way of cultivating insight (abhidhīyate).

--- PAGE 838 ---
Jain Tantra      813
 
382.	 The object of japa is noble recitation.
	
It is said to be a hymn to the gods (devatā-​stava).
	
It is seen that though this sins dissolve (pāpa-​hāra).
	
Poisons are thus removed (viṣa-​apaharaṇa).
The Jain path includes techniques common to all faith traditions: ethical practices, litur­
gical performance, and prayer. Furthermore, Haribhadra Virahanka advocated an in­
clusive approach to this practice, noting:
118.	 Householders should honor
	
all the great souls and gods
	
with a will and inclination
	
that does not discriminate against any of them.
119.	 All gods merit honoring,
	
not just one preferred god.
	
Those (who worship all gods) have controlled their senses.
	
They overcome their fears and difficulties.
This particular text emphasizes goodness across faiths. It extols commonality between 
the exemplars of the Jain and Buddhist faiths:
272.	 These two (Bodhisattvas and Saṃyagdṛṣṭis) are the same in all ways.
	
They have a taste for higher purpose. They are visionary. They tread the path.
	
They are of noble disposition. They have lovely qualities.
273.	 Correct vision and awakening arise from the same source (pradhāna).
	
It is clear that the Jain saint is of the same being as the Bodhisattva.
274.	 Whether a person desires to be joined
	
in the space of awakening [the Bodhisattva]
	
or making pilgrimage (the Jain saint’s journey to the Siddha Loka),
	
it is known that excellence can be found
	
in both the Bodhisattva and the Jain saint.
This affirmative and comparative approach demonstrates the high level of study and the 
liberality associated with Haribhadra Virahanka.
The Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya of Haribhadra 
Yakini Putra
Two hundred years later, such liberality could not be extended to the newly risen tantric 
movement. As noted by Vidya Dehejia:
The tantric cult of the Yoginīs . . . referred to as Kaula Mārga, appears to have risen to 
considerable significance in the centuries following A.D. 600. . . . The orthodox tradi­
tion became increasingly aware of the power of this new religious order. . . . Realizing

--- PAGE 839 ---
814      Christopher key Chapple
 
that the Yoginīs possessed a certain persistent and magnetic appeal, it decided to in­
corporate their goddesses at least into the outer fringes of its own tradition.
(Dehejia 1986, 185)
The eighth-​century scholar Haribhadra Yakini Putra undertook such a project in the 
Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya, a Sanskrit text of 227 verses (Chapple 2003). It provides a compara­
tive analysis of different forms of Yoga and is one of the earliest texts to address the topic 
of goddess worship. In a fascinating show of rhetoric, Haribhadra Yakini Putra, whose 
own name shows allegiance to an inspirational Yakini or protective form of the divine 
feminine, aligns Jain spiritual practices with the eight steps of Patañjali’s Aṣṭāṅga Yoga, 
an eightfold Vedānta path, an eightfold Buddhist system, and the names of eight hith­
erto unknown goddesses (see Table 32.1).
The Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya refers to practitioners of tantra as Kula Yogis and affirms 
their shared goal of liberation. However, whereas the Yogabindu posits no difference 
between the Buddhist Bodhisattva and the Jain aspirant, this text harshly criticizes the 
“misguided” pursuits of the Kula Yogis: “The Kula Yogis are drunken and more dull 
than us” (222; Chapple and Casey 2003, 150). He characterizes these people as licentious 
(avedyasaṃvedya) and considers them to be deluded (v. 67).
76.	 The lover of worldly existence is vile,
	
finding pleasure in acquiring things,
	
wretched, wicked, filled with fear,
	
deceitful, engaged in undertakings that bear no fruit.
77.	 Being full of negative behavior (vṛtti),
	
their attitude is not pretty.
	
Even considering such behavior is like mixing food with poison.
78.	 Such deluded persons are blind
	
when it comes to discriminating between right and wrong.
	
Their ability to see correctly is suppressed.
79.	 Despite seeing that existence is oppressed by birth, death,
	
old age, disease, infirmity, sorrow, and so forth,
	
due to their delusion, they do not shrink from it.
80.	 They always see evil deeds as something to be done,
	
and do things that ought not to be done.
	
they see pleasure in suffering as if drawn to scratch a scab.
81.	 Just as in such itching
	
there is no thought of the impact on the scab,
	
for those ensconced in enjoyment, there is no abating of desire.
82.	 They blind themselves, violent with desire, always in darkness.
	
Rendered stupid by the dust of their sin, they never consider truth.
. . .
84.	 Like baited meat on a fish hook, they are addicted
	
to vanity, decadent pleasures, and cruel behavior.
	
Cruel and lethargic, they renounce the true object of desire.
	
What a pity!

--- PAGE 840 ---
Table 32.1  Forms of Yoga as Given in Haribhadra’s Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya and Comparisons
Haribhadra
Patañjali
Bandhu Bhagavaddatta
Bhadanta Bhāskara
Guṇasthāna
Patañjali’s Samādhi
Mitrā
(Friendly)
Yama
(Disciplines)
Adveṣa
(No aversion)
Akheda
(No distress)
4–​7; insight and ethics
citta-​vṛitti
Tārā
(Protector)
Niyama (Observances)
Jijñāsa
(Desire for knowledge)
Anudvega
(No anxiety)
8; in path,
with passions
samāpatti
Balā
(Power)
Āsana
(Postures)
Śuśruṣā
(Desirous to hear truth)
Akṣepa
(No distraction)
9; with gross passions
savitarka
Dīprā
(Shining)
Prānāyāma
(Control of breath)
Śravaṇa
(Hearing truth)
Anuttānavatī
(No interruption)
10; with subtle passions
nirvitarka
Sthirā
(Firm)
Pratyāhāra (Detachment)
Sūkṣmabodha
(Subtle awakening)
Abhrānti
(Unmuddied)
11; no passion, calmed 
delusion, no omniscience
savicāra
Kāntā
(Pleasing)
Dhāraṇā
(Concentration)
Mīmāṃsā
(Reflection)
Ananyamud
(Not finding pleasure in 
anything other)
12; no passion, diminished 
delusion, no omniscience
nirvicāra
Prabhā
(Radiant)
Dhyāna
(Meditation)
Pratipatti
(Perception of truth)
Arug
(Without pain)
13; no passion, no delusion, 
with body
sabīja
Parā
(Highest)
Samādhi
Sātimī-​kṛta-​pravṛtti 
(Enactment of absorption)
Sanga Vivarjitā (Free from 
attachment)
14; omniscience, no activity
nirbīja
From Christopher Key Chapple. Reconciling Yogas: Haribhadra’s Collection of Views on Yoga. (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2003), 97.

--- PAGE 841 ---
816      Christopher key Chapple
 
85.	 Stepping into licentiousness is the blindness
	
that makes one fall into unhappiness.
	
This is to be overcome by the great souls
	
through the Yoga of good company and sacred teachings.
This scathing indictment of tantra represents one of the earliest Jain condemnations of 
this popular practice. Although Haribhadra Yakini Putra claimed to have written these 
words for their benefit, he asked that this text not be shared with them, out of the con­
cern that it would “engender contempt and that little would be gained” (v. 227).
Other literature similarly derided tantra and the worship of the goddess. The Yaśatilaka 
of Somadeva (956 CE) contains a ghastly description of the goddess Caṇḍamārī in her 
temple:
Garlands of human skulls are her head ornament. Corpses of children are her ear or­
nament. The elbows of dead men are her earrings. Balls made from the bones of dead 
bodies form her necklaces. The oozings from the leg bones of corpses serve as her 
cosmetics. Skeletons play the part of toy lotuses in her hands. Rivers of wine are the 
streams wherein she performs her evening ablutions. Charnel fields are her pleasure 
grounds. The ashes of funeral pyres are her face ornament. Rawhide constitutes her 
robe. The intestines of dead bodies form her girdle. The bosoms of dead men are her 
dancing floor. She plays with the heads of goats as with balls. Her water sports take 
place in lakes of blood. The blazing fires of cremation grounds serve as her votive 
lamps at night. Human skulls are the vessels she eats from. Her greatest pleasure is 
when living creatures of all kinds are sacrificed at her altar.
(Handiqui 1968, 56)
Jinadattsūri, Jincandrasūri, and the 
Conversion of Yoginīs
From various narrative accounts, it can be discerned that the Kaula Mārga yoginī cults 
competed with Jain teachings. Jinadattasuri (1075–​1154 CE) was the first of four magnifi­
cent miracle-​working monks known as Dādāgurus. Among his many accomplishments, 
he thwarted sixty-​four yoginīs who had planned to interrupt a public lecture he was 
presenting in Jaipur. They were unable to arise from their mats when the talk ended, 
but then pledged to help Jinadatatsūri propagate Jain teachings and were released. 
Jinadattasūri warned his successor, Jinacandrasūri (1140–​1166 CE), to avoid the city of 
Delhi, known in the twelfth century as Yoginīpur, due to the preponderance of goddess 
worship and tantric practices (Dalrymple 1993). Though remembering his guru’s words, 
he settled there at the invitation of the King, Madanpāl. Jinacandrasūri successfully 
converted a meat-​eating woman to the Jain faith. She became a revered teacher known 
as Atibal. When Jinacadrasūri died, his body became immovable. When his body was

--- PAGE 842 ---
Jain Tantra      817
 
burned, a jewel emerged from his head (Babb 1996). Dada Bari, the site of his death in 
the Mehrauli village area of South Delhi, remains an important pilgrimage site today.
The Jain Adaptation of Goddess 
Worship and Tantric Techniques
Lawrence Babb (1996, 1998) and Michael Meister (1998) have written about a particular 
temple in the western Rajasthan village of Osiāñ, also known as Osiyā. It houses a shrine 
to Saciyā Mātā, a “lineage goddess” generally worshipped during the Nava Rātri festival 
period in October. They described how this bloodthirsty goddess begged to accept vege­
tarian offerings when the local population embraced the Jain faith several hundred years 
ago. Other scholars have written about the “conversion” of fierce goddesses to the gentler 
ways of the Jain faith, especially John Cort (1987) and Phyllis Granoff (1989). Likewise, 
Alexis Sanderson (Vekemans 2016) showed how the Nirvāṇakalikā, a Jain ritual manual, 
borrowed heavily from the eleventh-​century Śaiva text, the Siddhāntasārapaddhati. 
These developments affirmed John Cort’s observation that “nearly every social and cul­
tural development in South Asian history is reflected in the Jain tradition” (1998, 15), 
with the absorption of some aspects of tantra being a prime example.
The Jñānārṇava, the Yogaśāstra, and 
the Adaptation of Tantra
As noted in the quotation by Vidya Dehejia above, the popularity of goddess wor­
ship and the practices of tantra required creative innovations. In order to remain rel­
evant, and undoubtedly to retain patronage, Jain philosophers needed to respond and 
adapt. In addition to taming goddesses and retelling their stories in new ways that 
accommodated Jain ethics, the more esoteric practices associated with tantra became 
repurposed. These include three practices widely found in tantric traditions: the in­
vocation of mantra, sacred geometry in the form of yantras and mandalas, and con­
centration on the elements. Ellen Gough (2012; see also “Jain Tantric Diagrams of the 
Goddess Padmāvatī,” this volume) provided a preliminary analysis of the intersection 
between mantra and mandala in Jain liturgy. This section focuses on an early example 
of Śaiva tantra themes reinterpreted in a Jain milieu. Śubhacandra, a Digambara 
Jain, composed a comprehensive work in the eleventh century, the Jñānārṇava, that 
amalgamates these features of tantra (Jain 2011). These chapters were repeated within 
the Yogaśāstra, the comprehensive manual on Jain practice by Hemacandra (1089–​
1172 CE) (Quarnström 2016, 141).

--- PAGE 843 ---
818      Christopher key Chapple
 
Chapter 37 of the Jñānārṇava appeared in nearly identical form in Hemacandra’s 
Yogaśāstra. It provided a distinctly Jaina approach to the processes of elemental purifi­
cation and the transformation of self-​identity. Tantric practice in Buddhist and Hindu 
traditions arrays the five great elements in a fixed order: earth, water, fire, air, and space. 
The earliest record of this specific order appeared in the Dhātu Vibhaṅga, a Buddhist 
text. The Markaṇḍeya Purāṇa provided the early correlations between elements and the 
body that later take full blossom in tantra:
The Yogi should hold to the earth and enter its subtle quality,
thinking about its expansive nature, moving beyond its fragrance;
likewise in regard to the subtle flavor in water
and the form revealed by the light of fire.
This concentration extends similarly to the touch of the wind.
In the subtle activity of the sky, one moves beyond sound.
Thus one enters all the elements through the mind.
Markaṇḍeya Purāṇa (40.17–​40.20, translation by author)
The order of the elements is very specific: earth, water, fire, air, space. The Jñānārṇava 
followed an atypical ascent through the senses. Rather than proceeding from gross to 
subtle, with earth at the bottom, topped with water, fire, and air before reaching space, this 
new Jain rendering moved from earth to fire, to air, then to water, before reaching space.
This progressive meditation begins with visualizing the earth as a lotus tainted with 
karmas (Chapple 2020). The meditator visualizes fires scorching the eight downward 
petals of the lotus that represent the eight Jaina karmas. Four negative karmas obstruct 
knowledge, intuition, and energy and cause delusional thinking and action. They can 
be purified and expelled through this practice. The four karmas that enable feeling, life 
span, physique, and social status must also go up in imaginal flames. The heat of this 
fire fans strong winds. One engages in effortful breathing to carry away the residues of 
smoke and ash and generate billowy clouds. Pelting rains wash away all the remnants of 
the burned karmas and clear away all obstacles and constraints. The final visualization 
reveals purified space and the presence of the liberated soul and great teacher Mahāvῑra. 
Thus, the progression moves from earth substances affiliated with karma to the fiery 
power of incinerating these karmas through spiritual austerities, including the tapas of 
fasting, and adhering without fail to a strict code of ethics. From fire one stirs up suffi­
cient wind to gather clouds that carry rain. The resulting deluge of water washes away all 
remaining impurities. The process ends in a meditative space that replicates the feeling 
tone of freedom.
In traditional Kundalini tantra, one ascends from the root (mūladhāra cakra) asso­
ciated with earth and the base of the spine to the svādhisthāna cakra associated with 
the watery functions of the genitals. From there, one rises to the navel (nābhi) or the 
solar plexus (maṇipura cakra), associated with the “fire in the belly,” the heat-​intensive 
processes of digestion. Next comes the hṛdaya or anahata cakra, located in the area 
of the heart and lungs, associated with air. Finally, one ascends to the viśuddha cakra,

--- PAGE 844 ---
Jain Tantra      819
 
associated with the emotions of the throat and the element space. The sequence moves 
from earth to water to fire to air to space. In contrast, the Jain sequence moves from 
earth to fire to air to water to space.
Jñānārṇava, Chapter 37
1.	 According to the auspicious radiant shining souls,
	
four concentrations are to be recognized:
	
firm in substance (piṇḍastha), firm in movement (padastha),
	
firm in form (rūpastham), and beyond form (rūpavarjitam).
2.	 Those who are well controlled (samyamis)
	
and who are totally conscious overcome the snare of birth
	
using the five concentrations on substances.
	
These are to be known as explained below by the heroes.
3.	 [These substances] would be earth, then fire, breath, and eventually water,
	
all contained within the form of space. These are then to be understood in steps.
4.	 The Yogi, with equanimity while in the world, focuses on the milky ocean.
	
The mist of each silent, peaceful wave resembles a garland of pearls.
5.	 The Yogi should move his or her well-​formed focus
	
toward the middle of the thousand-​petalled lotus,
	
bringing to mind its blazing immeasurable splendor,
	
shining as brilliantly as melted gold.1
6.	 Like filaments rising up in the lotus, and like the brilliant mountains
	
that surround the earth, [these experiences] delight the bee-​like mind.
7.	 [While gazing at these mountains] one should focus on the crown of the lotus
	
as the golden heavenly Mount [Meru], emitting a web of yellow light,
	
tinging the horizon in reddish brown.
8.	 One should think of oneself seated comfortably and tranquil
	
[high on the white throne] similar to the autumnal moon.
9.	 Marked with qualities of abstinence, patience, and discipline,
	
free from attraction and aversion, one cuts off the flow of karma
	
at its very origin.
10.	 Then, using the practice of meditation
	
on the lotus in the maṇḍala of the navel,
	
one focuses on the beautiful uplifted sixteen petals.
11.	 One should reflect upon the vibration
	
of the great mantra at the crown of the lotus,
	
its petals nested within one another
	
as a glorious garland of [sixteen] syllables.
	
[From the commentary: a, ā, i, ῑi, u, ū, ṛ, ṝ, ḷ, ḷ, e, ai, o, au, aṃ aḥ]
12.	 Through the murmuring of the sixteen seed mantras
	
comes a state of abeyance adorned with the emptying of sound.
	
[This experience is like] the glowing of a pendulous moon at its fullest,
	
its white face extending beauty [everywhere].

--- PAGE 845 ---
820      Christopher key Chapple
 
13.	 From the murmuring [of the mantra raṃ] one should then focus afterward
	
on the emerging gentle result, an uninterrupted succession of endless pulsing fire.
14.	 By this, the eternal Jina [is visualized] within these flickering flames.
	
Then, when that fire burns continually, one becomes steady,
	
situated in the white lotus of the heart.
15.	 The eight upside down petals, representing the eight kinds of karma,
	
are to be burnt completely by the fierce fire
	
that arises with the great mantra and meditation.
16.	 Then the triangular mandala of fire [is visualized] outside of the body.
	
One should focus on those flickering flames as if they are bioluminescent.
17.	 Marked by a svastika located at the edge,
	
the fire seed bῑja is approached [with the syllable raṃ].
	
It is smokeless and glittering with gold as it ascends in the rising wind.2
18.	 The inner fire of the mantra burns like a brush fire burns city after city,
	
running and resounding swiftly, spreading radiance from its flames.
19.	 This state reduces both body and lotus to ash.
	
Burning itself out, the fire gently, softly goes into a state of peace.
20.	 With great swiftness and great strength,
	
the Yogi meditates without interruption on moving through the air
	
as if having entered the path of a sky chariot (prāṇāyāma).
21.	 Rallying an army of gods by bellowing thirty breaths,
	
he holds in abeyance dense swarms [of karma]
	
as if dousing them in the mighty sea.
22.	 In this state, one finds enjoyment in moving about the world
	
with one’s countenance travelling with the wind,
	
wandering to the abodes of people, settling down on the face of the earth.
23.	 With the powerful wind, one can speedily rouse oneself up into passion.
	
Then, through firm, accomplished practice,
	
one can calm the breath [the inner wind].
24.	 That virtuous soul should focus on the spectacle
	
in the western sky of dense clouds,
	
filled with moisture, rumbling lightning, and rainbows.
25.	 Then the ascetic should focus diligently
	
upon the unrelenting, tremendous rains,
	
each drop illuminated by lightning,
	
making them shine like large, brilliant pearls.
26.	 Then the Yogi should meditate
	
on the beautiful water abode resembling a half moon
	
that causes the ocean to rise up,
	
overflowing into the face of the sky.
27.	 Once this inconceivable, powerful, divine meditation on water has arisen,
	
the body purified from dust is born.
28.	 Then the accomplished one focuses on his omniscient soul,
	
liberated from the seven bodily constituents,
	
shining like the unblemished full moon.
29.	 His soul, joined with heavenly eminence,
	
is worshipped by demons, gods, and serpents alike,

--- PAGE 846 ---
Jain Tantra      821
 
	
possessing both beauty and power,
	
seated upon the lion’s throne [an allusion to Mahāvῑra].
30.	 The Yogi should meditate on the self in one’s own body,
	
an embryo in the form of a person
	
whose karmas have been diminished without remainder,
	
trembling with immeasurable beauty.
31.	 The Yogi whose practice grows
	
to uninterrupted steadiness in Piṇḍastha Meditation
	
soon reaches unparalleled, auspicious bliss,
	
and is called the Noble One.
32.	 He meditates on the glistening whiteness
	
of the new nectar on the full moon,
	
experiencing a moment of blessed omniscience,
	
seated on the golden mountain peak, free from all sensory outflows.
	
He meditates on the self and the universal form,
	
on the multitudes of teachers in the three realms,
	
as well as on the inconceivable Lord.
	
That piṇḍastha meditation makes one similar to the Jina
	
who has crossed the great water to the other shore.
This visualization begins with meditation on a lotus-​shaped earth, with a focus on a 
horizon laced with mountains. In a process akin to such Tibetan practices as chöd (T. 
gcod), one uses a visualization on fire to burn the karmic body to ash. Then one invokes 
the wind through the practice of rapid breathing, strong enough to shake Mt. Meru, to 
disperse the ashes of the body, allowing one to sit still and contemplate the sky, filled 
with rainbows, lightning, and thunderclouds. Rains then wash the burned body with 
sacred water, such that its luster resembles a half moon. Then one contemplates the soul 
as seated on a throne, adored by benevolent gods, its eight karmas eradicated. In this 
state, one emulates the liberated souls, most specifically the great teacher, Tῑrthaṅkara 
Mahāvῑra. In this tantric transformation, one uses visualization and mantra to incin­
erate impurities, obtaining the diamond-​like body beyond the reach of all karmas.
In addition to employing the meditation on the five great elements in a specialized 
order, this chapter also invokes the importance of mantra recitation, another central 
component of tantra. It very specifically advocates the recitation of the seed syllable raṃ 
to invoke the power of fire to incinerate all eight forms of karma.
Padmāvatī and Contemporary Tantra
As an example of contemporary Jain expressions of tantra, we conclude with an ex­
amination of the worship of Padmāvatī, a popular goddess, including reflections on 
both text and ritual. It begins with a summary overview of the Padmāvatῑ narrative, 
closely linked to the story of the twenty-​third great Jain teacher, Parshvanath. Second,

--- PAGE 847 ---
822      Christopher key Chapple
 
thematic aspects of the text are delineated. Third, similarities of this text to a parallel 
108-​line invocation of Śrῑlalitā included in the Sunanda and Yajneshwar Shastri study of 
Śaṅkarācārya’s Triśatῑ is discussed (Shastri 2016).
Though every Jain family is said to know the story of Padmāvatῑ (Babb 1996, 34) 
and her husband, how they were rescued by the Jain saint Parśvanath, and later helped 
him, remarkably little has been written in English about the repeated interchanges 
between Parśvanath, his nemesis Kamaṭh, and Parśvanath’s protectors, Padmāvatῑ 
and Dharṇendra. In brief, Parśvanath and Kamaṭh were spiritual competitors during 
Parśvanath’s final birth. Kamaṭh took up a rigorous form of austerity that involves 
being surrounded on four sides by fire and then placing a fire on one’s head, which 
is a practice that can still be seen today in India. Parśvanath discerned that snakes 
were trapped in one of the burning logs. Parśvanath liberated two snakes, Padmāvatῑ 
and Dharṇendra, provoking Kamaṭh’s wrath. Kamaṭh died shortly thereafter, 
gaining powers as a result of this tapas that allowed rebirth as Lord of the Monsoon, 
Meghamālin. He encountered Parśvanath in the Kadambri forest near Varanasi. 
Parśvanath was meditating. Kamaṭh tried to break his meditation by sending first a 
lion and then a snake to disturb Parśvanath, to no avail. He created a torrential storm. 
As the water rose, Padmāvatῑ and Dharṇendra came to the rescue, entwining their 
bodies to lift Parśvanath above the water so that he could breathe and protecting him 
with their cobra hoods. Dharṇendra then chastised Kamaṭh, who relented and bowed 
at the feet of Parśvanath, becoming his disciple. Eighty-​four days later, Parśvanath 
attained the state of liberation, known in Jain faith as the “knower of freedom” 
(kevaljñān). He lived for another sixty-​nine years, nine months, and seven days before 
entering the Siddha Loka at age 100.3 Table 32.2 provides a step-​by-​step diagram of the 
sequence of births in which Kamaṭh follows Parśvanath.
After several visits to Jain temples throughout India and North America, it be­
came quite evident to this observer that, although the twenty-​fourth Tirthankara, 
Mahāvῑra, was the most recent and is credited with providing the core teachings of 
Jain faith, his immediate predecessor, Parśvanath, seemed more popular, at least by 
the frequency of his appearance and the attention lavished on his image. In personal 
conversation, both Whitney Kelting (2001) and John Cort (2001), who have written 
extensively on Jain ritual, have concurred with this observation and stated that part 
of the enduring appeal of Parśvanath can be found in the miracles associated with 
his life, the drama of his repeated encounters with Kamaṭh, and the novelty of the 
two protector snakes. In particular, Padmāvatῑ holds special interest because of her 
gender and, as we will see, she in many ways becomes a vehicle for the acknowledg­
ment of feminine power. As will be surmised, her form as a snake betokens aspects of 
the kuṇḍalinī power residing at the base of the spine and the fact that she elevates the 
body of Parśvanath with her own body (entwined with the body of her husband) in 
some ways allows female participation in the otherwise solitary meditative experi­
ence. Additionally, the emergence of the cult of Padmāvatῑ seems to coincide with the 
adoption of tantric practices within Jainism, including the recitation of mantra and 
valorization of the goddess.

--- PAGE 848 ---
Jain Tantra      823
 
The 108 Praise Verses to Padmāvatῑ
In the winter of 2013, I first visited a Padmāvatῑ shrine at Jain Vallabh Smarak in Alipur, 
North Delhi. I have returned to this shrine each summer, sometimes sitting quietly, 
sometimes watching the priest (pūjārῑ) cleanse and adorn the Padmāvatῑ image, and 
occasionally participating in packed community events in her honor. In the summer of 
2018, a booklet titled Rāj Rājeśvarῑ Māteśvarῑ Māṃ Padme (RRMMP; n.d.) appeared in 
the shrine. I then began reading the 108 praise verses of the text, eventually producing 
the translation given below. This 108-​verse text in praise of Padmāvatī falls within 
a genre of literature widely employed in tantric rituals. It includes a mix of mantra, 
panegyric, and narrative, as well as theological and philosophical tropes. Having 
participated on many occasions in annual Nava Rātri celebrations at Śivānanda Yoga 
Vedānta Center in Los Angeles, I was quite accustomed to the 108 names format and 
decided to investigate how this idiom, which in the Vedānta context is addressed to 
the Devῑ, would “translate” into a Jain context. The 108 goddess names chanted during 
Nava Rātri allude directly to the Devῑmahātmyā, a rather brutal section of the Skandha 
Purāṇa that describes the slaying and beheading of the demon Mahῑṣa by goddess 
Durgā (Coburn 1984, 1990). Each line begins with “yā devῑ sarva bhūteṣu” (She, the 
Table 32.2  History of Birth to Birth Conflict Between Parśvanath and Kamaṭh
Parśvanath as Brahmin brother Marubhūti.
Kamaṭh as Brahmin brother who commits 
adultery with his brother Marubhūti’s wife 
and is punished by the king. Kamaṭh stones 
Marubhūti to death.
Parśvanath/​Marubhūti is reborn as an elephant.
Kamaṭh takes the form of a serpent rooster/​
snake and kills the elephant.
Marubhūti is reborn as a god.
Kamaṭh goes to hell.
Marubhūti is reborn as King Kiraṇveg.
Kamaṭh, as a snake, kills the king.
Marubhūti ascends to the twelfth heaven.
Kamaṭh descends to the fifth hell.
Marubhūti is reborn as King Vajnābh.
Kamaṭh as a Bhῑl tribal kills Vajnābh with an arrow.
Marubhūti is born as Emperor Svarṇbāhu with 
karma that indicates future status as a Tῑrthankar.
Kamaṭh as a lion kills Svarṇbāhu.
Marubhūti is born in the tenth heaven and 
worships Tῑrthankar images in Nandῑśvar Dvῑp.
Kamaṭh goes to hell.
Marubhūti is reborn as Parśvanath to Vāmā, Queen 
of Banaras, and King Aśvasen. She experiences the 
fourteen auspicious dreams. Parśvanath marries 
the princess Prabhāvatῑ, saves the two snakes 
from Kamaṭh’s fire, sees a painting of Neminath’s 
wedding, and renounces.
Kamaṭh is born as a Brahmin ascetic, performs 
the five fire penance, dies, and is reborn as 
Meghmālin.

--- PAGE 849 ---
824      Christopher key Chapple
 
goddess in all beings), celebrating the goddess that resides (saṃsthitā) in all beings, 
offering her praise rendered in the feminine dative case (namastasyai). How would 
the Jain goddess, who does nothing more than lift and support, align with the fero­
cious goddess who slays with many weapons? Would this be an instance of conver­
sion as described by Dhaky and Meister (1991; Meister 1998) in regard to the narrative 
regarding the shift of worship at the Osiāñ temple in Rajasthan? This story describes 
the change in veneration of the fierce, flesh-​eating Durgā Cāmuṇḍā Devῑ to the gentle 
“personal goddess (śāsanadevῑ)” Saciyāmātā of the Osvāl Jain community, a goddess 
who receives only “cakes, sweets, camphor, saffron, and other nice things” (Hoernle as 
quoted in Meister 1998, 129). To clarify, Meister stated that “Saciyāmātā . . . has in rela­
tively recent times, changed from being a local personal goddess (śāsanadevī). . . into 
the kul devī [origination goddess] for . . . communities of . . . Jains” (Meister 1998, 133).
In the Jain pantheon, Padmāvatῑ, as an attendant of the Tirthankara Parśvanath, is 
considered a yakṣῑ, a goddess of the earthly realm accessible to human beings (Cort 
1987, 236). She is associated with many families in Karnataka, as well as the South Indian 
pilgrimage site of Śravanabelgola (Yocum 1997; Rao 2020). The Digamabara monk 
Malliṣena wrote a text about her, the Bhairava Padmāvatῑ Kalpa (Manuals of Rituals to 
the Fierce Padmāvatῑ) in Karnataka in 1057 CE, which includes instructions on how to 
gain power over others through pacification, subjugation, immobilization, sowing con­
flict, displacement, or seduction (Cort 1987, 245). None of those qualities seem to be in­
cluded in the text under consideration here.
The 108-​verse praise text to Padmāvatῑ repeats four primary mantras at the start of 
each line (oṃ, āṃ, kroṃ, hrῑṃ), as well as the laudatory syllable śrī in the middle and the 
praise word namaḥ at the end. Dundas described a link between the first syllables of the 
namo kara mantra a/​arhat, si/​siddha, ā/​ācārya, u/​upādhyāya, sa/​sādhu and the process 
of “placing” those initial syllables on one’s own body and the body represented in the 
Jina image (Dundas 1998, 35; see also Gough, this volume and Williams, this volume). In 
other words, one repeats the mantra, touching one’s own body and then the image of the 
Jina as described in the Yogaśāstra of Hemacandra:
One should meditate on the syllable a [from the mantra, a-​si-​ā-​u-​sā], located in 
the lotus of the navel, syllable si in the lotus of the head, the syllable ā in the lotus of 
the mouth, the syllable u in the lotus of the heart, [and] the syllable sā in the lotus 
of the throat.
(Yogaśāstra VIII:76–​76; Quarnström 2002, 163)
Cort noted in his study and translation of Ghaṇṭākarṇa Mantra Stotra that Jain 
mantras allow one to gain powers such as “cures for disease and increasing worldly 
wealth,” and that “Jainism is as much about how to live successfully in the world as 
it is about ascetic practices to liberate oneself from the world” (Cort 2000, 418). The 
Padmāvatῑ text combines repeated bῑja mantras with qualities of the goddess that 
laud both her devotional and worldly accomplishments. Padmāvatῑ displays the

--- PAGE 850 ---
Jain Tantra      825
 
powerful qualities associated with the many Hindu goddesses who are called out in 
the hymn and is praised as adept in the particulars of the process of Jain purifica­
tion. Hence, it can be seen that this 108-​line verse speaks to the ways of the world and 
the path out of the world. In the analysis that follows, three threads of meaning are 
traced: aspects of the text that allude to the more tantric aspects of goddess worship; 
passages that tie Padmāvatῑ to the mainstream worship of the devī; and decidedly 
Jain references.
Perhaps the most obvious tantric signal can be found at the beginning of each line, 
which begins with the recitation of seed syllables oṃ, āṃ, kroṃ, hrῑṃ, and, at the end 
of each line, the word of praise, namaḥ. Unlike the traditional Devῑ Mantra, the final 
word appears as a simple utterance declined in nominative singular rather than in 
the feminine dative as in namastasyai. However, each word before the final namaḥ 
carries the dative marker, whether –​yai or –​ye. One sequence of three lines states: 
“You are Totilā, the eternal, the goddess of the three cities” (Rāj Rājeśvarῑ Māteśvarῑ 
Māṃ Padme RRMMP108, v. 12–​14). The phrase “three cities” carries several possible 
meanings, including the invocation of the realms of earth, atmosphere, and sky (Bhūr, 
Bhuvaḥ, Sva) and the three major subtle breath channels (Iḍā, Piṅgalā, and Suśumnā), 
as well as the three guṇas (sattva, rajas, tamas) and the three moments of time (past, 
present, and future). It is also a possible allusion to the “three cities” tradition of the 
Tripurā Upanisad (see Brooks 1990, 12). Another sequence calls out Padmāvatῑ as a 
“Yoginῑ, a knower of Yoga, not broken by poverty or death, holding an endowment of 
patience (v. 69–​72).
Mainstream worship of the goddess can be seen in the opening six lines that praise 
Padmāvatῑ as beautiful, powerfully strong, and learned. Several verses invoke other 
forms of the goddess, such as Lakṣmῑ, Sarasvati, Durgā, the wives of Śiva, Kālῑ, and the 
river Ganges (v. 18–​20, 24, 45, 48, 50, 87–​90) and ferocious and benign qualities asso­
ciated with Hindu goddesses such as “holder of the magical noose” and “giver of the 
breast” and “wish-​fulfilling cow” (v. 77, 78, 98). Additionally, several universal qual­
ities are listed that pertain to any goddess: “accomplished in desire, knowledgeable, 
giving, the embodiment of perfection, the essence of spring, fearless, warding off sin, 
garlanded, tender, free from constraints, profound, and fascinating” (v. 15, 17, 31, 40, 
47, 74, 75, 96, 105, 106).
The Jain aspects of Padmāvatῑ permeate at least 22 of the 108 lines. The first section 
of five lines announces unambiguously, “You are devoted to the Jina Dharma” (v. 7), 
followed with a trope of four sets of five, starting with the category of five in general, 
associated with five aspects of Brahma (pañca-​brahma-​pada-​ārādhyāya) followed with 
three standard tropes of Jain faith and practice:
  9.  You teach the fivefold (namo kara) mantra
10.  and are endowed with the qualities that arise from practicing the five vows.
11.  You see the five beautiful events (when the future Jina enters the womb, is born, 
renounces the world, gains all knowledge, and eventually leaves the body).

--- PAGE 851 ---
826      Christopher key Chapple
 
The namo kara mantra, delineated above, shows respect and praise for the liberated 
teachers, the liberated saints, the religious leaders, the teachers, and the practitioners: 
arhats, siddhas, ācāryas, upādhyāyas, sādhus. The five Jain vows are nonviolence, 
truthfulness, not stealing, sexual restraint, and nonpossession: ahiṃsā, satya, asteya, 
brahmacarya, and aparigraha. The five beautiful events are important memory con­
nection points for observant Jains and in some ways resemble the remembrance of the 
birth of any religious leader, the moment of liberation, the commitment to help others, 
and the eventual death. Though all follow the same general pattern, details are given 
for each of the twenty-​four Tῑrthankaras, though the stories of Ādinath (1), Neminath 
(22), Parśvanath (23), and Mahāvῑra (24) are perhaps the best known and most often 
represented in works of art and literature.
The physical description of Padmāvatῑ can be found in several of the lines. She is 
crowned with a serpent’s hood (v. 26), she wears a tiara that shimmers (v. 27), and she 
rides a magical bird-​like snake, the kukkuṭaroga (v. 29). Repeatedly, she is associated 
with the eponymous padma or lotus (v. 30, 60–​62, 88). Her role of wife is mentioned re­
peatedly (v. 33, 45, 87) and in the first instance in her role as companion and queen with 
King Dharṇendra. She is described as a snake (v. 34, 35) and as dwelling in the serpent 
realm (v. 59).
Padmāvatῑ also keeps august company. Repeatedly the text associates her with the 
Arhats, the liberated teachers, and the wise persons who affiliate with one another as 
spiritual exemplars. The text proclaims: “You abide with the wisdom of the assembled 
Arhats” (v. 21). Another term that is somewhat particular to the Jains is gaṇa, which in 
a sweeping way evokes the abundance of Jina images generally found in contexts where 
it can be translated as “flock.” In this text, gaṇa has been rendered as assembly, giving 
the sense that the like-​minded souls who desire liberation form a sort of club, and that 
the Siddha Loka includes those who have succeeded in attaining the highest goal. By 
placing Padmāvatῑ in their midst, she may be seen as a mediator and, in a sense, as an 
organizing mother figure:
57.   You are part of the assembly [of sages].
58.   You are the governess of the assembled Arhats.
Two additional lines quietly affirm her ability to form a bridge between the realm of 
sorrow and that of freedom:
102.   You watch over the true dharma.
103.   You pacify all sin.
Padmāvatῑ brings purity and safety.
Perhaps drawing a link between Padmāvatῑ and the scholarly qualities of Sarasvati, 
she is said to be the “teacher of all scriptures” (v. 22), and to know all twelve books of 
Jain scripture (v. 37). Additionally, she represents spiritual attainment as outlined in the

--- PAGE 852 ---
Jain Tantra      827
 
Tattvārthasūtra, knowing the fourteen forms of ascent or guṇasthānas that culminate in 
total liberation (v. 38). The text also refers to the ladder used to make this ascent from the 
morass of karmas to the state of liberation:
79.	 You gather the fruit of the ladder leading to karma’s thinning.
Also, from the opening verse of this foundational text, she embodies the three jewels at 
the heart of Jain faith and practice:
52.	 You possess the purity of right view.
53.	 You are the epitome of right knowledge.
54.	 You are endowed with right action.
Through meditating on her form, the devotee places herself or himself squarely within 
the ambiance of the spiritual path, in a sense visiting “all pilgrimage places” (v. 73).
A quietly evocative string of verses emphasizes the significance of Padmāvatῑ’s hands:
80.	 You have hands.
81.	 You have auspicious wisdom.
82.	 You are noble.
83.	 You hold all in your hands,
84.	 hands that bring
85.	 [the gifts of] the goddess of spring.
The gentle, almost haunting repeat of the word hand (hasta) betokens the power of the 
hand to give and to receive, to bless and to offer.
A similarly delicate triplet of lines links the Jain teaching of nonabsolutism (anekānta) 
with contemplative practice (cintitā) leading to the jewel-​like state associated with states 
of absorption or samādhi:
91.	 You know the essence of Self from multiple perspectives.
92.	 You bring the fruit of meaningful contemplation.
93.	 You are the jewel of consciousness.
The text comes to a close with praise of Padmāvatῑ’s qualities as “profound, fasci­
nating, and accomplished,” culminating in a description of her as a medicinal tree, 
Vitex Negundo, whose flowers quell passion and glow with the color purple. Padmāvatῑ 
carries many attributes, including being a snake, the wish-​fulfilling cow, a great teacher, 
a forest goddess, and a healing tree.
In summary, this 108-​line text includes praise of Padmāvatῑ’s qualities, comparing her 
with well-​known Hindu goddesses and their qualities. It also gives summaries of key 
points of Jain philosophy and suggests that by directing one’s devotion to Padmāvatῑ, 
one will gain the benefits that she symbolizes.

--- PAGE 853 ---
828      Christopher key Chapple
 
Śrῑ Lalitā’s 108 Names
In their comprehensive study of the Śrῑ Lalitā Triśatῑ Bhāṣyam attributed to Ādi 
Śaṅkarācārya, Sunanda and Yajneshwar Shastri include a 108-​verse text in praise of Śrῑ 
Lalitā (Shastri 433–​435). As with the Padmāvatῑ text translated above, each verse begins 
with a mantra (in this case the single syllable oṃ), includes a description of the goddess 
in the feminine dative (indicating that the words are devoted and offered to Lalitā), and 
ends with the word namaḥ, indicating obeisance.
This particular text is wedded closely to Sāṃkhya philosophy, beginning with the 
gross manifestations and ascending from the material to the mental, and from the 
mental to the spiritual, and eventually to the transcendent. Specifically, the first six 
lines address the earth. The seventh line gives praise to the goddess in the form of water, 
followed with praise to fire (v. 8), wind and its qualities (v. 11–​13), light and space. At line 
17, it turns its attention to bodily capacities that receive the elements, starting with smell 
(v. 18–​19), taste (v. 20–​22), seeing (v. 23–​25), touching (v. 27–​28), and landing on hearing, 
sound, and speech (v. 29–​33). The hands are honored as the locus of action (34–​35), as 
are the functions of walking and digestion (v. 37–​38). Through mind, thought, and in­
tention, one obtains all things (v. 42–​44), depending on the disposition of the buddhi 
(intellect) (v. 45) and its expression through the ego (ahaṃkāra v. 46–​47). Everything 
becomes known to consciousness (v. 48–​49) and depends on the guṇas (v. 50–​51). The 
text mentions the subtle elements, the nature of bondage, and Prakṛti as holding the 
power of time and the form of time (v. 56–​58). It invokes the practice of yantra and 
mantra and states that Lalitā takes the forms of Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, the Great Lord, 
the eternal (Sadā) Śiva, eternal life, Śiva, Lakṣmῑ, and all time (v. 61–​70). She contains 
the gross body and the subtle body (v. 73–​74), all that is spoken and can be spoken; all 
that is known and can be known; all that is done and what can be done (v. 75–​77). She 
is the goddess of all truth, the ten sounds, the myriad rivers of energy (nāḍῑs), as well as 
silence (v. 78–​81). She suffuses the knowledge of the Vedas, the Sūtras, the Śāstras, Ayur 
Veda, the Artha Śāstra, the sixty-​four Arts, the Āgamas, and poetry (v. 82–​92). The god­
dess contains the meaning of all that can be spoken (v. 94–​96), and she is of the nature 
of knowledge and all that can be done (v. 97). She has a great heart (v. 102) and can be 
found in light and in darkness (v. 104–​105). She knows the difference between truth and 
untruth (v. 108).
This 108-​verse text serves as a compendium of philosophy and theology, naming the 
creative categories that comprise worldly experience, linking them through the god­
dess Lalitā to an entire pantheon of gods. Like the Padmāvatī text, it combines praise 
and information. Whereas the Padmāvatῑ text intersperses philosophical content in 
clusters interrupted by panegyric, the Lalitā text moves progressively along the archi­
tecture of Sāṃkhya and Vedānta, moving from the gross elements to the senses, from 
the senses to the mind, from the mind to consciousness, and from consciousness to 
manifestations of the divine. The Padmāvatῑ text clusters verses 7–​11, 26–​30, 31–​38, and

--- PAGE 854 ---
Jain Tantra      829
 
52–​59 and individual verses (73, 79, 91) to convey the uniquely Jain aspects of its mes­
sage. Otherwise, the focus remains on the majesty of Padmāvatῑ somewhat without reli­
gious or philosophical specificity.
Sāṃkhya philosophy and Yoga practice hinge on the reciprocal relationship between 
a witnessing awareness (puruṣa) and the creative realm (prakṛti). The mandala provides 
a cosmic map, a yantra that shows the universe emanating from its center or bindu. The 
recitation of mantra brings one into the center point of clear awareness, while elevating 
the movement that radiates around the center. In the case of Padmāvatī, she is at the 
center of an entourage of saints (21) and the “totality of knowledge” (39). In the case of 
Lalitā, her presence evokes all the creative aspects of the body and the external and heav­
enly realms. As described by Vijaya Nararajan, at its core the drawing of rice powder 
yantras known as kolam each morning reminds the artist and the community of this 
relationship between the world of movement and the still center (Nagarajan 2019, 157).
Reflections of Orality, Musicality, 
and Ritual Engagement in Jain Tantra
The texts composed in honor of Padmāvatī and Lalitā were designed to be sung, and 
most likely were composed at least in part proclaiming their qualities out loud. Kofi 
Awoonar, a scholar of oral literature, has written:
In discussing oral literature . . . it must be understood that we are discussing a large 
body of material which can have its total integrity, impact, and realisation only 
with the scope of performance, transmission, and occasion. The performer of oral 
literature gives body to the material, formulates, it, and realises it, within regulated 
and specified occasions. . . . The chant’s basic poetic qualities include repetition 
of lines, digression, word-​picture painting—​use of ideophones and parallelism—​
comparison, simile, metaphor, metonymy, allusions, and epigrams.
(Awoonar 1975, 80)
In this regard, it is important to bear in mind that the two texts we have considered are 
liturgical texts. They are not designed to be read silently but are designed to be chanted 
out loud and to be heard. They exhibit many of the qualities highlighted by Awoonar in 
regard to oral literature. (On the oral dimensions of tantra, see Lorea, this volume) The 
mantras repeat at the beginning. Each line ends with the word namaḥ. Both serve as 
performative book markers announcing the start and the end.
Digression seems to be an important part of the Padmāvatῑ and Lalitā texts. A theme 
mentioned once might be taken up in more detail further in the text. In the case of the 
Padmāvatῑ text, it serves the function of creating a mood of awe by listing various qual­
ities as well, reminding those receiving the text that she exemplifies the ideals of Jain

--- PAGE 855 ---
830      Christopher key Chapple
 
theology. On the one hand, she is linked with universal powers of speech and culture 
and beauty. On the other hand, she communicates very specific Jain teachings. The 
economy of language uses key phrases to remind the listener of her broader narrative 
without filling in the details. The genre of the 108-​text form is to hit points of memory 
and emotionality within a compact space, allowing the allusions to do their magic.
D’Aquili and Newberg (1999) have written that ritual prompts an affective experi­
ence in the participant (89) and that rhythm can be an important contributor to a ritual 
moment:
In the special case of prolong rhythmic stimuli, it appears that the simultaneous 
strong discharge of both parts of the autonomic nervous system creates a state that 
consists not only of a pleasurable sensation but, also, under proper conditions, a 
sense of union with conspecifics and a blurring of cognitive boundaries.
(D’Aquili and Newberg 1999, 90)
Whitney Kelting, in regard to the Jain musical tradition known as stavan, has noted that 
“repetition . . . has the effect of making the stavan . . . chant-​like and hypnotic” (Kelting 
2001, 91). The repetition of the mantras and the syllable namaḥ creates a mood that lends 
itself to religious experiences.
Without doubt, these hymns to Padmāvatῑ and Lalitā, carry an innate musicality. 
Each in their own way carry what might be described as a “recurring pattern of beats,” 
not in a fixed-​line structure, but through the device of an announced beginning and 
end. This suggests a notion of repeated return as defined by Martin Clayton as “cyclicity 
. . . a reconciliation between linear progression and recurrence” (2000, 21). Just as music 
can lead to an experience beyond space and time, so also praise chants, particularly in 
the rarefied atmosphere of a temple and the presence of a visual image to reinforce the 
content, can bring about a state of absorption and enthusiasm, perhaps leading even to 
bliss. Taking darśan of a god, goddess, or guru can engage multiple senses. These praise 
chants demonstrate the power of transformation through the word, music, singing, 
hearing, seeing, smelling, and even tasting. Music, orality, and aurality all play a central 
role in the building of tantra.
Conclusion
Much research needs to be undertaken to more fully understand the many intersections 
between Jain meditation and ritual and tantra. This chapter began with an explication 
of core Jain teachings and the centrality of nonviolence. This strongly held position 
made the Jain an unlikely dialogue partner with tantra, particularly due to tantra’s vi­
olative practices of eating meat and fish, ingesting intoxicants, and engaging in illicit 
sex. Jain thinkers condemned goddess worship and the overall practices of tantra, par­
ticularly Haribhadra Yakini Putra in his Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya (ninth century CE) and

--- PAGE 856 ---
Jain Tantra      831
 
Somadeva in the Yaśatilakā (959 CE). However, tantra could not be ignored. Even the 
Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya makes some concessions, acknowledging the desire of the tantrikas 
to become free and inviting a thought experiment that encourages conceptualizing the 
Jain path to liberation (mokṣa-​mārga) in light of an eightfold goddess journey. In the 
next two centuries, Śubhacandra and Hemacandra fully adapt Śaiva tantra meditation 
techniques, rendering them not only Jain friendly but also, in many ways, Jain essential. 
Jain practice includes syllabic recitation and visualization and, as can be seen in Gough’s 
analysis (2012), representation with temple adornments. The chapter concludes with an 
example of how contemporary worship of Padmāvatī exemplifies Jain tantra.
Appendix
108 Nāma Jāpya Mantra to the Jain Goddess Padmāvatῑ
To Padmāvatῑ
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
1.	 Praise to you, the great goddess,
2.	 beautiful,
3.	 empress of the world.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
4.	 Praise! You are fierce,
5.	 learned,
6.	 fair skinned.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
7.	 You are devoted to the Jina Dharma
8.	 and have gained boons from those five groups committed to holiness (the Arhats, the 
Siddhas, the Ācāryas, the Upadhyāyas, the Sādhus and Sādhvῑs).
9.	 You teach the fivefold (namo kara) mantra
	10.	 and are endowed with the qualities that arise from practicing the five vows.
11.	 You see the five beautiful events (when the future Jina enters the womb, is born, renounces 
the world, gains all knowledge, and eventually leaves the body).
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	12.	 You are Totilā,
	13.	 the eternal,
	14.	 the goddess of the three cities.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	15.	 You accomplish all desires

--- PAGE 857 ---
832      Christopher key Chapple
 
	16.	 and are garlanded with rapture.
	17.	 You are knowledge.
	18.	 You are the Great Lakṣmi,
	19.	 Sarasvati,
	20.	 and all the arts that arise from Sarasvati.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	21.	 You abide with the wisdom of the assembled Arhats.
	22.	 You are the teacher of all scriptures,
	23.	 the empress of all things.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	24.	 You are the Great Durgā,
	25.	 adorned with three eyes,
	26.	 crowned with a serpent’s hood.
	27.	 Your tiara shimmers with the light of the moon on your full hair.
	28.	 Your mount resembles a bird-​like snake.
	29.	 You face each of the four directions.
	30.	 You sit upon a great lotus.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	31.	 You are the goddess of giving,
	32.	 the empress of the house.
	33.	 You are the great wife of the snake king (Dharṇendra).
	34.	 You also take the form of a snake.
	35.	 You are the divine snake.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	36.	 You are endowed with final perfection.
	37.	 You follow all twelve books (of the Jain scripture)
	38.	 and the fourteen great forms of knowledge (the guṇasthānas).
	39.	 You radiate the totality of knowledge.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	40.	 You are the essence of spring,
	41.	 the forest goddess,
	42.	 garlanded with the forest.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	43.	 You are the great empress,
	44.	 exceedingly strong

--- PAGE 858 ---
Jain Tantra      833
 
	45.	 like the wife of Rudra,
	46.	 freed from being timid,
	47.	 rendered fearless.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	48.	 You are Kālῑ,
	49.	 the night that swallows all.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	50.	 You are the River Ganges,
	51.	 and the the governess of the Gandharvas.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	52.	 You possess the purity of right view.
	53.	 You are the epitome of right knowledge.
	54.	 You are endowed with right action.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	55.	 You are the helper of humanity.
	56.	 You are endowed with incalculable merit.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	57.	 You are part of the assembly [of sages].
	58.	 You are the governess of the assembled Arhats.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	59.	 You dwell in the serpent realm.
	60.	Yet you are the lotus.
	61.	 You have a face like a lotus.
	62.	 You radiate like a lotus.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	63.	 You have obtained wisdom.
	64.	 You are the wife of the moon
	65.	 waxing.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	66.	 You are the support.
	67.	 You are the one who supports.
	68.	 You are victorious.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	69.	 You are the Yoginῑ,
	70.	 the knower of Yoga,

--- PAGE 859 ---
834      Christopher key Chapple
 
	71.	 not broken by poverty or death,
	72.	 holding an endowment of patience.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	73.	 You reside in all pilgrimage places,
	74.	 warding off all sin.
	75.	 You wear a garland of great brilliance.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	76.	 You are the Vidyādevi who sports a thunderbolt corset.
	77.	 You hold a magical noose.
	78.	 You are the giver of the breast.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	79.	 You gather the fruit of the ladder leading to karma’s thinning.
	80.	 You have hands.
	81.	 You have auspicious wisdom.
	82.	 You are noble.
	83.	 You hold all in your hands,
	84.	 hands that bring
	85.	 [the gifts of] the goddess of spring.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	86.	 Your voice gives praise.
	87.	 You are the wife of Śiva
	88.	 seated on a lotus throne.
	89.	 Like the wife of Śiva, you radiate the color of the rising sun.
	90.	 You are the governess of erotic play.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	91.	 You know the essence of Self from multiple perspectives.
	92.	 You bring the fruit of meaningful contemplation.
	93.	 You are the jewel of consciousness.
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	94.	 You are full of tenderness,
	95.	 freed from sinful undertakings,
	96.	 free from the constraints of lineage.
	97.	 You gather this epochal earth.
	98.	 You are the wish-​fulfilling cow.
	99.	 You are the maker of auspiciousness

--- PAGE 860 ---
Jain Tantra      835
 
	100.	 and the lover of dharma.
	101.	 You are all.
	
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	102.	 You watch over the true dharma.
	103.	 You pacify all sin.
	104.	 You ward off all illness.
	105.	 You are profound,
	106.	 fascinating,
	107.	 and accomplished.
	
oṃ āṃ kroṃ hrῑṃ śrῑ
	108.	 You dwell in the medicinal tree* adorned with purple flowers. 4
	
*Vitex Negundo, also known as the Chaste Tree.
Notes
	1.	 This seems to refer to the sunrise. This verse was translated by Griffin Guez, Loyola 
Marymount University, as were verses 25, 26, 28, 29, and 31.
	2.	 This verse was translated by Jodi Shaw, University of Florida.
	3.	 Summarized in Babb 1996, 30–​35. This material is based on a manual written by 
Kavῑndrasāgar (1905–​1960 CE) as indicated by Babb (28).
	4.	 Translation by Christopher Key Chapple with assistance from Natale Ferreira, Wijnanda 
Jacoby, Jensen Martin, Jennifer Guinter, and Joseph Cadiff, members of the translation 
group at Loyola Marymount University. From Rāja Rājeśvarῑ Māteśvarῑ māṃ Padme 
(Delhi: Śrῑ Pārśvanātha Jaina Dhyāna Sādhanā Kendra, n.d.), 37–​41.
Bibliography
Awoonar, Kofi. 1975. Breast of the Earth: A Survey of the History, Culture, and Literature of Africa 
South of the Sahara. Garden City: Anchor Press/​Doubleday.
Babb, Lawrence A. 1996. Absent Lord: Ascetics and Kings in a Jain Ritual Culture. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Babb, Lawrence A. 1998. “Ritual Culture and the Distinctiveness of Jainism.” In Open 
Boundaries: Jain Communities and Cultures in Indian History, 139–​162. Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Brooks, Douglas Renfrew. 1990. The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Śākta 
Tantrism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chapple, Christopher Key, with John Thomas Casey. 2003. Reconciling Yogas: Haribhadra’s 
Array of Views on Yoga With a New Translation of the Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya. New York: State 
University of New York Press.

--- PAGE 861 ---
836      Christopher key Chapple
 
Chapple, Christopher Key. 2020. Living Landscapes: Meditations on the Five Elements in Hindu, 
Buddhist, and Jain Yogas. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Clayton, Martin. 2000. Time in Indian Music: Rhythm, Metre, and Form in North Indian Rāg 
Performance. New York: Oxford University Press.
Coburn, Thomas B. 1984. Devī Māhātmya: The Crystallization of the Goddess Tradition. Delhi, 
India: Motilal Banarsidass.
Coburn, Thomas B. 1990. Encountering the Goddess, a Translation of the Devī-​Māhātmya and a 
Study of Its Interpretation. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Cort, John E. 1987. “Medieval Jaina Goddess Traditions.” Numen 34: 235–​255.
Cort, John E. 1998. Open Boundaries: Jain Communities and Cultures in Indian History. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Cort, John E. 2000. “Worship of Bell-​Ears the Great Hero, a Jain Tantric Deity.” In Tantra 
in Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 417–​433. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Cort, John E. 2001. Jains in the World: Religious Values and Ideology in India. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
D’Aquili, Eugene, and Andrew B. Newberg. 1999. The Mystical Mind: Probing the Biology of 
Religious Experience. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press.
Dalrymple, William. 1993. City of Djinns: A Year in Delhi. New York: Penguin.
Dehejia, Vidya. 1986. Yoginī Cult and Temples: A Tantric Tradition. New Delhi, India: National 
Museum.
Dundas, Paul. 1998. “Becoming Gautama: Mantra and History in Śvetāmbara Jainism.” In 
Open Boundaries: Jain Communities and Cultures in Indian History, edited by John E. Cort, 
31–​52. Albany: SUNY Press.
Gough, Ellen. 2012. “Shades of Enlightenment: A Jain Tantric Diagram and the Colours of the 
Tīrthaṅkaras.” International Journal of Jaina Studies 8, no. 1: 1–​47.
Granoff, Phyllis. 1989. “Religious Biography and Clan History Among the Śvetāmbara Jains in 
North India.” East and West 1, nos 1–​4: 195–​215.
Handiqui, Krishna. 1968. Yaśatika and Indian Culture or Somadeva’s Yaśatilaka and Aspects of 
Jainism and Indian Thought and Culture in the Tenth Century. Solapur, India: Jaina Saṃskṛti 
Saṃrakshaka Sangha. First published in 1949.
Haribhadra Virahanka. 1940. Yogabindu. Bhavanagar, India: Jain Grantha Prakashaka Sabha.
Jacobi, Hermann. 1884. Jaina Sutras Translated From the Prakrit. Part I. The Ākārānga Sūtra 
and the Kalpa Sūtra. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Jain, Dashrath, tr. 2011. Shri Subhachandracharya’s Jnanarnavah. Delhi, India: Jain Granthnagar.
Kelting, M. Whitney. 2001. Singing to the Jinas: Jain Laywomen, Maṇḍal Singing, and the 
Negotiations of Jain Devotion. New York: Oxford University Press.
Meister, Michael. 1998. “Sweetmeats or Corpses? Community, Conversion, and Sacred Places.” 
In Open Boundaries: Jain Communities and Cultures in Indian History, edited by John E. 
Cort, 111–​138. Albany: SUNY Press.
M. A. Dhaky., and Meister, Michael W., eds. 1991. Encyclopedia of Indian Temple Architecture, 
Vol. 2. Part 2: North India. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Nagarajan, Vijaya. 2019. Feeding a Thousand Souls: Women, Ritual, and Ecology in India: An 
Exploration of the Kolam. New York: Oxford University Press.
Quarnström, Olle, tr. 2002. The Yogaśāstra of Hemacandra: A Twelfth Century Handbook on 
Svetambara Jainism. Cambridge, MA: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard 
University, distributed by Harvard University Press.

--- PAGE 862 ---
Jain Tantra      837
 
Quarnström, Olle. 2016. “Hemacandra on Yoga.” In Chapple, ed. Yoga in Jainism, 139–​154. 
London: Routledge.
Rāja Rājeśvarῑ Māteśvarῑ māṃ Padme, 37–​41. n.d. Delhi, India: Śrῑ Pārśvanātha Jaina Dhyāna 
Sādhanā Kendra.
Rao, Nalini. 2020. “An Analysis of Jain Sculpture and Built Environment: Recent Excavations 
in Karnataka.” In South Asian Studies: Bridging Cultures, edited by Deepak Shimkhada, 
127–​145. Claremont, CA: South Asian Studies Association.
Shastri, Sunanda Yajneshwar, and Yajneshwar S. Shastri. 2016. Śrῑ Lalitā-​Triśati-​Bhāṣyam by 
Ādi Śaṅkarācārya. Ahmedabad, India: Sriyogi Publications.
Tatia, Nathmal. 1994. That Which Is: The Tattvārtha Sūtra of Umāsvāti. San Francisco: Harper 
Collins.
Vekemans, 
Tine. 
2016. 
“Jaina 
Tantra: 
SOAS 
Jain 
Studies 
Workshop 
2015.” 
Centre of Jaina Studies Newsletter, Issue 11, March 2016.
Yocum, Glenn. 1997. “ ‘On the Ground’ Jainism in South India.” Religious Studies News 12, no. 3: 
11, 12, 25, 27, 30.

--- PAGE 863 ---


--- PAGE 864 ---
Chapter 33
Tibetan Tantric 
Buddhist Literature
Paul Hackett
Tantra in Tibet
Since the time of its popular exposure to the English-​speaking world, Tibetan 
Buddhism has mistakenly been taken to be synonymous with tantric Buddhism.1 The 
introduction and growth of the literature in Tibet that promoted that general idea arose 
in several stages over the history of the country of Tibet, from populist social events to 
translation activities and finally to assimilation and localization.
The origins of Buddhist tantra remain shrouded in speculative histories of inter­
religious growth in the early first millennium in India. Numerous scholars have 
identified “proto-​tantric” themes, practices, and imagery in literature and archeological 
sites datable to as early as the fifth century ce.2 Traditional Buddhist historians point to 
the fourth century ce as the advent of tantric Buddhist teachings entering the human 
realm, and assert that those teachings were then propagated in secrecy for roughly three 
hundred years. In terms of extant literature by datable authors, however, it is difficult to 
identify any properly tantric compositions3 prior to the eighth century ce.4 Nonetheless, 
tantric Buddhist imagery can be definitively dated to the early seventh century, when 
a statue of the Buddha Akṣobhyavajra accompanied the Nepalese princess Bhṛkūṭi to 
Tibet for her marriage to the Tibetan emperor Trisong Detsen, whose father unified the 
Tibetan plateau in the early 600s (Beckwith 1987).
It was not until the late eighth century ce, that the Tibetan imperial government 
began a campaign of active patronage of Buddhist figures from then-​contemporary 
India and Nepal, including the sponsorship of textual translation and temple construc­
tion. This period of activity in Tibet corresponded with the semipublic production and 
dissemination of Buddhist tantric literature in the Indian subcontinent. Consequently, 
in addition to discourses attributed to the Buddha Śākyamuni and major philosoph­
ical treatises of the day, core texts of tantric literature also made their way into Tibet

--- PAGE 865 ---
840      Paul Hackett
 
where they were translated, and which, as a result, had a profound effect on the nascent 
Buddhist culture there.
Early Tibetan historical documents, such as the Testament of Ba (Wangdu and 
Diemberger 2000) and others, recount that the populace attributed the arrival of 
Buddhist monks from India and Nepal with precipitating the anger of local spirits which 
manifested as environmental disasters such as hail storms, earthquakes, and the like. 
Consequently, part of the initial appeal of tantric Buddhism in Tibet—​certainly with the 
country’s rulers—​lay with the utility of the mundane magical powers (siddhis) attributed 
to Buddhist monks in direct connection to the need to control environmental disasters 
such flooding, hail, and so on, which were a common occurrence on the Tibetan pla­
teau, and which, in general, were typically attributed to unruly local spirits. In this re­
gard, the eighth century yogi Padmasambhava played a central role in the propagation 
of Buddhism in Tibet, having been regarded by later generations as having subdued the 
local spirits. Some (e.g., Sorensen 2003) have argued that his acts of spirit subjugation 
may have also included instituting water management practices to limit the damage 
produced by annual flooding.
In addition, it should be noted that one of the identified (Thurman, 1997) features of 
Tibetan culture during this time that contributed to the receptiveness of Tibetan so­
ciety to Buddhism was an attitude of cultural self-​deprecation coupled with a valoriza­
tion of the cultural output of India—​exemplified by the identification of India as “the 
land of the Āryas” as it was referred to in Tibet—​as being the products of a higher civ­
ilization. Having already derived their written language from an Indian script, early 
Buddhist proponents in Tibet began an active campaign of formulating a mythology 
that interwove the royal family of first-​millennium imperial Tibet with figures in the 
tantric Buddhist pantheon and recast Tibet from being a remote and barren moun­
tainous region into a Buddhist safe haven intentionally protected and curated by en­
lightened beings for that specific purpose. It was a narrative that appears to have been 
firmly established as early as the ninth century CE, as described in documents such as 
The Red Annals (Tucci 1971) by Paṇchen Sonam Drakpa (bsod nams grags pa, 1478–​1554) 
and others.
The Early History
It is clear that as early as the eighth century, tantric materials were being translated 
in Tibet. In the preface to the ca. 814 ce imperial edict on translation activities, the 
“Glossary in Two Sections” (sgra sbyor bam po gnyis pa), it is stated:
The tantras of the Secret Mantra [class] are to be kept secret in accordance with the 
texts themselves, and it is also not appropriate to explain or teach them to people 
who are not fit vessels [for such teachings]. In the present time, however, it is the case 
that some people have been translating [these texts] and also putting [their contents]

--- PAGE 866 ---
Tibetan Tantric Buddhist Literature      841
 
into practice, but since they were unable to unravel the explanations [given] in a con­
cealed manner [in those texts] and so took them literally, they have engaged in per­
verted conduct. Thus, since it is known that there are cases where [such texts] were 
selected among the Secret Mantra [class of] tantras and were also translated into 
Tibetan, from now on, except for [certain] dhāranīs and tantras that are approved 
for translation by royal decree, it is not permitted to select Mantra [class] tantras or 
treatises on [Secret] Mantra and to translate them.5
In documents such as this, it is recorded that even at the earliest stages of Buddhism 
entering into Tibet, tantric teachings were prevalent, as was the understanding of the 
encrypted presentation of their contents.6 Even if this imperial edict exercised some in­
fluence over the early translation and propagation activities in central Tibet, it was short 
lived, since the central government would collapse in a succession dispute less than 
thirty years later, and it is clear that tantric texts continued to be translated into Tibetan 
during the decades that followed.
By the mid-​tenth century, it appears that precisely the same problem described in this 
early ninth-​century edict—​practices based on a literal reading of the tantras—​remained 
prevalent. In the “ordinance” (bka’ shog) of a tenth-​century king in western Tibet, Lha 
Lama Yeshe Ö (Karmay 1980), the effects of not only literal readings of Buddhist tantras 
but of apparently non-​Buddhist tantras that made no pretense to containing concealed 
meanings as well are explicitly described:
Heretical tantras, pretending to be Buddhist, are spreading in Tibet. . . . These 
practices of those who claim “we are Buddhists”, show less compassion than the 
monster of karma, more avaricious for meat than a hawk or wolf, more lusty than 
even a donkey or an ox, . . . more indifferent to pure and impure than a dog or a 
pig. . . . Worshipping the Three Jewels with meat and urine, ignorant about the con­
cealed intention [of these texts] and therefore practising it literally . . . what strange 
Buddhist would adhere to such practices!?! If practices such as these were to bring 
about Buddhahood, then hunters, fishermen, butchers, and prostitutes—​all of 
these—​would certainly have attained Enlightenment by now.
In addition to his objection to the state of affairs in the late tenth-​century Tibet, the hag­
iography of this king positions him as having a direct role in the remediation of tantric 
Buddhism in Tibet through his invitation to Tibet sent to the great Buddhist master 
Atiśa. While Atiśa did eventually visit Tibet in the mid-​eleventh century and teach on 
tantra, he does not appear to have explicitly repudiated many of these things—​for ex­
ample, sexual practices described in the tantras—​but rather emphasized tantric practice 
in relation to the doctrine of Mahāmudrā or “the Great Seal,” which placed its focus on 
cultivating an understanding of the nature of mind (Apple 2017).
Although the histories covering this era position both Atiśa and the most famous 
of the new era of translators, Rinchen Sangpo, prominently, it is clear that many 
individuals—​both Tibetan and Indic—​were involved in the translation and transmis­
sion of Buddhism at this time in both its tantric and non-​tantric forms. Indeed, from

--- PAGE 867 ---
842      Paul Hackett
 
even a cursory glance at various histories and the colophons to texts in the Tibetan 
Buddhist canon, over a dozen named Tibetan translators worked with Atiśa alone on 
canonical and noncanonical translations of Indic works. Considering just the eleventh 
century, the colophons to canonical texts record close to a hundred individuals from 
India, Nepal, and Kaśmīr working with more than two dozen Tibetan translators, many 
of those works being tantric in nature.
By the eleventh century, major translation initiatives on the Tibetan plateau were well 
under way, as numerous Tibetans with the financial backing of the fortunes of various 
Tibetan aristocratic families that were purposefully directed to the acquisition, trans­
lation, and dissemination of Buddhist philosophy and both exoteric and esoteric (i.e., 
tantric) Buddhist practice. During this period of acquisition of both Buddhist texts and 
knowledge of the practices, such information appears to have been the proprietary intel­
lectual property of several Tibetan clans which demanded, at times, substantial material 
offerings in exchange for access to its content.
The Era of Competing Translations 
and Transmission Lineages
From the tenth to twelfth centuries, Tibet witnessed a wealth of translation activities 
focusing on traditional accounts of discourses of the Buddha (sūtra) as well as their 
nominally derivative philosophical treatises (śastra), but also on texts related to tantric 
practice from core texts (“root tantras,” mūlatantra) to explanatory commentaries and 
practice manuals (sādhana).
In general, all these materials were rooted in the overarching system of Mahāyāna 
Buddhism, which took, as its objective, the emulation of the life of Śākyamuni Buddha, 
with the goal of likewise achieving a state of Buddhahood above and beyond that of 
mere liberation from saṃsāra as an arhat (“one worthy of veneration”) typified by the 
teachings found in the Pāli Nikāyas. In this Mahāyāna system, the basic framework of 
Buddhist practice followed the Buddha’s multi-​life story of perfecting his interactions 
in the world. That model of practice consisted of meritorious and ethical disciplines 
to calm the body, meditative disciplines to calm and focus the mind, and analytical 
meditations on philosophical principles designed to instigate the realization of the na­
ture of reality along with its soteriological effects.
This same basic pattern is likewise found in those tantric texts in which alternate sets 
of practices are presented for the purpose of attaining that same goal of Buddhahood 
more rapidly, and occasionally including an alternate account of the enlightenment 
story of a buddha. In such alternate enlightenment accounts, the process of the attain­
ment of a state of Buddhahood is framed not in terms of the gradual accumulation of 
merit and wisdom over many lifetimes but rather in terms of the emulation of the final 
enlightened state. In this process, the practitioner is told to cultivate causes similar in

--- PAGE 868 ---
Tibetan Tantric Buddhist Literature      843
 
nature to the body of a buddha and to cultivate as different causes, mental attitudes sim­
ilar in nature to the mind of a buddha. This process known as “deity yoga” was argued 
by some Tibetan scholars, such as Tsongkhapa, to be the singular defining feature of 
Buddhist tantra, with all other aspects of popularly imagined tantric practice—​various 
sexual and nonsexual physical yogas, incantations, cultivations of magical powers, and 
so forth—​not being exclusive to tantrism or even Buddhism. Buddhist deity yoga is thus 
presented as a progressive practice in two stages, known variously as “concentration with 
and without recitation,” “yoga with and without signs,” or “generation and perfection 
stages” depending on the type of tantric practice involved, and variously categorized 
into four, seven, or nine classes of tantra, which are then further subcategorized in terms 
of the central deity and types of practice emphasized (Hackett 2012).
Just as in the non-​tantric texts, in which the attainment of different levels of spir­
itual progress is accompanied by the attainment of paranormal abilities (ṛddhi), tantric 
texts also describe the attainment of paranormal abilities. Unlike some non-​Buddhist 
systems in which powers are bestowed by a deity, the ability to attain certain magical 
powers (siddhi) described in the Buddhist tantras is a consequence of different levels 
of spiritual attainment. This attainment is grounded in “divine pride” in one’s self-​
identification with aspects of the enlightened state, with that “divine pride” being the 
conviction that one’s meditational activities are actually efficacious. Indeed, some texts 
focus on one or more specific types of magical powers as aids in support of more ad­
vanced practices on the path to full enlightenment. Such powers are typically categorized 
into four types—​pacification, increase, subjugation, and wrathful activities.7
Similar to the social circumstances of eighth-​ and ninth-​century Tibet, the attainment 
of such magical powers was also at the forefront of activities of tantric translator-​
practitioners in Tibet in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Indeed, because of the 
wealth and prestige associated with knowledge of Buddhist texts, as early as the elev­
enth century significant rivalries between translators jockeying for political (and hence 
monetary) patronage arose, and the attainment of such magical powers played a role in 
those competitions as well. One figure who exemplifies the extreme nature of some of 
these rivalries was the eleventh-​century translator of many tantric works, Ra Lotsāwa 
Dorje Drakpa (Cuevas 2015). Specializing in certain tantras renowned for developing 
facility in “wrathful activities,” Ra Lotsāwa is reported in his biographies to have killed 
more than a dozen rival translators—​all routinely described as acts of self-​defense—​in 
ritual magical combat by means of his superior powers. Nonetheless, figures such as Ra 
Lotsāwa remained revered by the generations that followed him as a prominent figure 
in the transmission of tantric teachings in Tibet. This is because, far outshadowing 
differences in interpretation of Buddhist philosophy, transmission lineages of different 
tantric teachings formed the basis of what would come to be called the various “sects” of 
Tibetan Buddhism.
Although the production of Buddhist texts came to an abrupt end with the Muslim 
invasion of India and destruction of major centers of learning at the start of the thir­
teenth century (Eaton 2000), the translation into Tibetan of Buddhist tantric and non-​
tantric texts already in Tibet and supplemented from sources in Nepal and Kaśmir

--- PAGE 869 ---
844      Paul Hackett
 
would continue for roughly another century. By the fourteenth century, the vast ma­
jority of Buddhist tantric and non-​tantric texts from India had been translated into 
Tibetan, often in one or more translations of varying quality by different translators. 
The result was that efforts began at this time to collect, select, collate, document, and 
edit the various disparate translations into a coherent canon. The role of the tantric texts, 
however, proved particularly problematic in this process since disputes arose over the 
validity of pre-​tenth-​century translations—​predominantly texts associated with the 
Nyingma sect. Since these texts contained purāṇic-​style cosmogonies,8 as well as other 
heterodox features in comparison with later translated texts, some scholars considered 
these texts to be non-​Buddhist in nature or possibly even forgeries—​the latter charge 
being levied against them given the inability of their proponents to identify Sanskrit 
manuscript originals—​and so the vast majority were excluded from what became the 
formal canon. These disparate excluded tantric texts would subsequently be collected 
into their own extra-​canonical collection referred to as the “Hundred Thousand Tantras 
of the Nyingma Sect” (rnying ma rgyud ‘bum). It was this codification of tantric and 
non-​tantric texts into a coherent canon that would lay the groundwork for the growth 
of major educational institutions in Tibet which would typically have one or more sepa­
rate or affiliated tantric colleges, which would be devoted to explicating the minutiae of 
Buddhist tantric theory and practice.
The Early Commentarial and Practice 
Literature and Integration with 
Exoteric Philosophies
With the establishment of the Tibetan canon as a common basis of reference for tex­
tual analysis, disputes over the specific details of the individual tantric texts as well as 
the relationships between texts in the canon as a coherent whole inevitably arose. With 
regard to the tantric texts in particular, many authors of this period wrote detailed 
annotations and general presentations of specific tantric practice traditions that would 
often argue against alternate interpretations by other scholars. One debate in particular 
that arose concerned the role of the tantric teaching in the context of the Mahāyāna 
Buddhist path as a whole, and was, specifically, aimed at questioning whether the tantras 
presented an alternate set of meditational and yogic practices to be paired with norma­
tive Buddhist philosophy, or if they should be taken as presenting an alternate philo­
sophical stance as well. Two individuals who figured prominently in this debate in the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries in Tibet were Dolpopa Sherab Gyeltsen (1292—​1361) 
and Tsongkhapa Losang Drakpa (1357–​1419).
In general, the forms of Buddhist philosophy that serve as a foundation for Mahāyāna 
Buddhism fall into two general categories, that of “Middle Way” (Madhyamaka) or 
“non-​entitiness” (niḥsvabhāva) philosophy, and that of “Mind-​Only” (Cittamātra) or

--- PAGE 870 ---
Tibetan Tantric Buddhist Literature      845
 
“Yogic Practice” (Yogācāra) philosophy. Both of these philosophical schools (and their 
sub-​variants) present permutations on three basic notions: objects as being the referents 
of words and concepts; objects existing intrinsically with their own nature; and objects 
existing as separate entities from the consciousnesses apprehending them, thereby 
entailing the existence of an external world. “Middle Way” philosophy is ontologically 
parsimonious, repudiating the referentiality of words and concepts and denying the in­
trinsic existence of objects, and yet nonetheless asserting the existence, in some ineffable 
manner, of an external world.9 “Mind-​Only” philosophy, on the other hand, advocates 
a more consciousness-​dependent reality by repudiating the referentiality of words and 
concepts but also denying the existence of an external world (but not denying the exist­
ence of other continuums of consciousnesses, i.e., other sentient beings), asserting the 
intrinsic existence of objects in the form of moments of consciousness appearing dual­
istically to the perceiver.10 In practice, when meditating on the nature of reality in either 
of these systems, what is being negated is an exaggerated and falsely superimposed no­
tion of the status of phenomena, with their actual true status—​“the ultimate”—​being a 
nonimplicative negation, a mere emptiness that is the absence of that falsely imputed 
status.
By the fourteenth century in Tibet, “Middle Way” philosophy had achieved an iconic 
status as the definitive and authoritative philosophical view of Mahāyāna Buddhism. 
In the works of Tsongkhapa and other institutionally dominant thinkers of his era, 
Buddhist tantric practice was necessarily presented as compatible and interwoven 
with the philosophical understanding of reality according to Middle Way philosophy. 
Consequently, tantric practice was viewed and presented—​and indeed, supporting 
Indian canonical sources systematized—​from this perspective such that tantric practice 
was presented as an alternative to exoteric meditation practices aimed at the same reali­
zation of the nature of reality presented in Middle Way texts. Thirteenth-​century scholar 
Sakya Paṇḍita Kunga Gyeltsen summarized this position in his “Clear Differentiation of 
the Three Vows”11 stating:
There is just one [philosophical] view from study
That is understood by means of explanations.
Nevertheless, the system of secret mantra is distinctly superior
With regard to the method for realizing [that ultimate, which is] free of elaborations.12
In Tsongkhapa’s presentation of Buddhist tantra,13 he likewise adheres to such an under­
standing of the role of tantras in the larger Buddhist enterprise. In his major work on the 
subject, Tsongkhapa engages in a comprehensive overview of the key points of Buddhist 
tantras, while assessing and evaluating the assertions of different Indian authors as re­
vealed in their works preserved in translation in the Tibetan canon, and lays out the 
overall path structure of various Buddhist tantric systems in terms of a hierarchy of 
their practices. Tsongkhapa accomplishes this by first by identifying the distinguishing 
features of tantric practice from non-​tantric practice, as well as those of the different 
classes of tantras and their practitioners. In doing so, Tsongkhapa lays out a detailed

--- PAGE 871 ---
846      Paul Hackett
 
presentation of the practices and rituals of each class of tantras with extensive scriptural 
citations and evaluations of conflicting opinions in the commentarial literature. In no 
part of his presentation, however, does Tsongkhapa argue that the nature of “wisdom,” 
that is, the nature of reality that is realized by means of these esoteric practices, is in 
any way different from what is presented in the Middle Way writings of Nāgārjuna and 
Candrakīrti.
By contrast, the early fourteenth-​century author Dolpopa, in his extensive work, The 
Mountain Doctrine,14 presents a view of Buddhist philosophy and practice that could 
be described as the exact opposite of the more normative view presented by figures like 
Tsongkhapa, Buton, Sakya Paṇḍita, and others. In that work, Dolpopa argued that the 
tantras should not be taken as restricted to meditational instructions but rather should 
contain their own distinct philosophical view as well, and that this tantric philosophical 
worldview was also compatible with all exoteric philosophical presentations. In this re­
gard, Dolpopa is less interested in providing a discrete presentation of Buddhist tantra 
than in presenting all of tantric and non-​tantric practice, and all Buddhist philosoph­
ical presentations as a singular and all-​encompassing system of practice and theory. The 
different philosophical schools represented by the writings of first-​millennium Indian 
Buddhist thinkers found in the Tibetan canon contain statements that are difficult to 
read as anything other than mutually contradictory, and the standard approach to their 
reconciliation in Tibetan academic circles was to separate them into categories forming 
distinct philosophical schools and subschools that were thus coherent and consistent. 
Dolpopa, however, while pointing out the contradictions that occur from taking the 
wide range of statements in the philosophical treatises literally, argued instead, through 
an appeal to the authority of the Buddha, that all such statements as pronouncements 
from an omniscient source must be impervious to contradiction and so proposed that 
another doctrine—​unspoken by any previous figure (including the Buddha)—​must be 
the only way of achieving a systematic unification of all statements and doctrines. Thus, 
Dolpopa proposed that there was, in fact, a unifying set of philosophical assertions that 
could subsume the various individual philosophical systems, and he proposed such a 
system by asserting categories and proposing new terms that were presented by none 
of them. Called the doctrine of “other-​emptiness” (gzhan stong), this unifying philos­
ophy drew equally on statements from tantras and from philosophical texts and, taking 
such statements literally, asserted that the ultimate nature of reality—​rather than being 
a nonimplicative negation, a mere emptiness, as described in canonical Mahāyāna phil­
osophical texts—​was instead only “other-​empty” (i.e., empty of everything other than 
themselves) and in fact possessed a self-​nature.
Both these approaches by Tsongkhapa and Dolpopa can be viewed as very specific 
characterizations of Buddhist tantra aimed at the goal of systematization for the sake 
of consistency and coherency. While Dolpopa’s presentation sacrifices both historical 
and indeed philosophical fidelity to canonical authors in order to achieve a uniquely 
singular presentation of philosophy and practice, his resulting system was deeply prob­
lematic in relation to fundamental premises of Buddhist philosophy since it appeared 
to reintroduce the sort of “self” (atman) that was universally repudiated in canonical

--- PAGE 872 ---
Tibetan Tantric Buddhist Literature      847
 
Buddhist texts, and was thus roundly criticized for doing so. Tsongkhapa, by contrast, 
is certainly faithful to his Indian canonical sources in presenting a complete and co­
herent presentation of Buddhist philosophy and tantric practice and does not shy away 
from pointing out mistakes and inconsistencies in the writings of some Indic authors, 
although in the process it is clear that Tsongkhapa needed to deploy—​at times, seem­
ingly contrived although ingenious—​hermeneutical strategies to achieve his goal even 
with regard to sources and authors that he accepts as authoritative.
In addition, when examined even merely on the level of exoteric philosophy, there are 
Indian Buddhist tantric commentaries that clearly rely upon the vocabulary of Mind-​
Only philosophy in their presentation of tantric practices and textual exegesis. All of 
this would seem to imply that the philosophical dispositions of Indian Buddhist tantric 
practitioners and scholars was likely (and unsurprisingly) far more varied and less ho­
mogeneous than the later traditions might want to present.
Another dispute during this time was over the appropriateness of sexual yogas in 
tantric practice for ordained monks, that is, for practitioners holding vows of celibacy. 
From reading the canonical commentaries and practice texts on the highest class of 
tantras—​the “Unsurpassed” (anuttara) Yoga tantras—​it is clear that at a certain stage of 
advanced practice, one possible form of practice involves the use of a consort. Far from 
providing a blanket license for licentiousness, however, the bar for engaging in sexual 
yogas and related practices as described in the texts is exceptionally high, involving such 
things as the ability to engage in controlled breathing exercises for a twenty-​four-​hour 
period,15 attainment of the stage of “mind isolation,”16 and so forth. Nonetheless, it is 
clear that some individuals in Tibet routinely engaged in tantric practice with a con­
sort, certainly in the imperial era (seventh to ninth century ce) and well after. Even if 
assuming a practitioner had indeed reached that stage of practice, the question of the 
relationship between monastic vows and tantric practice remained hotly disputed.
One of the categories of tantric literature that addressed precisely such issues was 
the “Three Vows” literature. These discussions and presentations framed the issue in 
terms of three types of vows: monastic, bodhisattva, and tantric. In these presentations, 
a common assertion was that because monk’s vows and the bodhisattva vows of 
Mahāyāna serve as their basis, the tantric vows are to be observed in conjunction with 
the other two (Rhoton 2002).
In the lineage following Tsongkhapa, which came to be called the “system of virtue” 
(“Geluk”) because of their strict observance of the monastic codes and the vow of celi­
bacy in particular, it was argued that “higher” forms of practice (including tantra) did 
not supersede monastic vows, and that any individual who perceived them to be in 
conflict had a mistaken understanding of ethics.17 Thus, in the Geluk lineage, a monk 
who had reached the level of practice where a consort would be of use would either re­
nounce their monk’s vows and return to life as a lay tantric practitioner, or would instead 
follow the model set forth by Tsongkhapa himself, by delaying that aspect of practice 
until the time of death, when the sorts of changes in a person’s psychophysical makeup 
that would be induced by a consort would instead occur naturally. In other lineages of 
Tibetan Buddhism, the monastic codes were less strictly observed in relation to tantric

--- PAGE 873 ---
848      Paul Hackett
 
practice, or were deemed to be superseded by the dictates of tantric practice, thereby 
allowing for the possibility of tantric consort practice.
Praxis Literature and Consolidating 
Compendia in the High Classical Era 
of Tibet (ca. Seventeenth–​Nineteenth 
Centuries)
With the growth of large monastic institutions following the fifteenth century, the locus 
of political and financial power connected with tantric knowledge shifted away from 
clan-​based structures toward a more democratized access model via nominally in­
dependent monastic institutions.18 In concert with this, there was a general move by 
Tibetan authors toward the consolidation and systematization of tantric materials as 
part of a larger trend aimed at the formation of standardized curricula for use in the mo­
nastic universities.
In addition to composing topic-​specific tantric commentaries, several authors 
formulated such curricula, and in doing so looked to the genres of textbooks devel­
oped for non-​tantric subjects such as the Perfection of Wisdom commentarial liter­
ature that presented progression on the path to enlightenment in terms of “grounds” 
(bhūmi) and “paths” (mārga). The overarching structure and vocabulary of these ex­
oteric presentations of the stages leading to enlightenment were deployed to a similar 
end for academic introductions to tantra. Hence, the classification of tantras, combined 
with the various descriptions of stages of practice were homologized into a parallel pre­
sentation of “grounds and paths” subsuming the range of different tantras found in the 
canon.19 For example, whereas in graded progression of the stages of the path to enlight­
enment according to the Perfection of Wisdom, advancement was described in terms 
of the accumulations of merit and wisdom, and the direct realization of the nature of 
reality accompanying the progressive diminution of various levels of obstructions to en­
lightenment, in the tantric versions of these types of presentations, these same stages of 
spiritual attainment became mapped to progressive levels of success in the tantric prac­
tice (sādhana) texts. In addition, a great deal of attention was paid to the development 
of ritual manuals containing practical instructions for conferring empowerments, per­
forming tantric offering ceremonies, and the like.
In other less academically oriented monastic centers around Tibet, there was 
the different problem of coping with a plethora of extracanonical tantric texts and 
transmissions. One of the uniquely Tibetan features of tantra during this period was the 
growth of “treasure” (gter ma) literature. Treasure texts are purported to be teachings by 
notable figures in the past that were intentionally hidden—​in physical and nonphysical 
forms—​for the benefit of later generations. Revealers (gter ston) of these treasure texts

--- PAGE 874 ---
Tibetan Tantric Buddhist Literature      849
 
became a fixture in some lineages of Tibetan Buddhism and instigated the formation of 
extensive tantric lineages based upon these recovered texts (Doctor 2013). Consequently, 
in addition to compiling collections of tantras excluded from the canon, this era saw the 
compilation and consolidation of various tantric systems into large collections called 
“treasuries” (mdzod) by individuals attempting to preserve smaller lineages in danger 
of being lost, although in doing so, much of the uniqueness and specificity of these same 
lineages was subsumed into larger generic systems.
Finally, beginning in the nineteenth century, there was a movement toward 
ecumenicism between the various sects of Tibetan Buddhism in which the tantric 
Treasure traditions played a key role. Promoted as a nonsectarian movement, it was 
rather formed predominantly as a political coalition against the dominant Geluk 
sect in Tibet, who were consciously excluded (Gardner 2006). In the mid-​twentieth 
century, following the Chinese invasion of Tibet and genocide during the Chinese 
Cultural Revolution, the resulting diaspora of nearly all major religious leaders and 
hundreds of thousands more Tibetans and their common need for cooperation for 
survival prompted a de facto ecumenism among the major sects, which some have 
used as an opportunity to promote true understanding and reconciliation between 
those various tantric lineages and their theories regarding Buddhist tantra, with 
the effect of spurring on the ongoing production of yet another new genre of tantric 
literature.20
Notes
	1.	 There are Buddhist practices found in the Tibetan tradition that are non-​tantric, and tantric 
Buddhist traditions are likewise found outside the Tibetan tradition, such as in the Japanese 
Shingon tradition.
	2.	 In terms of literature, dhāraṇī texts and related ritual manuals are frequently cited as “proto-​
tantric” literature (Dalton 2016) while the text of the “Array of Stalks” (karaṇḍavyūha) 
sutra—​datable to as early as the fifth century—​contains the famous mantra oṃ maṇipadme 
hūṁ as a meditational device. Likewise, in terms of physical evidence, sites such as the 
Kanheri caves along the Koṅkan coast of western India date back to the fifth century and 
contain images closely associated with tantric pantheons (Davidson 2002).
	3.	 That is, composition by self-​avowed human authors citing or quoting root tantras (which 
are typically attributed to buddhas dwelling outside human realms).
	4.	 The chronology of authors of tantric treatises are established in reference to the late eighth-​
century author Haribhadra, whose dates are well established, and who served as the teacher 
of some notable tantric authors such Buddhaśrījñānapāda.
	5.	 D 4347, fol. 132b.6–​.7: gsang sngags kyi rgyud rnams gzhung gis gsang bar bya ba yin te, snod 
du ma gyur pa rnams la bshad cing bstan du yang mi rung la, bar du bsgyur zhing spyod du 
gnang gis kyang, ldem po dag tu bshad pa ma khrol nas sgra ji bzhin du ‘dzin cing log par 
spyod pa dag kyang byung, sngags kyi rgyud kyi nang nas thu zhing bod skad du bsgyur ba 
dag kyang byung zhes gdags kyi, phyin chad gzungs sngags dang rgyud bla nas bka’ stsal te, 
sgyur du bcug pa ma gtogs pa, sngags kyi rgyud dang, sngags kyi tshig thu zhing bsgyur du 
mi gnang ngo,.

--- PAGE 875 ---
850      Paul Hackett
 
	 6.	 It is interesting to note that by the thirteenth century, some Buddhist figures were making 
precisely the opposite claim and attacking those who took symbolic readings of certain 
sexual practices (Szántó and Grimes 2018).
	 7.	 These are śāntika/​zhi ba, pauṣṭika/​rgyas pa, vaśya/​dbang, and abhicāraka/​mngon spyod, 
respectively.
	 8.	 Such texts often contained cosmogonic narratives in which a primordial “buddha” 
splinters into multiple beings—​some enlightened and some unenlightened—​giving rise to 
the cosmos. Given the close parallels of such accounts with post-​Vedic (“Hindu”) purāṇa 
literature, some scholars considered them non-​Buddhist in nature.
	 9.	 It can be easily seen that the Mādhyamaka subschool of Svātantrika does assert refer­
entiality and intrinsic existence on a conventional level, although it also refutes both 
ultimately.
	10.	 Permutations of this same three-​fold set of assertions also holds for the non-​Mahāyāna 
philosophies as well. The doxographically defined “Great Exposition” (Vaibhāṣika) 
school asserts all three propositions, while the so-​called “Sūtra School” (Sautrāntika) 
denies the referentiality of concepts (i.e. that generalities inhere in their particulars), 
while asserting the inherent existence of the foundational constituents of reality in an 
external world.
	11.	 Sakya Paṇḍita Kunga Gyeltsen (sa skya paṇḍi ta kun dga’ rgyal mtshan, 1182–​1251). Cf. 
Rhoton 2002.
	12.	 Verse # 256: des na bshad pas go ba yi /​ thos pa’i lta ba gcig nyid yin /​ ‘on kyang spros bral 
rtogs pa yi /​ thabs la gsang sngags khyad par ‘phags //​.
	13.	 Tsongkhapa’s magnum opus on Buddhist tantra, the Great Exposition of Secret Mantra 
remains untranslated in its entirety, although selected chapters have been translated and 
published in Hopkins 1987a, 1987b, 1987c, and Yarnall 2013.
	14.	 Ri chos nges don rgya mtsho. A complete translation into English of this work can be found 
in Hopkins 2006.
	15.	 The exact criterion being the ability to perform mantra recitations and visualizations in con­
cert with the “21,600 breaths” that constitute the number of breaths taken in a single day.
	16.	 This is the stage at which one has attained complete mastery over the subtle bodily 
forces (“winds”), can manipulate them at will and draw them into the “central channel” 
(avadhūti) and dissolve them there.
	17.	 For example, Tsongkhapa’s Exposition of Secret Mantra Ethics, discusses the relationship 
between the tantric and non-​tantric vows, as well as their specific definition and scope 
(Sparham 2005).
	18.	 In actual practice, many monastic institutions were still financially bound to familial 
clans and regional authorities who styled themselves as local kings. With the passage of 
time, governance (and taxation) of such local fiefdoms would be supplanted by monastic 
authorities and institutions, the largest of which came to be the Ganden Potrang govern­
ment under the auspices of the Dalai Lamas. The growth in political and financial power 
by the monasteries and the loss of such by local kings eventually led to conflict in the sev­
enteenth century when one local king attempted to assassinate the Fifth Dalai Lama and 
overthrow the monastic governance of central Tibet.
	19.	 Some of these presentations can be found in the collected works of authors as early as the 
fifteenth century.
	20.	 See, e.g., HH the Fourteenth Dalai Lama, “Union of the Old and New Translation Schools” 
(Hopkins and Napper 1984).

--- PAGE 876 ---
Tibetan Tantric Buddhist Literature      851
 
References
Apple, James B. 2017. “Atiśa’s Teachings on Mahāmudrā.” The Indian International 
Journal of Buddhist Studies 18: 1–​42.
Beckwith, Christopher. 1987. The Tibetan Empire in Central Asia. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Cuevas, Bryan J. 2015. The all-​Pervading Melodious Drumbeat: The Life of Ra Lotsawa. New 
York: Penguin Books.
Dalton, Jacob P. 2016. “How Dhāraṇīs WERE Proto-​Tantric: Liturgies, Ritual Manuals, and 
the Origins of the Tantras.” In Tantric Traditions in Transmission and Translation, edited by 
David B. Gray and Ryan Overbey, 199–​229. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, Ronald. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism. New York: Columbia University Press.
Doctor, Andreas. 2013. Tibetan Treasure Literature. Boston, MA: Snow Lion.
Eaton, Richard. 2000. “Temple Desecration in Pre-​Modern India,” Frontline 17, no. 25: 62–​70.
Gardner, Alex. 2006. “The Twenty-​Five Great Sites of Khams: Religious Geography, Revelation, and 
Nonsectarianism in Nineteenth-​Century Eastern Tibet.” Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan.
Hackett, Paul G. 2012. A Catalogue of the Comparative Kangyur (Bka’-​’gyur dpe bsdur ma). New 
York: AIBS.
Hopkins, Jeffrey. 1987a. Deity Yoga: in Action and Performance Tantra. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Hopkins, Jeffrey. 1987b. Tantra in Tibet. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Hopkins, Jeffrey. 1987c. Yoga Tantra: Paths to Magical Feats. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Hopkins, Jeffrey. 2006. Mountain Doctrine: Tibet’s Fundamental Treatise on Other-​Emptiness 
and the Buddha Matrix. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Hopkins, Jeffrey, ed. and trans., and Elizabeth Napper, ed. 1984. Kindness, Clarity, & Insight: 
The Fourteenth Dalai Lama His Holiness Tensin Gyatso. Boston, MA: Shambhala.
Karmay, Samten. 1980. “The Ordinance of Lha Bla-​ma Ye-​shes-​‘od.” In Tibetan Studies in 
Honour of Hugh Richardson, edited by M. Aris and Aung San Suu Kyi, 150–​162. Warminster, 
UK: Aris and Phillips.
Rhoton, Jared. 2002. A Clear Differentiation of the Three Vows. Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Sorensen, Per. 2003. “Lhasa Diluvium Sacred Environment at Stake: The Birth of Flood 
Control Politics, the Question of Natural Disaster Management and their lmportance for the 
Hegemony over a National Monument in Tibet.” Lungta 16: 85–​135.
Sparham, Gareth. 2005. Tantric Ethics. Boston, MA: Wisdom.
Szántó, Peter-​Daniel, and Samuel Grimes. 2018. “Mahāsukhavajra’s Padmāvatī Commentary 
on the Sixth Chapter of the Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇatantra.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 46, no. 
4: 649–​693.
Thurman, Robert. 1997. Essential Tibetan Buddhism. Edison, NJ: Castle Books.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1971. Deb T’er Dmar Po Gsar Ma: Tibetan Chronicles by bSod nams grags pa. 
Rome: Istituto Italiano Per Il Medio Ed Estremo Oriente.
Wangdu, Pasang, and Hildegard Diemberger. 2000. dBa’ bzhed: The Royal Narrative Concerning 
the Bringing of the Buddha’s Doctrine to Tibet. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.
Yarnall, Thomas. 2013. Great Treatise on the Stages of Mantra (sngags rim chen mo): Chapters 
XI-​XII, The Creation Stage. New York: AIBS.

--- PAGE 877 ---


--- PAGE 878 ---
Chapter 34
The Cakrasaṃvara 
Tantra
David B. Gray
Critical History
The tantric traditions of Buddhism emerged in the eighth century, developing from es­
oteric traditions of magic, ritual, and meditation in Mahāyāna Buddhist communities 
in India. As Jake Dalton (2016) and Koichi Shinohara (2014) have argued, the precursors 
to the tantras were textual collections of spells (dhāraṇī) that described the ritual and 
meditative practices associated with them. Such collections were increasingly produced 
and disseminated throughout East Asia during the first millennium CE and over time 
demonstrated the increasing complexity and systematization that came to characterize 
the tantric traditions. These traditions claim to preserve the secret teachings of the 
Buddhas that enable one to rapidly achieve the supreme accomplishment, awakening, 
and mundane magical abilities, such as clairvoyance, clairaudience, and so forth.
The earliest known esoteric scripture produced by the Indian Buddhist commu­
nity that came to be known as tantra is the Awakening of Mahāvairocana Tantra 
(Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi-​tantra), which was composed circa 640 CE and was 
reportedly one of the texts collected by the Chinese pilgrim Wuxing (無行) circa 680 
CE (Hodge 2003, 14–​17). Both Wuxing and another Chinese pilgrim, Yijing (義淨), 
who also traveled to India in the late seventh century, reported the emergence of new 
esoteric teachings in India (Davidson 2002, 118; Hodge 2003, 10). The eighth century 
saw the development of large numbers of tantric texts, as well as the transmission of 
many of them to China and Tibet.
Among the texts produced and disseminated during this period was a collection 
of eighteen tantras, of which there are various reports. The earliest account is found 
in Amoghavajra’s Index of the Vajraśekhara Sūtra Yoga in Eighteen Sections, a text he 
composed after his return to China from a trip to South Asia in 746 CE; a similar list 
of eighteen tantras was also preserved in Tibet (Giebel 1995, Gray 2009, Almogi

--- PAGE 879 ---
854      David B. Gray
 
2014). One of the texts included in these collections was the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga-​
ḍākinījālasaṃvara Tantra. This text, dating to the eighth century, was an important 
precursor to the Yoginītantra genre, which is characterized by focus on both female 
deities and transgressive ritual practices involving sexuality and violence. It has been 
characterized as a “proto-​Yoginītantra” and was later added to this genre of texts.1 The 
Cakrasaṃvara Tantra is textually dependent on this text, repeats several verses found in 
it, and also follows several patterns established by this text.
The first and most noticeable aspects of both texts are their unconventional styles, 
at least in the context of Buddhist scriptures. Most Buddhist scriptures, sutras as well 
as tantras, begin with the standard opening background verse (nidāna). Asserting the 
claim that the text is the authentic speech of the Buddha (buddhavacana),2 the standard 
nidāna verse usually begins: “Thus have I heard: at one time” (evaṅ mayā śrutam 
ekasmin samaye), and continues by indicating the setting and audience for the discourse. 
Both the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga-​ḍākinījālasaṃvara Tantra and the Cakrasaṃvara 
Tantra open with a more unconventional text that came to be identified as the back­
ground verse (nidāna) of the Yoginītantras. It occurs as follows in the opening verse of 
the former text:
The Hero that is made of all buddhas,
Vajrasattva, the bliss that is supreme,
Always abides in the nature of all,
The secret that’s supreme and delightful.3
An almost identical version of this verse occurs in the first chapter of the Cakrasaṃvara 
Tantra, where it occurs as follows:
The Hero that’s made of all ḍākinīs,
Vajrasattva, the bliss that is supreme,
Always abides in the nature of all,
The secret that’s supreme and delightful.4
Both texts contain significant overlap in the first chapter, indicating that this text was 
one of the sources drawn on by the author(s) of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra.
In addition to quoting this text, the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra mentions it and sev­
eral other tantric works by name, in verses occurring toward the end of its twenty-​
seventh and thirtieth chapters. The other texts it mentions are the Tattvasaṃgraha, 
Śrīparamādya, Guhyasamāja, and Vajrabhairava tantras.5 Aside from the last, all of 
these texts are included in the Amogavajra’s Index. Therefore, the Cakrasaṃvara must 
have been composed after these texts, which appear to have existed in some form by the 
mid-​eighth century. And it must have been composed no later than 975 CE since it was 
among the texts that the Tibetan translator Rinchen Zangpo (rin chen bzang po, 958–​
1055 CE) encountered when he journeyed to Kashmir in 975 CE, and that he translated 
into Tibetan with the help of the Kashmiri pundit Padmākaravarman.

--- PAGE 880 ---
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra      855
 
However, the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra was probably composed during the ninth cen­
tury, most likely no later than 900 CE. This is because there is considerable textual ev­
idence pointing to its gradual emergence as a composite text, which grew over time as 
new sections were added to it. As Alexis Sanderson has shown (1994, 2001, 2009), much 
of the oldest portions of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra was drawn from older Śaiva texts. The 
sections drawn from Śaiva sources deal with the clans of the yoginīs, goddesses who can 
assume human form, and the techniques needed to identify them and win their favor. 
As such lore concerning yoginīs and ḍākinīs are a central feature of the Yoginītantras, 
this is a case in which Buddhists relied heavily on earlier Hindu sources for the devel­
opment of a new practice tradition.6 The passages borrowed from Śaiva sources are also 
the sections of the text that relate antinomian content, namely practices involving ritual 
sexuality, violence, and anthropophagy.7 On the other hand, the portions of the text that 
feature distinctly Buddhist terminology—​the opening of ­chapter 10, the end of ­chapter 
50, and ­chapter 51—​appear to be later additions to the text, as indicated by the fact that 
the earliest commentary by Jayabhadra, composed circa the late ninth or early tenth 
century, does not comment on these passages at all (Gray 2012, 9–​10). However, these 
sections are found in Rinchen Zangpo’s translation, indicating that they were added 
sometime during the tenth century.
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra and its associated practice traditions originated in India 
and continued to be practiced among Buddhist communities in South Asia until their 
decline and disappearance during the mid–​second millennium CE. It was preserved 
and continues to be an important practice tradition for Newar Buddhists in Nepal 
(Lewis and Bajracharya 2016, 157–​166). It was also transmitted to Tibet as part of the 
“later transmission” (phyi dar) of Buddhism to Tibet, a process that began with Rinchen 
Zangpo’s tenth-​century journey to India, which led to the translation of this work into 
Tibetan. Over the following three centuries, many more works associated with the 
Cakrasaṃvara Tantra were translated, and it became an important practice tradition in 
the “New” (gsar ma) Schools of Tibetan Buddhism established during this time, namely 
the Sakya, Kagyü, and Geluk schools of Tibetan Buddhism.
Legendary History
Textual history points to the gradual development of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra over ap­
proximately a century (ca. 875–​975 CE), with a major feature of its development being 
the transformation of Śaiva Hindu texts and practices into Buddhist scriptures and as­
sociated practice traditions. As we will see, this scenario is interestingly paralleled by the 
origin myth for this text and the tradition preserved in Buddhist sources.
The traditional locus of authority in Buddhist scriptural traditions is, naturally, 
Śākyamuni Buddha, the reputed teacher in most Buddhist scriptures. Most Buddhist 
scriptures are traditionally classified as buddhavacana, literally “that which the buddha 
spoke,” and thus are understood to be records of his teachings. Traditionally, Buddhists

--- PAGE 881 ---
856      David B. Gray
 
emphasized the truth of the teachings that persist through time, to be continually 
rediscovered by new generations of awakened ones.8 While this in theory destabilized 
the locus of authority for Buddhist textual traditions, most Buddhists conservatively 
stuck to Śākyamuni Buddha as the awakened one of our age. However, with the rise of 
the Mahāyāna traditions in the first millennium CE, an increasing number of “new” or 
“newly discovered” Mahāyāna scriptures were attributed to other Buddhas, accessed via 
revelatory, visionary states rather than historical lineages (Harrison 1987).
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra, also known as the “Saṃvara Light” tantra (Laghusaṃvara-​
tantra) or the “Discourse of Śrī Heruka” (śrīherukābhidhāna), was a Buddhist scripture 
not attributed to Śākyamuni Buddha, but rather to Śrī Heruka, a manifestation of the 
Mahāvajradhara Buddha, relayed to his consort, the female Buddha Vajravārāhī. The 
short and cryptic Cakrasaṃvara Tantra, being only about seven hundred stanzas in 
length, bears only traces of the conversational style that is supposedly the context for its 
revelation. The main indication of the conversational context in which the scripture was 
believed to have been taught is the first-​person voice in which most of the text’s chapters 
begin. For example, the text opens with the following: “And now I will explain the secret, 
concisely, not extensively” (Gray 2007, 155).
One explanation for the text’s laconic beginning, athātas, “and now,” is that 
the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra was originally revealed as a much larger text, which was 
called either the “Discourse” (abhidhāna), the “Sky-​like” (khasama) or the “Ocean 
of Spells” (vidyārṇava), a title that was mentioned in the text itself.9 The length of 
this extensive text (mahātantra) is variously described as being either one hundred 
thousand stanzas, three hundred thousand stanzas, or even one hundred thousand 
chapters in length (Gray 2017, 33–​34). The current text, also known as Saṃvara Light 
(laghusaṃvara) as a sign of its abridged status, was shortened to a much more manage­
able seven hundred stanzas for the sake of beings of the current kaliyuga age, who lack 
the long lifespans that the study of such huge texts would necessitate. The authors who 
make these claims thus evoke the old myths of massive revelations followed by loss 
and partial recovery of the lost texts that have been advanced by tantric communities 
from the very beginning of the revelation and recovery of these traditions, going back 
to the seventh century CE.10
Several Buddhist writers, including the Indian commentator Indrabhūti and the 
Tibetan historian Butön Rinchen Drup (bu ston rin chen grub, 1290–​1364 CE) relate 
the origin myth of this tantra. According to these authors, the Buddha who revealed 
Cakrasaṃvara Tantra was Mahāvajradhara Buddha, and the revelation occurred on Mt. 
Sumeru, either during the past dvāparayuga or during the current kaliyuga ages (Gray 
2017, 39–​40). Indrabhūti’s account, which seems to be the oldest source for this legend, 
relates that the scripture originated with Mahāvajradhara Buddha in the Akaniṣṭha 
heaven and was related to Vajrapāṇi bodhisattva. The trigger for its revelation was con­
cern about the activities of two Hindu deities, Bhairava and Kālarātri, who along with 
their divine, semidivine, and demonic followers, seized control of Mt. Sumeru as well 
as twenty-​four sacred sites scattered across the subcontinent. To deal with this problem, 
Mahāvajradhara and his consort assumed Śaiva guise, manifesting as the deities of

--- PAGE 882 ---
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra      857
 
Śrī Heruka and Vajravārāhī and taking on the appearance of the Hindu deities whom 
they then subdued, Bhairava and Kālarātri. The others in their retinue manifested in 
the twenty-​four sacred sites, subduing their Hindu counterparts and restoring “order” 
to the universe, while at the same time manifesting the Cakrasaṃvara mandala in the 
world.11
While Indrabhūti identifies Vajrapāṇi as the interlocutor whose questions triggered 
the initial revelation of the scripture, some other commentators, such as the tenth-​
century commentator Bhavabhaṭṭa, assign this role to Vajravārāhī (Gray 2007, 32). 
Reconciling these claims, the Tibetan historian Zhönnu Pel (gzhon nu dpal, 1392–​1481) 
claimed that there were two distinct revelations of the scripture, by Vajravārāhī to the 
Mahāsiddha Lūipa and by Vajrapāṇi to the Mahāsiddha Saraha, leading to two distinct 
lineages of the text and associated practices (Roerich 1976, 380–​397).
Interestingly, the traditional accounts acknowledge the debt Buddhist traditions owe 
to rival Śaiva traditions. However, they account for this borrowing as an act of skillful 
means, initiated so as to convert “immoral heretics” to Buddhism. The myths them­
selves, along with associated iconographic art, feature and depict the subjugation of one 
tradition’s deities by another’s. These contentious narratives and iconography point to 
the fierce competition that existed between these traditions in South Asia during the 
early medieval period.
The Textual Corpus
By itself, the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra is a short text that alludes to, but does not relate 
clearly or completely, any of the elements of tantric practice. Key rituals, such as the 
production of the mandala made with strings and colored powders as the site for the 
consecration rituals (abhiṣeka), are described in the text, but incompletely, with some of 
the details of practice presented out of order. Details of the iconography of the deities, 
needed for creation stage (utpattikrama) visualization exercises, are related in a sporadic 
and incomplete manner, and the advanced perfection stage (niṣpannakrama) practices 
are not described at all, except via hidden allusions noted by astute commentators. The 
text thus requires commentary, and hence a larger textual corpus, in order to serve as the 
basis for an actual practice tradition.
Shortly after the composition of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra, likely within years or 
decades, Indian Buddhists began composing longer scriptures that filled many of 
the gaps left by the root tantra. Among the earliest of the works are the much longer 
“Discourse Appendix Tantra,” Abhidhānottaratantra, the title of which indicates that it 
was understood to be an appendix to the Abhidhāna, in this case most likely the myth­
ical mahātantra, and not the Cakrasaṃvara itself. This is because the work includes 
the Cakrasaṃvara in a list of works to which it claims superiority, clearly indicating 
that it was composed after the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra, and suggesting that its authors 
or compilers intended it to supplant that text.12 It was likely composed during the

--- PAGE 883 ---
858      David B. Gray
 
tenth century. It was brought to Tibet and translated by the great Indian pundit Atiśa 
Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna (982–​1054 CE), who journeyed to Tibet in 1040 CE.
Ultimately, the Abhidhānottaratantra was classified as an “explanatory tantra” 
(vyākhyātantra) of the Cakrasaṃvara root tantra. The term explanatory tantra refers to 
typically larger works that are thought to fill in the gaps left by cryptic root tantras. They 
are believed to be texts that were revealed by Buddhas. In the Cakrasaṃvara tradition 
there are generally understood to be at least five explanatory tantras.13 Durjayacandra, 
the eighth preceptor of the Vikramaśīla monastic college who met with Rinchen Zangpo 
in the late tenth century, wrote a commentary on the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra that claims 
that there are five explanatory tantras. In addition to the Abhidhānottaratantra, he also 
included the Vajraḍāka Tantra; the “Transit of the Yoginīs” Yoginīsaṃcāra Tantra; 
the “Origin of Heruka” Herukābhyudaya Tantra; and the “Kiss” or Saṃpuṭa Tantra. 
These texts were likely composed during the tenth century since they are mentioned in 
Durjayacandra’s late tenth-​century commentary. Some later commentators added sev­
eral more texts—​“The Kiss of the Four Yoginīs” Caturyoginīsaṃputa Tantra; the “Ocean 
of Ḍākas” Ḍākārṇava Tantra; “The Origin of Saṃvara” Saṃvarodaya Tantra; and/​or 
the “Approach of Vārāhī” Vārāhyabhibhava Tantra—​expanding the list to either seven 
or nine texts. These works were likely composed later, during the eleventh or twelfth 
centuries (Gray 2017, 34–​36).
Several of these explanatory tantras, including the Abhidhānottaratantra and 
Vajraḍāka Tantra, are much longer than the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra and hence do fill in 
many of the details concerning practices that are omitted in the root text. Over time, 
however, many other works were composed by scholars to further elucidate the tra­
dition. There were eleven commentaries on the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra composed by 
Indian pundits and preserved in the Tibetan Tengyur,14 and more were composed by 
Tibetan authors as well.
There were also many practice texts composed by Indian pundits, such as meditation 
manuals (sādhana) and ritual texts for the construction of mandalas (maṇḍalavidhi) and 
the performance of consecration ceremonies therein (abhiṣekavidhi). Particularly influ­
ential among these are those attributed to the greatly accomplished saints (mahāsiddha) 
of the Indian Buddhist tantric traditions.15 These include the “Cakrasaṃvara 
Realization,” Cakrasaṃvarābhisamaya, an influential meditation manual attributed 
to the Mahāsiddha Lūipa, who was generally considered to be a founding figure of 
Cakrasaṃvara practice traditions. The Sanskrit text for this work has survived (edited in 
Sakurai 1998), and its importance is indicated by the large number of commentaries on 
it preserved in the Tibetan Tengyur, including one by Atiśa, which indicates it must have 
been composed prior to his arrival in Tibet in 1040 CE.
Several influential works are attributed to the Mahāsiddha known as Kāṇha and 
also as Kṛṣṇācārya. Attributed to him are several important works that address the 
path of creation and completion stage practice in the Cakrasaṃvara tradition. These 
include his Spring Drop (vasantatilakā), his The Four Stages (olicatuṣṭaya) and its 
autocommentary, and his Light on the Secret Reality (guhyatattvaprakāśa).16 He also 
wrote an influential Cakrasaṃvara meditation manual, the Sanskrit text of which

--- PAGE 884 ---
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra      859
 
has been preserved (Sugiki 2000) and wrote a manual for the rite of fire sacrifice 
(homavidhi; see Gray 2016).
The third mahāsiddha seen as a major figure in Cakrasaṃvara practice traditions 
is Ghaṇṭāpāda, also known as Vajraghaṇṭa. He is the reputed author of an important 
text on practice in this tradition called The Five Stages of the Śrī Cakrasaṃvara, the 
Sanskrit text of which has been recovered and edited.17 Two meditation manuals are 
also attributed to him, as well as ritual texts on mandala construction and the bestowal 
of consecrations therein. All of these texts are preserved in Tibetan translation; the 
Sanskrit originals do not appear to have been preserved.
Closely connected to the Cakrasaṃvara tradition are the traditions of practice 
connected with the goddess Vajravārāhī/​Vajrayoginī. As Vajravārāhī she is considered 
to be the consort of Śrī Heruka and hence the central female deity in the Cakrasaṃvara 
mandala. But she is also a very popular deity in her own right, with her own mandala 
and associated practice tradition, which has been particularly popular with female 
practitioners. Many ritual texts focusing on her have been composed, and they remain 
very popular in Nepal, Tibet, and Mongolia.18
Needless to say, in the living practice traditions of Nepal, Tibet, and Mongolia, many 
new practice texts have been composed and are used by contemporary practitioners of 
these traditions. While some of these texts have been translated into English for use by 
practitioners, they are typically not openly published due to the esoteric nature of the 
details of tantric practice. However, there have been some Tibetan lamas who have done 
this recently, relaxing the rules of secrecy in the interest of greater accessibility.19
Distinctive Practice Traditions
Cakrasaṃvara practice traditions were preserved up to the present day by Newar 
Buddhist communities in Nepal as well as the Sarma traditions of Tibetan Buddhism, 
preserved in Tibet, the Himalayan region, Mongolia, parts of China, and ethnic Mongol 
regions of Russia. Both the Newar and Tibetan traditions share common origins, in 
the Indian Buddhist traditions that were transmitted first to Nepal and later to Tibet. 
Indeed, the Tibetans were highly dependent on Nepal as a major locus giving them ac­
cess to Indian Buddhism (Lo Bue 1997). Relatively little is known about Newar prac­
tice traditions since they not only maintain the secrecy that traditionally shrouds 
tantric practice, but also because training in their traditions is limited to the traditional 
Buddhist groups in the Newar caste system, such as the Vajrācārya, Śākya, and Urāy 
caste groups. Partly as a result of this insularity, relatively little has been published on the 
details of practice in Newar Buddhist communities.20
On the other hand, while Tibetan Buddhist communities likewise observed se­
crecy with respect to the details of tantric practice, they tended to be less insular. Many 
Tibetan lamas have engaged in missionary activity, attempting to spread their teachings 
to neighboring regions such as Mongolia, China, and the non-​ethnic Tibetan regions in

--- PAGE 885 ---
860      David B. Gray
 
the Himalayas. Moreover, with the Tibetan diaspora following the Chinese occupation 
of Tibet in the 1950s, numerous lamas have come to serve as spiritual guides for various 
communities around the contemporary world (Zablocki 2009). As a result of this, the 
details of Tibetan Buddhism tantric practice have become much better known, and a 
large number of works dealing with tantric practice have been published, with a con­
comitant disclosure of practice details that were formerly considered to be secret.21
For those interested in practicing in the Cakrasaṃvara tradition, the first step would be 
finding a qualified lama to serve as one’s teacher. Should the lama accept one as a student, 
he or she would likely first have one engage in the “preliminary practices” (sngon ‘gro) that 
are thought to make one qualified, or a “suitable vessel,” for initiation into the practice 
lineage. These are usually divided into two types; one is “ordinary preliminary practices” 
(thun mong gi sngon ‘gro), which are designed to provide one with a good moral and in­
tellectual foundation via introduction to classical Mahāyana teachings. Tibetan authors 
typically recommend as well “extraordinary preliminary practices” (thun mong ma yin gi 
sngon ‘gro), which provide the basis for more advanced tantric practices.
The ordinary preliminaries, or the early phase of tantric training in the Tibetan tra­
dition, are usually articulated in terms of the “three trainings” (bslab gsum) of Buddhist 
practice: moral discipline (tshul khrims), wisdom (shes rab), and meditative concentra­
tion (ting nge ‘dzin). Novice practitioners in Tibetan Buddhism are exhorted to find a 
qualified teacher, under whose guidance they can begin their training. The early phases 
of spiritual training typically involve an introduction to Buddhist teachings in order to 
help the novice practitioner generate a correct understanding of the religion, establish 
a firm moral basis, and engender a strong motivation for spiritual practice, all of which 
are seen as essential foundations for proper spiritual development.
The extraordinary preliminaries include taking refuge in the Three Jewels—​
the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṅgha—​and generation of the spirit of awak­
ening (Skt. bodhicitta, Tib. byang sems), as well as several contemplative and ritual 
exercises. These exercises include a purification practice that entails focusing on the 
deity Vajrasattva (who is associated with spiritual purification and the overcoming 
of mental obstacles). That involves a relatively simple visualization of Vajrasattva, 
performed while reciting a liturgy that includes the repetition of Vajrasattva’s mantra 
of one hundred syllables. They also include the mandala offering ritual, a simple ritual 
in which one makes an offering of rice or barley, which is visualized as an extensive 
offering made to a vast host of Buddhas, bodhisattvas, and the gurus of one’s prac­
tice lineage. Another important preliminary is the practice of guru yoga, a contem­
plative exercise in which one visualizes one’s guru above one’s head in the form of an 
awakened being. One takes refuge in one’s guru and the guru lineage that he or she 
represents and recites prayers to one’s gurus. These practices are taught as stand-​alone 
practices for novices who aspire to undertake advanced forms of tantric contempla­
tive practices. They are also commonly embedded in the meditation manuals (Skt. 
sādhana, Tib. sgrub thabs), as preliminaries conducted prior to the actual meditative 
practice (Beyer 1973, 434–​442, and Khetsun Sangpo 1996, 113–​182).

--- PAGE 886 ---
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra      861
 
Once a lama deems that a student is suitably qualified, he or she would be permitted 
to attend a consecration ceremony (abhiṣeka, dbang bskur), an important ceremony 
that initiated the student into the practice tradition and empowers her or him to re­
ceive advanced teachings in the tradition (see Davidson, this volume). Depending on 
the tradition, it takes one to three days to perform. In the ceremony, one is introduced 
to the deity mandala of the practice tradition into which one is being initiated, which 
empowers one to undertake the advanced contemplative practices associated with that 
tradition (see Berzin 1997). Typically, newly initiated students must make a vow to prac­
tice daily according to one of the meditation manuals associated with the tradition into 
which they have been initiated.
Receiving the rite of consecration qualifies one to receive teachings in the advanced 
stages of tantric practice. In the “new” traditions of Tibetan Buddhism, these are twofold: 
the stage of “creation” or “generation” (utpattikrama, bskyed rim) and the stage of “per­
fection” or “completion” (niṣpannakrama, bskyed rim). In the former stage, one engages 
in what is known as “deity yoga” (devatāyoga, lha’i rnal ‘byor). In the Cakrasaṃvara tra­
dition, this entails imagining one’s ordinary identity dissolve into emptiness and then 
emerging as either one of the tradition’s central deities, Śrī Heruka or Vajravārāhī, or as 
the deity couple in inseparable union. This transformed sense of self-​identity is called 
the “divine pride” (lha’i nga rgyal) of oneself as an awakened being. One then imagines 
the mandala as one’s environment, with oneself surrounded by the mandala’s deities. 
One tries to develop and maintain the ability to visualize this in a crystal-​clear manner 
and also to maintain this sense of divine identity existing in a divine abode even when 
one comes out of the meditative state, and engages with the so-​called “ordinary world,” 
retaining the growing sense that one’s perception of it is conditioned and can thus be 
reconditioned and transformed by contemplative practices. Moreover, the beings one 
encounters in the postmeditative state should be conceived as the awakened beings of 
the mandala to undermine ordinary social conceptions (e.g., prejudice) and emotional 
patterns (e.g., lust, hostility, etc.). The mastery of visualization practice is very challenging 
for most people and typically requires a serious commitment on the part of the practi­
tioner. The Tibetan Buddhist practice of going into meditative retreat, ideally for three or 
more years, is designed to enable this kind of accomplishment (Ngawang Zangpo 1990).
While creation-​stage visualization is found in most tantric Buddhist traditions, the 
Yoginītantras feature a special and advanced creation stage visualization practice that 
is designed to segue one into the more advanced perfection-​stage practices. This is 
known as “body mandala” (kāyamaṇḍala, sku’i dkyil ‘khor) practice. As noted above, the 
Cakrasaṃvara origin myth posited a mandala of twenty-​five sacred sites, Mt. Sumeru 
surrounded by a network of twenty-​four sacred sites, which were initially occupied by 
Śaiva deities, but were later overtaken by Śrī Heruka and Vajravārāhī and the twenty-​
four deity couples of their entourage. This outer “map” of sacred sites is represented 
by the Cakrasaṃvara mandala, which centers on the central couple, surrounded by 
the Body, Speech, and Mind Wheels, each of which consists of eight deity couples cor­
responding to eight of the sacred sites. This mandala is also mapped onto the body of

--- PAGE 887 ---
862      David B. Gray
 
the practitioner, which becomes a mesocosm, linking the outer mandala of actual pil­
grimage sites with the inner visualized mandala.
In body mandala practice, one visualizes one’s body as pervaded by the Cakrasaṃvara 
mandala. Each sacred site (sthāna) and associated seed syllable (bīja) is connected with 
a yoginī goddess, associated with various body parts, and their male consorts, who are 
associated with various bodily constituents (dhātu). Interestingly, included in the lists 
of bodily parts and constituents are those conventionally viewed as “filthy” or impure, 
such as the genitals, anus, and feet, as well as substances such as phlegm, blood, and 
feces. Interestingly, the Indian Buddhists who developed this practice drew from lists 
of bodily parts and constituents developed by early Buddhists and found in works such 
as the Scripture on the Foundations of Mindfulness (Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta), the pur­
pose of which was to undermine attachment to the body (one’s own or another’s) by 
contemplating its impurity. Here, however, the aim is different—​developing a sense of 
the body in all of its aspects, regardless of their supposed impurity in the conventional 
understanding, as the completely pure abode of the mandala and its deities.22 Moreover, 
the tradition also maps the three wheels of the mandala not only to the three levels of 
the cosmos (triloka) (the heavens, earth, and underworld), but also the three levels of a 
Buddha’s embodiment (trikāya), linking the practice to the ultimate goal of awakening 
(Sugiki 2003, 165–​168).
While body mandala visualization practice is part of the creation stage, it also enables 
the practitioner to transition to the more advanced perfection-​stage practices since 
there is also body mandala practice in the Cakrasaṃvara perfection stage. The per­
fection stage focuses on the subtle body, which consists of channels (nāḍī) and wheels 
or channel nexus (cakra), through which are conducted vital wind (prāṇa) and subtle 
drops (bindu); here the sacred sites of the body mandala correspond to vital points on 
the subtle body to be manipulated in perfection-​stage yogic practices (Gray 2017, 180). 
The ultimate goal of perfection-​stage practice is the achievement of nondual gnosis, 
which is equated with awakening in this tradition (Gray 2021). This is achieved in 
Unexcelled Yoga tantra traditions by opening the lower aperture of the central channel 
of the subtle body and forcing into it the vital winds that normally reside in the left and 
right channels. This purportedly leads to awakening the subtle “Fury Fire” (caṇḍālī, Tib. 
gtum mo), which travels up the channel and melts the subtle “drop” of the brain center, 
whose molten descent down the channel awakens increasingly intense levels of bliss 
(Cozort 1986, 68–​88). The Fury Fire practice, which is analogous to the Hindu kuṇḍalinī 
yoga practices,23 is a perfection-​stage practice that is distinct to the Yoginītantras and is 
linked strongly to the Cakrasaṃvara and Hevajra tantras.
There were several systems of perfection-​stage practice developed by Indian 
Buddhists. These include the five stages (pañcakrama) system of the Guhyāsamāja 
Tantra, which is attributed to the mahāsiddha Nāropa,24 as well as the six yogas system 
associated with both the Guhyāsamāja and Kālacakra tantras (Tsongkhapa 2013, 4). 
The most famous systems for perfection-​stage practice in the Yoginītantras are the two 
closely related systems of “six teachings” (dharma, chos) attributed to the mahāsiddha

--- PAGE 888 ---
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra      863
 
Naropā as well as the yoginī Niguma, who was reputed to be his sister.25 These practices 
focus on the subtle body with the aim of opening the aperture of the central channel, 
which reportedly can only be done while dreaming, engaging in sexual intercourse, or 
dying. These practices thus focus on dream yoga, practice with a real or a visualized con­
sort, and preparation for the dying process. Although several texts dealing with these 
sets of six teachings have been translated into English, the details of these practices are 
traditionally considered to be highly secret and thus are typically only revealed by lamas 
who preserve them to students who are considered qualified via being initiated and very 
well trained in the preliminary and creation-​stage practices, typically by successfully 
completing a three-​year meditation retreat.
The Cakrasaṃvara tradition is a living tantric Buddhist tradition that has been pre­
served since its revelation, circa the late ninth century, until the present day. While tra­
dition has been shrouded in secrecy for much of its history, this veil has lifted somewhat 
as both the texts and teachers of this tradition have been widely disseminated around 
the world due to the Tibetan diaspora. It preserves fascinating contemplative practices 
that may be of interest to contemporary individuals interested in meditation and yoga.
Notes
	 1.	 See English 2002, 5. It should be noted that there were various attempts to classify the 
growing number of tantras in India and Tibet. The term yoginītantra, “tantras of the 
yoginīs,” is an Indic term and was often used as an alternative to the mahāyogatantra, 
“great yogatantras,” genre, which focused on male deities. These two genres were later in­
cluded in the yoganiruttaratantra, “unexcelled yoga tantras,” generally presented as the 
highest among the various classes of tantras. See also Dalton 2005.
	 2.	 Regarding the concept of buddhavacana and its transformation in Mahāyāna scholastic 
literature, see Lopez 1995 and McMahan 1998.
	 3.	 My translation, /​sems dpa’ sangs rgyas kun gyi dngos/​ /​rdo rje sems dpa’ bde ba’i mchog /​gsang 
ba mchog gi dgyes pa na/​ /​thams cad bdag nyid rtag tu bzhugs/​ (Sarvabuddhasamāyoga-​
ḍākinījālasaṃvara Tantra, fol. 151b).
	 4.	 My translation of Cakrasaṃvara Tantra 1.2c–​3b: rahasye parame ramye sarvātmani sadā 
sthitaḥ //​ sarvaḍākinīmayaḥ sattvo vajrasattvaḥ paraṃ sukhaṃ (Gray 2012, 49); /​gsang ba 
mchog gi dgyes pa na //​ thams cad bdag nyid rtag tu bzhugs //​ mkha’ ‘gro kun dngos sems dpa’ 
ni/​ /​rdo rje sems dpa’ bde ba’i mchog (Gray 2012, 249); cf. Gray 2007, 155–​156.
	 5.	 The verses in question are Cakrasaṃvara Tantra (CT) 27.20 and 30.24; see Gray 2012, 160, 
178, and Gray 2007, 279, 295.
	 6.	 Regarding this, see Hatley 2016.
	 7.	 For an example of such a passage and an analysis of its content, see Gray 2005.
	 8.	 The Buddhist canons traditionally were divided into “three baskets” (tripiṭaka) or 
categories of teachings. These include discourses (sūtra), teachings on monastic discipline 
(vinaya), and scholastic works (abhidharma). See Harrison 2004.
	 9.	 This occurs at Cakrasaṃvara Tantra 34.8a in my edition; see Gray 2012, 189 and 2007.
	10.	 This theme is discussed at length in Gray 2009.
	11.	 For a translation of Indrabhūti’s account, see Gray 2007, 46–​51.

--- PAGE 889 ---
864      David B. Gray
 
	12.	 The Abhidhānottara Tantra quotes the Cakrasaṃvara in the parallel passage to CT 27.20, in 
which texts are listed, including the text saṃvare, “in the Saṃvara,” which commentators 
understand to be a reference to the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga-​ḍākinījālasaṃvara Tantra. 
The former text, on the other hand, reads cakrasaṃvare “in the Cakrasaṃvara” here. See 
Gray 2007, 279, and 2012, 160.
	13.	 See Gray 2017, 32–​56, for Tsongkhapa’s lengthy discussion of these works.
	14.	 See Gray 2007, 21–​24. Among these, Sanskrit manuscripts have survived for three 
of them, Jayabhadra’s Cakrasaṃvarapañjikā (edited in Sugiki 2001), Bhavabhaṭṭa’s 
Cakrasaṃvaravivṛtti (edited in Pandey 2002), and Kambala’s Sādhananidhi-​
śricakrasaṃvara-​nāma-​pañjikā, which survives in a manuscript preserved in 
Nepal (National Archives of Nepal, ms. no. 4-​122, bauddhatantra 87, Mf. B31/​20; it is 
miscatalogued under the name *Herukāvidhāna) but which has not yet been edited to my 
knowledge, although I took into account its root text quotes in my edition of the root text 
(Gray 2012).
	15.	 Regarding these figures, see White 1996.
	16.	 See Samdhong Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1990 for an edition of the Vasantatilakā and Sugiki 
1999 for more on the Olicatuṣṭaya. The Guhyatattvaprakāśa is preserved only in Tibetan 
canon to my knowledge.
	17.	 See Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭapāda 2005.
	18.	 For a discussion of this goddess, a survey of literature focusing on her, and a translation 
and edition of Umāpatideva’s Vajravārāhī -​sādhana, see English 2002. For a discussion of 
the importance of this tradition in Tibet, see Diemberger 2007.
	19.	 For example, practice texts have been published by both the Geluk teacher Geshe Ngawang 
Dhargyey (2006) and the Sakya teacher Khenpo Lama Migmar Tseten, founder of the 
Sakya Institute for Buddhist Studies in Cambridge, Massachusetts, who has published a 
series of English language practice texts in the Cakrasaṃvara tradition (Migmar Tseten 
2018a, 2018b, 2018c).
	20.	 For more information on Newar Buddhism, see Gellner 1992 and Lewis and Bajracharya 
2016.
	21.	 For excellent introductions to tantric practice by Tibetan masters, see Khetsun Sangpo 
1996 and Lama Yeshe 2001.
	22.	 For more information on this practice see Gray 2007, 56–​66, and Sugiki 2003.
	23.	 Regarding this tradition, see White 1996 and Mallinson 2016.
	24.	 This was the model for Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭāpāda’s (2005) “Five Stages” system for the 
Cakrasaṃvara tradition.
	25.	 Regarding these traditions of practice, see Mullin 1996 and Harding 2010.
Bibliography
Almogi, Olga. 2014. “The Eighteen Mahāyoga Tantric Cycles: A Real Canon or the Mere 
Notion of One?” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines, no. 30 (October): 47–​110.
Berzin, Alex. 1997. Taking the Kalacakra Initiation. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Beyer, Stephen. 1973. The Cult of Tārā: Magic and Ritual in Tibet. Los Angeles: University of 
California Press.
Cozort, Daniel. 1986. Highest Yoga Tantra: An Introduction to the Esoteric Buddhism of Tibet. 
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.

--- PAGE 890 ---
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra      865
 
Dalton, Jacob P. 2005. “A Crisis of Doxography: How Tibetans Organized Tantra During the 
8th–​12th Centuries.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 28 (1): 
115–​181.
Dalton, Jacob P. 2016. The Gathering of Intentions: A History of a Tibetan Tantra. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
Diemberger, Hildegard. 2007. When a Woman Becomes a Religious Dynasty: The Samding 
Dorje Phagmo of Tibet. New York: Columbia University Press.
English, Elizabeth. 2002. Vajrayoginī: Her Visualizations, Rituals, and Forms. Boston: Wisdom.
Gellner, David N. 1992. Monk, Householder, and Tantric Priest: Newar Buddhism and Its 
Hierarchy of Ritual. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Giebel, Rolf. 1995. “The Chin-​kang-​ting ching yü-​ch’ieh shih-​pa-​hui chih-​kuei: An Annotated 
Translation.” Journal of Naritasan Institute for Buddhist Studies 18: 107–​201.
Gray, David B. 2005. “Eating the Heart of the Brahmin: Representations of Alterity and the 
Formation of Identity in Tantric Buddhist Discourse.” History of Religions 45 (1): 45–​69.
Gray, David B. 2007. The Cakrasamvara Tantra: A Study and Annotated Translation. New York: 
AIBS/​Columbia University Press.
Gray, David B. 2009. “On the Very Idea of a Tantric Canon: Myth, Politics, and the 
Formation of the Bka’ ’gyur.” Journal of the International Association of Tibetan Studies, 
no. 5 (December): 1–​37.
Gray, David B. 2012. The Cakrasamvara Tantra: Editions of the Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts. 
New York: AIBS/​Columbia University Press.
Gray, David B. 2016. “The Three Types of Fire Sacrifice According to Kāṇha’s Śrīcakrasaṃvara-​
homavidhi.” In Homa Variations: The Study of Ritual Change across the Longue Durée, edited 
by Richard K. Payne and Michael Witzel, 214–​224. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gray, David B. 2017. Tsong Khapa’s Illumination of the Hidden Meaning: Maṇḍala, Mantra, 
and the Cult of the Yoginīs (An Annotated Translation of Chapters 1–​24). New York: AIBS/​
Columbia University Press.
Gray, David B. 2021. “Bodies of Knowledge: Bodily Perfection in Tantric Buddhist Practice.” 
Religions 12 (2): 89. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​2020​089.
Harding, Sarah. 2010. Niguma, Lady of Illusion. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Harrison, Paul. 1987. “Buddhism: A Religion of Revelation After All?” Numen 34 (2): 256–​264.
Harrison, Paul. 2004. “Canon.” In Encyclopedia of Buddhism, edited by R. E. Buswell Jr., vol. 1, 
111–​115. New York: Macmillan Reference USA. Accessed January 19, 2022. https://​link.gale.
com/​apps/​doc/​CX340​2600​083/​GVRL?u=​sant38​536&sid=​bookm​ark-​GVRL&xid=​72b5d​3f9.
Hatley, S. 2016. “Converting the Ḍākinī: Goddess Cults and the Tantras of the Yoginīs between 
Buddhism and Śaivism.” In Tantric Traditions in Transmission and Translation, edited by 
David B. Gray and Ryan Richard Overbey, 37–​86. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hodge, S. 2003. The Mahā-​Vairocana-​Abhisaṃbodhi Tantra with Buddhaguhya’s Commentary. 
London: RoutledgeCurzon.
Kambala. Sādhananidhi-​śrīcakrasamvara-​nāma-​pañjikā. To. 1401, D rgyud ’grel vol. ba, 
1b–​78a.
Kāṇha/​Kṛṣṇācārya. Ālicatuṣṭaya. To. 1451, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 355b–​358b.
Kāṇha/​Kṛṣṇācārya. Ālicatuṣṭaya-​vibhaṅga. To. 1452, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 358b–​367b.
Kāṇha/​Kṛṣṇācārya. Bhagavacchrīcakrasaṃvaramaṇḍalavidhi. To. 1446, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 
276b–​292b.

--- PAGE 891 ---
866      David B. Gray
 
Kāṇha/​Kṛṣṇācārya. Guhyatattvaprakāśa. To. 1450, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 349.a–​355.b; PTT. 
2167, vol. 51, starting p. 224.4.
Kāṇha/​Kṛṣṇācārya. Śrīcakrasaṃvarasādhana. To. 1445, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 272b–​276b.
Kāṇha/​Kṛṣṇācārya. Vasantatilakā. To. 1448, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 298b–​306b.
Khetsun Sangpo. 1996. Tantric Practice in Nying-​ma. Translated by Jeffrey Hopkins and Anne 
C. Klein. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications.
Lewis, Todd, and Naresh Man Bajracharya. 2016. “Vajrayāna Traditions in Nepal.” In Tantric 
Traditions in Transmission and Translation, edited by David B. Gray and Ryan Richard 
Overbey, 87–​198. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lo Bue, Erberto. 1997. “The Role of Newar Scholars in Transmitting the Indian Buddhist 
Heritage to Tibet (c. 750–​c. 1200).” In Les habitants du toit du monde: Études recueillies en 
hommage à Alexander W. Macdonald, edited by S. Karmay and P. Sagant, 629–​658. Nanterre, 
France: Societé d’Ethnologie.
Lopez, Donald S., Jr. 1995. “Authority and Orality in the Mahāyāna.” Numen 42: 21–​47.
Mallinson, James. 2016. “Śāktism and Haṭhayoga.” In Goddess Traditions in Tantric Hinduism: 
History, Practice and Doctrine, edited by Bjarne Wernicke-​Olesen, 109–​140. London: 
Routledge.
McMahan, David. 1998. “Orality, Writing, and Authority in South Asian Buddhism: Visionary 
Literature and the Struggle for Legitimacy in the Mahāyāna.” History of Religions 37 (3): 
249–​274.
Migmar Tseten, Khenpo Lama. 2018a. Common and Uncommon Vajrayogini Sadhanas. 
Cambridge, MA: Mangalamkosha.
Migmar Tseten, Khenpo Lama. 2018b. Shri Chakrasamvara Body Mandala Sadhana. 
Cambridge, MA: Mangalamkosha.
Migmar Tseten, Khenpo Lama. 2018c. Vajrayogini Practice Manual with Visualization Aids. 
Cambridge, MA: Mangalamkosha.
Mullin, Glenn H. 1996. Tsongkhapa’s Six Yogas of Naropa. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Ngawang Dhargyey, Geshe. 2006. Vajrayogini Sadhana and Commentary. Dharamsala, India: 
Library of Tibetan Works & Archives.
Ngawang Zangpo. 1990. Jamgon Kongtrul’s Retreat Manual. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Pandey, Janardan Shastri. 2002. Śrīherukābhidhānam Cakrasamvaratantram with the Vivṛti 
Commentary of Bhavabhaṭṭa. 2 vols. Rare Buddhist Texts Series no. 26. Sarnath, India: 
Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies.
Roerich, G. (1949) 1976. The Blue Annals by gZhon-​nu dPal. 2nd ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Sakurai, M. 1998. Cakrasaṃvarābhisamaya no genten kenkyū. Chizan Gakuho 47: 1–​32.
Samdhong Rinpoche and Vrajvallabh Dwivedi, eds. 1990. Vasantatilakā of Caryāvratī 
Śrīkṛṣṇācārya with Commentary: Rahasyadīpikā by Vanaratna. Rare Buddhist Text Series 7. 
Sarnath, India: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1994. “Vajrayāna: Origin and Function.” In Buddhism into the Year 2000: 
International Conference Proceedings, no editor, 87–​102. Los Angeles: Dhammakaya 
Foundation.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. “History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the 
Pañcarātra and the Buddhist Yoginītantras.” In Les Source et le temps, edited by François 
Grimal, 1–​47. Pondicherry, India: École française d’Extrême Orient.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early 
Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, 41–​349. 
Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.

--- PAGE 892 ---
The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra      867
 
Sarvabuddhasamāyoga-​ḍākinījālasaṃvara-​nāma-​uttaratantra. To. 366, D vol. ka 151b–​193a.
Shinohara, Koichi. 2014. Spells, Images, and Mandalas: Tracing the Evolution of Esoteric 
Buddhist Rituals. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sugiki, 
Tsunehiko. 
1999. 
“Kṛṣṇācārya’s 
Four 
Stage 
Meditational 
Process.” 
Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 47 (2): 142–​145.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2000. “Kṛṣṇācārya’s Śrīcakrasaṃvarasādhana: Critical Edition with Notes.” 
Chisan Gakuhō (智山学報) 49: 45–​62.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2001. “On the Making of the Śrīcakrasaṃvaratantra, with a Critical Sanskrit 
Text of Jayabhadra’s Śrīcakrasaṃvarapañjikā.” Chisan Gakuhō (智山学報) 50: 91–​141.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2003. “Five Types of Internal Maṇḍala Described in the Cakrasaṃvara 
Buddhist 
Literature: 
Somatic 
Representations 
of 
One’s 
Innate 
Sacredness.” 
Tōyō-​bunka-​kenkyū-​sho-​kiyō (The Memoirs of the Institute of Oriental Culture) 144: 157–​231.
Tsongkhapa. 2013. A Lamp to Illuminate the Five Stages: Teachings on Guhyasamaja Tantra. 
Translated by Gavin Kilty. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭāpāda. 2005. “Śrῑcakrasaṃvara-​pañca-​krama of Ghaṇṭāpāda. dPal ’khor lo 
sdom pa’i rim pa lnga pa| mdzad pa po| rDo rje dril bu pa.” Dhῑḥ 39: 149–​168.
Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭāpāda. 2013. A Lamp to Illuminate the Five Stages: Teachings on the 
Guhyasamāja Tantra. Translated by Gavin Kilty. Boston: Wisdom.
Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭāpāda. Sahajasaṃvarasādhana. To. 1436, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 233a,b.
Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭāpāda. Śrīcakrasaṃvaramaṇḍalavidhitattvāvatāra. To. 1430, D rgyud ‘grel 
vol. wa, 203b–​219b.
Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭāpāda. Śrīcakrasaṃvarapañcakrama. To. 1433, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 
224b–​227a.
Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭāpāda. Śrīcakrasamvarasādhana. To. 1432, D rgyud ‘grel vol. wa, 222b–​224b.
Vajraghaṇṭa/​Ghaṇṭāpāda. Śrīcakrasamvaraśekaprakriya-​upadeśa. To. 1431, D rgyud ‘grel vol. 
wa, 219b–​222b.
White, David G. 1996. The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Yeshe, Lama. 2001. Introduction to Tantra: The Transformation of Desire. Boston: Wisdom. First 
published in 1987.
Zablocki, Abraham. 2009. “Transnational Tulkus: The Globalization of Tibetan Buddhist 
Reincarnation.” In Transbuddhism: Transmission, Translation, Transformation, edited 
by Nalini Bhushan, Jay L. Garfield, and Abraham Zablocki, 43–​53. Amherst: University of 
Massachusetts Press.

--- PAGE 893 ---


--- PAGE 894 ---
P a r t V I I
 SOCIAL 
ORGANIZATION AND 
INSTITUTIONS

--- PAGE 895 ---


--- PAGE 896 ---
Chapter 35
What the Kālamukhas 
Can Tell Us about 
Identity, Institutions, 
and Community in the 
Early Medieval Deccan
Jason Schwartz
The traditions we have variously labeled Kālamukha, Kālāmukha, or Kalāmukha 
have left an outsized material and cultural footprint upon the medieval Deccan.1 And 
yet, scholars of Indian religion and Indology have made only cursory attempts at 
reconstructing their lifeworlds. In the absence of a recoverable scriptural canon, tan­
tric studies tends to treat the Kālamukhas as a black box in our historical record whose 
contents are irretrievable. Either we have presumed that our only access to these 
traditions is through some cursory epigraphy, whose lack of doctrinal specificity un­
problematically indicates consonance with a mainline Brahmanism,2 or else it has been 
suggested that we are encountering “living fossils” perpetuating a pre-​tantric tradition 
of “Rudra asceticism,” whose contours are best gleaned from those rare moments when 
the earliest Śaiva Āgamas deign to represent their formative antecedents (Sanderson 
2006).3
This essay represents an initial attempt to revive the rather moribund study of the 
Kālamukhas by turning to fresh archives and methodologies. Most importantly, the 
evidence in question demands that we overturn our assumption that the Kālamukha 
“tradition” represents a unitary value system primarily articulated in a textual domain. 
As we shall see, the designation “Kālamukha” instead indexes vibrant and internally 
diversified “context-​specific” religious imaginaries. Within these domains, remnants 
of Atimārga praxis, especially from the Lākulas, were blended with the Mantramārga, 
particularly the Dakṣiṇasrotas dedicated to the worship of Bhairava, alongside extra-​
tantric influences (Sanderson 2006).4 Moreover, not only were the corpuses to which

--- PAGE 897 ---
872      Jason Schwartz
 
Kālamukhas lay claim heterogenous and eclectic, but they shared their spheres of op­
eration with other sorts of Śaiva ascetics and ritual specialists. In other words, I assert 
that the very state of ambiguity about the boundaries between the categories Kāpālika, 
Kālamukha, Lākula, and other Śaiva identities that so perplex us when we encounter 
them in the early medieval Sanskrit sources and that have catalyzed our scholarly 
conversations are not so much errors in interpretation as they are candid reflections of 
complex composite contemporary realities.
Given this internal plurality of Kālamukha communities, a strictly philological ap­
proach to the reconstruction of “lost” premodern religions faces certain methodological 
difficulties. However brilliantly executed, such efforts generally proceed by recovering 
a transhistorical canon of fragmentary evidence, in which the inclusion of the relevant 
materials was often originally incidental or served a polemical purpose. On the basis 
of discursive commonalities within this body of evidence, often privileging the most 
archaic materials, scholars then set out to isolate a core essence, inquiring “who were 
the Kālamukhas really and what did they believe?” The aim is to identify a canon of text 
and praxis, disambiguating core theological stances from those of competing strains of 
Śaivas.5 Such an approach presumes, then, that (1) an entextualized doctrine was the 
constitutive feature of religious life, as opposed to one of many conceptual resources, (2) 
that religious identities are static over time and space, and (3) that Śaiva communities 
and institutions were discretely organized according to their unwavering doctrinal 
affiliations. This study suggests the value of reconsidering all of these presuppositions, 
arguing in favor of reembedding texts, whenever possible, within broader lived contexts.
Toward this end, I offer three brief case studies: one purely textual, one concerned with 
visual culture in situ, and one offering regional institutional histories over the longue 
durée. Each of these will speak to the composite nature of Kālamukha imaginaries on 
and off the page, a complexity that generated a certain emic befuddlement within the 
contemporary Śaiva communities of their day. Throughout, I consider how the evidence 
at hand urges us to think more robustly about not merely the content of our sources, 
whether in text or stone, but also their workmanly dimensions. How and why do they 
direct specific messages to discrete audiences? In what contexts do they include or ex­
clude particular types of details? How might questions of form and genre shape what 
can and cannot be communicated in a given register? And finally, how might we as­
semble these intentionally delimited messages in the service of reconstructing a robust 
and multidimensional reality?
They All Look the Same to Me: Or What 
Is a Doxographer to Do?
Written from the perspective of a south Indian living around the twelfth century, the 
Sarvasiddhāntaviveka (SSV), a neglected doxography of the Śaiva Siddhānta tradition,

--- PAGE 898 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      873
 
offers us a rare glimpse of tantric imaginaries in all their idiosyncratic diversity.6 Taking 
into account a far greater array of Śaiva and Śaiva adjacent traditions than any other 
work of the genre, the text shows an unusual attentiveness to the incongruity between 
inherited and idealized textual prescription and real world praxis. In places, it even be­
grudgingly recognizes that the type of conceptual clarity that scholars are so inclined 
to prize presents an awkward fit with the messiness of lived realities. At the same time, 
however, what the text offers is not a straightforward snapshot of the religious landscape 
“just as it was” but one person’s perspective. We are encountering a viewpoint shaped by 
the rhetorical and theological agenda of a partisan scholar who, for all his investment in 
verisimilitude, is ardently committed to demonstrating the superiority of his eccentric 
brand of Śaiva Siddhānta above and beyond all other systems.
Far from presenting an obstacle, however, the perspectival nature of the SSV speaks 
volumes concerning the medieval south Indian sociology of knowledge—​that is, who 
had access to what kind of knowledge and under what circumstances? For instance, the 
SSV delineates in some detail that adherents to what it calls the Vāma tradition, which 
scholars today label as belonging to the Kulamārga,7 can be categorized according to 
their chosen philosophical stances, including nondualism, dualism, a peculiar form 
of bhedābheda8 where nondifference with a variety of independent śaktis9 can be 
achieved through possession, and an ontologically pluralist pariṇāmavāda position.10 
Notwithstanding this intellectual diversity on matters of ontology and epistemology, 
however, the author of the SSV presumes that we should speak of the Vāma as a single 
Siddhānta, as these mutually exclusive ideological stances are built on contested readings 
of the exact same sources and entailed the application of many shared practices.11
Even more fundamentally, the SSV cautions us against conflating adherents of Vāma 
traditions with a fixed demography or institutionalized religious community. Any 
person, our author tells us, who has mastered the praxis of a Vaiṣṇava, Śaiva, or the 
Bhairava system, once he has been initiated by a sadguru into the Vāma system,12 is ca­
pable of performing the observances of that path and achieving liberation.13 Much as 
scholars today speak of the Mantramārga as organized around a shared ritual grammar 
that crosses the boundary of religious traditions, the SSV speaks to a functional inter­
changeability of all Mantramārga praxis systems, sometimes rendering “doctrine” 
trivial or irrelevant, even when it extends to the workings of such fundamental practices 
as initiation. Perhaps even more significantly, this fluidity suggests a greater degree of 
social permeability within and across religious communities than we have generally 
presupposed, for only in a social world where individual agents frequently crossed such 
boundaries would behavior of this sort not instantly identify a person as a potentially 
disreputable adept of the Vāma.
It is this same portrait of nested religious realities with blurred boundaries, then, that 
characterizes the SSV’s account of pre-​tantric Atimārga traditions. The author takes 
as his point of departure a somewhat familiar inherited schema, the division of reli­
gious traditions into sets of six samayas,14 here further expanded to encompass the ex­
ternal (bāhya) traditions on the one hand (Lokāyata, Buddhist, Jain, Pūrva Mīmāṃsā, 
Māyāvāda, and Pañcarātra), and internal (antaḥ) traditions on the other (Śaiva,

--- PAGE 899 ---
874      Jason Schwartz
 
Pāśupata, Vāma, Bhairava, Mahāvrata, and Kālamukha). More remarkably, however, 
he proceeds to discuss at least forty primarily Mantramārga traditions.15 Pre-​tantric 
traditions, in contrast, are effectively subdivided into two interrelated groupings: one 
treating the “Kālamukhas,” “Kāpāla Lākulas,” and “Mahāvratins” as an ambiguously 
interrelated set, while another similarly dissects the Pāśupata landscape. While the 
Pāśupatas in the SSV show very little continuity with the classical sources, our author 
is particularly well informed, it appears, about Kālamukha and Kālamukha-​adjacent 
traditions. Fundamentally, the SSV perceives both the Lākulas and the Mahāvratins as 
successive internal developments emerging out of a baseline Kālamukhamata. That is to 
say, an exceptionally well-​informed Śaiva writing in northern Tamil Nadu believed that 
the Kāpāla-​Lākulas accepted the canonical positions and practices of the Kālamukhas, 
rejecting only those elements conflicting with their own supplementary practices, while 
the Mahāvratins in turn accepted both Kālamukha and Lākula normativities while also 
adopting their own distinctive practices.16
Approaching these transmissions in reverse order, Mahāvratins are distinguished by 
being liṅgadhārins, bearing a portable aniconic liṅga on their bodies at all times and 
supplementing the general reverence of the śivabhakta with a special veneration of re­
ligious authorities called jaṅgamas.17 Doctrinally, they recognize a plurality of souls 
and two of the three canonical forms of mala, but not as an individuated function,18 
while worshipping an immanent and all-​powerful form of Sadāśiva. Sartorially, they 
combine the five signs of a Kāpālika with a sacred thread of human hair, while wearing 
earrings and travelling about with a snake and a great jewel. And yet, apart from these 
emendations, they are quite difficult to distinguish from the Lākulas, the original 
transmitters of the eighteen Pramāṇa scriptures,19 not merely because they are both 
skull bearing ascetics but also because they are supposedly making selective use of the 
very same textual canons.
From the perspective of our author, the skull bearing (kapālin) Lākulas are the 
custodians of the Kāpālasiddhānta, represented as a named canon with titles largely 
corresponding to the Lākula Pramāṇa scriptures.20 This seems to suggest that by this 
period, the “pre-​tantric” Somasiddhāntins have disappeared from the lived religious 
landscape, while the Mahāvratins have evolved into a distinctive community acting as a 
formative antecedent to the traditions of the Vīramāheśvaras, in a manner that demands 
a reworking of stale inherited doxographical categories to bring them into alignment 
with contemporary realities. Despite their given designation, the Kāpālasiddhāntins 
are here seen as yogins who meditate upon the self, adopting attitudes of extreme dis­
passion. Skull bearers who beg and sing for their alms, otherwise consuming no other 
food, they revere Rudra as the lord of the world, while subordinating him to the great 
god (Mahādeva) who dances in the great cremation ground during the cosmic dissolu­
tion. As with the Mahāvratins, they also recognize a plurality of souls, and two forms of 
mala, while maintaining that liberation simply involves becoming similar to Śiva, much 
as a constellation strives to imitate the sun. In contrast to the Kālamukhas, they treat 
the principle of time, and not the ontic category called Dhruva,21 as the causal engine 
generating worldly differentiation and delusion.

--- PAGE 900 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      875
 
As for the Kālamukhas, either strategically or fortuitously, their portion of the 
doxography in the published sources has suffered substantial damage, particularly re­
garding the Kālamukhavrata.22 We are in a somewhat better position, however, con­
cerning the doctrinal dimensions imputed to the tradition. Against the Mantramārga, 
and the proliferation of intermediary demiurgic forces, the tradition seems to ada­
mantly deny any distinction between Rudra and the supreme deity, such that the myriad 
of Śaiva iconographic manifestations are simply perceived to be extensions of this core 
reality. Incidentally, this framework seems to include the Rudrabhaktas themselves 
(rudrāṃśa), whose apparent distinctiveness from the deity is to be seen as no different 
in kind from Rudra’s particularized manifestation as Sadāśiva or Dakṣiṇāmūrti, each 
of which is aligned with expressing a specific function.23 Instead of some strong claim 
about ontology, we encounter a more restricted assertion that all kinds of sanctified 
things partake of Rudra’s nature in precisely the same way.24 Thus, the individual self, 
having arrived at a balance of karmas (karmasāmya), becomes gradually purified of the 
three malas through a practice (anuṣṭhāna) that engenders a conjunction (saṃyoga) 
between Śiva and the Self (ātman), yielding a form of liberation where multiple selves 
shine like constellations reflecting the light of the supreme sun.25
This irenic inclusivism within the Lākula-​Kālamukha-​Mahāvratin continuum, 
however, appears to radically exclude the Bhairavasiddhānta. As depicted in the SSV, 
the Kālamukha perspective emphatically asserts that the Lord manifests directly as 
Mahādeva and Rudra, but not ever as Bhairava (rudra eva na bhairavaḥ). In fact, this ex­
clusion of Bhairava from what constitutes Śaiva knowledge is a conspicuous rhetorical 
choice made throughout the doxography.26 On the one hand, starting from his chosen 
definition of the scope of internal Śaiva knowledge, our author makes copious use of 
inherited material deeply concerned with the Dakṣiṇasrotas. On the other, however, he 
makes an atypically minimal effort to specify the doctrines and praxis of Bhairava re­
lated traditions. In this regard, rather than reflecting lived religious realities—​which, 
as we will soon see, were replete with Bhairava related imagery and praxis—​the SSV 
seems to reflect the particular historical moment within Śaiva Siddhānta discourse out 
of which it emerges. In contrast to earlier generations of less philosophically inclined 
Saiddhāntikas, the SSV seeks to cultivate a “pure” Śaiva knowledge newly segregated 
from proximate “others” it deems somewhat dubious.27 This profound anxiety about 
being conflated with the “wrong” kind of Śaivism finds its clearest expression in a cu­
rious parenthetical aside, inserted between the discussion of the Kāpāla Lākulas and the 
Kālamukhas. The author quips: “how is it that some scholars have imputed the existence 
of a doctrinal unity [ekadeśamatatvena] between the doctrine of the Kālamukhas and 
the Śaivas just spoken of [namely, the Kāpālas]?”28
Once again, through the thickness of his descriptions, our partisan Saiddhāntika au­
thor is offering his reader insights above and beyond his intended purposes. We have 
just seen that the rhetorical distancing of “a pure Rudra asceticism,” whether real or 
imagined, from unsavory and more transgressive forms of religious practice is not 
merely an artifact of modern scholarship, but an apologetics with a deep history. We have 
also learned that many educated people in our author’s day, just as in our own, whether

--- PAGE 901 ---
876      Jason Schwartz
 
erroneously or strategically, readily conflated the Kālamukhas and Lākulas, while 
viewing the Mahāvratins as a closely adjacent phenomenon. The simultaneous existence 
of both perspectives among educated people strongly suggests something fundamental 
and somewhat unexpected about the nature of religion during this period. Specifically, 
in marked contrast to what will emerge with early modernity, it does not entail the public 
performance and publicization of particularized identity. In other words, it was only 
within restricted networks, such as during a learned debate among rivals or a teaching 
session from which nonadepts were excluded, that the specific doctrinal differences be­
tween different types of Śaivas would be aired. Especially if we presume that the lost 
extract on the Kālamukhavrata had also incorporated a skull observance, even when 
one attends with great care to identifying points of contestation, our doxography has in­
advertently elucidated that the distinctions between these communities—​indeed their 
conceptual distinctiveness from other forms of Śaiva thought that elsewhere in this text 
will be associated with different variants on the Siddhānta—​were mostly a matter of the 
narcissism of small differences. In practical terms, someone less savvy than our highly 
learned author, called on to pick a specific subject out of a lineup, would have struggled 
to discern which, if any, of the ascetics on hand was the Kālamukha.
It’s What Is on the Inside That Counts: 
Kālamukhas through Their Material 
Culture
As we are beginning to see, in the decidedly nonconfessional society that was early me­
dieval India, how “religious” communities positioned themselves in relation to the ad­
jacent social worlds of their neighboring “others” was less a reflection of their “deeply 
held beliefs” than it entailed a strategic navigation of competing scholastic, institu­
tional, bureaucratic, and juridical norms. Integral to this process, as in much of India 
today, was the selective representation of communities as they engaged with different 
facets of the legal and political system or represented themselves within specific kinds 
of lived spaces. Even in reference to the very same institutions at a similar moment in 
history, the specificity with which the identities of religious authorities are indicated in 
our documentary records thus says more about the particular bureaucratic practices 
being deployed, as well as the degree of intimacy of the donor with the institution, than 
it does about the ebb and flow of the fortunes of a religious community. Likewise, when 
it comes to treating inscriptions as material objects or visual representations as reflective 
of core community values, specificity of context is everything. With this in mind, I will 
be discussing briefly several institutional spaces often treated as quintessential examples 
of Kālamukha institutional complexes, each of which sheds additional light upon the 
author of the SSV’s deep anxieties about distinguishing an imagined authentic Atimārga 
from the Dakṣiṇasrotas. Succinctly, contrary to our expectations, there is a profound

--- PAGE 902 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      877
 
disjuncture between the Kālamukha imaginaries preserved within of our documen­
tary records when they are treated as texts without context and the portrait that emerges 
when we reembed these supposed messages from nowhere within the relevant material 
cultural landscape.
In Shimoga District in southwestern Karnataka lies Baḷḷigāvĕ, quintessential hub of 
Kālamukha religiosity, home to the lineages of the Śaktipariṣad. Indeed, when our sec­
ondary literature, inspired by David Lorenzen’s (1972) seminal work The Kāpālikas and 
Kālamukhas, generalizes about Kālamukha tradition, it is typically unconsciously re­
fracting its perceptions through the lens of the inscriptional corpus of the Śaktipariṣad, 
concentrated in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Written in a highly Sanskritic and 
formalized register of old Kannada, these documents aim rhetorically to communicate 
the overwhelming erudition of the Kālamukhācāryas of the Śaktipariṣad, their compre­
hensive mastery over the entire spectrum of Brāhmaṇical śāstra, and their habitual suc­
cess in utterly obliterating their opponents, whether Jaina, Buddhist, or Mīmāṃsaka, 
in the context of formal philosophical debates (Rice 1903, 174).29 In fact, it is based on 
this mastery of a primarily Brāhmaṇical canon that Lorenzen dismisses doxographical 
representations of Kālamukhas as antinomian skull bearing tantric practitioners as a 
distortive polemic. After all, who could ever imagine a learned tāntrika!
When we begin to think of texts not as snapshots from the past but as particularized 
and interested strategic interventions into a multifaceted social reality, a markedly dif­
ferent picture emerges. As Shubha Shanthamurthy (2015) has shown, except at the very 
earliest strata of the corpus, rather than representing the concrete accomplishments of 
individual Śaktipariṣad ācāryas, these paeans to the brilliance of the successive heads 
of maṭhas are highly repetitive and standardized. In other words, when we read the 
śāsanas of Baḷḷigāvĕ, we are encountering an iterated scribal formula, analogous to the 
frozen laudatory titles (birudas) used to define a dynasty of rulers, where a tropology 
of conquests in scholarship substitutes for inheriting claims to great-​grandfathers’ 
victories on the battlefield. Just as significantly, these templates do not even originate 
among the Kālamukhas. Rather, they are adapted from rhetoric widely in use among 
Digambara Jains, eager to prove their own uber-​Brāhmaṇical and learned pedigree.30
My point here is not to suggest that this implied erudition is wholly imaginary, but 
rather that its presentation as constitutive of the Kālamukha worldview is not merely 
documentary but served a specific purpose, namely, the cultivation of a rhetorical ef­
fect, directed at both proximate and distant “others.” It creates a public impression that 
the word Kālamukha primarily conveys impeccable participation in the imaginaries of 
the Sanskrit and old Kannada cosmopolises, without specifying the doctrinal and ritual 
dimensions of what it means to be a Kālamukha within the context of multifunctional 
cultural spheres inhabited by diverse social agents. In contrast, when one attends to both 
discursive and physical spaces restricted to Kālamukhas alone and their direct disciples, 
a markedly different set of values, influences, and priorities are in evidence.
A salient example of this dynamic, enacted in stone, is provided by the central ritual 
complex of Baḷḷigāvĕ’s Bhujaṅgāvaḷi Kālamukhas—​the lineage of the snake branch—​
which will prove an apt moniker indeed. Shanthamurthy has suggested that the temple

--- PAGE 903 ---
878      Jason Schwartz
 
of Tripurāntakēśvara, which contains some of Baḷḷigāvĕ’s most spectacular and best-​
preserved material culture, was constructed, or at least substantively revitalized, under 
the direction of Trilōcana Paṇḍita, foremost among the Kālamukhas of his lineage (c. 
eleventh century). (On the lineage out of Tripurāntakēśvara, see Shanthamurthy 2015, 
33–​38.) Where this underexamined site is mentioned at all, archaeological and art his­
torical literature has focused on the exterior of its portico, a multifunctional public 
space where representatives of the Bhujaṅgāvaḷi might well have received their visitors. 
Though apart from a magnificent sixteen-​armed Durgā dancing upon the back of a 
lion, the rest of the exterior of the temple is rather plain, this front porch is replete with 
depictions of secular erotica and kings on the hunt intermingled with episodes from the 
Pañcatantra and Rāmāyaṇa. In short, the whole tableau evokes a common courtly ethos. 
Step inside the structure, however, and the atmosphere instantaneously shifts to reflect a 
rather different visual idiom: the culture of the cremation grounds.
Looming over Tripurāntakēśvara’s first chamber are the leering visages of two im­
mense door guardians (dvārapālas). To the right of the doorway, the more spectacular 
figure (Figure 35.1) has a crown and girdle belt (mekhela) adorned with human skulls. 
The fragmentary remains of a hand seem to shake a broken hand-​drum (ḍamaru) as 
his long dreadlocks (jaṭās) swing wildly about. There is a serpent wrapped around his 
Figure 35.1.  First antechamber, Tripurāntakēśvara, Baḷḷigāvĕ. Dvārapāla with Kāpālika affect.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 904 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      879
 
throat and an immense five-​headed cobra at his feet. In the next chamber, before the 
garbhagṛha, such ghoulish visages are replaced by an equally immense and exquisitely 
rendered pair of female figures. As inviting as their counterparts were terrifying, each 
stands under a different species of (kula)31 tree encircled by a panoply of serpents and 
nāgas. On the door lintel, Brahmā and Viṣṇu flank the central figure of many-​armed 
Gajasaṃhāramūrti, who unmistakably bears the fanged visage of Bhairava.
If anything, the small figural representations on the pillar inside the second ante­
chamber are even more suggestive. A naked female ascetic, with long dreadlocks, sits on 
a coiled serpent throne (Figure 35.2). While her sword rests upon a severed human head, 
she worships her personal portable liṅga (iṣṭaliṅga). As if to suggest a homology between 
the two figures, directly across from her is a Śākta goddess, plausibly an antecedent of 
the scheduled caste folk deity Maṃchamma (Figure 35.3). Her foot resting on a serpent, 
her four arms, bearing trident, sword, ḍamaru, and skull bowl, mark her as analogous to 
the most common regional iconography assigned to Bhairava. Adjacent pillars display a 
similar pairing of a seated naked male Kālamukha ascetic with long dreadlocks (Figure 
35.4) and a standing Bhairava (Figure 35.5) displaying identical implements.
If Indic texts tend to speak in voices that are prolix and idealizing, then messages 
in stone are blunt yet enigmatic. Is this a pairing of social agents and their respective 
focuses of ritual identification through visualization, or is the female figure also an 
imagined reality? To be candid, we simply do not know. What is clear, however, is that 
the material culture of Baḷḷigāvĕ has integrated images unmistakably saturated with a 
visual idiom derived from Śākta traditions and the Bhairavasiddhānta that must have 
been theologically significant to its inhabitants. And yet, although these features might 
align with specific textual representations, they evidently did not exhaust the conceptual 
resources animating the lived religion of these Kālamukhas. Even within its institutional 
epicenter, Kālamukhas drew liberally upon regionalized vernacular imaginaries, such as 
snake cults, perhaps venerating goddesses such as Mānĕ Maṃchamma. Perhaps it was 
this very synthesis that compelled the residents of Tripurāntakēśvara to self-​identify as 
the lineage (āvali) of the serpent.
The inflection of Tripurāntakēśvara’s visual culture with the visual idioms of Śākta 
and Bhairava related traditions, at least within circumscribed spaces to which di­
verse publics had little access, is hardly an aberration. In fact, these same stylistic and 
conceptual choices are the defining features of virtually all the surviving Kālamukha 
ritual centers that I have visited throughout the Deccan where substantive material 
culture is preserved in situ. A particularly salient case, everywhere evocative of these 
hybrid imaginaries, is provided by the artisan training college and ritual complex at 
Trikūṭēśvara in Gadag. Over a hundred miles northeast of Baḷḷigāvĕ, Trikūṭēśvara has 
been read by scholarship primarily through the lens of a single, rather lucid Sanskrit 
inscription (Hultzsch 1900–​1901, 89–​107). Composed in 1192 CE at the direction of 
the Hoysala King Ballāla, the text praises the preceptor Siddhānticandrabhūṣaṇa 
Paṇḍitadeva of the lineage of the Kālamukhācāryas. He is celebrated extensively 
for renovating everything at the Gadag complex—​apart from the main structure of 
Trikūṭēśvara itself—​and for his integrity and magnanimous charity, which inspired him

--- PAGE 905 ---
880      Jason Schwartz
 
to feed, clothe, and care for desperate people with a resolve more consistent than even 
the ocean tides. Complementing the three stationary liṅgas that provide Trikūṭēśvara 
with its name, this celibate yogin, we are told, is a moving liṅga (jaṅgama) in ceaseless 
union (samāgama) with the goddess who abides at all times as half of his own body.
Figure 35.2.  Details, second antechamber, Tripurāntakēśvara, Baḷḷigāvĕ. Sādhakī on serpent 
throne.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 906 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      881
 
Overdetermined by the normative assumption that the Kālamukhas represent some 
sort of anodyne orthodoxy, scholars have tended to overlook the readily available 
indications of Śākta commitments in these verses, many of which strongly resonate 
with the doxographical account we encountered in the SSV of the Kālamukha-​adjacent 
Figure 35.3.  Details, second antechamber, Tripurāntakēśvara, Baḷḷigāvĕ. Four-​armed Śākta 
deity, foot resting on serpent.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 907 ---
882      Jason Schwartz
 
theology of the Mahāvratins. First, our ascetic is identified as a jaṅgama, a term whose 
familiar association with the Vīraśaivas has eclipsed its usage within earlier skull car­
rying communities. His very title, moreover, “the scholar who is an ornament of the 
doctrine of the moon,” read in relation to the surrounding material culture, plausibly 
alludes to the subordinate incorporation of Somasiddhāntin Kāpālika doctrines within 
Figure 35.4.  Details, second antechamber, Tripurāntakēśvara, Baḷḷigāvĕ. Naked Kālamukha.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 908 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      883
 
twelfth-​century Kālamukha imaginaries. Similar resonances underlie his self-​ascribed 
mode of practice, wherein the practitioner abides in every waking moment visualizing 
his sexual (samāgama) union with the goddess.
Our failure to relate text with its immediate material context has also led to the mis­
identification of the “three liṅgas” alluded to in the inscription. Instead of referring 
to some network of specific geographical sites, they reflect the extraordinary pres­
ence in Trikūṭēśvara itself of three sthāvara liṅgas placed side by side within a single 
garbhagṛha (Figure 35.6). Directly across from this eccentric arrangement, contained 
within an octagonal antechamber, is an unusual representation of an eight-​armed 
Figure 35.5.  Details, second antechamber, Tripurāntakēśvara, Baḷḷigāvĕ. Standing Bhairava.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 909 ---
884      Jason Schwartz
 
Figure 35.6.  Octagon chamber, Trikūṭēśvara, Gadag. The three liṅgas.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 910 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      885
 
Figure 35.7.  Octagon chamber, Trikūṭēśvara, Gadag. Detail, Naṭeśa.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 911 ---
886      Jason Schwartz
 
dancing Naṭeśa—​mātuluṅga in hand32—​presiding over a pīṭha designated for offerings 
(Figure 35.7). In a manner that should instantly remind us of the centrality of such im­
agery to the liturgical imaginaries of classical Śākta transmissions (c. 600–​1300 CE), at 
its center are traces of a yantra, replete with faintly engraved lotus petals encircling a pair 
of pādukas (Figure 35.8).
Step through the doorway into Trikūṭēśvara’s principal chamber, and the conceptual 
continuities with tantric textuality become even more acute. Entering, to your right, 
one is flanked on one side by a panel in which portraits of a staid Kālamukhācārya and 
Gaṇapati frame an intimidating twelve-​armed Naṭeśa, whose visage identifies him 
Figure 35.8.  Octagon chamber, Trikūṭēśvara, Gadag. Naṭeśa on altar before pādukas in yantra.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 912 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      887
 
with Bhairava (Figure 35.9). Just across the way, though now dispossessed from his 
original setting, rendered in a similar visual idiom and material, we find a large figur­
ative representation of Bhairava (Figure 35.10) whose scale and unusual iconographic 
specificity suggests his liturgical centrality to at least some historical iteration of the 
programs of worship at Trikūṭēśvara. As with the female ascetic at Tripurāntakēśvara 
we examined earlier, Bhairava squats upon a coiled serpent throne, his prominent fangs 
evoking the multitude of snakes that serve as his necklaces and earrings. Again, we are 
confronted with a fusion—​selective prescriptions from textual sources, such as the 
Svacchandatantra’s broad-​chested Koṭarākṣa Bhairava, similarly bedecked in serpentine 
accoutrements—​combined with a recurrent regional feature, the serpent throne, with 
no apparent textual provenance.33
With a visual style predating the material culture of the reign of the Kalyāṇi Cāḷukya 
emperor Vikramāditya VI onward (r. 1076–​1126 CE), many of these images apparently 
originate from much earlier phases in Trikūṭēśvara’s institutional history. Indeed, in 
both their style and medium of execution, these iconic images (mūrtis) diverge sharply 
from Trikūṭēśvara’s most famous deity, the majestic Sarasvatī (Figure 35.11) who is 
housed within an independent structure incorporated into the monastic complex dedi­
cated to the training of the artisans (śilpins) under Gadag’s Kālamukhas.34
Figure 35.9.  Main chamber, Trikūṭēśvara, Gadag. Kālamukhācārya, Naṭeśa, Gaṇapati.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 913 ---
888      Jason Schwartz
 
Figure 35.10.  Main chamber, Trikūṭēśvara, Gadag. Bhairava on serpent throne.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 914 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      889
 
In a testament to the agglutinative nature of these site-​specific traditions, where the 
past is not discarded but habitually incorporated into an ever-​expanding canon of the­
ologically charged possibilities, as the Kālamukhas at Trikūṭēśvara evolved in their 
commitments, they quite literally built on top of older imaginaries without obscuring 
them from view. Such an approach results in the rare preservation of Trikūṭēśvara’s arti­
cles of incorporation in the foundational inscription, literally embedded in the temple’s 
outer reinforcing wall (prākāra; Rao 1986, n. 48). Composed in 1002 CE, a full twenty 
years before our earliest textual records at Baḷḷigāvĕ, and expressed in an archaic and 
irregular register of Kannada, Trikūṭēśvara, at the time of its founding as an autono­
mously administered land grant—​seemingly contemporary with the core of the temple 
and thus the instituting of its liturgy—​was under the direction of a monastic overseer (S. 
maṭhādhipati, or Kannada jīya) named Vākkhāni.35
Figure 35.11.  Sarasvatī maṇḍapa, Trikūṭēśvara, Gadag. Sarasvatī.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 915 ---
890      Jason Schwartz
 
Depicted as “a knower of the kāḷajñāna,”36 Vākkhāni is nowhere identified with any 
specific religious community, whereas Gadag’s later documentary records habitually in­
voke such affiliation. Instead, he positions himself within a specific preceptorial lineage 
(guruparaṃparā), defined in geospatial terms.
Succinctly, he is the disciple of an identically named teacher residing at Kǒppina 
(modern-​day Kopal), who was in turn the disciple of “the scholar at Pūliya” (pūliyapa
ṇḍita).37 Needless to say, this rhetorical choice to privilege place over the names of spe­
cific people renders the correlation of Vākkhāni-​at-​Gadag’s guru with named ācāryas 
at other sites effectively impossible.38 When it comes to questions of place, we are in 
a slightly better position. The town of Pūliya/​Puligere, an alternative designation for 
modern-​day Lakṣmēśvara near present-​day Gadag, as far back as the composition of 
the ninth-​century Kāvirājamārga, has been revered as the “heart of Karnataka,” the site 
of the composition of such literary classics as the Pampābhārata of Kannada’s ādikavi. 
In other words, Vākkhāni’s lineage of ascetics situate their emergence not from the pe­
riphery of the literary and cultural worlds of the early medieval Kuntaladeśa but from its 
very epicenter.39
Though its exterior (Figure 35.12), remains unapologetic in its Śākta-​Śaiva 
commitments (Figures 35.13 and 35.14), the central Śaiva complex at Lakṣmēśvara—​the 
Figure 35.12.  Sōmēśvara Temple, Lakṣmēśvara. Details of Bhairavas on śikhara.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 916 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      891
 
temple of Somēśvara—​is a composite structure, largely a product of the twelfth and early 
thirteenth centuries. Among the preserved fragments of another early medieval temple, 
possibly a prior incarnation of Somēśvara, and several of the doorway lintels within 
the older portions of Somēśvara itself, the discerning eye will notice the recurrence of 
a figure iconographically identical to the peculiar Naṭeśa we examined at Trikūṭēśvara, 
right down to the mātuluṅga. In one fragment (Figure 35.15) this mātuluṅga-​bearing 
Naṭeśa is even encircled by the deities of the directions, identifying him as the main 
focus of worship of an earlier local liturgy. Such stray relics provide us with clear visual 
indications of an otherwise obscured entangled history.
In other regards, however, there are striking discontinuities. For example, of the 
dozens of seated and standing Bhairavas and Śākta goddesses incorporated into 
Somēśvara’s śikhara, none of them is seated on a serpent; indeed, snake related imagery 
is almost entirely absent from the complex. In its place, we find traces of other highly 
specific extratextual affiliations. Some of these, such as a huge spread-​eagle Lajjā Gaurī 
(Figure 35.16) still under worship, reflect transregional religious focuses long predating 
Mantramārga and maybe even Atimārga traditions, whose popular significance 
demanded they be incorporated into liturgy, independent of the reigning theologies 
of the day.
Figure 35.13.  Sōmēśvara Temple, Lakṣmēśvara. Details of Bhairavas on śikhara.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 917 ---
892      Jason Schwartz
 
In other instances, however, key extratextual elements stem from roughly recover­
able historical contexts. Such seems to be the case with the central focus of worship 
at Somēśvara, which, in a style and medium utterly distinct from images produced 
in the Deccan, depicts Śiva and Pārvatī riding on a bull (Figure 35.17). Oral tradition 
among the temple officiants asserts that this image (Figure 35.18) was rescued by a cer­
tain Ayya Svāmī from Somanātha in Saurashtra when that famous place was under 
siege, and was then imported by a diaspora of Śaiva ācāryas seeking refuge, from 
whom the current temple managers trace their descent. While the specifics of such 
tales are impossible to confirm, visual representations preserved on a gateway into the 
temple complex (Figure 35.19) indicate that the centrality of the worship of this image 
substantively predates the visual style generally in evidence on Somēśvara’s exterior, 
aligning instead with the sort of figurative representations we find within the old core 
of temple.
In essence, what we are grappling with here is a story of divergent evolution, 
illustrating the plasticity of lived traditions. Sometime within the hundred-​year eviden­
tiary vacuum between the founding of Trikūṭēśvara in 1002 CE and the composition of 
our earliest substantive Śaiva histories in 1102 CE, the authorities in Gadag rebranded 
themselves as descending from an unbroken line of self-​defined Kālamukhas, only 
Figure 35.14.  Sōmēśvara Temple, Lakṣmēśvara. Details of Bhairavas on śikhara.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 918 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      893
 
subtly inflected by older Kāpālika inheritances. At the same time, the monastic complex 
came to focus on the training of master sculptors and the production of material culture, 
which would define the mission of the institution into early modernity.
Concurrently, the ācāryas at Lakṣmēśvara chose a different path, proudly publicizing 
their primordial status as Mahāvratins. Older points of commonality were rendered 
relics, their places occupied by localized commitments and new site-​specific histories. 
In both trajectories, we see the gradual thickening of ascriptive identities, which 
begins to characterize religious communities by the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, 
prefiguring the formalized sectarianization of early modernity. The labels these 
lineages came to embrace were often as much strategic as they were descriptive, for 
these new identities are hardly exhaustive. Sometimes, indeed, they were barely indic­
ative of the particular practices and commitments that lent these communities their 
distinctive character.
Figure 35.15.  Fragment of prior temple, Lakṣmēśvara. Naṭeśa with mātuluṅga.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 919 ---
894      Jason Schwartz
 
Putting It Together: The Āvalis 
and the Tantras
In 1061 CE, while residing with his army in a military camp just outside the walls of 
Puliya, the Kalyāni Cāḷukya emperor Āhavamalla issued a command that a cer­
tain Sōmēśvara Paṇḍita, already recognized as a monastic head and overseer of the 
Nāgarēśvara temple at Sūṇḍi (Figures 35.20, 35.21 and 35.22), be granted an additional 
Figure 35.16.  Sōmēśvara Temple, Lakṣmēśvara. Lajjā Gaurī.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 920 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      895
 
Figure 35.17.  Sōmēśvara Temple, Lakṣmēśvara. Śiva-​Pārvatī on Vṛsabha in situ.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 921 ---
896      Jason Schwartz
 
village, so that with the revenue it would provide, he might continue his excellent work 
renovating Śaiva spaces and performing Śaiva pūjās.40 When placed in relation to other 
documentary records preserved in situ from the same period, however, Āhavamalla’s 
beneficence reads less like an act of personal devotion than an exercise in administra­
tive prudence or even restorative justice. Like so much of the central Deccan, Sūṇḍi 
seems to have been heavily impacted by the atypically destructive and deliberately icon­
oclastic invasion of the region by Rājarāja Cōḻa, a cultural calamity that only resolved 
itself when that wildly ambitious ruler was killed in battle in 1052 CE. As a series of in­
triguing but rather fragmentary inscriptions preserved at Sūṇḍi itself makes evident, 
as early as 1050 CE and extending well into the next decade, the imperial court of the 
Kalyāni Cāḷukyas was taking concrete action to contain potential irruptions of social 
disorder. Although we might assume that such actions aimed to legitimate and reaffirm 
Cāḷukya sovereignty over regions that had asserted their independence in a political 
vacuum, these interventions were in fact of a markedly different character. Succinctly, 
our records reveal efforts to reinstate prior statutes and particular regulations, not 
merely as they pertain to specific land grants, but in relation to discrete institutional 
spaces and communities.41 The texts repeatedly assert that the Cāḷukya rulers and their 
Figure 35.18.  Sōmēśvara Temple, Lakṣmēśvara. Śiva-​Pārvatī on Vṛsabha in situ, without 
alaṃkāras.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 922 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      897
 
representatives would continue to protect the specific dharmas of these places in align­
ment with local governing norms. Nevertheless, to affirm the pluralized rights of specific 
preexisting sites and communities required a new kind of taking stock of localized best 
practices. And with this comes a revolution in the expectations assigned to the produc­
tion of documentary records that have specific evidentiary functions. A new emphasis 
is placed on the specification of recipients and other social agents, and more attention 
is paid to how new endowments and acts of institution building might relate to preex­
isting local social realities. In other words, suddenly in the middle of the eleventh cen­
tury, nearly everywhere in the western Deccan where Kannada serves as the language of 
power, it becomes possible to tell much richer and concrete stories about the lifeworlds 
of religious institutions. This fact is less a reflection of transformed religious realities 
than the result of a newly attentive scribal apparatus capturing long-​standing realities in 
a refreshed documentary idiom.
Indeed, as is common with these institutional spaces, the Śaiva presence at Sūṇḍi 
commences with the earliest documentation we have regarding the city. And yet, the 
early tenth-​century sources are not tales of beginnings but highly delimited, virtually 
context-​free fly-​by glimpses of thriving institutions. Thus, for example, we encounter a 
Figure 35.19.  Detail from gateway into temple complex showing image under worship in the 
early medieval period, Lakṣmēśvara.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 923 ---
898      Jason Schwartz
 
certain Mūrtiśivācārya, depicted with traits very often ascribed to Kālamukhas but as­
sociated with no specific temple or monastery, working in concert with the authorities 
of Puli/​Pūliya to feed a thousand ascetics, a state of affairs that presumes that these 
communities were already exceptionally well-​funded, transregionally networked, and 
engaged with substantial publics.42 We generally find such specifics, however, only 
where Śaiva authorities or their direct devotees are the issuing agents. When the royal 
court or its subsidiaries are producing the records, especially if the focus of the grant has 
no connection to Śaiva authorities, representations of Śaiva agents become deliberately 
vague and muted, even to the extent of ācāryas, simply dispensed with as “dēvara,” being 
conflated with the gods they serve.43
With the mid-​eleventh-​century changes in scribal conventions, over the course of a 
decade, our records at Sūṇḍi suggest that Cāḷukya administrators achieved an increas­
ingly sophisticated grasp of on-​the-​ground local realities in accordance with courtly 
priorities. First, in 1050 CE, we find a blanket reinstitution of preinvasion norms, along 
with a delineation of local laws, punishments, and patterns of revenue collection. Then 
three years later, in a document that atypically mimics Cōḻa records in all but its language 
of expression, the Cāḷukyas reinstitute the prior administrative regime governing the 
temple founded by the royal family, which bears the name of the queen Akkā Mahādevī. 
Figure 35.20.  Joḍukalaśa, Sudi,
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 924 ---
Figure 35.21.  Joḍukalaśa, Exterior detail, Sudi. Bhairava on serpent throne.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 925 ---
900      Jason Schwartz
 
This text is so fragmentary that what survives amounts to little more than a partial list of 
proper names and their assigned monetary and real estate allotments. Despite its frag­
mentary condition, we do find specific mention of a certain Viśvaśivācārya as head of 
the institution, and under his purview goldsmiths, cāmara bearers, flutists, and temple 
gaṇikās. Four years after this, the bureaucracy decides to affirm in writing, on behalf of 
the thousand ascetics that make up its constituency, that Akkēśvara will continue to be 
managed according to preestablished rules and norms, and that the Cāḷukyas will con­
tinue to protect the preexisting dharma specific to the community and not, by implica­
tion, advocate for the imposition of some other dharma norms. In other words, it is only 
eight years into an ongoing process of reconstructing a community that the Cāḷukya bu­
reaucracy deigns to acknowledge the numerous other Śaiva and Jain institutions already 
present within the community.
When they do so, their chosen focus is Sōmēśvara Paṇḍita, remembered by his 
successors as the progenitor of the Kālamukha lineage of the Āvalis.44 No such des­
ignation, however, is in evidence in our earliest record. To be sure, much as we have 
seen with the inscriptions at Baḷḷigāvĕ, Sōmēśvara, lord of ascetics (sōmēśvarayati­
patiyaṃ), keeper of the divine vow (divyabratīndrar), whose virtue in austerity is 
exceeded only by his stainless conduct and skill in the domain of learning (ĕṃba 
Figure 35.22.  Joḍukalaśa, Interior garbhagrḥa, Sudi. Image of Kālamukha ascetic.
Photo by Jason Schwartz.

--- PAGE 926 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      901
 
tapōvikhyātiyēnĕṃb’amaḷinacaritrakhyātiyēnĕṃba vidyācaturatvakhyātiyēn), is effu­
sively, albeit formulaically, praised for his excess of erudition. Our ācārya, for example, 
serves as a sun to [open] the lotus of logic (naiyāyikasarasija-​mārttaṇḍa) and an afflicter 
of the bloodlines of the Mīṃāmsakas (mīmāṃ[s]‌akagōtratrāsi). In addition, in more 
pragmatic terms, the Bhaṭṭāraka or dēvara Sōmēśvara, disciple of a certain Vakkhāni 
(vakkhānisūta), whereabouts unknown, is also identified as an administrator, a task that 
entails managing a monastery and governing a temple, here called Nāgēśvara.45
In this latter capacity, our Śaiva ācārya is assigned responsibility for overseeing 
a cornucopia of different varieties of temple dancers, the temple drummer, a stone 
mason, and a flutist. This relatively restricted on-​site staff provides further indica­
tion that the temple, but not necessarily the monastery, that Sōmēśvara is overseeing 
had only been recently institutionalized, a task carried out by a minister of a 
Cāḷukya king named Nāgadēva, who seems to have been Sōmēśvara Paṇḍita’s dis­
ciple. Though the document informs us of a regulation that while gŏravas46 who are 
also Kālamukhas are indeed permitted to stay at the temple, if they indulge them­
selves too much with the temple women, or if students enrolled on site neglect their 
studies, the administrator is required to drive them out. In other words, within this 
text, while Sōmēśvara is implored to manage the behavior of iterant Kālamukhas 
as they pass through the premises, neither he nor his lineage are identified as 
Kālamukhas themselves.
With the passage of a decade, the situation looks very different. Again Sōmēśvara 
Paṇḍita, the beneficiary of a new endowment, seems to have become responsible for the 
management of multiple additional temples, including those whose chief constituency 
comes from artisan, goldsmith, and merchant castes, some of whom seem to be his dis­
ciples, and is now in a position to provide for the mass feeding of ascetics. The passage 
of another year yields even more expanded endowments, incorporating rights to addi­
tional lands, many of them within Sūṇḍi itself. With new resources come new privileges 
and responsibilities. Suddenly, Sōmēśvara, here simply referred to as Munisōma, per­
haps evoking the blurred boundaries between Kālamukha, Lākula, and Mahāvratin we 
have encountered so many times before,47 has both a named successor, Vigrahēśvara, 
and an initiated son, Śrīvallabha, along with a grand disciple, Kalyāṇaśakti. And it is 
only in these later records that our now thoroughly entrenched ācārya, his legacy 
ensured and social position a fait accompli given that he is legally an autonomous agent 
who now owns or has rights to half the facilities in town, suddenly starts presenting 
himself as an incarnation of Lakulīśa, fond of the Lākulāgamas (lākuḷāgamaprasannar; 
Rao 1986, n. 153). In other words, doctrinal specificity has a time and a place, and that 
tends to be when you are in indisputably in charge.
For my purposes, it suffices now to flash forward, to tie this case study together with 
my earlier considerations of how lived Kālamukha religion operates at the confluence 
of the entextualized traditions of the Mantramārga, site-​specific institutional realities, 
and local religion. Serendipitously, to do so requires me to stage a brief encounter with 
one of the most vividly realized personages captured in the documentary records of the

--- PAGE 927 ---
902      Jason Schwartz
 
Deccan, Somēśvara’s great-​grand-​disciple, the Siddha Kaḷēśvara. In a record from 1167 
CE, we are introduced to Kaḷēśvara and his lineage:
among the Kālamukha order of the Nakharēśvara temple at Sudi, by whom the āvalis 
are honored, the firm-​minded, chief munis, Śrī Kaḷēśvara—​the king of those engaged 
in vows—​attained fame. Among the Kālamukhas, honored by the great Sind[h]‌a lin­
eage, the most excellent of ācāryas, Sōmēśvara, had a student Vigrahēśvara Budha 
the learned. His student was Yōgēśvara, the Rājaguru, endowed with a multitude of 
merit. His chief student was Kaḷēśvara, the Saiddhāntika Rājaguru, the sole refuge 
for wise men. . . . Noble Kaḷēśvara has embraced the role of guru of the world
(Desai 1956, 66).48
With the passage of just shy of a hundred years, Sōmēśvara’s tradition has ascended 
to even greater prominence, having served for two generations at least as Rājagurus to 
the Sindha kings. Just as significantly, the lineage is now proudly proclaiming itself to be 
a Kālamukha tradition, with a fixed geographical locus as well as a particular doctrinal 
feature, namely its characteristic honoring of the “āvalis.” At the same time, however, the 
past has not merely been honored, it has also been adjusted. Sōmēśvara’s grand-​disciple 
Kalyāṇaśakti, who appears nowhere in subsequent sources, has been forgotten. Perhaps 
even more significantly, the very nature of the temple headquarters at Sūṇḍi has been 
reimagined. No longer is it Nāgarēśvara, named after a now irrelevant Cāḷukya minister. 
Now it is Nakharēśvara, the collective expression of the Nakharasamūha, in this case 
very specifically, the goldsmiths, responsible for the day-​to-​day administration of its af­
fairs on behalf of the Kālamukha pontiff, who is also their guru. Elsewhere, we learn that 
Kaḷēśvara began his career at Sūṇḍi responding to the needs of these very people. By 1167 
CE, now head of his lineage, he has assumed an even grander office that entails a posting 
out of station, to the great pīṭha of Kukkunūr.
A full account of Kaḷēśvara’s integration into this multifaceted sacred center, 
which has its own recoverable, longue durée history of profound interest to the dis­
cipline of tantric studies, will have to await another occasion (see Schwartz 2023, 
chap. 4). For the moment, I will focus on one rather surprising facet of Kaḷēśvara’s 
tenure at Kukkunūr. Specifically, records point to an undercurrent of frustration 
with the discrepancy between Kaḷēśvara’s personal esoteric religious commitments 
and the understandings held by visiting devotees whose site-​specific religious duties 
he was obliged to accommodate on their own terms. To understand the passage, 
we need to recognize that the Mahāmāyā Temple at Kukkunūr’s garbhagṛha housed 
three deities, each of which had its own distinct mūrti. From Kaḷēśvara’s perspec­
tive, the goddess Kālikā, the mother of the primordial dissolution, and Kapāḷīśa 
Bhairava stood alongside the supreme eldest goddess (jyēṣṭhē) who was none other 
than Siddhayōgēśvarī. Visitors to the shrine, confronted with a material cultural 
representation of the pan–​South Indian goddess Jyeṣṭhā, replete with her crow com­
panion and fan, seem to have seen things rather differently. The resultant tension is 
evoked by a particularly elegant verse:

--- PAGE 928 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      903
 
With her winnowing fan, immediately, swinging [it] delightfully she snuffs out the 
flame of the lamp that is the life of the rogue, who, out of stupidity and blinded 
by intoxication challenges [her]. It’s as if, at that moment, she subjects his body 
to the beak of her frightening crow.
Who would dare say that Jyeṣṭhā is a common [sāmānya] goddess?
What person can survive that great goddess, Mother Māri of insatiable thirst?
She causes lightning to wither as it strikes, and she swallows time and death.
Who is able to evade that goddess Kāḷikā?
(Desai 1956, 66)49
With an exquisite sense of irony, the poet responsible for this portion of our 
śāsana, naturally a disciple of Kaḷēśvara, masterfully captures how initiation into the 
Mantramārga imbued a practitioner with a new perception of old lived realities. 
Whereas ordinary people, concerned with birthing babies, winning victories, and 
warding off misfortune, visited a temple almost transactionally to pay homage to eve­
ryday (sāmānya) pan–​South Indian deities like Jyēṣṭhā and Māri (indeed, the well-​
heeled donor of this record had just such a mission), the people running these temples 
often saw their gods in much grander soteriological, epistemological, and cosmolog­
ical terms, reflecting the entextualized scriptural imaginaries scholars tend to think 
about when they study “classical tantra.” But to be a Kālamukha, however well creden­
tialed, and live in the world among other people, to fulfill one’s transactional duties, such 
understandings had to be selectively invoked, at least in shared spaces, perhaps even 
subjected to self-​imposed acts of epistemological bracketing.
Whenever we have access to thick enough descriptions of institution-​specific values 
and practices, the lived religions of the Deccan offer us both more and less than what we 
might have anticipated. To make sense of the voice of our archives demands that we at­
tend with great depth not only to the careful philological reconstruction of the revealed 
corpuses valued by at least some the social agents we are studying but also to the multi­
tude of extratextual realities that these sources decline to acknowledge. Only in doing so 
can scholars of tantric studies begin to produce maps that more than marginally corre­
spond to the territories we seek to explore.
As a coda, especially for those who discount the value of a dialogical approach 
that takes tantric textuality seriously, I can close by showing what Kaḷēśvara and his 
followers meant when they spoke of their lineage as “honoring the āvalis”: “Kaḷēśvara, 
the disciple of the wise, extracted (uddharisi) his definitive doctrine (siddhānta) from 
the Transmission of the Siddhas (siddhāvali), the Śākta Transmission (dēvyāvali), 
the Siddhānta Transmission ([soma]siddhāntāvali), and the Śaiva Transmission 
(śivāgamāvali) (Desai 1956, 67).”50
Here, beyond any ambiguity, the stories we have glimpsed in stone come into align­
ment with the written record. Within the mid-​twelfth-​century western Deccan, to be 
an illustrious Kālamukha entailed not merely some vague familiarity with incidental 
elements of the Mantramārga, but an encyclopedic command of the entire spectrum 
of Atimārga, Mantramārga, and even Kaula traditions. To be like Kaḷēśvara, guru of

--- PAGE 929 ---
904      Jason Schwartz
 
the world, demanded something more—​not merely the rote mastery of other people’s 
revelations, but the wisdom, learning, and insight to make doctrine own’s one, to craft 
a new Śivasiddhānta and to somehow find the time for such a momentous accomplish­
ment amid one’s worldly duties.
Notes
	1.	 The name Deccan is derived from the Old Kannada Dakkhaṇa, which in turn is a 
vernacularization of the Sanskrit word dakṣiṇa. Taken literally, it simply means “the South.” 
Geographically, it has typically referred to the area of India that is south of the Narmadā 
River. Its southernmost boundary is somewhat more variable, either the far bank of the 
Godāvarī (which would exclude much of southern Karnataka and Maharashtra) or the 
Kāverī River in Tamil Nadu. When defined in linguistic terms, the Deccan encompasses 
most of the regions (present-​day Maharashtra, Karnataka, Telangana, and Andhra) oc­
cupied by mother tongue speakers of Marathi, Kannada, and Telugu, and alludes to their 
intertwined political and cultural histories.
	2.	 Though its core thesis, that the Kālamukhas were a Brāhmaṇical sect that had been er­
roneously conflated with the transgressive Kāpālikas (see, Törzsök 2011) as part of a 
campaign of anti-​Śaiva polemic, has now been disproven, David Lorenzen’s work The 
Kāpālikas and Kālāmukhas: Two Lost Shaivite Sects (1972) is foundational to all subse­
quent discussions of Kālamukha doxographic and documentary records. Lorenzen takes 
great pains to translate, periodize and organize many available sources by lineage and 
region. In practice, however, Lorenzen’s mapping of Kālamukha institutional cultures, 
purportedly covering the eighth through fourteenth centuries, artificially distills the 
complex references to distinct guru paraṃparās to focus on two major transmissions, 
the Śaktipariṣad and the Siṃhapariṣad. It is primarily the sixty-​five inscriptions 
produced by the former that provide him with the evidentiary foundation for evaluating 
the tradition as a whole. For more on Lorenzen’s problematic theoretical presumptions, 
see hereafter. See also the work of Vasundhara Filliozat (2001) and Filliozat and Pierre-​
Sylvain (1995, 2012), which draws anachronistically on Vijayanagar era Śaivism in 
reading early medieval Kālamukha religion. Other discussions of Kālamukha traditions 
worth consulting are the Kannada language monograph of Kaṭarāḷa (1955) along 
with some insightful comments tying in the evidence from the Tamil sphere found in 
Ghose (1996).
	3.	 In his masterful reconstruction of the proto-​tantric Lākula Atimārga tradition (on 
which see the next note), Alexis Sanderson (2006) has demonstrated that the numerous 
references to the “Lākulāgama” in Deccani inscriptional records are direct allusions to 
the Lākula Pramāṇaśāstras and that their Mahāvrata observance is documented in the 
Mataṅgapārameśvara. Somewhat more problematically, Sanderson baldly asserts the 
“identity” of this community: “with a tradition of Raudra asceticism known up till now 
almost exclusively from epigraphs . . . the Kālamukhas studied by David Lorenzen” (179). 
Sanderson is almost certainly correct that the Mahāvrata vow in question represents the 
continuation of the skull carrying observance in which Lākula ascetics, rejecting the dis­
tinction between purity and impurity, aspire to see all things as forms of Rudra. What is less 
clear, however, is the evidentiary basis for taking such discrete Lākula informed practices as 
exhaustive of lived Deccani Kālamukha realities.

--- PAGE 930 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      905
 
	4.	 In his most recent work, Alexis Sanderson has provided us an invaluable schematic map­
ping of the tantric traditions that at once offers an account of their historical evolution and 
their doctrinal diversity. In its current form, which draws upon an array of doxographical 
passages in tantric sources, Sanderson’s model proposes that what we call tantric traditions 
emerge out a confluence of two prior religious imaginaries. The first of these, Sanderson 
proposes, is a pre-​tantric “lay Śaiva” tradition of liṅga veneration with its own so­
cial and legal norms, best exemplified by the Śivadharmaśāstra. The second predecessor 
is the Atimārga (the “path beyond”), which is now understood to contain three primary 
divisions, each of which has its own tradition of asceticism. To distill these categories down 
to the essentials: (1) the Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas had as their core surviving scripture the 
Pāśupatasūtra, a work from which the standard features of tantric cosmologies are almost 
entirely absent. These Pāśupatas seem only to have accepted Brahmin males as adepts and 
observed a three-​time daily ash bath as a key component of their five-​stage sādhanā, which 
involved a gradual withdrawal from participation in human society and its norms. In con­
trast, (2) the Lākulas produced a substantial scriptural canon, the Pramāṇaśāstras, which 
seem to supply later tantric traditions with much of their core cosmology and some key 
doctrines. Unlike the Pāśupatas, the Lākulas were heavily invested in the making of explic­
itly Śaiva social institutions. Their core ascetic observance was an occasional practice in 
which ascetics wandered through the world, rejecting normative notions of purity and im­
purity while carrying a human skull. Finally, (3) the pre-​tantric Atimārga Kāpālika tradition 
of the Somasiddhānta, about which we know very little, appear to have venerated emaciated 
goddesses through acts of ritual violence and sexual offerings that prefigure the practices of 
the later Kulamārga. The Kāpālika vow modifies the Lākula skull carrying observance to in­
corporate five additional insignia made from human bone.
	 	   What we now call the tantric traditions begin to emerge in the fifth century, when they are 
known to our sources as the Mantramārga (the “path of mantras”) and encompass a range 
of broadly similar transmissions spanning all of the major religions as well as what will later 
come to be perceived as the main sectarian divisions internal to Hinduism. As we recover 
more fragments from the Atimārga, it becomes increasingly evident that much of what is 
“new” in “tantra” is less a matter of innovative concepts and doctrines than of the emergence 
of a new ritual grammar, a style of textual organization and composition, as well as perhaps a 
model for social organization that actively incorporates nonascetics on a larger scale.
	 	   Though Alexis Sanderson has characterized the early medieval period when the clas­
sical versions of these traditions flourished as “the Śaiva Age,” it is pivotal that we do not 
anachronistically conflate this usage of the term “Śaiva” with a specific doctrinal or phil­
osophical stance, let alone with the programmatic dualistic exegetical approach to the in­
terpretation of a fixed canon of Āgamas proffered by Kashmiris from the ninth century 
onward and then further codified in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries in Tamil Nadu. 
For evidence abounds that “Śaiva Siddhānta” in this sense, as a discrete tradition, is a scho­
lastic fiction imposed upon an internally variegated canon of Śivabheda and Rudrabheda 
scriptures that had been previously subject to a wider range of philosophical and the­
ological interpretations by different communities. Indeed “the Śaivism” of the Śaiva Age 
was deeply dialogical, such that virtually all of the scriptural sources incorporate textual 
borrowings from a range of traditions. In particular, what comes to be called Śaivāgama, 
the canon of the Yāmalas, as well as the various Śākta transmissions that coalesce into the 
Āmnāya systems of the Trika, Kubjikā tantras, and Kālīkrama, all draw substantively upon 
the Dakṣinasrotras, whose many traditions of Bhairava veneration are today primarily

--- PAGE 931 ---
906      Jason Schwartz
 
accessible through the Svacchanda tantra. As the present essay makes evident, the cultural 
impact of these Bhairava traditions on the world of the early medieval Deccan has been 
thoroughly underestimated.
	5.	 The writings of the dualistic Śaiva exegetes of Kashmir, particularly Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha 
II, offer substantial scholastic treatments of the philosophical positions ascribed to the 
Kālamukhas by other Śaiva traditions. An unnoticed irony is that these mid-​tenth-​century 
perceptions of Deccani religious realities as viewed from a considerable cultural and ge­
ographical distance predate all but a handful of the earliest attestations of the tradition in 
our documentary records. Succinctly, the Kālamukhas as described by Rāmakaṇṭha II are 
antecedents to most of our recoverable traditions, and thus their values may not accurately 
map onto Deccani institutional histories.
	6.	 Much like the Kashmiri Takṣakavarta’s paddhati, which incorporates substantial extracts 
from otherwise lost classical tantras, including the pre-​ninth-​century Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṃhitā, 
the Jñānāvaraṇaviḷakkam (Veḷḷiyambalavāṇar 1957–​59) of the seventeenth-​century Tamil 
theologian Veḷḷiambara Vānar Tambirān transmits large portions of unattested Sanskrit 
and Tamil Śaiva texts, including the anonymous Śaiva doxography provisionally titled the 
Sarvasiddhāntaviveka (Nagaswamy 2006). The two most recent works known to the SSV 
are the Vāyavīyasaṃhitā (c. eleventh century) and the Ratnatrayaparīkṣā of Śrīkaṇṭha (c. 
eleventh century), which it twice invokes verbatim. Regarding the latter, the author ambig­
uously writes “ratnatrayādau gurubhiḥ eva hi,” “gurubhir api tathaiva pratipādyate.” Should 
we read this as suggesting that he was Śrīkaṇṭha’s disciple, this would place the work in the 
twelfth century. Regardless, numerous elements suggest against an early modern origin; 
the work’s numerous explications of Śaiva traditions does not incorporate the quintessen­
tial early modern canon of caste-​ and function-​specific Tamil Śaiva identities, and it knows 
a Matsyendranātha-​centric Kaula tradition in which Gorakṣanātha, Siddha, and Buddha 
are explicitly excluded from the core disciples. Perhaps most significant, when our author 
sets out to demonstrate that the Śaiva Siddhānta is the highest form of Śaivism (“śaivaś ca 
siddhāntī para īritaḥ”), the Siddhānta he proposes diverges sharply from the canonical 
tradition as depicted by figures like Aghoraśiva and is utterly dissimilar from the model 
propounded in early modern Tamil Śaiva literature.
	7.	 Following Abhinavagupta and his commentator Jayaratha, who in the Tantrāloka dis­
tinguish between the Tantraprakriyā and Kulaprakriyā, in his most recent publications, 
Sanderson now recognizes the legitimacy of a domain superseding the Mantramārga, 
which he labels Kulamārga. Its defining feature, he proposes, is communal orgiastic modes 
of worship along with, in some strains, a radical rejection of purity that offers an episte­
mological critique of the nature of reality. Sanderson suggests that the Kulamārga emerges 
organically out the pre-​tantric Kāpālika traditions in much the same manner that much of 
the Mantramārga is an evolute out of the Lākulas. In practical terms, however, it is perhaps 
more useful to think of the Kulamārga as a distinctive style of worship, often reserved for 
specialist adepts, that is frequently incorporated, overtly or covertly, within Mantramārga 
ritual. In fact, if we exclude what comes to be called the Siddhānta, the vast majority of 
“Mantramārga” tantric texts, including the Svacchandatantra, come down to us with 
Kulamārga elements already inserted into some chapters.
	8.	 Like “nondual” (abheda) and “dualistic” (bheda), bhedābheda is a doxographical category 
within Indian philosophy that offers an ontological claim about the nature of the universe. 
A very common specific application of such a perspective entails more specifically parsing 
the logic and mechanics of just how humans are connected to higher order realities, such

--- PAGE 932 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      907
 
	 	 as a supreme deity or principle. Variously understood as “difference and nondifference” or 
“identity within difference,” bhedābheda models typically advocate one of two positions. 
Many essentially promote ontological pluralism—​that there are many types of real things 
in the world which both share and do not share a fundamental nature with their source of 
origin and each other. Often this general framework comes paired with the suggestion that 
it is only one specific facet of the individual souls of a discrete set of agents that are iden­
tical in essence with the Godhead. Other more subtle bhedābheda approaches envision 
an ontology where there is only one real thing but it is at once composite and irreducible. 
In much the same way that an egg is made up of complementary but discrete parts, such 
as a shell, a yolk, and embryo, each with its own particular functions and traits, and yet at 
the same time cannot be broken down into “simpler” fundamental components without 
its identity and function as an egg—​and the life within it—​being terminated, this type of 
bhedābheda proposes that everything shares the same nature and that nature is itself varie­
gated in all of its manifestations.
	 9.	 While in Indian philosophy more generally, the word śakti can refer to a principle compa­
rable to force, power, or even potentia, within tantric discourses these abstractions tend 
to be personified, often in the form of at least vaguely menacing female entities. Within 
the otherwise unattested tradition being discussed here, it seems that these different 
individuated śaktis were seen as having their own discrete intrinsic natures which do not 
coalesce into a unified great goddess, nor are they identified with a higher order of reality.
	10.	 The doctrine of change of phase or transformation (pariṇāmavāda) is one of several 
Indian philosophical models that offer an explanation for how causes are logically related 
to effects. In the context of theology, such theoretical models are used to make sense of 
how the ultimate cause, whichever deity that might be, is logically related to the world 
he created as well as the agents within it. Essentially, a doctrine of transformation aims 
to account for the emergence of traits in the effect that were not immediately apparent in 
the cause. In opposition to those who propose that substances and entities from the mo­
ment of their creation have a fixed irreducible nature that cannot change without them 
being destroyed (the position of the Vaiśeṣikas), or that the cause and the effect are iden­
tical and that real change does not exist (the stance of Vivartavāda Vedānta) advocates of 
Pariṇāmavāda positions propose that the substances and agents that make up this uni­
verse can undergo real change and manifest emergent properties, in much the same way 
that milk can go sour, clot, or even change phase to become a solid such as paneer. Often 
the suggestion is that material differentiation proceeds through a kind of curdling of the 
divine nature into less pristine yet palatable forms.
	11.	 Literally “the end of what has been established,” in philosophical discourse the term 
Siddhānta refers both the conclusive position at which the author has arrived as well as 
something like the totality of positions defended by his school of thought. To speak of the 
Vāma, regardless of whether it is dualist, nondualist, or something in between, as forming 
a unified Siddhānta is effectively to say that the cohesiveness of this school of thought is 
defined by a set of shared positions and practices that are more fundamental than mere 
ontology.
	12.	 The concept of the “true guru” (sadguru) is perhaps most familiarly associated with early 
modern vernacular devotional traditions of North India and the Deccan, wherein the 
central focus of liturgical worship shifts from the deity to the embodied human teacher. 
The term’s point of origin, however, as already attested within the Tantrāloka (see for ex­
ample ­chapters 21–​22), is within the Kulamārga. There, alongside the closely related term

--- PAGE 933 ---
908      Jason Schwartz
 
saṃsiddhika guru (­chapter 4,13), it refers specifically to teachers who have the ability to 
directly confer mind and body altering somatic experiences onto their disciples.
	13.	 “Vaiṣṇavādiṣu bāhyeṣu śaivabhedeṣu vā punaḥ /​ bhairavādiṣu bhedeṣu kṛtakṛtyaḥ purā 
naraḥ /​ karmasāmyādisaṃsiddhiśaktipātaviśeṣataḥ /​ vāmatantroktamārgeṇa sadguror 
labdhadīkṣayā /​ caryādīnām [emd. from caryādināṃ] anujñānāt sādhako muktibhāg 
bhavet”; SSV, S-​7.
	14.	 For a learned review of the historical semantics of the lexeme samaya, focusing on its ap­
pearance in early Prakrit sources, see Mette (1991). Often translated as “convention,” from 
its inception the lexeme samaya tends to suggest a special set of context specific rules, 
norms, or circumstances that operate in contradistinction to what is presumed to be the 
“normal” state of affairs. By extension, in a juridical context, it indexes fixed modes of so­
cial relation that fall outside of, substitute for, or even supersede Varṇāśramadharma nor­
mativity. It is from this perspective that we need to reassess the standard designation of 
the entry level initiate to the traditions of the Mantramārga as a samayin. In Dravidian 
languages, as in modern Tamil, an enumerated list of samayas gradually comes to be used 
as something akin to an emic term for “religion” during the early medieval period, eventu­
ally becoming a fixture of inscriptional rhetoric wherein kings and other authority figures 
are called upon and call upon others to protect and preserve either “all the samayas,” “the 
four samayas,” “the six samayas,” or a designated array of the “samayas of the Vaiṣṇavas, 
Kālamukha, Bauddhas, Jinas and so forth.” A similar usage, divided between non-​Śaiva 
and Śaiva traditions, is attested in several Sanskrit Śaivāgamas, seemingly prior to its 
emergence in the Tamil commentarial tradition surrounding the Civañānapōtam. The 
present author is currently at work historicizing its development.
	15.	 “Lokāyato ’tha bauddhaś cārhato mīmāṃsā eva ca /​ māyāvādaḥ pāñcarātraṃ ṣaḍ ete 
samayā bahiḥ /​ śaivaṃ pāśupataṃ vāmaṃ bhairavaṃ tu mahāvratam kālamukhaṃ iti 
khyātam antaḥsamayaṣaṭkakam”; SSV, S-​7.
	16.	 To invoke just two examples of this rhetoric of cumulative inclusion: “atha 
kāpālasiddhāntaḥ kathyate saṃgrahād hi /​ tatkālāmukhasaṃproktam aṅgīkṛtya 
yathocitam”; “atha mahāvrataḥ śaivaḥ kathyate leśataḥ sphuṭam /​ kāpālāgamasaṃproktam 
aṅgīkṛtya yathocitam.”
	17.	 “Liṅgadhārī sadā svasya mastake kandhare ’thavā /​ . . . tathāpi jaṅgame bhaktir viśeṣa 
iti kathyate /​ mahāvratākhyaśāstroktanityakarmāditatparāḥ”; SSV, S.9–​11. On the 
continuities of these materials with early Vīramāheśvara traditions, see Fisher (2021, 
forthcoming).
	18.	 Though they differ in their understanding of the nature of these categories, both the 
traditions of Śaiva Siddhānta and Trika Śākta Śaivism posit that souls are bound by three 
kinds of innate impurity (mala)—​namely, ontic stain related to action (karmamala), 
ontic stain related to māyā (māyīya mala), and ontic stain inherent in the individual soul 
(āṇava mala)—​and that these are the source of suffering and transmigration experienced 
by bound souls. While Diwakar Acharya’s (2014) preliminary periodization of the history 
of ideas about innate impurity (mala) within the Śaiva Siddhānta identifies the seventh-​
century CE Svāyambhūvasūtrasaṅgraha as the locus classicus for the articulation of the 
concept within the Āgamas, he suggests that its antecedents, which identify mala as a facet 
of the fetters (pāśa), most likely emerge within the domain of Atimārga II. The eclectic 
recension of the Kālottara known of as the Jñānapañcaśikā, briefly noted by Goodall and 
Sarma (2007) as teaching a decidedly non-​Saiddhāntika skull carrying vow, provides us 
with additional confirmations of just such a model. For, in addition to retaining an older

--- PAGE 934 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      909
 
Pāśupata model where ontological bondage is ascribed not to a substance but to a “net” 
of causation, somewhat obliquely, the text refers to mala twice. First, in a terse presen­
tation of cosmology, māyā is equated with the will of Śiva, which is responsible for de­
termining the fate of all things (niyama), and the similitude of māyā with an otherwise 
underspecified self-​born innate impurity (sahaja mala) is then suggested. Later, just after 
discussing the dīkṣā ritual, mala is invoked in the context of assuaging doubt or anxiety 
about its continued existence in a state of liberation.
The SSV itself provides additional confirmation that we should seek out the prehistory of mala 
within non-​Pāśupata Atimārga sources, for here all three of our Atimārga traditions incor­
porate a theory of mala into their presentation of the fetters. Thus, for the Kālamukhas, the 
fetters are said to be of multiple types, namely mala itself, māyā (identified with the mate­
rial universe), and some unspecified “other” category, an arrangement perhaps prefiguring 
the threefold mala model. In contrast, in the SSV, though the word mala itself does not 
appear, the Lākulas seem to accept the existence of two types of fetters, karma and māyā 
(here identified not with material reality but with time). Finally, among the Mahāvratins, 
the claim is explicitly made that one of the points that marks their system as distinctive is 
that the fetters of karma and māyā are accepted, but not the concept of an ontological stain 
that is located solely within the individuated soul (āṇava), a formulation that suggests that 
this triadic model was a point of considerable debate within Śaiva communities that did 
not have its origins within the milieu of the Trika.
	19.	 As attested in a range of Śaiva sources, the original Lākula canon is said to be comprised 
of eight Pramāṇa scriptures (Pañcārtha, Śivaguhya, Rudrāṅkuśa, Hṛdaya, Lakṣaṇa, 
Vyūha, Ākarṣaka, Ādarśa), which derive their names from the eight Rudras who revealed 
them. This canon is sometimes expanded to include some supplementary works on ritual 
and, I have argued elsewhere, pratiṣṭhā (the installation of images), associated with the 
Hṛdayapramāṇa, for a total of fourteen Lākula Pramāṇa Āgamas. Of these, only some 
small passages from the Pañcārtha have been identified. The near verbatim adaptation of 
the extant citations into the earliest Trika scripture, the Siddhayogeśvarīmata, in its pre­
sentation of what had previously been thought of as our earliest Śākta cosmology, strongly 
suggests that extensive similar textual borrowings have also been incorporated into other 
Mantramārga works.
	20.	 “Pañcārtham ca purākalpaṃ śivaguhyapramāṇakam /​ vyūhamādarśanaṃ caiva 
padmākarakaśailakam /​ nṛttaṃ caiva suduṣprāpaṃ siddhārthaṃ hi caturdaśa /​ kāpālam 
evām ākhyātaṃ lākulaṃ śṛṇu cānagha”; SSV, S-​10. The surrounding passages overlap with 
the decidedly early modern vulgate Dīptāgama, while frequently providing more cogent 
readings.
	21.	 As preserved within the Śaiva canon, for example Niśvāsamukha (4.129) (Kafle 2020), 
Lākula practitioners taught a pre-​tantric cosmological system where the highest reality, 
existing within the pure realm, was equated with the realm of Dhruva, perhaps identified 
with the pole star. In later Śaiva systems, these cosmologies, often mapped vertically onto 
the human body—​with the highest principles placed within or just above the head—​
provided concrete models for ritual practice involving the practitioner visualizing their as­
cent and conquest in ascending order of different planar realms, a task accomplished via a 
confluence of rote actions, the manipulation of various mantras, and control of the breath. 
The direct adaptation of Lākula models into the Svacchanda Tantra of the Dakṣiṇasrotras, 
incorporating such embodied cosmologies, suggests this may also have been a feature of 
Lākula practice.

--- PAGE 935 ---
910      Jason Schwartz
 
	22.	 Echoing the calendrical observances of the Śivadharmaśāstra, this vrata is represented as a 
periodic observance performed on Aṣṭamī, on Caturdaśī, and as part of Śivarātravrata.
	23.	 Recent discoveries, both regarding pre-​tantric textual traditions such as the 
Śivadharmaśāstra as well as the rhetorical echoes of older formulations inherited by 
tantric literature proper, have shed some surprising light on the prehistory of devotion 
within Śaiva traditions, especially the emic understanding of Śaiva devotees. In the earliest 
stratum of the literature human Śaiva devotees (rudrabhakta, śivabhakta) seem to have 
been conceived of as partial emanations (aṃśa) or even incarnations either of an aspect of 
Śiva himself or of one of his attendants. The Kālamukhas in the SSV seem to have treated 
most of the iconographically specific forms of the deity associated with specific mythic 
episodes as an analogous phenomenon, expressions of parts of the nature of the Godhead 
as opposed to a manifestation of the whole.
	24.	 “Rudrāṃśena vinā tasya na pṛthaktvena sambhavaḥ /​ tasmād evaṃ mahādevo rudro ’yaṃ 
mūlavigrahaḥ /​ ata eva dakṣiṇāmūrtisvarūpādibahuvigrahaḥ /​ sākṣāt sadāśivo nityaḥ siva 
eva jagatpatiḥ /​ tadbhedo bahudhā proktas tatatkṛtyānusārataḥ”; SSV, S-​9.
	25.	 “Śaktipātānusāreṇa karmasāmye ’pi sambhave /​ tathānuṣṭhānasāmarthyād ātmā śuddho 
bhavet tadā /​ ātmā nakṣatravad bhāti śivas tv arka iva sphuṭam /​ tadātmaśivasaṃyogaḥ 
paramokṣa iti samṛtaḥ”; SSV, S-​10.
	26.	 That these omissions are features of the SSV itself and not its selective use by Veḷḷiambara 
Vānar Tambirān himself in his Tamiḷ commentary becomes evident once we recognize 
that Veḷḷiambara Vānar has a positive view of the Dakṣiṇasrotras and makes extensive use 
of the only work of that tradition directly available to him, the Svacchanda tantra.
	27.	 Counterintuitively, the two earliest writings associated with the most famous Śaiva 
Siddhānta lineage of the Mattamayūravaṃśa, namely the Prāyaścittasamuccaya of 
Hṛdayaśiva and the Pratiṣṭhālakṣaṇasārasamuccaya of Vairocana, express a vision of Śaiva 
knowledge inclusive of non-​Siddhānta traditions and practices. So does the key textual 
source for the Somaśambhupaddhati, Bhoja’s Siddhāntasārapaddhati, which makes liberal 
use of Bhairavasrotras materials in a manner that suggests that the typical story about the 
emergence of Śaiva Siddhānta as a knowledge system is in need of revision.
	28.	 “Kāpālīti hi saṃproktaḥ kāpāle sādhakottamaḥ /​ kathaṃ prāguktaśaivasya kālāmukhamatasya 
ca /​ ekadeśamatatvena kecid icchanti paṇḍitāḥ”; SSV, S-​10.
	29.	 “Duṣṭavādiniṣṭhurapaṭiṣṭhaśārddūḷaṃ bauddhābdhibaḍavāmukhaṃ mīmāṃsakadhātrī­
dharavajraṃ. . . . sāṅkhyāhīndrarundravainatēyaṃ advaitavādibhūjakuṭhāran akalaṅkatripura­
dahanatriṇētraṃ” Jagirdar (2019, p. 174). In one of the earliest inscriptions from Baḷḷigāvĕ from 
1036 CE, the Kālamukha Vādirudra, for example, is rendered: “a lion, most sharp and severe to 
the depraved disputers, like a submarine fire to the ocean of Buddhism, a diamond club to the 
mountain of the Mīmāṃsakas, a great Garuḍa bird to the serpents of Sāṅkhya, an axe to the tree 
that is the espousers of nonduality, and the third eye of Śiva himself in burning the threefold 
city of the Jain logician Akalaṅka.” The grand irony is that the prehistory of this type of rhetoric 
takes as its focus the eighth-​century Jain philosopher Akalaṅka himself. For a brief discussion 
of the Śaiva adaptation of Akalaṅka-​related rhetoric into their own epigraphy see Gurevitch 
(2022, p. 124).
	30.	 The comprehensive history of the symbiotic relationship between Kālamukha and 
Digambara Jain imaginaries demands further exploration. For instance, near Baḷḷigāvĕ in 
Shimoga District, in an inscription from 1122 CE, Prabhācandra Siddhāntadeva, a Digambara 
Jain in the lineage of Kuṇḍakuṇḍa of the Kranurgaṇa, is praised in a manner almost identical 
to the typical conventions for depicting Kālamukhas: “akalaṅkasiṃhāsanaman aḷaṃkarisi

--- PAGE 936 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      911
 
nĕgardda tārkkikacakrēśvararuṃ /​ vādībhasiṃharuṃ /​ paravādikuḷakamalavanamadamāta
ṅgaruṃ bauddhavādi-​timirapataṅgaruṃ /​ sāṅkhyavādikuḷādrivajradhararuṃ /​ naiyyāyaik
ācāryabhūjātakuṭhāraruṃ /​ mīmāṃsakamataghanāghanapracaṇḍapavanaruṃ”; EC vol. 11 
(Rice 1903, p. 11). “Adorning the lion throne of the philosopher Akalaṅka, he was a world-​
conquering emperor of logic, a lion to disputants, an elephant in rut before the lotus groves 
that were the other arguers, a sun to the darkness of Buddhist disputants, a diamond club to 
the mountain of Sāṅkhya disputants, an axe to the tree of the teachers of Nyāya, a ferocious 
wind before the wisp of cloud that is the doctrine of the Mīmāṃsakas.”
	31.	 Kula trees appear in the Kaula tantric sources where specific species of trees (Kadamba, 
Tamarind, etc.) are associated with specific deity lineages, mythologies, and systems of 
practice. They in turn build on an archaic religious imaginary associating a variety of types 
of gift and curse bestowing supernatural entities with trees. See Tantrikābhidhānakośa vol. 
2, pg. 128.
	32.	 Most commonly associated with the goddess Mahālakṣmī of Kolhapur, the object called 
the mātuluṅga or bījāpūra is frequently identified with a citron fruit, either the wild or­
ange or sweet lime. The range of visual representations of this object across regions, how­
ever, suggests a more complex identity than can be accounted for by simple equation, 
incorporating more varied local identifications, including with pomegranate-​holding an­
tecedent Greco-​Roman deities.
	33.	 Within surviving tantric textuality, the worship of Koṭarākṣa Bhairava is entirely de­
pendent upon ­chapter 9 of the Svacchandatantra, where his dhyāna is presented in verses 
9.3–​8. In the seventh paṭala of the Jayadrathayāmala’s third ṣaṭka, Aṭṭahāsabhairava is 
mounted on a snake. His decidedly non-​Śaiva iconography, right down to the śaṅkha, 
cakra, gaḍa, and hala in his hands suggests that this feature reflects his original Vaiṣṇava 
identity as Balarāma.
	34.	 As I will argue elsewhere, a more promising approach to making sense of site-​specific 
Kālamukha normativities is to attend to the specific caste communities (weavers, oil 
makers, goldsmiths, etc.) and social functions (such as whether the institution is also an 
artisan training center) with which a particular complex is aligned.
	35.	 “Agrahāraṃ 
kardugina 
svayaṃbudēvara 
dēgulada 
pūliyapaṇḍitara 
vidyāśiṣyar 
kkŏppina vakkhāṇijīyara śiṣyarappa kāḷagnāni vakhkhāṇijīyarggĕ dhārāpūrvvakaṃ 
vidyādānamāgĕ purigĕṟĕnāḍǒḷagaṇa” (South Indian Inscriptions XI, n. 48).
	36.	 The “knowledge concerning kāla” (Kālajñāna) is an ambiguous compound because kāla 
is a polyvalent lexeme. Although indexing “knowledge of Kālamukha doctrines” in some 
later inscriptions, kālajñāna is more commonly understood as referring to the siddhi of 
knowing the three times (kāla), namely past, present, and future, or, more specifically, to 
the practice of augury.
	37.	 On account of dialectical variation, scribal error, and metri causa, standardization of 
spelling is uncommon in Old Kannada epigraphy. Regarding this site, for example, Puli, 
Pūli, Pūliya, Purigērĕ, and Purĕgērĕ are all attested. Likewise, we find the proper name 
variants Vākhāni, Vākkhāni, Vākhhāni, and Vakkhāni. Determining which of these 
usages is “correct” or even whether they are always synonymous is most difficult.
	38.	 Kǒppina Vākkhāni surfaces again in an inscription from 1179 CE, published in EI 19 
(Sastri [1927–​1928], pp. 228–​232), preserved the city of Rōṇ, in which Kǒppina Vākhhāni 
is treated as the progenitor of a distinct Kālamukha lineage descending from him to 
Rudraśakti, to Jñānadevaśakti, and then to the current authority Gurubhakta, who have 
all been reimagined as belonging to the Parvatāvali line out of Śrīśailiam. This pattern of

--- PAGE 937 ---
912      Jason Schwartz
 
the focused forgetting of no longer pertinent pasts and rewriting lineage lists is endemic 
throughout our sources.
	39.	 The highly selective nature of the published inscriptional record from Lakṣmēśvara (all 
which are contained within South Indian Inscriptions [hereafter SII], vol. 20 (Gai 1988) 
with three edited and partially translated in EI, vol. 3 (Hultzsch [1894–​1895], pp. 31–​52) 
poses substantial problems for further contextualization. Of the six major Śaiva temples 
surviving, some with material cultural remnants dating back to the ninth century, only the 
largest complex, Somēśvara, offers us documentary records. In contrast to Lakṣmēśvara’s 
Digambara Jain communities, where we have inscriptions from the early seventh century 
(SII, vol. 20, nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 244–​6, 47, 52, 53, 55), our first legible Śaiva sources referring 
to Sōmēśvara (SII, vol. 20, no. 66, 1102 CE) date back only to the twelfth century, though 
significantly, they already presume the preexistence of various institutions including the 
temples of Sōmēśvara and Muddēśvara, and are thus substantively younger than all of 
the relevant material culture. Intriguingly, most of this corpus identifies local authorities 
as belonging to a lineage of Mahāvratins, many with initiatory names ending in Sōma, 
marking them as inheritors of Kāpālika traditions. Our Pūliya Paṇḍita could well have 
been one of the ancestors of these ācāryas, or else been aligned with a maṭha associated 
with one of these other temples.
	40.	 EI, vol. 15 (Thomas 1920), SII, vol. 11, no 95. The epigraphical records discussed in this sec­
tion include: EI, vol. 15 (tenth century); SII, vol. 11 (Rao 1986), no. 87 (1050 CE); SII, vol. 11, 
no. 91 (1054 CE); SII, vol. 11, no. 93 (1058 CE); EI, vol. 15, SII, vol. 11, no. 95 (1061 CE); SII, 
vol. 11, no. 109 (1069 CE); SII, vol. 11, no. 114 (1075 CE); SII, vol. 11, no. 130 (1084 CE); SII, 
vol. 11, no. 131 (1084 CE); SII, vol. 11, no. 153 (1103 CE); SII, vol. 11, no. 164 (1113–​14 CE); SII, 
vol. 15 (Desai and Gai 1952), no. 92 (twelfth century).
	41.	 SII, vol. 11, no. 87, for example, refers to the “śāsanamaryyādĕya,” the “nāḍa maryyādĕya” 
(jurisdictional law), and the “sĕṭṭiyaramarryādĕ” (law pertaining to merchants), treating 
each as a discrete set of norms. For more on the relation between tantric imaginaries and 
community and site-​specific legal pluralism see Schwartz (2019, p. 112).
	42.	 EI, vol. 15, p. 75.
	43.	 The Kannada term dēvara affixes an honorific plural -​ra suffix to the Sanskrit loan word 
dēva. Much like its cognate, Kannada dēvara can refer indiscriminately to a deity, to the 
iconic and aniconic embodiment of the deity on earth, a human king, or to other political 
and sacerdotal authorities. Since in the formal compositional conventions of many land 
grants there is no distinction drawn between the authority acting on behalf of the recipient 
and the intended recipient itself, the result is that in many cases it is impossible to distin­
guish whether a grant is being given to a specific empowered human sacerdotal agent or 
directly to the god.
	44.	 The Sanskrit world āvali literally refers to a row or continuous sequence. In Śākta tantric 
sources, especially associated with the goddess Kubjikā and the Kālīkrama, Āvali becomes 
the proper name of specific lineage transmissions, paralleling the usage in the inscriptions 
we are studying. As the Kālamukha lineage we are studying incorporates into its program 
of worship elements from both the Western transmission and the Kālīkrama, it is likely 
that a specific referent is intended.
	45.	 EI, vol. 15, pp. 88–​89.
	46.	 Of uncertain origin but appearing frequently in Old Telugu and Kannada inscriptional 
records from at least the eighth century, the terms Gŏrava, Gŏraga, Gurava, Gŏrāva, etc. 
refer to a class of non-​Brahmin religious authorities. Primarily Śaiva but occasionally

--- PAGE 938 ---
EARLY MEDIEVAL DECCAN      913
 
Digambara Jain, in the inscriptions Gŏravas often act as the sthānācāryas of a temple com­
plex or are presented as managing a settlement (often called x-​vāḍa or x-​pura) dedicated 
to their specific community. While by the early modern period in the western Deccan such 
terms have become associated with specific caste communities, either, in Maharashtra, a 
Śaiva priestly caste called the guravs, or, in Karnataka, a subcaste of the nomadic Kurubas 
with their own largely Śaiva ascetic tradition, these narrower identifications appear to be a 
subsequent development.
	47.	 Here it is important to remember that both the pre-​tantric Atimārga Kāpālika traditions 
and their tantric successors often referred to themselves as adherents of the Somasiddhānta 
and initiated their adepts into names ending in x-​Soma as well as other semisynonymous 
terms referring to the moon, such as Candra. By identifying here as “Muni-​Sōma”—​the 
Soma Sage—​the Kālamukha Sōmēśvara seems to be deliberately evoking such older 
resonances.
	48.	 My understanding of this text as well as the lucidity of its translation have benefited im­
measurably from the contributions of Tim Lorndale, with whom I had the privilege of 
working through some of the most difficult passages.
	49.	 “Śaraṇ’ 
ĕṃdaṃg’abhayapradhānaphaḷamaṃ 
kaigūḍuvaḷu 
sŏrkkim 
ākarisuttirppa 
madāndhanappa khaḷan’ āyurddīpamaṃ taṃna cāmaradiṃ tŏṭṭanĕ naṃdĕ bīsi kaḷĕvaḷu 
tatkāyamaṃ taṃna bhīkarakākānanak’ āgaḷaṃtĕ guṟimāḷpaḷu jyēṣṭhĕ sāmānyo || 21 || 
ĕṟaguva baṟasiḍilaṃ nĕṟĕd’ aṟĕyaṭṭuva kālamṛtyuvaṃ nuṃguva peraṟikĕya pĕrmāriyan ār 
uṟadar bbardukāḍalārppar’ ā kāḷikĕyaṃ.” || 22 ||
	50.	 “Pĕṟav’ ill’ĕnĕ nĕṟĕd’ aṟivinŏḷ aṟivina kaṇiy’ĕnisidaṃ kaḷēśvaradēvaṃ || 35 || siddhāvaḷi 
dēvyāvaḷi siddhāṃtāvaḷi śivāgamāvaḷi nĕṟĕd’ ī | siddhāṃti kaḷēśvara budhan uddharisi.”
References
Acharya, Diwakar. 2014. “On the Śaiva Concept of Innate Impurity (Mala) and the Function of 
the Rite of Initiation.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 42, no. 1: 9–​25.
Adelheid, Mette. 1991. “Notes on Samaya ‘Convention’ in Pali and Prakrit.” In Middle Indo-​
Aryan and Jaina Studies, edited by Colette Caillat, 69–​80. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Desai, Pandurang Bhimarao, ed. 1956. Śāsana Paricaya: Idaralli Granthakāranu Saṅgrahisi 
Pariśōdhisida 53 Śāsanagaḷannu avugaḷa Sārāṃśa, Pīṭhike Muntādudarondige Sampādiside. 
Dharwad: Karnataka Itihasa Samsodhaka Mandala.
Desai, Pandurang Bhimarao, and Govind Swamirao Gai, eds. 1952. South Indian Inscriptions 
vol. 15: Bombay-​Karnatak Inscriptions. Madras: Government Press.
Filliozat, Vasundhara,. 2001. Kālāmukha and Pāśupata Temples in Dharwar. Chennai: 
Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute.
Filliozat, Vasundhara, and Pierre-​Sylvain Filliozat. 2012. Kālāmukha Temples of Karnataka: Art 
and Cultural Legacy: Somanātha at Haraḷahaḷḷi and Kaḍambeśvara at Raṭṭtihaḷḷi. New Delhi: 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts.
Filliozat, Vasundhara, and Pierre-​Sylvain Filliozat. 1995. The Temple of Muktēśvara at 
Cauḍadānapura: A Little Known 12th–​13th Century Temple in Dharwar District, Karṇāṭaka. 
Delhi: Abhinava.
Fisher, Elaine. Forthcoming. The Meeting of Rivers: Translating Devotion in Early Modern India.
Fisher, Elaine. 2021. “Saivism after the Śaiva Age: Continuities in the Scriptural Corpus of the 
Vīramāheśvaras.” Religions 12, no. 222: 1–​24.

--- PAGE 939 ---
914      Jason Schwartz
 
Gai, G. S., ed. 1988. South Indian Inscriptions. Vol. 20. Madras: Archaeological Survey of India.
Goodall, D., and Sarma, S. A. S. 2007. “A First Edition of the [Śatika-​]Kālajñāna, the Shortest 
of the Non-​eclectic Recensions of the Kālottara.” In Mélanges Tantriques à La Mémoire 
d’Hélène Brunner. Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, edited by Sous La Direction 
De Dominic Goodall and André Padoux, 125–​166. Collection Indologie 106. Pondichéry: 
Institut français de Pondichéry/​Ecole française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Ghose, Rajeshwari. 1996. The Tyāgarāja Cult in Tamilnāḍu: A Study in Conflict and 
Accommodation. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Gurevitch, Eric. 2022. Everyday Sciences in Southwest India. PhD diss., University of Chicago.
Hultzsch, E., ed. 1900–​1901. Epigraphia Indica. Vol. 6. Calcutta: Office of the Superintendent of 
Government Printing, India.
Hultzsch, E., ed. 1894–​1895. Epigraphia Indica. Vol. 3. Calcutta: Government of India Central 
Printing Office.
Jagirdar, Sitaram, ed., 2019. Epigraphia Carnatica. Vol. 14. Mysore: Kuvempu Institute of 
Kannada Studies, University of Mysore.
Kafle, N. Ed., 2020. Niśvāsamukhatattvasaṃhitā: A Preface to the Earliest Surviving Śaiva 
Tantra (on Non-​tantric Śaivism at the Dawn of the Mantramārga): Critical Edition, with 
Introduction & Annotated Translation: and an Appendix Containing Śivadharmasaṅagraha 
5–​9. Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry.
Kaṭarāḷa, Kṛṣṇarāya. 1955. Karnāṭaka lākuḷa śaivara itihāsa. Dhāravāḍa: Kannaḍa Saṃśodhana 
Saṃsthe.
Lorenzen, David N. 1972. The Kāpālikas and Kālāmukhas: Two Lost Śaivite Sects. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Nagaswamy, R. 2006. Art and Religion of the Bhairavas Illumined by Two Rare Sanskrit Texts 
Sarva-​Siddhāntavivēka and Jñāna-​Siddhi. Chennai: Tamil Arts Academy.
Rao, N. L., ed. 1986. South Indian Inscriptions. Vol. 11. Pts. 1–​2. Mysore: Archaeological Survey 
of India.
Rice, Lewis, ed. 1903. Epigraphia Carnatica. Vol. 11. Bangalore: Mysore Government 
Central Press.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2006. “The Lākulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate between 
Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism and Āgamic Śaivism.” Indian Philosophical Annual 24: 143–​217.
Sastri, Hirananda, ed. 1927–​28. Epigraphia Indica. Vol. 19. Calcutta: Government of India 
Central Publications Branch.
Schwartz, Jason. 2023. Ending the Śaiva Age: The Rise of the Brāhmaṇa Legalist and the 
Universalization of Hindu Dharma. PhD diss., University of California, Santa Barbara.
Schwartz, Jason. 2019. “The King Must Protect the Difference: The Juridical Foundations of 
Tantric Knowledge.” Religions 9, no. 4: 112.
Shanthamurthy, Shubha. 2015. An Epigraphical Account of the Śaiva Institutions of Baḷḷigāve 
(11cAD–​12cAD). MPhil thesis, University of Oxford.
Thomas, F., ed. 1920. Epigraphia Indica. Vol. 15. Calcutta: Government of India Central 
Publication Branch.
Törzsök, Judit. 2011. “Kāpālikas.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Leiden: Brill.
Veḷḷiyambalavāṇar. 1957–​59. Jñanāvaraṇa Vilakkam and Mahā Bhāṣyam. 2 vols. Dharmapura: 
Dharmapuram Adhinam.

--- PAGE 940 ---
Chapter 36
The Total Revelation 
Tantra
The Geopolitical Origins and Significance of 
the Name, Nepālī Sarvāmnāya Tantra
Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
Introduction
Surrounded by the Tibetan Autonomous Zone of China, India, Pakistan, and Bhutan, 
Nepal is at the historical and cultural heart of the development of Hindu and Buddhist 
tantra. Many of the most significant lineages of tantra have either arisen in or subse­
quently migrated to Nepal, which continues to be home to one of the most vibrant living 
traditions of tantra throughout the world. Known by Nepālī tāntrikas themselves as 
the Tantra of All Revelations (“all”: sarva, “revelations”: āmnāya), Nepālī Sarvāmnāya 
tantra is inherently syncretistic, reflecting the rich history of the development of tantra 
throughout the subcontinent over the last two millennia and into the present. Not only 
is Nepal a repository of many important tantric manuscripts, but perhaps more impor­
tantly, it is home to a number of the world’s most highly educated tantric practitioners. 
Careful study of Nepālī tantra must therefore combine (1) reading source texts in their 
original languages, with (2) studying the many works of secondary scholarship (in­
cluding, particularly, those ethnographies done by Nepālīs themselves), and addition­
ally (3) engaging contemporary practitioners through fieldwork in Nepal. This triadic 
heuristic, grounded conjointly in Indology, ethnography and “indigenous hermeneu­
tics,”1 provides deeper access to the place-​specific patterns of tantric practice in Nepal.
Engaging the field in this interdisciplinary way, one comes to appreciate Nepālī tantra 
as a multileveled, historically-grounded tradition expressing itself simultaneously 
in a plethora of texts, temple complexes, power seats (śākta-​pīṭhas), and a network of 
both domestic and temple practices. The host of liturgical practices use sacred visual

--- PAGE 941 ---
916      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
diagrams (mandalas, yantras), mystical utterances (mantras), body gestures (mudrā), 
the consumption of wine and certain foods, and “coupling” (maithuna), whether lit­
eral or symbolic. Nepālī tantra operates according to a dyadic rhythm of “internal” 
practice (antar-​yāga) and “external” (bahir-​yāga) linking the rhythms of private, do­
mestic practices with temple rituals and public festivals. Sarvāmnāya additionally 
links together the multiplicity of Nepālī castes, interconnecting the various so-​called 
indigenous castes with the many so-​called mountain peoples or Parbatiyas. While the 
Parbatiyas are sometimes viewed as migrants to Nepal, they are in fact as much Nepālī as 
the Newārs, who are typically identified by scholars as the original inhabitants of Nepal 
(Gellner 1992; Levy 1990; Slusser 1982).
Regardless of debates over insiders and outsiders or natives and migrants, it is a mistake to 
assume that the tantra of one caste is in some way fundamentally distinct from the tantra of 
another. Within Nepal, all the tantric traditions operate and coalesce within an overarching, 
integrated system of revelation and practice known as Sarvāmnāya or the Total Revelation 
Tantra. This Sarvāmnāya tantric tradition operates under the logic of bhedābheda-​vāda,2 
or the orthodox ideal of multiplicity within unity—​of the many comprising the One and 
that One being the material and efficient cause of the many. It is a tradition that has arisen 
from multiple regions throughout the subcontinent, including from within Nepal itself, 
and which therefore integrates a plethora of textual sources and related peoples and cultural 
traditions. Embodying a theological presupposition that one supreme Godhead projects 
itself internally onto its own Being as the multiplicity that is creation, Sarvāmnāya tāntrikas 
are called to engage in ritual practices in which they mimic the activity of the Godhead they 
seek to realize. Moreover, they are trained through their practice to see their own geopolit­
ical and cultural landscape as mirroring the activity of that Godhead.
To understand these complex dynamics, we first turn to an important debate within 
the field of scholarship on Nepālī tantra. The debate has unfolded over nearly thirty 
years and is of interest not just to the scholars engaged in the debate but to Nepālī 
tāntrikas themselves who have become familiar with the debate and have taken their 
own stand on the central questions that drive the debate. This stand-​taking sheds light 
on the nature of Nepālī tantra as it is understood and practiced by contemporary and 
past tāntrikas of Nepal.
Not Six but All: The Significance of 
Naming to Nepālī Tāntrikas
The debate at hand is between Jeffrey S. Lidke and Mark Dyczkowski over the correct 
and traditional name for Nepālī tantra. Lidke, based on his research with Timalsina, 
identifies Nepālī tantra writ large as the Tantra of the Total Revelation, “Sarvāmnāya 
Tantra.” Dyczkowski, on the other hand, argues that the proper label is the tantra of the 
Six Revelations, “Ṣaḍ Āmnāya Tantra.” Why does this matter? And what do we learn

--- PAGE 942 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      917
 
from the debate about the tantra of Nepal? First, it matters because Nepālī tāntrikas 
themselves care about the debate. Second, an analysis of the specifics of the debate sheds 
important light on the nature of Nepālī tantra—​light that will be helpful in illuminating 
both the origins and practices of the tradition.
In a relatively recent assessment of the work of Lidke (2017) Dyczkowski identifies the 
Sarvāmnāya system outlined by Lidke as “alien to the Newārs of the Kathmandu valley” 
(Dyczkowski 2009, 2:351).3 However, he does concede that while Newār Kaula tāntrikas 
do not refer to their tradition as Sarvāmnāya, they do uphold the ideal of being “well 
versed in all the āmnāyas (sarvāmnāya-​viśārada)” (Dyczkowski 2009, 2:348). Why does 
Dyczkowski view the tradition described by Lidke as “alien” to the Newār community 
of Nepal even as he acknowledges the importance to said tāntrikas to be well versed in 
“all the revelations” (sarvāmnāya)? His primary objection is to Lidke’s stance that Nepālī 
Sarvāmnāya tāntrikas receive a multiplicity of initiations in the overall context of their 
tantric practice as opposed to one single initiation. His position in this regard is that 
Newār tāntrikas receive only a single initiation which itself provides eventual access to 
all the āmnāyas. In this regard, he seems to be stressing the important notion of a root 
initiation (mūla-​dīkṣā) linked to a single root teacher. However, a number of contempo­
rary Nepālī tāntrikas, Newār and non-​Newār alike, emphasize the necessity of receiving 
distinct initiations into each of the six systems of revelation. Receiving each of the neces­
sary initiations for each of the six āmnāyas makes one “well versed in all the āmnāyas.” 
Since the aim of Nepālī tantra is to achieve the total revelation that comes with initiation 
into all of the āmnāyas, Nepālī tāntrikas tend to use the term “Sarvāmnāya” to identify 
their tradition. Dyczkowski’s ethnographic research was primarily with the late great 
Kedar Raj Rajopadhyaya. In his instruction to Dyczkowski, Kedar Raj seems to have 
deemphasized the term sarvāmnāya in favor of ṣaḍāmnāya and also to have stressed the 
value of receiving a single initiation within a single āmnāya.4
A second reason that Dyczkowski rejects Sarvāmnāya as the universal name of Nepālī 
tantra relates to Lidke’s claim that within the Sarvāmnāya system, the Śrī Vidyā holds a 
special, preeminent position for all Nepālī tāntrikas due to its status as the tradition of 
the Upper Revelation (ūrdhvāmnāya). Indeed, Lidke has claimed that the secret iden­
tity of Taleju, the royal goddess of Nepal, is Tripurasundarī precisely for this reason 
(Lidke 2017, 108–​145). Dyczkowski himself reserves this place of special status for the 
goddess Kubjikā (Dyczkowski 2001, 24–​25), the tutelary deity of the Western Revelation 
or paścimāmnāya, and he is correct in pointing out that Newārs as a whole do not 
view the Śrī Vidyā tutelary deity Tripurasundarī with the centrality that is presented in 
Lidke’s work.
The truth is that Lidke and Dyczkowski are both right and both wrong. In their re­
spective studies, both scholars were viewing the Sarvāmnāya system through a par­
ticular point of focus. Lidke was focused on the Upper Revelation while Dyczkowski 
was focused on the Western Revelation. As a result, both scholars failed, at least ini­
tially, to recognize that each and all of the āmnāya systems are operating by a similar 
“difference-​in-​unity” (bhedābheda) logic of total mutual inclusivity. As Lidke’s work was 
focused on Nepālī Śrī Vidyā, consequently, for those Nepālī tāntrikas with whom he was

--- PAGE 943 ---
918      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
working, Tripurasundarī did indeed embody the highest of empowerment in a special 
way and was therefore associated with the patron deity of Nepal, Taleju. On the other 
hand, Dyczkowski’s ethnographic focus, and access to Nepālī Śākta tantra, has prima­
rily been through the lens of the paścimāmnāya tradition. Therefore, for him, Kubjikā 
embodies the highest state of empowerment in a special way and is in turn viewed as the 
secret identity of Taleju. Neither is entirely wrong.5 Both are providing important schol­
arly examples of how the nondual logic of Sarvāmnāya operates through two of the six 
āmnāyas that comprise Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra. Scholars who plan to do research on 
Nepālī tantra are advised to understand that the tradition is like a six-​sided crystal, each 
side with its own hue. Each side of this crystal is an āmnāya. If you gaze into the crystal 
from the west, then the center of the crystal will be colored by that western hue. Seeing 
it from the north you will see the northern hue, and so on. The key is to view the crystal 
as a whole, to see the center from all the sides and to understand that the tradition itself 
demands this kind of viewing-​from-​all-​sides perspectivalism.
Within the Sarvāmnāya system—​which embraces, is open to, and includes participa­
tion by Newārs, Parbatiyā and nearly all other Nepālī caste groups—​the secret identity of 
Taleju, the royal goddess, is not restricted to a single deity or name. Rather, Taleju, being 
none other than Parā Śakti, the Supreme Power, and Mahā Devī, the Great Goddess, is a 
dynamic, multitiered shifting symbol signifying a non-dual state of supreme conscious­
ness that by nature and definition is beyond labels. What appears as Tripurasundarī 
becomes Kubjikā for another, depending on initiatory context. As Mahā Devī and Parā 
Śakti, the names and revelations of Taleju are multiple. All these names and revelations 
arise from and return to her—​this is the basic understanding of the majority of Nepālī 
tāntrikas, regardless of their caste identification.
In sum, while Dyczkowski claims that Sarvāmnāya is a tantric system “alien to the 
Newārs,” the reality is that a good number of contemporary Newār tāntrikas do in fact 
refer to their tradition by the name Sarvāmnāya. And, indeed, the textual basis for such 
an identification appears to extend back several centuries. The exact origin of this term 
sarvāmnāya is not known, but evidence for its use is abundant in a variety of textual 
sources, ranging from classical pan-​Indic scriptures to the eighteenth-​century Nepālī 
tantric compendium the Puraścaryārṇava to a host of ritual manuals (paddhatis) in 
use by Newārs and non-​Newārs alike.6 It is our assumption that because this term, 
sarvāmnāya, has been in use in the classical tantric sources for at least four hundred 
years the consequence is that over time Nepālīs—​Newār and non-​Newār alike—​have 
come to adopt the term as the name for their distinctive Nepālī Śākta tantric traditions.
A Loss of Meaning?
In his classic study, The Canon of the Śaivāgama, Dyczkowski makes the following im­
portant, understandable yet problematic, statement: “In Nepal . . . the Nepālī . . . aban­
doned themselves to . . . a formal ritualism, which, though charged with meaning, had

--- PAGE 944 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      919
 
lost all significance for them beyond the ritual itself. Thus the Nepālīs, unlike the Kashmiris, 
did preserve the original tantras they made use of in their rituals, but largely failed to see 
anything beyond their immediate content” (Dyczkowski 1988, 12–​13 [emphasis added]).
It is understandable that Dyczkowski came to the conclusion that Nepālī tāntrikas 
had by and large “failed to see” the meaning beyond the immediate content of their re­
spective rituals. Such meaning is not easily found in any written materials. And given 
tantra’s strict hermetic tendencies, no one in Nepal is going to be easily talked into 
conveying cult secrets. Moreover, the kind of deep “mystical” analysis found in the 
writings of the likes of Abhinavagupta is not going to be readily apparent in the everyday 
cultural patterns of contemporary Nepālīs. However, the fact that Nepālī tāntrikas may 
not be talking about the deeper meaning of their ritual practices is not inherent proof 
that they do not recognize the presence of said meaning in the activities in which they 
engage. The truth is that there are tāntrikas in Nepal who do in fact know the esoteric 
meanings of their rituals.
We of course cannot assume that all Nepālī tāntrikas know the deepest meanings of 
their tantric practices, but such is the case with all religious traditions: within a populace 
as a whole the levels of understanding of any given religious community are going to vary 
significantly. Being able to identify exactly what the percentages are in Nepal of tāntrikas 
who know the esoteric meanings of their ritual actions and meditative practices would 
require a careful and comprehensive quantitative analysis that is not only beyond the 
scope of this current chapter but would also would likely be doomed to failure given that 
most tāntrikas are sworn to secrecy regarding the inner meanings of their tradition. That 
no one (beyond Kedar Raj) seems to have shared with Dyczkowski the inner meanings 
of their tradition may simply reflect the fact that in the eyes of most of his informants, 
he was an outsider. To be fair to Dyczkowski, his above comments on meaning were 
published in 1988. Perhaps the landscape had changed by the time Lidke did his exten­
sive field research in the Kathmandu valley in 1996–​1997. At that time, as documented 
in The Goddess Beyond (2017), there were multiple Nepālī tāntrikas who not only clearly 
knew the deeper meanings of their rituals but were willing to speak about them to Lidke. 
And at the time of the writing of this chapter it is certainly the case that there is a high 
degree of evidence that a significant number of contemporary tāntrikas are clearly aware 
of the deeper meaning laden in their respective ritual practices.7
One could further counter that these informed individuals are but a short list of ed­
ucated tāntrikas, but that the majority of the tāntrikas in Nepal do not know the deeper 
meanings of their practice. To such an argument, our reply is twofold. First, we ask, 
how many individuals must know something before we can comfortably claim that it 
is known within the individual’s community? Is there a magical percentage that sud­
denly transforms a society from being generally “unaware of deeper meaning” to “aware 
of deeper meaning”? Second, if the ideal for an “enlightened tantric community” is 
eleventh-​century Kashmir (as Dyczkowski and many other tantric studies scholars—​
Müller-​Ortega, Sanderson, etc.—​seem to think) then are we to assume that just because 
we have the writings of Abhinavagupta and his interlocutors that therefore the majority 
of Kashmiri tāntrikas knew the deeper meaning of their rituals? If a handful of people in

--- PAGE 945 ---
920      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
a community write a few books that last through the centuries and are later “discovered” 
by a foreign scholar, does that therefore prove that those authors were a reflection of the 
general knowledge in their respective communities at the time of their writings? Could 
it not be rather that the authors were members of an elitist literati community and that 
their reflections reflected the exception and not the rule in terms of what was known 
in their community about their practice? Could it not even be that, as White has pro­
vocatively suggested, Abhinavagupta even fabricated the meaning he articulated in his 
numerous works (White 2003, xi–​xvi)? If White’s thesis is correct, then clearly the only 
people who knew Abhinavagupta’s deeper meanings were the very few folks who either 
were initiated by him or read his works or both. Is it not likely the case that those who 
truly know the “deeper meaning” of tantric rituals have always been relatively few and 
far between?
It would seem that we need to revise Dyczkowski’s claim regarding the understanding 
of tantra in Nepal by Nepālī tāntrikas. We do so by putting in writing the fact that today 
in Nepal itself and spread throughout the globe are a number of Nepālī tāntrikas who 
not only know the deeper meaning of their respective rituals but who are actively en­
gaged in preserving and disseminating this understanding, not only within their own 
tightly knit initiation groups, but also together with the international community of tan­
tric practitioners and scholars. Scholars of tantra can never return to eleventh-​century 
Kashmir, but we can be in communication with contemporary Nepālī tāntrikas and we 
can learn from and with them the modes by which their complex ritual system embodies 
and disseminates the esoteric meaning of what White has dubbed “high Hindu tantra” 
(White 2003), both at private and domestic levels.
Paśupati-​Guhyeśvarī as Commingled 
Source of the Six Revelations
A primary reason that Nepal is home to each and all of the six primary tantric systems of 
revelation is because the Paśupatinātha temple (see fig. 36.1), together with the Temple 
Seat (pīṭha) of Guhyeśvarī, has been a magnet for drawing in tantric practitioners from 
all over the subcontinent. Evidence of the existence of Paśupatinātha can already be 
found in the inscription from the fifth century ce (Rājavaṃśī 1989) with local chronicles 
pushing the origins of Paśupatinātha back to the third century bce (Michaels 2008, 10). 
Gautama V. Vajracharya (2021a), a noted historian, traces the antiquity of Paśupatinātha 
to the Vedic era and beyond—​in other words, to before it was formally organized as 
Paśupatinātha itself in the fifth century ce. In reference to the ancient indigenous culture 
of the Newārs, based on what he identifies as Monsoon-​Culture (an ancient culture that 
was based on monsoon weather and rain), Vajracharya argues that initially Paśupatinātha 
was hidden underground as a subterranean sacred watery presence (Vajracharya 2021a, 
2021b).

--- PAGE 946 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      921
 
In Nepal, these national patron deities, Paśupatinātha and Guhyeśvarī, are no different 
than Śiva and Śakti. Appropriately, the most important temple in Nepal is Paśupatinātha, 
which is dedicated to Śiva and includes an important temple to Guhyeśvarī, his female 
consort and source of power, Śakti. The main idol in Paśupatinātha is a five-​faced liṅga 
(pañcavaktra mukhaliṅga), with Tatpuruṣa as the eastern face, Aghora as the southern 
face, Sadyojāta as the western face, Vāmadeva as the northern face, and Īśāna as the 
upward face, assumed but not typically carved into the idol. These five faces of Śiva are 
identified as the five faces of Paśupatinātha in the classic “Hymn to the Five Faces of 
Paśupati” (Paśupati-​pañcāsya-​stava).8
One of the oldest extant inscriptions that mentions Śiva having five faces is a fifth-​
century ce inscription from the Paśupatināth temple. It reads: “five faces adjoined 
together (sa-​pari-​cumbita-​vaktra-​pañca), possessed with all qualities (sarva-​guṇa-​
upapanna), an idol (pratimā) is established here.”9 This inscription echoes the 
Svacchanda-​tantra (8.31)10 which states that in order to disseminate the tantric reve­
lation, Śiva himself became both teacher (guru) and disciple (śiṣya) by unveiling him­
self as five faces (pañcamukhebhyaśca) and giving the teachings of the five āmnāyās 
(pañcāmnāyāḥ), being the paths to liberation (mokṣamārgāḥ) to his five Śaktis.11
Figure 36.1.  Paśupatinātha Temple, Kathmandu.
Courtesy of L. S. Akshunna.

--- PAGE 947 ---
922      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
The Kulārṇava-​tantra (3.7) further states that from its five faces (pañcamukhebhyaśca) 
emerged (samudgatāḥ) the five revelatory systems (pañca-​āmnāyas). Including the 
sixth face, Paśupatinātha becomes the six-​headed (ṣaḍ-vaktra) Mahā-​Paśupatinātha 
and together with his six śaktis reveals sarva (all) ṣaḍ (six) āmnāyas (see fig. 36.2 
and table 36.1).The Kulārṇava-​tantra (3.43–​44)12 further identifies twenty-​four var­
iations of the Western Revelation (purvāmnāya),13 twenty-​five of the Southern 
Revelation (dakṣiṇāmnāya),14 thirty-​two of the Western Revelation (paścimāmnāya),15 
and thirty-​six16 of the Northern Revelation (uttarāmnāya).17 With regard to the Upper 
Revelation (ūrdhvāmnāya), the Kulārṇava-​tantra (3.45) states that it transcends all 
divisions and that through engagement in the practices of this revelation one becomes 
Śiva himself. Nonetheless, we do see in Nepal a great deal of variation in terms of the 
representations of the deity Mahātripurāsundarī. Similarly, although not mentioned 
by the Kulārṇava-​tantra, Vajrayoginī additionally appears in diverse forms within the 
Lower Revelation (adharāmnāya). With all of these revelations and their variations still 
alive in Nepal as living traditions, we come to see why Nepālīs themselves, both Newār 
and non-​Newār like, identify Nepāli tantra as the Tantra of All Revelations (Sarvāmnāya 
tantra).
Figure 36.2.  Sarvāmnāya Paśupati Śiva Śakti.
Courtesy of Vidyanath Upadhyaya Bhatta.

--- PAGE 948 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      923
 
Based on the evidence of the fifth-​century, five-​faced Paśupati liṅga and its associa­
tion with the five Śaktis we can conclude that the krama traditions of the Ciñcinnīmata, 
Siddhayogeśvarī, and Śiraścheda tantras originated in Nepal by the seventh century, 
through the Yoginīkula of Matsyendranātha.18 Indeed, it is not just these key texts but 
their prescribed practices that flourish to this day in Nepal.19 Ciñcinnīmata is the first 
text to provide a fourfold division of the āmnāyas with the Purvāmnāya originating 
from Mīnanātha.20 The fifteenth-​century Parātantra arises out of and aligns itself with 
the older Śiraśchedamata and is undoubtedly of Nepālī origin (Sanderson 2014, 66). 
One could even argue that the seveth-​century Śiraścheda is itself of Nepālī origin. It 
is true that in the Parātantra the goddess of the southern āmnāya is called Niśeśī, not 
Tripurasundarī. However, Parātantra 2.321 identifies this Niśeśī as Raktakālī, which is but 
another name of Tripurāsundarī.22 From this textual and ethnographic evidence, it can 
be concluded that the indigenous Nepālī lineages of the Ciñcinnīmata and Parātantra 
are not in conflict with each other. The Parātantra simply expands the possibilities 
for Tantric practice through the variations (bhedas) it maps out, such as crafting the 
Dakṣiṇāmnāya as a synthesis of the Dakṣinakālī and Tripurasundarī traditions.
Nepal as the Water Pot of Revelations
Yoshizaki provides a detailed description of the imagery of the water pot (kalaśa), 
wherein multiple Buddhist deities are invoked, invited, and enlivened. He extends his 
analysis to claim that the Kathmandu valley is itself such a kalaśa (Yoshizaki 2012).23 
Drawing from this analysis, we argue that the kalaśa is a fruitful metaphor for under­
standing the development and practice of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra. Certainly, for the 
Śaiva-​Śākta Hindus of Nepal any and all of the āmnāya deities can be and are invited 
into the ritual kalaśa. However, the goddess that abided originally in the “water pot” that 
is Nepal is Guhyeśvarī. Indeed, the “water pot” that is Nepal contains within itself the 
Table 36.1  The six āmnāya.
Direction
Śiva
Śakti
āmnāya
1. (East)
Tatpuruṣa
Pūrṇeśvarī
Purvāmnāya
2. (South)
Aghora
Niśeśvarī
Dakṣiṇāmnāya
3. (West)
Sadyojāta
Kubjeśvarī
Paścimāmnāya
4. (North)
Vāmadeva
Siddheśvarī
(Guhyākālī)
Uttarāmnāya
5. (Upper)
Īśāna
Kāmeśvarī 
(Mahatripurāsundarī)
Ūrdhvāmnāya
6. (Lower)
Kālāgnirudra
Vajreśvarī
Adharāmnāya

--- PAGE 949 ---
924      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
waters from a multiplicity of streams that have flown into Kathmandu over the centuries 
and have mingled with Nepal’s own autochthonous scriptural stream, the uttarāmnāya 
or Northern Transmission, which is grounded in the Northern Seat (uttara-​pīṭha), and 
which is both a body of revelation and a geographical region from which that revelation 
arises (Dyczkowski 1988).
Being the origin for the emergence of the Northern Revelation, Nepal is thus the 
Northern Seat. As the Northern Seat, the Nepāl-​Kalaśa has been intermingled with 
the revelations of the multiple revelatory streams (āmnāyas) and sacred sites of power 
(pīṭhas) from the regions at its borders. This fluid intermingling and development 
has resulted in the Sarvāmnāya tantra tradition, which is the dominant tradition 
within Nepal, across Newār, Parbatīyā (pahāḍe) and all other divides, whether they 
be identified as ethnic, linguistic, caste, or cultural. In other words, the Sarvāmnāya 
tantra system, in its comprehensive, historically grounded instantiations, speaks for 
and embodies a country of diverse peoples whose primary religious orientation is 
grounded in the understanding that their religiocultural and geopolitical identities 
resemble the very water pot that is at the heart of the worship of their primary national 
goddess, Guhyeśvarī.
To understand how Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tāntrikas themselves view their own tradi­
tion, one must take into account the historical assimilation of the multiple revelatory 
streams (āmnāyas) that merged into the waters of Nepāl’s own Northern Revelation 
(uttarāmnāya), and as a result how the Nepal kalaśa became a vessel for containing all 
the streams (nepāla-​sarvāmnāya-​kalāśa) (see fig. 36.3).
The ritual water–pot deity goddess par excellence in Nepal is the Mistress of the 
Secret, Guhyeśvarī. This fact is well documented by the presence of a kalaśa both out­
side the Guhyeśvarī temple’s tympanum (see fig. 36.4) and inside in its main sanctum. 
Guhyeśvarī is a highly venerated goddess by both the Hindus and Buddhists of Nepal. 
For Buddhists she is Vajrayoginī, or more precisely Nairātmyā, while for Hindus she 
is Guhyākālī and at times they overlap each other in people’s practice. For example, a 
Buddhist can at times be seen doing worship to Guhyākālī as Nairātmyā, while simul­
taneously a Hindu Śaiva-​Śākta might be seen chanting a Buddhist Guhyeśvarī hymn 
by Mañjunātha (from the Svayambhū-​purāṇa) or even chanting the verses from 
Māyātantra (Buddhist) which expounds the mysteries of Guhyeśvarī.24
As the goddess of the Northern Revelation (uttarāmnāya), arising out of the revel­
atory scriptural sources and geographical region associated with Nepal (uttarapīṭha), 
Guhyakālī is inseparably bound with the tutelary national god of Nepal, Paśupatinātha, 
who is the composite form of each of the six āmnāyas, which are themselves the means 
for removing all the fetters (pāśa).25 As such, Guhyeśvarī26 is referenced as the Goddess 
of All Revelations (sarvāmnāyeśvarī), and one who is to be “worshipped through all 
transmissions” (sarvāmnāyaprapūjitā).27
The Hāhārāva-​tantra (32a)28 likewise affirms that Guhyākālī is the goddess of all 
revelations (sarvāmnāyeśvarī) while clarifying that this same label can be applied to the 
other deities of all the other āmnāyas, as the principal deity of each are all manifestations 
of the supreme Goddess, Mahā Devī or Parāśakti. Abiding in a recurring logic that 
the one nondual reality (abheda) is manifest in manifold expression (bheda), Nepālī

--- PAGE 950 ---
Figure 36.3.  Kalaśa at Purano Guhyeśvarī Temple, Kathmandu.
Courtesy of Kritan Joshi.
Figure 36.4.  Tympanum at Guhyeśvarī Temple gate, Kathmandu.
Courtesy of L. S. Akshunna & J. S. Lidke.

--- PAGE 951 ---
926      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
initiates of Paścimāmnāya similarly understand the Goddess Kubjikā to be the Goddess 
of All Revelations (sarvāmnāyeśvarī). In fact, the Newār Rājopādhyāyas29 often say 
that the paścimāmnāya is both the sarvāmnāya (all āmnāyas) and the jyeṣṭhāmnāya 
(seniormost āmnāya). As such, they reiterate claims made by adherents of each of the 
other five āmnāya traditions within Nepal, as we will further discuss below.
An Account of the Six Revelations (Ṣaḍāmnāya-​Māhātmya), an unpublished manu­
script (ca. eighteenth century ce; see fig. 36.5) from Nepal, states that the one who has 
received full empowerment into either the Southern or Upper transmission is eligible 
for the practice of all the transmissions (sarvāmnāya).30 In Nepal, this principle of eligi­
bility applies to all the āmnāyas. For instance, the Newār Rājopādhyāyas of the Western 
Revelation (paścimāmnāya), upon receiving the final and complete initiation, known as 
the Liberating Initiation of Complete Eligibility into All the Revelations (sarvāmnāya 
sarvādhikāra nirvāṇa dīkṣā), thereby become eligible (adhikārī) for performing and 
imparting each and all of the revelations and related practices of the Six Revelations 
(ṣaḍāmnāya). For this reason, these Rājopādhyāyas refer to the Western Revelation 
(paścimāmnāya) as the Total Revelation (sarvāmnāya). When doing careful, system­
atic fieldwork in Nepal and not limiting one’s focus to just one revelation system, then 
one recognizes that this similar process of full inclusion of all the āmnāyas is also found 
among the practitioners of all the systems of revelations.
Sarvāmnāya as a Krama 
Tantra Tradition with Watery 
Indigenous Roots
To understand the history of Sarvāmnāya tantra in Nepal, it is of utmost importance 
that we understand the history of the krama system of tantra, as Nepālī Sarvāmnāya 
Figure 36.5.  First page of a manuscript named Sadāmnāya Māhātmya, ca. eighteenth century. 
Nepal National Archives.
Courtesy of L. S. Akshunna.

--- PAGE 952 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      927
 
tantra is a krama practice—​one of “systematic order” (krama). The Bṛhad-​vaḍavānala-​
tantra reads, “Sarvāmnāya is prescribed into the krama division of six main vidyās 
(āmnāyas).”31 The Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā in its Kāmakalā-​Khaṇḍa section (8.690) reads, 
“one should do the practice in krama (a systematic order), first by practicing saptadaśī 
(seventeenfold mantra), accepted by sarvāmnāya (all-​revelations).”32 Moreover, the 
fifth-​century ce Śīlavatī inscription,33 which describes the krama system and its god­
dess Śarvāṇī,34 is not only the oldest Śākta inscription in Nepal but in the entire Śākta 
world (see fig. 36.6). The inscription reads: “with full devotion, the goddess of the Krama 
system, Śarvāṇī, is established” (Acharya 1996, 39–​45) (see fig. 36.7).
When discussing the krama system of tantra, one must understand the primacy of 
the Northern Revelation (uttarāmnāya), which emerges from the Northern Power Seat 
(uttarapīṭha). As Rastogi states, “Really speaking Krama is called Uttarāmnāya because 
it arose in and spread out from Uttarapīṭha” (Rastogi 1979, 44). Along these lines the 
Vaḍavānala-​tantra35 reads, “The deities Guhyakālī, Siddhilakṣmī . . .(etc.) are of the 
Northern Power-​seat (uttarāmnāya-​pīṭha) and they are excellent among all vidyās 
(wisdom) which give the caturvargaphala (fourfold-​fruits).”36 The Parātantra (4.1), a 
fifteenth-​century text37 says, “uttarāmnāya emerged from kālīkula.”38 The Mahākāla-​
saṃhitā reads, “among all (sarvāsāṃ) Kālīs, ten-​faces (daśa-​vaktrā) Guhyakālī is the 
principal-​one (mukhyatamā).”39
As noted above, in Nepal, Guhyakālī—​principal deity of uttarāmnāya—​is popu­
larly known as Guhyeśvarī and has her primary temple (pīṭha) near Paśupatinātha 
in Deopatan. The Kubjikāmata (10.22)40 provides the name of Guhyeśvarī as 
Guhyakālī and the Manthānabhairava states succinctly that Guhyeśvarī to­
gether with Paśupatinātha reside in Nepāla.41 The important Śākta text the Śrīmad‌ 
Devī Bhāgavata Mahāpurāṇa (7.38.11) identifies the seat of Guhyakālī as Nepāla42 
while the Niśisañcāratantra, a text cited by the illustrious Abhinavagupta,43 links 
Guhyeśvarī together with Paśupatinātha as situated in Nepāla.44 Additionally, 
the Tripurārahasya Mahātmya-​khaṇḍa (48.74) claims that Nepāla is “the place of 
Guhyakeśvarī” (nepāle guhyakeśvarī).
Figure 36.6.  Inscription of Śīlavatī, 489 ce. Courtesy of Saroj Shrestha. This is the first time 
that a proper photo of the Inscription of Śīlavatī is published. When requested, Saroj Shrestha, 
Niran Rajopadhyaya (priest of Taleju temple), and Dinanath Joshi of Lalitpur helped to find the 
inscription and send the photo.

--- PAGE 953 ---
928      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
In sum, Nepal is clearly identified as the uttarapīṭha or Northern Seat by a multiplicity 
of central texts, inscriptions, and important architectural structures. Nevertheless, 
Rastogi opines for Kashmir as the true Northern Seat with the sole evidence for his 
case being a single mention of the term uttarapīṭha (in relation to the krama) in 
Tantrāloka-​viveka where it states that Śivānanda (a Kashmirian krama exponent) re­
ceived teachings at uttarapīṭha.45 But this statement begs the question: where exactly 
is the uttarapīṭha? Our position is that the overwhelming evidence is that the original 
seat of the Northern Revelation is Nepal. Moreover, we identify Guhyakālī (Guhyeśvarī) 
as the primary goddess of the Northern Revelation (uttarāmnāya). In this capacity, we 
understand Guhyakālī to have preeminent significance with regard to understanding 
the development and practice of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra. In her status as the Goddess 
of All Revelations (sarvāmnāyeśvarī), Guhyakālī is to be worshipped through all the 
transmissions (sarvāmnāyaprapūjitā) in Nepal. The Goddess of the Secret abides as an 
indigenous core at the heart of the Nepālī tantric tradition.
But what exactly makes Nepal’s indigenous Northern Transmission tradition 
(uttarāmnāya) distinct from other tantric āmnāyas? To answer this question, we must 
appreciate the degree to which tantric traditions are literally grounded in the lands, 
peoples, and histories from which they emerge and for which they function as living 
expressions of the connection of identity to place. With regard to the prehistory of 
Figure 36.7.  Śarveśvara (a.k.a. Kumbheśvara) temple, Lalitpur.
Courtesy of Shivesh Sharma Rajopadhyaya.

--- PAGE 954 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      929
 
Guhyeśvarī/​Guhyakālī in Nepal, a thorough study has not been done. However, as noted 
above, one can certainly trace her roots back to the early, pre-​Vedic Monsoon-​Culture of 
Śakti worship in which the goddess was and continues to be associated with water and 
fertility. The modern remnants of this ancient monsoon culture remain prevalent in the 
geographic and cultural landscape of Nepal to this day (Vajracharya 2016).
The Influence of Kashmir, Bengal, 
and South India
With regard to the historical development of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra, we now note 
the important influence from and integration of the ritual manuscripts (paddhatis) that 
entered Nepal over the centuries from Gauḍa (Bengal), Kerala, and Kashmir. While the 
indigenous roots of Nepālī tantra are rightly traced through her Northern Transmission 
associated with the Guhyakālī, the complete development of the Sarvāmnāya tradi­
tion must be understood as a result of the migration of the important tantric traditions 
that flowed into Nepal from its western, southern, and eastern borders. A significant 
number of ritual manuals (paddhatis) from three regions share a geographic parsing 
of the subcontinent into three central regions. This parsing is consistent with that as 
stated in the Kālī-​khaṇda portion of the ca. seventeenth-​century ce Śakti-​saṅgama-​
tantra (4.3),46 which divides the triangular India (identified as bhāratavarṣa) itself into 
the three regions of Gauḍa (Bengal), Kerala, and Kashmir. It is from the central line of 
the Vindhyāvāsinī/​Vindhyācala mountain ranges that a geographical division is drawn. 
All regions east from the central point of the vindhyācala are Gauḍa, all regions west are 
Kashmir, and all regions south are Kerala. Nepāla is at uttara (north) of Vindhyācala.
As noted above, the cultural and geopolitical extents of Nepal ae not limited to the 
Kathmandu valley but rather incorporate the cultures of the lands at its borders. With 
specific regard to tantric revelation and practices, Nepal has equally integrated Gauḍa 
or Bengali tantra (as seen in the Śakti-​saṅgama-​tantra)47 together with Kaśmirī tantra 
(as seen in the Mahā-​siddhasāra-​tantra)48 and the tantra of South India generally and 
Kerala specifically. Indeed, Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantrics view their land as a sacred hub 
for the paddhatis of the regions of Gauḍa, Kashmir and Kerala (see fig. 36.8). Let us now 
turn to a brief analysis of the influence of each of these three regions.
Bengali/​Gauḍa Influence
In the 1920s, P. C. Bagchi (1934, 1), discovered the original manuscript of the 
Kaulajñānanirṇaya (together with other Kaula texts) in Nepal. This Gauḍa text of 
the Kaulajñānanirṇaya is attributed to Matsyendranātha,49 who is well known to be 
a Mahāsiddha from the Gauḍa region of Assam/​Kāmarūpa-​Kāmākhyā. However,

--- PAGE 955 ---
930      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
Matsyendranātha is nowhere venerated as he is in Nepal. The longest and one of the 
most important festivals of Nepal, the festival of Rāto (red) Matsyendranātha is cele­
brated every year in Nepal. In the festival, Matsyendranātha is brought to Lalitpur 
from Bungamati. The main priests are Buddhist Newār Shakyas under the mentorship 
(ācāryatva) of Newār Vajrācāryas, but the Kaula priests are also necessary to do the 
pūjā of Matsyendranātha in Lalitpur and they are the Newār Rājopādhyāya priests from 
Pūrṇacaṇḍī (Siddhilakṣmī) temple (see fig. 36.9). Nepali tradition believes that the deity 
(Siddhilakṣmī) in this temple is the tutelary deity of Matsyendranātha.
In his Kāmakalā-​Rahasya (1979, 40) Ja.Ba.Rā. goes so far as to state that Nepālī tantra 
is mostly Gauḍa-​influenced, and that a majority of the practices in Nepal’s temples are of 
Gauḍa nature. Indeed, if we look into Kulārṇava-​tantra (ca. eighth–​thirteenth century), 
we find that most of the Nepālī practices resemble its descriptions.
Kashmir Influence
Though not a Kaśmiri by birth, a śaivācārya named Vimalaprabodha (a south Indian)50 
who had studied in Kashmir51, came to Nepal in the thirteenth century ce with a 
Figure 36.8.  Regional division of tantra.

--- PAGE 956 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      931
 
number of books like the Devīdvyardhaśatikā (eleventh century ce) related to Trika 
Śaivism (also known as Kashmiri Śaivism).52 He was a guru who gave the coronation-​
empowerment to Ari Malla (r. 1200–​1216 ce), the first Malla king of Nepal. Inspired by 
his coronation-​guru, Ari Malla centered his political-​religious vision of his kingdom 
(dubbed “the territory of Nepal,” Nepāla-​Maṇḍala) specifically within the Kathmandu 
valley (Nepāla 2005, 136). With Vimalaprabodha, even when his ideas appear inspired by 
Kashmiri sources, his own written “expressions are unmistakably Dravidian, and prob­
ably from the Kannaḍa-​or Tuḷu-​speaking areas of the Deccan,” as Sanderson (2014, 64) 
noted. In other words, for Sanderson, those texts by Vimalaprabodha have their origins 
in the south, not Kashmir. According to Sanderson (2020, 8), the Trika texts that sur­
vive in Nepal are Siddhayogeśvarīmata, Tantrasadbhāva, and Trikasāra. Additionally, 
the Nepālī king following Ari Malla, Abhayamalla (r. 1216–​1255 ce), composed a tantric 
text named Amṛteśvarapūjana (Sanderson 2014, 47) based on Netra-​paddhati (which 
was composed in Kashmir between ca. 700 and 850 ce) (30).
Sanderson (2007, 2014) and Dyczkowski (1988) both identify a significant 
number of texts related to Kashmir Śaivism extant in Nepal. In addition to the 
Kālikākulapañcaśataka and the Devīdvyardhaśatikā, there is a text peculiarly impor­
tant for Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra based on the Kālī tradition (kālīkula) known as the 
Figure 36.9.  Kaula Newār Brahmin priests at Pūrṇacaṇḍī (Siddhilakṣmī) temple, Patan, 
Nepal. Courtesy of Bijaya Sharma Rajopadhyaya. This photo is of Newār Kaula Rajopadhyaya 
priests associated with the temple Pūrṇacaṇḍī (Siddhilakṣmī). Bijaya Sharma Rajopadyaya 
(standing on a lower base), who is associated with this temple, is one of the emerging well-​known 
young Kaula Newār priests, expert both in practice and philosophy.

--- PAGE 957 ---
932      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
Parātantra. This important tantra describes in detail all (sarva) of the systems of reve­
lation (āmnāyas). In its colophon, the Parātantra identifies itself as a tantra under the 
root tantra Śiraccheda.53 Sanderson (2007) writes “the non Saiddhāntika Śaiva exegetes 
of Kashmir are grounded within the Śakti tantra division of the Vidyāpītha, which 
contains texts of the two main divisions of that tradition: the Trika and the Kālīkula, 
rooted respectively in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata and the Śiraccheda” (235). While 
Parātantra mentions Śiraccheda,54 which suggests Kashmir, Parātantra is uniquely 
Nepālī in its composition and authorship. Moreover, while Sanderson states that this 
text is concocted and fictitious (2014, 67), from the emic view of Nepālī tāntrikas it is in­
stead perceived as a legitimate adaptation based on the authentic Nepālī tradition itself. 
Vimalaprabodha (thirteenth century ce), a non-​Nepālī, used a similar adaptive process 
when he came to Nepal and wrote Kālīkulakramārcana as a ritual text (paddhati) for the 
worship of the indigenous Nepālī goddess, Guhyakālī.55 Regardless of opinions on au­
thenticity, Parātantra (5.1) establishes that by the early fifteenth century, Nepālī tāntrikas 
were using the term sarvāmnāya in reference to their own traditions. Today, Parātantra 
remains a root text for the majority of Nepālī tāntrikas.
Keralan Influence
In Nepal, two roots of Keralan influence are noticeable, one in the temple practices of 
Paśupatinātha and a second in the practices of Taleju temples.56 At the Paśupatinātha 
temple in Deopatan, Nepal, the worship of all the revelations (sarvāmnāya-​pūjā) is 
practiced by placing a śrīyantra diagram drawn on the upper face (ūrdhva-​īśānāmukha) 
by the main temple priests, who are of the Bhaṭṭa clan. Though the Nepālī tradition 
holds that the renowned south Indian philosopher Ādi Śaṅkarācārya (ca. eighth century 
ce) himself established this practice here in Paśupatinātha, there is a lack of a sound 
historical evidence for this claim. Nonetheless, south Indian Bhaṭṭas have continuously 
been the priests here since at least 1734 ce, and they perform the pūjā according to the 
Keralan ritual manuals (paddhatis) (Michaels 2008, 23).
Regarding the goddess Taleju and her tradition, Newār Rājopādhyāyas, Karmācāryas, 
and astrologers (jośīs) have maintained her practice. Over the centuries, a number of 
different deities have been integrated into the figure of Taleju. One very popular legend57 
is that Tulajā Bhavānī (a form of Durgā) was brought to Nepal by King Harisiṃhadeva 
(r. 1304 to 1325 ce) of the Karnāṭa dynasty.58 This Tulajā is unique and distinct from the 
Tulajās that are prevalent in India at the moment because this Tulajā, according to the 
legend, has a śrīyantra incorporated within her. This integration is certainly seen in as­
sociation with the Taleju of Nepal. For example, on the tympanum of one of the doors 
of the Bhaktapur Taleju temple there is a goddess with nine heads in three rows. The 
uppermost row has a single head of the Durgā called Tvaritā whose Nature is Śrīvidyā 
(śrīvidyātmaka-​tvaritā59). In the second row there are three heads that represent the 
three forms of Durgā as Mahālakṣmī, Mahākālī, and Mahāsarasvatī. Below that, in the 
central row, there is Siddhilakṣmī60 with five heads. The entire composite form is known

--- PAGE 958 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      933
 
as the Tvaritā Durgā Whose Nature is Siddhilakṣmī and Kubjikā (siddha-​kubjikātmaka-​
tvaritā). Here, the śrīvidyātmaka tvaritā component of the images demonstrates the 
historical influence of śrīvidyā coming from the Kerala division of tantra.61 However, a 
prior, perhaps indigenous tradition, can easily be detected in Nepal through the analysis 
of the temples’ existence and practices in place before the start of both the Paśupatinātha 
and Taleju traditions (Bhanī 1984; Michaels 2008). In other words, the texts of these two 
Keralan traditions are integrated and adapted as per the already existing Nepālī tradi­
tion but without significantly altering the original function and meaning.62
The Influence of the Śāha Dynasty
To complete this study on the origins and nature of Sarvāmnāya tantra we must now 
look at the influence of the Śāha dynasty of Gorkha kings. It is through the patronage 
of these kings that the Sarvāmnāya tradition becomes firmly established as the national 
religion of Nepal. A proper early history of the Śāha (family of Gorkha) kings before 
Jaina Khām̐ṇa—​including their territories before they settled in Syāṅgjā—​is unknown 
and their Magar-​origin is controversial.63 However, in Syāṅgjā district of Gandaki 
Province, there is a temple of Śāha’s tutelary deity named Ālama-​devī where a preteen 
Magar boy occupies the role of a priest (see fig. 36.10). In this temple, in place of an idol 
Figure 36.10.  Temple of Ālama Devī, Lasargā, Syāṅgjā.
Courtesy of Ālama Devī Temple.

--- PAGE 959 ---
934      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
there is simply a small tree. There is a saying that this goddess, which was brought by 
Jaina Khām̐ṇa, submerged (alapa) underground upon reaching the region. Hence this 
deity is called Ālama-​devī, meaning the “submerged or disappeared deity.”64 However, 
Jagman Gurung claims that the words Ālana (Karnali region), ālama (Gandaki region), 
and alām̐ (in Gurung dialect) are words meaning dhvajā, or flag.65
To identify this Ālama-​devī, the tutelary deity of Jaina Khām̐ṇa, one has to see when 
and how the main pūjā is practiced. The pūjā of the tutelary deity is done here every 
year on the fourteenth day of the bright lunar fortnight of vaiśākha month. According 
to Āgamic tradition,66 this is the day when the pūjā of Siddhilakṣmī is done. So, the tu­
telary goddess of Jaina Khām̐ṇawho disappeared (lost?/​submerged?) here seems to 
be Siddhilakṣmī. However, the disappearance of the goddess does not seem to mean 
the loss of her power, because a descendent of Jaina Khām̐ṇa has even more success in 
getting the kingdom of Kāskī (kāskī-​rājya).
The goddess Guhyakālī (Guptakālī in the local dialect) resides in Kāskī-​koṭa (see 
fig. 36.11). This is intriguing given that Siddhilakṣmī and Guhyakālī are both deities 
of the Northern Revelation (uttarāmnāya) and in one of the krama practices of 
the uttarāmnāya, the practice of Siddhilakṣmī is to be mastered first before that of 
Guhyakālī. It is also noteworthy that King Kulamaṇḍana Khām̐ṇa of Kāskī was bestowed 
with the title of Śāha or “mighty” by the Bādaśāha of Delhi, and since that time Śāha has 
been in use for their surname (Subedi 2003).
Figure 36.11.  Temple palace of Guhyakālī, Kāskīkoṭa.
Courtesy of Dinesh Sharma Marasini.

--- PAGE 960 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      935
 
From Guhyakālī, Kāskī-​koṭa, one of the descendants of Kulamaṇḍana Śāha went 
to Lamjung and became king there; from Lamjuṅg, their descendent Dravya Śāha 
migrated to Gorkhā and became the first Śāha king of Gorkha in 1559 ce. There is a 
temple of Kālī at the Gorkhā palace (see fig. 36.12) and this deity is often called a younger 
sister of Guhyakālī of Kāskī, so Gorakha-​kālī seems to be another form of Guhyakālī.
Adjacent to the palace is also the Gorakhanātha cave temple. The relationship be­
tween the Gorakhanāthī and the Śāha Kings is well known in Nepal. In the Kathmandu 
valley, both Taleju (as Kubjikā) and Guhyeśvarī (as Guhyakālī) have great authority 
(see fig. 36.13). In the Gorakṣa-​saṃhitā (14.159–​14.167), there is an integrated form of 
Guhyakālī and Kubjikā whose iconography is detailed in fig. 36.14 (Pandeya 1976, 150–​
151). Moreover, the Gorakṣa-​saṃhitā (14.170–​14.171) explicitly states that this form is a 
higher form of Guhyakālī (as Guhyeśvarī).67
The descendent of Dravya Śāha, King Pṛthivī Nārāyaṇa Śāha, is said to have entered 
Kantipur with his military force in 1768 ce upon the occasions of the annual festival 
of Indra-​jātrā. Fearing for his life, King Jaya Prakāśa Malla fled to Lalitpur for asylum. 
Pṛthivī Nārāyaṇa went straight to the living goddess Kumārī, and rather than taking 
control of her, kneeled down and prostrated to her. In response, the Kumārī anointed 
Pṛthivī Nārāyaṇa Śāha as the King of Nepal by putting a ṭīkā on his forehead. This 
shows that the living goddess Kumārī (the embodiment of Goddess Taleju) favored him 
(Gurung 2022; Lidke 2017, 125).68 The Bṛhat Puraścaryārṇava69 says that the kumārī, the 
clan virgin (kulabālā), is herself worshipped by all the āmnāyas (sarvāmnāya-​prapūjitā). 
Figure 36.12.  Temple palace of Gorakha-​Kālī, Gorkha, Courtesy of Ric Ergenbright.

--- PAGE 961 ---
936      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
Figure 36.13.  Temple of Guhyeśvarī, Kathmandu.
Courtesy of Śrī Guheśvarī Mandira Vyavasthāpana Samiti.
Figure 36.14.  Guhyeśvarī. Painting by Jñānakāra Vajrācārya. The iconograph here is ac­
cording to the Gorakṣa-​saṃhita.
Courtesy of Mark Dyczkowski. This color painting of Guhyeśvarī was 
first published as Plate 6 by Dyczkowski (2001, 60).

--- PAGE 962 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      937
 
In this way the Virgin Goddess is identified as the living embodiment of the Goddess of 
the Total Revelation (sarvāmnāyeśvarī) (see fig. 36.15).
Conclusion
In conclusion, we offer a timeline for Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra in table 36.2, which 
identifies the key sources for the tradition, beginning in the fifth century. We have pro­
vided notation for the purpose of reminding the reader of the specific significance of 
each reference in the table.
What table 36.2 establishes is that the origins of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra extend 
back to the fifth century with the famous Paśupatinātha inscription identifying the five 
faces of Śiva as the source of the streams of revelation (āmnāya). In this same century we 
find evidence of the presence of the Krama tantric tradition in Nepal, which is signifi­
cant as Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra is a Krama system grounded in the revelations that 
arise from the faces of Śiva. Contemporary Sarvāmnāya tāntrikas identify the seventh 
century as the time of the great Nepālī Kaula master, Matsyendranātha. This is also the 
beginning of the composition of important root texts which are not only housed at the 
Nepal National Archives but which likely were composed in or around Nepal. Running 
from the seventh through the sixteenth centuries, these texts include the Ciñcinīmata, 
Figure 36.15.  Taleju priest of Patan, Niran Rajopadhyaya doing Kumārī-​pūjā. Courtesy of 
Niran Rajopadhyaya. Taking a photo of Kumārī of Kathmandu (Kāntipura) and Taleju priests 
therein doing the pūjā is highly prohibited. Here, Niran Rajopadhyay, one of the priests of Taleju 
(Patan), is doing a pūjā to the Kumārī of Lalitpur.

--- PAGE 963 ---
938      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
Table 36.2  Timeline for development of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra
Timeline
Reference
5th century
Oldest inscription that mentions the five faces of Śiva (sa-​pari-​
cumbita-​vaktra-​pañca) is from Paśupatinātha, Nepāla.a
Śarvāṇī, a goddess of krama tradition mentioned in the oldest known 
śakta inscription is in Lalitpur, Nepal.
ca. 7th centuryb
Matsyendranātha and Kaula tradition.c
Composition of Ciñciṇīmata and Siddhayogeśvarīmata.d
ca. 8th century
Composition of Niśisaṃcāratantrae
ca. 9/​10th centuryf
Composition of Kubjikāmata-​tantra (One of the earliest references to 
mention sarvāmnāya)g
ca. 10–​13th century
Composition of Vāmakeśvaratantra/​Vāmakeśvarīmata, which includes 
Yoginī Hṛdaya & Nityāśodaśikārṇava.h
ca. 11–​14th century
Composition of Skanda purāṇai (Kāśī khaṇḍa),j Tripurārahasya,j 
Kulārṇava tantra,k and Hāhārāva-​tantra.l
ca. 12–​16th century
Composition of Vārāhī-​Tantra,m Parātantra,n Bṛhad-​vaḍavānala-​
tantra,o and Muṇḍamālā-​tantra.p
ca. 14th century
Construction of Sarveśvara (aka Kumbheśvara) temple.q
16th–​17th century
Construction of Taleju Temples.r
ca. 16th–​18th centurys
Composition of Sarvāmnāya-​tantra,t Śakti-​saṅgama-​tantra,u and 
Tantracintāmaṇi by Mahāmātya Navamī Siṃha.
18th century
Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva.
20th century
Writings of Dhana Śamaśera Ja. Ba. Rā, Pt. Kṛṣṇa Prasāda Bhaṭṭarāī.
21st century
Writings of Timalsina, Upadhyaya, Lamichhane, Akshunna, Acharya, 
Sapkota, Dyczkowski, Sanderson, Lidke et. al.v
Source: Courtesy of Akshunna and J. S. Lidke.
a  Kulārṇavatantram (3/​7) states that it is from the five faces of Paśupatinātha that the āmnāyas 
emerged.
b  Although there is no universally accepted date for Matsyendranātha, this is the dating that Nepālīs 
use for both Matsyendranātha and Gorakṣanātha.
c  According to Nepali tradition, Matsyendranātha and Gorakṣanātha in the time of King Narendradeva 
started the Kaula tradition of āmnāyas and practices in Nepal.
d  The texts and traditions of both the Ciñcinīmata and Siddhayogeśvarīmata survive to this day 
in Nepal.
e  As previously mentioned, the Niśisaṃcāratantra establishes Guhyeśvarī (sarvāmnāyeśvarī) together 
with Paśupatinātha (sarvamnāyeśvara) in Nepal.
f  See Sanderson 2002.
g  Pūjayetsarvabhāvena sarvāmnāyaṃ sa gopayeth | | (Kubjikāmata 19/​118).
“Do the pūjā from all bhavas (temperament) and keep it secret in all that is.” (Alternatively translated as 
“Do the pūjā from all bhāvas (temperaments) and keep sarvāmnāya secret”) (Kubjikāmata, 19/​118).

--- PAGE 964 ---
Table 36.2  Continued
The Total Revelation Tantra      939
h  In Nityāśodaśikārṇava, āmnāyas are described as ājñās. See Madhav Lamichhane (2018, p. 17).
i  Skanda-​purāṇa includes a timeline from the eighth century down to seventeenth century. This 
section, the Kāśī khaṇḍa, is usually placed in the eleventh century with its last part being completed 
around the mid-​thirteenth century.
j  Sarvāmnāya nidhirbhava|| (Skanda-​purāṇa kāśī khaṇḍa, 2.23|150).
“Be a treasure of sarva (all) āmnāyas.” (Skanda-​purāṇa Kāśī khaṇḍa, 2.23.150).
k  Sarvāmnāyasamanvitām‌ (Tripurā rahasya caryā khaṇḍa 2/​28).
Inclusive of sarva(all)-​āmnāya~s (Tripurā rahasya caryā khaṇḍa 2/​28).
l  The Kulārṇava is a root text used among the kaulas of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra.
m  Hāhārāva-​tantra, a root text in Nepal, refers to Guhyakālī as Sarvāmnāyeśvarī and identifies her 
as the supreme goddess of the Sarvāmnāya: Sarvāmnāya parama devī kālikā guhya nirmitā (12b).
n  A very important tantra for Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra that integrates many different practices.
o  This is the most important text of Nepālī origin for Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra because it deals with 
sarva (all) āmnāyas in accord with the Nepali tradition: “Goddess of all-​cakras, worshipped in all 
(sarva) āmnāyas” Sarvacakreśvarī nityā sarvāmnāyaprapūjitā|| (Parātantra, 5.1).
p  This tantra is very important for Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra, and describes in detail all of the 
āmnāyas and the krama process of Sarvāmnāya under Sarvāmnāya itself. The complete text is not 
currently available except for some fragmentary verses in Puraścaryārṇava and in the writings of 
Dhana Śamaśera Ja Ba Rā.
q  Muṇḍamālā tantram (1/​1) starts its text as follows: “All the blissful wisdom venerated 
by all āmnāyas, to you the goddess, giver of all boons, I salute.” sarvānandamayī vidyāṃ 
sarvāmnāyairnamaskṛtām, sarva siddhipradāṃ devīṃ namāmi parameśvarīm.
r  Built in Lalitpur in 1392 ce.
s  Bhaktapur Taleju Temple was built in ca. 1553 ce, Kathmandu Taleju Temple in 1564 ce by King 
Mahendra Malla, Patan Taleju Temple in 1667 ce by King Śrī Nivāsa Malla.
t  Kavindrācārya Sarasvatī had Sarvāmnāya-​tantra in his collection in the seventeenth century, so 
obviously the original text must have been written half a century ago or a century ago. This would 
definitely make it a text from the sixteenth century at the least.
u  The existence of this Sarvāmnāya-​tantra is known to Nepālī sādhakas but the text hasn’t come 
to light yet from anywhere. However, Kavindrācārya Sarasvatī from Kashi, who was a contemporary 
of Mughal emperor Shah Jahan (1592–​1666 ce), had an extensive library where he used to mark all 
the books with his name and a list of 2,192 manuscripts in his possession was cataloged between 
1628 and 1688 (Jain et al. 2013, 4). Sarvāmnāya-​tantra is listed as no. 1757 in Kavindracharya’s list 
(Sastry 1921).
v  One of the most important texts used in Nepal that integrates all āmnāyas, darśanas and 
paddhatis.
w  The last decade has seen a remarkable engagement between western scholars and Nepālī 
scholars and practitioners in the Kathmandu valley. Three important outlets for these 
collaborative exchanges are (1) Vimarsha Foundation, founded by Sthaneswhar Timalsinsa 
(https://​www.vim​arsh​afou​ndat​ion.org/​); (2) the Facebook group, Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra, 
founded by Lorsdri Gurung; and (3) the academic community, tantra Charcha Pariwar, 
established by Sandip Sapkota.

--- PAGE 965 ---
940      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
Siddhayogeśvarīmata, Niśisaṃcāratantra, Kubjikāmata-​tantra, Vāmakeśvarīmata, 
Skanda purāṇa, Tripurārahasya, Kulārṇava tantra, Hāhārāva-​tantra, Vārāhī-​Tantra, 
Parātantra, Bṛhad-​vaḍavānala-​tantra, and Muṇḍamālā-​tantra.
In terms of architectural evidence for Sarvāmnāya tantra, we see the construction of 
the Sarveśvara temple (see fig. 36.7) to the āmnāya-​generating Śiva in the fourteenth 
century, and by the sixteenth century we witness the construction of multiple temples to 
the royal Newār Sarvāmnāya goddess par excellence, Taleju (see fig. 36.16). By the eight­
eenth century we see the composition of the Sarvāmnāya-​tantra, Śakti-​saṅgama-​tantra, 
and Tantracintāmaṇi—​all key texts for contemporary Sarvāmnāya practitioners. It is in 
the eighteenth century that the great Śāha king, Pratāpa Siṃha, composed the Bṛhat-​
Puraścaryārṇava, an invaluable compendium of Sarvāmnāya practice. In the modern 
age, we have the invaluable writings of Dhana Śamaśera and Pt. Kṛṣṇa Prasāda Bhaṭṭarāī 
as well as the scholarship of a host of Nepālī and Western scholars—​scholarship that is 
helping shape and preserve the Sarvāmnāya tradition even as Nepālī culture and society 
undergoes tremendous forces of change.
Today, Newār and non-​Newār Nepālī tāntrikas alike identify their tradition as 
being the tradition that contains the total (sarva) revelation of the six streams of rev­
elation (ṣaḍ-​āmnāya) by naming it Sarvāmnāya tantra (see fig. 36.17). In the course 
of their respective spiritual disciplines (sādhanas), Sarvāmnāya tāntrikas seek in­
itiation into each of the six revelations as it is through the cumulative total of all 
Figure 36.16.  The three main priests of the Taleju temples of Kathmandu, Bhaktapur and 
Patan. From left to Right: Niran Jwalananda Rajopadhyaya (Patan Taleju head priest), Sandip 
Sapkota (founder, Tantra Carcā), Binaya Bikram Shah (Shay royal family descendent), Udhavman 
Karmacharya (Kathmandu Taleju head priest), and Pragnesh Raj Rajopadhyaya (Bhaktapur 
Taleju head priest).
Courtesy of Binaya Bikram Shah and Sandip Sapkota.

--- PAGE 966 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      941
 
the revelations that one achieves the desired status of being “established in all the 
āmnāyas” (sarvāmnāya-​viśaradā). Although no religious populace is ever 100 per­
cent cognizant of the esoteric meaning of its respective religious practices, it is the 
case that in Nepal there are a significant number of scholar-​practitioners who are 
indeed well versed in the deeper meaning of the practices of all the āmnāyas. Given 
that Nepal not only birthed a good number of texts and traditions—​including but 
not limited to the Guhyakālī tradition of the Northern Revelation—​but also has 
functioned to this day as a proverbial “water pot” for the inflow of the streams of 
revelation that came from Kashmir, Bengal, and Kerala, one therefore cannot over­
emphasize the impact and value of the Sarvāmnāya tradition for the study and un­
derstanding of tantra in South Asia.
Notes
	1.	 By this term we mean precisely the kind of insider-​out epistemic orientation outlined by 
Sthaneshwar Timalsina (2014) in his important essay “Indigenous Epistemology and 
Placing the Cultural Self in Crisis: A New Hermeneutic Model for Cultural Studies.”
Figure 36.17.  Parbatīyā brahmin, Sandip Sapkota (left) with Newārs, Maheshwar Juju (middle) 
and Beti Bajracharya (right), during ceremony on December 30, 2022, for the establishment of 
tantra Carcā Pariwār, an indigenous scholar-​practitioner community dedicated to the preserva­
tion of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tantra.
Courtesy of Sandip Sapkota and J. S. Lidke.

--- PAGE 967 ---
942      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
	2.	 From verbal root bhid “to portion or divide,” bheda implies “diversity,” and its opposite, 
abheda, indicates the absence of diversity or unity. The compound phrase bhedābheda 
literally means “unity-​in-​diversity.” The term has been used by Hindu theologians across 
sectarian lines since the seventh century ce to refer to the panentheistic vision that crea­
tion is God’s emanation. The multiplicity of creation is One. See Nicholson 2010, passim. 
This vision of unity-​through-​multiplicity is in turn translated into the social and political 
logic at the heart of the vision of Nepal as a mandala. See Lidke 2017, 78–​84. Cf. Slusser 
1982, passim.
	3.	 Dyczkowski makes this claim as part of his brief response to an uncited passage from 
Lidke’s dissertation on Śrī Vidyā traditions in Nepal in which the latter summarizes 
the Sarvāmnāya as a progression of Śākta tantric initiations that link the scriptures and 
mantras of the six āmnāyas to cakras within the subtle physiology through the methods of 
kuṇḍalinī-​yoga.
	4.	 This kind of variation in labels and practices is a characteristic of the very nature and, as it 
were, style of Nepālī tantra, with its inclusivist orientation. The ideal of a Total Revelation 
can certainly incorporate the label “Six Revelations.” While some Newārs, like Kedar Raj, 
may teach (to at least some) that there is only one initiation, this does not mean that for 
other Newārs multiple initiations is not the norm. One need not assume, as Dyczkowski 
does, that Sarvāmnāya is a Parbatīyā tradition, alien to the Newārs. Further, it important 
to note here that the term “Parbatīyā” (“of the hills”) is by no means a fixed caste category 
that in each and every case identifies people who are clearly distinct from those who call 
themselves Newār. Relative to the people of India, for example, the entire population of 
Nepal has been labeled “of the [northern] hills.” Relative to the people of the Kathmandu 
valley, everyone outside the valley has been labeled “of the hills,” including, primarily 
those who migrated from India. And within the Kathmandu valley itself some groups ei­
ther self-​identify as or are otherwise labeled as “of the hills” and at times even if they are 
otherwise properly identified as Newārs. In short, the question of what or who exactly a 
Parbatīyā is can be a rich and complicated topic of debate. Indeed, one example of this 
complexity is the fact that Newār Rājopādhyāyas and Parbatīyā Kumāī Brāhmaṇa’s both 
trace their origins to Kannauj in north India (Toffin 2007, 51). Before migrating to Nepal, 
both of these groups likely viewed the land of Nepal as “of the hills” and while today the 
Rājopādhyā may reference his Kumāī contemporary as “parbatīyā” the use of such a label 
does not eradicate the historical fact that they share common geographical and cultural 
roots. In short, whatever conclusions one comes to in the context of this debate, it would 
be a mistake to assume that within the Kathmandu valley particularly, but even Nepal 
as whole, that that which is Parbatīyā may not be Newār and vice versa. Certainly, this is 
true when it comes to the greater system of Nepālī tantric practice. Whether we call that 
system All Revelations or Six Revelations or both, depending on context, it is important 
to understand that the essential components of the practice are shared by tantrics across 
caste categories and boundaries.
	5.	 Indeed, from the Sarvāmnāya perspective, Tripurāsundarī and Kālī are the same deity 
with two aspects. As it states in the Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava: “In accordance with the dis­
tinction as Śyāmā (the dark one) and Raktā (the red one), Kālī is twofold. The dark one 
is called Dakṣiṇā whereas the red one is called Śrī [Tripurā]Sundarī.” Sā Kāḷī dvividyā 
proktā śyāmāraktāprabhedataḥ. Śyāmāra tu dakṣiṇā proktā rakta Śrī Sundarī matā. (Bṛhat-​
Puraścaryārṇava, Part 1, p. 24).

--- PAGE 968 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      943
 
	 6.	 Tripurārahasya (1.28) reads, Yē saṅgatāḥ pūrṇadīkṣāṁ śrīmahāpādukāyutām. 
Mahāśrīṣōḍaśīyuktāṁ sarvāmnāya-​samanvitām (TR 1.28): “Those who have attained the 
complete initiation (pūrṇadīkṣāṁ) do so through the Mahāpādukā [initiation] which 
includes the Maha Śoḍaśi mantra (of Tripurasundarī) and interweaves (samanvitām) 
all the revelations (sarvāmnāya).” In a similar vein, the Skanda Purāṇa Kāśī Khaṇḍa 
(2.23.150) reads, Īśvara uvāca. Suraśrēṣṭha tapaḥśrēṣṭha sarvāmnāya nidhirbhava. Sr̥ ṣṭēḥ 
karaṇasāmarthyaṁ tavāstu madanugrahāt (SkPu KaKha 2.73.150.): “The Lord Said: O 
best of the Gods, O best of the ascetics, be the treasure-​mine of all the transmissions.” 
Finally, 
the 
Saundaryalaharī 
10 
reads, 
Sudhādhārāsarāiścaraṇa-​yugalāntar-​
vigalitaiḥ prapañcaṃ siñcantī punarapi rasāmnāyamahasaḥ | Avāypa svāṃ bhūmiṃ 
bhujaganibhamadhyuṣṭavalayaṃ svamātmānaṃ kṛtvā svapiṣī kulakunḍe kuhariṇi || SL 
10 || “With streams of nectar flowing from between your feet sprinkling the universe, 
recreating through the power of reciting the sacred texts that produce the six (āmnāyas), 
again you reach your own abode and into the form of a serpent in three and a half coils 
you convert yourself and sleep in the kulakuṇḍa hollow” (SL 10). The classical pan-​Indic 
scriptural sources are paradigmatically reiterated in the many paddhatis both at Nepal’s 
National Archives as well as in the private collections of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya practitioners.
	 7.	 In addition to Sthaneshwar Timalsina who is both a classically trained Brāhmaṇa paṇḍita 
(Sanskrit is Timalsina’s native tongue) and a “Western” scholar with a PhD in Indology 
from Germany who is now Nirmal K. and Augustina Mattoo Endowed Chair in Classical 
Indic Humanities at Stony Brook University, there are a number of other highly informed 
tāntrikas in Nepal. Other notable mentions in this regard are Diwakar Acharya (Spalding 
Professor of Eastern Religions and Ethics at the University of Oxford), Lordsri Gurung, 
the late Siddhi Gopal Vaidya, and the many participants in the online Nepālī Sarvāmnāya 
tantra Facebook group organized by different ethnic members including Madhav 
Lamichhane (mountain Brahmin), Sandip Sapkota (disciple of the priest Maheshwar 
Juju Rajopadhyaya of Degu-​Taleju temple), Bijaya Sharma Rajopadhyaya (Newār priest), 
Abhas Rajopadhyaya (priest of Chaṅgu Nārāyaṇa temple) and Shanta Ratna Vajracharya 
(Newār Buddhist priest).
	 8.	 See Paśupati-​pañcāsya-​stavaḥ at Sanskrit Documents website: pashupati panchAsya 
stavaH (sanskritdocuments.org).
	 9.	 Translated by L. S. Akshunna. Although a pañcamukha linga was found in Bhita, near 
Allahabad, and Sharma (1976) proposes its date to the second century ce, this inscription 
from Nepal is the oldest one that explicitly references five (pañca) faces (vaktra). For fur­
ther details on the inscription, see Śyāmasundara Rājavaṃśī (1989).
	10.	 Guruśiṣyapade sthitvā svayaṃ devaḥ sadāśivaḥ (Svacchandatantram, 8.31).
Sadāśivaḥ himself stood in the role of Guru and Śiṣya (Svacchandatantram, 8.31).
	11.	 Mama pañcamukhebhyaśca pañcāmnāyāḥ samudgatāḥ, pūrvaśca paścimaścaiva 
dakṣiṇaścottarastathā, 
urdhvāmnāyaśca 
pañcaite 
mokṣamārgāḥ 
prakīrtitāḥ 
(Kulārṇavatantram, 3.7).
From my five faces came the five āmnāya~s (revelations); all these five eastern, western, southern, 
northern and upper āmnāyas are of the nature of liberating path (Kulārṇavatantram, 3.7).
	12.	 pūrvāmnāyasya saṅketāścaturviṃśatirīritāḥ | dakṣiṇāmnāyasaṅketāḥ pañcaviṃśatirīritāḥ 
||43|| paścimāmnāyasaṅketā dvātriṃśat‌ samudāhṛtāḥ | viduḥ ṣaṭ triṃśadāmnāye saṅketā 
śrīmaduttare ||44||
	13.	 1. Pūrṇeśī, 2. Bhuvaneśī, 3. Lalitā, 4. Aparājitā, 5. Lakṣmī, 6. Sarasvatī (sāradā), 7. 
Pārijāta-​sarasvatī, 8. Annapūrṇā, 9. Jayā, 10. Jayantī, 11. Vijayā, 12. Ajitā, 13. Nārasiṃhī,

--- PAGE 969 ---
944      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
14. Vyāgreśvarī, 15. Karālā, 16. Unmanī, 17. Raktadantā, 18. Viśālākṣī, 19. Kāmeśī, 20. 
Caṇḍamālinī, 21.Vidyujivā, 22.Bhrāmareśī, 23.Nāṭeśī, 24.Nṛtyanāyikā.
	14.	 1. Ādyākālī, 2. Niśeśī, 3. Dakṣiṇakālī, 4. Bagalā, 5. Chinnamastā, 6. Bhadrā, 7. Mātāṅgī, 8. 
Jambhinī, 9. Stambhinī, 10. Mohinī, 11. Mṛtyuñjayā, 12. Carcikā, 13. Siṃhī, 14. Pracaṇḍā, 15. 
Ugracaṇḍā, 16. Ugratārā, 17. Kapālinī, 18. Tvaritā, 19. Vākpradāyinī, 20. Nilasarasvatī, 21. 
Bhīmā, 22. Trailokya Dāmareśvarī, 23. Trailokyavijaya, 24. Caṇḍikā, 25. Raktacāmuṇḍā.
	15.	 1. Aghorakubjikā 2. Vajrakubjikā 3. Samayakubjikā 4. Ghorakubjikā 5. Virakubjikā 6. 
Jayakubjikā 7. Bhogakubjikā 8. Siddhikubjikā 9. Mokṣakuubjikā 10. Rājakuubjikā 11. 
Karmakubjikā 12. Divyakubjikā 13. Barbarākubjikā 14. Bālakubjikā, 15. Caṇḍakubjikā 
(guhyakubjikā), 16. Kulalikā, 17. Mātaṅgī, 18. Rājamātaṅgī, 19. Amṛtalakṣmī, 20. Caṇḍā, 
21. Caṇḍikā, 22. Pracaṇḍā, 23. Mahogratārā, 24. Siddhīcāmuṇḍā, 25. Triśakticāmuṇḍā, 26. 
Trikhaṇḍā, 27. Caṇḍākapālikā, 28. Krameśī, 29. Navātmeśvarī, 30. Svachandabhairavī, 31. 
Rājalakṣmī, 32. Jayavāgīśvarī.
	16.	 1. Siddhilakṣmī, 2. Guhyakālī (Kāmakalā/​Ekavaktra), 3. Siddhikarālī, 4. Caṇḍayogeśvarī, 
5. Kāmakalākālī, 6. Mahākālī (pañcavaktra), 7. Tumbureśī, 8. Kālasaṅkarṣiṇī, 9. 
Pratyaṅgirā, 10. Kālarātrī, 11. Siddhibhairavī, 12. Raktakapālinī, 13. Caṇḍakapālinī, 14. 
Mahābhimasarasvatī, 15. Mahāḍāmarīśvarī, 16. Trirupātārā, 17. Bhadrakālī, 18. Ugrakālī, 19. 
Kālakālī, 20. Kṛtāntakālī, 21. Saṃhārakālī, 22. Kālāntakālī, 23. Kalpāntakālī, 24. Bhimākālī, 
25. Phetkāriṇī, 26. Caṇḍakkurī, 27. Jayamaṅgalā, 28. Dhumāvatī, 29. Svarṇakoṭeśvarī, 30. 
Nakuleśvarī, 31. Kāpālinī, 32. Jhiṇṭeśī, 33. Chinnamastā (ṣaḍjarī) 34. Śamaśānakālī, 35. 
Śvetacāmuṇḍā, 36. Guhyakālī (Nirvāṇa/​Daśavaktra).
	17.	 This list of variations comes from Dhana Śamaśera’s commentary on the Kulārṇava-​tantra 
(1989, 47–​49).
	18.	 The seventh century is identified by Nepālī tāntrikas as the time period of 
Matsyendranātha, who is believed to be a contemporary of King Nardendradeva. It is not 
clear whether Matsyendranātha and Mīnanātha are the same person. In Nepal, during the 
festival of Red Matsyendranātha, two distinct chariots (rathas) are built, one for each as 
distinct masters, but both from the same tantric community (kula).
	19.	 The authors have observed the practice of Śiraścheda in the lineage of Vidyanatha 
Upadhyaya Bhatta and the practices of the Ciñcinnī in the lineage of Sthaneshwar 
Timalsina. Moreover, the practices of both traditions are preserved by the Newar 
Rājopadhyāyas.
	20.	 In the Dakṣiṇāmnāya it is Kāmeśvarī/​Tripurasundarī together with the Nityās. The 
Uttarāmnāya is Kālīkula while the Paścimāmnāya is Kubjikā. See Dyczkowski 1988, 67–​73.
	21.	 Caitanyabhairavī kecid raktakāliti kecana | “Some call her Caitanyabhairavī and others, 
Raktakālī” (Parātantra 2.3).
	22.	 Sā Kālī dvividyā proktā Śyāmāraktāprabhedataḥ. Śyāmāra tu dakśinā proktā rakta Śrī 
Sundarī matā | “In accordance with the distinction as Śyāmā (the dark one) and Raktā 
(the red one), Kālī is twofold. The dark one is called Dakṣiṇā while the red one is called Śrī 
[Tripurā]Sundarī.” Vaḍavānala Tantra, cited in Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava, Part 1, p. 24.
	23.	 His analysis echoes the words of Kramrisch: “in the Kalaśa-​sun, all the gods are merged in 
the Deathless” (1946, 355).
	24.	 The authors have seen Vidyanath Upadhyaya Bhatta, a Sanskrit scholar and a prominent 
Śaiva-​Śākta tantra guru of Nepal, chanting verses from the Buddhist Māyātantra on a 
number of occasions. He said that this practice of Māyātantra used to be practiced by a 
famous Buddhist tantric Jāmanaḥ Gubhāju, a friend of a famous Śaiva-​Śākta tantric guru 
Lambakarṇa Bhaṭṭa (ancestor of Vidyanath Upadhyaya Bhatta) where together they were

--- PAGE 970 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      945
 
the tantric gurus of King Pratap Malla in seventeenth-​century Nepal (Facebook conversa­
tion with author, November 2, 2021).
	25.	 Pāśavaddhaḥ sadā jivaḥ pāśamukta sadā Śivaḥ. “Bound by fetters, one is always a singular 
soul (jīva), liberated, one is always a Śiva” (Kūlārṇāva tantra 9.43).
	26.	 The goddess often associated with Kubjikā in Nepal is Taleju, who is said to be the Royal 
Goddess of Malla Kings; however, there is a difference between the royal goddess of the 
Mallas and Kubjikā. One of the reasons Taleju is considered as Kubjikā is because the 
Newār priests who do the worship of her are initiates of pascimāmnāya and do ritual-​
worship according to this āmnāya’s specific conduct and codes. However, to say Taleju 
is exactly Kubjikā and nothing else would be far-​fetched because there are many Taleju 
temples and there is no uniformity in their practice. Even the Kubjikā established on the 
southern door tympanum of Taleju temple in Kathmandu is integrated with Tvaritā (see 
Ja.Ba.Ra. 1979, 151). So, together with Kubjikā, multiple deities including Siddhilakṣmī, 
Ugracaṇḍa, Tripurā, Pratyaṅgirā, and Guhyākālī (all deities mostly from uttarāmnāya) 
are worshiped in the practice of Taleju. Nevertheless, even when Taleju is considered as 
Kubjikā, the importance of Guhyeśvarī is of utmost importance in Nepal. This becomes 
clearer with the jātra (festive-​procession) from Taleju to Guhyeśvarī temple that occurs 
every year on Mārgaśīrṣa-​Daśamī (tenth dark fortnight of the lunar months around 
November–​December) where it is said that the festive-​procession is about the goddess 
Taleju visiting Guhyeśvarī to pay her homage.
	27.	 Her status as the Goddess of All Revelations is dominant in Nepal, particularly with Newār 
Rājopādhyāyas in the Kathmandu valley who identify with the paścimāmnāya or Western 
Transmission. The chief deity of the paścimāmnāya is Kubjikā, but even in Kubjikāmata 
the importance of Guhyākālī is acknowledged. See, e.g., Asya dūtī mahāmāyā śrīmad 
guhyeśvarī parā| Guhyākālīti nāmena sarvāyudhavimardanī|| (“Its Śakti is the divine ul­
timate Mahāmāyā Guhyeśvarī. She, the Guhyeśvarī, will destroy all the weapons of the 
enemies”) (Kubjikāmata 10.22).
	28.	 See https://​sa.wik​isou​rce.org/​s/​1uon. It is the only freely available source online at the 
moment, though it is not well organized. However, there are a number of manuscripts of 
Hāhārāvatantra in the National Archives of Nepal, one being the Reel No.: A 204/​4, Access 
No.: 5/​4799.
	29.	 Most of the Rājopādhyāya friends of the authors state that the paścimāmnāya is 
sarvāmnāya and jesthāmnāya. Also, see the feature news at Mahanagarakhabara 
of September 1, 2018, and the Rajopadhyaya Blogspot (2018) where the activities of 
Rājopādhyāyas are disseminated.
	30.	 Available in National Archives of Nepal as Ṣaḍāmnāyamāhātmya, Reel No.: E 396/​3.
	31.	 As cited by Ja. Ba. Ra (2006, 33): Sarvāmnāya prabhedana ṣaḍdā vidyā kramaṃ smṛtam.
	32.	 Tatastattvamitā mantrā nyasanīyā krameṇa hi| sarvāmnāyah saptadaśyāh prathamaṃ 
samudīrayet.
	33.	 The inscription was first published by Śyāmasundara Rājavaṃśī in 1995 ce (2052 V.S.) in a 
journal Abhilekh, Purnanka 13.
	34.	 Śarvāṇī (wife of Śiva or Śarva-​Īśvara) is another name for Durgā or Umā. Durgā Saptaśatī 
(5.11), invokes Durgā with the words, “salutation to you, Śarvāṇī (śarvāṇyai te namo 
namaḥ).” Puraścaryārṇava (Ja. Ba. Rā 1968, 17) states that Durgā is sarvāmnāya-​prapūjitā 
(worshiped by all āmnāyas). The inscription of Śīlavatī that mentions Śarvāṇī was dis­
covered in 1995 ce while digging for a drainage in Lalitpur, not far from the temple of 
Śarveśvara (aka Kumbheśvara). Hence, Śarvāṇī and Śarveśvara could be related and

--- PAGE 971 ---
946      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
though the present temple of Śarveśvara was only built in around 1392 ce by King Jayasthiti 
Malla (see fig. 36.7), the site could actually be more ancient. In this temple of Śarveśvara, 
the practice of sarvāmnāya (all the āmnāyas) is alive and highly maintained by the Newār 
Rajopadhyaya priests.
	35.	 As cited in Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva and published by Ja. Ba. 
Rā (1968, 16): Siddhilakṣmīrguhyakālī . . . uttarāmnāya piṭhasthāścaturvargaphalapradāḥ |
	36.	 Fourfold fruits: (1) dharma: virtue, (2) artha: wealth, (3) kāma: love, and (4) mōkṣa: final 
beatitude, liberation.
	37.	 As there are no other copies of Parātantra discovered in other places than in Nepal and no 
citation of it discovered in any Kashmiri texts or elsewhere, Madhav Lamichhane (2018, 
11), who has edited this tantra text and published it through the National Archive of Nepal, 
situates this tantra as not later than the fifteenth century.
	38.	 Ugrāmnāyamuttaraṃ tu kālīkulasamudbhavā.
	39.	 Sarvāsāṃ guhyākālīnāṃ sā vai mukhyatamā smṛtā (Mahākāla saṃhitā Guhyakālī 
khaṇḍa, 1.9).
	40.	 Asya dūtī mahāmāyā śrīmad guhyeśvarī parā| guhyakālīti nāmena sarvāyudhavimardanī.
	41.	 Guhyeśvarī 
mahābhogāṃ 
nityaṃ 
paśupateryutām, 
nepāle 
saṃsthitāṃ 
naumi 
bhavaghorāndha hāriṇīm.
“Guhyeśvarī (Mistress of the Secret Place) who enjoys great pleasure (mahābhogā) and, 
always together with (the god) Paśupati, resides in Nepāla” (Manthānabhairavatantram 
kumārikā khaṇḍaḥ, Dyczkowski 2009, 188–​189).
	42.	 Guhyakālyā mahāsthānaṃ nepāle yatpratiṣṭhitam.
	43.	 See Tantrāloka 30.241.
	44.	 Nepālasaṃsthito deva: paśūnāṃ patiriṣyate| guhyeśvarīsamāyukta: sthānapālasamanvita:|
Manuscript in National Archive, Nepal, Microfilms no. 1/​1606 B 26/​25 as cited in 
Nepālapiṭha ra Guhyeśvarī by Diwakar Acharya (2018, 42).
	45.	 Uttarapiṭhalabdhopadeśāt śrīśivānandapiṭhat (T.A.V. III p.192) as cited by Navjivan 
Rastogi (1979, 44).
	46.	 Keralaścaiva kāśmīro mauḍamārgastṛtīyakaḥ | Kerala, Kashmir and Gauḍa are the three 
ways of division.
	47.	 Aṣṭādaśasu deśeṣu Gauḍamārga: prakīrtitta: | nepāladeśamārabhya kaliṅgāntaṃ 
maheśvari ||Starting from Nepal, all eighteen regions (east) up to Kalinga are Gauḍa(Śakti-​
saṅgama-​tantra kālī-​khaṇḍa, 4.4).
	48.	 As mentioned in Reflections on the Tantras by Sudhakar Chattopadhyaya (1978, 50).
	49.	 Here, it is well worth remembering that even the tenth-​century Abhinavagupta venerates 
Matsyendranātha in his Tantrāloka (1/​7) by praying to him (Macchendravibhū) to be 
pleased (prasannaḥ) with him. However, the exact timeline of Matsyendranātha is un­
known; nevertheless, Nepali tradition believes Matsyendranātha to be a contemporary of 
King Narendradeva (seventh century).
	50.	 Dyczkowski (1989, 183) identifies Vimalaprabodha as a south Indian (1989, 183). Acharya 
claims he was from Gujarat (2018, 43).
	51.	 Ja. Ba. Rā (1979, 41) states that in the temple of Guhyeśvarī, Narsimha Thakur, after the dis­
covery of the piṭha, started the worship from the tradition of Kashmir. Then, King Pratap 
Malla (re?)constructed the temple and in 1654 ce, his guru Lambakarṇa Bhaṭṭa made a tra­
dition in it to be worshiped from all traditions (sampradāya/​sects) including Buddhists, 
that is, sarvāmnāya-​prapūjitā (worshiped by all āmnāyas).

--- PAGE 972 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      947
 
	52.	 See Lamichhane’s edited and translated book of Devīdvayardhaśatikā, for a helplful intro­
duction on Vimalaprabodha and the texts he brought to Nepal (2017, 28–​31).
	53.	 Iti śrībhairavaśrotasi śiracchande(!) mahākaravīrayoge parātantre kālīkulakramaḥ 
samāptaḥ || || śubhaṃ ||
	54.	 Śiraccheda itself is a root text of Parātantra and there is no confirmation that it is a Kashmiri 
text. In fact, as it belongs to Kālīkula, there is a possibility that just like Parātantra, this text 
itself could be of Nepālī origin.
	55.	 Sanderson acknowledges that this “system was put to work . . . for the worship of the 
Nepalese goddess Guhyakālī” (2020, 11, see also 2014, 71).
	56.	 Here the word “Keralan” is used to speak generally for all south Indian influences in Nepal. 
This is because the majority of south Indian tantric traditions that have come to Nepal 
have come from Kerala.
	57.	 As mentioned in chronicles like Bhāṣāvaṃśāvalī and Gopālavaṃśāvalī.
	58.	 When King Harisimhadeva’s kingdom of Tirhut (Mithila) was stormed by the forces of 
Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq, he fled to Bhaktapur but he died on the way; only his wife reached 
Bhaktapur with the Tulajā Bhavānī image. He was a descendent of King Nanyadeva 
and they had their roots at Karnāṭaka (south India) from where the Tulajā was brought 
originally.
	59.	 Tvaritā is an epithet for Durgā.
	60.	 Ja. Ba. Rā (1979, 40) identifies her as Kubjikā, but with five heads she more strongly 
resembles Siddhilakṣmī.
	61.	 In Nepal, this is not the only source for Śrī Vidyā. The other source is the Khasa region of 
Nepal where she is one of the clan (kula) deities in the tradition of Bāhra Bhāī Masṭa and 
Nau Bahinī Bhavānī (Lidke 2023).
	62.	 Renowned practitioner-​scholar of Nepālī tantra, Prof. Vidyānātha Upādhyāya Bhaṭṭa, 
cites an example of his own family lineage: “Originally my ancestor Lambakarṇa Bhaṭṭa 
(I) at the time of King Śivasiṃha Malla (r. 1583 and in 1597 ce) came here from south India 
and initiated and gave him empowerment and lived as a Rājaguru but then Nepal has its 
own distinct tradition, so we had to adapt our own paddhatis to that of the tradition of 
Nepal.” (Facebook conversation with the author, December 3, 2020).
	63.	 Hamilton (1819) writes: “The family of Gorkha which now governs Nepal, although it 
pretends to come from Chittor, according to Sadhu Ram, a good authority, is, in reality, of 
the Magar tribe; and, at any rate, these people are now firmly attached to its interests, by 
having largely shared in the sweets of conquest; and by far the greatest part of the regular 
troops of that family is composed of this nation” (26).
	64.	 Admittedly the words alapa and ālama do not match, making this local etymology a bit 
mysterious.
	65.	 Gurung writes, “In the far western Nepal (in the Khāsa region), the dhvajā (flag) is called 
ālana. In temples there, such ālanas are installed. Satya Mohan Jośī has written about this 
in his Karṇālī saṃskṛti: maṣṭakā ālanaharu (1972). This ālana of Karnali region is called 
ālama in Gandaki region. In Gurung language dhvajā (flag) is called alām̐. Ālana, ālama 
and alām̐ are words for the same meaning. Here, as Jaina Khām̐ṇa installed dhvajā/​ālama 
and established his territory, it is thus called Ālama-​devī.” (Facebook message to author, 
January 26, 2022). For more on development of Sarvāmnāya tantra in western Nepal, see 
Lidke 2023.
	66.	 As cited in Prabuddhasanātanarahasyam by Ja.Ba.Ra. (1963), “Vaiśākhasya sitepakṣe 
hyardhdarātrau maheśvarī, siddhilakṣmīḥ samutpannā nṛsiṃhasya samīpataḥ tasminkāle

--- PAGE 973 ---
948      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
mahādevyā jayantī mānyatāṃ vrudhaiḥ (In the midnight of the bright lunar fortnight of 
vaiśākha month, adjacent to Nṛsiṃha, Siddhilakṣmī emerged, hence a wise person do her 
pūjā on this day)” (221).
	67.	 The higher form of Guhyakālī is explained in the Śrīmatottara: “This is not even explained 
in Parātantra, you with a beautiful face, this is the truth. Without having this form, 
Guhyakālī cannot be brought to perfection; This is hidden in all the tantras, and is revealed 
only due to your love.” Guhyakālyāḥ parā mūrtirākhyatā śrīmatottare| nākhyātā cā (ca) 
parātantre satyaṃ satyaṃ śubhānane|| anayā rahitā devī guhyakālī na siddhyati| gopitā 
sarva tantreṣu tava snehāt prakāśitā|| (Gorakṣasaṃhitā, 14.170–​14.171).
	68.	 In an interview with Manoj Joshi, Gurung (2022) said, “Had the small child Kumārī turned 
her head away from Pṛthivī Nārāyaṇa Śāha or kicked to him, the course of Nepal would 
have turned otherwise because it is the tradition of Nepal that only when the Kumārī 
anoints a King, the King would be legitimated as the King.”
	69.	 Bṛhat Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva and published by Ja. Ba. Rā (1968, 
Part I, 17): “Kulabālā ca durgā ca sarvāmnāyaprapūjitā (Kumārīa and Durgā are worshiped 
by all āmnāyas).”
References
Acharya, Diwakar. 1996. “Śīlāvatīko abhilekha ra yasako viśiṣṭa pakṣa.” Prajñā Pūrṇāṅka 83: 
39–​45. Kathmandu: Nepāla Rājakīya Prajñā-​pratiṣṭhāna.
Acharya, Diwakar. 2018. Nepālapī ṭha ra Guhyeśvarī. Kathmandu: Śrīpaśupati Arcanā 
Suvyavasthā Pratiṣṭhāna.
Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra, ed. 1934. Kaulajñāna-​Nirṇaya and some Minor Texts of the School of 
Matsyendranātha (Texts from Nepal. 1). Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing & Publishing House.
Bhanī, Tīrthalāla Naḥ Ghaḥ. 1984. “Śrī Taleju Bhavānī.” Ancient Nepal: Journal of the 
Department of Archaeology 82: 7–​17 (Nepali Section).
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh, ed. 1932. Śakti-​Saṃgama-​Tantram. Bombay: Government of His 
Highness the Maharaja Gaekwad of Baroda.
Bhaṭṭarāī, Kṛṣṇa Prasāda. 1968. “Śrīcakrakā saṃkṣipta vivaraṇa.” Kalyāṇa Upāsanā Aṅka Year 
42, No.1 (Full No. 494): 416–​420.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma, ed. and trans. 2002. Śrītantrāloka (with vivekavyākhā), Vol. I–​V. 
Vārāṇasī, India: Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2005. Svachanda-​Tantram. Vārāṇasī, India: Caukhambā Surabhāratī 
Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2009. Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā (Kāmakalākālī-​Khaṇḍa). Vārāṇasī, India: 
Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2014. Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā (Guhyakālī-​Khaṇḍa), Vol I & II. Vārāṇasī, 
India: Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2016. Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā (Guhyakālī-​Khaṇḍa), Vol III. Vārāṇasī, 
India: Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Caturvedī, Rādheśyāma. 2018. Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā (Guhyakālī-​Khaṇḍa), Vol IV & V. Vārāṇasī, 
India: Caukhambā Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Chattopadhyaya Sudhakar. 1978. Reflection on the Tantras. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 
Publishers Pvt. Ltd.

--- PAGE 974 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      949
 
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 1988. The Canon of Śaivāgama and the Kubjikā Tantras of the Western 
Kaula. Tradition. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 2001. The Cult of the Goddess Kubjikā: A Preliminary Comparative 
Textual and Anthropological Survey of a Secret Newar Goddess. Vol. 23. Nepal Research 
Centre. Kathmandu: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Dyczkowski, Mark S. G., ed. and trans. 2009. Manthānabhairavantantram Kumārikākhaṇḍaḥ: 
The Section concerning the Virgin Goddess of the Tantra of the Churning Bhairava. 14 vols. 
Indira Gandhi National Centre of the Arts. New Delhi: D. K. Printworld.
Gellner, David N. 1992. Monk, Householder and Tantric Priest: Newār Buddhism and Its 
Hierarchy of Ritual. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gupta, Sanjukta, Dirk Jan Hoens, and Teun Goudriaan. 1979. Hindu Tantrism. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: E. J. Brill.
Gurung, Jagman. 2022. “Pṛthvīnārāyaṇa Śāhako Yogadāna, Kastā thie Śāha?.” Interview by 
Manoj Joshi. AP Talk Time, AP1HD, January 11, 2022. Video, 19:20. https://​www.yout​ube.
com/​watch?v=​VKmE​tfui​ua4
Hamilton, Francis. 1819. An Account of The Kingdom of Nepal. London: Archibald Constable 
and Company.
Hāhārāvatantra. National Archives of Nepal. Reel No.: A 204/​4, Access No.: 5/​4799.
Ja. Ba. Rā, Dhana Śamaśera. 1963. Prabuddhasanātanarahasyam. Kathmandu: Nepal Press.
Ja. Ba. Rā, Dhana Śamaśera, ed. 1968. Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva 
Part I. Kathmandu: Dhana Śamaśera Ja. Ba. Rā.
Ja. Ba. Rā, Dhana Śamaśera, ed. 1971. Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva Part 
II. Kathmandu: Dhana Śamaśera Ja. Ba. Rā.
Ja. Ba. Rā, Dhana Śamaśera, ed. 1972. Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva Part 
III. Kathmandu: Dhana Śamaśera Ja. Ba. Rā.
Ja. Ba. Rā, Dhana Śamaśera, ed. 1974. Bṛhat-​Puraścaryārṇava by Pratāpa Siṃha Śāha Deva Part 
IV. Kathmandu: Dhana Śamaśera Ja. Ba. Rā.
Ja. Ba. Rā, Dhana Śamaśera. 1979. Kāmakalā-​Rahasya. Kathmandu: Nepāla Ra Eśiyālī 
Anusandhāna Kendra.
Ja. Ba. Rā, Dhana Śamaśera. 1989. Kulārṇava Rahasya. Kathmandu: Nepāla Rājakīya 
Prajñā-​pratiṣṭhāna.
Ja. Ba. Rā, Dhana Śamaśera. 2006. “Krama Dikṣā.” In Dīkṣā Prakāśa, edited by Rāmadatta 
Śukla and Ṛtaśīla Śarmā, 29–​42. Kathmandu, Nepal: Kalyan Mandir Prakashan Prayag.
Jain, Anil Kumar, Sudhir Kumar, Subhajit Choudhury, Keerti Bala Jain and Bal Krishna 
Sharma. 2013. “Rare handwritten manuscript collection in Indic Languages at Scindia 
Oriental Research Institute (SORI), (India).” IFLA WlIC 2013. http://​libr​ary.ifla.org/​id/​epr​
int/​17/​1/​095-​jain-​en.pdf
Jośī, Satyamohana. 1972 (Nep. 2029 B.S.). Karṇālī loka saṃskṛti: Maṣṭakā ālanaharu. Prajñā, 
Year 2, No. 3, pp.39–​67.
Kramrisch, Stella. 1946. The Hindu Temple II. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Lamichhane, Madhav, ed. 2018. Parātantra. Kathmandu: Rāṣṭriya Abhilekhālaya.
Lamichhane, Madhav, ed. and trans. 2017. Devīdvayardhaśatikā. Kathmandu: Nepal Academy.
Levy, Robert. 1990. Mesocosm, Hinduism and the Organization of Traditional Newār City in 
Nepal. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2017. The Goddess Within and Beyond the Three Cities: Śākta Tantra and the 
Paradox of Power in Nepāla-​Maṇḍala. New Delhi: DK Printworld.

--- PAGE 975 ---
950      Jeffrey S. Lidke and L. S. Akshunna
 
Lidke, Jeffrey S. 2023. “Looking to the Hills: The Influence of Khas Culture on the Development 
of Sarvāmnāya Tantra in Nepal.” Tantram Journal of Tantric Studies 1: 1–​12. https://​tant​ram.
lam​baka​rna.org/​
Michaels, Axel. 2008. Śiva in Trouble: Festival and Rituals at the Paśupatinātha Temple of 
Deopatan. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Miśra, Paramahaṃsa, ed. and trans. 2002. Kulārṇava-​Tantram. Vārāṇasī, India: Caukhambā 
Surabhāratī Prakāśana.
Nepāla, Jñānamaṇī. 2005. Nepālako Mādhyamika Kālako Itihāsa. Kathmandu: Makalu Books 
and Stationers.
Nicholson, Andrew J. 2010. Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual 
History. South Asia Across the Disciplines. Columbia: Columbia University Press.
Pāṇḍeya, Janārdana, ed. 1976. Gorakṣasaṃhitā (Part I). Varanasi, India: Research Institute, 
Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya.
Panta, Nayarāja, Devīprasāda Bhaṇḍārī, Gautamavajra Vajrācārya, and Dineśarāja Panta. 1968. 
Śrī 5 Pṛthvī Nārāyaṇa Śāhako Upadeśa. Kathmandu: Jagadambā Prakāśana.
Rājavaṃśī, Śyāmasundara. 1989. “Paśupatinātha prāṃgaṇamā prāpta aprakāśita licchavi 
abhilekha.” Ancient Nepal: Journal of the Department of Archaeology 115: 1–​3 (Nepali 
section).
Rājavaṃśī, Śyāmasundara. 1995. “Lalitapurako sarvaprācīna licchavi abhilekha.” Abhilekha, 
Pūrṇāṅka 13: 106–​121.
Rajopadhyaya Blogspot. 2018. “Tantradīkṣā Grahaṇa garna Amerikā dekhi . . .” August 7, 2018. 
https://​rajop​adhy​aya.blogs​pot.com/​2018/​08/​blog-​post.html
Rastogi, Navjivan. 1979. The Krama Tantricism of Kashmir. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Rāya, Pradipa Kumāra, ed. and trans. 2010. Muṇḍamālā Tantram. Vārāṇasī, India: Prācya 
Prakāśana.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2002. “Remarks on the Text of the Kubjikāmatatantra.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 
45: 1–​24.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. “The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire 
d’Hélène Brunner/​Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, edited by Dominic Goodall 
and André Padoux, 106: 231–​241. Pondicherry, India: Institut français d’Indologie /​ École 
française d’Extrême-​Orient. Collection Indologie.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2014. “The Śaiva Literature.” Journal of Indological Studies (Kyoto) 24, 
25: 1–​113.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2020. Evidence of the Early Śākta Traditions in Regions Other than Kashmir. 
Handout. 
https://​sakt​atra​diti​ons.org/​wp-​cont​ent/​uplo​ads/​2020/​11/​OCHS-​3-​Early-​Sakta-​
Tra​diti​ons-​in-​Regi​ons-​Other-​than-​Kash​mir.pdf
Sastry, R. Ananta Krishna, ed. 1921. Kavindracharya List. Baroda: Central Library.
Sharma, B. N. 1976. Iconography of Sadasiva. New Delhi: Abhinav.
Slusser, Mary Sheperd. 1982. Nepal Mandala: A Cultural Study of the Kathmandu Valley, 2 vols. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Subedi, Rajaram. 2003 (2060 VS). History of Kaski state. Kathmandu: Vidyarthi Pustak.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2006. “Terrifying Beauty: Interplay of the Sanskritic and Vernacular 
Ritual of Siddhilakṣmī.” Journal of Hindu Studies 10: 59–​73. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s11​
407-​006-​9002-​8
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2011. “Encountering the Other: Tantra in the Cross-​Cultural Context.” 
The Journal of Hindu Studies 4: 274–​289. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​jhs/​hir​033

--- PAGE 976 ---
The Total Revelation Tantra      951
 
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2014. “Indigenous Epistemology and Placing the Cultural Self in Crisis: 
A New Hermeneutic Model for Cultural Studies.” Southeast Review of Asian Studies 36: 6–​29.
Toffin, Gerard. 2007. Newār Society: Caste, Society and Periphery. Patan, Nepal: Himal Books.
Vajracharya, Gautama V. 2016. Nepālī Seasons: Rain and Ritual. New York: Rubin Museum 
of Art.
Vajracharya, Gautama V. 2021a. “Paśupatiko purāno mūrti ra pāhāṃ cahreko devatā: ke ho 
mithabhitrako itihāsa?” Himal Khabar, April 10. https://​www.hima​lkha​bar.com/​news/​122​
807?fbc​lid=​IwA​R2ib​A3t7​g628​z3Lu​FL6N​ihSl​lIs dvp-​IQ9CeDOdk1VrSNAP3_​89lafEZTg
Vajracharya, Gautama V. 2021b. “Ṛṛtu saṃskṛti: Nevāra saṃskṛtimā abhirūci lineharū veda 
paḍhdainan.” Kāntipura, November 10. https://​ekanti​pur.com/​bibi​dha/​2021/​11/​10/​163​6531​
3801​9892​324.html
White, David G. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginῑ: ‘Tantric Sex’ in Its South Asian Contexts. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Yoshizaki, Kazumi. 2012. The Kathmandu Valley as a Water Pot: Abstracts of Research Papers on 
Newār Buddhism in Nepal. Kathmandu: Vajra.

--- PAGE 977 ---


--- PAGE 978 ---
Chapter 37
The Soteriologies of 
Buddhist Tantrism
Iain Sinclair
Introduction
Soteriology can be defined as the theory and practice of saving living beings from 
suffering in an ultimate sense. If soteriology is at heart concerned with the transition 
from being lost to being saved,1 and with a process of internal transformation, then the 
role of an external savior may be peripheral or altogether unnecessary. Such a notion of 
soteriology has been applied to Buddhist analytical approaches involving the aggregates 
of personality, for instance, and the application of the dialectic of emptiness to the sub­
ject of suffering.2 For Buddhists, what ultimately saves lies within, and dependence on 
an outer, absolute force cannot be reconciled with the agency of the practitioner or with 
nonessentialist Buddhist thinking.
In the classical Buddhist worldview, it is ultimately the attainment of awakening 
(bodhi) that saves from suffering. The associated final state of peace, nirvana, is corre­
spondingly remote and elusive. Nirvana is not, however, the prime goal of the tantric 
practitioner. Buddhist tantrism builds on the soteriology of the Mahāyāna, in which cy­
clic existence, the condition of misery from which beings need to be saved, is under­
stood to be codependent with nirvana (saṃsāranirvāṇavibhāvana). The exemplar of 
salvation, the bodhisattva, hovers in “nonsettled” nirvana (apratiṣṭhitanirvāṇa) lifetime 
after lifetime in order to perform altruistic deeds for others. Although the bodhisattva 
ideal continues to be valued in tantrism, it is shaken up by the revelation that awakening 
can be attained “in this lifetime” (iha janmani). The deferred gratification of the bodhi­
sattva, concomitant with belief in rebirth, is no longer central or even relevant. While 
Buddhist tantras put forward a plethora of methods that are claimed to lead to rapid sal­
vation, they were often seen as drastic, unconventional, and especially at odds with the 
rule-​following monastic or layperson, the śrāvaka.

--- PAGE 979 ---
954      Iain Sinclair
 
The conception of tantric Buddhism as a path to salvation distinct from other paths 
is the focus of this chapter. The many and varied means for moving along this path can 
only be mentioned in passing, even if these means are often regarded as integral to the 
salvific process. Nor is there room to go into aspects of Buddhist tantrism such the 
emic classifications of tantras—​which were often correlated to grades of soteriological 
efficacy—​and the evidence for dating individuals, texts and so on.3 What is presented 
here is but a sketch of the progression of tantric Buddhist soteriology, which draws on 
published editions of tantras as well as the renascent scholarship in this field that has 
been stimulated by the Tibetan diaspora, postwar Japanese prosperity, and the improved 
availability of primary sources in the information age. Attention is given to the busiest 
period, spanning the mid-​seventh to the mid-​eleventh centuries, and to South Asian 
and Sanskrit sources, which underpin Buddhist tantrism wherever it manifests.4
Defining Tantrism
Buddhist tantras appeared at a time when religions in South Asia were giving more at­
tention to techniques such as mantric invocation, programmatic visualization, and 
yogas of the body, and to the role of the teacher who knows reality. Such developments 
spread across sectarian boundaries, along with speculation about the nature of the re­
ality that they opened up. However, the teachings of the tantras are not easily reduced to 
one type of praxis. In tantric traditions that urge yogis to remain focused on salvation, 
rather than the specifics of process—​the “practice without elaboration” is discussed later 
in this chapter—​ubiquitous forms of religion such as mantra repetition and the wor­
ship of images are disparaged.5 The supposedly unimpeachable authority of the guru, 
likewise, is sometimes met with criticism and calls for teachers to meet the standards 
set for them in tantric discourse.6 And although it has been noticed since the start of 
the modern era that tantrism is an initiatory religion,7 transmitted by a guru or ācārya, 
much of the behavior that co-​occurs with tantrism—​such as magic, divination, pūjā, 
yoga, pilgrimage, and artistic and architectural creation of certain kinds—​does not need 
to be authorized by a rite of initiation.
Tantrism has been defined both emically and etically by listing its observed features.8 
It is also possible to identify a common tantric culture in instances of intertextuality, 
which express shared ideas about salvation. One maxim, for instance, has been seen as 
typical of tantric soteriology:9
That by which creatures are bound . . . by that itself they are freed from the bondage 
of existence.
This is an example of a principle propounded in a tantric Buddhist context that was 
adopted into Śaivism and its exegesis.10 Tantric soteriology often transmutes the subjects 
rejected by other faiths into an otherwise unattainable experience of the extraordinary.

--- PAGE 980 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      955
 
Tantrism can then be described as a religiosity of the other, of becoming other (para) in 
search of transcendence, which leads toward different soteriological goals in different 
religious traditions. Buddhist tantrism, in the present context, refers to the principles 
and processes of salvation taught in Buddhist tantras and in their exegesis.
The First Soteriological Buddhist 
Tantras
The potential for a “way of mantra praxis” (mantracaryānaya) to reach the endpoint of 
enlightenment, or an equivalent state, becomes a central concern in a revealed scrip­
ture, the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi. Like other texts of the seventh-​century period that 
teach mantric methods for salvation, the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi calls itself a sūtra of 
the Mahāyāna, but is often referred to by others as a tantra.11 Earlier scriptures that re­
vealed mnemonic formulas (dhāraṇī), “heart” mantras (hṛdaya), and so on were some­
times claimed to be conducive to spiritual progress, but individual texts of this kind did 
not arrive at a systematic vision of salvation.12 The Vairocanābhisambodhi, by contrast, 
positions its mantric practices both within the bodhisattvas’ religion and as an alter­
native to the “difficult relinquishments” (duṣkaraparityāgāni) that they perform over 
uncountable lifetimes, such as the giving up of their lives and comforts for others. The 
effects of mantras are said to extend directly into the mindstream in the present lifetime:
It is to be entirely realized (abhisambudhyante) by the bodhisattva who practises bo­
dhisattva practice through the gateway of mantra (mantramukhabodhisattvacaryācā
riṇā) that their own mind—​devoid of all existence, dissociated from the aggregates 
of personality, the senses, and their domains, and the perception of subject and ob­
ject (skandhadhātvāyatanagrāhyagrāhaka)—​is, due to its similarity with the non-​
selfhood of dharmas (dharmanairātmyasamatayā), originally unborn, having the 
inherent nature of emptiness.13
The association of mantric methods with the attainment of an essenceless, liberating 
cognition was an important development. The terminology of this passage was incor­
porated into the later Guhyasamāja, and it had lasting significance in the exegesis of the 
Buddhist tantras as a whole.14
Another key proposition of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi is that the state of salvation, 
namely, the realization of the “gnosis of all-​knowledge” (sarvajñajñānam), has compas­
sion as its root (karuṇāmūlam), is caused by the will to awaken (bodhicittahetukam), 
and is brought to a conclusion through skilful means (upāyaparyavasānam). Although 
this is but a restatement of elementary Mahāyāna principles,15 in the tantric context it 
foregrounds the critical role of bodhicitta in the practitioner’s motivation and the ac­
ceptability of means of all kinds. Positioning compassion as the foundation of tantric 
practice harks back to the classical understanding that the Buddha taught in order to

--- PAGE 981 ---
956      Iain Sinclair
 
benefit all beings, and deprecates tantrism practiced for the sole purpose of gaining per­
sonal power or gratifying the deity.
Mantra praxis in this system involves identification with the pantheon of the 
“mandala born from the Matrix of Great Compassion” (*mahākaruṇāgarbhodbha-
vamaṇḍala). The mandala emanates from the cosmic buddha Vairocana, proliferating 
into the tathāgatas of the directions, a host of bodhisattvas and mantra deities drawn in 
part from pre-​existing dhāraṇī traditions, and a conclave of nature spirits, demigods, 
and gods who take their places on the periphery.16 Each member of the mandala can 
be invoked by a variety of means, whether by recalling their physical likeness, forming 
their associated gesture, or reciting their characteristic mantra. Such mandalas and their 
processes of rote yogic identification with its inhabitants comprise a schematic, totalistic 
vision of awakening, which varies according to the particulars of the tantra in which it is 
taught.
The Vairocanābhisambodhi self-​consciously arrives in a crowded religious field in 
which all-​knowledged gnosis “teaches religion to all beings according to various ways, 
various inclinations, various means.” It manifests as “the way of the Śrāvakayāna for 
some, the way of Pratyekabuddhayāna for some, the way of the Mahāyāna for some.” 
The dharma emanating from the Great Vairocana could even be seen to be taught by 
Viṣṇu or Śiva for those so inclined.17 On the other hand, these diverse paths to salva­
tion are not held to be equivalent in their efficacy. For instance, the śrāvakas are only 
taught about gnosis, without the means for attaining it.18 The suite of meditative and 
ritual techniques imparted in the Vairocanābhisambodhi is typical of a new soteriolog­
ical vision of programmatic gnosis. Mantra praxis is presented both as a subsidiary path 
of the Mahāyāna and as the “foremost vehicle” of salvation (agrayāna), rather than as an 
entirely distinct development.
Vajrayāna and the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha
The denomination of Vajrayāna is introduced in the revelation of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, a scripture divided into sections that end with the 
words: “This well-​spoken Sūtra, the diamond-​thunderbolt-​like vehicle (vajrayāna), the 
secret of all Tathāgatas, is an encapsulation (abhisaṃgraha) of the whole of the Great 
Vehicle.”19 Accordingly, Vajrayāna soteriology incorporates pioneering features of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha: the unfolding of a vision of the Buddha pentad united 
by thunderbolt-​like gnosis (vajrajñāna), the routines of mantra-​yogic identification 
with the mandala by means of the Four Seals (caturmudrā) and so on, and the rites that 
authorize their practice and further propagation.
As is the case throughout tantric Buddhism, the formal authorization of praxis 
occurs in a rite of initiation, generically known as “unction” or “anointment” (seka, 
abhiṣeka),20 which forges a compact (samaya) between the initiand and a “deity” 
(devatā) who resides in the mandala.21 The rite of initiation introduces the initiand

--- PAGE 982 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      957
 
to a set of methods for performing yoga, in which the deities themselves are called 
on to grant authorization and ultimately reside in the practitioner’s consciousness 
as Vajrasattva. Although access to initiation is often restricted, in a spirit of univer­
sality the initiation of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha is open to all takers. Its 
yoga is said to offer better prospects of salvation for persons who are not suited for 
non-​tantric Buddhism—​to those who “crave all kinds of things, food, drink and sen­
sual enjoyments,” to those who “dread precepts,” and even to “religious beings” who 
have been worn out by pursuing conventional goals of ethical discipline, meditation, 
and insight (śīlasamādhiprajñā).22 The initiatory processes themselves are, how­
ever, to be kept secret. Some initiands are anticipated to have prior commitments to 
non-​Buddhist religion—​namely, to have “entered the maṇḍalas of other deity clans” 
(anyadevakulamaṇḍalāni praviśanti).
From the start, Buddhist soteriology has aimed to expose and sidestep the pitfalls 
of the ambient socioreligious environment surrounding the Buddha’s path. The 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha narrates a famous episode in which Maheśvara, “con­
ceited with supremacy over the whole triverse,” refuses to enter the mandala that 
distills the “teaching of all Tathāgatas” and imparts the gnosis of all-​knowledge. In an 
angry altercation, he is slain by the mantras of the Buddha’s bodyguard Vajrapāṇi and 
resurrected. Maheśvara then joins the other converted gods as one of the mandala’s 
protectors.23 This much-​discussed Maheśvara subjugation myth asserts the primacy of 
the gnosis attained through the Vajrayāna, while internalizing in pacified form the ex­
ternal reality of hostile theist competition. The forcing of Maheśvara into the fold of 
the all-​knowing Buddha reflects the altruistic concern, expressed in the proto-​tantric 
Kāraṇḍavyūha, that the masses who place faith in Maheśvara will be deprived of a path 
to awakening (bodhimārgeṇa viprahīṇāḥ).24 The subjugation episode further sets the 
scene for the yogin to reenact the suppression of the gods in apotropaic ritual, a topic of 
interest in Buddhist tantras of all kinds.
The Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha also asserts that the Vajrayāna is synonymous 
with, or supervenes upon, the Great Vehicle of the bodhisattvas. The mandala duly 
sources some of its inhabitants from preexisting Mahāyāna narratives, as had also 
occurred in the Vairocanābhisambodhi and other early tantras.25 However, the model 
renunciant of conservative Buddhism, the śrāvaka, is not mentioned even once in the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. Increasing prominence and centrality is instead given 
to female figures who personify salvific Mahāyāna virtues or acts such as pūjā, as well as 
new tantric concepts such as the Four Secret Seals of the “sex-​thunderbolt” (rativajra) 
and so on.26
Beyond Convention and Conceptuality: The Guhyasamāja
A watershed in the development of tantric Buddhist soteriology is reached with the 
inversion of conventional morality in the Guhyasamāja. The speaker of this tantra,

--- PAGE 983 ---
958      Iain Sinclair
 
Vajradhara, combines the “body, speech and mind of all Tathāgatas,” a typically tantric 
abstraction of Buddhahood. In the tantra’s fifth chapter Vajradhara tells bodhisattvas:
The clans of passion, hate and delusion, becoming intent on nonconceptuality 
(nirvikalpa), can achieve greater success (siddhi) in the highest vehicle, unsurpassed 
. . . the Buddhayāna, this Mahāyāna.27
The path to salvation is now open to groups who would otherwise be hampered by 
their defilements. The goal is no longer awakening or nirvana—​already out of reach for 
most followers of the Buddha—​but its effective equivalent: a state of cognition without 
conceptuality or discrimination, which had been established as a trait of all-​knowing 
gnosis in the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi.28 And the ideal means is not restraint or altruism, 
as advocated in regular Buddhism, but the experiential “proving” or “effectuation,” 
sādhana, of the desired state of mind through special means. A sādhana is applied so­
teriology, shaped according to the situations of its practitioners and of the tradition in 
which it is transmitted. It leads ultimately to the status of adept, siddha, or some other 
achievement tantamount to Buddhahood. The Guhyasamāja’s teaching on sādhana is 
so unconcerned with conventional morality that it causes bodhisattvas to faint in shock:
Beings who kill, who love lying, who delight in stealing others’ possessions, who love 
lust, who make bodily wastes their food (viṇmūtrāhārakṛtyā)—​they indeed are good 
at sādhana.29
Here is a direct inversion of the five precepts of the Buddhist layperson—​namely, the 
precepts to abstain from killing, lying, stealing, sexual misconduct, and intoxicants.30 
The extremeness of the inversion serves to downgrade the idea of regular ethics as re­
flective of reality in any essential way. However, these “perverse” dismissals of conven­
tional Buddhist morality, so called, amount to more than mere verbiage or “hyperbole.”31 
As the tantra turns to other topics, its soteriology continues to hinge on “worshipping 
as one likes with the enjoyment of all desires,”32 and to be expressed in acts involving 
polluting substances and sexual intercourse. This is all positioned as legitimate Buddhist 
soteriology, with the speaker of the tantra being addressed as follows: “O Vajra of pas­
sion, hate and delusion, O Preacher of Vajrayāna . . . Salutation to you, Purified body, 
speech and mind, O Vajrayāna.”33 But insofar as the Vajrayāna is understood to require 
the transgressive behaviors taught in this tantra, its compatibility with conventional and 
institutional Buddhism remains in doubt.
The game-​changing antinomianism of the Guhyasamāja, which moves far beyond 
the reserved transgressive sentiments of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha,34 has not 
yet been located in a particular socioreligious environment or otherwise explained 
as a product of historical circumstances. It has been pointed out that the moral inver­
sion taught in this tantra scandalizes Brahmanical sensibilities even more than those 
of Buddhism—​a reaction that became quite apparent when the tantra resurfaced in the 
nineteenth century35—​and that in so doing it rebels much more against theist hegemony

--- PAGE 984 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      959
 
in South Asia.36 However, the tantra reveals only a “dehistoricized” vision, in which 
known episodes of social stress or crisis are not discernible and non-​Buddhist religion 
is barely noticed, apart from passing references to Hindu gods (or their followers) as 
potential opponents in magical battles.37 While erotic, antinomian rituals were also 
starting to appear in the Hindu tantrism of the Picumata and so on at around the same 
time,38 their rationales are tied to the Brāhmaṇa–​Śaiva milieu to such a degree that they 
do not transfer to Buddhism in any straightforward way.
It is clear that the Guhyasamāja’s message found a receptive audience, as the tantra 
was soon quoted in manuals for initiation, consecration and regular meditation or 
sādhana.39 Its dictates were taken seriously—​if not by the “outcastes, flute makers, 
slaughterers,”40 and other marginalized persons who were excluded from institutional 
Buddhism and who are identified as the tantra’s ideal practitioners, then by a faction 
of the monastic saṅgha. The Guhyasamāja’s injunctions to kill, lie, steal, and fornicate 
were repeated verbatim at initiation ceremonies presided over by saṅgha members. 
One of the earliest practical handbooks in this tradition, the Vimśatividhi, is reli­
ably attributed to the tantric monk Nāgabuddhi.41 Many more monastics followed 
Nāgabuddhi as interpreters and practitioners of the transgressive soteriology revealed 
in the Guhyasamāja. In some traditions, the Guhyasamāja would be held up as the de­
finitive revelation of the soteriology of the Buddha pentad, which corresponds to the 
literary genre of Yogatantra or Mahāyogatantra, whereas for others, the most important 
revelation in this genre continued to be the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha.
The Subaltern Theophany of the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga
The growing acceptance of the involvement of women in praxis, and of the body as 
the locus of enlightenment, is apparent in the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃ-
vara or Sarvabuddhasamāyoga, another influential Buddhist tantra. The practices 
of this tantra are repeatedly said to bring about “equivalence with all Buddhas” 
(sarvabuddhasamāyoga) —​ to emulate or reflect the qualities of enlightened conscious­
ness. Much of this tantra is taken up with instructions for invoking deities with hand 
gestures (mudrā)—​a common element of early Buddhist tantric ritual—​together with 
newer methods such as whole body postures (abhinaya) and tantric songs (vajragīti) 
sung in Apabhraṃśa, a Middle Indic vernacular. Performances of this kind persist in a 
major subculture of tantric Buddhism in which the practitioner manifests the persona 
of the deity with the immediacy of song and dance. The honoring of the samaya in a 
gathering of initiates who embody their respective deities is a related practice, which 
is later standardized as the ritual of the “group circle” (gaṇacakra). It is described in the 
Sarvabuddhasamāyoga in brief and prototypical form:
A well accomplished woman, lovely with her own mudrā and insignia, should 
be imagined as the maṇḍala of the group (gaṇamaṇḍala) by those facing their 
principal deity.42

--- PAGE 985 ---
960      Iain Sinclair
 
There is a consistent emphasis on vocal and bodily performance in this tantra, which 
extends to another form of embodied practice, that of “forceful yoga,” haṭhayoga. The 
Sarvabuddhasamāyoga has been identified as the earliest known tantric source for the 
term haṭhayoga.43 The salvific psychophysical experience of “great bliss,” mahāsukha—​
which had been deified as Vajrasattva in an earlier Buddhist tantra, the Śrīparamādya—​
also receives more attention here. Again, such praxis terms are introduced with 
assurances that they create identicality with all Buddhas.
Although many of the innovations and practices of the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga- 
ḍākinījālasaṃvara were absorbed into Buddhist tantrism as a whole, this tantra 
is also known as the progenitor of a distinct and divergent stream of religiosity that 
the later tradition classifies as Yoginītantra. The titular woman of this tantra is the 
ḍākinī, another fringe figure, seen as a “witch or an old woman,”44 a sorcerous female 
type existing outside the Buddhist mainstream. As the ḍākinī masters flight of the 
shamanic or yogic kind, she is identified with the yogic attainment that traverses the 
whole of space (sarvākāśacarā siddhi), a hallmark of the gnosis of all tathāgatas, and 
in this sense she has the status of “universal mudrā.”45 This tantra also nominates as 
a ferocious figurehead the mortuary divinity called Heruka, a kind of successor to 
Vajrapāṇi.46 Heruka is a deity of the charnel grounds where ḍākinīs gather to offer 
flesh and blood, and who is briefly noticed in this capacity in non-​Buddhist tantras. 
He is described as
Immense with a crown of skulls and a great blaze of flaming hair, frightening like a 
charnel ground [made] pitch dark by a great conflagration.47
The elevation of the frightful Heruka and the man-​eating ḍākinīs into figures to be 
adored and imitated on the path to salvation represents another major shift away from 
the benevolent ethos of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. This Buddhist thrust into the 
subaltern territory of charnel-​ground religion led to the advent of the Herukābhidhāna 
(a.k.a. Cakrasaṃvaratantra48), the Hevajra (a.k.a. Dvikalpa) and so on. These 
tantras centered on different sexually coupled forms of Heruka soon supplanted the 
Sarvabuddhasamāyoga itself.
In appraising the position of these Yoginītantras within Buddhist tantrism as a whole, 
it should be recognized that most commentators construed them through established 
Mahāyāna and mantranaya conceptual frameworks such as the gnostic Buddha pentad. 
The Yoginītantras’ objects of devotion, the ḍākinīs and bone-​clad warlocks, were not 
as widely depicted in South Asia as the tantric buddhas, bodhisattvas and deities of the 
“lower” tantras.49 Furthermore, the practices later associated with Heruka, such as the 
previously alien cult of pilgrimage to the goddesses’ power places (pītḥa), received little 
attention from exegetes of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, the Guhyasamāja, and so 
on. These foundational tantras remained at the heart of Buddhist tantrism and its inter­
pretative enterprise, even after the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga gave rise to one of its major 
subtraditions.

--- PAGE 986 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      961
 
Pioneering Interpretations of Tantric 
Buddhist Soteriology
Some of the earliest and most influential figures in the exegesis of tantric Buddhism are 
non-​monastic yogīs or yoginīs, according to tradition and internal indications in their 
works.50 They are not known to have belonged to a monastic saṅgha,51 and they inter­
pret the Buddhist tantras without referring to the conventional ethics of the monk or the 
layperson, even though they teach from an otherwise Buddhist standpoint. A seminal 
work from this milieu is the Jñānasiddhi of Indrabhūti —​ apparently a nom de plume for 
a king of a region once known as Oḍḍiyāna. Indrabhūti’s impact was such that Oḍḍiyāna 
was valorized as a tantric Buddhist homeland for many generations; this region has not, 
however, yet been decisively identified with a historical polity in current scholarship.52 
The Jñānasiddhi refers directly to the Sarvatathāgatattvasaṃgraha, the Guhyasamāja 
and its uttaratantra, the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga and so on. Much the same tantric 
corpus informs Padmavajra’s Guhyasiddhi. Then there is the brief Advayasiddhi of 
Lakṣmī, which shares some verses with the Guhyasiddhi. Lakṣmī’s treatise heralds the 
growing visibility of women in Buddhism as authorities on tantrism. These three works 
along with four others in the same vein, all having titles ending in siddhi, constituted a 
mini-​corpus of “seven siddhi texts” (grub pa sde bdun) for the Tibetans who eventually 
received and translated them.53
Much of the Jñānasiddhi, Guhyasiddhi, and Advayasiddhi and so on is occupied 
with paraphrasing or amplifying the doctrines of the Guhyasamāja. Padmavajra and 
Lakṣmī, for instance, both reiterate the tantra’s injunctions to take polluting substances 
as sacraments.54 Indrabhūti, however, often discusses misunderstandings and abuses. 
Even and especially on the path to salvation where anything goes, the cardinal sins of 
disrespecting the guru and the samaya could not represent the only wrong turns. Some 
of the admonitions in Indrabhūti’s Jñānasiddhi were separately reexpressed as a set of 
praxis “downfalls” (āpatti), which were later adopted as formal restraints on the be­
havior of the Vajrayāna practitioner.55 In one long discussion, Indrabhūti is at pains 
to point out that transgressive acts do not in themselves lead to liberation, and that 
nonconceptuality does not warrant immorality:56
Some most idiotic juveniles who do not look at reasoning and scripture say, ‘evil may 
as well be just conceptuality,’ destroying themselves.57
His appeal to the classical reasoning-​and-​scripture dialectic tempers the absolute 
authority of the guru—​often asserted in the tantras—​and helps to establish Buddhist 
tantrism as a principled undertaking rooted in scriptural sources. Although no over­
arching interpretative strategy is put forward at this stage, Indrabhūti and Padmavajra 
pay close attention to certain passages of the Guhyasamāja, and are aware of the

--- PAGE 987 ---
962      Iain Sinclair
 
relatively developed two-​stage system of tantric praxis comprising the stage of genera­
tion (utpattikrama) and the stage of the generated (utpannakrama).58
The seven siddhi texts provide valuable data on the early reception of tantric religi­
osity, which is not always easy to glean from the tantras themselves. One passage in the 
Guhyasiddhi that has excited a great spurt of interest in modern scholarship mentions 
two Śaivite tantras by name.59 Here Padmavajra recommends that the yogī tout copies 
of these tantras to win the confidence of non-​Buddhist outcastes, such that they be­
come willing to offer a tantric consort to the yogī. Yet the explicit references to Śaivite 
scripture, so very rare in Buddhist tantric discourse, are acceptable here precisely be­
cause they portray outcaste devotees of Śaivism as gullible exclusivists who accept “ab­
solutely no other divinity” (naivānyaṃ daivatam), if not as deserving candidates for 
the “web of lies” that the yogī may weave in servicing the samaya.60 For critical con­
text on the acceptability of non-​Buddhist tantrism in this Buddhist milieu, the views of 
Padmavajra’s coreligionist Indrabhūti can be kept in mind. He reminds his audience to 
keep up conventional religion such as feeding and donating to the saṅgha on holy days, 
while warning against “practitioners of false religion” and charismatic preachers of the 
Supreme Spirit (parātma), who are “bound by the noose of Māra.”61
The proliferation of divergent opinions on how to go about practising tantra, which 
nonetheless draw on much the same canonical sources, illustrates the capriciousness 
introduced into Buddhism by “guruism,” a third source of authority accepted alongside 
reasoning and scripture by tantric practitioners. The guru or ācārya is encouraged to be 
seen as identical with Vajrasattva, the personification of the tantras’ ultimate goal. The 
word of the guru allows the norms and interpretations developed in one tantric circle to 
be superseded by contrary advice, at the same level of authority, in another circle.
Contesting Nonconceptuality: The Tattvasiddhi and the 
Sūtakamelāpaka
Śāntarakṣita, a specialist in epistemology writing in the second half of the eighth cen­
tury, examines a vital aspect of tantrism in his Tattvasiddhi. The very title of the 
Tattvasiddhi—​as well as its circumstances of transmission, and its reliance on a common 
tantric corpus62—​may indicate that Śāntarakṣita worked in the same period and milieu 
as the Oḍḍiyāna siddhas. Śāntarakṣita, however, has a monastic background and a more 
theoretical focus, and argues with both formal reasoning and scriptural citations.
The Tattvasiddhi’s author starts by recalling that the mahāvajrayāna or 
vajramahāyāna suits those who are kept ignorant by their conceptualizations, and who 
would not otherwise find the means to be saved from suffering over countless eons. 
The state by which they are saved “in the convenience of this very lifetime” is “the holy 
Vajrasattva-​hood of great bliss” (śrīmatmahāsukhavajrasattvatvam). This “great bliss” 
(mahāsukha) is the transcendent state realized through the conjoining of “insight and 
means” (prajña-​upāya). Śāntarakṣita does not reduce these polysemic, euphemistic

--- PAGE 988 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      963
 
terms to practical or ritual particulars; instead he investigates their general soteriolog­
ical potentials:
Here, the sense-​objects of tangible form and so on, grasped with insight and means 
(prajñopāyaparigṛhītā rūpādayo viṣayāḥ), being transformed into a state of enjoy­
ment, become conveyors of special effects (viśiṣṭaphalāvāhakāḥ). This surely is to be 
admitted by the circumspect, for it is established for all disputants that a totality of 
special [conditions] (viśiṣṭā hi sāmagrī) arises as a quite special effect (viśiṣṭam eva 
phalam).63
The relationship between special effects and special causes occupies the bulk of the 
discussion. Śāntarakṣita argues against the objection that mental defilements and 
latent tendencies, which are particular in nature, cannot be brought to an end by 
nonconceptuality, which is unspecific.64 He concludes that the objects of enjoy­
ment (upabhoga) that characterize the tantras are a valid basis for developing gnosis, 
but this gnosis nonetheless entails conceptuality (savikalpam api jñānam). This is far 
from an unqualified endorsement of the soteriology of Buddhist tantrism as it existed 
in his day.65 Still, Śāntarakṣita establishes the Buddhist tantras as a rational subject of 
inquiry, which can be interrogated with reasoning and brought into conversation with 
Mahāyāna scriptural ideals.
In a rejoinder of sorts to the Tattvasiddhi, deutero-​Āryadeva’s Sūtakamelāpaka—​
also called *Caryāmelāpakapradīpa66—​argues that nonconceptuality proper is attain­
able through tantric practice. The Sūtakamelāpaka does not respond directly to the 
Tattvasiddhi but draws upon it silently, cribbing text blocks and giving lip service to the 
idea of special causes giving rise to special effects.67 The author assumes the identity 
of the classical Mādhyamika theorist Āryadeva, affecting historical and intellectual pri­
ority over Śāntarakṣita. This deutero-​Āryadeva accepts the authority of the sūtras and 
tantras cited in the Tattvasiddhi, and often cites the same passages, but he relegates their 
teaching to a lower level of efficacy. A distinctive practice of the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga, 
the theophany of mandala deities in the bodies of the yogī and yoginī, now typifies the 
lower-​grade category of practice with “specificity” or “elaboration” (prapañcacaryā). 
The slightly higher grade of “practice without elaboration” (niṣprapañcacaryā), obtained 
through a six-​month period of cohabitation with a single initiated consort, is the Wise-​
Woman Vow or vidyāvrata described in the Guhyasamāja.68 The Sūtakamelāpaka 
commends the Wise-​Woman Vow with the proviso that it is to be practiced in a nondual 
and aconceptual frame of mind.
For deutero-​Āryadeva, the highest kind of practice, “exceedingly without elaboration” 
(atyantaniṣprapañcacaryā), is exemplified by the Madness Vow (unmattavrata). The 
practitioner of the Madness Vow wanders alone and at will, following no defined path—​
“sometimes laughing, chattering, sometimes standing” like a lunatic. His meditation is 
defined only as “proficiency in the gnosis of clear light” (prabhāsvarajñānakauśalya).69 
However, this Madness Vow is not taught by that name in the Buddhist tantras cited 
by Śāntarakṣita. It had been introduced by Padmavajra as one way of honoring the

--- PAGE 989 ---
964      Iain Sinclair
 
transgressive mandates of the Guhyasamāja. Padmavajra all but admits its provenance 
in non-​Buddhist Pāśupata religiosity.70 And while the Sūtakamelāpaka’s author does 
know of the Guhyasiddhi and refers to it by name, he finds a different source for the 
Madness Vow: a new and ostensibly canonical “explanatory tantra”71 not noticed in the 
Tattvasiddhi. This explanatory tantra, as cited in the Sūtakamelāpaka, twice states that 
the practitioner of the Madman’s Vow is “nonconceptual” (nirvikalpa), as if to hammer 
in that salvation through nonconceptuality is possible in Buddhist tantrism—​against 
Śāntarakṣita’s conclusions—​after all. This is one example of the way in which a soterio­
logical claim is bolstered by grounding it in a previously unknown scriptural revelation. 
Over time this developed into a common exegetical strategy.72
Carnal or Chaste: Monastic 
Receptions of the Guhyasamāja
As tantric practice became more entrenched among monastics, its challenges to con­
ventional morality drew more concerted responses. The prospect of celibate monks en­
gaging in noncelibate behavior, seemingly condoned in the tantras, emerged as a major 
concern for the saṅgha. The rule of celibacy is in general paramount for the monastic 
community. It comes first in the list of prātimokṣa rules for monks, and a deliberate 
breach of celibacy is an offense warranting immediate expulsion (pārājika).73 Although 
a monk or nun who is found to have engaged in sexual activity may not, in certain cases, 
be expelled from the community automatically,74 the exemptions for diminished re­
sponsibility in the monastic code do not apply to monastics who abandon celibacy in 
order to perform tantric practice.
The prospect of prominent, well-​trained monks bound by prātimokṣa norms who 
breached their vows of celibacy for the sake of tantric liberation was then a pressing 
concern. Large monasteries could not afford to ignore persistent allegations of miscon­
duct among the monastic fraternity. They often depended on state support and operated 
in view of pilgrims, non-​Buddhist provocateurs, and Buddhist saṅghas that rejected 
tantrism. A glimpse of a heated situation is given in a letter by the famous monk Atiśa 
calling on the mid-​eleventh-​century Pāla emperor Nayapāla to punish “malfeasant 
monks” (*duḥśīlabhikṣu, tshul khrims ’chal ba’i dge slong) whose misdemeanors are not 
specified.75 As ordinary ethical lapses among the saṅgha should have been handled by 
the protocols of the vinaya, Atiśa must have been referring to monastics who considered 
themselves above the law—​tantric monks. The emergence of a theoretical discourse 
on the interoperability of monastic, bodhisattva, and tantric religiosity then points to 
a growing need to manage different praxis regimes according to common principles, 
without relying too much on a particular individual or tantric tradition.
The notional scenario of magical murder did not attract nearly as much attention 
from the monastic establishment as noncelibate behavior.76 Institutional Buddhism has

--- PAGE 990 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      965
 
tended to turn a blind eye to the dark arts of tantrism. Prescriptions for black magic are 
more widespread and explicit in Buddhist tantras than those relating to sexual yoga. 
Rites for magical slaying were among the few recourses available to monks who faced 
marauding armies, tyrannical rulers, belligerent practitioners of other religions and 
other homicidal threats. The overcoming of an opponent in yogic combat was itself seen 
as a sign of advanced spiritual attainment, if not an act of mercy toward the opponent’s 
future victims.77 An accusation of black magical murder would also be hard to substan­
tiate before the monastic assembly (bhikṣuparṣad), unlike accusations of carnal know­
ledge leading to pregnancy, which are noticed many times throughout the canon and in 
monastic case law.
For observant Buddhist monks, the question of how to perform the sexual yogas 
mandated in the tantras can be reduced to a dilemma. Contact with a flesh-​and-​blood 
tantric partner is either forbidden—​monastic celibacy being the normative position—​
or it is permitted by some authority, theory or strategem accepted by a monastic com­
munity. These opposed standpoints are not only seen in the writings of the period 
spanning the eighth to the eleventh centuries; they are also discernible in period art. The 
art-​historical corpus shows that there were different modes of representing an erotic 
pair of tantric deities. The male deity can be either solitary (ekavīra) or positioned along­
side a female deity; alternatively, the two can be depicted as coital “insight-​and-​means” 
(prajñopāya) couples.78 Many of the former depictions are associated with monastic 
sponsors or sites such as Nālandā and feature deity twosomes, which if visualized from 
texts alone might instead be conceived as sexually united. Such sensual imagery was 
promulgated amid disagreements about the implementation of tantric praxis among the 
saṅgha. The *Mantrāvatāra of Jñānākara, for example, is critical of “initiations which 
involve intercourse with women” and “any action which is preceded by hatred and delu­
sion.”79 Here the Guhyasamāja and its ethos receives criticism from within the broader 
mantranaya. Conservative polemics were not common within Buddhist tantric dis­
course, but they point to the presence of informal pressure to tone down any public dis­
play of sexual imagery or praxis in monastic settings.
Jñānapāda’s School of Guhyasamāja Interpretation
One of the two main traditions of interpretation of the Guhyasamāja condones con­
tact with a woman (mudrā) as a means toward realizing ultimate reality. This school 
is named for Buddhaśrījñāna or Jñānapāda (jñānapādakrama,80 ye shes zhabs lugs). 
Tradition regards Jñānapāda as the first abbot of Vikramaśīla monastery, the center 
for tantric studies established early in the Pāla dynasty. In one of his major works, the 
*Dvitīyakrama, Buddhaśrījñāna sets out a procedure for initiation inspired by the tan­
trism of the Guhyasamāja. In the course of this procedure, the initiate has a scripted 
tryst with a consort provided by the guru. The musings on the selection of the consort 
based on her physical characteristics, as categorized in worldly bedchamber literature 
(kāmaśāstra),81 leave no doubt that this encounter was meant to occur in the flesh rather

--- PAGE 991 ---
966      Iain Sinclair
 
than in meditation. Similarly, this initiation is a prelude to a regime of erotic praxis, 
carried out in the flesh, as mandated in the aforementioned Wise-​Woman Vow, the 
vidyāvrata.82 The flagrant impropriety of carnal rituals in the context of celibate mo­
nasticism is brushed aside with the claim, going back to the Guhyasamāja, that they are 
necessary for salvation: “by no other means is Buddhahood attained.”83
The sexual yoga process described by Buddhaśrījñāna is prefaced with an unusually 
detailed account of his training, as though anticipating that his system needed to be 
vouchsafed with strong credentials. Buddhaśrījñāna attributes his system as a whole to 
the bodhisattva of gnosis, Mañjuśrī. He identifies his human teachers as Vilāsavajra, a 
literate commentator on tantras such as the Guhyasamāja, trained in Oḍḍiyāna; Pālita­
pāda, a specialist in tantric ritual; and, unusually for the time, two women.84 However, a 
key element of the sexual yoga he teaches was known outside this circle. It concerns the 
instruction given to the initiate at the climax of his initiation:
In the middle of bliss and cessation of bliss, the targeted [state] is to be observed and 
made stable.85
Here “the targeted” (lakṣya) refers to the fleeting peak experience of orgasm, which 
exemplifies essenceless or nonconceptual cognition and can therefore justify, in this 
system, ritualized intercourse. The instruction to mark this experience is worded in 
a very similar way in Padmavajra’s Guhyasiddhi.86 Whereas sexual dalliances pose no 
inherent difficulty in Padmavajra’s nonmonastic Buddhist tantrism, they could only 
occur under exceptional (yet unspecified) circumstances in a monastic community 
such as Vikramaśīla’s. The procurement of a consort is another common topic covered 
by Padmavajra and Jñānapāda, but the latter treats the topic more systematically and 
without mentioning non-​Buddhist tantras.
Whether the erotic practices mandated by Buddhaśrījñāna were actually performed 
by him at Vikramaśīla is not known, but his methods are known to have been propagated 
and modified by later generations. His method posed few problems for lay practitioners 
such as Kṣitigarbha—​an associate of the monk Atiśa—​who gives frank instructions for 
sexual yoga.87 The question of whether monks should take initiations involving corpo­
real women was taken up by Vāgīśvarakīrti, a tantric monk active in the late tenth cen­
tury. In his short initiation handbook, the Saṃkṣiptābhiṣekavidhi, Vāgīśvarakīrti allows 
both monks and laypersons to be sexually initiated on the condition that they “develop 
the mentality of the way of mantras” (mantranayacittotpāda).88 However, the mentality 
of the mantric practitioner is neither specified nor tied to the altruism of bodhicitta, 
which might justify the recourse to carnal tantrism for the benefit of all beings. While 
Vāgīśvarakīrti advanced the exegesis of the Guhyasamāja by confronting the problem of 
celibates’ involvement in carnal ritual, the low bar that he set for participation ensured 
that the problem would continue to be investigated.

--- PAGE 992 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      967
 
The Āryas’ Guhyasamāja Exegesis and the Kālacakra
A second school of Guhyasamāja interpretation, that of the Āryas (’phags lugs)—​so 
called because its proponents assume the identities of famed ecclesiastics or āryas such 
as Nāgārjuna, Āryadeva, and Candrakīrti—​is ambivalent about the need for initiates to 
experience physical contact with a woman. A defining project of the Ārya school is its six-​
point hermeneutics (ṣaṭkoṭivyākhyā) and its allowance for scriptural statements to be 
interpreted as either definitive (nītārtha) or nondefinitive or “indicative” (neyārtha).89 
These multiple levels of interpretation allow scriptural directives to be implemented in 
different yet equally valid ways. The ideal sādhana of this school codified by deutero-​
Candrakīrti refers to the “exterior/​interior consort” (bāhyādhyātmikā mudrā),90 in ef­
fect allowing the parts of the procedure involving a mudrā or woman to be carried out as 
visualizations by a celibate practitioner.
By permitting ethically questionable processes to move into the subjective realm, the 
Ārya exegetes not only condone but also encourage a physically chaste form of praxis. 
Deutero-​Āryadeva tells devotees that “the outer lady” (bāhyāṅganām), that is, a flesh-​
and-​blood woman, is to be put aside when undertaking the aforementioned “practice 
absolutely without elaboration,” which he ranks as the best and fastest path to salva­
tion.91 Operating under cover as they promoted competitive interpretations of the 
Guhyasamāja, the self-​styled Āryas also confected explanatory tantras to give their 
views the respectability of buddhavacana.92 Their tactics counter an unnamed sensu­
alist approach to tantrism by reasserting long-​standing norms of Buddhist chastity. The 
Āryas’ school is understood to have been based outside Jñānapāda’s seat of influence at 
Vikramaśīla, probably at Nālandā monastery.93
The Āryas’ exegesis provided a foundation for the later Kālacakra tantric system, 
which moves beyond the Guhyasamāja and emerges as its own distinct tradition in­
tegrating elements from the Yoginītantras. The chief commentary in this system, the 
Vimalaprabhā, authored by a putative bodhisattva-​king called Puṇḍarīka, gives both 
“indicative” neyārtha and “definitive” nītārtha interpretations of the statements of 
the Kālacakratantra. Often Puṇḍarīka interprets injunctions for transgressive beha­
vior on the “definitive” level as acts of internal yoga that only advanced yogīs can per­
form. Whereas, for instance, killing beings is permissible only under certain extreme 
circumstances in the neyārtha interpretation, in the nītārtha interpretation “killing” 
is allowable in the sense of halting the flow of bodhicitta in yoga.94 The proponents 
of the Kālacakra also urge tantric practitioners to heed the commentaries of the 
bodhisattvas,95 presumably meaning those of the Āryas as well as those produced by 
the Kālacakra insiders. Kālacakra proponents used such hermeneutics to claim that 
celibacy (brahmacarya) can be maintained in yogic practice with women through co­
itus reservatus.96 Yet another approach to reconciling tantrism with monasticism is 
inaugurated here.

--- PAGE 993 ---
968      Iain Sinclair
 
Tantric Praxis as One of Three Ways 
to Salvation
Advanced treatments of tantric Buddhism, developed with access to a mature tantric 
corpus and sophisticated exegesis, return to the idea of tantrism forming a “way” or 
“guiding principle” (naya) rather than a distinct “vehicle” (yāna) of its own. Attempts to 
situate tantric Buddhism in the framework of soteriological vehicles contend with the 
three legacy classifications of Śrāvakayāna, Pratyekabuddhayāna, and Mahāyāna. The 
term “Vajrayāna” provides a useful emic designation for Buddhist tantrism, but it has no 
canonicity outside the tantras. Nor did a consensus form on whether transgressive be­
havior is integral and indispensable to Vajrayāna soteriology.
The Kālacakra commentator Vajragarbha states, in this regard, that “Buddhists 
have no fourth vehicle beyond the Mahāyāna.” It is remarkable that Vajragarbha here 
disregards the self-​understanding of tantric praxis as both Vajrayāna (one distinct so­
teriology) and Mahāyāna (the broader soteriology that includes it), which had been put 
forward since the Guhyasamāja. By rejecting the category of a stand-​alone vehicle for 
tantrism and insisting on the primacy of Mahāyāna, Vajragarbha seeks “to arrest those 
who discard charity and discipline”—​two characteristic behaviors of the bodhisattva—​
on the path of tantric practice.97 The designation “way of mantras,” however, overcomes 
the problem of locating Buddhist tantrism within the preexisting set of three yānas by 
affirming its place as a kind of specialty within the Mahāyāna.
The Way of Mantras and the Way of the Perfections
The notion that the way of mantras constitutes a distinct path to salvation, 
complementing the altruism of the way of the perfections (pāramitānaya), is developed 
in the exegesis of Buddhist tantrism. Like mantranaya, pāramitānaya is a canonical 
term. Expressions such as the “way of the perfection of charity” (dānapāramitānaya) 
go back to Mahāyāna scripture such as the Gaṇḍavyūha. The “way of the perfection 
of wisdom” (prajñāpāramitānaya) is a key term of the proto-​tantric Adhyardhaśatikā 
Prajñāpāramitā, although in this work it refers, unusually, to its elementary form 
of mantric practice.98 In general the term “way of the perfections,” pāramitānaya, 
designates the perfection of six virtues of charity and so on over many lifetimes in the 
pursuit of awakening, as well its associated ideology and sources. Tantric Mahāyāna is 
mantranaya; pāramitānaya is non-​tantric Mahāyāna.
Positioning tantrism as a path parallel to the bodhisattva path may imply that the 
bodhisattva’s cultivation of transcendent virtues such as charity and discipline is 
dispensible. The notion that tantric praxis not only supplements but substitutes for bo­
dhisattva praxis is foregrounded in a stock verse that has found its way into many ritual

--- PAGE 994 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      969
 
handbooks. Here each of the bodhisattva’s six perfections is correlated with a different 
phase of mandala-​making ritual:
Charity (dāna) is [giving] cowdung together with water [to purify the site]; moral 
discipline (śīla) is sweeping [the site]; forbearance (kṣānti) is removing tiny ants 
[from the site]; courage (vīrya) is starting up the ritual; meditation (dhyāna) is in­
stantly becoming single-​minded; insight (prajñā) is the brilliance of a fine line. All 
these six perfections are obtained drawing the maṇḍala of the Buddha.99
This is a confident expression of tantric Buddhism as a self-​contained soteriology, in 
which particular praxis forms are substituted for the more arduous tasks of the bodhi­
sattva. At the same time it raises the question of whether tantrism is practised in con­
junction with the non-​tantric Mahāyāna or separated from it altogether.
The Nayatraya Treatises
The modeling of Buddhism as three ways to salvation (nayatraya)—​the ways of 
śrāvakas, bodhisattvas, and mantras—​is developed in treatises that seek to clarify 
the place of tantric Buddhism relative to other soteriologies. The Nayatrayapradīpa 
of Bhaṭṭa Trivikrama has been one of the most influential works of this kind. Other 
treatises on the three ways have also come to light among the many dozens of Sanskrit 
works that were conveyed to Tibet but have remained untranslated there. One such 
work, the Nayatrayabheda, is credited to the ācārya Kuśalaśrī, who describes himself as
learned in dependent origination and the import of the [Nobles’] truths (pratītyotpāda-​
satyārtha), the non-​selfhood of dharmas (dharmanairātmya), and mantra.
These three doxa epitomize the three ways to salvation discussed in his treatise.100 Kuśalaśrī 
further refers to the use of mantras by different religious groups: non-​Buddhists, śrāvakas, 
and bodhisattvas.101 In the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi, the mantras of śrāvakas and worldly 
deities had been noticed as having different modes of expression, lesser powers, and so on 
compared to those of the Mahāyāna.102 From this standpoint, the mantranaya is a form of 
praxis associated as much with the bodhisattva as with mantras themselves.
Trivikrama’s Nayatrayapradīpa argues for the acceptance of the mantranaya as the 
best of the means at the bodhisattvas’ disposal. In his view, the inverted morality of the 
tantras is encompassed within the broad ideals of non-​tantric Buddhism, as the bodhi­
sattva can transgress conventional ethics in order to bring benefit to others. On the con­
tingency of lying, for instance:
Suffering and so on is taught to be Truth (satyatā) in order to motivate the śrāvakas, 
whereas even untruth [can be spoken] out of compassion, such as the statement ‘a 
soul exists.’103

--- PAGE 995 ---
970      Iain Sinclair
 
The implication that the Nobles’ Truths on suffering are not truthful in the absolute 
sense is further justified by resorting to the Madhyamaka dichotomy of conventional 
and absolute truth.104 Trivikrama is primarily concerned with the Mahāyāna, which he 
positions above śrāvaka and non-​Buddhist religion due to its higher ideals, wider sal­
vific scope, and so on. He proceeds to assimilate the great compassion of the bodhisattva 
(mahākṛpā) to the passion (rāga) sublimated by the tantric practitioner:
The highest beings [i.e., bodhisattvas], belts tightened to save beings in the three 
worlds, who tossed away lives, sons, land, women and riches like grass because of 
pitying [others’ predicaments]—​who else on this earth has a greater acquaintance 
with passion?105
Why, furthermore, would those of great compassion not to wish to take up the 
best available means (upāyāgra) for saving beings106—​that is, the way of mantras? 
Trivikrama then, in this regard, makes his famous assertion about the superiority of tan­
tric Buddhism:
Although the goal [of the two higher nayas] is common, the body of teaching on 
mantra is distinguished by its lack of confusion, many means, lack of difficulty, and 
authority for those of sharp faculties.107
This verse was often quoted by proponents of tantric Buddhism active at the begin­
ning of the second millennium. Among them were Śraddhākaravarman and Atiśa, 
who were both acquaintances of the Tibetan scholar-​translator Rin chen bzang po. At 
this time Buddhist tantrism resumed its spread across the Himalayas aided by the er­
udite support it was receiving in its homeland. Learned endorsements of tantrism also 
occurred in systematic treatments of Buddhism that reaffirmed the validity of mo­
nastic and bodhisattva religiosity. Atiśa, as is well known, argued to Tibetan students in 
his Byang chub lam gyi sgron ma (*Bodhipathapradīpa) that celibate monasticism was 
integral to Buddhism and that celibates could not take tantric initiations involving a 
sexual liaison.108 Here Atiśa nominates the Kālacakra Paramādibuddhatantra as his au­
thority for this prohibition. There is then the implication—​which may have remained 
opaque to most of his Tibetan audience, and to others who lacked access to the elusive 
Paramādibuddhatantra—​that carnal initiations remained open to those who were “celi­
bate” in the tantric sense, as espoused in the exegesis of the Kālacakra.109
Atiśa’s contemporary Advayavajra—​who, like Atiśa, had been part of the South 
Asian monastic system, knew Tibetans, and became a major authority in Indo-​Tibetan 
Buddhism—​also cites the Nayatrayapradīpa to affirm the superiority of the way of 
mantras. Advayavajra, however, teaches from the standpoint of a tantric yogī rather than 
a lifelong celibate. In his Tattvaratnāvalī, Advayavajra puts forward a brief doxography 
of Buddhism consisting of the three yānas—​Śrāvakayāna, Pratyekabuddhayāna, and 
Mahāyāna—​and bifurcates the latter into pāramitānaya and mantranaya.110 Advayavajra 
further positions the two lower vehicles as “stairways” to the Mahāyāna, while adding

--- PAGE 996 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      971
 
that the very conceptualization of yāna is lost in the undifferentiated dharmadhātu.111 
For Advayavajra, the mantranaya is epitomized by the Four Seals, which he homologizes 
to the four phases of orgasmic bliss experienced in initiatory ritual.112 Here mantranaya 
has become another designation for the path of sublimated ecstasy, mahāsukha, and in 
this sense it is just as broad as Vajrayāna. In spite of the chronic ambiguity about how the 
way of mantras is practised, which seems to have never been resolved in a definitive way, 
the place of the mantranaya in transregional Buddhism had been secured in learned 
discourse, at least in those monasteries where the Mahāyāna itself was not rejected.
Conclusions
The plurality of paths to salvation in Buddhist tantrism reflects the variety of factors 
bearing on its constitutive processes. From the start, there is an acceptance of dif­
ferent propensities and proclivities among those who are to be saved, which leads to 
an enlargement in the range of soteriological methods. As these methods expand into 
transgressive behavior and liminal experiences—​tantrism proper—​and come to be 
associated with superior results, they challenge established Buddhist norms of ascet­
icism and altruism. The situation of the monastic who faces potential conflicts with 
vows of celibacy or other religious commitments occasions special, elaborate, and 
sometimes circuitous strategies for reconciling tantric sensuality with the morality of 
the Buddhist establishment. Tantrism then has been accommodated within the insti­
tutional religion in ways that reflect the influence of individual teachers, the strength 
of pre-​existing traditions and so on. External inputs resulting from contacts with 
other religions, transregional flows, and changes in regimes and natural environments 
all merit further consideration, but have not been examined here because they have 
only a slight presence in the self-​understanding of Buddhist tantrism, which affects 
timelessness and universality and which persists today as a plural and heterogeneous 
religion.
Abbreviations
D	
Tibetan Tripiṭaka, Sde dge printing.
Q	
Tibetan Tripiṭaka, Qianlong (Peking) printing.
T	
Chinese Tripiṭaka, Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō.
Notes
	1.	 Salvation is identified with this transition by van Rensburg (2005, 410).
	2.	 Boisvert (1995, 145); Huntington (1983, 82).

--- PAGE 997 ---
972      Iain Sinclair
 
	 3.	 Current understandings of the chronology of Buddhist tantras are summarised by Sugiki 
(2022).
	 4.	 For bibliographic details on the Sanskrit texts of Buddhist tantrism and their canon­
ical translations, see Tsukamoto, Matsunaga, and Isoda (1990). More recently published 
editions of Sanskrit texts are also referred to in this chapter. Note that complete Sanskrit 
quotations are not supplied here, in keeping with the guidelines for the present volume.
	 5.	 See Guhyasiddhi 6.41cd (Rinpoche & Dwivedi 1987, 41) and Advayasiddhi 15ab (Rinpoche 
& Dwivedi 1987, 162) for typical examples, and for further comments, Dasgupta (1950, 77).
	 6.	 See, e.g., Jñānasiddhi 10.13–​10.16 (Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, 131; trans. Krug 2018, 322), 
Ṣaṭsāhasrikā Hevajraṭīkā 1.10–​1.18 (Sferra 2009, 445, 458), and Dasgupta (1950, 175).
	 7.	 See, Ward (1818, 497) for an early example.
	 8.	 See, for instance, Hodge (2003, 4–​5). For an extended discussion of these issues, see Payne 
(2006, 9–​14). Definitional issues are discussed more fully in Orzech, Payne, and Sørensen 
(2011).
	 9.	 Eliade (1958, 411).
	10.	 In the view of Bang (2020, 1127), this verse (yena hi badhyante . . . tenaiva mucyante 
bhavabandhanāt), which occurs both in the Buddhist Hevajratantra and in Jayaratha’s 
commentary on the Śaivite Tantrāloka (with one variant), comes out of a Buddhist en­
vironment, where this idea is more germane and widespread. For some related classical 
references see also Eliade (1958, 411). Classical loci for this verse that are probably earlier 
than the Hevajra are deutero-​Āryadeva’s Cittaviśuddhiprakaraṇa (cf. Eliade 1958) and 
Lakṣmī’s Advayasiddhi 7 (Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, 161).
	11.	 The scriptural genre of the Vairocanābhisambodhi is discussed in Yamamoto (2020, 145).
	12.	 See Matsunaga (1978, vii–​xiii); Hodge (2003, 5–​8).
	13.	 Vairocanābhisambodhi Uttaratantra 7 (Wang 2022, 1107, 1106); my translation. See also 
Hodge (2003, 439), here translating from the Tibetan, D494. This passage is repeated 
with slightly different wording in the uttaratantra and other texts connected with the 
Vairocanābhisambodhi.
	14.	 The prose following Guhyasamāja 2.3 attributes a similar statement to the Tathāgata 
Vairocanavajra (Matsunaga 1978, 10; cf. Fremantle 1971, 36). On the skandhadhātvāyatana 
categories as a focus of later exegetical attention, see Tanaka (2018, 188–​189).
	15.	 Kamalaśīla’s non-​tantric Bhāvanākrama I-​7 (Tucci 1956, 196) quotes this phrase from the 
Vairocanābhisambodhi by name. Giebel (2005, xv), among others, draws attention to the 
significance of this passage.
	16.	 On the structure and formation of the Matrix Maṇḍala (Daihi Taizō mandara 
大悲胎蔵曼荼羅), as it is known in the Japanese reception of the Vairocanābhisambodhi 
tradition, see Snodgrass (1988, 162–​543) and, for more recent findings, Tanaka (2018, 
56–​83).
	17.	 Vairocanābhisambodhi 2, via Vilāsavajra’s Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī (Munenobu Sakurai 
in Tsukamoto., Matsunaga and Isoda 1990, 515–​516), my translation. See also Giebel (2005, 
4–​5) and Hodge (2003, 52).
	18.	 Vairocanābhisambodhi, via deutero-​Āryadeva’s Sūtakamelāpaka (Wedemeyer 2007, 462); 
see also Hodge (2003, 342–​343); Giebel (2005, 166); Wedemeyer (2007, 284).
	19.	 Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha I, II (Horiuchi 1983, 313, 617, my translation).
	20.	 On abhiṣeka in this context, see Snellgrove (1987, 213–​234) and Davidson this volume.
	21.	 On the Vajradhātumahāmaṇḍala of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha and its associated 
rituals, see Snellgrove (1987, 209–​216) and Snodgrass (1988, 576–​643).

--- PAGE 998 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      973
 
	22.	 Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha 4 (Horiuchi 1983, 119–​120;), my translations; see also 
Giebel (2001, 73–​74); Snellgrove (1987, 145).
	23.	 Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha 3 (Horiuchi 1983, 331–​332; Snellgrove 1987, 136–​142); see 
also Davidson (2002, 150–​151).
	24.	 Kāraṇḍavyūha I-​4 (Sinclair 2015, 462, 437). The two texts share a definite understanding 
here: Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha I-​4 gives the resurrected and awakened Maheśvara 
the name Bhasmeśvaranirghoṣa (Horiuchi 1983, 349), whereas in Kāraṇḍavyūha II.7, 
Maheśvara is predicted to attain awakening under the name Bhasmeśvara.
	25.	 Matsunaga (1978, xiv–​xv).
	26.	 Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha 
4, 
Vajrakāryakarmamaṇḍalavidhivistara 
(Horiuchi 
1983, I:294–​295). On the praxis of the guhyamudrās as transmitted in the Ṛtasaṃgraha 
悝多僧蘗囉 a.k.a. Gobu Shingan 五部心觀 (cf. Tsukamoto, Matsunaga, and Isoda 1990, 
199), see Snodgrass (1988, 683).
	27.	 Guhyasamāja 5.3, 4cd (Matsunaga 1978, 15), my translation; see also Fremantle (1971, 41).
	28.	 Vairocanābhisambodhi 2 (Giebel 2005, 4–​5; Hodge 2003, 53).
	29.	 Guhyasamāja 5.5cd–​6 (Matsunaga 1978, 15), my translation; see also Fremantle (1971, 41); 
Snellgrove (1987, 171).
	30.	 The consumption of bodily wastes arguably need not induce the particular state of “inso­
briety” or “derangement” (pramādasthāna) prohibited by the fifth lay Buddhist precept 
(Richard K. Payne, personal communication, January 15, 2023). Nonetheless, the lay pre­
cept against drinking alcohol is more directly inverted in other traditions of Buddhist tan­
trism (see, e.g., Broido 1988, 71).
	31.	 Snellgrove (1987, 171) argued that these “teachings are a form of hyperbole” by referring 
to their enactment in meditation elsewhere in the Guhyasamāja. Nonetheless, their 
implications for real-​world ethics did concern Buddhist theorists, as is discussed in the 
following sections.
	32.	 Guhyasamāja 7.1ab, 7.2ab (Matsunaga 1978, 20), my translation; see also Fremantle 
(1971, 46).
	33.	 Guhyasamāja 8.2ab, 8.4cd (Matsunaga 1978, 24), my translation; see also Fremantle 
(1971, 50).
	34.	 Snellgrove (1987, 176) draws attention to passages in Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha 13, Sar
vavajrakulakarmamaṇḍalavidhivistara (Horiuchi 1983, 612–​613), which condone killing, 
stealing, and fornication, if done for the good of others. The corresponding injunctions in 
the Guhyasamāja lack this caveat.
	35.	 The contents of the Guhyasamāja were compared to the “worst specimens of Holiwell 
[sic] Street literature”—​i.e., to the pornography sold at Holywell Street, formerly part of 
the Strand in London—​by Rajendralal Mitra (1882, 261), a prominent nineteenth-​century 
scholar of high-​caste Kāyastha ancestry. Mitra’s indignation was seized upon by critics of 
“the much-​bepraised ‘Esoteric Buddhism’ ” such as Reverend William St. Clair-​Tisdall 
(1903, 157–​158) and is often cited as a characteristically Victorian dim view of tantrism. 
However, Mitra’s native perspective needs to be given its due; for instance, his comparison 
with pornography indicates that he understands the viṇmūtrāhārakṛtyāḥ at face value as 
paraphiliacs.
	36.	 Verardi 2011 (304–​305).
	37.	 For instance, Guhyasamāja 13.66 (Matsunaga 1978, 50) sets out a quick meditation for 
stupefying non-​Buddhists during a debate (sarvatīrthapravādistambhanavajro nāma 
samādhiḥ (see Matsunaga 1978, 50).

--- PAGE 999 ---
974      Iain Sinclair
 
	38.	 Hatley (2016a, 332–​338).
	39.	 To give just two examples, see, respectively, the Vajrasattvaniṣpādana of deutero-​
Candrakīrti (Luo and Tomabechi 2009) and the earlier Viṃśatividhi of Nāgabuddhi 
(Tanaka 2003), which both quote the Guhyasamāja at length.
	40.	 Guhyasamāja 5.2ab (Matsunaga 1978, 15). The Pradīpodyotana commentary of deutero-​
Candrakīrti explains that “those bent on killing” refers to persons who trap and snare 
creatures for their livelihood.
	41.	 Guhyasamāja 16.61 (Matsunaga 1978, 91) is excerpted in Nāgabuddhi’s Vimśatividhi 15.6 
on the ācāryābhiṣeka (Tanaka 2003, 212).
	42.	 Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara 6.9 (Negī 2018, 164), also quoted in 
Sūtakamelāpaka 9 (Wedemeyer 2007, 468). A historic performance of this kind mentioned 
by the eighth-​century commentator Jñānamitra is discussed by Davidson (2002, 242–​243) 
and Tomabechi (2009, xlix). On the developed gaṇacakra, the “tantric feast,” see also 
Snellgrove (1987, 160–​161).
	43.	 See Mallinson (2020). Mallinson locates the term haṭhayoga in the Guhyasamāja, but it is 
only mentioned in its uttaratantra, v. 162 (Matsunaga 1978, 125), which may be later than 
the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara.
	44.	 The ḍākinī was characterized in this manner in British India (Wilson 1853:185). On the no­
tion of the ḍākinī as a witch in early classical sources, see Hatley (2016b).
	45.	 Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara 1.7–​8 (Negī 2018, 143). The etymological asso­
ciation between flight and the word ḍākinī is discussed in connection with this verse by 
Hatley (2016b). On the characterization of all Tathāgatas as sarvākāśacaryāgryaḥ and so 
on, see Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha 1 (Giebel 2001, 20; Horiuchi 1983, 47).
	46.	 Tanaka (2018, 205, 207).
	47.	 Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara 5.47 (Negī 2018, 159). On Heruka as a charnel-​
grounds deity in the Kālikāpurāṇa, see Chaudhuri (1931, 669–​670) and Davidson (2002, 
211–​214).
	48.	 See Gray (2022).
	49.	 For some hard data on the (mostly tantric) Buddhist subjects of Pāla dynasty sculpture, 
comprising over a thousand entries, see Mori (2012).
	50.	 Onians (2002, 190).
	51.	 There are suppositions that “the tantric movement” originated in “siddha communities” 
outside monasteries (Davidson 2002, 265, 294).
	52.	 For cogent observations on possible locations of Oḍḍiyāna, see Hodge (2003, 539–​541 
nn.10, 12). The fact that Padmavajra describes a coastal region as an ideal place for praxis 
(Guhyasiddhi 8.17ab [Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, 54]) provides one reason to doubt that 
tantric Buddhist Oḍḍiyāna can be exclusively identified with the Swat District in the far 
north of Pakistan.
	53.	 For the seven texts’ titles and bibliographic details, see Tsukamoto, Matsunaga, and Isoda 
(1990, 344–​346), and see Krug (2018, 420ff) on the Tibetan reception of these texts as a 
tantric “mini-​canon.”
	54.	 Guhyasiddhi 6.95, Advayasiddhi 4 (Rinpoche & Dwivedi 1987, 47, 132). Where transgres­
sive tantric injunctions are accepted in classical contexts without further comment, the 
modern belief that “obviously we cannot just take them literally” (Broido 1988, 72) is called 
into question.
	55.	 Standard lists of āpattis (e.g., Advayavajra’s Sthūlāpattayaḥ v. 2cd [Mathes 2016, 339]) 
reflect some of Indrabhūti’s admonitions, such as the prohibition on fraternizing with

--- PAGE 1000 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      975
 
śrāvakas in Jñānasiddhi 13.16 (Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, 131; Krug 2018, 322). A manual 
for confessing āpattis, the *Vajrayānamūlāṅgāpattideśana (Rdo rje theg pa’i rtsa ba dang 
yan lag gi ltung ba’i bshags pa, Q4626 (Katz 1979) is attributed to Indrabhūti.
	56.	 Jñānasiddhi 10.2 (Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, 126; Krug 2018, 175).
	57.	 Jñānasiddhi 9.20 (Rinpoche and Dwivedi 198, 123), my translation; see also Krug 
(2018, 310).
	58.	 On the two stages, see Klein-​Schwind (2012, 74) and Dalton (2019, 176–​181).
	59.	 See Krug (2018, 252–​256) for a translation of the relevant passage as well as references to 
prior studies, to which Onians (2002, 185–​188) and Gerstmayr (2017, 199–​201) should 
be added.
	60.	 Guhyasiddhi 8.9, 8.12, 1.14 (Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, 53–​54, 6).
	61.	 Jñānasiddhi 10.12, 10.26, 10.31 (Rinpoche & Dwivedi 1987, 149–​151), my translation; see also 
Krug (the latter two verses) (2018, 323).
	62.	 Śāntarakṣita quotes verses that are also cited in the Seven Siddhi Texts, and the Tattvasiddhi 
was in some cases transmitted alongside these texts (see, e.g., Moriguchi 1993, 176, 195). 
These commonalities do not, however, necessarily amount to proof that Śāntarakṣita 
belonged to the same period and place as Indrabhūti et al.
	63.	 Tattvasiddhi (Moriguchi 1993, 167), my translation). For Moriguchi’s reading 
viṣayaparibhogabhāvam, instead read paribhogabhāvam (yongs su longs spyod pa’i ngo bor, 
via D3708). See also Friquegnon, Mandelbaum, and Jamspal (2017).
	64.	 Tattvasiddhi final section (Steinkellner 2001, 840).
	65.	 Tattvasiddhi (Steinkellner 2001, 835, 850).
	66.	 Mallinson (2020) has pointed out that the title *Caryāmelāpakapradīpa is not attested 
in the available Sanskrit texts. The title Sūtakamelāpaka is given internally (Wedemeyer 
2007, 338 n.23, variant of MS C) and other texts likewise cite it with this title or the abbrevi­
ated title Sūtaka (sūtra-​tantra-​kalpa).
	67.	 The text blocks taken from the Tattvasiddhi—​their source has not been noticed in pre­
vious editions of the Sūtakamelāpaka—​include: (1) part of Śāntarakṣita’s opening state­
ment (rūpādayo . . . viśiṣṭaphalāvāhakā bhavantīti), slightly reworded (Wedemeyer 2007, 
463); (2) a verse from the Paramādya followed by a prose quotation from the Ratnakūṭa (see 
Wedemeyer 2007, 464); (3) another quotation followed by a line of prose, not extant in the 
published Sanskrit text (bsam pa gang dang gang gis ni . . . ’bras bu ’byung bar ’gyur ro, D1803).
	68.	 Sūtakamelāpaka 10 (Wedemeyer 2007, 485–​486, 313–​315), here quoting Guhyasamāja 
16.92–​16.97, 16.101–​16.103 (Matsunaga 1978, 95). The present translation “Wise-​Woman 
Vow” aims to capture etymological aspects of the words vidyā and vrata. The word vidyā, 
“wisdom,” is feminine and in this context polysemic, referring to a spell or mantra as well 
as a corporeal woman.
	69.	 Sūtakamelāpaka 11 (Wedemeyer 2007, 492, 325, my translations).
	70.	 Krug (2018, 221–​223) rightly links passages relating to the unmattavrata in Guhyasiddhi 
4.51–​52, 6.7–​12 to pre-​existing non-​Buddhist sources for this practice. Aspects of the 
unmattavrata described in the Sūtakamelāpaka are nonetheless related to the vidyāvrata 
of the Guhyasamāja, especially the claim that it leads to siddhi in no more than six months.
	71.	 The Sūtakamelāpaka’s vyākhyātantra source for the passage on the unmattavrata can 
be identified here as the Vajrahṛdayālaṃkāra (Rdo rje snying po rgyan gyi rgyud, D451). 
Wedemeyer (2007, 324 n.324) notes: “Tsongkhapa claims. . . that the passage is drawn 
from. . . the Vajramaṇḍalālaṃkāra Tantra (rDo rje snying po rgyan gyi rgyud . . . ),” but the 
word snying po (*hṛdaya) here indicates the Vajrahṛdayālaṃkāra.

--- PAGE 1001 ---
976      Iain Sinclair
 
	 72.	 See Matsunaga (1978, xxx) and further discussion below.
	 73.	 On this standard arrangement, see, among others, Onians (2002, 191–​194) and Sinclair 
(2016, 78–​79).
	 74.	 Clarke (2009, 5–​8).
	 75.	 *Vimalaratnalekha v.16 (Dri ma med pa’i rin po che’i phrin yig, D4188); see Basu (1930, 
23), and for further references, Sinclair (2016, 219 n.92).
	 76.	 Onians (2002, 262).
	 77.	 See Sinclair (2014, 158) and Klein-​Schwind (2012, 162–​168), respectively.
	 78.	 Weissenborn (2012, 179–​191) gives examples of both types, designating the latter type of 
depiction as yuganaddha.
	 79.	 *Mantrāvatāra (Gsang sngags la ’jug pa, D3718); see Tulku and Clark (1999, 27).
	 80.	 Kṣitigarbha’s Daśatattvasaṃgraha 1.1 (Klein-​Schwind 2012, 188) affiliates itself to the 
jñānapādakrama.
	 81.	 *Dvitīyakramatattvabhāvanā (Rim pa gnyis pa’i de kho na nyid sgom pa, D1853); see 
Dalton (2019, 235–​242).
	 82.	 For more on the vidyāvrata, see Onians (2002, 176–​185) and in particular Dalton (2019, 
291–​294).
	 83.	 Guhyasamāja (uttaratantra) 18.125c (Matsunaga 1978, 122), quoted via Vāgīśvarakīrti’s 
Saṃkṣiptābhiṣekavidhi by Onians (2002, 198). For similar sentiments see—​one of many 
examples—​Padmavajra’s Guhyasiddhi 3.24 (Rinpoche & Dwivedi (1987, 22).
	 84.	 *Dvitīyakramatattvabhāvanā 6 (Dalton 2019, 302, 304–​306). The reconstructions of 
the names of Jñānapāda’s two women associates are uncertain. The name bā li pā da 
has not previously been reconstructed convincingly (ibid., 306 n.24), but calls to mind 
Subhūtipālita (*Pālitapāda), a figure active in this period, some of whose works (such as 
the Bhūtaḍāmaramaṇḍalopāyikā) are still extant in Sanskrit.
	 85.	 *Dvitīyakramatattvabhāvanā v.123 (D1853), (my translation); see also Dalton 
(2019, 395).
	 86.	 *Dvitīyakramatattvabhāvanā v.123 (D1853) (Dalton 2019, 395) parallels Guhyasiddhi 
2.69cd (Rinpoche and Dwivedi 1987, 19). The Guhyasiddhi, however, has “the targeted” 
moment occurring “at the end of bliss and cessation” (viramānandayor ante).
	 87.	 Daśatattvasaṃgraha 2.9–​12, Suratodbhavamaṇḍala (Klein-​Schwind 2012, 191, 234).
	 88.	 Onians (2002, 199, 282–​290).
	 89.	 Broido (1988).
	 90.	 Vajrasattvaniṣpādanasūtra (Luo and Tomabechi 2009, 25).
	 91.	 Sūtakamelāpaka 11 (Wedemeyer 2007, 489, 320).
	 92.	 Matsunaga (1978, xxx).
	 93.	 Tanaka (2018, 178–​179).
	 94.	 Broido (1988, 73).
	 95.	 Ṣaṭsāhasrikā Hevajraṭīkā 1.10–​18 (Sferra 2009, 445, 458); Vimalaprabhā I-​1, 
Sanmārganiyamoddeśa (Dwivedi and Bahulkar 1994, 3–​4).
	 96.	 The relevant statement is nārīcaryāsu manthānaṃ [acyutaṃ] brahmacaryam, tathā 
anena yoginā kartavyam; see Vimalaprabhā 4 on Kālacakra 4.125 (Dwivedi and Bahulkar 
1994, 216). Here the word acyutam is supplied in accordance with the polemic of 
Vimalaprabhā I-​1 (ibid., 4).
	 97.	 Ṣaṭsāhasrikā Hevajraṭīkā 1.40ab, 44ab (Sferra 2009, 446, 447, 460), my translation.
	 98.	 Tomabechi (2009, lv).

--- PAGE 1002 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      977
 
	 99.	 There is an instance of this common verse in Anupamavajra’s Ādikarmapradīpa 
(Vallée Poussin 1898, 196; my translation). Its earliest occurrence is probably in a 
tantric manual, Kukkurīpāda’s *Pañcavidhi (Dkyil ’khor thams cad kyi rjes su ’jug 
pa’i cho ga lnga pa, D1670). The verse has since become a staple of Newar Buddhist 
gurumaṇḍala procedure; for further details, see Sinclair (2016, 335).
	100.	 Nayatrayabheda v. 2, read via Kano (2021, 132).
	101.	 Nayatrayabheda v. 70, summarized in ibid.
	102.	 Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi (Giebel 2005, 42, 44); for Buddhaguhya’s commentary, see 
Hodge (2003, 131,136).
	103.	 Nayatrayapradīpa v. 3 (Kano and Li 2019, 137), my translation. The statement “a soul 
exists” (asty ātmā) is discussed both in the śrāvaka canon and the emic scholarly litera­
ture on epistemology (pramāṇa).
	104.	 Nayatrayapradīpa autocommentary on v.3 (Kano 2020:91).
	105.	 Nayatrayapradīpa v. 6 (Kano and Li 2019, 137), my translation).
	106.	 Nayatrayapradīpa v. 16 (Kano and Li 2019, 138).
	107.	 Nayatrayapradīpa v. 15 (Kano and Li 2019, 138), my translation).
	108.	 *Bodhipathapradīpa (Byang chub lam gyi sgron ma, D3947); see in particular the discus­
sion of this passage and its autocommentary (Byang chub lam gyi sgron ma’i dka’ ’grel, 
D3948) in Onians (2002, 260–​265).
	109.	 For a different interpretation of Atiśa’s reference to the Kālacakra in connection with 
sexual yoga and “celibates,” see Tanaka (2018, 230).
	110.	 Tattvaratnāvalī (Mathes 2016, 342, 74–​75). See also Dasgupta (1950, 71–​72). Advayavajra’s 
outline of the four interpretative positions (sthiticatasra) of Buddhism (Vaibhāṣika, 
Sautrāntika, Yogācāra, Mādhyamika) is not discussed here.
	 111.	 Tattvaratnāvalī (Mathes 2016, 342, 74–​75).
	 112.	 Caturmudrānvaya (ibid., 385, 107).
References
Bang, Junglan. 2020. “Śaiva Verses Redacted from Buddhist Ones: Found in the First Chapter 
of the Tantrasadbhāva.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 68, no. 3: 18–​22. https://​doi.
org/​10.4259/​ibk.68.3_​1​124
Basu, Anathnath. 1930. “The Vimalaratnalekha or an epistle to King Nayapāla of Magadha from 
Dīpaṅkara Śrījñāna with Sanskrit reconstruction and English translation.” In Proceedings 
and Transactions of the Fifth Indian Oriental Conference, November 19, 20, 21 and 22, 1928, 
vol. II. Lahore: University of the Panjab, i–​27.
Boisvert, Mathieu. 1995. The Five Aggregates: Understanding Theravada Psychology and 
Soteriology. Waterloo, Canada: Laurier University Press.
Broido, Michael M. 1988. “Killing, Lying, Stealing, and Adultery: A Problem of Interpretation 
in the Tantras.” In Buddhist Hermeneutics, edited by Donald S. Lopez Jr., 71–​118. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Chaudhuri Bankim Chandra. 1931. “A Comparative Study of Hindu and Buddhist Mythology.” 
In Buddhistic Studies, edited by Bimala Churn Law, 668–​672. Calcutta: Thacker, Spink & Co.
Clarke, Shayne. 2009. “Monks Who Have Sex: Pārājika Penance in Indian Buddhist Monasticisms.” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 37: 1–​43. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s10​781-​008-​9059-​3

--- PAGE 1003 ---
978      Iain Sinclair
 
Dalton, Catherine. 2019. “Enacting Perfection: Buddhajñānapāda’s Vision of a Tantric 
Buddhist World.” PhD diss., University of California, Berkeley. https://​escho​lars​hip.org/​uc/​
item/​6xn0g​9bp
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A social history of the tantric movement. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2022. “Initiation (Abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism.” In The Oxford 
Handbook of Tantric Studies, edited by Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes (online edn, 
Oxford Academic). https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​oxfor​dhb/​978019​7549​889.013.3
Dasgupta, Shashi Bhusan. 1950. An Introduction to Tāntric Buddhism. Calcutta: University of 
Calcutta.
Dwivedi, Vrajavallabh and Bahulkar, S. S. 1994. Vimalaprabhāṭīkā of Kalkin Śrīpuṇḍarīka on 
Śrīlaghukālacakratantrarāja by Śrīmañjuśrīyaśas. Vol. II. Sarnath, India: Central Institute of 
Higher Tibetan Studies.
Eliade, Mircea. 1958. Yoga: Immortality and Freedom. Translated by Willard R. Trask. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Fremantle, Francesca. 1971. “A Critical Study of the Guhyasamāja Tantra.” PhD diss., University 
of London.
Friquegnon, Marie-​Louise, Arthur Mandelbaum, and Geshe Lozang Jamspal, eds. and trans. 
2017. Tattvasiddhi (The Attainment of Suchness) & Madhyamakalankara (The Attainment of 
the Middle Way). New York: Cool Grove Press.
Gerstmayr, Paul. 2017. “Aiśa Sanskrit in Early Śaiva Tantras.” PhD diss., University of Oxford.
Giebel, Rolf. 2001. Two Esoteric Sutras: The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra. The Susiddhikara Sutra. 
Berkeley. CA: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
Giebel, Rolf. 2005. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi sutra. Moraga, CA: BDK America.
Gray, David B. 2022. “The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra.” In The Oxford Handbook of Tantric Studies, 
edited by Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes (online edn, Oxford Academic). https://​doi.
org/​10.1093/​oxfor​dhb/​978019​7549​889.013.31.
Hatley, Shaman. 2016a. “Erotic Asceticism: The Razor’s Edge Observance (asidhārāvrata) and 
the Early History of Tantric Coital Ritual.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 
79 no. 2: 329–​345. https://​doi.org/​10.1017/​S00419​77X1​6000​069
Hatley, Shaman. 2016b. “Converting the Ḍākinī: Goddess Cults and Tantras of the Yoginīs be­
tween Buddhism and Śaivism.” In Tantric Traditions in Transmission and Translation, edited 
by David B. Gray and Ryan Richard Overbey (online ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford Academic. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​acp​rof:oso/​978019​9763​689.003.0003
Hodge, Stephen, trans. 2003. The Mahā-​Vairocana-​Abhisaṃbodhi Tantra, with Buddhaguhya’s 
Commentary. Oxon, UK: RoutledgeCurzon.
Horiuchi, Kanjin. 1983. Shoe kongō chō gyō no kenkyū: bonzō kan taishō. Bonponkō tei hen. 2 
vols. Kōya-​cho, Japan: Mikkyō Bunka Kenkyūjo.
Huntington, C. W. 1983. “The System of the Two Truths in the Prasannapadā and the 
Madhyamakāvatāra: A Study in Mādhyamika Soteriology.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 11: 
77–​106. https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​BF0​0221​064
Kano, Kazuo. 2020. “Shōmon ni yoru Daijō no shinjitsukan hihan: Nayatrayapradīpa Bonbun 
kōtei to yakuchū.” Komazawa Daigaku Bukkyō Gakubu Ronshū 51: 77–​102.
Kano, Kazuo. 2021. “Nayatrayapradīpa, Nayatrayabheda, Nayatrayahṛdaya—​Kenmitsu no 
taikei o gaijū suru santen no Bonbun sakuhin.” Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū 70, no. 1: 129–​
136. https://​doi.org/​10.4259/​ibk.70.1_​394

--- PAGE 1004 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      979
 
Kano, Kazuo, and Xuezhu Li, 2019. “Nayatrayapradīpa of Trivikrama: A Preliminary Report 
on the Newly Surfaced Sanskrit Manuscript.” Journal of World Buddhist Cultures 2: 125–​140.
Katz, Nathan. 1979. “Indrabhūti’s ‘Confession of Errors in the Fundamental Teachings 
of the Vajrayāna’: A Critical Edition, English Translation and Discussion.” 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 2, no. 2: 31–​44. https://​doi.org/​
10.2143/​JIABS.2.2.3286​379
Klein-​Schwind, 
Sabine. 
2012. 
“The 
Compendium 
of 
the 
Ten 
Fundamentals: 
Daśatattvasaṃgraha of paṇḍita Kṣitigarbha.” PhD diss., University of Hamburg.
Krug, Adam Charles. 2018. “The Seven Siddhi Texts: The Oḍiyāna Mahāmudrā Lineage in 
its Indic and Tibetan Contexts.” PhD diss., UC Santa Barbara. https://​escho​lars​hip.org/​uc/​
item/​4rd57​4cz
Luo Hong, and Toru Tomabechi, eds. 2009. Candrakīrti’s Vajrasattvaniṣpādanasūtra 
(Vajrasattvasādhana): Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts. Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing House.
Mallinson, James. 2020. “Haṭhayoga’s Early History: From Vajrayāna Sexual Restraint to 
Universal Somatic Soteriology.” In The Oxford History of Hinduism: Hindu Practice, edited 
by Gavin Flood (online ed.) Oxford, UK: Oxford Academic. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​oso/​
978019​8733​508.003.0008
Mathes, Klaus-​Dieter. 2016. A Fine Blend of Mahāmudrā and Madhyamaka. Maitrīpa’s 
Collection of Texts on Non-​conceptual Realization (Amanasikāra). Vienna: Verlag der 
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Matsunaga, Yukei. 1978. The Guhyasamāja tantra. Osaka: Toho Shuppan.
Mitra, Rājendralāla. 1882. The Sanskrit Buddhist literature of Nepal. Calcutta: Asiatic Society of 
Bengal.
Mori, Masahide. 2012. Pāra-​chō ki no mikkyō bijutsu. Kanazawa, Japan: Institute of Asian 
Iconographic Resources.
Moriguchi, Mitsutoshi. 1993. “Tattvasiddhināmaprakaraṇa I—​shoingyō ron.” In Indogaku 
Mikkyōgaku kenkyū: Miyasaka Yūshō Hakase koki kinen ronbunshū, edited by Miyasaka 
Yūshō Hakase koki kinen ronbunshū kankōkai, vol. 2, 137–​199. Kyoto, Japan: Hōzōkan.
Negī, Ṭhākurasena, ed. 2018. “Śrīsarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvaranāmatantram.” 
Dhīḥ: Journal of Rare Buddhist Texts Research Project 58: 141–​201.
Onians, Isabelle. 2002. “Tantric Buddhist apologetics, or Antinomianism as a norm.” D. Phil. 
diss., University of Oxford.
Orzech, Charles D., Richard K. Payne, and Henrik H. Sørensen. 2011. “Esoteric Buddhism 
and the Tantras in East Asia: Some Methodological Considerations.” In Esoteric Buddhism 
and the Tantras in East Asia, edited by Charles D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard 
K. Payne, 3–​19. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​ej.978900​4184​
916.i-​1200.6
Payne, Richard. 2006. “Introduction.” In Tantric Buddhism in East Asia, edited by Richard K. 
Payne, 1–​31. Boston, MA: Wisdom.
Rinpoche, Samdhong, and Vrajavallabh Dwivedi, eds. 1987. Guhyādi-​aṣṭasiddhi-​saṅgraha. 
Sarnath, India: Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies.
Sferra, Francesco. 2009. “The Laud of the Chosen Deity, the First Chapter of the 
Hevajratantrapiṇḍārthaṭīkā by Vajragarbha.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, ed­
ited by Shingo Einoo, 444–​456. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.
Sinclair, Iain. 2014. “Just War and War Magic in Indian Tantric Buddhism.” Social Analysis 58, 
no. 1, 149–​166. https://​doi.org/​10.3167/​sa.2014.580​108

--- PAGE 1005 ---
980      Iain Sinclair
 
Sinclair, Iain. 2015. “The creation of theism personified: A conceptual history of the God-​
Maker Avalokiteśvara.” In Asian Horizons: Giuseppe Tucci’s Buddhist, Indian, Himalayan and 
Central Asian Studies, edited by Andrea A. Di Castro and David Templeman. Melbourne, 
Australia: Monash University, 431–​478.
Sinclair, Iain. 2016. “The Appearance of Tantric Monasticism in Nepal: A History of the Public 
Image and Fasting Ritual of Newar Buddhism, 980–​1380.” PhD diss., Monash University. 
https://​doi.org/​10.4225/​03/​58ab8c​adcf​152
Snellgrove, David. 1987. Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and their Tibetan Successors. 
2 vols. London: Serindia.
Snodgrass, Adrian. 1988. The Matrix and Diamond World Mandalas in Shingon Buddhism. 2 
vols. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
St. Clair-​Tisdall, William. 1903. The Noble Eightfold Path. London: Elliot Stock.
Steinkellner, Ernst. 2001. “Is the Ultimate Cognition of the Yogin Conceptual or Non-​
conceptual? Part 1: A Critical Edition of the Tantristic Tattvasiddhi, Final Section.” In Le pa­
role e i marmi: Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70° compleanno, edited by Raffaele 
Torella and Raniero Gnoli, 835–​852. Rome: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2022. “On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras.” In The Oxford 
Handbook of Tantric Studies, edited by Richard K. Payne and Glen A. Hayes (online ed.). 
Oxford, UK: Oxford Academic. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​oxfor​dhb/​978019​7549​889.013.32
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2003. “Nāgabodhi no Śrī-​guhyasamājamandalopāyikā-​vimśati-​vidhi ni 
okeru kanjō shidai.” Tōyō Bunka Kenkyūjo Kiyō 142: 193–​217. https://​doi.org/​10.15083/​
00027​034
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2018. An Illustrated History of the Maṇḍala: From Its Genesis to the 
Kālacakratantra. Somerville, MA: Wisdom.
Tomabechi, Tōru. 2009. Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā: Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts. Beijing: 
China Tibetology Publishing House.
Tsukamoto, Keishō, Matsunaga, Yūkei, and Isoda, Hirofumi, eds. 1990. Bongo Butten no 
kenkyū. Vol. IV: Mikkyō kyōten hen. Kyoto, Japan: Heirakuji Shoten.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1956. Minor Buddhist Texts. Part I. Rome: Is. M. E. O.
Tulku, L., T. Doboom, and Robert W. Clark. 1999. “The Mantrāvatāra of Jñānākara.” 
The Journal of Religious Studies 30: 23–​29.
Vallée Poussin, de la Louis. 1898. Bouddhisme, études et matériaux. Ādikarmapradīpa, Bodhicar
yāvatāraṭīkā. London: Luzac & Co.
van Rensburg, F. J. J. 2005. “Metaphors in the Soteriology in 1 Peter: Identifying and Interpreting 
the Salvific Imageries.” In Salvation in the New Testament, edited by J. G. van der Watt, 409–​
435. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​978904​7407​102_​018
Verardi, Giovanni. 2011. Hardships and Downfall of Buddhism in India. Delhi: Manohar.
Wang, Junqi. 2022. “A Preliminary Study of a Newly Discovered Sanskrit Manuscript of the 
Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 70, no. 3: 1102–​1108. 
https://​doi.org/​10.4259/​ibk.70.3_​1​102
Ward, W. 1818. A View of the History, Literature, and Mythology, of the Hindoos: Including a 
Minute Description of Their Manners and Customs, and Translations from Their Principal 
Works. Vol. 1. Serampore, India: Mission Press.
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2007. Āryadeva’s Lamp that Integrates the Practices 
(Caryāmelāpakaprādīpa): The Gradual Path of Vajrayāna Buddhism According to the 
Esoteric Community Noble Tradition. New York: The American Institute of Buddhist Studies, 
Columbia University.

--- PAGE 1006 ---
The Soteriologies of Buddhist Tantrism      981
 
Weissenborn, Karen. 2012. Buchkunst aus Nālandā. Vienna: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und 
Buddhistische Studien.
Wilson, H. H., A. C. Ganguli, and N. D. Basu, eds. [1853] 1940. A Glossary of Judicial and 
Revenue Terms, and of Useful Words Occurring in Official Documents Relating to the 
Administration of the Government of British India. Calcutta: Eastern Law House.
Yamamoto, Shoichiro. 2020. “Dainichikyō ni okeru Daijō no gainen.” The Chisan Gakuhō 69: 
141–​160. https://​doi.org/​10.18963/​chisa​ngak​uho.69.0_​0​141

--- PAGE 1007 ---


--- PAGE 1008 ---
Chapter 38
Singing Tantra
Aural Media and Sonic Soteriology in 
Bengali Esoteric Lineages
Carola Erika Lorea
Introduction: Towards a Sonically 
Aware Methodology for 
Tantric Studies
A Brahmin, is astonished to witness a man and woman entwined together 
in a single blue garment. [ . . . ] They are singing very tenderly, but many 
more come into view, singing songs of their sect in the vulgar tongue, 
drinking spirituous liquor, and behaving in a very excited and dissolute 
way, their observance involving sex that disrupts correct, Vedic behaviour 
with regard to caste and stage of life.
This translation from the play Āgamaḍambara, composed during the reign of 
Shankaravarman in Kashmir (883–​902 C.E.), is employed by Gavin Flood (2006: 52) 
to show that before 900 C.E., tantric traditions had already achieved a strong degree 
of visibility and development. It can also demonstrate that singing songs “in the vulgar 
tongue” were already a trademark of tantric communities and an important part of their 
practice.
Tantric traditions in South Asia have been predominantly studied through the lit­
erary and philological analysis of (primarily Sanskrit) texts. However, music and dance, 
songs, and sung stories, in a variety of vernaculars, have always represented an impor­
tant component of lived religion in tantric communities. Religiosity in South Asia is 
performance-​centered: holy literatures as “audible texts” (Wilke and Moebus 2011: 12) 
are frequently ensounded, embodied, staged, or sung. The logocentric and nonsensory 
study of tantric texts—​although archaeological sources and iconography have been used 
too—​has covered a hegemonic role in the history of tantric studies, at the expense of

--- PAGE 1009 ---
984      Carola Erika Lorea
 
sensory dimensions other than the visual. This hierarchizing of the media corresponds 
to Western expectations but hardly at all to the actual use of these media in indigenous 
practice (Wilke and Moebus 2011: 4). Attempting to understand tantric traditions solely 
through philology, epigraphy, and iconography will miss out on precisely those sensory 
media and technologies of communication that are often most central to the tantric 
practitioners themselves: the aural, oral, and sonic fields of tantric expression.
This is especially relevant when dealing with Bengali esoteric lineages. Journeying 
across old, middle, and modern Bengali, esoteric poems, in the form of couplets, sung 
verses, and strophic lyrics (dohās, padas, and gān) have accompanied the development 
of the religious history of Bengal, to the extent that the history of Bengali literature is 
largely a history of Bengali songs (Cakrabarti 1990: 13). Besides a few notable exceptions 
(Hess 2015 among others), esoteric and devotional songs are often studied as “poems,” 
that is, as textual objects rather than performative events, although they are frequently 
preceded by an indication of their melodic framework, musical style, and/​or rhythmic 
pattern (rāga, sur, tāl). The semantic dimensions of these lyrics are certainly crucial to 
understand the worldviews of those who composed them. But besides their text, the 
sonic aspects of these events should be considered on their own right as co-​constitutive 
of religious identity and practice. The repetition of precise sound—​comprising the silent 
or sonorous repetition of mantric syllables (mantra japā), the chanting of the name of 
Hari, and songs in congregations (sādhusaṅga) of Bāuls and Fakirs—​acts upon the per­
sonal and the collective self, transforms sensibilities, and shapes ways of thinking, states 
of the soul, and even moral character (Beck 1995: 23).
Sounds have often been treated as ephemeral, ornamental, or secondary in the study 
of religions. However, citing Ruth Illman (2019): “We need to realize that music, and the 
arts in general, are not just ornaments or illustrations of something more profoundly 
important to religion, but they are aspects of religious engagement in their own right” 
(xxx). An emerging group of scholars of religion interested in sensory epistemology and 
sound studies are placing a new emphasis on aural media, encouraging a “sonic turn” in 
the study of religions (Hackett 2012: 2018). This article is theoretically embedded in and 
indebted to this current debate in the academic fields of religion and multisensory re­
search (Van Ede 2009). Such sonically aware methodological underpinning is, I argue, 
particularly suitable for the study of tantric traditions.
In modern Bengal, aural media, oral literature, and tantric religiosity are inseparably 
interwoven. Primarily studied by ethnomusicologists and area specialists, aural–​oral 
aspects of tantric ideologies in Bengal rarely enter wider debates in the field of tantric 
studies. In the nineteenth century, musicology and tantric practice forged an intellec­
tual, aesthetic, and affective alliance. Richard Williams brought to our attention how 
edited collections of Śākta songs in modern Bengal lie upon a tantric musicological 
foundation through a shared assumption in Śākta music-​making that the embodied self 
can be manipulated, transformed, and refined through sound (Williams 2019). Recent 
studies of Bengali esoteric songs offered a tremendous contribution to understand the 
ways in which tantra as a “deep worldview” (Kripal 2012) is enacted in the material and 
aesthetic practice of contemporary lineages (Salomon 1991; Trottier 2000; Openshaw

--- PAGE 1010 ---
Singing Tantra      985
 
2002; Cantú 2019, to name a few). However, these contributions often remain con­
fined to area specialists and rarely attempt to make a broader intervention in the field 
of tantric studies. In this chapter, I hope to demonstrate that we can gain new insights 
by applying a sonically aware methodology to the field of Tantic Studies, and I attempt 
to unravel some of the knotted reasons why aural–​oral media of contemporary lineages 
who ensound their tantric worldviews are left at the margins of tantra scholarship.
	
1.	 In the first section, I address this issue as a problem of terminology involving 
emic-​versus-​etic categories. Living practitioners in Bengal will hardly at all refer to 
themselves as “tantric.” Matters of self-​definition pose a serious ethical and episte­
mological problem to ethnographers. Through historical sources and the evidence 
found in songs, I will advocate for the use of “tantric” as a post-​emic category.
	
2.	 In the second section I explore the possibility that aural media have covered a mar­
ginal role in the study of tantric traditions because of a scholarly paradigm that 
has constructed songs and collective music-​making as the domain of emotional 
bhakti, contrasting them to tantric religiosity as the domain of text-​based ritu­
alism, transgression, and violence.
	
3.	 To problematize the previous point, in the third section I discuss how singing 
features ubiquitously in the history of tantric communities as well as in the 
living practices of contemporary lineages, urging us to take aural media into se­
rious consideration for a fuller anthrohistorical understanding of tantra from a 
multisensory perspective.
	 4.	 In the last section, stepping beyond the semantic significance of songs, I address 
aural media as practices of sonic liberation that are embedded in tantric ide­
ology. Using comparative ethnographies, I suggest that embodied techniques of 
the voice, the dancing body and percussion instruments, produce ecstatic states 
referred to as samādhi. This complex religious acoustemology rooted in tantric 
conceptions of the body and cosmic vibration (nād) can emerge through immer­
sive and long-​term ethnographic fieldwork.
To address these points, I use a multitude of sources. Ethnographic material such as oral 
exegeses and the study of performances through participant observation is drawn from 
an extensive and multisite fieldwork conducted between 2011 and 2019 among diverse 
communities of singers-​practitioners in West Bengal, Bangladesh, and the Andaman 
Islands. The primary sources used for this chapter include: handwritten manuscripts 
from Bengali singers and composers collected during my doctoral research and during 
the digitization of endangered notebooks of songs;1 edited collections of songs; “small 
media” like booklets sold at fairs and festivals; and audiovisual media—​such as my field­
work recordings.
Previous works on sound in Indian thought rely heavily upon tantric texts (Beck 1995). 
Wilke and Moebus’s monumental work on sonic cultural history argues that Sanskrit 
Hinduism provides “the richest source of material on language and sound in India” 
(Wilke and Moebus 2011: 1). While Sanskrit hymns and powerful syllables certainly

--- PAGE 1011 ---
986      Carola Erika Lorea
 
occupy an important place, I wish to emphasize that vernacular traditions, Dalit cultural 
heritage, and low-​caste sonic cultures are equally rich—​although understudied archives 
of sonic cultural history of South Asia. This chapter discusses how tantric conceptions 
of sound and sonic manifestations of tantric ideology are embodied, enacted, and 
performed in living esoteric lineages. In their oral histories, these lineages are only mar­
ginally transmitting a tantric genealogy. In fact, most of the singers-​practitioners I have 
worked with would not like to be associated with anything “tantric,” because of the so­
cially reproachable connotations that the term came to be tinged with (Urban 2003, 
2010). The esoteric literature of Bāul, Fakir, and related lineages seem to have stopped 
referencing a direct tantric heritage since the late nineteenth century. However, this does 
not mean that their texts, ideas, and practices are irrelevant to the field of tantric studies.
The religious history of these various groups is complicated, deriving from a conflu­
ence of Tantric Buddhist, Nāth, Vaiṣṇava, and Sufi religiosities (Dasgupta 1962; Cashin 
1995). I use the broad terms “esoteric” and “heterodox”2 in order to discuss the views of 
predominantly low-​caste practitioners who would define themselves using situational 
and multiple definitions—​Bāul, Fakir, Vaiṣṇava, Sahajiẏā, Matuẏā, Lālan panthī, and 
so on. The lineages often conflate, fluidly overlap, exchange disciples, and participate 
in each other’s ritual occasions. These movements transmit esoteric teachings on the 
human body (dehatattva), based on the assumption that the body as microcosm reflects 
the universe-​macrocosm. They worship the human (mānuṣ), and believe that there is 
nothing higher than a human being in its perfected state.3 Although they live in regions 
that are dominantly Hindu or Muslim, they do not follow the orthodox norms or rituals 
of these religious establishments. Their highest goal is the experience of pure love (prem) 
and the accomplishment of the blissful state of transcendence of all dualities, known as 
sahaja (simple, innate, spontaneous). To purify the body–​mind and reach those goals, 
they employ a set of practices (sādhan or sādhanā) that revolve around the control of 
breath and bodily substances. They all employ music and singing for didactic, ritual, and 
soteriological purposes. Techniques to progress in sādhanā are learned from one—​or 
more—​gurus. Accomplished practitioners are given the honorific epithet of a madman 
(pāgal, khyāpā). Hierarchies and differentiations among human beings based on society 
and religions, such as caste divisions, are scorned and rejected, and so are claims of au­
thority based upon the knowledge of sacred scriptures. Songs, instead, are considered 
the most authoritative repositories of knowledge.4
Tantric as Post-​Emic Category: Duddu 
Shah and the Genealogy of Bāuls
When the Vaiṣṇava Bāul couple Nitai and Shanti5 traveled to Italy for the first time, they 
asked me to write a short introduction to the Bāul tradition in Italian, to help intro­
duce their songs to the unfamiliar audience. Then they looked at my two-​paragraph

--- PAGE 1012 ---
Singing Tantra      987
 
description, and immediately asked me to delete the word “tantric,” which I had used 
in order to locate Bāul ontologies of body and universe. Nitai and Shanti were anxious 
to disassociate from the word “tantric,” because, as they humbly said, “we don’t know 
anything about mantra-​tantra and tantric scriptures.” Historical reasons led the term 
“tantra” in Bengal to acquire suspicious connotations, related to spooky, occult, and 
scandalous practices (Urban 2003). The tantric path came to be seen as incompatible 
with a “proper Vaiṣṇava” (śuddha baiṣṇab) religious self (Lorea 2018b).
I diligently deleted the term. Yet many of the common denominators that char­
acterize tantric traditions6 are definitely shared by performers and practitioners who 
today may reject such legacy according to their lineage and stage of realization. As an 
ethnographer, using the term “tantric” as a descriptive category, when my interlocutors 
do not agree to be identified with anything tantric at all, poses an ethical dilemma, 
which can only be resolved by contextualizing and historicizing such hostility. Esoteric 
movements following tantric ideas on the body and on liberation, opposing castes and 
celibate renunciation (sannyās), worshiping the human (mānuṣ bhajan), and encour­
aging spiritual-​erotic companionship (yugal sādhanā) with a partner came to be viewed 
as heterodox during the articulation of a restored and institutionalized Vaiṣṇavism in 
nineteenth-​century Bengal. Accusations and allegations from the dominant culture 
resulted into a conscious turn away from the nominal transmission of “tantric” heritage 
among practitioners of low caste and class status.
However, Bāul singers and their spiritual teachers often undergo tantric training and 
initiation, especially in the Śākta order, as it is evident from the biographical information 
that we can gather about a number of guru-​composers. The prolific composer Haure 
Gosain of Bardhaman (1202–​1319 BS, c. 1796–​1909 C.E.) received initiation (dikṣā) 
from his mother. Later he received tantric initiation (pūrṇābhiśek) after accomplishing 
textual and experiential training under Swami Vashishthananda. At a later stage, he 
found his śikṣā (teaching) guru in Nadia, Prahlad Goswami, who taught him esoteric 
Vaiṣṇava practices and gave him the name Haure Gosain, which he used in his songs 
(see Bhattacharya 1957: 762; Jha 2009, 547–​548). Raj Kṛṣṇa of Nadia was renowned for 
his cremation ground practices, and for spiritual powers (siddhis) harnessed through 
sādhanā, such as rising up in the air (Openshaw 1995: 139–​140). The famous saint-​
composer Bhaba Pagla was initiated with a Śākta mantra by an itinerant ascetic wearing a 
snake around his neck and carrying a trident; he persisted in worshiping Kālī even while 
professing the uselessness of all exterior rites (Lorea 2016). Despite abundant linkages, 
explicit association with tantric traditions seems to stop, or radically decrease, in the ev­
idence left by Bāuls since the late nineteenth or early twentieth century. Concomitantly, 
the intellectual elite that popularized these songs for a bhadralok (upper-​class, high-​
caste Hindu urban) public presented a purged image of the composers, deprived of tan­
tric tones. Perhaps unsurprisingly then, the song of Duddu Shah “Mahānirbāṇ keman 
kare haẏ” (How is the great liberation obtained?), in which Duddu directly mentions 
the teachings of Buddhist tantras, has never made it into a printed anthology. Duddu 
Shah (1841–​1911) was born into a Muslim family in Jhenaidah (now Bangladesh) and is 
possibly the most well-​known disciple of Lalan Fakir (d. 1890), whose songs have been

--- PAGE 1013 ---
988      Carola Erika Lorea
 
studied, translated, and performed internationally. I have recorded this song during a 
sādhusaṅga in Birbhum, at the ashram of Khyepa Baba, a learned tantric guru from East 
Bengal following the lineage of Nityānanda.7
মহানির্
বাণ কেমন করে হয় ।। 

ভগবান বুদ্
ধ যার নাম 

লিচ্
ছবিতে যাহার উদয় । 

মহানির্
বাণ কেমন করে হয় ।।
How is the great liberation (mahānirbāṇ) obtained?
The one called god Buddha 
Emerged at the time of the Licchavis. 
How is the great liberation (mahānirbāṇ) obtained?
পঞ্চসঙ্গী শিষ্
য তাহার করলেন ব﻿﻿�
ৌদ্ধ ধর
প্রচার । 
ব﻿﻿�োধ
িদ্রুমের নিচে বসে 

করেন বুদ্
ধ নির্
বাণ প

শুন্
যদেশ বলিয়া তায়।।
His disciples, the five companions, 
propagated the Buddhist dharma. 
They spread the word of Buddha’s liberation 
under the Bodhi tree.
That [liberation] is known as the country of void 
(śunya deś).
শূন্
য বলতে কিছু বুঝা যায় 

যেমন পিতার দেহে পুত্
র রয় 

শূন্
যদেশ তেমনি হয় 

বস্তু-​সাধক জানবে উপায়।।
This void is hard to explain in words.
Just like the son who resides in the father’s body 
[in essence, as semen],
Such is the country of void. 
The bastu8-​practitioners have the means to 
know it.
সেই শুন্
যতত্
ত্ব এখন রসিক ধর্
ম নামে বর

চণ্ডীদাস করেছেন মিলন 

রাধাকৃষ্
ণের ভাব মিশাইয়ে ।।
That doctrine of the void is now called the 
dharma of love-​tasters (rasik).
Caṇḍīdās made the fusion, mixing it with the 
love mood (bhāb) of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
তন্ত্র মতে বুদ্
ধের বাণী সেই তন্ত্র শির﻿﻿�োমণি । 

দুদ্
দু বলে আমরা জানি 

লালন সাঁই দরবেশের দয়ায়।।
The tantric path of Buddha’s message 
That tantra is the most precious jewel. 
Duddu says, we know all this 
From the grace of Lalan Sai Darbesh.
Following the oral interpretation provided by Baba, Duddu is describing the spir­
itual path learned from Lalan as a heritage of the tantric teachings of the Buddha: the 
achievement of nirvāṇa with the acceptance (as opposed to renunciation) of saṃsāra. 
Those then got mixed together with Vaiṣṇava imageries of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s love. 
Hence, he said, the song mixes Buddhist and Vaiṣṇava terminology: śunya (void, ulti­
mate reality) becomes a deś (literally “country”), the final stage of Vaiṣṇava progression 
in sādhanā.9 The last stanza exhorts the listeners to acknowledge the value of tantric 
Buddhist revelations.
The song is very unique, and so is its composer. But such an eclectic religious brico­
lage should not surprise us. Duddu was said to be proficient in Farsi and Arabic and 
well-​studied in Sanskrit, and he purportedly knew the Caitanya Caritāmṛta by heart.10 
Moreover, explicit references to tantric texts and a prescription to read them appear in 
at least two songs of his teacher, Lalan Fakir.11 To scholars of Bengali music and pop­
ular religious movements, this genealogy should sound familiar. The Bengali historian

--- PAGE 1014 ---
Singing Tantra      989
 
of kīrtan Hitesh Ranjan Sanyal (1989: 151) states that Buddhist Sahajiẏās in premodern 
Bengal had created a veritable music tradition of their own, and that the success of later 
Vaiṣṇava devotional movements in medieval Bengal was largely due to their ability to 
incorporate and adopt such tantric spiritual-​musical tradition (Chakravarti 1991: 456).
While Lalan’s songs and other sources used by Bāuls12 do not seem to have a problem 
in recognizing a tantric ancestry, Duddu strives to justify the doctrine of the void as a 
respectable and precious teaching, compatible, in fact fused, with Vaiṣṇava devotion. 
Intertextuality can reveal that several songs in Duddu’s oeuvre share this mission, in 
the effort to transmit a lineage history that links Bāuls to tantric Buddhism, while dis­
paraging the bigotry of reformed orthodox Vaiṣṇavas. This effort needs to be under­
stood in the context of the harsh attacks, widespread in colonial and bhadralok sources, 
against Bāul, Darbeś, Sahajiẏā, and various popular religious movements. Gauṛīya 
Vaiṣṇava reformers in the second half of the nineteenth century severely condemned 
Bāuls and cognate lineages both on metaphysical as well as on moral grounds. From a 
doctrinal perspective, they were accused of being “impersonalists,” “voidists,” “tantrics,” 
crypto-​Buddhists, “a-​Vaiṣṇavas,” or straightforwardly “Muslim” disguised as Vaiṣṇavas. 
Their behavior was seen as promiscuous, indulgent, and obscene. Such is the back­
drop against which one should understand Duddu Shah’s historiographic—​or rather 
historiophonic—​project.
কী ধর্
ম প্
রচারে গ﻿﻿�োরা যারে প্
রেমের 
ধর্ম কয়
তবে কেন হরিদাসে হরিনাম নিতে হয়।
সর্ব ধর্
মে আছে মুক্
তি বৈষ
বলে যুক্
তি
তবে কেন এ রীতি হরিদাসের বেলায় ।।
পক্ষপাতিত্
বের দ﻿﻿�োষে দুষ্
ট ভাই 
বৈষ্
ণব মত সে
তাইতে বাউল তাই দ﻿﻿�োষে, দেখতে 
যা পায় ।।
কৃষ্ণ বিনে প্
রেমের করণ ক﻿﻿�োন নবি কি 
জানে নি কখন
তবে কেন এমন বচন কৃষ্ণের 
পড়ে দেয়।।
ব﻿﻿�
ৌদ্ধ তন্
ত্রের করণ পঞ্
চরসিক 
করে নিরূপন
শাক্
ত মতে এসে মিলন তাইতে হয় ।।
সাহিত্
য কাব্
যের তরে রাধা কৃষ্ণ 
সৃষ্
টি করে
এ ভাবে সৃষ্
টি হয় রে দুদ্
দু তাই জানায় ।।
13
What's this religion propagated by Caitanya that 
they refer to as the “dharma of Love”?
If so, then why Haridās (a Sufi) had to be converted 
and take the name of Hari?
Every religion has a path to liberation, argue the 
Vaiṣṇavas.
Then why did Haridās receive such treatment?
Brother, the Vaiṣṇava view is contaminated by 
partiality,
that's why the Bāuls accuse them for what they 
observe.
Wasn’t divine love understood by any prophet, 
besides Kṛṣṇa?
So why do they give credit to Kṛṣṇa alone?
The Five Love-​Tasters (pañcarasik) realized the 
truths of the Buddhist tantras; the teachings on the 
union came as Śākta doctrine.14
In the realm of poetry, they created Rādhā 
and Kṛṣṇa,
Duddu explains, that’s how this bhāb has been 
created.

--- PAGE 1015 ---
990      Carola Erika Lorea
 
In Bengali esoteric lineages, the aesthetic/​emotional theories of Vaiṣṇava bhakti 
permeated a tantric substratum, but there is no contradiction between the two. Duddu 
outlines a history of syncretic confluence between esoteric Buddhism and Vaiṣṇava aes­
thetic/​emotional theory of bhāb as ecstatic love. As many Bāuls assert up to the present, 
Duddu traced back his lineage history to Nityānanda and his son Bīrabhadra.15 Tantra 
has an explicit presence in such an historical recollection. However, the tāntrika has be­
come a rasika in the process of amalgamation that fused the Śaiva–​Śākta theology of 
union, with the emotion (bhāb) of Rādhā-​Kṛṣṇa love.
The rasik dissolves the boundaries between sacred and profane enjoyment: blending 
aesthetic, spiritual, and musical presuppositions, the rasik experiences and shares the 
emotion of divine love as a form of spiritual practice that is best conveyed through song. 
In bhakti poetry, the rasik modality of religiosity is opposed to the juiceless, dull, and 
sterile modality of yogis and ascetics, “rasa-​less as dried up stem of sugarcane” in com­
parison to the sweetness of singing the names of god (Agradās in Burchett 2019: 235). 
In the code language of Bengali esoteric lineages, rasik is also the practitioner of yugal 
sādhanā who exchanges fluids of pleasure rather than practicing austere abstinence and 
“dry” celibacy, progressing on the spiritual path through regulation and manipulation of 
bodily substance (see also Openshaw 2002: 139).
While practicing body-​centered sādhanā and sustaining a lifeworld where the human 
body is intimately connected to the macrocosm, contemporary practitioners reject the 
tantric label. Discussing the identity of contemporary practitioners and their songs as 
“tantric” does not represent an emic taxonomy. However, the literary heritage as well 
as the ethnography of modern lineages clearly deserve a place in the comparative 
and anthrohistorical study of tantra. This is possible by applying the term “tantric” as 
a post-​emic category: a term that used to appear for definitions of a lineage genealogy 
but has ceased to bring status and prestige because of complex social, cultural, and his­
torical reasons, and thus was substituted by other appellations. Instead of concealing 
this history of erasure, using tantric as a post-​emic category indicates that there are 
textual as well as historical connections between tantra and contemporary lineages. 
The “tantric” category is not entirely an etic fabrication, derived solely from schol­
arly analysis and outsiders’ observations. Linage holders locate their roots in a tantric 
worldview from a diachronic perspective (hence post-​); moreover, direct references 
to authorities, texts, deities, and practices defined as tantric by the practitioners 
themselves are still found in many communities and guru-​disciple circles (hence 
-​emic). The definition of tantric as post-​emic is meant to reflect the ambiguous status 
of the tantric legacy in modern Bengal and its relevance as a controversial yet essential 
backdrop.
Recent studies suggested that since the Delhi Sultanate period, a flourishing devo­
tional religiosity dominated by a Sufi-​inflected Vaiṣṇava bhakti has remodeled the 
Indian religious sphere, at the expense of tantric traditions associated with yoga, as­
ceticism, and ritualism. Patton Burchett (2019) suggests that tantric elements were not 
simply wiped out by the bhakti movement, but rather they shifted out of the public 
sphere and survived in disguise, behind the noncontroversial curtain of bhakti. The

--- PAGE 1016 ---
Singing Tantra      991
 
songs of Duddu Shah are a demonstration of this hypothesis. Highlighting the remem­
brance of a Buddhist tantric past, in the ethnohistory of Bāuls and Fakirs, the songs of 
Duddu retrace the merging of tantric sādhanā with Vaiṣṇava bhakti. While bhakti has 
been often portrayed as antithesis to tantra (and vice versa, tantra as antagonistic to 
devotionalism), this juxtaposition would fail to understand several living traditions16 
and their use of aural media and oral-​performative realms of songs as fundamental 
expressions of tantric ideologies.
Rethinking the Song =​ Bhakti Paradigm
In the history of religions of South Asia, songs have been overwhelmingly portrayed 
as the domain of the bhakti poet-​singer. The songs of Mirabai, Kabir, Surdas, Sant, and 
so-​called bhakti poets are often understood as the outpouring of the poet-​saint’s devo­
tional love to a personal theistic recipient. This modality of worship is contrasted to the 
harsh, virile, heroic path of the ritualistic tāntrika, reiterating Lee Siegel’s assumption 
that “love plays no part in the tantras” (1978: 17). Decades of popular and academic liter­
ature contributed to shaping this dichotomy that essentialized both devotional and tan­
tric phenomena as incompatible. This perspective is of little use for both ethnographers’ 
fieldwork engagements with living communities, who routinely mix devotional and 
tantric elements, as well as the literary study of esoteric songs, which draw from bhakti-​
oriented and tantric-​yogic repertoires of images, ideas, and symbols.
In “Bhakti and Tantra Intertwined,” Karen Pechilis (2016) looks at the insistent crema­
tion ground imagery that appears throughout the poetry of the sixth-​century Tamil po­
etess Karaikkal Ammaiyar. Her poetry suggests “a period of fluidity between the paths 
of bhakti and tantra prior to their overlapping yet contested developments in the medi­
eval period” (1). Pechilis assumes that “deriving meaning from unscripted encountered 
experience is the way of the bhakti poet” while “enacting meaning through scripted ex­
perience is the way of the Tantric ritualist” (7). Drawing from authoritative scholars in 
the field of tantric textual traditions, like Gavin Flood and David Gordon White, for 
her understanding of characteristics deemed tantric, Pechilis writes that Karaikkal 
Ammaiyar’s poetry “does not describe rituals, in contrast to the centrality of rituals in 
tantra, from dīkṣā (initiation) to practices of ritualized sex, which David White (2003) 
considers to be unique to tantra, and to ritual divinization of the body, which Gavin 
Flood (2006) considers to be tantra’s special feature” (7). It is hard to imagine, under this 
light, that a practitioner of tantric rites can also be a poet and an ecstatic singer.
The categorical division of bhakti as qualitatively different and clashing with tantra 
is partly a product of academic ideas on the latter, based upon texts as primary sources, 
and overemphasizing transgressive and violent practices, as markers of authenticity. In 
Burchett’s persuasive history of bhakti, yoga, and tantra after the collapse of the institu­
tionally grounded “Tantric Age” (2019: 30–​64), the dichotomy is reinforced with a so­
ciological explanation. North Indian bhakti is portrayed as “a discourse and sensibility

--- PAGE 1017 ---
992      Carola Erika Lorea
 
spread through the performance of songs . . . in which entertainment, artistic virtuosity, 
aesthetic appreciation, ecstatic religiosity melded in moments of collective efferves­
cence” (181). The joviality of this collective experience of sonic piety is contrasted to an­
tisocial ascetics and yogis who “largely worked for themselves, for their own goals and 
were not particularly interested in diffusing a religious message to a broader public,” 
whereas “bhakti singers and reformers . . . strived, in some sense to work for the ge­
neral good of a larger community” (181). This binary in moral and aesthetic regimes 
is used to reify a tension and a “real difference” (181) between these two styles of religi­
osity. However, such irreconcilable difference can be questioned. There are hardly single 
lonely renunciates but rather organized and connected networks of “sādhu societies” 
(Openshaw 2002: 125–​128). Yogis and Siddhas had obvious interest in sharing their mes­
sage, gathering disciples and generating audiences, which they achieved through the 
performance of songs (Davidson 2002). Songs and dance are forms of worship offered 
in the tantric gaṇacakra rituals. Nāth yogis often were, and still are, bards, performers, 
and entertainers (see Gold 1992; Lorenzen and Muñoz 2011). David Gellner (1992) goes 
to the extent of postulating that “the basis of the cult of tantric deities” in Newar society 
is the use of songs and dance, together with offerings of meat and alcohol (143, 284). In 
the next section I offer a brief outline of how singing features across tantric traditions 
not only as a technology of communication but also as a path to siddhi. What shaped the 
common understanding of tantric religiosity as something at odds with the emotional-​
ecstatic way of the bhakta?
Bhakti poetry insistently preaches the inferiority of rituals, scriptures, and ascetic 
penances, if compared to the blissful way of the devotee intoxicated in the nectar of di­
vine love. To make this point, bhakti composers often address their contempt against 
“tantra-​mantra,” a common compound, often translated as “hocus-​pocus,” referring to 
pragmatic rituals officiated by a specialist, utilizing knowledge of mantras and scriptures. 
Scorn toward mantra-​tantra is a literary topos and a recurrent refrain throughout 
bhakti literature. However, this should not be used to substantiate that bhakti in me­
dieval India constructed itself as distinct from (and superior to) tantric worldviews. In 
fact, the very communities that are often referred to as tantric were equally addressing 
tantra-​mantra in derogatory terms, in their own songs. This is because the rejection of 
scriptures and formal ritualism, and the internalization of all rituals, including mantra 
recitation, is germane to tantric-​yogic formations, particularly of Kaula, Vajrayāna, and 
Sahajiẏā groups. The rejection of mantra-​tantra is already attested in the collection of 
tantric songs known as Caryāgīti (eleventh–​twelfth century): “Of what use are mantras, 
of what use tantras, oh! Of what use explanations of meditation when you are immersed 
in spontaneous bliss [ . . . ]?” (Kvaerne [1977] 2010: 27).
The denigration of mantra-​tantra is pervasive in Bāul, Fakir, and other esoteric 
Bengali repertoires. Adversity to mantra-​tantra is used as a rhetorical device to ex­
emplify the superiority of the sahaja path that subordinates rituals, texts, and exte­
rior paraphernalia, in order to prioritize self-​exploration and self-​transformation 
through the psychophysiological sādhanā learned from a guru. A famous song by the 
saint-​composer Bhaba Pagla, very popular among Bāuls, says: “Singing is the supreme

--- PAGE 1018 ---
Singing Tantra      993
 
sādhanā; it does not require flower offerings or sandal paste: it doesn’t even need 
mantra-​tantra.”17 The composer, however, is known for initiating all his disciples with 
a Kālī mantra, which should be repeated 108 times, at least at initial stages. The blunt 
rejection of mantra-​tantra surely does not mean that Bāuls do not use mantras, do not 
take initiation, or do not learn tantric-​yogic sādhanā.18 Candi Gosain, a Bāul guru of the 
Namashudra caste from Faridpur, makes this point clear. In his songs, mantra-​tantras 
ultimately fall off as the futile reliance upon external devices, which are not needed for 
body-​ and breath-​centered sādhanā:
মূলাধারে জগৎ-​মাতা
সহস্
রারে জগৎ-​পিতা
দুইজনে করলে একতা
জন্মমৃত্
যু হবে না আর।
তন্ত্র-মন্ত্র জপে সবে
তাই তে কি সেই যুগল হবে,
তা হ’লে য﻿﻿�োগী ঋষি
রেচক পূরক কুম্ভক কেন করে অনিবার ।
গুরুর কাছে আছে জানা19
এ সব কথা কইতে মানা
. . . গ﻿﻿�োঁসাই চণ্
ডী বলে, সাধন করবি কবে আর।
(Bhattacharya 1957: 712)
In mūlādhāra resides the cosmic mother
In sahasrāra resides the cosmic father
By uniting the two
One surpasses birth and death.
So many people recite tantra-​mantras
Is that how the union (yugal) is achieved?
If so then why Yogis and Rishis
perform their breathing exercises (recak 
pūrak kumbhak kare) incessantly?
These matters are known by the gurus
It is forbidden to discuss these openly
. . . Gosain Candi says, how long will you 
still wait? Learn sādhanā, do not delay.
Formally forsaking mantra-​tantra and pursuing the union (yugal), either within 
themselves or with a ritual consort, esoteric Bengali lineages interweave bhakti-​oriented 
aesthetic-​emotional attitudes with deeply rooted tantric-​yogic worldviews. These fused 
and inseparable elements constitute the foundations of Bengali esoteric lineages. They 
can provide useful evidence to rethink the assumption that vernacular songs in North 
India pertain to the field of Vaiṣṇava bhakti as separate and distinct from tantric re­
ligiosity. Tantric ideas permeate the erotic and ecstatic character of bhakti, particu­
larly in eastern India and Bengal (Flood 2006: 95; Dimock 1966). On the other hand, 
bhakti elements of emotional and participative devotion, to a theistic recipient or to the 
guru, where bhakti represents an active spiritual endeavor (Sharma 1987: 109), feature 
prominently in several tantric traditions. Writing about devotion to Kālī, Patricia Dold 
has argued that “sweetening” and “sanitization” of the Goddess as mother are not only 
later developments of Śākta traditions. Devotional elements appear as co-​constitutive 
of the cosmic mother Goddess tradition since medieval times, yet scholars have often 
overemphasized transgressive and violent elements, neglecting the less exotic/​erotic 
aspects of the Goddess cult (Dold 2005).
Bengali songs of the Śākta poets-​practitioners Ramprasad and Kamalakanta 
(eighteenth–​nineteenth century) are a clear example of the long-​lasting coexistence 
of devotion and tantric yogic practice. Songs provide elements for visualizations and 
veneration of the various forms of the Goddess. A great number of songs describe the

--- PAGE 1019 ---
994      Carola Erika Lorea
 
intricacies of the sādhanā of kuṇḍalinī awakening, employing the yogic jargon of the 
esoteric mapping of the subtle body. However, anthologies of Śākta songs as well as re­
cording studios routinely omit the songs that are overly concerned with tantric-​yogic 
themes (McDermott 2000).
Songs of the Śākta sādhakas (practitioners) are embedded in a rich tradition of 
Bengali spiritual songs connecting premodern esoteric literature with the modern and 
contemporary tradition of Bāul and Fakir performers, who borrow abundantly from 
the śāktapadāvalī repertoire of Bengali songs to the Goddess (Lorea 2016). Bengali 
composers like Ramprasad, Haure Gosain, Duddu, Lalan, and Bhaba Pagla belong to 
diverse lineages and lack a common institution or sacred scripture. Although they are 
not representative of a monolithic genre or of any homogeneous “tradition,” their tropes 
fluidly travel across sects, their performative occasions overlap, lineages cross-​pollinate, 
and imageries mingle freely. They are part of the larger repertoire of ecstatic songs com­
posed by realized “madmen,” often referred to as bhāber gān, bhāb saṅgīt, or sādhanā 
saṅgīt.20 This fluid, open-​ended, and ever-​growing repertoire consolidated only relatively 
recently into discrete communities (sampradāẏa) with separate songs’ canons. For those 
who sing, dance, and listen to them, singing is itself a path toward self-​realization.
Tuning Representations: Songs in, 
Songs as Tantric Tradition
There is no separation between music and tantra: both have the 
same goal.
—​Ramji, interview (Lidke 2017: 137)
In the cultural history of South Asia, singing—​and particularly singing in vernacular 
languages—​has been intrinsically associated with grassroots, socially inclusive bhakti 
traditions. Congregational singing of religious songs in vernacular languages (kīrtan 
and bhajan; see Beck 2018) is often seen as the core feature of a coherent bhakti “move­
ment” which started from the Tamil south and made its way northward, finally entering 
North India and then Bengal. The twilight of the Sultanate period and the Moghul pe­
riod are seen as times of intensification and blossoming of performance-​centered lit­
erary genres in the vernaculars of North India (Orsini 2012). According to Burchett 
(2019), this religious realm of songs contributed to consolidate an aesthetic, emotional, 
and ethical sensibility that has great resonance with Sufism and great dissonance with 
certain “key aspects of tantric religiosity” (86). However, singing and shared sonic 
experiences permeate the history of tantric traditions. Vajrayāna Siddhas were possibly 
among the first practitioners to employ singing and dancing in the acts of offering before 
images (Davidson 2002: 223–​224). Pivoting on vernacular songs as an element of con­
trast between “earlier tantric religiosity” and a Sufi-​inflected bhakti sensibility would 
disregard abundant evidence about the ubiquity of dance and songs in tantric groups.

--- PAGE 1020 ---
Singing Tantra      995
 
Bengali esoteric lineages use singing as a mode of discourse fulfilling several 
purposes. Songs spread the message; their enchanting allegories attract new disciples 
eager to find gurus who might be able to reveal their inner meanings. Their performance 
reinforces the sense of belonging, creating social formations as “communities of sound.” 
Their content reiterates important values and teachings about the body, the cosmos, 
and society. The practice of singing is equated with strenuous yogic practices in that it 
achieves the same results: it is said that one can be born enlightened (svaẏaṃ–​siddha), 
one can become enlightened perfecting the mind–​body complex (sādhan–​siddha), or 
one can accomplish self-​realization through singing songs (gāne siddha). The com­
poser Bhaba Pagla (1902–​1984), whose community I have followed for about four years 
while living in West Bengal, is closely related to Ramprasad Sen in his hagiographies 
(Bandyopadhyay 1985; Cakrabarti 1995). One of his songs says: “I don’t need to concen­
trate or meditate: Songs are my worship and my sādhanā /​ Kuṇḍalinī wakes up, I get 
mad and overwhelmed and I drive the world crazy.”21 In the community of his followers, 
there is no such distinction between bodily and musical sādhanā: both are disciplines to 
control and transform the body–​mind, producing an ascendance through the manipu­
lation of breathing (Trottier 2000: 90–​91).
Singing shapes the gross body, the subtle body, as well the emotional and moral quali­
ties of the practitioners. It is directly compared to the physical and mental effects of yoga 
and meditation. The gurus say that singing naturally brings inhalation and exhalation 
under control. It clears the mind from any outer concern and liberates one from kām, 
selfish sexual desire—​the king of the six afflictions (ripu) which needs to be tamed in 
order to be transubstantiated into prem, divine love. Especially for disciples at initial 
stages, it is important to maintain the practice of singing, no matter if one is out of tune 
or not. In previous works, I have discussed the epistemology of singing among lineages 
whose songs are considered as paramount ways to obtain and disseminate knowledge.22 
Songs are anthropopoietic in that they transmute an unrefined person into a human 
(mānuṣ). This “religion of songs” (gāner dharma, as some interlocutors have called it) 
creates human beings in material, emotional, and moral ways, which is also understood 
as a process of feminization, embracing qualities associated to womanhood (Openshaw 
2007; Lorea 2018: 195–​198).
Such transformation is possible on the basis of a phonocentric lifeworld where 
music is a form of yoga and both the world and the word emanated from primordial 
sound (Wilke and Moebus 2011: 12–​13). Some interlocutors, tackling my questions on 
what singing does to singers and listeners, employ the concepts of universal sound and 
cosmic vibration—​śabda brahman and nāda—​to connect the universe-​as-​sound to the 
power of sound on the human body. When they clarify my doubts about the code lan­
guage of esoteric songs, they trace back the emergence of singing from the embodiment 
of the ultimate reality—​parā—​uttered as perceivable and meaningful sound. These 
understandings are reflected in tantric philosophical formulations whereby cosmic 
sound is generative and pervasive in all layers and levels of the cosmos (Flood 2006: 
65). Both mundane conversations and sung verbal interactions have their origin in the 
hierarchical cosmos pervaded by divine power as sound (Flood 2006). The concept

--- PAGE 1021 ---
996      Carola Erika Lorea
 
of cosmic and cosmogonic sound-​vibration, nāda brahman, developed by the Indian 
musicologist Śarṅgadeva in the early thirteenth century clearly outlines the connec­
tion between tantric sonic ideology and music theories. The tantric text on drumming 
Ḍhol Sāgar analyzed by Andrew Alter (2009) draws connections between drumming 
and tantric sonic cosmology, reflecting the influence of Nath ideas on the contempo­
rary practices of low-​caste communities of drummers in the Himalayas. Passages from 
the text (“In this way Guru Gorakhnath also acknowledges that primordial sound is the 
basis for existence and that this primordial sound emerges from the sound of Shiva’s 
drum—​which is dhauṅ-​dhauṅkār!”) induce Alter to theorize that to understand god 
one must use sound (197). Sound as cosmogonic and salvific is thus a shared symbolic 
capital, historically effective within popular tantric and devotional traditions.
The ecstatic behavior of the tantric practitioner, including songs and dance, is promi­
nent in early Śaiva esotericism and in later Buddhist tantras (Wedemeyer 2013: 157), dis­
tinguishing esoteric practitioners from the code of monastic discipline (Wedemeyer 
2013: 179). Davidson (2002: 223) discussed the employment of songs and dance in eso­
teric Buddhism, particularly as attested in Yoginī tantras, and possibly inherited from the 
Pāśupatas. He outlines a connection bonding Siddha masters, folk poets, and oral litera­
ture: They employed “varieties of language that were inauthentic by any aesthetic standards 
of the day: regional [ . . . ] Sanskrit, Apabrahṃśa, Old Bengali . . . Siddhas spoke in the first 
person, and employed forms of versification most closely allied with folk theater, wan­
dering poets and images of the countryside” (237). Playfulness, comedic expressions, and 
grotesque humor have been observed in Siddha literature (Dowman 2000), together with 
the use of vernacular-​based enigmatic poems and a “secret sacred sociolinguistics” (269) 
that directly ties an aesthetic and expressive continuity between Siddhācāryas, Nāth, Sant, 
and Bāul Fakir literature (or rather, orature, as “audible texts”). Esoteric songs not only 
functioned as a vehicle of worship and spiritual practice, but also laid the very foundations 
for the formation of textual traditions, and consolidated communitas among sectarian 
groups, through the collective dimension of performance participation. Davidson 
suggests that esoteric scriptures arose “as preeminently social events” (238): the new texts 
of the Siddhas, Mahāyoga, and Yoginī tantras are “overwhelmingly dominated by ritual, 
song, dance and story-​telling” and present an extraordinarily “performative nature.” Such 
traditions might have emerged from low-​caste groups of entertainers, itinerant preachers, 
and touring theater troupes, living at the margins or urban society (238).
A comparative overview of the role of singing in the history of Indian religions cer­
tainly encompasses medieval bhakti traditions and underlines a continuity rather than 
a rupture from tantric esoteric groups. In the Hevajra tantra, adepts performed music 
and dance at gatherings with the aim of attaining an exalted spiritual state: “If in joy 
songs are sung, let them be the excellent Vajra-​songs . . . Song symbolizes mantra, dance 
symbolizes meditation, as so singing and dancing the yogin always acts” (I.vi.1O, 14, in 
Snellgrove 1959: 64). Sahaja teachings, singing, songwriting, and tantric sādhanā have 
interconnected histories. Rather than departing from tantric religiosity, bhakti emo­
tional and aesthetic communities intersected with the sonic cultures of living tantric 
traditions, producing fertile terrain for a hybrid religiosity where singing is seen as

--- PAGE 1022 ---
Singing Tantra      997
 
a devotional act (sevā; see Hanssen 2018) but also a path to siddhi in that it mediates 
human and divine spheres.
The “intentional” or “twilight language” (sandhyābhāṣā) of esoteric songs, their par­
adoxical images and enigmatic poetics, constitute a fil rouge that scholars have traced 
to emphasize continuities across sects. The above-​mentioned Caryāgīti is a term used 
to designate a genre of tantric songs in Apabrahṃśa which at one time must have been 
composed in great numbers (Kvaerne [1977] 2010: 7–​8). Composition is attributed 
to the Siddhas, many of whom are also known in Nāth sources. Siddha composers 
of dohās and padas, like Saraha, must have flourished before the twelfth century (5). 
These compositions were intended to be sung, as the name (-​gīti) suggests. A rāga (me­
lodic framework) is indicated for each song in the text of the commentary, and each 
has a refrain (dhruvapada) indicating perhaps that a chorus alternated with a soloist. 
Handwritten note-​books of modern performers also indicate the melody and rhythmic 
pattern before the transcription of the song lyrics (see figs. 38.1a 1b).
(a)
Figure 38.1a and 1b.  Personal collection of digitized notebooks. Handwritten manuscript, 
authored by Bhaba Pagla. 1a. Indicates that the song should be performed in prasādī sur (the tune 
popularized for the songs of Ramprasad). 1b indicates that the song is in rāg pūrvī.

--- PAGE 1023 ---
998      Carola Erika Lorea
 
The sung pada has proved to be an extremely popular lyrical form to propagate spir­
itual messages in a form that is accessible, enjoyable, and adaptable to melodic varia­
tions across regions. Probably inaugurated by “Sahajiyā Siddhas, together with the 
Jain Munis,” this malleable format was adopted extensively by later saint-​composers 
like Kabir (Vaudeville 1974: 54). Caryā/​ cacā songs directly connected to the Caryāgīti 
corpus are sung by Newar Vajrācāryas in Nepal (Widdess 2004) to the accompaniment 
of dance and instrumental music. Caryāpada songs translated into modern Bengali 
are currently being sung by Fakirs in Bangladesh, as the result of a revival movement 
initiated by urban intellectuals interested in emphasizing the pre-​Muslim cultural her­
itage of eastern Bengal.23
Singing songs in “the vulgar tongue,” as mentioned in the opening quote of this 
chapter—​including dohās from the Mahāsiddhas, verses sung in offering rituals, 
in initiation, and during worship—​signal intimate and esoteric passages in tantric 
(b)
Figure 38.1a and 1b.  Continued

--- PAGE 1024 ---
Singing Tantra      999
 
literature (Stephenson 2020). In Yoginī tantras and in Śaiva traditions, Goddess songs 
in Apabrahṃśa represent intense, direct mystical revelation by yoginīs. In the Tibetan 
canon, these “songs of realization” (rtogs-​pa brjod-​pa’i mgur) are often sung by yoginīs 
and ḍākinīs during the tantric feast.24 Through metaphorical language and seemingly 
nonsensical questions, they communicate a realm of experience beyond ordinary laws 
of logic (Shaw 1995). Songs create shocking contrasts and disorienting images to give 
a foretaste of nondual truth, conveying the paradoxical ultimate reality of sahaja. For 
such reasons, Kvaerne ([1977] 2010: 63) suggests that tantric songs work as a sort of in­
itiation on their own right, for they reveal the nature of the ultimate state through their 
systematic ambiguity, symbolizing the co-​emergence of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa in the 
state of “great bliss.”
Tibetan yogis adopted this poetic tradition which they refer to as the language of 
mahāmudrā and adapted it to the mgur genre of folk songs (Gamble 2011: 5). Through 
the paradoxical images of these songs, the sādhaka-​singers were able to interrupt the 
audience’s conventional view, prompting an alternative experience of reality. In this 
pedagogical and salvific potential of their “twilight language,” tantric songs’ aesthetics 
share the characteristics of the upside-​down language (ulaṭ bāṃsī) of Kabir (Hess 1983), 
the riddle-​like songs of Jñāndev (Kiehnle 1994), and the symbolic language of Bengali 
esoteric lineages (Lorea 2018c). The “songs of ecstasy” (Bhāber Gīt) of the Kartābhajā 
sect, which emerged out of a Muslim Fakir-​Vaiṣṇava encounter in eighteenth-​century 
Bengal, share an esoteric imagery drawn from Sahajiẏā and other tantric traditions of 
medieval Bengal (Urban 2001: 7). They are intended to generate an experience of gnosis 
and spiritual ecstasy (4) and they are filled with references to tantric subtle anatomy 
and emotional alchemy. While alluding to sexual practices to be performed by a male-​
female couple of practitioners, songs conceal tantric elements behind an elaborate veil 
of coded discourse, thickly embroidered with metaphors (Lorea 2018c).
Scholars of tantric traditions, including Hugh Urban, are interested in song texts and 
their language of secrecy, but not in how nonverbal and multisensory dimensions shape 
the sensibilities of those who participate. Songs are not solely constituted by their se­
mantic content. Their lyrics are often secondary, according to those who sing, dance, and 
hear them. The material and affective qualities of their sound is often paramount. The 
next section explores how such sound, which “awakens bhāb” and “distributes ānanda,” 
in the words of my interlocutors, can transport performers and listeners to higher states 
of realization. The field of tantric studies needs more ethnographic research to grow in 
its comparative and anthrohistorical understanding of how tantric communities use 
aural media, and how such media co-​produce epistemic communities of tantric practice 
that share sonic experiences.
Ethnographers of tantric traditions have suggested that music is widely employed in 
ritual and in everyday life for forging correspondences between microcosm and macro­
cosm and to transform the practitioner’s body into a divine body. Caryā/​cacā songs in 
Nepal are performed in a state of divine possession and are believed to confer esoteric 
powers (Widdess 2004). Rich Freeman (1997) discussed the use of torram songs to enact 
divine possession in Kerala. Singing the song of possession (uccaral torram), a low-​caste

--- PAGE 1025 ---
1000      Carola Erika Lorea
 
dancer “fixes” that state in his consciousness, effecting the deity’s descent as an animate 
and effective presence through songs (Freeman 1997). Freeman suggested that torrams 
fill the same functional roles as stotras, invocation, and meditation ślokas used in high-​
caste tantric rites in Keralan temples. Through immersive and participative research on 
the Tibetan Chöd (gcod) tradition, Jeffrey Cupchik reveals that melodies and rhythms in 
Chöd performance enhance the meditation process by eliciting specific emotions that 
aid the practitioners’ transformative experience. Music in this tantric practice functions 
“not as a secondary aesthetic gesture, a mere accompaniment to written poetry, but in 
fact can be considered a primary text-​and a primary conduit for the participants’ de­
velopment of specific emotional states and visualizations that can lead to meditative 
insights” (Cupchik 2015: 32).
In a different sociocultural constellation, Sukanya Sarbadhikary’s work (2015) on 
musical instruments and low-​caste instrument-​makers in West Bengal portrays tantra 
as a pervasive worldview that imbibes the habitus of performers and craftsmen. In 
Sarbadhikary’s anthropology of Bengali Vaiṣṇavism, the sonorous enactment of devo­
tion is impregnated by tantric ideologies. Vaiṣṇava bhakti in Bengal is suffused with tan­
tric conceptions of polar and gendered oppositions of cosmic principles that in their 
primordial unity exist as erotic vibration. According to Sarbadhikary’s informants, the 
opposite parts of the sacred drum (khol) embody Kṛṣṇa (the black part) and Rādhā. The 
two are struck together, representing the deity-​couple in erotic vibration: “As the khol’s 
edges shiver in sound, the couple vibrates in love” (2015: 212). Partaking the religious 
sound of musical instruments, loaded with affective and soteriological significance, 
practitioners can reach ecstatic stages of bliss and complete absorption in nondual 
reality, referenced as samādhi.
Sonic Soteriology, Ensounded Samādhi
If you attend Matua kīrtan with devotion, then that wind of love can pos­
sess you. . . gradually repeating Hari one can lose consciousness! Is he/​she 
in the realm of humans, or dead? In that time s/​he can talk to God. If you 
can reach that kingdom of bhāb then you find so many things. It is like 
the junction of the Triveni: The union of the three rivers during high tide. 
There is the house of a girl. It is a teaching to look at that girl as a mother, 
with those eyes.
(P. Modal, interview, December 2018)
In modern Bengal, the Matua (Matuẏā) movement continued and renewed the kīrtan 
tradition of sonic liberation, creating new song texts, music instruments, and a distinct 
performance style (Bairagya 1999: 307).25 The Matua religion emerged in the first half 
of the nineteenth century in the Faridpur district of East Bengal (now Bangladesh). Its 
founding prophets, Harichand (1812–​1878) and his son Guruchand Thakur (1847–​1937),

--- PAGE 1026 ---
Singing Tantra      1001
 
rebelled against Hindu casteist norms and created a separate religious identity to em­
power the stigmatized Namashudra caste.26 Imbibed with ecstatic devotionalism, 
Matuas combine a theology of egalitarian devotional love (prem bhakti), with an 
emphasis on remunerative work, disciplined conjugality, and social uplifting (see 
Bandyopadhyay 1997). Placing the human at the very center of their (political) theology, 
Matua members worship people, not in the metaphorical sense but literally performing 
adoration rituals toward other human beings.
Since the second half of the nineteenth century, the Matua religion presented it­
self as a restored and reformed sanātana dharma, with explicit instructions from the 
gurus on how to care for personal hygiene, uphold monogamy, dress, and behave in a 
way congruent to bhadralok expectations.27 Such emphasis on decency and respecta­
bility was partly a response to derogatory caste stereotypes that portrayed low castes 
as dirty, superstitious, and irrational and condemned low-​caste religious movements 
as obscene, allowing for sexual promiscuity and encouraging unproductive idle­
ness, through the use of intoxicants like ganja. The community distanced itself as 
much as possible from any nominally “tantric” path, ritual or textual authority; my 
interlocutors generally react with horripilation when I mention my interest in “tan­
tric” traditions.
A distinctive trait of the Matua style of kīrtan is that it always starts and ends with a 
drumming session led by ḍaṅkā (a large drum struck with two sticks which is said to 
represent the ḍamburu of Shiva), kām̐si (brass gong), siṅgā (buffalo horn), and the in­
cessant repetition of the holy name (haribal), accompanied by a vigorous and ecstatic 
dance. These intense sessions are called mātām.
During mātām, devotees jump, shaking their head up and down rhythmically, with 
arms raised up and repeating incessantly, in a loud voice, or in a panting whisper, the 
sacred sounds of the syllables haribol. The devotees can enter a state of trance called 
bhāber bibhor—​described as a complete annihilation of the ego, when the individual self 
disappears, perception of the outer world ends, and only the incessant interior sound of 
haribol remains. This is interpreted as the instantiation of the Matua ethical precept of 
social equality, because during mātām young and old, rich and poor, men and women, 
all meld undifferentiated in the ecstasy of sacred sound. The entranced is often taken by 
long bursts of uncontrollable crying. Other devotees will help the entranced to slowly 
cool down (or to become ṭhāṇḍā).
In Matua songs, oral teachings, and embodied knowledge, mātām is used as a prac­
tice for self-​realization, bringing one to enlightenment (siddhi); as a form of yoga that is 
ideal for marginalized low castes; and as the most direct method to awaken kuṇḍalinī 
energy and reach the state of samādhi. Matua narratives maintain that the high-​caste 
sages of the past could sit in meditation and repeat the sacred “aum” for twelve years to 
reach enlightenment. But mātām is for householders and working-​class people, who 
cannot afford to sit in an āsana for twelve years. Corroborating ethnographic sources, 
a very informative booklet released by the Matua Press of Thakurnagar explains with 
details the physical and spiritual benefits of practicing mātām (see fig. 38.2).

--- PAGE 1027 ---
1002      Carola Erika Lorea
 
Performers-​preachers of the community, called Pāgal and Gosain, teach how to 
awaken kuṇḍalinī through mātām. This path toward samādhi is simple (sahaja) 
and open to all: it is based on embodied techniques of sound, rhythmic repe­
tition, and dynamic movement. It is considered a superior method, compared to 
the performance of static meditation or exterior ritualism.28 The path of sonic 
liberation is described in the corpus of songs and chanted literature of the Matua 
community:
Figure 38.2.  Booklet “What are mātām and samādhi?” by Rasamay Bain, sold at Matua fairs, 
showing ecstatic devotees rolling on the ground.

--- PAGE 1028 ---
Singing Tantra      1003
 
Yoga śakti bole yāre 
mātāme sei śakti dhare 
dhare ei mātāmer sutra 
dehaman sab haye pabitra 
siddhi yogger anupān 
mātām hay sarba pradhān.
(Śrī Gurucām̐d Carit 1943, in Bain 2018)
The so-​called power of yoga
Is the same power that mātām holds.
Follow this mātām thread:
your body-​mind will get purified.
As the healing vehicle of siddhi through yoga,
mātām is the best of all methods.
Hṛdaẏe yantre harinām mantre, 
puriyā sutān.
Sattva rajaḥ tamaḥ tāre gāore guṇa gān.
Sthūlete mūl tāl ṭhik rekhe, prabartte 
nām laore sukhe.
Sādare sādhak tāke ei tare tor ḍākār 
bidhān.
Siddhe giẏe mātām diẏe yāore matta 
mātāl haẏe.
Prem sāgare joẏār diẏe, kara Hari 
nāmāmṛta pān.
(Gosain) Ashwini Kumar Sarkar (2004 
[1915]: 8)29
Play the melody of the Harinām mantra 
with your heart-​instrument, 
on the three strings -​ satva rajaḥ tamaḥ -​ sing 
the praising songs. 
In sthūla, keep your rhythm consistent, 
in prabarta take the holy name with 
contentment. 
In sādhaka your prescription is to call Him 
on this shore with much affection. 
Reaching siddha through mātām go ahead 
like a drunken madman. 
When the ocean of love floods, drink the 
nectar of the name of Hari.
The embodied performance of mātām constitutes an experiential path to divinity 
through the powerful sound of incessant and intense drumming, rhythmic movement, 
and manipulation of the breath. This possibility is built upon a shared conception of the 
subtle body and the assumption that latent kuṇḍalinī energy can be turned and directed 
upward through sound. The Matua teachings around dehatattva rely upon the subtle 
mapping of a tantric yogic body (see fig. 38.3).
In the Matua community, as hinted at in the initial quotation, salvific sound liberates 
one from kām. Songs of sādhanā narrate equality and respect toward womanhood, 
since all humans come from a mother. Listening to these songs thus delivers one from 
kām and consequently produces a better humanity, where all tyranny, oppression, and 
abuse against women will come to an end.30 A Matua guru eloquently explained that 
kīrtan, through singing and dancing, uplifts the kuṇḍalīni and dispels kām: “If you see 
my guru’s penis, it is so small!” explaining that it reduced in size because of the beneficial 
effects of kīrtan.31
Guy Beck (1995) argued that techniques for the realization of higher truths in various 
paths of sādhanā are significantly centered on exercises involving the transformative 
power of sacred sound —​a characteristic of Indic traditions which he called “sonic the­
ology.” This concept is put to work in tantric traditions, where the material universe is 
an immensely complex web of vibrations and resonances. The integral relation of music

--- PAGE 1029 ---
1004      Carola Erika Lorea
 
and cosmic vibration is essential to Indian views on the soteriological significance of 
sound: as a manifestation of nāda, sacred sound is a mode of access to the highest reality 
(Wulff 1983: 154). Sound and techniques of “deep listening” are so central in the history 
of yoga that Finnian Gerety (2021: 516) proposed a redefinition of yoga as “meditation 
through sound (understood as a technique of chanting that supports contemplative 
Figure 38.3.  Front cover of the booklet “Six cakras and knowledge of sādhana,” authored by 
one of the sons of Guruchand Thakur (Thakur 2009), found at fairs and festivals of the Matuas.

--- PAGE 1030 ---
Singing Tantra      1005
 
states), meditation on sound (as a technique of listening that leads to emancipatory ab­
sorption) and meditation towards sound (as the highest soteriological goal [ . . . ]).”
According to later yoga works like Gheraṇḍa Saṃhitā and Haṭhayogapradīpikā (c. 
fourteenth to sixteenth century), concentration on nāda brings about complete ab­
sorption (laya) and samādhi, a state of bliss in which one forgets the ego and can no 
longer hear the individual internal sounds of drums, bells, bees, and so forth, perceived 
in various states of meditation, but only a pure “unstruck” (anāhata) sound (Wilke and 
Moebus 2011: 706). In the Matua community, this state is triggered by the mātām music-​
dance session, at the end of which the sound of the loud drums (ḍaṅkā) and the inces­
sant repetition of haribol are fused with the practitioner’s own pulsation, life rhythm, 
and breath, until all external sensory stimulations stop being perceived.
The central role of sonic mediation in ritual action has been noticed by virtually 
all scholars who use long-​term and immersive ethnographic methods in the study of 
living tantric traditions. Andrew Alter (2019) describes sonic theology as “a notable 
part of Śākta-​Tantra rituals” (322). He studied festivals of the Goddess in the Western 
Himalayas, where drumming, dance, and possession have a crucial role. These ritual 
contexts provide for a material reflection of sonic ideologies through the agency of 
officiates, participants, and most significantly musicians. Andrew Alter (2019) argues 
that in embodied Śākta rituals, the power of sound permits direct association with the 
divine, through the presumption of sound’s divine essence.
These findings are comparable to other ethnographic contexts. In his study of the 
Śrī Vidyā tradition in Nepal, Jeffrey Lidke (2017) has observed that the underlying tan­
tric worldview that appears in sophisticated textual traditions pervades all spheres of 
Nepali society, beyond elite rulers and priests. Shamanic traditions, local healers, and 
musicians equally participate as actors that culturally embody such “Tantric culture” 
(66). Lidke suggests that music and possession are the primary links that tie the center 
and the periphery of tantra into a coherent mandala-​like cultural system. Learning from 
tabla musicians, he noted that the practitioners understand the Goddess as “translated” 
into music and embodied listening, with precise correspondences between rhythmic 
cycles (tāl), mantric syllables, and visual components of the śrī yantra diagram (Lidke 
2017: 78–​81). This comparative framework should be helpful in situating the Matua mu­
sical and spiritual practice of mātām, the drumming-​dancing-​breathing-​chanting com­
plex that dissolves ego identity and mediates the path to divine experience.
Final Remarks: Ensounding Tantric 
Texts, Bodies, and Histories
Case studies drawn upon comparative ethnographies and histories of tantric communities 
in South Asia clearly reveal that sonic media are not solely an accompaniment to more 
significant ritual actions or textual traditions. Far from being mere ornaments or artistic

--- PAGE 1031 ---
1006      Carola Erika Lorea
 
embellishments to something supposedly more relevant and authentic, transformative 
songs and auditory practices are co-​constitutive of many tantric traditions. Religious 
communities create and are created by sonic cultures. This is what Jeffrey Cupchick (2015) 
intended with his provocative title, “Buddhism as Performing Art.”
Singing features ubiquitously in the history of tantric communities as well as in the 
living practices of contemporary lineages, urging us to take aural media into serious 
consideration for a fuller anthrohistorical understanding of tantra from a multisensory 
perspective. I have proposed to employ “tantric” as a post-​emic category to ensure that 
works on heterodox and esoteric Bengali lineages, who do not refer to themselves as 
tāntrikas, can fit into wider interdisciplinary and comparative discussions on tantra. I 
have argued that academic literature has contributed to reproduce a dichotomy between 
bhakti saints and tantric ritualists, whereby songs have been conceived as a product of 
the devotional bhakti movement, and excluded from the territory of tantric studies. A 
comparative overview of the role of singing in the history of Indian religions certainly 
encompasses medieval bhakti traditions and underlines a continuity rather than a rup­
ture from tantric esoteric groups. Performance, music, and dance emerge as central 
components of tantric paths and aesthetic communities.
To conclude, not only are tantric bodies “entextualised” (Flood 2006) following 
tradition-​specific codes, but they are also ensounded. Visual aspects of tantric textual and 
material culture—​the mandala above all—​have been elected as common denominators 
across tantric traditions (White 2000). Sounds lack the historical longevity of texts and 
artifacts, escaping the conventional archives of tantra scholars. However, if scholars 
tune their sensitivity beyond ocularcentric epistemologies and sharpen their ears, sonic 
devices resound throughout the heterogeneous tantric world of South Asia. Mantra and 
speech feature as central subjects in tantric deliberations of a multilayered phonic re­
ality. The agency and sonic efficacy of nonsemantic mantras allows for the manipulation 
of such acoustic power for specific means. However, while mantras have received con­
siderable attention in tantric studies, the application of aural media and sonic efficacy 
encompasses the sophisticated ritual use of mantric and phonetic utterances. Ranging 
from congregational singing to reenactments of the ḍamburu of Shiva, tantric auditory 
practices reflect a complex religious acoustemology. Further research that employs par­
ticipatory ethnography to study local epistemologies of sound will be able to shed more 
light on how diverse communities—​whether explicitly “tantric” or post-​emically so—​
employ aural media to shape aesthetic, spiritual, and ethical realities of the participants. 
A multisensory and multimodal approach could expand the understanding of tantra in 
South Asian religions beyond the overrepresented realm of elite male theologians and 
officiants, to include music-​makers, storytellers, singers, trancers, and healers as pow­
erful and creative agents of tantric traditions.
Notes
	1.	 Endangered Archives Programme, project EAP1247, “Songs of the Old Madmen” (see 
https://​eap.bl.uk/​proj​ect/​EAP1​247).

--- PAGE 1032 ---
Singing Tantra      1007
 
	 2.	 These antinomian communities do not follow prescribed rituals of their Hindu and Muslim 
surroundings (e.g., they do not fast during Ramadan; they do not consider a menstruating 
woman “polluted”). Since the second half of the nineteenth century, most groups came to 
be condemned as blasphemous Muslim or as deviant Hindu sects (apasampradāẏa), and 
they have been subjected to various kinds of persecution (see Lorea 2018b). Most lineages 
cherish part of their knowledge and practices as secret (gopan) and specify a distinction be­
tween their public aspect (bahiraṅga) and private practices (antaraṅga), which have to be 
learned directly from a guru. Because certain practices are restricted to initiated members, 
according to their stage of sādhanā, I do not write about teachings or techniques that gurus 
signaled as confidential. Studying esoteric communities involves particular ethical and 
epistemological issues surrounding secrecy and the local protocols of knowledge disclo­
sure/​accessibility. I discuss these aspects in a previous article (Lorea 2018c).
	 3.	 A common saying draws from verses by the poet Caṇḍīdās: śunaha mānuṣ bhāi/​sabār 
upare mānuṣ baṛo, tāhār upare nāi (Listen fellow humans: [being] human is the highest, 
there is nothing higher than that).
	 4.	 A common saying goes gāne jñān—​songs are knowledge, and wisdom is in songs.
	 5.	 Pseudonyms are used to protect the interlocutors’ identity.
	 6.	 Although vastly heterogeneous, scholars have outlined some characteristics of tantric 
traditions, often built upon the often cited list of Gupta, Hoens, and Goudriaan (1979: 8–​
9), and later Brooks (1990: 53).
	 7.	 The song appears printed in a publication commemorating the death anniversary of Lalan 
Fakir and bears the price tag of twelve rupees. See De (1997). Media sample: Personal 
collection of field recordings, Birbhum, West Bengal, 2017. Edited from the original re­
cording of the song, lasting over 40 min. https://drive.google.com/file/d/​1m-​eVZi9​tmy​
Wq72zOco222zIhI_Kvzbw8/view?usp=sharing.
	 8.	 In Sahajiẏā and Bāul terminology, bastu is understood as fundamental substance, cosmo­
gonic “stuff,” material essence of reality, found in the human body, around which sādhanā 
revolves (see vastu in Hayes 1988, 2003).
	 9.	 Sthūl, prabarta, sādhak, siddha (loosely translatable as the gross, the introductory, the 
practitioner, and the accomplished stage), and often a fifth and secret stage encompassing 
and transcending the first four.
	10.	 A short biography of Duddu Shah is given in Jahangir (1964–​65) and in Shakti Nath Jha 
(2012).
	11.	 In the first one, Lalan says “read the śakti-​sār tantra [the tantra whose essence is Śakti 
(Salomon, City of Mirrors, 2017: 178)] /​ the obscurity of ignorance will be wiped away” 
(Song 358 in Ahmad 2002). In the second one, it is said that if the rasik devotee searches in 
the tantras, the turbidity of the confused mind will be clarified (bojho rasik tantra ḍhuṃṛe /​ 
ghuce yābe maner gholā. Song 1, in Ahmad 2002).
	12.	 An example can be drawn from Svarup Dāmodarer Kaṛacā, a text of uncertain au­
thorship and datation that contemporary practitioners attribute to Svarup Damodar, 
a close associate of Caitanya. The text is used in the teachings of contemporary eso­
teric lineages. In the initial pages, the composer says that the sahaja sādhana described 
in the verses is not a legacy of institutional Vaishnava religion but rather derives from 
the tantras (sampradāẏī Baiṣṇaber naẏ e sab sādhan /​ e sab karaṇ haẏ Tantra anugāmī. 
Svarūp Dāmodar Gosvāmī n.d.: 13). Later the composer refers to the teachings revealed 
by Shiva in the Kaulāvalī tantra to explain the qualities of an ideal female consort for

--- PAGE 1033 ---
1008      Carola Erika Lorea
 
sādhana (sei rūp hale siddhi nahe śudhu kaṣṭa /​ Kaulābalī Tantre Hara kariyache spaṣṭa; 
Svarūp Dāmodar Gosvāmī n.d.: 23).
	13.	 This transcription is taken from Jha (2012, song 141). From oral exegesis it appears that 
the last verse should be “bhāber sṛṣṭi” (the creation of the mood, or emotion) instead of 
“bhāb.” I translated accordingly. I am grateful to Abhishek Ghosh for drawing my atten­
tion to these lyrics.
	14.	 In the oral exegesis offered by Baba, milan is interpreted as union of the male–​female 
couple (yugal sādhana) which comes down as a Śākta practice in that it worships the fem­
inine. The five “Love-​Tasters” are the composers of divine love songs about Rādhā and 
Krishna: Jayadeva, Vidyapati, Vilvamangal, Caṇḍidās, and Ray Ramananda. According to 
oral histories shared among esoteric lineages, they were Śaiva-​Śākta in their personal lives 
but wrote their poetry depicting yugal sādhana through imagery and metaphors around 
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Duddu is very assertive about this genealogy of the Sahajiẏās.
	15.	 See Duddu’s song in Jahangir (1964–​65: 11), translated in Lorea (2018b).
	16.	 Including the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiẏā lineages where tantra and bhakti are enmeshed and 
interpenetrating, as illustrated in the discussion of Mukundadāsa’s Amṛtaratnāvalī by 
Glen A. Hayes (2000).
	17.	 For the whole song, see Lorea (2016: 258–​59).
	18.	 Another example can be drawn from our collection of digitized Bāul notebooks “Songs of 
the Old Madmen” (https://​eap.bl.uk/​proj​ect/​EAP1​247). In the handwritten notebooks of 
Lakshman Das Bāul, Sukhdev Das Bāul, and Mahadev Das Bāul, one can find explanations 
of mantras given by the guru and notes on their correct use for meditation and worship.
	19.	 The original verse has a typo: Bhattacharya gives “gurur kāche jānā”, which I amended here.
	20.	 Early collections of songs of sādhanā are called Bhāb Lalarī, Bhāb Saṅgīt, etc. Haure 
Gosain’s manuscript of songs was published under the title tattvasādhan gītābalī (Jha 
2009: 548). Editors of “Premik” Mahendranath Bhattacharya’s songs (1917) gathered 
Bāul, Śākta, and kīrtan under one rubric (Kālīkīrtan o Bāul Gītabalī). Kartābhajā songs 
were collected under the title Bhāber Gīt (first edition 1882–​83). Songs of Lalan Fakir are 
also published as Lālaner Bhāb Saṅgīt. Songs of Bhaba Pagla are known as sādhan saṅgīt 
(Khettry 2013). Songs of the Namashudra composers that follow Harichand Thakur are 
called Harir Bhāb Saṅgīt.
	21.	 Full text in Tamonash Bandyopadhyay (1988: 79).
	22.	 For more on the sādhanā of singing, see the chapter “Songs, Body and Bhāb: The 
Transformative and Soteriological Power of Singing” (Lorea 2016) and the article “Sonic 
Matters: Singing as method and the epistemology of singing across Bengali esoteric 
lineages” (Lorea 2022).
	23.	 See https://​www.deshr​upan​tor.com/​surjo-​mukhi/​2020/​02/​22/​200​485 and https://​www.
pro​thom​alo.com/​entert​ainm​ent/​song/​ ভাওয়াইয়া-​ঢঙে-​চর্
যাপদ
	24.	 In Love Letters from Golok, Gayley (2007) discussed the collaborative work of a Tibetan 
woman and a man in a Tantric Buddhist relationship. Expanding the usual archive to un­
derstand lived tantra and tantric identities, the book shows that lovers wrote to one an­
other in the form of song.
	 	   Tantric songs of love and esoteric teachings from the Tibetan repertoire: famously in­
clude the songs attributed to the Sixth Dalai Lama Tsangyang Gyatso (see Williams 2004) 
and the deliberately shocking lyrics of Drukpa Kunley according to Bhutanese oral tradi­
tion (see Dowman 2000).

--- PAGE 1034 ---
Singing Tantra      1009
 
	25.	 For a general but comprehensive discussion of the history and characteristics of the Matua 
movement, see Lorea (2020).
	26.	 The emergence of the Matua movement, its doctrine and the life stories of the founding 
saints are narrated in the most revered of the Matuas’ sacred texts, Śrī Śrī Harilīlāmṛta 
(Sarkar 1916).
	27.	 Hindus refer to their religion as sanātana dharma, the eternal and natural order, truth, or 
way of life. The Matuas maintain that mainstream Hinduism is but a gross (sthūl) sanātana 
dharma, while their practices and teachings reflect a refined and perfected (sukṣma) 
sanātana dharma.
	28.	 An often cited verse of the Matua corpus says that the power harnessed through mātām 
does not require further practice of meditation or formal worship (Mātām ye śakti dhare, 
dhyān pūja lāge nāre).
	29.	 The song describes the four conventional stages of the devotee’s journey toward self-​
realization (sthūla-​pravarta-​sādhaka-​siddha) using the semantic field of music (i.e., the 
heart-​instrument). The highest stage of accomplishment is to be reached through the 
practice of mātām, the frenzied dance that is accompanied by the deep bass sound and in­
tense rhythm of the sacred percussion instruments. Full text in Sarkar (1915).
	30.	 Sukumar Mistri, Majhdia, April 21, 2012.
	31.	 Manik Gosain, interview, Radhanagar, February 2017.
References
Ahmad, Wakil. 2002. Lālan Gīti Samagra. Dhaka: Baipatra.
Andrew Alter. 2009. “The Significance of Tantric Sects for Drum Practice in the Central 
Himalayas.” Yearbook for Traditional Music 41: 187–​98.
Alter, Andrew. 2019. “Expressing Sonic Theology: Understanding Ritual Action in a Himalayan 
Festival.” Ethnomusicology Forum 28, no. 3: 321–​37.
Bain, Rasamay. 2018. (Matua year 602). Mātām O Samādhi Kī? Thakurnagar: Matua 
Barta Press.
Bairagya, Birat. 1999. Matuẏā Sāhitya Parikramā. Nadia: Parimal Bairagya.
Bandyopadhyay, Tamonash. 1985. Paramguru Bhabāpāglā. Vol. I and II. Kolkata: Nalini 
Prakashani.
Bandyopadhyay, Tamonash. 1988. Nāmer Pherioẏālā Bhabāpāglā. Digha: Harbola Mandir.
Bandyopadhyay, Sekhar. 1997. Caste, Protest and Identity in Colonial India: The Namasudras of 
Bengal, 1872-​1947. Richmond, UK: Curzon.
Beck, Guy L. 1995. Sonic Theology: Hinduism and Sacred Sound. New Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Beck, Guy L. 2018. “Kīrtan and Bhajan.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism Online, edited by: 
Knut A. Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha Narayanan. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill. http://​doi.org/​10.1163/​22125​019_​beh_​COM_​2040​060.
Bhattacharya, Mahendranath. (1917) 1987. Āndul Kālīkīrtan O Bāul Gītābalī. Calcutta: Prabodh 
Printers.
Bhattacharya, Upendranath. 1957. Bāul O Bāul Gān. Kolkata: Orient Book.
Brooks, Douglas. 1990. The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Shakta Tantrism. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 1035 ---
1010      Carola Erika Lorea
 
Burchett, Patton E. 2019. A Genealogy of Devotion: Bhakti, Tantra, Yoga, and Sufism in North 
India. New York: Columbia University Press.
Cakrabarti, Gopika Ranjan. 1995. Bhabāpaglār Jīban o Gān. Dhaka: Bangla Academy.
Cakrabarti, Sudhir. 1990. Bāṅlā Dehatattver Gān. Calcutta: Pustak Bipani.
Cantú, Keith. 2019. Islamic Esotericism in the Bengali Bāul Songs of Lālan Fakir. 
Correspondences 7, no. 1: 109–​165.
Cashin, David. 1995. The Ocean of Love: Middle Bengali Sufi Literature and the Fakirs of Bengal. 
Stockholm: Stockholm University Association of Oriental Studies.
Chakravarti, Kunal. 1991. “Kīrtan and Social Organisation in Medieval Bengal.” 
The Indian Economic and Social History Review 28, no. 4: 445–​461.
Cupchik, Jeffrey. 2015. “Buddhism as Performing Art: Visualizing Music in the Tibetan Sacred 
Ritual Music Liturgies.” Yale Journal of Music and Religion 1, no. 1: 31–​62.
Dasgupta, Sashibhushan. 1962. Obscure Religious Cults as a Background of Bengali Literature. 
Calcutta: Firma KLM.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
De, Karuna Prasad. 1997. “Lokāẏat Bāṅlā Cirāẏat Dharma O Lālan Aitihya.” In Sonār Mānuṣ, 
edited by Jatindranath Ray, 35–​43. Kolkata: Paścimbaṅga Rājya Lālan Melā Samiti.
Dimock, Edward. 1966. The Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic Mysticism in the Vaiṣṇava-​
Sahajiyā Cult of Bengal. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dold, Patricia A. 2005. “Kali the Terrific and Her Tests: The Śākta Devotionalism of the 
Mahābhāgavata Purāṇa.” In Encountering Kālī, edited by Rachel McDermott and Jeffrey 
Kripal, 39–​59. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Dowman, Keith. 2000. The Divine Madman:The Sublime Life and Songs of Drukpa Kunley. 
Katmandu: Pilgrims.
Gerety, Finnian M. M. 2021. “Sound and Yoga.” In Routledge Handbook of Yoga and Meditation 
Studies, edited by Suzanne Newcombe and Karen O’Brien-​Kop, 502–​21. Oxon; New York: 
Routledge.
Flood, Gavin D. 2006. The Tantric Body: The Secret Tradition of Hindu Religion. London: I.B. 
Tauris.
Freeman, J. R. 1997. “Possession Rites in the Tantric Temples: A Case Study from Northern 
Kerala.” DISKUS Internet Journal of Religion, 2, no. 2. Accessed June 2022. https://​jbasr.com/​
basr/​dis​kus/​disk​us1-​6/​FREE​MAN.TXT.
Gamble, Ruth. 2011. “Looking Over at the Mountains: Sense of Place in the Third Karmapa’s 
Songs of Experience.” Studia Orientalia 19: 1–​15.
Gayley, Holly. 2017. Love Letters from Golok: A Tantric Couple in Modern Tibet. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Gold, Ann Grodzins. 1992. A Carnival of Parting: The Tales of King Bharthari and King Gopi 
Chand as Sung and Told by Madhu Natisar Nath of Ghatiyali, Rajasthan. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Gupta, Sanjukta, Dirk Jan Hoens, and Teun Goudriaan. 1979. Hindu Tantrism. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Hackett, Rosalind I. J. 2012. “Sound, Music, and the Study of Religion.” Temenos 48, no. 1: 11–​27.
Hackett, Rosalind. 2018. “Sonic (Re)turns.” The Immanent Frame. January 17, 2018. https://​tif.
ssrc.org/​2018/​01/​17/​sonic-​retu​rns/​.
Hanssen, Kristin. 2018. Women, Religion and the Body in South Asia: Living with Bengali Bauls. 
London: Routledge.

--- PAGE 1036 ---
Singing Tantra      1011
 
Hayes, Glen A. 1988. “On the Concept of Vastu in the Vaiṣṇava-​sahajiyā Tradition of Medieval 
Bengal.” In Religions and Comparative Thought, edited by Purusottama Bilimoria and Peter 
Fenner, 142–​49. Delhi: Indian Books Centre.
Hayes, Glen A. 2000. “The Necklace of Immortality: A 17th-​Century Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Text.” 
In Tantra in Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 308–​25. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Hayes, Glen A. 2003. “Metaphoric Worlds and Yoga in the Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā Tantric Traditions 
of Medieval Bengal.” In Yoga: The Indian Tradition, edited by I. Whicher and D. Carpenter, 
162–​84. London: Routledge.
Hess, Linda. 1983. “The Cow Is Sucking at the Calf’s Teat: Kabir’s Upside-​Down Language.” 
History of Religions 22: 313–​37.
Hess, Linda. 2015. Bodies of Song: Kabir Oral Traditions and Performative Worlds in North India. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Illman, Ruth. 2019. Podcast interview. Melodies of Change: Music and Progressive Judaism. 
February 25, 2019. https://​www.reli​giou​sstu​dies​proj​ect.com/​podc​ast/​melod​ies-​of-​cha​nge-​
music-​and-​prog​ress​ive-​juda​ism/​.
Jahangir, Borhan Uddin Khan. BS 1371 (1964–​65). Bāul Gān o Duddu Śāh. Dhaka: Bangla 
Academy.
Jha, Shakti Nath. 2009. Bāul Fakir Padābalī. Calcutta: Monfakira.
Jha, Shakti Nath. 2012. Duddu Śā’r Padābalī. Calcutta: Sahajapath.
Khettry, Gopal, ed. 2013. Bhabāpāglār Sādhanā Saṅgīt Saṃgraha. Calcutta: Nalini Prakashani.
Kiehnle, Catharina. 1994. “Metaphors in the Jñāndev Gāthā.” In Studies in South Asian 
Devotional Literature, Research Papers 1988-​1991, edited by A.W. Entwistle and F. Mallison, 
301–​23. New Delhi: Manohar.
Kripal, Jeffrey. 2012. “Remembering Ourselves: On Some Countercultural Echoes of 
Contemporary Tantric Studies.” In Transformations and Transfer of Tantra in Asia and 
Beyond, edited by Istevan Keul, 435–​56. New York: De Gruyter.
Kvaerne, Per. (1977) 2010. An Anthology of Buddhist Tantric Songs: A Study of the Caryāgīti. 
Bangkok: Orchid Press.
Lidke, Jeffrey. 2017. The Goddess Within and Beyond the Three Cities: Shakta Tantra and the 
Paradox of Power in Nepala-​Mandala. New Delhi: DK Printworld.
Lorea, Carola E. 2016. Folklore, Religion and the Songs of a Bengali Madman: A Journey Between 
Performance and the Politics of Cultural Representation. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Lorea, Carola E. 2018. “Pregnant Males, Barren Mothers and Religious Transvestism: 
Transcending Gender in the Songs and Practices of ‘Heterodox’ Bengali Lineages.” 
Asian Ethnology 77, no. 1/​2: 169–​213.
Lorea Carola E. 2018b. “Sectarian Scissions, Vaiṣṇava Deviancy, and Trajectories of Oral 
Literature: A Virtual Dialogue between the Bengali Songs of Bhaktivinod Thakur (1838-​1914) 
and Duddu Shah (1841-​1911).” Zeitschrift für Indologie und Südasienstudien, Band 35: 83–​114.
Lorea Carola E. 2018c. “ ‘I Am Afraid of Telling You This, Lest You’d Be Scared Shitless!’: The 
Myth of Secrecy and the Study of the Esoteric Traditions of Bengal.” Religions 9, no. 6: 172. 
https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​9060​172.
Lorea, Carola E. 2020. “Religion, Caste, and Displacement: The Matua Community.” 
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Asian History. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​acref​ore/​978019​
0277​727.013.428.

--- PAGE 1037 ---
1012      Carola Erika Lorea
 
Lorea, Carola E. 2022. “Sonic Matters: Singing as Method and the Epistemology of Singing 
across Bengali Esoteric Lineages.” American Anthropologist. 1–​14. https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​
aman.13721.
Lorenzen, David N., and Adriàn Muñoz. 2011. Yogi Heroes and Poets: Histories and Legends of 
the Naths. New York: State University of New York Press.
McDermott, Rachel Fell. 2000. “Raising Snakes in Bengal: The Use of Tantric Imagery in Sakta 
Poetry Contests.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by David Gordon White, 167–​83. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Openshaw, Jeanne. 1995. “Raj Kṛṣna: Perspectives on the Worlds of a Little-​known Bengali 
Guru.” In Mind, Body and Society, Life and Mentality in Colonial Bengal, edited by Rajat 
Kanta Ray, 109–​51. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Openshaw, Jeanne. 2002. Seeking Bāuls of Bengal. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Openshaw, Jeanne. 2007. Renunciation Feminised? Joint Renunciation of Female–​Male 
Pairs in Bengali Vaiṣṇavism, Religion 37, no. 4, 319–​32. https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.relig​
ion.2007.06.007.
Orsini, Francesca. 2012. “How to Do Multilingual Literary History? Lessons from Fifteenth 
and Sixteenth Century North India.” Indian Economic and Social Hisotry Review 49, no. 2: 
225–​46.
Pechilis, Karen. 2016. “Bhakti and Tantra Intertwined: The Explorations of the Tamil Poetess 
Kāraikkāl Ammaiyār.” International Journal of Dharma Studies 4, no. 2: 1–​10.
Salomon, Carol. 1991. “Cosmogonic Riddles of Lalan Fakir.” In Gender, Genre and Power in 
South Asian Expressive Traditions, edited by Frank J. Korom, Arjun Appadurai, and Margaret 
A. Mills, 267–​304. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Salomon, Carol. 2017. City of Mirrors: Songs of Lālan Sā̃ i. Edited by Saymon Zakaria and Keith 
Cantú. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sanyal, Hitesh Ranjan. 1989. Bāṅlār Kīrtaner Itihās. Calcutta: K.P. Bagchi, for Centre for 
Studies in Social Sciences.
Sarbadhikary, Sukanya. 2015. The Place of Devotion: Siting and Experiencing Divinity in Bengal 
Vaishnavism. Oakland: University of California Press.
Sarkar, Ashwini Kumar. 2004 [1915]. Śrī Harisaṅgīt, 18th Edn. Orakandi: Thakurbari.
Sarkar, Tarakchandra. 1916 [BS 1323]. Śrī Śrī Harilīlāmṛta. Calcutta: Shastrapracar Press.
Sharma, Krishna. 1987. Bhakti and the Bhakti Movement: A New Perspective. New Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal.
Shaw, Miranda. 1995. Passionate Enlightenment: Women in Tantric Buddhism. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Siegel, Lee. 1978. Sacred and Profane Dimensions of Love in Indian Traditions as Exemplified by 
the Gītagovinda of Jayadeva. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Snellgrove, David L. 1959. Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism. London: 
Oxford University Press.
Stephenson, Jackson. 2020. “Love Me for the Sake of the World: “Goddess Songs” in Tantric 
Buddhist Maṇḍala Rituals.” Religions 11: 124. https:doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​1030​124.
Svarūp Dāmodar Gosvāmī. n.d. Āśraẏ Siddhānta Candrodaẏ bā Svarūp Dāmodar Gosvāmīr 
Kaṛacā. Edited by Haradhan Baisnab Thakur. Malda: Manindranath Adhikari.
Thakur, Paticand. 2009 [BS 1415]. Satcakra O Sādhan-​Tattva. Khulna: Friends Press.
Trottier, Anne-​Hélène. 2000. Fakir: la Quète d’un Baul Musulman. Paris: L’Hamattan.
Urban, Hugh B. 2001. Songs of Ecstasy: Tantric and Devotional Songs from Colonial Bengal. New 
York: Oxford University Press.

--- PAGE 1038 ---
Singing Tantra      1013
 
Urban, Hugh B. 2003. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics, and Power in the Study of Religion. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2010. The Power of Tantra: Religion, Sexuality and the Politics of South Asian 
Studies. New York: I. B.Tauris.
van Ede, Yolanda. 2009. “Sensuous Anthropology: Sense and Sensibility and the Rehabilitation 
of Skill.” Anthropological Notebooks 15, no. 2: 61–​75.
Vaudeville, Charlotte. 1974. Kabīr, Part I. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2013. Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology, and 
Transgression in the Indian Traditions. New York: Columbia University Press.
White, David Gordon. 2000. “Introduction—​Tantra in Practice: Mapping a Tradition.” 
In Tantra in Practice, edited by D. G. White, Vol. 8, 3–​38. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of the Yogini: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Contexts. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Widdess, Richard. 2004. “Caryā and Cacā: Change and Continuity in Newar Buddhist Ritual 
Song.” Asian Music 35, no. 2: 7–​41.
Wilke, Annette and Oliver Moebus. 2011. Sound and Communication: An Aesthetic Cultural 
History of Sanskrit Hinduism. New York: De Gruyter.
Williams, Paul. 2004. Songs of Love, Poems of Sadness: The Erotic Verse of the Sixth Dalai Lama. 
London: I. B. Tauris.
Williams, Richard. 2019. “Playing the Spinal Chord: Tantric Musicology and Bengali Songs in 
the Nineteenth Century.” The Journal of Hindu Studies 12: 319–​38.
Wulff, Donna Marie. 1983. “On Practicing Religiously: Music as Sacred in India.” In Sacred 
Sound: Music in Religious Thought and Practice, edited by J. Irwin, 149–​72. Chico, CA: 
Scholars Press.

--- PAGE 1039 ---


--- PAGE 1040 ---
Chapter 39
From the Fringes to 
Center Stage
Hijṛās and Fertility Rituals in Kāmākhyā
Sravana Borkataky-​Varma
Introduction
Hijṛās are also known today as kinnars, but they are not homogeneous. This chapter 
addresses the shift in the nomenclature of this heterogeneous group of individuals—​
from hijṛās to kinnars. This group has been hardly studied in such fields as Hindu 
traditions and tantra and has garnered less attention in the larger context of Śākta tantra. 
At the moment, hijṛās, specifically as an organized group under the banner of Kinnar 
Akhāṛā (Hindu religious renunciant group), are rapidly taking center stage in certain 
Hindu ritual spaces. They are coming from the fringes to becoming mainstream ritual 
specialists; in this shift, they are claiming—​I would argue reclaiming—​their space, espe­
cially in fertility rituals.1 In order for them to bless people with a successful pregnancy, 
their own physical bodies must undergo significant transformation. This shift from the 
fringes to becoming the ritual specialists is observed in the temple setting of Kāmākhyā 
in the Indian state of Assam.2
Position and Method
It is imperative to situate my positionality: I am a scholar-​practitioner. I was initially 
initiated into the goddess Kāmākhyā lineage at the age of eight or nine, and then at fif­
teen years of age, I received the fourth stage of consecration (abhiṣeka). I continue to 
practice, study, and teach Śākta tantra as understood within the Kāmākhyā lineage, and 
I do so inside and outside the academy.

--- PAGE 1041 ---
1016      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
Being an initiate presents difficulties. How do I write about my tradition in a way 
where I critique certain ritual practices, codes, and rules? How do I do this without 
being reductive or apologetic? How can I respond to the phallocentric nature of this ma­
terial? What will I make public and what will remain private? I swore to secrecy. I con­
tinue to keep my vows but not at the cost of subverting voices, especially ones that are 
marginalized. This productive tension is present throughout my standing as a scholar-​
practitioner in academia when observing and performing rituals, and by my presence in 
public spaces.
In this chapter, I use research methodology that is a blend of social anthropology 
“from the outside” with elements of reflexive autoethnography “from the inside.” 
I have come to define this method as ‘AND methodology,’ that is, both etic and emic. 
The combined approach is necessary considering the complicated topic I present, the 
spaces I enter, and the liminal people I engage. My ethnographic methods include 
conversations with devotees and ritual specialists, participant observation, recorded 
face-​to-​face interactions in person and remotely (i.e., using WhatsApp). The boundary 
between participants and the observer was not rigidly dichotomous. Great care was 
taken to sift through and separate the disclosed religious world of the kinnars and 
devotees and critically reflect upon how I experienced these very religious worlds.
Most of the interviews cited were conducted during the annual Ambubachi (a 
three-​day, monsoon season festival celebrating the yearly menstruation of the goddess 
in Kāmākhyā) Melā in 2019. Approximately two million visitors (Bhattacharya 2019) 
attended this festival. Data were collected by conducting structured interviews using 
a questionnaire to interview people in-​person during the festival. The questionnaire 
included these questions:
	
1.	 Do you identify yourself as a hijṛā or a kinnar?
	
2.	 If yes, have you been part of any fertility rituals for conception, during pregnancy, 
and/​or after birth?
	
3.	 How do people contact you to contract ritual services?
	 4.	 Where was the pūjā performed (temple, house, or community center)?
In 2020 and 2021, I conducted research through three brief visits to India and video 
calls using WhatsApp and Facebook messenger. The increase in social media use 
worldwide during the COVID-​19 pandemic made access to my research communities 
through WhatsApp and Facebook messenger rather convenient. I continue to use 
social media not only to gather new information but to communicate my ongoing 
interpretations and report my resulting research. It is important not only to my aca­
demic but to my personal ways of being that I present my intentions, methods, findings, 
and interpretations of those findings both to the people I encounter in my research and 
to my scholarly readers.
The chapter proceeds as follows. First, I will explain the historical background 
of hijṛās and why hijṛās today are choosing the name kinnar. Next, I will explore the

--- PAGE 1042 ---
From the Fringes to Center Stage      1017
 
significance of fertility rituals in Kāmākhyā. In the third section, I focus on the hijṛās in 
Kāmākhyā. I conclude by speculating about what the future holds for these figures be­
cause history is currently in the making in the larger world of Śākta tantra.
Hijṛās to Kinnars
Hijṛās are a heterogeneous group. The LGBTQ +​ and the twenty-​six various gender 
identities are not being currently used by the majority in the community.3 Community 
members in question self-​identify as hijṛā, so the larger society refers to them with the 
homogeneous umbrella term hijṛā; the term is used in the same fashion in this chapter. 
In urban centers—​Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Bangalore, and so forth—​where gender 
identities are part of the upwardly mobile social milieu conversations, metropolitan 
hijṛās are starting to identify themselves as trans women (Roy 2016), a term not indige­
nous to South Asia. Furthermore, there is currently a rising awareness of the LGBTQ +​ 
identities in India, leading to the innovative reframing of hijṛās as legitimate historical 
figures of queerness (Saria 2021: 11). Irrespective of the metro or the nonmetro localities, 
unlike the transgender identity conversations in the modern West, hijṛās seldom con­
sider themselves men before they take on the hijṛā identity. This too is complicated 
because a majority of the hijṛās go through a castration ritual to remove their vestigial 
maleness, which we will return to later in this chapter. Hijṛās’ religious identities are in 
flux, for historically they engaged a combined Hindu and Muslim ritual cosmogony, but 
this too is changing rapidly. Islamic elements are fast being shed in the formation of the 
new identity known as kinnar. We will return to this shift shortly as well.
Other identity terms are grouped together with hijṛā too, especially in Hindi-​English 
code-​switching. For example, we find taxonomies of effeminate men, catla (who wear 
saris), kada-​catla (non-​sari-​wearing), zenana (women-​men identifying as Muslims), 
jogtas or jogappas (keeper of the Goddess Renuka-​Yellamma), and so forth (Reddy 
2005: 53).
Etymologically, the term hijṛā comes from the Arabic term Hegira. Sibsankar Mal 
argues the Urdu word hijṛā is derived from the Arabic root hjr which means leaving 
one’s tribe (Mal and Bahalen Mundu 2018: 7). Hegira is a medieval Latin translitera­
tion of the Arabic word meaning “departure” or “migration,” among other definitions. 
Alternative transliterations of the word include Hijra or Hijrah. The term is frequently 
used to refer to the journey of the prophet Muhammad and his followers from Mecca to 
Medina in the year 622 (Sheikh 2010: 51–​51). Laxminarayan Tripathi, a prominent hijṛā 
leader and activist, states that the word hijṛā comes from hij which refers to the “soul,” 
a holy soul. The body in which the holy soul resides is called “hijra” (Tripathi 2015: 39). 
While Tripathi does not provide the source from where and how she came to define 
the term as “the vessel for the holy soul,” her interpretation is significant in the con­
text of new identity-​making, especially the shift from hijṛā to kinnar. These etymologies

--- PAGE 1043 ---
1018      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
signify a gender shift, from being born as a male to becoming a female. According to 
Serena Nanda,
the hijra role is a magnet that attracts people with many different kinds of cross-​
gender identities, attributes, and behaviors—​people whom we in the West would dif­
ferentiate as eunuchs, homosexuals, transsexuals, hermaphrodites, and transvestites. 
Such individuals, of course, exist in our own and perhaps all societies. What is note­
worthy about the hijras is that the role is so deeply rooted in Indian culture that it can 
accommodate a wide variety of temperaments, personalities, sexual needs, gender 
identities, cross-​gender behaviors, and levels of commitment without losing its cul­
tural meaning. The ability of the hijra role to succeed as a symbolic reference point 
giving significant meaning to the lives of the many different kinds of people who 
make up the hijra community is undoubtedly related to the variety and significance 
of alternative gender roles and gender transformations in Indian mythology and tra­
ditional culture.
(Nanda 1999: 19–​20)
Compared to Western gender identity narratives—​which are largely uncomfortable 
with any sorts of ambiguities, especially regarding ambiguous gender—​the Hindu tra­
ditional culture is not only comfortable with ambiguities but treats such opacities as 
meaningful, even powerful. Here one is reminded of Clifford Geertz: “Becoming human 
is becoming individual, and we become individual under the guidance of cultural 
patterns, historically created systems of meaning in terms of which we give form, order, 
point, and direction to our lives” (Geertz 1973: 13).
Hijṛā identity is not just about individual and communal identity but also about 
hijṛā kinship. Citing Ina Goel, Daniela Bevilacqua states, “today, hijṛās’ households 
are spread all over India and are organized around seven gharāṇā (literally houses, 
clans).” (Bevilacqua forthcoming). The term gharāṇā comes from the Hindi word 
ghar, derived from the Sanskrit word Gṛha (house). Gharāṇā is used broadly within 
the traditional communities of musicians, dancers, and prostitutes. Since hijrās are 
associated with and engage in music and dance as well as sex work—​the activities 
of those aforementioned gharāṇās—​it is possible that as a collective whole they call 
their social organization gharāṇā due to their professions (Goel 2016: 540). The term 
hijṛā is currently being replaced by kinnar, and, likewise, the term gharāṇā has been 
replaced by the term akhāṛā.
A hijṛā household is best understood as a commune “generally composed of 
individuals from a diverse range of religious, caste, class, ethnic, linguistic, gender and 
sex backgrounds” (Roy 2016: 12). Hijṛās take a female name when they join the com­
munity, and they use female kinship terms for each other: “sister,” “aunty,” and “grand­
mother” (mother’s mother). In some parts of India, they have a special, feminized 
language, which consists of the use of feminine expressions and intonations (Freeman 
1979: 295). However, there are some inconsistencies. Some sources—​namely, Ibbetson, 
MacLagen, and Rose (1911)—​report that hijṛās “affect the names of men,” but Laurence

--- PAGE 1044 ---
From the Fringes to Center Stage      1019
 
Preston (1987) say that hijṛās take women’s names. In my fieldwork, the hijṛās referred 
to their male names in the past tense. If they were born a male, they were given a male 
name, but since becoming a hijṛā, they only use the female name.
The communes are residential and economic units (Nanda 1999: 39). They are 
governed under an elaborate and rigid structure with set codes of expected behavior. 
Some rules may be different depending on the geographic region and primary liveli­
hood of the commune. Each member is expected to contribute a percentage of her earn­
ings. In addition, each member has a defined role either to maintain the building, cook, 
clean, and so forth. Further, all communes have a head or a leader akin to a guru (Hall 
1995: 42).
How does one become a hijṛā? What entails becoming part of the hijṛā household? 
My informants state that at a fairly early age, they as individuals and their respective 
birth family members recognized they were different (effeminate, wanting to dress in 
girl clothes, put on lipstick and nail polish, dance, identify as a girl, and not a boy, etc.). 
Some were brought to the commune by a family member because the birth family did 
not have the means to support the needs of their different child, or the family member 
worried for the safety of the child, or the safety of other children in the family because of 
the hate and violence meted to this child, or social stigma, or poverty, or the child joined 
the hijṛā household as a young adult.4
The future hijṛā must find a guru and be formally initiated in the commune. 
“Theoretically, in order to become a ‘true’ hijṛā, if the individual is not a eunuch by birth, 
he should undergo through a ritual called nirvāṇ, during which the penis and testicles 
are removed,5 but this ritual is not compulsory and remains an individual choice” 
(Bevilacqua forthcoming). But today this too is contested. Specifically, to the issue of 
nirvāṇ, Tripathi states:
It is believed that all hijras are castrated. We call it nirvan. In the eyes of the public, 
we are castrated males. But that is not always the case. Castration is strictly optional, 
and every hijra decides for himself whether or not to undertake it. Castration cannot 
be forced upon a hijra. Though the world believes that a castrated hijra alone is a real 
hijra, we do not endorse this. I am not castrated. I did not opt for it and my guru did 
not pressure me into it. Most of my chelas are also uncastrated like me. But yes, many 
of us have had breast implants. The surgery is expensive, but without it our transfor­
mation is incomplete. However, unlike many other hijras, I haven’t gone in for hor­
mone therapy in my desire to look feminine. Though I am not castrated, the hijras 
regard me as one of them.
(Rao and Joshi 2013)
Tripathi may very well be part of the new hijṛā group wherein more and more hijṛā 
will choose not to undergo the procedure. Time will tell. In the absence of nirvāṇ, 
Tripathi refers to her entry into the community with the haldi-​kumkum (turmeric-​
vermilion) ceremony (Tripathi 2015: 11), where turmeric and vermilion are applied to 
the body. During this ceremony, two green saris are gifted, known as jogjanam (one

--- PAGE 1045 ---
1020      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
who is born on an auspicious moment) saris, and she is crowned with the community-​
owned dupatta (long traditional scarf mostly worn by women but occasionally 
by men as well, popular in South Asia) (Tripathi 2015: 42). My research findings 
align with Nanda (1999: 28) and Reddy (2005: 97), concluding that the majority of 
the hijṛās are castrated. Most castrated hijṛās questioned the sacrality of those who 
chose not to do it.
During the nirvāṇ ritual, the penis and testicles are removed from the body: “the 
dai ma takes the knife from her sari and makes two quick opposite diagonal cuts. The 
organs-​both penis and testicles-​are completely separated from the body. A small stick is 
put into the urethra to keep it open. [ . . . ] When the cut is made, the blood gushes out, 
and nothing is done to stem the flow [ . . . ]” (Nanda 1999: 28). The severed organs are 
secretly put in an earthen pot and buried under a living tree. The blood that pours out 
is understood to be the masculine tattva (elements). The blood must flow out and no 
stitches may be placed on the wound, for the hijṛās believe it is only by complete flushing 
of the male blood that a person transforms into becoming not only a female but a recep­
tacle for the goddess Bahucarā Mātā (mother goddess).
The nirvāṇ rituals are accompanied by a forty-​day recovery and care period, which 
includes eating special foods like ghee, pure sugar, rice (eastern and southern India), 
and rotis (northern and western India), similar to what women eat and how women 
are cared for after childbirth. This nirvāṇ ritual is a symbolic identification of child­
birth, and emasculation is rebirth. Castration also marks an entrance into celibacy, 
but celibacy is not necessarily understood as no sex because many hijṛās are involved 
in sex work.6 At the end of the forty days, the hijṛā is perceived as a vessel of divine 
power. In other words, the repressed hijṛā’s sexual desire is transformed into sa­
cred power.
Western audiences balk at the nirvāṇ ritual and dismiss it as barbaric. I am compelled 
to refer to Jonathan Haidt. Whereas Haidt is referring to Richard Schweder’s “three 
ethics theory,” and not going anywhere close to gender let alone hijṛās, his theory on the 
“ethic of divinity” is useful to understand the relevance of the nirvāṇ ritual and concept 
of celibacy. Haidt’s understanding may help the reader shift from a reductionist perspec­
tive of considering the nirvāṇ ritual brutal. Haidt states, “people are, first and foremost, 
temporary vessels within which a divine soul has been implanted. [ . . . ] The body is a 
temple, not a playground [ . . . ]. Many societies, therefore, develop moral concepts such 
as sanctity and sin, purity and pollution, elevation and degradation. In such societies, 
the personal liberty of secular Western nations looks like libertinism, hedonism, and a 
celebration of humanity’s baser instincts” (Haidt 2012: 119).
It is also believed that nirvāṇ bestows “fertility power.” Hijṛās are believed to have the 
power to confer fertility on others: sacrificing their fertility to bestow universal procre­
ative power (Reddy 2005: 97). Another significant and not well-​known aspect of this 
birth into becoming a hijṛā is that in the past it could include conversion into Islam.7 In 
my 2021 interview with Mausi, I particularly probed whether the head of a hijṛā com­
mune is indeed Muslim. She hesitated for the longest time and would not give me a 
straightforward answer. After much probing, she said “Yes! Historically the leader of the

--- PAGE 1046 ---
From the Fringes to Center Stage      1021
 
commune was a Muslim and when one becomes a hijṛā, one simultaneously converts 
to Islam while parallelly becomes the receptacle of Bahucarā Mātā, a [Hindu devī]. But 
that is changing now. New leaders are and can be “purely Hindu” (interview with the 
author March 2021).8 Mausi’s response to commune leaders being Muslims was also 
documented by Reddy (2005) and Hossain (2020). So, what is changing? Why is it 
changing? And what is it changing to?
Hijṛā Gharāṇā to the Formation of 
Kinnar Akhāṛā
Under the leadership of Laxminarayan Tripathi, in 2019 the hijṛās formed the Kinnar 
Akhāṛā. The two terms, kinnar and akhāṛā, need some unpacking. The word kinnar(a) 
has a range of meanings in different religions (Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism) 
and languages (Sanskrit, Hindi, Pali, and Prakrit), and that meaning can vary from a 
type of person to a type of semi-​divinity. The Monier-​Williams dictionary provides the 
following meaning, echoed in the related term kiṃpuruṣa, for kiṃnara, “what sort of 
man?” “[He] is a mythical being with a human figure and the head of a horse (or with 
a horse’s body and the head of a man; originally perhaps a kind of monkey cf. vānara; 
in later times (like the Naras) reckoned among the Gandharvas or celestial choristers, 
and celebrated as musicians.”9 Other meanings include a “mixed up” or “mongrel 
person.” Furthermore, kinnarakara is a slave, following kiṃkara meaning slave.10 Other 
definitions in Monier-​Williams set forth a class of heavenly beings who in early sources 
resemble a bird with a man’s head and in later texts resemble centaurs. They act as 
gandharva musicians in Śakra’s (Indra’s) heaven. Hence, we can comfortably state that 
the term Kiṃnara refers to celestial half-​man entities with heads of creatures possessing 
superhuman powers.11 But here is a twist. In my fieldwork, I am yet to find hijṛās who 
understand these different historical meanings of the term. If we assume that the iden­
tity shift from hijṛā to kiṃnara is positive, then in this present usage “kinnar” connotes a 
blend of man who becomes a woman and divinity.
But the flip side to the term is reading kiṃnara as, “Is this (kiṃ) a man (nara)?” In 
other words, is this a human being? This reading is completely derogatory. Since the 
term was proposed and adopted by the Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh hijṛās and in these 
geographical regions the term is understood in a respectful manner (Loh 2014: 14).12 
I maintain the former interpretation, and I consider the hijṛās, aka kinnars, and from 
here on referred to as kinnars, as celestial beings who possess special qualities in music 
and dance.
Kinnars are mentioned in the Vedas, Purāṇas, and other literary sources. In the 
Manusmṛti kinnars are placed together with sādhus (religious ascetics), yakṣas,13 and 
gandharvas (celestial beings).14 They are understood to not reincarnate. Following this, 
present-​day kinnars believe they themselves (i.e., the individual kinnars on earth) are

--- PAGE 1047 ---
1022      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
demigods, and this makes their role in fertility rituals pivotal. Tripathi also recalls a pas­
sage in the Tulsidas Rāmcaritmānas, where the term kinnar is used to describe the third 
gender when she says: “dev danuj kinnar nar sreni sādar majjahin sakal trivenī (deities, 
demons, kinnars, men, women, all went to Trivenī, i.e., the confluence of the Ganga and 
Yamuna rivers with the mythological Sarasvati)” (Bevilacqua forthcoming).
The Hindi term akhāṛā means “wrestling arena,” from which akhāṛiyā is derived, 
meaning “master fighter,” “skilled maneuverer,” or “strategist.” There is a network of 
akhāṛās throughout India, particularly in the North, where men train in wrestling and 
other methods of fighting” (Clark 2020). But the term akhāṛā has a long history within 
Hindu traditions (see Lorenzen 1978; Ghurye 1964; Alter 1992; Pinch 2006). In short, 
an akhāṛā can be a place of practice with facilities for boarding, lodging, and training, 
both in the context of Indian martial artists or a monastery. At the end of the nineteenth 
century, the Hindu tradition recognizes thirteen akhāṛās, which are in some fashion 
gatekeepers of the Hindu dharma. It is important to note that until 2019, although some 
akhāṛās have female sections they were controlled and run by men. Further, many be­
lieve that the thirteen akhāṛās are set in stone, and a fourteenth cannot be created. If 
approved people may join one of the thirteen. But all that changed, and we now have a 
fourteenth akhāṛā: the Kinnar Akhāṛā.
The two people who must be given credit for this historic turn of events are 
Laxminarayan Tripathi, head of the Kinnar Akhāṛā, and Hari Girī Mahārāj, head of the 
Jūnā Akhāṛā. “On Tuesday, [January 15, 2019] her [Laxminarayan Tripathi] religious 
movement, called the Kinnar Akhada, became the first transgender group to bathe [in 
the Kumbh Melā] at the confluence of the holy Ganges and the Yamuna rivers on the 
first day of the ancient festival, traditionally reserved for reclusive Hindu priests, almost 
all of whom are men” (Pal 2019).
The Kumbh Melā is believed to have been founded by the eighth-​century Hindu 
philosopher and saint Adi Shankara, aiming to start major Hindu gatherings for phil­
osophical discussions and debates among representatives from Hindu monasteries 
across the Indian subcontinent.15 Fast forward thirteen hundred years to 2019: now 
a nonmale ascetic order is allowed to take the ritual bath on the first day and can be 
recognized and organized as a legitimate ascetic group. With this new identity, the 
kinnars are rapidly moving away from the historic Islamic roots and Muslim identity. 
Here, Sanskritization—​the process by which lower status groups adopt higher-​status 
behavior and language, namely, emulating Brahmins and using the Sanskrit language 
(Srinivas 1966)—​has come to fruition. Their new greeting is Jai Śrī Mahākāla (fierce 
manifestation of both Śiva and Viṣṇu) and the Kinnar Akhāṛā tilak (sectarian mark on 
the forehead) is made of three horizontal lines, typical of Śaiva followers, with a vertical 
red line at center, symbolizing the Śrī (feminine) and a large red bindi (dot). The leaders 
today are called maṇḍaleśvara (provincial heads) or mahāmaṇḍaleśvara (great provin­
cial chiefs).16 They now show up in large religious gatherings, dressed in bright colors, 
reclaiming the ritual spaces they believe belong to them. One such area is the space of 
fertility rituals.

--- PAGE 1048 ---
From the Fringes to Center Stage      1023
 
Kāmākhyā, Kinnars, and 
Fertility Rituals
Kāmākhyā is a temple complex in the Nilachal hills in the northeastern state of Assam, 
India. This temple complex epitomizes the retention of many ancient practices. 
Kāmākhyā is also one of the Śākta pīṭhas (sacred seat of the devī). Before we get into 
the topic of kinnars and rituals, two terms should be defined: tantra and Śākta tantra. 
A range of scholars—​including Douglas Brooks (1990), David Kinsley (1997), David 
Gordon White (2000), André Padoux (2002, 2017), Hillary Peter Rodrigues (2003), 
Prem Saran (2008), and Hugh B. Urban (2009)—​have proposed academic definitions of 
tantra. Drawing upon these definitions, I consider a ritual space, philosophical thought, 
and/​or texts to be tantric, if that space/​thought/​text engages the following features:
	
1.	 Mantra-mandalas-​yantra that help to transcend the divide between the micro­
cosm and macrocosm. The divine macrocosm resides within the microcosm of 
beings. So, we are the divine as much as the divine is us.
	
2.	 Activation of subtle esoteric anatomies so that cakras, naḍis, and kuṇḍalinī energy 
become the catalyst to engage with the divine in the vertical plane and dissolve 
the binaries, such as sacred and profane, birth and death, beautiful and ugly, and 
so forth.
	
3.	 The human body including the bodily fluids are not rejected; in fact, these are 
essential.
	 4.	 All the above features may be put into the service of liberation, which is to be 
achieved while living, jīvanmukti (Borkataky-​Varma 2020: 190–​191).17
Śāktism and tantra are closely associated. I use the definition of Śākta tantra proposed 
by Brooks (1990):
Worship of Śakti . . . i.e., the universal and all-​embracing dynamics which mani­
fest itself in human experiences as a female divinity. To this should be added that 
inseparably connected with her is an inactive male partner as whose power of ac­
tion and movement the Śakti functions. . . . It is therefore not enough to say that a 
Śākta worships the female as ultimate principle; nor is it correct categorically to state 
that Śāktism is characterized by the use of the five [“prohibited substance” known 
as] makāras. . . . Although Śāktism is often defined also by means of typical ritual 
practices, it is advisable to restrict the use of this term for a world view oriented 
towards Śakti.
(Brooks 1990: 47–​48)
Brooks’s definition is simple and encompasses almost all aspects of Śāktism, but not all 
Śāktas are tantrics. Similarly, there is no single understanding of the Devī, the Goddess.18

--- PAGE 1049 ---
1024      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
Regarding Kāmākhyā and the varied Śākta pīṭhas, while the list of fifty-​one pīṭhas differs 
based on the compendium to which one is referring, all lists include Kāmākhyā. Further, 
almost all Śākta pīṭhas negotiate a complex integration of Brahmanical and indigenous 
practices (Cakrabartī 1992; Urban 2011). Having said that, three features are unique to 
Kāmākhyā.
	
1.	 All ten wisdom goddesses (dasa mahāvidyā) have their temples on this hilltop.
	 2.	 None of the devīs are portrayed in any kind of imagery. They are aniconic, and the 
worship of the ten mahāvidyās happens over holy rocks and streams. Although 
there is an exception. There is one mūrti of Tripurasundarī in Kāmākhyā, popu­
larly known as Kamakhi.19
	
3.	 It is the yonī, the vulva, of Satī that fell on this site, and this makes Kāmākhyā an 
epicenter of fertility rituals.
Devī Tripurasundarī is conceptualized to be the supreme deity in texts like 
Lalitopākhyāna (Tagare 1958) and in part of the Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa (Shastri, Bhatt, and 
Tagare 2003), and Saundaryalaharī (Sankaracarya 1958). She is a beautiful and auspicious 
manifestation of the great female divinity, and Ṣoḍaśī (the girl of sixteen), Lalitā (the one 
who is elegant and graceful), Kāmeśvarī (goddess lording over desires), and Śrividyā 
(goddess of auspicious knowledge) are some other names she goes by. In Kāmākhyā, 
Tripurasundarī is popularly known as Ṣoḍaśī and/​or Tripurabālā, envisioned as a beau­
tiful young girl of sixteen. She is also recognized by the name Rājarājeśvarī, in the fol­
lowing specific ritual context (Borkataky-​Varma 2020: 193). The central and exoteric, 
public ritual in Kāmākhyā for Ṣoḍaśī is the kumārī pūjā, pūjā offered to prepubescent 
girls (kumārī) from as young as one to as old as sixteen years of age.20 The esoteric 
pūjā performed in Kāmākhyā is the Rājarājeśvarī pūjā, done during Chaitra Navarātri 
(March-​April, based on the lunar calendar). Rājarājeśvarī is understood as in the realm 
of Kamakalā-​vilāsa where the meaning of Tripurasundarī is explained within the con­
text of sexual fluids: “red being the female sexual fluid; white, semen, [and] the union 
of the two” (Kinsley 1997: 121). Also, “offerings of the pañcamakāra21 or the pañca tattva 
ritual is central and essential” (deo Sarma in conversation with the author, in Kāmākhyā, 
November 2018). Before turning to the growing prominence of the kinnars being in­
volved in fertility rituals, let us explore why the word (blessing or curse) of the kinnar is 
considered to be powerful and how deeply entrenched is this belief. Speaking of historic 
kinnars I will return to the term hijṛā, appropriate for the context.
Hijṛās are mentioned in both the Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata. In the 
Mahābhārata, the nymph Urvaśi fell in love with Arjuna, but he clapped his hands over 
his ears when she propositioned him, for he said she was like a mother to him. Furious, 
she cursed him to be a dancer among women, devoid of honor, regarded as a nonman, a 
eunuch. But Indra, the father of Arjuna, softened the curse and made it valid for only a 
year. Years later, when it was time for Arjuna and his brothers to hide in disguise, Arjuna 
put on woman’s clothing (though he failed to disguise his hairy, brawny arms) and told 
his brothers, “I will be a eunuch.” He offered his services as a dancing master to the

--- PAGE 1050 ---
From the Fringes to Center Stage      1025
 
women in the harem of a king. The king was suspicious at first, remarking that Arjuna 
certainly did not look like a eunuch, but he then ascertained that “her” lack of manhood 
was indeed firm and so let “her” teach his daughters to dance (MBh 3, 1.6. 36–​162).
Another oft-​narrated story is that of Caitanya. Caitanya was regarded by some as an 
avatar of Kṛṣna but by others (including himself) as an avatar of Rādhā. Thus, it is said 
that Kṛṣna became Rādhā in the form of Caitanya in order to experience what it was like 
to be Rādhā (and to make love with Kṛṣna), and he became Kṛṣna in Caitanya’s body in 
order to make love to Rādhā (Hayes 2006). But the mention and treatment of hijṛās in 
the Rāmāyaṇa is especially relevant. The power of the hijṛā’s words can be traced to the 
Valmiki Rāmāyaṇa. As Rāma was leaving to serve fourteen years in exile, the people 
of Ayodhya were heartbroken, and they followed him to the edges of the kingdom, all 
in tears. When they reached the borders of Ayodhya, Rāma addressed the people of 
Ayodhya, and asked the male and female citizens to go back to their houses, saying he 
would see them after fourteen years. Upon his return, he found the hijṛās waiting in ex­
actly the same place where he instructed people to go back. Rāma realized he had said 
male and female people: he did not include hijṛās. Realizing his mistake, he bestowed 
upon them the power that whatever they say will come true. While such stories are well 
known, the fact is there is an ontological difference between saying God is androgynous 
versus God is androgyne (Doniger 1982: 283). Ellen Goldberg argues, in the context of 
Ardhanārīśvara, “the status of male Śiva half, is privileged by the title “iśvara” (god, lord, 
master), whereas the female Pārvatī half with whom Śiva shares his body, is simply des­
ignated by “nārī” (woman).” (Goldberg 2002).
Historically and into present times, it is believed the words of a hijṛā invariably be­
come real. Due to this power, people fear their curses and seek their blessings. In the 
past, tracing hijṛā history and lore to the epics was common, and it becomes more and 
more common currently. Once, hijṛās would simply state that they have a history as long 
as Hinduism and assert they are mentioned in several ancient texts. But in 2019, Sonal, a 
kinnar, was chastised in the Bengali language by another member of her akhāṛā when I 
asked Sonal which ancient texts she was referring to. She said, “Oh! Many ancient texts.” 
To which one of her friends lashed out: “How ignorant are you? Don’t you know the spe­
cific story?” (Sonal in conversation with the author, in Kāmākhyā, July 2019). The power 
that a kinnar embodies the power of speech leads to ambivalence and fear. It is the same 
power a kinnar often uses to her advantage and makes a livelihood from.
Kinnars are most often part of the badhāī. While the term badhāī means “happy 
greetings,” in the context of the kinnars, it has an added layer of “blessings,” particularly 
blessings bestowed after the culmination of a happy life event like marriage or the birth 
of a child. The badhaī is usually performed via singing and dancing. Within this larger 
context of badhaī, it is believed the kinnar bestows fertility to the married couple (Nanda 
1999: 2–​4). In another important fertility ritual, a kinnar officiates when a couple has not 
been able to have a child and/​or they want a male offspring.
Kinnars increasingly are taking on more public-​ritual spaces and officiate fertility 
rituals in large religious festivals where devotees congregate in one location. The year 
2016 marked the first time a large congregation of kinnars visited Kāmākhyā for the

--- PAGE 1051 ---
1026      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
Ambubachi festival.22 The congregation grew manyfold in 2019, in which at sunset, 
the kinnar members emerged in procession, dressed in beautiful silks, and perfect 
makeup. The crowds (a mixture of onlookers and devotees) grew every day, seeking to 
get pictures and witness the procession. While the crowds loved it, there were palpable 
tensions between the Kāmākhyā deos, priests who are mediators between the devotees 
and the goddess, and the kinnars. One Mr. Sarma called them charlatans and claimed 
several of them were involved in sexual and criminal activities. Another Mr. Sarma was 
certain that the Kāmākhyā board of trustees would act to ban them from coming to 
future Ambubachi Melā. A third priest, not named Mr. Sarma, chimed in and openly 
mocked them. He resented their popularity that directly translated into monetary gains 
(in conversations with the author, in Kāmākhyā, June 2019).
During 2019 fieldwork at Kāmākhyā, while most devotees sought kinnars for ge­
neral blessings (not for any particular outcome), I noticed some patrons seeking and 
requesting kinnars to perform fertility pūjā rituals, a fascinating and new phenom­
enon in Kāmākhyā. As I have written about rituals in Kāmākhyā broadly and alluded 
to fertility in several articles (Borkataky-​Varma 2017, 2018, 2020), fertility is central to 
Kāmākhyā, but the kinnar-​led fertility rituals were a rather new phenomenon, an inno­
vation. During the fertility ritual commissioned by a couple who either is seeking to be 
blessed by a healthy child or, specifically, a male child, the kinnar performing the ritual 
invokes Bahucarā Mātā. It is believed that the goddess gives a boon to the couple via the 
body of the kinnar as a conduit. So, who is Bahucarā Mātā and how is she embodied?
Samira Sheikh (2010) traces reports of Bahucarā Mātā in the Gujrati press media 
during the 1930s. A published booklet asserted that Bahucarā was a Charan deity.23 This 
was supported by references from manuscript literature of the community in which a 
Charan virgin was worshipped as Bahucarā:
Bahuchara was born in Ujala village of Marvad in the Detha branch of the Maru 
Charans. Her parents were Bapal and Deval. Deval was an avatar of Jagadamba 
(World-​Mother). She lived c. 1309 (CE). Bapal had three daughters: Butay, Balal and 
Bahuchara, apart from sons. [ . . . ] On the way, they reached Chunval and camped 
near Sankhalpur for the night when a bandit named Bapaiya attacked them. Seeing 
this, the youngest daughter Bahuchara cut off her breasts and did tragu.24 Her sisters 
did the same. Then she cursed the bandit: “You will become a eunuch (Pavaiyo)”25 
Hearing this, the bandit begged for mercy, which she granted, ordering him to build 
a shrine (sthanak) for her at the spot. He would then be blessed, and if a naturally 
emasculated man arrived at her shrine and lived in women’s clothing and sang her 
praises, he would certainly reach her favour. She [Bahuchara] then died.
(Sheikh 2010: 89)
A long history on the origin and kinship of Bahucarā Mātā continued. The details 
are not important here, but the deity is important. Bahucarā Mātā rides on a rooster. 
Her association with chickens led to a popular legend in which she humbles the Muslim 
invader Sultan Alauddin II, known as khuni. It is the eighteenth-​century poet Vallabh 
Bhatt’s (1640–​1751 C.E.) composition that did most to “re-​invent” or ‘engender’ the

--- PAGE 1052 ---
From the Fringes to Center Stage      1027
 
goddess as a respectable, Puranic manifestation of “trans-​regional Shakti” (Sheikh 2010: 
95). In sum, Bahucarā Mātā’s ability to transform gender and to protect people with am­
biguous gender was brought to the forefront.
Returning to the fertility ritual performed by kinnar in 2019, the kinnar officiating 
the pūjā placed one coconut, wheat, and Rs. 1.25 in the jholī (a pouch bag made from 
a dupatta or saree) on the lap of the aspirant mother while reciting the Bahucarā Mātā 
mantra. The kinnar then placed her right palm over the larger area of the womb of the 
aspirant mother and said “Go now! Enjoy [there was a crackling of laughter because 
“enjoy” meant having sex]. You will have the desired child” (this ritual was performed 
by one Priyanka, during Ambubachi Melā, July 2019). In return, the couple promised 
to make the goddess happy, and thereby make the kinnars happy, by offering pūjā and 
giving gifts, mostly material and monetary offerings after their wish is fulfilled.
While fertility rituals performed by kinnars are well-​known and steadily on the rise 
in the early twenty-​first century, they have primarily been private affairs. This is about 
to change. In March 2021, one of the mahāmaṇḍaleśvara said plans were made to per­
form a large public event where the putrakāmeṣṭi yajña (ritual sacrifice with a specific 
objective) would be performed on April 22 in Ujjain. Putrakāmeṣṭi yajña is performed 
for the sake of having a child, especially a healthy male child. My informants stated 
that this rite had not been performed in this yuga, age.26 Mausi, the informant said 
that putrakameshti yajña was last performed in the ancient time, during the age of 
the Rāmāyana, when, upon the recommendation of Sage Vasiṣṭha, King Daśaratha of 
Ayodhya performed the putrakāmeṣṭi yajña. After its successful completion, the Lord 
of Fire, Agni devā appeared and gave a bowl of sweets to the King of Ayodhya, which 
was then consumed by his three queens to generate his famous sons Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, 
Bharata, and Śatrughna. This event was planned and would be led by the Ujjain Kinnar 
Akhāṛā. However, due to certain unforeseen circumstances arising from the pandemic, 
it was rescheduled for 2022.27
Further conversations with Mausi on the relevance of putrakāmeṣṭi yajna yielded that 
the presence of a Kinnar in the yajña is essential, “without a kinnar the yajña cannot 
be performed.28 In addition, Mausi also mentioned that extensive plans were in place 
to lay the foundation of what she called the “largest and most magnificent Bahucarā 
Mātā temple” (in conversation with the author, over WhatsApp video call, March 2021). 
When the kinnar Akhāṛā performs the putrakameshti yajña in the public arena and lays 
the foundation to the temple, they will establish their role in fertility rituals, pivotal and 
mainstream.
Conclusion
The hijṛās have shifted their status within the larger world of Śākta tantra. Under 
the newly formed identity of kinnar, organized under the kinship of Kinnar Akhāṛā, 
congregating in large groups during important Hindu religious festivals such at the

--- PAGE 1053 ---
1028      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
Ambubachi Melā, Kumbh Melā, and so forth, the kinnars strategically reorient their 
identities to focus on how, by the virtue of sacrificing their fertility, they can give pro­
creative powers. As ritual specialists, they are moving from the fringes, from begging 
in street corners and/​or providing sexual services to being acknowledged and being 
honored, thereby moving to the Hindu ritual center of authority, respect, and reverence.
The field of Tantric Studies has addressed gender and sexuality, but it has largely done 
so from the lens of heterosexuality. Gender fluidity and gender identification within 
this field of study have largely been missing. There are dynamic social-​religious-​
cultural developments at play. Kinnars by the virtue of the allegorical embodiment of 
the interworld can generate a spiritual gender identity. This religious discourse allows 
the kinnars—​whom Salman Rushdie (2008: 109) calls “contemporary gender benders” 
(Rushdie 2008: 109)—​to fashion their spiritual self within a nonbinary religious context. 
This uncommon spiritual path “beyond the binary” on the socioreligious margins of 
society entails a liminal social position that imbues kinnars with an ambiguous status. 
This ambiguity has positive connotations in that it suggests great sanctity and power.
Notes
	1.	 The notion of reclaiming was first brought in a casual conversation during fieldwork. Over 
the years of my research, I have come to agree with the kinnars.
	2.	 Kāmākhyā’s history surpasses most of the shrines in eastern India. It is difficult to date 
the temple’s historical origins, but, based on sculptures and the oldest architectural 
stratum, there must have been temples at this cite in the seventh century, with a larger 
temple complex from the Pāla dynasty (c. 750–​1162) (Bernier 1997: 23). This chapter ex­
clusively focuses on the Hijṛās. Historic and present-​day scholarship on the rituals, tan­
tric traditions, and politics of power surrounding the Kāmākhyā temple is not included in 
this chapter. The work of scholars like Hugh Urban (2009), Irene Majo Garigliano (2015), 
Jae Yun Shin (2016), Sundari Johansen Hurwitt (2019), and Paolo E. Rosati (2020), should 
be consulted to arrive at a better understanding of the place and its relevance in the larger 
space of Śākta tantra.
	3.	 Agender, androgyne, bigender, butch, cisgender, genderfluid, gender queer, nonbinary, 
omnigender, transgender, and so on.
	4.	 Not every family gives up their children, the same way not every gender fluid individual 
joins the hijṛā household.
	5.	 Hossain (2020: 36) highlights that in Bangladesh, instead, people view the hijṛā practice of 
emasculation as a fraud, since a real hijṛā is an individual who is born with missing or am­
biguous genitals (i.e., intersex).
	6.	 It is celibacy in the sense the hijṛā having removed the penis will no longer use the organ for 
any kind of penetration.
	7.	 Hybrid identities are not new to the subcontinent. David White writes about Nath siddhas 
having Persian names when interacting with Muslims or in Muslim areas and Sanskrit 
names when around Hindus (Donald Lopez 1995).
	8.	 “Purely Hindu” is a relatively new and particularly problematic especially in the rise of 
Hindu nationalism and bolderization of Hindu identities in present-​day India.

--- PAGE 1054 ---
From the Fringes to Center Stage      1029
 
	 9.	 https://​www.sansk​rit-​lexi​con.uni-​koeln.de/​scans/​MWS​can/​2020/​web/​webtc/​inde​xcal​
ler.php.
	10.	 https://​san​skri​tdic​tion​ary.com/​ki%E1%B9%83k​ara/​56614/​1.
	11.	 I appreciate Aaron Ullrey for providing deeper insights into the term, especially the slave 
aspects.
	12.	 Vallabha Bhatta in the eighteenth century authored Anand No Garbo, “Song of the Bliss” in 
Gujrati. He uses the term vyandhal, which may be translated as impotent or the one who’s 
neither a man nor woman. Present-​day hijṛās in the state of Gujrat often cite the poet and 
his representation of the term.
	13.	 Yaksha, also spelled yakṣa, Sanskrit masculine singular yakṣa, Sanskrit feminine singular 
yakṣī or yakṣīnī, in the mythology of India, a class of generally benevolent but sometimes 
mischievous, capricious, sexually rapacious, or even murderous nature spirits who are the 
custodians of treasures that are hidden in the earth and in the roots of trees. They are pow­
erful magicians and shape shifters.
	14.	 Males are singers and females are dancers.
	15.	 It is worth noting that followers of Adi Shankara over time become proponents of a more 
traditional view of the Hindu religion and the Hindu way of life, which is becoming 
politicized at a rapid pace.
	16.	 Maṇḍaleśvara or mahāmaṇḍaleśvara in Sanskrit are masculine terms. But in the context 
of the Kinnar Akhāṛā, the terms are being used by and for transwomen. While they take 
on female pronouns, with regard to the term the kinnars are not using long ending of ā or ī 
or even inī. This too possibly is indicative of lack of knowledge of Sanskrit as was seen with 
the term Kinnar.
	17.	 The author also acknowledges that some of the practices may be used for certain 
predesired outcomes and not necessarily liberation. For example, the ṣaṭkarman rituals. 
The “six results” (ṣaṭkarman) in Hindu magic rituals are śānti (tranquilizing), vaśīkaraṇa 
(subjugating), stambhana (immobilizing), mohana (bewildering), vidveṣana (dissent), 
uccāṭana (eradicating), ākarṣaṇa (attracting), and mārana (murder). These too fall in the 
larger arch of tantra.
	18.	 There is not a singular all-​encompassing devī. There is a divine female energy, many big 
goddesses, and innumerable small goddesses.
	19.	 There is some ambiguity around who brought the mūrti. Some people believe that 
someone from Kāmākhyā went to the South of India and brought the mūrti and others 
state that someone from South India brought the mūrti sometime between 1996 and 
2000. There are no records of this mūrti being donated. Having said that, several 
temple records for some unknown reason are missing, especially in the 2015–​2016-​
time frame. There are all kinds of speculations around the reasons for the missing 
documents.
	20.	 The Devībhāgavatapurāṇa also gives different names to girls of different age: two-​year-​
old is Kumārī, three-​year-​old is Trimūrti, four-​year-​old Kalyāṇī, five-​year-​old is Rohiṇi, 
and so forth. Girls above the age of ten are “not allowed in all ceremonies” (Mukherjee 
2016: 152). In Kāmākhyā, however, the names are different, and the kumārī pūjā can be 
performed until the age of sixteen, as long as the girl is prepubescent. In Kāmākhyā, the 
names used from one-​ to sixteen-​year-​old are (1) Sandhyā, (2) Sarasvatī, (3) Tridhāmūrtī, 
(4) Kālīkā, (5) Subhagā, (6) Umā, (7) Mālinī, (8) Kubjikā, (9) Kālasaundarbhā, (10) 
Aparājitā, (11) Rudrāṇī, (12) Bhairavī, (13) Mahālakṣmī, (14) Pīṭhanāyikā, (15) Kṣetrajñā, 
and (16) Ambikā.

--- PAGE 1055 ---
1030      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
	21.	 Pañcamakāra or pañca tattva are the five essentials of the left-​hand tantra ritual: madya 
(wine), māṃsa (meat), matsya (fish), mudrā (sacred hand gestures), and maithuna 
(ritualized sexual union).
	22.	 Kinnars would visit the temple during various festivals before 2016. But they kept a low-​
key profile and were not seen in a large organized group and/​or made their presence felt.
	23.	 A group who are traditional genealogists and recordkeepers all over Gujarat and Rajasthan.
	24.	 Tragu is the ritual self-​mutilation or suicide practiced by Charans to place the curse of the 
goddess on someone. On the importance of tragu in Saurashtra see Tambs-​Lyche (1997). The 
sacral power of genealogist groups such as the Charans and Bhats to guarantee transactions 
continued to be used in the early nineteenth century (see Rabitoy 1974: 46–​73).
	25.	 Sheikh tells us that “Pavaiya" is a Gujarati word for eunuchs, and that it is synonymous 
with “hijada” in Hindi. The traditional link between Pavaiyas and the shrine of Bahucarā is 
recorded in the 1961 census We also know that the king of Champaner’s son was impotent, 
and that the king dedicated his son to the worship of Bahucarā (Sheikh 2010: 98).
	26.	 Yuga is the cycle of four world ages, catur-​yuga: Krita (Satya) Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dvapara 
Yuga, or Kali Yuga. Kali Yuga began 5,122 years ago and has 426,878 years left as of 2021 C.E. 
By this calculation Kali Yuga will end in the year 428,899 C.E.
	27.	 The second wave of the COVID-​19 pandemic had created a havoc in India. As of January 
2022, the Ujjain Kinnar Akhāṛā are hopeful of the yajña taking place in 2022.
	28.	 This claim needs to be further researched and, possibly, ritual texts and other ritual 
specialists should be consulted.
References
Alter, Joseph S. 1992. The Wrestler’s Body: Identity and Ideology in North India. London: Oxford 
University Press.
Bernier, Ronald M. 1997. Himalayan Architecture. Madison, NJ: Dickinson University Press.
Bevilacqua, Daniela. Forthcoming. “From the Margins to Demi-​God: The Establishment of the 
Kinnar Akhāṛā in India.” Asian Ethnologies.
Bhattacharya, Rajeev. 2019. “The Faces of India’s Ambubachi Mela.” The Diplomat, July 2. 
https://​thed​iplo​mat.com/​2019/​07/​the-​faces-​of-​ind​ias-​ambuba​chi-​mela/​
Borkataky-​Varma, Sravana. 2017. “The Dead Speak: A Case Study from the Tiwa Tribe 
Highlighting the Hybrid World of Śākta Tantra in Assam.” Religions 8, no. 10: 221. https://​
doi.org/​10.3390/​rel​8100​221.
Borkataky-​Varma, Sravana. 2018. “Menstruation: Pollutant to Potent.” In Hinduism and Tribal 
Religions. Encyclopedia of Indian Religions, edited by Long, Jeffery D., Sherma, Rita D., Jain, 
Pankaj, and Khanna, Madhu. Springer,147–​175.
Borkataky-​Varma, Sravana. 2020. “Taming Hindu Śakta Tantra on the Internet: Online Pūjās 
for the Goddess Tripurasundarī.” In Digital Hinduism, edited by Zeiler, Xenia, 186–​206. 
London: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Brooks, Douglas Renfrew. 1990. The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Śākta 
Tantrism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cakrabartī, Sudhīr. 1992. Brātya Lokāẏat Lālan. Kolkata: Pustak Bipani.
Clark, Matthew. 2020. “Akhāṛās: Warrior Ascetics.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism Online, 
edited by Jacobsen, Knut A., Basu, Helene, Malinar, Angelika, and Narayanan, Vasudha. 
http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1163/​2212-​5019​_​BEH​_​COM​_​900​0000​002.

--- PAGE 1056 ---
From the Fringes to Center Stage      1031
 
Doniger, Wendy. 1982. Women, Androgynes, and Other Mythical Beasts. Chicago: Chicago 
University Press.
Freeman, James M. 1979. Untouchable: An Indian Life History. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Garigliano, Irene M. 2015. Les Brahmanes du complexe de temples de Kāmākhyā (Assam). Droits 
héréditaires, relation avec les pèlerins et pouvoir administratif. Paris: Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique [French National Centre for Scientific Research].
Geertz, Clifford. 1973. The Interpretations of Culture. New York: Basic Books.
Ghurye, G. S. 1964. Indian Sadhus. Bombay: Popular Book Depot.
Goel, Ina. 2016. “Hijra Communities of Delhi.” Sexualities 19, no. 5–​6: 535–​46. https://​doi.org/​
10.1177/​13634​6071​5616​946.
Goldberg, Ellen. 2002. The Lord Who Is Half Woman: Ardhanarisvara in Indian and Feminist 
Perspective. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Haidt, Jonathan. 2012. The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and 
Religion. New York: Vintage Books.
Hall, Kira. 1995. “Hijra/​Hijrin: Language and Gender Identity.” Berkeley: University of 
California Press. https://​escho​lars​hip.org/​uc/​item/​6m574​4jx.
Hayes, Glen. 2006. “Contemporary Metaphor Theory and Alternative Views of Krishna and 
Rādhā in Vaishnava Sahajiyā Tantric Traditions.” In Alternative Krishnas Regional and 
Vernacular Variations on a Hindu Deity, edited by Beck, Guy L. New York: State University 
of New York Press, 125–​138.
Hossain, Adnan. 2020. “Hijras in South Asia: Rethinking the Dominant Representation.” In 
The SAGE Handbook of Global Sexualities, edited by Davy, Zowie, and Cristina, Santos Ana, 
404–​21. London: SAGE.
Hurwitt, Sundari J. 2019. “The Voracious Virgin: The Concept and Worship of the Kumārī in 
Kaula Tantrism.” PhD diss., California Institute of Integral Studies. ProQuest Dissertations 
and Theses.
Ibbetson, D. C. J., M. E. Mac Lagen, and H. A. Rose. 1911. A Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of 
the Panjab and North-​West Frontier Province. Vol. 2. Lahore: Civil and Military Gazette Press.
Kinsley, David. 1997. Hindu Goddesses: Visions of the Divine Feminine in the Hindu Religious 
Traditions. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Loh, Jennifer U. 2014. “Narrating Identity: The Employment of Mythological and Literary 
Narratives in Identity Formation among the Hijras of India.” Religion & Gender 4, no. 1: 21–​
39. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​18785​417-​00401​003.
Lorenzen, 
David 
N. 
1978. 
“Warrior 
Ascetics 
in 
Indian 
History.” 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 98, no. 1: 61–​75.
Mal, Sibsankar, and G. Bahalen Mundu. 2018. “Hidden Truth about Ethnic Lifestyle of Indian 
Hijras.” Research Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences 9, no. 3 (September): 620–​28. 
https://​doi.org/​10.5958/​2321-​5828.2018.00104.3.
Mukherjee, C. B. 2016. Kūmarī Pūjā: A Religious Custom. Kolkata: Jadavpur University.
Nanda, Serena. 1999. Neither Man nor Woman: The Hijras of India. Belmont: Wadsworth.
Padoux, Andre. 2002. Vāc: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. New Delhi: Sri 
Satguru.
Padoux, André. 2017. The Hindu Tantric World: An Overview. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Pal, Alasdair. 2019. “From Pariah to Demi-​God: Transgender Leader a Star at Kumbh.” https://​
www.reut​ers.com/​arti​cle/​india-​relig​ion-​kumbh-​tran​sgen​der-​idINKC​N1PE​04J.

--- PAGE 1057 ---
1032      Sravana Borkataky-Varma
 
Pinch, W. R. 2006. Warrior Ascetics and Indian Empires. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Preston, Laurence W. 1987. “A Right to Exist: Eunuchs and the State in Nineteenth-​Century 
India.” Modern Asian Studies 21, no. 2: 371–​87.
Rabitoy, Neil. 1974. “Administrative Organisation and the Bhats of British Gujarat.” 
Indian Economic and Social History Review 11, no. 1: 46–​73.
Rao, R. Raj, and P. G. Joshi. 2013. “Lakshmi’s Story.” Words without Borders, June. https://​www.
word​swit​hout​bord​ers.org/​arti​cle/​laksh​mis-​story.
Reddy, Gayatri. 2005. With Respect to Sex: Negotiating Hijra Identity in South India. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. https://​doi.org/​10.7208/​chic​ago/​978022​6707​549.001.0001.
Rodrigues, Hillary. 2003. Ritual Worship of the Great Goddess: The Liturgy of the Durga Puja 
with Interpretations. New York: State University of New York Press.
Rosati, Paolo E. 2020. “Religions of South Asia.” Religions of South Asia 14, nos. 1–​10: 1–​2. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1558/​rosa.19632.
Roy, Jeffrey. 2016. “Translating Hijra into Transgender: Pverformance and Pehchān in India’s 
Trans-​Hijra Communities.” Duke University Press, Transgender Studies Quarterly 3, no. 3–​4: 
412–​32.
Rushdie, S. 2008. “The Half-​Woman God.” In AIDS Sutra: Hidden Stories from India, edited by 
Akhavi, N., 109–​17. Anchor: Random.
Sankaracarya. 1958. The Saundaryalahari or Flood of Beauty. Trans. William Norman Brown. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Saran, Prem. 2008. Yoga, Bhoga, and Ardhanariswara: Individuality, Wellbeing and Gender in 
Tantra. London: Routledge.
Saria, Vaibhav. 2021. Hijras, Lovers, Brothers: Surviving Sex and Poverty in Rural India. New 
York: Fordham University Press.
Shastri, J. L., G. P. Bhatt, and G. V. Tagare. 2003. The Brahmananda Purana: V. 22, Pt. 1: Ancient 
Indian Tradition and Mythology. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Sheikh, Samira. 2010. Forging a Region: Sultans, Traders, and Pilgrims in Gujarat, 1200–​1500. 
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Shin, Jae Yun. 2016. “Searching for Kāmrūpa: Historiography of the Early Brahmaputra Valley in 
the Colonial and Post-​Colonial Period.” Journal of the Directorate of Archaeology & Museums 
1: 115–​32.
Srinivas, M. Narasimhachar. 1966. Social Change in Modern India. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Tagare, G. V. 1958. Lalitopakhyana. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Tambs-​Lyche, Harald. 1997. Power, Profit and Poetry: Traditional Society in Kathiawar, Western 
India. Delhi: Monohar.
Tripathi, Laxmi Narayan. 2015. Me Hijra, Me Laxmi. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2009. The Power of Tantra: Religion, Sexuality and the Politics of South Asian 
Studies. London: I.B. Tauris.
Urban, Hugh B. 2011. “The Womb of Tantra: Goddesses, Tribals, and Kings in Assam.” 
The Journal of Hindu Studies 4, no. 3: 231–​47. https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​jhs/​hir​034.
White, David Gordon. 1995. “The Ocean of Mercury: An Eleventh-​Century Alchemical 
Text.” In Religions of India in Practice, edited by Donald S. Lopez Jr., 281–​87. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
White, David Gordon. 2000. Tantra in Practice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

--- PAGE 1058 ---
P a r t V I I I
 HISTORY AND 
HISTORIOGRAPHY
 Events, Memory, and Recollection

--- PAGE 1059 ---


--- PAGE 1060 ---
Chapter 40
Śaiva Tantra
Toward a History
Dominic Goodall
What is “Śaiva Tantra”? Clearly no such label seems to have been used for the early 
centuries in which what we may now regard as tantric ideas and practices were devel­
oping and circulating. The label “tantra” covers many religious movements spread out 
widely across space and time and is rather wildly used by many today to refer to some 
quite different modern notions. Answering such a question is further complicated by 
the fact that much of the earliest textual evidence has probably been lost.
This chapter concentrates first and foremost on “tantrism” in the first millennium 
of the Common Era, the formative period, in which a school of doctrine and liturgy 
emerged as dominant that was therefore known as the Śaivasiddhānta, “the settled 
view of Śaiva scripture.” A much broader picture of the Śaiva religions is given by the 
numerous invaluable articles of Sanderson, perhaps particularly 1988 (the broadest 
and briefest overview), 1992, 1995, 2004a, 2004b, 2006, 2007, 2009 (the longest, at 
300 pages), and 2014 (a condensed version of which appeared in 2015). This short ac­
count differs in that it focuses on the dominant school between the eighth and twelfth 
centuries.
Philosophically dualist, the Śaivasiddhānta maintained that souls and matter are ir­
reducibly different. Each soul possesses infinite powers of knowledge (jñānaśakti) and 
action (kriyāśakti), but these powers are occluded by three bonds: (1) an innate impu­
rity (mala); (2) the retributive force of past actions (karman); and (3) primal matter 
(māyā), which is the material cause of the universe, in which the nonmaterial souls 
are enmeshed. Each soul is identical to Śiva, except in one particular, namely, that 
Śiva is beginninglessly free of bondage, whereas other souls must be made free. The 
only route to salvation—​consisting in full realization of one’s innate omnipotence and 
omniscience—​is through a ritual initiation.
These tenets were set out at greater length by Sanderson in his article “The Doctrine of 
the Mālinīvijayottara” (1992, 282–​287), in which he demonstrates that even tantras that 
did not belong to the Śaivasiddhānta often shared the same framework. This is contrary

--- PAGE 1061 ---
1036      Dominic Goodall
 
to a widespread notion—​fostered by nondualist thinkers such as the Kashmirian pol­
ymath of the turn of the tenth to the eleventh century Abhinavagupta (see Sanderson 
1992, 281–​282)—​that non-​Saiddhāntika tantras distinguished themselves from those of 
the Śaivasiddhānta in that they taught a higher, nondualist ontology, which Sanderson 
also usefully outlined (1992, 287–​291). Abhinavagupta and his followers, defending what 
has come to be known misleadingly as “Kashmir Śaivism,” sought to demonstrate that 
“the inferiority of the Siddhāntas was proved not only by the less esoteric nature of their 
practice but also, less ambiguously, by the fact that they taught a nonultimate view of re­
ality” (Sanderson 1992, 281).
The Śaivasiddhānta appears in fact to have predominated across and beyond the 
Indian subcontinent, and one of its best-​known theologians, Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha, also 
lived in Kashmir at the same time as Abhinavagupta. But the label Śaivasiddhānta is 
often wrongly used as though it applied only to a rather different religious tradition 
that developed from it in the Tamil-​speaking south of India after the twelfth century, 
where its scriptures determined the public liturgy of temples and in which a some­
what different soteriology, shaped by the Bhakti movement and by Vedānta-​centered 
philosophizing, developed.1
“Tantrism” avant la lettre?
One of the earliest surviving scriptures that we may regard as a Śaiva tantra is the 
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā. But that scripture does not refer to itself as a “tantra,” and al­
though it certainly uses that term, the word seems simply to mean “book.” We even find 
it used there to refer to books that are clearly not tantras.2 Furthermore, although the 
Niśvāsa figures in the list of the twenty-​eight scriptures that are said to form the canon 
of the dualist school that came to be called Śaivasiddhānta,3 it contains no allusion to ei­
ther that label or any entity that could be recognized as the school that came to bear that 
label. Instead, the Niśvāsa uses the term Mantramārga, “the path of mantras,” which var­
ious authors hold to be a possible candidate for an emic equivalent of the term tantrism.4 
(The term is used to contradistinguish the new movement from the Atimārga, “the path 
beyond,” an expression used of Pāśupata traditions.5)
Indeed, we find no commitment in the Niśvāsa to the dualist ontology of the clas­
sical Śaivasiddhānta, and its last and longest book, the Guhyasūtra, includes a lengthy 
grimoire of magical rites of the kind that Saiddhāntika theologians tended to ignore, 
deprecate, or eschew. In form and content, these magical recipes are closely paralleled 
in the Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa (Goodall and Isaacson 2016, passim), which belongs to the 
earliest phase of Tantric Buddhism. Moreover, hundreds of verses of the Niśvāsa have 
migrated into non-​Saiddhāntika Śaiva tantras (Goodall and Isaacson 2013, 125–​126). 
So, although it came to be regarded as a scripture of the Śaivasiddhānta, the Niśvāsa 
seems to have come into existence before a separation of Śaiva scriptural revelation into 
different streams, and it shows close affinities with other early tantric traditions. These

--- PAGE 1062 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1037
 
considerations make it a natural starting point for reflections about the history of the 
Mantramārga, and I refer to it often.6
What Are Mantras?
Attempts to define or at least to describe “tantrism” have not been easy,7 but from the 
last decades of research on the subject, it seems clear that what first united the various 
schools of disparate beliefs and practices labeled “tantric” was the notion that all re­
ligious goals could be achieved through the mastery of mantras. Spells had long been 
used to gain special powers: to destroy one’s enemies, to enslave or seduce others, or 
to cross great distances instantly. But the defining claim of the Mantramārga was that 
such mantras could also be used to destroy the bonds of earthly existence and thus 
escape the potentially endless cycle of saṃsāra, the unending sequence of births and 
deaths.8
Tantric mantras broadly conform in shape to two types: bījamantra and 
mālāmantra.9 The first of these, a “mantra in the form of a seed,” consists of a con­
sonant (or group of consonants) followed by a nasalized vowel (or group of vowels). 
A typical bījamantra, for example, is HĀṂ, which is often taken to express the heart 
(hṛdaya) of the god. Sometimes these seed mantras take the form of an almost un­
pronounceable string of consonants with a single vowel, such as HRKṢMLVYŪṂ.10 
These can be represented graphically by writing the successive consonants conjoined 
beneath each other.
The second type, sometimes called mālāmantra, “mantra in garland form,” consists 
of a semantically significant series of syllables. The best known mālamantra, the 
vyomavyāpin, contains eighty-​one syllables.11 A shorter mantra of this type is OṂ 
CAṆḌIKE KRAMA KRAMA SVĀHĀ, “OṂ [O goddess] Caṇḍikā, walk, walk! 
SVĀHĀ!” In spite of its semantic content, this mantra is actually prescribed for a 
catoptromantic process in the Guhyasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (3.24–​3.27). A 
virgin boy or girl has his or her thumb rubbed with oil impregnated with thousands of 
repetitions of this incantation, and then that innocent child is instructed to stare at the 
glistening surface of the oil and recount what is “seen.”12
Each mantra is conceived as an incarnation made of sound, a sonic body, of a pow­
erful deity, and there are said to be seventy million of them. The central religious fact 
that characterizes all Mantramārga traditions, at least during the early centuries of their 
existence, is dīkṣā, an initiation rite that deploys such mantras to bring about the goals 
of religious aspirants. In translation we call dīkṣā an “initiation” since the term comes 
from Vedic tradition and is originally an initiatory rite that confers the right to perform 
a particular Vedic sacrifice. But it has become much more than that, for, although it may 
function as an introduction to religious activity, conferring on the initiate the privilege 
of being able to use the mantras himself, a full tantric dīkṣā guarantees the initiate’s at­
tainment of ultimate liberation on death. It may, in other words, be itself a salvific ritual

--- PAGE 1063 ---
1038      Dominic Goodall
 
and not merely an initiatory preparation for subsequent religious practice. (Some 
traditions, and not only ones outside the Śaivasiddhānta, allowed that there were other 
paths to ultimate liberation, such as yoga13 or subitist gnosis, which could be transmitted 
through the guru’s gaze or touch, but the view that dīkṣā was an essential prerequisite for 
liberation predominated, so much so that some of these alternative paths became classi­
fied as types of nonritual dīkṣā.14)
The mantras most commonly used in ritual are not so numerous, and the most 
important among them are held to be the sonic forms of the central deity, or of the 
central deity’s heads and “body parts.” In fact, the “central deity,” namely the ul­
timately subtle Śiva, cannot be visualized or conceived of at all, but he adopts, as 
an act of grace toward those who wish to revere and meditate on him, the form of 
Sadāśiva, who is five-​faced and ten-​armed. His five heads—​Tatpuruṣa, Vāmadeva, 
Sadyojāta, Aghora, and Īśāna—​are five mantras that are considered to be Vedic 
and that were already a focus of meditative practice within the Atimārga.15 His so-​
called body part mantras (aṅgamantra) are the heart (hṛdaya); head (śiras); topknot 
(śikhā); cuirass (kavaca, correlated with the chest); weapon (astra, correlated with 
the hands); and, in some cases, eyes (netra).16 Equally important in many rituals is 
a central mantra known as the root-​mantra (mūlamantra) or as the Śiva-​mantra, 
which expresses the divinity as a whole. In some tantras, the root-​mantra and the 
heads and body parts are all of seed-​syllable type, as in the case of the earliest layers 
of the Niśvāsa and in most early recensions of the Kālottaratantra, whose mantra 
system is followed in all extant medieval manuals of ritual (paddhati) bar one.17 
In other tantras, such as the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, the root mantra is the 
garland-​type vyomavyāpin, and the heads and body part mantras consist of small 
sequences cut from the vyomavyāpin.
Given the protracted dominance of the Śaivasiddhānta, one might expect there to 
be many old representations of Sadāśiva, but all seem to belong to recent centuries, 
other than a few eleventh-​ and twelfth-​century sculptures from the Bengali-​speaking 
and Khmer-​speaking regions,18 unless one counts also the famous but contested rep­
resentation in Elephanta on the west coast.19 This paucity might be partly explained 
by Sadāśiva’s relatively esoteric status as the central mantra deity of an initiatory reli­
gion, albeit one that is today regarded as not particularly secretive, and partly by the 
fact that Sadāśiva is primarily a form whose image is to be visualized and projected 
into the liṅga before worship. Any liṅga is thus, from the perspective of an initiate, 
sufficient as a substrate for the worship of Sadāśiva, of whom no graven image is 
therefore required. Aside from the few early figured representations, there are other 
traces of the erstwhile importance of Sadāśiva discernible beyond the Śaivasiddhānta: 
His five-​headedness became generalized for the central deities of other tantric 
cults (Törzsök 2013), and several rival cults incorporate the transcended corpse of 
Sadāśiva in the visualized throne of worship on which their central deity is enthroned, 
expressing thereby both their implicit acknowledgment of the centrality of the 
Śaivasiddhānta and a wish to express transcendence beyond its teachings (Sanderson 
1986; Goodall 2011).

--- PAGE 1064 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1039
 
Growing Social Hierarchy Within 
the Mantramārga
If you have heard the term Śaivasiddhānta, the chances are that you have heard of it as a 
medieval (post-​twelfth-​century) South Indian school of devotion that, though tantric in 
name, can be seen as consistently “right-​handed” in praxis (observant, in other words, 
of widespread conventions of ritual purity), Veda-​congruent in discourse, supportive of 
a monotheistic worldview that must have comforted “the establishment,” and the source 
of a complex courtly protocol of ritual and of calendrical festivals that animated the 
great temple cities of the south, thus shoring up the social status quo.
But when we examine the earliest surviving textual sources, we find no evidence 
of a Veda-​congruent school rooted deeply and broadly in the wider social fabric. The 
more social elements of religious life—​temples; monasteries; public liturgy; festivals; 
and life-​cycle rites marking births, marriages, coming of age, and death—​are ignored 
in the successive textual layers of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (fifth to seventh century), as 
well as in other demonstrably early tantras, such as the 200-​, 350-​, 700-​, and 1,300-​verse 
recensions of the Kālottara. Naturally, this does not mean that such phenomena of so­
cial religion didn’t exist at the time, and indeed we catch glimpses of them in allusions. 
What it suggests instead is that the earliest tantric works were not interested in these 
social dimensions of religion. The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā reflects rather the concerns of 
specialists wishing to master mantras for “magical” and spiritual benefits. The various 
layers of the text show how “spells” (mantra) are to be propitiated and then put to use 
for achieving either liberation (mukti, mokṣa) or special enjoyments (bhukti, bhoga)—​
often characterized as supernormal powers (siddhi)—​followed ultimately by the attain­
ment of liberation. A prerequisite for the use of mantras is the ritual of initiation (dīkṣā), 
which, by means of oblations into a divinized fire using mantras, at once consumes the 
initiand’s karman—​the retributive force of that soul’s past actions—​that has been or will 
be stored up for consumption one day in the numerous worlds throughout the cosmos. 
But this initiation thereby also gives him (only male initiates are spoken of in this text) 
the authority (adhikāra) to take on mantra-​sādhana, that is to say the pursuit of super­
normal powers (siddhi) by means of propitiation and then ritual deployment of a mantra 
that he chooses (or that is chosen for him) to master (sādhyamantra).
All initiates may be referred to in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā as sādhakas, in other 
words, aspirants to the attainment of siddhi through sādhana using a sādhya-​mantra. 
(Note that siddhi, sādhana, sādhya, and sādhaka are all terms derived from the same 
verbal root, sādh/​sidh, “to achieve, accomplish”.) Even the guru who performs an in­
itiation may be referred to simply with the word sādhaka, and no other hierarchy 
among initiates is alluded to. What all this suggests is not a vast institutionalized re­
ligious movement, but rather a not-​so-​numerous group of enthusiasts who have 
distanced themselves from societal norms in order to quest for supernormal powers. 
For this they used a largely inherited ritual technology involving the propitiation

--- PAGE 1065 ---
1040      Dominic Goodall
 
of mantra-​deities by making offerings into a sanctified fire to the accompaniment 
of the recitation of mantras, held to be the sonic form of mantra-​deities. The wider 
social aspects of this religious world seem to be so unimportant as to pass largely 
unmentioned.
The absence of a complex social hierarchy in the earliest works is highlighted by 
the gradual emergence in later textual sources of labels, practices, rituals, and ideas 
that clearly do imply a growing social diversity. This is the case even for the more 
power-​oriented, “left-​handed” currents of the Mantramārga. In the Picumata-​
Brahmayāmala, for example, a large non-​Saiddhāntika tantra, which teaches the 
worship of a pantheon of fierce mantra-​deities to be worshipped in a mandala of 
cremation grounds in a manner that involves transgressive sexual rites, there is evi­
dence of a hierarchy within the religion, for we find there different classes of sādhakas 
distinguished, as Csaba Kiss’s work has sought to clarify (Kiss 2015, 35–​53). A social 
hierarchy naturally also emerged in the gradually more orthodox and orthopractic 
Śaivasiddhānta: It is probably in the seventh-​century Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha 
that we find for the first time the four categories of initiate, the lowest being the pre­
liminarily initiated neophyte (samayin) bound to the rules (samaya) of the religion, 
the highest being the guru (ācārya), whose principal disciples (from among whom he 
would choose his successor) were the fully initiated putrakas (the word may have been 
adopted from Dharmaśāstra, where it refers to an “adopted son”). The remaining cat­
egory was that of the sādhaka, the power seeker, which in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, 
as we have seen, was still a generic label used for all initiates. One implication of this 
hierarchy is that the religion had become centered on households of gurus—​proto-​
monasteries headed by gurus who were waited on by their putrakas and samayins—​
with the sādhakas effectively now liminal figures, pursuing siddhi outside the guru’s 
domain. This adumbrates the gradual marginalization of siddhi and its pursuit within 
the Śaivasiddhānta, which, for instance, Brunner has spoken of in an article about 
the sādhaka as a “forgotten personage” (1975). Concomitantly, the theologians whose 
works have survived seem to have become increasingly uninterested in, even embar­
rassed by, the passages in early Siddhāntatantras that detail procedures for the acquisi­
tion of supernormal powers and pleasures, which they came to regard as the province 
of other traditions of the Mantramārga, whereas the Śaivasiddhānta focused only on 
the loftier goal of mokṣa.
The same four classes of initiates are widely referred to elsewhere, along with 
other sorts of evidence of a growing social scope. In the possibly eighth-​century 
Kiraṇatantra, for example, we find not only a chapter devoted to begging (33), as 
would suit monad sādhakas, but also a passage devoted to communal eating using 
tables (? unless pīṭha here means “stools”) of different heights for each rank of initiate 
(45.7ff.). We also find fairly detailed prescriptions for the creation of a temple (­chapter 
55, edited and translated by Mills 2019), but the text also mentions the installation of 
a liṅga in a large private house (mandire), distinguished from one installed in a public 
temple (51.6).20

--- PAGE 1066 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1041
 
Further Socioreligious Clues
Besides these social clues from what is said about infrastructure, the account that the 
Kiraṇatantra gives of the topic of observance (caryā) is revealing. This term in earlier 
literature typically referred to vrata-​caryā, in other words to the following (by adopting 
a certain dress, diet, and behavior) of a timed religious observance primarily for the 
purposes of propitiating a particular mantra before using it for acquiring siddhi. But 
by the time of the Kiraṇatantra, caryā had evidently slipped in meaning (see Goodall 
2020a, 55–​59) and was now instead applied to the everyday dress and behavior of the 
different classes of initiates. This semantic shift underlines a shift away from the rela­
tively isolated power seekers of the Niśvāsa, toward small communities attached to the 
households of gurus. What is still not in evidence in the Kiraṇatantra’s presentation of 
the religion, however, is any sort of public temple liturgy or any calendrical festivals. 
There are however some life-​cycle rites that appear to emerge in the Mantramārga in 
this period. As part of a generalized diversification of types of initiation, we find the 
prescription of funerary initiations (for a brief account, see Sanderson 1995, 31–​33, but 
for detailed treatment of Śaiva mortuary and postmortuary rituals, including editions 
and translations of primary sources, see Mirnig 2018), somewhat illogically, it seems, 
performed even for those who received a salvific initiation while alive and of forms of 
initiation of the dead performed in the absence of a body, (mahājāla, mṛtoddhāra). 
Moreover, the Kiraṇatantra also adds postfunerary rituals (śrāddha), which, no doubt 
like many death-​related rituals throughout the world, seem doctrinally out of step with 
the soteriology of the religion in which they developed (again, see Sanderson 1995, 34–​
37, and, for greater detail, Mirnig 2018, 189ff.).
One sign of the emerging prominence of Śaiva initiates in wider society is the appear­
ance in literature and inscriptions of individuals bearing initiatory names. Such names 
usually take the form of the name of a mantra followed by a distinctive ending, the most 
common being the ending °śiva; a typical example would thus be Aghora-​śiva, the 
name of the most famous South Indian theologian, whose celebrated ritual manual, the 
Kriyākramadyotikā, was probably completed in 1157 CE, but also a commonly attested 
name in inscriptions (Goodall 2000). Such initiatory names made their first appear­
ance in the epigraphical record in central India in the seventh century (see Goodall, 
Sanderson, and Isaacson 2015, 51–​58); by the tenth century, they had become wide­
spread in Cambodia (Goodall 2015a, 21–​26). We know this because, with its large lists of 
temple personnel, Khmer epigraphy is a rich field for onomastic study. We can also see 
that these Saiddhāntika names gradually replaced anthroponyms that mark Pāśupata 
obedience known from the donors and patrons who figure in seventh-​century Khmer 
inscriptions, namely, ones that begin with Bhā-​ or Bhava-​21 or that end with -​rāśi.22
Over the same spread of centuries, we find also allusions to the tantric initiations 
of kings in epigraphs spread across the entire Sanskrit cosmopolis (Sanderson 2001; 
Goodall 2004; Goodall and Griffiths 2013). This development, a testimony to growing

--- PAGE 1067 ---
1042      Dominic Goodall
 
royal patronage, which was no doubt a factor in popularizing the Mantramārga 
(Sanderson 2013), is reflected in scripture by the provisions of a special “seedless in­
itiation” (nirbījā dīkṣā), which was clearly designed to widen the availability of a sal­
vific tantric initiation to include more than just the power-​seeking sādhakas, who were 
once the focus of the religion as presented in the Niśvāsa. In this newer system, reg­
ular initiands, those judged capable of following postinitiatory observances, received a 
sabījā dīkṣā, a “seeded initiation,” thus making them into putrakas, the “seed” in ques­
tion being the obligation to follow postinitiatory rules (samaya). Those too busy or 
unable to perform postinitiatory observances instead took an initiation in which the 
obligation was removed and thus was called “seedless” (nirbīja). Such an initiation is 
referred to, without such a label, in some pre-​tenth-​century Siddhāntatantras (e.g., 
Kiraṇatantra 6.11; see also Goodall 1998, 363–​365, quoting Sanderson), and the termi­
nology is perhaps first found in the Svacchandatantra (4.88): bālabāliśavṛddhastrībho
gabhugvyādhitātmanām | eṣāṃ nirbījikā dīkṣā samayādivivarjitā, “Children, fools, the 
aged, women, kings, the sick—​for these [there is] seedless initiation, devoid of [the obli­
gation to follow] post-​initiatory observances and so forth.”
As explained above, texts such as the Niśvāsa appear to reflect the ideas and 
practices—​yogic, theological, magical, ritual—​of celibate male power-​seeking ascetics 
on the margins of society who do not appear to cultivate institutional ties. But a reli­
gion consisting only of such persons would surely risk swift extinction. One indication, 
however, that the Mantramārga was already veering toward wider social inclusion at its 
very inception is the inclusion of fire in its rituals. As Sanderson observed (2006, 147, 
192–​193), what we know of the rituals of the early Atimārga groups known as Pāśupatas, 
suggests that no fire was involved, as would be expected of an ascetic tradition, since 
the maintaining of a fire is the prerogative of married householders. The earliest mag­
ical rituals attested in works of the Mantramārga, in contrast, prominently involve 
oblations into fire (see Goodall and Isaacson 2016, 19–​24), unlike those described in the 
Arthaśāstra (as remarked in Goodall, Sanderson, and Isaacson 2015, 82).
The further inclusion of purely salvific and “seedless” ritual initiations for “chil­
dren, fools, the aged, women, kings, the sick,” with none of them regarded as able to 
follow the daily or occasionally obligatory rituals of pūjā (worship) and agnikārya (fire 
oblations), is a marker of a considerable social widening of the religion, even if it still 
remained for a while anchored in small communities grouped around the households 
of gurus. Whether such initiates really had no further religious duties after initiation 
must have varied from one context to another. The tenth-​century Kashmirian theolo­
gian Rāmakaṇṭha, a back-​to-​the-​scriptures fundamentalist whose writings helped to 
standardize Saiddhāntika doctrine, said that such persons could listen to pious tales and 
follow the lay practices taught in texts of the Śivadharma (about which more below). In 
other words, he held that they could be pious but there was no further soteriologically 
significant activity that they could engage in. But it would not be surprising if in fact 
pressure increased to prescribe practices that were tailored to their needs. And indeed 
we find that the Kiraṇatantra, for instance, teaches a procedure for the worship of Śiva’s 
consort Gaurī that was designed to suit the wives of initiates. The suitability of Gaurī

--- PAGE 1068 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1043
 
worship for married women is still more clearly marked in an account of Gaurī wor­
ship given in a chapter of the eleventh-​century Bṛhatkālottaratantra (Sathyanarayanan 
and Goodall 2015, 30–​35).23 There are even allusions in Trilocanaśiva’s twelfth-​century 
manual of expiation to the worship of Śiva by women (Sathyanarayanan and Goodall 
2015, 36–​37). The growing importance of women is perhaps also reflected in a sort of 
“feminization” of the pantheon of worship (Goodall et al. 2005, 25, 149–​151). In all pre-​
twelfth-​century literature, Sadāśiva is consortless, and all the members of his retinue 
of five circles of eight deities are also consortless and masculine, with the exception of 
Gaurī in the second circle and Gadā and Śakti in the fifth and outermost circle, who 
are both personifications of weapons that happen to be grammatically feminine. But in 
some later scriptures, all are visualized with consorts.
Moving back a couple of centuries, the emergence of a body of ritual manuals 
(paddhati) may attest to deepening institutionalization of the religion in the tenth 
and eleventh centuries. The most famous of these is the Kriyākāṇḍakramāvali, best 
known as the paddhati of Somaśambhu, the head of a celebrated and extremely well-​
endowed Śaiva monastery at Golagī (today Gurgi; see Sanderson 2014, 21). That text 
is well known among Indologists today because of the heavily annotated four-​volume 
edition and translation (1963–​1998) of Hélène Brunner-​Lachaux. But it was already a 
somewhat famous and influential text when it was produced in the eleventh century 
and seems to have been disseminated in more than one eleventh-​century “edition” 
(Goodall 2014; Sanderson 2007, 420–​421, fn. 640). The ritual instructions of the manual 
are by default still addressed to individual male initiates or to the guru, but it has been 
plausibly suggested by S. A. S. Sarma (forthcoming) that the will to formulate and then 
disseminate such a standardized Śaiva liturgy might be a natural consequence of the 
flourishing of relatively large monastic institutions, such as the one that Somaśambhu 
himself headed, which was founded by the ninth-​century Kalachuri king Yuvarājadeva 
(Sanderson 2009, 263–​264). The epigraphic record preserves accounts of numerous 
royal grants that resulted directly or indirectly in the creation of Śaiva monasteries (for 
translations of three such grants, including that of Gurgi, see Davis 2000) and that gave 
an exalted—​indeed almost kingly—​status to some Śaiva gurus (see Sanderson 2009, 
263–​273), and the massive stone remains of some of these impressive monasteries still 
stand today (Sears 2014).
No doubt the esoteric speculations, yogic meditations, and (sometimes transgres­
sive) mantra-​based rituals of individual seekers always continued to be practiced 
and to develop, as they do today, but in the background of this new mainstream. But 
within this mainstream the earlier, more ascetic, motive force seems to have been grad­
ually enveloped and then supplanted by a social religion whose expanding embrace 
was marked at first, as we have seen, by the accretion of hierarchical ranks, monastic 
foundations of increasing size, and socially significant life-​cycle rites such as funerals 
and postmortuary ceremonies (śrāddha). To these may be added calendrical festivals, 
which began to make their appearance (again in the Kiraṇatantra) with an autumnal 
rite known as pavitrotsava,24 and then a spring one called damanotsava (Goodall 2019). 
While these festivals may often have had different origins outside Śaivism, to justify

--- PAGE 1069 ---
1044      Dominic Goodall
 
their presence in what was now held to be a widely proselytizing but still narrowly so­
teriological religion, they were treated as expiatory rituals that repair faults or ritual 
omissions that may have occurred over the course of the previous year or month.
But in the Siddhāntatantras produced in South India from the late twelfth century on­
ward, no such quasi-​soteriological justification seems required for the plethora of temple 
processions and festivals described. These scriptures seem to reflect a religion that has 
entirely shifted its focus again, this time away from the salvation of (often wealthy) 
individuals, through expensive initiation rituals, to center instead on the bustling life of 
a South Indian temple city and the communities that kept it alive. Whereas dīkṣā seemed 
earlier always to be the central focus of both the doctrinal and the ritual teaching—​a rite 
of initiation aimed first at enabling control over spells for attaining supernormal powers 
and salvation equally, then primarily directed toward salvation alone—​it came now to 
be seen effectively as a rite of ordination to serve as a priest in temple ceremonies, which 
now became the principal focus of the teaching of the Siddhāntatantras. Those eligible 
to perform these ceremonies were held to belong exclusively to a semiendogamous 
subcaste of Brahmins known as Ādiśaivas or Śivabrāhmaṇas.25
The ritual activities of this class of hereditary priests seem to be the main concern 
of such works as the Kāmika, Kāraṇa, Raurava (trans. Barazer-​Billoret and Dagens 
2000), and Ajitatantra (Bhatt, Filliozat, and Fillozat 2005) and of many other tantras 
that appear to describe South Indian temple rituals, sometimes using distinctively 
South Indian vocabulary (see Goodall 2021), and to have been transmitted only in 
South Indian manuscripts.26 But the rights and duties of members of other communities 
important for public liturgy (e.g., drummers, musicians, dancers, and craftspeople) 
also appear there.27 The earliest labeled and still identifiable quotations from such 
scriptures—​the South Indian Temple Āgamas—​appear in works of the twelfth and thir­
teenth centuries. The majority of them, however, appear not to have been identifiably 
quoted until rather later, in the sixteenth century; this lateness may be partly because 
so very little Saiddhāntika writing in Sanskrit can be firmly dated to the fourteenth 
and fifteenth centuries.28 After intensive production of ritual manuals, theological 
commentaries, and digests in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth centuries, there seems to 
have been a lull among Śaivas in Sanskrit literary activity in the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries (at least by avowedly human authors, for the South Indian Temple Āgamas 
may have been produced in this period), followed by another period of intense produc­
tivity in the Tamil-​speaking south in the sixteenth century.
It should be noted that the gap may be more apparent than real since there may be 
many lost works, or unnoticed surviving works, that belong to this period. Furthermore, 
it is to this period, the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, that most if not all of the 
fourteen theological treatises in Tamil known as the Meykaṇṭacāttiraṅkaḷ belong.29 
These treatises use the terminology of the Siddhāntatantras and their commentators—​
sometimes in the form of words borrowed from the Sanskrit and sometimes in the 
form of Tamil calques—​but in fact teach a soteriology that is different from what was 
defended by the earlier theologians whose works survive, the most famous of whom are 
Sadyojyotiḥ (seventh century), Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha (tenth century), his son Bhaṭṭa

--- PAGE 1070 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1045
 
Rāmakaṇṭha, a certain Bhoja (eleventh century), Aghoraśiva (twelfth century), and a 
disciple of his called Trilocanaśiva. For in these Tamil works, personal devotion to God 
is paramount, ritual initiation is barely mentioned, and the ultimate goal is no longer 
to realize one’s innate powers and to become identical to Śiva, but rather to become in 
some way united with Śiva and yet also not entirely fused within him.
This shift in theology was followed by South Indian Śaivas writing in Sanskrit in the 
sixteenth century. An exception is Jñānaprakāśa of Śālivāṭi in Sri Lanka, who attempted 
to defend the doctrines systematized by Kashmirian thinkers of the tenth century, but 
with an awareness of a now vast body of Śaiva literature that could not easily be brought 
into harmony with it. The vastness of the then-​accessible literature is reflected in the 
tendency in this period to produce nibandha works, or commentaries with a nibandha-​
like quality, that is to say works in which long sequences of illustrative quotations were 
strung together, sometimes only thinly interspersed with explanatory prose or with 
identificatory labels. The voluminous unpublished Sanskrit works of Vedajñāna II 
(whose uncle Vedajñāna I died in 1563 CE) illustrate this tendency.30 We may specu­
late that the growth of institutional monastic libraries may have enabled this style of 
composition.
Once again, we can see the above-​mentioned developments as a reflection of new 
social and theological concerns that had emerged and required discussion and resolu­
tion. For instance, one particular current of thought with which earlier Śaiva thinkers 
hardly engaged had become preeminent in South Indian intellectual life, namely 
that of Vedānta, the body of schools of philosophical exposition of the Upaniṣads.31 
Confronting Vedānta led of course to fresh discussion of old theological issues and 
veering away from the strict dualism of the old Śaivasiddhānta toward something 
resembling the qualified dualism of Viśiṣṭādvaita. Two concomitant further shifts may 
be mentioned, both no doubt also connected to the continued social broadening of 
the religion. One was linguistic, the shift from Sanskrit into Tamil. Some of the earliest 
works of the Mantramārga may already long ago have emphasized that it was not just 
Brahmins who were eligible for initiation, but they are nonetheless full of injunctions 
directed at Brahmin males, who were the addressees by default of their teachings. But, as 
we have seen, an increasing range of actors are taken into account over time, and the use 
of the regional language Tamil is explicitly associated in some of the Tamil works them­
selves with broad accessibility. But the use of Tamil would not have been enough by itself 
to bring Śaiva tantric teachings to the masses because these are verse compositions in an 
elevated literary register, often rendering them actually more challenging to interpret 
than their Sanskrit counterparts. The other shift was religious, namely, the preoccupa­
tion with devotion. In order to understand this shift better, we may step back a moment 
to consider the role of devotion in the Śaivasiddhānta until the twelfth century.
In the early Mantramārga, the conception of mantras as inconceivably powerful 
instruments that could be used not only as spells for wielding supernormal powers but 
also for attaining ultimate liberation from saṃsāra, a goal hitherto typically regarded 
as requiring many lifetimes of toilsome religious endeavor or morally upright be­
havior. But this reliance had led to the view that ultimate liberation was in fact only

--- PAGE 1071 ---
1046      Dominic Goodall
 
possible through reliance on mantras deployed in a particular manner in the context 
of a lengthy ritual initiation involving hundreds of oblations into fire for purging every 
layer of the universe in which the soul would otherwise be destined, because of karmic 
debt, to be reborn. This was the unvarying teaching, over several centuries, of the 
doctors enumerated above, in the period in which the Śaivasiddhānta was still a pan-​
Indian tradition. We know this from the large textual corpus that they have left behind, 
which defends at length a complex cosmography of hundreds of worlds imbricated in 
an intricate ritual procedure of purification by fire oblations that is presented as the 
only path to salvation. Certainly there was religious activity that was enjoined after in­
itiation, notably daily veneration (pūjā) using Śaiva mantras, first internally, which in­
volved first mentally burning away one’s physical body and replacing it with one made 
of Śiva’s mantras, before visualizing the deity Sadāśiva enthroned in one’s heart, and 
then externally, involving visualizing him in (typically) a liṅga, and making offerings 
to him present there and then as present in the fire. But this regular practice involving 
self-​identification with the divine, a sort of prefiguring of the ultimate liberated state 
in which the soul was to realize fully his innate Śiva-​nature, received rather weak 
justifications—​that it was to be practiced in order to ensure the continuity of the re­
ligion, for example (thus Kiraṇatantra 6.13–​6.14), or that it burned off the residue of 
bondage left in place in order to sustain the current birth, since bondage cannot wholly 
be burned away by the mantras in the course of a regular dīkṣā or else the initiate would 
at once drop dead. Such odd justifications were a corollary of maintaining that a ritual 
dīkṣā, if correctly performed, guaranteed liberation.
The result is a somewhat mechanistic soteriology that left almost no place for per­
sonal devotion, and that must surely have been psychologically unsatisfying for some. 
In this dry system, devotion (bhakti) seems to have had no other soteriological func­
tion beyond indicating to the qualified guru that a certain person must be ripe for re­
ceiving a ritual initiation, and the influential exegete Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha accordingly 
gives this lukewarm definition:32 “Bhakti is taught to be a particular kind of know­
ledge that consists in being penetrated by suitability [for initiation and thereby salva­
tion]” (bhaktir yogyatāveśalakṣaṇo jñānaviśeṣa uktaḥ). In other traditions, hymns 
to the divine naturally enough often take the form of emotional poetic effusions, but 
the few surviving pre-​twelfth-​century stotras of the Śaivasiddhānta tend to be pieces 
of dry catechesis, furnishing their users, for instance, with mnemonic versification 
for recalling a sequence of ritual acts (Jñānaśambhu’s Śivapūjāstava), or a sequence of 
visualizations for daily worship (Aghoraśiva’s Pañcāvaraṇastava and Trilocanaśiva’s 
Dhyānaratnāvali33) or exegesis of mantras (Rāmakaṭha’s Vyomavyāpistava). In such 
compositions, we typically encounter neither the elegant wit nor the emotion of, for 
instance, Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvali. Knowledge acquired through meditation, moral 
rectitude, piously motivated acts that help others, or any signal manifestation of devo­
tional fervor, including fasting, pilgrimages, participation in festivals—​all these may 
produce merit (puṇya)—​but merit is not salvific for it is ultimately only one ritual, that 
of initiation (dīkṣā), that makes salvation possible. Even though a place is found in the 
Śaivasiddhānta for all the above-​mentioned religious phenomena and activities, their

--- PAGE 1072 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1047
 
importance is inevitably diminished by the soteriology that much of the Saiddhāntika 
literature of the tenth to twelfth centuries was devoted to setting out and defending.
But what, you may ask, about the first-​millennium Tamil devotional poetry of the 
Tēvāram, which celebrates festivals and whose focus was on sacred places, glorifying 
Śiva and his mythological exploits in dozens of Southern temple towns? It is true that 
the devotional hymns of the poet-​saints Appar (also known as Tirunāvukkaracu), 
Ñānacampantar (Sanskrit: Jñānasambha), and Cuntarar (Sanskrit: Sundara) are often 
presented as though they belonged to or helped popularize the Śaivasiddhānta in 
Southern India. But their poems were not in their own time in any sense Saiddhāntika 
compositions and only came to be so regarded centuries later.34 Nor do they exhibit 
any particular leaning toward the Mantramārga. Instead, the hymns refer to several 
groups of Śiva-​worshipping religious professionals, apparently without favoring any 
of them. Among the people thronging the streets of the temple city of Tiruvarur, for 
example, we see mixed together (Tēvāram 4.20.3) ascetics with matted locks, Śaivas, 
Pāśupatas, and Kāpālikas.35 Here, the Śaivas (Tamil: caivar) are probably adherents of 
the Mantramārga and thus perhaps of the Śaivasiddhānta. In other holy sites, we find 
just Śaivas and Pāśupatas presented together (1.66.4), or just Mahāvratins (4.21.1), or 
religious professionals called Rudras (uruttirar, 2.29.4, 2.37.9), who may have been of 
another group who (like the Pāśupatas, Mahāvratins, and Kāpālikas) belonged to the 
Atimārga.36 Similarly, we find the god Śiva himself presented as taking on the dress and 
attributes of these religious professionals: He wears Pāśupata garb in 1.97.6, 6.20.2, and 
6.91.2, but he wears the dress of a Śaiva (caivaveṭaṉ) in 1.53.6 and 1.12.2 and that of a 
Kapāli (viz. Kāpālika) in 1.27.70. Furthermore, we do not find allusions in the corpus 
to details of theology or liturgy that were distinctive of the Mantramārga. Allusions to 
mantras, to bonds and bondage (pācam), and to impurities afflicting the soul (malam) 
are not rare, but they are not particularly distinctive. One clear instance of a distinctive 
piece of tantric terminology does stand out. In a passage alluding to the sage Agastya 
worshipping Śiva, Agastya is said to perform sakalīkaraṇa (cakaḷī ceytu, in 7.65.5), 
which refers to the procedure of laying Śiva’s mantras on his own body as part of his self-​
identification as Śiva (or as a Śiva), which is an essential preliminary to pūjā. To sum­
marize, adherents of the Mantramārga were certainly present in South Indian religious 
life at the time of the composition of such hymns, but they appear to have been just one 
among several groups of co-​religionists, accorded no more emphasis than older groups 
of Śiva-​worshipping religious professionals.
In other words, we should be careful not to read back into this devotional liter­
ature our notions of the preeminence of the Mantramārga. The place of tantrism 
generally, partly because of recent curiosity in the West and because a voluminous 
Sanskrit literature of tantric texts has been transmitted that were the realm of a great 
deal of speculative and esoteric lucubration, may well have been exaggerated at the 
expense of other religious traditions. One useful corrective, arguably, is provided by 
the long-​neglected literature of the Śivadharma corpus, notably what appear to be the 
two earliest texts, the Śivadharmaśāstra and the Śivadharmottara. These two relatively 
staid nontantric Sanskrit treatises of the seventh century encourage pious religious

--- PAGE 1073 ---
1048      Dominic Goodall
 
activity—​foundations, calendrical festivals, copying and keeping religious literature 
(see De Simini 2016)—​under the active patronage of kings and the wealthy. The suc­
cess of the Śivadharma, according to Bisschop (2018a), is to be attributed in part to its 
formulation of a ritual for invoking a pantheon of Śaiva-​aligned deities to promote 
peace (the sixth or śānti-​adhyāya of the Śivadharmaśāstra). Otherwise, these treatises 
appear to promote no groundbreaking doctrines, no radically unfamiliar spiritual 
path, and no paradigm shifts, but instead describe what must surely long have better 
reflected the religiosity of a much larger swathe of people than, for instance, the trans­
gressive Picumata-​Brahmayāmala, with its scatological eschatology (see Hatley 2018 
and Kiss 2015); the Tantrarājatantra and Svacchandatantra, with their complex initia­
tory rites based around an intricate cosmography; the grimoires of sexual or charnel-​
ground rituals aimed at the acquisition of supernatural powers and pleasures that 
we find in, for instance, the Guhyasūtra of the Niśvāsa and in the Vīṇāśikhatantra 
(Goudriaan 1985); or the Saiddhāntika Mṛgendratantra, with its dense, ordered, and 
carefully worded presentation of the theological niceties of Śaiva soteriology37 (or, for 
that matter, than the priestly South Indian Temple Āgamas). In short, all such var­
ious tantric works would probably have been the concern of only a small number of 
individuals at any one time.
The evidence of the Tēvāram and the Śivadharmaśāstra, which document popular de­
votional practices not specific to particular theological schools, underline that festivals, 
temple worship, and other socioreligious phenomena that have come to be associated 
with the Śaivasiddhānta in fact pre-​date the Mantramārga, whose earliest works are in­
stead tightly focused on the individual salvation (mukti) of the sādhaka and his quest for 
special powers (bhukti).
Besides such nontantric sources, for a rounded history of the Śaiva Mantramārga one 
should of course also take into consideration the evidence furnished by non-​Śaiva tan­
tric works. It is clear that Buddhist and Vaiṣṇava tantric systems were not only evolving 
in parallel, but also there was considerable mutual influence between them. Goodall 
and Isaacson (2016) have pointed out shared notions and terminology in the earliest 
surviving texts of these three traditions, for instance, building on Sanderson’s obser­
vation (2001, 38, fn. 50) that “the ritual systems taught in the Śaiva and Pāñcarātrika 
Saṃhitās resemble each other so closely that they have the appearance of two dialects 
of a single ‘Tantric’ language,” as well as on a similar observation of Strickmann (1996, 
24) concerning Śaivism and Buddhism.38 The shared evolution of Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava 
(Pāñcarātra) ritual just in the realm of visualization has been demonstrated for their 
“thrones of worship” (Goodall 2011), but a large pool of distinctive shared vocabulary 
for all manner of ritual objects and concepts, particularly in the post-​twelfth-​century 
period of the later scriptures of the Pāñcarātra and the South Indian Śaiva Temple 
Āgamas, is at once evident from perusing any part of the Vienna dictionary of tantric 
terminology.39
This sketch of how we might reconstruct the history of the Śaiva Mantramārga has fo­
cused on the Śaivasiddhānta of the first millennium because we know that this lay at the 
heart of the Śaiva tantric traditions and that the texts that came to be regarded as forming

--- PAGE 1074 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1049
 
its canon constitute a common source (sāmānyaśāstra), a shared doctrinal basis, on 
which other Śaiva schools built. Reflecting the view that doctrinal developments may be 
better understood in tandem with the social background against which they emerge, I 
have tried here to contextualize the evolution of the Śaivasiddhānta with such evidence 
from social history as can be inferred.
Notes
	 1.	 For an account of how apologists for this later southern Śaivasiddhānta have distorted our 
notions of the Śaiva canon in other ways, see Goodall 2004, xiii–​xxxiv.
	 2.	 In the Niśvāsa’s Nayasūtra 1.112, the expression paśutantra° is used to refer to a “book 
[expounding the limited knowledge] of bound souls.”
	 3.	 For a presentation of the differing early versions of the list of the canon of twenty-​eight 
scriptures, see Appendix III of Goodall 1998.
	 4.	 Thus Goodall, Sanderson, and Isaacson 2015, but reservations have been expressed by 
Bisschop 2020.
	 5.	 For a brief account of the Pāśupatas, see Acharya 2018.
	 6.	 The books of the Niśvāsa that have been published so far are the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra, 
and Nayasūtra, the three earliest layers of composition (Goodall, Sanderson, and Isaacson 
2015), and an introductory book assumed to be of later date called the Niśvāsamukha 
(Kafle 2020).
	 7.	 Besides Sanderson’s book-​length articles mentioned above (particularly 2004b, 2009, 
and 2014), books that attempt broadly to cover “Hindu” (and thus predominantly Śaiva) 
“Tantrism” include that of Goudriaan and Gupta 1981, which attempts an overview of the 
literary corpus; Flood 2006; and, most recently, Padoux 2017.
	 8.	 For this characterization of the Mantramārga, see the “Short Preface On the Importance 
of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā for the history of Tantrism ” in Goodall, Sanderson, and 
Isaacson 2015.
	 9.	 For more on the types of mantras and their history, see Goodall and Isaacson 2016, 4–​19.
	10.	 This form of the navātman, “the ninefold,” one of the oldest mantras of the Śaiva 
Mantramārga, appears in the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (see Goodall, Sanderson, and Isaacson 
2015, 318–​319).
	11.	 For a discussion of the form of this mantra, see Bhatt 1982, xi–​xvi.
	12.	 On catoptromancy in Indian sources, see Somdev Vasudeva’s article on prasenā in TAK3. 
For a more detailed discussion, see Vasudeva 2014, 369–​390.
	13.	 The Mataṅgapārameśvara (kriyāpāda 1.2 and vidyāpāda 26.63), for example, presents 
gnosis, yoga, and special observances ([vrata]caryā) as alternative paths; for discussion 
of this position and of its distortion by the tenth-​century theologian Rāmakaṇṭha, see 
Goodall 1998, 366–​374.
	14.	 See s.v. cākṣuṣyādidīkṣā and jñānadīkṣā in Tāntrikābhidhānakośa II (Brunner, 
Oberhammer, and Padoux 2004).
	15.	 For a discussion of these five mantras and the question of their Vedic character, see 
Bisschop 2018b.
	16.	 For further discussion of these body part mantras, see Brunner 1986.
	17.	 The exception is the twelfth-​century Mṛgendrapaddhati of Aghoraśiva. For a presentation 
of the surviving medieval paddhatis, see Sanderson 2014, 20–​25.

--- PAGE 1075 ---
1050      Dominic Goodall
 
	18.	 Examples from Bengali-​speaking regions appear as ­figures 44 and 45 in Goodall et al. 2005. 
For a twelfth-​century Khmer example, see, for instance, Jessup and Zéphir 1997, 328–​329.
	19.	 For a brief discussion of the possibility that the image in Elephanta is Sadāśiva, see Goodall 
et al. 2005, 136, fn. 79.
	20.	 The verse is in the tenth-​century Nepalese manuscript and not in the South Indian edition, 
but there are other references in ­chapters 52, 53, and 54 to differences in prescriptions for a 
private house and a temple.
	21.	 See Goodall 2015b, 26–​28.
	22.	 See Goodall 2020b.
	23.	 Sushmita Das (École française d’Extrême-​Orient/​Pondicherry University) is preparing 
a complete edition and translation of the portions of the Bṛhatkālottara related to Gaurī 
worship.
	24.	 For a short presentation, see Tāntrikābhidhānakośa 3 (Goodall and Rastelli 2013) s.v. 
pavitrāropaṇa.
	25.	 See Gollner 2021, 96–​103.
	26.	 A detailed reception history of the most famous of these, the Kāmika, has now been 
produced by Michael Gollner (2021), who has explored at length the religious and social 
background of the text that has come to be frequently printed under the title Kāmikāgama.
	27.	 On the temple women known as Rudragaṇikās, see Goodall 2018; on other temple per­
sons, see Davis and Orr 2007.
	28.	 It may also be because many of these South Indian Temple Āgamas were still taking shape. 
See Goodall 2018, 134:
For some South Indian Temple āgamas, [ . . . ] such as the Sūkṣmaśāstra and, in differing 
degrees, also the Kāmika and Kāraṇa, some manuscripts of the transmission may reflect dif­
ferent moments in a stop-​start editorial process that never actually reached a smooth finish.
	29.	 A useful summary of the contents of these Meykaṇṭacāttiraṅkaḷ may be found as appendix 
2 to Balasubramaniam 2013, 351ff.
	30.	 The same pair of authors are today also widely known by their Tamil names, Maṟaiñāna I 
and Maṟaiñāna II, for at least the surviving works of Vedajñāna I were in Tamil, whereas 
works in both Sanskrit and Tamil are ascribed to his nephew Vedajñāna II. For a study of 
their œuvre, see Ganesan 2009.
	31.	 For the lack of importance of Vedantic nondualism in first millennium Saiddhāntika 
writings, see Goodall 2015c. For its marked impact in post-​twelfth-​century southern 
Śaivism, see, for example, Goodall 2006 and Gollner 2021, 142–​158.
	32.	 The definition appears in the Mataṅgavṛtti (ad vidyāpāda 2.4), when Rāmakaṇṭha is 
glossing the expression bhakticandravapuṣmatyā . . . girā, “with a voice . . . that had the 
beauty of a moon of bhakti.”
	33.	 In an appendix to their first edition of the Dhyānaratnāvalī, Sarma, and Sathyanarayanan 
(2012) usefully gathered together details of the various hitherto published Saiddhāntika 
stotras.
	34.	 For further discussion of the early Saiddhāntika canon, see the “Explanatory Preface” to 
Goodall 2004, in particular p. xxxiii for remarks on the hymns of the Nāyaṉmārs.
	35.	 The numeration is that of Subrahmanya Aiyer, Chevillard, and Sarma 2007, whose con­
cordance makes the search for clues of Saiddhāntika (and explicitly non-​Saiddhāntika) 
details incomparably easier. The verse in question has also been translated into French by 
Törzsök (2004, 15).

--- PAGE 1076 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1051
 
	36.	 This is the suggestion of Törzsök (2004, 13, fn. 49).
	37.	 Hulin 1980 and Brunner-​Lachaux 1985 offer a complete French translation of this com­
plex work.
	38.	 The affinity is universally acknowledged, but the nature of the relationship is a contested 
one, with very different models of interaction assumed by Ruegg (1964) on the one hand 
and Sanderson (1994) on the other.
	39.	 We have had occasion in these pages to mention two volumes of the Tāntrikābhidhānakośa; 
see Brunner, Oberhammer, and Padoux 2004 and Goodall and Rastelli 2013.
Bibliography
Acharya, Diwakar. 2018. “Pāśupatas.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism Online, edited by Knut 
A. Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha Narayanan. Consulted online on 
October 26, 2022. <http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1163/​2212-​5019​_​BEH​_​COM​_​900​0000​056>
Balasubramanian, Ranganathan. 2013. Śaiva Siddhānta Polemics: A Translation and Analysis of 
the Civañāṉa Cittiyār—​Parapakkam. Montreal: McGill University.
Barazer-​Billoret, Marie-​Luce, and Bruno Dagens. 2000. Le Rauravāgama: un traité de 
rituel et de doctrine śivaïtes. Vol. 1–​2. 2 vols. Publications du département d’Indologie 89. 
Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry.
Bhatt, Niddodi Ramacandra, ed. 1982. Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (Kriyāpāda, Yogapāda et 
Caryāpāda) avec le commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha. Publications de l’Institut Français 
d’Indologie 65. Pondicherry, India: Institut français d’indologie.
Bhatt, Niddodi Ramacandra, Jean Filliozat, and Pierre-​Sylvain Filliozat. 2005. 
Ajitamahātantram. The Great Tantra of Ajita. Vols. 1–​5. 5 vols. Kalāmūlaśāstra Series 47. New 
Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts/​Motilal Banarsidass.
Bisschop, Peter. 2018a. Universal Śaivism: The Appeasement of All Gods and Powers in the 
Śāntyadhyāya of the Śivadharmaśāstra. Universal Śaivism. Gonda Indological Studies 18. 
Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. https://​brill.com/​view/​title/​39141.
Bisschop, Peter. 2018b. “Vedic Elements in the Pāśupatasūtra.” In Farnah. Indo-​Iranian and 
Indo-​European Studies in Honor of Sasha Lubotsky, 1–​12. Ann Arbor, MI: Beech Stave Press.
Bisschop, Peter C. 2020. “From Mantramārga Back to Atimārga: Atimārga as a Self-​Referential 
Term”. In Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions. Essays in Honour of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson, 
edited by Shaman Hatley, Srilata Raman, Harunaga Isaacson, and Dominic Goodall, 15–​32. 
Gonda Indological Studies 22. Leiden & Boston: Brill. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​978900​4432​
802_​003.
Brunner, Hélène. 1963, 1968, 1977, 1998. Le rituel quotidien dans la tradition sivaïte de l’Inde de 
Sud selon Somaśambhu. Vols. 1–​4. Publications du département d’Indologie 25. Pondicherry, 
India: Institut Français d’Indologie.
Brunner, Hélène. 1975. “Le sādhaka, personnage oublié du śivaïsme du Sud.” Journal Asiatique 
263: 411–​443.
Brunner, Hélène. 1986. “Les membres de Śiva.” Asiatische Studien—​Études Asiatiques 40, no. 2: 
89–​132.
Brunner, Hélène, Gerhard Oberhammer, and André Padoux, eds. 2004. Tāntrikābhidhānakośa: 
dictionnaire des termes techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique. Vol. II. Beiträge zur 
Kultur-​ und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 44. Vienna, Austria: Verlag der Österreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften.

--- PAGE 1077 ---
1052      Dominic Goodall
 
Brunner-​Lachaux, Hélène. 1985. Mṛgendrāgama: section des rites et section du comportement. 
Avec la vṛtti de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇakaṇṭha. Traduction, Introduction et Notes. Publications du 
département d’Indologie 69. Pondicherry, India: Institut français d’indologie.
Davis, Richard H. 2000. “Praises of the Drunken Peacocks.” In Tantra in Practice, edited by 
David Gordon White, 131–​145. Princeton Readings in Religions 19. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. https://​doi.org/​10.1515/​978069​1190​457-​013.
Davis, Richard H., and Leslie C. Orr. 2007. “People of the Festival.” In Mélanges Tantriques à La 
Mémoire d’Hélène Brunner. Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, edited by Dominic 
Goodall and André Padoux, 73–​97. Collection Indologie 106. Pondicherry, India: Institut 
Français de Pondichéry /​ École française d’Extrême-​Orient.
De Simini, Florinda. 2016. Of Gods and Books: Ritual and Knowledge Transmission in the 
Manuscript Cultures of Premodern India. Studies in Manuscript Culture 8. Berlin: De 
Gruyter.
Flood, Gavin D. 2006. The Tantric Body: The Secret Tradition of Hindu Religion. London: I. B. 
Taurus.
Ganesan, T. 2009. Two Śaiva Teachers of the Sixteenth Century, Nigamajñāna I and His Disciple 
Nigamajñāna II. IFP Publications Hors Série 9. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de 
Pondichéry.
Gollner, Michael. 2021. The Descent of Scripture: A History of the Kāmikāgama. Montréal: 
McGill University.
Goodall, Dominic. 1998. Bhaṭṭarāmakaṇṭhaviracitā Kiraṇavṛttiḥ. Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭhaʼs 
Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra. Volume I: Chapters 1–​6. Critical Edition and Annotated 
Translation. Publications Du Département d’Indologie, 86.1. Pondichéry: Institut français 
de Pondichéry /​ École française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Goodall, Dominic. 2000. “Problems of Name and Lineage: Relationships Between South 
Indian Authors of the Śaiva Siddhānta. A Review Article of Somaśambhupaddhati. Rituels 
Dans La Tradition Śivaïtes Selon Somaśambhu. Quatrième Partie: Rituels Optionnels: Texte, 
Traduction et Notes. Hélène Brunner-​Lachaux. 1998.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 10, 
no. 2: 205–​216.
Goodall, Dominic. 2004. The Parākhyatantra: A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. Collection Indologie 
98. Pondicherry, India: Institut français de Pondichéry/​École française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Goodall, Dominic. 2006. “Initiation et délivrance selon le Śaiva Siddhānta.” Puruṣārtha 25: 
93–​116.
Goodall, Dominic. 2011. “The Throne of Worship: An ‘Archaeological Tell’ of Religious 
Rivalries—​Dominic Goodall, 2011.” Studies in History 27: 221–​250.
Goodall, Dominic. 2014. “Saiddhāntika Paddhatis I: On Rāmanātha, the Earliest Southern 
Author of the Śaivasiddhānta of Whom Works Survive, and on Eleventh-​Century Revisions 
of the Somaśambhupaddhati.” Cracow Indological Studies 16: 169–​201. https://​doi.org/​
10.12797/​CIS.16.2014.16.08.
Goodall, Dominic. 2015a. “Les influences littéraires indiennes dans les inscriptions du 
Cambodge: l’exemple d’un chef-​d’œuvre inédit du VIIIe siècle (K. 1236).” In Migrations de 
langues et d’idées en Asie, edited by Jean-​Louis Bacqué-​Grammont, Pierre-​Sylvain Filliozat, 
and Michel Zink, 67–​80. Paris: Académie des inscriptions et belles-​lettres.
Goodall, Dominic. 2015b. “On K. 1049, a Tenth-​Century Cave-​Inscription from Battambang, 
and on the Sectarian Obedience of the Śaiva Ascetics of Non-​Royal Cave-​Inscriptions in 
Cambodia.” UDAYA, Journal of Khmer Studies 13: 3–​34. http://​www.yosot​hor.org/​uplo​ads/​
ima​ges/​Udaya/​UDAYA​_​ISS​UES/​Udaya​_​13/​01_​Domi​nic%20Good​all.pdf.

--- PAGE 1078 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1053
 
Goodall, Dominic. 2015c. “The Śaiva Siddhānta and the Vivartavāda of the Aupaniṣadas.” 
In Vedānta Without Māyā? A Debate on Saptavidha-​Anupapatti, edited by Godabarisha 
Mishra, 269–​285. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass/​ICPR.
Goodall, Dominic. 2018. “Rudragaṇikās: Courtesans in Śiva’s Temple? Some Hitherto 
Neglected Sanskrit Sources.” Cracow Indological Studies 20, no. 1: 91–​143. https://​doi.org/​
10.12797/​CIS.20.2018.01.06.
Goodall, Dominic. 2019. “Damanotsava: On Love in Spring, on What Jñānaśambhu Wrote, 
and on the Spread of Public Festivals into the Mantramārga Studies in the Saiddhāntika 
Paddhatis II.” In Tantric Communities in Context, edited by Marion Rastelli, Nina Mirnig, 
and Vincent Eltschinger, 385423. Beiträge Zur Kultur-​Und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 99. 
Vienna, Austria: Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Goodall, Dominic. 2020a. “Dressing for Power: On Vrata, Caryā, and Vidyāvrata in the Early 
Mantramārga, and on the Structure of the Guhyasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā.” In 
Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions. Essays in Honour of Alexis G. J. S. Sanderson, edited by 
Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson, Srilata Raman, and Dominic Goodall, 47–​83. Gonda 
Indological Studies 22. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. https://​brill.com/​view/​book/​edc​oll/​
978900​4432​802/​BP000​005.xml.
Goodall, Dominic. 2020b. “Nandirāśi’s Pāśupata Monastery: K. 1352 (590 Śaka), a Non-​Royal 
Sanskrit Inscription in Kampot From the Reign of Jayavarman I.” In Liber Amicorum. 
Mélanges Réunis En Hommage à Ang Chouléan, edited by Grégory Mikaelian, Ashley 
Thompson, and Sophearith Siyonn, 325–​343. Paris: Association Péninsule & Association des 
Amis de Yosothor.
Goodall, Dominic. 2021. “On the Influence of the Language and Culture of the Tamil-​Speaking 
South on the Temple Āgamas of the Śaivasiddhānta: An Annotated List of Distinctive 
Vocabulary.” In Linguistic and Textual Aspects of Multilingualism in South India and 
Sri Lanka, edited by Giovanni Ciotti and Erin McCann, 217–​283. Collection Indologie/​
NETamil Series, 147/​8. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry/​École française 
d’Extrême-​Orient.
Goodall, Dominic, and Arlo Griffiths. 2013. “Études Du Corpus Des Inscriptions Du Campā, V. 
The Short Foundation Inscriptions of Prakāśadharman-​Vikrāntavarman, King of Campā.” 
Indo-​Iranian Journal 56: 419–​440. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​15728​536-​13560​307.
Goodall, Dominic, and Harunaga Isaacson. 2013. “Tantric Traditions.” In The Bloomsbury 
Companion to Hindu Studies, edited by Jessica Frazier, 122–​137, 189–​191. London: 
Bloomsbury Publishing.
Goodall, Dominic, and Harunaga Isaacson. 2016. “On the Shared ‘Ritual Syntax’ of the Early 
Tantric Traditions.” In Tantric Studies. Fruits of a Franco-​German Project on Early Tantra, 
edited by Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson, 1–​72. Collection Indologie/​Early Tantra 
Series, 131/​4. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry/​École française d’Extrême-​
Orient/​Asien-​Afrika-​Institut, Universität Hamburg.
Goodall, Dominic, and Marion Rastelli, eds. 2013. Tāntrikābhidhānakośa: dictionnaire 
des termes techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique. Vol. 3. Beiträge zur Kultur-​ und 
Geistesgeschichte Asiens 76. Vienna, Austria: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, 2013.
Goodall, Dominic, Nibedita Rout, R. Sathyanarayanan, S. A. S. Sarma, T. Ganesan, and S. 
Sambandhasivacarya. 2005. The Pañcāvaraṇastava of Aghoraśivācārya: A Twelfth-​Century 
South Indian Prescription for the Visualisation of Sadāśiva and His Retinue. Collection Indologie 
102. Pondicherry, India: Institut français de Pondichéry; École française d’Extrême-​Orient.

--- PAGE 1079 ---
1054      Dominic Goodall
 
Goodall, Dominic, Alexis Sanderson, and Harunaga Isaacson. 2015. The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: 
The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra. Collection Indologie/​Early Tantra Series, 128/​1. 
Pondicherry, India: Institut français de Pondichéry, École française d’Extrême-​Orient; 
Asien-​Afrika Institut, Universität Hamburg.
Goudriaan, Teun. 1985. The Vīṇāśikhatantra. A Śaiva Tantra of the Left Current. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Goudriaan, Teun, and Sanjukta Gupta. 1981. Hindu Tantric and Śākta Literature. A History of 
Indian Literature, II.2. Wiesbaden, Germany: Otto Harrassowitz.
Hatley, Shaman. 2018. The Brahmayāmalatantra or Picumata. Volume I, Chapters 1–​2, 39–​40, & 
83. Revelation, Ritual, and Material Culture in an Early Śaiva Tantra. Collection Indologie/​
Early Tantra Series, 133/​5. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry/​École 
française d’Extrême-​Orient/​Asien-​Afrika-​Institut, Universität Hamburg.
Hulin, Michel. 1980. Mṛgendrāgama. Sections de la doctrine et du Yoga. Avec la vṛtti de 
Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇakaṇṭha et la dīpikā d’Aghoraśivācārya. Traduction, Introduction et 
Notes. Publications du département d’Indologie 63. Pondicherry, India: Institut français 
d’indologie.
Jessup, Helen Ibbitson, and Thierry Zéphir. 1997. Angkor et Dix Siècles d’art Khmer. Paris: 
Réunion des musées nationaux.
Kafle, Nirajan. 2020. Niśvāsamukhatattvasaṃhitā. A Preface to the Earliest Surviving Śaiva 
Tantra (on Non-​Tantric Śaivism at the Dawn of the Mantramārga). Critical Edition, with 
Introduction & Annotated Translation and an Appendix Containing Śivadharmasaṅgraha 
5–​9. Collection Indologie/​Early Tantra Series, 145/​6. Pondicherry: Institut Français 
de Pondichéry: École française d’Extrême-​Orient: Asien-​Afrika-​Institut, Universität 
Hamburg.
Kiss, Csaba. 2015. The Brahmayāmalatantra or Picumata. Volume 2. The Religious Observances 
and the Sexual Rituals of the Tantric Practitioner: Chapters 3, 21, and 45. Collection Indologie/​
Early Tantra Series, 130/​3. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry; École 
française d’Extrême-​Orient; Asien-​Afrika-​Institut; Universität Hamburg.
Mills, Libbie. 2019. Temple Design in Six Early Śaiva Scriptures. Critical Edition and Translation 
of the Prāsādalakṣaṇa-​Portions of the Bṛhatkālottara, Devyāmata, Kiraṇa, Mohacūrottara, 
Mayasaṃgraha & Piṅgalāmata. Collection Indologie 138. Pondicherry, India: Institut 
Français de Pondichéry/​École française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Mirnig, Nina. 2018. Liberating the Liberated. Early Śaiva Tantric Death Rites. Beiträge Zur 
Kultur-​Und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 96. Vienna, Austria: Austrian Academy of Sciences.
Padoux, André. 2017. The Hindu Tantric World. An Overview. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Ruegg, Seyfort. 1964. “Sur les rapports entre le bouddhisme et le ‘substrat religieux’ indien et 
tibétain.” Journal Asiatique 252: 77–​95.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1986. “Maṇḍala and Āgamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir.” In Mantras 
et Diagrammes Rituels Dans l’hindouisme, edited by André Padoux, 169–​214. Paris: Éditions 
du CNRS.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World’s Religions, edited 
by S. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke, and F. Hardy, 660–​704. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1992. “The Doctrine of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra.” In Ritual and 
Speculation in Early Tantrism. Studies in Honor of André Padoux, edited by Teun Goudriaan, 
281–​312. Albany: State University of New York Press.

--- PAGE 1080 ---
Śaiva Tantra      1055
 
Sanderson, Alexis. 1994. “Vajrayāna: Origin and Function.” In Buddhism into the Year 2000: 
International Conference Proceedings, 87–​102. Bangkok: Dhammakaya Foundation.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1995. “Meaning in Tantric Ritual.” In Essais Sur Le Rituel III. Colloque Du 
Centenaire de La Section Des Sciences Religieuses de l’École Pratique Des Hautes Études, ed­
ited by Anne-​Marie Blondeau and Kristofer Schipper, 15–​95. Bibliothèque de l’École Des 
Hautes Études, Sciences Religieuses 102. Louvain-​Paris: Peeters.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. “History Through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the 
Pañcarātra and the Buddhist Yoginītantras.” In Sources and Time. Les Sources et Le Temps: A 
Colloquium, Pondicherry, 11–​13 January 1997, edited by François Grimal, 1–​47. Publications 
Du Département d’Indologie 91. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry/​École 
française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2004a. “Religion and the State: Śaiva Officiants in the Territory of the King’s 
Brahmanical Chaplain.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 47, no. 3–​4: 229–​300. https://​ora.ox.ac.uk/​obje​
cts/​uuid%3A8​9d30​edd-​def5-​4195-​829a-​34d2f​9e70​610.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2004b. “The Śaiva Religion Among the Khmers (Part I).” 
Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-​Orient 90, no. 1: 349–​462. https://​doi.org/​10.3406/​
befeo.2003.3617.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2006. “The Lākulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate Between 
Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism and Āgamic Śaivism.” Indian Philosophical Annual 24, no. 2003–​
2005: 143–​217.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. “The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir.” In Mélanges Tantriques à La Mémoire 
d’Hélène Brunner. Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, edited by Dominic Goodall 
and André Padoux, 231–​442. Collection Indologie 106. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français 
de Pondichéry/​École française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism During the 
Early Medieval Period.” In Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, 
41–​349. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series 23. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2013. “The Impact of Inscriptions on the Interpretation of Early Śaiva 
Literature.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 56, no. 3–​4: 211–​244. https://​doi.org/​10.1163/​15728​536-​
13560​308.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2014. “The Śaiva Literature.” Journal of Indological Studies 24–​25, no. 2012–​
2013: 1–​113.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2015. “Śaiva Texts.” In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism Volume VI, ed­
ited by Knut A Jacobsen, Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha Narayanan, 10–​42. 
Handbuch Der Orientalistik, Zweite Abteilung, Indien 22/​6. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Sarma, S. A. S., and R. Sathyanarayanan, eds. 2012. Dhyānaratnāvalī of Trilocanaśivācārya. 
Srimath Srikanta Sivachharya Research Institute Series 4. Karaikal, India: Srimath Srikanta 
Sivachharya Research Institute.
Sarma, S. A. S. Forthcoming. Trilocanaśiva’s Twelfth-​Century Commentary on the 
Somaśambhupaddhati.
Sathyanarayanan, R., and Dominic Goodall. 2015. Śaiva Rites of Expiation: A First Edition and 
Translation of Trilocanaśiva’s Twelfth-​Century Prāyaścittasamuccaya. Collection Indologie 
127. Pondicherry, India: Institut français de Pondichéry; École française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Sears, Tamara I. 2014. Worldly Gurus and Spiritual Kings: Architecture and Asceticism in 
Medieval India. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

--- PAGE 1081 ---
1056      Dominic Goodall
 
Strickmann, Michel. 1996. Mantras et mandarins : le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine. Paris: 
Gallimard.
Subrahmanya Aiyer, V. M., Jean-​Luc Chevillard, and S. A. S. Sarma. 2007. Digital Tēvāram. 
Kaṇiṉit Tēvāram [CD-​ROM]. Collection Indologie 103. Pondicherry, India: Institut 
Français de Pondichéry/​École française d’Extrême-​Orient. https://​www.ifpin​dia.org/​
bookst​ore/​ci103/​.
Törzsök, Judit. 2004. “Śiva le fou et ses dévôts tamouls dans le Tēvāram.” In South Indian 
Horizons. Felicitation Volume for François Gros on the Occasion of His 70th Birthday, ed­
ited by Jean-​Luc Chevillard, Eva Wilden, and Appasamy Murugaiyan, 3–​28. Publications 
du département d’Indologie 94. Pondicherry, India: Institut Français de Pondichéry /​ École 
française d’Extrême-​Orient.
Törzsök, Judit. 2013. “The Heads of the Godhead. The Number of Heads/​Faces of Yoginīs and 
Bhairavas in Early Śaiva Tantras.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 56, no. 2: 133–​155. https://​doi.org/​
10.1163/​15728​536-​0000​002.
Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2014. “Prasenā, Prasīnā & Prasannā: The Evidence of the Niśvāsaguhya 
and the Tantrasadbhāva.” Cracow Indological Studies 16 (December): 369–​390. https://​doi.
org/​10.12797/​CIS.16.2014.16.14.

--- PAGE 1082 ---
Chapter 41
On the Chronology of 
the Buddhist Tantras
Tsunehiko Sugiki
Introduction
The early medieval age in South Asia1 witnessed the composition of a large number of 
Buddhist tantras, that is, scriptures in Sanskrit and Apabhraṃśa, belonging to tantric 
traditions in Buddhism. Before discussing the chronology of Buddhist tantras, it is nec­
essary to define what the tantra indicates. I use the concept of tantra as an analytical tool 
to define the scope of the research, and that concept must be inherent in the texts in early 
medieval South Asia. From this perspective, it seems best to use the definition proposed 
by Issacson and Sferra, namely, “tantras are defined as scriptures that label themselves 
tantras or that have come to be classified as such by Indian Buddhist authors, starting 
from at the latest about the eighth century CE, even though some of those scriptures no 
doubt were not originally conceived of as tantras”2 (Issacson and Sferra 2015b: 307). My 
analysis of the chronology of Buddhist tantras begins with the Subāhuparipṛcchā and 
several others composed in the sixth or seventh century. Considering the large number 
of tantras, it is impossible to discuss the dates of all of them. However, based on my anal­
ysis and previous studies in recent decades, I wish to cover as many important tantras as 
possible to offer a comprehensive overview of the history of Buddhist tantras. Perhaps 
there is no publication on the chronology of Buddhist tantras that, based on recent re­
search findings, covers more tantras. The “Conclusion” to this chapter presents some 
perspectives for studying the history of Tantric Buddhism in South Asia. I hope that this 
chapter helps students who study the history of Buddhist tantras and serves as material 
for further discussion.
Generally, it is difficult to clarify the precise date of the composition of scriptures in 
South Asia. Buddhist tantras are no exception. This is primarily due to the lack of his­
torical sources, such as inscriptions, and the lack of a sense of historicity in the tantras’

--- PAGE 1083 ---
1058      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
compilers. The compilers are anonymous; they interpret tantras as teachings of timeless 
truth. However, it is possible to determine the approximate time of origin by examining 
the dates of production of the oldest Sanskrit manuscripts of the tantras noted in their 
colophons, the dates of the translators who translated the tantras into Chinese or 
Tibetan, and the references and quotations of the tantras. Different tantras often have 
similar discourses. Comparing similar discourses is also an effective means to clarify 
which tantra was composed earlier.
This study focuses on chronology. I do not examine the places where the tantras were 
compiled, except in some cases where the place of compilation is important to under­
stand the chronology. I do not deal with the concealed root-​tantras (mūlatantra), from 
which the existing tantras often define themselves as having been extracted for author­
ization, because most or all of such root-​tantras are imaginary and do not exist. The 
classifications of tantras are also left undiscussed, such as the classification into kriyā 
and yoga, with which the Indo-​Tibetan exegetical tradition often explains the nature of 
the tantras. These classifications only roughly correspond to the actual chronology of 
the tantras.
Dates of Compilations of the 
Buddhist Tantras
This section analyzes the approximate dates of Buddhist tantras. The tantras are 
listed in a tentative chronological order. However, the order is not chronological in 
part because I have grouped some of the tantras that belong to the same scriptural 
cycle and are closely related. (I have not grouped some of the tantras of the same 
scriptural cycle if the dates of their compilations differ greatly.) In the groups, they 
are listed in chronological order or Sanskrit alphabetical order if the chronological 
order is uncertain.
I have translated all tantras’ titles literally. I often refer to the following two works 
composed in relatively early centuries: Amoghavajra’s (不空金剛) Jingang ding jing 
yuqie shibahui zhigui (金剛頂經瑜伽十八會指歸: “Key Points of the 18 Sections 
of the Yoga of the Vajra Pinnacle Scripture,” T 869) and Vilāsavajra’s Nāmamantrā
rthāvalokinī (An Explanation of the Meaning of the Name-​mantras) (Tribe 2016: 3), 
a commentary on the Nāmasaṃgīti (Chanting of the Names). Amoghavajra com­
posed the Jingang ding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui sometime between 746 and 771 
ce (Giebel 1995: 108–​109). According to Tribe, Vilāsavajra’s Nāmamantrārthāvalo-
kinī is datable between the second half of the eighth century and the early to mid-​
ninth century (Tribe 2016: 3). The tantras mentioned in the former and latter texts 
were most likely present in some form at the times when the two texts were written, 
respectively.3

--- PAGE 1084 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1059
 
The Guhya (Secret); the Subāhuparipṛcchā (Subāhu’s 
Inquiry); and the Susiddhikara (Bringing Good 
Accomplishment)
Sakai considered the date of compilation of the Guhya,4 the Subāhuparipṛcchā, and the 
Susiddhikara5 to be between the fifth and the mid-​sixth centuries (Sakai [1962] 1973: 
219), and recent scholars, such as Otsuka, dated it between the mid-​sixth and mid-​
seventh centuries before the appearance of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi (mid-​seventh 
century) (Otsuka 2013: 731–​778).
The Tibetan translation of the Subāhuparipṛcchā (D 805/​P 428)6 contains treatises 
on antinomian rituals, such as the fire ritual using human flesh that is not included in 
the oldest Chinese translation (T 895) of Śubhākarasiṃha (善無畏) in the first half 
of the eighth century. In his commentary (D 2671/P 3496) on the Subāhuparipṛcchā, 
Buddhaguhya (late eighth century) comments on those antinomian discourses. They 
were incorporated in the Subāhuparipṛcchā by the late eighth century at the latest.
The Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka (Consecration of Vajrapāṇi)
Unlike the three scriptures mentioned above, the Lord in the Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka7 is Vairocana, 
who is also the Lord in the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi and Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. 
Sakai analyzed the date of composition of the Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka to be the early sev­
enth century, after the Guhya, the Subāhuparipṛcchā, and the Susiddhikara and before the 
Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi (Sakai [1962] 1973: 219). Otsuka locates the date of composition of the 
Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka roughly in the same centuries when the Guhya, the Subāhuparipṛcchā, 
and the Susiddhikara were composed, namely between the mid-​sixth and the mid-​seventh 
centuries before the appearance of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi (Otsuka 2013: 731–​778).
The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi (The Awakening of Vairocana)
Various views have been presented on the date of composition of the 
Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi, such as the mid-​seventh century (Sakai [1962] 1973: 219; 
Matsunaga 1980: 172–​174; Hodge 2003: 11, 14) and the mid-​sixth century (Wayman and 
Tajima 1992: 10). Now, it is almost a common notion among modern scholars that the 
Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi was probably compiled in the middle of the seventh century 
(Yamamoto 2012: 88; Kano 2015: 382). Hodge analyzed it as follows (Hodge 2003: 4–​
14): A Chinese monk Wuxing (無行) had been in India for eight years until he died in 
674 ce. He had gathered Sanskrit manuscripts of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi in India. 
Śubhākarasiṃha and Yixing (一行) found one of them in Hua-​yan Temple in Chang-​
an, and they translated it into Chinese (T 848) in 724 ce. Taking into account some

--- PAGE 1085 ---
1060      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
evidences from Chinese sources regarding the popularity of Tantric practices in India 
at that time, it is most likely that the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi was compiled or gained 
acceptance around the middle of the seventh century, perhaps around 640 ce or a little 
earlier, shortly before Wuxing arrived in India.
The Trisamayarāja (the Triple Pledge King)
The Trisamayarāja is mentioned and cited in Śāntideva’s Śikṣāsamuccaya (Bendall and 
Rouse 1922: 136, 168–​169, 264). The Śikṣāsamuccaya was composed around the first half of 
the eighth century, which is the terminus ante quem of the existence of the Trisamayarāja 
in some form. Trisamayarāja cannot be found in the Chinese Canon. However, it includes 
the two texts (T1199 and T1200) related to that scripture, which were translated by 
Amoghavajra in the eighth century. Sakai pointed out a possibility that the Trisamayarāja 
is older than the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi mentioned earlier.  The Trisamayarāja was one 
of the sources of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi (Sakai [1962] 1973: 221; Hodge 2003: 9).
The Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa (Mañjuśrī’s Root Ritual-​Practice)
Using the available Sanskrit manuscripts, Delhey analyzed the title to be originally 
Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa and not Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa (Delhey 2012: 70–​71). The compila­
tion date was obscure. The extant version of the Sanskrit Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa consists 
of fifty-​five chapters. Chapter 9 was in existence in some form before 702 ce. There are 
several Chinese translations of Mañśriyamūlakalpa. The two oldest translations (T 1181 
and T 1182) were produced in 702 and 703 ce, respectively (Matsunaga 1980: 322, and 1985: 
888f). These are translations of ­chapter 9. However, they are not entirely identical to the 
chapter found in the extant Sanskrit version (Delhey 2012: 59). Chapter 53 cannot be earlier 
than the late eighth century because it mentions King Gopāla (750–​775) (Sanderson 
2009: 129, n. 300). The Chinese translation, consisting of twenty-​eight chapters (T 1191), 
was produced by Tianxizai (天息災) in the tenth century ce. The Tibetan translation, 
comprising thirty-​six chapters (D 543/​P 162), was produced by Kumārakalaśa and Śākya 
blo gros in the eleventh century (Delhey 2012: 59). It is the best way to understand that the 
Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa was gradually enlarged and compiled into the extant Sanskrit ver­
sion by different authors over several centuries (Isaacson and Sferra 2015b: 315).
The Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha (Compendium of 
Truth of All Tathāgatas)
Sakai considered the date of the compilation of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha to 
be the early eighth century (Sakai [1962] 1973: 220). Matsunaga analyzed it as follows 
(Matsunaga 1980: 194–​196): the shorter version of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha,

--- PAGE 1086 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1061
 
which contained only the discourses on the mandala of the vajra-​quality 
(vajradhātumaṇḍala), was translated into Chinese (T 865) by Amoghavajra in 753–​
754 ce. Before that, in 723 ce, Vajrabodhi (金剛智) translated into Chinese a ritual 
manual (T 866) that was written in India based on the shorter or an older version of 
the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. According to the Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu 
(貞元新定釈教目録) (T 2157), a catalog of Buddhist scriptures composed by Yuanzhao 
(圓照), Nāgabodhi (龍智) taught the Vajra Pinnacle Yoga Scripture (金剛頂瑜伽経), 
which was perhaps the older version of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, and gave an 
initiation based on its system (the five-​lineage system) to Vajrabodhi in 700 ce.
The extant Sanskrit Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha is the longer version, corre­
sponding to the Chinese translation (T 882) by Dānapāla (施護) in the early elev­
enth century and the Tibetan translation (D 479/​P 112) of Śraddhākaravarman 
and Rin chen bzang po from the eleventh century. Buddhaguhya (late eighth cen­
tury) composed the Tantrārthāvatāra, a commentary on the longer version of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha (D 2501/​P 3324).
From these sources, Matsunaga concludes that the shorter version of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, or the version older than that, which Vajrabodhi 
learned, was in existence in the late seventh century. The longer version of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha was composed before the end of the eighth century.
The Guhyamaṇitilaka: (Secret Gem Ornament)
The Guhyamaṇitilaka is related to the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgaha. Guhyamaṇitilaka 
is also referred to in Vilāsavajra’s Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī (Tribe 2016: 376–​379). 
According to Tokushige, the eleventh section of the Vajra Pinnacle Scripture mentioned 
in Amoghavajra’s Jingang ding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui possibly indicates the 
Guhyamaṇitilaka, and from its instruction on the deity yoga, the Guhyamaṇitilaka can 
be dated between the second half of the seventh century and the early eighth century 
(Tokushige 2019: 194, n. 1, n. 8). The Tibetan translation of the Guhyamaṇitilaka (D 493/​
P 125), which is the only available text of this scripture, was produced by Sugataśrī and Kun 
dga’ rgyal mtshan in the thirteenth century. This is the terminus ante quem of the entire text.
The Bhūtaḍāmara (Tamer of Spirits)
The Dharmachakra Translation Committee (DhTC) summarizes the teachings in the 
Bhūtaḍāmara as ritual practices that are intended to give the practitioner dominion over 
worldly gods and spirits (DhTC 2020b). Bhattacharyya found that the Bhūtaḍāmara 
was composed in the early seventh century before the Śaiva version of the Bhūtaḍāmara 
(Bhattacharyya 1933: 356). Fujii notes that the compilation of the Bhūtaḍāmara can be 
dated from the 7th to 8th centuries, and points out that the terminus ante quem of its en­
tire text is the tenth century (994 CE), when Fatian (法天) translated it into Chinese (T

--- PAGE 1087 ---
1062      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
1129) (Fujii 2018: 158 and 161, note 1). According to DhTC, ­chapter 8 teaches a visualiza­
tion of Lord Bhūtaḍāmara which contains most of the elements of deity yoga, features of 
the so-​called Yogatantra scriptural class. The Bhūtaḍāmara is mentioned in Vilāsavajra’s 
Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī (Tribe 2016: 376–​379). Based on these two points, DhTC 
assumes that the Bhūtaḍāmara was composed sometime between the seventh and 
eighth centuries (DhTC 2020b).
The Nāmasaṃgīti (Chanting of the Names)
The “Names” in the title of the Nāmasaṃgīti indicate the names of Mañjuśrī. According 
to Tribe, Mañjuśrī is not the personal bodhisattva but the gnosis being (jñānasattva), “an 
entity underlying the very nature of buddhahood.” The “Names” in the title are largely 
articulations of the “myriad ways that gnosis can manifest” (Tribe 2015: 353). Davidson 
found that the Nāmasaṃgīti was composed in the first half of the eighth century. The 
earliest commentator, Mañjuśrīmitra, was from the middle of the eighth century. He 
probably taught Vilāsavajra (Davidson 1981: 5).
The Trailokyavijaya (Conquest of the Triple World); the 
Vajraśekhara (Vajra Pinnacle); and the Sarvarahasya 
(All Secrets)
These tantras, which are closely related to the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgaha, were prob­
ably composed in the eighth century, no earlier than the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃ- 
gaha. The Trailokyavijaya and the Vajraśekhara are mentioned in Amoghavajra’s Jingang 
ding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui (Giebel 1995: 111–​112) and Vilāsavajra’s Nāmamantrārthā
valokinī (Tribe 2016: 376–​379). The Vajraśekhara is frequently cited in Buddhaguhya’s 
Tantrārthāvatāra from the late eighth century (Kitamura 2012: iii, x). The Sarvarahasya 
is quoted in Āryadeva’s Sūtakamelāpaka (Caryāmelāpakapradīpa) (Wedemeyer 2007: 
364, 460) and Candrakīrti’s Vajsasattvaniṣpādanasūtra (Luo and Tomabechi 2009: 24–​
25). According to Isaacson and Sferra, Āryadeva and Candrakīrti flourished in the ninth 
and perhaps tenth centuries, respectively (Isaacson and Sferra 2015a: 476, 2015b: 308). 
From its contents, Wayman considered the Sarvarahasya to have been composed in the 
eighth century (Wayman 1984: 521).
The Sarvadurgatipariśodhana (Complete Purification of 
All Misfortunes)
The Sarvadurgatipariśodhana is closely related to the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgaha. 
The Tibetan Canon includes two versions of Sarvadurgatipariśodhana. Version (1)

--- PAGE 1088 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1063
 
(D 483/​P 116), the old version, was translated into Tibetan in the late eighth century by 
Indian Śāntigarbha and Tibetan Jayarakṣita during the reign of King Khri srong lde brtsan 
(740–​c. 798 ce). Buddhaguhya (late eighth century) composed a commentary on version 
(1). Therefore, it is likely that version (1) already existed in the middle of the eighth cen­
tury. Version (2) (D 485/​P 117), which corresponds to the available Sanskrit version of the 
Sarvadurgatipariśodhana, was translated into Tibetan in the first half of the thirteenth 
century by Devendradeva, Māṇikaśrījñāna, and Chos rje dpal (Skorupski 1983: xvii–​
xviii, xxiv). The Triple Meditation (trisamādhi) section of version (2) seems to have been 
influenced by the triple meditation and other systems of Ānandagarbha (ninth century). 
Version (2) was compiled sometime between the ninth and early thirteenth centuries.
The Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā (Perfection of 
Wisdom in 150 Verses)
The Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā originated from the scriptural tradition of 
the Prajñāpāramitā-​sūtras. Tomabechi calls the scriptural cycle to which this scrip­
ture belongs the “Paramādya cycle” (Tomabechi 2010: xii). A distinguishing feature of 
this scripture, and the Paramādya cycle as a whole, is the purity (viśuddhi) of sensual 
pleasure, expressed as X-​viśuddhipadam etad, yad uta bodhisattvapadam (The state of 
purity of X, it is indeed the state of Bodhisattva) (Tomabechi 2010: lviii–​lix).
The Chinese Canon includes five Chinese translations of this scripture: the versions 
translated by Xuanzang (玄奘: 660–​663 ce), Bodhiruci (菩提流志: 693 ce), Vajrabodhi 
(first half of eighth century), Amoghavajra (sometime between 763 and 771 ce), and 
Dānapāla (980 ce) (T 220, 240, 241, 243, and 242, respectively). The oldest translation 
by Xuanzang in the mid-​seventh century is a version of the pre-​Tantric stage. The trans­
lation of Amoghavajra in the mid-​eighth century, which is Tantric, is most similar to 
the Sanskrit text and the Tibetan translation (D 489/​P 121, where no translator’s name is 
given) (Tomabechi 2010: xi–​l).
The Paramādya (The Best and First)
The Paramādya (or Śrīparamādya), which belongs to the Paramādya cycle, is an ex­
panded version of the Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā. The former scripture contains 
many discourses on ritual actions and meditations that are more detailed than the latter 
scripture. The Paramādya is referred to or quoted in the several texts composed in the 
mid-​eighth to ninth century such as Amoghavajra’s Jingang ding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui 
(Giebel 1995: 111–​112), Vilāsavajra’s Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī (Tribe 2016: 376–​379), 
and Āryadeva’s Sūtakamelāpaka (Tomabechi 2010: li–​lii; Wedemeyer 2007: 463–​464, 
466). The Paramādya was translated into Chinese (T 244) by Faxian (法賢 once called 
Tianxizai) in the tenth century (Tomabechi 2010: li), which is the terminus ante quem of 
the basic part of its entire text.

--- PAGE 1089 ---
1064      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
The Vajramaṇḍālaṃkāra (Vajra Essence Adornment) 
Also Called Vajramaṇḍalālaṃkāra (Vajra Mandala 
Adornment)
The Vajramaṇḍālaṃkāra is another expanded version of the Adhyardhaśatikā 
Prajñāpāramitā (Tomabechi 2010: lii–​liii). It belongs to the Paramādya cycle. In his 
Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī, Vilāsavajra mentions the Vajramaṇḍālaṃkāra (Tribe 2016: 
376–​379). Tanaka examined various aspects of the Vajramaṇḍālaṃkāra and found that 
it was composed in the second half of the eighth century (Tanaka 2007: 211–​213).
The Guhyendutilaka (Secret Moon Ornament)
The Guhyendutilaka8 is mentioned in Vilāsavajra’s Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī (Tribe 
2016: 376–​379). It was present in some form toward the end of the eighth century. The 
Guhyedutilaka is also cited in several other works composed after the ninth century, 
such as some works of the Guhyasamāja school and Abhayākaragupta’s Āmnāyamañjarī 
(Tomabechi 2017: 112). Despite its popularity, the scripture’s teachings and features have 
been insufficiently researched.
The Māyājāla (Illusionary Net)
Matsunaga pointed out that there were roughly two versions of the Māyājāla. The 
old version was used for the new Tibetan translation (D 466/​P 102) of Rin chen 
bzang po in the eleventh century, and the new version was used for the old Tibetan 
translation (D 833/​P 456) by Vimalamitra and Jñānakumāra in the eighth to ninth 
centuries. The old version of the Māyājāla was composed sometime between the 
appearances of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha and the Guhyasamāja. The new 
version of the Māyājāla was produced after the Guhyasamāja was composed and 
before Vimalamitra and Jñānakumāra translated it into Tibetan (Matsunaga 1980: 
240–​244).
The Guhyasamāja (Secret Community)
The Guhyasamāja is the first major tantra in which elements of esoteric eroticism be­
come conspicuous, such as the Buddha or Blessed One preaching scripture in women’s 
vaginas, male deities copulating with their consorts, and the sacramental consumption 
of sexual substances (Tanemura 2015: 326). Several scholars have discussed the date of 
composition of the Guhyasamāja, such as Farquhar (who places the date of composition

--- PAGE 1090 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1065
 
to be the early seventh century), Bhattacharyya (no later than the fourth century), Sakai 
(second half of the eighth century), Wayman (fourth century), Tucci (between the sev­
enth and early eighth centuries), and Hadano (no later than the end of the eighth cen­
tury ce).9
Matsunaga notes that the basic text of the extant version of the Guhyasamāja 
was composed toward the end of the eighth century, particularly in the second 
half of the eighth century. He analyzed it as follows (Matsunaga 1980: 249–​258): (1) 
Amoghavajra’s summary of the Pimijihui yuqie (祕密集會瑜伽, *Guhyasamājayoga), 
the fifteenth section of the Vajra Pinnacle Scripture, corresponds to the contents of 
­chapter 15 of the extant version of the Guhyasamāja. A discourse that Amoghavajra 
referred to as Guhyasamājayoga existed in the mid-​eighth century, and it may have 
been a prototype text from which the tantra titled Guhyasamāja was developed. (2) 
Buddhaśrījñāna, also called Jñānapāda (second half of the eighth century), founded 
a school (the Jñānapāda school) of Guhyasamāja. From comparison with the texts 
attributed to Jñānapāda, it is most likely that the extant version of the Guhyasamāja 
was gradually compiled in the second half of the eighth century. However, according 
to Szántó, Jñānapāda was active in the late eighth to early ninth centuries (c. 770–​820) 
(Szántó 2019: 264).
The extant version of Guhyasamāja consists of eighteen chapters. Matsunaga 
sets forth how the individual chapters of the Guhyasamāja were composed: the 
Guhyasamāja can be divided into three parts: (1) ­chapters 1–​12, (2) ­chapters 13–​17, and 
(3) ­chapter 18. First, ­chapters 1–​12, which contain the elementary discourses of the 
Guhyasamāja and form the oldest part of this tantra, was composed. Next, ­chapters 
13–​17, which are more extensive and contain more teachings on rituals, were compiled. 
Finally, ­chapter 18, which summarizes the discourses in ­chapters 1–​12, was composed 
and added. All these developments took place in the second half of the eighth century 
(Matsunaga 1980: 235–​240).
The Indo-​Tibetan exegetical tradition considers the first seventeen chapters as the 
“root-​tantra” (mūlatantra) and ­chapter 18 as the “continuation tantra” (uttaratantra) 
(Tanemura 2015: 326). The first seventeen chapters and ­chapter 18 are also often called 
Samāja ([Secret] Community) and Samājottara (Continuation of the Samāja or 
Community), respectively.
The Advayasamatāvijaya (Victory of Nondual Equality)
Often regarded as belonging to the Guhyasamāja scriptural cycle, the Advayasamatāvijaya 
was already present in some form in the second half of the eighth century. It is referred to in 
Amoghavajra’s Jingang ding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui (Giebel 1995: 111–​112) and Vilāsavajra’s 
Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī (Tribe 2016: 376–​379). Fan analyzed the Advayasamatāvijaya to 
have elements derived from both the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha and the Guhyasamāja 
(Fan 2011: 353–​355).

--- PAGE 1091 ---
1066      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
The Sarvabuddhasamāyoga (Complete Union of 
All Buddhas) and the Sarvakalpasamuccaya 
(Compendium of All Rituals)
The Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara (or -​śaṃvara) (hereafter Sarvabuddha­
samāyoga) is the earliest among the major tantras that are generally classified by Indian exegetes 
as Yoginītantras. According to Szántó and Griffiths, Sarvabuddhasamāyoga is probably the 
first Buddhist tantra to use Apabhraṃśa verses (­chapters 6 and 9). It also explicitly introduced 
the practice of gaṇacakra or communal worship (Szántó and Griffiths 2015: 369–​370). Tanaka 
notes that ­chapters 1 and 9 of the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga are mentioned in Amoghavajra’s 
Jingang ding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui (Tanaka 2010: 330–​332). Sanderson, Tanaka, and Szántó 
and Griffiths state that the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga existed in some form in the early eighth cen­
tury (Sanderson 2009: 145;Tanaka 2010: 332; Szántó and Griffiths 2015: 367).
The Tibetan translation of the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga (D 366/​P 8) classifies itself as the 
uttaratantra (continuation tantra) of the imaginary root-​tantra. The Tibetan translation 
of the Sarvakalpasamuccaya (D 367/​P 9), which is currently the only available text of this 
tantra, classifies itself as *uttarottaratantra (a tantra that is the continuation of the contin­
uation), namely a tantra that is the continuation of the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga. The main 
theme in the Sarvakalpasamuccaya is the encoding of the mantras used in this scriptural 
tradition. According to Tomabechi, the encoding system in the Sarvakalpasamuccaya 
is closely related to that found in the Śaiva Vīṇāśikha-​ or Vīṇāśikhā-​tantra (Tomabechi 
2007). The compilation of the Sarvakalpasamuccaya can be dated after the appearance of 
the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga (eighth century) and before Ānandagarbha (ninth century), 
who wrote a commentary (D 1662/​P 2534) on the former tantra.
In many works, the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga is referred to as Saṃvara (equiva­
lent to Śaṃvara, “Supreme Bliss”), and the Sarvakalpasamuccaya, as Saṃvarottara 
(Continuation of the Saṃvara).
The Vajrabhairava (Vajra Terror)
Vajrabhairava is another name of Yamāntaka (Ender of Yama), who dominates Yama, 
the Brahmanical god ruling the underworld and presiding over death (Siklós 1996: 3). 
Sanderson pointed out that the Vajrabhairava was referred to in Vilāsavajra’s Nāmama-
ntrārthāvalokinī. The Vajrabhairava was present in some form by the time Vilāsavajra 
flourished (Sanderson 2009: 146, n. 337; Tribe 2016: 376–​379).
The Kṛṣṇayamāri (Black Yamāri) and the Raktayamāri 
(Red Yamāri)
Yamāri (Enemy of Yama) is another name of Yamāntaka. Yamāri takes two forms: 
Kṛṣṇayamāri (Black Yamāri) and Raktayamāri (Red Yamāri). In Tibetan, Kṛṣṇayamāri,

--- PAGE 1092 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1067
 
Raktayamāri, and Vajrabhairava are collectively referred to as the “triad of Red, Black, 
and Terror” (dmar nag ‘jigs gsum) (Kuranishi 2004: 61). The Kṛṣṇayamāri was translated 
into Tibetan (D 467/​P 103) by Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna and Tshul khrims rgyal ba in the 
first half of the eleventh century, and the Raktayamāri (D 474/​P 109), by Candrakīrti, 
Candraśrī, and Grags pa rgyal mtshan toward the end of the twelfth century. These are 
the terminus ante quems of the two tantras. Kuranishi states that the Kṛṣṇayamāri was 
composed sometime between the ninth and tenth centuries under the strong influence 
of the Guhyasamāja (Kuranishi forthcoming: 1). The Raktayamāri is a revision of the 
Kṛṣṇayamāri (Kuranishi 2004: 61–​65, forthcoming: 8).
The Sandhyāvyākaraṇa (Explanation of the Intention); 
the Caturdevīparipṛcchā (The Four Goddesses’ Inquiry); 
the Vajramālā (Vajra Rosary); the Jñānavajrasamuccaya 
(Gnosis Vajra Compendium) and its longer version; and 
the Vajrahṛdayālaṃkāra (Vajra Heart Adornment)
The six tantras presented here are referred to as “commentary tantra” (vyākhyātantra), 
that is, tantras that are commentaries on the Guhyasamāja. The concept of “commen­
tary tantra” was probably first developed in the Guhyasamāja tradition (Isaacson and 
Sferra 2015b: 310).
These six tantras, which are a part of the Guhyasamāja cycle, were written over sev­
eral centuries, beginning around the ninth century. The Sandhyāvyākaraṇa may 
be one of the earliest among them: It contains commentaries only on the first twelve 
chapters of the Guhyasamāja (viz., the oldest part of the Guhyasamāja) and is free from 
interpretations of any particular school (Matsunaga 1980: 236; Tanemura 2015: 326). The 
six tantras were translated into Tibetan in the eleventh century,10 which is the terminus 
ante quem of the final versions of the entire texts. The Guhyasamāja schools developed 
practices that were not explicitly taught in Guhyasamāja. They composed these tantras 
to authorize these practices, and the works of the Guhyasamāja schools were composed 
according to these tantras (Matsunaga 1980: 311; Wedemeyer 2007: 46–​48; Tanemura 
2015: 328).11 The relation to other scriptural cycles is also important. For example, the 
Vajramālā12 contains discourses similar to those in the Mahāmudrātilaka, a relatively 
late tantra belonging to the Hevajra cycle. The discourse on internal fire ritual in the 
Vajramālā (­chapter 60) is a version that seems to have been developed from the ver­
sion of the discourse on the same subject included in the Mahāmudrātilaka (­chapter 11) 
(Sugiki 2016: 172–​181).
The Catuṣpīṭha (Four Chapters)
The Catuṣpīṭha is one of the early Yoginītantras. According to Szántó, it is perhaps 
the second earliest Yoginītantra to use Apabhraṃśa verses. Among Buddhist texts,

--- PAGE 1093 ---
1068      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
Jñānapāda’s Mukhāgama is the first to mention the practice of utkrāntiyoga, or yogic 
suicide. The Catuṣpīṭha is the first tantra to teach this in detail (Szántó 2015a: 320, 323, 
325). Szántó places the probable date of origin of the Catuṣpīṭha in the late ninth cen­
tury. The Catuṣpīṭha and its passages are cited or borrowed in some texts composed in 
the tenth century, such as the Dunhuang manuscript (Pelliot tibétain 849), Jayabhadra’s 
Cakrasaṃvarapañjikā, the Vajraḍāka, and the Sampuṭodbhava (Szántó 2012, vol. 1: 35–​
54) (Szántó 2015a: 320).
The Vajrāmṛta (Vajra Nectar)
The Vajrāmṛta is also an early Yoginītantra. Omi estimates that the Vajrāmṛta was com­
posed sometime between the ninth and eleventh centuries, after the Guhyasamāja 
(or Mahāmāyā) was composed and before Candrakīrti (perhaps tenth century) and 
Ratnākaraśānti (first half of the eleventh century)13 quoted the Vajrāmṛta (Omi 2013: 
35–​36). According to Sferra, the Vajrāmṛta was probably composed sometime be­
tween the end of the ninth century and the beginning of the tenth century. Candrakīrti’s 
Pradīpoddyotana is perhaps the earliest source that cites the Vajrāmṛta (Sferra 2017: 
409–​411).
The Mahāmāyā (Great Illusion)
Omi locates the compilation of the Mahāmāyā between the eighth and eleventh 
centuries, that is, between the periods when the Śākta Devīmāhātmya (which includes 
similar expressions) was compiled and when Ratnākaraśānti wrote the Guṇavatī, a com­
mentary on the Mahāmāyā (Omi 2005: 100–​102). Szántó points out that the Mahāmāyā 
is silently quoted by Bhavabhaṭṭa in his Nibandha commentary on the Catuṣpīṭha 
(Szántó 2012: 102).14 DhTC states that the Mahāmāyā was composed in the late ninth or 
early tenth centuries (DhTC 2013).
The Cakrasaṃvara (Circle’s Saṃvara) Also Called 
Herukābhidhāna (Discourse of Heruka), Laghusaṃvara 
(Small Saṃvara), or Laghvabhidhāna (Small Discourse)
Sanderson pointed out that the Cakrasaṃvara contains many discourses that were 
redactions from the tantras of the Śaiva Vidyāpīṭha cycle, such as the discourse of 
the sacred sites (Sanderson 1995; etc.). The Cakrasaṃvara refers to the titles of some 
tantras, namely, the Paramādya, the Vajrabhairava, the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, 
the Guhyasamāja, and the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga. In his Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī, 
Vilāsavajra mentions an early version of the Cakrasaṃvara or another text that he calls

--- PAGE 1094 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1069
 
Cakrasaṃvara. Davidson estimates the date of origin of the Cakrasaṃvara to be in the 
eighth century (Davidson 1981: 7–​8, 2004: 40; Gray 2007: 11–​14), and Sanderson in the 
relatively late ninth century (Sanderson 2009: 158–​165; Gray 2012: 3–​19).
The extant version of the Cakrasaṃvara consists of fifty-​one chapters, which can be 
roughly divided into two parts: (1) ­chapters 1 to 49 and the first half of ­chapter 50 (–​50.18) 
and (2) the second half of ­chapter 50 (50.19–​) and ­chapter 51. The first part is the ancient 
part of the tantra. Jayabhadra, the earliest exegete, and Bhavyakīrti used some forms of 
the old version (Sugiki 2001: 91–​99, summarized in English in 2010: 509–​510; Sanderson 
2009: 159–​160). The latter part was added to the old part by the time in the tenth century 
when some exegetes, such as Bhavabhaṭṭa, wrote commentaries on the whole fifty-​one 
chapters of the Cakrasaṃvara.
The Hevajra (Hevajra)
A highly influential Yoginītantra, the Hevajra was the first scripture to set forth the 
teachings of the innate (sahaja), the fourfold joy (caturānanda), the subtle-​body system 
centered on the four chakras (cakra), the three main channels (avadhūtī, lalanā, and 
rasanā), and the inner fire called Caṇḍālī. The Hevajra consists of two parts (kalpa) 
called “the awakening of Vajragarbha” (vajragarbhābhisambodhi) and “illusion” (māyā). 
Therefore, the Hevajra is also called Dvikalparāja or “the king [of tantras] in two parts” 
(Szántó 2015b: 334–​335, 339).
Snellgrove believed that the present form of the Hevajra existed toward the end of the 
eighth century because, according to Tāranātha, Kāṇha, who wrote the Yogaratnamālā 
commentary on the Hevajra, was a contemporary of Devapāla (first half of the ninth 
century) (Snellgrove 1959, vol. 1: 14). According to Isaacson, however, this Kāṇha 
or Kṛṣṇa, who is also called Samayavajra or Śāntibhadra, may have been a disciple of 
Ratnākaraśānti in the eleventh century (Isaacson 2001: 458). In his Yogaratnamālā, 
Kāṇha cites the Buddhakapāla (Luo 2010: xxxiii). Davidson states that the Hevajra 
was probably composed in the late ninth or early tenth century (Davidson 2004: 41). 
The Hevajra was not attested in the texts before the tenth century (Isaacson and Sferra, 
2015b: 315).
The Ḍākinīvajrapañjara (Ḍākinī Vajra Cage)
The Ḍākinīvajrapañjara is perhaps the earliest and most influential among the tantras 
belonging to the Hevajra cycle (Szántó 2015b: 339). According to Shimada’s analysis, 
the Ḍākinīvajrapañjara was composed after the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga and before the 
Hevajra. The Ḍākinīvajrapañjara did not teach the fourth initiation ritual or the yoga 
of the subtle body, which the Hevajra expounds (Shimada 1983). Tanaka believed that 
the Ḍākinīvajrapañjara originated after the Hevajra (Tanaka 2010: 351–​352). Yokoyama 
notes that it is difficult to decide which of the Hevajra and the Ḍākinīvajrapañjara is

--- PAGE 1095 ---
1070      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
earlier through comparison of their texts, for both tantras were developed independ­
ently of each other (Yokoyama 2016: 111–​115). The terminus ante quem of its entire text is 
the first half of the eleventh century, when it was translated into Tibetan (D 419/​P 11) by 
Gayādhara and Shākya ye shes.
The Buddhakapāla (Skull of Buddha)
According to Luo, the Buddhakapāla, a Yoginītantra, was composed in the ninth or 
tenth century, and it was very popular in India in the eleventh and twelfth centuries (Luo 
2010: xxxi). It contained some material borrowed from the Guhyasamāja and Hevajra 
and is also influenced by Śaivism (Vidyāpīṭha Kāpālika). As mentioned earlier, the 
Buddhakapāla is cited in the Yogaratnamālā of Kāṇha (Luo 2010: xxxii–​xxxiii). Kāṇha 
was active in the ninth century according to Snellgrove (1959, vol. 1: 14) and the eleventh 
century according to Isaacson (2001: 458).
The Vajrāralli (Vajrāralli)
The scriptural cycle, which includes the Vajrāralli and the Rigyaralli, is often referred to 
as the “Aralli (Ārali) cycle.” The word ārali first appears in the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga 
in the sense of “ḍākinī,” and vajrāralli in the sense of “Vajrasattva.” In the Vajrāralli, the 
main deity is Heruka, who is also called Ārali (or Aralli). The Vajrāralli is mentioned 
in Nāropa’s commentary on the Hevajra, namely, the Vajrapadasārasaṃgrahapañjikā 
(eleventh century). From these sources, Omi concludes that Vajrāralli was composed 
between the ninth and eleventh centuries, after the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga and before 
Nāropa (Omi 2016: 127–​129). The Vajrāralli was translated into Tibetan (D 426/​P 65) by 
Gayādhara and Shākya ye shes in the eleventh century.
The Herukābhyudaya (Realization of Heruka); the 
Abhidhānottara (The Continuation of the Discourse); the 
Caturyoginīsampuṭa (The Union of the Four Yoginīs); the 
Yoginīsaṃcāra (Yoginīs’ Rotation); the Vajraḍāka (Vajraḍāka); 
and the Vārāhyabhyudaya (Realization of Vārāhī) and its 
uttaratantra (continuation tantra)
These tantras, which belong to the Saṃvara scriptural cycle (a scriptural cycle that 
emerged from the Cakrasaṃvara), were most likely composed around the tenth century 
after the old part of the Cakrasaṃvara was composed and before they were translated 
into Tibetan (eleventh century)15 (Sugiki 2007: 1–​17, 19; Sanderson 2009: 158). The 
Herukābhyudaya is perhaps the second oldest among them. Sanderson pointed out

--- PAGE 1096 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1071
 
that the Herukābhyudaya contains a passage that is more archaic than Cakrasaṃvara 
(Sanderson 2009: 213–​214). However, the Herukābhyudaya also contains the instruc­
tion of the root mantra of the goddess Vārāhī (D 374, 6v6–​7r5), which is not found in 
the earlier texts of the Saṃvara cycle. The list of scriptures in the Dunhuang manuscript 
(Pelliot tibétain 849: ll. 21–​37) toward the end of the third quarter of the tenth century 
includes a tantra that may be the Herukābhyudaya (He ru ka a pu tha tan tra or He ru ka 
thams cad ‘byung ba’i rgyud) (Kapstein 2006: 11–​12, 20, n 32).
The Sampuṭodbhava (Emergence from the Union) and the 
Sampuṭatilaka (Ornament of the Emergence from the Union)
The Sampuṭodbhava, often grouped with the Hevajra cycle in Tibetan exegesis, was 
composed around the tenth century, (1) after the appearance of the old part of the 
Cakrasaṃvara (late ninth century at the latest) and before Gayādhara and Śākya ye shes, 
who translated the Sampuṭodbhava into Tibetan (D 381/​P 26), or before Ratnākaraśānti, 
who quoted it in his Muktāvalī (first half of the eleventh century) (Sugiki 2007: 15–​17, 19; 
Szántó 2016: 403); (2) after the writing of the Hevajra (late ninth or early tenth century) 
and before the appearance of the Kālacakra (early eleventh century) (Szántó 2012, part 1: 
50–​51); or (3) after the writing of the Hevajra and possibly before Durjayacandra (around 
1000 ce), who probably quoted a passage from the Sampuṭodbhava (Szántó 2016: 402–​
403). DhTC dates the Sampuṭodhava to the end of the tenth century (DhTC 2020a).
According to Szántó, Sampuṭatilaka may be the first exegesis of the Sampuṭodbhava, 
and it was often transmitted together with the Sampuṭodbhava (Szántó 2016: 403). The 
compilation of the Sampuṭatilaka can be dated after the Sampuṭodbhava was composed 
(tenth century) and before Gayādhara and Śākya ye shes translated the former tantra 
into Tibetan (D 382/​P 27) (first half of the eleventh century).
The Mahākāla (Mahākāla)
According to Stablein, the oldest Sanskrit manuscript of the Mahākāla (Bihar Research 
Society in Patna, a photocopy of the original found by Rāhula Sāṅkrityāyana at the Ngor 
monastery) dates to 1135 ce during the reign of King Madanapāla (Stablein 1976: 84–​85). 
The Mahākāla was translated into Tibetan (D 440/​P 79) by Samantaśrī and Chos rab in 
the early to mid-​ eleventh century, which is its terminus ante quem.
The Kālacakra (Wheel of Time)
The Kālacakra, one of the most influential Buddhist tantras, was compiled in the early 
eleventh century. Traditionally, the Kālacakra is interpreted according to Puṇḍarīka’s 
Vimalaprabhā, a commentary on the Kālacakra. Taking into account the year referred

--- PAGE 1097 ---
1072      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
to in the Kālacakra and the year in which Nāropa, who cited the Kālacakra and the 
Vimalaprabhā, died, Newman estimates that the Kālacakra and the Vimalaprabhā were 
written between 1025 and around 1040 ce (Newman 1998: 343). The year referred to 
in the Kālacakra, according to Orofino and Wallace, is 1026 ce (Orofino 1994: 15–16; 
Wallace 2001: 3). Sferra attaches more importance to the fact that no citation from the 
Kālacakra can be found before the eleventh century (Sferra 2015: 341).
The Rigyaralli (Rigī and Aralli)
In the Rigyaralli, Rigi or Rigī is the main goddess or ḍākinī, equated with Mahāmāyā 
(Buddha’s mother), and so on, and Aralli (Ārali or Āralli), her male consort, defined 
as Śuddhodana (Buddha’s father), is the supplicant. The Rigyaralli uses ten categories 
of sacred sites, such as the pīṭha, which are derived from the ten categories of sacred 
sites inherent in the Saṃvara scriptural tradition. According to Omi, the Rigyaralli was 
composed after the Vajrāralli, and the terminus ante quem is the eleventh century when 
Nāropa cited the Rigyaralli in his Vajrapadasārasaṃgrahapañjikā (Omi 2016: 128–​129). 
Szántó notes that there is no evidence dating the Rigyaralli to any period earlier than 
the mid-​eleventh century. All authors who mentioned this tantra (such as Raviśrījñāna) 
were active between the mid-​eleventh and mid-​thirteenth centuries. The Rigyaralli was 
also translated into Tibetan (D 427/​P 66) by Gayādhara and Shākya ye shes in the elev­
enth century (Szántó 2017: 492–​495).
The Mahāmudrātilaka (Great Seal Ornament); the 
Jñānagarbha (Womb of Gnosis); the Jñānatilaka (Ornament 
of Gnosis); and the Tattvapradīpa (Light of Truth)
These tantras are also part of the Hevajra cycle. The terminus ante quem of their entire 
texts is the late eleventh century when they were translated into Tibetan in the presence 
of Prajñāśrīgupta or by him,16 who flourished in the late eleventh century (Szántó 2015c: 
5). In texts composed before Prajñāśrīgupta, there may be no evidence for the titles of 
these tantras.
It is only the Mahāmudrātilaka whose Sanskrit manuscript is extant (Staatsbibliothek 
zu Berlin no. Hs or 8711), although it is a recent manuscript, copied in the nineteenth 
century. The difference between the Sanskrit manuscript and the Tibetan transla­
tion of the Mahāmudrātilaka is not small. In ­chapter 28 of its Tibetan Translation, the 
Mahāmudrātilaka defines itself as a “continuation tantra” (rgyud phyi ma, *uttaratantra) 
(D 420, 90v5) of the imaginary root tantra. In its colophon, the Jñānagarbha is de­
fined as a tantra that is the continuation of the Mahāmudrātilaka (D 421, 96v6).17 The 
Jñānatilaka refers to the Mahāmudrātilaka and the Jñānagarbha as a continuation 
tantra and a tantra that is the continuation of the Mahāmudrātilaka, respectively, and

--- PAGE 1098 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1073
 
calls itself “a commentary tantra” (bshad pa’i rgyud, *vyākhyātantra) (D 422, 127v1–​v2). 
These suggest that the Mahāmudrātilaka is chronologically earliest among the three 
scriptures.
Szántó argues that the compilation of the Mahāmudrātilaka may be datable in the 
late eleventh century. The Mahāmudrātilaka includes many discourses of the subtle-​
body system that are more elaborate than those in Hevajra. It mentions the titles of the 
Guhyasamāja, Vajramālā, Saṃvara (Sarvabuddhasamāyoga), and Hevajra (Szántó 
2015c: 6, 9, 10). The Mahāmudrātilaka has discourses similar to those found in the 
Vajramālā (Sugiki 2016: 172–​181).
The Ḍākārṇava (Ocean of Ḍākas); the Saṃvarodaya 
(Emergence of Saṃvara); the Vārāhīkalpa (Ritual Practice 
of Vārāhī); and the Yoginījāla (Net of Yoginīs)
These tantras, which also belong to the Saṃvara cycle, share many similar discourses. 
They were composed in the last phase of the history of the Saṃvara cycle, probably after 
the Kālacakra. They contain several teachings that are more developed than those in 
the other tantras of the Saṃvara cycle discussed earlier. Either the Ḍākārṇava or the 
Saṃvarodaya is likely the earliest, and the Vārāhīkalpa and the Yoginījāla are the most 
recent (Sugiki 2007: 17–​19, 110–​113, 257–​282, 316–​330).
The Ḍākārṇava mentions the Vajraḍāka, Herukābhyudaya, and Sampuṭodbhava. 
Although an early version of the Ḍākārṇava or another text that was called Ḍākārṇava 
might have existed in the early eleventh century, the extant version of the Ḍākārṇava 
probably dates from around the early twelfth century. Padmavajra’s commentary on the 
Ḍākārṇava (D 1419/​P 2136), written in the early or mid-​twelfth century, is perhaps the 
first to cite passages taken from the extant version of the Dākārṇava. The Ḍākārṇava 
flourished in Nepal to a certain degree. It was translated into Tibetan (D 372/​P 19) by 
Jayasena (disciple of Padmavajra) and Dharma yon tan in the mid-​ to late twelfth cen­
tury in Kathmandu (Sugiki 2022: 9–​20). Based partially on these two tantras composed 
and/​or flourished in Nepal, the Vārāhīkalpa, and the closely related Yoginījāla, were 
developed. They were not translated into Tibetan (Sugiki 2007: 18; Sanderson 2009: 
177). Most likely the Vārāhīkalpa and the Yoginījāla were compiled in Nepal. Isaacson 
and Sferra note that the Saṃvarodaya was most likely composed in Nepal after the 
Kālacakra (Isaacson and Sferra 2015b: 315). According to the colophon of its Tibetan 
translation, the Saṃvarodaya was translated into Tibetan (D 373/​P 20) by Gzhan la phan 
pa mtha’ yas (Indian) and Rgyus ban de smon lam grags (Tibetan); their translation was 
finalized by Gzhon nu dpal (late fourteenth to fifteenth centuries), who used Vanaratna’s 
(mid-​fourteenth to mid-​fifteenth centuries) Sanskrit manuscript of this scripture. 
Ratnarakṣita, who composed the Padminī commentary on the Saṃvarodaya, was active 
around 1200 ce. After the downfall of Vikramaśīla in the beginning of the thirteenth 
century, Ratnarakṣita came to Nepal (Lewis 1996: 156).

--- PAGE 1099 ---
1074      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
The Jñānodaya (Emergence of Gnosis)
The Jñānodaya, a short tantra, contains treatises on the yoga of the subtle body that are 
more developed than those found in the tantras of the Saṃvara cycle in the tenth century 
mentioned earlier. The Jñānodaya can also be assigned to the most recent group of tantras 
of the Saṃvara cycle. It is possible that the compilation of the Jñānodaya is no older than the 
Saṃvarodaya and the Ḍākārṇava. The Jñānodaya was composed in Nepal and not translated 
into Tibetan (Sugiki 2007: 17–​18, 170–​175, 257–​263) (Isaacson and Sferra 2015b: 316).
The Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa (Fiery Great Wrathful One)
The Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa is of Nepalese origin, most likely of Newar origin. In South 
Asia, the Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa is not mentioned outside Nepal (DhTC 2016; Grimes and 
Szántó 2018: abstract). It teaches how to attain the state of Buddha Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa 
through the practice of fourfold joy, and so on (DhTC 2016). Van der Kuijp states that 
Ratnaśrī and Grags pa rgyal mtshan completed the translation of the Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa 
into Tibetan (D 431/​P 70) in 1293 or, less likely, 1305 ce (Van der Kuijp 2009: 29). DhTC 
assumes that the Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa was composed in the tenth or eleventh century 
(DhTC 2016). Grimes and Szántó point out that there is no certain textual evidence to 
show the existence of the Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa before the thirteenth century (Grimes 
and Szántó 2018: 651). Mahāsukhavajra’s Padmāvatī is the only extant commentary. 
Mahāsukhavajra may have been a Nepalese scholar from the thirteenth century (Grimes 
and Szántó 2018: 653). It is uncertain whether the Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa was composed 
later than the Vārāhīkalpa, Yoginījāla, and Jñānodaya.
Conclusion
Based on the discussion and overview of the approximate dates of the Buddhist tantras 
in the previous section, I would like to draw attention to three aspects.
First, toward and after the demise of the great monasteries in India in the twelfth and 
thirteenth centuries, Nepal became an important place where tantras were composed. 
This suggests that in India, the great monasteries played an important role in the writing 
of the tantras, including those teaching antinomian practices. The Mahāmudrātilaka 
and the Ḍākārṇava, whose final versions were probably completed in the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries, respectively, list Nepāla (Nepal) in their lists of sacred sites (Sugiki 
2009: 533, 540). Many studies have been conducted regarding Tantric Buddhism in 
India and Tibet. Tantric texts in Nepal should also be more researched attentively.
Second, the history of Buddhist tantras does not advance toward a single goal. It 
has often been said that the Kālacakra is the final tantra that integrates various tantric

--- PAGE 1100 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1075
 
traditions. However, it is almost certain that the Kālacakra is neither the final tantra 
nor the only comprehensive one that encompasses and integrates the previous systems. 
The view of diversity that runs through the history of the Buddhist tantras should be 
maintained, even though it can be said that the integrative system of the Kālacakra is the 
most sophisticated among those included in the last Buddhist tantras.
Third, when compiling individual tantras, the diversity of history of the scriptures 
should also be taken into account. Many Buddhist tantras are evolving texts; they were 
gradually compiled, enlarged, and organized by different compilers over decades or 
in some cases even centuries. In this process of compilation, compilers also took ideas 
and texts from other scriptures of the same or foreign traditions and integrated them 
into the scriptures they were working on. Therefore, the final version of a tantra often 
contains both ancient and new elements. It is also common that different versions of a 
tantra were developed separately by different groups of compilers. Although I have been 
able to do it only partially in this chapter, chronological study should also be intended 
to reveal as far as possible the complicated processes of growth and reproduction of the 
tantras mentioned above.
Acknowledgments
I appreciate the helpful advice and suggestions of Dr. Péter D. Szántó and Dr. Toru Tomabechi 
(alphabetical order). This study was supported by INDAS-​South Asia (Intergreted Area Studies 
on South Asia, National Institute for the Humanities) and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 
20K00054 (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science). I am responsible for any mistake that 
may be found in this chapter.
Abbreviations
D	
Tibetan Canon, Sde dge edition
DhTC	
Dharmachakra Translation Committee
P	
Tibetan Canon, Peking edition
T	
Chinese Canon, Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō
Notes
	1.	 By the “early medieval age” I mean roughly the sixth to thirteenth centuries.
	2.	 The Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha is a good example of the scripture that originally did not 
define (or might not have defined) itself as tantra and that came to be classified as such by 
Indian Buddhist exegetes. As is well known, according to the colophons of both the avail­
able Sanskrit text and Tibetan translation, the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha defines itself 
sūtra (mahāyānasūtra) and not tantra. However, the Indian exegetes such as Buddhaguhya 
(late eighth century) called that scripture tantra.

--- PAGE 1101 ---
1076      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
	 3.	 In his Jingang ding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui, Amoghavajra summarizes the contents 
of the eighteen sections of what he conceptualized as “Vajra Pinnacle Scripture in 
100000 verses.” Giebel provided a list of the Sanskrit names of the eighteen sections: 
(1) Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, (2)–​(3) Vajraśekhara, (4) Trailokyavijaya, (5) 
Laukikalokottaravajra (?), (6)–​(8) Paramādya, (9) Sarvabuddhasamāyoga, (10)–​(12) un­
known, (13) Mahāsamaya, (14) unknown, (15) Guhyasamāja, (16) Advayasamatāvijaya, 
and (17)–​(18) unknown (Giebel 1995: 111–​12).
	 	   Tribe provides a list of scriptures mentioned in the Nāmamantrārthāvalokinī: Amoghapāśa, 
Āryamañjuśrī, Krodhavijaya, Trisamayālaṃkāra, Bhūtaḍāmara, Mahāvidyottama, Subāhukara 
(Subāhuparipṛcchā), Susiddhikara, Vairocanābhisambodhi, Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka, Vajrapātāla, 
Guhyamaṇitilaka, 
Guhyālaṃkāra/​Asādhāraṇaguhyālaṃkāravyūha, 
Tattvasaṃgraha, 
Trailokyavijaya, Paramādya, Vajramaṇḍālaṃkāra, Vajraśekhara, Advayasamatāvijaya, 
Guhyendutilaka, Cakrasaṃvara, Māyājāla, Vajrabhairava, Guhyasamāja, Mahāsamaya, 
Saṃvara (Sarvabuddhasamāyoga), Krodhendutilaka, Guhyakośa, Vajrakirīṭa, Vajraghanoccaya, 
Sarvatantrasamuccaya, and Ṣaṭprajñānayasaṃvara (Tribe 2016: 376–​79). Among them, the 
important tantras that I do not discuss in this chapter are Amoghapāśa (Effective Noose) and 
Mahāvidyottama (i.e., Vidyottama, “Supreme Knowledge”). The Amoghapāśa was translated 
into Chinese (T 1092) by Bodhiruci (around the late seventh century). The Tibetan translation 
(D 686/​P 365) does not report the translator’s name. The Vidyottama was translated into Tibetan 
(D 746/​P 402) by Vidyākaraprabha and Dpal brtsegs (around the early ninth century). Both 
scriptures are listed in the Ldan dkar ma catalogues (D 4364, 301r6–​r7) compiled in the first half 
of the ninth century.
	 4.	 This Guhya was translated into Chinese (T 897) by Amoghavajra (between 746 and 776 ce). 
The Chinese translation (T 897) is titled *Guhyasūtra (蕤呬耶經). The Tibetan transla­
tion (D 806/​P 429) transcribes its title as Sarvamaṇḍalasāmānyavidhi-​guhyatantra (dkyil 
’khor lo thams cad kyi spyi’i cho ga gsang ba’i rgyud: “Tantra [named] the Secret, [which is] 
the Ritual Manual Commonly Applicable to [the Performance of] All Maṇḍalas”). The 
translator’s name is not given in its colophon.
	 5.	 The Susiddhikara was translated into Chinese by Śubhākarasiṃha (善無畏) (726 ce: 
Giebel 2001: 114). The Chinese Canon includes three versions of Śubhākarasiṃha’s trans­
lation (all of which are numbered T 893). The Tibetan translation (D 807/​P 431) does not 
report the names of the translators.
	 6.	 The translator’s name is not reported in its colophon.
	 7.	 The Chinese Canon does not include the Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka. The Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka 
was translated into Tibetan (D 496/​P 130) by Śīlendrabodhi and Ye shes sde (early ninth 
century).
	 8.	 In the Tibetan translation (D 477/​P 111) by Rin chen bzang po (eleventh century), the title 
of this scripture is falsely back-​translated as Candraguhyatilaka.
	 9.	 I have used Matsunaga (1980: 244–​249) to make the list of previous studies except for 
Sakai’s (Sakai [1962] 1973: 219).
	10.	 The Sandhyāvyākaraṇa was translated into Tibetan (D 444/​P 83) by Dharmaśrībhadra 
and Rin chen bzang po; the Caturdevīparipṛcchā (D 446/​P 85) by Smṛtijñānakīrti; the 
Vajramālā (D 445/​P 82) by Sujana Śrījñāna and Zhi ba’i ’od; the Jñānavajrasamuccaya 
(D 447/​P 84) and its longer version (D 450) by Jñānākara and Khu ston dngos grub; and 
the Vajrahṛdayālaṃkāra (D 451/​P 86) by Kamalagupta and Mnga’ bdag lha ye shes rgyal 
mtshan.

--- PAGE 1102 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1077
 
	11.	 Matsunaga investigated an aspect of this relationship as follows: ­chapters 1–​
67 of the Vajramālā→Nāgārjuna’s Piṇḍīkṛtasādhana, then the early version of 
Nāgārjuṇa’s Pañcakrama→Chapter 68 of the Vajramālā→The extant version of 
Nāgārjuṇa’s Pañcakrama→The first half of the Jñānavajrasamuccaya→Candrakīrti’s 
Pradīpoddyotana→The second half of the Jñānavajrasamuccaya→The longer version of the 
Jñānavajrasamuccaya (Matsunaga 1980: 311). See also (Matsunaga 1964: 24).
	12.	 For the compilation of the Vajramālā, see also Kittay (2020: 5–​20).
	13.	 The dates of Candrakīrti and Ratnākaraśānti are based on (Isaacson and Sferra 2015a: 476 
and 478).
	14.	 The date of Bhavabhaṭṭa is a controversial topic. Several different views have been 
presented by different scholars (late ninth to early tenth century, mid-​tenth century, tenth 
century, and c. 1000 ce).
	15.	 The Herukābhyudaya was translated into Tibetan (D 374/​P 21) by Advayavajra and Chings 
yon tan ‘bar; the Abhidhānottara (D 369/​P 17) by Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna and Rin chen 
bzang po; the Caturyoginīsampuṭa (D 376/​P 24) by La cings yon tan ‘bar (perhaps iden­
tical to Chings yon tan ’bar, who translated the Herukābhyudaya with Advayavajra); the 
Yoginīsaṃcāra (D 375/​P 23) by ‘Gos lha btsas; the Vajraḍāka (D 370/​P 18) by Gayādhara 
and ‘Gos lhas btsas; and the Vārāhyabhyudaya and its uttaratantra (D 378 and 379/​P 60 
and 61) by Gayādhara and Zla ba ‘od zer, respectively. Bhavabhadra (Bhavabhaṭṭa), who 
flourished around the tenth century, wrote a commentary on the Vajraḍāka.
	16.	 The Mahāmudrātilaka was translated into Tibetan (D 420/​P 12) by Prajñāśrīgupta, Chos 
kyi ye shes, and Phyug ’tshams dgra bcom; the Jñānagarbha (D421/​P13) by Prajñāśrīgupta; 
the Jñānatilaka (D422/​P14) by Prajñāśrīgupta; and the Tattvapradīpa (D423/​P15) by 
Prajñāśrīgupta.
	17.	 The text is dpal phyag rgya chen po’i thig le rnal ’byor ma’ rgyud kyi rgyal po’i phyi ma’i 
phyi ma. Literally, it means “[a tantra that is] the continuation of the continuation of the 
Mahāmudrātilaka. However, its correct meaning seems to be [a tantra that is] the con­
tinuation of the continuation [tantra which is] the Mahāmudrātilaka, because the 
Mahāmudrātilaka (its Tibetan translation) defines itself as a continuation tantra.
Bibliography
Bhattacharyya, B. 1933. “The Cult of Bhūtaḍāmara.” In Proceedings and Transactions of the Sixth 
All-​India Oriental Conference, 349–​370. Patna: The Bihar and Orissa Research Society.
Bendall, Cecil, and Rouse, W. H. D. 1922. Śikṣāsamuccaya, A compendium of Buddhist doctrine 
compiled by Śāntideva. Delhi, India: Motilal Banarsidass. (Reprint 1981)
Davidson, Ronald M. 1981. “ The Litany of Names of Mañjuśrī: Text and translation of the Ma
ñjuśrīnāmasaṃgīti.” In Tantric and Taoist studies in Honour of R. A. Stein, vol. 1, edited by 
Michel Strickmann (Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 20), 1–​69. Brussels, Belgium: Institut 
belge des hautes études chinoises.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2004. Tibetan renaissance: Tantric Buddhism in the rebirth of Tibetan cul­
ture. New York: Columbia University Press.
Delhey, 
Martin. 
2012. 
“The 
textual 
sources 
of 
the 
Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa 
(Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa), with special reference to its early Nepalese witness NGMPP A39/​4.” 
Journal of the Nepal Research Centre 14: 55–​75.

--- PAGE 1103 ---
1078      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
DhTC. 2013. “The Mahāmāyā tantra.” 84000 translating the words of the Buddha. Accessed 
August 2, 2021. https://​read.84000.co/​tran​slat​ion/​toh​425.html.
DhTC. 2016. “The tantra of Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa.” 84000 translating the words of the Buddha. 
Accessed August 15, 2021. https://​read.84000.co/​tran​slat​ion/​toh​431.html.
DhTC. 2020a. “Emergence from Sampuṭa.” 84000 translating the words of the Buddha. 
Accessed August 2, 2021. https://​read.84000.co/​tran​slat​ion/​toh​381.html.
DhTC. 2020b. “The Bhūtaḍāmara Tantra.” 84000 translating the words of the Buddha. Accessed 
September 15, 2021. https://​read.84000.co/​tran​slat​ion/​toh​747.html.
Fan, Muyou. 2011. 梵文写本《无二平等経》的対勘与研究 (Advayasamatāvijaya: A study 
based upon the Sanskrit manuscript found in Tibet). Shanghai: Zhongxi Book.
Fujii, Akira. 2018. “The Dwelling Place of Maheśvara in Indian Esoteric Buddhism: Focusing 
on Descriptions of ekaliṅga in the Bhūtaḍāmaratantra.” Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū 
(Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies) 66, no. 3: 158–​162.F
Giebel, Rolf W. 1995. “The Chin-​kang-​ting ching yü-​ch‘ieh shih-​pa-​hui chih-​kuei: An 
annotated translation.” Naritasan Bukkyō Kenkyūjo Kiyō (Journal of Naritasan Institute 
for Buddhist Studies) 18: 107–​201.
Giebel, Rolf W. 2001. Two esoteric sutras, the Adamantine Pinnacle sutra, the Susiddhikara sutra, 
translated from the Chinese (Taishō Volume 18, Numbers 865, 893). Berkeley, CA: Numata 
Center for Buddhist Translation and Research.
Gray, David B. 2007. The Cakrasamvara Tantra (The Discourse of Śrī Heruka): A Study and 
Annotated Translation. New York: The American Institute of Buddhist Studies, Columbia 
University Center for Buddhist Studies and Tibet House US.
Gray, David B. 2012. The Cakrasamvara Tantra (The Discourse of Śrī Heruka): Editions of the 
Sanskrit and Tibetan Texts. New York: The American Institute of Buddhist Studies, Columbia 
University Center for Buddhist Studies and Tibet House US.
Grimes, Samuel, and Szántó, Péter D. 2018. “Mahāsukhavajra’s Padmāvatī commentary on the 
sixth chapter of the Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇatantra: The sexual practices of a Tantric Buddhist 
Yogī and his consort.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 46: 649–​93.
Hodge, Stephen. 2003. The Mahā-​Vairocana-​Abhisaṃbodhi Tantra with Buddhaguhya’s 
Commentary. Oxon: RoutledgeCurzon.
Isaacson, Harunaga. 2001. “Ratnākaraśānti’s Hevajrasahajasadyoga (Studies in Ratnākaraśānti’s 
Tantric Works I).” In Le Parole e i Marmi: Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70 compleanno, 
edited by R. Torella, 57–​487. Rome: Istituto italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Isaacson, Harunaga, and Francesco Sferra. 2015a. “Tantric commentaries: South Asia.” In Brill’s 
encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, edited by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, Vincent 
Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 467–​82. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Isaacson, Harunaga, and Francesco Sferra. 2015b. “Tantric literature: Overview South Asia.” 
In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, edited by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, 
Vincent Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 307–​19. 
Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Kano, Kazuo. 2015. “Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, ed­
ited by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, Vincent Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes 
Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 382–​89. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Kapsten, Matthew T. 2006. “New light on an old friend: PT 849 reconsidered.” In Tibetan 
Buddhist literature and praxis, studies in its formative period, 900–​1400, edited by Ronald M. 
Davidson and Christian K. Wedemeyer, 9–​30. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.

--- PAGE 1104 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1079
 
Kitamura, Taido. 2012. Zen’yaku Kongōchō Daihimitsuyuga Tantora. Tokyo: Kishinshobō.
Kittay, David. 2020. The Vajra rosary Tantra (Śrī Vajramālā tantra) by Vajradhara, an explan­
atory tantra of the esoteric community tantra with commentary by Alaṃkakalasha (Treasury 
of the Buddhist Sciences). New York: American Institute of Buddhist Studies, Columbia 
University.
Kuranishi, Ken’ichi. 2004. “A study of the relation between the Kṛṣṇayamāritantra and 
the Raktayamāritantra.” In Bukkyōbunka Gakkai Jusshūnen, Hojo Kenzo Hasase Koki 
Kinenronshū, Indogakushoshisō to Sono Shūhen, 61–​68. Edited by Bukkyōbunka Gakkai. 
Tokyo: Sankibō.
Kuranishi, Ken’ichi. forthcoming. “Fragments of the Sahajālokapañjikā, a critical edition 
of the IASWR manuscript.” https://​www.acade​mia.edu/​4267​123/​Fra​gmen​ts_​o​f_​th​e_​Sa​
haj%C4%81lok​apa%C3%B1jik%C4%81_​A_​Critical_​Edit​ion_​of_​t​he_​I​ASWR​_​Man​uscr​ipt.
Lewis, Todd T. 1996. “A chronology of Newar-​Tibetan relations in the Kathmandu Valley.” In 
Change and continuity: Studies in the Nepalese culture of the Kathmandu Valley, edited by 
Siegfried Lienhad, 149–​66. Turin, Italy: Edizioni Dell’orso.
Luo, Hong. 2010. The Buddhakapālatantra Chapters 9 to 14. Beijing: China Tibetology 
Publishing House.
Luo, Hong, and Toru Tomabechi. 2009. Candrakīrti’s Vajrasattvaniṣpādanasūtra 
(Vajrasattvasādhana), Sanskrit and Tibetan texts critically edited. Beijing: China Tibetology 
Research Center and Austrian Academy of Sciences.
Matsunaga, Yukei. 1964. “A doubt to authority of the Guhyasamāja-​Ākhyāna-​tantras.” Indogaku 
Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū (Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies) 12, no. 2: 16–​25.
Matsunaga, Yukei. 1978. The Guhyasamājatantra: A new critical edition. Osaka, Japan: Toho 
Shuppan.
Matsunaga, Yukei. 1980. Mikkyō Kyōten Seiritsushi Ron. Kyoto, Japan: Hozokan.
Matsunaga, Yukei. 1985. “On the date of the Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa.” In Tantric and Taoist studies 
in honour of R. A. Stein, vol. 3 (Mélanges chinois et bounddhiques 22), edited by Michel 
Strickmann, 882–​984. Brussels, Belgium: Institut belge des hautes études chinoise.
Newman, John R. 1998. “The epoch of the Kālacakra Tantra.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 41: 319–​49.
Omi, Jisho. 2005. “Mahāmāyā Tantra no Seiritsu nikansuru Ichikōsatsu—​Bukkyō 
Tantora to Hindū Shinwa no Kankeisei wo Megutte—​” (On the Mahāmāyātantra). 
Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū (Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies) 54, no. 1: 100–​03.
Omi, Jisho. 2013. “Kongōkanro Tantora no Seiritsu nikansuru Ichikōsatsu” (“On the 
Vajrāmṛta-​tantra”). Mikkyō Bunka (Journal of Esoteric Buddhism) 230: 7–​56.
Omi, Jisho. 2016. “Indo Kōkibukkyōmikkyō niokeru Ārarikeishobunken no Ichi to 
Seikaku” (“The position of the texts of the Ārali Cycle and its character in late Indian 
Esoteric Buddhism: Focused on the *Vajrārali-​tantra and the *Rigyaralitantra”). 
Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū (Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies) 64, no. 2: 127–​31.
Orofino, Giacomella. 1994. Sekoddeśa, A Critical Edition of the Tibetan Translations with An 
Appendix by Raniero Gnoli on the Sanskrit Text. Roma: Instituto Italiano per il Medio ed 
Estremo Oriente.
Otsuka, Nobuo. 2013. Indo Shokimikkyō Seiritsu no Kenkyū (A study on the development of the 
early esoteric Buddhism in India). Tokyo: Shunjūsha.
Sakai, Shinten. (1962) 1973. Shūtei Dainichikyō no Seiritsu nikansuru Kenkyū. Tokyo: 
Kokushokankōkai.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1995. “Vajrayāna: Origin and function.” In Buddhism into the year 2000, 87–​
102. Bangkok: Dhammakaya Foundation.

--- PAGE 1105 ---
1080      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age—​The rise and dominance of Śaivism during the early 
medieval period—​.” In Genesis and development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, 41–​
349. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.
Sferra, Francesco. 2015. “Kālacakra.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, edited 
by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, Vincent Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes 
Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 341–​51. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Sferra, Francesco. 2017. “A Fragment of the Vajrāmṛtamahātantra: A critical edition of the 
leaves contained in Cambridge University library Or.158.1.” In Indic manuscript cultures 
through the ages: Material, textual, and historical investigations (Studies in Manuscript 
Cultures 14), edited by Vincenzo Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo, and Camillo Alessio Formigatti, 
409–​48. Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter.
Shimada, Shigeki. 1983. “Vajrapañjara to Hevajra” (“Vajrapañjara and Hevajra”). 
Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū (Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies) 32, no. 1: 188–​89.
Siklós, Bulcsu. 1996. The Vajrabhairava Tantras (Buddhica Britannica series continua VII). 
Tring, UK: Institute of Buddhist Studies.
Skorupski, Tadeusz. 1983. The Sarvadurgatipariśodhana Tantra, elimination of all destinies, 
Sanskrit and Tibetan texts with introduction, English translation and notes. Delhi, India: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Snellgrove, D. L. 1959. The Hevajra Tantra, A critical study. 2 vols. London: Oxford 
University Press.
Stablein, William George. 1976. “The Mahākālatantra: A Theory of ritual blessings and tantric 
medicine.” PhD diss., Columbia University.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2001. “Cakrasaṃvaratantra no Seiritsu Dankai nitsuite—​Oyobi Jayabhadar 
Saku Śrīcakrasaṃvarapañjikā Kōteibonpon” (“On the making of Śrīcakrasaṃvaratantra—​
With a critical Sanskrit text of Jayabhadra’s Śrīcakrasaṃvarapañjikā”). Chisan Gakuhō 
(Journal of Chisan Studies) 50: 91–​141.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2007. Saṃvara Kei Mikkyō no Shosō: Gyōja, Seichi, Shintai, Jikan, Shisei 
(Aspects of Saṃvara Esoteric Buddhism: Practitioner, holy site, body, time, and death and life). 
Tokyo: Tōshindō.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2009. “The structure and traditions of the systems of holy sites in Buddhist 
Saṃvara cycle and its related scriptural cycles in early medieval South Asia: The geography 
of esoteric Buddhism in the eyes of the compilers of scriptures.” In Genesis and development 
of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo, 515–​62. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University 
of Tokyo.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2016. “Oblation, non-​conception, and body: Systems of psychosomatic 
fire oblation in esoteric Buddhism in medieval South Asia.” In Homa variations, the study 
of ritual change across the Longue Durée, edited by Richard K. Payne and Michael Witzel, 
167–​213. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sugiki, Tsunehiko. 2022. The ocean of heroes: A critical edition, translation, and analysis of the 
Ḍākārṇavatantra, ­chapter 15, and Jayasena’s meditation manual. Basel, Switzerland: MDPI.
Szántó, Péter D. 2012. “Selected chapters from the Catuṣpīṭhatantra appendix volume with crit­
ical editions of selected chapters accompanied by Bhavabhaṭṭa’s commentary and a bibliog­
raphy.” 2 vols. PhD diss., Oxford University.
Szántó, Péter D. 2015a. “Catuṣpīṭha.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, edited 
by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, Vincent Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes 
Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 320–​25. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.

--- PAGE 1106 ---
On the Chronology of the Buddhist Tantras      1081
 
Szántó, Péter D. 2015b. “Hevajratantra.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, ed­
ited by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, Vincent Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes 
Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 334–​40. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Szántó, Péter D. 2015c. “The Mahāmudrātilaka: Its contents, history, and transmission.” 
Handout in the World Sanskrit Conference 2015, Bangkok.
Szántó, Péter D. 2016. “Before a critical edition of the Sampuṭa.” Zentralasiatische Studien 45: 
397–​422.
Szántó, Péter D. 2017. “Minor Vajrayāna texts IV. A Sanskrit fragment of the Rigyarallitantra.” 
In Indic Manuscript cultures through the Ages: Material, textual, and historical investigations 
(Studies in Manuscript Cultures 14), edited by Vincenzo Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo, and 
Camillo Alessio Formigatti, 487–​504. Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter.
Szántó, Péter D. 2019. “Jñānapāda.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 2, edited by 
Jonathan A. Silk, Richard Bowring, Vincent Eltschinger, and Michael Radich, 264–​68. 
Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Szántó, Péter D., and Arlo Griffiths. 2015. “Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara.” In Brill’s 
encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, edited by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, Vincent 
Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 367–​72. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2007. Kongōjōshōgon-​tantra no Seiritsu to Indo Mikkyōshijō ni okeru Ichi 
(The date of composition of the Śrīvajramaṇḍalālaṃkāra and its position in the history of 
Indian Tantric Buddhism). Tōyōbunka Kenkyūjo Kiyō (Memoirs of the Institute of Oriental 
Culture) 152: 381–​400.
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2010. Indo niokeru Mandara no Seiritsu to Hatten (Genesis and development 
of the Maṇḍala in India). Tokyo: Shunjusha.
Tanemura, Ryugen. 2015. “Guhyasamāja.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, ed­
ited by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, Vincent Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes 
Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 326–​33. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Tokushige, Hiroshi. 2019. “Guhyamaṇitilaka niokeru Shiva to Indora nitaisuru 
Chōbuku no Sai” (“Differences in Trailokyavijaya’s victory over Śiva and Indra in the 
Guhyamaṇitilaka”). Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū (Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies) 
68, no. 1: 194–​99.
Tomabechi, Toru. 2007. “The extraction of 
Mantra (mantroddhāra) in the 
Sarvabuddhasamāyogatantra.” In Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on 
the occasion of His 70th birthday, part 2, edited by Birgit Kellner, Helmut Krasser, Horst 
Lasic, Michael Torsten Much, and Helmut Tauscher, 903–​23. Vienna: Arbeitskreis für 
Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien, Universität Wien.
Tomabechi, Toru. 2010. Adhyardhaśatikā Prajñāpāramitā: Sanksrit and Tibetan texts. Vienna: 
China Tibetology Research Center and Austrian Academy of Sciences.
Tomabechi, Toru. 2017. “Abhayākaragupta saku Āmnāyamañjarī shoinyōbunken—​Shinshutsu 
bonbunshiryō dai 1–​4 shō yori—​” (“Quotations in Abhayākaragupta’s Āmnāyamañjarī 
­chapters 1–​4, extracted from a newly available Sanskrit-​Tibetan bilingual manuscript”). 
Taishō Daigaku Sōgōbukkyōkenkyūjo Nenpō (Annual of the Institute for Comprehensive 
Studies of Buddhism Taisho University) 39: 99–​136.
Tribe, Anthony. 2015. “Mañjuśrīnāmasaṃgīti.” In Brill’s encyclopedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, ed­
ited by Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, Vincent Eltschinger, Lucia Dolce, Johannes 
Bronkhorst, and Angelika Malinar, 353–​59. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.

--- PAGE 1107 ---
1082      Tsunehiko Sugiki
 
Tribe, Anthony. 2016. Tantric Buddhist practice in India, Vilāsavajra’s commentary on the 
Mañjuśrī-​nāmasaṃgīti, a critical edition and annotated translation of ­chapters 1–​5 with 
introductions. London: Routledge.
Van der Kuijp, Leonard W. J. 2009. “On the vicissitudes of Subhūticandra’s Kāmadhenu commen­
tary on the Amarakoṣa in Tibet.” Journal of the International Association of Tibetan Studies 
5: 1–​105.
Wallace, Vesna A. 2001. The inner Kālacakratantra, A Buddhist tantric view of the individual. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Wayman, Alex. 1984. “The Sarvarahasyatantra.” Indokoten Kenkyū (Acta Indologica) 6: 521–​69.
Wayman, Alex, and Ryujun Tajima. 1992. The enlightenment of Vairocana. Delhi, India: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2007. Āryadeva’s lamp that integrates the practices (Caryāmelāpakapradīpa), 
the gradual path of Vajrayāna Buddhism according to the esoteric community noble tradition. New 
York: American Institute of Buddhist Studies at Columbia University, Columbia University’s 
Center for Buddhist Studies, and Tibet House US.
Yamamoto, Shoichiro. 2012. “Dainichikyō no shiryō to kenkyūshi gaikan.” Gendaimikkyō 23: 
73–​102.
Yokoyama, Hiroaki. 2016. “Ḍākinīvajrapañjara no Bunkengakuteki Kenkyū.” PhD diss., Taisho 
University.

--- PAGE 1108 ---
Chapter 42
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi 
as an Argument against 
Dharmakīrti
John Nemec
Introduction
It is well known that the Buddhist epistemologist Dharmakīrti figures centrally in 
the philosophical formulations of the nondual Śaiva tantric authors, Utpaladeva (fl. 
ca. 925–​975 CE) and Abhinavagupta (fl. ca. 975–​1025 CE). This chapter illustrates the 
manner in which the same Buddhist author served fundamentally to shape the writings 
of Utpaladeva’s teacher and Abhinavagupta’s great grand-​teacher, Somānanda (fl. ca. 
900–​950 CE). In particular, I here examine what may be found in key passages of his 
magnum opus, the first work of Pratyabhijñā philosophy and one of the earliest nondual 
Śaiva “postscriptural” work of exegesis, the Śivadṛṣṭi (ŚD).1 In particular, I here survey 
arguments found principally the fourth “daily lesson” (āhnika) of this complex, highly 
influential, but still little-​read work, the latter half for which Utpaladeva’s commentary 
is lost (i.e., after ŚD 4.75); and as Abhinavagupta’s Śivadṛṣṭyālocana is entirely lost to 
history, except for a very small number of citations in his Parātrīśikavivaraṇa, we are 
without commentarial resources for many of the textual passages in question. The work 
of interpreting the ŚD is therefore at times exceedingly difficult, though not impossible, 
to engage.
The fourth āhnika marks the point at which Somānanda begins not merely to argue 
against the views of other schools but positively to articulate his own philosophical po­
sition.2 He does so largely by arguing that his opponents’ views can only cohere logically 
if they accept the ontological nondualism for which he argues. And when Somānanda 
comes “positively” to articulate his Śaiva non-​dualism, he does so implicitly and explic­
itly in opposition to Dharmakīrti.3

--- PAGE 1109 ---
1084      John Nemec
 
Somānanda’s Siddhānta
If Somānanda is to speak positively, what, precisely, does he argue? What is his “settled 
opinion” (siddhānta)? First, the view for which he advocates is fundamentally an on­
tological one. The core argument of his text exemplifies this. Without telling us he is 
doing so, he maps his core proposition syllogistically in the opening verses of the fourth 
āhnika. There, he suggests that all things in the universe are in their very nature identical 
with the one and unitary Śiva, who exists in the form of consciousness.
The manner in which he articulates this position is striking. For while it is well 
known that the ŚD is an eclectic and ranging work that mixes tantric and philosophical 
registers, including as it does oblique and explicit references both to a variety of eso­
teric religious traditions and to orthodox Hindu and Buddhist philosophical schools, 
this complex style is perhaps most evident in the passage to be examined next, because 
the language he deploys to claim that all is Śiva uses a terminology that evokes Śaiva 
theological formulations in a manner that simultaneously serves to parry Dharmakīrti’s 
antipersonalist philosophy.
The argument at ŚD 4.1–​5 is structured as follows.
	
(1)	 All phenomena in the world are possessed of Śiva-​nature (this is the pratijñā or 
thesis),
	
(2)	 because all phenomena in the world are possessed of causal efficacy (this being 
the hetu or logical reason).
	
(3)	 Whatever has causal efficacy exists as a power or capacity that is controlled by an 
agent—​what is Śiva-​nature. This is so in the manner that a king directs those who 
serve him, for example, or the god of the dualist Śaivas deploys the power of illu­
sion (moha) and karmic equanimity, respectively, to create the world and to grace 
some among those dwelling within it with liberation. (This is the udāharaṇa or 
example.)
	 (4)	 Since all phenomena in the world are, indeed, possessed of causal efficacy, which 
is the mark of Śiva-​nature (this being the upanaya or application of the universal 
concomitance of the reason to the case in question),
	
(5)	 therefore (the nigamana or conclusion:) all phenomena in the world are powers 
or capacities of one who controls them—​Śiva—​which is to say they are possessed 
of Śiva-​nature.
The claim, then, is this: one sees things appearing in the world having effects, which 
defines them as real, because unreal things cannot do anything, including effecting the 
event of making themselves known in consciousness. Thus, all phenomenal things are 
capable or empowered in the world, at the very least in the sense that they are capable 
of making themselves known to the one who witnesses them. If, moreover, there are 
multiple things in the world which are capable and real, then they must be mutually

--- PAGE 1110 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1085
 
coordinated and structured such that they function in mutual relation. Somānanda 
argues thereby that multiplicity demands—​is the very proof of—​an underlying or over­
arching unity, because a nonchaotic and functioning multiplicity demands the existence 
of a single agent who guides and controls that multiplicity.
As we shall presently see, this syllogistic argument contains within it the seeds of 
Somānanda’s fundamental arguments against Dharmakīrti, all of which aim to prove 
one or another of the following three claims:
	
1.	 All phenomena are causally efficacious, and not just some of them as Dharmakīrti 
claims,
	 2.	 All phenomena are qualitatively mutually identical, meaning it is not the case that 
distinct classes of phenomena exist, as Dharmakīrti claims (principally by distin­
guishing svalakṣaṇas from sāmānyalakṣaṇas); and finally and ultimately
	
3.	 All phenomena are defined by an underlying unity and ontological identity.
And yet, at the beginning of the fourth āhnika, neither Somānanda nor Utpaladeva 
explicitly characterizes the passages there as proffering all the five standard components 
of the well-​known syllogism of the Nyāya,4 as I argue they do. Neither does Somānanda 
in any way make clear he wishes the argument to serve to counter the views of 
Dharmakīrti. Rather, the passage begins in a manner that rather appears simply to fur­
nish a stock Śaiva theological argument. Consider now the entire passage in Sanskrit 
and with the corresponding English translation:
athedānīṃ pravaktavyaṃ yathā [(1) pratijñā→] sarvaṃ śivātmakam |
[(2) hetu→] nāśakto vidyate kaścic chaktaṃ vastv eva te ’pi no  || ŚD 4.1 ||
iṣyante bahavaḥ śaktāḥ sarvasvātantryam āpatet |
athaikasyādhikā śaktir nyūnaśaktinibandhinī || ŚD 4.2 ||
svakāryaviṣaye sarvaḥ śakta eva nibandhanam |
śaktasya śakyate kartum evaṃ cen nānyaśaktatā || ŚD 4.3 ||
[(3) udāharaṇa→] nṛpādisādhanāpekṣā svakarmaphalatā bhavet |
sarvaḥ śakto ’pi sāpekṣa īśavan mohasāmyayoḥ || ŚD 4.4 ||
tasmād [(4) upanaya→] anekabhāvābhiḥ śaktibhis tadabhedataḥ |
[(5) nigamana→] eka eva sthitaḥ śaktaḥ śiva eva tathā tathā  || ŚD 4.5 ||
Next, the manner in which [(1) pratijñā→] everything is of the nature of Śiva is now 
to be explained (by me). [(2) hetu→] Nothing exists that is incapable (of causal ef­
ficacy); (and) that which is capable (of causal efficacy) definitely is a real thing, 
although we certainly do not accept that these many [entities in the world] are them­
selves (individually) capable: that would lead to everything being independent. 
Rather, a superior power of one [capable agent] restrains a subordinate power (of 
the same). Everything(, however,) is fully capable within the domain of its own work; 
(for) the (only) restraining that can be effected belongs to the one [agent] who is ca­
pable. If this is the case, the others are not (individually) capable. [(3) udāharaṇa→] 
The state of being of one who owns the rewards of one’s own actions must depend on 
the means of the king, etc.(, whom one has served). Everything, although capable (of

--- PAGE 1111 ---
1086      John Nemec
 
producing its own effect), is dependent, like the Lord on delusion and (karmic) equa­
nimity. Therefore, [(4) upanaya→] because he remains occupied in various ways with 
the powers, whose natures are multiple, this because he is not different from them, 
[(5) nigamana→] Śiva alone is empowered, he being absolutely unique, one.5
An Argument against the Duality of 
Objects of Awareness
In fact, we here read already Somānanda’s first argument against Dharmakīrti, though 
one imagines it may not yet be obvious given the resonance of the verses in question 
with Śaiva theological formulations. This resonance is particularly evident inasmuch as 
Somānanda says that “real things” (vastus) in the world are “capable” or śakta, the latter 
term of course calling to mind the feminine power or śakti that is invoked across Śaiva 
literatures and in the ŚD itself, as follows for example:
na śivaḥ śaktirahito na śaktir vyatirekiṇī || ŚD 3.2 ||
śivaḥ śaktas tathā bhāvān icchayā kartum īdṛśān |
śaktiśaktimator bhedaḥ śaive jātu na varṇyate || ŚD 3.3 ||
Śiva does not exist apart from śakti; śakti is not different (from Śiva). And Śiva is 
empowered [śakta] to create such entities at will. In Śaivism, no difference whatso­
ever between power and the one possessing the power is described.
Somānanda, however, simultaneously cites the writings of the Buddhist epistemol­
ogist Dharmakīrti and evokes Śaiva theological norms, for in suggesting that nothing 
found in the world is “incapable” (aśakta), ŚD 4.1 clearly draws a contrast with 
the Pramāṇavārttika (PV) regarding the nature of objects of cognition, which for 
Dharmakīrti, as is well known, may be divided into objects that are capable of causal 
efficacy (arthakriyā), on the one hand, and, on the other, what are not real objects, such 
as the floating hair one might falsely sense to be on the eye, since they have no causal 
efficacy.
pramāṇaṃ dvividhaṃ meyadvaividhyāc chaktyaśaktitaḥ |
arthakriyāyāṃ keśādir nārtho ’narthādhimokṣataḥ || PV 3.1 ||
The means of knowledge is two-​fold because the object of knowledge is two-​fold, 
this [i.e., the latter double-​nature] inasmuch as it [i.e., the object] is capable or in­
capable of causal efficiency [arthakriyā]. The hair (one erroneously sees floating on 
one’s eye), for example, is not a real object, because there is no determinate apprehen­
sion of it as such.6
In other words, references in ŚD 4.1cd to a vastu that is either śakta or aśakta may be 
shown to have Dharmakīrti and very possibly PV 3.1 itself in mind, for Somānanda 
denies that any aśakta entity or vastu may exist at all.

--- PAGE 1112 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1087
 
Utpaladeva in explaining Somānanda’s reference to the non-​existence of anything 
that is incapable makes the reference to Dharmakīrti explicit. He does this by speaking 
in the Śivadṛṣṭivṛtti explicitly in terms of the causal efficacy (arthakriyā) of objects. He 
then goes on to describe the nature of the vastu by paraphrasing but reformulating 
Dharmakīrti’s view of the same: the real thing, Utpladeva explains, if it is capable, exists 
in the ultimate sense or is paramārthasat, what is Śiva-​nature itself.7
aśaktaś cārthakriyāyāṃ vidyate ca, ity etāvan nāsti prakhyopākhyākaraṇena tāvad 
avyabhicārāt. śaktaṃ cet, tad vastv eva paramārthasad eva śivarūpam iti .
That which is incapable of causal efficiency and (simultaneously) exists—​there is no 
such thing, because so much [i.e., the nonexistence of such an entity] truly conforms 
with the instrument (of knowing)—​(whether it is) perception [prakhyā] or intellec­
tual reflection [upākhyā].8 If capable, then it definitely is a real thing, it definitely 
exists in the ultimate sense; (thus,) it has Śiva’s nature. This is definitive.
Indeed, though even Utpaladeva’s statement evokes Śaiva theological termi­
nology precisely in referring to the vastu as paramārthasat, it is rather fundamentally 
a reworking of the formulation offered in the NB at 1.14–​15 (tad eva paramārthasat. 
arthakriyāsāmarthyalakṣa​ṇatvād vastunaḥ): “That [svalakṣaṇa] alone is what exists in 
the ultimate sense. This is so because that which is real [vastu] is defined by its capacity 
for causal efficacy.” The argument, then, is crafted in opposition to Dharmakīrti’s two­
fold classification of reality, his distinction of what is the ultimate reality from what is 
merely conventionally real, found in his PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.3 (with PV 3.3ab 
being identical with Pramāṇaviniścaya 2.55ab):
arthakriyāsamarthaṃ yat tad atra paramārthasat |
anyat saṃvṛtisat prokte te svasāmānyalakṣaṇe || PV 3.3 ||
That which is capable of causal efficacy is real in the ultimate sense (paramārthasat), 
here [in the world/​on our view]. What is other is conventionally real (saṃvṛtisat). 
The two are referred to (respectively) as the svalakṣaṇa and the sāmānyalakṣaṇa.
See also PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.54cd:
tasya svapararūpābhyāṃ gater meyadvayaṃ matam || 3.54 ||
It is held (by Dignāga) that there is a pair of objects of cognition, because that [par­
ticular] is understood by its own form (via direct cognition) and by way of another 
form (via inference).
(Translation a slight modification of Franco and Notake 2014, 140.)
This suggests, then, that ŚD 4.1c–​d (nāśakto vidyate kaścic chaktaṃ vastv eva ), what I 
identify as the hetu in Somānanda’s argument, contrasts directly with this position.9
It is for this reason that Utpaladeva repeatedly explains Somānanda’s verses by arguing 
that whatever is found in the world—​whatever is sensible in any sense in consciousness,

--- PAGE 1113 ---
1088      John Nemec
 
including the floating hair—​is real in the ultimate sense, because it does something, at 
the very least causing itself to be known in consciousness. Somānanda, too, is explicit 
in stating as much in what immediately follows what I have identified above as the 
nigamana or conclusion to his syllogism.10 Simply put, according to Somānanda, there 
may be no binary classification of phenomena into qualitatively different classes or types 
of objects of knowledge—​particular, real entities (svalakṣaṇas), on the one hand, and 
conceptual forms, on the other.
An Argument against the 
Nonlinguisticality of Perception
This is also to say that Somānanda rejects the fundamental division of percept from 
concept that is favored by his Buddhist interlocutors. So much is articulated in a diffi­
cult passage of the āhnika (at ŚD 4.81cd–​84ab) for which the commentary is lost. There, 
Somānanda argues in evident consonance with the Mīmāṃsā that the two types of 
objects of which the Buddhists conceive must be mutually integrated in a Śaiva matrix of 
nonduality if his opponent’s position is logically to cohere. For there would otherwise be 
no way for conceptual forms to relate to perceptual phenomena.11
itaś cāsti jagaty aikyaṃ pratyakṣāgrahaṇād12 api || ŚD 4.81 ||
svalakṣaṇena yogitvād vyavahārasya sarvataḥ |
loke cānupapatteś ca pramā vā vyavahāragā13 || ŚD 4.82 ||
bālamūkādivijñānasadṛśī kīdṛśī kriyā14 |
savikalpasya yogitvād yathāvastu grahaḥ katham || ŚD 4.83 ||
tena jñeyam ekam eva vastu bhinne grahaḥ kutaḥ |
And, it is (also) for this (following) reason that there is unity in the universe, be­
cause there would (otherwise) be no apprehension (of that universe) by means of di­
rect cognition, either; (this is so) because discourse/​mundane activity [vyavahāra] is 
everywhere connected with the unique particular in the world, and because it is not 
(otherwise) possible; or, (this is so because) valid knowledge deals with discourse/​
mundane activity. (After all:) Of what kind is the action (of perception) that is sim­
ilar to the awareness of children, mute people, and the like? How(, moreover,) could 
a conceptual cognition accurately apprehend (a svalakṣaṇa, the object of cognition) 
as a result of it being connected (with it,) (if perception and conception were utterly 
divided)? (It cannot.) Thus, one should know the real thing to be absolutely one; if it 
were divided, how could one apprehend it?
One can see that this passage is laden with terminology from the Buddhists—​svalakṣaṇa, 
savikalpa, the vastu—​and Somānanda here clearly cites favorably the Ślokavārttika at 
ŚD 4.83ab. The long and the short of it is that Somānanda agrees that there can be only 
one nature of what is real in the universe. Just as Kumārila accepts a vyakti that is per­
ceivable without conceptualization but also in a manner imbued with the universal, so

--- PAGE 1114 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1089
 
percept and concept, non-​conceptual perception and conceptually imbued cognition, 
cannot by nature be absolutely divided inasmuch as the nature of the object lends itself 
fully to both.
Arguments concerning 
Perceptual Error
Also embedded in the syllogistic logic that opens Somānanda’s fourth chapter is a chal­
lenge to Dharmakīrti’s conception of perceptual error. Simply, if everything in the world 
is Śiva, inasmuch as everything is real, the latter because everything is capable, then 
even what are conventionally understood to be erroneous or illusory cognitions must be 
conceived in the same fashion: everything is real in the ultimate sense (paramārthasat). 
Thus, as I have indicated elsewhere (Nemec 2011, 8 n. 16; cf. Nemec 2012, 233), it is prin­
cipally in the fourth āhnika (though also in the sixth) that Somānanda delivers an argu­
ment for the ultimate reality of apparent illusions, what he promised in the first āhnika to 
explain “later on,” the promise coming in the form of an explicit rebuke of Dharmakīrti’s 
own understanding of the matter:
dṛśyante ’tra tadicchāto bhāvā bhītyādiyogataḥ || ŚD 1.45 ||
tatra mithyāsvarūpaṃ cet sthāpyāgre satyatedṛśām |
By his will, entities are seen here that are associated with fear, etc. If you argue that 
they have an erroneous nature, I will establish the reality of such entities later on.
This passage, as is well known,15 evokes the PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.282:
kāmaśokabhayonmādacaurasvapnādyupaplutāḥ |
abhūtān api paśyanti purato ’vasthitān iva || PV 3.282 ||
He who is blinded by intense desire, by sorrow, by fear, by drunkenness, by dreaming 
of thieves, etc., can see, as clearly as if they were before him, things that, in reality, do 
not exist.16
This denial of the existence of ultimately unreal entities is fashioned in two ways in 
the ŚD corpus. The first, cited here below, is fascinating for dealing with a philosophical 
problem common to other schools of Indian thought, namely, the nature of dreaming 
sleep. Consider Utpaladeva’s ŚDVṛ ad ŚD 4.19-​21ab, which deals with error in this con­
text. There, Utpaladeva argues that even a cognition of something that does not exist 
in the everyday world, such as that of water in a dream, is capable of causal efficacy and 
therefore is real. This is so inasmuch as such cognitions can please the agent who knows 
such cognitions. Causal efficacy is not dependent on the external reality of a cognitive 
experience, then; it may be found even in phenomena that appear only to the internal 
sense organ (the antaḥkaraṇa).17 Thus, the dreamer of the present example may delight

--- PAGE 1115 ---
1090      John Nemec
 
in the satisfaction of drinking water in a dream, the delight being real even while the 
water is merely imagined:18
abhrāntatvād19 vāstavasvapnajalasya pānādyarthakriyā bhrāntāpi syāt, tṛṇnivṛttyā20 
tu tṛptiḥ21 svasaṃvedanasiddhā22 na visaṃvadati23
A causal efficacy—​that of drinking, for example—​must exist (within the dream-​
state) for water that is real in a dream, because it [i.e., the water] is not unreal (in 
the dream), although it [i.e., the causal efficacy] is unreal (outside of the dream); 
and still, with the quenching of one’s thirst (in the dream) there is a satisfaction that, 
having been established in self-​awareness, does not deceive.
What is more, Somānanda may be said somewhat obliquely to make the same claim in 
the passage that Utpaladeva here has explained:24
vyavahārasya bādhā ced vyavahāre yatheṣṭatā |
kvacit satyasuvarṇasya pratyante vyavahāritā || ŚD 4.19 ||
kūṭakārṣāpaṇādau vā vyavahāro ’pi dṛśyate |
tāvatā vyavahāro vā yad ātmāhlādamātrakam || ŚD 4.20 ||
arthakriyāsamarthatvam etad evāsya vāstavam |
Objection: The invalidation is of the mundane activity. (Reply:) The mundane activity 
is as it is wished to be. Somewhere in a bordering country, real gold is the currency of 
trade; but trade [vyavahāra] also is seen in alloyed coins and the like. Alternatively, 
(one may understand the matter as follows:) the mundane activity [vyavahāra] exists 
(only) to the extent that the self is delighted; this alone is the true capacity for the pur­
poseful action belonging to this [object used in mundane activity].
More generally—​this is the second analysis of error—​the ŚD details at length an ar­
gument for the reality of supposedly erroneous perceptions, as I have shown elsewhere 
(see Nemec 2012, 227–​235). Their reality, Somānanda again argues, consists of the very 
fact that such perceptions appear in consciousness. In making this case, he suggests that 
Dharmakīrti can draw a distinction between real and unreal objects of knowledge only 
conventionally, and only by first implicitly accepting the Śaiva view that all phenomena 
are real qua appearing in and as Śiva-​as-​consciousness:
mithyājñānavikalpyānāṃ sattvaṃ cidvyaktiśaktatā || ŚD 4.7 ||
vidyate tat tad atrāpi śivatvaṃ . . . 
Those [perceptions] that could be conceived of as erroneous cognitions are found 
to be capable of manifestation in consciousness. That constitutes their reality; (and) 
that [reality] (in turn) is the Śiva-​nature that exists here [in even these “erroneous” 
perceptions], as well.25
So much effectively claims what Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikās (ĪPK) and 
Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikāvṛtti (ĪPKVṛ) so famously stated at ĪPK 2.4.3a–​d, that all that 
is inexistent must be only that—​totally beyond the realm of the knowable—​while all 
that is existent need do nothing to obtain that existence. Anything appearing in and as

--- PAGE 1116 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1091
 
consciousness is real, existent qua appearing as such; nothing that cannot appear in con­
sciousness may be countenanced at all.
yad asat tad asad yuktā nāsataḥ satsvarūpatā |
sato ’pi na punaḥ sattālābhenārtho . . .
That which is nonexistent is nonexistent; it is not tenable that that which is nonex­
istent has an existent nature. As for that which is existent, by contrast, there is no 
need for it to acquire existence . . . 
Note also the similarity of expression of ĪPK 2.4.3a with ŚD 4.6ab: tathā yatra sad ity 
evaṃ pratītis tad asat katham.26
Endeavoring logically to guarantee this proposition—​that no cognition is 
erroneous—​Somānanda devotes considerable effort to proving that no cognition may 
be said to be invalidated, this—​again—​in an explicit dispute with Dharmakīrti. He 
argues that no cognition or any element of the experience thereof may be shown to have 
been false subsequent to the cognition thereof. None may be contradicted, that is, none 
may be said not to have been real in at least the sense of objects having been caused to 
be known, what is a causally efficacious effect caused primarily by the object itself. Thus, 
the moment of time in which a cognition appeared, the act of its production, the agent’s 
experience thereof, the sense organ that knew it, the relation of the sense organ to the 
object of cognition in question, the activity of seeing erroneously, and the locus where 
such a cognition is said to have occurred all are said not to be impossible to invalidate.27
It is not possible even for a subsequent cognition to contradict a previous one. This 
Somānanda argues by claiming that neither of the two types of contradiction identified 
by Dharmakīrti himself—​mutual nonconcomitancy (sahānavasthiti) and incompat­
ibility (parasparaparihāra)—​validly describe any subsequent cognition that might be 
posited as the invalidator of a preceding one.
sahānavasthitir nāsti virodhaḥ prāgvināśataḥ |
anyonyaparihāro vā jñānājñānātmakaḥ sthitaḥ || ŚD 4.24 ||
The incompatibility that is impossibility of (the) co-​presence (of mutually distinct 
entities) [sahānavasthiti] does not exist (here), due to the destruction in an earlier mo­
ment (of the prior cognition, before the subsequent cognition arises); nor does a mutual 
exclusion [anyonyaparihāra] exist, one of awareness and the absence of awareness.28
There can be little doubt that Somānanda here has in mind the Nyāyabindu (NB) at 3.74–​77.
NB 3.74: dvividho hi padārthānāṃ virodhaḥ.
Opposition between objects is of a double kind.
NB 3.75: avikalakāraṇasya bhavato ’nyabhāve ’bhāvād virodhagatiḥ .
When (one fact that) has duration (as long as) the sum-​total of its causes remains 
unimpaired, and it (then) vanishes as soon as another, (the opposed,) fact appears, it 
follows that both are incompatible.29
NB 3.76: śītoṣṇasparśavat.

--- PAGE 1117 ---
1092      John Nemec
 
. . . just as the sensations of heat and cold.
NB 3.77: parasparaparihārasthitalakṣaṇatayā vā bhāvābhāvavat.
There is also (opposition between two facts) when their own essence consists in mu­
tual exclusion, as between the affirmation and negation (of the same thing).30
Simply put, Somānanda argues that error cannot (ultimately, ontologically) exist, be­
cause no cognition qua appearing in and as consciousness can be invalidated.
Arguments against apoha as Defining 
the Universal (sāmānya)
Still elsewhere (namely, at ŚD 4.68 and following), Somānanda challenges the no­
tion that inference could occur without the existence of a real universal or sāmānya. 
His rationale, elaborated further in the commentary of Utpaladeva (this is one of 
the last passages of the ŚD for which the commentary remains extant), suggests that 
reference to a negative category could not explain the ways in which an entity could 
be positively identified by language. The problem at hand is this: how can categories 
of entities be comprehended or even exist at all unless some essential nature defines 
them as such?
The Buddhist opponent argues that so much results not from the existence of a 
real, universal nature (sāmānya) belonging to various entities, for they deny the per­
manence that the existence of such a nature would presuppose and require. They in­
stead argue that entities of a class, all of which are in reality utterly unique and utterly 
particular in their nature (these are what they refer to as svalakṣaṇas), may only be 
classed contingently, by what makes them relatively speaking mutually similar. The 
relative similarity lies in a similarity of the effects they can have in the world: they 
perform in a manner that is mutually similar and, more importantly, dissimilar from 
other entities. This classing by way of relative capacity or function they refer to as 
apoha, or exclusion. And the Buddhists insist that the similarity is built only on ne­
gation, on the fact of the nonsimilarity of the entities in the constructed category 
with other entities to be found in the world. Something is of a class because it cannot 
be said not to be functionally like others in that class, and because entities not in the 
class can be said not to be functionally like the members of the class in question. In 
this way, entities may be conventionally classed as “of a kind” but without accepting 
they are of some essential or true (and therefore unchanging) nature, such that the 
class may be said ultimately to exist.
Somānanda, by contrast, argues that the quality that defines this contingent classifica­
tion requires there to be something that really is held in common among those entities. 
They must in fact share a common nature or else no similarity even defined on a rela­
tional basis could be identified. In other words, Somānanda argues that the very de­
nial of the real universal nature (sāmānya) of entities for which the Buddhists argue

--- PAGE 1118 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1093
 
implicitly presupposes that that very nature exists. Without the real universal, moreover, 
there would be no way to comprehend or even refer to entities of a particular class.
bauddhasya cen na sāmānyam anumānaṃ nivartate |
yathā suvarṇabhāṇḍeṣu na tathā hematāmrayoḥ || ŚD 4.68 ||
suvarṇam ānayety ukte śūnyatā kiṃ pratīyate |
viśeṣasparśavirahāt kadācid api yujyate || ŚD 4.69 ||
tattvasyaikyaṃ vinā na syād ekasyaiva viruddhatā |
sāmānyena viśeṣeṇa katham ekasya yogitā || ŚD 4.70 ||
If for the Buddhist there is no (real) universal, (then) inference ceases to occur.31 
(When one says “bring the gold,”) (an awareness based on verbal knowledge 
rooted in the universal does) not (arise) with respect to (mixed) gold and copper 
as (it arises) with respect to (pure) gold ornaments.32 Is it absence [śūnyatā] that is 
perceived when one says, “bring the gold,” as a result of the absence of contact with a 
particular (that is not gold)? Is that appropriate somewhere? It could not be so in the 
absence of the unity of reality: (for,) the one [object, e.g., a gold bracelet] itself would 
be (self-​)contradictory. How could the one [object] be connected with the universal, 
(and) with the particular?
Utpaladeva’s ŚDVṛ and ŚD 4.68–​70 reads in part as follows:
atha sāmānyaṃ bauddhasya nāsti, tad anumānaṃ sāmānyaviṣayam abhīṣṭaṃ hīyate. 
tathā sāmānyaṃ vinā yathā suvarṇam ānayety ukte sauvarṇakaṭakakeyūrādiṣv 
artheṣu pratītir na tathā hematāmrayoḥ, tāmrāsaṃsparśena hemna eva pratīteḥ, 
kaṭakakeyūrādiṣu tu na kasyacit parityāgaḥ. anyāpohasyāpi sāmānyatve ’bhyupagate 
kiṃ suvarṇam ānayeti śūnyatā prasajyapratiṣedharūpā pratīyate viśeṣasparśavirahād 
dhetoḥ, api tv asauvarṇavyāvṛttāḥ suvarṇapratyavamarśakāriṇaḥ ta ekatām 
āpādyamānā viśeṣā eveti kadācid api yujyata iti kākvā vyākhyeyam. na kadācid apy 
etad yujyate śūnyatāpi bhātīti. tad etac cittattvasya padārtheṣv aikyaṃ vinā na syād 
ekasyaivārthasya parasparaviruddhatvāt.
If there is no universal for the Buddhist, then he abandons the inference he lays 
claim to, which has the universal as its object. And without the universal, when 
one says “bring the gold” the awareness [pratīti] (that “this is gold” that arises for 
someone looking for gold) with respect to golden objects such as a bracelet or an 
upper-​arm bracelet would not occur as it does with respect to (entities consisting 
of alloyed metal of both) gold and copper, because the awareness of gold only 
[eva] (in the context of both gold and copper) results from the absence of any con­
tact with copper, while nothing at all is left out of (the awareness of those entities 
that are made only of gold,) the kaṭaka and keyūra bracelets, for example. When 
one [i.e., the Buddhist] accepts the exclusion of the other [anyāpoha], for its part, 
as the universal, (then one may ask:) is it an absence the form of which is a pure 
negation [i.e., the total absence of that which is non-​gold] that is cognized when 
one says “bring the gold,” the cause being that there is no contact with a particular 
(that is non-​gold)? Or, (to put the matter in terms of that with which one posi­
tively does have contact,) is it those particulars alone that are (mentally) excluded 
from that which is not made of gold, that (are cognized,) produce the judgment

--- PAGE 1119 ---
1094      John Nemec
 
of gold, (and thereby) receive a unity (as a single class of entities—​as “golden”)? 
[Somānanda] says in a certain tone of voice [i.e., with contemptuous irony] that 
it is this that must be explained (by his Buddhist opponent), viz., whether so 
much is somewhere appropriate; (and so much is not possible, for) this is never 
appropriate—​that absence, for its part, appears. Thus, this [view of the sāmānya] 
is not possible in the absence of a unity of the reality of consciousness in (all) 
things, because (in its absence) there would be a mutual contradiction in the na­
ture of one and the same object.
Utpaladeva here explains the problem of a universal constructed exclusively on ne­
gation in three ways. First, he interprets Somānanda’s reference to the two contexts in 
which a sāmānya may be operative, one where one becomes aware of objects made of 
pure gold after someone issues the order, “bring the gold,” the other where, after the 
same order, one is to be made aware of objects made (if I understand the matter cor­
rectly) of an alloyed metal containing both gold and copper. Utpaladeva notes that 
Somānanda is correct in saying the awareness one might have would not be the same 
in each case, for in the first instance nothing at all is left out of what one sees—​all that is 
present is pure gold, but in the latter instance, one could have an awareness of nothing 
but gold only by way of making no contact with the copper, which would not be possible 
in the instance in question, meaning Somānanda argues that one could not be aware of 
“gold” under such circumstances at all!
Next, Utpaladeva glosses ŚD 4.69. There, Somānanda queries how it is possible that 
an absence or śūnyatā could be perceived when one is told “bring the gold.” The problem 
is as follows: if gold, for example, consists of nothing but not non-​gold, then awareness 
of gold amounts to the absence of an awareness of “not gold”; therefore, Utpaladeva 
suggests, the absence of contact with a particular that is not gold (such as copper, e.g.), 
what is in fact an absence of an awareness of that which is not gold, could lead one to 
have an awareness of gold.
Finally, Utpaladeva queries the nature of exclusion when one cognizes the particulars 
the nature of which is to produce an understanding not non-​x. He asks whether it is 
appropriate for these (unique) particulars, consisting only in the exclusion of what is 
not gold, to lead uniformly to the judgment “gold” and thus acquire a unity. That is, he 
argues that it is difficult for the Buddhists to explain how the particulars themselves that 
are seen (as not non-​x) can lead to an awareness of a particular category of entities neg­
atively so defined: “Or (tu), [to put the matter in terms of that with which one positively 
does have contact,] is it (api) those particulars alone (viśeṣā eva) that are [mentally] 
excluded from that which is not made of gold (asauvarṇavyāvṛttāḥ), that [are cognized,] 
produce the judgment of gold (suvarṇapratyavamarśakāriṇaḥ), [and thereby] receive a 
unity [as a single class of entities—​as ‘golden’]?” Put differently, the previous instance 
involved the production of an awareness of a void, a total absence or prasajyapratiṣedha; 
the present instance understands a cognition of something that is present only inas­
much as what one does contact in the cognition is that which excludes what it is not, or 
in other words is another kind of absence.

--- PAGE 1120 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1095
 
Arguments against Convention 
(saṃketa) Explaining Denotation
Somānanda argues that another consequence of a noneternal universal would be that 
language would lose its denotative capacity. He claims that it is not possible for a theory 
of denotation to rely solely on convention (saṃketa), because the very establishment of 
the convention—​that a word may properly be taken to refer to a particular thing in the 
world—​could never occur in the absence of the existence of a prior and innate connec­
tion of word and thing. A theory of linguistic meaningfulness based on convention, that 
is, presumes the existence of the very possibility of the relation of word and thing that 
it seeks to explain, a connection that Somānanda, like his Mīmāṃsaka counterparts, 
evidently understands to be natural. Yet again, then, Somānanda suggests that his 
interlocutors’ philosophical position is tenable only by way of their implicit acceptance 
of his own: there must be one kind of phenomenon in the universe, and its nature cannot 
be split, the conceptual from the perceptual.
kathaṃ na devadattasya yajñadattavad ākhyayā |
atra saṃketitatvāc cet saṃketenātra kiṃ kṛtam || ŚD 4.78 ||
saṃyogaś cen na dūreṣu mūrtāmūrteṣu yujyate |
śabdasyoccāritadhvaṃsān naṣṭānaṣṭadvaye na ca || ŚD 4.79 ||
vācyavācakarūpaś cet sa eva33 niyamaḥ kutaḥ |
uktasya34 vācakatvaṃ hi vācyatvam aparasya tu || ŚD 4.80 ||
vācyavācakarūpatve vācyavācakatānvayaḥ |
How is one like Yajñadatta not (designated) by Devadatta’s name? (The Buddhist 
opponent’s) Objection: Because of the fact that there is agreement here (regarding the 
one denoted by the name). (Somānanda’s Reply:) What service is done here by the agree­
ment? (The Buddhist’s) Objection: A connection (of the name with the person named). 
(Somānanda’s Reply:) That [i.e., the connection or saṃyoga] is not possible with respect 
to those [entities, i.e., what are denoted and the words that denote them,] which are 
(mutually) distant, which (respectively) have a form and do not have a form; nor, given 
that speech expires after it is uttered, is it (possible) with respect to the pair (in ques­
tion), which (respectively) have perished [viz., the name “Devadatta,” after it is uttered] 
and not-​perished [viz., the perduring Devadatta himself]. (The Buddhist’s) Objection: It 
[i.e., the saṃyoga] exists in the form of designatum and designator [vācyavācakarūpa]. 
(Somānanda’s Reply:) Wherefrom this necessity? For what is uttered [i.e., speech, the 
name] is that which designates, while that which is designated is something different. 
If (you argue:) it [i.e., the niyama or necessity] is (found in) the (very) nature of the 
designatum and designator [vācyavācakarūpatve], (we reply:) there is(, in that case,) a 
definite link of the nature of the designatum to that of the designator.35
The absence of a real—​nonconstructed, substantial—​universal (sāmānya) in the phi­
losophy of the Buddhist epistemologists, Somānanda further argues, would render not

--- PAGE 1121 ---
1096      John Nemec
 
just language but also inferential reasoning impossible. For, he suggests, it is impossible 
for his Buddhist opponent to explain the possibility of inferring the presence of fire where 
smoke is visible (for example), this in the absence of a unity that could guarantee the 
very possibility of associating one svalakṣaṇa (e.g., that of smoke) with another (e.g., that 
of fire), even if the invariable concomitance of the two were apprehended. The reason 
offered to justify this claim is the fact that each svalakṣaṇa, understood by the Buddhists 
to be absolutely unique, would be incapable of effecting a generalized and generalizable 
instance of inferential knowledge abstracted from the unique particulars in question. 
One would have to presume the existence of a generic nature of a svalakṣaṇa to know it.
tathānumānaṃ na bhaved dhūmāgnyor anvaye kvacit || ŚD 4.84 ||
apūrvayor gṛhīte ’pi tatkālaṃ gatayor dvayoḥ |
agṛhīte na gṛhītaḥ saṃbandho ’gniḥ pratīyate || ŚD 4.85 ||
And, no inference could arise anywhere (from a direct cognition, in the absence 
of the existence of a real universal), even if the invariable concomitance of smoke 
and fire(, for example,) were apprehended, the two being unique entities that are 
no longer existent at that time (of the inference). If(, moreover,) that [invariable 
concomitance] has not been apprehended, the relation (between the perception 
of smoke and the presence of fire) is (also) not apprehended; (thus,) the fire is not 
cognized (by way of an inference based in seeing the appearance of smoke).36
Somānanda further argues that no conventional, constructed understanding of the 
nature of the universal could serve to explain how the divide between a truly unique 
svalakṣaṇa and a general characteristic thereof (such as having the nature of “fire,” or 
having the nature of “smoke”) could be bridged, which is indispensably necessary for in­
ferential reasoning. He in fact reasons that it is the Buddhists’ own understanding of the 
universal that proves that no instance of valid knowledge (pramā) could be produced 
thereby.37 Not even a sādṛśya or “similarity” among perceptions of unique svalakṣaṇas 
could explain the same, Somānanda says, because the nature of the sādṛśya by definition 
cannot with any veridicality be associated with svalakṣaṇas when they are in fact unequiv­
ocally and utterly unique. Only by sharing a true, common nature, a real quality—​what is 
impermissible on the Buddhist’s own formulation—​could perceptions of svalakṣaṇas be 
mutually identified or associated.38 In a word, much in the manner of his critique of inval­
idation, Somānanda here exhibits a reliance on a critique of Buddhist ontology to suggest 
that the disparate svalakṣaṇas could never be properly mutually related such that one (ut­
terly unique) svalakṣaṇa could lead to a valid inference regarding the presence of another.
sāmānyam aviśeṣaṃ ced aviśeṣāt kutaḥ pramā |
viśeṣasyāpy apūrvatvāt39 kathaṃ cāsti samanvayaḥ || ŚD 4.86 ||
sādṛśyād atha cen nāsti yāthātmyena samāgamaḥ |
na ca vātrānumānatvaṃ dhūmataḥ kevalād bhavet || ŚD 4.87 ||
Objection (of the Buddhist opponent): There is a universal; it is the non-​particular.40 
(Reply:) How (on your view) is valid knowledge the product of a non-​particular?

--- PAGE 1122 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1097
 
And how, since the particular (according to you) is, for its part, unprecedented, could 
a connection exist (of that unique particular with the aviśeṣa or universal)? Now, (on 
the one hand,) if you argue it [i.e., the connection (samanvaya)] is the result of simi­
larity [sādṛśya],41 (we reply:) there is no conjunction [samāgama] (of the sādṛśya and 
the conceptions it conveys) with the real nature (of the particular). Nor, on the other 
hand, could a legitimate inference (of the fire) arise, here, from (a cognition of) the 
(svalakṣaṇa of) smoke alone.
The Buddhist opponent, that is, must implicitly assume the unity for which Somānanda 
argues in order logically to proffer the very position they claim as true. The division 
of entities into two types, ultimately real svalakṣaṇas, on the one hand, and merely 
constructed and therefore only conventionally real universals (sāmānyas), on the other, 
is, on Somānanda’s view, simply untenable.
Arguments against Momentariness 
Devoid of Overarching Unity
Finally, a similar line of attack is prosecuted, as well, in response to the kṣaṇabhaṅgavāda 
(to which Somānanda explicitly refers at ŚD 4.93c), the doctrine of the instantaneous 
destruction of each momentary svalakṣaṇa.
kṣaṇabhaṅgaparāmarśād apy etad upapadyate || ŚD 4.93 ||
śaktāśaktavikalpair hi dīpajvālādyudāhṛtaiḥ |
sthiratā nopapannā te pratyakṣenāpi ca sthitā || ŚD 4.94 ||
sthiratvaṃ kṣaṇikatvāc42 ca pramāṇāṃ cintayā sthitam |
avisaṃvādirūpāc43 ca viruddhaṃ tat kathaṃ bhavet || ŚD 4.95 ||
yāvan na sarvabhāvānām ekatvena vyavasthitiḥ |
pareṇa kṣaṇabhaṅgasya parāmarśāgamaḥ kutaḥ || ŚD 4.96 ||
tato ’py etac chivātmatvaṃ bhāvānām upapadyate |
This can be rationally justified by a consideration of (your doctrine of the) instan­
taneous destruction (of all phenomena), as well. For, according to you, (real) per­
manence [sthiratā] is not obtained by way of conceptual constructions—​which are 
exemplified by the (apparently perduring) flame of a lamp, for example—​whether 
they are capable or incapable,44 nor is it established by direct cognition, either.45 
Moreover, because the instances of valid knowledge [pramā] are (thus) momen­
tary in nature, their stability is established (only) by way of intellectual reflection; 
and, given that (you maintain that) they are by nature reliable [avisaṃvādi],46 (we 
ask:) how can they be possessed of that [stability,] which is contrary (to their real 
nature)? As long as there is no fixed existence of all entities (in the universe) as a 
unity, how could another bring one to reflect on the instantaneous destruction (at 
all)? It is also for that reason that this, the Śiva-​nature of (all) entities, is rationally 
justified.

--- PAGE 1123 ---
1098      John Nemec
 
Somānanda here argues that the utter uniqueness and momentariness of all phenomena 
would inhibit all inferentiality and even conceptuality. This is so because the very stability of 
any instance of valid knowledge (pramā) must of necessity be, on the Buddhists’ own logic, 
conceptually constructed and therefore self-​contradictory in nature. That is, Somānanda 
argues that a pramā is deceptive (visaṃvādaka) on their own definition, for while it is un­
derstood to furnish valid knowledge, what it offers is a form that in its very capacity to per­
dure is false: it deceptively presents a stability (or nonmomentariness) where none exists. 
This, then, constitutes Somānanda’s critique of inference for oneself (svārthānumāna). And 
in the absence of a unity of all phenomena, Somānanda concludes in a rhetorical flourish, 
the instantaneous destruction of all—​including the instantaneous destruction even of the 
abstract concept or idea of “instantaneous destruction” itself—​would render it impossible 
for the kṣaṇabhaṅga doctrine to be communicated to one by another. So much, then, for the 
Buddhists’ conception of inference for another (parārthānumāna).
Conclusion
The logic of Somānanda’s siddhānta, in sum, implicitly and explicitly challenges the 
notion that causality could function in an impersonal manner and by being grounded 
in an ontology recognizing a multiplicity of phenomena only related by such (contin­
gent) causal events. Indeed, the entire core ontology of the PV is challenged in that 
Somānanda and Utpaladeva reject the notion, expressed at PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 
3.44, that everything that is real necessarily ceases to exist.47 Instead, Somānanda argues 
not only that disparate appearances, disparate capable phenomena, could not be co­
ordinated and could not interact in the absence of the existence of an organizing ma­
trix, directed by an agent who possesses and directs and orders capable phenomena as 
capacities—​and who is identified with them, allowing thereby such coordination and 
direction—​but also that everything is always and ever existent, if not always percep­
tible.48 He argues, in a word, that none of the philosophical positions of the Buddhists 
addressed by him is logically supportable unless a unity as mapped in the syllogism 
found at the beginning of the āhnika, a unity embodied in the person of an ever-​existent, 
power-​wielding god, Śiva, is implicitly assumed to exist. For all of existence in being 
perceivable and experienced is real in that it causes such experience in the first place. 
All is capable. And capable entities can only be circumscribed in their effectiveness by a 
governing power, an agent who controls them. The very multiplicity that Somānanda’s 
Buddhist opponents describe demands a unity and a controlling agent.
With this, one witnesses a relatively early exemplar of the sophistication of the 
“postscriptural” works produced by tantric philosophical authors. In Somānanda’s case, 
the Śaiva scriptural background is rendered relatively indeterminate and, while evoked 
rather clearly, somewhat underexamined by him in the ŚD. But its presence is felt even 
in his turn to arguing about and for a philosophically grounded understanding of di­
vinity and reality that largely characterizes Śaiva postscriptural works. In making such a

--- PAGE 1124 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1099
 
philosophical turn, the authors of the Pratyabhijñā, beginning with Somānanda, devoted 
considerable attention to their Buddhist interlocutors, whose philosophical sophistication 
and influence, in Kashmir of the day and well beyond the valley, demanded nothing less.
Acknowledgment
An earlier version of this chapter was presented at Harvard University on May 7, 2022. I thank 
Ching Keng and Parimal Patil for the invitation to that very stimulating one-​day conference in 
Cambridge, MA.
Notes
	1.	 Reference to these figures as “postscriptural” authors cites the nomenclature of Sanderson 
1988, 690–​704.
	2.	 Utpaladeva explains ŚD 4.1–​2ab in part as follows (for which, see Nemec 2021, 184, ll. 6–​
7 of the critical edition): dūṣananirākaraṇād anantaraṃ vidhimukhenaiva saṃprati tad 
vaktavyam asmābhir yathā sarvaṃ śivātmakaṃ sidhyati tad ucyate |. “Immediately after 
repudiating the (supposed) faults (identified by others regarding our non-​dualism), this is 
now to be declared affirmatively by me, (namely,) the manner in which everything is proven 
to be of the nature of Śiva. That is what [Somānanda] said” (at ŚD 4.1ab).
	3.	 The degree to which other Buddhist authors influenced Somānanda is somewhat indeter­
minate. A number of the arguments he prosecutes, for example, would work equally well 
against Dignāga, and the particular contributions of Dharmottara are difficult to identify 
with any certainty in the ŚD. What justifies singling out the influence of Dharmakīrti in par­
ticular, however, is the fact that Somānanda clearly cites him in several passages of the ŚD.
	4.	 These passages are consonant with what is presented at ŚD 1.2, where Utpaladeva in his 
ŚDVṛ glosses the verse in question by suggesting it encapsulates a logical argument: he there 
identifies a thesis or pratijñā, a reason or hetu, and a means of knowing them (pramāṇa). 
See Nemec 2011: 104–​106 and 277–​278. For the Nyāya syllogism see NS 1.1.32.
	5.	 This rendering is a slight modification of what is found at Nemec 2021, 62–​66. See also 
Nemec 2021, 6, esp. n. 11.
	6.	 The present rendering is a slight modification of that of Franco and Notake 2014, 29.
	7.	 See Nemec 2021, 184, ll. 7–​9 of the critical edition.
	8.	 The two terms, prakhyā and upākhyā, deployed here to displace the terminology ubiqui­
tously found in the writings of the Buddhist epistemologists (pratyakṣa and anumāna), are 
also paired elsewhere in Utpaladeva’s oeuvre. See, e.g., the Ajaḍapramātṛsiddhi, vv. 2 and 3. 
Lawrence (2009, 642) there translates the terms, respectively, with “basic knowledge” and 
“expressed knowledge” and notes (Lawrence 2009, 642, n. 75) that Abhinavagupta also pairs 
the terms in his ĪPV commentary at verses 1.1 and 1.21, and in the first of his two benedictory 
verses to the Dhvanyālokalocana (about which see Ingalls, Masson, and Patwardhan 1990, 
43, who translate, respectively, with “genius” and “speech,” renderings that seem to have 
been influenced by the Bālapriyā subcommentary of Rāmaṣāraka, where the terms are 
respectively glossed with kaveḥ pratibhā and vacanam). The terms are also paired, for ex­
ample, at Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī (ĪPVV) and ĪPK 2.3.8 and in Yogarāja’s com­
mentary on the Paramārthasāra of Abhinavagupta at verse 44.

--- PAGE 1125 ---
1100      John Nemec
 
	 9.	 Cf., e.g., ŚDVṛ ad ŚD 4.6–​7ab (ll. 40–​41 of the edition of Nemec 2021, 189).
	10.	 ŚD 4.6–​7ab reads as follows: tathā yatra sad ity evaṃ pratītis tad asat katham | yat sat 
tat paramārtho hi paramārthas tataḥ śivaḥ || ŚD 4.6 || sarvabhāveṣu cidvyakteḥ sthitaiva 
paramārthatā |. (Thus, how could that [i.e., the vastu] be inexistent where it is perceived in 
this way as existing? Indeed, that which is existent is the ultimate reality; (and since) it is 
the ultimate reality, it follows from that that it is Śiva. The state of being the ultimate reality 
is fully present in all entities, because they are manifested in consciousness.)
	11.	 Given Somānanda’s well-​known and vociferous rejection of Bhartṛhari’s ontology, to 
which he devoted an entire āhnika of the ŚD, one may rightly question how, precisely, 
he comes to accept a concept that is evocative of—​not at all to say identifiable with—​a 
central tenet of the philosophy of the Grammarians, namely, the fact that all phenomena 
are imbued with a nature that is śabda or “speech.” (That all is infused with śabda is of 
course expressed at Vākyapadīya (VP) 1.131ab, also cited at ŚD 2.10ab.) Suffice it here to 
say Somānanda evidently follows Kumārila in understanding the nature of the object 
perceived to be imbued with linguisticality inasmuch as a universal or sāmānya is innately 
associated with it. This does not suggest, however, that Somānanda denies the possibility 
of nonconceptual perception, as Kumārila also does not.
	12.	 pratyakṣāgrahaṇād] TKed.; pratyakṣād grahaṇād C. All manuscript sources for the ŚD and 
Utpaladeva’s commentary thereon that are cited in the present chapter are explained in de­
tail in Nemec 2021, 42–​48.
	13.	 vā vyavahāragā] conj.; ca vyavahāragā TKed.; vācyavahārataḥ C. I propose a conjec­
tural emendation of vā vyavahāragā where Ked., along with T, reads ca vyavahāragā  and 
C witnesses vācyavahārataḥ, because the close similarity of cya and vya in devanāgarī 
suggests that the corrupted testimony of C has precisely this reading underlying it.
	14.	 Clear reference here is made to Ślokavārttika (pratyakṣapariccheda) vv. 112–​113: asti hy 
ālocanājñānaṃ prathamaṃ nirvikalpakam | bālamūkādivijñānasadṛśaṃ śuddhavastujam 
|| na viśeṣo na sāmānyaṃ tadānīm anubhūyate | tayor ādhārabhūtā tu vyaktir evāvasīyate 
||. McCrea 2013, 135 translates as follows: “First there is an initial perception (ālocanā)—​a 
non-​conceptual awareness, similar to the awareness of children, mutes, and the like, and 
arising purely from the object. At that time, neither particular nor universal is experienced, 
but, rather, the individual (vyakti), which is the basis (ādhāra) of both, is apprehended.” 
See also the translation, explanation, and notes to these verses in Taber 2005, 94, 202–​205.
	 	   Here, Kumārila explicitly and directly challenges a core assumption of the Buddhist 
epistemologists, namely, that a clear and absolute distinction exists between the object of 
direct cognition or pratyakṣa, on the one hand, which they claim is purely perceptual in na­
ture, and the product of inference or anumāna, on the other hand, which they understand 
to be entirely conceptual in nature. As McCrea (2013) says of this passage, “By introducing 
as the content of our initial moment of perceptual awareness the entire object, undiffer­
entiated but comprising both individuality and universality in its ‘dual nature,’ Kumārila 
aims to defuse Dignāga’s critique of universals as something introduced only in subsequent 
moments of awareness, and therefore not truly a perception of the object at all.”
	 	   So much is further explained at ŚV (pratyakṣapariccheda) vv. 118–​120: nirvikalpakabodhe 
’pi dvyātmakasyāpi vastunaḥ | grahaṇaṃ lakṣaṇākhyeyaṃ jñātrā śuddhaṃ tu gṛhyate || na 
cāsādhāraṇatvena paravyāvṛttyakalpanāt | viśeṣānugamākḷpteḥ sāmānyam iti nāpi tat || 
tataḥ paraṃ punar vastu dharmair jātyādibhir yayā | buddhyāvasīyate sāpi pratyakṣatvena 
saṃmatā ||. (Even in nonconceptual awareness, there is apprehension of a thing with a dual 
nature (dvyātmaka): it can be explained via definitions, but it is grasped in its pure form

--- PAGE 1126 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1101
 
by the knower—​not as something unique, since it does not conceptualize the exclusion of 
others, nor as “a universal” since it does not conceptualize recurrence across (a range of) 
individuals. After that, however, the awareness which determines the thing by way of its 
properties, such as its class character (jātyādi), is likewise regarded as perception) (trans­
lation McCrea’s). Compare also with the rendering of Taber 2005, 98. Note also that, ac­
cording to Pārthasārathi Miśra, the “dual nature” is that of the sāmānya and the viśeṣa. See 
his ŚVNRĀ on the passage in question: dvyātmakasya sāmānyaviśeṣātmakasyety arthaḥ.
	 	   To sum up, Somānanda here deploys Kumārila’s conception of perception against that 
of his Buddhist opponents, to suggest that the nature and location, as it were, of the 
universal or sāmānya cannot be ontologically separated from the nature of the object 
with which it is related. See also Nemec 2019, 258–​261. Finally, see Taber 2005, 1–​43 for 
a thorough treatment of the nature of conceptualized and nonconceptual perception in 
Kumārila’s thought.
	15.	 See, e.g., Gnoli 1957, 22.
	16.	 Translation of Gnoli 1957, 22, also cited in Nemec 2011, 143–​144, n. 335, where, regrettably, 
the citation erroneously directs the reader to a (nonexistent) page 28 of Gnoli’s article.
	17.	 About the bāhya-​ and antaḥ-​karaṇas, see Nemec 2021, 130, n. 283, which cites ĪPK 2.4.3–​
4 (also cited and translated at Nemec 2021, 115–​116, n. 237), and also the corresponding 
passage of the ĪPKVṛ cited and translated at Nemec 2021, 124, n. 263. Cf. ĪPKVṛ ad ĪPK 
1.8.8. Finally, see ĪPK and ĪPKVr. ad 2.2.2, where Utpaladeva suggests that there are two 
objects of knowledge, internal and external, what (we know from the overall structure of 
his system) may be cognized by corresponding internal and external senses.
	18.	 See ŚDVṛ ad ŚD 4.19–​21ab, especially at lines 130–​131 of Nemec 2021, 199.
	19.	 abhrāntatvād] GJS2a.c.S3S5; bhrāntatvād DS2p.c.PRKed.
	20.	 tṛṇnivṛttyā] DGJS2p.c. S3S5Pp.c.Ked.; tṛnivṛttyā S2a.c., tpaṇnivṛttyā Pa.c., tyaṇnivṛtyā R
	21.	 tṛptiḥ] DGJS2S3S5Ked.; tṛttiḥ PR
	22.	 svasaṃvedanasiddhā] DS2S3S5 PRKed.; svasaṃvedasiddhā GJ
	23.	 visaṃvadati] DGp.c.JS2S3S5PKed.; saṃvivadati Ga.c., saṃvadati R
	24.	 An evident parallel to ŚD 4.19–​21ab is also to be found at ĪPK 1.7.14. See also, esp., the intro­
ductory passage (avataraṇikā) of Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV (vol. 1, p. 312, ll. 3–​9) prior to ĪPK 
1.7.14, which alludes to the concerns raised in ŚD 4.19–​21ab, though in the ĪPK and ĪPKVṛ 
the reference to error is elided in preference for commentary on more and less mundane 
activity in the world.
	25.	 The same is also cited in Nemec 2012, 228, n. 9. On the textual variants found herein, see 
the critical edition and footnote 35 of the translation in Nemec 2021. On the word order 
(anvaya) of the verse, see footnote 36 of the translation in Nemec 2021. Cf. ŚDVṛ ad ŚD 
4.7cd–​9, ll. 49–​50 of the critical edition of Nemec 2021 and note the parallels with ŚDVṛ ad 
ŚD 4.6–​7ab, recorded in footnote 42 of the translation of Nemec 2021.
	26.	 See also ŚD 4.8b–​9a, which continues the argument presented just above: . . . kena vāryate | 
iti ced eṣu satyatvaṃ sthitam eva cidudgamāt || tathā śivodayād eva . . . (Objection: By what 
are they averted? (Reply:) Reality is fully established in these [supposedly “erroneous” 
perceptions], because they arise in consciousness, this simply because Śiva arises in such a 
manner.)
	27.	 All of this is spelled out serially and in detail in ŚD, and ŚDVṛ ad, 4.15–​22 and examined in 
detail in Nemec 2012.
	28.	 One must read the negative particle (na) with the second half-​verse as well as the first, and 
I have translated as such. I address this passage and the concerns therein in Nemec 2012,

--- PAGE 1127 ---
1102      John Nemec
 
230–​232. Cf. Bandyopadhyay 1988, 229–​232 for a treatment of the categories of contradic­
tion conceived by Dharmakīrti.
	29.	 The translations of NB 3.74, 3.75, and 3.76 are Stcherbatsky’s, for which see Stcherbatsky 
[1932] 1993, vol. 2, 187.
	30.	 The translation here quoted is Stcherbatsky’s, for which see Stcherbatsky [1932] 1993, vol. 
2: 192.
	31.	 Perhaps Somānanda here has PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.30 in mind when he suggests 
that his Buddhist interlocutor accepts no (real) universal: arthānāṃ yac ca sāmānyam 
anyavyāvṛttilakṣaṇam | yanniṣṭhās ta ime śabdā na rūpaṃ tasya kiṃcana ||. (That which 
is the universal [sāmānya] of things, moreover, what is characterized by the exclusion of 
others, (and) on which those words (for the things in question) are based—​it has no nature 
[rūpa] whatever.) See also the translation of Franco and Notake 2014, 92, on which the pre­
sent one is based. Cf. PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.43ab, also PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.50. 
Finally, see PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.45.
	32.	 The problem of the inferential nature of language and its dependence on the universal 
is of course well known in the Buddhist epistemological tradition. See, e.g., Dignāga’s 
Pramāṇasamuccaya 5.1 (cited in Kamalaśīla’s Tattvasaṅgrahapañjikā and Tattvasaṃgraha 
1514, page 539: na pramāṇāntaraṃ śābdam anumānāt tathā hi tat | kṛtakatvādivat 
svārtham anyāpohena bhāṣate ||. (Cognition based on the word [śābda] is not different 
from inference, for just as (an inferential mark or liṅga such as) the quality of having been 
produced [kṛtakatva] (proves the probandum, or sādhya, through the exclusion of others 
[anyāpoha]), it [i.e., the cognition based on the word] expresses its own object through 
the exclusion of others.) (The translation, excepting very minor modifications, is that 
of Hattori, for which see Hattori 2000, 139; cf. Hattori 2006, 56. Compare, also, with the 
translation of Jha 1937–​1939, 2: 754–​755, noting that Jha counts TS 1514 as TS 1515.)
	33.	 eva] TC; eṣa Ked.
	34.	 uktasya] C; yat tasya TKed.
	35.	 The argument, it is clear, turns on Somānanda applying the very line of questioning that 
was prosecuted by the pūrvapakṣin of the Śābarabhāṣya (ŚBh) to the view of his Buddhist 
opponents. He asks how one can account for a connection or relation of speech, which 
denotes meaning, to the object it denotes, when the two are mutually distinct entities 
situated in mutually differing locations and are of distinct natures, the one (i.e., what is 
denoted; Devadatta, e.g.) having a form and being a perduring entity, the other (i.e., the 
name; “Devadatta,” e.g.) not having form and perishing immediately after it is uttered. 
Somānanda objects to the possibility that the connection is ad hoc, constructed by conven­
tion, because, he argues, there would be no way to account for any necessary connection of 
designatum and designator, unless, that is, the designatum and designator are intrinsically 
connected, are connected inasmuch as it is their very nature to be thus (there must be a 
vācyavācakatānvaya). Put in other words—​and as the Vṛttikāra in the ŚBh argued against 
the pūrvapakṣin, and as Kumārila, following on the ŚBh, did as well in his ŚV—​the relation 
between vācya and vācaka (which are explicitly dealt with in the ŚV) cannot be fabricated; 
it must always have existed. See, esp., ŚV (saṃbandhākṣepaparihāra) vv. 5ff. It is at verse 12 
of the saṃbandhākṣepaparihāra section that an opponent objects to the Mīmāṃsā view of 
the saṃbandha as permanent, arguing instead that it exists as a matter of convention. See 
also Arnold 2006, 461–​467 for a treatment of the issues here at hand and see esp. 462 for 
Arnold’s translation of saṃbandhākṣepaparihāra, v. 12. This may also be compared to that 
of Jha [1900] 1983, 349.

--- PAGE 1128 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1103
 
	 	   Note, however, that although it seems likely the opponent here is a Buddhist, it is at least 
possible that Somānanda here has a Naiyāyika or Vaiśeṣika opponent in mind, for they, 
too, hold that speech is conventional. On the notion that speech is denotative on the basis 
of convention according to the Naiyāyika Vātsyāyana, see NS and NSBh ad 2.1.55–​56, esp., 
NSBh ad 2.1.56. See also, e.g., VS 7.2.15ff., along with Candrānanda’s commentary thereon, 
for a treatment of the conventional nature of denotation according to Vaiśeṣikas, esp. at VS 
7.2.24.
	 	   One must also note that Dharmakīrti grounds his understanding of saṃketa in his 
theory of apoha, which in turn is based on an understanding of causality as that which 
establishes difference, what is not found in Dignāga’s understanding. See Dharmakīrti’s 
Pramāṇavārttikasvopajñavṛtti (PVSV) ad PV 1.72cd (Gnoli 1960: 40): yasya 
pratyāyanārthaṃ saṃketaḥ kriyate, abhinnasādhyān bhāvān atatsādhyebhyo bhedena 
jñātvā tatparihāreṇa pravarteteti. ([A convention is established] so that, when one knows 
that [certain] entities having the same effects are *different* from [those] which do not 
have those effects, one may act [toward the former] by excluding the [latter].) The same 
passage is quoted in Arnold 2006, 441, n. 64. The present translation, however, is that of 
Eltschinger et al. 2018, 84. Compare also the translation of Dunne 2004, 343–​344, cited 
also in Arnold (2006), 441, n. 64.
	 	   For Dharmakīrti, convention is formed on the basis of identifying bhāvas that have 
common effects; yet, as above, the classification of such entities is based on a relative 
basis (measuring the entities in relation to others) and involves identification by way 
of exclusion. The convention, moreover, is precisely that, on Dharmakīrti’s view. See 
PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.171 (note that the edition of Sāṅkṛtyāyana 1953, 264, ll. 8–​
9 reads nirdṛṣṭārthena for nirdiṣṭārthena; Sāṅkṛtyāyana 1938 records what here follows, 
excepting it reads śrutāṃ for śrutau): tasmāt saṃketakāle ’pi nirdiṣṭārthena saṃyutaḥ | 
svapratītiphalenānyāpohaḥ sambadhyate śrutau ||. (Therefore, it is also at the moment of 
(the applicability of) the convention [saṃketakāle] that exclusion of the other [anyāpoha], 
which is connected with an object that is indicated (by the saṃketa), one that itself results 
in knowledge of itself, is joined to what is communicated.) (The same is cited in Arnold 
2006, 444, n. 70.) Cf. Arnold 2006, 445. On ŚD 4.78–​81ab, see Nemec 2019, 253–​258.
	36.	 Note that Kumārila himself made a similar argument, as Taber 2005, 29 indicates. That is, 
he suggested that the viability of inference is directly implicated by the question of whether 
or not conceptual cognition is possible: if the latter is not possible, then inference is also 
not possible. See ŚV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 248cd–​249ab and Taber 2005, 146 for his rend­
ering of the same.
	 	   The only relation recognized by Dharmakīrti is that of cause and effect, what can be es­
tablished by a series of two perceptions and three nonperceptions. (And even this relation 
is ultimately called into question as such, about which see Saṃbandhaparīkṣā 7ff.). Thus, 
the present argument essentially anticipates Utpaladeva’s and Abhinavagupta’s similar 
claim, that a unified knower must connect discrete perceptions, inasmuch as both depend 
on the notion that the cognitions in question are utterly momentary. See, esp., ĪPK 1.2.10, 
where the Buddhist position is articulated: tatra tatra sthite tat tad bhavatīty eva dṛśyate | 
nānyan nānyo ’sti saṃbandhaḥ kāryakāraṇabhāvataḥ ||. (This is what is seen and nothing 
else: where one or another entity is present another entity comes into being. There is no 
other relation [saṃbandha] than that of the relation of cause and effect.) (This translation 
is based on the renderings of Torella 1994, 95 and Ratié 2011, 298, n. 85.) The necessity of a 
single knowing agent to establish such a relation is articulated at, e.g., ĪPK 1.7.4.

--- PAGE 1129 ---
1104      John Nemec
 
	37.	 See ŚD 4.86. Unfortunately left out of this argument is any sense of Dharmakīrti’s (well-​
known) response to this concern, namely, that the product of one of the two means of valid 
knowledge—​inference—​is such that it is useful, even if it is the product of what ultimately 
is unreal and, in this sense, erroneous. To this position, an opponent of the Buddhists 
objects by asking how it is that a false apprehension can be a means of knowing. (See PV 
[pratyakṣapariccheda] 3.55: ayathābhiniveśena dvitīyā bhrāntir iṣyate | gatiś cet pararūpeṇa 
na ca bhrānteḥ pramāṇatā ||. (The second [apprehension, namely, that of the particular 
in another form] is considered to be false because it determines [the object] incorrectly. 
[Objection:] If [the second apprehension, namely, inference is] an apprehension [of the 
particular] with another form, [it is false], but a false cognition is not a means of know­
ledge [just like an illusion].) Translation that of Franco and Notake 2014, 141.)
	 	   Dharmakīrti’s reply is that even a false cognition can sometimes offer a valid means of 
knowledge, because it can lead one successfully to engage a causally efficacious action. 
(See PV [pratyakṣapariccheda] 3.56: abhiprāyāvisaṃvādād api bhrānteḥ pramāṇatā | gatir 
apy anyathā dṛṣṭā pakṣaś cāyaṃ kṛtottaraḥ ||. ((Reply:) Even an error is (sometimes) a 
means of knowledge, because the intention (of the one acting on the knowledge produced 
by the error) is not violated [-​avisaṃvāda]. Even an apprehension [gati] that is at vari­
ance [anyathā] is seen (to lead to an object capable of causal efficacy), and this position (of 
the opponent, viz., that inference must apprehend something real) has been answered to.) 
See also the rendering of Franco and Notake 2014, 142 and the notes thereon. The present 
translation is an adaptation of theirs.)
	 	   To exemplify as much Dharmakīrti offers the famous example of two errors, each 
involving a misperception leading to an awareness of the presence of a gem, only one of 
which leads one to grasp the gem. The light of a lamp, seen through a keyhole, could be 
mistaken for a jewel, as could the light of the jewel itself. The latter, if pursued, will lead one 
to acquire the gem, while the former will not. See PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.57–​58.
	38.	 See ŚD 4.87ab.
	39.	 apūrvatvād] TC; apūrvatve Ked.
	40.	 The sāmānya may be said to be related to but different from the unique particulars, the 
svalakṣaṇas. It may be defined by the similarity of effect of the svalakṣaṇas in question, 
which therefore may be referred to by a common term. See, e.g., PVSV ad PV 1.137–​142 (239 
of Pandeya’s edition): evaṃjātīyāś ca sarve samūhasantānāvasthāviśeṣaśabdā ye samastāḥ 
kiṃcid ekaṃ kāryaṃ kurvanti teṣāṃ tatra viśeṣābhāvād apārthikā viśeṣacodaneti sakṛt 
sarveṣāṃ niyojanārtham ekam ayaṃ lokaḥ śabaṃ teṣu niyuṅkte ghaṭa iti. te ’pi sajātīyād 
anyataś ca bhedāviśeṣe ’pi tatprayojanāṅgatayā tadanyebhyo bhidyanta ity abhedāt tato 
’viśeṣeṇa pratīyante. The purpose of this passage of Somānanda’s text, then, is to record the 
pūrvapakṣin’s response to Somānanda’s argument at ŚD 4.84cd–​85. A single word may be 
used to refer to multiple unique things that function in a similar manner to effect a single 
result. A perception (of smoke, e.g.) can lead to a (verbally based) conception that gives 
knowledge of another real phenomenon (fire, e.g.). In a word, Somānanda’s Buddhist op­
ponent claims a cogent explanation for the existence of a constructed, conventional uni­
versal that can effect the kinds of inferential knowledge here in question.
	41.	 I do not think reference to sādṛśya here is simply to the similarity of the perceptual image 
to the empirical object. Rather, Somānanda here suggests that his Buddhist opponent 
cannot argue that similarity (sādṛśya) may guarantee that a particular that is unique may 
be related to a general, universalized (and therefore conceptual) understanding of the

--- PAGE 1130 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1105
 
same. He wishes to argue that to thus guarantee knowledge of a unique object there must 
be something categorically real about the object itself that encompasses or guarantees the 
possibility of such similarity. A real sāmānya must properly be associated with the partic­
ular if any similarity is to be recognized at all.
	42.	 kṣaṇikatvāt] conj.; kṣaṇikatvaṃ TKed., kṣaṇitvaṃ (hypometric) C.
	 	   I conjecture that the text should read kṣaṇikatvāt where T and Ked. read kṣaṇikatvaṃ 
and C reads (hypometrically) kṣaṇitvaṃ. It seems possible that degemination led to the 
presentation of an apparently errant form (kṣaṇikatvā, losing the final c before ca), and 
a scribe, seeing the connective ca took both sthiratvam and (he supposed) kṣaṇikatvam 
to be joined thereby, correcting to kṣaṇikatvam ca from what was clearly wrong, namely, 
kṣaṇikatvā ca. I understand ca to be connective with the previous verse.
	43.	 avisaṃvādirūpāc ca] conj.; api saṃvādirūpāc ca T, atisaṃvādarūpā ca C, apy 
asaṃvādarūpaṃ ca Ked.
	 	   I propose a conjectural emendation of avisaṃvādirūpāc ca where Ked. reads apy 
asaṃvādarūpaṃ ca, T witnesses api saṃvādirūpāc ca, and C atisaṃvādarūpā ca. T 
witnesses the very reading I conjecture, apart from recording api where I conjecture avi-​, 
and pi and vi are exceedingly similar in the Malayalam script in which T is recorded.
	44.	 Chaturvedi (1986, 162) suggests that śaktāśaktavikalpa refers to two types of conceptual 
construction, one that has the capacity to lead to purposeful action and one that does not. 
Dharmakīrti accounts for both types, the former as represented by the well-​known ex­
ample of the mistaken perception of the reflection of a jewel for the jewel itself, the latter by 
that of the light of a lamp seen through a keyhole (and understood to be the light of a gem). 
The conceptual form of the former, though erroneous, can lead to acquiring the jewel, but 
the latter example is of a conceptual form that will not accomplish the purpose in question. 
See PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.57–​58.
	45.	 I here read the negative particle twice, with both sthiratā . . . upapannā and pratyakṣenāpi 
ca sthitā. One could alternatively consider emending the text here to cāsthitā. Ked. here 
records ca sthitā, T witnesses ca sthitaiḥ, and C reads cāsthitaḥ.
	46.	 Cf. PV (pramāṇasiddhipariccheda) 2.1ab: pramāṇam avisaṃvādi jñānam arthakriyāsthitiḥ 
|. See also Dharmottara’s Nyāyabinduṭīkā, pp. 17–​18, on correct cognition as avisaṃvādaka, 
as follows: avisaṃvādakaṃ jñānaṃ samyagjñānaṃ loke ca pūrvam upadarśitam 
arthaṃ prāpayan saṃvādaka ucyate. tadvaj jñānam api pradarśitam arthaṃ prāpayat 
saṃvādakam ucyate. Ratié (2007, 351, n. 78) translates the passage as follows: (“Right know­
ledge” is a knowledge which is not deceptive [avisaṃvādaka]. And in the world (as well), 
(someone) who makes (us) reach an object that (he) has first shown (to us) is called “trust­
worthy” [saṃvādaka]. Accordingly, the knowledge also which makes (us) reach an object 
that (it has previously) shown to us is called “trustworthy.”) Cf. Ratié 2011, 134, n. 56.
	47.	 PV (pratyakṣapariccheda) 3.44: vastumātrānubandhitvād vināśasya na nityatā | 
asaṃbandhaś ca jātīnām akāryatvād arūpatā ||. (Because [being] real is sufficient to entail 
cessation, [the universal, were it to be real, would] not be permanent. Moreover, it would 
follow from universals’ not being effects, [that is to say, from the alternative view,] that 
they [would] have no connection [with individuals] and [would] have no [own] nature.) 
Translation that of Franco and Notake 2014, 121.
	48.	 The arguments for the eternal presence of all phenomena despite their only occasional 
appearance are made primarily in opposition to Sāṅkhya views of the satkāryavāda. On 
these arguments, see Nemec 2021, 20–​27.

--- PAGE 1131 ---
1106      John Nemec
 
References
Arnold, Dan. 2006. “On Semantics and Saṃketa: Thoughts on a Neglected Problem with 
Buddhist Apoha Doctrine.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 34, no. 5: 415–​478.
Bandyopadhyay, Nandita. 1988. “The Conception of Contradiction in Indian Philosophy.” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 16, no. 3: 225–​246.
Chaturvedi, Radheshyam, trans. 1986. The Śivadṛṣṭi of Śri Somānanda Nātha. [Hindi and 
Sanskrit]. Varanasi, India: Varanaseya Sanskrit Saṅsthan.
Dunne, John D. 2004. Foundations of Dharmakīrti’s Philosophy. Boston: Wisdom.
Eltschinger, Vincent, John Taber, Michael Torsten Much, and Isabelle Ratié. 2018. Dharmakīrti’s 
Theory of Exclusion (apoha), Part I: On Concealing, An Annotated Translation of Pramāṇa-​ 
vārttikasvavṛtti 24, 16–​45, 20 (Pramāṇavārttika 1.40–​91). Studia Philologica Buddhica 36. 
Tokyo: International Institute for Buddhist Studies.
Franco, Eli, and Miyako Notake. 2014. Dharmakīrti on the Duality of the Object: 
Pramāṇavārttika III.1–​63. Leipziger Studien zu Kultur und Geschichte Süd-​ und 
Zentralasiens 5. Vienna: Lit Verlag.
Gnoli, Raniero. 1957. “Śivadṛṣṭi by Somānanda: Translation and Commentary, Chapter I.” 
East and West 8: 16–​22.
Gnoli, Raniero. 1960. The Pramāṇavārttikam of Dharmakīrti: The First Chapter with the Auto-
commentary. Serie Orientale Roma 23. Rome: IsMEO.
Hattori, Masaaki. 2000. “Dignāga’s Theory of Meaning: An Annotated Translation of the 
Pramāṇasamuccayavr.tti, Chapter V: Anyāpoha-​parīkṣā (I).” In Wisdom, Compassion, and 
the Search for Understanding: The Buddhist Studies Legacy of Gadjin M. Nagao, edited by J. A. 
Silk, 137–​146. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Hattori, Masaaki. 2006. “The Apoha Theory as Referred to in the Nyāyamañjarī.” Spec. issue, 
“Word and Meaning in Indian Philosophy.” Acta Asiatica (Bulletin of the Institute of Eastern 
Culture) 90: 55–​70.
Ingalls, Daniel H. H., Sr., Ed. and trans, Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and M. V. Patwardhan, trans. 
1990. The Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta. Harvard 
Oriental Series 49. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jha, Ganganatha. [1900] 1983. Ślokavārttika: Translated from the Original Sanskrit with 
Extracts from the Commentaries ‘Kasika’ of Sucarita Misra and ‘Nyayaratnakara’ of Partha 
Sarathi Misra. Sri Garib Das Oriental Series 8. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Jha, Ganganatha, trans. 1937–​1939. The Tattvasaṅgraha of Shāntarakṣita, with the Commentary 
of Kamalashīla, Translated into English. 2 vols. Gaekwad Oriental Series 80 and 83. Baroda, 
India: Oriental Institute.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2009. “Proof of a Sentient Knower: Utpaladeva’s Ajaḍapramātṛsiddhi 
with the Vṛtti of Harabhatta Shastri.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 37, no. 6: 627–​653.
McCrea, Lawrence. 2013. “The Transformations of Mīmāṃsā in the Larger Context of Indian 
Philosophical Discourse.” In Periodization and Historiography of Indian Philosophy, edited 
by E. Franco, 127–​144. Vienna: Institut für Südasien-​, Tibet-​ und Buddhismus-​ kunde der 
Universität Wien.
Nemec, John. 2011. The Ubiquitous Śiva: Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi and His Tantric Interlocutors. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Nemec, John. 2012. “The Two Pratyabhijñā Theories of Error.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 40, 
no. 2: 225–​257.

--- PAGE 1132 ---
Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi as an Argument against Dharmakīrti      1107
 
Nemec, John. 2019. “Somānanda on the Meaningfulness of Language.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 
62, no. 3: 227–​268.
Nemec, John. 2021. The Ubiquitous Śiva (II): Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi and His Philosophical 
Interlocutors. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pandeya, Ram Chandra. 1989. Pramāṇavārttikavṛtti: Pramāṇavārttikam of Ācārya 
Dharmakīrti, with the Commentaries Svopajñavṛtti of the Author and Pramāṇavārttikavṛtti 
of Manorathanandin. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Ratié, Isabelle. 2007. “Otherness in the Pratyabhijñā Philosophy.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 
35, no. 4: 313–​370.
Ratié, Isabelle. 2011. Le Soi et l’Autre: Identité, différence et altérité dans la philosophie de la 
Pratyabhijñā. Jerusalem Studies in Religion and Culture 13. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Sanderson, Alexis G. J. S. 1988. “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions.” In The World’s Religions, 
edited by S. A. Sutherland, L. Houlden, P. Clarke, and F. Hardy, 660–​704. London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1988. Repr. The World’s Religions: The Religions of Asia, edited by F. Hardy, 
128–​172. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1990.
Sāṅkṛtyāyana, Rāhula, ed. 1938–​1940. “Pramāṇavārttikam, by Ācārya Dharmakīrti.” 
Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society 24–​26. Appendices: 24: 1–​136, 25: 137–​480, 
and 26: 481–​531 and 25–​51.
Sāṅkṛtyāyana, Rāhula, ed. 1953. The Pramāṇavārttika-​alaṃkāra of Prajñākaragupta. Patna, 
India: Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research Institute.
Stcherbatsky, Theodore. [1930–​1932] 1993. Buddhist Logic. 2 vols. 1st Indian ed. Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Taber, John A. 2005. A Hindu Critique of Buddhist Epistemology: Kumārila on Perception, The 
“Determination of Perception” Chapter of Kumārila Bhaṭṭa’s Ślokavārttika. Routledge Hindu 
Studies Series. London: Routledge.
Torella, Raffaele. 1994. The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vṛtti: 
Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Rome: IsMEO.

--- PAGE 1133 ---


--- PAGE 1134 ---
Chapter 43
Dynamic Manifestations 
of Eternal Divinity
Late Nondual Śaivism on the Emanation and 
Contemplative Reabsorption of Time
David Peter Lawrence
Introduction
There is no time to consider all the important theories and practices regarding time. 
Time has been discussed by many or most Sanskrit and world philosophical traditions. 
Time is often said to be cognized in the sequence of action or change and to be meas­
ured by the regular synchronized repetition of particular actions. Religion and philos­
ophy have often viewed temporal finitude as the central human predicament. Heidegger 
described our limited temporal situation as being-​towards-​death (Heidegger 1962, 279–​
311 and passim). Psychological terror management theory argues that the denial (or we 
may say vanquishment) of death is the foundational human motivation (Solomon et 
al. 2015).
Utpaladeva advanced the initiatives of his teacher Somānanda (ca. 900–​950 CE) 
in creating the originary verses and commentaries of the Pratyabhijñā philosophical 
theology of late nondual Śavism. Abhinavagupta is famous for brilliant and extensive 
commentaries on Utpaladeva’s writings and for the creation of a vast and influential 
corpus of philosophical hermeneutics, itself comprising both a poetics and an exegetics 
of tantric symbolism and ritual.
In nondual Śaivism, as in many Hindu understandings of male deities, the Lord is 
the śaktimān, “possessor of Śakti,” encompassing her within his androgynous nature 
as his integral Consort and Potency.1 According to the predominant nondual Śaiva 
panenthistic cosmogony and metaphysics, Śiva out of a kind of play divides himself 
from Śakti and then in sexual union emanates, embodies himself within and controls the

--- PAGE 1135 ---
1110      David Peter Lawrence
 
universe through her. The basic pattern of return is the recapitulation of the cosmogony. 
Thus, in nondual Śaivism practice the approach to Śiva is through emanatory Śakti. The 
same mythico-​ritual process is articulated in practical, symbolic, and philosophical-​
theological terms.2
The Pratyabhijñā system replicates this modus operandi in śāstraic philosophical dis­
course as the disclosure that one has Śiva’s Śakti (śaktyāviṣkaraṇa) (see IPK and IPV 
1.1.2 in IPV 1:56–​1.59; and IPK and IPV 2.3.17, 2:139–​149). The publicly intelligible in­
ference (parārthānumāna) is: I am Śiva because I have Śakti (Lawrence 1999, 49–​57).3 
The Pratyabhijñā epistemology primarily explains Śakti as the idealistically constitutive 
self-​recognition (pratyabhijñā, ahampratyavamarśa), apprehension with a recognitive 
structure or recognitive apprehension (vimarśa and cognates), and analogous 
recognitive synthesis (anusaṃdhāna and cognates) (on this vocabulary, see Lawrence 
2022, 20–​21). Śakti and its equivalents are also identified with a principle of Supreme 
Speech (parāvāk) derived from the linguistic philosopher Bhartṛhari and are thereby 
articulated in language or “subtly linguistic”—​or “semiotic”—​signifiers (Lawrence 
1999, 87–​90 and passim). Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta further conceived recogni­
tion, and so on, ontologically as universal first-​person agency (uttamapuruṣa, kartṛtva, 
svātantrya) (Lawrence 1999, 2008a, Dupuche 2001; Baumer 2011) constituting reality as 
divine action (kriyā).
In the course of this chapter, I need to introduce a few new terms and concepts. 
Previously, I have etically characterized the overall argumentation of the Pratyabhijñā 
system as a transcendental inference.4 I have also spoken of the late nondual Śaiva 
approach to time specifically as the subsumption of time and sequence (Lawrence 
2008b, 32–​37). At the outset of the present essay, I humbly suggest two more of 
such characterizations: First, the Pratyabhijñā epistemological and ontological 
interpretations of Śakti are what the West since Neoplatonism has described as 
“henological” (see the recent formulation in Macquarrie 1987)—​there is the con­
templation of unities in various domains, as deriving from the nondual Ultimate-​
cum-​Potency.5 The interpretations of Śakti—​in terms of recognition, recognitive 
apprehension, recognitive synthesis, Supreme Speech, relation, action, agency, and so 
on—​all advert to sorts of unity. In the Pratyabhijñā, henology is often articulated within 
an idealistic logic that “to be is to be perceived” (esse est percipi), as worldly unities rest in 
some sort of originary subjectivity.
Second, I suggest that the Pratyabhijñā argumentation may be characterized as a form 
of what C. S. Peirce called “abduction,” for affirming the Ultimate Self on the basis of the 
Ultimate’s potentiality and correlative practical consequences.6 The disclosure of Sakti 
more fully may be understood as the disclosure of the potentiality of a nondual agent, 
for emanating and controlling the various domains of epistemological and ontological 
diversity.
The Pratyabhijñā conceives time (kāla, and sometimes other expressions of se­
quence, though we focus on time) generated by the Kāla Śakti as one of the chief ways 
of explaining the differentiation of Śiva’s totality.7 Paradoxically, this differentiation is 
abductively posited and immediately realized as consisting of modes of dynamic unity

--- PAGE 1136 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1111
 
manifesting the unity and Potency of God. To reiterate, the main objective of this 
chapter is to demonstrate and interpret the nondual Śaiva henology and potentialism or 
abduction that ascribes sequential time to Śiva-​Śakti (paramaśiva) as unity-​cum-​potency. 
The culmination of Śaiva henological and abductive reflections and contemplations is 
the affirmation of the subitist and apophatic realization of pleromatic eternity in the re­
plete present moment.8
Backdrop of Theories and Practices 
Regarding Time and Moments
We first discuss some of the important South Asian backgrounds to the late nondual 
Śaiva understanding of time. An entire section later is devoted to some of the influen­
tial ideas of Bhartṛhari. Scholars such as Mircea Eliade (Eliade 1991) and Ananda K. 
Coomaraswamy (Coomaraswamy 1992) wrote groundbreaking early surveys of time in 
Sanskrit texts. Eliade, in his general theory of religion, contended that the eternal myth­
ical time of the Sacred transcends or sacralizes ordinary mundane times (Eliade 1958, 
388–​409).9 Eliade suggested that in Hinduism and Buddhism, with their individual and 
cosmic cycles, there is also an effort toward a transcendence of time (Eliade 1991).
A dominant, though of course not the only, theme in Hinduism is the assertion 
that an eternal Ultimate, superagent deity, Potency or related aspect of the deity, is the 
emanatory source that “encompasses” or “subsumes”—​and thereby in a sense “stops”—​
time amid worldly actions. A major source for broader henological reflection in 
Brahmanic and Hindu traditions is the Puruṣa Sūkta of the Ṛg Veda, which describes 
the emanation of the world through the sacrifice and dismemberment of an immanent-​
cum-​transcendent “Cosmic Man” (puruṣa) (Rig Veda 10.90); thus, a central theme 
of Vedic and later Hindu praxis is the recovery of the various aspects of the unity of 
God. Whether or not it was influenced by the Puruṣa Sūkta, Atharva Veda XXI 53.1–​
53.8 henologically describes the deity Time (kāla) as intentionally bringing together and 
encompassing things:
He indeed together brought beings; he indeed together went about (pari-​i) beings; 
being father, he became son of them; than him verily there is no other brilliancy that 
is higher (para).
(Atharva Veda 1905, 29.53, 2:988; cf. the rest of 2.53 and 29.54)
There are related ideas of the “reintegration” of the sacrifice in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 
(Coomaraswamy 1992, 173–​174).
In the discussion of time in Maitrī Upaniṣad, brahman is said to have the forms of both 
time and timelessness, described as being with parts (kala) and henologically without 
parts (akala) (Upaniṣatsaṅgraha 1970, 6.15, 185). The Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad states that,

--- PAGE 1137 ---
1112      David Peter Lawrence
 
through dhyana and yoga, some have found the divine self’s potency (devātmaśakti) 
ruling over kāla and other causes (Upaniṣatsaṅgraha, 1.3, 135).10 Finally, another early 
deification of time is evinced in the omnipotent Kṛṣṇa’s identification with time in the 
11th chapter of the Gītā (1975, 11.32, 311).11
While not a passage on the eternalization/​deification of time per se, the Īśā Upaniṣad 
takes perhaps a step toward a henological explanation. It describes a sort of religious 
“transfiguration” of temporal change or action as a conjunction of an entry into, and de­
parture from, existence.
He who knows as conjoined [saha]—​origination [saṃbhūti] and destruction 
[vināśa]—​with destruction overcomes death, and with origination gains immor­
tality [amṛta]
(Īśā Upaniṣad, in Upaniṣatsaṅgraha 1970, 14, 1).12
We return to this crucial issue of temporal sequence as the relation of existence with 
nonexistence throughout this chapter.
The Śaivas were also influenced by the classic Yoga and Sāṃkhya position, which 
presents an alternative henological argument to that based on the deification of the 
causal essence of time. Maintaining the preexistence of the effected world in its source, 
these schools assert the constructedness and unreality of time. For these traditions, time 
is a potential or actualized quality (dharma) in the transformation (pariṇāma) of an en­
during, unifying nature (prakṛti) (Patañjali et al. 1998, 3.13–​3.15, 290–​305). Prakṛti does 
not have the variety of potentiality that is agency, associated with conscious intention­
ality. However, for them Prakṛti does have an unconscious potentiality in the form of a 
repleteness for manifestation.
According to Yoga, prakṛti as substratum is actually one with the moment (kṣaṇa), as 
the locus of all change in the world. Yoga thus prescribes a discipline of concentration 
(saṃyama) on the moment (kṣaṇa) within transformation. That discipline creates a re­
versal of transformation and the subsumption of sequence within the present moment 
(Patañjali et al. 1998, 3.52, 383–​390,13 4.31–​4.34). The Yoga discipline was appropriated 
in various nondual and theistic metaphysics and axiologies.14 This practice is also 
discussed further below.
As already mentioned, another important background to the Śaiva philos­
ophy of time is Buddhism. The Buddhist theories of greatest interest to Western 
scholars deconstruct henological and other substantialist notions of the traversal of 
time, with interpretations, sometimes idealistic, of the doctrine of dependent origina­
tion (pratītyasamutpada). Early Abhidharma theories of time and moments (kṣaṇa) 
seem to have developed in close communication with Sāṃkhya and Yoga and con­
ceive kṣaṇa as similar to a quality (dharma), but without an underlying substance 
(Stcherbatsky 1983, 43–​48). Reminding us of Eliade, Steven Collins contended that 
Buddhists understand nirvāṇa as an, albeit often metaphysically aporetic, realization 
that overcomes time (1998, 121–​285).

--- PAGE 1138 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1113
 
Alexander von Rospatt suggested that a theory of universal momentariness (kṣaṇikatva) 
may have first been popularized by Sarvāstivādins. The Yogācāra of Vasubandhu argued 
for the immediate origination and destruction of phenomena, as can be illumined in 
mindful awareness (see Rospatt 1995; de La Vallee Poussin 1934; Silburn 1955). In the 
Śaivas’s chief opponents and a major appropriated source—​the logical-​epistemological 
tradition of Dignāga, Dharmakīrti, and their successors—​reality is posited as a stream of 
instantaneous, self-​characterized particulars (svalakṣaṇa), unqualified even by sequential 
relation.
Bhartṛhari’s Theories and Practices Regarding Time
The greatest influence on the Śaivas, Bhartṛhari’s linguistic or semiotic philosophy 
of time (ca. 400–​500 CE), advanced earlier Vedic and Buddhist ideas. Like earlier 
Brāhmaṇic or Hindu eternalizations and deifications of time, for Bhartṛhari the Kāla 
Śakti of the unitary and nonsequential (akrama) “Word Absolute” (śabdabrahman) is its 
Potency for the emanation of all sequential diversity (krama). The Kāla Śakti and time 
are summarized near the very beginning of the Vākyapadīya and further clarified in 
later verses from the Kāla Samuddeśa:
The beginningless and endless, Brahaman, the nature of which is Word [śabda], from 
which are the phonemes—​[also] projects [vivartate]15 objects. From that, there is the 
production [prakriyā] of the world. (VP 1966, 1.1, 1:1)
That which has been known through tradition [āmnāta] as entirely one [ekam] is the 
basis of diverse Śaktis. Even though there is no separation, that projects as if separate 
from the various Śaktis [in their emanation]. (VP 1966, 1.2, 1:14)
Resting on whose Time Potency [kālaśakti], to which are ascribed partitions—​the 
six changes, that is, production, and so on [existence, transformation, growth, decay 
and destruction] are the sources [yonayaḥ] of the diversity of entities. [bhāva]. (VP 
1966, 1.3, 1:18)
However, the differentiation of the synchronized [saṃsargiṇām, that is, active 
entities] are regarded as its [measured] specifics. Differentiated by them, time [kāla], 
constructs the differentiation of situations [avasthānām]. (VP 1973, 3.9.8, 3.2)
The Omnipresent, impelling its partitions [kalā] through actions that are like the 
turnings of a water wheel, thus obtains the name time [kāla]. (VP 1973, 3.9.14, 3.2:45)
The action [viceṣṭita] of time is the arisal of the appearance [nirbhāsa] of the universe, 
which is actually sequenceless—​as if it were sequential. (VP 1973, 3.9.46, 3.2:57)16
Anticipating the Śaivas, Bhartṛhari explained (taking the Vṛtti as the work of 
Bhartṛhari) that the Kāla Śakti of śabdabrahman is also its agency:

--- PAGE 1139 ---
1114      David Peter Lawrence
 
Indeed there are all powers, which are heteronomous [paratantra] and have their 
origin—​by means of the agential autonomy [svātantrya] named the Kāla Śakti. 
(VPV 1966, 1.3, 1:18)17
Bhartṛhari additionally theorized that a unitary-​eternal and emanatory Kāla 
subsumes the moments and other temporal divisions that constitute sequential time:
Such enduring [unitary] time [kāla], through divisions by the intellect [buddhi] 
[becomes] the worldy usages of moment [kṣaṇa], yuga and manvantara. (VP 1973, 
3.9.6, 48)18
We again return to the consideration of moments in nondual Śaivism.
In the present context, we recall the passage of a contemplation in the Īśā Upaniṣad in 
which there is a religious transfiguration of temporal change or action as an entry into 
and departure from existence.19 In my interpretation of the underlying concept, in any 
action, there is a combination of continuity and difference, or existence and nonexist­
ence. Amidst differences, one identifies both the continuities of the action itself and the 
acting items in one condition and then another; Bhartṛhari explains this as the Time 
Potency’s employment of allowance (abhyanujñā) and prevention (pratibandha):
There is contrariety within the manifold universe. By means of prevention and al­
lowance, brought about through their discrimination by Śakti, there is the manifes­
tation [of that manifold universe] as if it were sequential. (VPV 1966, 1.3, 1:18–​1.19)20
We will see that the Śaivas further reduced directly to Paramaśiva’s unity, time’s very 
constellation of allowance-​prevention or existence-​nonexistence.
Pratyabhijñā Theorization on Time: 
Explanatory and Contemplative 
Subsumption
Evidently the influence of Bhartṛhari on tantra precedes the Pratyabhijñā. Thus, Pierre-​
Sylvain Filliozat demonstrated the influence of Bhartṛhari’s philosophy of time on 
āgamas such as the Mataṅgapārameśvara and Siddhānta thinkers such as Rāmakaṇṭha 
(2009, 221–​223). Though Somānanda is well known to have had his reservations about 
Bhartṛhari, Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta utilized that thinker’s linguistic philosophy 
as a central component of their system (Torella 2008). Bhartṛhari is the primary source 
for their theories of time.
Inspired by Bhartṛhari’s as well as earlier Hindu, Buddhist, and tantric 
contemplations—​Abhinavagupta’s own name as ever-​new (abhinava) and hidden 
(gupta) or eternal, came to epitomize the late nondual Śaiva approach to the moments

--- PAGE 1140 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1115
 
that constitute sequential time.21 Like Bhartṛhari, the Śaivas described temporal se­
quence as characterizing worldly action (IPV 2.1.2).22 Just as the Pratyabhijñā theory of 
the recognition (potency) I call transcendental subverts the Buddhist epistemologies of 
instantaneity, so the eternal Kāla Śakti emanates the flux of time.
Utpaladeva explained Paramaśiva as the Unity-​cum-​Potency underlying all sequence 
and diversity, sometimes quantifiable by synchronous repetition:
It is possible for worldly [laukikya] action to be sequential, due to the [Lord’s] Time 
Potency [kālaśakti]. However, [sequence] cannot belong to the eternal [action] of 
the Lord, just as it cannot belong to the Lord himself. (2.1.2)
Time [in worldly experience] is really [tattvataḥ] nothing but the sequence [krama] 
indicated by movement of the sun, and so on, the birth of various flowers, or hot and 
cold. (2.1.3)
That Lord causes to manifest [ābhāsayati] . . . the sequence of time from the 
manifestations [nirbhāsa] of the diversity of action. (2.1.5) (IPV 2:10–​16)23
In the Pratyabhijñā explanation, there are at least two levels of henology-​cum-​
postulation pointing to the intertwined Action (kriyā) and Time (kāla) Śaktis. First, 
the Śaivas explicitly invoke the recognition (pratyabhijñā) and recognitive synthesis 
(potencies) to account for the uninterruptedness of active entities within temporal 
sequence:
However, from the force of the awareness [prakāśa] of strong recognition 
[pratyabhijñā], there is the experience,“This is that very characteristic form of the 
hand.” In that conception, there is no differentiation of material form [mūrti]. Yet 
different forms appear [bhāti]. Those different forms that cannot exist in that which 
has a single form, are explained to be action, which cannot exist as such because of 
contradiction. He manifests the diversity of that [action] through its recognitive 
synthesis [anusaṃdhāna] as measured [actions such as the going of Devadatta] and 
unmeasured [actions such the repetitive movement of the sun],24 and according to 
emotional proclivities [yathāruci] about what is conceived [carcitena], as the basis 
for the accomplishment of [particular] results. Thus, he manifests that very sequence 
that has the form of time.
(IPV 2.1.5, 2:17)25
At the same level of henology, the Śaivas also asserted the unity of action itself across 
time as the coordination of syntactico-​semantic factors (kārakas, things expressed by 
words declined in what the West calls “cases”) in the sequence of process (vyāpāra). 
Utpaladeva asserted:
The coordination [samanvaya] of the action-​factors [kāraka] is the domain of the 
recognitive apprehension [vimarśa, potency] of action [kriyā].
(IPV 2.2.6, 2:54)

--- PAGE 1141 ---
1116      David Peter Lawrence
 
Abhinavagupta explained the unity in this manner:
Thus, kārakas also have the nature of nothing but relation [sambandha]. . . . A kāraka 
depends on action [kriyā]. That [kriyā] also rests upon kāla, which is the Lord of its 
life [prāṇeśvara]. And that kāla, which through action [kriyā] is the essence of all 
entities, depends upon relation [sambandha].
(IPV 2.2.4, 2:47–​2.49)26
Abhinavagupta also identified the recognitive apprehension (vimarśa potency) of ac­
tion itself (kriyā) as established through the semantic and syntactic relations of the 
kārakas articulated in the epistemic triad (tripuṭi) of cognizer (pramātṛ), means of cog­
nition (pramāṇa), and object of cognition (prameya). (Lawrence 1999, 150–​152)
The Pratyabhijñā thinkers do not conceive that there are emanated unities only 
amidst the temporal sequence of action. At the second level of henology, they con­
template temporal sequence or difference as itself an emanated unity. This builds on the 
understandings of time we examined in the Īśā Upaniṣad and Bhartṛhari, of time as the 
relation of the existence-​and-​nonexistence, or allowance-​and-​prevention of the aspects 
of action. Utpaladeva thus explains temporal sequence in terms of the existence and 
nonexistence of manifestations brought about by the divine:
Sequence has differentiation as its substratum. There is differentiation from 
the existence and nonexistence of manifestations. The existence and nonex­
istence of manifestations is due to the Lord, who is the maker of variegated 
manifestations.
(IPK 2.1.4)27
In this vein, Abhinavagupta interpreted time as a relation between something in the al­
ternate conditions of being with and without, in the course of action:
The extension of one’s [an example such as Devadatta’s] action [kriyā] subsisting ei­
ther as being with or without—​such is time, which is present, and so on [absent].
(IPV 2.2.4)28
Abhinavagupta has explained worldly time as the relation of difference between 
manifestations of something in the course of action.29 He has in effect explained differ­
ence as a kind of emanated unity.30
To repeat, the Śaivas have discovered an emanated unity amidst difference and such 
a unity as difference itself.31 Finally, reminding the reader of the religious context of the 
Śaiva philosophy, the Śaivas distinguish between the unenlightened immersion in se­
quential temporality and the subsumption of it within the eternal:
In all things, the differentiation of manifestations may be the basis for the sequence of 
time for the knower . . . who has a limited light [vicchinnabhāsa]. However, it cannot

--- PAGE 1142 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1117
 
[be the basis for the sequence of time for the unlimited knower], who has manifested 
already and always [sakṛd].
(IPK 2.1.6, 2:20)32
Further Contemplations of the 
Subsumption of Temporal 
Sequence (Krama)
The Krama, “Sequence,” tradition of tantric symbolism and ritual interpreted by 
Abhinavagupta and his commentator, Jayaratha, well illustrates the religious sub­
sumption of immanent time and sequence into the potency of the nondual eternal. 
Basing himself on the Kālīkulapañcaśataka and other āgamas (see Sanderson 2007), 
Abhinavagupta viewed Śakti or Potency as Kālī (TS 6, 45–​4633; cf. Rastogi 1992). In 
Krama, Kālis are commonly differentiated as twelvefold (there are other numerical 
divisions), in terms of knower (pramātṛ), means of knowledge (pramāṇa), and object 
of knowledge (prameya) multiplied by creation (sṛṣṭi), continuation (sthiti), withdrawal 
(saṃhāra), and the inexpressible (anākhyā). These twelve Kālīs correspond to moments 
of sequence in the process of cognition.
Building on the erasure of sequence into the apophasis of the divine, the Kālīs 
are finally dissolved into the Goddess as Kālasaṃkarśinī, “the Retractor of Time.” 
Abhinavagupta explained the underlying consciousness:
Therefore, consciousness [saṃvit], which is entirely unitary, subsists as twelvefold 
in all cognizers. Thus, there is never a specification [niyama] that sequence [krama] 
belongs to it. There is no simultaneity because of the lack of sequence. There is also 
no sequence because of the lack of that [simultaneity]. Because that principle of con­
sciousness [saṃvittattva] has transcended [atīta] talk of sequence and nonsequence, 
it is without taint [nirmala].
(TA 1987b, 4.178cd–​180a, 3:823–​824)
This Krama tantra is reflected in the program of the eleventh-​ to twelfth-​century 
nondual Śaiva contemplative manual, Virūpākṣapañcāśikā. That text advocates the 
contemplative subsumption of sequence discussed by Abhinavagupta. A divine per­
fect egoity (pūrṇāhaṃtā subsumes the limited knower (pramātṛ), knowledge (pramā), 
the means of knowledge (pramāṇa), and the object of knowledge (prameya) (Lawrence 
2008b, 32–​37).
I can only mention here the complex schemes of the emanation and reabsorption of 
time in terms of breath [prāṇa] and other subtle physiology, tantric theosophy, cosmic 
cycles, and moments or small portions of ti (tuṭi) throughout the Tantrāloka and partic­
ularly in the discussion of concentration on the place (sthānaprakalpanāī) in Tantrāloka

--- PAGE 1143 ---
1118      David Peter Lawrence
 
6 (TA 19887b, 6, 3:1089–​1291). The basic henological-​potentialist realization regarding 
time is as described:
Supreme Time [the Kāla Śakti] has the nature of sequence and nonsequence and 
subsists in [nondual] consciousness [saṃvid]. The one called Kālī is praised as the 
Supreme Śakti of God.
(TA 6.7, 3:1094)34
Intercultural Reflections
We find numerous other examples of the quest for a unitary and potent, often but 
not always agentive—​Ultimate, generator or creator—​of time throughout the world. 
Henological-​cum-​potentialist reflections aimed at establishing a nondual, eternal, the­
istic, or nontheistic Creative Source are found throughout Western traditions. They 
are paramount in varieties of Platonism and Neoplatonism, though less completely 
expressed in Aristotelianism that has not been influenced by Neoplatonism, as is 
Thomism.
In the Timaeus, Plato suggests that God or the Good somehow emanated the syn­
chronously measured dunamis of this shadowy word:
Wherefore he resolved to have a moving image of eternity, and when he set in order 
the heaven he made this image eternal but moving according to number, while eter­
nity itself rests in unity, and this image we call time. For there were no days and 
nights and months and years before the heaven was created, but when he constructed 
the heaven he created them also.
(Plato, 37d-​e)
However, the schemes of emanation in Timaeus are interrupted ironically by the “sub­
lation” of temporal becoming by being in Parmenides, The Republic, and other dialogs. 
While aporias about the possibility of change preclude a firm understanding of poten­
tiality in Plato, he in any event conceives a likeness to its source in the entire creation as 
mediated through participation in the Ideas or Forms that unify spatiotemporal differ­
ence (e.g., Plato 1989, 1163; Gerson 2004). Victor Ilievski has argued that the sempiter­
nity of cosmic time that qualifies motion is an image of the eternity of God and the Ideas 
(Ilievski 2015).
We may leave aside the question of emanation in Aristotle’s philosophy of the eternity 
of the world. Nevertheless, Aristotle developed profound conceptions of act and poten­
tiality (Dufour 2004), which Plotinus forthrightly appropriated within Neoplatonism. 
Plotinus maintained that a transcendent, eternal One in its potent (whether or not 
agential) and overflowing perfection manifests the immanently actualized world, via 
the Ideas and hypostases. Plotinus says about time and eternity:

--- PAGE 1144 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1119
 
Eternity, we have said, is Life in repose, unchanging, self-​identical, always endlessly 
complete; and there is to be an image of Eternity—​Time—​such an image as this 
lower All presents of the Higher Sphere. . . . Over against that Oneness without ex­
tent or interval there must be an image of oneness, a unity of link and succession. . . 
. Over against the Whole in concentration, there must be that which is to be a whole 
by stages never final. The lesser must always be working toward the increase of its 
Being; this will be its imitation of what is immediately complete, self-​realized, end­
less without stage: only thus can its Being reproduce that of the Higher.
(Plotinus 1992, III.7, 266)
Plotinus describes the contemplation of time: “If, then, the Soul withdrew, sinking itself 
again into its primal unity, Time would disappear” (Plotinus 1992, 3.7, 267).35 Proclus 
explains tersely:
Eternity . . . is indeed measure as unity, but time as number. . . . And the former meas­
ures the [eternal] permanency of beings, but the latter the [enduring or sempiternal] 
extension of generated natures.
(Proclus 2017, 4.189, 499, my bracketed inserts)
There are numerous Jewish, Christian, and Muslim expressions of Neoplatonism in 
which the One that emanates time is identified with the Abrahamic, omnipotent cre­
ator God. Their theologies have encompassed Platonic and Aristotelian immanence 
in the world and time, within a dialectical tension with their religions’ emphasis on 
transcendence.36
Italian, Christian Renaissance Neoplatonist, Marsilio Ficino strongly emphasized the 
older Neoplatonic doctrine of the midpositionality and consequent choice of the soul 
between unitary and omnipotent, divine eternity and mundane temporality (Ficino 
2010, 450).37 Ficino’s Neoplatonism greatly influenced later Romanticism, occultism, 
and German, British, and American idealism. In my understanding, henology is re­
flected in Kant’s “transcendental unity of apperception,” although that thinker greatly 
limited the metaphysical meanings of unity and the transcendental.
This quest for a theistic, dynamic unity was later found in American philosopher 
Charles Sanders Peirce. Peirce was deeply influenced by Friedrich Schelling’s “nature 
philosophy” (Franks 2015, 732–​734; Niemoczynski 2011, 110–​112, 117–​121) and thus in­
directly by Neoplatonism (for the interpretation of Peirce himself as a Neoplatonist, see 
Parker 2001).38 Like Schelling, Peirce described his prospective synthesis of idealism 
with science as “objective idealist.” Various scholars have also characterized Peirce as 
a panentheist.39 Granting his more dualistic proclivities, Peirce sometimes came rather 
close to the Pratyabhijñā philosophy:
And what is religion? In each individual it is a sort of sentiment, or obscure percep­
tion, a deep recognition of something in the circumambient All, which if he strives 
to express it, will clothe itself in forms more or less extravagant, or less accidental, but

--- PAGE 1145 ---
1120      David Peter Lawrence
 
ever acknowledging the first and the last, the [𝚨] and [𝛀], as well as a relation to that 
Absolute of the individual self, as a relative being.
(CP 6.429, 302)
Like Bhartṛhari and the Śaivas on Word or Speech, Peirce also variously described the 
world as a sign, poem, argument, painting, and so on, of God.40
We should recall Abhinavagupta on temporal action as a relation, deriving from 
nondual divine Potency, unifying the syntactico-​semantic factors (kārakas) in which 
action takes place. Introducing a couple of new terms to reconstruct more of Peirce’s 
metaphysics, it is suggested that his henology was articulated in terms of what he called 
synechism. While sometimes claimed to be a regulative principle of reason, this concep­
tion is frequently and ultimately constitutive. Synechism may be viewed as an alterna­
tive to monism/​nondualism in its reduction of everything, including time-​-​to a unitary 
and integral (panentheistic) continuum (on Peirce regarding unification or synthesis 
and its backgrounds in Kant, see Corrington 1993, 53, 93, 180; Niemoczynski, 47; on the 
synechism of time, see Schmidt 2020).
Even more thematically than for the Neoplatonists, for Peirce the unified continuum 
also comprehends what he called an element of tychism, a potentiality that becomes im­
manent as in indeterminacy and chance. Peirce interpreted creatio ex nihilo not prima­
rily in terms of God’s lack of a preexisting material cause, but from his ordering creation 
and time from what in Genesis is called tohu bohu, a state of unlimited potentiality or in­
determinate chaos (CP 6.490, 337; cf. Niemoczynski 2011, 48–​53, 64; Raposa 1989, 70–​71; 
Corrington 1993, 200, with links to Platonism).41 Leon J. Niemoczynski explained this 
primordial condition in a manner reminiscent of the way the Śaivas conceive Śakti:
I begin my project by considering “infinite being” first as an honorific sheer avail­
ability of being: potential or possible being that is the unlimited and supreme power 
behind the divine’s creative becoming. I entitle this creative becoming “the divine 
life,” as it represents the life of possibilities continuous phasing into actuality that 
makes for the evolutionary growth and development of the divine’s created cosmos. 
I then proceed to consider infinite being in terms of how hypothesis-​formation, or 
Peircean “abduction,” may reveal the infinite to be an encompassing reality of nature 
that situates and locates but also sustains what is finite (specifically in this context 
human inquirers, but also other life in a perspectival universe)
(Niemoczynski 2011, 2; cf. Niemocynski 2011, 120).
For Peirce, there was the consequent accumulation in actualized diversity of what 
we could call henological “habits” or unifying regularities grounded in the originary 
synechism-​cum-​tychism.42 These regularities include scientific laws, which Peirce 
described as “ideas or resolutions in the mind of some vast consciousness, who . . . is a 
Deity relatively to us” (CP 5.107, 69). They also include the order of relations in time.
In the temporal-​process orientations of later Peircean pansemiotics and biosemiotics, 
habits also become the unifying information in ever-​evolving, self-​organizing sys­
tems, adjusting to potentially and actually changing circumstances.43 Soren Brier found

--- PAGE 1146 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1121
 
support for this in Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers’s contention (1984) that in the 
big bang of contemporary cosmology “nothing became everything” (Brier 2008, 22). 
In the thermodynamic context, biological as well as cultural evolution are rudimen­
tary unifying or counterentropic “dissipative structures,” developing by tychistic “order 
through fluctuation” (Prigogine and Stengers 1984).
Somewhat like the Īśā Upaniṣad, Bhartṛhari and the Śaivas, Peirce described time as an 
experienced but inexplicable combination of what amounts to existence and nonexistence:
It is simply a unidimensional continuum of sorts of states of things and that these 
have an antitypy is shown by the fact that a sort of state of things and a different one 
cannot both be at the same time.
(Peirce 1908, 1976, 2:611,)44
Peirce is one of the fundamental influences on philosopher and theologian Robert 
Cummings Neville. Somewhat along the lines of Peirce, Neville conceived creatio ex ni­
hilo as the generation of the determinate from a potent, indeterminate source, often pos­
ited with a great deal of apophasis. Surprisingly, he contended that there is creatio ex 
nihilo whether cosmogony is viewed as coming from divine command, “out of thin air,” 
as it were, or from preexistent matter or self-​emanation.45
In Eternity and Time’s Flow, Neville described his position as a form of panentheism 
that views the cosmos as constituted within the immanence of God’s creative, eternal 
unity (Neville 1993, 180). The creative, eternal unity of past, present, and future is the 
henological basis of all sorts of relations through time:
The ontologically creative act is the context of mutual relevance, and only by virtue 
of the eternal unity of this act can there be temporal relations among the creatures 
with changing moments of present existence. Time’s flow is made possible by eternal 
togetherness.
(Neville 1993, 198)
Conclusion: Suppose That the Nondual 
Śaivas Contemplatively Absorb 
Sequential Time Within an Ineffable, 
Transtemporal Now of What They 
Conceive as the Divine Self
In the absorption of sequential time into the divine potency contained in the uni­
tary, transtemporal now, the relation of existence and nonexistence comes to a head.

--- PAGE 1147 ---
1122      David Peter Lawrence
 
As discussed above, long before nondual Śaivism, Yoga also established for South 
Asian traditions that one can realize that all sequence is subsumed within the present 
through concentration on a moment (kṣaṇa). Esteemed tantra scholar and practi­
tioner Hemendra Nath Chakravarty suggested that in nondual Śaiva contemplations of 
the moment (kṣaṇa), through kālasaṃkarśana, one realizes an equilibrium in spanda 
[cosmic vibration, a synonym for Śakti], beyond the gross oscillation of sequential time 
(Chakravarty 1985, 121; my bracketed explanation). Spanda is a nondual, potential “sort 
of” a movement (kiṃciccalana).
Although nondual Śaivas do contemplate the subtle physiology and cosmology 
of temporal intervals or moments [tuṭi], they do not thematize the moment per se as 
extensively as do other varieties of tantra. For them all sequence is subsumed in the 
nondual and replete “eternal present” of Śiva. We find the basis for Śaiva subitism in 
reconsidering Utpaladeva’s statement:
The differentiation of manifestations may be the basis for the sequence of time for the 
knower . . . who has a limited light [vicchinnabhāsa]. However, it cannot [be the basis 
for the sequence of time for the unlimited knower], who has manifested already and 
always [sakṛd].
(IPK 2.1.6, 2:20)46
In a different context, on the basis of self-​luminosity as well as soterific agency or 
grace, Abhinavagupta taught the sudden, present realization of Śiva throughout the 
discussion of the “nonmeans” (anupāya) in the second chapters of the Tantrāloka and 
Tantrasāra. All reality is a nondual and omnipotent consciousness (cittamātratattvva) 
as I. Since the subitist transcendence of all means of attainment includes means of the 
attainment of ordinary cognition (pramāṇa), the discussion of the nonmeans is also rig­
orously apophatic (TA 2, 2:111–​152; TS 2, 9).47
Plotinus articulates a hoary theme in Western culture of a replete eternal now:
We know it as a Life changelessly motionless and ever holding the Universal content 
in actual presence; not this now and now that another, but a consummation without 
part or interval. All its content is in immediate concentration as at one point; nothing 
in it ever knows development: all remains identical within itself, knowing nothing of 
change, for ever in a Now, since nothing of it has passed away or will come into being, 
but what it is now, that is ever.
(Plotinus 1992, 3.7, 255)
From an alternative philosophical perspective, Peirce also agreed that the potenti­
ality of the present moment synechistically and tychistically subsumes the rest of time. 
To further understand this, we need to consider his theory of the nature of moments—​
such as the present—​themselves. Peirce conceived moments as infinitesimals (Raposa 
1989, 49; Levy 1991) that are defined as “less than any finite quality” (Peirce 1976, 3:989). 
He maintained that each infinitesimal contains the entire flow of time (NE 3, 989; cf.

--- PAGE 1148 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1123
 
Raposa 1989, 49, and Niemoczynsky, 46).48 Neville similarly described a particular tem­
poral moment as “an abstraction from the whole” (Neville 1993, 173). Neville described 
the present moment as the place of “spontaneous creativity” in which temporal change 
takes place (Neville 1993, 86).49 In what we would call their henology and potentialism, 
these reflections are rather similar to the Śaiva disclosure of Śakti in the kṣaṇa.50
Paralleling Abhinavagupta’s reflections on the insolubility of the relation of unity and 
diversity, Peirce affirmed impossibility of the logical-​comprehensibility of the moment 
in his contention that there cannot even be found a pure moment because it would be 
contradictory. As in any action, something somehow becomes something, somewhere, 
or what not, else—​in a moment something would have to be itself and not itself at the same 
time (“The Logic of Time” in Schmidt 2020). Robert Corrington, in formulating his the­
ology of “ecstatic naturalism” on the basis of Peirce, made an interesting comment:
Infinitesimals are not so much discrete units as they are potencies that compel 
continua into being, while, ironically, opening out forms of novelty and chance. The 
ontological status of the infinitesimal is unique. It is neither an order with the world 
nor is it pure nothingness. I suggest that the infinitesimal is a kind of ontological link 
between the depth dimension of nature (the greater nothingness) and the manifest 
world of phenomena. . . . We cannot find an infinitesimal, if by “find” is meant that we 
isolate it as an object of inquiry. However, we can feel the pulsations of infinitesimals 
whenever we see continua grow and, at the same time, allow for diversity.
(Corrington 1993, 188–​189)
We cannot here inquire further into possibilities of mystical experience in Peirce or 
theologians influenced by him. Abhinavagupta was speaking of a subitist and apophatic 
religious realization of nondual and pleromatic Śiva-​Śakti.51 Bringing things together, the 
obscure nondual Śaiva named Nāgārjuna or Nāga states in the text Paramārcanatriṃśikā:
Śiva is changelessly devoid of conceptual constructions [kalpanā] regarding cogni­
tion and object of cognition, and without abode. When one is not very deeply ab­
sorbed into him in a moment [kṣaṇāt], worship [arcana] has no value
(Paramārcanatriṃśikā 10, edited in Kaw 1960, 32).52
Abbreviations
CP	
Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce
IPK	
Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā by Utpaladeva, using Bhāskarī IPV edition
IPV	
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, commentary on IPK, using
Bhāskarī	
IPV edition
IPVV	
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, commentary on 
Utpaladeva’s now fragmentary Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛti

--- PAGE 1149 ---
1124      David Peter Lawrence
 
TA	
Tantrāloka by Abhinavagupta
TAV	
Tantrālokaviveka by Jayaratha, commentary on TA
TS	
Tantrasāra by Abhinavagupta
VP	
Vākyapadīya by Bhartṛhari
VPP	
Prakīrṇaprakāśa by Helārāja on VP
VPV Commentary	
(vṛtti) on VP, believed to be by Bhartṛhari
Notes
	1.	 A higher female deity also often encompasses a male component.
	2.	 Although there are strongly apophatic (nirguṇa) traditions in Hinduism (including in 
nondual Śaivism), Hindu theism often approaches the divine through its (emanated) im­
manent traces or images. Diana Eck has explained that the Hindu divine makes itself pre­
sent through images (Eck 1985, 46, 51), and that “the divine is visible not only in temples 
and shrines, but also in the whole continuum of life—​in nature, in people, in birth and 
growth and death” (Eck 1985, 10). Gavin Flood discussed how the various accoutrements 
of tantric practice contain the immanent manifestations of the divine (2006). On the clas­
sification of nondual Śaivism with Karl Christian Friedrich Krause’s term “panentheism,” 
see Lawrence, 1999, 169. Loriliai Biernacki has creatively explored many aspects of nondual 
Śaivism as panentheism. For a survey of panentheism that includes nondual Śaivism, see 
Biernacki 2013. On the emphasis on the combination of transcendence with immanence, or 
a “vaguely panentheistic ultimate” in the nonaffiliated spirituality movement, see Forman 
2004, 51–​60. John Macquarrie (1987) labeled “panentheism” as “dialectical theism.” (Robert 
S. Corrington proposed the additional alternative of “deep pantheism.”) In the contempo­
rary period, including in retrievals of tantra and nondual Kashmir Śaivism, the Ultimate’s 
panentheistic transcendence-​cum-​immanence has been highly praised as mediating tradi­
tional “other-​worldly” and modern “this-​worldly” values (Lawrence 2001, 2022). I believe 
that panentheism and so on are a matter of emphasis rather than a unique doctrine, and 
that some transcendence and immanence are necessary respectively for its ultimacy and 
expressibility. As John Mbiti’s theological phenomenology, Concepts of God in Africa stated: 
“The transcendence of God is a difficult attribute to grasp, and one which must be balanced 
with God’s immanence. The two attributes are paradoxically complementary: God is “far” 
(transcendent), and men cannot reach him; but God is also “near” immanent, and he comes 
close to men.” (Mbiti 1979, 12)
	 	   What differs are cosmogonic and other metaphysical understandings of transcendence 
and immanence in relation to one another. Panentheism and its relatives emphasize both 
polarities.
	3.	 Śakti is conceived as the reason in the inference-​for-​the-​sake-​of-​others.
	4.	 I have previously interpreted Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta’s arguments endeavoring to 
perform śaktyāviṣkaraṇa as transcendental in a classic, non-​Kantian sense of philosophical-​
theological metaphysics (Lawrence 2022, though I mistakenly there distinguished varieties of 
neo-​Thomism regarding eidectic reduction).
	5.	 The Śaiva conception of the unity of “I” and “this” (which is basically the structure of what 
is demonstrated in śaktyāviṣkaraṇa) is called the Pure Wisdom (śuddhavidyā, sadvidyā) 
“I am this” (aham idam). One more of the diverse Śaiva ontological categories is relation

--- PAGE 1150 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1125
 
(sambandha), which includes among its rudimentary forms relations between guru and dis­
ciple, subject and object, word and object, and object and object. All syntactic associations 
or coordinations between inflected verbs and declined words (kāraka) are also sambandha. 
Cf. the Yoga Vāsiṣṭha, which comprehends nondual Śaivism among its influences: “All re­
lationship is therefore the realization of the already existing unity: it is regarded as relation­
ship only because of the previous false and deluded assumption of a division into subject 
and object.” (Concise Yoga Vāsiṣṭha 1984, 115). For a recent study of the nondual Śaiva un­
derstanding of relation, see MacCracken 2023. Arindam Chakrabarti is also purportedly 
writing an article on the nondual Śaiva Vijñāna Bhairava (106) prescription of sambandhe 
sāvadhānatā. An additional Śaiva henological conception correlates manifestations with 
words expressing universals (sāmānya).
	6.	 In spite of the further characterization, I remain unready to induct, deduct, or abduce—​that 
abduction is an entirely separate type of argument from induction and deduction. In any 
event, there is such a practical judgment or argument as has been called abduction. This clas­
sification of Pratyabhijñā argument as abduction accords with (1) the significance of Śakti as 
a Potency, Potentiality, or Capability to effect practical results (arthakriyā), including basic 
epistemological and ontological explicanda, or in the case of Time, sequential action or 
change itself; (2) the system’s stated highest purpose of bestowing on humanity the practical 
benefit (upakāra) of identity with the deity, described as the attainment of all prosperity (this 
interpretation construes samastasampatsamāvāpthetu in the benedictory verse of the IPK as 
a tatpuruṣa; Lawrence 1999, 38-​43); (3) Abhinavagupta’s approach to the arbitration of diver­
gent recognitions or knowledge claims in terms of coherence-​in-​practical utility (nirbādha 
in pursuing arthakriyā; Lawrence 2013); (4) the parāthānumāna’s grounding of an inference’s 
deductive conclusion in pragmatically formulated inductions and deductions (Lawrence 
2022; Lawrence unpublished manuscript); and (5) John Hick’s fallibilistic construal of reli­
gious arguments as demonstrations of the coherence of intellectual options rather than final 
proofs (Hick 1964).
	 	   My interpretation of Pratyabhijñā argument as abduction was developed in discussions 
between Arindam Chakrabarti, myself, and Sean MacCracken, for whose doctoral disser­
tation Prof. Chakrabarti and I were both readers. As I recall, Prof. Chakrabarti was the first 
to discuss abduction in another context. Then Dr. MacCracken was the first explicitly to 
ask whether the Pratyabhijñā inference may be understood as an abduction. Both Prof. 
Chakrabarti and I thought that this accorded with our own understandings of the philos­
ophy. Of course, both Prof. Chakrabarti and Dr. Maccracken may change their minds or 
develop their own understanding of these topics. After completing the present interpre­
tation, I read the somewhat different treatment of transcendental argument and practical 
hypotheses in the completed work of MacCracken in 2021. For Charles Sanders Peirce’s own 
abductive “Neglected Argument” for the reality of God, see CP 6.452–​6.493, 311–​339. See 
the discussion of this argument and its relation to abduction in Raposa 1989, 123–​137 and 
passim. Grounding himself in ideas of Peirce, Robert S. Corrington formulated a theology 
of “ecstatic naturalism” associated with his “deep pantheism” that affirms that the numinous 
presents within nature. For a later expression, see Corrington 2000. Leon J. Niemoczynski 
further built on views of Peirce and Corrington (Niemoczynski 2011).
	 	   We may ponder how many logical problems or paradoxes would be obviated, or at 
least deferred, if we interpreted Śakti as “Potentiality” or “Potency.” We could also speak 
of potencies of recognitive apprehension, self-​reflection, and so on. Arindam Chakrabarti 
agreed with the rationales in support of the present hypothesis and also thought that I 
should continue to engage with questions about it.

--- PAGE 1151 ---
1126      David Peter Lawrence
 
	 7.	 The Pratyabhijñā thinkers conceived of at least seven abstract ways of explaining the dif­
ferentiation of Śiva’s totality: (1) The Kāla Śakti, generating the sequence (krama) of time, 
place, form, and so on. (2) The fragmentation (khaṇḍanā), contraction (saṃkoca), and 
so on, of his pūrṇatā, “perfection, completeness or pleroma.” (3) Semantic Exclusion 
and Inferential Noncommitance (apoha), generated by the Apohanaśakti (on the appro­
priation of this concept in debate with the Buddhists; see Lawrence 2018; Pruiett 2019 
correlates construction/​exclusion with time). (4) Fantastic Fabrication (māyā), brought 
about by the Māyāśakti, invoked to explain the epistemology and theodicy of delusion (on 
the relation of the Māyā and Kāla Śaktis, see Torrella’s note to Utpaladeva 2002, 153n39). 
(5) Derivative or emanatory relations between personal pronouns-​cum-​referents: That is, 
from the indexical “I” (aham) emerges “this” (idam), or more fully “you” (tvam) and “this” 
(idam). (6). Derivative or emanatory relations in the semantics-​cum-​syntax and corre­
sponding referents of action and its action factors (kāraka) (kriyākāraka theory): From 
the divine agent (kartṛ) emerge action (kriyā) and other action factors. (7) Diversification 
of reflections (pratibimba; see Kaul 2020; Lawrence 2005) or of entities within a unitary 
manifestation, such as a vista, painting, dancer, river, or ocean.
	 8.	 On the quest to “stop” time, see King Henry the Fourth, Part 1, Act 5, Scene 4, 81-​83. Many 
contemporary studies have argued for the eternity of that which is experienced in mys­
ticism (Underhill 1961; Huxley 1945, 2006; Stace 1952; Forman 1999). W. T. Stace has 
forcefully argued that the eternal ultimate cannot be directly expressed, but only evoked 
through symbols (Stace 1952, e.g., 61).
	 9.	 We do not discuss here Eliade’s treatment of issues of time in terms of history and 
historicism.
	10.	 te dhyānayogānugatā apaśyandevātmaśaktiṃ svaguṇairnigūḍhām. yaḥ kāraṇāni nikhilāni 
tāni kālātmayuktānyadhitiṣṭhatyekaḥ.
	11.	 kālo’smi loka-​kṣaya-​kṛt. . . .
	12.	 Although the overall context may be different, these considerations accord with the en­
during pursuit of insight about the relation of existence and nonexistence in a pleromatic 
One described long before in the Ṛg Veda: “Sagacious poets [kavi] who searched in their 
heart with intelligence [maniṣā] found the relation [bandhu] of existence to nonexistence” 
(Rig Veda 2005, 10.129).
	 	   sato bandhumasati niravindan hṛdi pratīṣyākavayo manīṣā. I am aware of the diver­
sity of interpretations of this verse. For example, sometimes sato and asati are taken as 
adjectives rather than nouns. Sometimes, the locative in asati is taken as “in” rather than 
to. Sometimes bandhum is taken as “bond” rather than “relation” and so on. In various 
translations there remains the basic problem of finding the unifying “connection” between 
what exists and what does not exist.
	13.	 kṣaṇatkramayo saṃyamādvivekajaṃ jñānam and passim.
	14.	 Coomaraswamy long ago observed the strong common ground between the Yoga Sūtra 
and the Kālacakra (1992, 142, 171–​173).
	15.	 I give what perhaps sounds like a rather Advaita Vedāntin interpretation of vivartate. 
However, Bhartṛhari alternated between the concepts of vivarta and pariṇāma. The on­
tology of emanation for Bhartṛhari still needs to be further investigated.
	16.	 1.1: anādinidhanam brahma śabdatattvaṃ yadakṣaram/​vivartate’rthabhāvena prakriyā 
jagato yataḥ//​
	 	   1.2: ekameva yadāmnātam bhinnaśaktivyapāśrayāt/​apṛthaktve’pi śakibhyaḥ pṛthaktveneva 
vartate//​

--- PAGE 1152 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1127
 
	 	   1.3: adhyāhitakalāṃ yasya kālaśaktimupāśritāḥ/​janmādayo vikārā ṣad bhāvabhedasya 
yonayaḥ//​
	 	   3.9.14: jalayantrabhramāveśasadṛśībhiḥ pravṛttibhiḥ/​sa kalāḥ kalayan sarvā kālākhyām 
labhate vibhuḥ.
	 	   3.9.46: nirbhāsopagamo yo’yam kramavāniva dṛśyate/​akramasyāpi viśvasya tat 
kālasyaviceṣṭitam.
	 	   Helarāja argues that the Śakti of Kāla is Bhartṛhari’s innovation. He also connects the 
Kāla Śakti with Krishna’s statement that he is Time (Filliozat 2009, 221).
	17.	 Nevertheless, it is not clear whether the grammarian entirely conceived śabdabrahman as 
what we consider a “super-​person” or “god.” Also anticipating the Śaivas, Bhartṛhari and 
Helarāja closely interrelate time with delusion (avidyā) (VP and VPP 3.9.62, 3.2: 64–​65).
	18.	 buddhyavagrahabhedācca 
vyavahārātmani 
stiteḥ/​tāvāneva 
kṣaṇaḥ 
kālo 
yugamanvantarāṇi vā
	19.	 He is not necessarily taking the idea from this text. His idea may have some basis in the 
quotation Ṛg Veda 10.129 previously cited.
	20.	 tataśca pratibhāvam vaiśvarūpasya prabandhābhyupajñābhyāṃ śaktyavacchedena 
kravānivābhāsopagamo lakṣyate. Abhyanujñā and pratibandha are also said to be the 
two functions (of the Kāla Śakti) at 3.9.4, 3.2, 42. tamasya lokayantrasya sūtradhāram 
pracakṣate/​pratibandhābhyanujñābhyāṃ tena visśvam vibhajyate.
	21.	 At the end of his IPVV, Abhinavagupta also quotes and acknowledges his agreement with 
the cittamātra doctrine of the Vijñānavāda (1987a, 3:405).
	22.	 sakramatvaṃ ca laukikyāḥ kriyāyāḥ kālaśaktitaḥ/​ghaṭate na tu śāśvatyāḥ prābhvyāḥ 
syātprabhoriva.
	23.	 2.1.2: sakramatvaṃ ca laukikyāḥ kālaśaktitaḥ/​ghaṭate na tu śāśvatyāḥ prābhavyāḥ 
syātprabhoriva//​
	 	 2.1.3: kālaḥ sūryādisaṃcārastattatpuṣpādijanma vā/​śītoṣṇe vātha tallakṣyaḥ krama eva sa 
tattvataḥ
	 	 2.1.5: ṃūrtivaicitryato deśakramābhāsayatyasau/​kriyāvaicitryanirbhāsātkālakramamapīśv
araḥ
	24.	 Bhāskara’s subcommentary says on this page: sūryasaṇcārāder aparimitatvaṃ 
devadattayamanādeḥ parimitatvam.
	25.	 gāḍhapratyabhijñāprakāśabalāt tadeva idaṃ hastasvarūpam iti praitpattau mūrtena 
bhedaḥ atha ca anyānyarūpatvam bhāti tadaikasmin svarūpe yadanyat anyat rūpaṃ 
tadvirodhavaśāt asahabhavatkriyā ucyate tasyā yat vacitryam parimitāparimitātmakaṃ 
tadekānusandhānena phalasiddhyāisibandhanavaśāt yathāruci carcitena nirbhāsayan 
kālarūpaṃ kramamevāvabhāsayati. It has been observed that Abhinavagupta, in the par­
allel context of his aesthetics, prescribes a similar realization of the unity of rasa among 
the actors and audience (Arindam Chakrabarti, personal conversation in 2022). Even 
in the IPV, Abhinava explains a sort of henological aesthetics regarding the diversity of 
manifestations (IPV 2.1.4).
	26.	 iti kārakāṇāmapi sambandharūpataiva. . . . yadapi ca kārakaṃ tadapi kriyāmukhaprekṣi 
sāpi kālam prāṇeśvaram āśrayati so’pi kriyādvāreṇa sarvabhāvātmā sambandham 
uddhurayati. On universals (sāmānya), relations (sambandha), and action (kriyā) as 
intertwined and homologous synthetic categories, see IPV 2.2.4 intro., 2:46–​2.49.
	27.	 kramo bhedāśrayo bhedo’pyābhāsasadasattvataḥ/​ābhāsasadasattve tu citrābhāsakṛteḥ 
prabhoḥ. In his IPVV, Abhinavagupta defines the Time Potency (kālaśakti) as “God’s ca­
pacity for emanating what manifests and does not manifest” (IPVV 2.1.4, 3:10): bhagavata

--- PAGE 1153 ---
1128      David Peter Lawrence
 
eva ābhāsānābhāsaprtthanasamarthatā yā saiva kālaśaktiḥ. Is the combination of presence 
and absence contradictory? As we will see that he often accounts for diversity, Abhinava 
explains how only consciousness (saṃvid) is able to contain both manifestation and 
nonmanifestation. na caitat vācyam—​ekasvarūpasya katham anyat anyadrūpamiti? yato 
na asau kaścit bhāvo ya evaṃ kalpyate; saṃvideva hi tathā bhāti, tathā bhānameva ca tasyā 
aiśvaryam, na hi bhāsane virodha kaścit prabhavati, sa hi sukhaduḥkhāderbhāsanakṛta 
eva, tathā bhāsanābhāva eva virodhatattvam (IPV 2.1.5, 2:17–​19).
	28.	 asyāyaṃ kriyāpratānaḥ sahabhāvena āste vinābhāvena vā iti vartamānādiḥ kālaḥ.
	29.	 Cf. the explanation of the seasons as the successive existence and nonexistence of man­
ifestation brought about by the Kāla Śakti (IPV 2.1.4, 2:116): yadā tu śaradābhāsaṃ 
hemantābhāsena ca sarvathaiva śūnyamābhāsayati hemantābhāsaṃ ca śāradābhāsena 
tadā kālātmā krama uttiṣṭhati iti seyam ittambhūtā bhāvavaicitryaprathanaśaktiḥ 
bhagavataḥ kālaśaktiḥ ityucyate.
	30.	 Cf. bhinnatvaṃ sāmānyam (VPP 3.1, 3.1).
	31.	 Abhinavagupta in various places acknowledges the logical problem of reducing diversity to 
unity. He says that the experience of the one-​in-​the-​many is actually logically impossible, 
but that it is also possible within consciousness (cf. IPV 2.1.1, 2:7–​9)! The practical coherence 
of what we experience supersedes a more hypothetical argument. We return to the forthright 
transgression of logic in attempts to reduce time or difference in general to nonduality.
	32.	 ābhāsbhedo’pi bhavetkālakramākaraḥ/​vicchinnabhāsaḥ . . . māturbhāsya no sakṛt. See 
the discussion below of Utaladeva’s allusion here to Chāndogya Upaniṣad 8.4.1–​8.4.2. 
On favorable and unfavorable human relations to time, cf. TA, 4.165, 3:795–​796: kartā ca 
dvividhaḥ proktaḥ kalpitākalpitātmakaḥ/​kalpito dehabuddhādivavacchedena carcitaḥ. 
Jeffrey Kripal has described the religious theme of the dual human trajectory toward ei­
ther the worldly or the spiritual, as the human as two (Kripal 2014).
	33.	 kramākramakalanaiva kālaḥ sa ca parameśvara eva antarbhāti tadbhāsanam ca devasya 
kālī nāma śaktiḥ.
	34.	 kramākramātmā kālaśca paraḥ saṃvidi vartate/​kālī nāma parā śaktiḥ saiva devasya 
gīyate. Similar contemplations are found throughout late nondual Śaiva writings. An in­
teresting point in the Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa is that the adept aspires to a state of the nondual 
anuttara in which there is not even the temporal transmission between the teaching and 
taught (as occurs in the āgamas). Per the Parātrśīkāvivaraṇa Sanskrit in Abhinavagupta 
1989, 34: tad vānuttara-​padaṃ sṛṣṭirityarthaḥ. yadyapi ca sṛṣṭāvapi prāktananayenta 
kālopekṣi paurvāparyaṃ na syāt tathāpi upadeśyopadeśabhāvalakṣaṇo bhedo yāvat 
svātmani svātantryāt parameśvareṇa bhāsyate tāva-​tpaurvāparyam api. I mention that 
the Prapañcasāra ascribed to Śaṅkarācārya, along with the Yogavāśiṣṭha, also speak of the 
transition to the higher form of nonsequential time through tantric practice. See discus­
sion in Kaviraj 1990, 143–​145).
	35.	 Plotinus, endeavoring to interpret Plato, deplores any person who does not immediately 
trace the reflections in the world to their transcendent source as perishing like Narcissus 
gazing in the water (Plotinus 1992, 1.6.8, 71).
	36.	 Transcendence is traditionally understood in Christianity as evinced in creation from 
God’s command, without preexistent material cause. On what I have labeled a “dialectic” 
in Christianity, see Underhill 1961, 96ff.
	37.	 On Neoplatonic participation in the Forms conceived in Renaissance painting, see 
Gombrich 1948.

--- PAGE 1154 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1129
 
	38.	 Paul Franks maintained that Peirce’s stated heritage in the “monstrous mysticism of the 
East” is more likely about Jacob Boehme’s appropriation of kabbalah than Hinduism or 
Buddhism. Franks also explained that in kabbalah, as in nondual Śaivism, the physical 
world is a sort of contraction of the spiritual world (2015, 745–​751).
	39.	 Charles Hartshorne classified Peirce as a panentheist, albeit decrying his tendencies to­
ward classical theism and the overall coherence of his philosophy (Hartshorne and Reese 
2000, 258–​259, 268–​269). For other classifications of Peirce as a panentheist, see Raposa 
1989, 48–​51; Brier 2008; Niemoczynski 2011, 60, 118.
	40.	 This statement is illustrative:
“The universe is a vast representamen, a great symbol of God’s purpose, working out its 
conclusion in living realities. Now every symbol must have, organically attached to it, its 
Indices of Reactions and its Icons of Qualities; and such part as these reactions and these 
qualities play in an argument that, they of course, play in the universe—​that Universe 
being precisely an argument. . . . The Universe as an argument is necessarily a great work of 
art, a great poem—​for every fine argument is a poem and a symphony—​just as every true 
poem is a sound argument. But let us compare it rather to a painting.”
(CP 5.119, 75–​76)
On the world as God’s icons and symbols, see Raposa 1989, 108–​109.
	 	   I have previously compared Abhinavagupta’s view that recognition should be evaluated 
for truth in coherence (abādhya) in the pursuit of purposeful action (arthakriya)—​with 
the tripartite criteria David Tracy identified in William James—​possibility (which Tracy 
further interpreted in terms of hermeneutic disclosure), coherence and, praxis (see Tracy 
1990; Lawrence 2013). I now believe that James’s criteria have their basis in Peirce’s semi­
otic abuctivism and pragmatism.
	41.	 This tohu bohu corresponds to either the semiotic category Peirce called Firstness or a sort 
of precursor to Firstness.
	42.	 That is, consequent on the interruptive objectivity of “Secondness,” there evolves 
“Thirdness.”
	43.	 See Calcaterra 2012, 415, on the fallibilism provided by Peirce’s union of necessity and 
spontaneity in an evolutionary continuum.
	44.	 Peircean biosemiotic theorists Terrence Deacon and Tyrone Cashman likewise suggested 
that time is the mixture of actuality and its absence: “But what if time [is] . . . but a feature 
of the open-​ended nature of present/​absence relationships compounded on each other” 
(Deacon and Cashman, 2016, 426). Reminiscent of the contention by Abhinavagupta 
that difference is a sort of unifying relation of similarity, Corrington also explained that 
in Peircean philosophy: “Contrast is actually a subspecies of resemblance and functions 
according to the same momentum” (Corrington 1993, 103). Peircean pragmatic pluralist, 
Rosenthal also spoke of the sense of continuity within the process of time as recognition 
(Rosenthal 1994, 69).
	45.	 Neville thus accommodated within his abstract conception of cosmogony—​Abrahamic, 
Daoist, Confucian, Hindu, and Buddhist notions of creation or origination (Neville 1991). 
W. T. Stace observed that many Jewish mystics interpret creatio ex nihilo as creation out of 
the incomprehensible God who is “Nothing” (Stace 1952, 11–​12).
	46.	 This verse is inspired by Chāndogya Upaniṣad in Upaniṣatsaṅgraha 1970, 8.4.2, 79: “This 
world of brahman has at once and always manifested [sakṛdvibhāta].” sakṛdvibhāto

--- PAGE 1155 ---
1130      David Peter Lawrence
 
hyevaiṣa brahmlokaḥ. The Chāndogya Upaniṣad passage is quoted or referred to in nu­
merous places in Śaiva texts. See Utpaladeva 2002, 155n8.
	47.	 In the Tantrāloka, Abhinavagupta discusses haṭhapākapraśamana. See TA and 
TAV 3.260–​3.263, 2:591–​2:594. On the distinction of haṭhapākapraśmana from 
madhupākapraśmana, as well as the discussion of other aspects of the moment, in the 
āgamas, see Chakravarty 1985. Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta teach a negation of 
methodology by self-​luminosity (svaprakāśatva) in 1.1.2 and 2.3.15.–​2.3.16 of IPK and 
IPV and IPVV commentaries.
	 	   Regarding apophasis, in TA 2.28, 2:59, Abhinavagupta even sounds like a Mādhyamika 
in mentioning a catuṣkoṭi.
	 	   There is not existence [sat], nonexistence [asat], both existence and nonexistence 
[sadasat] or what lacks both [tannobhayojjhita]. For that state is difficult to compre­
hend [durvijñya]. That something is Anuttara samastamidam ekaṃ cinmātratattvaṃ 
kālena akalitaṃ deśena aparicchinnam . . . ākṛtibhiraniyantritam. . . . kālādeḥ 
pramāṇaparyantasya svarūpalābhanimittam ca. . . . tadeva ca aham.
	 	   Although there are roots of such apophasis in the Nāsadīya Sūkta (Rig Veda 10.129), 
the appropriation here of more recent Mahāyāna Buddhism, such as from the streams 
of Prajñāparamita or Mahāmudrā, within Śaiva metaphysics is evident. Sanderson and I 
have thus separately suggested that Krama and nondual Śaivism share common sources 
with Tibetan Dzogchen or Chinese sudden Ch’an (Lawrence 2016).
	48.	 Raposa explained that each individual makes one aware of the continuous whole (Raposa 
1989, 21).
	49.	 Cf. the biosemiotics of Kull 2018: “Semiosis takes place in the Now.”
	50.	 W. T. Stace himself observed that the mystic sees in the moment God immanent at the in­
tersection of the temporal and the eternal (Stace 1952, 75–​80). For corroboration he quoted 
his contemporary T. S. Eliot:
To apprehend
The point of intersection of the timeless
With time is an occupation of the saint.
(Eliot 1943, 26)
	51.	 Notwithstanding the dangers of irrationalism, I suggest that logical puzzles or aporias are 
present in virtually all philosophies. In line with what was said above on Abhinavagupta 
regarding the combination of the one and the many in consciousness—​perhaps disclosed 
or recognized truth claims, along with overall coherence in the practical pursuit of the 
highest felicity, can decide which philosophies are more persuasive (Lawrence 1999, 106; 
2013; cf. the commentary in Hick 1964 and elsewhere)
	52.	 mānameyamiti kalpanojjhito nirvikāramaniketanaḥ śivaḥ/​gāḍhgādhmavagāhyate kṣaṇāt 
yatra nanu kiṃ tadarcanam.
References
Abhinavagupta. 1986a. Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī (with Bhāskara’s Bhāskarī) (Vols. 1–​2). 
Edited by K. A. Subramania Iyer and K. C. Pandey. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Abhinavagupta. 1987a. Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī (Vols. 1–​3). Edited by Madhusudan 
Kaul Shastri. Delhi: Akay Book Corporation.

--- PAGE 1156 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1131
 
Abhinavagupta. 1987b. The Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta With the Commentary of Jayaratha. 
8 vols. Edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri and Mukunda Rama Shastri. Kashmir Series 
of Texts and Studies. Republication edited by R. C. Dwivedi and Navjivan Rastogi. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Abhinavagupta. 1989. A Trident of Wisdom [Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa]. Edited and translated by 
Jaideva Singh. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Atharva Veda. 1905. Translated by William Dwight Whitney and revised by Charles Rockwell 
Landman. 2 vols. Cambridge: Harvard Oriental Series.
Baumer, Bettina. 2011. “The Three Grammatical Persons and the Trika.” In Abhinavagupta’s 
Hermeneutics of the Absolute, Anuttaraprakriyā: An Interpretation of His Parātrīśikā 
Vivaraṇa, 101–​112. New Delhi: D. K. Printworld.
The Bhagavad-​Gita. 1975. Edited and translated by R.C. Zaehner. London: Oxford 
University Press.
Bhartṛhari. 1966–​1983. Vākyapadīya (with commentaries). 4 vols. Edited by K. A. Subramania 
Iyer. Kāṇḍa 1, Pune: Deccan College, 1966. Kāṇḍa 2, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983. Kāṇḍa 
3, part 1, Pune: Deccan College, 1963. Kāṇḍa 3, part 2, Pune: Deccan College, 1973.
Biernacki, Loriliai. 2013. Panentheism Across the World’s Traditions. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Brier, Soren. 2008. “A Peircean Panentheist Scientific Mysticism.” International Journal of 
Transpersonal Studies 27:20–​45.
Calcaterra, Rosa M. 2012. “Varieties of Synechism: Peirce and James on Mind-​World 
Continuity.” Journal of Speculative Philosophy 25:412–​424.
Chakravarty, 
Hemendra 
Nath. 
1985. 
“Kṣaṇa: 
Its 
Spiritual 
Significance.” 
Indian Theosophist, Thakur (Dr.) Jaideva Singh Felicitation Number 82, no. 10–​11: 121–​126.
Collins, Steven. 1998. Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities: Utopias of the Pali Imaginaire. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
The Concise Yoga Vāsiṣṭha. 1984. Translated by Swami Venkatesananda. Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Coomaraswamy, A. K. 1992. “Time and Eternity in Hinduism and Buddhism.” In Time in 
Indian Philosophy: A Collection of Essays, edited by Hari Shankar Prasad, 133–​185. Delhi: Sri 
Satguru Publications.
Corrington, Robert S. 1993. An Introduction to C. S. Peirce: Philosopher, Semiotician, and 
Ecstatic Naturalist. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Corrington, Robert S. 2000. A Semiotic Theory of Theology and Philosophy. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Deacon, Terence W., and Tyrone Cashman. 2016. “Steps to a Metaphysics of Incompleteness.” 
Theology and Science 14:401–​429.
De La Vallee Poussin, Louis. 1934. “Notes sur le ‘moment’ ou kṣaṇa des bouddhistes.” 
Rocznik Orjentalistyezny 8:1–​9.
Dufour, Richard. 2004. “Actuality and Potentiality of Plotinus’ View of the Intelligible 
Universe.” Journal of Neoplatonic Studies 9:193–​218.
Dupuche, J. R. 2001. “Person to Person: Vivaraṇa of Abhinavagupta on Parātriṃśikā Verses 
3–​4.” Indo-​Iranian Journal 44:1–​16.
Eck, Diana L. 1985. Darśan: Seeing the Divine Image in India, 2nd ed. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Eliade, Mircea. 1958. Patterns in Comparative Religion. Translated by Rosemary Sheed. New 
York: Signet.

--- PAGE 1157 ---
1132      David Peter Lawrence
 
Eliade, Mircea. 1991. “Indian Symbolisms of Time and Eternity.” In Images and Symbols: 
Studies in Religious Symbolism, translated by Philip Maret, 57–​91. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Eliot, T. S. 1943. The Four Quartets. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co.
Ficino, Marsilio. 2010. All Things Natural: Ficino on Plato’s Timaeus. Translated by Arthur 
Farndell. London: Shepheard-​Walwyn.
Filliozat, Pierre-​Sylvain. 2009. “Time as Power of Word According to Bhartṛhari.” In Bhartṛhari: 
Language, Thought and Reality, ed. Mithilesh Chaturvedi, 215–​223. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Flood, Gavin. 2006. The Tantric Body: The Secret of the Tantric Tradition. London: Tauris.
Forman, Robert K. C. 1999. Mysticism, Mind and Consciousness. Albany: State University of 
New York Press.
Forman, Robert K. C. 2004. Grassroots Spirituality: What It Is, Why It Is Here, Where It Is Going. 
Charlottesville, VA: Imprint Academic.
Franks, Paul. 2015. “Peirce’s ‘Schelling-​Fashioned Idealism’ and ‘The Monstrous Mysticism of 
the East.’ ” British Journal for the History of Philosophy 23:732–​755.
Gerson, Lloyd. 2004. “Plato on Identity, Sameness, and Difference.” Review of Metaphysics 
58:305–​332.
Gombrich, E. H. 1948. “Icones Symbolicae: The Visual Image in Neo-​Platonic Thought.” 
Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 11:163–​192.
Hartshorne, Charles, and Michael Reese. 2000. Philosophers Speak of God.New York, 
Humanites Books.
Heidegger, Martin. 1962. Being and Time. Translated by John Macquarrie and Edward 
Robinson. San Francisco: Harper.
Hick, John. 1964. The Existence of God: A Reader Edited With an Introduction. New York: 
Collier Books.
Huxley, Aldous. 1945. The Perennial Philosophy. New York: Harper & Row.
Huxley, Aldous. 2006. Time Must Have a Stop. Dallas, TX: Dalkey Archive.
Ilievski, Victor. 2015. “Eternity and Time in Plato’s Timaeus.” Ziva Antika 65: 5–​22.
Kaul, 
Mrinal. 
2020. 
“Abhinavagupta 
on 
Reflection 
in 
the 
Tantrāloka.” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 48:161–​189.
Kaviraj, Gopinath. 1990. “The Concept of Time.” In Selected Writings of M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj, 
130–​135. Varanasi: M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj Centenary Celebrations Committee.
Kaw, R. K. 1960. “Nagarjuna’s Contribution to Shaivism” (includes editions of Cittasantoṣatriṃśikā 
and Paramārcanatriṃśikā, ascribed to Nāgārjuna). Sharada-​Peetha Research Series 1:25–​35.
Kripal, Jeffrey J. 2014. Comparing Religions: Coming to Terms. Chichester, UK: Wiley Blackwell.
Kull, Kalevi. 2018. “On the Logic of Animal Umwelten: The Animal Subjective Present and 
Zoosemiotics of Choice and Learning.” In Semiotics of Animals in Culture: Zoosemiotics 
2.0, edited by Gianfranco Marrone and Dario Mangano, 135–​148. Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
Springer.
Lawrence, David Peter. 1999. Rediscovering God With Transcendental Argument: A 
Contemporary Interpretation of Monistic Kashmiri Śaiva Philosophy. Albany: State University 
of New York Press.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2001. “The Dialectic of Transcendence and Immanence in 
Contemporary Western and Indian Theories of God.” In Transcendence and Immanence: 
Comparative and Multi-​Dimensional Perspectives, edited by Liu Shu-​hsien et al., 347–​363. 
Hong Kong: New Asia College, Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2005. “Remarks on Abhinavagupta’s Use of the Analogy of Reflection.” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 33:583–​599.

--- PAGE 1158 ---
Dynamic Manifestations of Eternal Divinity      1133
 
Lawrence, David Peter. 2008a. “Abhinavagupta’s Philosophical Hermeneutics of Grammatical 
Persons.” Journal of Hindu Studies 1:11–​25.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2008b. The Teachings of the Odd-​Eyed One: A Study and Translation of 
the Virūpākṣapañcāśikā With the Commentary of Vidyācakravartin. Albany: State University 
of New York Press.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2013. “The Plurality and Contingency of Knowledge, and Its 
Rectification According to the Pratyabhijñā.” In Abhinavā, Perspectives on Abhinavagupta: 
Studies in Memory of K. C. Pandey on his Centerary, edited by Navjivan Rastogi and Meera 
Rastogi, 226–​258. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2016. “Givenness Versus Cultivation on the Religious Path: 
Philosophical and Historical Reflections on Linji Yixuan and Abhinavagupta.” 
Prabuddha Bharata 2 (January): 205–​214.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2018. “Pratyabhijñā Apoha Theory, Shannon–​Weaver Information, 
Saussurean Structure, Peircean Interpretant Agency.” Religions 9, no. 6: 191. https://​doi.org/​
10.1007/​978-​81-​322-​1812-​8_​29-​2.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2022. “Pratyabhijā Inference as a Transcendental Argument About 
a Nondual, Plenary God.” In Handbook of Logical Thought in India, edited by Mihir 
Chakraborty and Sundar Sarukkai. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 489–​518. Online first: 
https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​978-​81-​322-​1812-​8_​29-​2.
Lawrence, David Peter. Unpublished manuscript. “Pratyabhijñā Inference as Transcendental 
Abduction.”
Levy, 
Stephen 
H. 
1991. 
“Charles 
S. 
Peirce’s 
Theory 
of 
Infinitesimals.” 
International Philosophical Quarterly 31:127–​141.
MacCracken, Sean Kelly Irwin. 2021. “The Grammarian, The Sceptic, and the Nondualist: The 
Proof of Relation (Sambandhasiddhi) of Utpaladeva, and Its Place in Contemporary Theories 
of Language and Cognition.” Doctoral dissertation, California Institute of Integral Studies.
MacCracken, Sean Kelly Irwin. 2023. “Being is Relating: Continuity-​in-​Change in the 
Sambandhasiddhi of Utpaladeva. Religions, no. 1. https://​doi.org/​10.3390/​rel1​4010​057 
(registering DOI)
Macquarrie, John. 1987. In Search of Deity: An Essay in Dialectical Theism, The Gifford Lectures 
1983. New York: Crossroad.
Mbiti, John S. 1979. Concepts of God in Africa. London: SPCK.
Neville, Robert Cummings. 1991. Behind the Masks of God: An Essay Toward Comparative 
Theology. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Neville, Robert Cummings. 1993. Eternity and Time’s Flow. Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Niemoczynski, Leon J. 2011. Charles Sanders Peirce and a Religious Metaphysics of Nature. 
Lanham, MD: Lexington.
Parker, Kelly A. 2001. “The Ascent of the Soul to Nous: Charles S. Peirce as a Neoplatonist.” 
In Neoplatonism and Contemporary Thought, Part One, edited by R. Baine Harris, 165–​182. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Patañjali et al. 1998. Pātañjalayogadarśanam. Edited by Srinarayan Mishra. Varanasi, India: 
Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 1960–​1966. Collected Papers of Charless Sanders Peirce. Edited by 
Charles Hartshorne, Arthur W. Burks and Paul Weiss. 8 volumes and 4 books. Cambridge, 
UK: Harvard Belknap.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 1976. New Elements of Mathematics. 4 volumes and 5 books. Edited by 
Caroly Eisele. Berlin: De Gruyter.

--- PAGE 1159 ---
1134      David Peter Lawrence
 
Plato. Timaeus. 1989. Translated by Benjamin Jowett. In The Collected Dialogues of Plato, 
edited by Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns, 1151–​1211. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Plotinus. 1992. The Enneads. Translated by Stephen Mackenna. New York: Larson Publications.
Prigogine, Ilya, and Isabelle Stengers. 1984. Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue With 
Nature. Toronto: Bantam Books.
Proclus. 2017. The Commentaries of Proclus on the Timaeus of Plato. Translated by Thomas 
Taylor. Vancouver: Kshetra Books.
Pruiett, Catherine. 2019. “Beyond Time, Not Before Time: The Pratyabhijñā Śaiva 
Critique of Dharmakīrti on the Reality of Beginningless Conceptual Differentiation.” 
Philosophy East and West. Preprint. https://​doi.org/​10.1353/​pew.0.0185.
Raposa, Michael L. 1989. Peirce’s Philosophy of Religion. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Rastogi, Navjivan. 1992. “Kālī as a Metaphysical Concept in the Krama System of Kashmir 
Śaivism.” In Time in Indian Philosophy, edited by Hari Shankar Prasad, 719–​721. Delhi Sri 
Satguru Publications.
The Rig Veda. 2005. Sacred Texts. Accessed September 26, 2021. https://​www.sac​red-​texts.com/​
hin/​rvsan/​index.htm.
Rosenthal, Sandra B. 1994. Charles Peirce’s Pragmatic Pluralism. Albany: State University of 
New York Press.
Rospatt, Alexander von. 1995. The Buddhist Doctrine of Momentariness: A Survey of the Origins 
and Early Phase of This Doctrine Up to Vasubandhu. Stuttgart, Germany: Steiner.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. “The Śaiva Exegesis in Kasmir.” In Tantric Studies in Memory of Helene 
Brunner, edited by Dominic Goodall and Andre Padoux, 231–​442. Pondicherry, India: 
Institut Francais de Pondichery.
Schmidt, Jon Alan. 2020. “Temporal Synechism: A Peircan Philosophy of Time.” Axiomathes. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s10​516-​020-​09523-​6
Silburn, Lilian. 1955. Instant et Cause: Le Discontinu dans la Pensee Philosophique de l’Inde. 
Paris: J. Vrin.
Solomon, Sheldon Jeff Greenberg, and Tom Pyszczynski. 2015. The Worm at the Core: On the 
Role of Death in Life. London: Penguin Books.
Stace, W. T. 1952. Time and Eternity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Stcherbatsky, F. Th. 1983. The Central Conception of Buddhism, and the Meaning of the Word 
“Dharma.” Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Torella, Raeffaele. 2008. “From an Adversary to the Main Ally: The Place of Bhartṛhari in the 
Kashmirian Shaiva Advaita.” In Linguistic Traditions of Kashmir: Essays in Memory of Pandit 
Dinanath Yaksh, edited by Mrinal Kaul and Ashok Aklujkar, 508–​524. New Delhi: D. K. 
Printworld.
Tracy, David. 1990. “The Question of Criteria for Inter-​Religious Dialogue: On Revisiting 
William James.” In his Dialogue With the Other: The Inter-​Religious Dialogue, 27–​47. 
Louvain, Belgium: Peeters Press.
Underhill, Evelyn. 1961. Mysticism. New York: Dutton.
Upaniṣatsaṅgraha. 1970. Edited by Jagadisha Shastri. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Utpaladeva. 2002. The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva With the Author’s Vṛttti, 
Corrected Edition. Edited and translated by Raffaele Torella. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Zaehner, R. C., ed. and trans. The Bhagavad-​Gita. 1975. London: Oxford University Press.

--- PAGE 1160 ---
Chapter 44
Buddhist Magic 
and Vajrayāna
Sam van Schaik
Introduction
Magical practices are found in Buddhist sutras, as well as other kinds of scriptural texts 
specializing in magical rites, known as vidyā (lit. knowledge, or skill), kalpa, or dhāraṇī 
(mnemonic). In the study of Indo-​Tibetan Buddhism, there has been a debate about 
whether we should see these magical texts and practices as “proto-​tantric.” Yet this re­
ally depends on how close a connection has to be demonstrated before the term “proto” 
becomes meaningful. Similarly, in the study of East Asian Buddhism, the term “esoteric 
Buddhism” has been the subject of many discussions, with some settling on “esoteric 
Buddhism” ’ (with a lower-​case “e”) for the magical texts, and “Esoteric Buddhism” (with 
an upper-​case “E”) for texts closely related to the tantras. This does not work well for oral 
discussions and is imperiled by typographical errors, but more important, it obscures 
the fact that most magical texts were not considered esoteric or secret, such restrictions 
being associated specifically with the initiatory practices of the tantras.
Since these categories tend to be tweaked or redefined with each new publication, 
there is unlikely ever to be a consensus about them, and this may be fine if we con­
sider them mere tools for the task at hand. On the other hand, such categorizations 
can be actively misleading, obscuring rather than revealing the nature of Buddhist 
practices. As some scholars have said, this approach tends to fall into a teleological fal­
lacy, interpreting an historical phenomenon in terms of later developments (see Sharf 
2002; Davidson 2002; McBride 2004). Here, I will look at magical elements in Buddhist 
literature that were later adapted in the tantras and their associated ritual texts, but 
rather than attempting to locate a point where non-​tantra becomes tantra, or a transi­
tional area of “proto-​tantra” or small-​“e” esoteric Buddhism, I will suggest approaching 
this as a process without major disruption, with each development drawing upon what 
came before.

--- PAGE 1161 ---
1136      Sam van Schaik
 
Categories developed within the Buddhist exegetical tradition can also mislead us 
if used inappropriately. Buddhist scholars who inherited more than a millennium 
of development in practices and texts developed strategies to situate them in hierar­
chical systems. Drawing on one of the most popular of these, the Tibetan tradition 
used a fourfold classification to categorize the texts of the Vajrayāna, from the lowest 
to highest level of tantra: kriyā (action), caryā (performance), yoga (union), and 
anuttarayoga (supreme union).1 Much of the magical literature in Buddhist scrip­
ture was assimilated into the genre of kriyā tantra. This category contains many more 
texts than the other three, yet much of what is included here has nothing to do with 
the tantras and predated the emergence of the Vajrayāna as a genre of scripture. Most 
of the scriptures in the kriyā category do not have the word “tantra” in their title; 
many are sutras, and others are characterized as spells (vidyā or dhāraṇi) and ritual 
manuals (kalpa).
These anomalies in the category of kriyā are due to its being imposed retrospectively 
on texts that had already been circulating for centuries. That is, these texts predated the 
appearance of anything known as a tantra and the emergence of a way of Buddhist prac­
tice known as Vajrayāna. Traditional categories like these are important, because they 
have informed the way generations of Buddhists understand the scriptures; however, 
they may be poor guides to the contents of the scriptures themselves, and they should 
not be used to understand the historical development of these texts before the categories 
themselves became generally accepted. Therefore, the approach I take here is to gather 
examples from Buddhist scripture—​regardless of how they have been categorized by 
traditional exegesis or modern scholarship—​as a step toward a “thick description” of 
magical practices in these texts and see how this affects our understanding of the devel­
opment of the Vajrayāna.
Magic in Buddhist Scriptures
To illustrate the way that elements of magical practice in early Buddhist literature devel­
oped and were adapted into tantric Buddhism, we will look at six scriptural texts as case 
studies. These include three texts that teach magical practices: (a) the Sutra of Atanata, 
which has come down to us in both Pali and Sanskrit versions, showing how early and 
widespread it was in Buddhist communities across the Indic world and beyond; (b) the 
Great Destroyer of the Universe, one of the “five protective texts” that is still popular in 
Tibetan and Nepalese Buddhism, and is well known in East Asian Buddhism as well; 
and (c) the Vajra Beak, a text that gives a series of ritual instructions on controlling the 
weather, a common theme in Buddhist magical literature. In these three texts, we see the 
central role of various non-​human beings, monsters, ghosts, and the serpent creatures 
called nāgas; we see how they are controlled or destroyed through mantras taught or 
sanctioned by the Buddha; and we see how the Buddha is situated at the center of a sym­
metrical space that is both microcosm and macrocosm and comes to be represented

--- PAGE 1162 ---
Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna      1137
 
as a physical mandala. These mandalas are arranged with sacred objects including jars, 
blessed strings, and statues.
We then look at three successively later texts: (a) the Sutra of Great Vairocana, which, 
despite its name, came to be considered a key scripture of the Yoga tantra category of 
the Vajrayāna; (b) the Tantra of the Secret Assembly, one of the most influential tantras 
in the Mahāyoga or Supreme Yoga tantra; and (c) the Tantra of Siddhaikavira, a lesser-​
known tantra that is essentially a grimoire or book of spells. Through three texts, we 
can trace some of the ways in which the heritage of Buddhist magic was adapted in the 
emerging tantric Buddhist tradition. As we will see, this happens in two ways. The first 
is the incorporation of the technologies of magical practice into Buddhist soteriological 
models. The scriptures and ritual manuals of the Vajrayāna build on the techniques of 
Buddhist magic, which included mantras, mandalas, visualization, and the harnessing 
of negative energies and wrathful beings for the benefit of the Buddhist community. The 
main differentiating factor is that these techniques are now put to the service of the ulti­
mate Buddhist goal of awakening. The other way in which Buddhist magic informs the 
Vajrayāna is more direct and can be seen in most tantras, which teach magical practices 
for worldly ends such as enrichment, enchantment, and the subjugation of enemies 
right alongside practices aimed at enlightenment itself.
The Sutra of Atanata
The Sutra of Atanata (Āṭanāṭiya or Āṭanāṭika sūtra) is one of the earlier scriptural texts 
in Buddhism. It is one of the texts in the Pāli canon, specifically in the Dīghanikāya, 
which may date from the fourth century bce, though no written versions exist from as 
early as this. This sutra has been found in manuscript fragments from ancient Buddhist 
cave sites in Eastern Central Asia, dating from the third to fifth centuries ce, written in 
Sanskrit rather than Pāli, showing its popularity across the early Buddhist world, and 
its importance in the spread of Buddhism (Sander 2007). The Sutra of Atanata belongs 
to the category of protective texts or rākṣa. In Theravada cultures, where they are also 
known as paritta, they are the best known and most frequently recited texts in all the 
Pali canon. These texts were the subject of an influential article by Peter Skilling (1992: 
168), who emphasized their fundamental nature in early Buddhism:
The chanting of certain auspicious verses or texts for protection against disease or 
malignant spirits and for the promotion of welfare was no doubt a “pan-​Nikāya” 
practice, common to all branches of the saṃgha, from an early date; indeed, on 
the internal evidence of texts like the Dhvajāgra and Āṭanāṭika Sūtras, the practice 
should predate the early schisms.
As Skilling and others have argued, there is no reason to consider the Sutra of Atanata, 
and other paritta texts, to be later than others in the Pali canon, on the assumption that 
magical texts must be more recent additions than ethical and philosophical teachings.

--- PAGE 1163 ---
1138      Sam van Schaik
 
The Sutra of Atanata begins with the scene of the Buddha seated on the mountain 
known as Vulture’s Peak and receiving as visitors the Four Great Kings and their armies. 
The kings approach from the north, south, east, and west and station their armies in 
each of these four directions before drawing closer to the Buddha and sitting around 
him, again situated in each of the four directions. Then the king of the north, Vaiśravana, 
speaks to the Buddha, telling him about the presence of monsters such as yakṣa, who are 
a threat to monks spending time in forests and other secluded places. In order to help 
these monks, Vaiśravana teaches a spell to neutralize the threat of monsters, ghosts, and 
other nonhuman creatures, as well as the threats from human thieves, murderers, and 
the like.
The Atanata spell begins with homage to five buddhas: Vipassī, Vesabhū, Koṇāgamana, 
Kāśyapa, and Gautama. The invocation of five buddhas here mirrors the center and four-​
directions model set up at the beginning of the sutra, with Gautama, to whom the spell 
offers the greatest praise, occupying a central position surrounded by four other buddhas. 
The spell continues with an invocation of each of the four directions in turn, first east and 
west (following the rising and setting of the sun) and then north and south. First, the in­
vocation describes the inhabitants of each direction and then how they all pay reverence 
to Gautama. The spell works by causing these threatening beings to pay homage to the 
Buddha, essentially bringing them under his power and into the fully controlled sacred 
structure of the center and four directions. The power of the buddha, harnessed by the 
recitation of the spell, transforms these negative factors into positive ones: the protection 
brought by the spell and the cosmos it describes harnesses the power of monsters to de­
feat monsters.
After reciting the spell, Vaiśravana assures the Buddha that any monk, nun, and male 
or female lay follower will be protected by reciting it themselves, so that any monster 
that threatens them will be cast out of any city or town in these four directions (one of 
these cities, Atanata, gives the sutra its name). Not only will the monster be cast out, but 
the inhabitants of the city or town will be so enraged that they will destroy the mon­
ster completely by splitting its head into seven pieces. Vaiśravana also promises that 
anyone assaulted by monsters can call for help from the commanders of the monsters 
themselves; these commanders are all named; this ends the teaching by Vaiśravana. The 
sutra concludes with a dissolution of the teaching scene. The Four Great Kings and their 
entourages each in turn circumambulate the Buddha before returning to their respec­
tive realms in the four directions (Walshe 1995: 471–​478).
The sutra, and especially the spell detailing the four directions and their inhabitants, 
offers a vivid cosmological picture, one that can be visualized, as Sarah Shaw (2021: 228) 
has argued: “The Āṭanāṭiya-​sutta is one of several in the Dīghanikāya that are explicit 
visualisations: it suggests that listeners imagine these supernatural beings, but, impor­
tantly, under protected conditions within an organized cosmos.”
Shaw, and others who have studied the Sutra of Atanata (Shulman 2019) refer to this 
visualized cosmos with the Buddha at its center as a mandala, though the text itself does 
not use this word. Shaw identifies visualized mandala arrangements elsewhere in the 
Dīghanikāya as well, for example, in the Mahāsudassana Sutta, which describes the

--- PAGE 1164 ---
Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna      1139
 
realm and palace of King Sudassana, a city surrounded by seven walls made of gold, 
silver, and various gemstones and entered by four gates; at the center is an exquisite, glit­
tering royal palace. As S. Shaw (2021: 171) writes: “the listener is encouraged to create in 
the mind’s eye the four corners of the kingdom, the city, the palace, the inner chamber, 
in a three-​dimensional maṇḍala.”
Equally important to the Sutra of Atanata as the mandala-​like arrangement is the 
figure of Gautama the Buddha at the center. This Buddha has not passed out of this 
world and into parinirvāṇa but is an ever-​present enlightened being who guarantees 
the effectiveness of the spell. According to Shulman (2019: 237), the logic of paritta spells 
relies on the idea of an enlightened, cosmological buddha at the center of the universe, 
and always accessible to practitioners through the recitation of the paritta itself:
The Buddha is positioned at the core of the cosmos, so that he controls malevolent 
forces and has a positive influence on all natural and supernatural powers. . . . The 
full-​blown expression of this cosmological picture is when the Buddha is understood 
to embody and provide access to the inner, benevolent realities of the cosmos: Truth 
(sacca), Care/​Love (metta) and Blessing (maṅgala).
How was the Sutra of Atanata used? From the text itself, we can see that it was in­
tended to provide a spell for the use of monks and nuns, as well as male and female 
laypeople, when they were in places where they feared for their safety. S. Shaw (2021: 
235) writes that its use must have varied over time and place, but in Southeast Asia “now­
adays, the Aṭānāṭīya-​sutta itself is in constant use practically and medically as a protec­
tive text, its paritta verses used at times of great distress, sickness or division.”
The Great Destroyer of the Universe
The Great Destroyer of the Universe (Mahā­sāhasra­pramardanī) is the name of both a 
scriptural text, and the spell that the Buddha teaches in this text (Gentry and Doctor 
2021).2 Like the Sutra of Atanata, it contains a narrative that functions to show the con­
text of the spell in the Buddhist universe, and its efficacy. The Great Destroyer of the 
Universe is one of the rākṣa texts contained in a collection known as the pañcarākṣa 
(five protective texts), which are still popular in Nepalese and Tibetan Buddhism. The 
texts circulated separately before being brought together into this collection. Some of 
the individual texts were translated into Chinese and became very popular in East Asian 
Buddhism as well.3
While the Great Destroyer of the Universe is not preserved in the Pāli canon, Peter 
Skilling (1992: 141) has shown that it has its roots in the tradition of protective sutras 
known in the Pali canonical tradition as Ratana (for Sanskrit ratna) sutras:
The Mahā­sāhasra­pramardanī enshrines a complete *Ratna-​sūtra, concealed by a 
tangled overgrowth of mantras and long verses. That this is its original kernel is clear

--- PAGE 1165 ---
1140      Sam van Schaik
 
from the narrative framework, which belongs to the “Ratna-​sūtra-​Vaiśālī miracle” 
tradition: the Buddha at Rājagṛha, the calamity at Vaiśālī, and the assembly of deities; 
the Buddha’s departure for Vaiśālī, the offering of divine umbrellas, the decorations 
of the route, and the indrakīla; the appeasement of the calamity.
The Great Destroyer of the Universe begins with the Buddha teaching at Rajāgṛha, 
when he perceives a great disaster occurring in and around the city of Vaiśālī, with 
malignant spirits descending on the people from the sky, signaled by thunder, light­
ning, and hail. The Buddha summons the gods of the realm and the kings of the four 
directions and tells them that such things cannot happen where the dharma has been 
taught. The Four Great Kings then each stand up in turn to speak to the Buddha; each 
describes the symptoms of a specific type of spirit possession and gives a mantra for 
dealing with the affliction. After this, the Buddha himself proclaims, with a roar like 
a lion, the eponymous spell of the Great Destroyer of the Universe.
As is suggested by the name, the Great Destroyer of the Universe is characterized 
by violent imagery. The dynamic of the text, like the Sutra of Atanata, is primarily 
about conversion, bringing the threatening forces of the universe under the sway of 
the Buddha’s dharma. In that sutra, those who did not surrender were threatened 
with having their heads smashed into seven pieces. In the Great Destroyer of the 
Universe, the monsters are bound by the Four Great Kings and brought before the 
Buddha, to whom they swear allegiance. But for those who will not, the threat of 
violence occurs more often, and with more variation. The introduction of the spell 
itself is more threatening; when the Buddha first shouts it out, like a lion roaring, it 
fills the whole world and strikes fear into ghosts and monsters, causing them to run 
about in a panic. After this, the Four Great Kings threaten punishment on all those 
who do not heed the spell, including the severing of limbs and the cutting out of 
tongues.
A range of non-​human beings is described in the Great Destroyer of the Universe, 
including yakṣas, gandharvas, pretas, and nāgas; for example, the bhūta yakṣas are 
described as follows (Gentry and Doctor 2021: 1.106–​1.108):
Terrible ones with four arms,
With many feet, or one foot,
With four feet, or two feet,
With feet above and face below,
With many bodies and one head,
With one body and four heads,
With many eyes and half a body,
With one eye and twelve stomachs,
With the heads of ass, camel, and elephant,
With arms above and head hanging,
With weapons for teeth, arms, and feet.

--- PAGE 1166 ---
Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna      1141
 
Less absurd and more threatening are the rakṣāsas (Gentry and Doctor 2021: 1.119, 1.128):
With sharp teeth, red hands,
And lips spattered with blood
They filled their hands
With half-​eaten bodies,
And with kidneys, hearts, and other internal organs.
Those with four arms carry torches,
Knives, sticks,
And vajra spears.
Vanquishing fierce armies,
They bring terror everywhere.
The recitation of the fearsome qualities of these monsters serves a double purpose. 
On the one hand, their terrifying nature shows the need for a powerful spell such as the 
Great Destroyer of the Universe. On the other hand, once the monsters are brought to the 
side of the Buddha by the spell, they are here to protect his followers against all threats. 
Thus the physical features of these monsters and the like provided models for the 
wrathful deities of tantric Buddhism, while the early notion of monsters being bound 
to vows to protect the Buddha and his followers developed into a pantheon of specific 
dharmapālas (dharma protectors).4
In the Great Destroyer of the Universe, King Vaiśrāvana describes his four-​gated palace, 
in the same lush and poetic terms that we have seen in the Pāli canon; here, the king tells 
us that the gates are manned by yakṣas wielding vajras, and he is also surrounded by a 
retinue of bhūtas, all bound to his service. Outside the palace there are eight mansions, 
all inhabited by women wearing fine clothes and jewelry and making music with a va­
riety of instruments. Outside the city walls roam the untamed and wild monsters, and 
the king vows to bind or destroy them all. Here again we see many elements of tantric 
mandalas: the king at the center of a four-​gated palace within the wider boundary of a 
city, himself surrounded by a retinue of wrathful beings, gate protectors, and women of­
fering music.
The second half of the Great Destroyer of the Universe provides spells and simple 
procedures for specific purposes. Among these, the longest is the protection of embryos 
and children from possession, which was believed to be the cause of miscarriage and 
sickness and death in ancient India (Smith 2006). Specific deities resembling animals 
are mentioned by name, and then instructions are given for a ritual for a woman who 
is childless or pregnant. In this ritual the sacred space is delimited with five-​colored 
threads, and the woman enters the space at midnight, when she is blessed by having 
mustard seeds placed on her head. The text also gives instruction for the preparation of 
a magical ointment that provides protection when applied to the eyes, to a shrine, or to 
ensure wider protection or to a drum which is to be beaten, or to the wings of birds that 
are to be sent flying far away.

--- PAGE 1167 ---
1142      Sam van Schaik
 
A ritual for the protection of the kingdom is also described briefly, which involves set­
ting out a ritual space with four young women holding swords, as well as four bells, and 
vessels filled with scented water, flowers, and fruits. The spell is then recited and copied 
onto cotton cloth and mounted on stupas, trees, and flagpoles (Hidas 2013). Similar 
rituals, involving the delimitation of an area of sacred space with objects such as swords, 
arrows, threads, and banners, are found in the other pañcarākṣa texts.
Whether as part of the scriptural text itself or as ritual manuals associated with (and 
often translated alongside) the text, the descriptions of these rituals seem to have be­
come more complex over time. Initially, the details of the ritual practice must have 
accompanied the text in the form of a teacher’s oral instructions, as we see in the earliest 
version of the Great Peacock Queen of Spells (Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī), translated into 
Chinese in the fourth century ce, in which there is an instruction to delimit the ritual 
space but none of the necessary details on how this is to be done or what materials are to 
be used (Sørensen 2009: 95). Later translations into Chinese show that more complete 
ritual instructions were incorporated into the text over time. After the emergence of the 
tantras, some of these magical texts incorporated mandala practices that were essen­
tially the same as those found in the tantras themselves (Shinohara 2014; Overbey 2016).
Another development in the magical literature was the deification of the spell. All of 
the pañcarākṣa texts, including the Great Destroyer of the Universe, were at some point 
turned into a deity. There is no such deity in the texts themselves, where their titles only 
refer to the spell, and their deification was again linked to the development of tantric 
Buddhism, in which spells or mantras were associated specific deities rather than having 
been taught by the Buddha or one of the Four Great Kings for a specific practical pur­
pose (Mevissen 2010).
The Vajra Beak
As we have seen, Buddhist magical scriptures tend to target a wide range of monsters, 
ghosts, and other non-​human beings. An exception to this pattern is those scriptures 
that deal with the weather. Since rain (and other forms of precipitation) was believed 
to be controlled by the serpent-​like beings called nāgas. Shrines to nāgas appear 
throughout the Indic world, and as Julia Shaw has shown, their existence near Buddhist 
monasteries show that the practice of propitiating or controlling nāgas was present 
in early Buddhism (J. Shaw 2013). Controlling the weather is a concern of one of the 
earliest Buddhist scriptures with detailed ritual instructions, the Great Cloud Sutra 
(Mahāmeghā sūtra).
Though less well known than the Great Cloud Sutra, the Vajra Beak has remained 
popular in Nepal, mainly copied in compendiums of rituals for controlling the weather. 
Its full name is The Vajra Beak’s Vow: King of Ritual Manuals (Vajratuṇḍasmayakalp
arāja), which refers to the deity Garuḍa, the traditional enemy of the nāgas. Dating 
to the fourth or fifth century ce, the Vajra Beak consists mainly of a series of ritual 
manuals and is notable for being one of the earliest texts to use the term mandala (or

--- PAGE 1168 ---
Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna      1143
 
maṇḍalaka) for a sacred space created as part of a Buddhist ritual. Its ritual instructions 
are similar to those found in the Great Destroyer of the Universe and the other texts in 
the pañcarākṣa, although only one of those texts, the Great Amulet Spell, also uses the 
term mandala.
The Vajra Beak begins in a similar way to other Buddhist magical scriptures. The 
Buddha is teaching at Vārāṇasī and is approached by a local Brahmin who has suffered 
his crops and his own body being burned by the nāgas because he made a mistake in the 
ritual to appease them. The Buddha comforts the Brahmin, and Vajrapāṇi suggests that 
he teach a spell to protect people and their crops against the nāgas. The Buddha recites 
a dharani spell called “Nāga Assailing and Impeding Vajra,” and this causes the nāgas to 
have splitting headaches and foul-​smelling bodies. They crawl to the feet of the Buddha 
and vow never to harm anyone again. Following this narrative, the Vajra Beak proceeds 
to give detailed instructions on ritual practice. The majority of the text comprises a se­
ries of ritual instructions, justifying the name “king of ritual manuals” (kalparāja). The 
similarly titled Amoghapaśakalparāja is also composed of a series of ritual instructions.
The first ritual is specifically for the Nāga Assailing and Impeding Vajra spell; it 
involves setting up a complex mandala on the ground in the area that is to be protected 
from the nāgas (1.11; trans. Hidas 2019: 46):
Then the spell-​master should prepare a square maṇḍalaka in the middle of the field 
or forest. Four filled jars should be placed [in the four directions]. Flowers should 
be scattered. Seven coiling figures should be made and rice spirals. Twenty-​one fig­
ures should be prepared one after the other. Boiled rice, milk rice, a dish of rice and 
peas, yoghurt and thickened milk should be placed. Fruits and flowers should be 
placed. Four jars should be placed. Preceded by a great offering, barley-​meal should 
be placed as foremost. A bowl should be placed in the middle of the maṇḍalaka. It 
should be filled with the five products of the cow, thickened milk and water. Mustard 
seeds and parched grain should be cast. Four stakes made of khadira wood and iron 
[should be placed] after they have been enchanted with the mantra sixty times. All 
stakes should measure eight aṅgulas. There should be four Nāgas made of brownish 
cow dung in the four corners of the maṇḍalaka. Stakes made of khadira wood should 
be driven into the ground over their heart completely. The mantra should be recited 
108 times.
Here the main features of the mandala are the use of jars placed in the four directions 
and the scattering of flowers to delimit the sacred space. Then figures of nāgas are placed 
in the four directions; like the Four Great Kings in the earlier Buddhist magical texts, 
these nāgas guarantee the taming of the hostile forces in all directions. The other main 
feature of the mandala is the placement of various types of food offerings. These food 
offerings are for the pacification of hostile forces, and shortly after the passage above, the 
text gives instructions for a pacification rite to be performed by offering barley, sesame, 
mustard seeds, and rice grains anointed with ghee (1.13; Hidas 2019: 49). Other rituals in 
the Vajra Beak are more violent; in one, enchanted mustard seeds are to be flung toward 
the sky and a wrathful mantra is to be recited (3.15; Hidas, 2019: 91): “One should utter

--- PAGE 1169 ---
1144      Sam van Schaik
 
‘phaṭ’ wrathfully. After uttering ‘phaṭ’ three times, the Nāgas fall down with their faces 
downwards. The bodies of the Nāgas crumble to small pieces and fall onto the ground.”
Another ritual focuses on warding off the nāgas; here another mandala is set up, and 
the ritual master stands at its center making warding gestures. For this purpose, the 
text describes a mudrā (4.1; Hidas 2019: 99): “A Nāga cross-​legged hand gesture should 
be made. The index finger should be like a serpent head. The little finger should be 
extended.”
Many of the key elements of later tantric Buddhist practice are already present here 
in this magical ritual: the master of the ritual is situated at the center of a mandala, 
reciting a mantra and making a mudrā gesture. A remaining question is who this ritual 
master might have been. In the Vajra Beak, they are called a vidyādhara (lit. a holder 
of spells). As Gergely Hidas has pointed out, references in this text to them wearing a 
robe and performing rituals at a monastery suggest that the vidyādhara was a monk or 
nun. A prophecy in the text also mentions monks using spells to ward off cold, winds, 
and thunderbolts. There is nothing in the Vajra Beak, or other texts that we have looked 
at here, to support the assumption that Buddhist magic was provided specifically for 
laypeople, or as Stephen Hodge (2003: 7) argues, “for the benefit of unsophisticated 
ordinary people beyond the confines of the great monasteries such as Nālandā.” This 
seems to be based on an assumption that Buddhist monastics, at least those in the major 
monasteries, were rationalists focused on scholarship and meditation, with no interest 
in magic and medicine. We can understand the development of tantric Buddhism better 
if we see magic as a part of the lives of most if not all Buddhist monks and nuns.
The Sutra of Great Vairocana
Though it came to be considered one of the fundamental texts of Yoga tantra, the Sutra 
of Great Vairocana was not originally considered a tantra. It was a sutra, and therefore 
part of the same scriptural continuum as the other sutras which also contained spell and 
ritual content such as the Lotus Sutra and the Sutra of Golden Light. The Sutra of Great 
Vairocana’s debt to the magical tradition in Buddhism is both implicit and explicit. In 
this sutra, the mandalas resemble those used in magical rituals for worldly ends, but 
they are now spaces in which a teacher bestows empowerment (abhisekha) upon a dis­
ciple. These empowerment rituals draw on earlier magical rituals, with a mandala laid 
out on the ground, deities situated within it represented by vases; however, the purpose 
is now enlightenment itself.
An explicit reference to the magical heritage of the practices in the Sutra of Great 
Vairocana can be seen in the sixth chapter, on the nature of accomplishment. Here, 
Vairocana convinces his audience of the power of mantras used in the practice of deity 
yoga, using only examples drawn from magic. This teaching begins with Vairocana 
telling his audience about a mantra used by the gods of the realms of desire, which 
causes them to experience such intense sensual pleasure that they faint. Vairocana 
goes on to explain how other mantras allow the gods to create whatever they desire at

--- PAGE 1170 ---
Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna      1145
 
will. Then there are mantras that create illusions, mantras for curing sickness, those for 
extinguishing a fire, and so on. “By these examples,” Vairocana concludes, “you should 
have faith in the power of mantras” (Hodge 2003: 169). In an influential commentary on 
the text, the eighth-​century scholar Buddhaguhya explained the purpose of this passage 
(Hodge 2003: 169):
In the following section he gives teachings about the power of mantras. Also, the 
doubts of sādhakas, who are sceptical about the sādhana and wonder whether they 
will accomplish attainments or not, will be cleared away by teaching the power of 
mantras.
At the end of this chapter, Vairocana tells his audience that it is thanks to the inherent 
power of mantras that sādhana practice allows its practitioners to achieve enlighten­
ment in a single lifetime. So, here we have a situation where the teachings on achieving 
enlightenment through empowerment and the subsequent meditation on the deity 
through sādhana practice are in question and need to be argued for, while the magical 
power of mantras is not in question, and is in fact the main argument for the efficacy of 
sādhana practice.
Furthermore, like most tantras, the Sutra of Great Vairocana teaches magical methods 
alongside the swift path to enlightenment. In the sixth chapter, along with instructions 
on how to meditate to achieve purification and to awaken the mind (bodhicitta), the 
Buddha gives instructions on how to achieve long life and how to remove poisons 
through specific visualizations in meditation. There is also a visualization for a love spell 
(Hodge 2003: 181):
In order to control a lover, he should make himself into an A and likewise the person 
to be controlled into a Va. He should place a lotus in himself and in the other he should 
place a conch, with each looking at the other, then at that instant he will gain control.
Along with this controlling spell, in the Sutra of Great Vairocana the Buddha teaches 
visualization techniques for attracting followers, for subduing rival teachers, and for 
enriching oneself. The Supplementary Tantra of Great Vairocana (Mahāvairocana 
Uttaratantra) gives detailed ritual instructions for these four activities through a fire 
altar (homa) practice (Hodge 2003: 395–​442). In Vajrayāna literature, these four kinds 
of magical spells became known as the “four ritual activities” that were considered to 
encompass the range of tantric techniques that were not focused directly on enlighten­
ment but rather on worldly achievements.
The Tantra of the Secret Assembly
As tantric Buddhism developed in India, violent and sexual imagery featured more 
heavily. Tantras with these characteristics came to be categorized as “great yoga”

--- PAGE 1171 ---
1146      Sam van Schaik
 
(mahāyoga) and other terms indicating their supremacy over earlier forms of Vajrayāna 
(Dalton 2005). One of the earlier and best known examples of this is the Tantra of the 
Secret Assembly (Guhyasamāja tantra). Like the Sutra of Great Vairocana, the Tantra 
of the Secret Assembly teaches practices for the purpose of swift enlightenment, using 
mandalas, mantras, and mudrās. Both texts also feature magical practices, using the 
same technologies but aimed at worldly ends such as enrichment, bewitchment, and the 
subjugation of enemies.
Instructions on constructing a mandala in the Tantra of the Secret Assembly include 
drawing the mandala on the ground and delimiting it with string, setting out physical 
objects and paintings, and visualization. For example, the “maṇḍala of mind” is taught 
in chapter four thus (4.11–​4.17; trans. Freemantle 1971: 40):
Meditating on body, speech and mind, the wise man should lay it out with a fair 
new thread, well twisted and of the right length; twelve cubits he should fashion 
the holy mandala of Mind, four-​sided, four-​cornered, with four gates; within it 
he should draw a circle, perfectly round, then place the symbols in it with the 
prescribed ritual action.
The tantra goes on to explain which symbols are to be drawn on the mandala: a vajra 
in the center, a wheel in the east, a jewel in the south, a lotus in the west, and a sword in 
the north. The tantra makes it clear that this mandala is laid out on the ground, for it is 
also decorated with perfumes and flowers, before the practitioner enters the mandala 
himself with a woman and practices sexual yoga. In another development characteristic 
of Mahāyoga tantras, the offerings made to the buddhas of the mandala are excrement, 
urine, semen, and blood. Yet despite these apparently new and shocking features of the 
practice, the mandala itself is established in very much the same way as in earlier mag­
ical scriptures such as the Vajra Beak.
The Tantra of the Secret Assembly also contains a wide range of magical practices. For 
example, in chapter thirteen, when the Buddha is asked to teach the meaning and use 
of mantras, he mentions the four kinds of worldly ritual activity, the magical acts of pa­
cification, enrichment, subjugation, and wrath, a similar set to the one seen in the Sutra 
of Great Vairocana. Most of the rest of the chapter consists of the Buddha’s teachings 
on subjugating and destroying enemies. These enemies are not anyone but must be 
“those who have no devotion, those who blame the Vajra Teacher, and other evil-​doers” 
(13.43; Freemantle 1971: 75). The visualization for this killing practice presents a process 
that was already in place at the time of the Sutra of Atanata; from a central position, the 
Buddha uses his powers to subdue and destroy those who threaten the Buddhist com­
munity. In this case the embodiment of all buddhas is Vajrasattva, and the site of the 
practice is the practitioner’s own body (13.44–​13.50; Freemantle 1971: 75–​76):
At the centre of space imagine a vajra, five-​pointed, four-​faced, Vajrasattva 
possessing all the divine aspects; on the right-​hand side visualise the circle of 
Buddhas arising from the Samaya of the Three Times, this Buddha-​circle of great

--- PAGE 1172 ---
Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna      1147
 
Power; distinguishing between the forms of the Buddhas, draw together the beings 
from the ten direction into a ball, and make them enter your body; then send out 
again the Buddhas of the circle of wisdom, wrathful, enraged with anger, ugly and 
terrifying, bearing various weapons, their thoughts intent on killing—​they destroy 
great evildoers, even Vajrasattva himself.
The visualization here presents a process that was already in place at the time of 
the Sutra of Atanata: from a central position, the Buddha uses his powers to subdue 
and destroy those who threaten the Buddhist community. Here, the central figure is 
Vajrasattva, who is the deity most emblematic of the state of awakening in Mahāyoga 
practice, and the form in which the practitioners most often will visualize themselves. 
The four directions are symbolized by a four-​headed crossed vajra, and instead of being 
summoned to stand before the Buddha, beings from all directions are absorbed into the 
body of Vajrasattva (and by implication, the practitioner-​as-​Vajrasattva). Then wrathful 
beings are dispatched to destroy the evildoers. In a trope common in the Tantra of 
the Secret Assembly, this wrathful practice is said to be powerful enough to kill even 
Vajrasattva himself.
So while we see here developments in the nature of the visualization, especially the in­
ternalization of the mandala into the body of the practitioner, the basic practice is a de­
velopment from earlier Buddhist magical scriptures. Another aspect of early Buddhist 
magical literature that is adopted in the Tantra of the Secret Assembly is the harnessing of 
the power of monsters (13.87–​13.90; Freemantle 1971: 80):
Imagine vajra space filled with rākṣasas, violent, burning in fierce wrath, and with 
various jackals, crows, vultures and wild dogs. Always visualise the enemy in the 
maṇḍala of fire, harming all the Buddhas, and then perform the yoga: imagine that 
they all overpower him, bearing many kinds of weapons, and tear out his entrails, 
marrow, blood and so on, and the enemy will die. Even if the Buddha or Vajradhara is 
visualised in this way he will die within a fortnight, there is no doubt.
The combination of sacred and profane, the transgression and boundary crossing is 
striking in the Tantra of the Secret Assembly and other Mahāyoga tantras. Yet as we have 
seen, many of these features, such as the Buddha using the language of violent threat, 
had already featured in much earlier Buddhist literature.
The Tantra of the Solitary Hero
Some tantras offered a direct continuation of the earlier magical tradition of Buddhist 
scripture. The Tantra of the Solitary Hero (Siddhaikavīra tantra) is essentially a grimoire, 
or book of spells; rather than offering a mixture of practices, some aimed at awakening 
and others at worldly ends, like the Sutra of Great Vairocana and the Tantra of the Secret 
Assembly, this text simply provides a long list of spells for different purposes. The tantra

--- PAGE 1173 ---
1148      Sam van Schaik
 
survives in Sanskrit manuscripts from Nepal and in Tibetan translation, but its history is 
unclear. It could have been an earlier text that was given a few cosmetic changes and the 
title of “tantra,” or a compilation dating from the period when the major tantras were com­
posed (i.e., seventh to tenth centuries), gathering spells from existing magical traditions.
The Solitary Hero does not play a major role in the tantra itself but seems to be an ep­
ithet of Mañjuśrī in this text. The framing narrative at the beginning of the tantra has it 
spoken by Mañjuvajra, a form of Mañjuśrī, and some rituals require the practitioners 
to visualize themselves as “the Solitary Hero Mañjuvajra.” The spells invoke many other 
deities, including Vāgīśvara, Tārā, Parṇaśabarī, and Gaṅapati. As in other magical lit­
erature, the deities associated with magic are often female, and deities more commonly 
associated with non-​Buddhist Indian traditions. The Tantra of the Solitary Hero teaches 
fifty-​five mantra spells; some work merely by recitation, some require other actions, 
and a few require visualization of oneself as a deity. The first two spells are for stop­
ping hailstorms, and the second mantra invokes Garuḍa, a continuation of the tradi­
tion of Garuḍa as the patron deity of weather control which we saw in the Vajra Beak. 
This second spell suggests inscribing the mantra on a drum and reciting over a drum­
stick, and then beating the drum to stop a hailstorm. The third spell is for binding (Skt. 
bandha) and has many uses, including stopping your enemies from speaking, stopping 
mice from chewing and mosquitoes from biting, and stopping thieves, armies, vomiting, 
and hiccups. One of these brief rituals for stopping a pregnant woman from giving birth 
is as follows (1.11; trans. Mical and Doctor 2021):
One should inscribe this mantra on a rag that has been discarded in a charnel 
ground, together with the name of a pregnant woman, enclose it in beeswax, place it 
in a charnel ground in a pot, seal it, and bury it. This will make the woman unable to 
give birth. Digging it up again, rinsing it with milk, and floating it on water will alle­
viate the problem.
Other rituals for this particular mantra include writing it onto a clay pot, filling the 
pot with ashes, and burying it; writing it on birch bark with turmeric or yellow orpi­
ment, tying it with string, enclosing it in beeswax, and inserting it into a hollow effigy of 
a ram; writing it in saffron and wearing it around one’s neck or arm for protection; and 
writing down the mantra, surrounded by other syllables of power, a mandala diagram 
and a double vajra, placing it in belly of a clay figure of Gaṇapati, and placing this inside 
a cremation urn and burying it in a cemetery.
The Tantra of the Solitary Hero contains magical spells for many other purposes, in­
cluding attracting women, mastering eloquence, and divination by having a child look 
into a mirror, a popular Buddhist divination practice known elsewhere as prasena (2.6). 
A number of spells are notably aggressive, such as the following spell for targeting a 
person with a molded doll (1.51; Mical and Doctor 2021):
One should make a beeswax effigy, four fingers long, and insert this mantra, written 
along with the name of the person targeted, into its heart. If one pierces its mouth

--- PAGE 1174 ---
Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna      1149
 
with a thorn the opponent’s mouth will be nailed. If one pierces its feet, one will stop 
him moving. If one pierces its heart, it will quell his anger. Whichever body parts one 
seizes and pierces with a splinter of human shinbone or an iron nail, his equivalent 
body parts will decay. If one buries the effigy under an enemy’s door, one will drive 
him out.
Because the Tantra of the Solitary Hero is really just a book of spells, it lacks the frame­
work of tantras like the Secret Assembly, which give a soteriological and ethical content 
to their aggressive spells, even if that context is an explicit transgression of conventional 
Buddhist ethics. Here the ethics are simply absent, and an aggressive ritual like the one 
above is presented as merely one among many useful spells. This feature of the Tantra 
of the Solitary Hero is also seen in spell books compiled in Tibet. The earliest of these 
is a manuscript from Cave 17 in Dunhuang, dating from before the eleventh century, 
a compendium of brief ritual texts from a variety of Buddhist scriptural sources, in­
cluding the Great Cloud Sutra (Mahāmegha sūtra), the Great Destroyer of the Universe 
(Mahāsāhasrapramardanī sūtra), the Dhāraṇī of the Blue-​Necked One (Nīlakaṭha 
dhāraṇī), and a Tantra of Bhṛkutī (Bhṛkutī tantra, apparently no longer extant).5
The sources of the compendium range from the earlier Buddhist magical texts to later 
tantras; there is no particular rationale or hierarchy, and the spells seem to have been 
chosen for practical purposes. The spell book also bears the name of its owner, written 
on the cover, a Bhikṣu Prajñāprabhā. Thus it is likely that this was a working collection 
of spells culled from various sources used by a Buddhist monk in or around Dunhuang, 
in the tenth century. Other books of spells have been preserved in Tibet, usually with the 
name Be’u ’bum in the title, including a major collection attributed to the Sakya master 
Bari Lotsawa (1040–​1111). Showing the continuing popularity of this format, another 
well-​known collection of spells was compiled by the Nyingma scholar Mipham Gyatso 
(1846–​1912). It seems, although many tantras contained at least some magical spells, in 
Tibet at least, the tantras themselves were less used for this purpose than books of spells 
extracted from them and other sources (van Schaik 2020: 84–​88).
Conclusion
The purpose of this brief review of a selection of Buddhist scriptures has been to 
give an idea of how Vajrayāna scriptures developed from Buddhist magical litera­
ture. As we have seen, this can be traced in two ways, the first being how the tantras 
adapted and developed the techniques and material culture of previous Buddhist mag­
ical rituals, turning them into practices aimed at the ultimate goal of awakening. The 
second is how the tantras simply continued the existing magical tradition in Buddhism 
by incorporating instructions for rituals aimed at worldly achievements alongside 
those aimed at awakening. We have seen that tantric literature codified magical prac­
tice by developing four categories, which were not the same in every tantra but usually

--- PAGE 1175 ---
1150      Sam van Schaik
 
encompassed the magical acts of pacification, enrichment, enchantment, and violent 
action. Another way in which the tantras and their commentators dealt with the pres­
ence of magic alongside practices for worldly ends was to distinguish between ordinary 
accomplishments (siddhi), such as those bestowed by magical practice, and the ultimate 
accomplishment of full awakening.6
Given how closely the practices of the tantras were modeled on early magical 
practices, can we distinguish Vajrayāna or tantric Buddhism from the magical literature 
that preceded it, and continued to be practiced alongside it? Any definition is likely to 
raise exceptions, but a significant difference is the emphasis in most tantras on the ulti­
mate Buddhist goal of awakening. This goal is occasionally mentioned in the magical 
texts, but even when it is, it is far from being the focus. A second key difference is that the 
Vajrayāna is an initiatory tradition, with permission or empowerment opening the way 
to secret practices and creating a community of practitioners.
Yet as we have seen in the example of the Tantra of the Solitary Hero, there are 
exceptions, and thus there is no clear line on which we can place Vajrayāna texts on one 
side and non-​Vajrayāna magical literature on the other. It is equally difficult to define 
what might fall within or outside the category of “proto-​tantra” or “esoteric Buddhism.” 
The wider view enabled by a thick description of Buddhist texts and practices over the 
centuries gives us a strong sense of a gradual and organic development without radical 
breaks. Thus I agree with Jacob Dalton’s critique of the idea that the Vajrayāna emerged 
suddenly, in the course of a few decades and presented a break with the Buddhist past 
(Dalton 2016: 220):
Surely we would do better to understand the appearance of the Buddhist tantras as 
the culmination of a much longer and more gradual process. By highlighting the role 
of ritual manuals, a more nuanced story is revealed, one that unfolds over a period of 
two hundred years, from the mid-​fifth to the mid-​seventh centuries.
Yet even a span of two centuries is too brief when we look at the importance of mag­
ical rituals to the evolution of what became the Vajrayāna. As we have seen, some key 
aspects of Vajrayāna Buddhism, such as visualization and mandalas, are at least implic­
itly present as far back as the texts of the Pali canon. One general trend in the gradual 
development of Buddhism that does seem clear is the increasing complexity of magical 
techniques over time, and their eventual adaptation to the ultimate goal of Buddhism, 
awakening itself, in the Vajrayāna path.
Notes
	1.	 The Tibetan phrase “bla na med pa’i mal ‘byor rgyud” rendered here as “supreme yoga” 
tantra is generally translated from the Tibetan into Sanskrit as “anuttara-​yoga” tantra. There 
is, however, no agreed Sanskrit for this term and some scholars today prefer “nirutta-​yoga” 
or “yoga-​niruttara” tantra. See, for example, Dalton (2005: 152 n.84).

--- PAGE 1176 ---
Buddhist Magic and Vajrayāna      1151
 
	2.	 Gentry and Doctor (2021) renders the title of this text as “The Sūtra ‘Destroyer of the Great 
Trichiliocosm.’ ”
	3.	 The five texts are Mahāpratisarā, Mahāsāhasrapramardanī, Mahāmāyūrī, Mahāmantrāṇus
āraṇī, and Mahāśītavatī.
	4.	 Illustrations of creatures looking something like these descriptions can be seen in some 
Dunhuang manuscripts; see Pelliot tibétain 37, for example.
	5.	 The manuscript is in the British Library, IOL Tib J 401; see van Schaik (2020) for a 
translation.
	6.	 See Wallace (2001: 198–​200) for an example of this distinction in the Vimalaprabhā com­
mentary on the Kālachakra tantra. See Davidson (2002: 200–​01) for a discussion of lists of 
magical siddhis.
References
Dalton, Jacob. 2005. “A Crisis of Doxography: How Tibetans Organized Tantra during the 8th-​
12th Centuries.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 28, no. 1: 115–​81.
Dalton, Jacob. 2016. “How Dhāraṇīs WERE Proto-​Tantric: Liturgies, Ritual Manuals, and the 
Origins of the Tantras.” Tantric Traditions in Transmission and Translation, edited by David 
Gray and Ryan Overbey, 199–​229. New York: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press.
Freemantle, Francesca. 1971. “A Critical Study of the Guhyasamāja Tantra.” Ph.D. diss., School 
of Oriental and African Studies, University of London.
Gentry, James, and Andreas Doctor, trans. 2021. “Destroyer of the Great Trichiliocosm.” 
84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha. https://​read.84000.co/​tran​slat​ion/​toh​558.html.
Hidas, Gergely. 2013. “Rituals in the Mahāsāhasrapramardanasūtra.” In Puṣpikā: Tracing 
Ancient India through Texts and Traditions. Contributions to Current Research in Indology, 
edited by N. Mirnig, P. Szántó, and M. Williams, 225–​40. Oxford: Oxbow Press.
Hidas, Gergely. 2019. A Buddhist Ritual Manual on Agriculture. Berlin, Germany: de Gruyter.
Hodge, Stephen. 2003. The Mahā-​Vairocana-​Abhisaṃbodhi Tantra with Buddhaguhya’s 
Commentary. Abingdon, UK: RoutledgeCurzon.
McBride, Richard Dewayne, II. 2004. “Is There Really ‘Esoteric’ Buddhism?” 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 27, no. 2: 329–​56.
Mevissen, Gerd J.R. 2010. “Hitherto Unidentified Metal Sculptures of the Pañcarakṣā Goddess 
Mahāsāhasrapramardanī from Nepal and Tibet.” In South Asian Archaeology 2007: 
Proceedings of the 19th Meeting of the European Association of South Asian Archaeology in 
Ravenna, Italy, July 2007, edited by Pierfrancesco Callieri and Luca Colliva, vol. II, 213–​24. 
Oxford, UK: Archaeopress.
Mical, 
Wiesiek, 
and 
Andreas 
Doctor. 
2016. 
“The 
Tantra 
of 
Siddhaikavīra.” 
84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha. Last modified 2021. https://​read.84000.co/​tran​
slat​ion/​toh​544.html.
Overbey, Ryan. 2016. “Vicissitudes of Text and Rite in the Great Peahen Queen of Spells.” In 
Tantric Traditions in Transmission and Translation, edited by David Gray and Ryan Overbey, 
257–​83. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sander, Lore. 2007. “Preliminary Remarks on Two Versions of the Atanatiya (Atanatika)-​Sutra 
in Sanskrit.” Journal of the International College for Advanced Buddhist Studies 11: 115–​52.

--- PAGE 1177 ---
1152      Sam van Schaik
 
van Schaik, Sam. 2020. Buddhist Magic: Divination, Healing and Enchantment through the Ages. 
Boulder, CO: Shambhala.
Sharf, Robert. 2002. Coming to Terms with Chinese Buddhism: A Reading of the Treasure Store 
Treatise. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Shaw, Julia. 2013. Buddhist Landscapes in Central India. London: Routledge.
Shaw, Sarah 2021. The Art of Listening: A Guide to the Early Teachings of Buddhism. Boulder: 
CO: Shambhala.
Shinohara, Koichi. 2014. Spells, Images and Maṇḍalas: Tracing the Evolution of Esoteric Buddhist 
Rituals. New York: Columbia University Press.
Shulman, Eviatar. 2019. “The Protective Buddha: On the Cosmological Logic of Paritta.” 
Numen 66: 207–​42.
Skilling, Peter. 1992. “The Rakṣā Literature of the Śrāvakayāna.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 
15: 110–​80.
Smith, Frederick. 2006. The Self Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asian Literature 
and Civilization. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sørensen, Henrik. 2009. “The Spell of the Great, Golden Peacock Queen: The Origin, Practices 
and Lore of an Early Esoteric Buddhist Tradition in China.” The Pacific World 3, no. 8: 
89–​124.
Wallace, Vesna. 2001. The Inner Kālacakratantra: A Buddhist Tantric View of the Individual. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Walshe, Maurice. 1995. The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Dighā Nikāya. 
Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications.

--- PAGE 1178 ---
Chapter 45
Modernity and 
Neo-​Tantra
Hugh B. Urban
The representation, popular imagining, and practice of tantra have changed dramati­
cally over the last two hundred years, particularly in the context of modernity, globaliza­
tion, and consumer capitalism. Once a highly esoteric tradition focused on awakening 
and harnessing the divine power that flows through the cosmos and human body, tantra 
has increasingly become a popular path focused on the pursuit of sensual pleasure and 
sexual freedom.1 Today, we need only browse the pages of Amazon.com or the shelves 
of Barnes and Noble to find a wide array of books, videos, and products such as The 
Complete Idiot’s Guide to Tantric Sex (Kuriansky 2004) and The Art of Sexual Ecstasy 
(Anand 1990). At the same time, new forms of practice such as “Neo-​tantra” have been 
marketed by global gurus such as Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh (aka Osho), now combined 
with elements of post-​Freudian psychoanalysis, the mysticism of George Gurdjieff, and 
experimental forms of therapy taught at New Age centers such as the Esalen Institute 
(Rajneesh 1980, 1981; Urban 2000, 2016).
So how did this remarkable transformation take place? This chapter retraces the com­
plex genealogy of tantra in the modern context, as it was interpreted, reinterpreted, 
appropriated, and transformed by a wide variety of British, European, American, and 
Indian audiences from the nineteenth century onward.2 For the sake of brevity, I focus 
on six key moments in this genealogy: (1) the largely negative representation of tantra 
in Orientalist discourse and in the works of Hindu reformers of the nineteenth century; 
(2) the positive revaluation of tantra in modern European esoteric groups such as the 
Ordo Templi Orientis and in the works of the British occultist, Aleister Crowley; (3) 
the development of the Left-​Hand Path in modern magic and Satanism; (4) the early 
twentieth-​century American reworking of tantra that we see in Pierre Arnold Bernard 
and the Tantrik Order in America; (5) the development of Neo-​tantra in the movement 
led by Osho-​Rajneesh; and (6) the contemporary marketing of tantra as an “art of ec­
stasy” or spiritual sex in New Age spirituality, where it now circulates globally for a mass 
consumer audience.

--- PAGE 1179 ---
1154      Hugh B. Urban
 
To conclude, I discuss the reimportation of a globalized form of tantra to contempo­
rary India, where it has taken on a number of new interesting forms (though most often 
associated with black magic and sorcery rather than sex). Here I revisit Agehananda 
Bharati’s famous idea of the “pizza effect” (1970) as a way of thinking about cross-​
cultural circulations of ideas and suggest that it needs to be updated a bit to address the 
contemporary global context. Rather than pizza, however, I argue that something like a 
“curry effect” is perhaps a more apt culinary metaphor to describe the complex histor­
ical journey of modern tantra.
“Black Art of the Crudest and 
Filthiest Kind”: Tantra in 
Orientalist Discourse
Much of the modern understanding and interpretation—​or perhaps more accu­
rately misunderstanding and misinterpretation—​is indebted to European and British 
Orientalist literature of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. As scholars such 
as Ronald Inden have shown, most European Orientalist scholars typically imagined 
India as a land of irrationality, sensuality, mysticism, and “disorderly imagination,” set 
in opposition to the rational, orderly, modern “West” (Inden 1990), and tantra was often 
portrayed as the very epitome of that dreamy, irrational realm, as “India’s darkest heart” 
or the “extreme Orient” (Urban 1999, 2003).
Most of the early Christian missionaries and European Orientalist scholars writing 
in India had an intensely negative view of Hinduism in general and of tantra in par­
ticular (Urban 2003). One of the first British authors to write about the religions of 
India was the British Baptist missionary, Reverend William Ward (1769–​1823), who 
described Hinduism as “the most puerile, bloody, and impure system of idolatry that 
was ever established on earth” (1817: 2.lxxvi); meanwhile, he denounced tantra as the 
worst example of this idolatry, involving a “most shocking mode of worship” and 
practices “too abominable to enter the ears of man and impossible to be revealed to 
a Christian public” (1817: 1.247). Ward’s intensely hostile view of tantra was echoed 
throughout Orientalist literature of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, 
where it was widely dismissed for its perverse mixture of magic and sensuality—​for 
example, as “black art of the crudest and filthiest kind” in which a “veritable Devil’s 
orgy is portrayed” (Avalon 1960: 5). As the great British Sanskritist, Sir Monier Monier-​
Williams, concluded, tantra is simply “Hinduism arrived at its last and worst stage of 
medieval development” (1894: 122–​123).
Many Indian authors and Hindu reformers of the colonial era largely accepted, 
internalized, and even amplified this Orientalist view of tantra. Thus, the great Bengali 
reformer Rāmmohun Roy (1772–​1833) described tantra as the clearest example of 
the polytheism, idolatry, and decadence that had corrupted the noble, pure spirit of

--- PAGE 1180 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1155
 
the Vedas. In Rāmmohun’s view, the “golden age of the Vedas” had been replaced in 
modern times by the “dark age” of the tantras, with their “ceremonies utterly subver­
sive of every moral principle” (Roy 1982: 1.9, 2.vii; Urban 2003: 61). Likewise, Swami 
Vivekananda (1863–​1902)—​arguably the most important figure in the articulation of 
modern Hinduism or “neo-​Hinduism”—​was particularly critical of the left-​hand or 
vāmācāra form of Tantric practice with its literal use of sexual rites and consumption 
of alcohol and meat. The degenerate vāmācāra practice, he lamented, was a kind of di­
sease that had gradually infected the marrow of the Indian body politic, emasculating 
and effeminizing this once powerful nation and allowing it to be dominated first by the 
Mughals and later by the British Empire: “Just look to your own province and see how 
this Vamachara (immoral practice) of the tantras has entered into our very marrow. . . 
. We must stem the tide of this Vamachara, which is contrary to the spirit of the Vedas” 
(Vivekananda 1984: 174).
In the early twentieth century, a few brave scholars did attempt to defend and 
rearticulate tantra for a modern audience. Foremost among these was Sir John 
Woodroffe (aka Arthur Avalon), a British High Court judge in India and also a secret 
tāntrika. Woodroffe argued passionately that tantra should be understood as a noble, 
respectable, and philosophical form of Hinduism, comparable to other philosophical 
schools such as Advaita Vedānta and in its ritual practice even not so dissimilar to the 
rites of the Catholic Church (1974: 4; Avalon 1960: 63). He also chastised his countrymen 
for their hypocritical prudishness and suggested that the tantras were perhaps far more 
honest in their views of sexuality than any in the modern West:
There is nothing “foul” in them except for people to whom all erotic phenomena are 
foul . . . [T]‌he ancient East was purer in these matters than the modern West, where, 
under cover of a pruriently modest exterior . . . extraordinarily varied psychopathic 
filth may flow. This was not so in earlier days . . . when a spade was called a spade and 
not a horticultural instrument.
(Woodroffe 1978: 134)
Despite Woodroffe’s efforts, however, tantra continued to be largely associated with 
sexuality, magic, and transgression throughout the European and American popular 
imaginations. Yet ironically, this association with magic, transgression, sexuality, and 
power also helped give birth to a wide array of new religious movements from the late 
nineteenth century onward.
The Ordo Templi Orientis, Aleister 
Crowley, and Sex Magick
One of the first and most important European groups to begin to embrace tantra 
in a more positive form was the Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.) or Order of Oriental

--- PAGE 1181 ---
1156      Hugh B. Urban
 
Templars. Founded between 1895 and 1902 by Karl Kellner and Theodor Reuss, the 
O.T.O. combined elements of Western esoteric traditions such as Gnosticism and 
Freemasonry with aspects of Hindu yoga and tantra (Pasi 2005; Urban 2008). Kellner 
(1851–​1905) was a wealthy Austrian chemist and industrialist who claimed to have been 
initiated into Tantric sexual techniques by a Sufi and two yogis, one of whom may have 
been a Bengali Tantric practitioner (Dvorak 1998; Urban 2008). Meanwhile, Reuss 
(1855–​1923) was an Anglo-​German occultist, Freemason, and journalist who wrote 
widely about both Western sexual magic and tantra, including a large volume on phallic 
worship entitled Lingam-​Yoni (1906; see Howe and Möller 1986).
Calling itself a kind of “neo-​Gnostic” tradition, the O.T.O. strongly condemned 
the doctrine of original sin, which it saw as a corruption of authentic Christian tra­
dition. Instead, it called for the dawn of a “new civilization” based not on repression 
and denial but rather on the open embrace and celebration of sexuality (Reuss 1997: 
227). Indeed, the O.T.O. claimed to possess the deepest secret of all esoteric traditions, 
which lay at the heart of all Masonic systems and ultimately derived from the “Wise 
Men of the East.” According to a publication from 1912, this occult key is none other 
than the secret of sexual magic, which is the original core of all religious traditions, 
both “East” and “West”:
Our Order possess the KEY, which opens up all Masonic and Hermetic secrets, 
namely, the teaching of sexual magic, and this teaching explains, without exception, 
all the secrets of Nature, all the symbolism of FREEMASONRY and all systems of 
religion.
(Reuss 1912: 21)
Much of the O.T.O.’s practice clearly drew on nineteenth-​century Western forms of 
sexual magic, such as the work of the American spiritualist Paschal Beverly Randolph 
and European groups such as the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor (Deveney 1997; 
Urban 2005). However, it also borrowed heavily from nineteenth-​century Orientalist 
scholarship on tantra to reimagine this as the most profound source of all mysticism 
and religion, one known to the ancient Greek mystery religions, to the early Christians 
Gnostics, and to the left-​hand tāntrikas of India alike. Like most Orientalist scholars 
before him, Reuss identified tantra primarily with sexuality and indeed as “sexual-​
religion,” in which the central focus is on the “principle of generation as it manifests 
in the female energy (Shakti) and the manly energy (Shiva)” (1993b: 71). In his view, 
this Tantric sexual religion was no different from the ancient worship of the phallus in 
the West:
The Eleusinian mysteries were pure Phallus cult. The ceremonies were those of the 
Tantrics. The members of these mysteries partook of such ecstasy that the freedom of 
the senses came to them as a totally natural by-​product . . .
The secret teachings of the Gnostics (Primitive Christians) are identical with the 
Vamachari rites of the Tantrics . . . Phallicism is the basis of all theology and underlies

--- PAGE 1182 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1157
 
the mythology of all peoples . . . The Phallus as a divine symbol received divine vener­
ation for thousands of years in India.
(see Reuss 1993a, 1993b: 71)
Ultimately, Reuss hoped that the O.T.O. and its more wholesome understanding of 
sexuality would usher in a whole new society and a new age of human civilization, one 
based not on denial of physical instinct but rather on acceptance and celebration of the 
divine power of sexuality. By wedding the left-​practices of tantra with his own neo-​
Gnostic spirituality, he hoped to usher in a new era to replace the repressive morality of 
the past: “A new civilization, a new system of morals will arise from the new Christianity 
of the gnostic Templar-​Christians . . . [T]‌he Church of the gnostic Neo-​Christians seeks 
to found communities, existing on a co-​operative basis, i.e., freed from the Nazarene-​
Christian ideas of original sin” (see Reuss 1993a, 1997: 226–​227)
Surely the most influential leader of the O.T.O. was the controversial British oc­
cultist, poet, and novelist Aleister Crowley (1875–​1947). From an early age, Crowley 
was involved with a variety of Western esoteric groups, such as the Hermetic Order of 
the Golden Dawn, and was also one of the first Western authors to begin writing about 
South Asian practices such as yoga, Buddhist meditation and tantra (Pasi 2005; Urban 
2005). After meeting Reuss in 1910, Crowley became closely involved in the O.T.O. and 
was named the “Sovereign Grand Master General of Ireland, Iona, and all the Britons.” 
Crowley actually wrote an entire liturgy for the O.T.O. called the Gnostic Mass, which 
prominently highlights sexual symbolism and the dynamics between the male priest 
and the female priestess. At the same time, he also elaborated the higher grades of the 
O.T.O.’s initiatory structure, which now included eighth, ninth, and eleventh degrees 
(the tenth in Crowley’s system is an administrative grade with no sexual aspect), which 
focused respectively on autoerotic, heterosexual, and homosexual rituals (Pasi 2005; 
Urban 2005).
Crowley’s actual knowledge of tantra does not appear to have been very deep and was 
mostly derived from secondary sources. However, he did discuss the general similarities 
between his own system of sexual magic and Tantric techniques:
Paradoxical as it may sound, the Tantrics are in reality the most advanced of the 
Hindus. Their theory is, in its philosophical ultimatum, a primitive stage of the 
White tradition, for the essence of the Tantric cults is that by the performance of cer­
tain rites of Magick, one does not only escape disaster, but obtains positive benedic­
tion. The Tantric is not obsessed by the will-​to-​die. It is a difficult business, no doubt, 
to get any fun out of existence; but at least it is not impossible.
(Crowley 1969: ch. 30 and 72, 1991: ch. 7)
More specifically, Crowley also noted the similarity between the central importance of 
semen in Tantric sexual practices and its role in the upper grades of the O.T.O.’s sexual 
magic. Many esoteric traditions, he argued, agree on the importance of semen and re­
gard it as a fundamental source of both physical and spiritual potency:

--- PAGE 1183 ---
1158      Hugh B. Urban
 
Like the Jews, the wise men of India have a belief that a certain particular Prana, or 
force, resides in the Bindu, or semen. . . .
Therefore they stimulate to the maximum its generation by causing a consecrated 
prostitute to excite the organs, and at the same time vigorously withhold by will . . . 
Nor is this ever to be lost, but reabsorbed through the tissues of the body. The organs 
thus act as a siphon to draw constantly fresh supplies of life from the cosmic reservoir 
and flood the body with their fructifying virtue. . . .
Initiates will notice also that these heathen philosophers have made one further 
march towards the truth when they say that the Sun and Moon must be united before 
the reabsorption (see almost any Tantra, in particular Shiva Sanhita).
(Crowley 1986: ch. 16)
In many ways, however, Crowley’s use of sexual magic did also depart quite sig­
nificantly from South Asian Tantric practices. Perhaps most important, South Asian 
tantra is for the most part built on a quite heterosexual (indeed, heteronormative 
and quite essentialist) metaphysical system: in Hindu tantra, for example, the entire 
universe unfolds through the interplay of cosmic male and female principles, Śiva 
and Śakti, liṅgam and yoni, and so on. Historically, moreover, the accounts of sexual 
practices outlined in Tantric texts have always been heterosexual, despite their other 
transgressions of class and purity (Urban 2010). Yet Crowley introduced techniques 
of autoerotic and homoerotic sexual magic that were not only quite unlike those of 
any South Asian Tantric tradition but also highly transgressive in the context of early 
twentieth-​century England, at a time when masturbation was widely believed to cause 
insanity and sodomy was illegal. Indeed, a large part of the power of Crowley’s sexual 
magic appears to have derived from its transgressive nature, its use of dangerous 
and impure techniques, and its deliberate violation of social and religious taboos 
(Urban 2005).
While Crowley’s own knowledge of tantra was probably limited, much of the syn­
thesis of Crowleyian magic with tantra was really due to the work of his follower, 
Kenneth Grant (1924–​2011). It was largely Grant who helped revive interest in Crowley’s 
work in the 1960s and 1970s, where it found a happy home among the burgeoning 
counterculture and sexual revolution. At the same time, Grant also developed his own 
system of magic called the “Typhonian current,” which he essentially identifies with 
tantra (Grant 1975: 63). Grant himself claimed to have received full initiation into a 
“highly recondite formula” of the Tantric path at the hands of David Curwen, who in 
turn claimed to have been initiated by a guru in South India. After meeting Crowley 
in 1944, Grant went on to write a series of books on Crowley and magic, which re­
peatedly emphasize the tāntrik nature of Crowley’s work. Thus, he praised Crowley’s 
text, The Book of the Law, as “the New Gnosis, the latest Tantra” and credited Crowley 
with having penetrated the innermost secrets of tāntrik sexual practices (1973: 7). 
Ultimately, Grant also found in the tantras a confirmation of the central tenet of 
Crowley’s teachings—​his law of Thelema (derived from the Greek for “will”), which 
rests on the fundamental belief in the divinity of the individual human will: “Another

--- PAGE 1184 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1159
 
point of contact between Tantra and Thelema is contained in the Thelemic aphorism: 
There is no god but man!” (1973: 127).
The Left-​Hand Path: Radical 
Transgression and Self-​Deification
Grant’s synthesis of Crowley’s magick with tantra has had a lasting influence on almost 
all later forms of occultism and much of New Age spirituality more generally. Today, 
this synthesis is widely known as the Left-​Hand Path (LHP) and has been articulated in 
various ways by a wide range of neo-​pagans, occultists, and modern Satanists (Flowers 
2012; Schreck 2002; Granholm 2012; Urban forthcoming).3
In striking contrast to most Orientalist scholars and Hindu reformers such as 
Swami Vivekananda, Grant saw vāmācāra as the highest form of Tantric practice. 
With its deliberate use of normally impure and forbidden substances such as alcohol, 
meat, and sexual fluids, vāmācāra in Grant’s view aims to achieve the overstepping 
of all taboos and all social boundaries, including the boundary between the human 
and the divine: “the ultimate aim is total absorption in the goddess, and this is some­
times accomplished through sexual union with the priestess who embodies her” 
(1975: 72–​73).
One of the most influential exponents of vāmācāra tantra was the controversial 
Italian scholar and self-​described “Traditionalist,” Julius Evola. In many ways, Evola’s 
embrace of vāmācāra was a part of his larger critique of modernity, which he saw as 
a general decline into moral decadence and spiritual emptiness. In his view, we are 
now living in the last phase of this cosmic cycle (the kali yuga, in Hindu cosmological 
terms), when most religious institutions are in decay and genuine Tradition has been 
displaced by the corrupt forces of materialism, secularism, and democratic political 
systems. In such extreme circumstances, extreme measures are needed, and the most 
viable path is therefore a path of action, virility, and heroic courage that can turn these 
dark forces to a spiritual end. This, for Evola, is the essence of the LHP. His clearest 
articulation of this idea appeared in Lo yoga della potenza (the Yoga of Power), which 
was published in 1949 as a revised version of his 1925 book L’Uomo come potenza (Man 
as Power):
During the last age, elementary, infernal and even abyssal forces are untrammeled. 
The immediate task consists in facing and absorbing these forces, in taking the risk 
of “riding the tiger,” to use a Chinese expression . . . or “to transform the poison 
into medicine” according to a Tantric expression. Hence the rituals and special 
practices of what has been named Left-​Hand Tantrism, or the Path of the Left Hand 
(Vama-​marga).
(Evola 1992: 3–​4)4

--- PAGE 1185 ---
1160      Hugh B. Urban
 
However, perhaps the most explicit turn to the LHP was taken by Anton Szandor 
LaVey (born Howard Stanton Levey, 1930–​1997), the controversial American founder 
of the Church of Satan. Established in San Francisco in 1966—​in the very midst of 
the sexual revolution and the psychedelic movement—​LaVey’s Church of Satan also 
represented the “dark side of the counter-​culture,” as it were. While embracing much of 
the sexual revolution, LaVey also ridiculed hippies, feminists, neo-​pagans, and others 
whom he believed had embraced weakness and a herd mentality rather than strength 
and individualism (Urban 2005: 210–​217).
At least in LaVey’s version of Satanism, “Satan” does not refer to some imagined ex­
ternal being set in opposition to God and dwelling in the underworld; rather, Satan is 
really the symbol of the individual human being, with all of his most physical, sensual, 
sexual, and violent drives and desires. Satan is in fact the embodiment of the left-​hand 
practice itself, as the path of the flesh, the religion of worldly desire and personal gratifi­
cation. As he explained in his first major text, The Satanic Bible:
The Satanic religion has not merely lifted the coin—​it has flipped it completely over 
. . . Satanism is not a white light religion; it is a religion of the flesh, the mundane, 
the carnal—​all of which are ruled by Satan, the personification of the Left-​Hand 
Path. (1969: 52)
The ideal of the LHP was carried over into many offshoots of the Church of Satan, 
including the Temple of Set and myriad others. However, one of the most explicit 
articulations of the Satanic version of the LHP came from Anton LaVey’s daughter, 
Zeena, working together with her partner, Nikolas Schreck. While their positions 
changed significantly over time, the Schrecks’ most extensive discussion of the LHP 
appeared in their 2002 book, Demons of the Flesh: The Complete Guide to Left Hand Path 
Sex Magic. Here, they echo Evola’s emphasis on the inherently elitist and undemocratic 
nature of the LHP. In their view, this path is only for the few and the strong who are ca­
pable of engaging in these dangerous rites, which are neither advisable nor possible for 
the common herd of humankind:
The left-​hand path is closed to the common man and woman, who is regarded as 
little more than a herd-​animal (Sanskrit pashu). The sinister current is considered 
fit only for the temperament of the heroic warrior (Sanskrit vira) . . . The ultimate 
left-​hand path goal of Awakening (Sanskrit bodhana) occurs through exerting a rig­
orous effort against the innate low-​level consciousness which is regarded as the nat­
ural condition of the human animal.
(Schreck and Schreck 2002: 2)
While the Schrecks do want to ground themselves in South Asian traditions of 
vāmācāra tantra, they have also transformed these traditions in a number of signifi­
cant ways. Among others, their version of the LHP is identified first and foremost 
with sexuality, erotic rites, and “sexual exaltation,” and the particular form of sexuality

--- PAGE 1186 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1161
 
emphasized here is radically transgressive, demanding an explicit violation of every im­
aginable social and religious taboo. Beginning with the principle that “SEX IS POWER,” 
Demons of the Flesh promises to unveil the secrets of “Sadomasochism, Orgies, Taboo-​
breaking, Fetishism, Orgasm prolongation, Sexual vampirism, Ritual intercourse with 
divine and demonic entities, Awakening the Feminine Daemonic,” as well as “Erotic 
deprogramming and deconditioning” (2002: back cover). In this respect, the Schrecks’ 
version of the LHP goes well beyond even the most “hardcore” forms of South Asian 
tantra, in which sexual union is typically restricted to heterosexual couples (White 
2002; Urban 2010). Indeed, the vāmācāra use of meat, wine, and sexual union seems 
rather tame compared to the Schrecks’ use of S&M (sadism and masochism), sexual fet­
ishism and vampirism.
The Tantrik Order in America: The 
“Loving Guru,” Pierre Bernard
Meanwhile, in the United States, probably the most important figure in the modern 
reimagining of tantra was Pierre Arnold Bernard (1876–​1955). Easily one of the most 
colorful, elusive, and enigmatic characters in American religious history, Bernard was 
also a key figure in the development of modern yoga and in the general interest in all 
things “Oriental” and exotic. In his own day, Bernard was known in the popular press 
as “the Great Oom” or “Oom the Omnipotent,” while in some modern publications, he 
is even credited as the founder of yoga in America (Lardner 1939; Boswell 1965; Urban 
2003; Love 2011).
Bernard’s biography is a bit difficult to reconstruct due to his own retellings and 
embellishments, but it seems that he was born with the name Perry Arnold Baker in 
Iowa. While just a teenager growing up in Nebraska, he became close friends with a 
young Syrian Indian from Calcutta named Sylvais Hamati. The two shared an interest in 
the occult, and Hamati took Perry under his wing, making him his chela or student and 
teaching him the basics of yoga and vāmācāra tantra. Eventually, the two would travel 
up and down the West Coast teaching yoga and a new sort of Americanized form of 
tantra (Love 2011: 1–​26).
In 1906, now using the name Pierre Bernard, he established his own Tantrik Order 
in America (1906), which published its own journal and also offered its own docu­
ment for initiation into the “Tantrik Brotherhood.” After the San Francisco earthquake, 
he relocated to New York City, where he established an “Oriental Sanctum” in 1910. 
Arguably the first Neo-​Tantric group in the United States, Bernard’s order attracted 
some of the most prominent social figures of the day, including composer Leopold 
Stokowski and members of the Vanderbilt family.
Like his European and British contemporaries such as Reuss and Crowley, Bernard 
saw sexuality as the most fundamental, most powerful drive in human nature and also

--- PAGE 1187 ---
1162      Hugh B. Urban
 
the key to personal and social transformation. As he wrote in his article from 1906, 
“Tantrik Worship,” the sex drive is in fact “the animating spirit of the world”:
The animating impulse of all organic life is the sexual instinct. It is that which 
underlies the struggle for existence in the animal world and is the source of all human 
endeavor. . . . That affinity which draws the two sexes together for the . . . production 
of a new being, that overmastering universal impulse, is the most powerful factor in 
the human race and has ever been the cause of man’s most exalted thought.
(1906a: 71)
In Bernard’s view, tantra is unique among religious techniques because it is the one that 
not only acknowledges the power of love and sexuality but uses these human drives as a 
primary means of spiritual liberation. Indeed, in his Tantrik Journal Bernard spells the 
word tantra in Sanskrit characters comprised of tiny hearts (1906b: 91).
Not surprisingly, Bernard also became an object of intense gossip and scandal in the 
New York press. Known in the popular media as the “Loving Guru,” Bernard was infa­
mous for his Tantric sessions with “Oriental music and women’s cries, but not those of 
distress” (Douglas 1997: 195). As one neighbor who occupied an apartment across the 
way summarized the local grievance: “What my wife and I have seen through the win­
dows of that place is scandalous. We saw men and women in various stages of dishabille. 
Women’s screams mingled with wild Oriental music” (Sann 1967: 190).
Yet despite—​or perhaps because of—​his controversial reputation, Bernard’s 
uniquely American practice has had a lasting legacy and helped redefine most twen­
tieth-​ and twenty-​first-​century versions of tantra. Indeed, there was even a revival of 
Bernard’s group with the formation of a “New Tantrik Order in America” by New Age 
guru, Nik Douglas, in 1996. Through his website “Tantra Works,” Douglas offers an 
updated Tantric initiation now adapted to the sensibilities of a contemporary audience, 
by correcting some of the “rather sexist, obscure and outdated” language of Bernard’s 
original Tantric document and presenting the secrets of tantra for a “new millennium” 
(Douglas 1996).
Osho-​Rajneesh and “Neo-​Tantra”
However, of all the various characters figures discussed in this chapter, arguably the 
most important for the global spread of modern tantra was the controversial Indian 
guru known in his early years as Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh and in his later days as Osho 
(1931–​1990). Today, Osho-​Rajneesh is known to most readers as the “Rolls Royce Guru” 
and “Guru of the Rich” who made global headlines during the 1980s when he estab­
lished a large and briefly very successful utopian commune in central Oregon (see Osho 
2000; Urban 2016). As documented in a recent series such as “Wild, Wild Country” on

--- PAGE 1188 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1163
 
Netflix, this utopian experiment quickly went off the rails and ended in a series of crim­
inal activities, including the largest bioterrorist attack on US soil and the largest immi­
gration fraud and wiretapping conspiracies in US history (Carter 1990; Urban 2016; Way 
and Way 2018).
Yet despite its sordid and often surreal history, the Osho-​Rajneesh movement is also 
critically important for our understanding of the modern development and transfor­
mation of tantra in a global context. Osho-​Rajneesh was in fact the first modern guru to 
coin the phrase “Neo-​tantra” and to explicitly synthesize aspects of Hindu and Buddhist 
tantra with modern psychoanalytic theory and techniques drawn from American New 
Age spirituality (Rajneesh 1980, 1981; Urban 2016).
Born Chandra Mohan Jain (and nicknamed “Rajneesh”) in Madhya Pradesh, he 
claimed to have achieved full enlightenment in 1953 and assumed the title “Bhagwan” 
(meaning “glorious” or “holy,” a traditional name of God). By the late 1960s, Osho-​
Rajneesh had gathered a large and wealthy following in Bombay (modern Mumbai) 
and then established a lively ashram in nearby Poona (Pune). He quickly became quite 
infamous as “India’s most dangerous guru,” known for his irreverent sense of humor 
and his iconoclastic attacks on religious and political leaders such as Gandhi, Nehru, 
and Mother Theresa (Urban 2016). Attracting a growing number of the American and 
European young people then touring South Asia, the Pune ashram became known as 
the “Esalen of the East” due to its rich synthesis of Eastern spirituality with new forms of 
therapy and psychological techniques practiced at New Age centers such as the Esalen 
Institute in California (Urban 2016; see also Kripal 2007).
At the heart of Osho-​Rajneesh’s eclectic, iconoclastic, and often seemingly contra­
dictory philosophy is the ideal of “Zorba the Buddha.” While other religions split the 
material from the spiritual, Osho-​Rajneesh argued instead that a fully realized being 
would combine the sensuous enjoyment and lust for life of Zorba the Greek with the 
spirituality and transcendental insight of Gautama the Buddha: “My concept of the 
new man is that he will be Zorba the Greek and he will also be Gautama the Buddha: 
the new man will be Zorba the Buddha. He will be sensuous and physical, in the body, 
in the senses, enjoying the body and all that the body makes possible, and still a great 
consciousness . . . He will be Christ and Epicurus together” (Osho-​Rajneesh 1982: 15; 
see Urban 2016).
From the outset, Osho-​Rajneesh set out to overturn established ideologies and 
to redefine all previous ways of thinking. Thus, his movement was dubbed a “reli­
gionless religion” that rejected the dogmatism of all existing traditions; his followers 
were called “neo-​sannyasins,” who only “renounced” the idea that sensual pleasures 
or worldly pursuits needed to be renounced; and his meditations were “dynamic” 
sessions that involved not seated contemplation but primal scream and free-​form 
dance. Similarly, Osho-​Rajneesh redefined traditional South Asian tantra, creating 
his own brand of “Neo-​tantra” that focused primarily on sexuality and the transfor­
mation of sexual pleasure into a kind of “superconsciousness” (Rajneesh n.d.). As he 
put it in two lectures from 1980 and 1981, the world today needs an updated form of

--- PAGE 1189 ---
1164      Hugh B. Urban
 
tantra that would transmute the primal power of orgasm into the ultimate source of 
godliness:
My whole effort here is to bring Tantra to the twentieth century and make it Neo-​
Tantra, to bring Tao to the twentieth century and make it Neo-​Tao . . . Neo-​Sufism 
and Neo-​Yoga (1980: 207).
That’s my effort here: to introduce a neo-​Tantra to the world, a new vision of love 
. . . and an insight into the reality of the orgasm—​because orgasm is your greatest 
source of finding godliness, harmony, truth, the universal unity of all life. . . . If you 
can be one with one woman, one man, you have the secret key in your hands. You can 
be one with the whole universe.
(1981: 342; Rajneesh 1974, 1983)
In his understanding of sexuality and his redefinition of tantra, Rajneesh drew heavily 
on post-​Freudian psychoanalysis, and above all the work of the enigmatic Austrian 
therapist Wilhelm Reich (1897–​1957). Like Reich, Rajneesh saw sex as the most powerful 
force in human nature, the cause of most of our social and psychological ills, and also 
the most powerful tool on the path of spiritual liberation. Indeed, Osho-​Rajneesh’s un­
derstanding of kuṇḍalinī as a kind of primal sexual energy latent in the body bears more 
than a passing resemblance to Reich’s notion of “orgone” energy, or the innate sexual 
power coursing through every physical body (Reich 1973).5 Like Reich, moreover, Osho-​
Rajneesh clearly linked sexual repression to social and political repression and therefore 
also identified sexual liberation as the ultimate source of social and political transforma­
tion. As such, he even recognized Reich as a kind of “Western tāntrika” who had discov­
ered the secrets of Tantric sex independently of the Eastern sources:
I will call Wilhelm Reich a modern Tantra master, although he was not aware of it. 
Perhaps in his past lives he may have known the secrets of Tantra—​because his work 
contained the secrets of Tantra . . .
Reich will have a revival because what he was doing was absolutely scientific . . . I 
have so many sannyasins educated in psychology, psychoanalysis, in analytical psy­
chology. . . . He belongs to us. I give him posthumous sannyas.
(Osho 1987: 143)
With its complex synthesis of East and West, Osho-​Rajneesh’s brand of Neo-​tantra 
has had a tremendous influence on virtually all popular forms of Tantric yoga in Europe 
and America since the 1970s (Urban 2016). Not only do many of these popular texts 
directly credit Osho-​Rajneesh as a primary inspiration, but some of the most influen­
tial works on popular tantra were in fact written by direct disciples of Osho-​Rajneesh. 
These include hugely influential best-​selling works such as The Art of Sexual Ecstasy by 
his disciple, Margot Anand (1990), and Tantric Pulsation by Osho disciple and trained 
Reichian therapist Aneesha Dillon (2005). Meanwhile, Osho-​Rajneesh’s own works on 
tantra and Yoga continue to sell widely throughout the globe in an array of books and

--- PAGE 1190 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1165
 
DVDs such as Yoga: The Science of the Soul, Tantra: The Supreme Understanding, The 
Tantra Experience: Evolution through Love and dozens of others (Osho 2012, 2016, 2017).
“Nookie Nirvana”: Tantra, the New 
Age, and Consumer Culture
By the 1980s and 1990s, this popularized form of Neo-​tantra or “spiritual sexology” had 
become a ubiquitous part of the New Age movement and of alternative spirituality more 
broadly. Now mass-​marketed through countless books, videos, and sensual products, 
Neo-​tantra has become in many ways emblematic of New Age spirituality as a whole. 
Today, not only can we browse The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Tantric Sex, but we can also 
easily discover the secrets of Sex Magic, Tantra, and Tarot, American Tantra: A Modern 
Guide to Sacred Sex, and New Age Tantric Yoga, among countless others. Virtually all of 
these popular texts are based on the fundamental equation of tantra with sex, usually 
combined with the erotic positions of the Kāma Sūtra and a healthy dose of the Joy of 
Sex. As Cosmopolitan magazine put it in an article, tantra is nothing less than the art of 
“nookie nirvana” and the secret to “mind blowing sex” (Collins 2000).
Although the term “New Age” is really a rough label that has been applied to a vast 
and diverse body of modern beliefs and practices, many scholars have argued that there 
are at least a few common themes that run through these various forms of alternative 
spirituality. As Paul Heelas suggests, the New Age can be characterized in general terms 
as “the celebration of the self and the sacralization of modernity”—​that is, a belief in 
the inherent divinity of the individual self and an affirmation of basic values of moder­
nity such as “freedom, authenticity, self-​responsibility, self-​reliance, self-​determinism, 
equality, and above all, the self as a value in and of itself” (Heelas 1996).
Contemporary “American tantra” or “Neo-​tantra” is a striking illustration of this 
larger celebration of the self and sacralization of modernity. Throughout popular liter­
ature, tantra is presented as the ultimate path to self-​fulfillment and personal pleasure, 
one uniquely suited to a modern global context in which “East” and “West” are cross-​
fertilizing in powerful new ways.
Thus in the Complete Idiot’s Guide, tantra is explicitly advertised as a “modern” 
practice, especially appropriate for our highly individualistic, materialistic, and 
quick-​fix lifestyle.
Although Tantric practices were developed in the Eastern part of the world, they 
are particularly applicable and appealing to the Western world today. . . .Tantric sex 
promises simple steps and instant results, which are appealing to Westerners who are 
conditioned to “instant” lifestyles (instant coffee, fast food, instant gratification). . . 
. Tantric sex starts with individual practice. . . . This is consistent with the individu­
alism that is the basis of Western society. . . . Tantric sex encourages heightening the

--- PAGE 1191 ---
1166      Hugh B. Urban
 
senses through beautiful clothing, attractive surroundings and stimulation of all the 
senses, which is consistent with Western obsessions with worldly pleasures.
(Kuriansky 2004: 8–​9)
As the modern Tantric guru, Nik Douglas, put it, Neo-​tantra is therefore perhaps the 
quintessential religion for the New Age as a whole—​a more democratic, less elitist and 
popular path open to all spiritual seekers in this dawning Age of Aquarius:
As the New Age manifested, traditional Tantra was transformed into a Tantra for the 
masses, a neo-​Tantric cult of sensual pleasure with a spiritual flavor. . . . In the 21st 
century, Tantra will . . . bless those prepared to deal with the new spiritual reality . . . 
in the flowering of the Age of Aquarius which commenced in 1962.
(Douglas 1997: 17, 345)
At the same time, much of Neo-​tantra also seems to embody what Kimberly Lau has 
called the rise of “New Age capitalism”—​that is, the tendency for alternative spiritual 
practices and exotic “Eastern” traditions to become transformed into commodities 
and marketed to a large new audience of spiritual consumers (Lau 2015; see also Urban 
2003; Carrette and King 2004; Jain 2014). Like Yoga and other spiritual imports from 
Asia, tantra has become a huge commercial industry in the United States, the United 
Kingdom, and Europe, spawning not only books and videos but a wide array of products 
and services. The online Ananda Shop, for example, offers a variety of spiritual-​sensual 
services, such as the “Men’s Tantra Session” ($250), as well as a wide range of products, 
such as the “Couples Tantra Video” ($25), “Coconut Tantric Massage Oil” ($15), and 
a “Pelvic Floor Yoni Egg” ($60) (Ananda Shop 2021). Imagined as the ideal wedding 
of mukti and bhukti, spiritual liberation and sensual pleasure, Neo-​tantra seems to fit 
perfectly with the contemporary consumer mentality; indeed, it might even be said to 
be sort of the quintessential religion of the current form of global capitalism generally 
known as neoliberalism—​a system in which, as David Harvey defines it, essentially 
“everything is a commodity,” including sexuality, the body, and religion itself (Harvey 
2007; Urban 2016).
Conclusions: From the “Pizza Effect” 
to the “Curry Effect”
This chapter has only scratched the surface of many different forms of modern tantra. 
If space allowed, we could also have explored the synthesis of tantra with other es­
oteric traditions such as Gnosticism, Kabbalah, and Tarot (Frater U.:D.: 2002), the 
many LGBTQ transformations of tantra (Urban 2012), and various other iterations of 
Neo-​tantra.

--- PAGE 1192 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1167
 
To conclude, however, I would just like to make some broader observations on the 
changing representations of tantra in the modern context, not only in Europe and in the 
United States but also in contemporary South Asia. Here I would like to revisit and re­
think Agehananda Bharati’s famous notion of the “pizza effect,” by which he meant the 
ways in which ideas from one culture are transferred to another, undergo profound 
transformations, and then return to the home culture in a new form (1970: 271; see Urban 
2003).6 We can clearly some of this pizza effect at work in figures such as Osho-​Rajneesh, 
who was strongly influenced by Americanized versions of tantra and ideals of sexual liber­
ation that were circulating at New Age centers such as Esalen in California; however, Osho-​
Rajneesh is also an interesting case, insofar as he was as much an exporter as importer of 
modern tantra and also spread his own version of Neo-​tantra to the West (Urban 2016).
For the most part, however, the version of tantra that circulates in the contempo­
rary South Asian imagination is very different from the forms of spiritual sex circu­
lating in the American and European popular imaginations. Indeed, if we look at the 
wide array of Bollywood films dealing with Tantric themes or at the myriad popular 
booklets sold on street corners throughout India, we find that tantra is almost always 
identified with black magic, sorcery, and horror (Urban 2020). The figure of the “sinister 
tāntrika” and black magician is a recurring trope in popular films such as Gerhrayee, 
Sangarsh, or Jaadugar, not to mention low-​budget productions such as Shaitan Tantrik 
and myriad others (Urban 2020). Still today on street corners throughout India, one can 
find countless booklets and cheap paperbacks on Tantric black magic, such as Tantra 
Mantra Maner Icchā Pūraṇ and Ādi Vaśīkaraṇa Tantrasāra. Almost all of these booklets 
have lurid covers featuring sinister tāntrikas who perform dark rituals with skulls and 
corpses in cremation grounds, surrounded by ghouls and terrifying forms of the god­
dess (Śāstrī n.d.; Jaiminī n.d.; Urban 2020).
What we see in the popular image of tantra in India versus “the West” is not so much a 
“pizza effect” but rather what I would call a “curry effect.” By this I mean that the modern 
development of tantra is not so much the story of a dish that travels from one culture 
to another and then back again (like pizza) but rather that of a dish that has a common 
origin but develops in two very different directions in two different cultural contexts 
(like curry). Although there is some debate over the origins of the word “curry,” many 
trace it to either the Tamil or Kannada terms khari or caril, which were then adopted 
into Portuguese and other European languages (Collingham 2006: 115). Prior to the 
sixteenth century and the introduction of chili peppers from the new world, however, 
Indian curry would have been a very different dish than what we find today. After the in­
troduction of chilies brought by the Portuguese from Mexico, South Asian curry quickly 
evolved into a wide array of new kinds of saucy dishes, often with intense spices and 
high heat (Collingham 2006: 49–​73). In the nineteenth century, British colonizers then 
developed their own more homogeneous form of “curry powder” and usually much 
milder curry dishes, and in the twentieth century, Americans developed the sort of 
highly processed and generally bland curries that we can buy canned or frozen at most 
grocery stores (Collingham 2006: 129–​154, 245–​255).

--- PAGE 1193 ---
1168      Hugh B. Urban
 
This culinary narrative is, I think, a better metaphor for the complex development of 
modern tantra in India versus the United States and Europe. Rather than a pizza effect 
and a reimportation of an Americanized tantra to South Asia, we seem to find more of a 
“curry-​style” bifurcation of popular representations of tantra in its modern South Asian 
and Western forms: while the latter generally exaggerates the sexual elements of tantra, 
the former typically amplifies its sinister, sorcerous, and black magic aspects. Both sides 
of this global play of representations and misrepresentations are crucial for our under­
standing of the complex nature of modern tantra.
Notes
	1.	 The category of tantra is, of course, notoriously messy and has been defined in many various 
ways by modern scholars. For the sake of this chapter, I find David Gordon White’s defi­
nition useful: “Tantra is that Asian body of beliefs and practices which, working from the 
principle that the universe we experience is nothing other than the concrete manifestation 
of the divine energy of the godhead that creates and maintains that universe, seeks to ritu­
ally appropriate and channel that energy. . . in creative and emancipatory ways” (2000: 9). 
For other useful definitions, see Brooks 1990; Urban 2010; Padoux 2017.
	2.	 I use the term “genealogy” in Michel Foucault’s sense, as a way of thinking about history 
that examines not so much the smooth historical continuities but rather the ruptures, 
discontinuities, and often complete reversals in the development of broad categories such as 
“tantra.” See Foucault 1984: 76–​100; Asad 1993; Urban 2003.
	3.	 LaVey identifies the LHP explicitly with Satan, understood not as an external being but as 
the symbol of the individual ego: “Satanism . . . is a religion of the flesh, the mundane, the 
carnal—​all of which are ruled by Satan, the personification of the Left-​Hand Path” (1969: 
52). Flowers, on the other hand, defines the LHP more broadly in terms of self-​deification 
and the rejection of all social, moral, or religious norms: “There are two major criteria for 
being considered a true lord (or lady) of the left-​hand path: deification of the self and anti­
nomianism” (2012: 11; see also Urban forthcoming).
	4.	 See Stucco 1992: xiv: “The thesis of the book is that the spiritual and social conditions that 
characterize the Kali Yuga greatly decrease the effectiveness of purely intellectual, contem­
plative, and ritual paths. In this age of decadence, the only way open to those seeking the 
great liberation is one of action. Tantrism defined itself as sadhana-​darshana, namely, a 
system based on practice.”
	5.	 The comparison between Reich’s orgone energy and Rajneesh’s notion of kuṇḍalinī was also 
made by others, including students who had been trained in both. See Dillon 2005.
	6.	 As Bharati put it, “Western things are not desirable in the Indian culture universe; but 
neither are the themes and the works of the tradition which is thought reactionary and 
obsolete. Yet, one and all, they gather momentum and respect through a process of re-​
enculturation. I have coined the facetious-​sounding term ‘pizza-​effect’ for this pervasive 
pattern” (1970: 271). Gavin Flood uses the phrase to describe the larger exporting and re-​
importing of Hindu ideas since the nineteenth century: “elements of Hindu culture, such 
as yoga, bhakti, gurus . . . have been exported to the West . . . where they have gained great 
popularity and then gained popularity among urban Hindus in India as a consequence” 
(1996: 267). On the pizza effect in the specific case of tantra, as it circulated from India to the 
United States and back again, see Urban 2003: 204.

--- PAGE 1194 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1169
 
References
Anand, Margot. 1990. The Art of Sexual Ecstasy: The Path of Sacred Sexuality for Western Lovers. 
New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher.
Ananda Shop. 2021. “All Products and Services.” AnandaShop.com.au. https://​theana​ndas​hop.
com.au/​coll​ecti​ons/​all-​produ​cts-​and-​servi​ces.
Asad, Talal. 1993. Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and 
Islam. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Avalon, Arthur, ed. 1960. Principles of Tantra: The Tantratattva of Śrīyukta Śivacandra 
Vidyārṇava Bhaṭṭācārya Mahodaya. Madras, India: Ganesh.
Bernard, 
Pierre 
Arnold. 
1906a. 
“Tantrik 
Worship: 
The 
Basis 
of 
Religion.” 
International Journal, Tantrik Order 5, no. 1: 71–​80.
Bernard, Pierre Arnold. 1906b. “Legacy of an Initiate.” International Journal, Tantrik Order 5, 
no. 1: 84–​91.
Bharati, Agehananda. 1970. “The Hindu Renaissance and Its Apologetic Patterns.” 
Journal of Asian Studies 29, no. 2: 267–​87.
Boswell, Charles. 1965. “The Great Fuss and Fume over the Omnipotent Oom,” 
True: The Man’s Magazine, January 31, 32, 85, 91.
Brooks, Douglas. 1990. The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Śākta Tantrism. 
Chicago: University Chicago Press.
Carrette, Jeremy, and Richard King. 2004. Selling Spirituality: The Silent Takeover of Religion. 
New York: Routledge.
Carter, Lewis F. 1990. Charisma and Control in Rajneeshpuram: A Commuinity without Shared 
Values. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Collingham, Lizzie. 2006. Curry: A Tale of Cooks and Conquerors. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Collins, Lynn. 2000. “The Secret to Tantric Sex.” Cosmopolitan, May, 240.
Crowley, Aleister. 1969. The Confessions of Aleister Crowley: An Autohagiography. New York: 
Hill and Wang.
Crowley, Aleister. 1986. Liber Agape, De Arte Magica. Rochester, UK: Kadath Press.
Crowley, Aleister. 1991. Magick without Tears. Phoenix, AZ: New Falcon.
Deveney, John Patrick. 1997. Paschal Beverly Randolph: A Nineteenth Century American 
Spiritualist, Rosicrucian, and Sex Magician. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Dillon, Aneesha. 2005. Tantric Pulsation: The Journey of Human Energy from Its Animal Roots 
to Its Spiritual Flower. Cambridge: Perfect Publishers.
Douglas, Nik. 1996. “About Tantra in America and the Tantrik Order.” TantraWorks.com. 
http://​www.tant​rawo​rks.com/​tan​trau​sa2.html#NTO.
Douglas, Nik. 1997. Spiritual Sex: Secrets of Tantra from the Ice Age to the New Millennium. New 
York: Pocket Books.
Dvorak, Josef. 1998. “Carl Kellner.” Flensburger Hefte 63. http://​www.parar​elig​ion.ch/​sunr​ise/​
carl.htm.
Evola, Julius. 1992. The Yoga of Power: Tantra, Shakti and the Secret Way, translated by Guido 
Stucco. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions.
Flood, Gavin. 1996. An Introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge 
University Press.
Flowers, Stephen. 2012. Lords of the Left-​Hand Path: Forbidden Practices and Spiritual Heresies. 
Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions.

--- PAGE 1195 ---
1170      Hugh B. Urban
 
Foucault, Michel. 1984. The Foucault Reader. Edited by Paul Rabinow. New York: Pantheon.
Frater, U.:D.:. 2002. Secrets of Western Sex Magic: Magical Energy and Gnostic Trance. Phoenix, 
AZ: Llewellyn.
Granholm, Kennet. 2012. “The Left-​Hand Path and Post-​Satanism: The Temple of Set and the 
Evolution of Satanism.” In The Devil’s Party: Satanism in Modernity, edited by Per Faxneld 
and Jesper A. Petersen, 209–​28. New York: Oxford University Press.
Grant, Kenneth. 1973. The Magical Revival. New York: Samuel Weiser.
Grant, Kenneth. 1975. Cults of the Shadow. London: Muller.
Harvey, David. 2007. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Heelas, Paul. 1996. The New Age Movement: The Celebration of Self and the Sacralization of 
Modernity. London: Blackwell.
Howe, Ellic, and Helmut Möller. 1986. Merlin Peregrinus: Vom Untergrund des Abendlandes. 
Würzburg: Königshausen +​ Neumann.
Inden, Ronald. 1990. Imagining India. Oxford, Uk: Basil Blackwell.
Jaiminī, J. S. n.d. Ādi vaśīkaraṇ tantrasār. Calcutta, India: Rāja Sacdev.
Jain, Andrea. 2014. Selling Yoga: From Counterculture to Pop Culture. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Kripal, Jeffrey J. 2007. Esalen: America and the Religion of No Religion. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Kuriansky, Judy. 2004. The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Tantric Sex. Indianapolis, IN: ALPHA.
Lardner, John. 1939. “Out of a Book.” Newsweek, May 19, 24.
Lau, Kimberly J. 2015. New Age Capitalism: Making Money East of Eden. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
LaVey, Anton Szandor. 1969. The Satanic Bible. New York: Avon.
Love, Robert. 2011. The Great Oom: The Mysterious Origins of America’s First Yogi. New York: 
Penguin.
Monier-​Williams, Monier. 1894. Hinduism. London: Society for Promoting Christian 
Knowledge.
Osho. 1987. Sermons in Stones. New York: Osho International.
Osho. 2000. Autobiography of a Spiritually Incorrect Mystic. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Osho. 2012. The Tantra Experience: Evolution Through Love. New York: Osho Media 
International.
Osho. 2016. Yoga: The Science of the Soul. New York: Osho Media International.
Osho. 2017. Tantra: The Supreme Understanding. New York: Penguin Random House.
Padoux, André. 2017. The Hindu Tantric World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pasi, Marco. 2005. “Ordo Templi Orientis.” In Dictionary of Gnosis and Western Esotericism. 
Volume 2, edited by Wouter J. Hanegraaff, 898–​906. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree. n.d. From Sex to Superconsciousness. Delhi, India: Orient 
Paperbacks.
Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree. 1974. The Book of Secrets III: Discourses on Vigyana Bhairava Tantra. 
New York: Harper and Row.
Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree. 1980. Unio Mystica, volume 1 . Pune, India: Rajneesh Foundation.
Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree, 1981. The White Lotus: Discourses on Fragmentary Notes of 
Bodhidharma’s Disciples. Pune, India: Rajneesh Foundation.
Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree. 1982. Zorba the Buddha: Intimate Dialogues with Disciples. Antelope, 
OR: Rajneesh Foundation International.

--- PAGE 1196 ---
Modernity and Neo-Tantra      1171
 
Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree, 1983. Tantra, Spirituality and Sex. Rajneeshpuram, OR: Rajneesh 
Foundation International.
Reich, Wilhelm. 1973. Selected Writings: An Introduction to Orgonomy. New York: Farrar, 
Straus, Giroux.
Reuss, Theodor. 1906. Lingam-​Yoni. Berlin, Germany: Verlag Willsson.
Reuss, Theodor. 1912. “Mysteria Mystica Maxima.” Jubilaeums-​Ausgabe der Oriflamme 
(September): 21–​23.
Reuss, Theodor. 1993a. “Das Aufbauprogramm und die Leitsätze der Gnostischen Neo-​
Christen O.T.O.” In Der Kleine Theodor Reuss Reader, edited by Peter-​R. König, 77–​83. 
Münich, Germany: Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Religions-​ und Weltanschauungsfragen.
Reuss, Theodor. 1993b. “Parsifal und das Enthüllte Grals-​Geheimnis.” In Der Kleine Theodor 
Reuss Reader, edited by Peter-​R. König, 56–​76. Münich, Germany: Arbeitsgemeinschaft für 
Religions-​ und Weltanschauungsfragen.
Reuss, Theodor. 1997. “Die Gnostischen Templer -​ oder Neo-​Christen.” In Der Grosse Theodor 
Reuss Reader, edited by Peter-​R. König, 226–​27. Münich, Germany: Arbeitsgemeinschaft für 
Religions-​ und Weltanschauungsfragen.
Roy, Rammohun. 1982. “A Defense of Hindoo Theism.” In The English Works of Raja Rammohun 
Roy, edited by I. C. Ghose, 123–​42. New Delhi, India: Cosmo.
Sann, Paul. 1967. Fads, Follies and Delusions of the American People. New York: Bonanza Books.
Śāstrī, Śrī Trailokyanāth. n.d. Tantra mantra maner icchā pūraṇ. Calcutta, India: Rājendra 
Library.
Schreck, Nikolas, and Zeena Schreck. 2002. Demons of the Flesh: The Complete Guide to Left-​
Hand Sex Magic. Powdere Springs, GA: Creation Books.
Stucco, Guido. 1992. “Translator’s Introduction.” In The Yoga of Power: Tantra, Shakti and the 
Secret Way, by Julius Evola. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions.
Tantrik Order in America. 1906. “Charter Document of the Tantrik Order in America.” 
International Journal of the Tantrik Order 5, no. 1: 96–​97.
Urban, Hugh B. 1999. “The Extreme Orient: The Construction of ‘Tantrism’ as a Category in 
the Orientalist Imagination.” Religion 29: 123–​46.
Urban, Hugh B. 2000. “The Cult of Ecstasy: Tantrism, the New Age and the Spiritual Logic of 
Late Capitalism.” History of Religions 39: 268–​304.
Urban, Hugh B. 2003. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics and Power in the Study of Religion. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2005. Magia Sexualis: Sex, Magic and Liberation in Modern Western 
Esotericism. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Urban, Hugh B. 2008. “The Yoga of Sex: Tantra, Orientalism and Sexual Magic in the Ordo 
Templi Orientis.” In Hidden Intercourse: Eros and Sexuality in the History of Western 
Esotericism, edited by Jeffrey J. Kripal and Wouter J. Hanegraaff, 401–​44. Leiden, The 
Netherlands: Brill.
Urban, Hugh B. 2010. The Power of Tantra: Religion, Sexuality and the Politics of South Asian 
Studies. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Urban, Hugh B. 2012. “Tantra, American Style: From the Path of Power to the Yoga of Sex.” In 
Transformations and Transfer of Tantra in Asia and Beyond, edited by Istvàn Keul, 457–​94. 
Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter.
Urban, Hugh B. 2016. Zorba the Buddha: Sexuality, Spirituality, and Capitalism in the Global 
Osho Movement. Berkeley: University of California Press.

--- PAGE 1197 ---
1172      Hugh B. Urban
 
Urban, Hugh B. 2020. “Horrifying and Sinister Tāntriks.” In Bollywood Horrors: Religion, 
Violence, and Cinematic Fears in India, edited by Ellen Goldberg, Aditi Sen, and Brian 
Collins, 78–​93. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Urban, Hugh B. Forthcoming. “The Left-​Hand Path.” In Occult South Asia, edited by Karl Baier 
and Mriganka Mukhopadhyay. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Vivekananda, Swami. 1984. The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, volume 7 . Calcutta, 
India: Advaita Ashram.
Way, Maclain, and Chapman Way, dir. 2018. Wild, Wild Country. Duplass Brothers 
Productions.
White, David Gordon. 2002. Kiss of the Yoginī: “Tantric Sex” in Its South Asian Contexts. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon, ed. 2000. Tantra in Practice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Woodroffe, John. 1978. Shakti and Shakta. New York: Dover.
Woodroffe, John, trans. 1974. The World as Power. Madras, India: Ganesh.

--- PAGE 1198 ---
Glossary
This glossary includes technical terms used in the chapters of this collection, that is, it is 
not intended as a comprehensive glossary of tantric terms. (The Tāntrikābhidhānakośa 
(Hélène Brunner et al., eds.; 3 vols. to date, Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences 
Press, 2000, 2004, 2013) is a comprehensive resource for Sanskrit tantric terminology 
with explanations in German, French, and English.) Except for a very few emendations 
by the editors, the English explanations (glosses) of the technical terms included here 
are those of the contributors. Proper nouns and accepted loanwords in English are not 
italicized and are not marked with diacritics. Some of the terms reach across several 
of the chapters, including crossing linguistic boundaries, as indicated by instances in 
which terms from different source languages are grouped together. These are just one in­
dication of the extent to which concepts, categories, and concerns are shared throughout 
tantric culture when understood broadly as this collection does.
Unless otherwise indicated, terms are Sanskrit, and only when needed for clarity are 
marked S. Sanskrit root forms are marked √.
Tibetan terms appear frequently with alternative transcriptions.
P. Pāli 
T. Tibetan, 
Ch. Chinese, 
J. Japanese, 
M. Mongolian

--- PAGE 1199 ---
1174      Glossary
 
abhakṣyabhakṣaṇa  eating what cannot be eaten
ābhāsa  manifestation
ābhāsvara-​citta (T. ‘od gsal)  clear light
abhayamudrā  gesture that dispels fear
abheda  the one nondual reality
abhicāra  subjugation, liquidation; ritual function
abhinaya  whole body postures
abhiṣeka (T. dbang bskur)  initiation, consecration
abhiṣekavidhi  ritual texts for the performance of consecration ceremonies
abhivyakti  emergence or manifestation
ācārya  Buddhism: tantric master, preceptor; Jain: mendicant leaders
adhiṣṭhāna (J. kaji, 加持)  empowerment
adhyātma  spiritual practice
adṛśya  invisibility	
advaitācāra  nondualism in ritual practice
advaitāṃ  nondual
āgama-​ghāra  tantric-​house
āgama-​koṭa  tantric shrine room
aghoramantra  mantra of Bhairava, who is an avatar of Śiva
Agni (Ch. Huo shen 火神, J. Ka Ten)  Vedic deity of fire
agnikārya  fire oblations
ahaṁkāra  ego function of mind
ahampratyavamarśa  idealistically constitutive self-​recognition
ahiṃsā  nonviolence
āhvāna: Jain: inviting the goddess into the diagram (yantra)
ajñāna  nescience
akala  without parts
ākarṣaṇa  to attract, of ritual practices
akṣaya  imperishability
akhyāti  nonmanifestation
akṣara  syllable
akṣaya-​sarovara  imperishable region
ālayavijñāna  storehouse consciousness
amṛta  nectar, immortality
anahata cakra  heart cakra
anākhyā  inexpressible
ānanda  cosmic bliss
andhāra  walled ambulatory
anekānta  Jain: nonabsolutism
anekāntātmatattvajñā  Jain epistemological stance that every object can be seen from multiple 
perspectives
aṅgamantra  body part mantras
aṅkayantra  numerical diagram
antaḥ  internal
antaḥkaraṇa  internal sense organ
antarābhava (Ch. zhongyin 中陰, J. chūin)  intermediate being
antar-​yāga  internal worship, domestic practice, meditative and visual practices

--- PAGE 1200 ---
Glossary      1175
 
anugraha  grace
anukalpa  symbolic substitutions of offerings
anukarman  maintenance of a temple
anupāya  “no means”
anusaṃdhāna  recognitive synthesis
anuttara  unsurpassable
anuttarayoga  supreme union, one of the categories of Buddhist tantras
anyāpoha  exclusion of the other
anyonyaparihāra  mutual exclusion
āpatti  downfalls
apratiṣṭhitanirvāṇa  nonsettled nirvana
apūrṇatākhyāti  incomplete manifestation
arcana  temple offerings
arhat  one worthy of veneration, Jain: enlightened souls
āropa-​sādhana  attribution practice
arthakriyā  causal efficacy
aśakta  incapable
āsana  posture
asidhārāvrata (also āsidhāraṃ, vratam, khaḍgadhārāvrata)  the “sword’s edge” observance
āśrayaparāvṛtti  transformation of the basis, or fundamental transformation
aṣṭamātṛkās  eight mothers
aṣṭāṅgayoga  eight auxiliaries, eight-​part yoga
aṣṭapāśa  eight impediments of the bound condition
astrarā ja  chief of weapons
aśubhabhāvanā  meditation on impurity
aśvamedha  horse sacrifice
ātmajñāna  self-​realization
ātmaśuddhi  purifications of one’s self
atyantaniṣprapañcacaryā  exceedingly without elaboration (highest kind of practice)
avadhūtī  one of the three main channels of yogic physiology
āvāhana  invoking a deity
avaidhika  non-​Vedic
avinābhāva  inseparability
bahir-​yāga  external worship, temple practice, externally oriented liturgical exercises; see also 
bāhyayaga
bāhya  external
bāhyādhyātmikā mudrā  exterior/​interior consort
bāhyāṅganām  the outer belle
bāhyayaga  external sacrifice; see also bahir-​yāga
bālatantra  childhood illness, midwifery
bali (T. gtor ma)  ritual offerings, animal sacrifice, food offerings
bali-​pūjā  ritual in which offerings are made
bandhas  internal muscular locks, yogic practice, see also bandhu
bandhu  bonds; see also bandha
bāṅkānadī  crooked river
beraśuddhi  purification of the deity image; see also bimbaśodhana

--- PAGE 1201 ---
1176      Glossary
 
bhagabandhana  sealing the vagina
bhagavān  lord, god
bhagavatī  goddess
bhakti  devotion
bhāvanā  visualization, cultivation
bhāvārtha  explicit reference, of mantras
bhāvayet  visualization
bheda  manifold expression, difference
bhedābheda  difference-​in-​unity
bhedhābheda-​vāda  logic of unity-​within-​multiplicity, of difference-​in-​unity
bhittis  outer walls of a temple
bhoga  sacrificial feeding
bhukti  enjoyment	
bhūmi  grounds, planes of reality
bhumisparṣamudrā  earth touching mudrā
bhūtajaya  mastery of the elements
bhūtaśuddhi  purification of the body, purification of the elements, visualizations of diagrams 
and seed syllables
bhuvanas  spheres, planes of existence
bījamantra  syllable mantra, lit. ‘seed’ mantra
bījamantra-​japa  repetition of power-​syllables
bimbaśodhana  purification of the deity image; see also beraśuddhi
bindu  dot, point of origins
bodhi  awakening
bodhicitta (J. bodaishin, 菩提心, T. byang sems)  intention to awaken, enlightened mind
bodhicittahetukam  caused by the will to awaken
bonnō (J. 煩悩)  see kleśa
bonnō soku bodai (J. 煩悩即菩提 )  transgressions (worldly desires, kleśa) are (identical to) en­
lightenment (bodhi)
bōsotsu (J. 亡卒)  dead soldiers; see also onryō
brahmarandhra  fontanelle
brgyud pa (T.)  transmission lineages
bslab gsum (T.)  three trainings
buddhadharma (J. buppō, 仏法)  teachings of the Buddha
buddhavacana  speech of the Buddha
buddhi  intellect
buppō no dōri (J. 仏法の道理)  principle of the buddhadharma
caityagṛ ha  monuments
cakra  wheels, circular regions or ‘wheels’ of the subtle body; discus: throwing weapon of a god
cakravartin  cosmic ruler, ideal universal ruler, universal ruler
caṇḍalī (T. tummo, gtum mo)  internal heat, ‘fury fire’
candrakapāla  a motif of a skull eating a half-​moon
caryā  performance, one of the categories of Buddhist tantras
caturānanda  fourfold joy
caturmudrā  four seals

--- PAGE 1202 ---
Glossary      1177
 
chandas  meter, pulse of a building
chöd (T. gcod)  severance
chöjung (T. cho ‘byung)  sacred history
cidākāśa  “sky of consciousness”
dag snang (T.)  pure visions
dāgha  fever, thirst, burning
daihi taizō (J. 大悲胎蔵)  great womb of compassion
dai shijōkōhō (J. 大熾盛光法)  Rite of Great Radiant Light, see also shijōkōhō
ḍākinī (T. khandroma, mkha’ ‘dro ma)  ‘she who flies in the sky’, i.e., in emptiness/​śūnyatā; poly­
valent goddess figure; also, incarnate ḍākinīs (T. zugpe khandroma, gzugs pa’i mkha’ ‘gro ma)
ḍākinījāla  esoteric name for the subtle body, ‘the invisible network of the ḍākinīs’; see 
manomaya-​kāya
dakṣiṇācāra  right-​handed practice, orthodox ritual practice
dakṣiṇa-​mārga  right-​handed path
dam sri mdzad (T.)  transgressor spirit
ḍamaru  hand-​drum
dāna  giving
dānapāramitānaya  way of the perfection of charity
darśana  view
daśāvatāras  ten incarnations of Viṣṇu
dehatattva  principles of the body
deśādhvan  course of space
deva-​deha  divine inner yogic body
devarāja  cakravartin coronation ritual
devatāyoga (T. lha’i rnal ‘byor)  deity yoga
devātmaśakti  divine self’s potency
dhāraṇā  visualization, fixation, retention
dhāraṇī (J. darani; 陀羅尼)  verbal formulae used ritually
dharma (T. chos)  teachings, also: Buddhism—​ultimate constituents of existence
dharmāḥ  qualities
dharmakāya (J. hosshin, 法身)  qualities that make a Buddha, the body of the Buddha’s 
teachings, truth body
dharmameghā  tenth bodhisattva ground, lit. clouds of dharma
dharmanairātmya  non-​selfhood of dharmas
dharmapāla (T. chos skyong, M. choijin)  guardians of the dharma
dhruvapada  refrain
dhūpa  incense
dhyāna  concentration, meditation, visualization
dhyāna mudrā  meditation mudrā
dīkṣā  initiation
divyabhāva  divine state
divya-​deha  divine body
dizhi (Ch. 地支)  earthly branches
dohās  couplets
dōri (J. 道理)  principles of the Buddhist teachings

--- PAGE 1203 ---
1178      Glossary
 
Doyō (J. 土曜)  Saturn
dravyaśuddhi  purification of the materials used in worship
duṣkaraparityāgāni  difficult relinquishments
dūtikās  messengers
dvaitādvaita  duality-​within-​nonduality
dvarapāla  gatekeeper, demonic guardians
dveṣa  aversion
dvija  twice-​born
Dzogchen (T. rdzogs chen, S. Mahāsandhi)  Great Perfection
dzogrim (T. rdzogs rim)  completion or perfection stage of practice
gān  strophic lyrics
gaṇacakra  ritual of the ‘group circle’
gaṇadhara  Jain: disciples of the tīrthaṅkaras
gandhaśakti  energy of smell
gāne siddha  self-​realization through singing songs
gāner dharma  ‘religion of songs’
ganmon (J. 願文)  liturgical genre of writing expressing one’s intentions
garbha (J. zō 藏)  repositories, matrices
garbhagṛha  innermost chamber of a temple
gāruḍatantra  texts on controlling snakes
gdod ma’i gzhi (T.)  primordial basis
genja/​geza (J. 験者)  monastic exorcists
geyō (J. 外用)  outer action, or actions that manifest inner enlightenment
ghaṭ  a pot made of clay or metal
ghāṭ  landing stairs on rivers or ponds
gītaṃ dhvanir nṛttam  making noise and dancing
gogyō (J. 五行)  see wuxing
gohō (J. 御法, 護法)  dharma protector
gohō zenjin (J. 護法善神)  dharma protector good spirit
goji gonshinkan (J. 五字嚴身觀)  visualization of the five syllables on the practitioner’s body
gojisō (J. 護持僧)  protector monk
golakābhyāsa  ‘globule practice’
goma (J. 護摩)  see homa
gopīs  milk maidens
gopura  grand gateways
gozō mandara (J. 五臓曼荼羅)  mandala of the five viscera
gṛhakleśanivāraṇa  averting evil from the house
gṛhastha  householder
grol gzhi (T.)  basis of liberation
gsang ba bla na med pa (T.)  utmost secret, class of teachings
gsang (T.)  secret, class of teachings
gser skyems (T.)  ‘golden drink’, an alcoholic drink in the offerings to a fierce deity
gter ston (T.)  treasure-​revealers
guhyābhiṣeka  secret consecration, secret initiation
guṇa  properties, qualities
guṇasthānas  Jain: quality stages

--- PAGE 1204 ---
Glossary      1179
 
guruparaṃparā  preceptorial lineage
gyokujo (J. 玉女, or pron. gyokunyo)  jewel woman
gzhan stong  other-​emptiness
gzhi (T.)  basis, ground
haṭhamelaka  violent consorting
haṭhayoga  forceful yoga
heruka (T. trak-​thung  khrag ‘thung): ‘blood drinkers’, male counterparts to ḍākinī
hlādini-​śakti  bliss emanation
hokuto (J. 北斗)  the Big Dipper, lit. ‘Northern Dipper’
homa (J. goma, 護摩)  votive fire offering ritual
homa kuṇḍa  hearth for the performance of homa
honji-​suijaku (J. 本地垂迹)  the original ground and its traces
hoshi mandara (J. 星曼荼羅)  star mandalas
hṛdaya  heart
hṛdaya cakra  heart cakra
indrābhiśeka  second coronation, consecration that confers cakravartin status following a for­
eign acquisition
iṣṭadevatā (T. yidams)  meditational deities
iṣṭaliṅga  personal portable liṅga
itihāsa  great epics
jagadānanda  universal bliss
jakyō (J. 邪教)  heterodox, lit. ‘deviant teachings’
japa  mantric recitation, recitation of god’s name, prayer
jaṭās  dreadlocks
jayatrayantra  victory banner diagram
jetsünmas (T. rje btsun ma)  honorific title signifying powerful practice, great realization, and 
exemplary teaching
jibo (J. 慈母)  compassionate mothers
jina (Jain; see also tīrthaṃkara)  spiritual warriors of the past
jīrṇoddhāra  removal (uddhāra) of what is old (jīrṇa): maintenance, repair, and replacement of 
temples and images
jīva  living soul
jīvanmukti  liberation while living
jñāna  knowledge, wisdom
jñānamudrā  visualized consort
jñānaśakti  energy of gnosis, infinite powers of knowledge
jñānasattva  gnosis being
jośīs  astrologers
jyotir-​aṃśa  particle of light
kadevātmakan  divine nature
kaigen (J. 開眼)  ‘eye-​opening’ ritual
kala, kalā  aspects, phonematic particles, parts
kāla  time
kālādhvan  course of time

--- PAGE 1205 ---
1180      Glossary
 
kālajñāna  knowing the time of death
kalaśas  ritual vessels, water pot
kālavañca (also mṛtyuvañcana, or ‘conquering death’ mṛtyuñjaya)  cheating death
kali yuga  Hindu cosmological term, period of moral decadence and spiritual emptiness
kalpa  ritual manual
kalpanā  imagination
kāma  pleasure, enjoyment, sexual desire
kāpālikas  skull-​bearing Śaiva tantric practitioners who engaged in charnel ground rituals
kaphamedayutaṃ śukram, purīṣamūtrasaṃyutam  using sperm combined with phlegm, fat, 
excrement, and urine
kārakas  syntactico-​semantic factors
kāraṇa  universal cause
kāraṇaśarīra  causal body
karmamudrā (T. lekyi chag-​gya, las kyi phyag rgya)  physical consort, practice of sexual yoga
karman  retributive force of past actions
karmasāmya  balance of karmas
kartā  officiant
kartṛtva  universal first-​person agency
karuṇāmūlam  rooted in compassion
kautūhala  conjuring
kāvya  courtly poetry
kāyamaṇḍala (T. sku’i dkyil ‘khor)  body mandala
kāyavākcitta  body, speech, mind
kevalin  Jain: the omniscient one
khaṭvāṅga  staff, often with a skull at top
khenmos (T. mkhan mo)  nuns who hold the highest monastic degree
’khrul gzhi (T.)  basis of illusion
kimon (J. 鬼門)  ‘demon gate’, northeast direction
kīrtana  devotional songs
kleśa (J. bonnō 煩悩)  destructive afflictions
klong sde (T.)  “space class” of Dzogchen teachings
kongō (J. 金剛)  see vajra
kongōsatta (J. 金剛薩埵)  see vajrasattva
kontai (J. 金胎)  womb and diamond realms together
kośa  bodily ‘sheaths’
koyomi (J. 曆)  Chinese system of calendrical science
krama  systematic order
kriyā  √kṛ, action, one of the categories of Buddhist tantras
kriyāśakti  infinite powers of action
kṛṣṇa-​pakṣa  waning of the moon
kṣaṇa  moment
kṣaṇabhaṅgavāda  doctrine of instantaneous destruction
kṣaṇikatva  universal momentariness
kula  embodied cosmos
kula-​devatā  worship of tutelary deity, family or clan deities
kula-​pitṛ-​pūjā  worship of ancestors
kumārī  a clan virgin

--- PAGE 1206 ---
Glossary      1181
 
kumārī pūjā  pūjā offered to prepubescent girls (kumārī)
kuṇḍalinī  cosmic energy, primal sexual energy, ‘coiled-​one’ (serpent)
kūṭa  mantras with multiple syllables
kyerim (T. bskyed rim)  generation, also creation or development stage of practice
lalanā  one of the three main channels of yogic physiology
lalitāsana  posture of royal ease
laukikya  worldly
lha’i nga rgyal (T.)  divine pride
liṅga, liṅgam  phallus, symbol of Śīva
liṅgadhārins  bearer of a portable aniconic liṅga
liṅgaśuddhi  purification of the image worshiped
lung (T. rlung =​ S. prāṇa)  inner breath
madhyamā  middle (one of Bhartṛhari’s tripartite levels of speech)
madya  alcohol (one of the five transgressive substances)
mahābhāva  intense spiritual state
mahābhūtas  elements
Mahādeva  the great god
Mahāmudrā (T. chagchen, phyag chen)  ‘great seal’ category of teachings
mahāpātakas  greatest sins
Mahāsandhi  see Dzogchen
mahāsiddha  greatly accomplished saints
mahāsukha (T. dewa chenpo, bde ba chen po)  great bliss
mahātantra  extensive text
mahāvākyas  great sayings
mahāvidyā  wisdom goddesses; dasa mahāvidyā  ten wisdom goddesses
Mahāyāna  ‘great vehicle’, Buddhist tradition
Mahāyoga  supreme yoga
mahendra  earth element
maithuna  sexual intercourse (one of the five transgressive substances)
mala  innate impurity, string of beads
mālāmantra  mantra in garland form
māṃsa  meat (one of the five transgressive substances)
mānasayāga  mental sacrifice
mānasikaroga  mental illness
mandala (J. mandara, 曼荼羅)  diagram of chief deity and his retinue, circular diagrams
maṇḍalavidhi  ritual texts for the construction of mandalas
maṇḍapa  temple
maṇipura cakra  cakra at the solar plexus
mañjarī  maidens
mañjarī-​sādhana  maiden practice
man ngag sde (T.)  ‘pith instruction’, class of Dzogchen teachings
manomaya-​kāya  subtle body
mantra, (J. shingon, 真言)  verbal formulae used ritually
mantra japā  silent or sonorous repetition of mantric syllables
mantracaryānaya  way of mantra praxis

--- PAGE 1207 ---
1182      Glossary
 
mantramārga  path of mantra
mantraśāstra  mantra science
mantramūrti  mantra form
mantranaya  way of mantras, i.e., tantric Mahāyāna
mantraśuddhi  purification of mantras
mantravāda  mantra science
mappō (J. 末法)  ‘last dharma age’
mapuṣpapāta  consecration name
māra  demons
māraṇa  killing
marman  vulnerable points in the site of temple construction
mātās  local goddesses
māṭhas  monastic and teaching institutions
mātṛ  mothers, Brahminical
mātrā  prosodic instance
mātṛkā  phonemes of the syllabary, source, mother, syllabary, alphabet goddess, matrix
matsya  fish (one of the five transgressive substances)
māyā  apparent reality
metta-​bhāvanā  loving-​kindness meditation
mdzod (T.)  treasuries
mikkyō (J.  密教)  esoteric/​tantric Buddhism
mitsuzō (J. 密藏)  esoteric treasury (bibliographic category)
mohana  delusion or bewilderment
mokṣa  liberation, spiritual freedom
mokṣamārgāḥ  paths to liberation
mononoke chōbuku no kaji kitō (J. 物の気調伏の加持祈祷)  spirit exorcism practices
mṛtasaṃjīvana  raising the dead
mudrā (J. in)  lit. ‘seal’, ritual hand gesture, also pounded grain (one of the five transgressive 
substances)
muktapada  the highest goal
mukti  liberation
mūladhāra cakra  root cakra
mūla-​dīkṣā  root initiation
mūlatantra  root tantra
mūrti  image of the deity
myōe ittai (J. 冥会一体)  the myōe (profound state) in one body, see shinkyō myōe
Myōken Bosatsu (J. 妙見菩薩)  Sudṛṣṭi Bodhisattva, personifies Polaris, the North Star
nāda  divine resonance
nāda brahman  cosmic and cosmogonic sound-​vibration
nāḍī  channels
nāga, nāgas  dragon, snake divinities
nagarā-​pūjā  worship of musical instruments
naishō (J. 内証)  the inner realization of enlightenment
naivedya  offering of purified foods
nakṣatras (Ch. ershi ba xiu 二十八宿)  twenty-​eight ‘lunar stations’
namthar (T. rnam thar)  hagiographies

--- PAGE 1208 ---
Glossary      1183
 
nang (T.)  inner, class of teachings
navasmaraṇa  Jain: Śvetāmbara ‘nine remembrances’
navātmamantra  nine syllable mantra that ends in the cluster mlvyū plus an anusvara
naya  way, or guiding principle
nayatraya  three ways to salvation
nāyikā  heroines
neyārtha  provisional, nondefinitive, or indicative, of scriptures
ngöndro (T. sngon ’gro)  preliminary practices
nigamana  conclusion
niḥsvabhāva  non-​entitiness
ningyō-​sho (J. 人形杵)  human-​shaped vajra
nirākāra  formless
nirañjanām  immaculate
nirbījā dīkṣā  seedless initiation
nirguṇa  attributeless
nirmāṇa  generated
nirmāṇakāya (J. keshin, 化身)  transformation body
nirodha  suspension
nirvāṇ  ritual removal of male sex organs
nirvāṇa dīkṣā  Śaiva initiation ritual, rite of liberating initiation
nirvikalpa  nonconceptuality
niṣkalajñāna  esoteric knowledge
niṣpannakrama  process of perfection, perfection stage, completion
niṣprapañcacaryā  practice without elaboration
nītārtha  definitive scriptures
niteki wagō (J. 二滴和合)  merging of two drops, red and white (semen and vaginal blood)
nitya  eternal
nityapūjā  daily standard worship
niyama  necessity
nyāsa (or more specifically aṅganyāsa or dehanyāsa)  placement, visualization of mantra 
deities in the body
nye brgyud gter ma (T.)  short transmission of treasure literature
nyoraizō (J. 如来蔵)  see tathāgatagarbha
nyūga ganyū (J. 入我我入)  ritual identification of practitioner and deity; interpenetration
ōbō (J. 王法)  imperial authority, cf. buppō
’od sku (T.)  visible bodies of light
onryō (J. 怨霊)  vengeful spirits
onryō no dōri (J. 怨霊の道理)  principle of vengeful spirits
padas  sung verses
paddhatis  ritual manuals
padma (J. renge 蓮華)  lotus, one of three ‘families’ in tantric Buddhism; also female 
sexual organs
pādukāsādhana  acquisition of magic shoes
pāṃśukūlikas  rag-​wearing monks
pañcabāṇa  five arrows (mantras)

--- PAGE 1209 ---
1184      Glossary
 
pañcabuddha  five buddhas
pañcadhāraṇā  five fixations
pañca-​krama-​yāga  fivefold sequential sacrifice
pañcakula (T. rigs lnga)  five buddha families
pañcamakāra  five transgressive substances
pañcāmnāyāḥ  five revelations (āmnāyās)
pañcamukhebhyaśca  five faces
pañcanamaskāra  Jain: fivefold praise
pañcaparameṣṭhin  five supreme beings of Jainism
pañcarākṣa  five protective texts
pañcaśuddhi  five purifications
pañcavaktra mukhaliṅga  five-​faced liṅga
pañ cavidyāsthāna (T. rigs gnas che ba lnga)  five major fields of knowledge
pañca-​tattvas  five elements
pārada  internal use of mercury
parakāyapraveśa  entering a foreign body
parakīyā  practice with another’s spouse
paramānandāṃ  supreme bliss
paramārthasat  real in the ultimate sense
paramātmā  Paramātman, supreme self
pāramitānaya  way of the perfections
pāramitā-​yāna  vehicle of the perfections
paranāda  highest resonance
parārthānumāna  inference for another, publicly intelligible inference
Parāśakti  supreme goddess
parasparaparihāra  incompatibility
paratantra  heteronomous
paratantrasvabhāva  dependent nature
parāvāc, parāvāk  divine speech, supreme speech
paravigraha  supreme body
parayoga  supreme yoga
parikalpitasvabhāva  imagined or conceptualized nature
pariṇāmavāda  transformation, ontological pluralism
pariniṣpannasvabhāva  perfected nature
paritta (P.)  protective texts
paśyantī  visionary (one of Bhartṛhari’s tripartite levels of speech)
pātañjala yoga  the yoga of Patañjali
pātraśuddhi  purification of the ritual vessels
pauṣṭika  augmentation/​increase ritual; ritual category
phala-​yāna  result vehicle
phur pa (T.)  ritual dagger
phyi (T.)  outer, class of teachings
phyi dar (T.)  later transmission
pīṭhas  sacred sites
prajñā (T. shes rab)  wisdom
prajñāpāramitānaya  way of the perfection of wisdom
prajña-​upāya, prajñopāya  insight and means

--- PAGE 1210 ---
Glossary      1185
 
prākāra  outermost wall of a temple
prakāśa  illumination
prakṛti  primordial matter, female essence, an enduring, unifying nature
pramā  valid knowledge
pramāṇa  means of cognition
pramātṛ  cognizer
prameya  object of cognition
prāṇa  vital wind
prāṇāyāma  breath practice
prapañcacaryā  practice with specificity or elaboration
prasādam  food and drink offerings made first to the deity and then consumed as a blessing
prasajyapratiṣedha  a void, a total absence
pratibimba  mirroring
pratikramaṇa  Jain: repentance, expiation
pratisthā  installing a deity, also treatises specifically concerned with the construction, installa­
tion, and consecration of the tantric temple and the image within it
pratiṣṭhācārya  lay ritual specialists
pratīti  awareness
pratītyasamutpada  dependent origination
pratyabhijñāna  recognition of reality, idealistically constitutive self-​recognition
pratyāhāra  withdrawal and internalization of the sense capacities
pratyakṣa  actual offerings/​sacrifices
pravarta  beginner
praviśya  having entered
prāyaścitta  remediation
prema, prem  pure love
pūjā  ritual worship, Jain: having the goddess accept scented substances and other offerings
puṇya  merit
pūrṇāhaṃtā  divine perfect egoity
pūrṇatā  fullness
purohita  chief officiant for Vedic ritual
puruṣa  male essence, cosmic man
puṣpa  flowers
putrakāmeṣṭi yajña  ritual sacrifice with a specific objective
putrakas  principal disciples, “adopted son”
rāga  melodic framework
rāga  passion
rāgānugā-​bhakti sādhana  practices of passionate devotion
rahasyam  secret teaching
rajādhirāja  supreme overlord
rājaguru  religious advisor
rājasūya  rite of royal consecration, or birth
rākṣa  protective texts
rasanā  one of the three main channels of yogic physiology
rasaśālā  laboratory
rasa  aesthetic experience, emotions, male semen

--- PAGE 1211 ---
1186      Glossary
 
rasaśāstra  alchemical tradition, aesthetics
rasāyana  alchemy
rasendra  mercury
rasika  connoisseur of emotions
rati  delight, desire, female vaginal secretions
rativajra  sex-​thunderbolt
ṛddhi  prosperity, paranormal abilities
rdzogs pa (T.)  perfection or completion
renge (J. 蓮華)  see padma
retas  semen
richi (J. 理智)  principle and wisdom
rig pa rang sar (T.)  self-​arising nature of awareness
Rinzai Zen (J. 臨済禅)  Japanese form of Chinese Linji Chan meditation school
rtogs-​pa brjod-​pa’i mgur (T.)  songs of realization
rūpa  external form, shape
rūpa-​kāya  form body
ruvat  exorcism
ryōbu mandara (J. 両部曼荼羅 or ryōkai mandara 両界曼荼羅)  the two mandalas of esoteric 
Buddhism
śabda  word
śabda-​brahma  word-​absolute
śabdarāśi  collection of letters, male counterpart to mātṛkā
sabījā dīkṣā  “seeded” initiation (see bījamantra: seed syllable mantra)
ṣaḍāmnāya  six transmissions from the six faces of Lord Paśupati, six streams of revelation
ṣaḍaṅgayoga  sixfold system
sadguru  true teacher
√sādh/​sidh  to achieve, accomplish; verbal root from which siddhi, sādhana, sādhya, and 
sādhaka all derive
sādhaka  practitioner, accomplished
sādhan–​siddha  perfecting the mind–​body complex
sādhana (T. drup-​thap: sgrub thabs)  ritual practice, Vajrayāna meditations
sādhu  ordinary mendicants
sādṛśya  similarity
sahaja  innate
sahaja-​mānuṣa  the innate person
sahānavasthiti  mutual nonconcomitancy, co-​presence of mutually distinct entities
sahasrāradala padma  thousand-​petaled lotus
Śaiva  traditions of Hinduism devoted to Śiva
śākta (T. shad ta pa)  follower or related to the goddess śakti.
śākta-​pītḥa  power-​seat, ritual space
śakti  divine feminine being/​energy.
śakticakra  wheel of śaktis
śaktimān  possessor of śakti
śaktipāta  emission of powers
śakti-​pūjā-​yāga  sacrificial worship of the goddesses
śakti-​upāsanā  worship of the tantric goddesses

--- PAGE 1212 ---
Glossary      1187
 
Śākyamuni  sage of the Śākya clan, honorific title of historical Buddha
samādhi (T. ting nge ‘dzin)  concentration, meditative concentration
samāgama  sexual union with the goddess, conjunction
sāmānya  real universal
sāmānyalakṣaṇa  conventional entities
sāmarasya  harmony
śamasana  charnel ground
samatā  equanimity
samatha (P.; S. śamatha)  calming, a style of meditation, cf. vipassanā
samāviśya  having co-​penetrated
samaya (T. damtsik, dam tshig)  tantric commitments
samayin  preliminarily initiated neophyte
sambandha  relation
śāmbhavopāya  liberation through divine means
saṃbhogakāya (J. hōshin, 報身)  reward body
saṃbhūti  origination
saṃdeha  with the body
saṃhāra  withdrawal
saṃhāra-​krama  order of dissolution
saṃkalpa  intention of the ritual
saṃkalpa-​mantra  intention-​mantra
saṃketa  convention
sampannakrama (T. dzog-​rim, rdzogs rim)  completion stage practice
saṃsāra  change and suffering
saṃsāranirvāṇavibhāvana  codependence of saṃsāra and nirvana
saṃskāra  residual traces
saṃskāras  rites of passage
saṃvṛtisat  conventionally real
saṃyagdṛṣṭi  correct understanding
saṃyama  concentration
saṃyoga  connection
ṣaṇḍhakaraṇa  causing impotence
sandhāna  repair of a temple
sandhyābhāṣā  intentional or twilight language
sang-​yum (T. bsang yum)  secret consort
sannidhīkaraṇa  Jain: having the goddess remain in the diagram (yantra)
śānti  pacification
śāntika  pacification/​protection ritual; ritual category
saptaratna  seven treasures
saptaratnābhiṣeka  seven treasure initiation
sarma (T. gsar ma)  New tantra
sarovara  stepped ponds
sarva  total
sarvabuddhasamāyoga  equivalence with all Buddhas
sarvajñajñānam  gnosis of all-​knowledge
sarvākāśacarā siddhi  yogic attainment that traverses the whole of space
sarvāmnāya  total revelation

--- PAGE 1213 ---
1188      Glossary
 
sarvatathāgata  assembly of all tathāgatas
śāsanadevatā  deities who protect the teachings, usually referring to yakṣiṇī/​yakṣī
śāsanadevī  local personal goddess
śastra  philosophical treatises
ṣaṭkarman  six acts
satkārya  the effect is already in the cause
ṣaṭkoṭivyākhyā  six-​point hermeneutics
savdag (M., T. sa bdag)  land spirits
sems nyid (T.)  intrinsic nature of our mind
sems sde (T.)  Mind Class of Dzogchen teachings
shakyōka (J. 釈教歌)  genre of waka expressing Buddhist teachings
shidai sho (J. 次第書)  ritual manual
shijōkōhō (J. 熾盛光法)  rite of radiant light; see also dai shijōkōhō
Shingi Shingon (J. 新義真言)  ‘New Shingon’ movement
shinkyō myōe (J. 心境冥会) profound state of unified mind
shōchi hōmi (J. 聖智法味 )  the ‘taste’ of the dharma
Shugendō (J. 修験道)  mountain-​based asceticism
shuo (Ch. 朔)  new moon
siddha  perfected one, Jain: liberated souls
siddha-​deha  perfected body
siddhānta  tenet systems, doctrine, ‘settled opinion’
siddhi (T. ngödrup, dngos grub)  success, realization power, mundane magical powers
śīla (T. tshul khrims)  morality, conduct
śīlasamādhiprajñā  ethical discipline, meditation, and insight
śilpaśāstra  non-​tantric construction manuals
śiṣya  disciple
śivabhakta  devotee of Śiva
smaraṇa  recollection, remembering
smaret  remembering
śmaśāna (T. turtrö, dur khrod)  charnel grounds
sngags nang pa (T.)  inner tantras
sngon ’gro (T.)  preliminary practices
śobha  beautiful
sokushin jōbutsu (J. 即身成仏)  enlightenment with/​in this very body
soma  highest Vedic ritual offering, ‘drink of the gods’, also Soma is deity
spanda  cosmic vibration, a synonym for Śakti
śrāddha  ancestral offering ritual
śrīmatmahāsukhavajrasattvatvam  the holy Vajrasattva-​hood of great bliss
śrīyantra  sacred diagram of interlaced triangles
sroter ujāna  against the current
sṛṣṭikrama  order of emission, order of creation
śrūti  divine revelation
stambhana  immobilization, paralysis—​a ritual function
sthānaśuddhi  purification of the sacrificial place
sthāpana  Jain: establishing the goddess in the diagram (yantra)
sthūlaśarīra  physical body, material body
śubha  suited to its task, Jain: psychic and bodily purity

--- PAGE 1214 ---
Glossary      1189
 
śuddha  pure; Jain: psychic and bodily purity
śuddhāṃ  pure, absolute
Sudṛṣṭi Bodhisattva  see Myōken Bosatsu 妙見菩薩
śukra  semen
śukrastambha  suppression of ejaculation
sūkṣma dhyāna  subtle body meditation
sūkṣma-​śarīra  subtle body
sūkṣmayoga  subtle yoga
śūnyatā (T. tongpa-​nyi)  voidness, also emptiness
sur  musical style
surāpānamadānvita  intoxicated by liquor
sūtra  threads, verses
svabhāva  unique essence or identity, intrinsic nature
svādhisthāna cakra  cakra at the genitals
svalakṣaṇa  particular, real entities; the object of cognition, self-​characterized particulars
svārthānumāna  inference for oneself
svarūpa  inner cosmic form
svātantrya  freedom, universal first-​person agency
svaẏaṃ–​siddha  born enlightened
Taimitsu (J. 台密)  Tendai esoteric teachings
tainai goi (J. 胎内五位)  five stages of the embryo in the womb
tāl  rhythmic pattern
talacchandas  rhythm of the plan of a temple
tanmātra  subtle element
tantra  scripture, bibliographic category
tantrāvatāra  descent of scripture
tantrika  tantric
tarka  rational inquiry and debate
tathāgata  ‘thus gone,’ epithet of the Buddha, one of three ‘families’ in tantric Buddhism
tathāgatagarbha (J. nyoraizō 如来蔵)  buddha nature, womb of tathāgata
tattvas  principles, levels of reality
tattvajaya  mastering existence
tejopuñja  mass of radiance
tenmon (J. 天文)  Chinese system of astronomy
terma (T. gter ma)  treasure-​texts
tertöns (T.)  treasure-​revealers
thun mong gi sngon ‘gro (T.)  ordinary preliminary practices
thun mong ma yin gi sngon ‘gro (T.)  extraordinary preliminary practices
tiangan (Ch. 天干)  heavenly stems
tīrtha  holy bathing site
tīrthaṅkaras (see also jina)  Jain: ford maker, spiritual warriors of the past
tithis  lunar days
tögel (T. thod rgal)  advanced contemplative methods, “leap over,” direct transcendence
Tōmitsu (J. 東密)  Shingon esoteric teachings
tribhāva  three states of being, three modes
tridhātu  three levels of meditation

--- PAGE 1215 ---
1190      Glossary
 
trikāya (J. sanshin, 三身)  three bodies of the buddha
triloka  three levels of the cosmos (the heavens, earth, and underworld)
tripuṭi  epistemic triad of cognizer (pramātṛ), means of cognition (pramāṇa), and object of 
cognition (prameya)
trividha yoga  threefold yoga
tsampa (T. rtsam pa)  roasted barley flour
tsogchin (M., T. tshogs chen)  assembly temple
tülku, (T. sprul sku)  incarnate lama
tummo (T. gtum mo)  inner heat meditation
uccāṭaṇa  eradication, expulsion
ulaṭ bāṃsī  upside-​down language
ulṭā-​sādhana  reversal practice
unmāda  madness
unmattavrata  madness vow
upabhoga  objects of enjoyment
upacāras  Jain  five stages of a ritual
upādhyāya  Jain: mendicant teachers
upāya  means
upāyaparyavasānam  brought to conclusion through skilful means
ūrdhvacchandas  rhythm of the elevation of a temple
ūrdhvāmnāya  upper revelation
utkrāntiyoga  yogic suicide
utpattikrama (T. kye-​rim: bskyed rim)  creation stage practice
uttamapuruṣa  universal first-​person agency
uttaratantra (T. rgyud phyi ma)  continuation tantra
*uttarottaratantra  a tantra that is the continuation of the continuation (note: S. name 
reconstructed from T.)
vāc  speech
vācyavācakarūpa  form of designatum and designator
vācyavācakarūpatve  nature of the designatum and designator
vāgīśvarī  speech goddess
vaidhi bhakti  external devotion
vaidhika  in accord with the Vedas
vaikharī  articulated (one of Bhartṛhari’s tripartite levels of speech)
Vaiṣṇava  strain of Hinduism devoted to Viṣnu
vājīkaraṇa  production of virility
vajra (J. kongō 金剛)  thunderbolt, ritual implement, one of three ‘families’ in tantric 
Buddhism, male sexual organs
vajragīti  tantric songs
vajrajñāna  thunderbolt-​like gnosis
vajrasattva (J. kongōsatta 金剛薩埵)  vajra-​being
Vajrayāna  tantric Buddhism
vajrolīmudrā  practice to control ejaculation

--- PAGE 1216 ---
Glossary      1191
 
vāmācāra  left-​hand, transgressive form of tantric practice, antinomian ritual practice
vāma-​mārga  left-​handed path
varṇa  phoneme
vāsanās  imprints
vaśīkaraṇa  to subjugate, of ritual practices
vastu  cosmic substance, real things
vāstu  site for the construction of a temple
vāstupuruṣ a  man of the site: personification of the site of construction
vedha  penetration
videha  without the body: Vedantic path
vidyā (also mahāvidyā, vidyādevī)  knowledge, mantra of a feminine deity, spell goddess
vidyārājas (J. myōō, 明王)  wisdom kings
vijñaptimātra  only perceptions
vimarśa  reflexivity, recognitive apprehension
vināśa  destruction
vipassanā (P.; S. vipaśyanā)  insight, a style of meditation, cf. samatha
vipatimantra  snakebite-​curing spell, the key Gāruḍa mantra
vīryastambha  suppression of ejaculation
visaṃvādaka  deceptive
visarjana  Jain: dismissing the goddess from the diagram (yantra) after worship is completed
viśuddha cakra  throat cakra
viśuddhi  purity
vyādhikaraṇa  causing illness
vyākhyātantra (T. bshad pa’i rgyud)  explanatory tantra, commentary tantra
wagō (J. 和合)  harmonious fusion, or interdependence
wagōshō (J. 和合杵)  vajra of sexual union
waidan  Ch., external alchemy
waka (J. 和歌)  a form of Japanese poetry
wang (Ch. 望)  full moon
wuxing (Ch. 五行)  the five phases, five agents
wuzang (Ch. 五臓, J. gozō)  the five viscera, the five major internal organs
yab-​yum (T.)  yidam deities in sexual union
yāga  tantric worship
yakṣa  male nature spirit
yakṣiṇī female nature spirit
yakṣiṇīsādhana  acquiring a yakṣiṇī
yāna  vehicle
yantra  tantric diagrams
yātrā  procession of a deity outside temple grounds
yidam (T. yi dam)  central deity, meditational deity; see also iṣṭadevatā
yoga  union, one of the categories of Buddhist tantras
yogācāras  Buddhist monks specializing in yogic practices
yoginī  female practitioner of yoga, female divinity

--- PAGE 1217 ---
1192      Glossary
 
yoginītantra  class of Buddhist tantras
yoginīvaktra  mouth of the yoginī
yoni  vagina, womb, vulva, source
yugal sādhanā  spiritual-​erotic companionship
yuvatīratisaṃyuktaḥ  enjoying young women
zhelchem (T. zhal chems)  last testaments

--- PAGE 1218 ---
Index
Note: page numbers followed by f and t refer to figures and tables respectively. Those followed by 
n refer to notes, with note number.
Abatai Sain Khan, 495
“Abbreviated Commentary on the Tantra on 
for All Wondrous Achievements in All 
Endeavours” (Ennin), 255
Abbreviated Torma Offering to 
Jamsran, The (Mergen Gegeen 
Luvsandambijaltsan), 502
Abhayagiri monks, 610–​12
Abhidhānottara tantra, 865–​66, 1078–​79
Abhidharma, 86, 226–​27
Abhinavagupta
Bhartṛhari and, 1122–​23
on body as world, 183
commentaries on Utpaladeva, 1117
on consciousness, 184, 187–​88
constitution of subjectivity and objectivity 
in, 184–​85
cosmology, 178–​84
deep analysis of, vs. public 
understanding, 927–​28
and Dharmakīrti, 1091
on dichotomies, 178
on dyad of Śiva and Śakti, 179, 182–​83
on emotions and embodied experiences, 191
epistemology of, 182, 184–​88
error theory of, 185–​86
on freedom (svātantrya), 177, 178, 186, 191
on Guhyeśvarī, 935
influences on, 178, 179–​80, 183, 188, 
191, 191n3
interdisciplinary approach to, 177
and Kulamārga, 914n7
on kuṇḍalī, 209–​10
life of, 177
on Mālinīvijayottaratantra, 236
manifestation model of causality in, 180–​81
on memory and recognition, 186–​87
model of syncretism in, 179–​80
on non-​Saiddhāntika tantras, 1044
and pantheism, 179
paradox of unity and diversity in, 187
phonetic mysticism of, 182–​84, 
192n17, 209–​10
range of subjects addressed by, 178
on reality as divine action, 1118
on sacrifice, 375
Śivadṛṣṭyālocana, 1091
six levels of relation in, 182–​83
soteriology of, 182, 186, 188–​91
on subjectivity, 183
on subtle body systems, 206–​7, 209
Tantrāloka, 62, 177, 178, 182, 302, 512, 1125–​
26, 1130, 1138n47
and tantric mysticism, 190
and theory of phonematic emanation, 
804, 805
on time, 1122–​25, 1128, 1130, 1131, 1138n47
on time and space, 178–​79, 181–​72
on the unsurpassable (anuttara), 183–​84
on visualization, 752
on wheel of Kālī, 180
works by, 177–​78
on world as play of Śiva, 178–​82
abhiṣeka. See initiation (abhiṣeka)
Abhiṣekaratnāloka (Prajnāśrīgupta), 43
Abhyaṅkar, K. V., 687
Ācārāṅga Sūtra, 819
Account of the Six Revelations, An 
(Ṣaḍāmnāya-​Māhātmya), 934, 934f
Acri, Andrea, 581

--- PAGE 1219 ---
1194      index
 
action, goals of, in tantra, xvi
Adamantine Vajra Realm, 260
Adhyardhaśatikā Prajnāpāramitā, 1071
Ādipurāṇa (Jinasena) (AP), 126, 127, 141–​42, 
143, 144
Ādi Śaṅkarācārya, 836–​38, 940
Adi Shankara, 1030
Ādityavarman, King, 574f, 575f, 576,  
635–​37, 657
Advayasamatāvijaya, 1073
Advayasiddhi (Lakṣmī), 969
Advayavajra, 978–​79
Adzom Paylo Rinpoche, 354–​55
Āgamaḍambara, 991
Āgamas, 178, 188, 191, 1052
Agastya, 651f, 1055
Agastyaparva, 429
Aghora, 929
Aghoraśiva, 1049, 1052–​53
Agni, 101–​2, 140, 275
Agni devā, 1035
Āhavamalla (Kalyāni Cāḷukya 
emperor), 902–​4
Aihole, Gaurī temple at, 517, 518f
Aitareyabrāhmaṇa, 32, 34
Aizen, 472–​78, 479, 481–​82, 483–​84
See also Ryōzu Aizen
Ajitā, 704
Ajitatantra, 1052
Ākaśagarbha, 615f, 618f
Akṣobhya, 573, 585, 592, 593f, 602, 603f, 
640f, 643
Akṣobhyavajra, 847
Ālama-​devī Temple, Lasargā, Syāṅgjā, 941–​
42, 941f
alchemy
Chinese, 303
in rasaśāstra medical tradition, 302, 311
in yoga and tantra, 316–​17
See also rasaśāstra medical tradition
Allione, Tsultrim, 356
Alter, Andrew, 1004
Ambikā, 510, 511f, 512, 514
Ambikākalpa, 703
Ambubachi festival, 1024
Amitābha (Buddha), 495, 498, 585, 592, 595f, 
602, 607f
Amnāyadṛṣṭi, 380
Amoghapaśa
in architecture designed as maṇḍalas, 634–​
35, 634f
sent to Sumatra by Kṛtanagara, 634–​35, 656f
Amoghapāśahṛdaya, 4, 34
Amoghapaśakalparāja, 1151
Amoghapāśamahākalparāja, 4
Amoghasiddhi, 585, 592, 602, 605f, 606f
Amoghavajra (Bukong), 35, 276–​77, 278, 
399, 557, 563, 594, 596–​97, 604–​5, 861, 
862, 1066
Amṛtānanda, 325, 338
Amṛtaratnāvalī (Mukunda-​dāsa/​deva) (AR)
and blendings’ ability to reduce cosmic 
entities to human size, 780
body system of Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā  
in, 764–​65
conceptual blending in, 764
conceptual metaphors in spiritual journey 
and body system of, 769–​70, 772–​73
on divine female beings, 771
manuscripts of, 786n6
obscurity of text, 764
process of conceptual blending of tantra 
and bhakti in, 781–​85, 782f
on Rati, 770–​71
on subtle body, 203–​5
Amṛtasiddhi, 316
Amṛteśvaratantra (a.k.a. Netratantra or 
Mṛteśvaratantra), 307
Anand, Margot, 1172
Ānandakanda, 312, 314, 315
Ananda Marga, 159
Ānandavimalasūri, Ācārya, 132
Anaṅga Raṅga, 309
Anchō, 254
Angowski, Elizabeth, 357
Annen of Godaiin
Bodaishingishō, 404–​5
on Buddhahood, 404–​5
on Buddha lands, 401–​2, 404–​6
Collection of Secret Methods on Conception, 
Pregnancy and Childbirth, 257–​58
on dharmakāya, preaching of, 402
on enlightenment of plants and trees, 395–​
96, 404–​7

--- PAGE 1220 ---
index      1195
 
life and influence of, 256–​57, 262, 400–​1
on mantra, 401, 402–​3, 405
Shingonshū kyōji gi, 404–​5
Sokushin jōbutsu shiki, 404
and Tendai esoteric Buddhism, 401
ANS. See autonomic nervous system
Apadāna, 33
Aparājitā, 704
aphantasia, 754
Apidamo jushe lun, 253
Appar (a.k.a. Tirunāvukkaracu), 1055
Appayya Dīkṣita, 338
Arapacana, 626
Ardhanārīśvari, 631
Arhats, 834
Ari Malla (king of Nepal), 939
Aristotle, 225, 1126
Arjuna, 1032–​33
aromatics, in Japanese astral magic, 284
Āryas, 975
Ārya Tāra Book Association, 362
Ārya Vimuktisena, 85
Asaba shō, 282–​83
Asad, Talal, 7
Āśādhara, 136–​37
Asaṅga, 81, 83–​84, 87
Aśoka, 32, 563
Aṣṭakamantra/​Durgāstava, 436
Aṣṭamaṇḍalaka sūtra, 604–​5
Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayasaṃhitā, 308
Aṣṭāṅga Yoga, 230, 237, 238, 240, 822
astrology in Buddhism, 274–​79
and apotropaic practices, 277
first authoritative manual in China, 276–​77
introduction to Japan, 281–​82
natal astrology, 277
and star maṇḍalas, 288–​89, 290f, 291
astrology in China
and astral magic, 279–​80
and Chinese calendar, 274
first authoritative Buddhist manual 
for, 276–​77
Indian influence on, 275
Indo-​Iranian influence on, 278–​79
influence in Japan, 274, 280, 281, 291
texts, 276–​79
uses of, 274, 277
astrology in Daoism, 276
astrology in Europe and Islamic world, 273
astrology in India, 273–​75
astrology in Japan
and astral iconography, 287–​89, 288f, 290f
and astral magic, 282–​84, 287
Chinese influence on, 274, 280, 281, 291
deities addressed in, 287
early autochthonous system, 280–​81
and horoscopy, 286
introduction of Buddhist astrology, 281–​82, 
291
later developments, 289–​91
Sukuyō and, 289
Sukuyōdō and, 285–​87, 291–​92, 293n11
texts, 276
Atharva Veda, 273, 307, 1119
Atikūṭa, 36, 39
Atimārga, 2
Atīśa, 575–​76, 849–​50, 972, 978
Atiśa Dīpaṃkara Śrījnāna, 866
attention, 741–​45
bias in, 743, 744
covert, 743–​44
definition of, 741
duration of, and binding of features to 
objects, 741–​42, 743
dynamic, in tantric visualization, 745
editing of inputs to, 741, 743–​45
focusing of, in tantric visualization, 742–​45
maṇḍalas and mantras as devices for 
focusing and deepening of, 740, 742–​44
and memory, interplay of, 749
role of metonymy or metaphor in, 741
autonomic arousal (PNS withdrawal 
associated arousal)
and phasic alertness, 158–​59
scholarship on, 159
in tantric practices, 158–​59, 161, 163–​64
autonomic nervous system (ANS)
advances in modeling of, 158
early model of sympathetic-​
parasympathetic opposition in, 156
emotions’ effect on, 156
heart rate and, 155
and modeling of Buddahood-​focused 
meditation, 157–​59

--- PAGE 1221 ---
1196      index
 
more-​complex model replacing 
sympathetic-​parasympathetic model, 
158, 167n12
structure and function of, 156
and threat response, 158
Avalokiteśvara, 36, 455–​56, 588f, 604, 617f–​18f, 
640, 649–​50, 670f–​73f
Avalon, Arthur, 198
Awakening of Mahāvairocana Tantra 
(Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi-​tantra), 861
Awoonar, Kofi, 837
Ayurvedic tradition
early embryological medical 
knowledge, 250
mercury in, 301
Badamjalbuuzal, 499–​500
Bagchi, P. C., 937
Bahucarā Mātā, 1034–​35
Bakhatrām Śāh, 145
Bālatantra (Rāvaṇa), 310
Balbir, Nalini, 509
Ballāla (Hoysala king), 887
Baḷḷigāvĕ
Bhujaṅgāvaḷi Kālamukhas, 885–​86
early overseer of, 885
as hub of Kālamukha religiosity, 885
inscription as strategic interventions, 885
Tripurāntakēśvara temple, 885–​87, 886f, 
888f–​91f
Bāmeśvara of Keḍiri, 429–​30
Bāṇabhaṭṭa, 302
Bandhuṣeṇa, 689
Banteay Chhmar temple complex, 649–​50, 
669f–​70f
bare awareness practices, neuroscientific 
research on, 157
Bari Lotsawa, 1157
Bat Cuṃ shrine, 565
Baudhāyanadharmasūtra, 275
Bāul singers, 995, 997
See also Shah, Duddu
Bayon temple
and architecture designed as maṇḍala, 
646, 664f
central Buddha in, 646
Greek cross base of, 569–​70, 569f
images of Heruka/​ Hevajra in, 560–​61, 561f, 
562f, 569–​71, 570f, 645–​46, 666f, 667f
and projection of maṇḍala of state into 
architecture, 571
Beck, Guy, 1011
Behari Ghose, Atal, 326
Bengali esoteric Buddhism, modern
antinomianism of, 1015n2
complexity of lineages, 994
disinclination to identify as “tantric,” 994–​
95, 998
doctrine of, 994
importance of song in, 992–​93, 994
Matua movement’s liberation through 
ecstatic song and dance, 1009–​13, 1010f
mix of Vaiṣṇava and tantric images in songs 
of, 996–​99, 1000–​1002, 1008
and musical performers and instrument 
makers, 1008
negative associations with tantra in, 995
and rasik modality of religiosity, 998
songs’ ability to provide accessible spiritual 
messages, 1005–​6, 1005f–​6f
tantric features of, as submerged, 998–​99
tantric label as post-​emic, 998
tantric themes in songs of, 992–​93, 
995, 1001–​2
training of Bāul singers, 995
“twilight language” of, 1005, 1007
Vaiṣṇava and, 998
Bennen, Enni, 263
Benson, Herbert, 159, 160
Bernard, Pierre Arnold, 1169–​70
Bhāgavata Purāṇa, 202–​3, 204, 207
Bhairava
in architecture designed as maṇḍalas, 628–​
29, 639f, 653f, 676n33
Jain equivalent to, 132
and murder of Tapā Gaccha monks, 131–​32
and rasaśāstra medical tradition, 314
significance in Abhinavagupta, 184, 191n4
statue of, at Padang Roco, 435, 631, 635–​37, 
655f, 676n33677n37
statue with Akṣobhya above the crown, 574f, 
575f, 576
symbolism of image, 190
autonomic nervous system (ANS) (cont.)

--- PAGE 1222 ---
index      1197
 
in temples of Kālamukha culture, 887, 894–​
95, 895f, 899, 899f, 907f
Bhairava cult in East Java
Bhīma and, 439–​40
ca. 1265 to fifteenth century, 432–​40
and candrakapāla motifs, 429–​30, 430f
and charnel ground culture, 432, 436, 
437, 438
decorative use of skulls, 432
descriptions of Bhairava, 436–​37
Durgā worship in, 430–​31, 436
erotic and transgressive images on temples, 
438, 439f
evidence of Bhairava and Kāpālika 
observances, 428–​29
Gaṇeśa statues with skull motifs, 431–​32, 
431f, 432
hard-​core tantric poems, 436
human sacrifice in, 431
king Kṛtanagara’s embrace of, 432–​35
in late Majapahit period, 437–​38
local versions of, 438–​40
Mongol threat and, 432, 434, 435
progressive demonization of Bhairava 
images, 432, 433f
reign of Bāmeśvara of Keḍiri and, 429–​30
rise, tenth to mid-​thirteenth 
century, 428–​32
and state-​protection and martial 
magic, 434–​35
and statues of Kṛtanagara, 435–​36
transgressive practices, 429, 432–​33, 438
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa (Malliṣeṇa)
available editions of, 690
avenues for future research on, 705–​6
described, 687, 691
on forecasting the future, 694–​95
impure and violent passages in, 696, 703
on magic spells, 832
modern influence of, 702–​6
overlaps with other Jaina texts, 703–​5
Padmāvatī as main goddess of, 687, 
688, 692–​94
Padmāvatī in, 519–​23
present-​day popularity, 689
protection and purification rites in, 691, 703
as ritual manual (kalpa), 688, 706
scholars’ focus on, 687–​90
spells in, 832
as tantric Jaina text, 514
yantra in, 690, 691–​96, 701–​2
Bhairavasiddhānta, 883
Bhaiṣajyaguru, Master of Medical 
Remedies, 559
Bhaktāmarastotra, 697, 702, 706
Bhaktāmara Stotra Yantra, 697
Bhaktapur Taleju temple, 940–​41
Bhakti songs
blending of tantra and bhakti in, 781–​85, 
782f, 999–​1002, 1004–​5, 1008
and congregational singing in vernacular 
languages, 1002
notable poet-​singers, 999
Bharati, Agehananda, 1175–​76, 1176n6
Bharati, Shuddhānanda, 328–​30
Bhartṛhari, 795–​96, 800, 801, 1118, 1121–​22, 
1128–​29
Bhatt, Vallabh, 1034–​35
Bhatta, Vidyanath Upadhyaya, 55–​56, 55f
Bhaṭṭācārya, Rāmatoṣaṇa, 241
Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, 1052
Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha, 1044, 1052–​53, 1054
Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha II, 914n5
Bhaṭṭa Trivikrama, 977–​78
Bhavabhaṭṭa, 865
Bhāvasaṅgraha (Devasena), 703
Bhāviveka, 79, 82
bhedābheda, 914–​15n8
Bhīma, 439–​40
Bhomiyājī, 130
Bhṛkuṭī, 636f, 847, 1157
Bhūtaḍāmara, 1069–​70
Bhūtiprakaraṇa of Gorakṣasaṃhitā, 312
Bhuvanakośa, 429
Bianhong, 596–​97
Biernacki, Loriliai, 179, 723–​24
Bījamantras, 234
binaries, rejection of, as defining feature of 
tantra, 1031
bindu, 799, 800, 801, 802
Blair, Heather, 259
Blazing Lamp Tantra, 463
Bodaishingishō (Annen), 404–​5
bodhicitta, 164

--- PAGE 1223 ---
1198      index
 
Bodhiruci, 127
bodhisattva(s)
birth of, in hagiographies, 30
and Buddha lands, 396–​98, 400–​6
in Cakrasaṃvara practice traditions, 868
and conventional ethics, 977–​78
in deity yoga, 715, 718, 722
four flasks of, 40
Goryū Shintō goma and, 110, 114f
Great Perfection narratives and, 454, 455
interpenetration of bodies of, 419–​21
and magic, 258
in maṇḍalas, 582, 585, 674n2718
most popular in India, 674n2
and sexual yoga, 974, 975, 978
Shingon goma and, 114, 114f, 115f
and Symbolic Transmissions, 462
in temple architecture, 590, 591f, 592, 604, 
614–​15, 619, 657
and yakṣa spirits, 500
Yogabindu on, 821
bodhisattva path
and abhiṣeka, 33
as central to tantric Buddhism, 714, 725
in Mahāyāna Buddhism, 40, 83, 715
and non-​abiding nirvana, 716, 961
as one of three paths, 977
as one of three types of vows, 855
royal consecration in, 33
sixth stage of, 715
and soteriology in tantric Buddhism, 963–​
66, 968, 972, 976–​77
Tenth Ground of, 489
Bodhisattva Trilogy, 92, 93
bodhi tree, 32
bodily fluids
consumption of, 385
as offering to Buddhas, 1154
See also sexual fluids
body maṇḍala, in Cakrasaṃvara 
traditions, 869–​70
bonnō soku bodai (transgressions are 
enlightenment), 473, 475, 476, 483, 484
Bön school, 453
Borges, Jorge Louis, 752
Bōricā Sūrya/​ Śiva temple, near Porbandar, 
534, 535f, 536f
Borobudur, 602–​3, 602f, 603f–​7f, 615, 622f, 658
Boro Gaṇeśa statue Blitar, 431, 431f
Boucher, Daniel, 77
bound condition, eight impediments of 
(aṣṭapāśa), 65
Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa, 1032
Brahmayāmala, 533–​34, 802
Brahmayāmalatantra, 802, 803
brain, webs of cognitive and neural 
connection cross-​mapped in, 767
breath retention
in Buddhist tantras, 240
in mastering of the elements rituals, 229, 
230, 232–​35, 237–​39
Bṛhad-​vaḍavānalatantra, 935
Bṛhatkālottara, 545
Bṛhat Puraścaryārṇava, 943
Bṛhatsaṃhitā (Varāhamihira), 542, 701
“Brief Explanation of the Production, 
Recollection, and Recitation of the Yoga 
of the Diamond Peak Scripture” manual 
(Vajrabodhi), 622
Brooks, Douglas Renfrew, 5, 331, 333, 334–​35,  
1031
Brunner, Hélène, 369
Buddha(s)
and abhiṣeka, 37, 39, 40, 43, 56, 591–​92
associated ceremonies, 32–​33, 35
and Buddhist scripture as 
buddhavacana, 863
Dainichi Nyorai as, 463
defining qualities of, 86–​87
in early texts on magic, 310, 1146–​47, 1148–​
49, 1151, 1153, 1154–​55
emulation of, in Mahāyāna system, 850
equivalence with, as goal in tantric 
Buddhism, 967–​68
five families of, 463
interpenetration of bodies of all, 419–​20, 717
maṇḍalas and, 557, 565, 582, 584–​87, 590, 
592–​94, 602–​3, 616–​17, 674n3, 729–​32, 977, 
1144–​47
Osho-​Rajneesh’s Zorba the Buddha, 1171
sovereign as, 435–​36, 574, 576, 621–​22,  
626–​31, 657
in tantric practice, 714–​19
and tantric sutras, 77

--- PAGE 1224 ---
index      1199
 
temple images of, 582, 584–​87, 590, 592–​94, 
602–​3, 612–​15, 618f, 625f, 626f, 640, 642–​
43, 646, 662f, 673n1, 674n3
three levels of embodiment, 870
visualization of self as, in tantric practice, 
89, 110
See also Akṣobhyavajra; Amitābha 
(Buddha); deity yoga; Gautama 
Buddha; Kunke Gyalpo (Buddha); 
Mahāvajradhara Buddha; Śākyamuni 
Buddha; Samantabhadra (Buddha); 
Vajradhara; Vajrasattva (Buddha); 
Vajravārāhī (female Buddha); Vipaśyin 
(Buddha)
Buddha bodies
completion stage (niṣpannakrama) of 
tantric practice and, 89
dharma body (dharmakāya), 86–​87
form body of, 717
in Mahāyāna thought, 77
reward body of, 416
in Shingon Buddhism, 730
and subtle body, 212–​13
in tantric practice, 717
transformation body of, 416
truth body of, 416, 717
buddhadharma, 411, 412, 415, 418–​19, 421, 
491, 492
Buddha-​Eye Buddha-​Mother, 260
Buddhaguhya, 1067, 1153
Buddhahood
Annen on, 404–​5
conditional and nonconditional 
aspect of, 86
as goal of Vajrayāna, 86, 153, 154–​55, 
157, 850–​51
in Mahāyāna system, 850
maṇḍalas and, 557–​58
of plants and trees, 395–​96, 403–​7
three embodiments of, 86
wider availability of, in tantric 
Buddhism, 965–​66
Buddhakapāla, 1078
Buddha lands
Annen on, 401–​2, 404–​6
effect of, 397–​98
generation of, 396–​99
types of, 397–​98
Zongying on, 403
Buddha nature (tathāgatagarbha)
Dolpopa on, 92–​93
introduction of concept, 87–​89
and mind of great bliss, 90
and Yogācāra, 87–​89
Buddha Samantabhadra, 453–​54
Buddhaśrījnāna, Jnānākara (a.k.a. 
Buddhaśrījnāna)
Buddhism
and astral deities, 275
cosmology, flat early in, 275
diversity of early thought, 75, 96n1
early embryological medical 
knowledge, 250–​52
early influence in Japan, 252–​60
embryological metaphors in, 249, 251, 
253, 254–​55
interaction and exchange across 
traditions, 78
meditation exercises, 211–​12
as response to suffering, 726
texts, types of, 80, 871n8
time in, 1120–​21
traditional, Śākyamuni Buddha as central 
focus of, 863–​64
visualization methods, origin of, 211–​12
on women’s status, 259–​60
See also astrology in Buddhism; esoteric 
Buddhism; Indian Buddhism
Buddhi vilāsa (Bakhatrām), 145
Bühnemann, Gudrun, 3, 333
Bunshō, Wakita, 289
Burchett, Patton, 998
Buton (Bu-​ston Rin-​chen Grub), 77, 84
Butön Rinchen Drup, 864
Butsuzō zui (Tosa), 289
Byakuhō kushō, 278
Byang chub lam gyi sgron ma 
(*Bodhipathapradīpa) (Atiśa), 978
Bynum, Caroline Walker, 350, 356
Caitanya, 1033
Caitanya-​caritāmṛta, 766
Caitanya Vaiṣṇavism and purification of the 
elements ritual, 229

--- PAGE 1225 ---
1200      index
 
cakras
in Cakrasaṃvara traditions, 870
four-​cakra systems, 212, 240
large variety of cakra systems, 371–​72, 387n6
six cakra system, 198, 206–​10, 371
system of the “wheels” (cakra), channels 
(nāḍī), and cosmic energy (kuṇḍalinī), 
198, 199, 200, 208–​11, 212, 214–​15
Cakrasaṃvara
Cakrasaṃvara maṇḍala, 565
image in Phimai, 568
in Khmer temple iconography, 559
Cakrasaṃvara (a.k.a. Herukābhidhāna or 
Laghusaṃvara)
basis in Sarvabuddhasamāyogadākinījāla-
saṃvara Tantra, 862
as composite text, 863
as condensed version of much longer 
text, 864
dates of composition, 862–​63
history of, 1076–​77
influence of, 863
and interiorization of Buddhist 
rituals, 212–​13
legends on origin of, 864–​65
other names for, 864
other texts mentioned in, 862
related explanatory tantras and 
manuals, 865–​66
sexually coupled forms of Heruka in, 968
Śrī Heruka (Mahāvajradhara Buddha) as 
purported author of, 864–​65
transgressive practices in, 863
unconventional style of, 862
Cakrasaṃvarābhisamaya, 866
Cakrasaṃvara genre of tantric texts, 720
Cakrasaṃvara practice traditions
areas of survival, 867, 871
beliefs of, 565–​66
Mahāsiddhas in, 865, 866–​67
maṇḍalas in, 865, 869
practices, described, 868–​71
preliminary practices in, 868
secrecy of, 867
Vajravārāhī and, 867
cakravartin, 419
Cakreśvarī, 510, 512
Cakrasaṃvara, 1078
Calon Araṅ, 436
Cambodia
establishment of Buddhism as state 
religion, 644–​46
spread of Śaivasiddhānta in, 1049
tantric temples in, 642–​51
See also Khmer state
Campbell, June, 349–​50
Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa, 1082
Caṇḍamārī, 824
Caṇḍayogeśvarī (Guhyakālī), 68
Candragarbha-​parivarta, 275
Candrakīrti, 82
Candrānandasāgarasūri, Ācārya, 130–​31, 132
Candraprabha Purāṇa, 518
Canon of the Śaivāgama (Dyczkowski), 926–​27
Cao Shiwei, 285–​86
Cape, Kali, 359–​60
Carakasaṃhitā, 301, 308–​9, 310
caru, consumption of, 385
Caryāgīti, 212, 1000, 1005, 1006
Caryāmelāpakapradīpa. See Sūtakamelāpaka 
(deutero-​Āryadeva)
Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the 
Buddhist Tripitaka (Nanjio), 278
Caturdevīparipṛcchā, 1075
Caturyoginīsampuṭa, 866, 1078–​79
Catuṣpīṭha, 1075–​76
CBT. See conceptual blending theory
Chagdüd Tülku Rinpoche, 351
Chakravarty, Hemendra Nath, 1130
cham dances, in Vajrayāna, 165
Chengshi lun, 253
Chengxing lingtai miyao jing, 284
China
alchemy (waidan) in, 303
calendars and calendrical reform  
in, 285–​86
and early Buddhist influence in 
Japan, 252–​58
early embryological medical theory, 250–​52
Sino-​Tibetan exchanges, in eighth and 
ninth centuries, 460
See also astrology in China
Chishengguang daweide xiaozai jixiang 
tuoluoni jing, 278

--- PAGE 1226 ---
index      1201
 
Chishengguang Foding (Da shengmiao jixiang 
pusa shuo chuzai jiaoling falun), 277–​78
Choo, Jessey, 251
Church of Satan, 1168
Cilappatikāram, 510
CIN. See conceptual integrated networks
Cinciṇīmatasārasamuccaya, 333
Cincinnīmata, 931
cittamātra, 93
“Clear Differentiation of the Three Vows” 
(Sakya Paṇḍita Kunga Gyeltsen), 853
CMT. See conceptual metaphor theory
cognitive blending, 740, 741
cognitive scholarship on tantra, 11–​13
conceptual metaphor theory, 11–​12
journals on, 13
neurobiology and neuroscience 
approaches, 12
notable works, 13
programs for, 12–​13
Cognitive Science of Religion (CSR), 216
cognitive science’s dialogue with tantric 
philosophy
cognitive processes in tantric  
practices, 740
potential benefits of, 739, 740, 745, 
746, 754–​55
and textual sources on tantric 
practice, 739–​40
cognitive therapy, tantric practice as, 740
Collection of Doctrines in the Tendai Lotus 
School (Gishin), 255–​56
Collection of Secret Methods on 
Conception, Pregnancy and Childbirth 
(Annen), 257–​58
“Commentary on the Mahāvairocana sūtra” 
(Yixing), 255, 261
“Commentary on the Śrīmālādevī Sūtra” 
(Shōtoku), 260
Comprehensive Mirror for Aiding 
Government (Sima Guang), 656–​57
conceptual blending theory (CBT)
and blending of tantra and bhakti in 
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā, 781–​85, 782f
blendings’ ability to reduce cosmic entities 
to human size, 780
on cascades of blending, 780
on metapor providing basic frame for 
blending, 781
on process for creating complex metaphors, 
775–​77, 776f, 777f
single-​scope, double-​scope, and 
hyperblend/​megablend metaphor 
networks, 779–​81
usefulness in analyzing tantric texts, 785
on vital relations shaping selection 
of metaphors for conceptual 
integration, 777–​78
conceptual integrated networks (CIN), 
776, 776f
conceptual metaphor theory (CMT), 11–​
12, 766–​67
on arranging of reality into concepts, 770
on conceptual metaphor as organizing 
structure in brain, 767
and conceptual metaphor in Vaiṣṇava 
Sahajiyā thought, 767–​73
notable works on, 12
on ontological metaphors used to 
comprehend events, 773
on universal primary vs. culture-​specific 
complex metaphors, 773–​75
usefulness in analyzing tantric  
texts, 785
consciousness, semantic structuring  
of, 739
consecration ceremony, in Cakrasaṃvara 
traditions, 869
Consecration Scripture (Foshuō guandīng 
qīwan erqiān shenwang hubǐ bǐqiū 
zhoujīng), 35
contact linguistics, 102–​4
Conze, Edward, 78
Copper Island Chronicle (Zangs gling 
ma), 456–​57
Corrington, Robert, 1131
Cort, John, 127–​28, 508, 509, 510, 513, 516–​17, 
519, 524, 830
cosmos in Buddhism, 395, 806–​7
Crowley, Aleister, 1165–​66
CSR. See Cognitive Science of Religion
Cundā, 604, 616f
Cuntarar, 1055
Cupchik, Jeffrey, 1008, 1014

--- PAGE 1227 ---
1202      index
 
Dādāgurus, 824
daihi taizō (great womb of compassion), 260–​61
Daishi Myōijn, 480
Ḍākārṇava Tantra, 866, 1082
Ḍākinī
biographies of, and tension between 
imitability and distinctiveness, 357
difficult of defining, 348
evolution from demon to goddess, 348
human women identified as, 352–​53, 355, 
356–​58, 361–​62
as meditational deity (yidam), 353–​54
in myth and ritual, 352
Orientalist studies of, 349–​50
as polysemic symbol of realization, 350–​53
recent scholarship on, 353–​55, 356
Ricoeur’s three levels of a symbol 
and, 351–​53
role in Tibetan Buddhism, 347–​48
scholarship on, 363–​64
and sexual yoga (karmamudrā), 359
Shabkar’s vision of, 347
and subtle body networks, 352–​53, 359
symbolic meaning of, 363–​64
and Tibetan renaissance, 361–​63
and transmission of Great Perfection 
(Dzogchen) teachings, 462–​63
Western essentialization of, 356
wrathful male consort heruka, 352
and Yoginītantra, 968
Ḍākinī’s Great Dharma Treasury (Khandro 
Chödzö Chenmo), 362, 364
Ḍākinīvajrapanjara, 1077–​78
Ḍakki’s Path and Fruit (dakki lam´bras 
skor), 359
Dakṣiṇasrotas., 883
Dalai Lama, and Mind and Life Institute, 216
Dalton, Jacob, 203, 212–​14
dance in tantric practice
early records of, 1002, 1004
Matua movement’s liberation through 
ecstatic song and dance, 1009–​13, 1010f
song of possession (uccaral torram), 1007–​8
Daoism, early embryological metaphors in, 
249, 251
Dari jing. See Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi
Dari jing shu (Yixing), 255, 276
Daśabhūmikasūtra, 33
Da shengmiao jixiang pusa shuo chuzai jiaoling 
falun (Chishengguang Foding), 277–​78
Dattātrey ayogaśāstra, 241
Davidson, Ronald M., 2, 3–​4, 557, 565, 582, 584, 
651, 1004
Dayan lii (Yining), 285
Dehejia, Vidya, 821–​22
deities, tantric, methods of representing, 973
deity yoga
in Cakrasaṃvara traditions, 869
deity in, as entire world, 718–​19
as distinctive feature of tantric 
Buddhism, 851
self-​generation vs. front-​generation 
processes, 714–​16
Shingon Buddhist gomas, 109–​10
in tantric ritual, 227–​28
in Vajrayāna, 159–​60, 160t, 161, 161t
and visualization in tantric 
Buddhism, 714–​18
visualizations in, as maṇḍalas, 718–​19, 725–​
26, 729–​31
See also visualization in deity yoga
dependent origination, doctrine of 
(pratītyasamutpada), 1120–​21
Deśavarṇana (Mpu Prapanca) (a.k.a. 
Nāgarkṛtāgama), 434–​35, 621
Descent to Laṅka Sūtra (Laṅkāvatāta 
Sūtra), 88
Deśwarṇana/​ Nāgarakṛtāgama, 631–​33
deutero-​Āryadeva, 971
deutero-​Candrakīrti, 975
Devasena, 515, 703
Devībhāgavatapurāṇa, 1037n18
Devīdvyardhaśatikā, 939
Devīmāhātmya, 755n6
dhāraṇā (fixations)
Bhaṭṭācārya on, 241
in Buddhist yoga practices, 240
in mastering of the elements rituals, 
230, 231, 232, 233–​35, 236–​37, 238–​40, 
242nn6–​7
and origin of tantra, 2–​3
Dharaṇendra, 519
Dhāraṇī of the Blue-​Necked One (Nīlakaṭha 
dhāraṇī), 1157

--- PAGE 1228 ---
index      1203
 
Dhāraṇīsaṃgraha, 36–​37, 39–​40
dhāraṇī texts, on possession (āveśa), 40
Dhareṇendra, 689
dharma
dharma body (dharmakāya), 86–​87
Five Dharmas of Maitreya, 76, 81, 83–​86, 
88, 94, 96
Three Ages of, 409–​10
Dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga (Distinguishing 
Phenomena from their True Nature), 
84, 85–​86
Dharmadhātuvāgīśvara maṇḍala, 635
dharmakāya, Shingon school on, 399–​400
Dharmakīrti, 575, 1091–​1107, 1121
Dharmamitra, 259–​60
dharmapālas (dharma protectors), 1149
Dharma Pātanjala, 441
Dharmarakṣa, 275
Dharṇendra, 830
Dhātu Vibhaṅga, 826
Ḍhol Sāgar, 1004
Diamond Sow ḍākinī, 347, 353, 364
dieties and extraordinary beings in tantra, 
types of, xvii
Digambara
fire offering for consecration of Jina icon, 
136–​44, 138f–​40f
as image-​worshipping sect of 
Jainism, 688–​89
modern Padmāvatī yantras, 697, 699, 700f
Dīghanikāya, 1145, 1146
Dignāga, 1121
Dillon, Aneesha, 1172
Discourse Explaining the Thought 
(Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra), 79–​80, 91
Distinguishing between the Middle and 
Extremes (Madhyāntavibhāga), 84, 85–​86
Distinguishing Phenomena from their True 
Nature (Dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga), 
84, 85–​86
Distinguishing the Jewel Lineage 
(Ratnagotravibhāga), 84, 88–​89
Divākarapaṇḍita, 565, 566f, 568–​69, 572
divine pride, 715–​16, 719, 728, 851, 869
divine state (divyabhāva), in Nepālī 
Sarvāmnāya tradition, 64–​66
Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpa Nyima, 351
Dōhan, 482–​83
Dolce, Lucia, 256, 262, 263, 474
Dole, V. A., 311, 314–​15
Dolpopa Sherab Gyeltsen, 91–​94, 852, 854–​55
Đồng Dương temple in Campā, 613–​15, 
625f–​32f
Douglas, Nik, 1170, 1174
Drāviḍa Sangha sect, 515
Dravya Śāha (king of Gorkha), 943
dream yoga, 870
Drime Özer, 360
Drukpa Kunley, 1016n24
Duckworth, Douglas, 728, 731
Duli yusi jing, 279, 286
Durgā, 628, 953n34
Dūrga Mahiśasuramardinī, 649f
Durgatipariśodhana maṇḍala, 635
Durjayacandra, 866
Dvarup Damodar, 1015n12
*Dvitīyakrama, (Buddhaśrījnāna), 973–​74
Dyczkowski, Mark, 924–​27, 928, 939
Dzigar Kongtrul Rinpoche, 352–​53, 356
Dzogchen. See Great Perfection (Dzogchen)
eight extraordinary powers (aṣṭasiddhi), 241
Eight Thousand Verse Perfection of 
Wisdom, 86–​87
Ekajaṭī, 456
Ekakṣara-​uṣṇīṣacakra, 417t, 419
elements
association with colors, 231, 235, 236, 
238, 240
in Buddhist yoga practice, 240
characteristics in Śaivasiddhānta, 234
diverse views of Buddhism schools 
on, 226–​27
Indian realist schools’ horizontal and 
vertical models of, 225–​26
Jainism’s reordering of tantric version 
of, 826–​28
key role in realist Indian doctrines, 225
meditation on, in Śrῑ Lalitā Triśatῑ 
Bhāṣyam, 836
in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tradition, 65–​66
role in tantric rituals, 227
similarity of Western and Indian 
conceptions, 225

--- PAGE 1229 ---
1204      index
 
in tantric Buddhism, 226–​27
terms for, 225
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā’ appropriation of Gauḍīya 
Vaiṣṇava elements, 765–​66
variety of systems in Indian realist 
schools, 225–​26
visualization of, 239–​40
See also mastering of the elements rituals; 
purification of the elements rituals
embodied cognition theory, 711, 725
embryological notions in medieval 
Japan, 253–​56
Buddhist influence on, 253–​56
and daihi taizō (great womb of 
compassion), 260–​61
and esoteric ritual, 261–​64
as medical knowledge, 255–​56
and ninth-​century women’s health 
manuals, 256–​58
as religious metaphor, 254–​55, 256, 260–​
61, 264–​65
and soteriological possibilities for 
women, 259–​61
and women’s bodies, positive view of, 259
embryological notions in premodern 
Asia, 249–​53
in Chinese cosmology, 251
in early Buddhist medical theory, 250–​52
in early Chinese medical theory, 250–​52
in early Indian medical theory, 250
in early Japanese medical theory, 252
embryological terms in Indian 
Buddhism, 253
in India, 249–​50
in Japanese religious metaphors, 252–​53
as religious metaphor, 249, 251–​53
variety of uses of, 250
Empedocles, 225
emptiness
clear light in deity yoga visualization as 
equivalent to, 719
doctrine of other-​emptiness (gzhan stong), 854
Dolpopa on, 92–​93
in Madhyamaka, 78–​79, 93–​96
in Mahāyāna Buddhism, 78–​79, 82, 
83, 91–​93
and mind of great bliss, 90
Nāgārjuna on, 91, 92
other emptiness, 91–​95
in Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras, 78–​79, 91
in Root Stanzas on the Middle Way, 82, 83
Enchin, 276, 282, 285, 400
endocrine system, emotions’ effect on, 156
English, Elizabeth, 354
enlightenment
aspiration to, sexual fluid and, 213
bonnō soku bodai (transgressions are 
enlightenment), 473, 475, 476, 483, 484
ḍākinī women and, 361
emptiness and, 79
inner, and outer action, 476
maṇḍalas and, 617
mantras and, 1153
manuals to aid in, 856
and nondual knowledge, 87
of plants and trees, 395–​96, 403–​7
powers aiding in, 851
rapid, in this lifetime, as goal of tantric 
Buddhism, 76, 90, 262, 265, 420, 482, 
714, 850
seeds of, in all sentient beings, 260
texts on magic and, 1145, 1152, 1153–​54
through sexual practice, 360
wisdom consciousness and, 715
women and, 967
See also emptiness; liberation; soteriology
Ennin, 255, 282, 284, 400–​1
Esalen Institute of California, 1171
esoteric Buddhism (mikkyō)
and early initiation (abhiṣeka) rites, 35–​36
in East Asia, mantra as defining feature 
of, 399
goddesses in, 260
influence on Japanese culture, 116
interaction with medieval Shintō, 106–​7, 116
and Japanese astral magic, 283–​84, 287
and Japanese astrology, 287, 291
medieval, interest in dualism and its 
transcendence, 476
Sukuyōdō and, 285
esoteric physiology
avenues for future research, 216
development over time, 199
elements (cont.)

--- PAGE 1230 ---
index      1205
 
early Vedic system, 199
as embodiments of doctrine, 204, 206–​7, 
208, 212–​13, 216
four-​cakra systems, 212, 240
great variation in, 209, 216
in Jain tantra, 215
large variety of cakra systems, 371–​72, 387n6
macrocosmic and microcosmic bodies, 198
related philosophical issues, 197
scholarship on, 198, 215, 216
six cakra system, 198, 206–​10, 371
system of the “wheels” (cakra), channels 
(nāḍī), and cosmic energy (kuṇḍalinī), 
198, 199, 200, 208–​11, 212, 214–​15
in Vaiṣṇava Hindu tantra, 199–​200
and yogically-​reversed sexual fluids, 
205, 211
See also subtle body
ethnographic studies of tantra, 10–​11
Evola, Julius, 1167
exorcism rites
Helācārya’s Jvālāmālinīkalpa on, 516
Jamsran and, 503
in medieval Japanese tantra, 472, 474, 475, 
478, 479, 482–​85
Mongolian independence movement 
and, 496
Explanatory Tantra, 972
Extensive History of the Great Perfection of the 
Seminal Heart (Rdzogs pa chen po snying 
thig gi lo rgyus chen mo), 454, 455, 462–​65
Fantian huoluo jiuyao (Yixing), 279
Fauconnier, Gilles, 739, 741, 776, 777–​78, 
780, 785
feminism
in interpretation of female deities, 350
and orientalist studies of Ḍākinī, 349–​50
fettered beast state (paśubhāva), 64–​65
Ficino, Marcilio, 1127
fire deity
Agni as, 101–​2
Māṇibhadra Vīra as, 132
fire rituals
for consecration of Jain Digambara icon of 
Jina, 136–​44, 138f–​40f
introduction in Śaivasiddhānta, 1050
inward-​vs. outward-​directed, 484–​85
modern Āhutividhān, 133
to purge karma, in Mantramārga, 1047–​48, 
1053–​54
three-​fire soma or śrauta rite, 32, 105, 198–​99
See also Goryū Shintō goma; Jainism, and 
fire rituals
Fisher, Elaine, 338
Five Dharmas of Maitreya, 76, 81, 83–​86, 
88, 94, 96
five fixations (pañcadhāraṇā), 230–​32, 234–​36, 
238–​39, 241
Five Great Statements of nondual 
Vedānta, 66–​67
Five Stages of the Śrī Cakrasaṃvara, The, 867
five transgressive substances
in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tradition, 59–​
61, 65–​66
in Śrīvidyā, 329–​30
five viscera, contemplation of, 264
Flood, Gavin, 199–​202, 206, 208, 211–​12, 216, 
241n2, 991, 999, 1176n6
forceful yoga. See haṭhayoga
form body of Buddha, 717
four ages (Kṛta, Treta, Dvāpara, and Kali), 92
Fourfold Maṅgala, 140
Four Great Kings, 1146, 1148, 1150
Four Noble Truths Path, 80, 726
Four Stages (olicatuṣṭaya) (Kāṇha), 866
Freeman, Rich, 1007–​8
Fudō, 472–​79, 481–​82, 483
Fujiwara no Tadazane, 412
Fujiwara Sukeyo, 286
funerary initiations, 1049
Fury Fire practice, 870
Futian li 符天暦 (Calendar which Tallies with 
Heaven) (Cao Shiwei), 285–​86
Gagaṇaganja, 635
Gaiser, Adam, 337–​38
Gaja Mada, 630
Gaṅapati/​Gaṇapati, 894–​95, 1156
Gaṇḍavyūha, 719
gandharvas, 1148
Gaṇeśa, 628, 650f, 651f
Gaṇitasāra (Ṭakkura Pherū), 701
Garab Dorje, 461

--- PAGE 1231 ---
1206      index
 
Garbhadhātu maṇḍala, 590–​92, 593–​97, 
600f, 674n7
Garbhavakrantīsūtra, 253
Garbhopaniṣad, 249–​50
Garland of Precious Jewels, 457
Garuḍa, 1150, 1156
Gāruḍa Purāṇa, 310
Gāruḍatantras, 307
Gāthāsaptaśati, 301
Gautama Buddha, 510, 1147
Gayley, Holly, 360–​61, 1016n24
Geen, Jonathan, 508
Geluk sect, 85, 163, 855, 857
gender
embrace of, in tantra, xvii
fluidity, as under-​studied in tantric 
studies, 1036
gendered symbols, expertise required to 
interpret, 350
gender studies approaches, 351
Gendün Gyatso, 494
Genji monogatari (Tale of Genji) 
(Murasaki), 285–​87
Genkō shakusho, 400
Genpishō (Jitsu’un of Daigō-​ji), 472–​73
Gerety, F., 795
Ghaṇṭākarṇa Mahāvīra, 130, 697
Ghaṇṭākarṇa-​Pratiṣṭhā-​Vidhiḥ (GhPV), 
128, 129t
Ghaṇṭāpāda (Vajraghaṇṭa), 867
Ghaṭotkacāśraya, 431, 436
Gheraṇḍa Saṃhitā, 1013
Gishin, 255–​56
Gītā, 1120
Gobhilagṛhyasūtra, 30
Goddess Beyond, The (Lidke), 927
goddesses
fierce and dangerous vs. beautiful and fertile 
types, 507
Mahāvidyā, 331–​33
nature/​mother/​fecundity type, as 
prehistoric in origin, 510
unique continuous tradition in India, 507
goddesses in Jainism
avenues for future research, 523–​25
defining features of, 509
early incorporation of, 510
fecund nature goddesses, 510
interaction with Indian goddesses, 508–​9
Jvālāmālinī’s characteristics as, 515–​18
Padmāvatī as, 519–​23
and renouncers’ acceptance of lay 
followers, 510
tantric, defining features of, 512–​15
vidyā (vidyādevī, mahāvidyā) 
goddesses, 510–​11
yakṣa deities, 510, 512
goddesses in tantra
in esoteric Buddhism, 260
importance of, 8–​9
as under-​studied by male academics, 9
western views on sexualized worship of, 7
See also Parā Śakti
goddess songs, 1007
Goldberg, Ellen, 1033
Gonsalez, David, 354
Goodall, Dominic, 2, 3, 230, 233, 798
Gorakha-​Kālī, temple-​palace of (Gorkha), 
943, 944f
Gorakhanātha cave temple., 943
Goraksanātha, 207
Gorakṣasaṃhitā, 315, 943
Goryū Shintō, history of, 106
Goryū Shintō goma
first offering section, 114, 115f, 117–​19
influence of Shingon Buddhist goma ritual 
on, 102–​4, 106–​12, 113
influence of Shingon vs. Tendai Buddhism 
on, 112, 113–​15, 114f, 115f, 116
and medieval development of Shintō ritual 
culture, 104
medieval Shintō’s interaction with 
Buddhism and, 106–​7
“Goryū Shintō ryōbu shūgō goma shidai,” 108
Gosain, Candi, 1001
Gosain, Haure, 995
Go-​Shirakawa (Emperor of Japan), 412
Gosvāmins, 202–​3
Gotoba (Retired Emperor of Japan), 410, 413, 
414, 421
Goudriaan, T., 333, 687
Gough, Ellen, 215, 508, 514, 518, 519, 524, 525, 825
Grant, Kenneth, 1166–​67
Grapard, Allan, 106

--- PAGE 1232 ---
index      1207
 
Gray, David, 348, 720, 728–​29, 733n10
Great Amulet Spell, 1151
great bliss (mahāsukha), 968
great chariot, two traditions of, 81, 96
Great Cloud Sutra (Mahāmeghā sūtra), 1150–​
52, 1157
Great Destroyer of the Universe (Mahāsāhasrap
ramardanī), 1144, 1147–​50, 1157
Great Image: The Liberation Narrative of 
Vairocana, 457, 459, 460
Great Peacock Queen of Spells 
(Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājnī), 1150
Great Perfection (Dzogchen) tradition
early patriarchs’ conversion into light-​
beings, 454–​55, 464, 466n9
hagiographies, characteristic events of, 
454–​55, 464
initiations, 463
methods of awareness transmission 
in, 462–​64
and mystics’ last testaments (Zhelchem), 
455, 466n10
in Nyingma and Bön schools, 453–​54
recorded history of, 462–​63
ritual use of symbols in, 463–​64
texts of, 461
Great Wisdom Treatise, 253
“Great Yantra of Pārśva’s Goddess Padmāvatī 
with 108 Names,” 697, 698f
Gross, Rita, 356
guest-​host metaphors in East Asian rituals, 
112, 120n7
Guhya, 1067
guhyābhiṣeka, 44, 45
Guhyagarbha, 214
Guhyakālī, 66–​67, 749–​50, 932, 935–​37, 942, 
943, 944f
Guhyamaṇitilaka, 1069
Guhyasamāja, 1072–​73
Guhyasamājamaṇḍala, 643
Guhyāsamāja Tantra, 42, 45, 240, 643, 862, 
870, 963, 965–​67, 969–​70, 971–​75
Guhyasiddhi (Padmavajra), 969–​70, 971–​72
Guhyasūtra, 232, 798, 1044, 1045
Guhyatantra, 37, 38, 39, 40
Guhyendutilaka, 1072
Guhyeśvarī, 928, 929, 931–​32, 935, 943, 953n27
Guhyeśvarī temple (Kathmandu), 928, 932, 
933f, 943, 944f
Gukanshō (Jien), 409–​10, 411, 413–​14, 418
Gulābcandra, Paṇḍit, 137, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145
Gumpung temple, 639
Guṇabhadra, 275
Gupta, Sanjukta, 687
Guptakālī, Temple palace of (Kāskīkoṭa), 
942, 942f
Gupta Tantra, 381
guru
as head of hijṛās/​kinnar gharāṇā/​
akhāṛā, 1027
magic to attract followers, 1153
Śaivasiddhānta’s development of guru-​
centered communities, 1048, 1049
Guruchand Thakur, 1008
Gurung, Jagman, 59–​61, 59f–​61f, 62, 63–​64, 
64f, 70n4
guru yoga, in Cakrasaṃvara traditions, 868
Gwalleuk, 281
Gyatso, Janet, 356
Hāhārāva-​tantra, 932
Haidt, Jonathan, 1028
hand gestures (mudrā), 109, 719, 967
hard-​core Tantra
and declarations of self as God, 441–​42
definition of, 427
in Java, 428, 440–​43
and “left-​hand” Buddhism, 427, 440
regional pockets of strength in 
India, 427–​28
See also Bhairava cult in East Java
Harding, Sarah, 355
Haribhadra, 85
Haribhadra Virahanka, 819–​21
Haribhadra Yakini Putra, 822–​24, 838–​39
Harichand Thakur, 1008
Hari Girī Mahārāj, 1030
Harisiṃhadeva, king, 940
Hārītī, introduction to Japan, 258
haṭhamelaka, 378
haṭhayoga (forceful yoga)
early tantric sources on, 968
kuṇḍalī in, 210
mastering of the elements rituals in, 240–​41

--- PAGE 1233 ---
1208      index
 
Hatley, Shaman, 209–​10, 304
Hayagrīva, 638f
Hayam Wuruk (king of Malasia), 576
Hayes, Glen, 14, 151, 164, 741
H. E. Gyeltshen Trulku Rinpoche, 163
Helācārya, 515–​16, 526n3
Hemacandra, 825–​26, 832
Hemavimalasūri, Ācārya, 131–​32
Henmyō’in Daishi Myōjin Go-​Takusenki 
(Takusen-​ki), 475, 476, 477, 479–​82
Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor, 1164
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, 1165
hero-​state (vīrabhāva), in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya 
tradition, 64–​65
Herrmann-​Pfandt, Adelheid, 350
Heruka
and attempt to establish Cakrasaṃvara 
maṇḍala at Śaiva Vidyāpīṭha holy sites, 
565–​69, 567f
definition of, 576n1
depictions in Cambodian temples, 669f–​70f
depictions in Malaysian temples, 640, 659f
iconography of, 564
images in monasteries by eleventh century, 564
in monastery maṇḍalas of Pāla dynasty, 557
and state protection of tantric Buddhism in 
maritime Asia, 559
and Yoginītantra, 968
See also Cakrasaṃvara; Hevajra
Herukābhidhāna. See Cakrasaṃvara
Herukābhyudaya Tantra, 866, 1078–​79
Hevajra
cult of, in Cambodia, 645–​49
cult of, in Sumatra, 640
gilt-​bronze, in palace-​like structure, 569–​
70, 571f, 646, 668f
images of, in Bayon temple, 560–​61, 561f, 
562f, 569–​71, 569f
in Khmer temple iconography, 559
other names for, 968
royal cults in Asia, 434, 558, 559–​60
in temple complex of Mỹ Sơn, 560
Hevajra cycle, 1075, 1079, 1080
Hevajra maṇḍala, 646, 665f
Hevajrasekaprakriyā, 44, 559
Hevajra Tantra, 35, 212–​13, 559, 563, 566, 575, 
577n2, 645, 1004, 1077
Highest Yoga Tantras (anuttarayogatantra), 
75–​76, 89–​90
hijṛās/​kinnar
association with music and dance, 
1026, 1033
decline of Islamic elements of identity, 1025, 
1028–​29, 1030
etymology of hijṛā, 1025–​26
female name taken by, 1026–​27
fertility power gained through ritual 
castration, 1026, 1028
as fertility ritual specialists, 1023, 1033–​35
as first transgender group to bathe in 
Kumbh Melā, 1030
Hindu culture’s acceptance of, 1026
hostility of some priests toward, 1034
at Kāmākhyā Ambubachi festival, 1033–​35
kinnar, meaning of, 1029–​30
Kinnar Akhada tilak, dress, and 
terminology, 1030
and LGBTQ +​ identities, 1025
name change to kinnars, 1023, 1025, 
1026, 1029
as now-​legitimate ascetic group Kinnar 
Akhada, 1030, 1035–​36
optional ritual castration (nirvāṇ), 1027–​28
power of blessings or curses by, 1032–​33
powers of, 1029–​30
related terms, 1025
scriptural mentions of, 1032–​33
and sex work, 1026, 1028
variety of identities included in, 1026
hijṛās/​kinnar gharāṇā/​akhāṛā (residential 
houses)
change of name to akhāṛā, 1026, 1029
codes of behavior in, 1027
guru heading, 1027
initiation into, 1027–​28
kinship within, 1026
meaning of akhāṛā, 1029
process of joining, 1027
Hillman, James, 349
Hinayāna (Lesser Vehicle)
as first stage in Tibetan Buddhism, 
153, 167n6
Mahāyāna path and, 76
as Sutra-​type practice, 153, 154t

--- PAGE 1234 ---
index      1209
 
Hinduism
approach to divine through its traces, 1132n2
deity and time in, 1119–​20
Hindu tantra
interactions with Buddhist tantra, 3, 
4, 213–​14
role of texts in, 10
scholarship on, 159
Hino’o kuketsu, 281–​82
Hishō mondō (Raiyu), 284
Hoirala, Mohani Prasad (Viṣṇu Guru), 65, 66f
homa
characteristics of, 101–​2
for Jesus and the Saints (Yogi Chen), 104
origin and history of, 101, 105
presence in most tantric traditions, 105
See also Goryū Shintō goma
Hopkins, Jeffrey, 110
Hoque, M., 587
Hoque, S., 587
horoscopy
in China, 286–​87, 293n14
as focus of astrology in Europe and Islamic 
world, 273
Indo-​Iranian, influence in China, 278–​79
in Japan, 286–​87
knowledge required for, 273
origin and spread of, 273–​74
Hōzō, 285
Huainanzi, 250–​51
human body, valorization in tantric traditions, 197
See also subtle body
“Hundred Thousand Tantras of the Nyingma 
Sect” (rnying ma rgyud ‘bum), 852
“Hymn to the Circle of Deities Located in 
the Body” (dehasthadevatācakrasto
tra), 206–​7
“Hymn to the Five Faces of Paśupati” 
(Paśupati-​pañcāsya-​stava), 929
identification with deity. See deity yoga
Ikh Khüre, 496
ikinnar. See hijṛās (kinnar)
Illman, Ruth, 992
imagery in tantric Buddhism
as catalysts for profound changes in 
practitioners, 712
concerns about violence and sexuality in, 
712, 723–​24
fields of study benefiting from 
understanding of, 713
holistic worldview as goal of, 711
importance of, xvii–​xviii
interdisciplinary approach needed in study 
of, 711–​12
multiple functions of, 712
range of interpretive approaches for, 712, 713
See also visualization, tantric
imagination
and aphantasia, 754
centrality to cognitive life, 751
and coping with chronic illness, 752
in deity yoga, 714
disorders of, 752
editing of inputs to, 741
exploration and training of, as core of 
tantric practice, 740
importance of speech and image to, 740
maṇḍalas as spur to, 740, 750–​51
and personal and collective narratives of 
self, 751, 752
role of metonymy or metaphor in, 741
in tantric visualization, 750–​54
Imam, Abu, 588
Immovable Wisdom King (Fudō Myōō), 417–​
18, 417t
impurity, innate (mala), 916–​17n19
Index of the Vajraśekhara Sūtra Yoga in 
Eighteen Sections (Amoghavajra), 
861, 862
India, early embryological medical theory, 250
Indian Buddhism
conflicted views on sexuality, 45
controversy over yogic practices, 45–​46
embryological terms in, 253
history of, 75
tantric, attempt to establish Cakrasaṃvara 
maṇḍala at Śaiva Vidyāpīṭha holy sites, 
565–​69, 567f
See also initiation (abhiṣeka) in Indian 
Buddhism
Indra, 31, 40
Indrabhūti, 655–​56, 864, 865, 969–​70
Indramahābhiṣeka, 617

--- PAGE 1235 ---
1210      index
 
Indranandin, 687–​89, 703–​4
initiation (abhiṣeka)
aspersion implements for, 32, 37, 38, 39–​
40, 41, 42
in Indian empowering ceremonies, 29
in invigoration rituals, 30–​31
literal and metaphorical uses, 30
meanings of, 29
in pretantric texts, 31–​35
in purification or cleaning ceremonies, 30
range of uses, 29, 47n1
as reproductive technology for Buddhas, 591
in rites of passage, 30
in Śaivasiddhānta, 1045–​46, 1047, 1050, 
1052, 1054
in tantric Buddhism, 962, 964–​65
terms for, xviii
See also initiation (abhiṣeka) in Indian 
Buddhism
initiation (abhiṣeka) in Indian 
Buddhism, 29–​47
adaptations for impoverished  
ritualists, 39
anointing image of deity, 37
controversies in later tantric 
abhiṣekas, 44–​46
early tantric rights, 35–​41
and fourth consecration, 44, 46
grouping by five Jinas or five forms of 
gnosis, 40–​41
higher initiations, 44–​45
and integration of politics and power into 
Buddhist communities, 46
later tantric rites, 41–​44
lower initiations, 42–​44, 45
pretantric ideology, 32–​35
ritual manuals for, 37, 43
sex acts in, 41–​42, 44–​45
turn to ritual of infusion of power, 41
various types and uses, 42
interaction and exchange among religions 
traditions
and agentivity, 102–​3
and borrowing vs. imposition, 103–​4
in Buddhism, 78
contact linguistists as model for, 102–​4
as methodology, 101, 102–​4
ĪPK. See Īśvarapratyabhijnākārikās 
(Utpaladeva)
ĪPKVṛ. See Īśvarapratyabhijnākārikāvṛtti 
(Itpaladeva)
Isaacson, Harunaga, 45
Īśāna, 929
Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati, 310
Īśā Upaniṣad, 1120, 1122, 1129
Ishinpō (Tanba no Yasuyori), 252
Īśvarapratyabhijnākārikās (Utpaladeva) 
(ĪPK), 1098–​99
Īśvarapratyabhijnākārikāvṛtti (Itpaladeva) 
(ĪPKVṛ), 1098–​99
Jacoby, Sarah, 357–​58, 360
Jago temple, 626–​27, 631, 633f, 634, 634f–​
45f, 637
Jaina kalpa (ritual manuals), 687–​88
large number of, 688–​89
misidentification as tantra, 688, 706
need for translations of, 705–​6
scholars’ focus on two texts, 687–​88
yantras in, 689
See also Jvālāmālinīkalpa (Indranandin); 
yantras, Jaina
Jaina Khām̐ṇa, 942
Jaini, Padmanabh, 141, 145
Jainism
blurry boundaries of, 507–​9
cosmology of, 819
and Dādāgurus, 824
defining characteristics of, 507, 508
dual focus on liberation and living 
successfully in the world, 832–​33
early, embryological notions in, 250
early inclusive views, 820, 821
early texts of, 510–​12, 522–​23
elements in, 226
five beautiful events in, 834
five forms of yoga in, 820
five-​level hierarchy of souls, 136
five supreme beings in, 128
five vows of, 834
and goddess worship, resistance to, 838
image-​worshipping sects, 688–​89
influential texts on mantraśāstra, 702–​3
interaction with other Indian religions, 508

--- PAGE 1236 ---
index      1211
 
on karma, accumulation and removal 
of, 819
recitations to destroy bad karma, 136
and rejection of brahminical beliefs and 
practices, 146
relationship of renouncers vs. lay 
community, as issue, 507–​8
spiritual practices in, 819
and sung texts praising goddesses, 837–​38
tantric texts in, 514
Terāpantha sect, 145
Tirthankaras in, 834
twelve vows of layperson, 131
two texts containing core teachings, 819
worship practices in, 820–​21
See also Ācārāṅga Sūtra; goddesses in 
Jainism; Tattvārtha Sūtra (Umasvāti); 
Yogabindu (Haribhadra Virahanka)
Jainism, and fire rituals
after medieval period, as based on tantric 
homa rather than Vedic, 126–​27
for consecration of Jain Digambara icon of 
Jina, 136–​44, 138f–​40f
controversy over use of, 128
differences from Hindu and Buddhist 
versions, 127–​28
internalization of Vedic sacrifice, 125
Jain defenders of, 145–​46
medieval revival of fire ritual, 126
nonviolence doctrine and, 126, 127, 135–​36, 
144, 145
in path to liberation, 128
rejection of Vedic fire ritual, 125–​26, 145
ritual manuals’ descriptions of, 128, 129t
and sacredness of fire, 145
sects still rejecting, 145
Śvetāmbara fire ritual performed for 
Māṇibhadra Vīra, 130, 133–​36, 134f, 135f
as tantric in form, 132, 144
Jainism, homas in
dozens of types, 144–​45
to enlightened and unenlightened beings, 
128, 144
groups with aniconic worship practices, 145
influence of Hindu ritual on, 141
integration of tantric image consecration 
practices, 144
mantras for, 127, 128, 132–​37, 140–​43
medieval development in response to non-​
Jain tantric homas, 137
and nonviolent, 126, 127, 135–​36, 144
and path to liberation, 141–​42
and saptaparamasthāna, 141–​42
similarity to non-​Jain counterparts, 127
use of maṇḍalas, 127, 137, 144
See also Jainism, and fire rituals
Jainism and tantric movement
in Ādi Śaṅkarācārya’s Śrῑ Lalitā Triśatῑ 
Bhāṣyam, 836–​37
adoption of repurposed tantra practices, 
825–​29, 839
avenues for future research, 838–​39
as competitors, 824–​25
contemporary Padmāvatī worship 
and, 829–​35
incorporation of “converted” goddesses 
from, 822, 825, 832
initial hostility toward, 821–​23, 838
meditation on five elements and, 826–​29
in 108 Nāma Jāpya Mantra to the Jain 
Goddess Padmāvatī, 831–​35, 836–​
38, 839–​43
scholarship on, 825
Jain tantra
avenues for future research, 705–​6
esoteric physiology in, 215
role of texts in practice, 10
wide range of untapped sources on, 706
Jajawa/​ Jawi temple, 631, 654f
Jamgön Kongtrul Lodro Tayé, 85, 95, 355
Jamsran
abode in Maruce, 500–​1
adaptability of, 502–​3
armies accompanying, 493, 494
associated deities, 489, 491, 493
as both fierce and transcendent, 500–​1
compassion toward worshipers, 494
as converted yakṣa deity, 489, 491, 492, 500, 
501, 502
destructive power granted to 
practitioners, 490–​91
as Dharma protector, 489, 490, 501
as emanation of Manjuśrī or Amitābha, 494, 
495, 502

--- PAGE 1237 ---
1212      index
 
iconography of, 493
legends and oral accounts of, 491–​92, 495
lineage holding secret to, 490–​91
and Mongolian independence 
movement, 496–​97
in Mongolian writings, 498–​502
names for, 489
roles and functions of, 489, 492–​94, 501–​2
transcultural context of, 489, 490, 492
variety of related texts, 489–​90, 503n7
violence of rituals of, 494
worship of, in Mongolia, 495–​98
Jamsran Beübüm, 489–​90, 491–​93, 499, 
501, 503n1
Jamsran’s Benediction (Lcam sring gi bkra shis) 
(Gendün Gyatso), 494
Japan
decline of Japanese imperial authority, Jien 
on, 409–​10
early Buddhist influence in, 252–​60
early embryological medical theory, 252
early embryological religious 
metaphors, 252–​53
Hōgen Rebellion, 314, 410, 412, 414, 415
Jōkyū Disturbance, 413, 414–​15
Tachikawa Buddhism, 261–​62
See also embryological notions in medieval 
Japan; Goryū Shintō goma
Japanese Buddhism
Rinzai Zen, 264
Shingon tradition, 255, 262, 276
Tendai tradition, 255, 257, 262, 276, 282–​83
Japanese medieval religion
exoteric and esoteric ideologies  
in, 105–​6
tantric exorcism rites, 472, 474, 475, 478, 
479, 482–​85
Java
Buddhism in, and interaction with China 
and Indonesia, 596
central, Buddhist architecture in, 597–​615
mild forms of Buddhism in Central 
period, 428
royal rituals in, 631–​33
See also Bhairava cult in East Java;  
hard-​core Tantra, in Java
Java, East
and Buddhist rectification of lives of sinful 
kings, 622
Mongol invasion of, 573–​74
state protection of tantric Buddhism in, 573–​74
temple architecture, two types of, 625
temple architecture designed as 
maṇḍalas, 621–​33
worship of deceased king in deified form, 
621, 626, 628, 631–​32
Jawi temple, 628
Jayā, 704
Jayabhadra, 863
Jayadrathayāmala (JY), 378
Jayākhasaṃhitā (JS), 200, 201–​2
Jayākhyasaṃhitā, 228, 238
Jaya Prakāśa Malla (king), 943
Jayaratha, 914n71125
Jayarathayāmala, 209
Jayavarman V (king of Khmer Empire), 565
Jayavarman VI (Khmer king), 568, 642–​43, 644
Jayavarman VII (Khmer king), 559, 560, 569, 
572, 644–​45, 647–​50, 657
Jetsün Ani Mumtso, 362
Jhavery, Mohanlal Bhagwandas, 513, 687
Jichiun, 263
Jien
“Articles Regarding the Establishment of 
Temple of Great Repentance,” 411–​12,  
413–​14
and Buddhist deities, reinterpreting of 
function, 416–​21
as composer of waka, 409–​10
on decline of Japanese imperial authority, 
409–​10, 414
Gukanshō, 409–​10, 411, 413–​14, 418
on Hōgen Rebellion, 412, 413, 414, 415
life of, 410
on mutual dependence of imperial 
authority and buddhadharma, 418
on need for government in line with 
Principles of Buddhist teaching, 410, 411, 
412, 414, 419–​21
“Origins of the Main Deity,” 410–​11
program to protect Japanese government 
against vengeful spirits, 411–​13, 414–​16, 
419, 421
Jamsran (cont.)

--- PAGE 1238 ---
index      1213
 
“Questions and Answers on the 
Commentaries of the Main  
Deity,” 410–​11, 419–​20
and Temple of Great Repentance  
(Sanjō Shirakawa bō), 410, 411–​13,  
414–​16, 415t, 416–​20, 417t, 421
and Tendai school, 410
on unity of bodies of Buddha, 419–​20
on vengeful spirits, 413–​14
See also Temple of Great Repentance  
(Sanjō Shirakawa bō)
Jieu, 414–​15
Jina, 136–​44, 138f–​40f
Jinacandrasūri, 824–​25
Jinadattasuri, 824
Jinasena, 126, 127, 141–​42, 143, 144
Jingang ding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui 
(Amoghavajra), 1066
Jingyingsi Huiyuan, 397
Jitsu’un of Daigō-​ji, 472–​73, 483
Jizang, 254, 397
Jñanagarbha, 1080
Jñānagupta, 4
Jñānākara (a.k.a. Buddhaśrījñāna), 973
Jñānamatī, Āryikā, 137
Jñānamitra, 655–​57
Jñānapāda school, 973–​74
Jñānaprakāśa (Śālivāṭi), 1053
Jñānārṇava (Śubhacandra), 825–​29
Jñānasiddhi (Indrabhūti), 969–​70
Jñānasūtra, 456
Jñānatilaka, 1080
Jñānavajrasamuccaya, 1075
Jñānāvaraṇaviḷakkam (Veḷḷiambara Vānar 
Tambirān), 914n6
Jñānodaya, 1082
Jōgyō, 289
Johnson, Mark, 766, 767, 768–​69, 770, 771, 775, 
776, 780–​81, 785
Joko Dolog statue of Jina  
Akṣobhya, 573
Jonang tradition, 91
Josipovic, Zoran, 162
JS. See Jayākhasaṃhitā
Jung, Carl, 349, 350
Junko, Nishiguchi, 259
Jvālāmālinī, 510, 512, 515–​18, 518f
Jvālāmālinīkalpa (Helācārya), 514, 515–​17, 
702, 703
Jvālāmālinīkalpa (Indranandin), 687–​89, 703–​4
Kabat-​Zinn, Jon, 156–​57
Kabir, 1006
Kādambarī (Bāṇabhaṭṭa), 302
Kagjü
neuroscientific research on, 159–​60
and Sūtra Mahāmudrā, 163
Kākacakratantra, 316
Kākacaṇḍeśvarīmata, 312
Kākacaṇḍeśvarīmatatantra, 315
kakavin Ghaṭotkacāśraya (Mpu Panuluh), 430
Kakavins, 436
kakavin Sutasoma (Mpu Tantular), 436
Kakṣapuṭa (KS), 306–​7
Kakuban, 264
Kakugen kudenshō (Kukai and Yūgen), 
474, 479–​80
Kakukai of Daigō-​ji, 474, 480
Kakushō, 277
Kakuwa, 476
Kakuzen, 473
Kakuzenshō (Kakuzen), 473
Kālacakra, 721f
Kālacakra Tantra, 316, 870, 1079–​80,  
1082–​83
Kālacakra tantric system, 975
Kālamukhācārya, 894–​95
Kālamukha lifeworlds
reconstruction of, 880
scholarship on, 879, 912n2
Kālamukha material culture, 884–​901
agglutive nature of sites, 897, 899–​901,  
920n39
Bhairava-​related traditions in, 887, 894–​95, 
895f, 899, 899f, 907f
and divergent evolution of religious 
traditions, 900–​1
importance of context for 
interpreting, 884–​85
regionalized vernacular imaginaries in, 887
Śākta traditions in, 885, 889–​90, 894
Śaktipariṣad inscriptions as strategic 
interventions, 885
similarity throughout Deccan, 887

--- PAGE 1239 ---
1214      index
 
Somēśvara temple, Lakṣmēśvara, 898–​901, 
898f–​904f
Trikūṭēśvara ritual complex  
(Gadag), 887–​98, 892f–​97f, 900–​1
Tripurāntakēśvara temple, 885–​87, 886f, 
888f–​91f
Kālamukha traditions
diversity within, 879–​80, 910–​12
doctrinal differences, 880–​84
elevation over time of Sōmēśvara 
Paṇḍita, 908–​10
influence of, 879
Kalyāni Cāḷukyas records documenting 
local cultures and, 905–​8
Śaiva exegetes of Kashmir on, 914n5
and texts as strategic interventions, 885
Kāla Śakti, 1118, 1121–​22, 1123, 1125–​26, 1134n7
Kālasaṃkarśinī, 1125
kalaśa pot, 32, 41, 42
Kaḷēśvara, 910–​12
Kālī
in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tradition, 66–​68
in nondual Śaivism’s conception of 
time, 1125
temple-​palace of Gorakha-​Kālī (Gorkha), 
943, 944f
Kālikākulapañcaśataka, 939
Kālīkulakramārcana (Vimalaprabodha), 940
Kālīkulapancaśataka, 1125
Kalikuṇḍa yantra, 704–​5
Kālottara, 1047
Kālottaratantra, 1046
Kalu Rinpoche, 355
Kalyāṇamandirastotra, 702
Kalyāṇaśakti, 909, 910
Kalyāni Cāḷukyas
records documenting local cultures, 905–​8
restoration and recognition of local 
cultures, 902–​5, 906–​8
Kāmakalāvilāsa (Puṇyānanda), 327–​28, 329
Kāmākhyā temple complex, 1023–​24, 1031–​32, 
1033–​35, 1036n2
Kamalakanta, 1001
kāma literature, aphrodesiacs in, 309
Kamasūtra, 308
Kamaṭh, 830, 831t
Kāmika, 1052
Kāmikāgama, 534
Kāṇha (Kṛṣṇācārya), 866–​67
Kāpaḍiyā, Mūlcandra Kisandās, 702–​3
Kāpālasiddhānta, 882
Kāpālikas, 301, 434n6, 441, 443
Kāpālikas and Kālamukhas, The (Lorenzen), 885
Kapālīśabhairava, 802
Karaikkal Ammaiyar, 999
Kāraṇa, 1052
Kāraṇḍavyūha sūtra, 605, 649–​50, 965
karma
destruction in initiation rites (dīkṣā), 1047–​48, 
1053–​54
Jainism on accumulation and removal 
of, 819
meditation on five elements and, 826
and theodicy, 374
Kashmir Śaivism. See Trika Śaivism
Kasiṇa meditation, 161, 161t, 162
Kaulajnānanirṇaya (Matsyendranātha) 
(KJnN), 207, 379, 937
Kaulas, 53, 302, 441, 974
Kaula Śaivism, 207–​8
Kavīndrārimathana, 565
Kavirāja, Gopīnāth, 203
Kellner, Karl, 1164
Kelting, Whitney, 830
Kesariya stūpa, 585, 585f–​87f
Ketu, 283
Khaḍga Mālā, 323
Khandro Rinpoche, 358
Khandro Tare Lhamo, 361–​62
Khanna, Madhu, 332
Khenchen Jigme Phuntsok, 362
Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtsho, 351
Khmer state
Buddhist Mahīdharapura dynasty rise to 
power, 565
Buddhists’ strategy to subsume Śaivism 
under esoteric Buddhism, 559, 562
state health system, 559
state protection tantric Buddhism in, 
565, 568–​69
Khüree of Erdene Khamba monastic 
center, 497–​98
Khyepa Baba, 996
Kālamukha material culture (cont.)

--- PAGE 1240 ---
index      1215
 
Khyungpo Naljor, 355
Kichijōten, 260
kings’ initiation (abhiṣeka) in pretantric 
Indian texts, 31–​32
kinnar. See hijṛās/​kinnar
Kinsley, David, 331–​32
Kiraṇatantra, 234, 806, 1048, 1049, 1050, 1051
Kīrtipaṇḍita, 565
Kiss, Csaba, 208
KJnN. See Kaulajnāna-​nirṇaya
Klein, Anne, 354
KM. See Kubjikāmata Tantra
Kojiki (The Records of Past Matters), 252, 292n8
Koravāśrama, 437–​38
Kōya Daishi go kōden (Shōken), 282
Kōyasan, 472–​73, 475, 482–​83
Krama Śākta, 746
krama tantric tradition, 934–​37
Kreinath, Jens, 102
Kriyākālaguṇottara, 310
Kriyākāṇḍakramāvali, 1051
Kriyākramadyotikā (Aghora-​śiva), 1049
Kṛṣṇa
and Caitanya, 1033
and time, 1120
in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā, 203, 204, 763, 766
Kṛṣṇa, Raj, 995
Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, 202–​3, 763, 766
Kṛṣṇācārya (Kāṇha), 866–​67
Kṛṣṇayamāri, 1074–​75
Kṛṣṇayamāri, 1074–​75
Kṛtanagara (East Javanese king), 432–​35, 561, 
563, 573–​74, 576, 626, 628–​31, 634–​36, 657
KS. See Kakṣapuṭa
Kṣemarāja, 207, 378–​80, 381, 804–​5
Kṣitigarbha, 596f, 612f, 618f, 974
kṣmlrvyūṃ mantra, 705
Kubjikā, 934, 943, 944f, 953n26
Kubjikā, the “hunchbacked” goddess, 207, 210
Kubjikāmata Tantra (KM), 206, 207, 208, 209, 
210, 306, 704, 935
Kublai Khan, 432, 434, 559, 561, 563, 573, 657
Kūkai
and Buddhist astrology in Japan, 281–​82, 
285, 289–​91
and Chūin-​ ryū, 480
on dharmakāya, 399–​400
and maṇḍala as body in Shingon, 729–​32
poetry and poetics by, 734n26
and Shingon school, 255, 399, 480
on sound and syllables, 400
on Vajrayāna, 713
Kulamaṇḍana Khām̐ṇa (king of Kāskī), 
942, 942f
Kulamārga, 881, 914n7
Kulārṇava-​tantra, 930
Kumano no gohonji, 264
Kumārī, 943–​45, 945f
kumārī pūjā, 1032
Kumbha, in abhiṣeka, 32
Kumbh Melā, Kinnar Akhada and, 1030
kuṇḍalinī
ascent and descent of, 210–​11
cakras in Kundalini tantra, 826–​27
and cosmogenesis, avenues of future 
research on, 806–​7, 814n79
as defining feature of tantra, 1031
history of concept, 209–​10
identification with source (mātṛkā), 798
in Matua movement on, 1011, 1012f
in non-​Saiddhāntika tantras, 802
and purification of the elements ritual, 228
rise from lower to higher centers, 198
Śākta-​Śaiva sources on, 800, 803, 812n57
scholarship on, 198
Kunke Gyalpo (Buddha), 459
Kuroda Toshio, 106, 418
Kuśalaśrī, 977
Kuyō hiryaku, 283–​84, 283f
Kuyōtō zuzō, 287–​88
Laghusaṃvara. See Cakrasaṃvara
Lajjā Gaurī, 899, 902f
Lakoff, George, 766, 768–​69, 770, 771–​75, 
776, 785
Lakṣmī, 325, 509, 969
Lakṣmīndralokeśvara, 614–​15, 630f. 631f
Lakṣmῑ Tantra, 201–​2
Lākula Atimārga tradition, 912n3
Lākulas, 879, 880, 882–​84, 909, 917n19, 917n21
Lalan Fakir, 995–​96
Lalitāsahasranāma, 323, 331
Lalitopākhyāna, 1032
Langer, Susanne, 732

--- PAGE 1241 ---
1216      index
 
Langley, J. N., 156
Laozi, 250
LaVey, Anton Szandor, 1168, 1176n3
Leadbeater, Charles, 198
left-​hand path (vāmācāra)
association with wickedness, 440
and hard-​core Tantra, 427, 440
in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tradition, 59–​62
left-​hand path (vāmācāra) in modern West, 
1167–​69
overstepping all taboos and social 
boundaries as central practice in, 1167, 
1168–​69
Satanism and, 1168–​69, 1176n3
and self-​deification, 1166–​67
valorizing of power and self  
in, 1168–​69
Legdrup (Legs grub) of Tsang, 456–​57
Lha Lama Yeshe Ö, 849
liberation
in Jainism, homas and, 128, 141–​42
and living successfully, dual focus on, in 
Jainism, 832–​33
mercury (rasa) and, in rasaśāstra medical 
tradition, 308
three doors of, 79
through ecstatic song and dance, in Matua 
movement, 1009–​13, 1010f
while living (jivanmukti), as defining 
feature of tantra, 420, 1031
See also emptiness; enlightenment; 
soteriology
Lidke, Jeffrey S., 924–​26, 927, 1013
Light on the Secret Reality 
(guhyatattvaprakāśa) (Kāṇha), 866
linguistic mysticism in tantric Buddhism
avenues of future research, 806–​7
Bhartṛhari and, 795–​96
Niśvāsa corpus on, 796–​98
in non-​Saiddhāntika tantric streams, 802
on OM as source of world and speech, 796
in Śaiva Siddhānta, 798–​802
in Śākta texts, 803–​5
on vibration or subtle language pervading 
creation, 795–​96, 798–​99, 806
Lion’s Roar of Queen Śrīmālā (Śrīmāladevīsaṃ
hanāda Sūtra), 88
literature, tantric
characteristics of, xviii
in India, fragmentary early record of, 17n11
See also tantras
Lobsang Palden Yeshe, 494
Locanā, 643f
Loṅkā Śāh, 131, 145
Lorenzen, David, 885
Lotus Sutra, 259, 404, 419–​20
loving–​kindness meditation (LKM), 167n8
Lo Yoga della potenza (Evola), 1167
Lūipa, Mahāsiddha, 865, 866
Luminous Heart Essence (Ösel Nyingthik) 
(Adzom Paylo Rinpoche), 354
Lutz, Antoine, 157
Lü Yan, 275
Machik Lapdrön, 355
Madhyamaka
emptiness in, 78–​79
as exegetical tradition, 81
Great Madhyamaka, 93–​96
śāstras, Mahāyāna path and, 76
and Yogācāra, 84
Madhyāntavibhāga (Distinguishing between 
the Middle and Extremes), 84, 85–​86
Madness Vow (unmattavrata), 971–​72
magic
adaptation to emerging tantric Buddhism, 
1145, 1152–​53, 1157
for binding, 1156
books of spells (grimoires), 1155–​57
characteristics distinguishing tantric texts 
from texts on, 1158
Chinese astral magic, 279–​80
to control monsters, 1144, 1148–​49, 1150–​
52, 1155
to control pregnancy, 1156
to control weather, 1150–​52, 1156
debate on classification of texts about, 
1143–​44
deification of spells, 1150
for divination, 1156
for enriching oneself, 1153
for entering and controlling foreign 
bodies, 377–​80
four categories of texts, 1144, 1157–​58

--- PAGE 1242 ---
index      1217
 
in Great Destroyer of the Universe (Mahāsāh
asrapramardanī), 1147–​50
in Guhyasamāja tantra (Tantra of the Secret 
Assembly), 1153–​55
Japanese astral magic, 283–​84, 287
and Kriyā tantra genre, 1144
love spells, 1153
in Malliṣeṇasūri’s 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, 520–​23
maṇḍalas and maṇḍala-​like spaces in texts 
on, 1144–​45, 1146–​47, 1149, 1150, 1151–​52, 
1154, 1155, 1156, 1158
of mantras, in Mantramārga, 1053–​54
mantras in, 1144, 1148, 1150, 1151–​54, 1156
monasteries and, 1152
murder through, 972–​73, 975
ongoing use of, 1144, 1147, 1150
for poison removal, 1153
for protection from specific problems, 1149
for protection of the kingdom, 1150
protective texts (rākṣa, paritta), 1145–​50
state-​protection and martial magic in 
Bhairava cult, 434–​35
for subduing women, 520–​22
for subjugating of enemies, 522–​23, 1153, 
1154–​55
in Sutra of Atanata, 1144, 1145–​47
in Sutra of Great Vairocana, 1152–​53
in Tantra of Siddhaikavira (Tantra of the 
Solitary Hero), 1155–​57
texts’ accretion of details over time, 1150
Tibetan spell books, 1157
in Vajra Beak’s Vow, 1150–​52
and vidyādhara (holders of spells), 1152
for voodoo-​like attacks on enemies, 1156–​57
magic squares
history of use of, 701–​2
in modern Jaina yantras, 699, 700f, 701–​2
Magsarjav, Khatanbaatar 
Sanagdorjiin, 496–​97
Mahābhārata, 211, 1032
Mahādaṇḍadhāraṇī-​śītavatī, 40
Mahākāla, 63, 434, 435, 626, 628, 631, 640, 652f, 
655f, 676n33
Mahākāla, 1079
Mahākāla-​Saṃhitā, 66–​67, 935
Mahākṣobhya, 628
Mahāmāyā, 1076
Mahāmudrā, 160, 162, 163
Mahāmudrātilaka, 1080, 1082
“Mahānirbāṇ keman kare haẏ” (Duddu 
Shah), 995–​96
Mahānirvāṇa Tantra, 327
Mahāniśīthasūtra, 704
mahāpātakas (five greatest sins), purification 
rituals for, 30
Mahāratnakūṭa sūtra, 253
Mahāsaṃnipāta, 275
Mahāsiddha Lūipa, 866
Mahāsudassana Sutta, 1146–​47
Mahātripurāsundarī, 68, 930
Mahāvairocana, 263, 614, 729–​30, 731
Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi (MVS)/
Mahāvairocanāsaṁbodhi sūtra or 
Mahāvairocana sūtra, 261, 399–401, 563, 
590, 594, 604, 635
See also Vairocanābhisambodhitantra 
Mahāvairocana maṇḍala, 635
Mahāvajradhara Buddha, 864–​65
Mahāvastu, 33
Mahāvidyās, 331–​33
Mahāvratins, 882
Mahāvῑra, 830
Mahāyāna Buddhism (“Great Vehicle”)
addition of new scriptures and 
Buddhas, 864
as “cause vehicle,” 717–​18
development of, 76–​77
doctrine of the three natures, 80–​81, 87
Dolpopa’s reinterpretation of, 91–​93
emptiness in, 78–​79, 82, 83, 91–​93
exegetical traditions, 81
final awakened state in, 86
Five Dharmas of Maitreya, 83–​86
vs. Hīnayāna path, 76
methods of, Highest Yoga Tantra  
and, 75–​76
Middle Way (Madhyamaka)  
“non-​entitiness” (niḥsvabhāva) 
type, 850–​51
“Mind-​Only” (Cittamātra) or “Yogic 
Practice” (Yogācāra) type, 850–​51
Nāgārjuna and, 81–​83
nondual awareness in, 162

--- PAGE 1243 ---
1218      index
 
paradigmatic sūtras, 78–​81
practice and goals of, 850
relation to tantric Buddhism 
(Vajrayāna), 76, 77
and Śākyamuni, 76
as second stage in Tibetan Buddhism, 153
as sutra-type practice, 153, 154t
texts of, 76, 81–​86
themes in thought of, 76–​77, 83
Tibetan systematization of, 81
on Turnings of the Wheel, 80
two components of, 76
two major types of, 850–​51
wisdom in, 76
on women’s status, 259
Mahāyāna Great Nirvāṇa Sūtra 
(Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra), 88
Mahāyoga, 213–​14, 1004, 1153–​54
Maheśvara, 965
Maheśvarānanda, 752
Mahīdharapura dynasty, 642
Mahmūd of Ghaznī, 575
Maitreya (Buddha), 81, 618f
in architecture designed as maṇḍalas, 610f
Asaṅga and, 83–​84
and Distinguishing the Jewel Lineage, 88
importance in tantric Mahāmudrā 
traditions, 88
Maitrīpa, 163
Maitrī Upaniṣad, 1119–​20
Makransky, John J., 85–​86, 87, 88, 93
mālinī, 802, 803, 806
Mālinīvijayottara (MVT), 188–​89
Mālinīvijayottara Tantra (MVUT), 236–​37, 
306, 375
Mallinson, James, 207
Malliṣeṇa. See Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa 
(Malliṣeṇa)
Māmakī, 644f
Māṇadeva, King, 53
maṇḍala(s)/​mandala(s)
appeal in Southeast Asia, 650–​51
and astral magic in early Heian 
period, 282–​83
bodhisattvas in, 582, 585, 674n2
as body, in Shingon Buddhism, 729–​32
in Buddhist initiation (abhiṣeka) rites, 35–​
38, 43
in Buddhist visualization of 
elements, 239–​40
Cakrasaṃvara maṇḍala, 565
in Cakrasaṃvara traditions, 865, 869
as defining feature of tantra, 1031
as device for focusing and deepening 
attention, 740, 742–​44
Dharmadhātuvāgīśvara, 635
earliest texts on, 1150–​51
in early magic texts, 1144–​47, 1149–​52, 1154–​
56, 1158
and esoteric physiology in Vaiṣṇava 
Pāncarātra tantra, 202
and expansion of memory capacity, 740–​41, 
743, 748–​49
Garbhadhātu maṇḍala, 590–​92, 593–​97, 
600f, 674n7
as hallmark of tantric Buddhism, 582
Hevajra maṇḍala, 646, 665f
hierarchical relationship between figures 
in, 584
and images as spur to imagination, 
740, 750–​51
in Janism, 127, 825
Mahāvairocana maṇḍala, 635
in mahāyoga tradition, 213–​14
Mandala of the Five Stages of the Embryo in 
the Womb, 264
Mandala of the Five Viscera, 264
mix of perspectives in, 583
as model of imperial political and social 
structure, 581, 582, 583–​84
and pursuit of kingship as central metaphor 
of tantric literature, 581
in rasaśāstra medical tradition, 302
and soteriology in tantric Buddhism, 961, 
964–​65, 967, 977
star maṇḍalas, 288–​89, 290f, 291
and tantric imagery of Buddha as 
king, 584–​85
in tantric practices, 190
themes of conquest and discipline in, 584
Two Mandalas of esoteric Buddhism, 260
typical structure of, 582
use in Jain homas, 137, 144
Mahāyāna Buddhism (“Great Vehicle”) (cont.)

--- PAGE 1244 ---
index      1219
 
Vajradhātu maṇḍala, 590–​97, 601f, 616–​17, 
635, 656–​57, 674n7
Vajrahūṁkāra maṇḍala, 675n19
in Vajrayāna practices, 159–​60, 160t, 
164, 275–​76
and visualization in deity yoga, 718–​19, 725–​
26, 729–​31
world as, for Nepālī tantrikas, 53
See also temple architecture designed as 
maṇḍalas
Maṇḍanamiśra, 801
Māṇekcand “Māṇek” Śāh, 130–​31
Māṇibhadra Vīra
as fire diety, 132
iconography of, 130, 134f
Jain Śvetāmbara fire ritual performed for, 
130, 133–​36, 134f, 135f
legends of, 130–​32
monthly homa at, 132
as protector deity of Tapā Gaccha, 
130. 131–​32
temples and shrines of, 130, 132
Mañjughoṣa, 606
Mañjuśrī, 276–​77, 494, 596f, 606, 609, 614f, 
626, 645f, 974, 1156
Mañjuśrīmitra, 455–​56, 461
Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa 258, 278
Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa (MMK), 590, 1044, 1068
Mañjuvajra maṇḍala, 635
Manthānabhairava, 333, 935
mantra(s)
Annen on, 401, 402–​3, 405
as defining feature of tantra, 1031, 1045
definition of, 399–​400
as device for focusing and deepening 
attention, 740, 742–​44
in Digambara fire offering for consecration 
of Jina icon, 142–​43
for each planet, in Japanese astral magic, 283
in East Asian esoteric Buddhism, 399
as embodiment of Śiva, 797, 799
and expansion of memory capacity, 740–​41, 
743, 753
of feminine deity (vidyā), 325
in initiation rites (dīkṣā) in Śaivasiddhānta, 
1045–​46, 1047, 1054
for Jain homas, 127, 128, 132–​37, 140–​43
Jainism’s adoption of, 825, 827–​28, 829
mantra in garland form (mālāmantra), 1045
in mastering of the elements rituals, 234
Mṛtyujit mantra, 370, 374, 381, 385
and power to achieve enlightenment in 
single lifetime, 1153
and puraścaraṇa, 746
in rasaśāstra medical tradition, 302,  
311–​14
root-​mantras (mūlamantra), 1046
Sadāśiva body part mantras, 1046
seed mantras (bījamantra), 715, 742, 744, 
755n21045
as sonic body of deity, 1045
in Śrῑ Lalitā Triśatῑ Bhāṣyam, 836
Tendai school on, 400–​1
two types of, 1045
use in magic practices, 1144, 1148, 1150,  
1151–​54, 1156
use to escape saṃsāra, 1045
way of the mantras (mantranaya), 968, 973, 
974, 976, 977–​79
See also 108 Nāma Jāpya Mantra to the Jain 
Goddess Padmāvatī
Mantramārga
development of, 913n4
early fire rituals to purge karma, 1047–​48, 
1053–​54
early focus on magical power of mantras, 
1053–​54
growth of social hierarchy  
within, 1047–​49
Kālamukha tradition and, 879, 909, 911
Kulamārga and, 914n7
and mantra used to escape saṃsāra, 1045
origin of, 2
permeability within and across religious 
communities, 881
potential exaggeration of influence, 1055–​56
Śaiva Siddhānta and, 881–​83
and Śaiva tantra, 1044–​45
social widening of, 1049–​53
and tantric as term, 513–​15
term for initiates in, 916n14
*Mantrāvatāra (Jñānākara), 973
Manusmṛti, 275
Markaṇḍeya Purāṇa, 826

--- PAGE 1245 ---
1220      index
 
mastering of the elements rituals, 229–​40
bodily perfections as one goal of, 229–​30
and borrowing across texts, 239, 241, 243n17
in haṭhayoga, 240–​41
in Non-​Saiddhāntika Śaiva texts, 235–​37
as not found in Buddhism, 239
overview of, 240
in Pāñcarātra tantras, 237–​39
powers gained from, 241
pre-​tantric texts on, 241
in Śaivasiddhānta, 230–​35
similarity to purification of the elements 
rituals, 230
two main contexts of, 230
yogic dhāraṇā as method in, 230
Mataṅgapārameśvara, 1122
Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama, 234
Mātaṅga-​sūtra, 275
Matisāgara, 689
mātṛkā (“mother,” source)
centrality to early Śaiva tantric 
literature, 797–​98
early development of concept, 797, 806
embodiment in script, 798
evolution into goddess, 797, 798, 802
identification with kuṇḍalinī, 798
Niśvāsa corpus on, 796–​97
in non-​Saiddhāntika tantric streams, 802
relationship to Sanskrit phonemes (varṇa), 
796, 797, 798, 806
in Śākta-​Śaiva sources, 798–​801
Śākta texts on, 803–​5
as source of language and manifest 
reality, 797
as source of power in all mantras, 798
worship of, 797, 798
Matsyapurāṇa, 30
Matsyendranātha, 207, 937–​38
Matsyendrasaṃhitā, 208, 237
Matua movement
founding and beliefs of, 1008–​9
kuṇḍalinī in, 1011, 1012f
liberation through ecstatic song and dance, 
1009–​13, 1010f
reluctance to identify as tantric, 1009
Māyā, 209
Māyājāla, 1072
McCrea, Lawrence, 336
medical texts, Sanskrit, 301–​2
See also rasaśāstra medical tradition
Meditation on Bodhicitta (Mañjuśrīmitra), 461
Meditation on the Great Lord of the Beasts 
(Mahāpaśupati-​dhyāna), 68–​69, 69f
Meeks, Lori, 259
Meiji reforms, and separation of Shintō and 
Buddhism, 106
Mekhalādhāraṇī, 310
memory
and attention, interplay of, 749
editing of inputs to, 741, 747
expansion of, in tantric visualization, 740–​
41, 743, 746–​50
as foundation of identity, 746
and identity modification, in tantric 
visualization, 746–​50
maṇḍalas and mantras used to expand 
capacity of, 740–​41, 743, 748–​49, 753
role of metonymy or metaphor in, 741
and temporal reordering in tantric 
visualization, 749–​50
Mendut temple, 604–​6, 607f, 608f–​19f, 615
mercury (rasa)
introduction to India, 301
limited information on uses of, 317
as medicine in Sanskrit texts, 301–​2
other meanings of rasa and, 301, 316
as sexual fluid, 303–​5
mercury (rasa), in rasaśāstra medical 
tradition
as aid to sexual prowess, 303
and aphrodesiacs, 308–​9
female sexual fluids needed to purify, 304
and immortality, 308
and liberation, 308
mantra for giving, 312–​13
powers of, 313–​14
purification of, 307, 313
and raising of the dead, 307–​8
rasaliṅga made with, 313
as sexual fluid of Śiva, 303, 307
as source of gods’ immortality, 304
Mergen Gegeen Luvsandambijaltsan, 502
metaphor
in Amṛtaratnāvalī, 769–​70, 772–​73

--- PAGE 1246 ---
index      1221
 
complexity of meaning, 766
embryological, in Buddhism, 249, 251, 
253, 254–​55
embryological, in Japan, 252–​53, 254–​55, 
256, 260–​61, 264–​65
reshaping of reality in deity yoga, 731
role in compression of cognition, 741
in tantric mapping of reality, 731, 740
in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā, 764, 767–​75, 776–​79, 
777f, 779–​81
See also conceptual metaphor 
theory (CMT)
Meykaṇṭacāttiraṅkaḷ, 1052
Mīmāṃsakas, 800
Mīmāṃsā system, 226
Minamoto no Shitagō, 281
Mind and Life Institute, 216
mindfulness-​based interventions
and bare-​awareness techniques, 157
neuroscientific research on, 153
as secularized meditation  
practice, 152
Mindfulness-​Based Stress Reduction 
(MBSR), 156–​57
mind of great bliss, completion stage 
(niṣpannakrama) of tantric practice 
and, 90
Mipham Gyatso, 1157
missionaries, Buddhist, threats of bad rebirth 
by, 617
Miwa daimyōjin engi, 106
MMK. See Manjuśriyamūlakalpa
modern Western forms of tantra
Bernard and Tantrik Order of America, 
1169–​70
Bhagwan Shree Rahneesh/​Osho and, 
1170–​73
and celebration/​deification of self, 1166–​69, 
1173–​74
great variety of, 1174
left-​hand path, 1167–​69
Neo-​Tantra, 1161
New Age spirituality, 1161, 1167, 1170–​71, 
1173–​74
Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.), 1163–​66
as popular path focused on sensual 
pleasure, 1161
as very different from Indian  
tantra, 1175–​76
monasteries, and magic, 1152
Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party 
(MPRP), 496, 497
Monier-​Williams, Monier, 1162
Monsoon Culture, 928
Monyōki, 416
Mookerji, K. B., 311
The Mountain Doctrine (Dolpopa Sherab 
Gyeltsen), 854
MPRP. See Mongolian People’s 
Revolutionary Party
Mpu Panuluh, 430
Mpu Prapanca, 434
Mṛgendratantra, 235, 800
Mṛtasugatiniyojana, 306
Mṛtyuvancanopadeśa, 306
Muara Jambi temple complex, 638, 639
Muara Takus temple complex, 638, 657f, 658f
Mukunda-​dāsa, 764
Mukundamuktāvalī (Mukunda), 203
Mūlamantra, 34–​35
Mūlasūtra, 231
Murasaki Shikibu, 285–​87
Mūrtiśivācārya, 906
MVS. See Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi
MVT. See Mālinīvijayottara
MVUT. See Mālinīvijayottara Tantra
Myōken Bosatsu, 284
nāda (vibrations), 1013
Nādakārikā (Rāmakaṇṭha), 801
Nāgarēśvara temple, Sūṇḍi, 902–​4, 906f–​8f
Nāgārjuna, 77, 81–​83, 91, 92
Nāgārjuna Siddha, 306, 308
Nāgarkṛtāgama. See Deśavarṇana (Mpu 
Prapanca)
nāgas, 1148, 1150–​52
Nakharēśvara, 910
Nāmamantrārth āvalokinī (Vilāsavajra), 1066
Nāmasaṃgīti, 1070
Namtrul Rinpoche, 361–​62
Nānacampantar, 1055
Nanda, Serena, 1026
Nandi, Ramendra Nath, 688
Nandiśvara, 648f

--- PAGE 1247 ---
1222      index
 
Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, 800
Narendrayaśas, 275
Nāropa, 88, 870–​71
Naṭanānandanātha, 327
Naṭeśa, 894–​95
navātmamantra, 704
Nawab, Sarabhai Manilal, 687
Nayapāla (Pāla emperor), 972
Nayasūtra, 231–​32, 796, 798
Nayatrayabheda (Kuśalaśrī), 977
Nayatrayapradīpa (Bhaṭṭa 
Trivikrama), 977–​78
NDA. See nondual awareness
Nelde, Peter Hans, 102
Nemicandra, 137–​38, 141, 142
Neoplatonism, 1126–​27
Neo-​Tantra, 1161, 1171–​74
Nepal, tantra in
Caryā/​cacā songs, 1007
commanders-​in-​chief (mir-​umarā-​
mukhiyā) of villages, 62, 70n4
and composition of tantras, 1082
gods dwelling within world and bodies of 
faithful, 53
as historical and cultural heart of 
Tantra, 923
as Nepāla-​Maṇḍala for Nepālī  
tantrikas, 53
as Northern Seat, 932, 935–​36
See also Sarvāmnāya Tantra, Nepālī  
(Total Revelation Tantra)
Nepalese-​German Manuscript Cataloguing 
Project, 335
Netra Tantra (NT)
as composite text, 370, 381
defense of sacrifice, 375
on dhāraṇā, 237
earlier versions of, 371
as gnostic system, 385–​86
on gross yoga, 369–​70, 380–​84
importance to history of tantric yoga, 369
introduction to threefold yoga, 372–​73
on magical medicines, 302
on meditation and subtle body 
system, 371–​72
Mṛtyujit as supreme deity in, 370
on mṛtyujit mantra, 370, 374, 381, 385
nondualist metaphysics overlaid onto, 
371, 374–​75
scholarship on, 369
structure of, 370
on subtle yoga (sūkṣmayoga), 369, 
370, 376–​81
on supreme yoga (parayoga), 369, 370, 
372, 373–​76
on technique for entering and controlling 
foreign bodies, 369, 377–​80
and theodicy, 374–​75
on threefold yoga, 369, 370
on triad of impurities (malatraya), 375
yoga as literal “yoking” in, 370, 371, 377, 
382, 387n14
yoga in, as distinct from traditional Yoga 
Sūtras types, 371, 372, 386
on Yoginīs as source of three-​fold 
yoga, 376–​78
on Yoginīs as united with Śiva, 373–​74, 
375, 384–​85
on Yoginīs’ killing and devouring of 
victims, 372–​73, 375–​76, 381–​84, 385
Netratantras, 306
Neumann, Eric, 350
neurobiology and neuroscience
nervous system structure and function, 156
scholarship on tantra, 12
neuroscientific research on yoga and 
meditation practices, 152
affective components and, 164–​65
and autonomic arousal in tantric practices, 
158–​59, 161, 163–​64
avenues for futher research, 164–​66
and bare awareness practices, 157
and constructive vs. destructive  
types, 157
and focused-​attention (FA) vs. open 
monitoring (OM) types, 157, 161t, 162
Kozhevnikov’s research on Vajrayāna, 152, 
153, 159–​64
methods and equipment used in, 155–​56
as model-​based field, 156
and modeling of Buddahood-​focused 
meditation, 157–​59
non-​tantric techniques’ relaxation 
response, 152, 153, 155–​57

--- PAGE 1248 ---
index      1223
 
other tantric techniques causing arousal 
response, 152
and parallels between ANS and tantric 
subtle body, 164
and practice uses of tantra for health and 
wellness, 165
taxonomies of practices, 157
on Theravāda, 153
on Tibetan meditation, 167n7
and tonic vs. phasic alertness, 158–​59, 162
Vajrayāna’s arousal response, 152, 159–​62
See also parasympathetic nervous 
system (PNS)
Neville, Robert Cummings, 1129, 1131
New Age spirituality
commercialization of, 1174
and Left-​Hand Path, 1167
and modern tantra, 1161, 1170–​71, 1173–​74
and sacralization of modernity, 1173–​74
New Shingon movement, 264
New Tantra (sarma) system, 162, 163
New Tantrik Order of America, 1170
Ngawang Zangpo, 358
ngondro practices, 164–​65
nibandha works, 1053
Nichū reki, 285
Niguma, 355, 870
Nihon shoki (The Annals of Japan), 252, 
281, 292n8
Nīlakaṇṭha, 338
Nilamatapurāṇa, 32
Nīlāmbaradhara-​Vajrapāṇi-​tantra, 41
Ning Yu, 775
nirvana
as goal in Buddhism but not tantric 
Buddhism, 961
non-​abiding, 716
Root Stanzas on the Middle Way on, 82–​83
and time, 1120
Nirvāṇakalikā (Pādaliptasūri), 508, 825
Niśisancāratantra, 935
Niṣpannayogāvalī, 675n19
Niśvāsa corpus, tantric linguistic mysticism 
in, 796–​98
Niśvāsamukha, 232–​33
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, 3, 230–​31, 233, 797–​98, 
1044–​45, 1046, 1047, 1048, 1050
Nittō guhō junrei kōki (Ennin), 284
Nityā cult antecedent to Śrīvidyā, 330, 333, 341
Nityākaula, 333
Nityanātha, 306
Niu Kōya Ryōsho Daimyōjin Hyōhyaku 
(Kakuwa), 476
nondual awareness (NDA)
as highest aim of Nepālī Sarvāmnāya 
Tantra, 57, 65–​66
many types of, 162, 163
in Mahāyāna Buddhism, 162
and nonduality of male and  
female, 163
scholarship of, 162
in Vajrayāna practices, 160, 162–​63
non-​self, in Buddhist thought, 88, 97n24
Norbu, Namkhai, 155
“Notes on the ‘Commentary to the 
Madhyamaka śāstra’” (Anchō), 254
NT. See Netra Tantra
Nubchen Sangye Yeshe, 454
Nyang Lotsawa, 490
Nyang Ral Nyima Oser, 355
Nyangrel Nyima Özer, 456–​57
nyāsa, 803
Nyāyabindu, 1099–​1100
Nyāya school, elements in, 226
Nyima Dragpa, 490, 504n8
Nyingma (Old Tantric) tradition
disputes over translations and, 852
distinct Dzogchen practices, 154
on Great Perfection (Dzogchen), 453–​54
Great Perfection lineage in, 454, 465n4
methods of awareness transmission 
in, 462–​64
neuroscientific research on, 159–​60
Śrī Siṃha in, 454
subdivisions of, 154, 154t
Oḍḍiyāna, 969
Offering to Red Protector, The, 501
Ogawa Toyoo, 263
Olivelle, Patrick, 125
OM, 795
Öndör Geegeen Zanabazar, 495, 498–​99
108 Nāma Jāpya Mantra to the Jain Goddess 
Padmāvatī, 831–​35, 836–​38, 839–​43

--- PAGE 1249 ---
1224      index
 
On Great Calming and Contemplation (Mohe 
zhiguan) (Zhiyi), 251
Ordo Templi Orientis (Order of Oriental 
Templars, O.T.O.), 1163–​66
celebration of sexuality and sexual magic in, 
1164–​65
departures from heterosexual practices of 
South Asian Tantra, 1166
on divinity of individual human well, 
1166–​67
revival in counterculture of 1960s and 
1970s, 1166
on semen as source of physical and spiritual 
potency, 1165–​66
Orientalist views on Tantra, 7–​8, 326, 327–​28, 
329, 340–​41, 349–​50, 1162–​63, 1164
Ornament of Mahāyāna Sūtras (Mahayānasūtr
ālaṅkāra), 84, 85–​86
Ornament of Realization 
(Abhisamayālaṁkāra), 77, 84–​85
Orr, Leslie, 533
Orzech, Charles, 14, 127
Osho. See Rahneesh, Bhagwan Shree (Osho)
Pabongkha Rinpoche, 354
Pādaliptasūri, 508
Padang Lawas temple complex, 638, 639–​
41, 659f
Padang Roco, 435, 631, 635–​37, 655f, 
676n33677n37
Padmasambhava, 456–​57, 848
Pādmasaṃhitā, 238–​39
Padmavajra, 969–​70, 971–​72
Padmāvatī, 520f
absence from modern yantras, 706
avenues for future research on, 524
characteristics in Jainism, 834–​35, 837–​38
contemporary popularity of, 519, 830
contemporary worship of, 829–​35
iconography of, 834
as Jaina goddess, 510, 512, 519–​23
Jain version of, as converted gentler version, 
831–​32, 833
as main goddess of 
Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, 519–​20, 692–​94
mix of tantric, mainstream Buddhist, and 
Jain elements in, 833–​34
in modern Jaina yantras, 696–​702, 698f
108 Nāma Jāpya Mantra to the Jain Goddess 
Padmāvatī, 831–​35, 836–​38, 839–​43
origin and spread of worship, 519, 689
story of, 830
Padoux, André, 333–​34
Pagla, Bhaba, 995, 1000–​1003, 1005f–​6f
Pāla dynasty monasteries, 557, 558, 575
Pāli canon, 80, 1145–​46, 1147
Panataran temple, 637
pañcanamaskāra, 136, 146n13
pañcarākṣa, 1147, 1151
Pāñcarātra, Vaiṣṇava, 229
Pāñcarātra Īśvarasaṃhitā, 542
Pāñcarātra tantras, 237–​39
Paṇchen Sonam Drakpa, 848
Paṇḍita Dawa Nagpo, 490
Pānduravasinī, 642f
Parā, 804
Parākhya, 800–​1
Parākhyatantra, 234, 799, 800, 806
Paramādibuddhatantra, 978
Paramādya, 1071
Paramaśiva, 1123
Pārameśvaras, 238
Parā Śakti, in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tradition, 
53–​54, 57, 70
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS)
functions of, 156
and relaxation response to non-​tantric 
techniques, 152, 153, 156–​57
and tonic alertness, 158
Parātantra, 931, 935, 939–​40
Parātrīśikā, 804–​5
Parātrīśikā mātṛkā, in Śākta texts, 804
Parātrīśikā-​Vivaraṇa (Abhinavagupta) (PTV), 
177, 178, 182, 1091
pariṇāmavāda, 881. 915n10
Parṇaśabarī, 1156
Pārśva, 519, 521f, 689–​90, 697, 702, 704–​5
Parśvanath, 830, 831t
Pārvatī, 900, 903f, 904f
Pāśupatas, 301
Paśupati, Lord, 68, 69f, 70
Paśupati liṅga, five-​faced, 931
Paśupatinātha, 929, 932
Paśupatinātha temple (Deopatan, Nepal), 940

--- PAGE 1250 ---
index      1225
 
Paśupatinātha temple (Kathmandu), 928–​30,  
929f
Pātañjala Yoga, elements in, 226
Pātañjalayogaśāstra, 241
Patañjali, 822
Patil, Parimal, 336
Paumacariẏa (Vimalasūri), 512
Pauṣkarasaṃhitā, 238
Pawon temple, 605, 618f, 620f
Payne, Richard K., 5
Pdanag Roco temple, 631
Pechilis, Karen, 999
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 1118, 1127–​29, 1130–​31, 
1137n40, 1137n44
Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand 
Lines, 79
Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras, 76–​79, 91
Perfect Wisdom in One Letter, 351
Phakpa, 573
Phimai temple, 568, 642–​45, 660f, 661f, 
662f–​63f
phoneme (varṇa)
association with mātṛkā, 796, 797, 798, 806
in linguistic mysticism of tantric Buddhism, 
799, 800–​1
mapping onto tantric body, 802, 803, 806
in non-​Saiddhāntika tantric streams, 802–​5
in Śaiva Siddhānta texts, 798–​802, 805
Śākta texts on, 803, 805
Vedas on, 795
Picumata, 967
Picumata-​Brahmayāmala, 1048
Piṅgalāmata
on beauty of temples, 536–​37
and Brahmayāmala, 533–​34
on correct proportions in temple 
construction, 539–​40, 550n10
on gods of temple as plug of safety over 
poisonous earth, 538–​39
on installation of deity into vessel in 
innermost chamber, 542
on making temple suitable as vessel for 
deity, 537
as northern, pre-​tenth-​century 
pratiṣṭhā, 533
on patron’s benefit as consideration in 
temple construction, 537, 539, 547
on rhythm (chandas) of temple design, 540
on suitability to purpose as source of 
beauty, 537
on suitable temple locations, 537
on temple elements and terms, 541
on temple layout, ritual care in creating, 538, 
549–​50n8
on temple site preparation, 537–​38
on twenty-​six types of temple design, 536–​
37, 540
on vulnerable points (marmans) during 
temple construction, 539
plants and trees, enlightenment of, 395–​
96, 403–​7
Plaosan temple, 604–​5
Plato, 225, 1126
Plotinus, 1126–​27, 1130
Polyvagal Theory, 728
Porath, Or, 264
Porges, Stephen, 158, 728
possession (āveśa)
in early Indian Buddhist texts, 40
involuntary and voluntary types, 310
in later Buddhist abhiṣeka ceremonies, 43
See also exorcism rites
Prabhākara, 185
practice without elaboration 
(niṣprapancacaryā), 971–​72
Prahlad Goswami, 995
prajñājnānābhiṣeka, 44, 45
Prajñāpāramitā, 604, 633, 640, 650
Prajñāpāramitānayaśatapancaśatikā/​Praj
ñāpāramitānayasūtra/​Adhrdyaśatikā 
Prajñāpāramitā, 655–​57
Pramāṇavārttika (Dharmakīrti) (PV), 1094–​
95, 1097
Prāṇatoṣanī (Bhaṭṭācārya), 241
Prapancasāratantra, 237
Prasād, Śītal, 137, 142, 143–​44
Pratiṣṭhāratnākara (Gulābcandra), 137, 141, 
142, 143, 145
Pratiṣṭhāsāroddhāra (Āśādhara), 136–​37
Pratiṣṭhātilaka (Nemicandra), 137–​38, 141,  
142
pratiṣṭhā treatises on construction of tantric 
temples, 533
See also Kāmikāgama; Piṅgalāmata

--- PAGE 1251 ---
1226      index
 
Pratyabhijñā philosophical theology
and abduction, 1118, 1133n6
concept of time in, 1118–​19, 1122–​25
founding figures of, 1117
parallels in Western philosophy, 1126–​29
on possession of Śakti as identity with Śiva, 1118
on Śakti and supreme speech, 1118
Śiva-​Śakti as unity-​cum-​potency in, 1118, 1123
on Śiva’s totality, 1118–​19, 1134n7
Preah Khan temple of Kompong Svay, 571, 645
Precious Summary (Saγang Sečen), 495
pre-​tantric beliefs and practices
initiation (abhiṣeka) in, 31–​35
mastering of the elements ritual, 241
meditative anointing, 33–​34
scholarly debates on, 2, 4
pretas, 1148
prosodic instance (mātrā), Vedas on, 795
Pṛthivī Nārāyaṇa Śāha (king of Nepal), 943
PTV. See Parātrīśikā-​Vivaraṇa 
(Abhinavagupta)
pūjā, tantric, identification with deity 
in, 227–​28
Puṇḍarīka, 975
Puntsog Osor, 498
puraścaraṇa, 746, 754–​55
purification of the body ritual (bhūtaśuddhi), 
200–​2, 211–​12, 215
purification of the elements rituals 
(bhūtaśuddhi), 211–​12, 227–​30, 241n2
Pūrṇacaṇḍī (Siddhilakṣmī) temple, Patan, 
938, 939f
Pūrṇamahābhiṣeka, 617
Pūrvas, 512
putrakāmeṣṭi yajna, 1035
PV. See Pramāṇavārttika (Dharmakīrti)
qi, in early embryological medical 
knowledge, 251–​52
Qiyao rangzai jue, 278–​79, 284, 286
Qiyao xingchen bie xingfa (Yixing), 279–​80
Qutuɣtu Sečen Qung-​Taiǰi, 495
Rādhā
and Caitanya, 1033
as consort, 203
in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā, 203, 204, 763, 766
Rāghavabhaṭṭa, 240–​41
Rahneesh, Bhagwan Shree (Osho), 1170–​73
Rāhu, 283
Raiyu, 284
Rajānaka Jayaratha, 341
Rājarāja Cōḻa, 904
Rājasanāgara, king, 631–​32
Rājendravarman II (king of Khmer 
Empire), 565
Rajopadhyaya, Kedar Raj, 925, 927
Rajopadhyaya, Niran, 945f
Rāj Rājeśvarῑ Māteśvarῑ Māṃ Padme 
(RRMMP), 831–​35
rakṣāsas, 1149
Raktayamāri, 1074–​75
Raktayamāri, 1074–​75
Ra Lotsāwa Dorje Drakpa, 851
Rāmakaṇṭha, 801, 1050, 1122
Rāmasena, 215, 703
Rāmāyaṇa, 1032
Rambāhan, Dharmaśraya, 635
Rambelli, Fabio, 264
Rāmcaritmānas (Tulsidas), 1030
Ramprasad, 1001
Randolph, Paschal Beverly, 1164
Rangjung Dorje, 85
Rarṇ. See Rasārṇava
Rasahṛdayatantra, 302, 307, 315–​16
Rasamañjarī, 305, 310, 312, 315
Rasaprakāṡasudhākara (RPSudh), 305
Rasaratnākara, 305–​6, 308–​9, 313
Rasaratnasamucchaya (RRS), 304, 311, 313, 314–​15
Rasārṇava (Rarṇ), 302–​3, 304, 307–​8, 312, 313, 
315, 316
Rasārṇavakalpa, 312, 315
Rasasaṃkelakalika, 305
Rasasaṃketalikā, 31
Rasasāra, 303
rasaśāstra medical tradition
alchemical pediatrics, 310
and alchemy, 302, 311
aphrodisiacs in, 304, 308–​9
and Chinese alchemy, compared, 303
defining characteristics of, 302
deities and rituals in, 311–​12, 313, 314–​16
and diseases caused by moral 
transgression, 310

--- PAGE 1252 ---
index      1227
 
and female demons, protection from, 310
and gender of gems, 305
goals of, 303
gods worshiped in, 302
initiation process, 311–​12
mercury (rasa) in, 302–​3, 304, 307–​9, 312–​14
oral tradition of, 307–​8
outside influences on, 303
raising of the dead, 306–​8
on recipes to affect women’s libido, 305
on six acts (ṣaṭkarman), 305–​6
tantric mantras in, 311–​14
tantric sexual practices in, 304
vs. tantric texts, 315–​16
texts in, 302–​3, 305
treatment room design, 314
types of possible actions, 305–​6
unclear links to Tibetan and Indian 
vernacular traditions, 302
use of mantras, maṇḍalas and 
meditation, 302
virility recipes, 305
and women’s health, 304–​5
and worship of rasaliṅga, 303
and worship of yakṣiṇīs, 305–​6
yantras in, 314
Rasendracintāmaṇi, 31
Rasendracūḍāmaṇi, 312
Rasendrasārasaṃgraha, 305
Rastelli, Marion, 238
Ratana (ratna) sutras, 1147–​48
Ratie, Isabelle, 185–​87
Ratnagiri monastery, 585–​86, 588f–​90f
Ratnasambhava, 585, 592, 594f, 602, 604f, 641f
Ratnatrayaparīkṣā (Śrīkaṇṭha), 801
Ratu Boko plateau, re-​creation of Sri Lankan 
Abhayagiri vihāra on, 610–​12, 623f–​24f
Raurava, 1052
Rauravasūtrasaṃgraha, 233
Rāvaṇa, 310
recognition (pratyabhijnā), 746, 752
Red Annals, The (Paṇchen Sonam 
Drakpa), 848
Reich, Wilhelm, 1172
Rele, Vasant, 164, 198
resonance (nāda), 796–​97, 798–​801, 802, 806
Reuss, Theodor, 1164–​65
Ṛg Veda, 53, 795, 1119, 1134n12
Ṛgvidhāna, 32
Ricard, Matthieu, 719–​20
Ricoeur, Paul, 350, 351, 731
right-​handed path of Buddhism, in Nepālī 
Sarvāmnāya tradition, 59–​62
rigpa, 160, 161, 162
Rigpey Lhamo, 491–​92, 493, 494
Rigyaralli, 1080
Rinchen Zangpo (Rin chen bzang po), 849, 
862, 863, 866
ritual implements, in Goryū Shintō vs. 
Shingon Buddhist gomas, 111
Ritual Manual for Initiation into the Great 
Maṇḍala of the Uṣṇīṣa-​Cakravartin 
(Bianhong), 596–​97
ritual of the “group circle” (gaṇacakra), 967
Ṛjuvimarśinī (Śivānanda), 337
Root Stanzas on the Middle Way 
(Mūlamadhya-makakārikā), 81–​83
Roy, Rāmmohun, 1162–​63
RPSudh. See Rasaprakāśasudhākara
RRMMP. See Rāj Rājeśvarῑ Māteśvarῑ 
Māṃ Padme
RRS. See Rasaratnasamucchaya
Ṛṣimaṇḍalastotra, 702
Ṛṣimaṇḍala Yantra, 697, 704
Rudrabhaktas, 883
Rudrayāmalatantra, 315
Rūpa Gosvāmin, 202
Ruppert, Brian, 260
Ryōzu Aizen
and Chūin-​ryū legitimization, 479–​82
early texts on, 472–​74
and exorcistic practices, 475
and gendered wisdom-​compassion 
binary, 475
as image of dualism and its 
transcendence, 476
as image of sexual union, 473, 474, 475
inward-​outward dynamic in, 474–​76
objects held by images of, 474–​76
origins of, 479, 484
ritual implements associated with, 473
ritual manual at Kōyasan, 483
and rituals of attraction, 473–​74
and rituals of external effects, 474

--- PAGE 1253 ---
1228      index
 
seed-​syllable of, 473–​74
and Shingon Buddhism, 472
and Shugendō, 472, 475, 478, 479
single-​headed version, 473
as symbol of duality-​nonduality, 474–​75
in Takusen-​ki, 479
and transgressive acts in tantric 
Buddhism, 484
two-​headed version, 472–​73, 476
as unification of Aizen Myōō and Fudō 
Myōō, 472
Śabdarāśi, 803
Saciyā Mātā, 825
sacrificial feeding, in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya, 
59–​60, 59f
ṣaḍaṅgayoga (Six-​branch Yoga)
control of elements ritual in, 230
Dolpopa and, 92
and mastering of the elements rituals, 
236, 240
practices, 232, 234, 237, 240
Sadyojāta, 929
Sadyojyotiḥ, 1052
Saichō, 255
Śailendras, 606, 610
Śaiva Bṛhatkālottara prāsādalakṣaṇapaṭ
ala, 539
Śaiva Kakṣapuṭa, (Nāgārjuna Siddha), 306
Śaivasiddhānta
association of elements with colors, 231, 235
association of elements with places in body, 
232, 235
characteristics doctrine, 1043
characteristics of elements in, 234
development of guru-​centered 
communities, 1048, 1049
development of more-​inclusive initiation 
types, 1050
early dominance on Indian subcontinent, 
1043–​44
early groups of religious specialists seeking 
supernormal powers and liberation, 
1047–​48
early scriptures, 1044–​45
emergence of, 1043
engagement with Vedānta, 1053
feminization of pantheon, 1051
fire rituals, introduction of, 1050
gaps in record of, 1052
growth of social hierarchy within, 1047–​49
inclusion of married women in worship, 
1050–​51
increased social prominence of initiates, 
1049–​50
initiation rites (dīkṣā) in, 1045–​46, 1047, 
1050, 1052, 1054
linguistic mysticism of tantric Buddhism in, 
798–​802
and mantras, 1046
mastering of the elements rituals in, 230–​35
medieval, as “right-​handed” establishment 
religion, 1047
monastic institutions, development of, 1051
and parallel evolution of Buddhist and 
Vaiṣṇava tantric systems, 1056
potential exaggeration of influence, 1055–​56
ritual manuals, development of, 1051
shift from Sanskrit to Tamil, 1053
shift to devotional focus, 1053–​55
social widening of, 1049–​53
turn from focus on supernormal powers to 
mokṣa, 1048
turn to focus on public festivals and rites, 
1051–​52
Śaiva Tantra
difficulty of defining, 1043
earliest scriptures, 1044–​45
early affinities with other tantric traditions, 
1044–​45
and Mantramārga, 1044–​45
See also Śaivasiddhānta
Śaiva texts, Non-​Saiddhāntika, mastering of 
the elements rituals in, 235–​37
Śaiva traditions
early texts of, 3
purification of the elements ritual in, 228
relation to Buddhist tantra, as issue, 3, 4
subtle body in, 206–​8
Śākta order
linguistic mysticism in, 803–​5
subtle body in, 206–​8
tantric themes in songs of, 992–​93, 995, 1001–​2
Ryōzu Aizen (cont.)

--- PAGE 1254 ---
index      1229
 
Śāktapramodaḥ, 332
Śakti
as divine consort, 192n15
and Śiva, in nondual Śavism, 1117–​18, 1119
and supreme speech, 1118
Śaktipariṣad lineages, 885
śaktipāta, 189–​90
Śāktism
definition of, 1031
and Kāmākhyā temple complex and, 1031
Śākya Chokden, 94–​95
Śākyamitra, 565
Śākyamuni Buddha, 33, 76, 83, 419–​20, 428, 
847, 850, 863, 864
Sakya Pandita, 353
Sakya Paṇḍita Kunga Gyeltsen, 853
Śālivāṭi, 1053
Samantabhadra (Buddha), 454, 462, 611f, 618f
samaya, honoring of, 967
Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra (Discourse Explaining 
the Thought), 79–​80, 91
Sāṃkhya philosophy
elements in, 226
in Śrῑ Lalitā Triśatῑ Bhāṣyam, 836–​37
time in, 1120
Saṃkṣiptābhiṣekavidhi (Vāgīśvarakīrti), 974
Saṃpuṭa Tantra, 866
Sampuṭatilaka, 1079
Sampuṭodbhava, 1079
saṃsāra
Dolpopa on, 92–​93
in Mahāyāna thought, 81
Samuel, Geoffrey, 212, 214–​15
Saṃvara, temples to, 642–​43
Saṃvara cycle, 1081, 1082
Saṃvarodaya, 434, 1081
Saṃvarodayatantra, 558, 566, 575
Saṃvarodaya Tantra, 866
Sanderson, Alexis, 2–​4, 206–​7, 330, 335–​36, 
508, 513, 524, 557, 563–​64, 568, 863, 912–​
14nn3–​4. 914n7, 939–​40, 1043
Sandhyāvyākaraṇa, 1075
Sanford, James, 14, 262
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantrayana, 597, 
614, 628
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan 
(Advayasādhana), 429
Sāṅkhya tradition, cosmology of, 181, 192n15
Sanskrit, multiple meanings of words in, 514
Śāntarakṣita, 970–​71
Sanyal, Hitesh Ranjan, 996–​97
Saptabuddhaka, 40
Saptaratnābhiṣeka (Seven Treasure 
Initiation), 596–​97
Śāradātilaka, 229
Saraha, Mahāsiddha, 465, 865, 1005
Saraogi, Olga Serbaeva, 369, 376
Sarasvatī (Śrutadevatā), 508, 895, 897f
Sarbadhikary, Sukanya, 1008
Sārdhatriśatikālottara, 800, 806
Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna, 275
Śarṅgadeva, 1003–​4
Sarvabuddhasamāyoga (Sarvabuddhasamā
yogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara), 348, 564, 862, 
967–​78, 1074
Sarvadurgatipariśodhana tantra (SDPS), 41, 
591, 616–​17, 628, 1070–​71
Sarvajnānottara, 799
Sarvakalpasamuccaya, 1074
Sarvāmnāya Tantra, Nepālī (Total Revelation 
Tantra)
aligning consciousness with Parā Śakti as 
goal of worship, 57–​58, 58t, 70
ancestor worship in, 63–​64, 64f
architectural evidence for, 948
Bengali/​Gauḍa influence on, 937–​38
bhedābheda-​vāda (multiplicity with unity) 
principle in, 923–​24, 925, 950n2
caste and, 924, 950n4
Daśain festival in, 61f, 62–​63
domestic inward worship (antar-​yāga) in, 
54–​5t, 55f, 58t
festival of Rāto (red) Matsyendranātha, 938
fivefold sequential worship in, 66–​67, 67f
five transgressive substances in worship, 
59–​61, 65–​66
gods in, as all manifestations of Mahā Devī 
or Parāśakti, 932–​34
Guhyakālī and, 932, 935–​37
Guhyeśvarī and, 931–​32, 935
home shrine rooms for temple worship, 57
host of practices, texts, and sites, 923–​24
incorporation of left-​and right-​handed 
paths, 59–​62

--- PAGE 1255 ---
1230      index
 
initiation rites, debate on, 925
internal vs. external practice, 924
inward worship in temples, 57
Kālī in, 66–​68
Kashmir influence on, 938–​40
as kaula tantric tradition, 59
Keralan influence on, 940–​41
as krama tradition, 934–​37
Lidke-​Dyczkowski debate on characteristics 
of, 924–​26
meaning of rituals, knowledge of, 926–​28
need for interdisciplinary approach to, 923
and Nepal as water pot (kalaśa) filled with 
blended practices, 931–​34
Newār form of, 925–​26
nondual state as highest aim of, 57, 65–​66
outward reality as inward play of Parā Śakti, 
53–​54. 57, 54
primacy of indigenous Northern Revelation 
(uttarāmnāya), 932, 935–​37
required familiarity with all revelations 
(āmnāyas), 925, 926
ritual intercourse in, 61–​62
ritual manuals’ parsing of Indian 
subcontinent into three regions, 937, 938f
sacrificial feeding in, 59–​60, 59f
Śāha dynasty influence on, 941–​45
scholarly debate on name, 924–​25
secrecy surrounding, 927
seminal texts of, 931
single initiation required for all six 
revelations (āmnāyas), 934, 948–​49
six faces of Paśupatinātha/​Śiva as source of 
six revelations in, 930, 930f, 931t
six revelations (āmnāyas) within, 
926, 950n4
and six transmissions (ṣaḍāmnāya), 68t
Śriyantra in, 68–​69, 69f
supreme deity Taleju, multiple identities 
of, 925
syncretism of, 923
temple outward worship (bahiryāga) in, 
54–​58, 56f, 58t
three modes of tantric worship in, 63–​
66, 66f
Timalsina form of, 924
timeline of, 945, 946f–​47f
Tripurasundarī in, 68
tutelary deity worship in, 63
variants of six revelations (āmnāyas) in, 930
varying names of Śiva and Śakti six 
revelations (āmnāyas) in, 929, 931t
worship in, goals of, 54
yāga practice, 68t
Śarvāṇī, 935, 953–​54n34
Sarvarahasya, 1070
Sarvasiddhāntaviveka (SSV), 880–​84, 914n6
Sarvāstivādins, 1121
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha (STTS), 40, 
399, 400, 401, 563, 565, 590–​91, 594, 606, 
610, 611–​12, 628, 1068–​69
Sarvatobhadra Yantra, 701, 702f
Śarveśvara (Kumbheśvara) temple, 
Lalitpur, 936f
Śāstrī, Paṇḍit Candraśekhar, 703
Satanic Bible, The (LeVey), 1168
Satanism, 1168–​69, 1176n3
Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, 1119
Ṣaṭcakranirūpaṇa, 210
Sātvatasaṃhitā, 238
Satyananda, Swami, 166
Satyavarman, 643
Saubhāgyasudhodaya (Amṛtānanda), 325
Saundaryalaharī, 323, 331, 340, 1032
Śavism, nondual
and Pratyabhijñā philosophical 
theology, 1117
relation (sambandha) in, 1132–​33n5
Śiva and Śakti in, 1117–​18, 1119
See also Pratyabhijñā philosophical 
theology; time in nondual Śavism
Saγang Sečen, 495
Scheid, Bernhard, 104
scholarship on tantra
focus on texts rather than practices, 8, 10–​11
institutions and collaborations for, 14–​16
interdisciplinary methods, necessity  
of, 13
scholar-​practitioners and, 1023–​24
specialization as obstacle to, 8
See also cognitive scholarship on tantra; 
ethnographic studies of tantra
Sarvāmnāya Tantra, Nepālī (Total Revelation 
Tantra) (cont.)

--- PAGE 1256 ---
index      1231
 
Schreck, Nikolas, 1168–​69
Schreck, Zeena, 1168–​69
Schweder, Richard, 1028
Scripture of the Mantra of Amoghapāśa’s 
Miraculous Transformations 
(Bodhiruci), 127
Scripture on the Foundations of Mindfulness 
(Mahāsatipaṭṭhāna Sutta), 870
ŚD. See Śivadṛṣṭi (Somānanda)
SDPS. See Sarvadurgatipariśodhana tantra
seeded initiation (sabījā dīkṣā), 1050
seedless initiation (nirbījā dīkṣā), 1050
seed mantras, 473–​74
Seh Lĕmah Abang (Siti Jĕnar), 442
Seika mibungo, 264
Seison, 477
Sekoddeśa, 42
Seminal Heart of the Ḍākinīs (Mkha’ ‘gro 
snying thig), 454, 457, 461, 465n5, 467n24
Seminal Heart of Vimalamitra (Bi ma snying 
thig), 454
Sengzhao, 397
senses’ association with colors. in 
Śaivasiddhānta, 231
Sera Khandro, 357–​58, 360
Sĕrat Cabolek, 442–​43
Serta Buddhist Institute (aka Larung  
Gar), 362
Setting in Motion of the Wheel of  
Dharma, 80
seven-​day week
in China, 277
introduction to Japan, 282
Seven Nails (Śrī Siṃha), 456
Seven Siddhi Texts (grub pa sde bdun), 969–​70
seven supreme stations 
(saptaparamasthāna), 141–​42
Sewu temple, 606–​9, 621f
sexual fluids
consumption of, 41–​42, 213, 214, 330, 385, 
765, 770–​71, 787nn12–​13
cosmic vastu created from, 765, 770, 772, 
777, 781, 782, 784
mercury (rasa) as, 303–​5
yogic reversal of, 205, 211, 309, 765, 766, 785, 
787n13, 788n33
sexuality in tantra, embrace of, xvii, 1031
sexual practices in tantric Buddhism, 213–​14,  
1154
as controversial, 44–​45
dangers and abuses of, 359–​61
debate over, in Tibetan tantric 
Buddhism, 855–​56
Heruka cults and, 968
in initiation (abhiṣeka) in Indian Buddhism, 
41–​42, 44–​45
metaphorical, in Japanese 
Buddhism, 261–​62
monastic responses to, 972–​75
and nondual awareness, 163
in Ordo Templi Orientis practices, 1166
privileging of male perspective in, 359–​
60, 364
purposes of, 360
in rasaśāstra medical tradition, 304
ritual adulterous sexual intercourse in 
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā, 763, 765
seven types of, 304
sexual yoga with consort (karmamudrā), 
44–​45, 61–​62, 213, 359–​61, 855–​56, 871, 
971, 973–​74, 1001
and soteriology, 966
three methods, 359
in Tibetan Buddhism, 359–​61
in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā tantra, 203
vajrolīmudrā (male draw up of sexual 
fluids), 309
in visualization by celibate practitioner, 
45, 975
visualization of deities in sexual embrace in 
in deity yoga, 721f, 722, 722f
western defenders of, 1163
See also modern Western forms of tantra
Shabkar, 347, 352
Shah, Duddu, 995–​99
Shah, Umakant Premanand, 513, 514
Shangpa Kagyü lineage, 355
Shanthamurthy, Shubha, 885–​86
Sharf, Robert H., 106
Sharma, Madhav Shyam, 56, 56f
Shastri, Chandra Shekhar, 515
Shaw, Miranda, 350
Shetoujian Taizi ershiba xiu jing, 275
Shin, Jae-​Eun, 333, 508, 513

--- PAGE 1257 ---
1232      index
 
Shingon Buddhism
Chūin-​ryu (Chūin branch), 472, 474–​
76, 478–​83
on dharmakāya, 399–​400
and “esoteric treasury,” 399
founding of, 399
gendered wisdom-​compassion binary 
in, 475
influence on Goryū Shintō goma, 102–​4, 
106–​15, 114f, 115f, 116
interest in dualism and its 
transcendence, 476
as less familiar to Western scholars, 116
maṇḍala as body in, 729–​32
visualization and deity yoga in, 729–​32
See also Ryōzu Aizen
Shingon Fudō Myōo Soku Sai goma, 108
Shingon mikkyō (tōmitsu), 105
Shingonshū kyōji gi (Annen), 405–​6
Shinohara, Koichi, 39
Shintō
embryological metaphor in, 262
medieval, interaction with esoteric 
Buddhism, 106–​7, 116
medieval, traditions developed, 106–​7
modern. lack of visible Buddhist 
influence, 116
separation from Buddhism in Meiji 
reforms, 106, 116
See also Goryū Shintō
“Shintō goma shidai,” 108
Sho ajari shingon mikkyō burui sōroku 
(Ennin), 282
Shōbō, 473
Shōken, 282
Shōrai mokuroku (Kūkai), 399
Shōtoku, 260
Shūei, 279, 286
Shugendō, 263, 472, 475, 477, 478–​79, 484
Siddhacakra Yantra, 697
Siddha Loka, 820
Siddha Mukund-​deva, 203
Siddhāntasārapaddhati (Bhojadeva), 508, 825
Siddhānticandrabhūṣaṇa Paṇḍitadeva, 887–​91
Siddhārtha, and five-​Buddha family, 591
Siddhayogeśvarīmata, 803, 812n57940
Siddhilakṣmī, 942
Siddhisaṃbhavanidi, 306
signlessness (ānimitta), in Perfection of 
Wisdom Sūtras, 79
Śīlabhadra, 278
Śīlavatī inscription, 935, 935f, 953n34
Sima Guang, 656–​57
singing
as socially inclusive practice in South 
Asia, 1002
and sound as cosmogonic and salvific, 1004
singing and auditory practices in tantric 
Buddhism, 1002–​8
association with yogic practices, 1003
and Bhakti poet-​singers vs. tantric 
ritualism, 999–​1002
central importance of, 1013–​14
early records of, 967, 991, 1002
emerging interest in, 992
and ensoundment of tantric bodies, 1014
gaṇacakra rituals, 1000
impact on worshippers, 992
importance in Bengali esoteric lineages, 
992–​93, 994
Matua movement’s liberation through 
ecstatic song and dance, 1009–​13, 1010f
modern traditions descended from, 1005–​6
and power of universal vibrations (nāda), 
1003–​4, 1011–​13
primacy of sound over semantic 
content, 1007
song of possession (uccaral torram), 1007–​8
songs of ecstasy (Bhāber Gīt) of Kartābhajā 
sect, 1007
songs of realization, in Tibetan tantric 
Buddhism, 1007
and sonic meditation, 1011–​13
and “sonic theology,” 1011–​12
tantric songs (vajragīti), 967
in Tibet, 1007
as type of initiation, 1007
as under-​studied, 991–​94, 1014
use of vernacular for, 967, 991, 1005–​6
uses of, 1003
See also Bengali esoteric Buddhism, 
modern; Bhakti songs
Singleton, Mark, 207
Siṅhosāri temple

--- PAGE 1258 ---
index      1233
 
and architecture as maṇḍala, 628–​30, 
646f–​47f
deities portrayed in, 628–​29, 631f–​53f
rebuilding of, 630
Śiraccheda, 940
Śiraścheda, 931
Śiraśchedamata, 931
Siti Jĕnar (Seh Lĕmah Abang), 442
Śiva
as embodiment of mantra, 797, 799
as formless vibration pervading 
creation, 796–​97
and Śakti, in nondual Śavism, 1117–​18, 1119
in temples of Kālamukha culture, 900, 
903f, 904f
Śivadharmaśāstra, 1055–​56
Śivadharmottara, 1055–​56
Śivadṛṣṭi (Somānanda) (ŚD)
argument against duality of objects of 
awareness, 1094–​96
argument against nonlinguisticality of 
perception, 1096–​97
argument of, 1092–​93
arguments against convention (saṃketa) 
explaining denotation, 1103–​5, 1110–​
12nn35–​37, 1112–​13nn40–​41
arguments against momentariness devoid 
of overarching unity, 1105–​6
complex style of, 1091
as first work of Pratyabhijñā 
philosophy, 1091
fundamental arguments against 
Dharmakīrti, 1093
on impossibility of inference of kind 
without real underlying universal 
(sāmānya), 1100–​102
lost commentaries in, 1091
on perceptual error as real, as proven by 
their effects, 1097–​1100
on reality of all things proven by their 
effects, 1092–​96
rejection of separation of percept from 
concept, 1096–​97
responses to Dharmakīrti in, 1091
and Śaiva postscriptural works, 1106–​7
on unity of existence within Śiva, 1091–​
92, 1106
Śivadṛṣṭivṛtti (Utpaladeva), 1095–​96
Śivānanda, 327, 328, 337, 338
Śivastava, 429
Śivastotrāvali (Utpaladeva), 1054
Six Meditation Experiences 
(Mañjuśrīmitra), 455
Skilling, Peter, 1145, 1147–​48
Skorupski, Tadeusz, 127
SKS. See Mahāvairocanāsaṁbodhi sūtra or 
Mahāvairocana sūtra; Susuddhikara  
sūtra
Smārta brahmins, 323, 342n2
Smith, Brian K., 386
Snellgrove, David, 592
social organizations and institutions,  
tantric, xviii–​xix
Society for Tantric Studies, 5, 12–​13, 14
sociological methods in interpretation of 
female deities, 350
Soebakin Soebardi, 442–​43
soft-​core Tantra, and “right-​hand” 
Buddhism, 427
Sōgen san dan shidai, 108
Sōkan, 283, 283f
Sokushin jōbutsu shiki (Annen), 404
Somadeva, 824, 838–​39
Somānanda, 179, 180, 1091, 1117
See also Śivadṛṣṭi (Somānanda) (ŚD)
soma or śrauta rite, three-​fire (three-​fire 
ritual)
described, 105
evolution of, 32, 105
and subtle body, 198–​99
Somapura monastery, 586–​87, 597f, 598f,  
599f
Somaśambhu, 1051
Somasiddhāntins, 444n6, 882, 890–​91
Sōmēśvara Paṇḍita, 908–​11
Somēśvara temple, Lakṣmēśvara, 898–​901, 
898f–​904f
Sönam Gyatso, 495
song. See singing and auditory practices in 
tantric Buddhism
soteriology, definition of, 961
soteriology in Buddhism
eschewing of exterior savior, 961
Nirvana as goal, 961

--- PAGE 1259 ---
1234      index
 
soteriology in tantric Buddhism
awakening in one’s lifetime as goal, 961, 963
compassion as basis of, 961–​62
early texts, 963–​68
and equivalence with all Buddhas, 967, 968
great bliss (mahāsukha) in, 968, 970–​71
in Guhyasamāja, 965–​67
hand gestures, body postures, and tantric 
songs in, 967
and inversion of conventional 
morality, 965–​67
maṇḍalas in, 964–​65, 967, 971, 977
mantra practice in, 963–​64
as path parallel to bodhisattva path, 976–​77
pioneering interpretations, 969–​72
and practice without elaboration 
(niṣprapancacaryā), 971–​72
rapid salvation in, vs. traditional Buddhist 
practice, 961–​62
in Sarvabuddhasamāyoga, 967–​78
in Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, 964–​65
special effects and special causes in, 971
tantra as one of three ways to 
salvation, 976–​79
use of transgressive practices, 964–​
67, 976–​77
in Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi, 963–​64
Vajrayāna soteriology, 964–​65
variety of paths, 979
and way of the mantras (mantranaya), 968, 
973, 974, 976, 977–​79
and way of the perfections 
(pāramitānaya), 976
will to awaken (bodhicittahetukam) in, 961
Sōtō Zen school of Buddhism, 263
source. See mātṛkā (source)
spanda, 1130
speech
component elements of, 795
and manifestation, in earliest Vedic 
religion, 795
power to deify, 795
See also vibration or subtle language 
pervading creation
spells. See magic
sphoṭa, in Śaiva Siddhānta, 800–​1, 806
Sphoṭasiddhi (Maṇḍanamiśra), 801
Spiraling Vine of Faith (Tāre Lhamo), 361
Spring Drop (vasantatilakā) (Kāṇha), 866
Śraddhākaravarman, 978
śrīcakra, 804
Śrīkaṇṭha, 801
Sri Lanka, Vajrayāna in, 611–​12
Śrīmad Devī Bhāgavata Mahāpurāṇa, 935
Śrīparamādya, 862, 968
Śrīpraśnasaṃhitā, 239
Śrī Siṃha
dates of life, debate on, 460–​61
hagiographies on, 454–​55, 464
Indian disciples, 456
last testament of, 456
life of, 455–​56, 456n13
in Nyingma Great Perfection lineage, 454
place of origin, debate on, 459–​60, 
468nn30–​31
Tibetan disciples, 456–​57
transgressive behavior of, 456
works by, 457–​59
Śrīvidyā
definition of, 323, 324–​25
devotional practice, 323
diversity of practices in, 328, 329, 330–​31, 339
five M’s in, 328–​29, 343n22
five transgressive substances in, 329–​30
initiation in, 341n1
kuṇḍalinī practices in, 334, 343n30
as late Kaula tradition, 333
Nityā cult antecedent to, 330, 333, 341
range of practitioners, 323
sexual practices in, 329, 330
shift toward nondualism, 334
śrīcakra (principle ritual diagram) of, 327
Vedic and tantric elements of, 334
Vedicization of, 338–​39
worship of Tripurasundarī in, 323
See also Tripurasundarī
Śrīvidyā, scholarship on, 326–​41
avenues for future research, 340–​41
focus on higher quality texts, 333–​34
in late 20th-​and early 21st-​first 
century, 333–​35
need for further research, 324, 325–​26
Orientalism and, 327–​28, 329, 340–​41
scholars contributing to, 339–​40

--- PAGE 1260 ---
index      1235
 
skewed focus on nondualist and 
metaphysical aspects, 327–​28, 330
tantric apologetics of Indian 
commentators, 328–​30
as tradition developed over time, 336–​39
by Woodroffe, 326–​28
Śrīvidyā texts
advances in, 333–​35
digitization of, and increased access, 335–​36
gaps in Sanskrit commentators’ 
understanding, 336–​37
high quality of some texts, 333–​34
kuṇḍalī in, 210
and scholarship, 198, 327–​28
texts still unstudied, 333
text tradition’s development over 
time, 336–​39
translation of, 326
Śriyantra, 68–​69, 69f
Śrῑ Lalitā Triśatῑ Bhāṣyam (Ādi 
Śaṅkarācārya), 836–​38
SSV. See Sarvasiddhāntaviveka
Stainton, Hamsa, 336
state protection of tantric Buddhism in 
maritime Asia
absorption of Śaiva and Śākta texts, 557–​
58, 5634
Amoghavajra’s role in development 
of, 563–​64
in East Java, 573–​74
and Heruka cults, 559–​60
and Heruka/​ Hevajra images in Bayon 
temple, 560–​61, 561f, 562f, 569–​71, 569f
historical record of, 559, 577n3
images in Haruka monasteries by eleventh 
century, 564
in interstate conflict, 558, 559–​60, 561–​
63, 573–​74
in Khmer state, 565, 568–​69
in large royal ceremonial centers, 564
maṇḍalas in, 557, 558, 562, 563
and maṇḍalas in landscape, 557
origin and spread of, 563–​64
and projection of maṇḍala of state into 
architecture, 569–​72, 572f
and promise of supernatural power, 
558, 562–​63
in Sumatra, 575–​76
and Vidyāpīṭha Śaivism, 559
and wealth and status of priests, 568
Stewart, Tony K., 5–​6
STTS. See Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha
Stutterheim, Willem F., 439
Subāhuparipṛcchā, 1065, 1067
Śubhacandra, 825–​29
Śubhakarasiṃha, 37, 276, 504, 594, 1067
subtle body
in Buddhist tantra, 211–​15
Buddhist vs. Hindu systems, 198–​99
in Cakrasaṃvara traditions, 870–​71
Ḍākinī and, 352–​53, 359
as embodiments of doctrine, 198–​99, 
200, 201–​2
in Netra Tantra, 371–​72
neuroscientific modeling of, 164
numerous versions of, 198
in Śaiva and Śākta traditions, 206–​8
scholarship on, 198
as term, 217n2
two processes in development of, 199–​200
typical characteristics of, 197
in Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra tantra, 200–​2
in Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā tantra, 204–​6, 209, 211
variety of versions, 197
See also esoteric physiology
Sudamala, 436
Sudhanakumāra, 637f
Sukhāmṛta copper plate inscription, 434, 437
Sukuyōdō, 285–​87, 291–​92, 293n11
Sumatra
state protection tantric Buddhism 
in, 575–​76
tantric temples in, 634–​41
worship of deceased king in deified 
form, 636
Sūṇḍi
destruction of Rājarāja Cōḻa and, 904
and elevation over time of Sōmēśvara 
Paṇḍita, 908–​10
Kaḷēśvara and, 910–​11
and Kalyāni Cāḷukyas records documenting 
local cultures, 906–​8
multiple deities worshipped, 910–​11
Nāgarēśvara temple at, 902–​4, 906f–​8f

--- PAGE 1261 ---
1236      index
 
Suprabheda, 542
Supreme Continuum of the Mahāynā 
(Mahāyāna Uttaratantra), 84, 86
Sūrimantrakalpa, 689
Sūrimantrapaṭa, 706
Susiddhikāra, 37, 38, 40, 43, 1067
Suśrutasaṃhitā, 250, 301, 308
Susuddhikara sūtra (SKS), 590, 594
Sūtakamelāpaka (deutero-​Āryadeva), 971–​72
Sutasoma kakavin, 437
Sutoku (Emperor of Japan), 412–​13, 414,  
415
sūtra and tantra, distinction between, 96
Sūtrakṛtāṅga, 126
Sūtra Mahāmudrā, 163
Sutra of Atanata (Āṭanāṭiya or Āṭanāṭika 
sūtra), 1144, 1145–​47
Sutra of Great Vairocana, 1145, 1152–​53
Sutra of Guiding Principle, 262, 263
Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā, 260
“Sutra of the Five Kings,” 257–​58
“Sutra of the King of One Syllable Spells, 
Among the Store of Spells of Bodhisattva 
Manjuśrī,” 258
Sūtra on Manjuśrī Bodhisattva and the Sages’ 
Teaching on Auspicious and Inauspicious 
Times (Manjuśrī). See Xiuyao jing 
(Manjuśrī)
“Sutra on the Topics [of the Meditation 
on] Mindfulness in the Correct 
Dharma,” 257–​58
Sutra on Transforming Women into 
Buddhas, 259–​60
Sutra-​type practices, 153–​55, 154t
Suvarṇabhāsottama, 31
Suvarṇadvīpa, 575–​76
Suzong (Chinese emperor), 596–​97
Svacchandabhairava, 236, 302
Svacchandabhairava Tantra (SBhT), 379–​
80, 802
Svacchandatantra, 236, 306, 307, 803, 929, 1050
Svarup Dāmodarer Kaṛacā, 1015n12
Svāyaṃbhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, 233, 798, 803, 
1046, 1048
Śvetāmbara
fire ritual performed for Māṇibhadra Vīra, 
130, 133–​36, 134f, 135f
as image-​worshipping sect of 
Jainism, 688–​89
and magic squares, 701
modern Padmāvatī yantras, 696–​99, 698f
Śyāmatārā, 635f
syllable (akṣara), Vedas on, 795
sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 156
TA. See Tantrāloka (Abhinavagupta)
Taichan shu, 250
Taishō zuzō, 282–​83
Taittirīyasamḥita, 31
Taittiriya Upaniṣad, 199
Taizō zuzō, 276, 279
Ṭakkura Pherū, 701
Takusen-​ki. See Henmyō’in Daishi Myōjin 
Go-​Takusenki
Taleju, 953n26
Taleju temples, 940–​41, 948f
Tanba no Yasuyori, 252
tantra
as autotelic, xv
definition(s) of, 1, 5–​7, 151, 1031, 1065, 1176n1
efforts to find early traces of, 301
history of, xix, 1, 6
human body as mesocosm in, 785
Krama “Sequence” tradition of symbolism 
and ritual, 1125
origin of, 1–​4
practices characteristic of, 513–​14
range of practices described as, 507
and state protection, 484
tantric, as term, 512–​15
as term, 16n1
wide range of practices and texts in, 151
Tantra Carcā Pariwār, 949f
Tantrāloka (Abhinavagupta) (TA), 62, 177, 178, 
182, 302, 512, 914n7, 1125–​26, 1130, 1138n47
Tantra of Bhṛkutī (Bhṛkutī tantra), 1157
Tantra of Siddhaikavira (Tantra of the Solitary 
Hero), 1145, 1155–​57
Tantra of the Secret Assembly (Guhyasamāja 
tantra), 1145, 1153–​55
Tantrarāja Tantra, 328, 329
tantras
chronology of, 1065–​83
and definition of tantra, 7, 17n14

--- PAGE 1262 ---
index      1237
 
determining dates of composition, 1065–​66
evolution over time of texts, 1083
final goal, lack of, 1082–​83
as not fixed texts, 7
other terms for, 7
Tantrasadbhāva Tantra (TST), 209, 378, 379
Tantrasāra (Abhinavagupta) (TS), 1130
tantric Buddhism (Vajrayāna)
aim of spiritual practice in, 151, 165–​66, 714, 
961, 963
areas where practiced, 153
and astrology, 275–​76
authority of scripture in, 969–​70
bodhisattva path to Buddahood as central 
to, 714
body-​mind training in, 152
Buddahood-​oriented variants, 154
and Buddhist tantric traditions, 10
within Buddhist tradition, 153–​55
defining characteristics of, 962–​63
and deity yoga, 851
diversity of doctrines, 913–​14n4
doctrines vs. mainstream Buddhism, 75
elements in, 226–​27
as elite form of practice, 153
emergence, 75, 1158
first wave, Indian masters initiating, 594
and healing in mental and physical 
sciences, 711
increase in violent and sexual imagery over 
time, 1153–​54
as initiatory religion, 962, 964–​65
interactions with Hindu tantra, 3, 4, 213–​14
in Japan, two forms of, 105
Kozhevnikov’s neuroscientific research on, 
152, 153, 159–​64
limited scientific research on, 153
and magical murder, 972–​73, 975
Mahāyāna texts and, 83
mahāyoga tradition, 213–​14
monastic responses to transgressive 
practices, 972–​75
neurological response vs. Theravāda, 161–​
62, 161t
neuroscientific research on arousal 
response in, 152, 159–​62
New Tantra (sarma) variant, 154, 154t
nondual awareness in, 162–​63
origin of, 847, 857n2, 861, 913–​14n4
paranormal abilities claimed by 
adherents, 851
as part of Mahāyāna tradition, 712, 714, 716
physical activity and emotions used in, 
152, 154–​55
as pinnacle of Buddhist thought, 75
powers gained through, 151
practitioners’ roles and training, 151–​52
pragmatic ends of many variants, 154
relation to Mahāyāna path, 76–​77
relation to Śaiva traditions, 4
as “result vehicle,” 717, 718
and Śaiva tantras, 4, 153
subtle body in, 211–​15
as summit of spiritual path in Tibetan 
Buddhism, 153
as term, 713
as thunderbolt vehicle, 557, 714, 725, 964
Tibetan systematization of, 81
turn to yogatantra, 212
two main variants of, 154
and two wings of wisdom and 
compassion, 716
unlimited human potential in, 740
use of imagination and body in spiritual 
work, 713
and Vajrayāna as term, 976
variety of practices in, 962
See also imagery in tantric Buddhism; 
linguistic mysticism in tantric 
Buddhism; modern Western forms of 
tantra; neuroscientific research on yoga 
and meditation practices; Nyingma 
(Old Tantric) tradition; subtle body; 
visualization, tantric
tantric Buddhist texts
claim to be pinnacle of Buddhist  
thought, 77
earliest texts, 2–​3, 861–​62
and original text (Urtext), 4
origin of, as issue, 77–​78
precursor texts, 861
preservation of, 15–​16
role in practice, 10
tantric Mahāmudrā traditions, scholars in, 88

--- PAGE 1263 ---
1238      index
 
tantric practice
“creation” or “generation” (utpattikrama, 
bskyed rim) stage, 89–​90, 160, 160t, 
168n17, 213–​14, 851, 870, 970
great variety in, 75
and Highest Yoga Tantras 
(anuttarayogatantra), 89–​90
mainstream Buddhists’ views on, 970
overview of, 89–​90
“perfection” or “completion” 
(niṣpannakrama, bskyed rim) stage, 
89–​90, 160, 160t, 168n17, 213–​14, 851, 
870–​71, 970
See also visualization, tantric
Tantrik Order of America, 1169–​70
Tantu Paṅgәlaran, 438, 441, 442
Ta Prohm temple, 645
Tārā, 722, 723f, 724f, 1156
Tārānātha, 77
tathagata, womb of, 260
tathāgatagarbha. See Buddha nature 
(tathāgatagarbha)
Tathāgatagarbha Sūtra, 87
tathāgatagarhbha theory, 260
Tatpuruṣa, 929
Tattvānuśāsana (Rāmasena), 215, 703
Tattvapradīpa, 1080
Tattvaratnāvalī (Advayavajra), 978–​79
Tattvārtha Sūtra (Umasvāti), 819
Tattvasaṃgraha, 862
Tattvasiddhi (Śāntarakṣita), 970–​71
Taylor, Kathleen, 326
Teeuwen, Mark, 117
Tejaprabhā, 277, 278, 282–​83
“Tejaprabhā Buddha and the Five Planets” 
(Zhang), 278
Tejorāśi Śākyamuni, 36
temple architecture designed as maṇḍalas
appeal to royalty, 616–​17
and Buddhist vision of just world ruler, 598
in central Java, 597–​615
deities in, 582
earliest structures in northeast 
India, 584–​89
in East Java, 621–​33
in first wave of tantric Buddhism, 581–​82, 
597–​602
and four Jina Buddhas around central 
Vairocana, 585–​89, 585f–​90f, 673n1
Garbhadhātu and Vajradhātu maṇḍalas as 
models for, 581, 584, 585, 593–​97
scholarship on, 582
in second wave of esoteric Buddhism, 
582, 621–​51
spread, seventh to tenth centuries, 581–​82
and tantric imagery of Buddha as 
king, 584–​85
textual basis for, 590–​92
typical structure of, 582–​83
and uniformity of design in many 
structures, 588–​89, 599f
use in ritual ceremonies, 655–​57
Temple of Great Repentance (Sanjō Shirakawa 
bō), 217t, 410–​20, 415t, 416–​20, 421
temples, tantric
ancient system of deity arrangement  
in, 538
area of deities’ influence within temple 
(kṣetra), 542
beauty of, 534, 535f, 536–​37, 536f, 547
in Cambodia, 642–​51
danger of impinging shadows, 539
darkness of central area, 542
differences in accounts on construction 
of, 534
entry and exit of, 543–​44
importance of single-​text instructions 
on, 534
innermost chamber (garbhagṛha) of, 
541, 542
installation of deity into vessel in innermost 
chamber, 542
and legitimization of political power, 535, 
636, 642, 644, 647, 651, 654–​55
maintenance of, 544–​47, 551n16
pratiṣṭhā treatises on construction and 
consecration of, 533–​34, 539
remediation (prāyaścitta) process to remove 
contaminants, 544
removal process for liṅga or image of 
deity, 545–​47
restrictions on access to, 547
ritual officials’ oversight of construction, 541
scholarship on architecture of, 535–​36

--- PAGE 1264 ---
index      1239
 
śilpaśāstra (or vāstuśāstra) instructions for 
construction, 534, 535, 539, 540
in Sumatra, 634–​41
vulnerability of aged, unused, or corrupted 
elements to malevolent spirits, 545–​47
ways of determining tantric identity, 533
worship of kings in deified form, 621, 626, 
628, 631–​32, 636, 655–​57
and Yātrā processions, 544
See also Piṅgalāmata; temple architecture 
designed as maṇḍalas
Tendai school, 105, 400–​1, 410
See also Annen of Godaiin; Jien
Testament of Ba, 847–​48
Tēvāram devotional poetry, 1055–​56
theodicy, 374–​75
Theravāda, 153, 161–​62, 161t, 252
Third Turning of the Wheel Doctrine, 94
Threaded String of Pearls, 463
three natures, doctrine of, 80–​81, 87
Thubten Yeshe, Lama, 719–​20, 727–​28
Tibet
Chinese oppression in, 361–​62
exchanges with China, eighth and ninth 
centuries, 460
women’s tantric lineages in, 8–​9
Tibet, tantric Buddhism in
Cakrasaṃvara practice traditions, 863, 867
Chinese occupation and, 857, 867–​68
classification of texts, 1144
consolidation and systematization of 
doctrine in high classical era, 856
dispute over sexual yoga, 855–​56
disputes over doctrine, 852–​55, 858n10
and doctrine of other-​emptiness (gzhan 
stong), 854
early competition among lineages and 
translations, 850–​52
early government patronage of, 847
early spread of heretical texts, 849
early texts excluded from, 852, 858n8
early translations of texts, 848–​50
ecumenical movement of nineteenth 
century, 857
establishment of canon, 852
and extracanonical “treasure” (gter ma) 
texts, 856–​57
first arrivals of texts, 847–​48
government opposition to literal readings 
of texts, 848–​49
Muslim invasion of India and, 851
origins of, 847
retreat periods required for 
practitioners, 152
scholarship on, 96
separation into schools, 854
and Seven Siddhi Texts (grub pa sde 
bdun), 969–​70
and shift of power from clans to monasteries 
after fifteenth century, 856, 858n18
singing in, 1007
spell books, 1157
systematization of Mahāyāna and tantric 
Buddhism, 81
“system of virtue” (Geluk), 855
tantric sexual practices in, 359–​61
tathāgatagarbha thought and, 88
texts, 88
and three stages of spiritual path, 153
and “Three Vows” literature, 855
Tibetan Buddhism
arrival in Tibet, and local spirits’ anger, 848
doxographical hierarchies, 93
early competition among lineages and 
translations, 850–​52
emphasis on treatises (śāstra) rather than 
on sūtras, 88
mistaken view of as synonymous with 
Tibetan tantric Buddhism, 847
sources of appeal to Tibetans, 848
systematization of Mahāyāna and tantric 
Buddhism, 81
three stages of spiritual path in, 153
See also Ḍākinī
Tijayapahuttastotra (Śvetāmbara), 701
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar, 151
time
Bhartṛhari on, 1121–​22
in Buddhism, 1120–​21
as central human predicament, 1117
as deity (kāla), 1119–​20, 1121–​22
in Hinduism, 1119–​20
in Sāṃkhya, 1120
in Yoga, 1120, 1130

--- PAGE 1265 ---
1240      index
 
time in nondual Śavism, 1118
Bhartṛhari and, 1121–​22
parallels in Western philosophy, 1126–​29
philosophical precursors to, 1119–​21
Pratyabhijñā philosophical theology and, 
1118–​19, 1122–​25
and subsumption of temporal sequence, 
1118, 1119, 1120, 1122, 1124–​26, 1129–​30
Tirumantiram, 334
Tiṣyarakṣitā, 13
Tiwari, Maruit Nandan Prasad, 514–​15
Tokuen, 403
Törzsök, J., 797
Tosa Hidenobu, 289
Totok Kerot, 432
Trailokyavijaya, 609–​10, 644, 663f
Trailokyavijaya, 1070
Transforming Women’s Bodies 
(Dharmamitra), 259–​60
transgressive practices in tantric Buddhism
early texts on, 862
Jain views on, 838
role of, 484–​85
and soteriology, 964–​67, 976–​77
See also sexual fluids; sexual practices in 
tantric Buddhism
transgressive substances
in Nepālī Sarvāmnāya tradition, 59–​
61, 65–​66
in Śrīvidyā, 329–​30
See also sexual fluids
treasure texts (gter ma), 75, 354
Treasury of Precious Instructions (Jamgön 
Kongtrul Lodro Tayé), 95, 355
Tribhuvana temple, at Kumbakonam, 
Tamilnadu, 534, 536f
Trika Śaivism (Kashmir Śaivism), 1044
Abhinavagupta and, 177, 180
cosmology, 192n15
earliest Tantra of, 803
influence on Nepālī Sarvāmnāya 
Tantra, 938–​40
on reality, 200
Trikūṭēśvara ritual complex (Gadag), 887–​98, 
892f–​97f, 900–​1
Trilōcana Paṇḍita, 886
Trilocanaśiva, 1052–​53
Tripathi, Gayan Charan, 229
Tripathi, Laxminarayan, 1025, 1027–​28, 
1029, 1030
Tripurāntakēśvara temple, 885–​87, 886f, 
888f–​91f
Tripurārahasya Mahātmya-​khaṇḍa, 935
Tripurasundarī
characteristics and iconography of, 323, 
325, 342n9
early texts on, 803
and Kāmākhyā temple complex, 1032
and Kaula Śaivism, 207–​8, 302
mantra for, 325, 342n7, 704–​5
and Nepāla-​Maṇḍala tantra, 68
other names for, 68, 323, 331, 332, 1032
scholarship on, 331–​33, 341
and Śrīvidyā, 323, 325, 327, 329, 330
and tantric medicine, 302
Trisamayarāja, 1068
Trisong Detsen, 847
truth body of Buddha, 717
TS. See Tantrasāra (Abhinavagupta)
Tsangyang Gyatso, 1016n24
Tsen Khawoche, 85
Tsongkhapa Losang Drakpa, 852, 853–​
55, 858n13
Tulajā Bhavānī, 940
tulkor exercises, 165
Tulsidas, 1030
tummo (inner heat) practice, 159, 160–​61, 160t, 
163, 164, 166
Turner, Mark, 739, 741, 776, 777–​78, 779–​
80, 785
Tutur Raṇayajna, 441
Two Mandalas of esoteric Buddhism, 260
Two Truths theory, 717
Udayagiri stūpa, 585–​86, 592f, 593f–​96f, 674n3
Udyogaparva, 429
Ullrey, Aaron, 705
Umāpatideva, 354
Umasvāti, 819
unifying nature (prakṛti), 1120
universal momentariness (kṣaṇikatva), theory 
of, 1121
Urban, Hugh B., 7, 1007
Usan Züil Khüree, 498

--- PAGE 1266 ---
index      1241
 
Uṣṇīṣavijayā, 417t, 418
Utpaladeva, 1054, 1091, 1093, 1095–​98, 1101–​2, 
1106, 1107n2, 1117–​18, 1122–​23
Uttarādhyayana, 125
uttarapīṭha, 935–​36
Uttarasūtra, 231, 796, 797, 798
Vāc, 795
Vaḍavānala-​Tantra, 68, 935
Vāgīśvara, 1156
Vāgīśvarakīrti, 974
Vairocana, 585, 589f, 591f, 592, 596f, 604, 605f, 
618f, 964
See also Sutra of Great Vairocana
Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi tantra (Mahāvairocan-
ābhisambodhisūtra), 4, 34–​35, 39, 40, 239, 
276, 963–​65, 977, 1067–​68
Vairocana of Pagor, 454, 456–​57
Vairoṭyā, 519
Vaiśeṣika school, 226
Vaiṣṇava Hindu tantra, 199–​200
Vaiṣṇava Pāncarātra tantra, 200–​2
Vaiṣṇava Sahajiyā
approach to decoding of metaphorical 
texts, 764
appropriation of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava 
elements, 765–​66
becoming dual incarnation of Kṛṣṇa or 
Rādhā as goal in, 766
blending of complex metaphors into 
megablend networks, 779–​81
body system of, 764–​65
conceptual metaphors in spiritual journey 
and body system of, 767–​75
consumption of sexual fluids, 765, 770–​71
on cosmic vastu created from sexual fluids, 
765, 770, 772, 777, 781, 782, 784
definition of, 763
fluid-​based, rather than typical energy-​
based cosmophysiology, 764, 774
history of, 202–​3
immortality as goal of practice in, 765
internal vs. external practice in, 203
Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā as central deities in, 763
as mix of orthodox Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava and 
transgressive practices, 763
and practice of reversal, 765, 766, 788n33
process of complex metaphor development 
in, 776–​79, 777f
process of conceptual blending of tantra 
and bhakti in, 781–​85, 782f
ritual adulterous sexual intercourse in, 
763, 765
ritual fashioning of spiritual body of 
maiden (mañjarī) in, 784
ritual practices, 765
Sahaja as highest goal of, 204–​5
scholarship on, 217n11, 786n1
subtle body in, 204–​6, 209, 211
textual corpus, 164
textual record of practices, 763–​64
transgressive practices characteristic of, 
763, 775
See also Amṛtaratnāvalī (Mukunda-​dāsa/​
deva)
Vaiśrāvana, King, 1146, 1149
Vajra Beak’s Vow: King of Ritual Manuals 
(Vajratuṇḍasmayakalp arāja), 1144, 
1150–​52
Vajrabhairava, 862, 1074–​75
Vajrabodhi from Kāncīpuram (Jin’gangzhi), 
557, 563, 594, 622
Vajrācāryas, Newar, 1006
Vajraḍāka, 866, 1078–​79
Vajradhara, 454, 565, 722f, 965–​66
Vajradhātu maṇḍala, 590–​97, 601f, 616–​17, 635, 
656–​57, 674n7
Vajragarbha, 976
Vajraghaṇṭa (Ghaṇṭāpāda), 867
Vajrahṛdayālaṃkāra, 1075
Vajrahūṁkāra maṇḍala, 675n19
Vajramālā, 1075
Vajramaṇḍālaṃkāra, 1072
Vajrāmṛta, 1076
Vajranandin, 515
Vajrapāṇi, 478, 590f, 604, 613f, 618f, 965, 1151
Vajrapañjarastotra, 133
Vajrapāṇyabhiṣeka, 4, 1067
Vajra Peak Sūtra, 399
Vajrāralli, 1078
Vajrasattva (Buddha), 456, 462, 640, 642–​43, 
968, 1154–​55
Vajrāvalī (Prajnāśrīgupta), 35, 43
Vajravārāhī (female Buddha), 864, 865, 867

--- PAGE 1267 ---
1242      index
 
Vajrayāna. See tantric Buddhism (Vajrayāna)
Vajrayoginī (Vajravārāhī), 352, 353
Vākkhāni, 897–​98
Vākyapadīya, 1121
Vāmadeva, 929
Vāmakeśvarīmata, 328, 336, 341, 803–​4
Varāhamihira, 701
Vārāhīkalpa, 1081
Vārāhyabhibhava Tantra, 866
Vārāhyabhyudaya, 1078–​79
Vardhamānavidyāpaṭa, 706
vase consecrations, 42, 44
Vasiṣṭhasaṃhitā, 240–​41
Vasubandhu, 84, 87, 1121
Vasudeva, Somadeva, 369, 803
Vasudevahiṇḍī, 510–​12
Vasugupta, 804
Vedajnāna II, 1053
Vedānta
elements in, 225–​26
esoteric physiology in, 199
Vedas
on power of speech and word, 795–​96
as touchstone of Hindu identity, 386
Veḷḷiambara Vānar Tambirān, 914n6
Vibhavasāgara, Ācārya, 137
vibration or subtle language pervading 
creation
Niśvāsa corpus on, 796–​97
in Śaiva Siddhānta, 798–​802
in Tantric literature, 795–​96
Vedas on, 795
Victory Banner (jayatrayantra), 701
vidyā (vidyādevī, mahāvidyā) goddesses, 510–​
12, 517
Vidyānanda, 337, 338
Vidyānandana, 560, 561, 647–​49
Vidyānuśāsana, 514
Vidyāpīṭha pilgrimage sites, 565, 578n12
Vidyāraṇya, 744–​45
Vijayā, 704
Vilāsavajra, 1066
Vimalakīrti nirdeśa sūtra, 259
Vimalakīrti Sūtra, 396–​98, 403
Vimalamitra, 456
Vimalaprabhā (Puṇḍarīka), 975
Vimalaprabodha, 938–​40
Vimalasūri, 512
Vimānārcanakalpa, 544
Vimuktisena, 85
Vīṇāśikha, 644
vinaya, Buddhist, 274
vipassanā, 157. 159, 161, 161t, 162
Vipaśyin (Buddha), 40
Virūpākṣapancāśikā, 1125
Visāvāḍā Old temple/​ Śaṅkha-​dērun, near 
Porbandar, 541–​42, 543f
Viṣṇudharmottarapurāṇa, 32, 40
Viṣṇu Guru (Mohani Prasad Hoirala), 65, 66f
Viṣṇuvardhana, 626
visualization, in Goryū Shintō vs. Shingon 
Buddhist gomas, 109–​10
visualization, tantric
and altering of ego, 753
and attention, focusing of, 742–​45
dynamic attention in, 745
guided compression of information in, 741
imagination in, 750–​54
and memory, expansion of, 740–​41, 
743, 746–​50
and memory, modification of identity 
through, 746–​50
seed syllable in, 715, 742, 744, 755n2
suspension (nirodha) in, 742
visualization in deity yoga, 714–​18
and breaking down of dualities, 716, 726
and Buddha’s truth body vs. form body, 717
as central tool, 711
clear light in, as equivalent to emptiness, 719
and collapse of dualities, 720–​21, 729
as concretization of doctrine, 719
and creation of embodied vision of 
healthier states, 720–​22, 725–​29
of deities in sexual embrace, 721f, 722, 722f
deity in, as both archetype of inner 
awakened presence and literal deity, 716
deity in, as entire world, 718
deity’s emergence from and return to clear 
light of wisdom mind, 716–​17
dissolving of visualized array into clear 
light, 712, 715
and divine pride, 715–​16, 719, 728, 851, 869
and gender duality, undermining of, 
720, 722

--- PAGE 1268 ---
index      1243
 
for healing, 725–​29
identification with image of perfect being 
emerging in, 715–​16
imagination in, 714
key features of, 714–​15
and mandalic imagery, 718–​19, 725–​
26, 729–​30
mantra used in, 715, 719
and metaphor’s reshaping of reality, 731
mudrās, 719
and nonverbal reasoning, 732
and outflow of light to world, 719, 725, 733n7
as part of ritual process, 712–​13, 714
process, stages of, 715–​16
and purification via inner light, 720, 733n7
research on health effects of, 726, 727–​28
and rupturing of ordinary sense of self and 
world, 732
seed syllable in, 715
as self-​generation vs. front-​generation 
process, 714–​16
and sexual energy, redirection of, 720
in Shingon Buddhism, 729–​32
and somatization of realization, 725–​26
sources on, 714
and transformation of identity/​self-​image, 
720, 725, 733n10
and Two Truths theory, 717
use of male or female deities in, 722
and wisdom consciousness, 715
Visuddhimagga, 211–​12
Vivekamārtaṇḍa, 241
Vivekananda, Swami, 1163
Vyomakuṇḍalinī, 378
Waitai miyao (Wang), 252
waka kanjō, 263
Walser, Joseph, 76, 77–​79, 83
Wamyō ruiju shō, 281
Wang Tao, 252
Ward, William, 7, 1162
water pot (kalaśa)
Nepālī Sarvāmnāya Tantra as, 931–​34
at Purano Guhyeśvarī Temple, Kathmandu., 
932, 933f
weather, magic to control, 1150–​52, 1156
Wedemeyer, Christian, 3, 728
Weimojing Wenshu (Zhiyi), 397–​98
wheel, turning of, in Mahāyāna thought, 80
wheel of Kālī, Abhinavagupta on, 180
Wheel of the Mahāyāna, 37
Wheel-​Turning Kannon (Nyoirin), 260
White, David Gordon, 6–​7, 198, 207, 209, 330, 
348, 999
whole body postures (abhinaya), 967
Wijaya, Raden, 573–​74
Williams, Paul, 76
Williams, Richard, 992
Willis, Janice, 348, 350
Winford, Donald, 102–​4
wisdom goddesses, and Kāmākhyā temple 
complex, 1032
Wise-​Woman Vow (niṣprapancacaryā), 971
wishlessness (apraṇihita), 79
Womb Realm, 260
women
amd rasaśāstra medical tradition, 304–​5
Buddhist, Ḍākinī’s Great Dharma Treasury 
collection of writings on and by, 362, 364
and Digambara Jain fire offerings, 144
equality in Matua movement, 1011
honoring of, as foundational Vajrayāna 
commitment, 353
tantric images of, in Cambodia, 650
women and tantra
importance of, xvii, 7
scholarship on, 9–​10, 17n17
tantric lineages in Tibet, 8–​9
See also goddesses in tantra
Women in Tibet (Gyatso), 356
Woodroffe, John, 164, 198, 207, 208, 210, 326–​
28, 1163
word (śabda)
emergence from resonance of universe, 799
as essential principle of ultimate reality, 
796, 806
OM and, 795
related concepts, 796
See also mātṛkā (source); phoneme (varṇa)
Wuxing, 276, 861
Wu xing zhan, 274
Xiuyao jing (Manjuśrī), 276–​77, 281–​82, 285, 
286, 289, 291

--- PAGE 1269 ---
1244      index
 
Yāg Maṇḍal evaṃ Panckalyāṇak Vidhān 
(Prasād), 137, 142, 143–​44
yakṣas, 477, 489–​94, 500–​2, 510, 517, 1148
yantras, as defining feature of tantra, 1031
yantras, Jaina
absence of Padmāvatī from, 706
adoption of, 825
in Bhairavapadmāvatīkalpa, 690–​96
Bhaktāmara Stotra Yantra, 702
modern, 689–​90, 696–​702, 698f, 699, 700–​
2, 700f, 704
Ṛṣimaṇḍala Yantra, 702
Yaśatilaka (Somadeva), 824, 838–​39
Yellow Emperor’s Canon, 250
Yeshe Tsogyal, 354–​55
Yijing, 258, 861
Yixing, 255, 261, 276, 279–​80, 285
yoga
Buddhist, elements in, 240
controversies in Indian Buddhism, 45–​46
dream yoga, 870
five forms in Jainism, 820
guru yoga, in Cakrasaṃvara traditions, 868
Mahāyoga, 213–​14, 1004, 1153–​54
in modern West, 1172
sexual, with consort (karmamudrā), 44–​45, 
61–​62, 213, 359–​61, 855–​56, 871, 971, 973–​
74, 1001
time in, 1120, 1130
types, Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya on, 822, 823t
See also Aṣṭāṅga Yoga; deity yoga; 
haṭhayoga; Netra Tantra (NT); 
neuroscientific research on yoga and 
meditation practices; ṣaḍaṅgayoga (Six-​
branch Yoga); visualization in deity yoga
Yogabindu (Haribhadra Virahanka), 819–​21
Yogācāra
and anointing rituals, 33–​34
and Buddha nature 
(tathāgatagarbha), 87–​89
development of, 79–​80
as exegetical tradition, 81
and Madhyamaka, 84
Mahāyāna path and, 76–​77
texts, 79–​80
Yogacārābhūmi, 34, 253, 257–​58
Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya (Haribhadra Yakini 
Putra), 822–​24, 823t, 838–​39
Yogalehrbuch, 33
Yogananda, Swami, 166
Yogaśāstra (Hemacandra), 825–​26, 832
Yoga Sūtras, 372, 386
Yogattvopaniṣad, 239
Yogayājnavalkya, 239
Yoginīhṛdaya, 327, 333–​34, 336, 341
Yoginīhṛdayadīpikā (Amṛtānanda), 325, 338
Yoginījāla, 1081
Yoginīs, 378–​79
See also Netra Tantra
Yoginīsaṃcāra Tantra, 866, 1078–​79
Yoginītantras, 43, 644–​45, 862, 863, 871n1, 968, 
1004, 1007
Yogin Sutra (Yugikyō), 261, 262, 263
Yōsai, 264
Yoshida Shintō tradition, 104
Yuanzhao, 257
Yūgen of Denbō’in, 474
Yugikyō, 256, 262, 263, 483
Yūkai, 483
Zangpo Tenzin, 494
Zhang Huaixing, 278
Zhiqian, 275
Zhiyi, 251, 264, 397–​99, 400, 401, 404
Zhongguanglun shu (Jizang), 254
Zhönnu Pel, 865
Zongying, 403
Zoroastrianism, on planets, 279
Zu Gawe Dorje, 85
Zydenbos, Robert, 508

--- PAGE 1270 ---


--- PAGE 1271 ---


--- PAGE 1272 ---


--- PAGE 1273 ---

