# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2024-kotyk-kingship-and-elite-values-mahasamghika-vinaya.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 06:27:39
# Total Pages: 26
# File Size: 1.27 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 1787.9 chars/page in sample)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
Kratèr
Quaderni di culture e tradizioni spirituali
III (2024)
RELIGIONI E IMPERI 
a cura di Alessandro Grossato
Questo terzo numero della collana Kratèr. Quaderni di culture e tradizioni spiri-
tuali è dedicato a quel continuo intreccio fra spiritualità e potere temporale che 
si è dipanato all’interno dei principali imperi succedutisi nella storia dell’Eurasia 
a partire dal VI secolo a.C. Per ragioni ancor oggi dibattute, l’‘età assiale’ è stata 
lo spazio temporale di emersione sia delle prime religioni universali che dei primi 
cinque grandi imperi interculturali: persiano, macedone, indiano, cinese e più tardi 
romano. Quando i due momenti religioso e politico si identificavano, o quasi, men-
tre l’eccezione confermava la regola. Un tema, quello del rapporto fra religioni e 
imperi, che solo negli ultimi decenni è tornato fortemente all’attenzione di studiosi 
e ricercatori, per evidenti ragioni sia storiche che geopolitiche.
Alessandro Grossato (Padova 1955) è docente incaricato di Religioni non cristiane presso 
la Facoltà Teologica del Triveneto a Padova. Studioso di fama, storico e antropologo delle 
religioni, ha insegnato nelle Università di Trieste, Gorizia e Trento. Ha fondato e diretto as-
sieme a Francesco Zambon la collana Viridarium della Fondazione Giorgio Cini di Venezia, 
assieme a Carlo Saccone i Quaderni di Studi Indo-Mediterranei dell’Università di Bologna, 
e assieme a Francesco Zambon la collana Kratèr. Quaderni di culture e tradizioni spirituali 
dell’ISUR di Rimini. Oltre a numerosi saggi e studi indologici e di storia comparata delle 
religioni, è autore di monografie come Navigatori e viaggiatori veneti sulla rotta per l’India 
(1994), e Il libro dei simboli. Metamorfosi dell’umano tra Oriente e Occidente (1999). Ha 
curato diverse opere collettive, fra le quali La montagna cosmica (2010), Le Tre Anella. Al 
crocevia spirituale tra Ebraismo, Cristianesimo e Islam (2013). Fra le sue curatele più recenti: 
Miti e simboli dell’arcobaleno (2020), Corpi di luce (2022), Draghi. Simboli, miti e iconografie 
(2024).
In Copertina:
Buddha Cakravartin che mette simbolicamente in moto la “Ruota della Legge” cosmica. Moneta d’oro del 
I secolo circa, proveniente da Tillya Tepe, Afghanistan. Kabul Museum.
Pazzini Editore
9 788862 575164
€ 24,00
ISSN  2975-0717
ISBN 978-88-6257-516-4
Kratèr 	 	
	
RELIGIONI E IMPERI

--- PAGE 2 ---
Direttori responsabili: Alessandro Grossato e Francesco Zambon 
 
Comitato scientifico: Luigi Alfieri (Università degli Studi di Urbino “Carlo 
Bo”), Mauro Bergonzi (Università degli Studi di Napoli “L’Orientale”), Franco 
Cardini (ISUS/SNS), Paolo Cesaretti (Università degli Studi di Bergamo), 
Victoria Cirlot (Universitat Pompeu Fabra in Barcelona), Elisabetta Colagrossi 
(Università di Genova), Claudia Di Fonzo (Università di Trento), Raphael Ebgi 
(Freie Universität Berlin), Riccardo Fracasso (Università Ca’ Foscari), Maurizio 
Giangiulio (Università di Trento), Moshe Idel (Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem), Mario Mancini (Università di Bologna), Attilio Mastrocinque 
(Università di Verona), Marcello Meli (Università di Padova), Antonio Panaino 
(Università di Bologna), Stefano Salzani (Sorbonne - Università di Verona), 
Angelo Scarabel (Università Ca’ Foscari), Sonu Shamdasani (University College 
of London), Guy G. Stroumsa (Hebrew University of Jerusalem), Alberto 
Ventura (†) (Università della Calabria), Alessandro Vitale (Università degli Studi 
di Milano), Philippe Walter (Université de Grenoble).

--- PAGE 3 ---
Kratèr 
QUADERNI DI CULTURE E TRADIZIONI SPIRITUALI  
III (2024) 
 
 
Religioni e Imperi 
 
a cura di 
Alessandro Grossato

--- PAGE 4 ---
Pubblicazione dell’Istituto di Scienze dell’Uomo, nell’ambito delle
attività della Scuola Superiore di Filosofia Orientale e Comparativa.
Via Costantino Nigra 26, 47923 RIMINI
Email: info@isurimini.it
ISSN 2975-0717
ISBN 978-88-6257-516-4

--- PAGE 5 ---
INDICE 
 
 
 
Imperium sine fine. L’archetipo metastorico e metareligioso degli Imperi 
di Alessandro Grossato 
 
 
 
 
 
                 7
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
               
 
 
 
“Per volere di Ahura Mazdā”. Autorità, potere e legittimazione religiosa  
del sovrano nell’Iran antico 
   di Andrea Piras  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     27 
 
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
   di Jeffrey Kotyk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     47 
 
Alla ricerca della bona consonantia. Cenni sul rapporto tra Impero  
e religione a Bisanzio 
   di Paolo Cesaretti 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
L’Imperatore Giuliano come mediatore 
   di Attilio Mastrocinque 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     91 
 
 
 
 
    
Santità imperiali 
   di Francesca Lucia Faggian  
 
 
 
 
 
   103 
 
Imperi tengristi da Bumïn Qaghan a Genghis Khan ed Osman Gâzî 
   di Ermanno Visintainer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   115 
 
Note sul Corno ducale e su Venezia come impero repubblicano 
   di Flavio Cuniberto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   151 
 
Fra età dell’oro ed era messianica. Tracce di concezioni cicliche e chiliastiche  
nella profezia dell’«ultimo imperatore dei Romani» 
   di Marco Giardini 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   171

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sulla concezione del Califfato in Ibn ‘Arabī 
   di Angelo Scarabel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             199 
 
La concezione dell'impero: da Dante al dantismo giuridico 
 
 
   
  di Claudia Di Fonzo  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   215 
 
Impero, potere politico e religione ortodossa in Russia. La persistenza di un legame  
originario e indissolubile 
   di Alessandro Vitale  
 
 
 
 
 
             233 
 
L’eredità contesa: l’impero di Akbar nel conflitto delle interpretazioni 
   di Elisabetta Colagrossi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   253

--- PAGE 7 ---
JEFFREY KOTYK 
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
 
 
Introduction 
   This study is an examination and discussion of kingship and elite values as they are 
presented in the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya. As Clarke explains, the Indic word vinaya “refers 
to the body of teachings concerning monastic discipline or law attributed to the historical 
Buddha. In theory each ordination lineage or school possessed its own Vinaya.”1 Vinaya 
literature is as canonical as sūtras (if we use the Tripiṭaka as representative of the Buddhist 
canon, which includes the sūtra-piṭaka, vinaya-piṭaka, and abhidharma-piṭaka), but mod-
ern Buddhists and even secular scholars often avoid reading the Vinaya, either out of dis-
interest or inaccessibility (for example, an absence of translations). Anyone interested in 
philosophy or meditation will not find much of interest in the Vinaya. The Vinaya ad-
dresses day-to-day activities and behavioral expectations of the sangha (monastic com-
munity), whereas sūtras generally deal with abstract doctrines and practices aimed at lib-
eration from saṃsāra (involuntary rebirth). Abhidharma might be understood as “Bud-
dhist scholasticism” that examines and discusses the contents of sūtras, as well as the 
disputes arising from different interpretations. 
   The Vinaya handles the organization, procedures, and regulations that govern the sangha, 
a part of which inevitably must address the authority of the crown and the laws of the 
realm. Kings certainly feature as diverse figures—either benevolent or evil—in the sūtras, 
but in the Vinaya, they can be evoked as authorities for how and when to establish a certain 
rule. In these instances, the sangha or more specifically the Buddha cede authority to a 
figure outside the sangha, whereas the sūtras arguably attempt to position the Buddha as 
the supreme and wisest authority in the world. While abstract religious conceptions of 
holy figures might have been fine for internal consumption and proselytization, the sangha 
nevertheless still had to live in a society governed by kings and more generally Brahman-
ical elites, who may or may not have embraced Buddhist values. The Vinaya might be full 
of fantastical tales, hilarious incidents, and supernatural entities, but in this study, I want 
to emphasize that the Vinaya clearly acknowledges the suzerainty of kings, and even 
forms some of its regulations based on what were elite values and/or the contemporary 
laws of the realm. 
 
1 S. CLARKE, “Vinayas”, in Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, edited by J.A. Silk, Brill, Leiden 2015, p. 
60.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
48 
 
   This study will discuss a few other matters. First, this study argues that the 
Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya employs kings as figures in ahistorical tales (or “legal cases”) to 
explain and justify the creation of specific precepts that monks and/or nuns were expected 
to observe. Although a king is not evoked in every instance, it is still evident that a royal 
voice or request was sufficient reason for the Buddha to create a new rule in response. 
Kingship is explicitly defined, valued, and unchallenged in the Vinaya, even when the 
king’s acts would constitute negative karma. In other words, the Vinaya gives a pass to 
the king when he does the “dirty work” of ruling the realm. The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
also often expects that not only will the king possess absolutist authority over all his sub-
ordinates and subjects, but that he will also use his position to safeguard and protect the 
sangha. 
   Further, I believe that we can glean some actual conventions of royal law as it existed 
in the environments in which the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya was compiled and written. Based 
on this, we can conclude that the Mahāsāṃghika—or at least the jurists connected with 
the Vinaya—were conscious of Brahmanical law codes2. They subsequently had to navi-
gate around a non-Buddhist system of social control, but they also attempted to position 
the sangha—at least in theory—as an entity separate from mainstream society, while also 
adhering to many demanding—predominately aristocratic—norms that were arguably un-
necessary according to Buddhist doctrine, especially dietary restrictions. At the same time, 
we can observe a disregard for plebeian interests. Instead, the sangha tried to position 
itself on favorable terms with the elites. Vinaya authors catered to “householders,” but 
this did not include all householders. Drawing on a recent discussion by Witkowski, these 
patrons were clearly Brahmanical elites and their close allies (e.g., the kṣatriyas), who 
were chiefly concerned with ritual purity, rather than the commonfolk, much less the out-
castes. Despite the theoretical potential for all men and women to be liberated from 
saṃsāra and then become arhats, the Vinaya is primarily concerned with powerful men 
 
2 We should emphasize that Vinaya texts (like any other Buddhist text) were not necessarily widely read 
or understood by Buddhists in India, hence we cannot assume that the values and conventions described 
in the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, for example, were universally understood or observed by all monastics 
and laypeople, even within the Mahāsāṃghika school. In fact, as Schopen has discussed, archaeological 
evidence would indicate that the lived religion of Buddhism was different from what is formally pre-
scribed in canonical literature. In evaluating earlier scholars who fail to account for archaeological evi-
dence, Schopen notes “the possibility that the texts we are to study to arrive at a knowledge of ‘Buddhism’ 
may not even have been known to the vast majority of practicing Buddhists—both monks and lay. It is 
axiomatically assumed that they not only were known but were also important, not only were ‘read,’ but 
were also fully implemented in actual practice.” G. SCHOPEN, “Archaeology and Protestant Presupposi-
tions in the Study of Indian Buddhism,” History of Religions, vol. 31, no. 1, 1991, pp. 4–5.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
49 
 
and the value they place on purity.3 The Buddha is framed as the supreme and unchal-
lenged lawgiver, but the Vinaya does not seek to overthrow the king or upset the social 
order, much less launch a social revolution. Instead, the Vinaya positions the sangha in 
subservient roles to the throne while tacitly expecting special privileges and exemptions, 
all the while receiving the grace of elite patrons. In short, the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya ide-
alizes kings as absolute monarchs with strong sympathies for the Buddhist institution. 
 
 
Historical Background 
   As the title indicates, the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya is the monastic code (Vinaya) of the 
Mahāsāṃghika school of Indian Buddhism. Each school generally had its own Vinaya, 
with the number of precepts and narratives differing between them. A Vinaya contains 
precepts and procedures for the monastic community (sangha) to follow. The core part of 
the literature includes narratives of the Buddha and community that describe troublesome 
incidents among monastics. These stories are then followed by the Buddha establishing 
new precepts (laws) to prevent such problems from recurring. Clarke notes that “only six 
seemingly complete Vinayas have come down to us, belonging to schools (nikāyas) from 
both sides of the so-called great schism in Buddhist history purportedly a century or so 
after the Buddha’s death.”4 The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya is especially significant because 
even in antiquity it was held to be the oldest version, a point that is confirmed by modern 
scholars.5 This does not imply, however, that the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya reflects historical 
events and an ecclesiastical model established by the Buddha; rather, it was held to be the 
earliest recension of monastic codes and modern scholarship appears to confirm this (bear-
ing in mind that today we have the Chinese translation). 
   Although Buddhists themselves believed that the events described in the Vinaya really 
happened as they are described, from a more critical point of view, their objective histo-
ricity is doubtful for a number of reasons. For instance, we have no sources 
 
3 N. WITKOWSKI, “Interpreting Brahmanization in the Indian Buddhist Monastery with J. Z. Smith,” in 
Thinking with J. Z. Smith - Mapping Methods in the Study of Religion, edited by B. Krawcowicz, Equinox 
eBooks Publishing, Sheffield 2023, p. 130. 
4 Clarke continues, “one is a Vinaya belonging to the Mahāsāṅghikas (“Majority”; with significant sec-
tions from an offshoot school, the Mahāsāṅghika-Lokottaravādins), and five stems from the branch 
known as the Sthaviras (“Elders”): (1) Theravāda (Mahāvihāra), (2) Dharmaguptaka, (3) Mahīśāsaka, (4) 
Sarvāstivāda, and (5) Mūlasarvāstivāda. In addition, we have some materials from the Kāśyapīya and 
Sāṃmitīya. 
As for the Vinayas of schools whose literatures have not survived, little can be said.” Clarke, “Vinayas,” 
p. 60. 
5 J.J. NATTIER and C.S. Prebish, “Mahāsāṃghika Origins: The Beginnings of Buddhist Sectarianism”, 
History of Religions, vol. 16, no. 3, 1977, pp. 267–270.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
50 
 
contemporaneous with the “historical Buddha,” such as inscriptions or artifacts that could 
offer evidence. More obvious is the fact that the tales in the Vinaya often relate fantastical 
incidents, such as monks confronting supernatural entities. We also read of the Buddha’s 
disciples engaging in acts of bestiality, necrophilia, and other sordid acts. If we read these 
stories as objectively historical, then the original sangha in the Buddha’s time was appar-
ently full of unhinged lunatics. I do not read any of these stories as objectively historical. 
Further, whether a “historical Buddha” (i.e, Śākyamuni) ever existed is debatable, a point 
taken up by David Drewes, who states his position as follows: 
 
Though there has long been an industry devoted to the production of sensational claims about the 
Buddha, nothing about him has ever been established as fact, and the standard position in schol-
arship has long been that he is a figure about whom we know nothing. My only real suggestion 
is that we make the small shift from speaking of an unknown, contentless Buddha to accepting 
that we do not have grounds for speaking of a historical Buddha at all. Of course, it is possible 
that there was some single, actual person behind the nebulous “śramaṇa Gautama” of the early 
texts, but this is very far from necessarily the case, and even if such a person did exist, we have 
no idea who he was. There may similarly have been an actual person behind the mythical Aga-
memnon, homer, or King Arthur; Vyāsa, Vālmīki, Kṛṣṇa, or Rāma, but this does not make it 
possible to identify them as historical.6 
 
I agree with Drewes on this matter: we cannot speak of any historical Buddha. The Vinaya 
and sūtras (e.g., the Āgamas and Nikāyas, as well as all Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna texts) 
can only be treated as products of their respective eras and locales. In this sense, although 
Vinaya literature is not an objective record of the early sangha and the laws credited to 
the Buddha, it still reflects the values and customs of at least some members of the sangha 
in the early Common Era. As Gregory Schopen has demonstrated, the Vinaya constitutes 
a form of Indian literature, complete with literary theory—such as humor—carefully em-
ployed by its authors for specific purposes.7 It is abundantly clear that great attention to 
detail was exercised in the creation of these texts to satisfy specific values and sensibilities. 
We would not expect a verbatim record to have been formulated with such conscious 
conventions. 
   The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya—like the other Vinayas of other schools—frequently men-
tions kings and includes them in the stories that relate how and why certain monastic 
precepts were established. I believe that we can learn from them something about the 
expectations and values of Buddhist jurists (i.e., the authors of the Vinaya) and the 
 
6 D. DREWES, “The Idea of the Historical Buddha”, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies, vol. 4, 2017, p. 19. 
7 G. SCHOPEN, “The Learned Monk as a Comic Figure: On Reading a Buddhist Vinaya as Indian Litera-
ture”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, vol. 35, no. 3, 2007, pp. 201–226.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
51 
 
environment in which they operated, although determining precisely what era (or eras) 
these values reflect is challenging, since the history of Buddhist monasticism is unclear. 
Bronkhorst provides the following data: 
 
The historical evidence does not allow us to determine with precision when buddhist monks and 
nuns settled down permanently in monasteries. The first epigraphic evidence for the donation of 
land to monastic establishments in continental India may date from the first century ce. In Sri 
Lanka land grants were presumably already given to buddhist monasteries in the latter part of the 
second century bce, which may not be an unlikely date even for continental India. But whatever 
its exact date, when this important transition took place, Buddhism became more than ever before 
dependent upon rich and powerful donors. This in its turn involved it inextricably in political and 
social issues.8 
 
In any case, once Buddhists had settled into permanent monasteries, the concern for royal 
authority and benefactors would have only grown. By the time the time the Mahāsāṃghika 
Vinaya was translated into Chinese in the early fifth century, monasticism was already in 
a mature form in India. Based on this text alone, we cannot confidently propose any dating, 
although I tentatively assume that the content generally reflects the environment around 
Magadha in the early centuries of the Common Era. 
 
 
The Chinese Translation 
   The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya is only fully extant as a Classical Chinese translation. A 
great amount of Indian Buddhist literature was otherwise lost in the original languages 
(not only Sanskrit, but also Gandhari, Middle Indic, etc.), but we are able to read many of 
these texts in Chinese. The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya was translated into Chinese (titled Mo-
hesengzhi lü 摩訶僧祇律 in Chinese) in forty fascicles by the monks Buddhabhadra 
(Fotuobatuoluo 佛陀跋陀羅; 358–429) and Faxian 法顯 (338–423) between 416 and 
418.9 The translation includes an appended note—presumably written by Faxian—that 
explains the origins of the text in question and the circumstances through which it was 
transmitted to China, as follows: 
“Postscript to the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya”: in Middle India during ancient times, there was for 
some time a wicked king who ruled the world. The śramaṇas fled to the four quarters to avoid 
him. The bhikṣus (monks) [familiar with] the Tripiṭaka were scattered like the stars. The evil king 
having died, he was replaced with a benevolent king. He invited the bhikṣus to return to the coun-
try, so that he could make offerings to them. At the time, in the city of Pāṭaliputra, there were five 
hundred monks. They sought to decide on matters, but they had no Vinaya Master. Further, they 
 
8 J. BRONKHORST, Buddhism in the Shadow of Brahmanism, Brill, Leiden 2011, p. 19. 
9 CLARKE, “Vinayas,” p. 64.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
52 
 
had neither the Vinaya text nor the inherited cases. They sent a man to Jetavana Vihāra, where he 
copied the Vinaya, which has been transmitted down to the present. Faxian copied the Sanskrit 
text at the South Indian Royal Vihāra at the Stūpa of King Aśoka in Pāṭaliputra in the country of 
Magadha, and then returned to Yangzhou [in China]. In year 12 of Yixi of the Jin Dynasty [416], 
during the eleventh lunar month, [the translation] commenced at Douchangsi, then being finished 
in the second lunar month of year 14 [418]. The Sanskrit text was translated into Chinese there 
with the Meditation Master. It is thus recorded.10 
 
Here, Faxian is presumably recording an original story that he had heard in India regarding 
the origin of the text he had copied. It is instructive that this “wicked king” is not named 
or dated (e.g., we would expect a certain number of years before or after the Buddha or 
King Aśoka). The version of the text used by the Mahāsāṃghika school in Pāṭaliputra was 
traced back to an ambiguous set of circumstances already in the fifth century CE, if not 
earlier. Although we might speculate about why such an ambiguous cover story was 
crafted, we can at least see that kings already had a role—either real or imagined—to play 
in the formation of the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya itself: a wicked king was responsible for 
scattering those monks with expertise in the canon, while a benevolent successor re-
quested their return, after which an authoritative copy of the monastic codes was retrieved 
from Jetavana Vihāra, This narrative only highlights the significance of royal authority to 
Buddhists. In his travelogue, Faxian also describes the circumstances in which he acquired 
a copy of the Vinaya: 
 
Travelling east from the country of Vārāṇasī, I returned to the city of Pāṭaliputra. Faxian origi-
nally sought the precepts and Vinaya, but the countries of Northern India all orally transmitted 
these from teacher to teacher, without any source which could be copied. For this reason, I trav-
elled at a distance to Middle India. It was here at a Mahāyāna saṃghārāma (monastery) that I 
acquired one copy of the Vinaya. This Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya was carried out by the first great 
assembly when the Buddha was alive. Jetavana Vihāra transmitted that version. The other eight-
een schools each have their instructional lineages. They are largely not different, but there are 
minor differences.11 
 
10 「摩訶僧祇律私記」: 中天竺昔時, 暫有惡王御世. 諸沙門避之四奔, 三藏比丘星離. 惡王既死, 
更有善王, 還請諸沙門還國供養. 時巴連弗邑有五百僧, 欲斷事而無律師, 又無律文無所承案,  即遣
人到祇洹精舍, 寫得律本, 于今傳賞. 法顯於摩竭提國巴連弗邑, 阿育王塔南天王精舍, 寫得梵本還
楊州. 以晉義熙十二年歲在丙辰十一月, 於鬪場寺出之, 至十四年二月末都訖. 共禪師譯梵本為秦
焉, 故記之. Taishō 1425, 22: 548a29-b9. 
11 從彼波羅㮈國東行, 還到巴連弗邑. 法顯本求戒律, 而北天竺諸國, 皆師師口傳, 無本可寫. 是以
遠涉乃至中天竺, 於此摩訶衍僧伽藍得一部律. 是摩訶僧祇眾律, 佛在世時最初大眾所行也. 於祇
洹精舍傳其本.自餘十八部各有師資, 大歸不異, 然小小不同. Taishō 2085, 51: 864b16-22. Cf. Li 
Rongxi trans., Lives of Great Monks and Nuns, 202. It is significant that Faxian acquired a written copy 
of the Vinaya from an expressly Mahāyāna (Moheyan 摩訶衍) monastery, whereas the other venues he

--- PAGE 13 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
53 
 
 
The Mahāsāṃghika at the time evidently possessed a certain level of pedigree in India. 
The text is therefore valuable for our present purpose of examining what kingship meant 
to Buddhists in an earlier (but certainly not the earliest) form of the religion. 
 
 
Defining Kingship 
   Kingship is explicitly defined in the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya as follows: “Regarding a 
king: a king is named as kṣatriya [or] brāhmaṇa, being an elder [or] layman, and having 
received an office as king.”12 This definition explicitly excludes the other two castes—the 
vaiśya and śūdra—from being kings. Although members of the lower castes could become 
arhats (i.e., awakened beings freed from the cycle of rebirth), Buddhists did not neces-
sarily endorse any sort of egalitarian social order. Based on this definition, the 
Mahāsāṃghika would, at least in theory, not recognize a king of the vaiśya or śūdra (let 
alone caṇḍāla) castes as legitimate. This explicit incorporation of caste into the definition 
of rulership also indicates an already universalistic perception of caste. Moreover, this 
framework does not anticipate a king from an altogether non-Indian background; for ex-
ample, a king from a nation without the caste system. The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya is 
clearly operating within an “Indo-centric” worldview. We can, however, point to an ex-
ample in Buddhist literature from around the same period in which a king is said to have 
hailed from a low-caste background. In the Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna, the Buddha speaks of 
King Triśaṅku or the “King of the Mātaṅga,” a caṇḍāla king of the Mātaṅga peoples who 
had lived in the very remote past. This king was versed in all manner of Vedic and mun-
dane sciences, especially astrology.13 This precedent did not necessitate Buddhist recog-
nition of such kings in the present age. Rather, the idea of a caṇḍāla king would have been 
something fantastical and not part of their present world in the eyes of many contemporary 
readers. The point of the narrative in the Śārdūlakarṇāvadāna is not to recognize kings of 
the lower castes, but simply to illustrate that such lowborn people could possess the same 
 
visited did not possess written copies. This instance perhaps demonstrates the well-known support for 
copying scriptures in Mahāyāna, rather than relying strictly on oral transmission. 
12 王者, 王名剎利, 婆羅門, 長者, 居士, 受職為王. Taishō 1425, 22: 244b7-8. 
13 See the relevant passages in the Chinese translations of the text: Taishō 1300, 21: 401b22-23; 1301, 
21: 411c3-5. The Chinese titles are Modengjia jing 摩登伽經 and Shetoujian Taizi ershiba xiu jing 舍
頭諫太子二十八宿經 respectively. The former apparently dates to around the fifth century despite the 
traditionally attributed translators, while the former dates to the fourth century. On the dates of these 
translations, see J. KOTYK, “Iranian Elements in Late-Tang Buddhist Astrology”, Asia Major 30, no. 1, 
2017, 28–29.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
54 
 
level of knowledge as their counterparts in the high castes. In any case, Mahāsāṃghika 
Vinaya does not express any awareness of such exceptional cases. 
   The Vinayas of other schools offer a more flexible definition of kingship, even recog-
nizing that women might occupy the position of ruler. The Sarvāstivāda Vinaya (Chn. 
Shisong lü 十誦律; Skt. *Daśa-bhāṇavāra-vinaya) gives the following definition: 
 
A king is of the kṣatriya caste, himself having received the kingly office and consecrated with 
auspicious water, being thus named king; also named ruler of the country; also named as the 
consecrated. If a brāhmaṇa [or] layman, or a lady, themselves receive the kingly office, they are 
also called king, ruler of the country, [or] the consecrated.14 
 
The Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya (Chn. Genben shuo yiqieyoubu pinaiye 根本說一切有部
毘奈耶) offers a similar definition, but explicitly recognizes that members of the lower 
castes can become kings: 
 
A king is a kṣatriya. Whether a brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, or śūdra, all those who have received the 
consecrated position of a kṣatriya king are called kings. If a lady has received the consecrated 
position, she is also called king.15 
 
Such allowances for the lower castes or even women to become rulers perhaps reflects 
political realities faced by the sangha, in which persons of diverse castes and also women 
could become monarchs or rulers. Brahmanical law codes would not have permitted this. 
The Mānava-Dharmaśāstra (7.2) does not state that a Brahmin or any low caste can be 
king; the kṣatriya can be king. We read, “A Kṣatriya who has received the vedic conse-
cration according to rule has the obligation to protect this whole world in accordance with 
the norms.” The definition of the king in the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya notably does not 
include any sense of deification, a feature that contrasts what we find in the Mānava-
Dharmaśāstra (7.8):  
 
“A king, though a mere child, must never be treated with disrespect, thinking he is just a human 
being; for it is a great deity who stands here in human form.”16  
 
 
14 王者, 剎利種, 身受王職, 吉水灌頂, 是名為王, 亦名國主, 亦名灌頂. 若婆羅門, 居士, 若女人,身受
王職, 亦名為王, 國主, 灌頂. Taishō 1435, 23: 4b5-8. 
15 若王者謂剎帝利. 若婆羅門, 若薜舍, 若戍達羅, 受剎帝利王灌頂位者, 皆名為王. 若有女人受灌
頂位, 亦名為王. Taishō 1442, 23: 637b3-6. 
16 See the translation in P. OLIVELLE, Manu’s Code of Law: A Critical Edition of the Mānava-Dhar-
maśāstra, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2005, p. 154.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
55 
 
   The discrepancies between the Mahāsāṃghika and the Sarvāstivāda recensions are in-
triguing, but we can also point to an example in another Vinaya in which caste is not a 
stated factor in the definition of kingship. The Dharmaguptaka Vinaya (Chn. Si fen lü 四
分律) reads as follows: 
 
A king has gained sovereignty and is subordinate to no one. A great minister is stationed to the 
left or right of the king. A Brahmin is one born as a Brahmin. A layman would be of the house-
holders, which excludes the king, great ministers, and Brahmins. A layman’s wife is also a house-
holder’s lady.17 
 
This definition of kingship would leave the position open to anyone. The reason why the 
Dharmaguptaka Vinaya would define kingship in this way may have stemmed from the 
geographical position of the Dharmaguptaka tradition. Based on Kharoṣṭhī inscriptions, 
Richard Salomon has pointed out that the Dharmaguptakas were especially prominent in 
Afghanistan.18 This would have been eastern Iran under the domain of the Parthians and 
later the Sasanians, hence it simply would not have been prudent to define kingship with 
reference to the Indian caste system. Brahmins as priests were certainly known to the 
Sasanians in the third century, and some even lived within the borders of the Sasanian 
empire, but the caste system was not have been applicable to polities outside the Brah-
manical sphere.19 We can speculate that the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya was modified in order 
to adapt to such an environment. With this possibility in mind, we can also assume that 
the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya was also adapted to the land in which it emerged before it was 
translated into Chinese, which based on Faxian’s statements would have been the area of 
Pāṭaliputra. 
 
 
 
 
 
17 王者, 得自在無所屬. 大臣者, 在王左右. 婆羅門者, 有生婆羅門. 居士者, 除王, 王, 大臣, 婆羅門, 
諸在家者是. 居士婦者, 亦在家婦人. Taishō 1428, 22: 613b5-8. 
18 R. SALOMON, “A Preliminary Survey of Some Early Buddhist Manuscripts Recently Acquired by the 
British Library”, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 117, no. 2, p. 354. 
19 An inscription at Naqsh-I Rustam from the third century CE records the triumphant statements of the 
Zoroastrian cleric named Kerdīr, who speaks of the destruction of the šmny (Skt. śramaṇa) and blmny 
(Skt. brāhmaṇa). See the translation and transcription of the Pahlavi text in J. BEDUHN, “The Co-for-
mation of the Manichaean and Zoroastrian Religions in Third-Century Iran,” Entangled Religions, 11, 
no. 2, 2020, p. 4. It is clear from such hyperbolic remarks that Buddhist monks and Brahmins certainly 
lived within the borders of the early Sasanian empire, which in turn means that they were also present 
under the Parthians.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
56 
 
Royal Intercession in Monastic Issues 
   Turning to the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, I want to explore the roles of kings in the for-
mation of specific rules. We find a number of cases in which the king is evoked when 
explaining the origins of rules. In one instance, Śuddhodana, the father of Śākyamuni, is 
called upon to specifically ask him to limit the intake of juvenile boys into the sangha. 
 
With regard to sons: the Buddha was residing in the Śākya monastery at the nyagrodha tree in 
Kapilavastu, as explained above. At that time, there were sons of the House of Śākya, who were 
ordained into the renunciate life by bhikṣus without having been released by their parents. Later, 
the parents of the sons had been instructing them; they resentfully said, “When the World Hon-
ored One was about to attain the state of a Wheel-Turning Holy King, he would still yet abandon 
it and go forth into the renunciate life. Could those under our care still not go forth into the re-
nunciate life?” At that time, the Śākya clan went to King Śuddhodana and said, “Great King! Our 
sons were not released, but the bhikṣus ordained them into the renunciate life. The other laypeople 
cannot instruct them. Even if they should instruct them, they resent that they went forth into the 
renunciate life, saying, ‘When the World Honored One was about to attain the state of a Wheel-
Turning Holy King, he would still yet abandon it and go forth into the renunciate life. Could those 
under our care still not go forth into the renunciate life?’ We request that the Great King beg of 
the World Honored One, that nobody should be permitted to renounce unless their parents have 
released them.” At that time, King Śuddhodana and the Śākya clan went to the World Honored 
One, prostrated their faces at his feet in respect and stood to one said. The king said to the Buddha, 
“World Honored One! The bhikṣus allowed the sons of the Śākya clan to renounce without the 
parents having released them. Even if the other householders should instruct them, they resent 
that they went forth into the renunciate life, saying, ‘When the World Honored One was about to 
attain the state of a Wheel-Turning Holy King, he would still yet abandon it and go forth into the 
renunciate life. Could those under our care still not go forth into the renunciate life?’ World Hon-
ored One! The parents cherish their children and love them down to the bone marrow. I was also 
the same way. When the World Honored One renounced, for seven years, there was not a day 
when I did not weep while sitting, standing, eating, and drinking. I request the World Honored 
One to restrict the bhikṣus: do not let anyone renounce unless their permits permit it.” At that 
time, the World Honored One appropriately taught the Dharma to Śuddhodana and delighted him, 
who then prostrated his face at the feet [of the Buddha] before departing. Not long after the king 
left, the World Honored One went to where the many bhikṣus were, laid out his niṣīdana to sit, 
and explained the above incident to the bhikṣus, The Buddha said, “From today onward, you 
should not permit anyone to renounce [and become monks] unless their parents have released 
them.”20 
 
20 兒者, 佛住迦維羅衛國尼拘律樹釋氏精舍, 廣說如上. 爾時釋家童子, 父母不放, 諸比丘度出家. 
後諸子輩父母教誨, 瞋恨言:「世尊臨得轉輪聖王, 猶捨出家, 我何所顧戀而不出家?」爾時釋種往
白淨王所白言:「大王！我子不放而諸比丘便度出家, 餘在家者不可教誨, 設加教誨, 懷恨出家而
言:『世尊臨得轉輪聖王位猶捨出家. 我何所顧戀而不出家?』唯願大王, 從世尊乞, 願父母不放勿

--- PAGE 17 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
57 
 
In this case, the issue was that adolescent boys had been admitted into the sangha before their parents 
had provided them with a complete education and upbringing. Renunciation of the home life and formally 
becoming a monk—in theory—is a highly meritorious act, so Buddhists would be reluctant to ever out-
right condemn ordination of anyone who fulfilled the criteria for monkhood. In this instance, however, 
the dispute was related to the fact that juveniles were still under the guardianship of their parents and 
required further tutelage. The established rule prevents the sangha from ordaining juvenile novices with-
out the express consent of their parents.  
   Gautama—who would become the Buddha—never had such consent, but nevertheless he still went 
forth into the homeless life, much to the despair of his father. Gautama’s journey, however, commenced 
only after he was mature enough to take on the lofty position of a Wheel-Turning King (Skt. Cakravartī-
rāja). As is well known, Gautama abandoned this path to supreme kingship in favor of the pursuit of 
liberation from saṃsāra. In the above narrative, King Śuddhodana was the most obvious character to 
sympathize with the distraught parents and request that his son—now the Buddha—prohibit ordinations 
of children without parental consent. The Buddha himself had abandoned kingship, but he was not above 
receiving requests from a king.  
   We might imagine that the impetus for the creation of this story was simply that the sangha wanted to 
avoid unnecessary complaints from mothers and fathers. It became necessary at some point to affirm 
parental consent to prevent adult monks from prematurely taking on novices, who would have then been 
under the guardianship of a monastery. In any case, the royal status of Śuddhodana was utilized by the 
authors to create compelling voice in favor of the new rule. We should also note that Śuddhodana as a 
king does not establish any royal law pertaining to novices, but instead he humbly requests that the Bud-
dha address the problem. The Vinaya jurists clearly did not want to position the king as having any sort 
of authority over internal sangha matters, but even if he had, the laws of Śuddhodana would not have 
extended to other kingdoms. The new rule had to be established by the Buddha for it to become applicable 
to all monks. 
 
 
Royal Ministers and the Sangha 
   The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya positions ministers as fully subordinate to the king, describ-
ing the throne in absolutist terms. The right to inflict punishment is solely in the hands of 
the king. Overreach by ministers is met with severe consequences. Such an idealized ar-
rangement in the Vinaya is framed as still beneficial to the Buddhist community, since the 
king affords special protections to monks. We can see how the throne is envisioned in 
relation to subordinate ministers and the sangha in the following excerpt: 
 
 
令出家.」爾時白淨王與眾多釋種往世尊所, 頭面禮足却坐一面, 王白佛言:「世尊！諸比丘釋種童
子, 父母不放而與出家, 餘在家者設有教誨, 懷恨出家言:『世尊臨得轉輪聖王位, 猶捨出家. 我何
所顧戀而不出家?』世尊! 父母念子愛徹骨髓, 我亦曾爾. 世尊出家, 七年之中, 坐起食飲無日不啼. 
惟願世尊, 制諸比丘, 父母不聽勿令出家.」爾時世尊為白淨王, 隨順說法發歡喜心, 頭面禮足而退. 
王去不久, 世尊往眾多比丘所, 敷尼師壇坐, 具以上事為諸比丘說, 佛言:「從今日後父母不放不應
與出家.」Taishō 1425, 22: 421a20-b11.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
58 
 
Regarding royal ministers, the Buddha was residing in the bamboo garden of Kalandaka in the 
city of Rājagṛha, as explained above. At that time, there were bhikṣus who had ordained a royal 
minister, having renounced the home life and received the full precepts. An officer witnessed this; 
he gathered together and apprehended the bhikṣus, sending them to the magistrate. He said, 
“These śramaṇas illicitly ordained a royal minister.” The magistrate said, “Take the upādhyāya 
and break three ribs; take the precept master and pull out his tongue; take someone from each of 
the ten assemblies and flog them eight times; and punish the one who received the full precepts 
to the full extent of the law.” At that time, many people were escorting [the punished monks] 
outside the city. King Bimbisāra was then about to visit the World Honored One, when he saw 
this group of people. The king asked, “Who are these people?” The aforementioned incident was 
communicated to the king. The king became greatly angered having heard this, and ordered [the 
monks] to be released: “From today onward, if anyone seeks to ordain, it is permitted that a master 
may ordain them.” The king said, “Summon the magistrate to come!” He came. The king said, 
“Who is king in this country?” The minister replied, “The Great King [your majesty] is king.” It 
was then asked, “If I am king, why did you not communicate that someone was to be punished 
for a crime?” The king then ordered that those handling the capture and judgment [of the monks] 
have their offices and household wealth seized, and their official stores confiscated. The officials 
did as the king instructed, seizing their offices, appropriating their family wealth, and confiscating 
their official stores. The bhikṣus then reported these circumstances to the World Honored One. 
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus, “Where is it that all kings would have faith like this? From today 
onward, royal ministers are not permitted to renounce [and become ordained monks].”21 
 
In this story, we again see that special privileges are supposed to be afforded to the sangha. 
Although in this instance, the magistrates inflicted violent punishments on the monks, 
these same officers in turn were condemned for this misstep and subsequently stripped of 
their offices and wealth by the king. The king was not only upset that his officers acted 
without reporting the incident to him (the implication is that he was outside the city on a 
visit to the Buddha) and deferring the matter to him, but he himself had no issues with 
royal ministers becoming monks. In this context, the expectation is that the king will pos-
sess absolutist authority and use it to protect the sangha, even if it means favoring them 
above his own ministers. 
 
21 王臣者, 佛住王舍城迦蘭陀竹園, 廣說如上. 爾時有比丘度王臣, 出家受具足已. 禁官見已, 合捉
比丘送與斷事官所, 作是言：「此沙門私度王臣.」斷事官言:「取和上打三肋折, 取戒師挽舌, 出
十眾合, 各與八下鞭, 受具足者極法治罪.」爾時眾多人即衛送出城, 時頻婆娑羅王欲詣世尊, 見此
眾人, 王問言:「是何等人?」即以上事具白王. 王聞已大瞋, 即勅令放:「從今日已後欲出家者, 恣
聽師度.」王言:「呼斷事官來!」來已王問言:「此國中誰是王?」臣答言:「大王是王.」便問:「若
我是王者, 何故不白輒治人罪?」王即勅有司取斷事者, 奪其官位, 家中財物, 沒入官庫. 諸司官即
如王教, 奪其官位, 籍其家財, 沒入官庫. 諸比丘以是因緣往白世尊. 佛語比丘:「何處一切王皆信
心如是? 從今日後王臣不聽與出家.」Taishō 1425, 22: 419c26-420a18.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
59 
 
   We might imagine that the goal of these stories in the Vinaya was not only to explain 
why certain rules exist, but also to encourage kings with sympathies for Buddhism to 
behave in certain ways that categorically protected the sangha and put the interests of the 
Buddhist community at the forefront. Magistrates—at least in this idealized framework—
were not supposed to punish or harm monks at their own initiative. The magistrates also 
severely overstepped their boundaries by punishing the former minister, now a monk, for 
illicitly ordaining. The implication here is that he was technically a monk, so secular pun-
ishment ought not have been applied to him. 
   Although we are not reading objective stories of what actually happened, there was 
likely some factuality behind the image of the king as the sole arbiter of justice. The 
Mānava-Dharmaśāstra (7.17) reads, “Punishment is the king; he is male; he is the leader; 
he is the ruler; and, tradition tells us, he stands as the surety for the Law with respect to 
the four orders of life.”22 The authors of the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya supported a similar if 
not identical position in which full punitive authority is vested in the king, at least when 
dealing with commoners (clearly Buddhists expected their monks to receive special im-
munity). 
 
 
Administration of Justice 
   The Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya describes the administration of justice by the king also in 
cases where excessively violent punishments are carried out, but again we see the narra-
tive implying that monks are not subject to such cruel acts, even when they are as guilty 
as a commoner who committed the same misdeed. In the section dealing with the prohi-
bitions against sexual acts, it is related that the wife of a man of Ujjayinī had committed 
adultery with another man. He threatened her with torturous punishment, but she persisted. 
The man then brought her and the philanderer to the king, requesting that the throne deal 
with the pair. The king, greatly indignant, ordered that his functionaries amputate their 
hands and feet, and then abandon them on a burial mound. Afterward, the woman—now 
with her hands and feet having been amputated—is seen sprawled out on the burial mound 
by a monk, who then asks her permission to engage in sexual intercourse with her. She 
consents to the act, despite her wretched condition. Her family then went to see if she was 
still alive, only to discover that she had recently engaged in intercourse. Her family is 
outraged at this, asking her who did this to her. She replies that it was a śramaṇa, one of 
the śākya-putra 沙門釋子 (a Buddhist monk), who carried out the act. The bhikṣu felt 
regret over the incident and reported it to the Buddha. It is related that the Buddha then 
asked the monk, “Bhikṣu! Did you not hear my restriction that holds you may not engage 
 
22 See the translation in OLIVELLE, Manu’s Code of Law, pp. 154–155.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
60 
 
in sexual acts?” The monk replied, “I am aware of the restriction, but I thought it applied 
to a fully intact body; just that here the amputee woman is disfigured.” The Buddha replied, 
“Regarding amputation, she is an amputee woman whether it is her left hand and right 
foot, or right hand and left foot; this is the definition of an amputee woman. It will consti-
tute a pārājika if you engage in intercourse with her.”23 
   This then was the conclusion of the matter and nothing more is said about it. The monk 
technically engaged in adultery with the mutilated adulteress, but no punishment was 
meted out to him, unlike the earlier man who had coupled with the lady. The monk was 
not even ejected from the sangha (i.e., defrocked), since he was able to argue that he was 
non-culpable in this instance, based on a technicality of the monastic law at the time that 
apparently held that sexual intercourse was only constituted if and when the receiving 
partner was in full possession of their limbs. In this instance, it was necessary for the rule 
to be extended to cover amputees (in another instance in the text, the rule had to be ex-
tended yet again to include fornication with corpses). This story was clearly invented as a 
means of explaining and justifying all conceivable conditions in which sexual intercourse 
could occur. 
   More important to our present discussion is the depiction of the king administering sec-
ular law and meting out punishments for the non-monastic adulterers, but when it comes 
to the monks, it is the Buddha who decides whether anyone is guilty. The act of dismem-
bering the adulterers reflects ancient Indian law. The Mānava-Dharmaśāstra (8.352) 
states that “when men violate the wives of others, the king should disfigure their bodies 
with punishments that inspire terror and then execute them.” It is further stated (8.371), 
“When a woman, arrogant because of the eminence of her relatives and her feminine qual-
ities, becomes unfaithful to her husband, the king should have her devoured by dogs in a 
public square frequented by many.”24 Cruel punishments meted out for adultery were nor-
mal, but the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya does not expect that monks would be subject to such 
laws. Instead, there is a parallel legal system for monks, otherwise we would expect that 
the monk would have also had his limbs amputated for committing adultery. 
   In the Vinaya literature, I believe that we can detect an expectation—obvious albeit left 
unstated—that the king deals with the commoners, while a separate system of rules applies 
to the sangha. Whether it really worked like this in practice is uncertain, but we can see in 
the text a system in which two parallel but separate systems of law exist. The sangha—or 
at least the authors of the Vinaya—were concerned with their own institutional interests, 
so it would not have been acceptable to frame the king as having any sort of punitive 
authority over any monk. For instance, if the king amputated the limbs of the offending 
 
23 Taishō 1425, 22: 235a18-b12. 
24 See the translation in OLIVELLE, Manu’s Code of Law, pp. 186–187.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
61 
 
monk, like he had done with the adulterers, this would have set a precedent that the king 
can and ought to intervene in the internal affairs of the sangha. In the above instance, 
however, it is the Buddha—not the king—who lays down the law when the sangha has 
come into disrepute.  
   The sangha attempted to position themselves as privileged individuals, not unlike the 
Brahmins. The Mānava-Dharmaśāstra (8.380), for example, states, “The king should 
never put a Brahmin to death, even if he has committed every sort of crime; he should 
banish such a Brahmin from his kingdom along with all his property, without causing him 
hurt.”25 The sangha presumably desired equivalent treatment for their members. The 
Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya nevertheless expresses an explicit awareness of royal law in the 
definition of theft. An act of theft by a monastic constitutes a pārājika, i.e., an offense 
requiring their defrocking, but only if the value equals or exceeds a specific value. The 
Vinaya links this value with what one king deemed sufficient to warrant the death penalty: 
 
The Buddha said, “Great king governing the country: equivalent to how much cash should theft 
warrant death? Equivalent to how much cash should theft warrant exile from the country? Equiv-
alent to how much cash should theft warrant corporal punishment?” At that time, King Bimbisāra 
said to the Buddha, “World Honored One! Nineteen in cash is one kārśapāṇa. If one kārśapāṇa 
is divided into four parts, then whether one part is stolen or it is one part in value, the crime should 
warrant death.”26 
 
The Buddha then makes an official rule that links the definition of the pārājika with the 
value given by King Bimbisāra: 
 
The Buddha said to the bhikṣus, “From now on you should know that nineteen in cash is deemed 
to be one kārśapāṇa. If one kārśapāṇa is divided into four parts, then whether one part is stolen 
or it is one part in value, a pārājika has been committed.”27 
 
Although it is not stated, the implication here is that theft over a certain amount in value 
warrants the death penalty, hence a monk guilty of such an offense is immediately subject 
to laicization. The text, however, does not explain what happens afterward. Is the former 
monk then handed over to the king to be executed? A defrocked monk would technically 
 
25 See the translation in Olivelle, Manu’s Code of Law, p. 187. Olivelle (p. 39–40) believes that “Śūdra” 
can often be a code word for non-Brahmanical sects, especially the Buddhist and Jain monks. 
26 佛告:「大王治國, 盜齊幾錢罪應至死? 盜齊幾錢應驅出國? 盜齊幾錢應用刑罰?」爾時瓶沙王白
佛言:「世尊! 以十九錢為一罽利沙槃. 分一罽利沙槃為四分, 若盜一分, 若一分直, 罪應至死.」
Taishō 1425, 22: 242c19-23. 
27 佛告諸比丘:「從今當知, 十九故錢名一罽利沙槃, 分一罽利沙槃為四分, 若盜一分, 若一分直, 犯
波羅夷.」Taishō 1425, 22: 243a4-6.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
62 
 
no longer be under an ecclesiastical authority, having been returned to lay status and there-
fore not enjoying any sort of legal immunity that he otherwise might have had. Whether 
King Bimbisāra was a historical figure is uncertain, so we cannot say with confidence that 
his definition of grand larceny was really his, but corporal punishment for theft over a 
certain amount is certainly attested in Brahmanical law. The Mānava-Dharmaśāstra 
(8.320), for example, states, “A man who steals more than ten Kumbha-measures of grain 
is subject to corporal punishment; even in lesser cases he should be fined eleven times the 
amount and made to restitute the property to the owner.”28 The definition of grand larceny 
in the Vinaya presumably reflects a worldly code of laws known to the authors. 
   We might imagine that the sangha could not provide protection to any of its members 
who engaged in serious acts of theft. Minor acts of the theft might not require ejection of 
the offender from the community, but anyone guilty of what we would call “grand larceny” 
had to be ejected from the community. In this instance, the sangha would not (and could 
not) shield their members from the death penalty. In other words, Buddhist law did not 
imagine or condone a monk being executed by the king, but anyone having already been 
stripped of their monastic status was now strictly in the realm of worldly law. From a 
Buddhist point of view, permitting a king to kill a monk would also allow for the king to 
carry out a grievous act of negative karma. This could be avoided, and the status of the 
sangha preserved, simply by turning the offender from a monk into a layman. Finally, it 
is especially noteworthy that the Buddha links a royal proclamation to the conditions for 
defrocking in the case of theft. In this instance, Buddhists were subordinate to the throne, 
which indicates that the sangha had to formulate some of their regulations in light of the 
laws of the realm. Even if one could expect some degree of ecclesiastical immunity, this 
could only be extended so far. 
 
 
Dietary Regulations and Elite Values 
   According to the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, monks and nuns are all permitted to eat meat 
in principle, but there are several restrictions. First, they may not eat any meat given to 
them if they had “seen, heard, or suspected” (見聞疑) that the animal had been slaughtered 
for their consumption.29 The idea here is that a monastic is prohibited from taking life, so 
they should not be an accessory to slaughter, even if only indirectly. The Vinaya further 
lists ten specific types of flesh that may not be consumed: namely, the flesh of humans, 
serpents, elephants, horses, dogs, crows, vultures, pigs, monkeys, and lions.30 There are 
 
28 See the translation in OLIVELLE, Manu’s Code of Law, p. 184. 
29 Taishō 1425, 22: 486a12-24. 
30 Taishō 1425, 22: 487a23-25.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
63 
 
stories that explain why exactly these types of meat became prohibited for the sangha, 
some of which connect with royal figures. For example, we read about an incident involv-
ing elephant meat as follows: 
 
When the Buddha was residing in Rājagṛha, the elephant of King Bimbisāra died. There were 
some small-caste caṇḍālas who ate the meat. There were also bhikṣus who ate it. At that time, 
the elders and youths went to where the Buddha was and prostrated their heads at his feet before 
standing to one side. They said to the Buddha, “World Honored One! The elephant of King Bim-
bisāra died. There were some small-castle caṇḍālas who consumed the meat. There were also 
bhikṣus who consumed it. A bhikṣu is one who has renounced the home life, being venerated by 
people; we ask that the World Honored One to not let them eat elephant meat.” The World Hon-
ored One accordingly preached the Dharma to the youths, instructing them and providing benefits 
and joy. They prostrated their heads respectfully at his feet before departing. At that time, the 
World Honored One went to where the assembly of numerous bhikṣus was, set down his niṣīdana 
(sitting cloth) and sat down. He explained the above matter to the bhikṣus. The Buddha said, 
“From now on, I do not permit you to eat elephant meat. You may not even eat the bone marrow 
of an elephant. I permit you to use elephant ivory and bones to make stands for bowls, and fas-
teners for garments, for which there is no transgression.”31 
 
This restriction was created to accommodate elite rather than plebeian preferences. In the 
story above, the monks were presumably offered the meat of the dead elephant by the 
untouchables, rather than partaking of it at their own initiative. The problem, it would 
appear, was twofold: first, the monks were eating meat alongside the caṇḍālas, which 
brought the sangha into disrepute. Nobody else apparently ate the dead elephant, but 
clearly some hungry monks did not see any issue with eating it. King Bimbisāra also did 
not eat anything from his dead elephant. Second, the elephant meat itself was considered 
a taboo food. These sort of sentiments toward specific meats perhaps reflect values re-
garding certain animals professed also in Brahmanical law. The Mānava-Dharmaśāstra 
(12.43) reads, “Elephants, horses, Śūdras, despised foreigners, lions, tigers, and boars—
these constitute the middle course related to Darkness.”32 The negative associations with 
elephants in this context may have influenced how Buddhists approached the meat of said 
animal. 
   In the story above, the Buddha prohibited eating elephant meat due to what we could 
call  
 
31 佛住王舍城時, 瓶沙王象死. 有諸小姓旃陀羅食肉. 諸比丘亦有食者. 時耆舊童子至佛所, 頭面禮
足却住一面, 白佛言:「世尊! 瓶沙王象死, 有諸小姓旃陀羅噉肉, 諸比丘亦有噉者. 比丘者, 出家人, 
人所敬重, 唯願世尊莫令食象肉.」世尊為童子隨順說法, 示教利喜. 頭面禮足而退. 時世尊往至眾
多比丘所, 敷尼師檀坐. 為諸比丘具說上事, 佛言:「從今已後不聽食象肉乃至象髓亦不聽食. 聽以
象牙骨作鉢支衣細結無罪.」Taishō 1425, 22: 486c27-487a7. 
32 See the translation in OLIVELLE, Manu’s Code of Law, p. 232.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
64 
 
class consciousness: the sangha was expected to remain on good terms with respectable 
people. Clearly, nobody cared about the poor caṇḍālas who were forced to eat carrion. 
The authors of the Vinaya were simply not concerned with fostering any sort of goodwill 
with socially ostracized, destitute people. In theory, the Buddha in the narrative could 
have simply pointed out that the elephant had not been killed for the monks, therefore it 
was a “pure meat” and the sangha could consume it if it was offered to them, but instead 
the Buddha made the decision to preserve the public image of the community. Buddhists 
were chiefly concerned with keeping up appearances while catering to the elites. The val-
ues of the elites were informed by Brahmanical norms and expectations, rather than any-
thing taught by the Buddha. In this way, the Buddha concedes to heterodox values and, in 
effect, partially integrates them into his Vinaya. Such concessions by the Vinaya authors 
were likely necessary in order to sustain long-term relationships with kings and aristocrats, 
who conceivably would not have wanted to support any sort of institution associated with 
low-caste behaviors. 
   Similarly, the Vinaya also prohibits the consumption of garlic, which is reflective of 
Brahmanical norms. From a strictly Buddhist doctrinal point of view, there ought not be 
anything wrong with eating garlic, since it is not an intoxicant, but it was still considered 
unpleasant because its smell was socially disruptive. This approach toward garlic is clear 
from the following case cited in the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya: 
 
Further, the Buddha was residing in Rājagṛha. At that time, the World Honored One was preach-
ing the Dharma to the great assembly. At the time, a bhikṣu ate garlic and was sitting downwind, 
fearing that he might scent the practitioners of pure practices (brahma-caryā). The Buddha knew 
why, but intentionally asked, “Here, what sort of bhikṣu sits alone in a place like a quarrelsome 
man?” The bhikṣus said to the Buddha, “World Honored One! This bhikṣu ate garlic. He fears 
that he will scent the practitioners of pure practices, hence he remains alone downwind.” The 
Buddha said to the bhikṣus, “You should know, when he had not consumed garlic, was this bhikṣu 
not about to lose this sort of sweet dew Dharma?” They replied, “He was not.” The Buddha said, 
“This bhikṣu has lost this sort of undying Dharma because he has consumed garlic.” The Buddha 
said, “From now on, I do not permit you to eat garlic.”33 
 
There was nothing inherently wrong with garlic in this instance; it was just socially awk-
ward to be present in a group of “pure” people, who might have been contaminated by 
what was considered a foul odor. Although not explicitly mentioned in the Vinaya, the 
law codes of ancient India prohibited the consumption of garlic. In fact, garlic is the first 
 
33 復次佛住王舍城, 爾時世尊為大眾說法. 時有比丘食蒜, 在下風而坐, 畏熏諸梵行人. 佛知而故問:
「此是何等比丘, 獨坐一處如鬪諍人?」諸比丘白佛言:「世尊! 是比丘食蒜, 畏熏梵行人, 故在下
風獨住.」佛語諸比丘:「當知是比丘若不噉蒜時, 當欲得失如是甘露法不?」答言:「不也.」佛言:
「是比丘以食蒜故, 失如是不死之法.」佛言:「從今已後不聽食蒜.」Taishō 1425, 22: 483b11-18.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Kingship and Elite Values in the Buddhist Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya 
 
65 
 
of the forbidden foods listed in the Mānava-Dharmaśāstra (5.5): “Garlic, leeks, onions, 
and mushrooms are foods forbidden to twice-born persons; and so is anything growing in 
an impure medium.” Later in the chapter (5.19), we read, “By eating mushrooms, a village 
hog, garlic, a village fowl, onion, or leek intentionally, a twice-born falls from his caste.”34 
These dietary laws were effectively upheld and enforced by kings, so Buddhists in effect 
were obliged to follow them, or at the very least not openly offend aristocratic sensibilities 
regarding food. 
 
 
Conclusion 
   This study has discussed kingship and more generally elite values as they are revealed 
in the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya. Unlike the sūtras, Vinaya literature is primarily concerned 
with the mundane affairs of running monasteries, disciplining monastics, and establishing 
a code of conduct, rather than focusing on liberation or spiritual wisdom. The Vinaya as 
a body of literature allows us to get a picture of how sanghas interacted with the higher 
echelons of the social hierarchy. In the present study, we can ascertain to some extent how 
the Mahāsāṃghika school—or at least some of the jurists associated with it—viewed 
kings and their relationship to the sangha. We established a few facts from the above dis-
cussion. 
   First, while the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya expressly defines a king as a kṣatriya or Brahmin, 
this is interestingly not a universal definition across all Vinaya texts. The Sarvāstivāda 
Vinaya and Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya anticipate that a king could come from either caste. 
The Dharmaguptaka Vinaya does not identify kingship with a caste, which I believe might 
be explained with reference to the geographical locations of the Dharmaguptaka school, 
where it was predominate in Afghanistan, i.e., Eastern Iran, where the caste system was 
irrelevant. There was clearly no single Buddhist definition of kingship, owing to geo-
graphical and cultural realities.  
   Various kings from the lifetime of the Buddha, who are familiar from the sūtras, serve 
different roles in the Mahāsāṃghika Vinaya, such as requesting the Buddha to establish a 
rule. The importance of kings is highlighted and there are attempts to position the sangha 
or even the Buddha above the king in terms of worldly authority. The authority of the 
kings is framed in absolutist terms: the king’s decisions are generally left unchallenged, 
even when cruel punishments are ordered. Based on what we might read in sūtras, we 
should expect the Buddha to encourage non-violence or at least some sort of moderate 
approach to handling criminals, given the negative karma involved in torture and killing, 
but the jurists were working with different concerns. Instead, the king has free reign over 
 
34 See the translation in OLIVELLE, Manu’s Code of Law, p. 138–139.

--- PAGE 26 ---
Jeffrey Kotyk 
 
66 
 
his subjects, but the Vinaya tacitly expects that monks will receive legal immunity. In 
short, special privileges are expected for monastics. Further, kings in various narratives 
avoid directly interfering in internal sangha matters. Still, the sangha reserved the right to 
defrock a monk, in which we case we can assume that he would have then been subject to 
royal laws and punishments. 
   Finally, a number of Brahmanical values are apparent throughout the Mahāsāṃghika 
Vinaya, especially when we point to common parallels in the Mānava-Dharmaśāstra. 
This is illustrated by dietary restrictions, such as those related to garlic and forbidden 
meats. Buddhists clearly attempted to align themselves with elite values. Plebeian con-
cerns, in contrast, were immaterial and not obviously considered in the content we sur-
veyed above.

