--- Page 2 ---
Introduction to Buddhist 
Meditation
This lively introduction to Buddhist meditation offers students and 
practitioners alike a deeper understanding of what meditation is and its 
purpose and place in the context of different Buddhist schools.
The historical background and geographical spread of Buddhist medi‑
tation is explored alongside an examination of the development of 
meditative practices. Chapters cover basic meditative practice, types of 
meditation, meditation in different regions, meditation and doctrine, and 
the role of chanting within meditation. Although not a practical guide, 
Introduction to Buddhist Meditation outlines the procedures associated 
with Buddhist practices and suggests appropriate activities, useful both for 
students and interested Buddhists. Vivid quotations from Buddhist texts 
and carefully selected photographs and diagrams help the reader engage 
fully with this fascinating subject.
Thoroughly revised throughout, this new edition also features a glossary 
and key, making it ideal reading for students approaching the topic of 
Buddhist meditation for the first time.
Sarah Shaw is a member of the Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern 
Studies, University of Oxford, and a fellow of the Oxford Centre for 
Buddhist Studies.

--- Page 4 ---
Introduction 
to Buddhist 
Meditation
Second Edition
Sarah Shaw
With a chapter on  
Tibet by Georgios Halkias

--- Page 5 ---
Designed cover image: Getty – Bubbers13
Second edition published 2024
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2024 Sarah Shaw
The right of Sarah Shaw to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in 
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to 
infringe.
First edition published by Routledge 2008
British Library Cataloguing‑in‑Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Names: Shaw, Sarah (Scholar of Buddhism), author. | Halkias, Georgios,  
1967– author.
Title: Introduction to Buddhist meditation / Sarah Shaw; with a chapter  
on Tibet by Georgios Halkias.
Description: Second Edition. | New York: Routledge, 2024. | Includes 
bibliographical references and index. | Identifiers: LCCN 2023047948 | 
ISBN 9780367769239 (hardback) | ISBN 9780367769246 (paperback) | 
ISBN 9781003168966 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Meditation—Buddhism.
Classification: LCC BQ5612.S53 2024 | DDC 294.3/4435—dc23/eng/20231025
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023047948
ISBN: 978‑0‑367‑76923‑9 (hbk)
ISBN: 978‑0‑367‑76924‑6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978‑1‑003‑16896‑6 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003168966
Typeset in Sabon
by codeMantra

--- Page 6 ---
List of figures and permissions
vii
Preface
ix
Key
xiii
Three kinds of Buddhisms
xv
  1	 The eightfold path and meditation
1
  2	 Buddhist guidance on meditation, old and new
18
  3	 Radiant but defiled: the human mind
40
  4	 Buddhaghosa and the forty objects of meditation
64
  5	 Chanting, paying respects and devotional ritual
86
  6	 Meditation in Buddhist South and Southeast Asia
105
  7	 Developments in Indian Buddhism
135
  8	 Buddhist meditation traditions in Tibet
152
  9	 Meditation in China
178
10	 Meditation in Korea and Vietnam
207
11	 Meditation in Japan
222
12	 Meditation around the world
243
Glossary
263
Index
270
Contents

--- Page 8 ---
Figures and permissions
  1.1	 Figure of the Buddha	
2
  1.2	 Eight‑spoked wheel from Jokhang Monastery, Tibet	
11
  2.1	 Sitting in meditation: a lay practice	
19
  4.1	 Stupa in Sri Lanka, where Buddhaghosa wrote his 
meditation manual	
65
  5.1	 Chanting in Shan State, Myanmar	
95
  5.2	 The chanted syllables Na Mo Bu Ddha Ya are often 
shown on diagrams known as yantras	
101
  5.3	 Amulets are often inscribed with yantras on the reverse	
101
  6.1	 Reclining stone Buddha at Gal Vihara, Polonnuruwa,  
Sri Lanka	
107
  6.2	 Festive Vesak offerings of lanterns in Kandy, Sri Lanka	
111
  6.3	 Nuns in Shan State, Myanmar	
112
  6.4	 Feet of the Buddha image at Wat Pho, Bangkok, 
Thailand; each foot has 108 auspicious symbols	
115
  6.5	 Picture of the Buddha teaching, folding chanting book 
(samut khoi), Thailand	
117
  6.6	 The chanted syllables Na Mo Bu Ddha Ya are often 
shown on diagrams known as yantras	
118
  6.7	 Buddhas for days of the week, Thailand	
125
  7.1	 Stupa at Sarnath, where the Buddha gave his  
first discourse	
137
  7.2	 Buddha figure at Bodh Gaya, where the Buddha  
gained awakening	
140
  8.1	 Temple in Tibet	
152
  8.2	 Tibetan religious trumpet	
159
  8.3	 Counting mantras with a rosary in Lhasa	
166
  8.4	 Tibetan prayer wheels	
170
  9.1	 Guanghua Monastery, Putian City, Fujian Province,  
built in 588 CE	
183
  9.2	 Longhua Monastery, Shaoxing city, Zhejiang Province	
187
10.1	 Haedong Yonggungsa Temple, Northern Busan	
207
10.2	 Gwaneumsa Temple at the foot of Mount Halla on Jeju 
Island	
212
10.3	 A shrine in Gwaneumsa	
218

--- Page 9 ---
viii
﻿Figures and permissions
11.1	 Kinkakuji, a Rinzai Zen temple in Kyoto, Japan	
232
11.2	 Practising calligraphy in formal dress	
238
12.1	 Meditators in the UK	
253
Images
123rf.com
Charles Shaw
Dr Georgios Halkias
Dr Paul Dennison, The Samatha Trust, UK
Edward Voet
Robert Adkins, The Samatha Trust, UK
Sarah Shaw
Sister Wanyu Zhang
Texts
Inward Path, Penang: Extract from Ven. Dhammasāmi, Mindfulness 
Meditation Made Easy (1999).
The Samatha Trust, Llangunllo, Wales, UK: Extracts from Samatha: Insight 
from a Meditation Tradition (1997) and U. McNab (trans.) The Suttanta 
on the Marks (1996).

--- Page 10 ---
Preface to the Second 
Edition
The history of Buddhism is often seen in terms of its ideas and the‑
oretical explanations. This book explores these but attempts, how‑
ever, to look at another kind of history: of what people do and how 
they approach meditation. I remember that when I wrote the first 
edition, one image encapsulated the feeling of the great richness of this 
living field of Buddhist practice. Each year, in May, there is a Vesakha 
conference in Bangkok to celebrate the Buddha’s birth, awakening 
and entry into nirvana. Delegates and visitors from hundreds of 
Buddhist localities and traditions are invited. The myriad of different 
robes, styles and dress amongst the monks and nuns is astonishing. 
Everywhere you look, there are different shades of maroon to gold, 
cinnamon to ivory, charcoal to silver, blue, coral‑pink and white: the 
formal dress of many different orders. Lay people also sometimes 
wear their ceremonial robes, equally diverse. These colours, all out‑
ward manifestations of slightly different approaches to practice and 
meditation, evoked for me the richness of Buddhist meditative praxis, 
across all its regions.
This time, when asked to do a revised edition, another image kept 
on surfacing. On my first visit to Sri Lanka, in the early 1980s, I went 
on a village pilgrimage with my hostess to Waturavilla, a forest monas‑
tery. We went to cook food for the large temple, chant, listen to talks, 
practise and generally have a good time. The hired bus took hours and 
everyone chanted and sang. Some on board were very elderly widows, 
dressed in white, who insisted on my sitting down while they stood. 
When we arrived in the evening, we chanted together and received 
blessings in the shrine hall, and then most people started cooking – it 
was going to take most of the night. The old ladies went back to the 
meditation hall and sat, with exquisite grace, often holding their hands 
above their head in añjalis. There they remained, gracefully erect, for 
hours, sometimes silent, sometimes quietly chanting, always attentive. 
They emerged, in the middle of the night, fresh and refreshed. The 
next morning we offered the food and there was more chanting and 
blessings. I asked people about the meditations they had been doing 
the night before. Everyone started laughing. I was assured, through 
interpreters, that lay people did not meditate! No, they were just

--- Page 11 ---
x
Preface to the Second Edition
chanting. A sense of that pool of unusual quiet and depth of feeling 
has always stayed with me.
This revised edition reflects my response to that incident. As we see 
in Chapter 1, bhāvanā, ‘practice’ or ‘cultivation’, covers many activ‑
ities considered salvific, including what we call meditation but also 
listening to talks, reflections, chanting, and devotions and the offering 
of food to monastics, in ritual acts of generosity. In this book I explore 
meditation as an aspect of bhāvanā, ‘making to become’: I define it as 
a form of praxis whereby both the attention and the intention of the 
practitioner are transformed. This includes the deeply alert contempla‑
tion known as jhāna, described as right concentration in the eightfold 
path, and other kinds of contemplative praxis. But such transform‑
ation also sometimes includes, encourages, or is helped by the kind 
of attentive practices I saw and felt in those old ladies, as their chants 
together dipped in and out of silence. I discuss this more in Chapters 
5 and 12.
Buddhist meditation is a terrain that looks and feels different when 
you move from region to region, and from one historical period 
to another. This book tries to describe some features of how it has 
changed and evolved, closely adapting to localities and the people it 
encounters. There are a few samples of texts, alongside one or two 
personal accounts. Specific instructions are felt to be best given by an 
experienced meditation teacher. It does try to give context: the ideas, 
culture and histories that foster and nourish the practice of medita‑
tion. This is inextricably linked to other aspects of what Buddhists call 
the eightfold path: theory, behaviour in the world and ways of seeing 
and interpreting events. Sometimes ritual gives a seed understanding 
of meditative procedure; sometimes theory is applied to the movement 
of the mind. These areas all work on one another and together.
Historically, Asian meditation has usually been taught in cultures 
where there is great respect for confidentiality and it has often been, 
and is now, taught in private. The information in this book is largely 
derived from the public domain – what texts, traditions, history and 
the published material of any group or school say. I hope I have not 
misrepresented any tradition.
I loved writing this book first time around. I am happy at how much 
has changed in the study of meditation in the meantime. So many more 
people are now examining the histories of this subject – which has 
also meant considerable additions and changes were needed for this 
edition. To try and do justice to traditions in new material and edits, 
I have tried to speak with both practitioners and scholars. I would 
like to thank them all for their friendly openness. Some are Ajahn 
Dhammasāmi, Dr Larson DiFiori, Dr Rajith Dissanayake, Professor 
H. Eifring, Juin Hosen Osho, Dr  Pyi Kyaw, Erin Lauer, Reverend 
Zenji Niō, Professor Harold and Dr Elisabeth Roth, Dr Nick Swann,

--- Page 12 ---
xi
Preface to the Second Edition
Dr  Warren Todd, the Weerawardana family, Mahes Wijavasiri, and 
Sister Wanyu Zhang. There are many others, in particular in my own 
group, the Samatha Trust, UK and the Samatha Foundation, USA. The 
staff and students on the Brown Contemplative Studies programme 
offered wonderful perspectives, as did those on the University of 
South Wales Buddhist Studies MA. I would also like to thank the three 
anonymous scholars who gave detailed and sympathetic feedback for 
this edition: it has shaped many revisions and changes to this book. In 
particular, I would like to express, yet again, my gratitude to Professor 
Georgios Halkias, for his cheerful and scholarly generosity in working 
on his contribution on Tibet and to Professor Peter Harvey for his 
comments. Thanks also to my editors, Pamela Bertram, Iman Hakimi 
and Sophie Dixon-Dash.
There is no exact counterpart in Buddhism to ‘meditation’, in 
twenty‑first century understandings of the word. However it is defined, 
it is turning out to be a refuge that is welcome to many more people 
now. Something feels inherently ungraspable about the vast ocean of 
this subject: trying to squeeze its waters into chapters and headings is 
impossible, but it is useful sometimes to have a cup to scoop something 
out. I hope this book helps with that. This remains an awe‑inspiring 
subject.
As always, thank you to Charles, Roland, Jeremy and Dechen (Lucy).
May any merit that arises from this book bring happiness and peace.

--- Page 14 ---
Key
In Japan there are some Zen stone‑gardens where it is never possible 
to see all of the stones from any given spot on the ‘field’: the garden 
can only be appreciated fully by walking around and taking in the few 
that one can see from a given angle. The use of terminology in various 
Buddhist contexts is a little like that. To someone familiar with Pāli 
texts, it seems strange to see Sanskrit terms used in the context of Pāli 
suttas; those more familiar with Sanskrit terms understandably find 
the Pāli inappropriate for suttas they regard as equally authoritative. 
There are versions of many texts in both, as well as in Chinese and 
Tibetan. Variations of some terms are given as they occur and in the 
glossary, but it seems easier for students if the ones used in a particular 
region are adopted. In the early part of the book the terminology is 
mostly in Pāli, as the texts are; after that the Sanskrit is usually given.
The use of the term Chan in China, Seon in Korea, Thien in Vietnam 
and Zen in Japan needs mentioning. The term in these contexts derives 
from jhāna (Pal.)/dhyāna (Skt.), the deep meditative state that forms 
the basis of many Buddhist traditions, but does not always mean pre‑
cisely that in these countries. It refers to a system of practice, common 
to those areas, where meditation practice forms a key component. This 
is sometimes of a different kind from the state denoted by the term in 
other Buddhist contexts.
For ease of reference, at the end of each chapter a list is given of 
works consulted or suggested for further reading. Within each chapter, 
references are made by giving name, date and page reference to a work 
cited at the end of the chapter.
Transliteration systems
Both Pāli and Sanskrit for some key terms are used where suitable. 
Transliteration systems for other languages are:
Chinese: Pinyin (For key terms and names Wale‑Giles is given in 
brackets in glossary).
Hangeul: Rule provided by the National Institute of the Korean 
Language on 19 July 2000. See (2008): www.korean.go.kr/eng/

--- Page 15 ---
xiv
Key
Tibetan: ‘Wylie’, see T. Wylie (1959) ‘A Standard System of Tibetan 
Transcription’, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 22, December, 
261–267.
For Pāli texts, editions used are those of the Pali Text Society (http://
www.palitext.org). They also have translations of all the texts quoted 
here. The reference to the text can be found by looking in the transla‑
tion at the top inside corners.
AN = An˙ guttaranikāya
Dhp = Dhammapada
D = Dīghanikāya (individual suttas by number, e.g., D 2)
Jātaka denoted by number of story, e.g., J 36.
MN = Majjhimanikāya (individual suttas by number, e.g., M 23)
Patis = Pat˙ isambhidhāmagga
SN = Sam˙ yuttanikāya
Sn = Sutta‑Nipāta
Th = Theragāthā
Th = Therīgāthā
Ud = Udāna

--- Page 16 ---
Three kinds of Buddhisms
For this book, and in accordance with usual practice, Buddhist 
traditions have been arranged under three broad headings. The three 
groups are like groupings of overlapping circles in a Venn diagram, 
with elements from one sometimes found in others and sometimes not. 
Some scholars prefer now not to employ these categories at all, but 
they are helpful and pertinent as long as they are not seen as too rigid.
South and Southeast Asian Buddhism
The first is that of the South and Southeast Asian forms, called, in 
a term that found its modern usage only in the twentieth century, 
Theravāda, or the teaching of the elders. This is predominant in 
Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka. The main source 
of text for this group is the Pāli Canon. At one time it was thought this 
canon was the earliest and thus the most authoritative of the Buddhist 
textual traditions: Pāli is a development of the local Indo‑Aryan lan‑
guage probably spoken at the time of the Buddha and could have 
been developed by him. There are many elements of truth in this, 
but it has long been recognized that texts in Sanskrit, Chinese and 
Tibetan sometimes retain elements that may be older than some Pāli 
texts. Writing was not introduced into India until after the Buddha’s 
death; texts were still orally transmitted for many centuries after that 
and hence liable to all kinds of creative accretions, modifications or 
editing. Southern Buddhism, as recorded in Pāli texts, does however 
contain many elements that must have come from the earliest strata of 
the tradition. Its meditation systems are primarily based on canonical 
and commentarial guidelines, but include also newer features, derived 
from a long process of acculturation and development.
Northern Buddhism
This is the development from the form of Buddhism that evolved in 
India in the first two centuries CE, which is principally practised now 
amongst Tibetan Buddhists. In the early stages of its evolution, it was 
not clearly differentiated from what became South and Southeast

--- Page 17 ---
xvi
Three kinds of Buddhisms
Asian Buddhism, and there seems to have been considerable inter‑
change of ideas and practice. In the early centuries of the first millen‑
nium, many monks would follow the same Vinaya, or monastic rule, 
while following slightly different practices and adopting different doc‑
trinal viewpoints. Sometimes called Mahāyāna, or ‘greater vehicle’, this 
school further develops the idea of the Bodhisattva, the being bound to 
or for enlightenment, to include many aspirant beings as well as one 
who became the historical Buddha. It uses visualization as a meditative 
tool and Abhidharma, the philosophical teachings, to direct the mind 
towards what was termed emptiness (śūnyatā). There is sometimes 
a vindication of both a politicized pacificism and physical violence 
in different Mahāyāna movements. The inspired, visionary nature of 
Indian Buddhism led to a stream of new Buddhist texts, up to the 
period 650 CE, which are used by many Mahāyāna schools to this 
day. Meditative texts of this tradition become quite different in form 
and content from texts of the Southern schools and are sometimes 
characterized by great faith and the use of hyperbolic description.
Eastern Buddhism
This refers to the forms of Buddhism developed by the Chinese, 
Koreans, Japanese and many Vietnamese, which, for the most part, 
represents a development from texts that either are, or anticipate, the 
Mahāyāna. In China, however, Buddhism spread in separate waves 
through Central Asia on the Silk Road. Over centuries this encouraged 
the development of new schools of Buddhism, sometimes on the basis 
of textual and practice traditions imported from India and Central 
Asia and sometimes through the fusion of those elements with local 
customs, theory systems and practices. The emergence of Zen and Pure 
Land Buddhism are part of this Eastern form of the tradition.
It is customary to think of the various schools of Buddhism as in 
some way opposed to one another, or the by‑product of major schisms, 
though the features contributing to Buddhist pluralism are more com‑
plex than this, involving doctrinal, philosophical, social, and even 
straightforwardly geographical developments. There is great variety 
in Buddhism, with traditions not necessarily subject to the categories 
named above: most speak of Buddhisms, rather than Buddhism. For 
practical purposes in this book material has been broadly arranged 
under country headings. As will become clear, there are many other 
factors, such as changing boundaries and varied ethnic, cultural, and 
linguistic groups which qualify this sort of categorization. Many groups 
cover large areas that transcend geographical boundaries, though some 
sort of local identity is usually evident too. There is no central authority 
or institution which supervises all Buddhist traditions, an absence of 
centralism perceived by many Buddhists as a source of great strength.

--- Page 18 ---
DOI: 10.4324/9781003168966-1
In this fathom long body, I declare, is the world, the arising of 
the world, the ceasing of the world and the path leading to the 
ceasing of the world
Gotama Buddha (AN 2.49)
Introduction to Buddhism and the middle way
The historical Buddha, Gotama, claimed that one simple experience 
in meditation changed his life. According to his own account, he 
sat down one day as a child under a rose‑apple tree and discovered 
it was possible to achieve a state he called jhāna. This was accom‑
panied by initial thought, exploration of the object, joy, happiness and 
one‑pointedness, or unification of mind, from which he saw his whole 
existence in a different way. In the commentaries that were composed 
after the Buddha’s death, the practice he is said to have undertaken was 
one which he later described as the most ‘sublime’ of all meditations. 
This was the observation of the simple motion of the breath in and out 
of his body, which brought his body and mind to a state of completion 
and rest. When he remembered this joyfully peaceful state later in life, 
he concluded that he did not have to fear the great happiness of being 
free from the pull of the senses. Rather, it was the wisdom derived 
from such peace that was actually helpful to understand things as they 
really are. He had been left alone while his father pulled a ceremonial 
plough:
while I was sitting in the cool shade of the rose‑apple tree, quite 
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unskilful states, I 
entered upon and abided in the first jhāna, which is accompanied 
by application of mind and exploration, with the joy and happiness 
born of seclusion. Might that be the path to awakening? Then, 
following on that memory came the consciousness: ‘This is the path 
to awakening. Why am I afraid of a happiness that has nothing to 
do with sensual pleasure and unskilful states?’
(MN 1.246–247)
1	
The eightfold path and 
meditation

--- Page 19 ---
The eightfold path and meditation
 
Crosby, K. (2014) Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, and Identity. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell.
 
Gethin, R. (1998) The Foundations of Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Gombrich, R.F. (1988) Theravāda Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benares to Modern
Colombo. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
 
Gombrich, R.F. (2009) What the Buddha Thought. London: Equinox.
 
Harvey, P. (2013) Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History and Practices, 2nd edn.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
Keown, D . (1996) Buddhism, A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Khemā, A. (1988) Within our Own Hearts: Twelve Dhamma Talks on Meditation Practice.
Kandy: The Buddhist Publication Society.
 
Rahula, W. (1967) What the Buddha Taught, with foreword by P. Demiéville , 2nd edn. London
and Bedford: Gordon Fraser.
 
Saddhatissa Ven. H. (1971) The Buddha’s Way. London: George, Allen & Unwin.
 
Shaw, S. (2006) The Jātakas: Birth Stories of the Bodhisatta. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
 
Shaw, S. (2006) Buddhist Meditation: An Anthology of Texts. London: Routledge.
 
Skilton, A. (2001) A Concise History of Buddhism, 2nd edition. Cambridge: Windhorse
Publications.
 
 
Buddhist guidance on meditation, old and new
 
Anālayo, Bhikkhu (2004) Satipaṭṭhāna: The Direct Path to Realization. Cambridge: Windhorse.
 
Arbel, K. (2017) Early Buddhist Meditation: The Four Jhānas as the Actualization of Insight.
London: Routledge.
 
Buddhadāsa, Bhikkhu (1989) Mindfulness with Breathing: Unveiling the Secrets of Life, A
Manual for Serious Beginners, translated by Bhikkhu SantikāYGro , 2nd edition. Bangkok:
Evolution.
 
Cousins, L.S. (1973) ‘Buddhist Jhāna: Its Nature and Attainment according to the Påli Sources’,
Religion, 3: 115–131.
 
Cousins, L.S. (1984) ‘Samatha-yāna and Vipassanā-yāna’, in Buddhist Studies in Honour of
Hammalava Saddhatissa, edited by G. Dhammapāla , R.F. Gombrich , and K.R. Norman .
Nugegoda , Sri Lanka: Hammalava Saddhatissa Felicitation Volume Committee.
 
Cousins, L.S. (2022) Meditations of the Pāli Tradition: Illuminating Buddhist Doctrine, History,
and Practice, edited by S. Shaw. Boulder , CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Dhammasāmi, Ven . (1999) Mindfulness Meditation Made Easy. Penang: Inward Path.
 
Gunaratana, Mahathera H. (1985) The Path of Serenity and Insight: An Explanation of the
Buddhist Jhānas. Delhi, Varanasi, Patna, Madras: Motilal Banarsidass.
 
Mahasi Sayadaw (1990) Satipaṭṭhāna Vipassanā: Insight Through Mindfulness. Kandy: The
Buddhist Publication Society.
 
Ñāṇarama, M. Mahāthera (1997) The Seven Contemplations of Insight: A Treatise on Insight
Meditation, translated by A.G.S. Kariyawasam . Kandy: The Buddhist Publication Society.
 
Nyanaponika Thera (1972) The Heart of Buddhist Meditation. London: Rider & Co.
 
Saddhatissa, Ven. H . (1971) The Buddha’s Way. London: George, Allen & Unwin.
 
Shaw, S. (2006) Buddhist Meditation: An Anthology of Texts. London: Routledge.
 
Shaw, S. (2020) Mindfulness: Where it Comes From and What It Means. Boulder, CO:
Shambhala Publications.
 
Sumedho, Ven . (1985) Mindfulness: The Path to the Deathless: The Meditation Teachings of
Venerable Ajahn Sumedho. Great Gaddesden: Amaravati.
 
Thate Desaransī , Phra Ācharn (1978) Meditation in Words, translated by K. Attagar . Nongkhai,
Thailand.

--- Page 20 ---
Radiant but defiled
 
Bodhi, Bhikkhu (2022) Discourse on the Fruits of Recluseship: The Sāmaññaphala Sutta and its
Commentaries. Kandy: The Buddhist Publication Society.
 
Chah, Ajahn (2006) Talks on Meditation: A Collection of Talks on Cultivating the Mind. Kandy:
The Buddhist Publication Society.
 
Gethin, R. (1998) The Foundations of Buddhism, pp. 112–159, 202–218. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
 
Hamilton, S. (2001) Indian Philosophy: A Short Introduction. Oxford and New York: Oxford
University Press.
 
Harvey, P. (2013) Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History and Practices, 2nd edn.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
Jones, D.T. (2011) This Being, That Becomes: The Buddha’s Teaching on Conditionality.
Cambridge: Windhorse.
 
Norman, K.R. (1992) The Group of Discourses (Sutta-Nipāta), revised translation, 2, 177
(comment on v.151, Mettā-Sutta). Oxford: Pali Text Society.
 
Nyanatusita, Bhikkhu (trans.) (2021) The Path to Freedom, 2 vols. Hong Kong: Centre for
Buddhist Studies, Hong Kong University.
 
Saddhatissa, Ven.H. (1971) The Buddha’s Way. London: George, Allen & Unwin.
 
 
Buddhaghosa and the forty objects of meditation
 
Harvey, P. (2013) Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History and Practices, 2nd edn, pp.
324–340. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
Heim, M. (2018) Voice of the Buddha: Buddhaghosa on the Immeasurable Words. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
 
Ñāṇamoli, Bhikkhu (trans.) (1991) The Path of Purification: Visuddhimagga: The Classic Manual
of Buddhist Doctrine and Meditation, 5th edn. Kandy: The Buddhist Publication Society.
 
Shaw, S. (2016) ‘Meditation Objects in Pāli Buddhist Texts’, in Asian Traditions of Meditation,
edited by H. Eifring , pp. 122–144. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
 
Chanting, paying respects and devotional ritual
 
Bizot, F. (1976) Le figuier à cinq branches: recherches sur le bouddhism Khmer. Paris:
Publications de l’École Française de l’Extreme Orient.
 
Chen, Pi-Yen (2010) Chinese Buddhist Monastic Chants. Middleton, WI: A-R Editions.
 
Crosby, J. (2014) Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity and Identity. Chichester: Wiley
Blackwell.
 
Harvey, P. (1993) ‘The Dynamics of Paritta Chanting in Southern Buddhism’, in Love Divine:
Studies in Bhakti and Devotional Mysticism, edited by K. Werner . London: Routledge.
 
Indaratana, E. Maha Thera (2002) Vandanā: The Album of Pāli Devotional Chanting and
Hymns. Penang: Mahindarama Dhamma Publication and Inward Path.
 
McDaniel, J. (2013) The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: Practicing Buddhism in Modern
Thailand. New York: Columbia University Press.
 
Sahn, S. (1996) ‘Chanting with English Translations and Temple Rules: The Kwan Um School
of Zen, Cumberland’, www.kwanumzen.com/pdf/chantbk.pdf
 
Samatha Trust (2014) Samatha Chanting Book. Llangynllo, Powys: Samatha Trust.
 
Simmer-Brown, J. (2002) Dakini’s Warm Breath: The Feminine Principle in Tibetan Buddhism.
Boston, MA: Shambhala Publications.

--- Page 21 ---
Studholme, A. (2002) The Origins of Oṃ Maṇipadme Hūṃ: A Study of the Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra.
New York: State University of New York Press.
 
Tanabe, G.T. (2004) ‘Chanting’, in Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2 vols, edited by R. Buswell ,
1:137–139. New York: Macmillan.
 
 
Meditation in Buddhist South and Southeast Asia
 
Buddhadāsa Bhikkhu (1988) Mindfulness with Breathing: A Manual for Serious Beginners,
translated by Bhikkhu Santikāro . Bangkok: Evolution.
 
Chah, Ajahn (2006) Talks on Meditation: A Collection of Talks on Cultivating the Mind. Kandy:
The Buddhist Publication Society.
 
Coleman, J. (1971) The Quiet Mind. London: Rider & Co.
 
Crosby, K. (2014) Theravada Buddhism: Continuity, Diversity, and Identity. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell.
 
Crosby, K. (2020) Esoteric Theravada: the Story of the Forgotten Meditation Tradition of
Southeast Asia. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Cousins, L.S. (1973) ‘Buddhist Jhāna: Its Nature and Attainment According to the Pāli Sources’,
Religion, 3(2): 115–131.
 
Cousins, L.S. (2022) Meditations of the Pāli Tradition: Illuminating Buddhist Doctrine and
Practice. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Dennison, P. (1997) ‘Na Yan: An Introduction’, in Samatha: Insight from a Meditation Tradition,
edited by J. Callow , 2:16–18. Llangunllo, Wales: Samatha Trust.
 
Dennison, P. (2022) Jhāna Consciousness: Buddhist Meditation in the Age of Neuroscience.
Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
French, R. (2004) ‘Laos’, in Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2 vols, edited by R. Buswell ,
2:456–459. New York: Macmillan.
 
Giustarini, G. (2023) ‘Meditative Listening in the Pāli Canon’, Numen, 70: 254–285.
 
Hallisey, C. (2015) Therigatha: Poems of the First Buddhist Women. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
 
Kornfield, J. (2010) Living Dharma: Teachings and Meditation Instructions from Twelve
Theravada Masters. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Kyaw, P.P. (2012) ‘The Paṭṭhaṅa (Conditional Relations) and Buddhist Meditation: Application
of the Teachings in the Paṭṭhaṅa in Insight (Vipassanā) Meditation Practice’, Conference
Proceedings, 2nd IABU Conference, ‘Buddhist Philosophy and Praxis’. Available at:
www.undv.org/vesak2012/iabudoc/07PyiPhyoKyawFINAL.pdf.
 
Matics, K.I. (2010) Gestures of the Buddha. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University Press.
 
McDaniel, J. (2013) The Lovelorn Ghost and the Magical Monk: Practicing Buddhism in Modern
Thailand. New York: Columbia University Press.
 
Nyanaponika Thera and Hecker, H. (2003) The Great Disciples of the Buddha: Their Lives,
Their Works, Their Legacy, edited with an Introduction by Bhikku Bodhi. Boston , MA and
Kandy: Wisdom and The Buddhist Publication Society.
 
Nyanaponika Thera (2014) The Heart of Buddhist Meditation: The Buddha’s Way of
Mindfulness, revised edn. Newbury Port, MA: Weiser Books.
 
Schedneck, B. (2023) Living Theravada: Demystifying the People, Places, and Practices of a
Buddhist Tradition. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Seeger, M. (2018) Gender and the Path to Awakening: Hidden Histories of Nuns in Modern Thai
Buddhism. Copenhagen: NIAS Press.
 
Shaw, S. (2006) Buddhist Meditation: An Anthology of Texts. London: Routledge.
 
Shaw, S. (2013) Spirit of Buddhist Meditation. London and New Haven: Yale University Press.
 
Shaw, S. (2021) The Art of Listening: A Guide to the Early Teachings of Buddhism. Boulder,
CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Skilling, P. (2000) ‘The Arahats of the Eight Directions’, Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation for the
Preservation of Buddhist Literature, 6:12, 22.
 
Strong, J.S. (2001) The Buddha: A Short Biography. Oxford: Oneworld.

--- Page 22 ---
Strong, J.S. (2015) Buddhisms: An Introduction. London: Oneworld.
 
Stuart, D. (2020) Goenka: Emissary of Insight. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Swearer, D.K. (2004) Becoming the Buddha: The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Tiyavanich, K. (2018) In the Cool Shade of Compassion: The Enchanted World of the Buddha in
the Jungle. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
 
Developments in Indian Buddhism
 
Crosby, K. , and Skilton, A. (eds) (1996) Śāntideva: The Bodhicaryāvatāra, with Introduction by
P. Williams . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
 
Hamilton, S. (2001) Indian Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
 
Harrison, P. (1978) ‘Buddhānusmṛti in the Pratyutpanna-
Buddhasaṃmukhāvasthitasamādhisūtra’, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 6: 35–57.
 
Harrison, P. (2018) Setting Out on the Great Way: Essays on Early Mahayana Buddhism.
London: Equinox Publishing.
 
Harvey, P. (1984) ‘The Symbolism of the Early Stūpa’, Journal of the International Association
of Buddhist Studies, 7(2): 67–93.
 
Jones, C.V. (2020) The Buddhist Self: On Tathāgatagarbha and Ātman. Honolulu: University of
Hawai‘i Press.
 
LeVine, S. , and Gellner, D.N. (2005) Rebuilding Buddhism: The Theravada Movement in
Twentieth-Century Nepal. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
 
Lusthaus, D. (2004) ‘Yogācāra School’, in Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2 vols, edited by R.
Buswell , 2:914–924. New York: Macmillan.
 
McNab, U. and friends (1996) The Suttanta on the Marks. Llangunllo, Powys: The Samatha
Trust.
 
Ruegg, D. Seyfort (1989) Buddha-nature, Mind and the Problem of Gradualism in a
Comparative Perspective: on the Transmission and Reception of Buddhism in India and Tibet.
London: SOAS University of London.
 
Salomon, R. (2018) The Buddhist Literature of Ancient Gandhara: An Introduction with Selected
Translations. Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications.
 
Skilton, A. (1994) A Concise History of Buddhism. Birmingham: Windrush.
 
Strong, J.S. (2015) Buddhisms: An Introduction. Oxford: Oneworld Publications.
 
Williams, P. (1989) Mahāyāna Buddhism. London and New York: Routledge.
 
Williams, P. , with Tribe, A. (2000) Buddhist Thought: A Complete Introduction to the Buddhist
Tradition. London and New York: Routledge.
 
 
Buddhist meditation traditions in Tibet
 
Batchelor, S. (1979) The Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. Translation from Tibetan.
Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives.
 
Chagme, K. , and Wallace, B.A. (trans.) (2000) Naked Awareness: Practical Instructions on the
Union of Mahamudra and Dzogchen. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
 
Chang, C. (trans.) (1977) The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa. London: Shambala.
 
Dalai Lama XIV (1995) The World of Tibetan Buddhism: An Overview of Its Philosophy and
Practice, translated by T. Jinpa . Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
 
Dowman, K. (1984) Sky Dancer: The Secret Life and Songs of the Lady Yeshe Tsogyel.
Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
 
Eimer, H. , and Germano, D. (2002) The Many Canons of Tibetan Buddhism. Leiden: Brill.
 
Hopkins, J. (1983) Meditation on Emptiness. London: Wisdom.
 
Jinpa, T. , and Elsner, J. (trans.) (2000) Songs of Spiritual Experience: Tibetan Buddhist Poems
of Insight and Awakening, with foreword by the Dalai Lama . Boston and London: Shambala.

--- Page 23 ---
Karmay, S. (1972) The Treasury of Good Sayings: A Tibetan History of Bon. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
 
Lhalungpa, L. (1977) The Life of Milarepa: A New Translation from the Tibetan. New York:
Dutton.
 
Lodro, Geshe Gedun (1998) Calm Abiding and Special Insight: Achieving Spiritual
Transformation through Meditation, translated and edited by J. Hopkins . Boston and London:
Snow Lion.
 
Lopez, D. (1997) Religions of Tibet in Practice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Lopez, D. (1999) Prisoners of Shangri-la: Tibetan Buddhism and the West. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
 
Mackenzie, V. (1995) Reborn in the West: The Reincarnation Masters. London: Bloomsbury
Publishing.
 
Powers, J. (1995) Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications.
 
Rinbochay, L. , and Hopkins, J. (1981) Death, Intermediate State, and Rebirth in Tibetan
Buddhism, with foreword by H.H. the Fourteenth Dalai Lama . Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
 
Roerich, G. (1976) The Blue Annals. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
 
Samuel, G. (1993) Civilized Shamans: Buddhism in Tibetan Societies. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
 
Shaw, M. (1994) Passionate Enlightenment: Women in Tantric Buddhism. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
 
Snellgrove, D. (1987) Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and their Tibetan Successors.
London: Serindia.
 
Sogyal Rinpoche (1992) The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying. London: Rider & Co.
 
Thubten Yeshe , Lama (2001) Introduction to Tantra: The Transformation of Desire. Boston:
Wisdom.
 
Tsultrim A. (1984) Women of Wisdom. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
 
Tulku Thondup Rinpoche (1997) Hidden Teachings of Tibet: An Explanation of the Terma
Tradition of Tibet. Boston: Wisdom.
 
Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche , et al. (2007) Skillful Grace: Tara Practice for our Times. Kathmandu:
Rangjung Yeshe Publications.
 
 
Meditation in China
 
Blofeld, J. (trans.) (1994) The Zen Teaching of Huang Po: On the Transmission of Mind, with
preface by P. H'siu. New York: Grove Press.
 
Buswell, R.E. (1981) Tracing Back the Radiance: Chinul’s Korean Way of Zen. Kuroda Institute,
Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Chang, G.C.C. (1972) The Buddhist Teaching of Totality: The Philosophy of Hwa Yen
Buddhism. London: George Allen & Unwin.
 
Cleary, T. (trans.) (1993) The Flower Ornament Scripture: A Translation of the Avataṃsaka
Sūtra. Boston: Shambhala.
 
Cole, A.O. (2016) Patriarchs on Paper: A Critical History of Medieval Chan Literature. Oakland,
CA: University of California Press.
 
Cook, F.H. (1977) Hua-yen Buddhism: The Jewel Net of Indra. University Park: The
Pennsylvania State University Press.
 
Cousins, L.S. and Lindop A. (1998) Unpublished translation of Ein Buddhistisches
Yogalehrbuch by Dieter Schlingoff (1964). Berlin.
 
Eifring, H. (2015) ‘Meditative Pluralism in Hānshān Déquīng’, in Meditation and Culture: The
Interplay of Practice and Context, edited by H. Eifring , pp. 102–127. London: Bloomsbury
Academic.
 
Eifring, H. (ed.) (2016) Asian Traditions of Meditation. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Ferguson, A. (2011) Zen’s Chinese Heritage: The Masters and Their Teachings. Boston:
Wisdom Publications.
 
Gomes, L.O. (1996) The Land of Bliss: The Paradise of the Buddha of the Marvellous Light.
Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.

--- Page 24 ---
Gomes, L.O. (2004) ‘Pure-Land’, in Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2 vols, edited by R. Buswell ,
2:703–706. New York: Macmillan.
 
Halkias, G. , and Payne, R. (eds) (2019) Pure Lands in Ancient Texts and Contexts: An
Anthology. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Harrison, P. (2018) Setting Out on the Great Way: Essays on Early Mahāyāna Buddhism.
Sheffield: Equinox Publishing.
 
Guan, Ven . Zhen (trans.) (2020) Foundations for Developing Buddhist Tranquillity (śamatha)
and Insight (vipaśyanā) Meditation. Singapore: Kong Meng San Phor Kark See Monastery.
 
Hawkins, B.K. (2004) Introduction to Asian Religions. New York: Pearson Longman.
 
Jones, C. (2021) Pure Land: History, Tradition and Practice. Boulder, CO: Shambhala
Publications.
 
Jorgensen, J. , Lusthaus, D. , Makeham, J. , and Strange, J. (eds and trans.) (2019) Treatise on
Awakening Mahāyāna Faith. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 
Lindop, A. and Cousins, L.S. (1998) Unpublished translation of Ein Buddhistisches
Yogalehrbuch (1964) by Dieter Schlingoff, Berlin .
 
Lopez, D.S. (1996) Religions of China in Practice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Lopez, D.S. , and Stone, J.I. (2022) Two Buddhas Seated Side by Side: A Guide to the Lotus
Sūtra. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Roth, H. (2016) ‘Meditation in the Classical Daoist Tradition’. In Asian Traditions of Meditation,
edited by H. Eifring , pp. 185–206. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Schlütter, M. (2016) ‘Kanhua Meditation in Chinese Zen’, in Asian Traditions of Meditation,
edited by H. Eifring , pp. 165–184. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Shahar, M. (2000) ‘Epigraphy, Buddhist Historiography, and Fighting Monks: The Case of The
Shaolin Monastery’, Asia Major Third Series 13(2): 15–36.
 
Sharf, R.H. (2015) ‘Mindfulness and Mindlessness in Early Chan’, in Meditation and Culture:
The Interplay of Practice and Context, edited by H. Eifring , pp. 55–75. London: Bloomsbury
Academic.
 
Shuyun, S. (2004) Ten Thousand Miles Without a Cloud. New York and London: Harper
Perennial.
 
Sponberg, A. (1986) ‘Meditation in Fa-hsiang Buddhism’, in Traditions of Meditation in Chinese
Buddhism, edited by P.N. Gregory , pp. 15–41. Kuroda Institute, Studies in East Asian
Buddhism, 4. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Stevenson, D.B. (1986) ‘The Four Kinds of Samādhi in Early T’ien-t’ai Buddhism’, in Traditions
of Meditation in Chinese Buddhism, edited by P.N. Gregory , pp. 45–97. Honolulu: University of
Hawai‘i Press.
 
Utsuki, N. (1924) The Smaller Sukhāvatīvyuhā Sūtra or The Sūtra on the Buddha Amitāyus
Translated from the Chinese Version of Kumarajiva. Educational Department of the West,
Hongwanji, Kyoto, Japan.
 
Williams, P. (1989) Mahāyāna Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations. New York and London:
Routledge.
 
Yu, L.K. ( Luk, C. ) (1964) The Secrets of Chinese Meditation. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser
Inc.
 
Yu, C-F. (1979) ‘Ta-Hui Tsung-Kao and Kung-an Ch’an’, Journal of Chinese Philosophy, 5:
211–235.
 
Yun, H (1999) Only a Great Rain: A Guide to Chinese Buddhist Meditation, translated by T.
Graham . New York: Wisdom.
 
 
Meditation in Korea and Vietnam
 
Baker, D. (2015) ‘Cinnabar-field Meditation in Korea’, in Meditation and Culture: The Interplay of
Practice and Context, edited by H. Eifring , pp. 162–171. London: Bloomsbury.
 
Buswell, R.E. (1981) Tracing Back the Radiance: Chinul’s Korean Way of Zen. Kuroda Institute,
Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Buswell, R.E. (1983) The Korean Approach to Zen: The Collected Works of Chinul, Honolulu:
University of Hawai‘i Press.

--- Page 25 ---
Buswell, R.E. (1986) ‘Chinul’s Systematization of Chinese Meditative Techniques in Korean Son
Buddhism’, in Traditions of Meditation in Chinese Buddhism, edited by P.N. Gregory , pp.
199–242. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Buswell, R.E. (1992) The Zen Monastic Experience: Buddhist Practice in Contemporary Korea.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 
Chanda, E.R. (1980) ‘The Korean Mountain Spirit’, Korea Journal, 20(9): 11–16.
 
Harrison, P. (2006) Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā: A New English Translation of the Sanskrit
Text Based on Two Manuscripts from Greater Gandhāra, Buddhist Manuscripts in the Schøyen
Collection, Vol. 3. Oslo: Hermes Publishing.
 
Jae-Ryong, S. (1999) Korean Buddhism: Tradition and Transformation. Seoul: Jimoondang
Publishing Company.
 
Koh, I-j . (1991) ‘Introduction of Ch’an ( K. Son ) in the Later Silla’, in Assimilation of Buddhism
in Korea: Religious Maturity and Innovation in the Silla Dynasty, edited by L.R. Lancaster and
C.S. Yu . Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press. (Extract printed with kind permission of the Jain
Publishing Company).
 
Lee, P.H. (trans.) (1974) Poems from Korea. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Nguyen, L. T-L. (2021) Truc Lam Buddhism in Vietnam: Its History, Development and Legacy.
Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
 
Shindai, S. (ed.) (1977) ‘Wonhyo’s calmness and insight’, Bukkyo no jissen genri [Buddhist
Soteriological Principles], pp. 429–445. Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin.
 
Tedesco, F. (1992) Collected Articles on Contemporary Korean Buddhism. Seoul: privately
published.
 
 
Meditation in Japan
 
Bielefeldt, C. (2004) ‘Japan’, in Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2 vols, edited by R. Buswell ,
1:384–391. New York: Macmillan.
 
Bucknell, R. , and Kang, C. (1997) The Meditative Way, pp. 64–65, 146–158. London: Curzon.
 
Dobbins, J.C. (2004) ‘Exoteric/Esoteric Kenmitsu Buddhism in Japan’, in Encyclopedia of
Buddhism, 2 vols, edited by R. Buswell , 1:271–275. New York: Macmillan.
 
Foard, J.H. , Solomon, M. and Payne, R.K. (1996) The Pure Land Tradition: History and
Development. Berkeley, CA: Jain Publishing.
 
Gomes, L.O. (2004) ‘Meditation’, in Encyclopedia of Buddhism, 2 vols, edited by R. Buswell ,
2:520–530. New York: Macmillan.
 
Hammitzsch, H. , and Lemesurier P. (trans.) (1977) Zen in the Art of the Tea Ceremony.
Tisbury: Element Books.
 
Harvey, P. (2013) Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History and Practices, 2nd edn, pp.
361–375. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 
Heine S. , and Wright D.S. (eds) (2000) The Kōan: Texts and Contexts in Zen Buddhism.
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
 
Heinemann, R.K. (1991) ‘The World and the Other Power: Contrasting Paths to Deliverance in
Japan’, in The World of Buddhism: Buddhist Monks and Nuns in Society and Culture, edited by
H. Bechert and R. Gombrich , pp. 231–279. London: Thames & Hudson.
 
Herrigel, E. (1953) Zen in the Art of Archery, translated by R.R.C. Hull , with foreword by D.T.
Suzuki . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
 
Hurvitz, L. (1976) Scripture of the Lotus Blossom of the Fine Dharma (The Lotus Sūtra):
translated from the Chinese of Kumarajīva. New York: Columbia University Press.
 
Jones, C. (2021) Pure Land: History, Tradition and Practice, Boulder, CO: Shambhala
Publications.
 
O'Brien, B. (2019) The Circle of the Way: A Concise History of Zen from the Buddha to the
Modern World. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Onuma, H. , with DeProspero, D. , and DeProspero, J. (1993) Kyudo: The Essence and
Practice of Japanese Archery. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
 
Pollack, D. (1985) Zen Poems of the Five Mountains. New York: Scholar’s Press.

--- Page 26 ---
van Schaik, Sam (2019) Spirit of Zen. London: Yale University Press.
 
Stevens, J. (1995) Sacred Calligraphy of the East, 3rd edn. Boston/London: Shambala.
 
Suzuki, S. (1991) Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind. New York: Weatherhill.
 
Taikō, Y. (1988) Japanese Esoteric Buddhism, translated and adapted by R. C. Peterson ,
edited by Y. Morimoto and D. Y1 Kidd . Boston and London: Shambala.
 
Uchiyama, K. (2004) Opening the Hand of Thought: Foundations of Zen Buddhist Practice.
Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications.
 
Unno, M. (2004) Shingon Refractions: Myōe and the Mantra of Light. Boston, MA: Wisdom
Publications.
 
Roshi, R. Aitken (trans.) (2004), ‘Kōans and sutras’; ‘Diamond Sangha Zen Sutras’:
www.ciolek.com/WWWVLPages/ZenPages/Daily-Zen-Sutras.html#HAKUIN
 
‘Dōgen’, Buddhist Information of North America (2023):
www.buddhistinformation.com/on_the_life_of_dogen_zenji.htm
 
‘Japanese Buddhism: Zen Koans’, Ashidakim.com (2023):
www.ashidakim.com/zenkoans/zenindex.html
 
 
Meditation around the world
 
Aaronson, H. (2004) Buddhist Practice on Western Ground: Reconciling Eastern Ideals and
Western Psychology. Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Ahemaitijiang, N. et al. (2020) ‘Effects of Meditation on the Soles of the Feet on the Aggressive
and Destructive Behaviors of Chinese Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorders’,
Mindfulness, 11: 230–240.
 
Allen, C. (2002) The Buddha and the Sahibs: The Men Who Discovered India’s Lost Religion.
London: John Murray.
 
Anālayo, Bhikkhu (2018) Rebirth in Early Buddhism and Current Research. Boston, MA:
Wisdom.
 
Benson, H. , Malhotra, M.S. , Goldman, R.F. , Jacobs, G.D. , and Hopkins, P.J. (1990) ‘Three
case reports of the metabolic and electroencephalographic changes during advanced Buddhist
meditation techniques’, Behavioural Medicine, 16: 90–95.
 
Bluck, R. (2006) British Buddhism: Teachings, Practice and Development. London: Routledge.
 
Bodhi, Bhikkhu (2021) ‘Manifesting the Buddha Dharma in a Secular Age’, in Secularizing
Buddhism: New Perspectives on a Dynamic Tradition, edited by R.K. Payne , pp. 163–184.
Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Dennison, P. (2022) Jhāna Consciousness: Buddhist Meditation in the Age of Neuroscience.
Boulder, CO: Shambhala Publications.
 
Eifring, H. (2016) Asian Traditions of Meditation. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Freeman, L. (2000) Christian Meditation: Your Daily Practice. Toronto: Novalis.
 
Habito, R. (2006) Healing Breath: Zen for Christians and Buddhists in a Wounded World.
Boston, MA: Wisdom Publications.
 
Houshmand, Z. , Livingston, R.B. , and Wallace, A.B. (eds) (1999) Consciousness at the
Crossroads: Conversations with the Dalai Lama on Brain Science and Buddhism. New York:
Snow Lion Publications.
 
Kornfield, J. (1993) A Path With Heart: A Guide through the Perils and Promises of Spiritual
Life. New York: Bantam Books.
 
Lama, Dalai (2005) The Universe in a Single Atom: The Convergence of Science and
Spirituality. New York: Morgan Road Books.
 
Lancaster, B.L. (1997) ‘On the stages of perception: towards a synthesis of cognitive
neuroscience and the Buddhist Abhidhamma tradition’, Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4(2):
122–142.
 
Lopez, D.S. (2016) Strange Tales of an Oriental Idol: An Anthology of Early European
Portrayals of the Buddha. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 
Loucks, E.B. et al. (2015) ‘Mindfulness and cardiovascular disease risk: state of the evidence,
plausible mechanisms, and theoretical framework’, Current Cardiology Reports, 17(12): 112.

--- Page 27 ---
Prebish, C.S. (1979) American Buddhism. North Scituate, MA: Duxbury Press.
 
Rhys Davids , T.W. (1881) The Hibbert Lectures. London and Edinburgh: Williams and Norgate.
 
Russell, T.A. , and Siegmund, G. (2016) ‘What and Who? Mindfulness in the Mental Health
Setting’, BJPsych Bulletin, 40(6): 333–340.
 
Skilling, P. (2018) ‘The Buddhist Cosmopolis: Universal Welfare, Universal Outreach, Universal
Message’, Journal of Buddhist Studies, 15: 55–80.
 
Sponberg, A. (1986) ‘Meditation in Fa-hsiang Buddhism’, in Traditions of Meditation in Chinese
Buddhism, edited by 5P.N. Gregory , pp. 15–43. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press.
 
Waugh, D.C. (2002) ‘William of Rubruck’s Account of the Mongols’,
http://depts.washington.edu/silkroad/texts/rubruck.html#buddhism
 
Williams, J.M. , Teasdale, J.D. , Kabat-Zinn, J. , and Segal, Z.V. (2007) The Mindful Way
through Depression: Freeing Yourself from Chronic Unhappiness, New York: Guilford Press.