WK. 


PVTl’AN; SMM.I. SHKINI: 








THE ARl OF BURMA AND TANTRIC 

BUDDHISM. 


- ■ " " ♦ 

T he religious history of Burma from the opening centuries of the Christian 
era up to the XI th century is still practically a blank ; for among the 
great countries of Indo-China, Burma is the one about which we know least, 
so far as knowledge based on solid documents goes, l?or instance, the same 
period in Cambodia and Champa is mu^i better known, i)wing to the evideJice 
furnisbed by very early inscriptions. The fact is that apart from a few Pyu 
inscriptions on funeral urns,' which have no reference whatever to religion, the l*ali 
extract on the Hmaw'za stone deciphered by M. L. Finot, the Maunggan in- 
scription* and a few votive tablets from Eastern and Northern India inscribed 
with a line or two in Sanskrit in characters of the Xlth century, and which 
were imported to Pagan, no records whatsoever, lithic or otherwise, have as 
yet been found antedating the middle of the Xlth century. The very little 
we know has been obtained from foreign, principally Tibetan and Chinese, 
sources and even these tell us no more than what the pagodas and temples 
at Tagoung, Prome and Thaton and a few at Pagan bear witness to, namely : 
that Buddhism was then established in the land. As to the time at which its 
introduction into Burma took place, we are .still in the dark. As regards this 
point, however, the religious history of Burma is integrally bound up with the 
general history of the expansion of Buddhism towards the East and South- 
East, and it is only by a close study of that expansion that we shall arrive 
at more conclusive results. From the re.searches of eminent scholars in French 
Indo-China and the Dutch Indies, it seems clear that the active and far-reaching 
expansion of Buddhism in Burma does not much antedate the fifth century 
A.D. That Buddhism within closely restricted limits and practically confined 
to the few Indian .settlements of the deltaic provinces, was already e.xistent 

* iSoo Reparts of the SaperutU tfilent, Archttohgical Survey, Burmi ; (I O. lilagden. The Pyu luscri utiofh't, 
Kpigraphia Indica, Vol. XII, p. 127. 

* L, Finot, Un nmivrau docutnrul ^ur h Bmddhisme Journal Asiatiquo, 11112, p. I2I ; Epigraphia 

Indica, Vol. V, p. 101. 

* Taranatlia, Gesekichte dcJt Buddhismun in Indien^ ScliiofiUT’a translation, p. 262 fl, and other footnot/<‘s 
below ; S. S. Chandra Das, Indian Pandits in the hnd of Snow, pp. 2JI, 50 ; A Record of the Buddhist 
Religion, by l-iuing, translated by Takakusu, pp. 9-10, Parker’s p. 12. 



80 


ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT, 1915-16. 


in Burma at that time, there can be no reasonable doubt ; but whether, following 
the rather late chronicles of Ceylon^ on which the still very much later native 
chronicles are solely based. Buddhism was introduced in the Eastern maritime 
provinces of Burma by the mission of Sona and Uttara from the council of 
Pataliputra, is still a moot point. This mission of Sona-uttara, absolutely un- 
known to the oldest Pali documents as well as to Asoka’s edicts, has been 
completely rejected by some scholars,* while others are inclined to accept it.* 
But perhaps the two opinions may be to a certain extent reconciled, if it be 
conceded that this mission, independently of the Pataliputra council and long 
after it, did in fact evangelize the coasts of Burma, and was inaccurately 
recorded in the Dipavaiiisa (from which the Mahavaiiisa merely copies) among 
the' missions of Asoka. That such an historical error might well have been com- 
mitted, is shown by many other such errors which occurs in the Singhalese 
chronicles. Moreover, the fact that this mi.ssion to Suvannabhumi, whatever 
its exact date, was recorded in the oldest chronicle of Ceylon, whose authors 
had no particular interest in so recording it, cannot be rejected in tolo without 
c( nvincing and conclusive proofs to the contrary. 

Of the expansion and vicissitudes of Buddhism after its introduction, we 
know practically nothing. The Tibetan historian of Buddhism, TSranatha, a 
diligent compilor and industrious recorder of current legendary and historical 
tradition, mentions Pagan* several times. Unfortunately, his knowledge of and 
information about Indo-Chine.se countries seem to be very vague and hazy. 
However, his references are useful, though the dates implied (he practically 
never gives any direct ones) are often open to suspicion. He tells us that 
many temples were built at Pagan, and places its architectural activity in the time of 
NfigSrjuna ; that a tooth of Buddha was taken from Assam to Pagan, during the 
time of a king Sila ;® that in the time of the Senas (Xlth-XIIth centuries), under 
the pressure of Muhammadan invasion, many learned doctors and disciples 
fled from Magadha to Pagan, Cambodia and other lands (P. 255) ; that very 
early. Buddhism, especially Mah5y5na Buddhism, spread over the Koki land, 
in which he includes, among other places Pagan, Arakan and Haiiisavati 
(Pegu). This mention of Mah3y5nism as being extant at Pagan is particularly 
interesting, because it is corroborated by votive tablets found at Pagan, as well 
as frescoes, some stone carvings, and bronze statuettes (among which are figures 
of Avalokite^vara and one of T5r5), the Mahiyinist character of which is 
unmistakable. It is corroborated also, though only indirectly, by the Burme.se 
chronicles. 

This rapid aper^u,* divested of all speculation, however plausible, and based 


> Dipavatiiltt. vni, 12 ; MabAvamfo, XII, 6. 44. 

^ K<*rn, Hi^toire du Buddhiftmfi darut I* hidr, 11, p. 280; V. iSmith, Asoka's alleged misJtian to Pegu^ 
Indian Antiquary, 1905, p. 180 

* I.,. Kincit, opus^eit. 

* Which he writes indifferently Pukant, Pukham and Pukhang. 

* ? Sil^ditya^Hamha Vardbana, VJIth oontury A.D. 

* For a more developed sketch, f oo Taw Sein Ko’g Burmestt SketcUit, p. 170. 



THE ARi OF BURMA AND TANTRIC BUDDHISM. 


81 


only on such meagre written documents as are now available,* brings us 

up to the Xlth century, and to the subject of our enquiry — the Ari. Up 
to this time and for the same reason, namely, the total absence in Burma of 
any written documents, the political history of the country is but little known, 
though somewhat better, it is true, than the religious one ; and we owe this 
knowledge again, apart from the native traditions, to ChinesQ, Arab and Indian 
sources.® This has been called the pre-hLstoric period of Burma, in contra- 

distinction to that which follows, in which we are treading on firm historical 
ground, and in respect of which we possess a variety of monuments, sculptures, 
paintings and inscriptions, which enable us to check the statements made 

in the Burmese histories. 

The career of Pagan as a great political power opens suddenly in 1057 
A.D., in the reign of king Anorata (1044-1077), by the destruction of some 
Indian settlements on the seashore and the sack of Thaton, the capital of the 
Talaing country or Lower Burma. The histories of the two countries, Burmese 
and Talaing,® agree in the essential points, and tell us^ that Anorata, after 

the sack of the city, carried away to the Burmese capital many sets of the 
Pali scriptures and their commentaries, as well as a largo number of the most 
learned monks. This was the beginnitig of the establishment, at Pagan, of 
the Hinayanism of Ceylon, which had been imported into Thaton at some unde- 
termined date prior to this event. The Burmese chronicles go on to say that, 
before this time. Buddhism did not exist at Pagan.* This is merely a sectarian 
endeavour to make the nation forget that there had once existed at Pagan a 
Buddhist sect, outside the pale of Singhalese Hinayanism, and very strongly 
tainted with grossly immoral practices which were repulsive to the purer faith 
they now professed. They ignored a whole phase of distasteful religious develop- 
ment by shortly stating that the religion of the Ari with an admixture of naga 
worship held supreme sway in the land.® Burmese histories,® no doubt pur- 
posely, tell us practically nothing about these Ari ; and the only two manu- 
scripts which purport to treat exclusively of them, are merely a collection of 
the short notices found in the chronicles, interspersed with the compilers’ own 
reflections, and throw no further light on this sect. This dearth of information 
is reflected in the .several opinions of Orientalists who have touched on the 
subject. Phayre says “ they lived in monasteries like Buddhist monks and 
their practices resembled those attributed to the votaries of the sect of Vamacharis 


* Tho works montioned in tho pnwious notes are tliose that give the most exact informations. 

* Parker’s Burnut \ Pelliot, "" Deur itinhraires de Chine enlnde*' in B. E. F. E.-O. 1904, l.‘il, a very 
interesting and important work; Ferrand, Rdations de x^oyages ei Uxiea gfographiguea relatifs d V Extreme 
Orient,"* under “ P6gou ” in index; V. Smith, ** Early History of India,'' 3n! edit., p. 466. 

* Mhan^nan Mahdrdjtivaxi to krt, tho standard history of Burma, and several others in manuscrijit. 
Tho Talaing history DhatnmocheA p. 12, places this event hi 1056 A.l)., the Burmeso in 1057. 

^Soe Pictorial rejrreuniatiom of Jdtakas in Burmo, in ArohieologieHl Survey of India, 1912.13, 
p, 87. 

•Tho Talaing chronicle, opus.eit. simply states that tho monks then at Pagan were alijjt, shameless, 
and that Anorata followed theiiv toaolung. 

* It must be remembered these i^ere compiled from old records at a time when rol gious unity had 
boon attained and the subject ot the Ari was unpleasant. 



82 


AKCH.SOLOGICAL REPORT, 1916-16. 


in Bengal ; he does not seem to think that they were Buddhist in any sense 
of the term. M. Louis Finot" thinks that Vislmu was the dewUA of the Ari, and 
that their cultus was a purely indigenous and savage one, though dignified 
by some Indian forms ; he too does not see in them Buddhist monks, even 
of a lax and degraded sect ; he doubts also whether they were in the least 
affected by Saivisgi. Others have thought they must have been a Mahayanist 
sect, fallen away from the primitive teaching at the time of its introduction 
at Pagan, and strongly influenced by the Naga worship, Tantrism and Saivism,* 
Up to the present year, no archaeological find of any kind had been made 
which might help in deciding whether or no these Ari were Buddhists and 
what was the character of their cultus. But a discovery has now fortunately 
been made which gives us some insight into this much discussed question. 

Min-nan-thu, a small locality not quite five miles to the north-east of Pagan, is 
full of interest. It is covered with rather extensive ruins, among which are those 
of a number of brick monasteries and temples, with various interesting archi- 
tectural features. The principal interest of this locality, however, is to be 
found in the stone and pla.ster carvings and in the frescoes which adorn not 
a few' of the temples and monasteries, and many of which are distinctly Maha- 
yjlnist and Tantric in character. Min-nan-thu was no doubt one of the strong- 
holds of some sect of Northern Buddhism, and this is borne out by the fact 
that it is only about one mile distant from Thamati, which latter was, accerding 
to all traditions and histories, the place in which the so-called Ari religion arose 
and endured for many centuries. Among the Min-nan-thu ruins is that of a 
temple now known as Paya-thon-zu, the date of which is not known, for no 
mention of it is found either in the inscriptions or in the chronicles. Its name, 
which signifies “ The Three-Temples,” has been given it because it consists 
of three distinct small square buildings with vaulted corridors and porticoes, 
joined together by two vaulted narrow passages leading from the one into the 
other (PI. XLVIIIa). This is a unique feature in Burma. The interior walls 
of the corridors and the roofs are covered with frescoes which are amongst 
the best executed and preserved in Pagan. Moreover, the subjects of these 
paintings are quite peculiar and unlike any others as yet found. Shortly, they 
represent that phase of religion, so much abhorred later, when the TheravSda 
school of Ceylon had been firmly established at Pagan, the priests of which 
were the Ari. All the accompanying plates are photographs of frescoes in 
this temple. A few hundred yards away, there is another temple, the Nanda* 
manna, clo.se by a brick monastery, and also decorated with similar paintings ; 
but whereas the Min-nan-thu frescoes, though suggestive, have nothing in them 
particularly offensive ; some in the NandamafinS are of a character so vulgarly 
erotic and revolting, that they can neither be reproduced nor described. The 
character of all these paintings tallies exactly with oral tradition and with what 


^ Phayre’s HtBiory oj Burvm, p. 33, 

125, 126. 

* E. Huber, A E. F. iUOO, p. 584 ; Taw »Seiii Ko o/nw. ciL ; Chaa. Duroiselle, Journal o/ (he Burma 
Research Society ^ 1911, Vol. J, Part 1, p, 126. 




THE ARi OP BURMA AND TANTRIC BUDDHISM. 8^ 

the histories vouchsafe to tell us about the Ari practices ; as a matter of 
fact, those practices have not, at least in some parts of Burma, quite dis- 
appeared, as we shall see later on. An inscription in Burmese was found near 
the Nandamafinfi temple, which had been originally erected within the precincts 
of the dionastery near by. It is dated 610 Burmese Era= 1^8 A.D.* ; though 
it is the original .stone, it is the record of an event which took place some 
time previously, but the exact date of which is not recorded in it. The ori- 
ginal document, referred to in the inscription, must have been composed long 
before, as it is clear from internal evidence. It is there said that Narapati- 
sithu, otherwise known as Alaungsithu, who ascended the tlxrone in 1112, urged 
one of his ministers to build this temple and the monastery clo.se by ; and that 
he, the king, sent Shin Arahan, the Taking apostle of Pagan, to Tenaa.serim. 
Now, Shin Arahan began hi.s work of evangelization in 1057 ; supposing him 
to have then been, at the lowest estimate, twenty years of age, he would, 
at the date of accession of Alaung.sithu (1112), have been already seventy-five. 
So his mission to Tenasserim, an arduous journey at that time, cannot have 
been long after that. Hence the foundation of the Nandamanna can be placed 
somewhere between 1112 and 1130 at the latest, allowing the venerable monk 
a span of life of about ninety-five years.’® Considering that the paintings of 
Nandamafinfi and of Paya-thon-zu are identical in technique and character, we 
shall not be far out of our reckoning in attributing about the same date to the 
latter as to the former. The most interesting part of, the inscription is the 
passage in which it is prescribed that, out of the revenues of the lands dedicated 
to the temple, the inmates of the monastery shall be daily provided with rice, 
meat and fermented spirits twice a day, morning and evening. This detail is 
important, in that it clearly shows that the inmates were not HinaySnists ; 
for the rules of the latter strictly forbid food after twelve in the day, and 
they hold the use of spirits, except when pre.scribed in a case of sickne.s.s, 
in abhorrence. The actual word “ Ari ” does not occur in the inscription ; but 

considering that the locality has always been de.scribed as the home of the Ari, 

the erotic character of the paintings in the two temple.s, and the mention of 
meat and spirits to be provided morning and evening, there cannot be the 

least doubt that this monastery as well as the numerous others scattered 

about, were the homes of that mysterious sect. The very omission of their 
name further shows that the Ari were then recognized as a long standing and 
matter-of-fact institution ; furthermore, the building of monasteries and temples 
and the providing of more than the usual necessaries of monkish life for their 
use, is a proof that, far from having been exterminated by king Anorata 
in 1067, as we are told, they were held, on the contrary, in high esteem, 

not only among the people, but also at the court. Another point worthy of 

remark is that contrary to all we are told in the chronicles about the intense 
enmity between the Ari and the professors of the newly implanted Theravada 

^ Inscriptions of Pagan^ Pinya an^ p. 250. 

•The Mhan-mn^ 1, 333, places thtj death of Shin Arahan in the reign of AlaungHilhu which tallicM 

with our inscription, but gives no date. 

3 ) 2 



84 


ARCHEOLOGICAL RBPORT, 1015*16. 


faith from Thatoii, the two communities seem to have lived on a footing of 
amity ; for, as the inscription tells us, Shin Arahan, the staunch TheravfidI, 
gees to Tenasserim in Lower Burma to bring back a Buddha*relic for enshrine* 
ment in the Nandamahfia, an avowedly Ari temple. The fact no doubt 
is that, at Pagan as well as in India and elsewhere, MahaySnism and HlhaySnism, 
at that period and probably long after, lived peaceably side by side, as 
I-tsing and TSranatha tell us was the case.* 

As has been seen, the frescoes foimd at Min*nan*tha are of the early part 
of the Xllth century ; but they certainly do not hold good for that period only, 
and they certainly represent a much older order of things; careful search will 
no doubt bring to light others of the same kind and older. The question 
whether the Ari were Buddhists or not, is settled by the character of the two 
temples mentioned above ; they arc Buddhist places of worship ; in each case, 
the cella contains a figure of the Buddha seated in the hhUmisparia attitude ; 
on the walls and ceilings, numerous Buddhas in divers attitudes are painted 
promiscuously with the other figures and whole series of Buddhas, surrounded 
by saints, are depicted on the roofs (PI. XLVIII*J). In the NandamaSnS, a standing 
Buddha, in the varada-mudm, or gesture of charity, is actually accompanied 
by his Sakti, T5ra. Thus, not only do we know they were Buddhists, but 
the presence of TSra indicates that they were Mahayftnists. A remarkable, thing 
about this iSakti is that, whereas the Buddha has Indian features, she looks 
like a Burmese wonjfin standing in a rather voluptuous attitude ; her 
right arm, invisible, seems to be embracing the Buddha behind. Had all these 
figures been absent, the riddle of the Ari would still have been unsolved ; for, 
as will be seen from the plates, there is nothing in the other figures to suggest 
they are Buddhist rather than Hindu. 

But from what can be gathered from oral tradition and the documents, 
the Ari were .something more than mere Buddhists ; they appear to have been 
the priests of some kind of Naga worship as well as the Shamans who presided 
over the ceremonies of the indigenous Nat-worship and the animal sacrifices 
and (frinking-bouts connected therewith. About the existence, at an early period 
of Mahayinism in Upper and Central Burma, there can be no doubt; this is 
attested by Tibetan sources.* The exact date of its introduction into these 

regions it is impossible to fix with any degree of certainty ; but it may with 

some probability be placed, according to the general consensus of opinion, some- 
where in the fourth or fifth century A.D. The route followed from northern 
and north*eastern India was by way of Assam and Manipur on one side and 
through Arakan on the other. This is confirmed by the Burmese chronicles, which 
mention several immigrations from Northern India at an early time, one of 
which was respon.sible for the foundation of the city of Tagoung, on the Irra- 
waddy, about one hundred miles above Mandalay, the site of which is still 
covered with extensive ruins. This Tagoung is now generally believed to be 

^ Takakudu« opus,eitf pp, XXTI, 14) 51 ;* T&ranftthft, p. 262* 

• Tiranfitha ; The Land of Snow, 




THE ABI op BURMA AND TANTRIC BUDDHISM. 86 

the Tugma of Ptolemy.^ The same route was still followed in the XVIIth century by 
Persian and other traders.* The Mhan Nan* (vide foot note No. 3, p. 81) vaguely 
records the fact that for an undetermined period, up to the Vlth century A.D., 
some form of Buddhism existed at Pagan* which, from that time, gradually 
deteriorated almost past recognition up to the beginning of the Xth century, 
the period at which the execrated Ari worship had become Absolutely supreme 
in the land. We are told that, at the beginning of the Vlth century,® king 
Thaiktain shifted his capital from Thiyipyissaya (SlripachchayS) to a place called 
Thamati, a few miles to the east, which he renamed Tampavati. He is credited 
with having introduced the Naga worship at Thamati, and it is from this time 
that mention of the Ari in connection with this worship begins. Is this worship 
to be connected with Buddhism or was it simply a native cult ? Probably jt 
was a compound of both. That snake-worship is a very ancient cult found 
in many countries, is well known ; in the Burmese legends, as well as in those 
of India, the snake is often a genius loci; the NSgas had also a prominent 
place in Buddhism, both Southern and Northern, as is attested by the texts, 
the sculptures and the paintings. The Ari, who, besides professing some form 
of Buddhism, were also the priests of the local worship, would naturally connect 
the Buddhist Naga with the local snake. Plate Lla shows us two Naga kings 
in the act of adoring the Master, which will be recognized at once as a familiar 
Buddhist conception. PI. Lllla shows a large snake behind a squatting 
monster with human body flanked by two dragons. This, as well as the winged 
serpents not uncommon among these frescoes, may be ^referred to the local 
worship as distinct from the Nagas of Buddhism. Old popular legends about 
snakes and dragons are numerous in Burma, as they are, in fact, ovei- all Indo- 
China. Traces of Vishnu worship have been found at Tliaton, Prome and Pagan 
in the form of sculptures and statuettes, also in the name of several cities.® 
Vishnu moreover, was revered up to the annexation of Upper Burma (1885) 
at great regal ceremonies, such as the king’s coronation, the piercing of the 
ears of princesses, etc. ; but this was due to the presence of pumuls or brahmans, 
who were always considered indispensable at Burmese courts for the Moper 
performance of those ceremonies. On the other hand, there is no evidence 


* Phayre’s Hktory^ p. I // ; Stuart*8 Burma through the (Jtiituries, oh. 1 ; Taw Soin Ko, r,lt. 

* Fcrrand, Vol. IT, 5/J6*57, whero an itinerary from India through A.ssHin to Rurma i.s 

-doscribod (1663) . 

» Vol. 1, 252. 

* By “ Pa^an ” in connootion with the earlier period of Burmeso hiatory, mu.st l>o underjitood, in most 
Euroj)ean authors and TaranUtha, Central Burma, and the principalities which were c-stablishtni at various 
places around the site of the modern Pagan. The latter, as a matter of fatd, was founded only in 849 
A.D., and became generally known by this name to neighbouring countries, (‘'hinese and others, only in 
the XI th or Xllth century, 

‘The Mhan^mn .(1,241) gives an exact date: 438, Saka Era— 516 A.D.; considering that the chronicles, 
written more than a thousand years afterwards, base themselves, for the early cimturics, solely on tradi- 
tion, these exact dates must be accepted with some reservation. The centuries given arc, however, pro- 
bably near the truth, for several arc found to tally with contemporary events in India. 

•Old Prome was known Bissano-Myo (-Vishoupura) ; .so also Taungdwin, foundinl in 857, and 
which was called also R&mavatf, after jRUma, the seventh incarnation of Vishnu; but Bissano and Ramavati 
were qui i-classioal appellations, and the town was always and is still popularly known as Taungdwin. 



86 


ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT, 1915-16. 


whatsoever, in the monuments, the inscriptions or the literature, to warrant 
the assumption that the worship of Vishnu ever struck root among the people 
or that it was popular in Burma. It was only the faith of Indian traders 
and settlers and of some of the Indian royal astrologers at the court. Probably, 
therefore, it was not associated with snake-worship in Burma. It is <also very 
probable that in %he matter of snake-worship Central Burma may also have 
been .strongly influenced by Manipm, which, under the name of N&gasyanta 
and Nagapura, is, in some Sanskrit works, mentioned as the reputed centre 
of Naga-worship.* The chronicles give us to understand that, during the four 
centuries which followed the introduction of snake-worship in Thamatl, the 
influence and power of the Ari gradually developed, until, at the dawn of the 
Xtli century, the Ari held all the people and the court under their spiritual 
sway. It is said that at that time king Sorahan (931-964),* an ancient 
gardener and usurper,* set up a dragon in a garden, which was an object of 
worship to the people and before which were placed offerings of meat and 
spirituous drinks. The Ari, it is stated, were the priests of this worship. This 
clearly has nothmg to do with Buddhism proper, nor did it disappear with the 
persecution of king Anorata a century later ; witness the beautiful Naga-yon 
temple, whose foundation at the end of the 11th century, as its name indicates, 
is connected with a snake-story. In fact, it has left lasting vestiges which 
can easily be traced even now. “ The European and the Burraan of to-day, who 
opens his eyes, can easily see that the NSga has not yet been stamped out, 
of the national art at* least, for the Nfiga is to be seen ever 3 rwhere in Burma, 
artistically, but not very much transformed, in every carving of the pagodas, 
at the extremity of the common carts and in pictures and frames. The ob- 
servant reader will easily detect the cobra (n3ga) everywhere on the platform 
of the Shwedagon at Rangoon. In this reign, also, and under the king’s 
patronage, the Ari built five temples, only one of which, the Patothamya, is 
.still extant. These temples are said to have been built on the model of those 
of Prome and Thaton. Several others followed, and this activity appears to 
heral^that architectural fever of four score years later which covered the land 
with a multitude of pagodas. 

It is only when we come to Anorata (1044-1077), that is, not quite a century 


^ .l)iJroiH(‘lle» ojm9. cit,, p. 126 ; Taw Sein Ko, opus, cit, p. 181. 

* ^fhan-nnn, l» 250. The interesting eventn, relating to archiU^ctiiro and religion reconled as fiaring 
taken place during this reign, are doubtless worthy of oredenoe* for with the foundation of Pagan it may 
be said we stand on the threshold of the |)o1itical importance of Upper Burma ; moreover, from the Vlllth 
century and coinciding with the stea^ly decline of Buddhism in India an intense religious intercourse 
between thie latter country and Lower and Central Burma was established ; numerous bhikshus passed 
through on their way to countries further to the east and south-east, and many established themselves 
at Prome, Thaton and Pagan, bringing with them tlieir ideals and learning. Then, again, the events con- 
nected with Sorahan took place barely a century l>efore the Burmese language became the medium of written 
riHiords. And last, but far from least, as the record of some of these events go<»s directly against 
national vanity and above all against sectarian bigotry, this evidently impartial record has a strong claim 
to the credence of tlie historian, 

* For an interesting parallel between this gardener] who became a king and a strikingly similar Oam*^ 

bodian story, see E. Huboi*» B, B, F, 1905, 176. • 

* Buroisolle, opus, ci7„ p. 128. 



THE ABf OP BURMA AND XiNTBIC BUDDHISM. 87 

after Sorahan, that we learn something more about the Ari, their dress, their mode 
of living, their doctrines and practices. As has already been said above, the 
documents tell us, unfortunately, but little about their practices^ but now some- 
thing further can be deduced from the frescoes of the Paya-thon-zu and Nanda- 
mahflS tgmples, which speak for themselves and clearly indicate certain in- 
fluences from India, which, it was known indeed, must have been felt at Pagan, 
but of which there was hitherto no actual and visible proof. Anorata was 
the instrument of a great religious reform in Pagan, for it is through him, 
with the help of Shin Arahan, a bhikshu from Lower Burma, whose likeness 
in stone is still to be seen in the Ananda temple, that Hinayanism was in- 
troduced into his capital in 1057, after the destruction of Thaton, and thence 
rapidly spread all over Upper Burma. He is represented as much dissatisfied 
with the doctrines and ways of the Ari, and as longing for a purer faith. The 
Ari arc said to have numbered sixty thousand with thirty abbois at their head. 
They wore a robe dyed with indigo, resembling that of the Lamas of Tibet 
and China,* and we are told of a him robe order of Tantric monks in Tibet 
who “ preached immorality and obscene doctrine.”* The similarity in coloiu* 
is striking and cannot but be attributed to Tibetan influence through Northern 
India. They kept their hair four finger-breadths long ; they lived in large 
monasteries, the ruins of some of which are still to be seen a few miles to the 
south-east of Pagan ; were addicted to much drinking ; and were not observant 
of monastic celibacy. The tise of meat and spirituous drinks for themselves 
and in their ceremonies, and their incontineticy, recalling the five m’« (makaras), 
the five requisites for T intra worship,* point to Tantrisra. In the VHI — VTIIth 
century, Buddhi.sm wa.s already declining in Iiidia, and becoming tainted 
with Tantric ideas ; sects arose in Bengal and Nepal, like the Vajray5na and 
the Sahajiyas, who practi.sed gross immorality ; and the influence of the Sukt} 
cult in its most revolting form was making itself felt everywhere. It is also 
about this time that a great religious intercourse between Bengal, where there were 
several celebrated Buddhist Tantric monasteries, and Northern India with Burma was 
established. It is owing to the.se influences that Tantrism, as practi.sed by the 
All, became establi-shed at Pagan. The frescoes from the Paya-thon-zu repro- 
duced here are, it will be remarked, quite Tantric in character, and the 
personages are distinctly Indian, as is clear from their dress {e.g., the two 
women in tight short bodices in PI. LI. h), and the mode of doing the hair and 
the large ornaments in the distended ear-lobes. They mostly repre.sent a man, 
probably a Bodhisattva, embracing two women in voluptuous attitudes, in some 
•ca.ses half naked, and sometimes with a suggestive gesture of the hand. As already 
hinted above, there are some fre.scoes of .so vulgar and gros.sly immoral a nature 
as to preclude any description. The central figures in the groups on the right 
hand of plates XLIX a and L a are interesting, becau.se they seem to be Burme.se 

^ Taw Sein Ko, optts, ci/., 182. 

‘ S. 8 Chandra Das, 56. 

* That is: (1) madya, intoxicants ; *(2) flesh ; (H) Hsh ; (4) mndm, mystic positiona of 

the hands aud (5) maithum, sexual intercourse. 



88 ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT, 1916-16. 

like the T&rA already mentioned in comiection with a fresco in the Nandamafifi&r 
and this promiscuity of Indian and Burmese (?) figures shows that these left-hand 
{v&macdri) practices, though in their remote origins Indian, had been thoroughly 
absorbed by the Burmese Ari. PI. L, b represents a deity with eight arms. 

It is not possible to identify exactly who this personage is ; « that he 
is a Boddhisattva is shewn by his head-dress and the stylized lotus flowers 
he is holding in two hands ; in two other hands, he is holding what looka 

like a piece of cloth, for it is certainly not the “ pustaka ” or book of 

Avalokitesvara ; tw'o hands are brought back before the breast in a peculiar 
tntidrd ; the two lowest hands are empty. There is nothing to allow exact 

identification. In the NandamannS is another figure with ten arms, the hauda 
of which are all empty. PI. LII, b repreifents a non-descript monster, in the 
manner of those so dear to Lamaism ; it has the head of an elephant, with 
one eye on each thigh and looks like a grotesque image of Ga^esa. From its 
back, on each side, springs a nftga, whose neck is embraced by a lion 
and, lower down, by a goblin. There is nothing* particularly Buddhist, and 
little that is Hindu about this figure, unless, indeed, we see Ganesa 
in the central figure. Possibly this fresco belongs to the peculiar indigenous 
pantheon of the Ari, as influenced by Hinduism. In PI. LII, a the central 
figure is a bilu (ogress), similar representations to which are still to be seen 
among the carvings of some temples and monasteries ; she is flanked by 
two elephants on which are disporting two goblins. PI. LIII, b, a leogriph 
on a caparisoned elephant, is one of the best paintings in the Paya- 
thon-zu ; it is beautifully preserved and forms a very fine motif for 
decoration. 

That the Ari, at the same time Buddhists, Shamans and Ssktas, were 
addicted to the grossest immorality, is therefore confirmed, not only by tradi- 
tion, but by their temples theuLselves. Besides the sexual aberrations derived 
from Tantric influence, they had the right to a kind of jus primae noctis, which, 
if we read between the lines, was in the end the means of their undoing ; for 

this privilege does not appear to have survived the persecution of the Ari 

initiated by Anorata in the Xlth century. Probably it was this practice to 
which the king took particular objection, for even the highest in the land were 
not exempt from it. On the eve of a marriage, the young bride, whatever her 
rank, peasant or princess, had to be brought in the evening to an Ari, monastery, 
where she was deflowered by the pious men, and sent back in the morning 

to her bridegroom. This custom is purely a native one ; it was not, in fact, 
confined to Burma. With slight differences^n preliminary ceremonial it was 
known of yore in Cambodia, Siam and the Laos. In Cambodia, the practice 
was called by the Chinese chen-tdn. At a fixed period each year, the time 

of the chen-tdn was officially announced, and the parents of girls who had te 
go through it had to give notice to the officials. The lattet gave the girl a 
taper, on which was made a mark ; “ on the appointed day, at night, the taper 
is lit, and when it has burned down to the marl^, tbe moment of the chen-t&n 
is come The parents choose a monk either Buddhist or Taoist, according 



THE A»I OF BUBMA AND TANTRIC BUDDHISM. 89 

Rs they live nearer the temple of one or the other sect.” * In Siam, according 
to the Chinese document which records the custom, “ The monks go to meet 
the bridegroom; arrived at the house of the bride, one of them deflowers her, 
and makes a red mark on the forehead of the young man ; this is called Li 
If appears that the bhikshus of the Laos, one of whose privileges was, 
according to custom, to perform a similar ceremony, were very lax Tn their morals.* A 
strange custom, which in Burma is popularly referred to as a remnant of 
Ari practices, is still extant among the Khamti Shans, on the Upper Irrawaddy, 
who are Buddhists. It is thus described by an eyewitness. The monks have 
to observe the lenten season very rigorously ; the people themselves see to that, 
and provide them with all that is necessary. They are not allowed to leave 
their dwelling. At the end of the period, all the young girls in the locality are 
drawn up in a line, the upper part of their body bare ; a monk passes along 
the line ; this is called the “ breast-offering.” He designates the one who 
pleases him by touching her breasts ; she follows him to his monastery and 
lives with him till the next lenten season comes round, at the end of which 
the ceremony is repeated. The young lady thus chosen is much honoured by 
the people and so is the offspring, if any. It may be remarked that, among 
the Burmese, the Shan monks in general are regarded with little favour ; they 
arc s^id to be very lax as to the observance of their vow of chastity, and this 
laxity is ascribed to lingering Ari influences. Such practices, in any form, .seem 
to have been long extinct among the Burmese. 

As priests, properly so called, of the indigenous Nat- worship, the Ar* 
officiated at the extensive animal sacrifices which yearly took place- at Pagan 
and at Mount Poppa, the sacred mountain. The king, his queens and the 
people, preceded by the Ari, repaired to the appointed temple or temples and 
there large numbers of white buffaloes, goats and fowls were sacrificed, and their 
heads cut off and hung in festoons between the pillars of the temples. A 
characteristic of these festivals was the vast amount of spirits imbibed by everyone 
from the king downward, the priests included. Such bloody .sacrifices, but on 
a much smaller scale, seem to have lasted for a long time after king Anorata ; 
for mention of them is made in several inscriptions, in which it is said that, at 
the dedication of a pagoda or temple, animals were killed and toddy offered.* 
In remote places they seem to have endured even up to the XIXth century. 
Sir Arthur Phayre says “ I have seen, in a remote part of Burma an idol 
placed in a small hollow temple in the midst of a secluded jungle, to which 
buffaloes and other animals were^acrificed by the surrounding Buddhist popula- 
tion.”* These bloody sacrifices may be consfdered as belonging to the 
aboriginal cult, which, as we have seen, existed along with, if it was not to 

» PelHot, B i. jp. j^d, 1902, 164. 

• ibid. ^ 

*ibid. M. Finot, opus. eif,p 127, in inclinoil to think thi« custom was not a “ droit do jambage ” pr.".* 
perly said, but a ritual oeromony independent of any Indian influence, and that it originated probably froni 
a seaual taboo caused by the fear of blood* He is no doubt right. 

^See, lor instance, Inscriptions of Paffan, Panya and p. 293, an inscription found at Thaniatf, 
dated 1302* 

^ Bistcry of Burmap p. 21, note 2, 



■90 


ARCHEOLOGICAL REPORT, 1915-16. 


a great extent amalgamated in the Tantric Buddhism of the Ari ; for it must 
be borne in mind that in Burma as well as in other parts of Indo-China, notions 
purely Indian, belonging to whatever religion, did not displace the beliefs already 
extant in the countries which they penetrated. The adaptability of Hinduism 
and Buddhism in this respect are well known. In Burma, the long established 
native cults followed their own course side by side with the imported religion, 
both, as is patent in the case of the Ari, influencing each other to a greater or 
less degree.' Such was the case in Champa and elsewhere ; “ it is sufficient 
to point out the agrarian rites, of which traces still exist, among the Malais, 
the sacred interdictions (tabun), which appear, as this word indicates, to be 
borrowed from Polynesian religions ; the sacrifices of buflaloes offered likewise 
by. the Nepalese and the aboriginals of Indo-China.”* The influence of Saivism 
in connection with these bloody sacrifices may, therefore, be rejected. More- 
over, only very feeble traces of Saivism have, at least up to the present, been 
found in Burma ; no litiga, for instance, nor anything that could irrefutably 
be proved to be a linga, has yet been discovered — a fact which alone goes far to prove 
the comparatively small head-way made by this cult in this cotmtry. Siva, as 
Mahesvara, is mentioned as one of the deities who presided at the foundation 
of Sarekkhetara (old Prome) ; but it is now agreed on all hands that this city 
was founded by a small colony of Indians from southern India, who would, 
as a matter of course, bring with them their ishtd devatd. One or two coins 
have been found with, possibly, a few traces of Saivism ; but the • only certain 

trace of Saivism in Pagan is a statue of Siva about four feet high in the late 

medimval style, which was originally found near a Vaishnava temple erected 
between the XTth and Xlllth centuries,* and a few small figures of Ganesa of 
the same period. As Vishnu, so also i5iva was revered, through the influence 
of the Indian royal astrologers, at great court ceremonies,* but on no other 
occasions, and did not affect the people at large. In short Saivism was not 
unknown in Burma, but never attained the status of a popular religion, even 
in a small degree ; and there is nothing in tradition, oral or written, to authorize 
the assumption that these animal sacrifices were the outcome of Saivite ideas. 

The Ari preached the remission of sins through the recitation of certain 
texts. ” Whoever commits murder, of father, mother, etc., is absolved by the 

recitation of this or that suUa” * and so on through a long series of crimes 

and misdeeds ; it is also hinted that payment to them in kind, according to a 
paded scale, did much to relieve the offendera from the consequences of their 
crimes in the next world. This highly pernicipus doctrine could not but find 
some favour at an oriental court, where human life, especially when it stood 
in the way of ambition and power, was accounted so little. Nothing else is 
mentioned of their peculiar doctrines. The mention of suUas points to their 

* Buddhifiin hus not ywt, for instance, diaplacod Xat-worship, which in rite throt^oqt Burma, and 
not yet from groM8 JicentiouAneH^, at least in many localities. 

* Cabaton, “ NmveUfs rechtreheH sur les ChatMy ” p. 49. 

* Vide, if. 8, /. Annual Reporte, 1912-13p p, 137. 

* Cf, p. 85 above. 

^ CU a )80 SiaamvadMa, Pali ToxtB Society, p. 56. 



THE ABI of BURMA AND TInTRIC BUDDHISM. 9r 

bavinl^had some kind of sacred books ; and, seeing that they were MahSyfinists, these 
books mwt] have been in Sanskrit. Whatever they may have been, their names 
have unhappily not been preserved. Tradition, however, mentions one, still 
extant in Burmese garb under the title of Adikappa (adikalpa),* said to hav^ 
been trani^&l^ compiled from Ari works. It is a collection of short 
chapters on quasi-Buddhist cosmogony, the description of some devatft and 
other beings, etc., which does not furnish an iota of new information about the 
sect. It is also said, but less affirmatively, that the Ari used the Buddha 
Purdva, a work now very rare and “interesting for the study of Nepalese 
Buddhism.” * This Nepalese Pur&na is no doubt the same as that reputed 
to have been in use among the Ar!. It is to be regretted that the paucity of 
information as to the exact tenets of the Ari precludes at present the possibility 
of establishing by comparing them with the contents of the Buddha Purfina, 
a direct intercourse between Nepal and Burma : intercourse which is otherwi.se 
traceable in some elements of Burmese architecture.’ There are widely read 
in Burma books known under the generic name of “ Loki-zfi,” about fifteen 
or twenty in number. Their principal interest lies in the fact that they contain 
a very large amount of matter not only foreign, but repugnant to theTherav&da 
Buddhism introduced in the 11th century by Anorata. It is a medley of 
alchemical recipes, of formulae for the discovery of the chintamani, or philoso- 
pher’s htone, of yogi precepts for the attainment of siddhi or magical powers, 
of popular medicine and wanton rules based on the kdmasiUras, all of which 
ideas are of a distinctly TS,ntric character, among them being embedded a vast 
amount of purely indigenous superstition and old time customs not to be found 
anywhere else. These works also are referred to as based on Ari teachings, 
so that the influence of these strange followers of the Buddha is making itself 
strongly felt even at the present day. This is borne out by the story of 
Ajjagona, the only Ari whose name has been preserved and popularly known 
as the “ Great Ari.” He is reputed to have found the philosopher’s stone and 
to have thereby produced a vast amount of gold which enriched the country. 
He has become, so to say, the patron saint of modern Burmese alchemi.sts. 

As a matter of fact, the Ari did not, as the chronicles would give us to 
understand, completely disappear after their persecution by Anorata in the mid- 
eleventh century. Of this we have a proof in the inscription of the 
NandamaMi temple above mentioned. The effects of this persecution were 
merely of a temporary nature, since, at the beginning of the Xllth century, 
they flourished at Min-nan-thu, and had temples and monasteries built for them 
by the kii^ and his ministers. 'Anorata’s persecution, on the contrary, had 
the unexpected result of spreading the sect in remote parts of Burma, and its 
remnants, though not styled Ari, are still existent among a large number of 
Shan monks, ajjiong whom the original doctrine has been forgotten, though the 

* The longer tiue is : Adihappahambh/l-^kyam. 

•Sylrain L6vi, Lt Nipal, Vol. J, p. 117, a yery short nnalyeis of it is found in the same vohinm p. 
372 and continued at p. 861. 

Ntfol, I, 249 ; A. Barth in B. E, F. E-0, p. 83 ; F. Benoit, L’Arckiteeture : L’Oritni 
Mtdiivai el Moitrn, p. 408. 

M 2 



92 


ARCHJEOLOGICAL REPORT, 1915-16. 


characteristic laxity of morals has persisted. Amongst the Burmese tbei^selves 
at the Burmese capitals and other places of some importance, a degenerate 
form of Arl .may be said to have lasted well into the XVIIIth century ; the 
Tnanuscripts of the Ari seem to have disappeared, as well as the right to the 
jus frame noctis, the animal sacrifices and the easy doctrine about t!(je remission 
of sins ; but thp spirit of the old sect survived in the love of good cheer, 
copious drinking and women. The greatest part of this transformation is no 
doubt due to the great religious reformation of Buddhism carried out in the 
XVth century by king Dhammaceti, as recorded in the Ealyani inscriptions.* 

The last mention by name of the Ari belongs to the opening years 
of the XIVth century, the scene now being Pinya, near Ava, where a now dynasty 
had just been founded after the fall of Fagan had been brought about by the 
hordes of Kubilai Khan. It is recorded that a number of Ari took service 
with prince So-yun — a statement which calls to mind the warlike bishops and 
monks of the Middle Ages in Europe. We know from an inscription of king 
Sinbyushin, dated 1557 A.D., that the severest blow dealt to these old practices 
was the prohibition by royal edict of all offerings of intoxicants and animal 
sacrifices to the Nats.** From this tim downwards, the name Ari® drops out 
of daily use, and an expression, equivalent to “ boxing-monks ” takes its place ; 
these boxing-monks are often referred to as Arl-gyl-do-anhvai/, that is, the 
“ Descendants of the Great Ari.” They were numerous at Pinya, Ava and 
Sagaing and seem to have been well patronized by the sovereigns. They were 
so called owing to their love of sports, e.specially boxing, of which they gave 
public exhibitions. They set all monastic rules at nought, were great drinkers, 

and had a weakness for the other sex ; they kept their hair about two inches 
long, wore a kind of cylindrical hat and robes of a colour not orthodox ; they 

dabbled in alchemy and popular medicine, and were reciters, for a coirsidera- 
tion, of mantras ; they sold amulets and recipes for the attainment of magical 
powers ; and they bred, rode and sold horses and exercised them.selves in the use 
of arms. They were powerful at Ava in the XVth century, in the reign of king 

* Taw Soin Ko, " Kalydni ItiMcriptiom, Text and TransUttion^^' Hangoon» 1892. 

* A strange cust^im, alnmst amounting to huinan sacrifice's, is r<»corded in the Vohdmtinatthadlpani 

p. 02. It is said that, when the rains were scarce — a pretty frequent occurrence in Ctnitral and Upper 
Burma — a j>i»st was plan' e<] in the river so that its mimmit was fiftwui or twenty feet above the waf^r . 
below was spread a net ; a man had to jump from the top of the post. If he died in the meshes of tho 
net, it w'as a goml omen ; it would rain abundantly. Things were no doubt arranged for the good omen 
to be as regular as possible, for the practice was abolished in the XVIth century by king Sinbyushin just 
mentioned. It is the same king who also put a sU>p, in the Shan 8tat<^ of Mo^smeit and Hsipaw, to 
funeral human sacrifices where, on the death of a chief or high official, his slaves, men and women, were 
slaughtered and burned or buried with him (tnscri()tion on a bell at the Shwezigon pagoda, Nyaung-U, 
not yet published). 

* Ari is the phonetic transcription of the name ; it is written arah ; following the written form, E, 
Huln^r (B. K. F, E-O, 1900, p. 584) derives this word from Arafinaka, basing himself on the Thai in* 
scription of lUma Khombeng at Sukhotay, in which the word Amhfkika occurs, and which he took to be 
the same as tho Burmese Arl ’’ in its full form. But M. L. Finot (opus cit) ha^||bown that Arafifiika 
is a pro|K;r nanus that of a '' monastery in a forest.” P&li words ending in Afi(a), are never abbreviated 
in Burmese, but always retained in their full form. Moreover, tho Arl were not ascetics living in forests, 
like the Buddhist and Brahman Arafifiakas, but lived together in large monasteries in or on the outsloria 
of villages. The word Ari comes from Ariya, ** noble ” ; P&li final y(a) becoming in Burmese regularly H 
which is always pronounced i : c/. vinava=: Burmese vinaft. pronounced, winl. 



THE ARI op BURMA AND TANTRIC BUDDHISM. 93 

Pathama-Min-gaung ; the chiefs among them had free entrance to the palace 
at any time of the day, and there, it is said, they often drank so immoderately 
as to be sent back to their monasteries in palanquins. They are still men" 
tinned in the XVlIIth century, when a thousand of them suddenly sallied fronri 
Ava and^put to flight a party of Talaings, with whom the Burmese were then 
at war. Their decline and final disappearance — though no dyubt not their in- 
fluence, — is placed at the end of the XVIIIth and beginning of the XIXth centuries. 

From what precedes it may be stated of the Ari : 1. That they were a 
Buddhist sect, ■ belonging to the Northern School, who came to Pagan from 
Bengal or Northern India about the VTth century. This is confirmed not only 
by Tibetan sources, but by the fre.scoea of the Paya-thon-zu and Nandamahfia 
temples at Min-nan-thu near Pagan. 2. That they ministered to the supersti- 
tions of the peojl^, and were the priests of the Naga and .Spirit- worship thhn 
prevalent in the land, and ofiiciated at the bloody sacrifices connected with 
this indigenous worship. 3. That they were, about the Vlllth century, profouixlly 
influenced by Tantrism, (whose rapid encroachment about that time is a feature 
common to Hinduism and Buddhism), a system of sorcery and witchcraft which, 
among the. Buddhists had for its aim the attainment, by spiritual moans, of 
desired objects, whether material or otherwise, and by means of mantras, charms 
and alchemy sought to realize dreams of invulneralnlity, invi.sibility, etc. 4. That 
they were also addicted, as revealed by the frescoes, to grossly immoral prac- 
tices resembling those of the “ left-hand ” or vamiicam, owing to Saha influences 
generally, and perhaps more particularly to intercourse with the Vajrai/dnas 
and Sahajiyas of Bengal and Nepal. 5. That they did not distjppear, as has 
been hitherto thought, in the Xlth century after Anorala’s persecution,- is attested 
by monasteries and temples, the dedication of which is recorded in inscrip- 
tions after that time. (5. That under the influence of the gi’eat restoration 
of Buddhism in Burma carried out by king Dhammecheti in the XVth century, 
and the prohibition of all sacrifices by king Sinbyushin .a century later, left- 
hand practices and bloody hecatombs were .stamped out ; but the Ari, under 
the name of “ boxing-monks,” continued to exist till at least the end of the 
XVIIIth centimy. 7. That Ari immoral practices are still not uncommon among 
certain clas.ses of the Shan monks. Among the Burmese this is attributed to 
the dispersion of part of the Ari caused by their momentary persec\ition in the 
Xlth century. 


CuAS. Duroiselle. 




Pl.ATK XI.VIII. 


THE AKI OF HEHMA. 



il. I’AYA-TIION-yj’ Tr.MPM-: AT MINWN'IHI'. l‘\<iAN. 



h, I’AVA THl»N /r TKMPLK: EHF.S< 0. Pi' Ji" > U' ij"). 


I'luilit -« tlWtHt * <1 A I'l llili il Ht I III OfTll Ill I III Mil ' l'> "I I IKilH < all r. 








\r.K 








LI I. 







:^J YWl/l; 




■•■ '>.’■• - ■■ ‘ lil.. ■■ . ,. ■ *■■- --■* - - 