Burmese Nissaya Literature: A Mainstream Monastic 
Education Learning Method and its Salient Features
Ven. Pannabhoga Herngseng
Acting Dean of Shan State Buddhist University, Head Department of 
Tipitaka Studies, Shan State Buddhist University, Taunggyi, Shan State, 
Myanmar
pannabhoga@gmail.com
Received 9 July 2020 | Revised 28 April 2021 | Accepted 15 June 2021
Abstract 
In some of the earliest Buddhist literature found in Myanmar, a type of translation 
in which each Pali word is followed by its relevant annotative interpretation, known 
as nissaya, can be found. Previous studies (Tin Lwin 1961; Pruitt 1992; McDaniel 
2008; Clark 2015) only examined what a nissaya is and to what literary genre nissaya 
literature belongs. In this paper, I will explore the various ways in which Burmese 
nissaya literature evolved into a mainstream monastic learning method, its role in 
the monastic education in Burma in particular, and further investigate whether the 
nissayas can be applied more generally and what the relationship is between nissaya 
and official Burmese Tipitaka translation. Lastly, this study argues that the Burmese 
nissaya literature can be compared to be on par with the encyclopaedic compilation 
on a specific subject.
Keywords 
nissaya literature – translation – monastic learning method – encyclopaedia – Burma 
history
1 Introduction
Since the introduction of Theravada Buddhism to Pagan in the late 12th ce  
by Arahan Thera, a native of Thaton, Burmese Buddhism began to grow in 
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the cc by 4.0 license.
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23
Published with license by Koninklijke Brill nv | doi:10.1163/26659077-25010027
© Ven. Pannabhoga Herngseng, 2023 | ISSN: 0859-9920 (print) 2665-9077 (online)
2
tandem with the flourishing Buddhist civilization. Before long the monarch 
and the people embraced the new faith, Pali and Abhidhamma, and learning 
was soon at the forefront of the populace’s interests in this period (Bode 2014, 
12–14). There was a wide range of grammatical treatises written by scholar 
monks. The best known among them was Saddanīti, authored by Aggavaṃsa 
in 1154 ce, a landmark of its kind that points to the level of Pali language and 
grammar skills at the time (Ruiz-Falqués 2017, 2 27). The popularity of Pali and 
Abhidhamma learning also extended beyond the monastic community as can 
be seen, for example, in a Pali language conversation between a young monk 
from Ava and a young mother from Pagan (Siri Sobhana 1974, 103–5).
Subsequently, Burmese literature, particularly those poetic genres such as 
mo gun: – a significant record, pjou – poems of epic proportion, ei: gjin: clas -
sical poems addressed to a royal child extolling the glory of ancestors, and 
dwei:gjou: a kind of Myanmar poem consisting of two stanzas, flourished in the 
late 13th century ce of Pagan and 15th ce of Ava. The motifs of early Burmese 
poetry were most commonly religion, royalty, nature and love (Hla Pe 1985, 
4–6). Dhammasami (2018, 18, 159) asserts that Mahā Raṭṭhasāra (14681-529) 
and his contemporary Mahā Sīlavaṃsa (1453–1518) were well-known for their 
masterpieces of Pyo poetry in the royal court of Ava. Along with this poetic 
literature, it is believed that a kind of Pali-Burmese translation work developed 
in this medieval period, which came to be known as nissaya, a literary genre of 
commentary on Pali texts. Such a literary genre, consisting of a word-to-word 
translation, was already popular in Sri Lanka and found among Pyu and Mon 
literature. Archaeological excavation in Myanmar found that the Sanskrit-Pyu 
nissaya at Srikṣetra in the 7th ce, and Kyansittha’s inscriptions at Pagan in 12th 
ce were the earliest forms of nissaya. The nissaya in its modern form presents 
different ways of interpretating and understanding Pali texts. In the tradi-
tional Burmese monastic learning method, the nissaya plays an important role 
on account of the different levels of meaning that it can extract from a text. 
McDaniel (2008, 131–136) calls this method of learning “lifting words” in similar 
monastic learning institutions in northern Thailand and Laos.
In traditional Buddhist learning, Pannabhoga (2020, 18) states that although 
nissaya is regarded as a sort of translation work, it would be difficult to cat -
egorize it as mere translation in the modern academic sense of the term 
because nissaya may offer more meanings in the monastic education system. 
On the other hand, standard Burmese translations of Buddhist texts have 
been unpopular as the language appears unnatural and not refined enough 
for general readers or academics. The reason is that current Tipitaka Burmese 
translations were obviously adopted from old nissayas. Similarly, Clark also 
(2015, 114) note that the Chaṭṭhasaṅgāyanā official annotated translation of 
Pali texts is nearly identical to that of nissaya wording; the translations are 
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23
3
merely reproductions or adoptions from a certain nissaya by simply removing 
the Pali words. Until today, traditional Burmese scholars who provide monas-
tic education in institutions throughout the country consider the textbooks of 
nissaya as either guidebooks, manuals or handbooks for students and teachers 
alike. Modern Buddhist scholars: Okell (1965), Pruitt (1992), McDaniel (2008), 
Lammerts (2010), Blackburn (2010), Walker (2020) and others have noted that 
nissaya literature has been important in monastic education since at least the 
15th century if not long before and continues to be so today.
The aims of this paper are to examine how the nissaya plays an important 
role in the pedagogy of monastic education as a living tradition to-date and 
whether the nissaya method can be applied to general Buddhist texts and 
scholarly works. To achieve the above aims, this study provides the historical 
background to nissaya with its development and training in the classrooms 
of monastic educational institutions based on my observations. Additionally, 
the study also investigates the relationship between nissaya and the official 
Burmese Tipiṭaka translation with the adaptation to old nissayas and com-
pares and contrasts samples of both older and modern nissayas in verse as 
well as prose including the interpretive nissaya method.
2 Research Methodology, Scope and Frameworks
This study discusses a certain method of translation used to interpret the 
Buddha’s teachings in Burmese Buddhist literature and an attempt is made 
to answer why it is so important to the development of Burmese literature in 
general and Buddhism in particular. As mentioned, nissaya literature is one of 
the most ancient ways of interpreting Buddhist texts found in Burma since the 
arrival of Buddhism in 12th ce and its continued relevance is a primary focus 
of this study. To meet this end, this research employs various qualitative tech-
niques, such as interviews with experts and students, targeting specific groups 
of study, sorting primary literature and secondly data and my personal obser -
vations in monastic classrooms. My own observation as an individual is unique 
and significant as I have been a student of monastic education and received 
training for almost two decades.
During my youth as a novice monk, along with fellow monastic brothers, 
I received training in a local monastery. We were instructed to memorize a 
certain Pali passage and then the trainer would produce the interpretation 
of that passage in nissaya format. By this means, we fostered our monastic 
education through the curriculum as a foundation for knowledge. Though, I 
did not know if this interpretive technique would carry on after completion 
of higher monastic training or formal education. The nissaya training trend, I 
burmese nissaya literature
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23
4
now realize, would carry on for the whole of my life as a monastic education 
provider to new generations to come.
Pali literature is originally written in Pali with varied scripts in different lan-
guages. Pali literature is categorized into several types of writing, in accord-
ance with its chronological development. In this research context, it includes 
canonical Pali texts, Aṭṭhakathā (commentaries), ṭīkā (sub-commentaries) and 
Anuṭīkā (sub-sub-commentaries), all of which are translated or interpreted 
using nissaya methods. Due to the language barrier, the texts written in Pali 
are inaccessible to general readers and even learners who have not yet mas -
tered the Pali language. For this very reason nissaya literature exists to support 
one in understanding the texts. Yet, nissaya literature, developed in Burma, not 
only makes Pali texts accessible but also brings Buddhism to the masses.
This paper aims to stress the importance of nissaya’s interpretation to 
Burmese Buddhism and the development of Myanmar culture. For example, 
in traditional Buddhist learning, although nissaya is regarded as a method 
of translation, it is not categorized as “translation” as generally understood 
because nissaya offers not only a definition but usually more than one mean-
ing and caters to varied opinions within. Very often the nissaya authors con-
sult various relevant texts of Aṭṭhakathā, ṭīkā, and anuṭīkā mentioned above 
to interpret the Buddha’s words. In much of the curriculum of the monastic 
education system in Burma, nissaya methods can be found. We not only learn 
through this method but re-contribute and re-transmit our knowledge through 
this means. In this context, I argue that nissaya literature is something more 
than translation and no less than an encyclopaedic source of knowledge avail-
able today.
3 Burmese Nissaya Literature: Background
3.1 Nissaya Origin
Theravada Buddhist literature has developed throughout history from as early 
as the 3rd century bce in India and subsequently translated into Sinhalese 
known as Sinhalaṭṭhakathā in the 1st ce. According to Malasekera (2014, 11, 
38), the Pali literature of Ceylon reveals that the extended Pali commentar -
ies (Aṭṭhakathā) today were re-translated from Sinhalese commentaries by 
Buddhaghosa under the supervision of the Mahāvihāra monastery, the base 
and birthplace of Theravada literature and civilization. The works of anthology 
on Pali literature were largely attributed to him and later to Elder Dhammapāla 
and Buddhadatta.
herngseng
MANUSYA: Journal of Humanities 26 (2023) 1–23