Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_22\documents\1996-Sabrizain-Religion_and_Cultural_Identity.pdf
Total Pages: 9
Statistics: Chars=17750, ThaiWords=3550.0, EnglishWords=3717

--- Page 1 of 9 ---
Religion and Cultural Identity 
Among the Bugis
(A Preliminary Remark)
Nurman SAID
The author, a lecturer of Philosophy of Religion at the
Faculty of Islamic Theology of the Alauddin State Institute of
Islamic Studies at Makassar, Indonesia, is currently a
Doctoral candidate in Islamic Studies at the Sunan Kalijogo
Institute of Islamic Studies at Yogyakarta, Indonesia, where
he is conducting research on Social Interaction among
Muslim Communities in Makassar, Indonesia.
INTRODUCTION
The Bugis, also known as the Buginese, are the main ethnic group of
South Sulawesi of Indonesia. Their dominance in number as well as
the large area in which they live has made them the most influential
ethnic group with regard to economic and political activities in the
area. The other ethnic groups of the province are the Makassar, the
Mandar and the Toraja. The Bugis are commonly known among their
neighbors as having good motivation in promoting a better life, and
this, together with the flourishing soil of their land, enables them to
develop important roles coloring the local activities not only at the
level of the province but also in the eastern part of Indonesia as
well. 
The coming of Islam to the Bugis world in the latter part of the
16
th century marked a turning point of the daily life of the Bugis.
Moving from the so called pre-Islamic syncretism to Islamic
formalism put them, to a certain extant, among those Insulindian
people whose Islamic identity is strong. And from there on, religion
has been an integral and essential part of the Bugis culture and way
of life (Pelras, 1996:4).
Not surprisingly then, Islam has become a fundamental aspect of
the Bugis culture. For the Bugis, holding ethnicity as the Bugis
should also be coincident with the position of being Muslim. In spite
of being devout Muslims, some of them still preserve their preIslamic beliefs that to a certain extent contradict their Islamic faith,
particularly for those who follow Islamic orthodoxy. Most of those
who still preserve this belief live particularly in remote villages
12 Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004

--- Page 2 of 9 ---
where Muslim proselytizers, have been unable to reach them due to
the problems of communication and transportation.
This study aims at describing the relation between religiosity and
cultural identity among the Bugis. Working in this field, I wish to
present a brief description on the role religion plays in the identity
of the Bugis.
THE MAKING OF CULTURAL IDENTITY
The meaning of the word Bugis itself has never been known
precisely. The word Bugis is the Indonesian or Malay absorption of
the word
ugi' or ogi', the living term used by the Bugis addressing
themselves. The early history of the Bugis is obscure due to the lack
of historical records dealing with the origin and the early lives of the
people. There are some oral accounts mentioning the origin and the
early lives of the Bugis, but those accounts are different from one to
another. It is very likely that those accounts were made to justify the
superiority of the Bugis compared with other ethnic groups. The
only widely referred written account commonly used to trace the
origin of the Bugis, particularly its noble groups, is the epic
La
Galigo cycle. This work is actually a mythical exposition compiled to
deal with the origin and the early history of the Bugis noble family.
Many Bugis people believe that the events described really occurred
in the early history of humankind.
It is difficult to trace the formation of the Bugis cultural identity.
The obscurity of the history of the early lives of the Bugis together
with the diversity of their sub-ethnic groups have contributed to the
difficulty for anyone who wishes to uncover the distinctive culture of
the Bugis. What one may possibly do with regard to the origin and
the formative period of the Bugis culture is to sketch it in a general
way.
Taking note of the fact that the general feature of the Bugis land
comprises hilly and low land, one may assume that most of the Bugis
are farmers, fishers, and traders. These professions have been
important factors in the lives of the Bugis, and to a certain extent
have shaped the cultural identity of these people. Both their spiritual
and material lives have always functioned in accordance with the
environmental features of their lands. Being farmers, for example,
the Bugis are familiar with Sangiasseri, the name given to the rice
deity. And Sangiasseri is none other than the daughter of the Datu
Patotoe', the prince who allocates destinies (Pelras, 1996:90).
The Bugis are also known as prominent sailors. Many sources
inform us that the Bugis boats were often seen all over the area
known today as the Indonesian archipelago, from Singapore to New
Guinea and from southern Philippines to north-western Australia,
and they even sailed across the Indian Ocean to Madagascar. This
Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004 13

--- Page 3 of 9 ---
m a yw e l lb et r u es i n c et h eB u g i s ,a sw e l la st h eM a k a s s a r ,t h e i r
fellow Bugis, have always been among the people most eager to
cross the sea either to trade or to catch fish.
Unlike other ethnic groups of South Sulawesi, the Bugis have
been known as people who like to travel to most parts of Indonesia
and even to some parts of its neighbors such as Australia and
Malaysia. Some of those have established Bugis villages or at least
Bugis communities in the regions they visited. There are numbers of
Bugis communities in several big cities of Indonesia such as in
Jakarta and Surabaya. And it is not an exaggeration to say that the
Bugis enterprises have dominated economic life in most parts on
eastern Indonesia such as Ambon, Kendari, Kupang, Sorong and
Jayapura.
The large area occupied by the Bugis has resulted in its division
into various sub-communities in the past, as can be seen in the
emergence of some Bugis kingdoms such as Luwu, Bone, Wajo,
Soppeng and Rappang. These Bugis kingdoms had become the basis
of the present day territorial and administrative boundaries. The
Bugis reside in at least 12 regencies out of 24 regencies in the
province. This means that half of the province is occupied by the
Bugis. The Makassar live in 9 regencies, while 5 regencies are
occupied by the Mandar, and 2 regencies are occupied by the
Toraja.
Like many other ethnic groups, the Bugis have been known as
people who always try to preserve their cultural heritage such as
language, traditional festivals, customs, ethnic solidarity, and
ethnicity pride. These cultural elements are still appreciated by most
of the Bugis regardless of the intensity of modernization, which to a
certain extent, brings about a decrease in appreciation for such
entities.
THE BUGIS RELIGIOSITY
The only source available concerning the historical background of
the Bugis religiosity is the La Galigo Cycle .T h e r ee x i s t ss o m e
information concerning the early life of the Bugis such as some
notes made by Western travelers who mentioned the Bugis, but since
they were mentioned only in passing, the information is rather
scanty. The information given by the
La Galigo cycle can be used as
tentative materials, to a certain extent, though on the basis that the
information is more fictitious than historical.
Based on the information given by the La Galigo cycle,i ti sc l e a r
that the indigenous religiosity may be rooted in both local and
imported systems. The local belief grew gradually during a long
period of time, starting from the very beginning of the history of the
Bugis. This process introduced to the Bugis a number of belief
14 Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004

--- Page 4 of 9 ---
systems such as animism, dynamism, and polytheism before the
coming of Hindu and Buddhism. The result of this process can be
seen in the fact that there are still elements of these belief system
practiced by some of the Bugis families. This process took place
from the beginning of the Bugis history up to the time when the
Christian missionaries first came to this area, which was almost the
same time as the coming of Muslim proselytizers who tried to
convert the Bugis to Islam.
The main religion embraced by the Bugis is Islam. About 95
percent of the Bugis are Muslims. There are a small number of the
Bugis who do not take Islam as their religion. A Bugis community
living in Amparita in the Sidenreng Rappang Regency remains in
pre-Islamic belief and is called as Tolotang. Some Bugis converted
to Christianity by means of marriage. But their number remained
small.
The Bugis first came into contact with Islam some time before the
end of the 16th century (Mattulada, 1983:216-219). Since that time,
the process of Islamization has taken place throughout the Bugis
area, conducted mainly by Muslim proselytizers who received much
support from the Bugis Kingdoms.
According to some local accounts, the Islamization of the Bugis
was conducted first by three Muslim proselytizers coming from West
Sumatra. These three figures are traditionally known as datuk, a
special term used mainly in Malay tradition. They are Datuk
Sulaiman, Datuk Ri Bandang, and Datuk Ri Tiro. It might not be
wrong if we assume that the process of Islamization of the Bugis
took place over a very long period starting from the time when the
people of this region, particularly those who conducted trade, came
into contact with the people of western part of Indonesia that had
converted to Islam. This is because Islam, like other missionary
religions, obliges its follower to be proselytizers.
The process of Islamization of the Bugis was consolidated at the
time the Bugis kingdoms officially accepted Islam as the formal
religion of their kingdoms. This process took place in the beginning
of the 17
th century in three major phases:
1. The official acceptance of Islam as the formal religion of the
Bugis kingdoms. This phase took place from the end of the
16th century until the beginning of the 17th century.
2. The institutionalization of Islamic teaching in the application of
political power in each kingdom.
3. The integration and the implementation of the Islamic teachings
in the daily life of the Bugis. This took place particularly during
the independence period.
Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004 15

--- Page 5 of 9 ---
The acceptance of Islam, which in turn was treated as an integral
part of pangngaderreng (a system of conduct), marked an important
point of the Bugis life with regard to their religiosity. By accepting
Islam as part of pangngaderreng, every single person in the Bugis
community should try to understand Islam in order to be able to
practice it in his or her life.
The integration of the Islamic law into the whole system of
pangngadereng enabled the process of Islamization to run smoothly.
The acceptance of Islam by the Bugis has strengthened their cultural
identity as can be seen in the formation of their worldview. There
have been several main cultural concepts known among the Bugis as
the essential basics of the Bugis cultural life.
Although the Bugis have experienced transition from the
traditional to the modern through a long and complex process, many
specific cultural elements inherited from the past are still alive.
Some of those have been considered as important aspects of the
cultural identity of the Bugis in terms of preserving and protecting
the uniqueness of the Bugis culture.
This is a large and conplex topic; therefore I will only elaborate
here on some of the fundamental cultural values that have been
perceived by most of the Bugis to be integral parts of their religious
cognizance on the basis that those cultural concepts have also been
brought forward by religion, and in particular, Islam.
SIRI’: THE VALUE OF ONESELF
Siri’ may mean honor, dignity or courtesy. In the daily life of the
Bugis, siri’ is applied in two main forms: siri ’ as personal honor, and
siri’ as communal honor. As personal honor, siri ’ indicates the value
of a human being. This means that every single person has his or
her own honor by birth. The higher the social status one has, the
greater honor he or she bears. This means that one who has higher
social status in a particular Bugis community would be protected
from doing anything that may challenge his or her dignity as a highly
respected member of society. Moreover, he or she has to try to
keep his or her conduct in order not to do anything that may ruin his
or her honor.
The important position of siri ’ in Bugis society has been outlined
by Hamid Abdullah who says that siri ’ is the most basic element in
the life of the Bugis as well as the three other main ethnic groups of
South Sulawesi. For the Bugis, siri ’ is always identical with the value
of life, and therefore they are ready to sacrifice everything,
including their lives, for the sake of siri’ (Hamid Abdullah, 1985:37).
Siri’ as a virtue should go hand in hand with pesse which means
painful feeling. The complete form of the term is pesse babua which
16 Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004

--- Page 6 of 9 ---
implies to feel painful in one's stomach as the form of sympathy.
This indicates a deep feeling of compassion for someone who is in
need of something such as food, medicine, compassionate and the
like (Pelras, 1996:207).
Siri’ is both an individual and a communal feeling. As an individual
feeling, siri ’ stimulates one to observe good manners in his or her
daily life. This also means that one should always work hard in order
to be able to gain success in every aspect of live, including
economics and politics. As a communal feeling, siri ’ plays an
important role in supporting one ’s group or community to achieve a
better livlihood.
To be frank, siri ’ can be misunderstood by either an individual or
by a group of people, and therefore can lead to unlawful things. This
may happen when siri ’ is understood in an extreme way. When a
Bugis feels humiliated by someone, he therefore assumes that his
siri’ has been challenged. As a result, he would think that he has the
right to retaliate as a way of protecting or restoring his siri ’.O n e
example that can be mentioned here is siri ’ in relation with marriage.
If a Bugis man plans to marry a Bugis woman and his proposal is
rejected, then he feels that his honor is dead. He will not have any
way out except by making a plan to run away with the girl. And if
this happens, the girl ’s family assume they have the right to protect
their family honor, so they justify killing the culprit in order to
restore the family's honor. It can be imagined that if the killing truly
happens, then the implications will be more complicated (Pelras,
1996:206).
Cases such as the above-mentioned seem to have decreased
following the implementation of law enforcement in society. But
since siri ’ has such deep roots in the Bugis, the reaction may take
other forms such as personal or communal humiliation. Thus it is
very often that one inflicts damage, or even death, as a result of
feeling offended by another.
The introduction of Islam to the Bugis seems to have modified the
image of siri ’ among the Bugis. Siri ’ is no longer understood in the
sense of showing force toward other people, but it is more
understood as a mental condition that may motivate someone to
behave in a good manner, as well as motivating them to perform
hard work in order to improve the quality of life socially, politically
or economically.
Siri’ tends to enforce both individual and communal integrity. In
the individual context, siri ’ gives motivation to abstain from doing
anything that may challenge one's honor. Here, every single person
in community should behave as an honorable person by observing
good deeds. In the communal context, siri ’ implies the obligation of
Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004 17

--- Page 7 of 9 ---
supporting group solidarity among members of the community by
having sympathy towards anyone in need in the society.
From the perspective of siri ’,t h e r ea r es o m ec u l t u r a lc o n c e p t s
considered to be an integral part of the Bugis culture. These
concepts have been perceived as the starting point with regard to
responding to others. The implementation of siri ’ in daily social life
of the Bugis is manifested in five principles of conduct:
1. Ada Tongeng (truthful wording)
2. Lempuk (honesty)
3. Getteng (steadfastness)
4. Sipakatau (mutual respect)
5. Mappesona ri dewata seuwae (submission to the will of God)
ADA TONGENG
Ada tongeng is the principle of wording in which one should speak
the truth. This entails a moral imperative to every single person of
the Bugis to be honest in telling anything. In addition, ada tongeng
also means that every word expressed should always bring about
good for life. One should always try to avoid any word that may
cause harm for other individual or group.
LEMPUK
Lempuk is the principle of action in which one should always do
right. He or she should try to avoid doing something that is not true.
This principle entails an obligation for everyone in the Bugis
community to be true in both words and action.
GETTENG
Getteng is the principle of attitude in which one should always have
a distinct or firm attitude concerning one thing. For the Bugis,
maintaining or defending a position which is believed as true, is a
must. This results in the trend among the Bugis to be steady in
whatever position he or she has chosen.
SIPAKATAU
Sipakatau is the principle of communication in which one should
address another in the best way possible. This implies certain
requirements that should be carried in dealing with other people. For
the Bugis, a human being is actually a special and unique entity in
the world and has to be responded to in full respect. This is because
every single person has both rational as well as emotional aptitudes
that have to be taken into account.
18 Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004

--- Page 8 of 9 ---
MAPPESONA RI DEWATA SEUWAE
Mappesona ri dewata seuwae is the principle of religiosity in which
every human being has to submit himself or herself to the will of
God. This principle implies that humankind has to subject everything
concerning his life to the will of God. The implication of this
principle is that every Bugis should have a religion and therefore
should always follow the teaching of the religion he or she belongs
to.
The above-mentioned principles have deep roots in the whole
system of Islamic teaching, the religion embraced by the majority of
the Bugis. The integration of siri ’ into the whole system of the
Islamic ethics can be seen in the Bugis paseng:
Tellui ri ala sappo
Tau'e ri dewata
Siri;'e ri watakkale
Siri’e ri padatta tau
There are three principles:
Belief in God
Respect for oneself
Respect for human beings (A.Moein MG, 1994:46)
La Side, a prominent Bugis thinker, states that siri ’ comprises two
important elements: virtue and dignity (La Side, 1977:4). Virtue
motivates one to be pure, thereby enabling one to live a blameless
life. This state can only be reached by someone who tries to avoid
doing sinful deeds. Dignity indicates that every single person has to
be addressed in the way he or she wishes to be. And if every
individual has the willingness to take these elements as the basis for
his or her actions, then society will benefit in the form of stability
and harmoniousness in life.
Any kind of disobedience to the value of siri ’ in society will cause
disharmony and chaos. This is because whoever does not have any
siri’ consciousness may easily do something unlawful. And if this
happens, then society will feel the effects. Those who do not have
siri’ can be considered to be an animal. There is a well-known Bugis
proverbial saying:
Naia tau de'e siri’na
Dek lainna olokolok'e
Siri’ emmitu tariaseng tau.
Whoever does not have siri’
Is nothing but animal
Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004 19

--- Page 9 of 9 ---
Only siri’ makes one to be human (La Side, 1977:4).
The main role of siri’ in the society is to protect all member of the
community and enable them to live in harmony. If all members of
community still appreciate siri ’ as the main reference in governing
good conduct then all members of the community will enjoy the
resulting benefits and will live in a good situation. On the basis of
this point it is clear that the core values of the Bugis culture
coincide with the universal message of all religions, which is
bringing good for human beings.
WORKS CITED:
Abdullah, Hamid. "Manusia Bugis Makassar: Manusia Bugis-Makassar: Suatu
Tinjauan Historis terhadap Pola Tingkah Laku dan Pandangan Hidup Manusia
Bugis-Makassar (The People of Bugis-Makassar: An Account on Their
Conduct and View of Lives)", Jakarta, 1985.
La Side. "Rerferensi tentang Pengertian, Perkembangan Siri ’ pada Suku Bugis"
(Reference on the Definition and the Establishment of Siri ’ Among The Bugis).
Paper presented in Seminar on Siri ’ held on July 11 th 13th, 1977 in
Makassar.
Mattulada, "Islam di Sulawesi Selatan" (Islam in South Sulawesi), in Taufik Abdullah
(ed.). Agama dan Perubahan Sosial (Religion and Social Change). Jakarta:
Rajawali, 1983:209-321.
Mattulada, "Kebudayaan Bugis-Makassar" (The Bugis-Makassar's Culture) in
Koentjaraningrat (ed.) Manusia dan Kebudayaan di Indonesia (Men and Their
Culture in Indonesia). Jakarta: Djambatan, 1979: 259-278.
Moein MG, A. Siri ’ Na Pacce (Siri ’ and Sympathy). Makassar: Yayasan Makassar
Press, 1994.
Pelras, Christian. The Bugis. Oxford: Blackwell Publisher, 1996.20 Inter-Religio 45 / Summer 2004