Source PDF File: output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\pdf-harvest\loop_B03_B04\desimini_ocean_dharma_2020.pdf
Total Pages: 24
Health Check: PASS (avg 2427.7 chars/page)
Statistics: Chars=58639, ThaiWords=11727.8, EnglishWords=10494

--- Page 1 of 24 ---
© Florinda De Simini, 2020 | doi:10.1163/22142371-12340058
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
brill.com/jas
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma: The Composition 
of Sanskrit Scriptural Digests in the Dharmaśāstra 
and Śaiva Siddhānta Traditions
Florinda De Simini
Associate Professor, Dipartimento Asia, Africa Mediterraneo, 
University of Naples “L’Orientale,” Naples, Italy
fdesimini@unior.it
Abstract
Scholars of Sanskrit literature in the second millennium CE had to deal with sizeable 
collections of sources claiming authority on different branches of knowledge and 
human experience. The need for ordering such sources went hand in hand with the 
establishment of “canons” of authoritative texts. This article will explore the topic of 
the composition of digests in two main traditions — the Dharmaśāstra and the Śaiva 
Siddhānta — to illustrate the breadth of this phenomenon, both in terms of its popularity and of its chronological range.
Keywords
Dharmaśāstra – Śaiva Siddhānta – Sanskrit digests – Purāṇas
 
Introduction
This article provides an overview of the practice of composing digests of scriptural sources in the second millennium CE, as a strategy to navigate and tame 
the vast corpora of Sanskrit prescriptive texts. The focus will be on two main 
cultural domains: the Dharmanibandhas, “Digests of [the sources of] Dharma,” 
which chiefly consist in selections of texts from traditional Dharma sources 
such as the Sanskrit Purāṇas and Dharmaśāstra, “scholastic literature on 
Dharma,” and the digests of the Śaiva Siddhānta tradition, collecting the scriptures of one of the currents of worshippers of the god Śiva. The emergence

--- Page 2 of 24 ---
265
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
of this genre, at a specific time in history, offers a possible comparison with 
the “encyclopaedism” of tenth-century CE Arabic culture, the topic of this 
Special Issue, whose development is chronologically parallel to the spread of 
the digests that will be discussed in the following pages. By illustrating some of 
the features of such scriptural corpora, and giving references to the main 
authors who have attempted to anthologize them, my purpose is to supply the 
readers of this Special Issue, mostly coming from the field of Arabic studies, 
with some terms of comparison regarding one of the ways in which Indian 
exegetes dealt with the complication of having “too much to know” about 
aspects of their lives and doctrines. As will become clearer in this article, the 
topic is tightly connected to the notions of scriptural authority, which led to a 
burgeoning production of texts claiming divine authorship; at the same time, 
we can also surmise, albeit in the absence of hard evidence, that the rise in 
the composition of digests in the second millennium is a sign of the increased 
availability of collections of such scriptures in institutional libraries.
 
The Ocean of Dharma
Indian intellectuals were faced early on with the task of ordering and selecting 
from the polymorphous wealth of ever-growing textual corpora that claimed 
the status of authoritative scriptures. Several factors that are peculiar to the 
cultures and religions that originated in South Asia have contributed to 
the formation of a very creative landscape in which, on the one hand, new 
scriptures kept being composed over the course of history and, on the other, 
texts could be modified, to the point where different works were at times 
known by the same title, or that scriptural texts were variously adapted to the 
different regional and cultural contexts in which they were transmitted. By 
identifying borrowings, rewritings, adaptations and recensions, and by studying the complex hermeneutical tradition that developed around such texts, 
philological research provides a crucial aid in historicizing the composition 
and transmission of these works.1
This phenomenon is particularly evident in the case of Purāṇic literature, 
which emerged in the first centuries of the first millennium CE and enjoyed 
such popularity that composition in this genre was protracted up to modern 
1 For general considerations concerning the contribution of textual criticism to the historical 
understanding of Indian scriptures and the communities that produced them, see Bakker, 
Methodological Considerations (for the Purāṇic sources), and Sanderson, History through 
Textual Criticism (for Tantric texts).

--- Page 3 of 24 ---
266
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
times and came to encompass several regional languages.2 Traditional lists 
mention eighteen “major Purāṇas” (mahāpurāṇas) and as many “ancillary 
Purāṇas” (upapurāṇas).3 However, we know that such lists — not always 
consistent with one another — do not cover the entirety of the Sanskrit production, and that this division into major and secondary Purāṇas was fictitious 
and not necessarily reflective of their importance. As tenuous as it may be 
to give a univocal definition to such a multifarious phenomenon, we might 
broadly describe the Sanskrit Purāṇas as encyclopaedic works, collecting 
prescriptions on the cult of “Hindu” deities, religious beliefs and the practice 
of specific rituals, descriptions of icons, as well as several aspects of society 
and law, cosmogonies, mythical narratives, stories about the origins of early 
dynasties, eulogistic accounts of specific holy places, and more.4 The Sanskrit 
term purāṇa literally means “ancient,” i.e., “traditional,” and therefore “timeless,” but not necessarily chronologically old. Such works, along with the epics, 
are conceived as reinforcements of the Vedas; they derive their authority from 
attributing their teachings to divine revelations, which have been variously 
redacted into proper works by ancient seers for the welfare of humankind.5 
Purāṇas are thus, strictly speaking, anonymous, although the tradition attributes their redaction to Vyāsa, the same a-historical figure to whom also the 
entire Mahābhārata, one of the major Sanskrit epics, is attributed. The name 
2 For an overview of Purāṇic literature, see Rocher, Purānas.
3 For lists of Mahāpurāṇas, see Matsyapurāṇa 53.11-57, Varāhapurāṇa 112.69cd, and 
Viṣṇupurāṇa 3.6.20-23. This Viṣṇupurāṇa list is of special importance because the polymath 
al-Bīrūnī (d. ca. 440/1048) mentions it in his Kitāb al-Hind, and gives a list of the eighteen 
Mahāpurāṇas that is coherent with the one extant in the Viṣṇupurāṇa (Rocher, Purānas, 31; 
on the importance of al-Bīrūnī’s knowledge of the Purāṇas as a source for his knowledge of 
Indian geography, see Verdon, Cartography). A popular list of Upapurāṇas, often quoted in 
medieval digests, is that of Kūrmapurāṇa 1.1.17-20.
4 A tradition going back to the Sanskrit lexicon Amarakośa (ca. sixth century) defines the 
Purāṇas as “containing five characteristics” (purāṇaṃ pañcalakṣaṇam, see Amarakośa 1.6.5). 
Such five characteristics are interpreted as topics and exemplified in the Purāṇas themselves 
(see, for instance, Śivapurāṇa 7.1.41) as being: emanation of the universe (sarga); secondary creation and reabsorption of the universe (pratisarga); genealogies (vaṃśa, in this case 
denoting the genealogies of gods and ancestors); the ages of Manu (manvantara, a sequence 
of fourteen eras that make up a kalpa, extremely long time-divisions that mark the creation 
and reabsorption of the universe); and genealogies of dynasties (vaṃśyānucarita). See Kirfel, 
Das Purāṇa, for the use of this thematic criterion in the study of the textual history of the 
Purāṇas; and Rocher, Purānas, 24ff, for a history of the interpretation of this and alternative 
notions.
5 This is not true for Purāṇas in regional languages, such as the Tamil Purāṇas, attested from 
the twelfth century, which are attributed to historical authors (see Zvelebil, Tamil Literature, 
170ff).

--- Page 4 of 24 ---
267
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
Vyāsa, after all, literally means “compiler,” coherently with the function that 
the tradition ascribes to him.
It is not surprising, then, that none of the many Sanskrit Purāṇas or 
Purāṇa-like works has a simple and straightforward composition history. On 
the contrary, their texts were expanded over time to include diachronically 
stratified layers. Exemplary in this regard is the case of the Skandapurāṇa, one 
of the major scriptures of the devotees of the god Śiva, which is the object of an 
ongoing editorial project and illuminates several aspects of religious landscape 
of early medieval India, while also offering important insights into Purāṇic 
composition.6 This Purāṇa was probably first redacted in the sixth-seventh 
century CE in Northern India and transmitted very soon to Nepal, where the 
text is preserved in a manuscript as old as the ninth century.7 Philological 
research has shown that before the twelfth century, a major redaction, now 
referred to in the critical edition as the “RA recension,” made thorough changes 
to the early text of this Purāṇa from chapter 162 onwards.8 This redaction, with 
further modifications and omissions, gave rise to a so-called Ambikākhaṇḍa 
recension and a Revākhaṇḍa recension; these in turn were the starting point of 
a long and complex transmission that led to the emergence of different “sections” (khaṇḍa) claiming to belong to the Skandapurāṇa.
Besides being expanded with the composition of new sections, Purāṇas 
could also come to incorporate text from other works. One of the most extreme 
cases in this sense is that of the Agnipurāṇa, the “Purāṇa of Fire,” a late work 
that contains several chapters extracted from works of the Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra 
scriptures,9 while also deriving materials from Śaiva ritual manuals,10 from 
other Purāṇas and from works of the Dharmaśāstra genre, as well as abridgements of the epics and various treatises.11
In other cases, philological analysis allows us to detect that the same text or 
portion of text, sometimes very long, was reused in different sectarian contexts, 
sometimes with minor adjustments, such as changing the names of the gods 
or skipping problematic contents, other times through thorough rewritings. 
6 
This is the project of editing the original Skandapurāṇa, initiated by Hans Bakker at the 
University of Groningen in 1994, and since 2016 continued at the Universities of Leiden 
and Kyoto.
7 
On this, see Adriaensen, Bakker and Isaacson, Skandapurāṇa, Prolegomena.
8 
On these early recensions of the Skandapurāṇa, see Harimoto, Some Observations.
9 
See Rastelli, Pāñcarātra Passages.
10 
Brunner-Lachaux, Somaśambhupaddhati, LIX fn. 81, attributing the information to 
Sanderson.
11 
On the composition of the Agnipurāṇa and the works abridged and borrowed in this text, 
see Hazra, Purāṇic Records, 136-137.

--- Page 5 of 24 ---
268
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
Examples of these practices can be found in the various re-adaptations of an 
early scripture of the devotees of the god Śiva, the Śivadharmottara, whose 
composition might be placed in the sixth-seventh century.12 This text — which 
does not describe itself as a Purāṇa, but was received as such in the Purāṇic 
tradition — and the topics it covers were broad enough to be easily translated 
into different contexts; as a consequence, large portions of it were reused in 
other Purāṇas of the Śaivas (i.e., the worshippers of the god Śiva), such as the 
Liṅgapurāṇa and the Śivapurāṇa, as well as in scriptures of their “competitors.” 
For instance, materials from at least three chapters of the Śivadharmottara are 
subsumed into the Devīpurāṇa, “The Purāṇa of the Goddess,” a scripture for 
the devotees of the Goddess that was most likely composed in Bengal in the 
eighth-ninth century.13 The usual methods that the author of the Devīpurāṇa 
uses to transform the text of the Śivadharmottara into a scripture supporting Goddess worship involve the selection of specific parts of the text, as well 
as the replacement of the name and references to the god Śiva with that of 
Devī.14 The result is that, to anyone who reads both works, the text is at times 
clearly recognizable as a textual borrowing, even prior to an in-depth philological study; but to readers of the Devīpurāṇa, the text of the Śivadharmottara 
was perfectly embedded within an original composition on the worship of 
the Goddess.
Even more striking examples of adaptations of the Śivadharmottara are presented in a section of the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa, the “Purāṇa of the Future.” This is 
another very complex work, whose first section, the Brāhmaparvan, collects 
“Saura” materials, namely materials on the cult of the Sun god (Sūra/Sūrya 
in Sanskrit). In recent years, the work of Bisschop has attracted attention to 
the strategies through which this section of the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa appropriated 
materials from early scriptures of the worshippers of Viṣṇu and Śiva, called 
Viṣṇudharma and Śivadharmaśāstra, respectively.15 Bisschop observes that 
the Brāhmaparvan of the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa has parallels from chapters 1-28 
of the Viṣṇudharma, and that almost the entire Śivadharmaśāstra was borrowed into chapters 1.175-180 of the same Brāhmaparvan; however, both the 
Viṣṇudharma and the Śivadharmaśāstra were not just merely copied into 
the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa, but rewritten and transformed into a Saura scripture.16 
In addition to this, we observe that the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa also reworks chapters 
12 
For an introduction on the Śivadharmottara, see De Simini, Gods and Books, 46ff.
13 
On the Devīpurāṇa, see Hazra, Upapurāṇas, 35-194.
14 
For more details about these cases of textual borrowings, see De Simini, Gods and 
Books, 73ff.
15 
See Bisschop, Universal Śaivism, and idem, Vyāsa’s Palimpsest, 21ff.
16 
Bisschop, Vyāsa’s Palimpsest, 168.

--- Page 6 of 24 ---
269
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
1 and 4-7 of the Śivadharmottara into chapters 1.187-192 and, similarly to its 
treatment of the Viṣṇudharma and the Śivadharmaśāstra, openly rewrites the 
text as a scripture supporting the cult of the Sun god. For instance, two verses 
from Śivadharmottara’s chapter 1 praising the work of the authentic Śaiva 
teacher are aptly transformed into a eulogy of the Saura teacher instead:
Śivadharmottara 117
Bhaviṣyapurāṇa 1.18718
The king should worship the teacher 
who expounds the teachings of Śiva 
as if he were Śiva [himself], for the 
welfare of the other beings and to 
the advantage of his own power. (47) /
[…]
Which ancestor is comparable to this 
[teacher] who saves a person drowning in the mud of transmigration by the 
hand of the Śaiva knowledge? (60) / 
Who would not worship this one, who 
gently anoints the king, burnt by the 
fire of ignorance, with the nectar of 
knowledge? (61)
One should worship, as if he were the 
Sun god [himself], the teacher who 
expounds the teachings of the Sun, 
who saves the people drowning into 
the ocean of transmigration. (30) /
Which teacher can be compared 
to this one, who, using the water of 
the Saura teachings, gently anoints 
a person who is burnt by the fire of 
ignorance, [and anoints] devotees 
with the nectar of knowledge? Who 
would not worship him? (31)
While the most basic strategy adopted by the authors of the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa is 
to change the references to Śiva and the knowledge derived from him into references to the god Sūrya and the Saura teachings (śivavat, “like Śiva,” becomes 
sūryavat, “like the Sun”; sivavākya, the “teachings of Śiva,” becomes sauravākya, 
the “teachings of the Sun,” and so on), we also notice that the structure of the 
verses has changed. The Bhaviṣyapurāṇa joins together, by slightly altering 
the lexical choice and the syntactic structure, two sets of stanzas from two different points of the chapter and omits twelve stanzas of the Śivadharmottara. 
The most striking consequence of this operation, which is clearly discernible 
by simply comparing Śivadharmottara 1.47 with Bhaviṣyapurāṇa 1.187.30, is 
17 
Śivadharmottara 1.47 and 1.60-61: śivavākyapravaktāraṃ śivavat pūjayed gurum | nṛpaḥ 
paropakārāya ātmanaś ca vibhūtaye || 47; saṃsārapaṅkanirmagnaṃ yaḥ samuddharate janam | śivajñānātmahastena kas tena sadṛśaḥ pitā || 60 || ajñānavahnisantaptaṃ 
nirvāpayati yaḥ śanaiḥ | jñānāmṛtena nṛpatiṃ kas tan na pratipūjayet || 61.
18 
Bhaviṣyapurāṇa 
1.187.30-31: 
sauravākyapravaktāraṃ sūravat pūjayed gurum 
| 
saṃsārārṇavanirmagnaṃ yaḥ samuddharate janam || 30 sauradharmāmbuhastena kas 
tena sadṛśo guruḥ | ajñānavahnisantaptaṃ nirvāpayati yaḥ śanaiḥ | jñānāmṛtena vai 
bhaktān kas taṃ na pratipūjayet || 31.

--- Page 7 of 24 ---
270
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
that the latter gets rid of the main subject of this and the following stanzas 
in the early Śaiva scripture, namely the king. This is not a minor change, if 
we consider that the stanzas of the Śivadharmottara that do not make it into 
the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa were entirely devoted to the importance of converting the 
king to the religion of Śiva, setting an important manifesto for the whole work, 
which often addresses its instructions to kings and ruling elites.19 This political 
scenario is removed from the parallel section of the Bhaviṣyapurāṇa, because 
it did not fit the agenda of its authors; at the same time, extensive portions 
from five chapters of the Śivadharmottara were easily subsumed into the text, 
which creatively rewrites this and other earlier scriptures.
Even these few examples and — deliberately generic — considerations 
might suffice to give an idea of how lively, albeit confusing, the situation could 
have been for the primary readers and users of these texts. At the same time, 
given the role played by such scriptures in establishing orthopraxy and thinking about macrocosmic scenarios and individual destinies, it soon became 
crucial to find strategies to ascertain a reliable canon of scriptures and tame 
this imposing quantity of prescriptions and instructions. In addition to this, we 
should note that Purāṇas were only one among the possible traditional sources 
of Dharma, which include the so-called Dharmasūtras and the Smṛtis, anonymous treatises on Dharma attributed to mythical sages of the past,20 as well as 
the epics.
The emergence of a literary genre styled as “Compendia of the [sources 
of] Dharma” (Dharmanibandha) is one of the main characteristics of secondmillennium production in the field of Dharmaśāstra, and also qualifies as a 
response to the bewildering state of the primary materials that has been 
sketched above. Brick has brought attention to what he calls a “crisis of scriptural authority,” originating from a proliferation of scriptures in this and other 
rival traditions, as one of the keys to understanding the emergence of the 
Dharmanibandhas.21 Such compendia structured their corpora of knowledge 
using different criteria. As one of the most basic examples, we can mention 
Lakṣmīdhara’s Kṛtyakalpataru, which is also among the earliest digests that 
has reached us complete.22 Composed at the onset of the twelfth century 
19 
On this aspect of the Śivadharmottara see De Simini, Gods and Books, especially 46ff.
20 
Introductions to this literature can be found, among others, in Derrett, Dharmaśāstra, 
which also contains observations on the Dharmanibandhas (see below), and Olivelle, 
Dharmaśāstra.
21 
Brick, Brahmanical Theories, p. 19.
22 
Regarding Lakṣmīdhara, see the introduction to Aiyangar, Kṛtyakalpataru; Bakker and 
Isaacson, Skandapurāṇa; and Brick, Brahmanical Theories. On the subgenre of the digests 
on gifting (dāna), see De Simini, Observations; and Gods and Books (chapter 3), where

--- Page 8 of 24 ---
271
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
in Varanasi by a minister of the Gāhaḍavāla king Govindacandra (r. ca. 1109- 
1168 CE), as Lakṣmīdhara himself declares in the introduction to his work, the 
Kṛtyakalpataru is a collection of scriptural quotations divided into fourteen 
books, each of them corresponding to a main general topic. Such books/topics 
are subsequently divided into chapters/subtopics that consist of a list of texts 
extracted from the traditional sources of Dharma, on which the author rarely 
comments. When he does so, he adopts a very terse style, often just explaining 
the meaning of rare words and compounds; the excerpts are all introduced 
by the title of the source or the name of its mythical author. In the introduction, Lakṣmīdhara mentions a few of his predecessors, whose works are mostly 
lost except for the section on śrāddha from Gopāla’s Kṛtyakāmadhenu, whose 
manuscript has been recently discovered and published by Kouda.23
The structure of Lakṣmīdhara’s digest, a comprehensive work in which 
excerpts from scriptures are structured according to fixed thematic categories 
and interspersed with (at times also very extensive) commentarial observations by the digest-writer, became popular in the following centuries. Notable 
examples are the Smṛticandrikā by Devaṇṇa, a South-Indian author usually dated to mid-twelfth century;24 the Caturvargacintāmaṇi by Hemādri, 
a minister of the Yādava kings Mānadeva (r. ca. 1260-1270) and Rāmacandra 
(r. ca. 1271-1311), whose digest is also referred to in local inscriptions as a sourcebook of norms;25 and the Bhagavantabhāskara by Nīlakaṇṭha, who named his 
digest, divided into various sections called Mayūkhas, after the Rajput king 
Bhagavantadeva (seventeenth century).26 These works are very diverse insofar 
as their choice of topics, as well as the selection, organization, and interpretation of sources is concerned. However, they approach their sources in a similar 
way. In the incipit to his Smṛticandrikā, Devaṇṇa declares:27 “I have not written 
anything here that conforms to my own interpretation, but rather everything is 
based directly upon scriptural statements; therefore, [this Smṛticandrikā] can 
be accepted without risks.”
It may seem counterintuitive that, after this statement, Devaṇṇa proceeds 
to comment extensively on some texts from his selection of sources. Derrett 
suggests that authors such as Devaṇṇa, who almost turn their digests (or, at 
I collect historical information about the authors of digests or digest-sections on dāna, 
offering a broader picture of their style and their method in dealing with this subject.
23 
Kouda, Gopāla (Kami); Gopāla (Shito).
24 
Kane, History of Dharmaśāstra 5.2, 721-23.
25 
Kane, History of Dharmaśāstra 1.2, 751-753 and Talbot, Precolonial India, 83-93.
26 
Shastri, Preliminary Report, 23; Kane, History of Dharmaśāstra 1.2, 938-941.
27 
Smṛticandrikā 1.2: svābhiprāyeṇa hi mayā na kiñcid iha likhyate | kintu vācanikaṃ sarvaṃ 
ato grāhyaiva nirbhayaiḥ ||

--- Page 9 of 24 ---
272
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
least, parts of them) into proper treatises, should be considered as belonging 
to a category of their own.28 Beside Devaṇṇa, these would include Caṇḍeśvara 
(a thirteenth century Nibandha-author who served king Bhaveśa Mithilā), 
Mādhavācārya (1330-1385, a minister of the first Vijayanagara kings and author 
of a digest-commentary on the Parāśarasmṛti) and others. Regardless of the 
taxonomy we want to adopt, what is relevant in their approach to primary 
sources is that these authors regarded the assemblage of primary materials 
from different authoritative sources as the real essence of their works, and 
their observations, however long they could be at times, as subservient to the 
scriptural excerpts.
Other Nibandha-authors composed digests on specific topics; among these, 
we can count Ballāla Sena, king of the Sena dynasty of Bengal (r. ca. 1158-1179), 
to whom four digests are attributed on the topics of gifting, ritual installations, 
extraordinary events, and customs respectively (Dānasāgara, Pratiṣṭhāsāgara, 
Adbhūtasāgara, Ācārasāgara).29 This author stands out because, in the introduction to his Dānasāgara, he states very clearly the reasons that prompted 
him to choose some sources over others, and consequently his purposes in 
composing his digest. In listing the Purāṇas that he has not accepted in his 
work,30 Ballāla Sena mentions criteria such as coherence with the general 
topic of the work, conciseness, the avoidance of redundancy, and the perfect 
orthodoxy of a work, as the main principles to establish whether a Purāṇa can 
or cannot be accepted as a source for his digest. In doing so, this author shows 
awareness of the complex transmission history of Purāṇas and of the existence 
of works that went under such names but should in fact be considered “spurious,” while also expressly attributing to his digest the function of discerning 
between rightful and illegitimate scriptures.
Other Nibandha-authors choose to organize their corpus of scriptures in 
the form of a commentary. The most exemplary work of this kind is attributed to Aparārka, an author who is identified with one of the twelfth-century 
homonymous Śilāhāra kings of Konkan.31 His digest qualifies as a commentary on the important “Smṛti of Yājñavalkya” (Yājñavalkyasmṛti), a treatise on 
Dharmaśāstra composed approximately in the fifth century. The genre of the 
Nibandha does indeed overlap in several aspects with that of the commentary on authoritative sources, which in ancient and medieval South Asia is, par 
excellence, the genre in which “scholarship” on various subjects is composed. 
28 
Derrett, Dharmaśāstra, 54-55.
29 
Kane, History of Dharmaśāstra 1.2, 730 ff., and Majumdar Ancient Bengal, 228-230.
30 
See text and translation in De Simini, Observations, 616 ff.
31 
Mirashi, Inscriptions, LXXV.

--- Page 10 of 24 ---
273
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
However, even just a cursory look at his work shows that the commentarial sections are overwhelmed by the long excerpts of scriptural passages on a given 
topic; the connections between the latter and the text that is commented upon 
are at times very weak.32
As opposed to their primary sources, which are anonymous and intentionally composed as a-temporal, and thus also very difficult to place in time and 
space, Dharma-digests are associated with historical authors who sometimes 
give information about themselves or can be otherwise identified with specific figures of scholars or kings. The chronological limits of this phenomenon, 
broadly speaking, are the eleventh and the eighteenth centuries, when the 
latest Dharmanibandhas were composed at the behest of the British rulers.33 
This clear collocation in time and the straightforward connection with political power, in the form of the attribution of these works to kings or ministers 
of kings, has prompted a reflection on whether we can establish a political 
factor as one of the reasons that stimulated the emergence and growth of this 
genre. This hypothesis was originally advanced by Pollock, who suggested a 
connection between the advance of a Mamluk sultanate in India and the composition of Nibandhas, which he saw as part of a reactionary project conceived 
under the threat of a prevailing foreign culture.34 While it has been remarked 
that this explanation is not sufficient on its own to cover the phenomenon of 
the emergence of the Dharmanibandhas — some of the earliest compositions, 
such as the above-mentioned Smṛticandrikā, were composed in areas where 
contact with foreign cultures was still not part of the political agenda — we 
can still hypothesize that in some areas this factor might have played a role. 
Indeed, authors such as Lakṣmīdhara, Ballāla Sena, Aparārka or Hemādri lived 
in areas that were facing (or were soon to face) what Pollock describes as a 
“juxtaposition with alternative lifeworlds.”35
32 
This hybrid form of digest-commentary is also attested in other domains of South 
Asian textual production. For instance, Francesco Sferra has recently brought to my 
attention the case of the Vajrapadasārasaṃgraha, a commentary on the Buddhist scripture Hevajratantra written by Yaśobhadra, also known as Nāropā (d. 1040-41). The text 
is currently only available in a Tibetan translation (Tôh. no. 1186) from Sanskrit, and is 
de facto a collection of long excerpts from other Tantric Buddhist scriptures, from the 
Prajñāpāramitā Sūtras and, rarely, from the works of famous Mahāyāna authors. As in 
the case of Aparārka’s commentary, the anthological section often prevails on the proper 
commentarial portions.
33 
Derrett, Administration.
34 
Pollock, Deep Orientalism.
35 
Ibid., 106.

--- Page 11 of 24 ---
274
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
Another aspect connected with the role of “public figures” of the Nibandha- 
authors is that, as Derrett notes,36 the composition of such works required 
an institution that would collect, produce and preserve the primary sources, 
often very extensive in size, upon which they depend. In other words, 
monarchic patronage was an indispensable prerequisite of the work of the 
Nibandha-authors, as it provided the level of cultural “institutionalization” 
that such an enterprise required.
The manuscript of the Kṛtyakāmadhenu, already mentioned above, is one 
of the works that Lakṣmīdhara mentions as predating his digest. It seems to 
portray exactly this situation: in the final colophon, the copyist states that the 
manuscript was copied “during the year 1209, in the dark half of the month 
Āṣāḍha, on a Saturday, in the glorious Varanasi, during the auspicious reign of 
the glorious king Govindacandra.”37 This date has been calculated by Kouda as 
corresponding to June 20, 1153.38 What is especially relevant to our discussion 
here is that the manuscript of this digest must have been produced in the same 
center where Lakṣmīdhara, minister of the king Govindacandra, was active. It 
thus belongs to a collection of texts that were copied with royal support at the 
request and/or to the benefit of the local scholars, and this same collection was 
probably available to Lakṣmīdhara allowing him to compose his digest.
 
Digests from the Śaiva Siddhānta Tradition
The situation described in the previous paragraph is not at all unique in the 
vast field of Sanskrit literary production. On the contrary, it reflects a trend 
that we can observe in several fields of knowledge. A family of texts that seems 
to follow a similar development — using digests as a way of navigating a vast, 
at times confusing body of anonymous scriptural knowledge, and establishing the canonical sources of such knowledge — is the very productive branch 
of religious literature belonging to the so-called Śaiva Siddhānta tradition. This 
religious current revolving around the cult of the god Śiva originally developed within the tantric Śaiva traditions from at least the fifth century CE,39 
36 
Derrett, Dharmaśāstra, 52.
37 
Kouda, Gopāla (Kami), 228: saṃvat 1209 āṣāḍha vadi 12 śanau śrīmadvārāṇasyāṃ śrīmad
goviṃdacaṃdradevakalyāṇavijayarājye. The facsimile of this folio is published in Kouda, 
Gopāla (Shimo), 94; the above-mentioned line corresponds to fol. 49r, line 5.
38 
Kouda, Gopāla (Shimo), 146. I thank Kenji Takahashi for helping me select the relevant 
information from this article in Japanese.
39 
The fifth century is when we can approximately date the composition of the earliest layer 
of the Niśvāsa, which in turn is the earliest surviving scripture of this tradition (see the

--- Page 12 of 24 ---
275
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
producing scriptures that mainly addressed the fundamental beliefs of this 
school and the ritual practice of its initiates. From the earliest surviving 
scriptures on, we find lists of twenty-eight Tantras considered “canonical,” 
accompanied by other texts that are conceived of as deriving from one of 
them.40 All of these scriptures — variously designated as Tantras or Āgamas — 
were considered authoritative because their authorship could be traced back 
to Śiva himself.41
Research conducted in recent decades has shown that, in its early history, 
the Śaiva Siddhānta was a pan-Indian phenomenon, as can be deduced both 
on the basis of what is left of its early canon and of the epigraphical attestations of its royal sponsorship.42 However, the historical trajectory followed 
introduction to Goodall, Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā for considerations concerning its absolute 
dating, as well as the relative chronology of the different parts of the text).
40 
For an overview of the contents of such lists, see the table attached to J. Filliozat’s introduction in Bhatt, Rauravāgama, as well as Appendix 3 in Goodall, Kiraṇatantra, 402-417. 
Here, besides giving a brand-new table and correcting a few imprecisions from the earlier 
list, Goodall also provides transcriptions of the unpublished texts from which some of 
these lists are extracted.
41 
See, on this, the discussion in chapter 3 of an early Śaiva Siddhānta scripture, the Parākhya 
(Goodall, Parākhyatantra, 37-46 (text) and 205-225 (translation)), where they refute the 
tenets of the Mīmāṃsā philosophical school, according to which it is exactly the existence of an author, human or divine, that is the cause for a cognition — and, thus, for 
teachings — to be unreliable. Śaivas and other currents maintain the opposite, namely 
that the teachings of their scriptures came from the mouth(s) of Śiva as a manifestation 
of his power and will to save his devotees, and this divine authorship makes them reliable. At the same time, the words of the scriptures are not a literal reflection of those of 
Śiva: as it is also evoked in the beginning of Parākhya’s chapter 3 (see especially verses 
2-6) and is commonplace in scriptural texts from different traditions, the god is supposed 
to have transmitted his teachings to some divine beings at the moment of creation, thus 
activating a chain of transmission that also reached the other gods, who transmitted 
such knowledge to human seers from whom the “best of men” (narasattamāḥ) learned it. 
Furthermore, in the course of this transmission, the teachings are stripped down to their 
essence (sāra), in order to make Śiva’s power understandable for other gods and finite 
human beings. On the notion of the “shrinking” of scriptures, see Parākhya 3.15-16, as well 
as Goodall’s discussion in fn. 228 (Parākhyatantra, 207), with references to more Tantras 
dealing with this subject.
42 
For examples of seventh-century inscriptions mentioning the Śaiva Siddhānta initiation 
being imparted on kings, see Sanderson, History through Textual Criticism, 8-10, fn. 2. The 
earliest mention of the expression “Śaiva Siddhānta” is found in a Sanskrit inscription 
from the Kailāsanātha temple in Kañchipuram; here the Pallava ruler Narasiṃha II, who 
reigned in the last twenty-seven years of the seventh century, is said to be “on the path 
of the Śaiva Siddhānta” (śaivasiddhāntamārge; see Hultzsch, South-Indian Inscriptions 12, 
v. 5cd). More tenth-eleventh-century attestations in Madhya Pradesh and the North-West 
are given in Goodall, Parākhyatantra, XX, fn. 17. Considerations on the criteria for establishing that a Śaiva Siddhānta scripture is early, including the existence of manuscript

--- Page 13 of 24 ---
276
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
by the Śaiva Siddhānta brought it to become progressively more rooted in the 
Tamil-speaking regions of the South of India, to which this tradition has been 
strongly associated especially from the twelfth century onwards, and where 
local variants are still alive today.43 This association with a specific area and the 
parallel weakening of its presence in other regions were accompanied by major 
changes within the tradition. In the Tamil South, the Śaiva Siddhānta became 
an integral part of the temple-based religious life that flourished under the Coḷa 
emperors (eighth to thirteenth century), and therefore developed a whole set 
of public (parārtha) rituals that were absent in the earlier scriptures, centered 
on the practice of private individuals. This and other major developments, like 
those concerning the theological speculation of this school, were supported by 
new texts that claimed the status of scripture;44 most of these bear the same 
titles as texts that are attested in the early pan-Indian lists, a strategy adopted 
in order for them to be recognized as canonical. However, on the basis of their 
contents as well as their transmission, scholars have established that these are 
more recent compositions from the South and that they owe their popularity 
to the loss of the earlier homonymous texts, of which sometimes only quotations survive in earlier exegetical literature. The composition of such new 
Tantras is then flanked by the development of a Śaiva Siddhānta devotional 
and exegetical literature both in Tamil and Sanskrit.
To add to the complexity of this brief sketch, the Śaiva Siddhānta coexisted 
with other Śaiva and non-Śaiva traditions, all of them relying on scriptures 
attributed to the same or another god, in one case even producing a whole 
canon of scriptures that once again bore the same titles as those of the early 
Śaiva Siddhānta canon.45 Thus, it comes as no surprise that digests and summaries of Śaiva Siddhānta teachings are attested, at least from the eleventh 
century onwards, as a way to organize scriptural knowledge around certain 
topics — ritual practice being one of the most important drivers — or to condense doctrines that were explained in conflicting ways in the scriptures. In 
this complex transmission history, digests also help us to fill some of the gaps 
attestations outside of Nepal and the production of early commentaries, are in Goodall, 
Kiraṇatantra, XL ff.
43 
Goodall, Kiraṇatantra, XL fn. 91, and idem, Parākhyatantra, XXVII.
44 
Besides the publications I already referred to (such as Sanderson, History through Textual 
Criticism, Goodall, Kiraṇatantra; Parākhyatantra), the reader will find a clear exposition 
of this and related developments also in Sanderson, Śaiva Literature, 13 ff.
45 
This is the case of the Vīraśaiva school, which is attested in the Deccan especially from 
the thirteenth century onwards, and which, just like the Śaiva Siddhānta in Tamil Nadu, is 
still a living local Śaiva tradition in Karnataka. For some introductory considerations on 
its canon of Sanskrit scriptures, see Sanderson, Śaiva Literature, 85.

--- Page 14 of 24 ---
277
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
in our knowledge of the early history of Śaiva scriptures, as they quote the 
text that they knew at a specific moment in history. At the same time, digests 
that are based on Śaiva Siddhānta sources are often not limited to the Tantras 
of this school, but branch out into the scriptural literature of other Śaiva currents, while also drawing from ritual manuals or works from other recognized 
teachers. The insertion of excerpts from texts by historical authors is, perhaps, 
the most important conceptual difference in the selection of sources operated by the authors of this school in comparison to those of the Dharmaśāstra 
tradition, who were, on the contrary, exclusively relying on the anonymous 
scriptures handed down by tradition.
The Nityādisaṃgrahapaddhati of Rājānaka Takṣakavarta from Kashmir 
(ca. twelfth century), for instance, is a ritual manual in the form of a digest 
in which the author covers different types of Śaiva worship by quoting scriptures from the Śaiva Siddhānta tradition, but also from those based on the 
Netratantra and the Svacchandatantra, alongside a number of other local ritual manuals.46 Another early example is that of Hṛdayaśiva of Mālava, a Śaiva 
Siddhānta initiate whose work can be placed within the twelfth century.47 
He is the author of the Prāyaścittasamuccaya, a digest (samuccaya, which 
literally means “collection”) on the topic of ritual atonement (prāyaścitta). 
The array of scriptures he quotes comprises a broad range of Tantras of the 
Śaiva Siddhānta tradition, but also includes some that are traced back to 
the so-called Mantrapīṭha and Vidyāpīṭha.48 The specific technique used by 
Hṛdayaśiva qualifies his work as a sourcebook on the topic of ritual atonement: each chapter of the Prāyaścittasamuccaya corresponds to a chapter on 
prāyaścitta from a Śaiva work, with the title of this source being stated both 
at the beginning of the chapter and in its final colophon.49 Different is the 
style of another almost contemporary Prāyaścittasamuccaya, composed by 
Trilocanaśiva, a Southern author of the Śaiva Siddhānta tradition, pupil of 
the famous exegete Aghoraśiva and thus also active in the twelfth century.50 
46 
On this author, see Sanderson, Śaiva Exegesis, 420-21.
47 
On the basis of the available evidence, Sanderson established that Hṛdayaśiva must have 
been active between 863 and 1158, which is the date of the Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript 
transmitting the Prāyaścittasamuccaya (History through Textual Criticism, 3, fn.1).
48 
As observed by Sanderson (History through Textual Criticism, 4, fn. 1), the work of 
Hṛdayaśiva transmits titles and quoted texts from Saiddhāntika scriptures that are not 
known from Kashmirian sources, and thus contributes to enlarge the range of sources we 
know.
49 
For a list of the texts that compose his digest and their identification, see Goodall, 
Introduction, 22-23.
50 
On Trilocanaśiva and his relationship to Aghoraśiva and Jñānaśiva, another relevant Śaiva Siddhānta author of that time, see Goodall, Problems. Trilocanaśiva’s

--- Page 15 of 24 ---
278
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
His digest on ritual atonement is composed in the style of an independent 
treatise, where stanzas written by the author are interspersed with short 
selections of scriptural texts and ritual manuals on the same topic, tightly 
intertwined and unattributed by the author. While Hṛdayaśiva kept the texts 
of his sources well separated, and gave his authorial contribution mainly in the 
general introduction (as well as in his work of selecting sources), Trilocanaśiva 
uses the texts of his authorities in order to create an independent treatise 
in which his authorial contribution is not distinct from the sources that he 
organizes and quotes. As observed by Goodall in his introduction to the 2015 
critical edition of Trilocanaśiva’s Prāyaścittasamuccaya, which also gives the 
text of Hṛdayaśiva’s digest as an appendix, the latter allows us better to understand the broader context of Trilocanaśiva’s selection of sources, when these 
come from texts that have not survived in their entirety, and also to assess the 
difference between the two in their use of primary materials. An important 
difference lies for instance in Trilocanaśiva’s choice of contaminating the 
Śaiva scriptures not only with excerpts from a famous Śaiva Siddhānta ritual 
manual, the Kriyākāṇḍakramāvalī by Somaśambhu (eleventh century), but 
also with scriptures from the Dharmaśāstra tradition. Unlike Takṣakavarta and 
Hṛdayaśiva before him, Trilocanaśiva quotes frequently from ancient Smṛtis 
such as the Manusmṛti, the Yājñavalkyasmṛti, the Parāśarasmṛti, and others, that had in fact a lot to say on the topic of ritual atonement. The use of 
Dharmaśāstra scriptures in a Śaiva Siddhānta context might certainly be read 
as a reflection of that increased “coherence with Brahmanical orthopraxy” that 
has always characterized the Śaiva Siddhānta tradition as opposed to other 
less orthodox Tantric currents, and which will become especially relevant 
for the later neo-Siddhānta in the South.51 At the same time and in connection with the popularity that the genre of the digest will enjoy in the Śaiva 
Siddhānta tradition from roughly the same time that saw their expansion in 
the Dharmaśāstra, this raises the still unanswered question of the direct influence that the latter might have had on the former. As suggested by Goodall,52 
Prāyaścittasamuccaya has recently been edited by R. Sathyanarayana (Śaiva Rites of 
Expiation).
51 
On later developments see Goodall, Parākhyatantra, XXVI ff., and Sanderson, Śaiva 
Literature, 85 ff. As for the Śaiva Siddhānta being the least esoteric among the Tantric 
traditions, one can refer to Sanderson, Śaivism, 668-669.
52 
See Goodall, Introduction, 18, in which he briefly considers the possibility that the digest 
was “a genre newly popular in Śaiva circles in its [scil.: the Prāyaścittasamuccaya’s] time, 
perhaps because of a growth in Śaiva monastic libraries, and perhaps under the influence 
of Dharmaśāstra, where this genre seems to have emerged around the same period or 
earlier.”

--- Page 16 of 24 ---
279
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
a possible shared presupposition for the composition of digests in both traditions might also be their high level of institutionalization, and thus, again, the 
availability of libraries: while the composition of digests of Dharmaśāstra usually fell into the domain of royal administrators, that of digests of Śaiva sources 
was often connected to the abbots of Śaiva Siddhānta monasteries.
A further source that is used in Trilocanaśiva’s Prāyaścittasamuccaya and 
not by Hṛdayaśiva is the Vāyavīyasaṃhitā, an early section of the Śivapurāṇa. 
The earliest author to quote from this text was one of Trilocanaśiva’s teachers, 
known under the initiatic names of Jñānaśiva or Jñānaśambhu, in his ritual 
manual Jñānaratnāvalī, also written in the style of a digest.53 According to the 
colophon of his work, this author composed the text in Varanasi, and since we 
know that he was a contemporary of Aghoraśiva, it is likely that he was active 
there at the same time as Lakṣmīdhara. This specific section of the Śivapurāṇa, 
along with the Śivadharmottara — which is used in all the early digests by 
Takṣakavarta, Hṛdayaśiva, Jñānaśiva and Trilocanaśiva — will become popular 
in the Southern Śaiva Siddhānta tradition, even though neither the Śivapurāṇa 
nor the Śivadharmottara are originally Śaiva Siddhānta works. In light of this 
continued popularity, we might therefore read the inclusion of these and 
other sources into the early digests not just as a reflection, but as the setting in 
motion of a process of integration into the local culture that culminated with 
their translation into Tamil in the sixteenth century, a period of great transformation of this tradition and profound rooting in the Tamil-speaking South.54
While the Śaiva Siddhānta tradition attests to the composition of digests 
or digest-like works quite consistently,55 the sixteenth century marks an important point in this development thanks to the work of Vedajñāna II (Tamil: 
53 
Information on Jñānaśiva and the Jñānaratnāvalī can be found in Goodall, Problems, 
especially 208-214. As regards Jñānaśiva being the earliest author to quote from the 
Vāyavīyasaṃhitā, see Barois, Doctrine et rituels, 103.
54 
On the Tamil translation of the Vāyavīyasaṃhitā, see Raghavan, Tamil Versions; on the 
Tamil translation of the Śivadharmottara, see Ganesan, Two Śaiva Teachers, 36.
55 
Besides proper digests of scriptures, such as the Śataratnasaṃgraha by Umāpati (fourteenth century), one should also consider the several compendia of Śaiva Siddhānta 
doctrines, such as for instance the two that are possibly attributed to the same 
Trilocanaśiva who authored the Prāyaścittasamuccaya, titled Siddhāntasamuccaya and 
Siddhāntasārāvalī, as well as the Siddhāntadīpikā by Rāmanātha (ca. twelfth century), as 
tools that authors of this tradition created in order to navigate its vast corpus of authorities 
and knowledge (on Rāmanātha, mostly with reference to his manual Naṭarājapaddhati, 
see Goodall, Saiddhāntika Paddhatis I). Moreover, the several ritual manuals (paddhati) 
that make extensive use of quotations from the authoritative literature, along with commentaries on such paddhatis, heavily loaded in scriptural quotations, also partly fulfil this 
function. For a list of such paddhatis and their commentaries, with considerations on 
their authors and transmission, see Sanderson, Śaiva Literature, 20-25.

--- Page 17 of 24 ---
280
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
Maṟaiñāṉa Tēcikar). This was a Śaiva Siddhānta author usually dated to the sixteenth century and associated, along with his teacher and uncle, Vedajñāna I 
(Tamil: Maṟaiñāṉa Campantaṉ), with the rich Śaiva centre of Cidamabaram.56 
The works produced by these two authors, though abundant and important, 
still needs to be properly edited and studied. Current academic projects promise to achieve a better understanding of their oeuvre and its historical and 
cultural function in the near future.57 A glance at their surviving works reveals 
that, while Vedajñāna I only wrote in Tamil, and also translated Sanskrit 
works into Tamil, the surviving works of Vedajñāna II are both in Tamil and in 
Sanskrit. In Tamil he was the author, among other things, of a commentary on 
the Civatarumōttaram, his teacher’s Tamil translation of the Śivadharmottara, 
as well as a commentary on the Civañāṉacittiyār, the Tamil adaptation of the 
Śivajñānasiddhi. Vedajñāna’s works in Sanskrit are mostly written in the style 
of digests, both of Śaiva scriptures and of authored texts, selected and arranged 
into thematic units. More specifically, he wrote two imposing ritual manuals, 
the Dīkṣādarśa (“Illustration of Initiations”) and the Ātmārthapūjāpaddhati 
(“Ritual Manual on Private Worship”), in the style of a digest in which the 
sources are all clearly identified, and to which a few commentarial sections 
are added; at times, it is possible to show that even these sections are not original and drawn from other sources, which in this case is not acknowledged. 
While not proper digests, the author’s other works such as the Āśaucadīpikā 
(“Light on Impurity”) or the Kālaviveka (“Examinations of the [Suitable] 
Times”) are still deeply indebted to the digest-style. Moreover, Vedajñāna II 
is also the author of a treatise titled Śaivāgamaparibhāṣāmañjarī (“The 
Anthology of Rules from the Śaiva Scriptures”). Here, like in Trilocanaśiva’s 
Prāyaścittasamuccaya, excerpts from scriptures and other authoritative 
texts are strung together in order to form a single, continuous text, in which 
sources are not acknowledged. However, in this case the author finds another 
way to navigate his body of sources, as he divides the subject matter according 
to numbers from one to twelve: in each chapter, the author deals with notions 
56 
There are still very few contributions on the work of these two important Śaiva authors. 
The reader might want to refer to Dagens, Śaivāgamaparibhāṣāmañjarī, Ganesan, Two 
Śaiva Teachers, and Sanderson, Śaiva Literature, 24-25 and 88 ff., for introductions.
57 
The study of these two authors, with special reference to their contribution to the 
translation of the Śivadharmottara from Sanskrit to Tamil and the composition of its 
commentary in Tamil, along with the production of Sanskrit digests, is one of the main 
research foci of the ERC-Starting Grant Project “Śivadharma.” Especially on this topic, the 
project receives contributions not just from its main host institution, the University of 
Naples “L’Orientale,” but also from researchers active at one partner institution, the École 
française d’Extrême-Orient in Pondicherry (India).

--- Page 18 of 24 ---
281
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
classified according to that number. Chapter one thus deals with things that 
are undivided (such as Śiva), chapter two with categories that are divided into 
two groups (like the two types of knowledge, of actions, of bodies), chapter 
three with threefold objects (the three topics, the three kinds of defilement, 
the three types of actions), and so on. This criterion might sound bizarre to 
a reader unacquainted with the strong taxonomic tendency that often characterizes South Asian technical literature. However, even so, the adoption of 
numbers as a way to structure the contents of a work of this kind is rare, and 
might in fact find parallels in local lexica and dictionaries rather than in other 
collections of scriptural sources.58 The other example that comes to mind from 
religious literature is that of the Aṅguttara Nikāya, one of the main divisions of 
the Sutta Piṭaka of the Pali Buddhist canon, in which the compositions (Suttas/
Sūtras) are arranged in categories according to the progressive number of the 
topics that are mentioned in them. Also, in this case, the redactors were not 
dealing with original compositions, but rather devising strategies to collect 
and transmit a preexisting body of authoritative knowledge.
The work of the two Vedajñānas, in the cultural environment of sixteenthcentury South India, seems thus to aim at strengthening the connections 
existing between the formerly pan-Indian Śaiva Siddhānta tradition and 
the Tamil state, an objective that is pursued both by means of the composition of new works in Tamil (among which is the remarkable translation 
of the Śivadharmottara, a work that earlier digests had started to integrate 
into the Śaiva Siddhānta canon), and by composing digests of works in Sanskrit. 
The importance of Vedajñāna’s digests in the history of the Śaiva Siddhānta 
also lies in the fact that they confirm that his scriptural horizon, though also 
including some earlier texts, was however firmly rooted in the new canon of 
scriptures that had been composed in the South to support Śaiva Siddhānta’s 
latest developments, and which in his digests are arranged to give structure to 
the ritual life of the local Śaiva communities.
 
Conclusions
This article reflects my own attempt at navigating an overwhelming body of 
texts, many of which are still unedited and/or inadequately studied. While very 
far from being exhaustive, I have tried to give the reader a sense of the dimensions of this important cultural phenomenon in South Asian societies, whose 
58 
I am grateful to Margherita Trento for this suggestion, which I will try to verify in my study 
of the Sanskrit digests composed by this author.

--- Page 19 of 24 ---
282
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
study tackles a number of issues — from the notions of orthodoxy and scripturality, to that of authorship and the creation of tradition — that lie at the 
heart of the production and transmission of texts. Furthermore, the connection drawn between the composition of these anthological works and public 
institutions, such as the court or the monastery, should not only be explained 
in terms of the practical presuppositions required for the composition of such 
works, but also of the function that digests and anthologies might have played 
in the process of knowledge preservation and transmission within such institutions, about which we still know little.
The perspective offered in this Special Issue can be particularly fruitful 
when dealing with the Sanskrit “thematic encyclopaedias,” since the phenomenon of selecting and structuring vast bodies of knowledge within thematically 
organized works is a common feature of textual cultures that have reached a 
certain level of development and spread of their writing culture, and can thus 
be very productively addressed through a comparative perspective. Among 
the ideas mentioned in other contributions to this Special Issue, I see the 
following as potentially thought-provoking fields for scholars of the Sanskrit 
digests: the focus on the systematic classification of materials as a culturally 
relevant phenomenon per se (Toral); the creation of archives and of an archival 
culture (Bray, Van Berkel); and the growth of the figure of the administrator- 
scholar and the stress on the technological developments that made the 
composition and transmission of such large works conceivable (Van Berkel). 
The latter highlights, among other things, how the spread of paper from the 
eighth century CE impacted both the composition of books and the production of state documents at all levels of administration, further linking the 
production and use of documents with their shape and contents. 
These sorts of considerations can be very fruitful when addressing the 
debated category of “encyclopaedism,” not just in the Arabic but also in the 
Sanskrit writing communities, by grounding the study of digests on that of the 
environments that conceived and made use of them. Too often these works, 
for reasons also related to our still incomplete knowledge, are mainly seen and 
used by scholars of Sanskrit and the Indian traditions for their philological 
value, as important sources of texts that are otherwise lost, or as testimonies 
of parallel recensions of known texts; still rarely we raise questions concerning their significance in the local environment of their production or in the 
supra-local context of their reception. Looking at digests of Dharma through 
this lens might help us better frame the emergence and success of a genre that 
handed down to us some of the best tools to understand which texts intellectuals of different regions and historical backgrounds were reading and choosing 
to transmit to future generations.

--- Page 20 of 24 ---
283
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
 
Acknowledgements
Some of the research for this article was carried out as part of the “Śivadharma 
Project” (https://shivadharmaproject.com/). This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 
803624). I thank Letizia Osti and James Weaver for inviting me to the “Navigating 
the House of Wisdom” workshop in May 2017 in Milan, and for their feedback 
on this article. I furthermore thank Alessandro Battistini and Francesco Sferra, 
as well as the two anonymous reviewers, for their observations and constructive criticism.
References
 
Primary Sources
Amarakośa
Shastri, Haragovinda, Amarakoṣa (Nāmaliṅgānuśāsana) of Amarasiṃha, Edited with 
Notes and the ‘Maṇiprabhā’ Hindī commentary [The Haridas Sanskrit Series 30], 
Varanasi: The Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1998
Kiraṇatantra
Goodall, Dominic, Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the ‘Kiraṇatantra’, Vol. I, 
Chapters 1-6 = Bhaṭṭarāmakaṇṭhaviracitā kiraṇavr̥ttiḥ, Pondicherry: Institut français 
de Pondichéry, 1998
Kṛtyakalpataru, Dānakāṇḍa
Aiyangar, K.V. Rangaswami, Kṛtyakalpataru of Bhaṭṭa Lakṣmīdhara, Vol. V: Dānakāṇḍa 
[Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 92], Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1941
Brick, David, Brahmanical Theories of the Gift: A Critical Edition and Annotated 
Translation of the Dānakāṇḍa of the Kṛtyakalpataru [Harvard Oriental Series 77], 
Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press, 2015
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā
Goodall, Dominic, The Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: The Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra. Vol. 1. 
Critical Edition & Annotated Translation of the Mūlasūtra, Uttarasūtra & Nayasūtra, 
by Dominic Goodall, in Collaboration with Alexis Sanderson & Harunaga Isaacson 
[Collection Indologie 128], Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry, 2015
Parākhyatantra
Goodall, Dominic, The Parākhyatantra: A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta [Collection 
Indologie 98], Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry & Ecole française 
d’Extrême-Orient, 2004

--- Page 21 of 24 ---
284
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
Bhaviṣyapurāṇa
Upadhyaya, Babu Ram, Bhaviṣya Mahāpurāṇa, Brāhmaparva (hindi anuvad sahit), 
Allahabad: Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, 2003
Matsyapurāṇa
Apte, Hari Nārāyaṇa, Śrīmaddvapayanamunipraṇītaṃ Matsyapurāṇaṃ, Puṇyākhya
pattana [=Pune]: Ānandāśramasaṃskṛtagranthāvaliḥ 54, 1907
Rauravāgama
Bhatt, Niddodi Ramacandra, Rauravāgama. Vol. I [Publications de l’Institut français 
d’Indologie 18], Pondicherry: Institut français d’indologie, 1961
Varāhapurāṇa
Shastri, Hrishikesha, The Varāha Purāṇa, Calcutta: The Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1893 
[Bibliotheca Indica New Series, 601, 631, 635, 640, 647, 654, 677, 694, 710, 714, 719, 
726, 733, 829]
Viṣṇupurāṇa
Sharma, Rajendranath, The Viṣṇumahāpurāṇam, Introduction, Text, Textual Corrections 
and Verse-Index, Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1984
Śivadharmottara
De Simini, Florinda, The Śivadharmottara, Critical Edition and English Translation, 
forthcoming
Skandapurāṇa
Adriaensen, Rob, Hans T. Bakker, and Harunaga Isaacson, The Skandapurāṇa. Volume 
I: Adhyāyas 1-25. Critically Edited with Prolegomena, Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 1998
Bakker, Hans T., and Harunaga Isaacson, The Skandapurāṇa Vol. IIa. Adhyāyas 26-31.14. 
The Vārāṇasī Cycle [Supplement to Groningen Oriental Studies 2a], Groningen: 
Egbert Forsten, 2004
Smṛticandrikā
Srinivasacharya, Lakshmipuram, Smritichandrika by Devanna-Bhatta. I. Samskara Kanda 
[Bibliotheca Sanskrita 43], Mysore: Government Branch Press, 1914
 
Secondary Sources
Bakker, Hans T., Some Methodological Considerations with Respect to the Critical 
Edition of Purāṇic Literature, in: Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Gesell
schaft. Supplementa. 23 (Deutscher Orientalistentag vom 16. bis 20. September 1985 
in Würzburg. Ausgewählte Vorträge hrsg. von Einar von Schuler), 1989, 329-341
Barois, Christèle, Introduction, in: La Vāyavīyasaṃhitā: Doctrine et rituels śivaites en 
context purāṇique, 3 vols, Paris: Doctoral thesis presented at the École Pratique des 
Hautes Études, Mention ‘Sciences de religions et systèmes de pensée’, I, 2012
Bisschop, Peter C., Universal Śaivism: The Appeasement of All Gods and Powers in the 
Śāntyadhyāya of the Śivadharmaśāstra [Gonda Indological Studies 18], Leiden: Brill, 
2018

--- Page 22 of 24 ---
285
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
Bisschop, Peter C., Vyāsa’s Palimpsest: Tracking Processes of Transmission and 
Re-Creation in Anonymous Sanskrit Literature, in: Nico Staring, Huw Twiston Davies, 
and Lara Weiss (eds.), Perspective on Lived Religion: Practices — Transmission — 
Landscape [Papers on Archaeology of the Leiden Museum of Antiquities 21], Leiden: 
Seidestone Press, 2019, 165-172
Brunner-Lachaux, Hélène, Somaśambhupaddhati: Rituels dans la tradition śivaïte 
selon Somaśambhu. Quatrième partie. Rituels optionnels: Pratiṣṭhā [Publications 
du Département d’Indologie, 25.4], Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry & 
École française d’Extrême-Orient, 1998
Dagens, Bruno, Śaivāgamaparibhāṣāmañjarī: Le florilège de la doctrine śivaïte [Publica
tions de l’Institut français d’Indologie 60], Pondicherry: Institut français d’indologie, 
1979
De Simini, Florinda, Observations on the Use of Quotations in Sanskrit Dharmani
bandhas, in: Journal of Indian Philosophy, 42 (2014), 601-624
De Simini, Florinda, Of Gods and Books: Ritual and Knowledge Transmission in the 
Manuscript Cultures of Premodern India [Studies in Manuscript Cultures 8], Berlin: 
De Gruyter, 2016
Derrett, J. Duncan M., The Administration of Hindu Law by the British, in: Comparative 
Studies in Society and History, 4 (1961), 10-52
Derrett, J. Duncan M., Dharmaśāstra and Juridical Literature [A History of Indian 
Literature 4], Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1973
Ganesan, Thiagarajan, Two Śaiva Teachers of the Sixteenth Century: Nigamajñāna I and 
his Disciple Nigamajñāna II, Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry, 2009
Goodall, Dominic, Problems of Name and Lineage: Relationships between South 
Indian Authors of the Śaiva Siddhānta, in: Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 10 
(2000), 205-216
Goodall, Dominic, Saiddhāntika Paddhatis I: On Rāmanātha, the Earliest Southern 
Author of the Śaivasiddhānta of whom Works Survive, and on Eleventh-Century 
Revisions of the Somaśambhupaddhati, in: Cracow Indological Studies, 16 (2014), 
169-201
Goodall, Dominic, Introduction, in: R. Sathyanarayanan (ed.), Śaiva Rites of Expiation: 
A First Edition and Translation of Trilocanaśiva’s Twelfth-Century Prāyaścittasamuccaya (with a Transcription of Hṛdayaśiva’s Prāyaścittasamuccaya). Introduction 
by Dominic Goodall [Collection Indologie 127], Pondicherry: Institut français de 
Pondichéry & École française d’Extrême-Orient, 2015
Harimoto, Kengo, Some Observations on the Revā- and the Ambikākhaṇḍa recensions 
of the Skandapurāṇa, in: Hans T. Bakker (ed.), Origin and Growth of the Purāṇic 
Text Corpus: With Special Reference to the Skandapurāṇa [Papers of the 12th World 
Sanskrit Conference. Held in Helsinki, Finland 13-18 July, 2003], Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass Publishers, 2004, 41-63

--- Page 23 of 24 ---
286
De Simini
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
Hazra, Rajendra C., Studies in the Purāṇic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs [Dacca 
University Bulletin 20], Dacca, 1940
Hazra, Rajendra C., Studies in the Upapurāṇas, vol. 2 [Calcutta Sanskrit College Research 
Series 22], Calcutta: Sanskrit College, 1963
Hultzsch, Eugen, South-Indian inscriptions, Tamil and Sanskrit, From Stone and 
Copper-plate Edicts at Mamallapuram, Kanchipuram, in the North Arcot District, 
and Other Parts of the Madras Presidency, Chiefly Collected in 1886-87 [South Indian 
Inscriptions, Volume I], Madras: Government Press, 1890
Kane, Pandurang Vaman, History of Dharmaśāstra (Ancient and Mediaeval Religious 
and Civil Law), Vol. 5.2 [Government Oriental Series, Class B6], Pune: Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, 1962
Kane, Pandurang Vaman, History of Dharmaśāstra (Ancient and Mediaeval Religious 
and Civil Law), Vol. 1.2 [Government Oriental Series, Class B6], Pune: Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute, 1975
Kirfel, Willibald, Das Purāṇa Pañcalakṣaṇa: Versuch Einer Textgeschichte, Bonn: 
Schroeder, 1927
Kouda, Ryōshū, Gopāla Cho Kṛtyakāmadhenu No Baiyō Shahon (Kami), in: Hasegawa 
Bukkyō Bunka Kenkyujo Nenpō 39 (2015), 1-61 (230-270)
Kouda, Ryōshū, Gopāla Cho Krtyakāmadhenu No Baiyō Shahon (Shimo), in: Hasegawa 
Bukkyō Bunka Kenkyujo Nenpō 40 (2016), 1-59 (150-192)
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra, History of Ancient Bengal, Calcutta: G. Bharadwaj, 1971
Mirashi, Vasudev Vishnu, Inscriptions of the Kalachuri-Chedi Era Part I [Corpus 
Inscriptionum Indicarum 4], New Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India, 1977
Olivelle, Patrick, Dharmaśāstra: A Textual History, in: Timothy Lubin, Donald R. Davis, 
and Jayanth K. Krishnan (eds.), Hinduism and Law: An Introduction, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010
Pollock, Sheldon, Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power Beyond the Raj, in: 
Carol A. Breckenridge and Peter Van der Veer (eds.), Orientalism and the Postcolonial 
Predicament. Perspectives on South Asia [South Asia Seminar Series], Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993, 76-133
Raghavan, Venkataraman, Tamil Versions of the Purāṇas, in: Purāṇam, 2/1-2 (1960), 
225-242
Rastelli, Marion, The “Pāñcarātra Passages” in Agnipurāṇa 21-70, in: Dominic Goodall 
and André Padoux (eds.), Mélanges tantriques à la memoir d’Hélène Brunner — 
Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner [Collection Indologie 106], Pondicherry: 
Institut français de Pondichéry & École française d’Extrême-Orient, 2007, 187-229
Rocher, Ludo, The Purānas [A History of Indian Literature 2.3], Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz, 1986
Sanderson, Alexis, Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions, in: Stewart Sutherland et al. 
(eds.), The World’s Religions, London: Routledge, 1988, 660-704

--- Page 24 of 24 ---
287
Navigating the Ocean of Dharma
Journal of Abbasid Studies 7 (2020) 264-287
Sanderson, Alexis, History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the 
Pañcarātra and the Buddhist Yoginītantras, in: François Grimal (ed.), Les Sources 
et le temps – Sources and Time [Publications du Département d’Indologie 91], 
Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry & École française d’Extrême-Orient, 
2001, 1-47
Sanderson, Alexis, The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir, in: Dominic Goodall and André 
Padoux (eds.), Mélanges tantriques à la memoir d’Hélène Brunner – Tantric Studies 
in Memory of Hélène Brunner [Collection Indologie 106], Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry & École française d’Extrême-Orient, 2007, 231-442 and 551-582 
(bibliography)
Sanderson, Alexis, The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the 
Early Medieval Period, in: Shingo Einoo (ed.), Genesis and Development of Tantrism, 
Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo, 2009, 41-349
Sanderson, Alexis, The Śaiva Literature, in: Journal of Indological Studies, 24-25 (20122013), 1-113
Sathyanarayanan, R., Śaiva Rites of Expiation: A First Edition and Translation 
of Trilocanaśiva’s Twelfth-Century Pāyaścittasamuccaya (with a transcription of 
Hṛdayaśiva’s prāyaścittasamuccaya). Introduction by Dominic Goodall [Collection 
Indologie 127], Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry & École française 
d’Extrême-Orient, 2015
Shastri, Haraprasad, Preliminary Report on the Operation in Search of Mss. of Bardic 
Chronicles, Calcutta: Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1913
Talbot, Cynthia, Precolonial India in Practice: Society, Region, and Identity in Medieval 
Andhra, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001
Verdon, Noémie, Cartography and Cultural Encounter: Conceptualization of al-Hind 
by Arabic and Persian Writers from the 9th to the 11th Centuries CE, in: Himanshu 
Prabha Ray (ed.), Negotiating Cultural Identities. Landscapes in Early Medieval South 
Asian History, London: Routledge, 2015, 30-59
Zvelebil, Kamil Veith, Tamil Literature [A History of Indian Literature 10.1], Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz, 1974