Source PDF File: output/palmleaf_india_nepal/research-notes/loop_A21/documents\0xc1aa5572%200x003f63e4.pdf
Total Pages: 10
Health Check: PASS (avg 1615.8 chars/page)
Statistics: Chars=16309, ThaiWords=3261.8, EnglishWords=2951

--- Page 1 of 10 ---
Griffiths, Rachael, Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) for Tibetan Manuscripts in 
Cursive Script. Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines, no. 72, July 2024, 43–51 
 
Publication date: 27.07.2024 
 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1553/TibSchol_ERC_HTR 
 
Abstract: 
 
The use of advanced computational methods for the analysis of digitised texts is becoming 
increasingly popular in humanities and social science research. One such technology is 
Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR), which generates transcripts from digitised texts with 
machine learning approaches, to enable full-text search and analysis. Up to now, HTR models 
for Tibetan manuscripts in cursive script have not been available. This paper introduces work 
carried out as part of the The Dawn of Tibetan Buddhist Scholasticism (11th-13th) TibSchol) 
project at the Austrian Academy of Sciences, which is utilising the Transkribus platform to 
explore possible solutions to automate the transcription of Tibetan cursive scripts. It presents 
our methodology and preliminary results along with a discussion of the limitations and 
potential of our current models. 
 
 
Project: 
 
TibSchol – The Dawn of Tibetan Buddhist Scholasticism (11th-13th c.) 
 
TibSchol aims at painting an integrative picture of the contextual and conceptual aspects of 
the formative phase of the Tibetan Buddhist scholastic tradition. Its ground-breaking study of 
an exceptionally active period of Tibetan scholarly creativity will integrate Tibetan thinkers 
into world intellectual history and the global history of philosophy. 
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 
101001002). It is hosted at the Institute for the Cultural and Intellectual History of Asia of the 
Austrian Academy of Sciences. 
The results published are solely within the author’s responsibility and do not necessarily 
reflect the opinion of the European Research Council or the European Commission who must 
not be held responsible for either contents or their further use.

--- Page 2 of 10 ---
Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) for Tibetan
Manuscripts in Cursive Script∗
R a c h a e l M . G r i f f i t h s
(Austrian Academy of Sciences)
T
he use of advanced computational methods for the analysis of digitised texts is becoming increasingly popular in humanities and social
science research. One such technology is Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR), which generates transcripts from digitised texts with machine
learning approaches, to enable full-text search and analysis. Up to now, HTR
models for Tibetan manuscripts in cursive script have not been available. This
paper introduces work carried out as part of the The Dawn of Tibetan Buddhist Scholasticism (11th-13th) (TibSchol) project at the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, which is utilising the Transkribus platform to explore possible solutions to automate the transcription of Tibetan cursive scripts. It presents our
methodology and preliminary results along with a discussion of the limitations and potential of our current models.
1.
Introduction
Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) is an active research field that has developed significantly over the last decade, making great strides in its ability to automatically transcribe texts, especially those in Roman script (Nockels 2022). Focus now is being applied to extending this to other scripts–including Devanagari (Merkel-Hilf 2022), Hebrew (Digitizing Jewish Studies
(DiJeSt) 2020), and Pracalit script (O’Neill & Hill 2022)–and offers great potential to those studying texts in a wider range of languages. In the context of Tibetan, several initiatives have been undertaken to develop Optical
Character Recognition (OCR) systems. Notable OCR implementations for
∗Rachael Griffiths, “Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) for Tibetan Manuscripts in Cursive
Script”, Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines, no. 72, Juillet 2024, pp. 43-51.
The writing of this paper was facilitated through the project The Dawn of Tibetan Buddhist
Scholasticism (11th-13th) (TibSchol). This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 101001002 TibSchol). The results presented are solely within
the author’s responsibility and do not necessarily reflect the opinion of the European Research
Council or the European Commission who must not be held responsible for either contents or
their further use.

--- Page 3 of 10 ---
44
Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines
Tibetan include Namsel OCR¹ and Google Drive/Google Docs. Additionally, projects and organisations such as the Buddhist Digital Research Centre
(BDRC, https://www.bdrc.io) and Esukhia (https://github.com/Esukhia/)
are actively engaged in research and development efforts in OCR and HTR.
However, despite these endeavors, publicly available HTR models for Tibetan
are currently unavailable.
Expanding the abilities of HTR models to Tibetan manuscripts is one strand
that is being explored as part of the ERC-funded project The Dawn of Tibetan
Buddhist Scholasticism (11th–13th) (TibSchol) at the Austrian Academy of Sciences. The project is carrying out an extensive study of the formative phase of
Tibetan Buddhist scholasticism, utilising a large number of recently surfaced
works. Notably it explores texts that were published as manuscript facsimile
in the bKa’ gdams gsung ’bum (Collected Works of the Kadampas) (dPal brtsegs bod
yig dpe rnying zhib ’jug khang 2006-2015). Additional relevant manuscript
sources are accessible online via BDRC. As TibSchol is a text-based project,
HTR offers the possibility of facilitating full-text mining and analysis for a
broad-scale approach to the corpus by relying on machine-readable transcriptions of these sources.
2.
Method
For this task, we have been using Transkribus, a popular platform for transcribing, annotating, and searching historical manuscripts, which can be run
on a local machine or in an online web interface (Kahle, Colutto, Hackl &
Mühlberger 2017). It allows users to train text recognition models based on
images of handwritten text that are lined up with corresponding diplomatic
transcriptions which are called ‘ground truth‘. It also provides pre-trained
HTR models in a range of scripts, although no public model is currently available in any Tibetan script. We tested a private model trained by Esukhia for
handwritten uchen (Tib. dbu can, ‘headed script’), however it was unable to
transcribe the ume (Tib. dbu med, ‘headless script’) works in our corpus. As
such, we have had to train a new HTR model from scratch.
As a guideline for creating an HTR model, Transkribus recommends preparing 5,000-15,000 words (25–75 pages) of transcribed material. In general, the
more training data used, the higher the accuracy of the HTR model will be.
The metric used to assess the accuracy of an HTR model in Transkribus is
Character Error Rate (CER), that is the percentage of character-level errors in
the recognised text compared to the ground truth text. A CER under 10%
is considered efficient for automatic transcription, however, to maximise the
1 https://github.com/zmr/namsel

--- Page 4 of 10 ---
HTR for Tibetan Manuscripts in Cursive Script
45
Fig. 1 – Examples of handwritten uchen (top, BDRC W3CN2815) and ume (bottom,
BDRC W1NLM1277).
usability of transcribed texts for the text mining and analysis that will form
the bedrock of our project, we are aiming for a CER of 5% or lower.
Our workflow began with making fundamental decisions about which
scripts and texts the HTR will be required to read and accordingly, which
images and transcripts will form a suitable ground truth. The manuscripts
in our corpus are written in a variety of scripts (Fig. 2), which makes the
possibility of training a general model more challenging. A further challenge
is the quality of the images, which varies considerably throughout the corpus, and many folios contain interlinear and/or marginal insertions that are
difficult to read. As such, we decided to begin with training a script-specific
model, choosing drutsa (Tib.’bru tsha) due to the quality of images available in
this script. We selected five manuscripts (totalling approximately 300 folios
and 2500 lines) in drutsa script for training that were clearly legible and for
which we already had a transcription in the so-called ”Wylie” system, which
uses Roman characters, without diacritics, to render univocal combinations
of letters in Tibetan syllables (Wylie 1959).
The next step was running the Layout Analysis (LA) tool on manuscript
images imported into Transkribus. This tool, which is integrated into the platform, automatically analyses the structure and layout of a document to identify its different components such as text regions, images, and other elements.
Before it can transcribe, the HTR model must be able to clearly define what
it is seeking to transcribe. The default LA tool did not generate accurate results on the Tibetan manuscripts we had selected for training; results often
included multiple text regions across one folio, the omission of lines or lines
only being partially recognised, and stains or markings on the manuscript

--- Page 5 of 10 ---
46
Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines
Fig. 2 – Examples of scripts found in the TibSchol corpus (top to bottom, BDRC
W26453, BDRC W1CZ1224, BDRC W12170, BDRC W1KG12371).
marked as a text. The number of errors were significant enough that manual
correction was not a feasible option (see first image in Fig. 4).
Initially, improvement in the LA was achieved through pre-processing
the images before uploading them to Transkribus. We used OpenCV (https:
//www.opencv.org) to affect image sharpness, resolution, and noise using
the filter2D and fastNlMeansDenoising functions (Fig. 3). These image enhancements improved the results of the default LA tool, although it continued
to segment stains and markings as baselines, which required manual deletion. We also trialed a Python pre-processing script developed by Esukhia,
which automatically generates baselines that stretch across an entire text region (https://github.com/Esukhia/custom-script-for-transkribus). The baselines created are straight lines, which unfortunately are not compatible with
our images, some of which are warped and contain marginalia and interlinear
additions. In June 2022, Transkribus launched a new feature, where users can
train a baseline model specific to their document typology (see Transkribus
(2022)). We tested this tool to see if it could train a customised baseline model
based on examples from our corpus.
The baseline model was trained on 160 folios that had been manually segmented, keeping aside 10% as a Validation Set (a Validation Set is used to evaluate the model’s performance on unseen data during the training process). A

--- Page 6 of 10 ---
HTR for Tibetan Manuscripts in Cursive Script
47
Fig. 3 – Section of folio from Tshad ma rnam par nges pa’i Ti ka legs bshad bsdus pa
(BDRC W1KG12371) before (top) and after (below) pre-processing using OpenCV.
Fig. 4 – Results of the default LA tool (top) and custom baseline model (bottom)
on the same folio from Tshad ma’i bstan bcos sde bdun rgyan gyi me tog (BDRC
W00KG03838).

--- Page 7 of 10 ---
48
Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines
Loss on the Training Set (LTS) and Loss on the Validation Set (LVS) below 10%
allows for an effective automatic segmentation. The TibSchol baseline model
has an LTS of 4.3% and LVS of 3.8%. As can be seen in Fig. 4, the model still
requires some manual correction, although this is minimal. As we were satisfied with the results, the baseline model was then run on the remaining folios
uploaded to Transkribus.
Once the layout was finalised, the transcriptions were added to the document editor and HTR training could begin. When we first started working
with Trankribus, it hosted two HTR engines: HTR+, developed by the CITlab
of the University of Rostock, and PyLaia, a PyTorch-based model developed
by the Technical University Valencia. During initial tests, PyLaia appeared
to struggle with reading ’curved’ lines (see the results of Model 5 in Fig. 6)–
some of our images are warped–while the HTR+ engine produced better results. Thus we decided to continue using HTR+ for training.
To more accurately gauge a model’s performance on the Validation Set,
it is possible to compare the ground truth of a page with the transcription
produced by the model using ’Compare Text Version’ (Fig. 5). This not only
flags sticking points for the model but also errors in our ground truth, which
were then manually corrected before training a new model with more data.
Fig. 5 – Errors in the Validation Set are marked in red. In green, the word is shown
as it is written in the ground truth transcription.
3.
Results
The project initially iterated through six models. Fig. 6 shows the size of the
training data as number of lines, beside the CERs of each model. Although
the results were promising, the CER of the Validation Set remained above
5%, and so work continued on improving the model’s accuracy. This included
reinspecting the segmentation of images and proofreading transcriptions (see
Griffiths 2022a and Griffiths 2022b).
In October 2022, our HTR model was trained on 269 folios (2310 lines),
with validation performed on 27 folios. Using 250 epochs, the trained model

--- Page 8 of 10 ---
HTR for Tibetan Manuscripts in Cursive Script
49
Fig. 6 – Results of HTR Models 1-6 trained in Transkribus.
had a CER of 1.15% for the Training Set and a 2.33% for the Validation Set. Satisfied with the results, we then tested the model on other manuscripts written
in drutsa that were not part of our dataset and were pleased to see that it produced accurate results.
Unfortunately, in November 2022, HTR+ recognition within Transkribus
was deactivated. All models trained using HTR+ can no longer be used, although they can be retrained with the PyLaia engine. Training with PyLaia
(using the same data set and number of epochs) initially produced poorer results; a CER of 10.20% for the Training Set and 8.80% for the Validation Set. A
recurring issue in the generated transcript was a string of random letters that
appeared mostly at the end of each line, although sometimes at the beginning
(Fig. 7), limiting the use of the model.
Fig. 7 – Example of errors in transcript produced by PyLaia model before dewarping.

--- Page 9 of 10 ---
50
Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines
The random string of letters was linked to PyLaia’s difficulty in reading
curved lines. Fortunately, Transkribus has developed a new tool that tackles
this issue: line dewarping (accessed via ’PyLaia advanced parameters’). We
found that selecting ’dewarp’ significantly improved training results. Our
most recent model was trained with a CER of 2.2% on the Training Set and
1.40% on the Validation Set.
4.
Next Steps
Having successfully trained a model that gives us a CER <3%, it is clear that
our research so far indicates that Transkribus works extremely well at recognising historical documents and can be applied to the yet unexplored Tibetan
texts in drutsa in our corpus.
There are however, two areas of focus to improve our current and future
models, as identified through our current validation. The first of these is
the occurrence of rarer textual elements, such as numerals, Tibetan rendering of Sanskrit words, and certain symbols and punctuation. Due to their
infrequency, the model struggles to recognise these and, instead, produces
something that appears similar e.g., a shad །instead of the number one ༡. We
have been able to significantly improve the model’s recognition of numbers
through identifying texts with a higher frequency of numerals and adding
these to the training model. The second emerging issue is that the model also
transcribes similar looking letters such as pa and ba, zha and na with lower
confidence, especially with lower quality images and/or damaged or soiled
manuscripts. To some degree, these issues will lessen as the model is trained
on a greater volume of texts, however, further investigation is required to allow tailored solutions.
The next stage of the project will be to train HTR models for the other
scripts found within our corpus. Currently, when tested, the drutsa model
has a higher CER (>10%) when applied to other scripts. However, used as a
base model, it will require significantly fewer pages to train models for other
scripts. We estimate around 30 to 50 folios of new ground truth, as opposed
to the 300 folios required for the base model. Based on our results with drutsa,
we are satisfied that our approach of developing multiple HTR models is appropriate for obtaining a reasonably accurate transcription of a large quantity
of data in multiple scripts. We would then be able to explore the possibility
of training scripts together to create a generic model for Tibetan manuscripts
in cursive script.
The development of HTR models that can transcribe multiple Tibetan
scripts would open up the possibility of unlocking a vast trove of fully searchable texts that could be available to a much broader audience. To this end, one

--- Page 10 of 10 ---
HTR for Tibetan Manuscripts in Cursive Script
51
of our project’s aims is to publish our models on Transkribus and make our
ground truth datasets publicly available.
Bibliography
Digitizing Jewish Studies (DiJeSt). 2020.
Digitize your texts with
Transkribus.
(last
accessed:
30.01.2023).
http://dijest.net/
digitize-your-texts-with-transkribus/.
dPal brtsegs bod yig dpe rnying zhib ’jug khang (ed.). 2006-2015. bKa’ gdams
gsung ’bum phyogs bsgrigs thengs dang po/gnyis pa/gsum pa/bzhi pa, vol. 1–
120. Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang.
Griffiths,
R. 2022a.
Transkribus in Practice:
Abbreviations.
The
Digital
Orientalist
https://digitalorientalist.com/2022/11/01/
transkribus-in-practice-abbreviations/. (last accessed: 30.01.2023).
Griffiths, R. 2022b.
Transkribus in Practice:
Improving CER.
The
Digital
Orientalist
https://digitalorientalist.com/2022/10/25/
transkribus-in-practice-improving-cer/. (last accessed: 30.01.2023).
Kahle, Philip, Sebastian Colutto, Günter Hackl & Günter Mühlberger.
2017.
Transkribus - a service platform for transcription, recognition
and retrieval of historical documents.
In 2017 14th iapr international
conference on document analysis and recognition (icdar), vol. 04, 19–24.
doi:10.1109/ICDAR.2017.307.
Merkel-Hilf, N. 2022. Ground Truth data for printed Devanagari [Dataset].
doi:10.11588/data/EGOKEI.
Nockels, J et al. 2022.
Understanding the application of handwritten
text recognition technology in heritage contexts: a systematic review
of Transkribus in published research.
Archival Science 22. 367–392.
doi:10.1007/s10502-022-09397-0.
O’Neill, A.J. & N. Hill. 2022. Text Recognition for Nepalese Manuscripts in
Pracalit Script. Journal of Open Humanities Data 8(26). doi:10.5334/johd.90.
Transkribus. 2022.
How to Train Baseline Models in Transkribus.
(last accessed: 30.01.2023).
https://readcoop.eu/transkribus/howto/
how-to-train-baseline-models-in-transkribus/.
Wylie, T. 1959. A Standard System of Tibetan Transcription. Harvard Journal
of Asiatic Studies 22. 261–267. doi:10.2307/2718544.