Source URL (Puppeteer): https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/11/23/3919

=== Plain Text Content ===

Next Article in Journal PEASE: A PUF-Based Efficient Authentication and Session Establishment Protocol for Machine-to-Machine Communication in Industrial IoT Previous Article in Journal A New Decentralized PQ Control for Parallel Inverters in Grid-Tied Microgrids Propelled by SMC-Based Buck–Boost Converters Journals Active Journals Find a Journal Journal Proposal Proceedings Series Topics Information For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For Librarians For Publishers For Societies For Conference Organizers Open Access Policy Institutional Open Access Program Special Issues Guidelines Editorial Process Research and Publication Ethics Article Processing Charges Awards Testimonials Author Services Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia JAMS Proceedings Series About Overview Contact Careers News Press Blog Sign In / Sign Up Notice You can make submissions to other journals here. clear Notice You are accessing a machine-readable page. In order to be human-readable, please install an RSS reader. Continue Cancel clear All articles published by MDPI are made immediately available worldwide under an open access license. No special permission is required to reuse all or part of the article published by MDPI, including figures and tables. For articles published under an open access Creative Common CC BY license, any part of the article may be reused without permission provided that the original article is clearly cited. For more information, please refer to https://www.mdpi.com/openaccess. Feature papers represent the most advanced research with significant potential for high impact in the field. A Feature Paper should be a substantial original Article that involves several techniques or approaches, provides an outlook for future research directions and describes possible research applications. Feature papers are submitted upon individual invitation or recommendation by the scientific editors and must receive positive feedback from the reviewers. Editor’s Choice articles are based on recommendations by the scientific editors of MDPI journals from around the world. Editors select a small number of articles recently published in the journal that they believe will be particularly interesting to readers, or important in the respective research area. The aim is to provide a snapshot of some of the most exciting work published in the various research areas of the journal. Original Submission Date Received: . You seem to have javascript disabled. Please note that many of the page functionalities won't work as expected without javascript enabled. clear zoom_out_map search menu Journals Active Journals Find a Journal Journal Proposal Proceedings Series Topics Information For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For Librarians For Publishers For Societies For Conference Organizers Open Access Policy Institutional Open Access Program Special Issues Guidelines Editorial Process Research and Publication Ethics Article Processing Charges Awards Testimonials Author Services Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia JAMS Proceedings Series About Overview Contact Careers News Press Blog Sign In / Sign Up Submit Search for Articles: Title / Keyword Author / Affiliation / Email Journal All Journals Accounting and Auditing Acoustics Acta Microbiologica Hellenica (AMH) Actuators Addiction & Prevention Adhesives Administrative Sciences Adolescents Advances in Respiratory Medicine (ARM) Aerobiology Aeronautics Aerospace Agriculture AgriEngineering Agrochemicals Agronomy AI AI and Precision Agriculture (AIPA) AI Chemistry AI for Engineering AI for Society AI in Education AI in Medicine AI Materials AI Sensors Air Algorithms Allergies Alloys Analog Analytica Analytics Anatomia Anesthesia Research Animals Antibiotics Antibodies Antioxidants Applied Biosciences Applied Mechanics Applied Microbiology Applied Nano Applied Sciences Applied System Innovation (ASI) AppliedChem AppliedMath AppliedPhys Aquaculture Journal Archaeological Studies Architecture Arthropoda Arts Astronautics Astronomy Atmosphere Atoms Audiology Research Automation Axioms Bacteria Batteries Behavioral Sciences Beverages Big Data and Cognitive Computing (BDCC) BioChem Bioengineering Biologics Biology Biology and Life Sciences Forum Biomass Biomechanics BioMed Biomedicines BioMedInformatics Biomimetics Biomolecules Biophysica Bioresources and Bioproducts Biosensors Biosphere BioTech Birds Blockchains Brain Sciences Breast Cancer Research and Care (BCRC) Buildings Businesses C (Journal of Carbon Research) Cancers Cardiogenetics Cardiovascular Medicine Catalysts Cells Ceramics Challenges ChemEngineering Chemistry Chemistry Proceedings Chemosensors Children Chips CivilEng Clean Technologies (Clean Technol.) Climate Clinical and Translational Neuroscience (CTN) Clinical Bioenergetics Clinics and Practice Clocks & Sleep Coasts Coatings Colloids and Interfaces Colorants Commodities Complexities Complications Compounds Computation Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum Computers Condensed Matter Conservation Construction Materials Corrosion and Materials Degradation (CMD) Cosmetics COVID Crafts Craniomaxillofacial Trauma & Reconstruction (CMTR) Crops Cryo Cryptography Crystals Culture Current Issues in Molecular Biology (CIMB) Current Oncology Dairy Data Dentistry Journal Dermato Dermatopathology Designs Diabetology Diagnostics Dietetics Digital Digital Health and Innovation (DHI) Disabilities Diseases Diversity DNA Drones Drugs and Drug Candidates (DDC) Dynamics Earth Ecologies Econometrics Economies Education Sciences Electricity Electrochem Electronic Materials Electronics Emergency Care and Medicine Encyclopedia Endocrines Energies Energy Storage and Applications (ESA) Eng Engineering Proceedings Entropic and Disordered Matter (EDM) Entropy Environmental and Earth Sciences Proceedings Environmental Remediation Environments Epidemiologia Epigenomes European Burn Journal (EBJ) European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education (EJIHPE) Family Sciences Fermentation Fibers FinTech Fire Fishes Fluids Foods Forecasting Forensic Sciences Forests Fossil Studies Foundations Fractal and Fractional (Fractal Fract) Freshwater Fuels Future Future Collections, Libraries, Archives, and Museums (FCLAM) Future Internet Future Pharmacology Future Transportation Galaxies Games Gases Gastroenterology Insights Gastrointestinal Disorders Gastronomy Gels Genealogy Genes Geographies GeoHazards Geomatics Geometry Geosciences Geotechnics Geriatrics Germs Glacies Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease (GUCDD) Grain Science Grasses Green Green Health Gynecologic Cancer Hardware Health Economics and Policy (HEP) Healthcare Hearts Hemato Hematology Reports Heritage Histories Horticulturae Hospitals Humanities Humans Hydrobiology Hydrogen Hydrology Hydrometeorology Hydropower Hygiene Immuno Industries Infectious Disease Reports Inflammation Journal Informatics Information Infrastructures Inorganics Insects Instruments Intelligent Infrastructure and Construction International Journal of Cognitive Sciences (IJCS) International Journal of Environmental Medicine (IJEM) International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health (IJERPH) International Journal of Financial Studies (IJFS) International Journal of Medical Devices (IJMD) International Journal of Molecular Sciences (IJMS) International Journal of Neonatal Screening (IJNS) International Journal of Orofacial Myology and Myofunctional Therapy (IJOM) International Journal of Plant Biology (IJPB) International Journal of Thermofluid Science and Technology (IJTST) International Journal of Topology International Journal of Translational Medicine (IJTM) International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power (IJTPP) International Medical Education (IME) Inventions IoT Iron ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information (IJGI) J Journal of Aesthetic Medicine (J. Aesthetic Med.) Journal of Ageing and Longevity (JAL) Journal of CardioRenal Medicine (JCRM) Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease (JCDD) Journal of Clinical & Translational Ophthalmology (JCTO) Journal of Clinical Medicine (JCM) Journal of Composites Science (J. Compos. Sci.) Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy (JCP) Journal of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease (JDAD) Journal of Developmental Biology (JDB) Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Analyses (JETA) Journal of Eye Movement Research (JEMR) Journal of Fast-Track Health (JFTH) Journal of Functional Biomaterials (JFB) Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology (JFMK) Journal of Fungi (JoF) Journal of Genome Biotechnology and Genetics (JGBG) Journal of Gerontology and Geriatrics (JGG) Journal of Imaging (J. Imaging) Journal of Innovation Journal of Intelligence (J. Intell.) Journal of Interdisciplinary Research Applied to Medicine (JDReAM) Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications (JLPEA) Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing (JMMP) Journal of Marine Science and Engineering (JMSE) Journal of Market Access & Health Policy (JMAHP) Journal of Mind and Medical Sciences (JMMS) Journal of Molecular Pathology (JMP) Journal of Nanotheranostics (JNT) Journal of Nuclear Engineering (JNE) Journal of Optical Materials Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine (JOHBM) Journal of Parks Journal of Personalized Medicine (JPM) Journal of Pharmaceutical and BioTech Industry (JPBI) Journal of Phytomedicine Journal of Respiration Journal of Risk and Financial Management (JRFM) Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks (JSAN) Journal of Superintelligence Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association (JAPMA) Journal of the Oman Medical Association (JOMA) Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research (JTAER) Journal of Vascular Diseases (JVD) Journal of Xenobiotics (JoX) Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens (JZBG) Journalism and Media Kidney and Dialysis Kinases and Phosphatases Knowledge LabMed Laboratories Land Languages Laws Legumes Life Lights Limnological Review Lipidology Liquids Literature Livers Logics Logistics Low-Altitude Economy Lubricants Lymphatics Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction (MAKE) Machines Macromol Magnetism Magnetochemistry Marine Drugs Maritime Materials Materials Proceedings Mathematical and Computational Applications (MCA) Mathematics Medical Ethics and Bioethics (MEB) Medical Sciences Medical Sciences Forum Medicina Medicines Membranes Merits Metabolites Metals Meteorology Methane Methods and Protocols (MPs) Metrics Metrology Micro Microbiology Research Microelectronics Micromachines Microorganisms Microplastics Microwave Minerals Mining Modelling Modern Mathematical Physics Molbank Molecules Multimedia Multimodal Technologies and Interaction (MTI) Muscles Nanoenergy Advances Nanomanufacturing Nanomaterials NDT Network Neuroglia Neuroimaging Neurology International NeuroSci Nitrogen Non-Coding RNA (ncRNA) Nursing Reports Nutraceuticals Nutrients Obesities Occupational Health Oceans Onco Optics Optoelectronics Oral Organics Organoids Osteology Oxygen Pandemics Parasitologia Particles Pathogens Pathophysiology Peace Studies Pediatric Reports Pets Pharmaceuticals Pharmaceutics Pharmacoepidemiology Pharmacy Philosophies Photochem Photonics Photovoltaics Phycology Physchem Physical Sciences Forum Physics Physiologia Plants Plasma Platforms Pollutants Polymers Polysaccharides Populations Poultry Powders Precision Oncology Primary and Hospital Care (PHC) Proceedings Processes Project Management Horizons Prosthesis Proteomes Psychiatry International Psychoactives Psychology International Publications Purification Quantum Beam Science (QuBS) Quantum Reports Quaternary Radiation Reactions Real Estate Receptors Recycling Regional Science and Environmental Economics (RSEE) Religions Remote Sensing Reports Reproductive Medicine (Reprod. Med.) Resources Rheumato Risks Robotics Romanian Journal of Preventive Medicine (RJPM) Ruminants Safety Sci Scientia Pharmaceutica (Sci. Pharm.) Sclerosis Seeds Semiconductors and Heterogeneous Integration Sensors Separations Sexes Signals Sinusitis Smart Cities Smart Fisheries Social Sciences Société Internationale d’Urologie Journal (SIUJ) Societies Software Soil Systems Solar Solids Spectroscopy Journal Sports Standards Stats Stratigraphy and Sedimentology Stresses Stroke Reports Surfaces Surgeries Surgical Techniques Development Sustainability Sustainable Chemistry Sustainable Packaging Swiss Archives of Neurology, Psychiatry and Psychotherapy (SANPP) Symmetry SynBio Systems Targets Taxonomy Technologies Telecom Textiles Thalassemia Reports Theoretical and Applied Ergonomics Therapeutics Thermo Time and Space Tomography Tourism and Hospitality Toxics Toxins Transplantology Trauma Care Trends in Higher Education Trends in Public Health Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease (TropicalMed) Universe Urban Science Uro Vaccines Vehicles Venereology Veterinary Sciences Vibration Virtual Worlds Viruses Vision Waste Water Welding Wild Wind Women World World Electric Vehicle Journal (WEVJ) Youth Zoonotic Diseases Electronics Article Type All Article Types Article Review Communication Editorial Abstract Book Review Brief Communication Brief Report Case Report Clinicopathological Challenge Comment Commentary Concept Paper Conference Report Correction Creative Data Descriptor Discussion Entry Essay Expression of Concern Extended Abstract Field Guide Giants in Urology Guidelines Hypothesis Interesting Images Letter New Book Received Obituary Opinion Patent Summary Perspective Proceeding Paper Project Report Protocol Registered Report Reply Retraction Short Note Study Protocol Systematic Review Technical Note Tutorial Urology around the World Viewpoint All Article Types Advanced Search Section All SectionsArtificial IntelligenceArtificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS)BioelectronicsCircuit and Signal ProcessingComputer Science & EngineeringElectrical and Autonomous VehiclesElectronic Materials, Devices and ApplicationsElectronic MultimediaIndustrial ElectronicsMicroelectronicsMicrowave and Wireless CommunicationsNetworksOptoelectronicsPower ElectronicsQuantum ElectronicsSemiconductor DevicesSystems & Control EngineeringGeneral All Sections Special Issue All Special IssuesAdditively Manufactured Flexible RF Structures for Next Generation of Wireless ApplicationsAdvanced Electronic and Photonic Devices from the International Conference on Next-Generation Electronics & Photonics (INGEP 2024)Advanced in Flexible Electronics and ApplicationsAdvanced Microcontrollers, Intelligent Control, and Edge Computing in Industrial IoT EcosystemsAdvancements in Communication and Sensing Systems through Machine LearningAdvances and Applications in Blockchain TechnologyAdvances and Development in Image Processing and Pattern RecognitionAdvances in Cloud and Distributed System ApplicationsAdvances in Electronics TechnologyAdvances in Electronics Technology—Selected Papers From the 6th International Conference on Electronics Technology (ICET)Advances in Electronics, Communication, and AutomationAdvances in High-Efficiency AI-Enabled Edge Computing for Distributed Networking SystemsAdvances in the Modeling and Simulation of Technical Systems Using ModelicaAdvances of Electronics Research from Zhejiang UniversityAdvances on Electronics for Harsh EnvironmentsApplication of Computer Vision and Pattern RecognitionApplication of Microgrids in Power SystemArtificial Intelligence for Virtual, Mixed, and Augmented Reality Content and InteractionAssistive Technology: Advances, Applications and ChallengesCelebrating the 200th Anniversary of the University of Manchester—Electrical and Electronic EngineeringCelebrating the 85th Anniversary of Beijing Institute of Technology—Electronic Science and TechnologyChanneling a Characteristics-Driven New Paradigm for Wireless Communication SecurityCollaborative Intelligent Systems: Advances in Theory and ApplicationsConverging Platform Technologies: Collaborative Innovations and Future DirectionsDesign, Analysis, and Control of Electric Machines and DrivesDigital Intelligence Technology and Applications, 2nd EditionDistributed Control of Multi-Agent Systems and RobotsElectronic Applications and Research in Environmental Protection and Environmental TechnologyEmerging Technologies in Intelligent Software Methodologies, Tools, and Techniques (Selected Papers from SoMeT 2023)Feature PapersFeature Review Papers in ElectronicsFlexible and Wearable Electronics: Design and ApplicationsFlexible Devices and Optoelectronics TechnologiesFlexible Electronics: Sensors, Energy and HealthFluidic Type Strain/Pressure Sensors for Wearable Electronics and Robotics ApplicationsFront-End Electronics for Radiation DetectorsHardware and Software Co-Design in Intelligent SystemsInstrumentation, Noise, ReliabilityIntelligent Mobile Robotic Systems: Decision, Planning and Control, 2nd EditionIntelligent Resource Allocation Methods for Next Generation Wireless Cellular SystemsInteractive, Mobile and Wearable TechnologiesInternet of Things (IoT) and Wearable Devices Applications in Healthcare and Disaster HealthcareInternet of Vehicles (IoV)IoT Applications for Renewable Energy Management and Control, 2nd EditionLatest Developments in LED DriversLTCC for Space, Imaging, Telecommunication, and Medical ApplicationsMachine Vision and 3D Sensing in Smart AgricultureMicro- and Nanotechnology of Wide Bandgap SemiconductorsMicrowave/ Millimeter-Wave Devices and MMICsMulti-Modal Biometrics for Surveillance and Digital Evidence Processing in Smart CitiesMultimodal Data Fusion and Computational Optimization for Intelligent Perception, 2nd EditionMultimodal Fusion and Its ApplicationMultimodal Remote Sensing for WildfiresNano-materials Based 3D ElectronicsNeuromorphic Devices and Brain-Inspired Intelligent Systems: Applications and ProspectsNew CMOS Devices and Their ApplicationsNew Insights and Techniques for Neural NetworksNew Research in IoT and Applications on Sustainable Smart Farming and AgricultureNext-Generation Sensing, Computing, and System Engineering for Large-Scale Connected and Automated Vehicle and Transportation: Celebrating the 70th Anniversary of Nanjing University of Aeronautics and AstronauticsPrinted and Flexible ElectronicsPulsed Magnetic Fields and Its ApplicationsQuantum Computation and Its ApplicationsRecent Advances in Intelligent SystemsRecent Advances in IoT/Blockchain Security and PrivacyRecent Developments and Emerging Trends in Computational ImagingRecent Developments in Object Tracking and Computer VisionSecond Quantum Revolution: Sensing, Computing, and TransmittingSelected Paper from Best PhD Thesis AwardSelected Papers from the 2024 International Conference on Science and Engineering of Electronics (ICSEE’2024)Selected Papers from the Asia Pacific Conference of the Prognostics and Health Management Society 2021Selected Papers from Young Researchers in Flexible ElectronicsSignal Processing and Analysis of Electrical CircuitSimultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) of Mobile RobotsState-of-the-Art Electronics and Informatics in AustraliaState-of-the-Art Electronics in the USAStretchable and Wearable ElectronicsTechniques and Advances in Human Activity RecognitionThe Explainable AI Revolution: From Black Boxes to Transparent InsightsTowards a Sustainable Future: Addressing AI and Big Data, Energy, Climate, and Public Healthcare ChallengesTrustworthy Collaborative Computational Intelligence: Learning, Optimization, and Emerging ApplicationsVLSI Architecture Design for Digital Signal ProcessingWearable and Flexible Integrated SensorsWearable and Flexible Sensors in Health Monitoring and DiagnosisWearable Sensors Applied in Artificial PerceptionWearable Sensors for Human Position, Attitude and Motion TrackingWhat Is the Future of Edge AI Accelerators? Emerging Algorithms, System Architectures, Circuit Implementations and ApplicationsWomen in ElectronicsYoung Investigators in Electronics All Special Issues Volume Issue Number Page Logical OperatorOperator AND OR Search Text Search Type All fields Title Abstract Keywords Authors Affiliations Doi Full Text References add_circle_outline remove_circle_outline Journals Electronics Volume 11 Issue 23 10.3390/electronics11233919 Submit to this Journal Review for this Journal Propose a Special Issue ► ▼ Article Menu Article Menu Academic Editor Silvia Liberata Ullo Recommended Articles Related Info Link Google Scholar More by Authors Links on DOAJ Zhang, C. Wang, W. Zhang, G. on Google Scholar Zhang, C. Wang, W. Zhang, G. on PubMed Zhang, C. Wang, W. Zhang, G. Article Views 2704 Citations 3 Table of Contents AbstractIntroductionRelated WorkMethodologyExperimental Results and AnalysisConclusionsAuthor ContributionsFundingData Availability StatementConflicts of InterestReferences Altmetric share Share announcement Help format_quote Cite question_answer Discuss in SciProfiles Need Help? Support Find support for a specific problem in the support section of our website. Get Support Feedback Please let us know what you think of our products and services. Give Feedback Information Visit our dedicated information section to learn more about MDPI. Get Information clear JSmol Viewer clear first_page Download PDF settings Order Article Reprints Font Type: Arial Georgia Verdana Font Size: Aa Aa Aa Line Spacing:    Column Width:    Background: Open AccessArticle Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions by Ce ZhangCe Zhang SciProfiles Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar 1,2, Weilan WangWeilan Wang SciProfiles Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar 1,* and Guowei ZhangGuowei Zhang SciProfiles Scilit Preprints.org Google Scholar 3 1 Key Laboratory of China’s Ethnic Languages and Information Technology of Ministry of Education, Northwest Minzu University, Lanzhou 730030, China 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Chongqing University of Education, Chongqing 400065, China 3 LinkDoc Technology, Beijing 100089, China * Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronics 2022, 11(23), 3919; https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 Submission received: 28 October 2022 / Revised: 23 November 2022 / Accepted: 25 November 2022 / Published: 27 November 2022 (This article belongs to the Topic Computer Vision and Image Processing) Download keyboard_arrow_down Download PDF Download PDF with Cover Download XML Download Epub Browse Figures Review Reports Versions Notes Abstract The construction of a character dataset is an important part of the research on document analysis and recognition of historical Tibetan documents. The results of character segmentation research in the previous stage are presented by coloring the characters with different color values. On this basis, the characters are annotated, and the character images corresponding to the annotation are extracted to construct a character dataset. The construction of a character dataset is carried out as follows: (1) text annotation of segmented characters is performed; (2) the character image is extracted from the character block based on the real position information; (3) according to the class of annotated text, the extracted character images are classified to construct a preliminary character dataset; (4) data augmentation is used to solve the imbalance of classes and samples in the preliminary dataset; (5) research on character recognition based on the constructed dataset is performed. The experimental results show that under low-resource conditions, this paper solves the challenges in the construction of a historical Uchen Tibetan document character dataset and constructs a 610-class character dataset. This dataset lays the foundation for the character recognition of historical Tibetan documents and provides a reference for the construction of relevant document datasets. Keywords: historical Tibetan documents; character annotation; character extraction; data augmentation; character recognition 1. IntroductionThe content recorded in historical Tibetan documents is extremely rich, involving all aspects of social development, and has important reference value for the study of Chinese culture. After much reading and preservation, historical Tibetan documents have been damaged to varying degrees, and some have even been lost. The protection, development and utilization of existing historical Tibetan documents have become an important and urgent topic in ethnic language research. Tibetan is a low-resource language, which makes it difficult to obtain a large amount of document data, and historical Tibetan documents are more difficult to obtain, resulting in the late start of relevant research. The study of historical Tibetan documents began in the 1980s. Since 1991, Kojima et al. have studied the analysis and recognition research on woodcut Tibetan documents, including character recognition [1,2], feature extraction [3] and other works. However, these works did not involve the construction of character datasets. More than a decade later, some researchers conducted relevant research in layout analysis [4], text line segmentation [5], character segmentation [6,7] on different versions of historical Tibetan document data. Since 2017, our research group has conducted more analysis and recognition research on historical Tibetan document images. Han et al. proposed a binarization approach based on several image processing steps, which achieved high performance in image binarization [8]. Zhao et al. proposed an attention U-Net-based binarization approach for the historical Tibetan document images [9]. Zhou et al., Wang et al. and Hu et al. proposed a text line segmentation method based on contour curve tracking [10], based on the connected component analysis [11] and combined local baseline and connected component [12] for Tibetan historical documents, respectively. In addition, in the aspect of layout analysis, Zhao et al. proposed accurate fine-grained layout analysis for the historical Tibetan document based on instance segmentation [13]. Zhang et al. studied character segmentation on the basis of previous work, which provides data for the construction of a character dataset in this work [14].Dataset construction is an important part of document analysis and recognition of historical Tibetan documents. In 2017, Wang et al. proposed an online handwritten “Tibetan-Sanskrit” sample generation method based on component combination [15]. First, the “Tibetan-Sanskrit” character set and component set were determined. Second, the location information of the component was obtained. Third, the samples of the online handwritten “Tibetan-Sanskrit” sample components were collected, and finally, a sample database of the “Tibetan-Sanskrit” character dataset was generated. In 2018, Li et al. constructed a dataset for the text recognition of historical Uchen Tibetan documents [16]. The samples of the dataset were composed of the upper part of the baseline, the lower part of the baseline and punctuation symbols. The number of samples in different classes was uneven, and there were no real samples corresponding to historical Tibetan documents in some classes. Because the character segmentation of historical ancient Tibetan documents is faced with the following challenges: text lines have different degrees of tilt and twist, there are many overlapping, crossing, touching and breaking character strokes; there are certain differences in the writing styles of the same characters in different positions. Up to now, there has been no relevant report on the character dataset with complete characters of historical Uchen Tibetan documents. Therefore, the construction of character datasets still faces two challenges.Challenge 1: Historical Tibetan documents belong to the handwriting category. There are great differences in writing styles, resulting in large left-right deviations in character strokes. It is difficult to extract characters according to their real position information.Challenge 2: Tibetan is a low-resource language, which makes it difficult to obtain a large amount of document data, and there are a large number of characters with low frequency, which aggravates the obvious difference in the numbers of samples of character classes.In view of the above challenges in the construction of character datasets, we propose a character extraction and dataset augmentation method.In short, the main contribution of this work is that we constructed a historical Uchen Tibetan document character dataset that has 610 classes, basically covering high-frequency characters. It lays the foundation for character recognition and provides a reference for the construction of historical document character datasets in other languages. 2. Related WorkUnder low-resource conditions, the following related work has been performed for the construction of historical Tibetan document character datasets. The research results of the previous stage as the basis of this work (Figure 1) as follows: An example image of historical Tibetan documents shown in Figure 1a is from the Buddhist Digital Resource Center (BDRC) [17]. Character blocks after segmentation shown in Figure 1b,c are from our previous research results [14]. the characters in the segmented character block are annotated, extracted and augmented, respectively, and the character dataset is constructed. Finally, the character recognition experiment is conducted with the constructed character dataset, and the quality of the constructed character dataset has been verified. The research content framework of this paper is shown in Figure 2. Figure 1. The research basis of this work: (a) example of historical Uchen Tibetan document; (b) example of text line after binarization and extraction; (c) partial character block obtained after a series of processes. Figure 2. Construction framework of the character dataset of historical Tibetan documents. 2.1. Character AnnotationCharacter annotation is to annotate the character image with the corresponding encoded character text. Due to the reduction in the quality of historical Uchen Tibetan documents to varying degrees, some documents have become blurred, and there is much Sanskrit Tibetan in historical documents, which brings multiple difficulties to character annotation. To improve the accuracy of annotation, we annotate character blocks. 2.2. Character Image ExtractionWe directly use the research results of character segmentation to construct the character dataset. The characters in the character segmentation results are on character blocks with different widths, and different characters are colored with different RGB color values. In order to achieve one-to-one correspondence with the annotated text, the characters in the character block need to be extracted according to the real position order. It is an easy task to extract the colored characters by color values, but the strokes of historical Tibetan characters have different degrees of left and right offsets, and the shape differences between strokes are obvious. Directly using the centroid coordinates or color values of characters (coloring is not in a fixed order) may lead to inconsistency between the extracted character sequence and the real position sequence. 2.3. Dataset Construction and AugmentationThe annotated character text is classified, and the extracted character image is put into the corresponding class. Because Tibetan is a low-resource language and there are many low-frequency characters, the class and sample number of the character dataset are uneven. To solve the data imbalance problem, we use synthetic data to realize data augmentation. 2.4. Character RecognitionThe constructed character dataset provides data for recognition. The quality of the dataset can be tested through character recognition. The constructed character dataset is used as the training set to train the recognition network. The correct character class is used as the test set to obtain the accuracy of character recognition. 3. Methodology 3.1. Character AnnotationCharacter image annotation is a heavy task. In view of the close relationship between the front and rear characters in Tibetan text, we first annotate in the character block before character segmentation and then realize character annotation through the corresponding relationship between the character image and character text in the character block. To ensure the accuracy of character annotation, we choose 8 Tibetans whose mother tongue is Tibetan and who have completed their graduate education as annotators to complete the annotation. Their annotation tasks do not overlap. An expert in the field of Tibetan language studies proofreads their annotation results.Tibetan adopts the Unicode coding scheme to encode Tibetan basic characters. Tibetan is formed by superimposing basic characters up and down, and the letters of the characters where the base consonant is located can be superimposed up to 4 layers (Figure 3), including prefixed consonant (PFC), base consonant (BC), superscript consonant (SPC), subscript consonant (SBC), top vowel (TV), bottom vowel (BV), suffixed consonant (SFC), further suffixed consonant (FSFC), and at most 1 vowel (top vowel or bottom vowel) appears. Syllables are separated by syllable point (SP). There is an implied base line (BL) between the top vowel and the other letters. There is a large amount of Sanskrit Tibetan in historical Tibetan documents. Sanskrit Tibetan has only top-down superposition, up to 7 layers at most. In the Unicode encoding scheme of Tibetan [18], the encoding length of the same character is inconsistent (Table 1). Therefore, the annotated character text needs to be processed with a unified coding method, that is, the way that all annotated text is unified into the least number of coding units. Figure 3. Syllable structure in Tibetan: (a) schematic diagram of syllable structure in Tibetan; (b) example of syllable structure in Tibetan. Table 1. Corresponding examples Tibetan characters and Unicode coding. We extract the segmented characters according to the order of the character text in the annotated character (Figure 4). The segmented character blocks are formed by coloring in turn in the unit of characters; that is, all strokes of the same character are colored into one color. Before extracting characters from the character block after character segmentation, to avoid the touching or loss of syllable points in the character block, which would cause the characters in the annotated text to not correctly correspond to the characters in the character block, it is necessary to delete the syllable points in the annotated text and the character block to obtain the annotated text and character block after deleting the syllable points (Figure 4d,e). Figure 4. Example of character annotation: (a) character block; (b) annotated text; (c) character block after segmentation; (d) annotation after shielding syllable points; (e) character block after shielding syllable points. 3.2. Character Image ExtractionThe characters of historical Uchen Tibetan documents belong are handwritten, and their stroke positions and shapes are quite different. In addition, the interference of three channel images in character extraction makes it difficult to extract the characters in sequence by using the centroid or coordinate position information of the connected component, which easily leads to disorder between the extracted character numbering sequence and the sequence. To solve the above problems, we first realize color value conversion by performing secondary encoding on the color values of the RGB three channels into a 32-bit grayscale and then extract the single characters, which can avoid the possibility that the color values cannot be uniquely corresponding when the RGB image is converted to the gray-scale image.We extract characters from encoded character blocks based on real location information (Algorithm 1). Algorithm 1: Character extraction algorithm based on real location informationInput: Encoded character block ECBOutput: Single character SC1: H, W ← size function(ECB)2: NC ← count the number of colors in ECB3: for l = 1: 2: H do4: ECBL ← ECB(1: l,:) = 0, ECB(l + 2, :) = 05: NCL ← count the number of colors in ECBL6: if NC == NCL7: for c = 1: NC do8: for h, w = 1: H, 1: W do9: if ECB(h, w) ≠ NCL(c)10: ECB(h, w) = 011: end if12: end for13: SC ← cropping function(ECB)14: end for15: end if16: end for 3.3. Dataset Construction and Augmentation 3.3.1. Character Dataset ConstructionThe classes of characters in the annotated text are counted to obtain the number of text classes. The annotated text string is extracted one by one according to the real order and named with the real order number, which lays the foundation for its subsequent matching with the character image. According to the extracted character number, the character image is classified into the corresponding character class to form a preliminary character dataset (Algorithm 2). There may be some errors in the process of character annotation and character extraction, and the character images in the character set need to be proofread manually. Algorithm 2: Construction of the algorithm of the character dataset based on real position sequence matchingInput: Single character annotations SCA, Single characters SCOutput: Preliminary character dataset PCD1: NSCA ← count the number of SCA2: for d = 1: NSCA do3: MN ← read the mapping name of SCA[d]4: ISEF ← exist the class folder of SCA[d] or not5: if not ISEF6: CF ← create the class folder of SCA[d]7: the MN in SC is written into CF //the MN corresponds to a single character name8: else9: the MN in SC is written into CF10: end if11: PCD ← save function(CF) //each CF represents a character class12: end for 3.3.2. Character Dataset AugmentationThe character dataset established by segmented characters has obvious differences in the number of samples of classes. There are more commonly used characters in Tibetan, less commonly used characters, and, even, no-character image samples in classes. We augment the character classes and samples in the character set by artificially synthesizing characters to balance the numbers of samples of character classes.Ordinary characterWe use characters synthesized by “Tibetan-Sanskrit” handwritten sample generation method based on component combination [15].Special symbolsBecause the component samples of special symbols are not collected in the “Tibetan-Sanskrit” handwritten sample generation method based on component combination, special symbols cannot be synthesized by this method. In addition to the syllable point (“”) and single vertical line (“”), there are seven main kinds of special symbols commonly used in the document images of historical Uchen Tibetan documents, namely, “”, “”, “”, “”, “”, “” and “”. For the first four special characters mentioned above, we collect them directly from the images of historical Uchen Tibetan documents. The fifth to sixth special symbols are highly similar to the single vertical line in shape and structure. By cutting a point and two points on the head position above the single vertical line symbol, we can obtain the fifth and sixth symbols, respectively. For the seventh special symbol, due to the small number of historical Tibetan documents, the direct acquisition method has difficulty achieving the purpose of augmentation. Through observation, the upper and lower strokes of the seventh special symbol (“”) have symmetry. The difference between the special symbols mainly lies in the spacing between the upper and lower strokes. We propose a special character synthesis method based on the random distance between upper and lower strokes (Algorithm 3).Algorithm 3: Special character synthesis algorithm based on the random distance between upper and lower strokesInput: Special symbols SSOutput: Synthesized special symbols SSS1: NSS ← count the number of SS2: for s = 1: NSS do3: SSU, SSL ← extract the upper and lower strokes of SS //use the Y coordinate of centroid4: SSUs, SSLs ← rotate function(SSU, SSL) //rotate 90 degrees counterclockwise5: RI ← generate a random integer in [−2,12] //[−2,12] is the priori distance range6: SSL, SSU ← SSUs, SSLs //the upper(lower) stroke is as the lower(upper) stroke of SSS7: SSS ← synthesis function(SSL, SSU, RI)8: end for 3.4. Character RecognitionThere are many research achievements in Tibetan recognition. From the level of technology and method applied, it can be roughly divided into methods based on digital image processing technology and deep learning methods. The former mainly focuses on the design and extraction of character features [19,20] and the design of classification algorithms [21,22]. The latter mainly focuses on the design and training of recognition models [23,24,25]. The main purpose of character recognition in this paper is to verify the quality of the constructed character dataset. Considering that all the samples in the character dataset are single characters, the classical convolutional neural network LeNet-5 [26] is used in the character recognition model (Figure 5). The convolutional neural network has three convolution layers and one fully connected layer. See the following for the specific configuration. The character dataset comes from the constructed historical Uchen Tibetan character dataset, which basically covers 610 classes of the most commonly used characters and symbols in historical Uchen Tibetan documents, with 700 image samples in each class. The character dataset is divided into a training subset and a verification subset at a ratio of 8:2, and the test data come from the correct characters obtained by character segmentation. Figure 5. Character recognition model framework. Historical Tibetan documents belong to the category of handwritten text. There are differences in writing styles among characters, and the stroke deformation of some characters is more serious. To objectively evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of this method, accuracy is used to evaluate the character recognition results, expressed as follows: 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦=𝑁𝐶𝑅𝐶𝑁𝑅𝐶×100%Accuracy=NCRCNRC×100% (1) where NCRC is the number of correctly recognized characters and NRC is the number of recognized characters. 4. Experimental Results and AnalysisUsing the character blocks after character segmentation as the basic data, we carried out relevant research on character block annotation, character image extraction, character dataset construction and augmentation, and character recognition. 4.1. Character Image Extraction ResultsUsing Algorithm 1, single characters are extracted one by one from the correctly segmented character blocks (Figure 6). Figure 6. Example of character image extraction results after shielding syllable points: (a) character block after segmentation; (b) extracted characters (shielded syllable points). 4.2. Character Dataset Augmentation and Construction ResultsFor 610 classes of Tibetan characters, 700 images are selected as class samples. In addition, we synthesized 47 classes of characters missing from the character classes of Tibetan documents (Figure 7) and augmented classes with fewer than 700 samples in the existing classes (Figure 8). Figure 7. Example of synthesized character samples: (a) character text; (b) synthesized character image samples. Figure 7. Example of synthesized character samples: (a) character text; (b) synthesized character image samples. Figure 8. Example of character samples before and after augmentation: (a) character sample before augmentation; (b) character sample after augmentation. Figure 8. Example of character samples before and after augmentation: (a) character sample before augmentation; (b) character sample after augmentation. After the above work, the character dataset of the historical Uchen Tibetan document and the corresponding annotation mapping file are finally constructed (Figure 9). Figure 9. The constructed character dataset: (a) character images; (b) part of the character annotation mapping file (rotated 90 degrees to the right). 4.3. Character Annotation and Recognition ResultsCharacter recognition is not only the purpose of character segmentation but also an important means of testing the effect of character segmentation. By dividing the established character dataset into a training set and a verification set at a ratio of 8:2, the model of the designed convolutional neural network is trained (the configuration is shown in Table 2). Finally, the trained recognition model is used to test the effect of character segmentation. The data to be recognized come from six sets of character block data obtained based on projection shortening in our character segmentation research results. The data to be recognized come from six sets of character block data obtained based on projection shortening in our character segmentation research results [14] in the previous stage. The ratio of the average height to the average width of characters in historical Tibetan documents is nearly 2:1, so the size of the input image is set to 64 × 32. The average loss value after each training and the recognition effect on the verification set are shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11, respectively. Figure 10. Loss value of the model training process. Figure 11. Recognition effect on the validation set. Table 2. Convolutional neural network configuration. The framework used for model training is Pytorch, and the computing platform is the CPU (Core i7-9700 3.00 GHz). The network model is trained using the CrossEntropyLoss loss function and the SGD optimizer (learning rate = 0.001, momentum = 0.9). The batch size and training epoch are set to 64 and 30, respectively.Syllable point touching is a common phenomenon in historical Tibetan documents. Due to the small area of the syllable point, the characters formed after the syllable point touching show little change in character structure attributes. Without the support of semantic knowledge, it is extremely difficult to determine the touching of the syllable point. Therefore, touching the syllable point and characters is not discussed in this paper. To ensure that the characters in the segmented character block can correspond to their annotated text in turn, we shield the non-touching syllable points in the character block and the syllable points corresponding to the annotated text.The data to be recognized comes from six sets of correctly segmented character blocks, which were obtained through systematic sampling and random sampling (Table 3). The three stroke attribution methods in Table 3 come from the centroid-based attribution method (Cen-AM), the connected component-based attribution method (Con-AM) and the attribution method combining the connected component and centroid methods (ConCen-AM) in our character segmentation work [14] in the previous stage, where NCCB is the number of correct character blocks, NACB is the number of annotated character blocks, PACB is the proportion of annotated character blocks, and NCASS is the number of characters after shielding syllables. Table 3. Annotating the character block to be recognized. To ensure the annotation quality, the annotation results need to be proofread repeatedly, and the annotation process is time-consuming and laborious. In addition, the images of historical Tibetan documents have different degrees of quality fading, which increases the difficulty of annotation. Therefore, after the steps of annotation and proofreading, each set of data has approximately 5500 character blocks available, which is about 56% of the total.We use the trained character recognition model to recognize six sets of character data after shielding syllable points in Table 3 to verify the effect of character segmentation. The character recognition results are shown in Figure 12. According to the distribution of character recognition results, the recognition results of 30 rounds of training are divided into the following four parts: (1) the number of model training rounds is between 1 and 10 rounds, and the overall character recognition effect shows an upward trend; (2) the number of model training rounds is between 11 and 14, and the character recognition effect shows a downward trend; (3) the number of model training rounds shows an upward trend for between 15 and 18 rounds; (4) the number of training rounds of the model tends to be stable for between 19 and 30 rounds. The highest recognition accuracy of the above four parts is shown in Table 4. Figure 12. Recognition result statistics of correct character segmentation. Table 4. Highest recognition rate statistics. 4.4. Limitation AnalysisAlthough this work constructs 610 classes of historical Uchen Tibetan document character datasets, which solves the problem of imbalance between the number of classes and the number of samples to a certain extent, in the face of complex historical Tibetan documents, the proposed character dataset construction method has the following certain limitations:Noise interference. If there is noise in the character block, the interference of noise with the actual number of the characters in the process of extracting characters by using Algorithm 1 will further lead to inconsistency between the extracted character number sequence and the real sequence.Low-frequency characters. Historical Tibetan documents are difficult to obtain, resulting in a small number of samples of low-frequency character classes and a large number of character samples to be augmented, which reduces the proportion of real samples in the character dataset. 5. ConclusionsWe propose the construction method of the historical Uchen Tibetan document character dataset, which includes the following four parts: (1) manually annotating character blocks; (2) using the character image extraction method based on real position information; (3) using “Tibetan-Sanskrit” handwritten samples based on component combination to generate ordinary characters and recollect or synthesize special symbols; (4) verifying the effect of the dataset based on the character recognition of historical documents based on a deep neural network. The experimental results show that our method solves the challenge of historical Tibetan document characters in the process of dataset construction to a certain extent, constructs a 610-class character dataset, and has high accuracy in character recognition, which provides support for the follow-up research on historical Tibetan document analysis and recognition.Although our method is proposed to solve the construction of historical Tibetan document character dataset, it can provide a reference for facing the following similar challenges of historical document character dataset construction: (1) the small scale of document data and (2) the characters being composed of fixed structural units. The proposed method can be applied to the following scenarios: (a) digitization and recognition of historical Tibetan cultural relics and (b) character recognition of other versions of historical Tibetan documents. Author ContributionsConceptualization, C.Z. and W.W.; methodology, C.Z.; software, C.Z. and G.Z.; validation, C.Z., W.W. and G.Z.; resources, C.Z. and W.W.; writing—original draft preparation, C.Z.; writing—review and editing, C.Z. and W.W.; supervision, W.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.FundingThis work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China un-der Grant 61772430 and Grant 62166036, Science and Technology Research Program of Chongqing Education Commission under Grant KJQN202101608, Research Program of Chongqing University of Education under Grant KY202118C.Data Availability StatementNot applicable.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.ReferencesKojima, M.; Kawazoe, Y.; Kimura, M. Automatic character recognition for Tibetan script. J. Indian Buddh. Stud. 1991, 39, 844–848. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Kojima, M.; Kawazoe, Y.; Kimura, M. Character recognition of wooden blocked Tibetan similar manuscripts by using Euclidean distance with deferential weight. Ipsj Sig Notes 1996, 1996, 13–18. [Google Scholar]Kojima, M.; Akiyama, Y.; Kawazoe, Y.; Kimura, M. Extraction of characteristic features in Tibetan wood-block editions. J. Indian Buddh. Stud. 1994, 42, 866–869. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhang, X.Q.; Ma, L.L.; Duan, L.J.; Liu, Z.Y.; Wu, J. Layout analysis for historical Tibetan documents based on convolutional denoising autoencoder. J. Chin. Inform. Process. 2018, 32, 67–73. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Duan, L.J.; Zhang, X.Q.; Ma, L.L.; Wu, J. Text extraction method for historical Tibetan document images based on block projections. Optoelectron. Lett. 2017, 13, 457–461. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Ngodrup; Zhao, D.C. Research on wooden blocked Tibetan character segmentation based on drop penetration algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2010 Chinese Conference on Pattern Recognition (CCPR), Chongqing, China, 21–23 October 2010; pp. 1–5. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhao, Q.C.; Ma, L.L.; Duan, L.J. A touching character database from Tibetan historical documents to evaluate the segmentation algorithm. In Proceedings of the Chinese Conference on Pattern Recognition and Computer Vision (PRCV), Guangzhou, China, 23–26 November 2018; pp. 309–321. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Han, Y.H.; Wang, W.L.; Liu, H.M.; Wang, Y.Q. A combined approach for the binarization of historical Tibetan document images. Int. J. Pattern Recog. Artif. Intell. 2019, 33, 1954038. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhao, P.H.; Wang, W.L.; Zhang, G.W.; Lu, Y.Q. Alleviating pseudo-touching in attention U-Net-based binarization approach for the historical Tibetan document images. Neural Comput Applic 2021. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhou, F.M.; Wang, W.L.; Lin, Q. A novel text line segmentation method based on contour curve tracking for Tibetan historical documents. Int. J. Pattern Recog. Artif. Intell. 2018, 32, 1854025. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Wang, Y.Q.; Wang, W.L.; Li, Z.J.; Han, Y.Q.; Wang, X.J. Research on Text Line Segmentation of Historical Tibetan Documents Based on the Connected Component Analysis. In Proceedings of the Chinese Conference on Pattern Recognition and Computer Vision (PRCV), Guangzhou, China, 23–26 November 2018; pp. 74–87. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Hu, P.F.; Wang, W.L.; Li, Q.Q.; Wang, T.J. Touching text line segmentation combined local baseline and connected component for Uchen Tibetan historical documents. Inform. Process. Manag. 2021, 58, 102689. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhao, P.H.; Wang, W.L.; Cai, Z.Q.; Zhang, G.W.; Lu, Y.Q. Accurate fine-grained layout analysis for the historical Tibetan document based on the instance segmentation. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 154435–154447. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Zhang, C.; Wang, W.L.; Liu, H.M.; Zhang, G.W.; Lin, Q. Character Detection and Segmentation of Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents in Complex Situations. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 25376–25391. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Wang, W.L.; Lu, X.B.; Cai, Z.Q.; Shen, W.T.; Fu, J.; Caike, Z.X. Online handwritten sample generated based on component combination for Tibetan-Sanskrit. J. Chin. Informat. Process. 2017, 31, 64–73. [Google Scholar]Li, Z.J.; Wang, W.L. Tibetan historical document recognition of uchen script using baseline information. In Proceedings of the SPIE Tenth International Conference on Graphic and Image Processing (ICGIP), Chengdu, China, 6 May 2019; Volume 11069, p. 110693. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Buddhist Digital Resource Center (BDRC) [EB/OL]. Available online: https://www.google.com.hk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwiU_6jpstX7AhWoUPUHHaHCBYwQFnoECAgQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.bdrc.io%2F&usg=AOvVaw2UzWbivOaU6W0AWZ70AKwx (accessed on 1 January 2018).Tibetan (0F00-0FFF), The Unicode Standard, Version 14.0 [EB/OL]. Available online: https://unicode.org/charts/PDF/U0F00.pdf (accessed on 28 August 2022).Wang, D.H.; Wang, W.L.; Qian, J.J. 2DPCA and IMLDA method of feature extraction for online handwritten Tibetan recognition. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Networking and Digital Society (ICNDS), Wenzhou, China, 30–31 May 2010; pp. 563–566. [Google Scholar]Qian, J.J.; Wang, W.L.; Wang, D.H. A Novel Approach for Online Handwriting Recognition of Tibetan Characters. In Proceedings of the International MultiConference of Engineers and Computer Scientists (IMECS), Hong Kong, China, 17–19 March 2010; pp. 333–337. [Google Scholar]Huang, H.M.; Da, F.P. Sparse representation-based classification algorithm for optical Tibetan character recognition. Int. J. Light Electron Opt. 2014, 125, 1034–1037. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Ma, L.L.; Wu, J. Online handwritten Tibetan syllable recognition based on component segmentation method. In Proceedings of the 2015 13th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), Tunis, Tunisia, 23–26 August 2015; pp. 46–50. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Hedayati, F.; Chong, J.; Keutzer, K. Recognition of Tibetan wood block prints with generalized hidden markov and kernelized modified quadratic distance function. In Proceedings of the 2011 Joint Workshop on Multilingual OCR and Analytics for Noisy Unstructured Text Data, Beijing, China, 17 September 2011. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Ma, L.L.; Long, C.J.; Duan, L.J.; Zhang, X.Q.; Li, Y.X.; Zhao, Q.C. Segmentation and recognition for historical Tibetan document images. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 52641–52651. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Keret, S.; Wolf, L.; Dershowitz, N.; Werner, E.; Almogi, O.; Wangchuk, D. Transductive Learning for Reading Handwritten Tibetan Manuscripts. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), Sydney, NSW, Australia, 20–25 September 2019; pp. 214–221. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit]Lecun, Y.; Bottou, L.; Bengio, Y.; Haffner, P. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proc. IEEE 1998, 86, 2278–2324. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [Scilit] Figure 1. The research basis of this work: (a) example of historical Uchen Tibetan document; (b) example of text line after binarization and extraction; (c) partial character block obtained after a series of processes. Figure 2. Construction framework of the character dataset of historical Tibetan documents. Figure 3. Syllable structure in Tibetan: (a) schematic diagram of syllable structure in Tibetan; (b) example of syllable structure in Tibetan. Figure 4. Example of character annotation: (a) character block; (b) annotated text; (c) character block after segmentation; (d) annotation after shielding syllable points; (e) character block after shielding syllable points. Figure 5. Character recognition model framework. Figure 6. Example of character image extraction results after shielding syllable points: (a) character block after segmentation; (b) extracted characters (shielded syllable points). Figure 9. The constructed character dataset: (a) character images; (b) part of the character annotation mapping file (rotated 90 degrees to the right). Figure 10. Loss value of the model training process. Figure 11. Recognition effect on the validation set. Figure 12. Recognition result statistics of correct character segmentation. Table 1. Corresponding examples Tibetan characters and Unicode coding. No.Tibetan CharacterComponent Unit and CodeCharacter Code10F000F68 0F7C 0F7E20F57 0FB20F75 0F830F56 0FB7 0FB20F75 0F83 Table 2. Convolutional neural network configuration. TypeConfigurationConvolutionk5 × 5MaxPoolingk2 × 2, s2Convolutionk5 × 5MaxPoolingk2 × 2, s2Convolutionk5 × 5Linear1 × 1 × 610Softmax1 × 1 × 610 Table 3. Annotating the character block to be recognized. Sampling MethodStroke Attribution MethodData AbbreviationNCCBNACBPACBNCASSSystematic samplingCen-AMSS-Cen9916558156.28%7728Con-AMSS-Con9971557155.87%7705ConCen-AMSS-ConCen9868555556.29%7657Random samplingCen-AMRS-Cen9963561556.36%7753Con-AMRS-Con10,056567456.42%7959ConCen-AMRS-ConCen9927556256.03%7689 Table 4. Highest recognition rate statistics. EpochSS-CenSS-ConSS-ConCenRS-CenRS-Con RS-ConCen1–100.90670.90620.90730.89780.89090.895011–140.90190.90150.90280.89370.88730.892415–180.90570.90530.90640.89640.89230.894819–300.90720.90710.90820.89890.89350.8982 Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.© 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Share and Cite MDPI and ACS Style Zhang, C.; Wang, W.; Zhang, G. Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions. Electronics 2022, 11, 3919. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 AMA Style Zhang C, Wang W, Zhang G. Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions. Electronics. 2022; 11(23):3919. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 Chicago/Turabian Style Zhang, Ce, Weilan Wang, and Guowei Zhang. 2022. "Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions" Electronics 11, no. 23: 3919. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 APA Style Zhang, C., Wang, W., & Zhang, G. (2022). Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions. Electronics, 11(23), 3919. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here. Article Metrics Yes Citations Scopus 3 Crossref 2 Google Scholar [click to view] No Article Access Statistics Created with Highcharts 4.0.4Article access statisticsArticle Views2. Jun3. Jun4. Jun5. Jun6. Jun7. Jun8. Jun9. Jun10. Jun11. Jun12. Jun13. Jun14. Jun15. Jun16. Jun17. Jun18. Jun19. Jun20. Jun21. Jun22. Jun23. Jun24. Jun25. Jun26. Jun27. Jun28. Jun29. Jun30. Jun1. Jul2. Jul3. Jul4. Jul5. Jul6. Jul7. Jul8. Jul9. Jul10. Jul11. Jul12. Jul13. Jul14. Jul15. Jul16. Jul17. Jul18. Jul19. Jul20. Jul21. Jul22. Jul23. Jul24. Jul25. Jul26. Jul27. Jul28. Jul29. Jul30. Jul31. Jul1. Aug2. Aug3. Aug4. Aug5. Aug6. Aug7. Aug8. Aug9. Aug10. Aug11. Aug12. Aug13. Aug14. Aug15. Aug16. Aug17. Aug18. Aug19. Aug20. Aug21. Aug22. Aug23. Aug24. Aug25. Aug26. Aug27. Aug28. Aug29. Aug30. Aug0k1k2k3k For more information on the journal statistics, click here. Multiple requests from the same IP address are counted as one view. Zoom | Orient | As Lines | As Sticks | As Cartoon | As Surface | Previous Scene | Next Scene Cite Export citation file: BibTeX | EndNote | RIS MDPI and ACS Style Zhang, C.; Wang, W.; Zhang, G. Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions. Electronics 2022, 11, 3919. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 AMA Style Zhang C, Wang W, Zhang G. Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions. Electronics. 2022; 11(23):3919. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 Chicago/Turabian Style Zhang, Ce, Weilan Wang, and Guowei Zhang. 2022. "Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions" Electronics 11, no. 23: 3919. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 APA Style Zhang, C., Wang, W., & Zhang, G. (2022). Construction of a Character Dataset for Historical Uchen Tibetan Documents under Low-Resource Conditions. Electronics, 11(23), 3919. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11233919 Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here. clear Electronics, EISSN 2079-9292, Published by MDPI RSS Content Alert Further Information Article Processing Charges Pay an Invoice Open Access Policy Contact MDPI Jobs at MDPI Guidelines For Authors For Reviewers For Editors For Librarians For Publishers For Societies For Conference Organizers MDPI Initiatives Sciforum MDPI Books Preprints.org Scilit SciProfiles Encyclopedia JAMS Proceedings Series Follow MDPI LinkedIn Facebook X Subscribe to receive issue release notifications and newsletters from MDPI journals Accounting and Auditing Acoustics Acta Microbiologica Hellenica Actuators Addiction & Prevention Adhesives Administrative Sciences Adolescents Advances in Respiratory Medicine Aerobiology Aeronautics Aerospace Agriculture AgriEngineering Agrochemicals Agronomy AI AI and Precision Agriculture AI Chemistry AI for Engineering AI for Society AI in Education AI in Medicine AI Materials AI Sensors Air Algorithms Allergies Alloys Analog Analytica Analytics Anatomia Anesthesia Research Animals Antibiotics Antibodies Antioxidants Applied Biosciences Applied Mechanics Applied Microbiology Applied Nano Applied Sciences Applied System Innovation AppliedChem AppliedMath AppliedPhys Aquaculture Journal Archaeological Studies Architecture Arthropoda Arts Astronautics Astronomy Atmosphere Atoms Audiology Research Automation Axioms Bacteria Batteries Behavioral Sciences Beverages Big Data and Cognitive Computing BioChem Bioengineering Biologics Biology Biology and Life Sciences Forum Biomass Biomechanics BioMed Biomedicines BioMedInformatics Biomimetics Biomolecules Biophysica Bioresources and Bioproducts Biosensors Biosphere BioTech Birds Blockchains Brain Sciences Breast Cancer Research and Care Buildings Businesses C Cancers Cardiogenetics Cardiovascular Medicine Catalysts Cells Ceramics Challenges ChemEngineering Chemistry Chemistry Proceedings Chemosensors Children Chips CivilEng Clean Technologies Climate Clinical and Translational Neuroscience Clinical Bioenergetics Clinics and Practice Clocks & Sleep Coasts Coatings Colloids and Interfaces Colorants Commodities Complexities Complications Compounds Computation Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum Computers Condensed Matter Conservation Construction Materials Corrosion and Materials Degradation Cosmetics COVID Crafts Craniomaxillofacial Trauma & Reconstruction Crops Cryo Cryptography Crystals Culture Current Issues in Molecular Biology Current Oncology Dairy Data Dentistry Journal Dermato Dermatopathology Designs Diabetology Diagnostics Dietetics Digital Digital Health and Innovation Disabilities Diseases Diversity DNA Drones Drugs and Drug Candidates Dynamics Earth Ecologies Econometrics Economies Education Sciences Electricity Electrochem Electronic Materials Electronics Emergency Care and Medicine Encyclopedia Endocrines Energies Energy Storage and Applications Eng Engineering Proceedings Entropic and Disordered Matter Entropy Environmental and Earth Sciences Proceedings Environmental Remediation Environments Epidemiologia Epigenomes European Burn Journal European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education Family Sciences Fermentation Fibers FinTech Fire Fishes Fluids Foods Forecasting Forensic Sciences Forests Fossil Studies Foundations Fractal and Fractional Freshwater Fuels Future Future Collections, Libraries, Archives, and Museums Future Internet Future Pharmacology Future Transportation Galaxies Games Gases Gastroenterology Insights Gastrointestinal Disorders Gastronomy Gels Genealogy Genes Geographies GeoHazards Geomatics Geometry Geosciences Geotechnics Geriatrics Germs Glacies Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease Grain Science Grasses Green Green Health Gynecologic Cancer Hardware Health Economics and Policy Healthcare Hearts Hemato Hematology Reports Heritage Histories Horticulturae Hospitals Humanities Humans Hydrobiology Hydrogen Hydrology Hydrometeorology Hydropower Hygiene Immuno Industries Infectious Disease Reports Inflammation Journal Informatics Information Infrastructures Inorganics Insects Instruments Intelligent Infrastructure and Construction International Journal of Cognitive Sciences International Journal of Environmental Medicine International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health International Journal of Financial Studies International Journal of Medical Devices International Journal of Molecular Sciences International Journal of Neonatal Screening International Journal of Orofacial Myology and Myofunctional Therapy International Journal of Plant Biology International Journal of Thermofluid Science and Technology International Journal of Topology International Journal of Translational Medicine International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power International Medical Education Inventions IoT Iron ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information J Journal of Aesthetic Medicine Journal of Ageing and Longevity Journal of CardioRenal Medicine Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease Journal of Clinical & Translational Ophthalmology Journal of Clinical Medicine Journal of Composites Science Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy Journal of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease Journal of Developmental Biology Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Analyses Journal of Eye Movement Research Journal of Fast-Track Health Journal of Functional Biomaterials Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology Journal of Fungi Journal of Genome Biotechnology and Genetics Journal of Gerontology and Geriatrics Journal of Imaging Journal of Innovation Journal of Intelligence Journal of Interdisciplinary Research Applied to Medicine Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing Journal of Marine Science and Engineering Journal of Market Access & Health Policy Journal of Mind and Medical Sciences Journal of Molecular Pathology Journal of Nanotheranostics Journal of Nuclear Engineering Journal of Optical Materials Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine Journal of Parks Journal of Personalized Medicine Journal of Pharmaceutical and BioTech Industry Journal of Phytomedicine Journal of Respiration Journal of Risk and Financial Management Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks Journal of Superintelligence Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association Journal of the Oman Medical Association Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research Journal of Vascular Diseases Journal of Xenobiotics Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens Journalism and Media Kidney and Dialysis Kinases and Phosphatases Knowledge LabMed Laboratories Land Languages Laws Legumes Life Lights Limnological Review Lipidology Liquids Literature Livers Logics Logistics Low-Altitude Economy Lubricants Lymphatics Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction Machines Macromol Magnetism Magnetochemistry Marine Drugs Maritime Materials Materials Proceedings Mathematical and Computational Applications Mathematics Medical Ethics and Bioethics Medical Sciences Medical Sciences Forum Medicina Medicines Membranes Merits Metabolites Metals Meteorology Methane Methods and Protocols Metrics Metrology Micro Microbiology Research Microelectronics Micromachines Microorganisms Microplastics Microwave Minerals Mining Modelling Modern Mathematical Physics Molbank Molecules Multimedia Multimodal Technologies and Interaction Muscles Nanoenergy Advances Nanomanufacturing Nanomaterials NDT Network Neuroglia Neuroimaging Neurology International NeuroSci Nitrogen Non-Coding RNA Nursing Reports Nutraceuticals Nutrients Obesities Occupational Health Oceans Onco Optics Optoelectronics Oral Organics Organoids Osteology Oxygen Pandemics Parasitologia Particles Pathogens Pathophysiology Peace Studies Pediatric Reports Pets Pharmaceuticals Pharmaceutics Pharmacoepidemiology Pharmacy Philosophies Photochem Photonics Photovoltaics Phycology Physchem Physical Sciences Forum Physics Physiologia Plants Plasma Platforms Pollutants Polymers Polysaccharides Populations Poultry Powders Precision Oncology Primary and Hospital Care Proceedings Processes Project Management Horizons Prosthesis Proteomes Psychiatry International Psychoactives Psychology International Publications Purification Quantum Beam Science Quantum Reports Quaternary Radiation Reactions Real Estate Receptors Recycling Regional Science and Environmental Economics Religions Remote Sensing Reports Reproductive Medicine Resources Rheumato Risks Robotics Romanian Journal of Preventive Medicine Ruminants Safety Sci Scientia Pharmaceutica Sclerosis Seeds Semiconductors and Heterogeneous Integration Sensors Separations Sexes Signals Sinusitis Smart Cities Smart Fisheries Social Sciences Société Internationale d’Urologie Journal Societies Software Soil Systems Solar Solids Spectroscopy Journal Sports Standards Stats Stratigraphy and Sedimentology Stresses Stroke Reports Surfaces Surgeries Surgical Techniques Development Sustainability Sustainable Chemistry Swiss Archives of Neurology, Psychiatry and Psychotherapy Symmetry SynBio Systems Targets Taxonomy Technologies Telecom Textiles Thalassemia Reports Theoretical and Applied Ergonomics Therapeutics Thermo Time and Space Tomography Tourism and Hospitality Toxics Toxins Transplantology Trauma Care Trends in Higher Education Trends in Public Health Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease Universe Urban Science Uro Vaccines Vehicles Venereology Veterinary Sciences Vibration Virtual Worlds Viruses Vision Waste Water Welding Wild Wind Women World World Electric Vehicle Journal Youth Zoonotic Diseases Select optionsAccounting and AuditingAcousticsActa Microbiologica HellenicaActuatorsAddiction & PreventionAdhesivesAdministrative SciencesAdolescentsAdvances in Respiratory MedicineAerobiologyAeronauticsAerospaceAgricultureAgriEngineeringAgrochemicalsAgronomyAIAI and Precision AgricultureAI ChemistryAI for EngineeringAI for SocietyAI in EducationAI in MedicineAI MaterialsAI SensorsAirAlgorithmsAllergiesAlloysAnalogAnalyticaAnalyticsAnatomiaAnesthesia ResearchAnimalsAntibioticsAntibodiesAntioxidantsApplied BiosciencesApplied MechanicsApplied MicrobiologyApplied NanoApplied SciencesApplied System InnovationAppliedChemAppliedMathAppliedPhysAquaculture JournalArchaeological StudiesArchitectureArthropodaArtsAstronauticsAstronomyAtmosphereAtomsAudiology ResearchAutomationAxiomsBacteriaBatteriesBehavioral SciencesBeveragesBig Data and Cognitive ComputingBioChemBioengineeringBiologicsBiologyBiology and Life Sciences ForumBiomassBiomechanicsBioMedBiomedicinesBioMedInformaticsBiomimeticsBiomoleculesBiophysicaBioresources and BioproductsBiosensorsBiosphereBioTechBirdsBlockchainsBrain SciencesBreast Cancer Research and CareBuildingsBusinessesCCancersCardiogeneticsCardiovascular MedicineCatalystsCellsCeramicsChallengesChemEngineeringChemistryChemistry ProceedingsChemosensorsChildrenChipsCivilEngClean TechnologiesClimateClinical and Translational NeuroscienceClinical BioenergeticsClinics and PracticeClocks & SleepCoastsCoatingsColloids and InterfacesColorantsCommoditiesComplexitiesComplicationsCompoundsComputationComputer Sciences & Mathematics ForumComputersCondensed MatterConservationConstruction MaterialsCorrosion and Materials DegradationCosmeticsCOVIDCraftsCraniomaxillofacial Trauma & ReconstructionCropsCryoCryptographyCrystalsCultureCurrent Issues in Molecular BiologyCurrent OncologyDairyDataDentistry JournalDermatoDermatopathologyDesignsDiabetologyDiagnosticsDieteticsDigitalDigital Health and InnovationDisabilitiesDiseasesDiversityDNADronesDrugs and Drug CandidatesDynamicsEarthEcologiesEconometricsEconomiesEducation SciencesElectricityElectrochemElectronic MaterialsElectronicsEmergency Care and MedicineEncyclopediaEndocrinesEnergiesEnergy Storage and ApplicationsEngEngineering ProceedingsEntropic and Disordered MatterEntropyEnvironmental and Earth Sciences ProceedingsEnvironmental RemediationEnvironmentsEpidemiologiaEpigenomesEuropean Burn JournalEuropean Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and EducationFamily SciencesFermentationFibersFinTechFireFishesFluidsFoodsForecastingForensic SciencesForestsFossil StudiesFoundationsFractal and FractionalFreshwaterFuelsFutureFuture Collections, Libraries, Archives, and MuseumsFuture InternetFuture PharmacologyFuture TransportationGalaxiesGamesGasesGastroenterology InsightsGastrointestinal DisordersGastronomyGelsGenealogyGenesGeographiesGeoHazardsGeomaticsGeometryGeosciencesGeotechnicsGeriatricsGermsGlaciesGout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition DiseaseGrain ScienceGrassesGreenGreen HealthGynecologic CancerHardwareHealth Economics and PolicyHealthcareHeartsHematoHematology ReportsHeritageHistoriesHorticulturaeHospitalsHumanitiesHumansHydrobiologyHydrogenHydrologyHydrometeorologyHydropowerHygieneImmunoIndustriesInfectious Disease ReportsInflammation JournalInformaticsInformationInfrastructuresInorganicsInsectsInstrumentsIntelligent Infrastructure and ConstructionInternational Journal of Cognitive SciencesInternational Journal of Environmental MedicineInternational Journal of Environmental Research and Public HealthInternational Journal of Financial StudiesInternational Journal of Medical DevicesInternational Journal of Molecular SciencesInternational Journal of Neonatal ScreeningInternational Journal of Orofacial Myology and Myofunctional TherapyInternational Journal of Plant BiologyInternational Journal of Thermofluid Science and TechnologyInternational Journal of TopologyInternational Journal of Translational MedicineInternational Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and PowerInternational Medical EducationInventionsIoTIronISPRS International Journal of Geo-InformationJJournal of Aesthetic MedicineJournal of Ageing and LongevityJournal of CardioRenal MedicineJournal of Cardiovascular Development and DiseaseJournal of Clinical & Translational OphthalmologyJournal of Clinical MedicineJournal of Composites ScienceJournal of Cybersecurity and PrivacyJournal of Dementia and Alzheimer's DiseaseJournal of Developmental BiologyJournal of Experimental and Theoretical AnalysesJournal of Eye Movement ResearchJournal of Fast-Track HealthJournal of Functional BiomaterialsJournal of Functional Morphology and KinesiologyJournal of FungiJournal of Genome Biotechnology and GeneticsJournal of Gerontology and GeriatricsJournal of ImagingJournal of InnovationJournal of IntelligenceJournal of Interdisciplinary Research Applied to MedicineJournal of Low Power Electronics and ApplicationsJournal of Manufacturing and Materials ProcessingJournal of Marine Science and EngineeringJournal of Market Access & Health PolicyJournal of Mind and Medical SciencesJournal of Molecular PathologyJournal of NanotheranosticsJournal of Nuclear EngineeringJournal of Optical MaterialsJournal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance MedicineJournal of ParksJournal of Personalized MedicineJournal of Pharmaceutical and BioTech IndustryJournal of PhytomedicineJournal of RespirationJournal of Risk and Financial ManagementJournal of Sensor and Actuator NetworksJournal of SuperintelligenceJournal of the American Podiatric Medical AssociationJournal of the Oman Medical AssociationJournal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce ResearchJournal of Vascular DiseasesJournal of XenobioticsJournal of Zoological and Botanical GardensJournalism and MediaKidney and DialysisKinases and PhosphatasesKnowledgeLabMedLaboratoriesLandLanguagesLawsLegumesLifeLightsLimnological ReviewLipidologyLiquidsLiteratureLiversLogicsLogisticsLow-Altitude EconomyLubricantsLymphaticsMachine Learning and Knowledge ExtractionMachinesMacromolMagnetismMagnetochemistryMarine DrugsMaritimeMaterialsMaterials ProceedingsMathematical and Computational ApplicationsMathematicsMedical Ethics and BioethicsMedical SciencesMedical Sciences ForumMedicinaMedicinesMembranesMeritsMetabolitesMetalsMeteorologyMethaneMethods and ProtocolsMetricsMetrologyMicroMicrobiology ResearchMicroelectronicsMicromachinesMicroorganismsMicroplasticsMicrowaveMineralsMiningModellingModern Mathematical PhysicsMolbankMoleculesMultimediaMultimodal Technologies and InteractionMusclesNanoenergy AdvancesNanomanufacturingNanomaterialsNDTNetworkNeurogliaNeuroimagingNeurology InternationalNeuroSciNitrogenNon-Coding RNANursing ReportsNutraceuticalsNutrientsObesitiesOccupational HealthOceansOncoOpticsOptoelectronicsOralOrganicsOrganoidsOsteologyOxygenPandemicsParasitologiaParticlesPathogensPathophysiologyPeace StudiesPediatric ReportsPetsPharmaceuticalsPharmaceuticsPharmacoepidemiologyPharmacyPhilosophiesPhotochemPhotonicsPhotovoltaicsPhycologyPhyschemPhysical Sciences ForumPhysicsPhysiologiaPlantsPlasmaPlatformsPollutantsPolymersPolysaccharidesPopulationsPoultryPowdersPrecision OncologyPrimary and Hospital CareProceedingsProcessesProject Management HorizonsProsthesisProteomesPsychiatry InternationalPsychoactivesPsychology InternationalPublicationsPurificationQuantum Beam ScienceQuantum ReportsQuaternaryRadiationReactionsReal EstateReceptorsRecyclingRegional Science and Environmental EconomicsReligionsRemote SensingReportsReproductive MedicineResourcesRheumatoRisksRoboticsRomanian Journal of Preventive MedicineRuminantsSafetySciScientia PharmaceuticaSclerosisSeedsSemiconductors and Heterogeneous IntegrationSensorsSeparationsSexesSignalsSinusitisSmart CitiesSmart FisheriesSocial SciencesSociété Internationale d’Urologie JournalSocietiesSoftwareSoil SystemsSolarSolidsSpectroscopy JournalSportsStandardsStatsStratigraphy and SedimentologyStressesStroke ReportsSurfacesSurgeriesSurgical Techniques DevelopmentSustainabilitySustainable ChemistrySwiss Archives of Neurology, Psychiatry and PsychotherapySymmetrySynBioSystemsTargetsTaxonomyTechnologiesTelecomTextilesThalassemia ReportsTheoretical and Applied ErgonomicsTherapeuticsThermoTime and SpaceTomographyTourism and HospitalityToxicsToxinsTransplantologyTrauma CareTrends in Higher EducationTrends in Public HealthTropical Medicine and Infectious DiseaseUniverseUrban ScienceUroVaccinesVehiclesVenereologyVeterinary SciencesVibrationVirtual WorldsVirusesVisionWasteWaterWeldingWildWindWomenWorldWorld Electric Vehicle JournalYouthZoonotic Diseases Subscribe © 1996-2026 MDPI (Basel, Switzerland) unless otherwise stated Disclaimer Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content. Legal Notice Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Privacy Settings Accessibility We use cookies on our website to ensure you get the best experience. Read more about our cookies here. Accept Share Link Copy clear Share https://www.mdpi.com/1971018 clear Back to TopTop
