# SOURCE FILE: balbir_niryukti_springer.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\loop_B09_B10\documents\balbir_niryukti_springer.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_3_colophons (3. ธรรมเนียมคัดลอก จารึกท้ายคัมภีร์ Colophons และนักคัดลอก)
# PAGES: 18 | TOTAL CHARS: 57427

=== PAGE 1 ===
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis:
The Niryukti-Discourse
Nalini Balbir1
Accepted: 17 May 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract This essay argues that the Prakrit Jain verse commentaries called
niryuktis form a coherent discourse, the ﬁxed procedures of which illustrate how
anekāntavāda works. These procedures are analysed in turn. They are the nayas, the
viewpoints. Then come the formalized nikṣepas which apply various parameters to
notions or terms in order to circumscribe their meanings and usages. List of syn-
onyms and hermeneutical etymologies similarly aim at extracting all the
potentialities of meanings. But, on the other hand, the multi-sided analysis is often
reduced to a sharp bipartition or tripartition with polemic purpose especially when it
comes to deﬁne key-terms of the tradition. Then the ultimate aim is to draw a clear
line between what is acceptable in Jain ethics and what is characteristic of other
religious groups. Thus the encyclopaedic exegesis of the niryuktis is meant both for
transmitting knowledge in the frame of monastic pedagogy and to provide the
believer with an adequate frame for proper conduct.
Keywords Jainism · Jain exegesis in Prakrit · Niryukti · Synonyms ·
Etymologies · Religious identity and polemics
Introduction
Multi-sidedness is the best known feature of the Jain philosophical approach known
through the emblematic term anekāntavāda. In academic scholarship it is mostly
discussed and illustrated through the investigation of the classical treatises of Jain
philosophy written in Sanskrit by Śvetāmbara and Digambara philosophers from the
climax period of the 7th to the 12th century. This paper focuses on the beginning
& Nalini Balbir
nalini.balbir@wanadoo.fr
1
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Sorbonne-Nouvelle University, Paris, France
123
Journal of Indian Philosophy
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10781-025-09613-y(0123456789().,-volV)
(0123456789().,-volV)

=== PAGE 2 ===
stages of the expression of multiple-angle analysis and the apparatus of
anekāntavāda as it unfolds in the strata of Śvetāmbara Jain literature known as
niryukti which represents the ﬁrst phase of Jain scholasticism. This group of
versiﬁed works is written in the Middle Indo-Aryan (Prakrit) language called Jaina
Māhārāṣṭrī with a style which puts them at the crossroads of oral exchanges between
teacher and pupil within a pedagogical setting of elucidation and of a strictly written
format. Niryuktis (Prakrit Ṇijjuttis) form a constituted body of ten texts, eight of
which have come to us. Some of them are attached to a canonical root work in
Ardhamāgadhī Prakrit (Ācārāṅga, Sūtrakṛtāṅga, Daśā, Uttarādhyayana, Daśa-
vaikālika) and have a limited size (a few hundreds of verses), while others grew
independently of any sūtra, at least in part (Ogha-niryukti, Piṇḍa-niryukti and
Āvaśyaka-niryukti) and reach imposing dimensions (ca. 2500 verses for the latter).
Though their composition has been ascribed by the Jain tradition to an early teacher
known as Bhadrabāhu (ﬁrst centuries CE), no clear authorship can be proved. Their
designation, Pkt. ṇijjutti, has been said to go back to Skt. niryukti, with the root
YUJ- conveying the idea of ‘connection’. What is more important is that niryuktis
have in common a set of procedures which they apply and which characterizes this
sub-genre of exegetical literature. It has often bafﬂed (Western) scholars because if
one considers the relation between a root-text and a commentary as direct or
univocal, niryuktis do not ﬁt in the picture. They often contain what may ﬁrst look
like excurses or as insertions without direct relation to the root-text they are
supposed to explain. On the contrary, if we consider these analytical procedures
together and try to understand what their real purpose is, we can see that they
combine to shape a connected discourse, which is a new phenomenon not found in
the root-texts (the sūtras). This, I argue, is a way to apply in the area of exegesis the
typical Jain multi-sided analysis of reality.
The Anuyogadvārasūtra, the Treatise on the doors of exposition, is recorded as a
propedeutic work in all traditional lists of what makes the Śvetāmbara Āgamas. So
it does not belong to the niryukti genre as such. However, it is a key methodological
work on exegesis in the Jain canon, and meant as a kind of guide to read and
understand texts belonging to this genre, taking the Āvaśyakasūtra as the key
instance for its exposition. In particular, it establishes various sets of angles or
parameters to approach the analysis of words, subjects, etc., as niryuktis do: it is in
fact ‘an umbrella term for a set of hermeneutical procedures’ that are to be applied
in order to access the true meaning (Jyväsjärvi, 2010, p. 147). Therefore, it is
justiﬁed to use it in order to build the foundation of the present essay. It is available
in two English translations (Bothara, 2007; Hanaki, 1970), the consultation of which
is always rewarding as the Anuyogadvārasūtra is rather technical and not of easy
access. Its language is predominantly Ardhamāgadhī Prakrit (the language of the
Śvetāmbara Āgamas as a whole). But it was followed by a Prakrit prose
commentary (cūrṇi) and the Sanskrit commentaries (vṛtti) by Haribhadra (ca. 8th
cent.?) and Hemacandra Maladhārin (12th cent.), all conveniently edited under the
same cover in Jambūvijaya (1999, 2000), which have been used too.
123
N. Balbir

=== PAGE 3 ===
The Bases of Multi-Sided Analysis
In the niryuktis, the term anekānta is not used and the classiﬁcation into seven
viewpoints (sapta naya), which is also fundamental to the Jain approach as attested
in classics of philosophy, is mostly not explicit. But it is known in the
Anuyogadvārasūtra (which leads one to question the statement of Bhatt (1991,
p. 32): ‘The Naya technique is known only to the post-canonical literature’). There,
ṇaya is the fourth and last door of disquisition (Pkt. dāra; Skt. dvāra) which is to be
applied in the exposition of the chapter Sāmāiya (of the Āvaśyakasūtra) according to
the Anuyogadvāra method (Hanaki, 1970, p. 19), so that the list of the seven
viewpoints forms the ﬁnal sūtra of the work.
606. Then what is a standpoint (naya)? Seven basic standpoints have been stated,
namely,
(1) negama (popular, Hanaki; coordinated, Bothara);
(2) saṃgaha (synthetic, Hanaki; generalized viewpoint, Bothara);
(3) vavahāra (pragmatic, Hanaki; particularized, Bothara);
(4) ujjusua (straightforward, Hanaki; precisionistic viewpoint or that related to
speciﬁc point or period of time, Bothara);
(5) sadda (verbal, Hanaki; verbal viewpoint or that related to language and
grammar, Bothara);
(6) samabhirūḍha (restricted, Hanaki; conventional viewpoint or that related to
conventional meaning and ignoring etymological meaning, Bothara);
(7) evaṃbhūta (functional, Hanaki; etymological viewpoint or that related to words
used in original derivative sense and signiﬁcance, Bothara).
On this (run the verses):
That which ascertains (the object) by various ways of knowledge (is negama) - this
is the etymology of (1) negama. The deﬁnition of the remaining nayas also I shall
propound here, please listen [136]
(They) brieﬂy speak of the (2) saṃgaha-statement as (expressing) the general
condensed meaning. The (3) vavahāra expresses the determinate (practicable)
meaning in respect of all substances [137]
The (4) ujjusua variety of naya is to be known as comprehending only the
(immediately) present object. The (5) saddanaya expects a still more specialized
present object [138]
In the (6) samabhirūḍha naya, the transference (of words) from its object (to
another object) is unreal. The (7) evaṃbhūta distinguishes between the word, its
meaning, and both of them (viz. word-cum-meaning) [139]
One should exert oneself only in the object having been known as either
acceptable or non-acceptable. This is the teaching called the viewpoints. [140, my
translation; ṇāyammi giṇhiyavve agiṇhiyavvammi ceva atthammi
jaiyavvam eva ii jo uvaeso so nao nāma; see also below p. 17]
Having listened to the diversity of assertions of nayas, because this one is pure
from all viewpoints the ascetic is established in the qualities of conduct [in
123
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis…

=== PAGE 4 ===
knowledge and conduct, comm.] [141; my translation] (Hanaki, 1970, pp. 211–
212, combined with Bothara, 2007, 2, 473–476).
This method is applied in the Anuyogadvārasūtra itself (nayapramāṇa, sūtras
473 and foll.: Bothara, 2007, 2, 316; Hanaki, 1970, pp. 174–177; and foll.) and
explained through three illustrations (Pkt. diṭṭhanta; Skt. dṛṣṭānta), that of the
wooden measuring pot, that of the abode and that of the space-point. The second one
(Pkt. vasahi; Skt. vasati, Bothara, 2007, 2, 323–327; Hanaki, 1970, pp. 175–177)
will be selected here as its rather concrete character makes the grasping of the
viewpoints (somewhat) easier.
Suppose a certain person asks another person: ‘Where do you live?’ The
impure negama viewpoint says: ‘I live in the world.’
– ‘The world is known as threefold: upper, lower, horizontal. Do you live in all of
them?’A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the horizontal one.’
– ‘In the horizontal world innumerable continents and oceans are known, the
Jambūdvīpa etc. up to the Svayambhūramaṇa. Do you live in all these?’
A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the Jambūdvīpa.’
– ‘In the Jambūdvīpa there are ten lands, namely Bharata, Airāvata, Hemavata,
Airaṇyavata, Harivarṣa, Ramyakavarṣa, Devakuru, Uttarakuru, Pūrvavideha,
Aparavideha. Do you live in all these?’
A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in Bharata.’
– ‘The Bharata land is known to have a southern and a northern half. Do you live in
all these?’
A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the southern half.’
– ‘In the southern half there are several villages, towns, walled-settlements, untidy
settlements, remote towns, cities connected both by roads and waterways,
commercial cities, settlements near mines, castle like settlements, suburbs. Do
you live in all these?’
A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in Pāṭaliputra.’
– ‘In Pāṭaliputra there are several houses. Do you live in all these?’
A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the house of Devadatta.’
– ‘In the house of Devadatta there are several quarters. Do you live in all these?’
A relatively purer viewpoint says: ‘I live in the inner quarter.’
Thus according to the negama viewpoint a person living (there) does live
there. The same thing for the vavahāra viewpoint. For the saṃgaha viewpoint
a person who has climbed on a bed lives (there). For the ujusua viewpoint the
person lives in the space-points which he occupies. For the three word-
viewpoints [no. 5, 6 and 7] he lives in the self.
Thus one of the functions of this method is to show how an analysis proceeds step
by step until it comes to the most reﬁned stage.
123
N. Balbir

=== PAGE 5 ===
The Regular Procedures of Multi-Sided Analysis in the Niryukti Discourse
As rightly pointed out by Alsdorf, ‘Jain monastic scholarship originated and
developed from the comparable task of explaining and handling down to pupils the
sacred scriptures of Jainism’ (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 455). This led Jain scholars to
emphasize methodology and to evolve different interpretive tools. The three main
ones are listed together at the outset of the niryukti on the Daśavaikālikasūtra:
nikkhev’ egaṭṭha nirutta (5, and again together in 332). They will now be examined
in turn, drawing examples from the shorter niryuktis, those on the ‘seniors’ of the
Jaina canon conveniently edited by Bollée (1995). A list of the cases found in the
Āvaśyakaniryukti, the largest representative of the corpus, with partial detailed
discussion is found in Balbir (1993, pp. 56–63). More examples have been discussed
also in Jyväsjärvi (2010, pp. 151–152).
Nikepa
The nikṣepa, for the investigation of which Alsdorf’s seminal article remains one of
the most accessible introductory studies, consists in ‘subjecting key words to an
investigation by applying a scheme of ﬁxed viewpoints’ (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 455). A
word common in Prakrit and Sanskrit, mostly with the meaning of ‘deposit’, it
evolves as a technical term in the context of hermeneutical discussions where it
means ‘placing’ a notion, a word, etc., in a way similar to what happens in
mathematics where numbers are placed and then subjected to various operations.
This use is easy to recognize because of the contexts of occurrence and does not
exclude other meanings for this word outside these particular contexts. The
technical use of this word and the method it refers to have a history, which can be
retrieved from Bhatt, 1991, 1978. In short, the dialectical technique consisting in
multi-sided analysis is earlier than the term designating it. Nikṣepa in the technical
understanding under consideration does not appear in the Śvetāmbara canon stricto
sensu (Aṅgas and Upāṅgas), but multi-sided analysis achieved through the
application of standard parameters or determinants is common. Listing and
decrypting such canonical instances is precisely the purpose of Bhatt, 1978. To
mention one example:
The dharma-astikāya is - in short - taught as ﬁvefold, viz. with respect to
dravya (substance), kṣetra (space), kāla (time), bhāva (non-physical nature),
guṇa (quality).
According to dravya, the dharma-astikāya is one dravya [i.e., one member
in the set of astikāyas (= ‘dravyas’). According to kṣetra, it has the
measurements of the world. According to kāla, never did it not exist, never
does it not exist, never will it not exist, it did exist, it does exist, it will exist, it
is ﬁrm, eternal, [etc.]. According to bhāva, it does not possess colour(s), smell
(s), taste(s), touch(es). According to guṇa, its quality is movement (translation
as Bhatt, 1978, p. 42; text in Bhatt, 1978, p. 72).
This passage is found in the ﬁfth Aṅga of the canon, the Vyākhyāprajñapti
(Proclamation of explanations), which is an emblematic work of scholastic teaching
123
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis…

=== PAGE 6 ===
for its framing and its contents. Whether it reproduces a historical reality or not, in
its present form it offers a model of live teaching and discussion connected with
orality since its two main characters are Indrabhūti Gautama, the ﬁrst of Mahāvīra’s
disciples, formulating questions, and Mahāvīra providing elaborate answers with
recourse to methods of multi-sided analysis. It is no wonder, then, that the only
canonical occurrence of Pkt. nikkheva (Skt. nikṣepa) in its technical meaning is
found in a list where various such methods are mentioned together (aṇugama-
nikkheva-naya-), precisely to describe the contents of the Vyākhyāprajñapti. This
takes place in the section of the Samavāyāṅga (fourth Aṅga) devoted to a
description of the contents of ‘twelvefold basket’ that constitutes the core of Jain
teaching (Samavāyāṅga, Prakīrṇaka section, se kiṃtaṃViyāhe?). The method of
analysis is attested (without the name) in various canonical scriptures, but,
undoubtedly, the ﬁfth Aṅga provides a large panel of examples of the two varieties
distinguished by Bhatt, 1978, namely those where the determinants are preceded by
an introductory sentence, such as in the dharmāstikāya mentioned above (Bhatt,
1978, pp. 16–20 [Nos. 19–50] and those where the determinants come straightaway
with no introduction (22–25 [Nos. 75–91).
The analysis with determinants expressing various angles of understanding is so
fundamental to the Jain way of approaching a notion that it can be found illustrated
even in a purely narrative canonical scripture such as the sixth Aṅga. In a passage,
which admittedly is not narrative, we come across a follower of Sāṃkhya
expounding his doctrine:
Among us dharma is known to be rooted in cleansing. And this cleansing is
known to be twofold, namely material cleansing and spiritual cleansing.
Material cleansing is done by using water and sand, spiritual cleansing by
using sacred grass and mantras.
amhaṃsoya-mūlae dhamme paṇṇatte. se vi ya soe duvihe paṇṇatte, taṃ
jahā: davva-soe ya bhāva-soe ya. davva-soe ya udaeṇaṃmaṭṭiyāe ya, bhāva-
soe dabbhehi ya mantehi ya. (Jñātadharmakathā 1.5; Bhatt, 1978, pp. 97–98)
Here, we have a twofold analysis in contrast which is reduced to what appears to
have become the two most important parameters or determinants (davva and bhāva;
see also below). At the canonical stage, anyway, ‘the term nikṣepa does not occur,
the technique being merely identiﬁed by the employment of identical terms for the
various aspects (davva = substance, khetta = space, kāla = time, and so on)’ (Bruhn,
1979, p. 103).
In Śvetāmbara Jain exegetical literature (Anuyogadvārasūtra and niryukti
corpus), the substantive nikkheva (variant spelling ṇikkheva; Skt. nikṣepa) is of
common use to designate this dialectical technique. The corresponding verb is also
attested:
tamhā
āvassayaṃ
ṇikkhivissāmi,
suyaṃ
ṇikkhivissāmi,
khaṃdhaṃ
ṇikkhivissāmi, ajjhayaṇaṃṇikkhivissāmi (Anuyogadvārasūtra 7). Following Als-
dorf (1973, p. 456) ‘begging pardon for the word-monster,’ we can render it with the
neologism ‘to nikṣepize,’ as Bhatt also does (1991, p. 32). This sentence gives the
programme which will be achieved in the rest of the work, successively for
āvassaya (sūtras 9–29), for the scripture (30–51), for the division (52–72) and for
the chapter (Anuyogadvārasūtra 534 foll.). Occasionally, Pkt. parūvaṇā (based on
123
N. Balbir

=== PAGE 7 ===
Skt. prarūp-, ‘to expound, explain’, used in Jain sources) is met with instead of
nikṣepa and functions as an equivalent term (Bhatt, 1978, p. 130; DaśavN 283),
while the Sanskrit commentaries often gloss it as nyāsa.
The verse following the programmatic sūtra 7 of the Anuyogadvārasūtra opens
the way to standardization of the determinants to be applied:
One should fully apply to a subject whatever ṇikkhevas are known about that
subject. And to those (subjects) whose ṇikkhevas are not known, one should
apply the four (Hanaki, 1970, p. 2).
The four are nāma, ṭhavaṇā (Skt. sthāpanā), davva (Skt. dravya) and bhāva. In
practice, these are the ones that the niryuktis resort to. Hence the scheme ﬁnally gets
a uniformity that was absent in the canonical practice. This holds true, in particular,
in the carrying out of the ﬁrst two determinants which are mostly not expanded upon
and appear to be there by convention (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 458). As a matter of fact,
nāma refers to the designation as such and does not seem to contain a lot of potential
for elaboration and sthāpanā ‘is the pictorial or material representation of the
animate or inanimate, concrete or abstract nikṣepa object, its efﬁgy or illustration’
(Alsdorf, 1973, p. 456) or ‘notional installation’ (Bothara, 2007) and appears to have
been regarded as more problematic than applicable (Alsdorf, 1973, pp. 456 and 457)
and the commentators mostly brush them away, not providing any detail. Even then,
both determinants are always present at the beginning of the lists. In order to make
them understood by 21st-century readers, Bothara (2007, p. 23) takes the example of
the word ‘mahāvīra’. If it is attributed to somebody just for convenience of
identiﬁcation, even though he is devoid of the qualities conveyed by the word, it is
called nāma nikṣepa. On the contrary, bhāva nikṣepa means calling ‘mahāvīra’
either the Jina himself or somebody who has similar qualities. To confer this name
to an image, picture, or symbol would be sthāpana, and to recognize the body of a
person named ‘mahāvīra’ after his death would be dravya nikṣepa, i.e. physical
aspect.
In practice, only the pair dravya ‘material, concrete’ and bhāva ‘moral, religious,
spiritual’ is important. It will be considered later, as well as their further subdivision
into āgamataḥand no āgamataḥ‘doctrinally, non-doctrinally’. On the other hand,
even though the fourfold list of determinants is overwhelmingly attested, it does not
prevent its increase to six, eight, or even twelve determinants in exceptional cases.
Nowhere is there any limitation assigned to their number.
When it is carried out systematically, a nikṣepa applies ﬁrst to the title of a whole
canonical sūtra, then to the title of a given chapter, then to the ﬁrst words of a
chapter, then to any word of the chapter regarded as important. This scheme is
formalized as follows in the Anuyogadvārasūtra (534): A nikṣepa is threefold: (1)
pertaining to general nomenclature (ohanipphaṇṇe), i.e. the general name of a work
or of its part (e.g., ajjhayaṇa), (2) pertaining to the speciﬁc name of a
chapter (nāmanipphaṇṇe), (3) pertaining to words of speciﬁc sentences of verses
of the sūtra (suttālāvaganipphaṇṇe). Since ajjhayaṇa (Skt. adhyayana) is a frequent
division, its nikṣepa, carried out in the Anuyogadvārasūtra (535foll.), recurs in
identical form in various niryuktis (UttN 5-11 = DaśavN 27-33); suyakhandha (Skt.
śrutaskandha) ‘section’ is another similar case in point (UttN 12-17; SūN 23). The
123
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis…

=== PAGE 8 ===
variety of words that are nikṣepized in the niryuktis is large. In fact, virtually no
word is excluded. For instance, a regional word with no clear etymology such as
khalunka, which is the title of Uttarādhyayanasūtra chap. 27, is subjected to a
nikṣepa (UttN 487-495). More important than any theory here, what counts is to
explain that in the material, concrete meaning (davva), the word designates animals
(oxen, horses) reluctant to taming and discipline, so much that they may break the
goads used by their drivers or turn the carts and drivers upside down, and that in the
moral, spiritual meaning (bhāva) it designates reluctant pupils who oppose their
teachers, insult others, do not respect or put in practice the Jinas’ teaching, and thus
have to be kept aside by wise people. The nikṣepa analysis is liable to extend very
far in some cases as its ﬁrst aim is to cover all the acceptations and applications of a
word. Thus in the case of Pkt. saṃjoga (Skt. saṃyoga), the ﬁrst word of the ﬁrst
stanza of the Uttarādhyayanasūtra (UttN 30–63):
This nikṣepa occupies no less than 32 nijjutti stanzas, for it comprises the
diverse and intricate doctrines of the combination (saṃyoga) of atoms to
aggregates, of the interpenetration (saṃyoga) of the pradeśas [space-points] of
the ﬁve astikāyas, of the contact (saṃyoga) of indriyas, manas and sense-
objects, the combination of sounds to words, of singulars to duals and plurals,
etc. All this does not, of course, contribute anything to the explanation of the
Uttarādhyayana stanza, it has nothing whatever to do with it and thus is a
good example of what is so bewildering and irritating at the ﬁrst acquaintance
with the nikṣepa: the text passage or title to be explained, the context of the
word which has given rise to the nikṣepa is very soon completely lost sight of,
so that e.g. in the nikṣepa of the word sūtra (occurring in the title of the second
aṅga, the Sūtrakṛtāṅga) we suddenly ﬁnd ourselves in a treatise on the
different threads (sūtra) of textiles [SūN 21]. In the case of saṃyoga—of
special interest because this is a well-known nyāya term raising the problem of
possible Nyāya inﬂuence—the nikṣepa has become a technical device for
dragging in a number of difﬁcult chapters of Jaina doctrine which have
nothing to do with the text to be explained but the inclusion of which in the
teaching programme seemed necessary or desirable if only to make the
instruction richer and more rewarding for teacher and pupil (Alsdorf, 1973,
pp. 456–457).
In addition to words designating textual divisions, there are also other words which
tend to recur from one work to the other, and are expanded upon independently,
without any cross-reference. Comparing the treatment of these words makes clear
that there is some amount of standardization and repetition, as Alsdorf has noted for
the word karaṇa (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 457), or as can be seen when proper names are
nikṣepized if they are used as titles of chapters (e.g., Kavila and Nami as
Uttarādhyayana chap. 8 and 9, UttN 250–251 similar to 260–261 except for the
name). This suggests that the teachers involved in the hermeneutical process (or the
authors who have recorded this process in the niryuktis) might have had at their
disposal a stock of explanations that they memorized and could use freely in
different contexts.
123
N. Balbir

=== PAGE 9 ===
The classical texts apply the method but do not really give any justiﬁcation for it.
The following 21st-century explanation provided by a representative of the Jain
tradition is therefore worthy of note:
Jain Philosophy is non-absolutism (jain darśan anekāntavādī hai). In order to
explain the true form of a thing and to understand the true and comprehensive
meaning of a word it deﬁnes that word from numerous viewpoints. Words are
limited but their meanings are unlimited. There are numerous meanings
concealed in a word. Who wants to convey what meaning at what place and
which meaning should one accept can be comprehended correctly and
precisely if we employ the process of attribution (nikshep). (Bothara, 2007, 1,
English rendering 22; Hindi 20–21).
These observations clearly connect the nikṣepa with both its pluralistic approach
and its focus on a correct understanding with the general conception of
anekāntavāda.
Synonymy
Listing synonyms of a notion central to a discussion is a regular procedure of the
niryukti discourse where numerous instances can be found (see below). But the
pattern is already given in the methodological treatise appended to the canon, the
Anuyogadvārasūtra, the purpose of which is to apply the various techniques to the
concept of āvassaya. Sūtra 29 starts with the following introductory sentence: ‘Of
that there are the synonymous names composed of different accented vowels and
different consonants’ (Hanaki, 1970, 10, tassa ṇaṃime egaṭṭhiyā ṇāṇāghosā
ṇāṇāvaṃjaṇā ṇāmadhejjā bhavanti). Pkt. egaṭṭhiya (Skt. ekārthika) or, more often,
egaṭṭha (Skt. ekārtha), ‘having the same meaning’ is the standard term used in
niryuktis to designate this frequently used technique (inventory in Kusumpragyā
et al., 1984) where words are listed one after the other.
‘What is obligatory, what must be done, what restrains the moral activity,
puriﬁcation, the section in six chapters, the right path, the practice for the sake
of salvation, the way (to salvation’; Hanaki, 1970, p. 10 slightly modiﬁed).
āvassayaṃavassakaraṇijjaṃdhuvaṇiggaho visohī ya
ajjhayaṇachakkavaggo nāo ārāhaṇā maggo (sūtra 29)
There is a certain logic or organization in the way the designations are listed. The
list starts with words very close in their sounds and formation to the basic term:
here, for instance, the ﬁrst two of the eight (Pkt. āvassaya and avassa) have the
fundamental element corresponding to Skt. āvaśyaka or avaśya. Then the list
expands to less literal designations which, rather, represent the true contents or the
spiritual meaning of the external procedures, thus the purpose of the obligatory
duties. The ﬁfth one, though, ajjhayaṇachakkavaggo ‘a sacred text having six
sections’, is of a different type as it is in fact a periphrastic designation of the work
where these duties are exposed, namely the Āvaśyakasūtra: 1. sāmāiya (Skt.
sāmāyika), ‘equanimity’; 2. cauvvīsatthaya (Skt. caturviṃśatistava), ‘praise of the
123
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis…

=== PAGE 10 ===
24 Jinas’; 3. vandaṇaya (Skt. vandanaka), ‘homage’; 4. paḍikkamaṇa (Skt.
pratikramaṇa), ‘repentance’; 5. kāussagga (Skt. kāyotsarga); 6. paccakkhāṇa (Skt.
pratyākhyāna), ‘resolutions of renunciation’. In the Anuyogadvārasūtra itself, this
technique is applied in two more cases, the lists being introduced by exactly the
same phrase (‘Of that there are the synonymous names composed of different
accented vowels and different consonants’). Suya (Skt. śruta) ‘oral tradition’ is
expanded as follows:
‘What has been heard, the indicator of meaning, the collection of meanings,
the conclusive truth, instruction, command, sermon, teaching, communication
and reliable tradition are the synonyms of sutta, having the same meaning’
(Hanaki, 1970, p. 15, slightly modiﬁed).
suya sutta gaṃtha siddhaṃta sāsaṇe āṇa vayaṇa uvadese
paṇṇavaṇa āgame yā egaṭṭhā pajjavā sutte (sū. 51, verse 4)
Here, perhaps even more than in the previous example, phonetics, repetition of
sounds or pairing of words through common ﬁnal sounds are part of the technique
and clearly support memorization. The movement is similar: starting from the
closest to the commented word, then expanding. Pajjava (Skt. paryaya) is here
another term for equivalent designation.
Finally comes khaṃdha (Skt. skandha), ‘section’:
‘Group, body, corpus, aggregate, grouping, heap and mass, clod and
collection, close union, congregation, gathering are the equivalents of
khaṃdha from the view point of essence.’ (Hanaki, 1970, p. 18, slightly
modiﬁed).
gaṇa kāya nikāya khaṃdha vagga rāsī puṃje ya piṃḍa niyare ya
saṃghāya ākula samūha bhāvakhaṃdhassa pajjāyā (sūtra 72)
This example shows that the technique is not conﬁned to religious terminology, but
can apply to any word. This is no exception. Synonyms of ‘tree’ and of ‘ﬂower’, for
instance, are listed in the DaśavN (35–36), as both together form the compound
naming the ﬁrst chapter of the sūtra: Duma-pupphiya, ‘Flower of a tree’ (Skt. druma
+ puṣpa; Balbir, 2020, p. 65). The same work includes a list of synonyms for
‘speech’:
vakkaṃvayaṇaṃca girā, sarassaī bhārahī ya go vāṇī
bhāsā pannavaṇī desaṇī ya vai-joga jogo ya (270)
One of them, vai-joga (Skt. vāg-yoga), ‘speech activity’ is somewhat speciﬁc to the
Jain tradition, but not the others. In a way, such lists are akin to Indian synonymic
lexica and foreshadow classics like the Amarakośa or Hemacandra’s Abhidhānac-
intāmaṇi, to mention a Jain representative of this trend. Applying the technique of
synonyms in the niryukti discourse features as a way to circumscribe a notion and, at
the same time, a way to grasp all its potential shades of meaning in their diversity.
123
N. Balbir

=== PAGE 11 ===
Etymology
The next technique common in niryuktis and already applied in the Anuyo-
gadvārasūtra is hermeneutic etymology (Pkt. nirutta, nirutti; Skt. nirukta, nirukti).
Like synonymy, it relates to language analysis in a very deep and clear way. When
deﬁning the name as essence (bhāvappamāṇe), sūtra 293 states that it is fourfold:
formed by compounds (sāmāsie), by secondary sufﬁxes (taddhitae), standing for
verbal roots (dhātue) and formed according to etymology (niruttie). Each kind of
formation is then expanded in turn. The result is a true grammatical exposition in the
line of vyākaraṇa. Each of the classes of compounds is mentioned by its technical
name (danda, bahuvvīhi, etc.) and described with the help of examples, then
nominal derivation is dealt with, then a few names which are roots are listed.
Finally, comes a list of seven words which are explained through etymologizing
(sūtra 312):
mahyāṃśete mahiṣaḥ, ‘it lies down on the earth [hence] mahi-ṣa ‘buffalo’.
bhramati ca rauti ca bhramaraḥ, ‘it wanders and hums [hence] bhrama-ra
‘bee’.
muhur muhur lasati musalam, ‘it rises and falls again and again [hence] mu-
sala ‘mace’.
kapir iva lambate tthac ca karoti kapittham, ‘it hangs like a monkey and
makes ttha [hence] kapi-ttha (a fruit).
ciditi karoti khallaṃca bhavati cikkhallam, ‘it makes cid and is viscous
[hence] ci-khalla ‘slime’.
ūrdhvakarṇaḥulūkaḥ, ‘it has erect ears [hence] an owl’.
mekhasya mālā mekhalā, ‘a garland of clouds [hence] a girdle’.
The process is deﬁned as follows in the Prakrit prose commentary (cūrṇi) on the
sūtra: ‘Etymology [is] syllables of a designation being uttered in a way as to get a
determined meaning’ (abhidhāṇakkharā ṇicchitatthovaladdhippagāreṇa uccarij-
jamāṇā ṇiruttaṃ, Jambūvijaya, 1999, p. 341). This is simpliﬁed in Hemacandra
Maladhārin’s commentary as: ‘Etymology [is] saying, speaking of an ascertained
meaning following the syllables of a designation’ (abhidhānākṣarānusārato
niścitārthasya vacanaṃbhaṇanaṃniruktam, Jambūvijaya, 1999, p. 353). Thus
this procedure clearly states the existence of a link between the sounds and the
meaning of a word, which is not arbitrary but can always be justiﬁed. The analysis is
made on the basis of segments that are considered meaningful and connected to
words existing in the language or, sometimes, artiﬁcially produced. In this area, a
broad panel of phonetic manipulations is allowed (e.g., mekha instead of megha and
other approximations) so as to render these connections possible. This is in the line
with the functioning of the Vedic nirukta as well. But in the above examples no
grammatical tool, such as the adverbs tasmāt or tena often met in similar contexts,
makes the logical link explicit. The explanatory sentence and the word to be
explained are simply juxtaposed. It is interesting to note that they are all in Sanskrit,
and that none of the commentaries seems to note this fact. The use of etymology as
a methodological parameter being part of the exposition system is again asserted in
123
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis…

=== PAGE 12 ===
the Anuyogadvārasūtra (604) where it forms the last of a 26-term list, to a large
extent akin to the Tantrayuktis found in the Brahmanical tradition.
Finally, an example of the functioning of hermeneutic etymology is provided in
the discussion of the ﬁrst of the seven standpoints (naya, sūtra 606), to be applied to
the remaining ones as well: ṇegehiṃmāṇehiṃmiṇai ttī ṇegamassa ya niruttī (verse
136ab). Ṇegama is divided into two segments: ṇega+ma, each one being linked to
different words in order to provide its etymology: ‘It is measured by various
standards’. The niryukti discourse follows this method and offers numerous
instances (Siddhapragyā & Nirvāṇaśrī, 1984). For example, the niryukti on the
Daśavaikālikasūtra connects Pkt. bhikkhu with the root bhid- ‘to split, to break’ and
says:
The breaker is the one possessed with religious tradition; what breaks is twofold
asceticism (i.e., kinds of fasting as external and study as internal); what must be
broken is the eightfold karma and hunger. Therefore through etymology he is a
bhikkhu.
bhettāgamovayutto duviha tavo bhedaṇaṃca bhettavvaṃ
aṭṭhavidhaṃkamma khuhaṃteṇa ṇiruttaṃsa bhikkhu tti (DaśavN12; cūrṇi
in Puṇyavijaya, 1973, p. 241)
The presence of ‘hunger’ (Pkt. khuhā) is necessary for the segmental analysis bhi-
kkhu, summed up in the phrase bhindanto yāvi khudhaṃbhikkhū (cūrṇi, ibidem),
but is not taken into account in Haribhadra’s ﬁnal recapitulation when he says: yaḥ
śāstra-nītyā tapasā karma bhinatti sa bhikṣuḥ(cf. Balbir, 2020, p. 64), ‘the one who
breaks karma through conduct according to the precepts through ascetic practices is
a bhikṣu’, and thus keeps only the moral understanding, which is the one relevant in
the context of the chapter. As the instance of bhikkhu makes clear, hermeneutic
etymology has little to do with linguistic etymology which, here, would connect
bhikkhu with the root bhikṣ- ‘to beg’. Even if this connection is known to the (Jain)
Indian tradition, it does not seem to contain as many semantic or interpretive
potentialities as the analysis seen above, and is then less adequate to serve the
niryukti discourse, the purpose of which, through all its techniques, is to go deep
inside a notion or a word in order to cover all its aspects and extract all its meanings,
with special focus on moral or ethical ones. Examining the niryukti corpus shows
that such etymologies tend to become standard and recur from one work to the other
(e.g., for bhikkhu see also UttN 375–379).
Now, is there any connection between the plurality of viewpoints expressed in
the naya-theory and between the procedures analyzed above? As far as I know, this
is nowhere made explicit. There are, however, points of contact. The recourse to
synonyms can be brought close to the ﬁfth viewpoint, the śabda-naya, which
focuses on synonymy and highlights the fundamental link between the word and the
object. The semantic analysis of a notion and its lexemes which is another feature of
the niryuktis has points of contact with the ﬁfth viewpoint, the samabhirūḍha-naya,
which insists on the fact that a unique linguistic expression characterizes a unique
object. Both these procedures suppose a Cratylus-like understanding of the
relationship between word and meaning, in sharp contrast with the Saussurian
analysis and the theory of l’arbitraire du signe.
123
N. Balbir

=== PAGE 13 ===
From a Multi-Sided Analysis Back to Bipartition and Single Correct
Understanding
As we saw earlier, the basic procedure of analysis of which Śvetāmbara canonical
literature provides ample illustration is the opposition between davva and bhāva
(see also Jyväsjärvi, 2010, p. 149). The fourfold nikṣepa and its broader variations
(sixfold, eightfold) seem to have developed from it. To take a simple example: Pkt.
thui (Skt. stuti) is nikṣepized in the niryukti on Sūtrakṛtāṅga 1.6 as it forms the title
of this chapter, which provides the earliest hymn to Mahāvīra. This nikṣepa is said
to be fourfold (the most common form; see above), but, as usual, the ﬁrst two
determinants are not discussed; here, they are not even mentioned. The concern is
the opposition between thui from the davva point of view and thui from the bhāva
point of view (84). In the ﬁrst understanding it is deﬁned as the celebration of a
guest by giving him ornaments (such as garlands), in the second one it is deﬁned as
the telling of existing qualities. So, as davva, it refers to material objects and
external manifestations; as bhāva, it is all internal. Only the latter is relevant
contextually as what will follow is a praise of the Jina’s qualities. The paradox of a
multi-sided analysis ﬁnally resulting into a clear bipartition where only one meaning
or understanding is considered right or correct becomes manifest especially when
discussions come to notions of primary importance in the Jain doctrine or ethos
which are conveyed by terms used in non-Jain traditions as well and have been
subjected to reinterpretation or different understanding among the Jains. In these
cases, the polemical intention comes into the foreground while the multi-sided
analysis goes into the background. For instance, in the UttN on Uttarādhyayanasū-
tra chap. 9 ‘The going forth of Nami’ (Nami-pavvajjā), the fourfold nikṣepa of
pavvajjā (Skt. pravrajyā) is ﬁrst announced, but the remaining part of the stanza
deals only with the parameters davva and bhāva:
The nikṣepa of ‘going forth’ is fourfold; in the material understanding it is that of
the other religious groups, whereas in the moral understanding it means renouncing
violence and sense of possession.
pavvajjā-nikkhevo cauvviho, anna-titthigā davve
bhāvammi u pavvajjā ārambha-pariggaha-ccāo (UttN 263)
The usual ﬁrst two parameters (nāma and sthāpanā) are omitted in this verse and
they are brushed away without hesitation by the Sanskrit commentator Śāntisūri
(nāma-sthāpane prāgvat). The polemical target expressed in the verse is empha-
sized by the commentator who states the ‘others’ are those whose doctrine have
been promulgated by non-Arhats and explicitly mentions Buddhists and other with
impurities (te ca Śākya-sarajaskādayaḥ) whose going forth is devoid of purpose. On
the contrary, bhāva refers to the Jain going forth deﬁned by two fundamental
qualities characterizing the ideal Jain monk. A very similar orientation is seen in the
discussion of Pkt. aṇagāra (Skt. anagāra) ‘the homeless (monk)’: in the true or
spiritual understanding it refers to the Jain monk who has right faith and is free from
staying in a house (bhāve sammaddiṭṭḥī agāravāsā viṇimmukko, UttN 547cd), in
contrast with those who proclaim themselves so and belong to heretical trends (this
time the word is Pkt. niṇhaga, Skt. nihnava referring to the seven schisms in the Jain
123
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis…

=== PAGE 14 ===
church in Mahāvīra’s time). Uttarādhyayanasūtra chap. 25 is called Pkt. jannaijjaṃ
(Skt. yajñīyaṃ) and starts with the nikṣepa of the crucial word Pkt. janna (Skt.
yajña), which procures an easy basis for a polemical approach. The opposition is
here between sacriﬁce in the material understanding, which relates to brahmins, and
sacriﬁce in the spiritual understanding which is stated to be one’s application to
ascetic practices and self-control (tava-saṃjamesu jayaṇā bhāve janno muṇeyavvo,
UttN 461cd). This is an adequate initial opposition for the chapter to come as it
stages a brahmin versed in the Vedas offering a sacriﬁce and a monk who is ﬁrst
rebuked by him but later succeeds in teaching him at length the Law and explaining
that the true brahmin is deﬁned by ethical behaviour, not by rituals. Similar
demonstrations are seen in the nikṣepa-discussion of Pkt. tavo (Skt. tapas, UttN
511), where the material sense refers to the ﬁve ﬁres (pañcāgni) in contrast with
asceticism in the spiritual meaning deﬁned as twofold, external and internal, i.e.
corresponding to the classical Jain view which recognizes a total of 6 + 6 forms of
tapas. Instances of treatments of such important notions could easily be multiplied
and drawn from all the texts of the niryukti-corpus (e.g., Balbir, 2020, pp. 63–65 for
bhikkhu in the DaśavN). In all of them, it appears as if carrying out the full nikṣepa
pattern would be a purely scholastic exercise, which is not the main purpose, in
contrast with the ethical concern, which is prominent and is fulﬁlled adequately by
the ideological dichotomy, where one angle only (the bhāva parameter) needs to be
retained. Hence the practical perspective of proper behaviour almost negates the
fourfold multi-sided method of analysis.
A similar orientation is followed by the Prakrit prose commentary (the cūrṇi) on
verse 140 of the sūtra (quoted and translated above p. 4) as a conclusion to the
deﬁnition of the seven viewpoints (naya): ‘These seven viewpoints, the negama and
others, come to/ amount to two viewpoints: the knowledge-viewpoint and the ethics-
viewpoint’ (ete ṇegamādi satta vi ṇayā dosu ṇaesu avataranti ṇāṇa-ṇaye caraṇa-
ṇaye ya). In this same verse the pair giṇhiyavve agiṇhiyavvammi (Skt. grahītavya/
agrahītavya; comm. upādeya / anupādeya) ‘acceptable / non-acceptable’ clearly
establishes a dichotomy which has an impact on ethics and whose contents is
expanded in the commentaries: the cūrṇi only says that acceptable means what is
unblamable and causes liberation. Haribhadra’s and Hemacandra’s Sanskrit
commentaries ﬁrst explain ‘acceptable object’ as referring to garland or sandal,
but then as correct faith, and explain non-acceptable as designating wrong views
(samyagdarśanādi versus mithyātvādi). So putting away all technicalities, they
clearly stand in favour of a very simple and powerful contrast aiming at efﬁciency
without confusing.
Another way to express this is the kind of Manichaean opposition conveyed
through the pair of antonym adjectives Pkt. apasattha (Skt. apraśasta) and Pkt.
pasattha (Skt. praśasta) meaning ‘non-commendable’ and ‘commendable’ or
‘inauspicious’/‘auspicious’ (Hanaki, 1970). In the primary meaning, it refers to
negative and positive, i.e., unbeneﬁcial / beneﬁcial actions. For instance, the
opposition occurs in the Anuyogadvārasūtra within the nikṣepa-discussion of Pkt.
āa (Skt. āya) ‘acquisition’ on the parameter bhāva: ‘acquisition as auspicious is
threefold: of determinate knowledge, of intuition, of correct conduct; acquisition as
inauspicious is fourfold: of anger, of pride, of deceit, of greed’ (Hanaki, 1970,
123
N. Balbir

=== PAGE 15 ===
p. 203, slightly abridged), and then within the nikṣepa-discussion of Pkt. jhavaṇā
(Skt. kṣapaṇā) ‘eradication’ on the parameter bhāva: ‘eradication as auspicious is
fourfold: of anger, of pride, of deceit, of greed; eradication as inauspicious is
threefold: of determinate knowledge, of intuition, of correct conduct’ (Hanaki,
1970, p. 205, slightly abridged). It is easily understood that it is good to eradicate
the four passions (kaṣāya) but not the three jewels of the Jain doctrine. The positive
or negative understanding are deduced from the connection between the main word
(acquisition/eradication) and its complements (negative versus positive elements).
In the niryukti-discourse, more broadly, the area covered by apasattha refers to non-
religious meanings, either profane (laukika, loka) or representing non-Jain values,
while the second one corresponds to the understanding of a notion within the Jain
worldview (lokottara). For instance, Pkt. paṇihi ‘applying the mind’ is one of the
words of the eighth chapter of the Daśavaikālikasūtra. As such it is discussed
through the nikṣepa-procedure. The non-commendable application of the mind
(DaśavN 302) consists in binding the eight kinds of karmas, while the commendable
one consists in expelling them (304). This opposition is carried out over several
stanzas and culminates in the concluding verse (308) stating that the non-
commendable application of the mind is to be left aside and the commendable one is
to be resorted to. Pkt. magga (Skt. mārga) ‘path’ is another example. It is subjected
to a sixfold nikṣepa (SūN 107, title of chapter 1.11, above p. X). A path is said to be
twofold according to the bhāva parameter: commendable or non-commendable
(pasattha taha appasattho ya, 109), having good destiny or bad destiny as its result
(110). A path in knowledge, faith and good conduct followed by varieties of non-
Jain ascetics is a wrong one (micchatta-maggo 112) and those who, being heavy
with powers, and savouring tastes or ﬁnding pleasure in hurting the six kinds of
living beings, teach a path, resort to a path which is bad (113). Those who are rich in
asceticism and self-control, having qualities, tell a true path which is useful to all
living beings which one regards as correctly enunciated (114). Here, as above, the
function of the discussion is thus to provide simple baselines meant to support the
believer in his endeavour towards a proper behaviour.
Another pair of contrastive terms where the opposition lies between Jain
understanding and non-Jain understanding is conveyed by the distinction between
the adverbial ablative āgamao (Skt. āgamataḥ) and no-āgamao (no-āgamataḥ)
which form subdivisions of the determinants dravya and bhāva in the nikṣepas.
They are mentioned in the Anuyogadvārasūtra (14, 16, etc.) and regularly applied.
In the practice of the niryuktis they may or not be stated and are rarely developed (e.
g. UttN 65, 237, 250, etc.). They strictly mean ‘doctrinally’ and ‘non-doctrinally’
but in fact ‘Jain’ and ‘non-Jain’ (Alsdorf, 1973, p. 260).
Such distinctions implying a polemic aspect as an intrinsic component are in fact
at the basis of Jain ideology. Right in the Anuyogadvārasūtra, when a notion like
Pkt. suya (Skt. śruta) ‘scripture, knowledge through words’ is considered from the
point of view of essence (bhāva), the two divisions seen earlier between Pkt. loya
(Skt. loka, laukika) and Pkt. louttariya (lokottarika) are established and their
contents are detailed without ambiguity (sūtras 47–50). The former, the ‘worldly’,
lists the Mahābhārata, the Rāmāyaṇa, Kauṭilya (i.e. the Arthaśāstra), then a number
of titles which resist scholarly identiﬁcation, then the various philosophical schools
123
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis…

=== PAGE 16 ===
such as Vaiśeṣika (Vaisesiya), the Buddha teaching (buddhavayaṇa), the Sāṃkhya
(as Kavila), the materialists (Loyāyaya, Skt. Lokāyata), the Nyāya (as Māḍhara),
Purāṇa, grammar, dramas, the four Vedas with their auxiliaries (Vedāṅga)—thus
works or authors regarded as authoritative in Hindu and Buddhist traditions. On the
other hand, the ‘extra-worldly’ is said to be represented by ‘the basket of the
gaṇadharas’, this generic notion being followed by the list of the twelve Aṅgas.
(The twelfth, the Dṛṣṭivāda has not come down to us and is a kind of mythical
content). Thus ‘extra-worldly’ clearly means Jain orthodoxy and original teaching.
The discussion of the key-term Pkt. āvassaya (Skt. āvaśyaka) follows a similar path,
this time referring to rituals and practices because it occurs within the examination
of the parameter Pkt. davva (Skt. dravya), so the material aspects of the notion. Here
the binary opposition just seen unfolds into a ternary opposition where the middle
category has a clearly polemic tinge since it is named kuppāvayaṇiya (Skt.
kuprāvacanika). The worldly (loiya) covers various usages or practices followed by
‘royal authorities, nobles, governors, family-heads, fabulously wealthy persons,
traders, military generals, caravan-leaders, etc.’ such as ‘washing of mouth, cleaning
of teeth, (rubbing of) oil, combing’ and many others (Anuyogadvāra sūtra 20,
Hanaki, 1970, p. 7), most of which pertain to the body’s care or elegance. The
kuppāvayaṇiya category, ‘belonging to perverse instruction’ (Hanaki, sūtra 21),
covers practices of worship to Hindu gods (named: Indra, Skanda, Rudra, Śiva,
Vaiśravaṇa), other beings (Nāgas, Yakṣas, Bhūtas) and unidentiﬁed names followed
by pāsaṇḍatthas (Skt. pāṣaṇḍastha) ‘heretics’. As the text is written from a Jain
point of view and as the word is always to be understood relatively as referring to
those who deviate from a given orthodoxy, it here refers to non-Jain groups. Ten of
them are then listed (Bothara, 2007, 1, 57–59 and Hanaki, 1970, pp. 7–8 for the
details, which cannot be elaborated in the present context). As the notion discussed
in the text is āvassaya from the material angle, even the ‘extra-worldly’
(loguttariya) category is not positive because it includes those ascetics, who being
deprived of qualities of a real ascetic, do not have compassion for the six groups of
living beings and are unrestrained (sūtra 22). The same threefold categorisation is
then applied to the notion of āvassaya as ‘essence’ (bhāva), in other terms from the
moral or spiritual angle. Again, the worldly aspect refers to the study of non-Jain
works (named: [Mahā]bhārata and Rāmāyaṇa, sūtra 26), the perverse instruction
aspect involves the repetition of the same list of heretics as above and pertains to
their performing the āvassayas, i.e. the Jain obligatory duties, with improper
behaviour or gestures (sūtra 27), whereas the extra-worldly ‘refers to those who are
monks (samaṇe), or nuns (samaṇī), or laymen (sāvae), or laywomen (sāviyā) whose
consciousness is ﬁxed on that Āvassaya, [...] whose paraphernalia are employed for
that Āvassaya’ (Hanaki, 1970, p. 10, sūtra 28). The rest of the development,
abridged here, clearly points to the same direction: we are here in a strictly Jain
context within the Jain understanding of what obligatory duties are and how they
have to be performed.
In the niryukti practice, a notion to which a similar process applies is Pkt.
dhamma (Skt. dharma), the ﬁrst word of the Daśavaikālikasūtra (DaśavN 40–43).
This is obviously a fundamental word. The technical understanding devoid of moral
connotations typical of the Jain tradition where dhamma designates the principle of
123
N. Balbir

=== PAGE 17 ===
motion and is one of the ﬁve substances illustrates the dravya-angle. The three
divisions are applied to dhamma as viewed from the non-material bhāva angle. As
‘worldly’ (loiya), dhamma is manifold, so this leads to a list which includes
practices relating to regional diversity (desa), to town, village, group, assembly
usage (puravara, gāma, gaṇa, goṭṭhi), to royal ethics (rājadharma). Then comes the
dhamma of wrong communities (kutitthiyadhammo) which is not approved
(pasattha) by the Jinas, in contrast with the extra-worldly one (loguttariya) as the
Jain scriptural tradition (suya-dhamma) and as Jain ethics (carittadhamma) in all its
categories detailed in the corresponding Prakrit prose commentary (cūrṇi, Punyav-
ijaya, 1973, p. 11).
The expositions in a niryukti that might seem unexpected or look like excurses
going very far from the context where they start as well as the encyclopedic nature
of several developments are not accidents or oddities, but truly constitutive
components. The highly formalized character of interpretive strategies as illustrated
in a niryukti gives it a curious abstract touch and the impression that it is a self-
moving mechanism. In fact, it rather provides an example of scholastic practice and
a form of academic teaching and learning within the religious Jain community. All
these procedures point in the same direction: they are endeavours to grasp and cover
the complexity of reality which cannot be approached in a unilateral manner,
especially as it is mediated by language, which may also be unclear or at least
ambiguous. This implies a pluralistic approach. But the ultimate purpose is
exclusively to defend and to promote the Jain principles for an ethical perspective
and thus to deﬁne Jain identity in contrast with other ideologies. Thus, despite what
could appear at ﬁrst sight, it is not a package of abstract scholastic techniques. On
the contrary, it is ﬁrmly anchored in a system of values based on an understanding
of reality which demonstrates in its own way that knowledge is a prerequisite of
proper behaviour.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article
or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the articleaˆ s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the articleaˆ s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view
a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interests There is no conﬂict of interest to be stated.
Abbreviations
DaśavN
Daśavaikālikaniryukti [As in Bollée, 1995, 31-73]
UttN
Uttarādhyayananiryukti [As in Bollée, 1995, 75-117]
SūN
Sūtrakṛtāṅganiryukti [As in Bollée, 1995, 119-136]
123
Multi-Sided Analysis in Early Śvetāmbara Jain Exegesis…

=== PAGE 18 ===
References
Alsdorf, L. (1973). Nikṣepa – A Jaina Contribution to Scholastic Methodology. The Journal of the
Oriental Institute (Baroda), 22: 453-463 [reprinted in Alsdorf, L., Kleine Schriften (ed. by A.
Wezler), F. Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart, 1974: 257-265].
Balbir, N. (1993). Āvaśyaka-Studien. Introduction générale et traductions. Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart
(Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien herausgegeben vom Institut für Kultur und Geschichte Indiens und
Tibets an der Universität Hamburg 45,1).
Balbir, N. (2020). Les débuts de la scolastique jaina: stratégies interprétatives et réception. Les
scolastiques indiennes: genèses, développements, interactions, ed. by É. Aussant and G. Colas.
École Française d’Extrême-Orient (Études thématiques 32): 57–71.
Bhatt, B. (1978). The Canonical Nikṣepa. Brill.
Bhatt, B. (1991). Study of the Word: nikṣepa and other Derivatives in the Śvetāmbara Jaina Canon. Akten
des Melzer-Symposiums 1991 (ed. by W. Slaje and Ch. Zinko), Leykam: 15–53.
Bollée, W. B. (1995). The Nijjuttis of the Seniors of the Śvetāmbara Siddhānta: Āyāraṅga, Dasaveyāliya,
Uttarajjhāyā and Sūyagaḍa. Text and selective glossary, Franz Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart (Beiträge
zur Südasienforschung Südasien-Institut Universität Heidelberg, 169). [Reference to the verse-
numbering of this edition for the works it contains].
Bothara, S. (2007). English translation of Anuyogadvārasūtra in Pravartak Amar Muni, Illustrated
Anuyog-dvar-Sutra. Delhi, Agra, Jaipur, 2nd ed., 2 volumes [here 2007,1 and 2007, 2].
Bruhn, K. (1979). Review of Bhatt 1978. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 7(1), 103–105. https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF02561255
Hanaki, T. (1970). Aṇuogaddārāiṃ(English Translation). Research Institute of Prakrit, Jainology &
Ahimsa, Vaishali.
Jambūvijaya. (1999). Anuyogadvārasūtram Part I the text critically edited by His Holiness Munirāja
Puṇyavijayajī Mahārāja with three commentaries Jinadāsa Gaṇi Mahattara’s Cūrṇi, Haribhadra
Sūri’s Vivṛti, Maladhārī Hemacandra Sūri’s Vṛtti. Shrī Mahāvīra Jaina Vidyālaya Bombay.
Jambūvijaya. (2000). Anuyogadvārasūtram Part II the text critically edited by His Holiness Munirāja
Puṇyavijayajī Mahārāja with three commentaries Jinadāsa Gaṇi Mahattara’s Cūrṇi, Haribhadra
Sūri’s Vivṛti, Maladhārī Hemacandra Sūri’s Vṛtti. Shrī Mahāvīra Jaina Vidyālaya Bombay.
Jyväsjärvi, M. (2010). Retrieving the hidden meaning: Jain commentarial techniques and the art of
memory. Journal of Indian Philosophy, 38, 133–162. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10781-010-9086-8
Kusumpragyā, S. (1984). Ekārthaka Kośa (samānārthaka kośa). Jaina Vishva Bharati.
Puṇyavijaya, M. S. (1973). Śayyaṃbhava’s Dasakāliyasuttaṃwith Bhadrabāhu’s Niryukti and
Agastyasiṃha’s Cūrṇi. Prakrit Text Society.
Siddhapragyā, S., & Nirvāṇaśrī, S. (1984). Nirukta Kośa. Jaina Vishva Bharati.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123
N. Balbir

