# SOURCE FILE: ciotti_pattern_detection_springer.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\loop_B09_B10\documents\ciotti_pattern_detection_springer.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_3_colophons (3. ธรรมเนียมคัดลอก จารึกท้ายคัมภีร์ Colophons และนักคัดลอก)
# PAGES: 13 | TOTAL CHARS: 52720

=== PAGE 1 ===
International Journal on Document Analysis and Recognition (IJDAR) (2021) 24:167–179
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10032-021-00371-7
SPECIAL ISSUE PAPER
Learning-free pattern detection for manuscript research:
An efﬁcient approach toward making manuscript images searchable
Hussein Mohammed1
· Volker Märgner2 · Giovanni Ciotti1
Received: 30 October 2020 / Revised: 30 April 2021 / Accepted: 6 May 2021 / Published online: 19 May 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Automatic pattern detection has become increasingly important for scholars in the humanities as the number of manuscripts
thathavebeendigitisedhasgrown.Mostofthestate-of-the-artmethodsusedforpatterndetectiondependontheavailabilityofa
large number of training samples, which are typically not available in the humanities as they involve tedious manual annotation
by researchers (e.g. marking the location and size of words, drawings, seals and so on). This makes the applicability of such
methods very limited within the ﬁeld of manuscript research. We propose a learning-free approach based on a state-of-the-art
Naïve Bayes Nearest-Neighbour classiﬁer for the task of pattern detection in manuscript images. The method has already
been successfully applied to an actual research question from South Asian studies about palm-leaf manuscripts. Furthermore,
state-of-the-art results have been achieved on two extremely challenging datasets, namely the AMADI_LontarSet dataset of
handwriting on palm leaves for word-spotting and the DocExplore dataset of medieval manuscripts for pattern detection. A
performance analysis is provided as well in order to facilitate later comparisons by other researchers. Finally, an easy-to-use
implementation of the proposed method is developed as a software tool and made freely available.
Keywords Pattern detection · Document analysis · Learning-free · Historical manuscripts · NBNN classiﬁer
1 Introduction
Automatic pattern detection and recognition can facilitate
research for scholars of manuscript studies and provide
quantitative measurements as supporting information. Such
methods are particularly important when dealing with a large
number of manuscripts.
Over the last decade, considerable advances have been
made in the tasks of object detection [1] and segmentation-
free word-spotting [2]. Most of the state-of-the-art methods
currently employed for these two tasks depend on the avail-
B Hussein Mohammed
hussein.adnan.mohammed@uni-hamburg.de
Volker Märgner
maergner@ifn.ing.tu-bs.de
Giovanni Ciotti
giovanni.ciotti@uni-hamburg.de
1
Cluster of Excellence: Understanding Written Artefacts,
Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
2
Technische Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig,
Germany
ability of a large number of training samples. These samples
need to be annotated manually beforehand (e.g. marking the
location and size of words, drawings, seals, etc.).
Although learning-based approaches can be useful when
thetrainingsamples,annotationsandcomputationalresources
for them are all available, the applicability of such methods
is very limited in manuscript research. Scholars often deal
with a small number of images within the scope of a spe-
ciﬁc research question. Even if a large number of images are
available, most of the manuscripts that contain them do not
contain any ground-truth information, such as related meta-
data or transcriptions. Annotations of this kind can only be
created under the supervision of experts from the manuscript
ﬁeld in question, and even then some of these annotations
are just a matter of subjective opinion. The aforementioned
reasons render most of the learning-based methods inappli-
cable or at least unfeasible for most questions in manuscript
research.
Furthermore, the images examined in manuscript research
often contain different scripts, even on one page. Some of
these scripts can only be read by a few experts from the
humanities. In addition, manuscript images often suffer from
123

=== PAGE 2 ===
168
H. Mohammed et al.
Fig. 1 Different detected patterns in manuscripts using the proposed
learning-free method. To achieve better visibility, only parts of the
images are shown
several types of degradation, such as low resolution, low con-
trast, varying background intensity and other factors caused
by the poor state of preservation of the actual manuscripts or
the nature of the writing support (e.g. bleed-through, a tex-
tured background, stains and water damage). Pre-processing
steps such as segmentation, layout analysis, OCR and binari-
sation are therefore challenging, and in many cases they are
not feasible at all.
This is why we developed a learning-free pattern detec-
tion method that does not require any pre-processing steps.
It is a practical alternative to making digitised manuscripts
searchable not only for text, but for visual patterns in general
such as letters, seals or drawings. Different detected pat-
terns in manuscripts are shown in Fig. 1 using the proposed
method in order to demonstrate its general applicability. The
pattern in (a) is a handwritten word in a manuscript from
the École française d’Extrême Orient (EFEO), Pondicherry
branch, the pattern in (b) is a seal in a manuscript from the
British Library: Oriental Manuscripts (https://www.qdl.qa/
archive/81055/vdc_100023410391.0x00003c), and the pat-
terns in (c) and (d) are parts of a ship and a person’s head in
medieval manuscripts from the DocExplore dataset [3].
The work in [4] demonstrated a state-of-the-art classiﬁca-
tion rate for the task of writer identiﬁcation on manuscript
images using the learning-free NBNN-based classiﬁer pro-
posed in [5] without any pre-processing steps. In addition,
the work in [6] proposed a category-level object detec-
tion method based on the Naïve Bayes Nearest-Neighbour
(NBNN) algorithm with state-of-the-art performance on
datasets of objects in complex scenes. We based our pro-
posed method on the aforementioned methods in order to
beneﬁt from their strong points.
The method proposed in [6] has two free parameters. This
can hinder its practicality as a research tool to be used on
a wide variety of patterns with different quality and degra-
dation levels. One of these parameters has therefore been
eliminated in this work, while the other is calculated adap-
tively from the images of labelled patterns.
Consequently, we are presenting a learning-free method
here that does not require any pre-processing steps at all and
that can cope with the heavy degradation typically found in
manuscript images. Furthermore, this method is a general
detection algorithm that can be used to detect a wide variety
of patterns in manuscripts.
The main achievements in this paper are the following:
– elimination of the two free parameters from the method
presented in [6] in order to develop a practical solution
(see Sect. 4 for more details);
– application of Features from Accelerated Segment Test
(FAST) keypoints [7] with the adaptive threshold PCK
(Percentage of Considered Keypoints) presented in [5]
and application of the Normalised Local NBNN distance
measure presented in [5] in order to enhance the perfor-
mance of the method described in [6] when applied to
manuscript images (see Sect. 4, steps 1 and 5 for details);
– application of the resulting learning-free method to an
actual research question from the humanities about palm-
leaf manuscripts (see Sect. 3 for details);
– providing state-of-the-art results on two extremely chal-
lenging datasets, namely the AMADI_LontarSet dataset
[8] of handwriting on palm-leafs for word-spotting and
the DocExplore dataset [3] of medieval manuscripts for
pattern detection, with performance analysis in order to
facilitate later comparisons.
– developing an easy-to-use implementation of the pro-
posed method, and releasing it as a free software tool
to the public.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: In
Section 2, we will discuss some of the related works along
with relevant public datasets. In Section 3, a use case from
manuscript research is presented, followed by a discussion of
the role and importance of our proposed method in answer-
ing the research question. In Sect. 4, the pattern detection
method we have developed will be presented. In Sect. 5, a
performance evaluation is provided using the research data
from the use case and two relevant and very challenging pub-
lic datasets. In Sect. 6, we will describe our implementation
of the proposed method as a software tool. The ﬁnal Section
contains our conclusions.
123

=== PAGE 3 ===
Learning-free pattern detection for manuscript research
169
2 Related work
Pattern detection can be considered as the general category
that includes both object detection and segmentation-free
word-spotting tasks as two of its special cases. The idea of
automatically detecting patterns in manuscript images has
been around for at least a decade [9], but no signiﬁcant
progress has been made so far due to the lack of standard
and public datasets with ground-truth annotations. Further-
more, the fact that most of state-of-the-art methods depend
on the availability of annotated training data has hindered
progress.
In the task of segmentation-free word-spotting, the pattern
is typically a printed [10,11] or handwritten [12,13] word in
a document. In manuscript research, it is often the case that
words are parts of handwritten sentences on degraded writ-
ing supports such as parchment, palm leaves or papyri. Most
segmentation-free word-spotting methods have been evalu-
ated on texture-free paper with no or very limited degradation
and a dedicated training set of annotated data [11,14–16].
The use of local features for the task of segmentation-
free word-spotting has been a successful approach in many
proposed methods [10–12]. These extracted features are typ-
ically clustered or used to train classiﬁers in most of these
methods [12,14,15], or they are directly matched to the fea-
tures of test images [10,11]. The need for “training-free”
methods was recently highlighted [16] in order to cope with
the lack of labelled samples for the task of segmentation-free
word-spotting.
In contrast, several pattern-detection methods have been
proposed to detect symbols, logos and other types of pat-
terns found in documents [17–20]. Some of these methods
have been dedicated to detecting patterns in historical docu-
ments and manuscripts [3,21,22]. This article is particularly
concerned with detecting patterns in historical documents
and aims to facilitate manuscript research. The focus of the
paper is therefore on datasets which are relevant to research
questions that manuscript scholars wish to address.
Recently, two extremely challenging datasets were pub-
lished: the AMADI_LontarSet dataset [8] of handwriting on
palm-leaves for word-spotting and the DocExplore dataset
[3] of medieval manuscripts for pattern detection. No results
have been reported on the ﬁrst dataset so far. On the
other hand, results of the authors of the second dataset
showed clearly that there is room for improvement [21,22].
These two datasets are relevant to our own work and offer
realistic scenarios in manuscript research, where very few
labelled samples are available for each pattern to be detected
(sometimes only one). These two datasets were used for per-
formance evaluation in this article for the aforementioned
reasons.
Fig. 2 The two occurrences of the invocation found by Giovanni Ciotti
and Marco Franceschini [23]
3 Use case from manuscript research
The current research aims at contextualising the occurrence
of a unique and hitherto unnoticed palaeographical feature
that appears in some palm-leaf manuscripts hailing from the
cultural area corresponding to Tamil Nadu today (in Southern
India).
Out of the tens of thousands of manuscripts that are held
in libraries across Tamil Nadu and contain texts mainly com-
posed in Sanskrit and Tamil (the former mostly written in
Tamilian Grantha script and the latter mostly in Tamil script),
only a few thousand that are available for scholars of South
Asian studies to scrutinise have been digitised so far (each
manuscript consists of hundreds of folios). For the last few
years, Giovanni Ciotti (University of Hamburg) and Marco
Franceschini (University of Bologna) have been making a
systematic study of colophons found in these manuscripts
[23]andhaveidentiﬁedseveraluncommoncodicologicaland
palaeographical features that await further investigation.
One such feature is a marginal invocation written in a
rather unusual square style of Tamilian Grantha. This is a
graphical variant of the widely attested invocation reading
hari ·h om, very often found at the beginning of manuscripts.
So far, Ciotti and Franceschini have found two occur-
rences of this squared hari ·h om (see Fig. 2 for images
of the word hari ·h) from the manuscripts belonging to the
manuscript collection of the École française d’Extrême Ori-
ent (EFEO), Pondicherry branch. There are not enough
occurrences to allow them to understand the context in which
such a distinctively written invocation appears, however.
3.1 Research question
Collecting as many occurrences as possible of such a unique
palaeographical feature can open a new window on the prac-
tices of traditional scribal activity in Tamil Nadu.
If more occurrences were available, it would be possible
to link the squared hari ·h om to speciﬁc scribes or groups
of scribes. It might even be possible to link them to speciﬁc
literary genres, were they to appear in manuscripts containing
a speciﬁc variety of texts, or to a well-deﬁned time and place
of production (if the colophons provided pertinent data), thus
possibly corresponding to a particular scribal fashion that
characterised a certain period or region.
If one or more of these assumptions were conﬁrmed, it
would be possible to make signiﬁcant progress in the attempt
123

=== PAGE 4 ===
170
H. Mohammed et al.
to divide manuscripts into subsets and thus reconnect them to
their past. As it turns out, however, Indian libraries have not
kept detailed records of their provenance. In other words, the
ties between manuscripts and their past have been severed, so
the individual history of each item needs to be reconstructed.
3.2 The importance of learning-free automatic
pattern detection
The proposed method allows us to automate the search for
speciﬁc palaeographical features we are interested in over
hundreds of thousands of images of manuscripts in the
EFEO collection. This procedure not only saves an enormous
amount of time, but it enables us to answer our research ques-
tion. Using a learning-free approach is critical in this case
because only two instances of the pattern are available, as
mentioned earlier. Furthermore, the possibility of providing
annotated data is very limited due to the need for specialists
in the ﬁeld.
Moreover, producing such annotations would clash with
the main reason for us using automated pattern detection in
the ﬁrst place, namely to save time and effort. Without a
suitable form of pattern detection that is automated, it would
take several years to go through each manuscript folio in the
collection looking for occurrences of the squared hari ·h om.
The proposed method can be applied to automate the
search for the same palaeographical features over even larger
sets of manuscript images. Furthermore, several other pat-
terns could be looked for. For example, speciﬁc words that
may appear in the margins of manuscripts and indicate the
name of the literary genre of the texts contained there or sym-
bols such as those used to indicate calendrical elements in
colophons (the year, month and solar day).
4 The proposed method
As mentioned in the introduction, the proposed method is
based on the work presented in [6] for category-level object
detection and the work presented in [5] for writer identiﬁ-
cation. Several modiﬁcations and optimisations have been
undertaken in order to have a practical pattern detection
method for manuscript research. The resulting algorithm is
shown in a simpliﬁed form in Fig. 3. A detailed description
of the method involves the following steps:
Step 1: Since patterns in manuscript research are mostly
the result of handmade marks on writing supports, the
resulting features on the formed contours can be efﬁ-
ciently detected using the FAST [7] keypoints detector
with the adaptive threshold PCK (Percentage of Con-
sidered Keypoints) after converting the coloured images
Fig. 3 A simpliﬁed illustration of the proposed learning-free algorithm
for pattern detection. See method description of Steps 1 to 6 for more
details
Fig. 4 An example of detected FAST keypoints in a handwritten pattern
where PCK = 10%. Each detected keypoint is represented by a circle
of different colour. This pattern is part of an image from the École
française d’Extrême Orient [EFEO], Pondicherry branch
Fig. 5 This ﬁgure shows ﬁve detected features in part of a test image
and the corresponding centre of an expected pattern. This pattern is
part of an image from the École française d’Extrême Orient [EFEO],
Pondicherry branch
to grey-scale images, as demonstrated in [4]; an example
is shown in Fig. 4. A circular neighbourhood of 16 pixels
is used around every pixel p in the image to be classi-
ﬁed as a keypoint if there are n contiguous pixels in the
surrounding circle satisfying one of these conditions:
– ∀i ∈n : Ii > Ip + t,
123

=== PAGE 5 ===
Learning-free pattern detection for manuscript research
171
Fig. 6 The detection matrix for part of a test image shown in (a). Each
dark spot in (b) indicates one expected pattern centre voted for by one
feature or more; see Fig. 5 for an illustration of the voting process
or
– ∀i ∈n : Ii < Ip −t,
where Ip is the intensity of the candidate pixel and
Ii is the intensity of any pixel that belongs to the n
contiguous pixels in the neighbourhood. t is a thresh-
old to be selected manually. n is set to 9 following
the recommendation in [7], and t is set to zero so that
we initially consider all the detected keypoints before
ﬁltering them by strength using the PCK parameter
as described below.
The strength of a keypoint is the maximum value of
t for which the segment test of that corner point is
satisﬁed, and PCK is the percentage of considered
FAST keypoints with the highest strength value; see
Fig. 4.
The detected keypoints using the FAST algorithm
are obviously dependent on image resolution because
of the ﬁxed size of the circular neighbourhood. The
detection performance is expected to drop gracefully
as the scale difference between the queries and the
pattern instances in the images increases; see the
degradation analysis of FAST keypoints in [4]. Nev-
ertheless, limited scale invariance can be obtained by
generating additional scales for each query sample.
The descriptors of detected features are then cal-
culated using the Scale-Invariant Feature Transform
(SIFT) algorithm [24]. The relative location of
detected features is stored as a scaled offset with
respect to the spatial centre of the labelled pattern;
the keypoint size can be used as a scaling factor when
a multi-scale keypoints detection algorithm is used.
Local features are detected and described in the
test images following the same procedure for query
images, but without storing any relative locations.
– Step 2: When coloured images are converted to grey-
scale images, pixels within the range of the red
spectrum tend to have very low intensity values. As a
consequence, the local contrast will be low compared
with other spatial regions.
Since our proposed method detects keypoints and
extracts features from grey-scale images, the per-
formance could be negatively affected if the query
image contains red parts. Thus, the aforementioned
issue has to be modiﬁed. This is particularly rele-
vant when dealing with manuscript images because
colours within the red range frequently appear in
handwriting, decorations and drawings.
The modiﬁcation is done in the following way: First,
the range of red colour is deﬁned as a range of Hue
values after converting the image from Red–Green–
Blue (RGB) format to Hue–Saturation–Value (HSV)
format. Then a mask is created to deﬁne the spatial
location of red pixels in the image. Finally, the key-
points located within this spatial region are sorted
separately. Once the strongest ten per cent of all the
keypoints have been selected as described in Step 1,
the strongest ten per cent of the spatial location of
red pixels are added. This allows keypoints detected
in low-contrast red regions to be included in the total
number of Considered Keypoints (PCK).
– Step 3:: The performance of the object detection
method presented in [6] is sensitive to the Kernel
Radius R, which is a free parameter of the method.
Therefore, we propose to calculate it automatically
using the image dimensions of labelled patterns. This
parameter represents the radius of the kernel, which
convolves with the detection matrix in order to gen-
erate the ﬁnal detections; see Eq. 8. In our approach,
the kernel size is adaptively calculated from the aver-
age value of all medians of width and height for all
123

=== PAGE 6 ===
172
H. Mohammed et al.
the examples from a given labelled pattern (class) as
follows:
Rc = 0.1 ×
(Medw
c + Medh
c)
2

;
(1)
where Rc is the calculated parameter R for pattern
(class) c, and Medw
c and Medh
c are the medians of
widths and heights respectively, calculated from all
the samples of a given labelled pattern (class) c;
which are typically no more than a few samples, or
even just one.
The average value of all medians are multiplied by a
ﬁxed value to calculate the ﬁnal kernel radius. This
ﬁxed value has been set to 0.1 (10%) in all our
experiments. Other values have been tested in our
preliminary experiments with no signiﬁcant differ-
ence in the overall performance, but the performance
starts to drop once we exceed a value of 0.5.
– Step 4: Two detection matrices are used in [6] for each
class with the same size of the test image. One matrix
(Mv
c )accumulatesthenumberofmatchedfeaturesfor
thecorrespondingclassinalocationcalculatedbyEq.
3. The other matrix (Ms
c) accumulates the distances
calculated between the features in the test image and
the labelled query. These two matrices are then com-
bined, after being convolved with their corresponding
kernels, in order to calculate the ﬁnal detection matrix
(Mc) using the parameter α, which has to be selected
manually, as a weight:
Mc = Ms
c ∗Kmask + α(Mv
c ∗Kdist);
(2)
where Kmask and Kdist are the kernels to be convolved
with the corresponding matrices.
In this work, only one detection matrix per pattern
is created for each test image instead of the two
matrices used in [6]. Our preliminary experiments
showed that the matrix Mv
c does not contribute to the
performance of the method in the used datasets of
digitised manuscripts, yet it adds to the total compu-
tational cost. Only the matrix Ms
c is used from [6] and
renamed Mdi
c . As a result, the parameter α has been
eliminated and there is no need to perform any further
computations. The detection matrix Mdi
c is the same
size as the corresponding test image.
– Step 5: One of the main contributions proposed orig-
inally by the NBNN algorithm [25] is measuring the
image-to-class distance instead of image-to-image
distance in order to generalise the image-matching to
class-matching. The image-to-class distance is mea-
sured by calculating the overall distance of image
features to the features of all the images in a given
class instead of the features of one image (image-
to-image distance). In this work, we measure the
feature-to-class distance in order to estimate the dis-
tance of each detected feature in the test image to
the class distributions estimated by their labelled fea-
tures.
Each detected feature in the test image votes for a cen-
tre of an expected pattern in the detection matrix; see
Fig. 5. The position of this expected centre is calcu-
lated using the relative location of nearest-neighbour
feature in the corresponding labelled pattern as fol-
lows:
Li,c = L f (di) −Offset(N Nc(di));
(3)
where Li,c is the location of the expected centre
by feature di in the detection matrix of class c.
L f (di) is the location of feature di in the test image.
Offset(N Nc(di)) is the scaled offset of the nearest-
neighbour feature from the centre of the labelled
pattern from the corresponding class.
An example in Fig. 5 shows ﬁve detected features.
Each one in the test image votes for the centre of an
expected (labelled) pattern (class) using relative off-
sets. Circles represent the detected features, and the
dots indicate the expected centres. Colours are used
to associate each detected feature with its expected
centre. It is clear that the feature marked in pink has
beenmismatchedwiththewrongfeatureinthisexam-
ple. Only detected features in the second part of the
word are used in this example, and PCK is set to one
percent for better visibility.
The value of the vote is equal to the distance of each
detected feature in the test image to features of the
corresponding class (labelled pattern) using the Nor-
malised Local NBNN distance calculation presented
in [5] in order to consider the calculated priori of
each class which is approximated by the number of
detected features in each class:
Md(Li,c) = Md(Li,c) + DistN(di, c),
(4)
DistN(di, c) = Dist(di, c)
Kc
,
(5)
where Md(Li,c) is the detection matrix of class c and
DistN(di, c) is the normalised distance between the
detected feature di in the test image and class c using
the distance calculation presented in [5]. Kc is the
number of features from the labelled patterns in class
123

=== PAGE 7 ===
Learning-free pattern detection for manuscript research
173
c, and Dist(di, c) is the Local NBNN [26], which has
been reformulated in [5] as follows:
Dist(di, c) =
n

i=1

∥di −φ(NNc(di)) ∥2
−∥di −Nk+1(di) ∥2 
,
(6)
where
φ(NNc(di)) =

NNc(di)
if NNc(di) ≤Nk+1(di)
Nk+1(di)
if NNc(di) > Nk+1(di),
and Nk+1(di) is the neighbour (k +1) of di. In a sim-
ilar way to the work in [26], we used the distance to
the k + 1 nearest neighbours (k = 10) as a “back-
ground distance” to estimate the distances of classes
which were not found in the k nearest neighbours.
According to Eq. 6, the larger the value of Dist(di, c)
the closer class c to feature di, because Dist(di, c)
measures the distance between class c and the back-
ground (k + 1) relative to di. Therefore, the matrix
Md(Li,c) is initialised with zeros in order to allow
for the detection of local maximums.
Search indices are created for all the classes using the
kd-treesimplementationprovidedbytheFLANN[27]
(Fast Library for Approximate Nearest Neighbours)
to have efﬁcient nearest-neighbour search. An exam-
ple of a detection matrix is shown in Fig. 6. It can be
clearly seen that the darkest spot corresponds to the
centre of the correct pattern annotated in part (a) of
Fig. 6. The detection matrices are smoothed using a
Gaussian ﬁlter. The kernel size of the ﬁlter is Rc x
Rc, where Rc is the adaptive parameter calculated in
Equ. 1.
– Step 6: Each detection matrix is convolved with a
kernel in order to produce the ﬁnal detections. The
detection kernel can be described as follows:
K di
c (x, y) =
1 if Offset2
x + Offset2
y < Rc
0 otherwise,
(7)
where K di
c (x, y) is the detection kernel of class c for the
detected feature di centred at location (x, y). Offsetx and
Offsety are the differences in the x- and y-axis between
the kernel centre and the current location (x,y) respec-
tively.
The ﬁnal detections Dc are calculated as follows:
Dc = Mdi
c ∗K di
c ;
(8)
The size of a detected pattern is set to be equal to the
median height and width of the corresponding labelled
pattern samples.
5 Evaluation on relevant datasets
We applied the proposed method on the École française
d’ExtrêmeOrient[EFEO]datasetfromtheusecasepresented
in Sect. 3 in order to demonstrate the applicability of this
method on actual research questions from manuscript schol-
ars. In addition, we evaluated the method using two different
public datasets in order to demonstrate its generality and
state-of-the-art performance. As mentioned above, the two
extremely challenging datasets are: the AMADI_LontarSet
dataset [8] of handwriting on palm-leaves for word-spotting
and the DocExplore dataset [3] of medieval manuscripts for
pattern detection. The ﬁrst dataset was selected because of
its relevance to the use case described in Sect. 3. The second
dataset is the only available public dataset for pattern detec-
tion in digitised manuscripts to the best of our knowledge.
5.1 The École française d’Extrême orient [EFEO]
dataset
The data used in this piece of collaborative research was a set
of palm-leaf manuscripts from Tamil Nadu mostly ascribable
to the 19th century, with a few exceptions from the 17th,
18th and 20th century. The digitised manuscript collections
are kept at the École française d’Extrême Orient, Pondicherry
branch (there are 1625 manuscripts, 155,372 images in total).
This valuable source of data was recognised as a UNESCO
“Memory of the World Collection” in 2005. A few samples
from the EFEO collection can be seen in Fig. 7.
The detection process resulted in 86 images which were
saved automatically to a folder along with a rectangular anno-
tation for each detection hypothesis. A manual inspection by
an expert from the ﬁeld of Tamil studies conﬁrmed seven cor-
rect detections in the saved images. The process of manual
inspection only took a few minutes due to the low number
of hypotheses and the clear annotations around each one.
The clear visual differences (inter-class variation) between
the detected instances and the labelled patterns demonstrate
the ability of the proposed method to generalise beyond the
labelled patterns; see Fig. 8.
In addition, some of the false positives that were detected
are also pertinent to the aims of the current case study. In
fact, they present features that are in between those of the
standard way of writing hari ·h om and its squared version.
123

=== PAGE 8 ===
174
H. Mohammed et al.
Fig. 7 A few examples of manuscripts from the École française
d’Extrême Orient, Pondicherry branch. The samples have been cropped
for better visualisation
Fig. 8 Examples of the detections generated automatically by the pro-
posed method. The samples have been cropped for better visualisation.
Note the visual variations between the detected patterns and the labelled
patterns in Fig. 2
The possibility of making such an observation thanks to the
detections produced by our method indicates that the scribal
activity we are investigating was more articulated than we
thought initially since scribes had the possibility of modulat-
ing the graphic rendition of hari ·h om in more than just two
ways.
Retrieving as many correct patterns as possible is more
desirable in most of the cases, but it is done at the expense
of precision because detected patterns can be inspected with
very little effort. In other words, the recall rate is often more
important than the precision for most questions in manuscript
research.
This automatic pattern detection test was carried out using
a standard ofﬁce computer (with an Intel i5 core, 3.3 GHz)
in about three seconds per image. The test took up less than
1GB of RAM.
5.2 The AMADI_LontarSet dataset
The manuscript samples used in the AMADI_LontarSet
dataset [8] are sample images of palm-leaf manuscripts
from Bali, Indonesia. In order to obtain a fair representa-
tion of palm-leaf manuscript images, the sample images were
collected from 23 different collections coming from ﬁve dif-
ferent regions: two museums and three private collections.
The dataset is partitioned into training and test subsets.
Since the proposed method is a learning-free approach, the
training subset is not used for training phase in this per-
formance evaluation. A hundred original images and 36
word-level annotated query images were provided for the test
subset. This means that only one example (labelled pattern)
was used per query.
To the best of our knowledge, no word-spotting results
have been published for this particular dataset, which makes
this the ﬁrst published result. Several standard performance
measurements are provided in order to facilitate later com-
parisons with other methods and provide a thorough perfor-
mance evaluation.
The performance evaluation of the proposed method is
presented in Table 1 using standard metrics for object detec-
tion and word-spotting, namely mean Average Precision
(mAP), average F-score, and the average recall rate at 0.3
False Positives Per Image (Recall at 0.3 FPPI). In order for
the detection hypothesis to be considered as a true positive,
the Intersection over Union ratio (IoU) must be more than
0.5 following the standard detection criteria. The same IoU
condition was applied in all our experiments.
It is worth noting here that the performance of the
method varies greatly across different patterns (queries) in
this dataset, as Table 1 shows. In general, its performance
is comparable to the state-of-the-art results even on much
less challenging datasets used for word-spotting in historical
handwritten manuscripts [28]. Nevertheless, the mAP is very
low for a few queries. One possible explanation of the big
difference in mAP across different queries is the complexity
of the query pattern itself; see Figs. 9 and 10. The more
complex the labelled pattern is, the more unique it is in terms
of its visual features. Furthermore, the quality of the query
image was an additional factor that inﬂuenced the quality of
the calculated descriptors.
This method provides automatic, learning-free pattern
detection that can save a signiﬁcant amount of time and effort
in the ﬁeld of manuscript research. In the case of word-
spotting, the method is a segmentation-free approach that
can cope with the typical degradation found in manuscript
images.
123

=== PAGE 9 ===
Learning-free pattern detection for manuscript research
175
Table 1
Performance analysis
of the proposed method on the
AMADI_LontarSet dataset [8]
Queries
mAP
average F-score
average Recall at 0.3 FPPI
All 36 queries
0.476
0.707
0.732
The best performing 30 queries
0.560
0.780
0.810
The worst performing 6 queries
0.053
0.344
0.343
Fig. 9 Examples of the 30 queries with the highest mAP from the
AMADI_LontarSet dataset [8]
Fig.
10 The
six
queries
with
the
lowest
mAP
from
the
AMADI_LontarSet dataset [8]
The test on the AMADI_LontarSet dataset was also per-
formed using a standard ofﬁce computer (with an Intel i5
core, 3.3GHz) taking an average of 13 seconds per image for
all the 36 queries combined (thus making an average of 0.36
second per query). Only 1.8 GB of RAM was needed.
5.3 The DocExplore dataset
The manuscript images in the DocExplore dataset [3] are
from the Municipal Library of Rouen, France, and they have
been dated to between the 10th and the 16th century. A total
of 1464 objects in 35 different graphical categories rang-
ing from ornate initial letters to human faces and decorative
objects in paintings were annotated for the task of pattern
detection. Each object in a category was used as a query.
The remaining objects in that category were kept as correct
detections.
The number of annotated objects per category ranges from
2 to 409, with an average of 42. The query size can be very
small (about 10 x 20 pixels), but the average size is 77 x 77
pixels, which still only occupies 0.7% of the average docu-
ment image size, which is 1024 x 768 pixels.
The mean Average Precision (mAP) was selected as the
only possible performance measure for the task of pattern
detection. The authors of this dataset did not provide any
ground-truth information or annotation data, but they did
develop a command-line tool which runs under Linux to gen-
erate mAP values as a performance measure for a given input
ﬁle with a pre-deﬁned format. We were therefore unable to
perform any further performance analysis. As an additional
consequence, we were not able to do a proper parameter anal-
ysis in order to determine the best possible settings for this
dataset. The results provided were generated using the same
parameter values used in the other datasets for FAST key-
point detection, the Normalised Local NBNN classiﬁer and
the adaptive kernel size K d
C.
Large variations in the performance can be observed
across different pattern categories in this dataset as well;
see Table 2. The very low mAP values for a few query cat-
egories can be attributed to the lack of visual complexity
in the queries compared to the queries in other categories
from the same dataset; see Figs. 11 and 12. In addition, some
categories in this dataset are visually identical to parts of pat-
terns in other categories; “Ship hull L” can be detected in a
“Ship” instance, for example, and both “Simple Separator”
and “Double Separator” can be detected in a “Triple Sep-
arator” instance; see parts (c), (d) and (e) in Fig. 12. This
can result in many false positives which are in fact correct
detections in terms of visual features.
The ﬁnal detection result in Table 2 represents the average
value of mAP for all 35 pattern categories (mAP per cate-
gory). This measurement approach allows the impact of each
pattern category on the overall performance metrics to be
evaluated. However, calculating the mean value of the Aver-
age Precision (AP) for every query (mAP per query) can be
extremely misleading, especially for this particular dataset.
The number of queries varies considerably across different
categories, and only six categories contain around 70% of all
the queries in the dataset. As a consequence, the mAP per
query mainly represents the results from a very small num-
ber of categories rather than providing a valid estimation of
the overall pattern detection performance in all categories.
This fact can easily be veriﬁed in this dataset by compar-
ing the results shown in Tables 2 and 3. We calculated the
123

=== PAGE 10 ===
176
H. Mohammed et al.
Table 2
Performance analysis of the proposed method using the Doc-
Explore dataset [3] for the task of pattern detection
Queries
mAP per Category
All 35 categories
0.587
The best performing 29 categories
0.700
The worst performing 6 categories
0.041
Table 3
Performance comparison for the state-of-the-art results on the
DocExplore dataset [3] for the task of pattern detection
Method
mAP per Query
Proposed Method
0.251
En et al. 2016 [3]
0.111
En et al. 2016 [22]
0.157
mAP per query as well in order to provide a fair comparison
with the existing state-of-the-art results, but we encourage
other researchers to evaluate their methods using the mAP
per category for this dataset.
The proposed method achieved a state-of-the-art result for
the task of pattern detection as shown in Table 3. We expect
the result would be signiﬁcantly higher if the ground-truth
information were publicly available, meaning that a thor-
ough performance analysis can be performed and the method
can be optimised even further. The reported result has been
achieved without any training or pre-processing. However,
the result (mAP per query = 0.272) in [21] was obtained
by using a subset of the test images to train a classiﬁer in
order to classify each page into text and non-text regions
after manually annotating and labelling non-textual regions
in 79 images from the test set, so this result is not considered
a valid state-of-the-art outcome in the comparison in Table 3.
The aforementioned discussions and results demonstrate
the generality and efﬁciency of our proposed method and
maintain its high performance using very different datasets.
These attributes exemplify the potential of our learning-free
method for use as a pattern-detection tool in manuscript
research.
6 Software tool implementation
An efﬁcient and easy-to-use software tool for pattern detec-
tion has been developed, which is based on the proposed
method. It provides a suitable environment for scholars to
carry out tests independently and can help make many digi-
tised manuscripts searchable. Known as the Visual-Pattern
Detector v1.0 (or VPD v1.0) [29], the software tool has
already been released and made freely available for non-
commercial use, similar to the software tools previously
Fig. 11 Examples of the 29 queries with the highest mAP from the
DocExplore dataset [3]
Fig. 12 The six queries with the lowest mAP from the DocExplore
dataset [3]
published by our research centre [30–32]. The main goal
of VPD is to automatically recognise and allocate visual
patterns such as words, drawings and seals in digitised
manuscripts.
The VPD was developed as an ofﬂine Razor Pages web
application using the .NET CORE platform from Microsoft
(https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet-core). It is
a free software tool published under the Creative Com-
mons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International Public
License. The VPD has been tested by researchers con-
cerned with document analysis and scholars from manuscript
research. A brief description of the main features is provided
here, but please refer to the description in the VPD itself for
more details.
The Graphical User Interface (GUI) of the VPD allows
the user to perform the detection process in individual steps:
selecting patterns to be detected, the images to be searched
123

=== PAGE 11 ===
Learning-free pattern detection for manuscript research
177
Fig. 13 The user can select pattern images from multiple folders to be
detected using the VPD
Fig. 14 In the VPD, users can select images from multiple folders to
be searched for the pre-selected patterns
Fig. 15 In the VPD, users can change the main parameters of the
method if the initial results are unsatisfactory
and ﬁnally the detection parameters; see Figs. 13, 14 and 15.
The instructions for each step can be found at the bottom of
the corresponding pages in the software tool. Furthermore, a
general guideline is provided in the “How To” Section of the
VPD.
Fig. 16 Example of the results that can be generated by the VPD.
The images are reproduced from the St. Gall collection kept by the
“Stiftsbibliothek” library [33]
Fig. 17 A visual inspection of the best and worst detection results from
the VPD can be used to determine a suitable detection threshold
The current version of the software allows users to change
the main parameters of the proposed method. In addition,
a limited scale and rotation invariance can be provided by
creating scaled and rotated versions of the uploaded pattern
images; see Fig. 15.
Finally, the detection results can be generated in a wide
range of formats so that different requirements that scholars
may have can be met. In addition, all detected patterns in
an image can be annotated concurrently; see Fig. 16. The
detection threshold can be controlled intuitively by visually
inspecting the three best and worst detection results from the
considered detections; see Fig. 17.
7 Conclusion
In this article, we have presented a novel, learning-free
pattern-detection method for manuscript research. The pro-
posed method is efﬁcient and very fast, and it performs very
well on very challenging manuscript images. Furthermore,
this method can cope with a very wide range of degradation
123

=== PAGE 12 ===
178
H. Mohammed et al.
in manuscript images without the need for any customised
pre-processing steps.
A use case from South Asian studies was outlined in order
to demonstrate the applicability of the approach to actual
questions from manuscript research. In this use case, we pre-
sented a typical scenario where training data and annotations
cannot be provided and a high recall rate is required.
In addition, a performance evaluation is provided in which
state-of-the-art results were achieved using two relevant but
very challenging datasets, namely the AMADI_LontarSet
dataset of handwriting on palm leaves for word-spotting and
the DocExplore dataset of medieval manuscripts for pattern
detection. Since our results are the ﬁrst one to be published on
the ﬁrst dataset, we provided three different standard eval-
uation metrics in order to facilitate later comparisons. As
for the second dataset, we presented a comparison with the
state-of-the-art results.
Achieving such high performance on very different
datasets and patterns without the need for any training or ﬁne-
tuning of parameters demonstrates both the generality and
feasibility of the proposed method for manuscript research.
This method was developed in order to provide a prac-
tical, automated, high performance tool that can help make
many digitised manuscripts searchable for patterns such as
words, seals and drawings. Therefore, the VPD software tool
is developed as an easy-to-use implementation of the method
and made publicly available for free.
The next step in our research is to develop an interac-
tive learning-based method that is capable of enhancing its
performance after every correct detection. Since this method
requires no more than one labelled sample, the detected pat-
terns can be employed, after being interactively validated by
scholars, to further enhance the performance. Once multiple
instances of the same pattern are detected, they can be used
to build a generic model of that pattern.
Acknowledgements Open Access funding enabled and organized by
Projekt DEAL. The research for this paper was sponsored by the Clus-
ter of Excellence 2176 “Understanding Written Artefacts”, generously
funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG), within the scope
of the work conducted at Centre for the Study of Manuscript Cultures
(CSMC).
Declaration
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthecopy-
right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Han, J., Zhang, D., Cheng, G., Liu, N., Xu, D.: Advanced
deep-learning techniques for salient and category-speciﬁc object
detection: a survey. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 35(1), 84–100
(2018)
2. Giotis, A.P., Sﬁkas, G., Gatos, B., Nikou, C.: A survey of document
image word spotting techniques. Pattern Recognit. 68, 310–332
(2017)
3. En, S., Nicolas, S., Petitjean, C., Jurie, F., Heutte, L.: New pub-
lic dataset for spotting patterns in medieval document images. J.
Electron. Imaging 26(1), 1–15 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1117/1.
JEI.26.1.011010
4. Mohammed, H., Märgner, V., Stiehl, H. S.: “Writer identiﬁcation
for historical manuscripts: Analysis and optimisation of a classiﬁer
as an easy-to-use tool for scholars from the humanities,” in 2018
16th international conference on frontiers in handwriting recogni-
tion (ICFHR), Aug 2018, pp. 534–539
5. Mohammed, H., Märgner, V., Konidaris, T., Stiehl, H. S.: “Nor-
malised local naïve bayes nearest-neighbour classiﬁer for ofﬂine
writer identiﬁcation,” in 2017 14th IAPR international conference
on document analysis and recognition (ICDAR). IEEE, 2017, pp.
1013–1018
6. Terzi´c, K., du Buf, J. H.: “An efﬁcient naive bayes approach to
category-level object detection,” in 2014 IEEE international con-
ference on image processing (ICIP). IEEE, 2014, pp. 1658–1662
7. Rosten, E., Porter, R., Drummond, T.: Faster and better: a machine
learning approach to corner detection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 32(1), 105–119 (2010)
8. Burie, J.-C., Coustaty, M., Hadi, S., Kesiman, M. W. A., Ogier, J.-
M., Paulus, E., Sok, K., Sunarya, I. M. G., Valy, D.: “ICFHR2016
competition on the analysis of handwritten text in images of bali-
nese palm leaf manuscripts,” in 2016 15th international conference
on frontiers in handwriting recognition (ICFHR). IEEE, 2016, pp.
596–601
9. Yarlagadda, P., Monroy, A., Carque, B., Ommer, B.: “Recognition
and analysis of objects in medieval images,” in Computer Vision
– ACCV 2010 Workshops, R. Koch and F. Huang, Eds. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 296–305
10. Gatos, B., Pratikakis, I.: “Segmentation-free word spotting in his-
torical printed documents,” in 2009 10th international conference
on document analysis and recognition, 2009, pp. 271–275
11. Konidaris, T., Kesidis, A.L., Gatos, B.: A segmentation-free word
spotting method for historical printed documents. Pattern Anal.
Appl. 19(4), 963–976 (2016)
12. Frinken, V., Fischer, A., Manmatha, R., Bunke, H.: A novel word
spotting method based on recurrent neural networks. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 34(2), 211–224 (2012)
13. Ahmed, R., Al-Khatib, W.G., Mahmoud, S.: A survey on handwrit-
ten documents word spotting. Int. J. Multim. Inf. Retr. 6(1), 31–47
(2017)
14. Rusiñol, M., Aldavert, D., Toledo, R., Lladós, J.: Efﬁcient
segmentation-free keyword spotting in historical document col-
lections. Pattern Recognit. 48(2), 545–555 (2015)
15. Fischer, A., Keller, A., Frinken, V., Bunke, H.: Lexicon-free hand-
writtenwordspottingusingcharacterhmms.PatternRecognit.Lett.
33(7), 934–942 (2012)
123

=== PAGE 13 ===
Learning-free pattern detection for manuscript research
179
16. Vats, E., Hast, A., Fornés, A.: “Training-free and segmentation-
free word spotting using feature matching and query expansion,”
in 2019 international conference on document analysis and recog-
nition (ICDAR). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1294–1299
17. Dutta, A., Lladós, J., Pal, U.: A symbol spotting approach in graph-
ical documents by hashing serialized graphs. Pattern Recognit.
46(3), 752–768 (2013)
18. Le, V.P., Nayef, N., Visani, M., Ogier, J.-M., Tran, De, C.: ”Doc-
ument retrieval based on logo spotting using key-point matching,”
in, : 22nd international conference on pattern recognition. IEEE
2014, 3056–3061 (2014)
19. Rusiñol, M., Lladós, J.: ”Word and symbol spotting using spatial
organization of local descriptors,” in, : The Eighth IAPR inter-
national workshop on document analysis systems. IEEE 2008,
489–496 (2008)
20. Wiggers, K. L., Britto, A. S., Heutte, L., Koerich, A. L., Oliveira,
L. S.: “Image retrieval and pattern spotting using siamese neural
network,” in2019international joint conference onneural networks
(IJCNN). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8
21. Úbeda, I., Saavedra, J.M., Nicolas, S., Petitjean, C., Heutte, L.:
Improving pattern spotting in historical documents using feature
pyramid networks. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 131, 398–404 (2020)
22. En, S., Petitjean, C., Nicolas, S., Heutte, L.: A scalable pattern
spotting system for historical documents. Pattern Recognit. 54,
149–161 (2016)
23. Ciotti, G., Franceschini, M.: Certain times in uncertain places: a
study on scribal colophons of manuscripts written in Tamil and
Tamilian Grantha scripts. Studi. Manuscr. Cult. 7, 59–129 (2016)
24. Lowe, D.G.: Distinctive image features from scale-invariant key-
points. Int. J. Comput. Vision 60(2), 91–110 (2004)
25. Boiman, O., Shechtman, E., Irani, M.: “In defense of nearest-
neighbor based image classiﬁcation,” 2008 IEEE Conf. on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–8, 2008
26. McCann, S., Lowe, D. G.: “Local Naive Bayes Nearest Neighbor
for image classiﬁcation,” 2012 IEEE Conf. on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp. 3650–3656, Jun. 2012
27. Muja, M., Lowe, D. G.: “Fast approximate nearest neighbors with
automatic algorithm conﬁguration.” in VISAPP (1), 2009, pp. 331–
340
28. Ahmed, R., Al-Khatib, W.G., Mahmoud, S.: A survey on handwrit-
ten documents word spotting. Int. J. Multim. Inf. Retr. 6(1), 31–47
(2017)
29. Mohammed, H.: “Visual-Pattern Detector v1.0 (VPD V1.0),” Feb.
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.25592/uhhfdm.8832
30. Mohammed, H.: “Handwriting Analysis Tool v3.0 (HAT3),” Feb.
2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.25592/uhhfdm.902
31. Mohammed, H.: “X-Ray Fluorescence Data Analysis Tool v1.3
(XRF-DAT1.3),” Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.25592/uhhfdm.1037
32. Mohammed, H.: “Line Detection Tool v1.0 (LDT1),” Jun. 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.25592/uhhfdm.1043
33. e-codices Virtual Manuscript Library of Switzerland. St. gallen,
stiftsbibliothek. [Online]. Available: http://www.e-codices.ch
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123

