# SOURCE FILE: colas_text_paintings_2022.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\pdf-harvest\loop_B03_B04\colas_text_paintings_2022.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_3_colophons (3. ธรรมเนียมคัดลอก จารึกท้ายคัมภีร์ Colophons และนักคัดลอก)
# PAGES: 34 | TOTAL CHARS: 61158

=== PAGE 1 ===
Cracow Indological Studies 
Vol. XXIV, No. 2 (2022), pp. 25–58
https://doi.org/10.12797/CIS.24.2022.02.02
Text and Paintings
A Preliminary Study of Indien 745, a Manuscript of 
the Bibliothèque nationale de France
ABSTRACT: The manuscript now preserved as Indien 745 in the Manuscript 
Department of the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF) contains 137 paint-
ings by an Indian artist, each accompanied by an explanation in French. These 
paintings depict deities and sages in static posture or narrative mode, as well 
as icons associated with temples. The present contribution forms a preliminary 
study of this manuscript in our project on South Indian manuscripts with paint-
ings of deities preserved in the BnF.
KEYWORDS: Indien 745, Bibliothèque nationale de France, paintings, deities, 
17th–18th century
The manuscript now preserved as Indien 745 in the Manuscript Department 
of the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF) contains 137 paintings 
Gérard Colas
colasg@ehess.fr
(Centre national de la recherche scientifique, France)
Usha Colas-Chauhan
gucc@orange.fr
(Independent scholar, France)
Francis Richard 
richardfrancis0@gmail.com
(Centre national de la recherche scientifique, France)

=== PAGE 2 ===
26
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
by an Indian artist, each accompanied by an explanation in French. 
These paintings depict deities and sages in static posture or narrative 
mode, as well as icons associated with temples. The present contribution 
forms a preliminary study of this manuscript in our project on South 
Indian manuscripts with paintings of deities preserved in the BnF.1 Our 
approach in this project will not be that of cultural history that some-
times sees orientalism or ethnology in European intellectual works on 
India from the 16th to the 18th century. We will not deal with South Indian 
painting in general, nor with art, aesthetics, art history or the circulation 
of artefacts from South India. The aim of this article, in keeping with 
the theme of the present CIS volume, is to discuss the relation between 
word and image as observed in Indien 745. This article does not intend 
to compare Indien 745 with other similar works.2 
Description of the manuscript
The binding of Indien 745 is à la française. Covered with a worn leather 
that appears to be sheepskin (basane), it may have been made in India.3 
An arabesque frame of foliage and flowers is drawn in black on the out-
side of the upper and lower boards. The back shows six raised bands. 
The paper is French with undated watermark. The number of quires 
cannot be known without dismantling the binding. The first quire con-
sists of eight folios. The folios measure 220 mm in width and 355 mm 
in height. The total number of folios is 283: four unnumbered folios 
([A] blank, [B] with the preamble (Aduertissemens),4 [C] blank and
1
This project will not deal with the manuscripts that contain paintings of deities 
without accompanying text, nor with the so-called Mughal and Company paintings. 
2
For descriptions of collections of paintings from South India accompanied or 
not by texts, see, for example, Dallapiccola 2010 and Hurel 2011.
3
We would like to thank Ms Marie-Pierre Laffitte (General Curator of Libraries) 
and Mr Laurent Héricher (General Curator of Libraries, Head of the Orient Service in 
the Manuscript Department of the BnF) for this information. 
4
On the top right side of folio [B] is inscribed in pencil “Indien 100,” an old 
call number (used in Blochet 1900: 180–186).

=== PAGE 3 ===
27
Text and Paintings…
[D], blank on the recto, with the commentary of painting 1 on the verso; 
then 230 folios (115 folios numbered 1 to 115 bearing paintings 
1 to 115 on the recto, each of which is followed by an interleaved folio 
with the recto blank and the verso inscribed with the commentary on 
the following ­painting); then 45 folios (23 folios numbered from 120 
to 142 with paintings 120 to 142 on the recto, each of which—except 
for folio 142—is followed by an interleaved folio with the recto blank 
and the verso inscribed with the commentary on the next painting); and 
finally four blank unnumbered folios [E], [F], [G] and [H]. 
Origin of the manuscript
That the manuscript was prepared in South India is evident for several rea-
sons: it contains paintings of deities honoured particularly in ­Tamil and 
Telugu countries; most of the  temples depicted are located in South 
India, with rare exceptions (for example, Badarikāśrama, ­painting 112);5 
the names of the deities often appear to be French transcriptions from Tamil 
or Telugu languages;6 the explanation of the liṅga of Mal­lik­ārjuna (e110) as 
that which is worshipped “on the northern side” (Du Coste du Nort) may 
indicate that the commentator was writing in an area south of Śrīśailam 
(where this Mallikārjuna temple is located, in the present Telangana state of 
South India). This geographical origin does not signify that the paintings of 
Indien 745 belong to a style that could be called “South Indian.” Moreover 
the very notion of “South Indian painting” remains to be defined by art 
historians given the number of schools, styles and idioms they identify in 
South Indian art of the 17th to 19th century.7 Also, factors such as the migra-
tion of artists according to the fortunes of their patrons, the influence of local 
5	
Hereafter, the mention of the number alone refers to that of the painting and 
the mention of the number preceded by “e” (“e” for “explanation”) refers to the expla-
nation of the painting concerned.
6	
Exceptionally, the transcription of the letter va as ba and of a as o is observed, 
for example in Bamon for Vāmana (6), showing the influence of a language from the 
North-East (Bengali or Oriya), a region bordering the extreme north of Telugu country.
7	
See, for instance, Dallapiccola 2010: 15, 17–19, etc.

=== PAGE 4 ===
28
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
traditions, varied time spans of styles, etc., make it difficult to determine 
the date and place of production of paintings on the basis of comparison 
with other paintings. 
The date of preparation of this work is unknown. Indien 745 is 
ascribed to 18th century by Blochet and Cabaton (Blochet 1900: 180 
and Cabaton 1912: 109) perhaps because it is described in the Cata-
logue of the Royal Library published in 1739. Mitter assigns it to 
a period not later than early 18th century due to its similarity to mis-
sionary works of late 17th and early 18th century (Mitter 1992: 323). 
According to Becherini, following Jakimowicz-Shah, Indien 745 seems 
to have been acquired by a Frenchman in Andhra Pradesh in the ear-
ly 18th century (Becherini 2017: 329, n. 40.). None of these scholars 
present a precise argument for the period and the origin they propose.
There are no indications about the person (missionary, ­traveller, 
collector, or other) who acquired Indien 745 or the milieu which had it 
prepared. It is quite possible that the author of the commentary belonged 
to a Catholic mission, more specifically Capuchin or Jesuit. It may be 
noted that the French Capuchin mission in Madras (active from 1642 to 
the end of the 17th century) is said to have prepared a collection of paint-
ings describing the deities honoured around Madras, accompanying 
a Mémoire that is apparently lost (Richard 1995: 67). In fact the com-
mentary on painting 23 of Indien 745 states: “as it is represented in the 
table of castes” (comme il est représenté dans la table des castes). Could 
this refer to a part of the above Mémoire and by consequence be a proof 
that Indien 745 comes from the ­Capuchin milieu? The BnF keeps four 
manuscripts (dated 1666, 1667 and 1677) of Christian texts composed 
in Tamil by the French Capuchin missionaries of Madras themselves or 
under their direction (Muthuraj 1986: ix and 44; Richard 1989: 161–162). 
If Indien 745 is of Capuchin origin, it is likely that it later passed into 
Jesuit hands. Indeed, the manuscript Od 38 pet. fol. (BnF, Estampes), 
probably of Jesuit origin, acquired from a Jesuit brother named Perchec8 
8	
Perchec or Le Perchec, being a Breton surname, this Jesuit brother could have 
belonged to a group of Jesuits coming from the West of France. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
29
Text and Paintings…
by the Royal Library in 1763,9 contains copies of paintings of Indien 
745 (or its original) with almost identical French commentaries.10 
The other conjecture is that Indien 745 was prepared exclusively 
in a Jesuit environment.11 It should be remembered that the Jesuits of 
the 17th and 18th centuries were particularly interested in the religious 
use of images as an instrument for the propagation of Christianity in 
India and Asia in general.12
The date of arrival of the manuscript Indien 745 in France remains 
unknown.13 The terminus ante quem of the manuscript’s presence in 
the Royal Library is 1739. The entry numbered XI of the Codices indici 
in volume I of the Catalogue of the Royal Library (published in 1739) 
9	
See inventory BnF Estampes Réserve Ye 1 pet. fol., fol. 211r: “Dessins 
[­surmounted by “et gravure chinoises” in the same hand] acquis en 1763 [surmounted 
by “1763” in pencil], du frere Perchec, Jésuite, en 1763 / un an apres lors de la supression 
de la Societé. savoir” [then follow the titles and inventory numbers of nineteen volumes, 
and at the bottom of the page: “Puis trois autres volumes contenant des dessins coloriés, 
savoir 1290—Le Premier contient Les Dieux des Indiens et Deesse de leurs Pagodes. 
[etc.].” The number 1290 of this inventory is found on a blank folio at the beginning of 
Od 38 pet. fol. 
In the transcription by Hurel 2010 (p. 43, note 72) of the passage “frere ­Perchec, 
Jésuite, en 1763,” “frère Bouchet [?]” is a conjecture for “frere Perchec” and “envoyés” a mis­ 
reading for “en 1763.” Thus there is no indication that Od 38 pet. fol. is from the Jesuit 
father Venant Bouchet (of the Carnate mission, died 1732), contrary to the assump-
tion of Hurel 2010, which became an affirmation in Hurel 2011 (p. 149: “­Provenance: 
1763, deposit by the Society of Jesus of the gift of Father Venant Bouchet, Jesuit” 
[trans. from French]). 
10	 For a comparison of Indien 745 with Od 38 pet. fol. see our forthcoming article.
11	 This could be the mission that became the Carnate mission (1688–1689 and 
following years): see Colas and Colas-Chauhan 1995: 8.
12	 See Bailey 1999. The Pietist Lutherans of Tranquebar, too, collected informa-
tion about Indian religious beliefs, including paintings of temple deities, as indicated by 
Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg in his Genealogie der malabarischen Götter (written in 1713) 
(see Becherini 2017: 316–317).
13	 Jakimowicz-Shah (1988: 8) states that “The set [that is, Indien 745 and the 
Warsaw University Library manuscript Inw. zb. d. 21944/1–105] was acquired by 
the library [that is, the Bibliothèque Royale, Paris] between the years 1682 and 1748 
according to the inventories” without giving the references of these inventories.

=== PAGE 6 ===
30
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
describes the manuscript now numbered Indien 745:14 “Manuscript on 
paper, in which are contained images of the gods and goddesses who are 
honoured among the Indians, by an anonymous eyewitness of all these 
things while residing in India, and they are very carefully represented.”15 
The identification of Indien 745 with the manuscript described in entry 
XI cannot be doubted because the number “11” is written in ink and 
underlined by a brace16 in the left margin of the first painting of Indien 
745.17 Moreover, Dupuis’ description in 1794–1795 of the manuscript 
referred to as “Bibliothèque nationale, n°11” and of several of its paint-
ings corresponds to the present Indien 745 (Dupuis 1794–1795: 599).
14	 This cannot be Indien 744, an album of paintings of deities (but also castes, etc.) 
which bears the date 1831.
15	 See Catalogus Codicum Manuscriptorum Bibliothecae Regiae, Tomus Primus 
(Paris, Imprimerie royale, 1739), Codices indici, p. 434: “XI./ Codex chartaceus, quo 
continentur deorum & dearum quae apud Indos, coluntur imagines, ab anonymo, rerum 
omnium, dum India versabatur, oculato teste, accuratissimè depictae.”
16	 This way of presenting the call number is common for Indian manuscripts in 
the old manuscript collection of the BnF. See, for example, Colas and Colas-Chauhan 
1995, entries for Indien 582, Indien 600, Indien 609, Indien 634, Sanskrit 876.
17	 Jakimowicz-Shah (1988: 8) reads the number “11” of Indien 745 as a “II” in 
Roman numerals and conjectures that Indien 745 is the second of a set of two volumes, 
and that manuscript 476 in the Warsaw University Library (the current call number 
of the manuscript is Inw. zb. d. 21944/1–105) would be the first of this set. This and 
the conjecture that one volume is Śaiva and the other Vaiṣṇava (see below) is unfortu-
nately accepted without discussion by other scholars (Hurel 2011: 13; Guy 2011: 174, 
n. 39). It should be noted that Jakimowicz-Shah gives her own numbers to the paint-
ings and they do not correspond to the painting numbers in the manuscript. Although
the treatment of the subjects, decorative elements and binding, as well as the handwrit-
ing of the French captions are very similar in the two manuscripts, the hand which paint-
ed the personages is different. Moreover, the Warsaw manuscript contains the names of
the deities in Telugu in the margins while Indien 745 does not. We thank Dr Małgorzata
Biłozór-Salwa (Curator of the Old Master Drawings Collection, University of Warsaw
Library) and the staff of the Imaging Services for their help in procuring a digital copy
of the Warsaw manuscript.

=== PAGE 7 ===
31
Text and Paintings…
Album or book?
Did the very concept of paintings on paper and bound in a book form 
exist among Indians before their contact with non-Indians, Persians 
or Europeans? Did the Indians themselves make or commission such 
albums?18 Were the paintings sold separately or in bound collections 
to pilgrims or local lords?19 According to some modern authors, art-
ists’ families kept collections of drawings of deities and other subjects, 
(Dallapiccola 2010: 22) but this observation concerns a period after 
the production of Indien 745. The prescriptions for paintings of deities 
on cloth in the fine arts treatises (śilpaśāstra) do not allow us to infer 
the existence of such collections either. The transmission of models 
through observation and oral or written instructions could explain these 
representations of deities without assuming the existence of collections 
of paintings in artistic circles. It is also possible that painters of temple 
or palace murals20 or craftsmen using colour to decorate various arte-
facts (Hurel 2011: 29) responded to commissions for paintings on paper 
from European or Indian clients.
Indien 745 is not a mere collection or album of paintings, but a book 
of images and their explanations. Thus, the commentator’s preamble 
presents the manuscript as a book (liuure). Can we not place Indien 745 
in the lineage of Christian books about religious images (identified by 
a marginal text, explained by a commentary and leading to meditation), 
a genre that reached its consecration with the Jesuits of the 16th century?21
18	 An inscription on Od 40 pet. fol. states: “it is said that this collection belonged 
to a famous Brame” [trans. from French] (Hurel 2011: 14). According to Jakimowicz-
Shah (1988: 18), the Warsaw manuscript “may have been made for a local ruler or for 
sale to pilgrims.”
19	 See Jakimowicz-Shah 1988: 18 (about the Warsaw manuscript); Hurel 2011: 
137 (in relation to Od 40b).
20	 For South Indian temple, palace and manuscript paintings, see Sivaramamurti 
1994; Hurel 2011: 14.
21	 According to Chatelain (1992: 331 ff.), one of the origins of this kind of work 
is the 16th century commentary on emblems, combining text and emblem.

=== PAGE 8 ===
32
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
The aim in the case of Indien 745 is neither religious nor medita-
tional, but to help the reader understand the Indian pantheon. The expla-
nations in this manuscript were intended to be as important as the paint-
ings, if not more so. The very physical form of this book testifies to 
the close relationship of the explanation to the painting: the alternation 
of the explanation on the verso and the painting on the recto of the next 
folio, facing each other, is continuous. In short, the back and forth 
between explanations and paintings is direct, textually and visually. 
The order of the paintings
The 137 paintings are numbered in the hand of the commentator, from 
1 to 115, then from 120 to 142. The choice of subjects does not indi-
cate any sectarian affiliation, whether Vaiṣṇava, Śaiva or other,22 of 
the painter of the volume or a preference of the commissioner. It is 
impossible today to measure precisely how the exchanges between 
the artist, the commentator and the patron (if he was not the same as 
the commentator) played out. How much freedom did the painter have 
in the order of the paintings, in the choice and treatment of subjects? 
Did the commentator have specific wishes, such as a certain documen-
tary realism or the choice of certain subjects? One of his interventions 
is obvious: he supplied the painter with French paper quires of a cer-
tain format with instructions regarding the blank folios which were to 
receive an explanatory text. 
Indien 745 is a compilation whose overall order, if there was one, 
is difficult to identify. However, the painter probably arranged certain 
paintings in micro-series. For example, ten incarnations (avatāras) of 
Viṣṇu (2–11, Kṛṣṇa is missing); deities of the directions and interme-
diate directions (12–16, Vāyu, Kubera and Īśāna missing), characters 
from the Rāmāyaṇa (93–104); the five Pāṇḍavas (5 Darme Rages) as
22	 Contrary to Jakimowicz-Shah’s affirmation that Indien 745 is “Saivite in 
content” and that the Warsaw manuscript is Vaiṣṇavite (1988: 8, 11, 28). Indien 745 
contains the paintings of Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava and other deities.

=== PAGE 9 ===
33
Text and Paintings…
 well as their wife (56–61), temple deities (62–65, 136–138), etc. Sever-
al series of paintings depict episodes from epics or the legend of temples 
(Paraśurāma-Jamadagni 49–50, vālivadha 100–103). Some other paint-
ings were gathered on the basis of iconographic features: three deities 
in yoga postures (Yogīśvara, Yoganārāyaṇa, Yoganarasiṃha 17–19); 
three figures possessing animal characteristics: snake body (Sarpa-ṛṣi), 
tiger body (Puruṣamṛga) and horned body (Ṛṣyaśṛṅga) (67–69). In 
contrast, some themes appear scattered throughout the volume, such 
as Kṛṣṇa’s exploits (vastrāpaharaṇa 105, govardhanagiridhara 109, 
kāliyamardana 111, slaying of different asuras 130–133), etc. At times, 
the succession of the paintings does not correspond to the chronology 
of events of a story (Tārā mourns in front of her dead husband Vāli in 
101, while Rāma is depicted aiming at Vāli to kill him in 102). This 
could indicate that the originally conceived order was disrupted even 
before the numbering and explanations of the paintings were written, 
when the quires were bound into a volume. 
The pictorial treatment 
The pictorial treatment of the 137 paintings appears to be specific to 
the artistic culture of the Indian painter and does not show any European 
influence. The rather thick colours of the paintings can be described as 
gouaches.23 All the subjects are painted within a double frame border of 
red and yellow. The painting sometimes extends beyond this frame, for 
example, 33 (the dhoti of Mahiśāsura), 36 (the tail of the serpent Śeṣa 
and the lotus below the feet of Viṣṇu), 93–97 (tails of monkey kings), 
132 (hand and feet of Bakāsura). The frame sometimes seems to have 
been painted after the subject (104, 106). Very often, a bracketed arch or 
one with multiple lobes, from which small garlands of flowers hang, is 
placed in the upper part of the frame. The figures are sometimes seated
23	 The technical, aesthetic and stylistic analysis of the paintings is beyond 
the scope of this article.

=== PAGE 10 ===
34
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
on a moulded pedestal which evokes a temple statue (for example, 42), 
and sometimes on a sort of moulded dais (23, 58, 71, etc.). 
Despite the diversity of subjects, the paintings show unity of style, 
notably through the use of a true aesthetic vocabulary. The paintings resort 
to many models and motifs (recumbent Viṣṇu, dress, textile designs, jew-
ellery) in a recurrent manner. The background colours are often plain, 
sometimes interspersed with flowers of various colours. Flowery decora-
tions and other motifs are profusely used both for the backgrounds and for 
the clothing of the figures. The painter also used gold and silver colours, 
especially for the jewellery of the figures, which have oxidised over time. 
What dominates are two-dimensional flat surfaces (à-plat), without 
perspective in the Western sense of the term. However, the painter plays 
with darker and lighter strokes to render the modelling of anthropo­
morphic and animal bodies. The faces of the characters are often depict-
ed from the front. Temple icons are represented from the front, which 
corresponds to the vision of these icons by the devotee in the sanctuary 
and, one must add, to the gaze that the icon-divinities are supposed 
to direct on the devotees (Colas 2018a: 163, 163 n. 90). The body of 
the deity is often painted from frontal view even when the head is repre-
sented in profile. This device is often used to indicate or draw attention 
to the physical particularity of the personage, notably the head of a mon-
key (28, 93–94, 96, etc.), elephant (44), or horse (11) on human bodies. 
Faces in profile also appear in narrative paintings where the action of 
a personage is directed towards another (for example, 92). Depictions 
of figures in lost profile are rare (39). In procession scenes, the icon 
being carried is depicted in front while the chariot or palanquin and 
the actors (bearers, chariot drivers, horses), in motion, are in profile 
(86–87, 142). Thus, the frontal representation of the deity takes pre-
cedence over the orientation of his vehicle (125) and his entourage. 
Times, spaces and their symbiosis
The deities depicted in static mode are generally in their normative 
representation, identifiable by their attributes, mounts, etc. For example, 

=== PAGE 11 ===
35
Text and Paintings…
Śiva with drum and fire in his hands and Gaṅgā in his matted hair 
(20), Viṣṇu with conch and disc (18), Kumārasvāmin on peacock (66), 
and others. The paintings of temple icons are in static mode (Veṅkaṭe­
śvara at Tirupati and Varadarāja at Kāñcipuram, 22 and 34). Hills 
(e.g., Aruṇā­cala at Tiruvannamalai, 62), rivers and islands (e.g., Kāverī 
at Sri­rangam, 124), tanks (e.g., Mahabalipuram, 126) and trees (tama-
rind tree at Alvartiruna­gari, 75) connected with the temples are some-
times depicted along with the deities in static mode. Narrative paint-
ings, on the other hand, recount one episode of a story, for instance, 
Śiva preventing ­Kannappa from gouging out his own eyes to offer 
them to god (26). Different moments of the same episode are some-
times evoked simultaneously in the same painting to narrate the story. 
For example, asuras who come to kill Kṛṣṇa are shown both in their 
non-offensive disguises and in their real forms once slain by Kṛṣṇa 
(the ogress [bhūtaki] in her disguise of a beautiful woman [Pūtanā] 
and in her true form of demoness when sucked to death by child 
Kṛṣṇa, 130 [Fig. 3–4]; 131–133, etc.); Bali is shown in a single paint-
ing before he grants three steps of ground to Vāmana and after he is 
pushed down into the netherworld by the third step on his head by 
Vāmana, now turned into Trivikrama (113). A story is also narrated 
in successive paintings, each reporting the ensuing event (Paraśurāma 
killing his mother Reṇukā and getting blessings from his father 
Jamadagni [49–50], Rāma slaying Vālin and restoring the kingdom 
to Sugrīva [100–103]).
The pictorial management of spaces, various times and space-
times in the paintings is ingenious. Temple icons are indicated by 
the presence of cult utensils (e.g., 52), priests (63) or devotees (27), 
which suggest depth or spatial distance (e.g., 53, icon of reclining Viṣṇu 
with his right hand on the head of a devotee; 121, two birds flying and 
a devotee kneeling in front of the liṅga). Another mode of presentation 
of space is created in the paintings by a division into frames or niches, 
which allows several specific spaces to be shown simultaneously. For 
example, in the painting of the temple of Kāśīviśvanātha (128), no less 
than eight panels can be distinguished, some consisting of rectangular 

=== PAGE 12 ===
36
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
frames, others of niches or chapels (see Fig. 5).24 A single painting may 
evoke several spaces and times with the help of a division into several 
panels simultaneously. For example, the painting of Mahābali­puram 
(136) depicts, through four separate frames, icons of an existing temple
and a mythical temple (?), and a scene from mythological time relating
to the site.
The commentator 
Without the commentary, the paintings of Indien 745 are for non-­Indians 
pure objects lacking the semantic truth that they have for Indians. The 
commentarial act aims to fill this void. The commentator gives no indi-
cation of the circumstances of the production or acquisition of the paint-
ings. He makes no value judgement either to appreciate the beauty of 
the paintings or to denigrate them or the figures represented in them. 
Nor does he discuss the vital importance which representations of dei-
ties have for Indian devotees. Apparently, these paintings for him were 
neither pieces of art nor a source of inspiration of religious feelings, but 
rather visual documents illustrating Indian pantheon and mythology. 
The commentator apparently belongs to a period in which the so-
called classical standardisation of French language was not yet widespread.25 
His spelling is noteworthy and, moreover, irregular.26 Articles are often 
not separated from nouns, apostrophes are often dropped, etc. If the 
commentator was a Jesuit, he was perhaps a lay brother not as educated 
24	 Depicting the river Ganges, a set of five small liṅgas, a large liṅga in a cella, 
a bull kneeling in profile on a green background, the temple pole, Viṣṇu’s two feet in 
profile, a deity seated in lotus posture, again the river Ganges.
25	 It should be remembered that the ‘classical’ grammatical and linguistic stan-
dardisation that gave rise to written French in the 18th century was not generalised, it 
seems, until around 1690–1695 and was not practised by everyone. On this period, see 
Brunot 1939: 143–149, 153. 
26	 He uses, for example, j instead of g (davantaje); z instead of s (choze); 
y instead of i (velocyté). See also fraicherre for fraîcheur; çauoire for savoir; hieux 
for yeux; bienfezante for bienfaisante; frequent absence of apostrophes; etc. See also 
gentils / jentils; changé / il set chanjé; muzeau / muzau; etc.

=== PAGE 13 ===
37
Text and Paintings…
as the fathers.27 He transliterates the Indian terms phonetically, particularly 
with the help of three diacritical marks, the tilde, the acute accent and a dot 
above o, though he does not apply them methodically (Fig. 1). 
The commentator’s text and his preamble
The  commentator’s  text consists of three elements: the  preamble 
(folio [B]), the names of the deities above and below each painting, and 
the explanations (explication) (preceded by the number of the ­painting 
concerned) on the verso of the intervening folios, facing the paint-
ings. The explanation sometimes refers directly to the painting28 which 
proves that the commentator wrote his explanations after the paintings 
had been executed.
The preamble (Fig. 2) to the reader announces that the author’s main 
project in this book is to “declare the  names of the  deities which 
the Gentiles worship, with some small thing [that is, the explanation] 
at the end.”29 A (full) explanation, he says, would be impossible because 
it would shock (morally perhaps) the reader’s “hearing” (l ouie, that 
is, understanding). So, he makes a simple description from what his 
informants, Brahmins and Gentiles, tell him. He counters possible criti-
cism of the incompleteness of his descriptions by referring to the mul-
tiplicity of views of his informants: according to him some of them are 
Pythagoreans (alluding to the belief in transmigration), others priapists 
(alluding to the worship of Śiva in the form of liṅga). They live without 
believing in One Being (un Estre), that is, a supreme god. The author 
then attributes certain characteristics to the Gentiles: they are cunning, 
malicious, calculating (fourbes, fins, aritmaticiens); they are voracious, 
greedy, etc. This (harsh) judgement signifies that he lived in contact 
27	 For Jesuit lay brothers, see Bailey 1999: 46.
28	 For example: ce que / vous voyez sur Les deux Mains deLa figure (e22); 
comme vous / voyé dans La figure (e25); Elles firent ceque vous voyé (e105); jusquá La 
figure que vous / voy couchee (e136); Comme vous le voyé En la figure (e142), etc.
29	 Declarer Les noms des Diuinites que Les gentils / adorent, Et quelque petite 
choze au bout.

=== PAGE 14 ===
38
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
with Indians.30 He reports that temple icons are made of gold, stone and 
wood and decorated with precious stones and pearls. He then returns, 
without going into details, to the Gentiles’ belief in the transmigration 
of the soul to the bodies of various animals, to their priapism—which 
explains their lust and why they take several wives—and to their love 
of gold and silver. Finally, he states that he is “leaving some space” 
(at the end of the preamble and, perhaps, after the explanation of each 
painting) for others to write further comments.31
The preamble refers to Brahmins and Gentiles without attributing 
any religion to them. In the explanations of the paintings, those who 
revere the deities are invariably referred to as jentils or gentils. The 
author refers to Muslims in a curious context: the aim of Kalki, one of 
Kṛṣṇa’s  avatāras, is said to be the  destruction of Mohammed-
ans (e11). The author does not compare the beliefs of Gentiles with 
those of Christians.
The names in the margins
The names of the painted figures are written in the upper and ­lower 
­margins, often the French name at the top and the Indian name at the 
bottom (112 has no names). Sometimes Indian names are written in 
the margins near the figures when there are two or more (for example, 
26, 100–104, 113). Exceptionally, numbers are placed on the figures 
within the painting and the corresponding names written in the margins 
(31, Fig. 6). It is not certain that the painter was aware that inscrip-
tions would be added in the margins. Thus, some names could not be 
inscribed in the lower margin for lack of space (51); some are written 
within the painting (5); and some are written around an element protrud-
ing into the margin (37). 
30	 See the description of Indien 745 in the Catalogus of 1739: “by an anony-
mous, eye-witness of all these things while residing in India.”
31	 JeDemeure En cet androit court, s il y á / quelqun quy En puisse dire d’­auan-
taje, jeLuy lay [cancelled] / Laise Du Blan pour pouuoir sexpliquer -.

=== PAGE 15 ===
39
Text and Paintings…
The naming of deities is based on the elements the commentator 
gathers from his informants as well as his own understanding. The effort 
to find a French name for the figures in the paintings seems to have 
diminished as the project progressed. Thus, French designations become 
less common and less elaborate from painting 50 onwards. Names are 
then only transcribed, from time to time, with the mention of the char-
acter’s family connection (72: Brahmā, son of Viṣṇu; 73: Sarasvatī, 
wife of Brahmā).
The transcription of Indian names seems to have passed through 
two cultural and linguistic filters: that of the Indian informants and 
that of the commentator. The designation by the Indian informants 
is conditioned by the languages they spoke and their pronunciation. 
The commentator probably resided in a region where Tamil and Telugu 
were spoken, perhaps by bilinguals. Several transcriptions of names 
end in -en, which corresponds to the nominative -an in Tamil (e.g., 
Ramen, Lachemen for Rāman [Tam.], Laṭcumaṇan [Tam.]). However, 
the name Ranganaiquellou (36) has the ending -lu which is a Telugu 
honorific form of masculine names of Sanskrit origin (see also the tran-
scription of the name of Nammālvār ending in -ou, 75). The other filter 
is that of the commentator.32 His transcription is conditioned by his 
hearing, his phonetic understanding of the names and his own tran-
scriptional codes. They include three diacritical marks: the acute accent 
(e.g., Parserámá for Skt. Paraśurāma), the tilde on y (e.g., Quallequỹ 
for Skt. Kalki) and on u (e.g., Varounoũ. deũ. for Skt. Varuṇadeva; 
Codendoũ for Skt. Kodaṇḍa) and the dot on o (Gȯȯ.Verdená for Skt. 
Govardhana) (Fig. 1). The transcription, however, is not always homo-
geneous. Thus, the  name Rāma (Skt.) is transcribed as -rámá (7), 
Ramon (8), Ramen (e 91), and that of Kṛṣṇa (Skt.), as Quichená (10), 
or Quichenen (111).
32	 A study of the transcription of Indian terms into French in the 17th–18th cen-
turies (notably in South Indian illustrated manuscripts like Indien 745), a fascinating 
project, is beyond the scope of the present contribution.

=== PAGE 16 ===
40
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
The French names of the deities are not established according 
to a homogeneous system either. Often, the French name of the dei-
ty corresponds to a moral trait. Thus, Paraśurāma (7) is named “The 
god judge of the will” (Le Dieu Juge dela volonté); Devendra (12), 
“The god of vigilance” (Le Dieu de la Vigilance); Dharmarāja (14), 
“The charitable god” (Le Dieu Charitable); Hanumat (28), “The god 
of cunning” (Le Dieu dela finesse); Īśvara (32), “The beneficent god 
Iprum” (LeDieu Iprum Bienfezant); dancing Kṛṣṇa (35), “The carefree 
bantering god” (LeDieu Badin sans soucy); Piṭāri-Kāli (48), “indecent 
goddess” (Deesse impudique). An iconographic feature may also be 
the origin of the name: thus Yogīśvara-Śiva (17) is called “The cres-
cent” (Le Croisan) because in the painting, his hair is adorned with 
a crescent moon. Sometimes the deity is said to be that of a section 
of Indian society. Baladeva (9) is named “the god of the ­ploughmen” 
(Le Dieu des Laboureurs), probably because he carries a  plough; 
Rājagopāla (37) is the “god of beggars” (Dieu Des Mandians) because 
of the arrangement of his hair similar to matted hair. The designation of 
the deity also sometimes relates to his role in the natural world: Nairṛti 
(15) is “the god of rain” (Le Dieu Dela Pluie); Varuṇa (16) is “the god
who presides over the waters” (LeDieu quy Prezide sur Les Eaux).
The French interpretation sometimes seems to be wrong: the designa-
tion of Rāma (8) as “The god present in the future” (Le Dieu present
a la venir) could refer to Kalki (the future incarnation of Viṣṇu).
The deity depicted is sometimes given the name of a deity from 
the Greco-Latin pantheon: thus Indra (12), portrayed with a body cov-
ered with eyes, is named Argus whom Greek mythology describes as 
possessing a hundred eyes; Garuḍa (29 and e139) is said to be Mercury 
because both are winged. 
The explanations
In his explanations, the commentator makes known the pantheon and 
mythology not only concerning famous deities, but also relating to tem-
ples depicted in the book. He never uses terms such as idols, idolatry

=== PAGE 17 ===
41
Text and Paintings…
 and idolaters. Although the preamble mentions priapism as a principle 
of the Gentiles, the commentator does not mention it in his explanations, 
despite the presence of liṅgas in quite a few paintings. The explanations 
are occasionally erroneous or of unknown origin. Perhaps the commen-
tator sometimes relied on informants who were not very knowledgeable. 
He also drew his explanations from his own culture (for example, ref-
erence to Greco-Latin pantheon) and imagination to explain the paint-
ings. Sometimes he gives an allegorical explanation of a particular deity 
or of an aspect of its representation. The explanations often replicate 
the French names written in the margins of the paintings. 
The explanations identify the characters in the paintings and often 
refer to the role they played in epics and mythology, but do not mention 
any text or literary source. The commentator appears to follow a tra-
dition that it was Kṛṣṇa, not Viṣṇu, who incarnated in ten avatāras,33 
as Kṛṣṇa himself does not appear in this series of avatāras. Kalki is 
said to be Kṛṣṇa with a horse’s head (e11). On the other hand, some of 
Kṛṣṇa’s feats are attributed to Viṣṇu: the slayer of Kāliya is Viṣṇu (e80), 
the flute-playing god is said to be Veṇugopāla-Viṣṇu (e51). 
Sometimes the legend reported by the commentator corresponds 
to a particular temple represented in the painting, for example, those 
of Virincipuram (e30), Srirangam (e36), Tiruvallur (e53), or Pudupet 
(e24). The commentator also mentions local traditions associated with 
famous temples. For instance, he recounts that at the Tirupati temple 
(e22), pilgrims have their beards shaved and receive the Vaiṣṇava brand-
ing.34 He also explains traditions relating to local deities like Pōlēramma 
(and the ceremonies around her) (e23), Piṭāri-Kāli (who is said to be 
worshipped by the Parias) ([= e48]). 
The explanations of some paintings are anomalous. Thus, while 
Govardhanagiri is the name of the mountain raised by Kṛṣṇa to protect 
cows and cowherds, the commentator explains that Viṣṇu “is named 
33	 Although Viṣṇu is said to have taken the avatāra of Buddha in e77.
34	 This refers to the practice of taptacakra, common among the followers of 
the Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra school.

=== PAGE 18 ===
42
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
Govardhanagiri, the saviour of oxen and cows, etc.” (Lon / Lapelle Gȯȯ.
Verdená Guiry sauueur des / Beufs. Et vaches &a) (e109). The explana-
tions of two paintings (10 and 77) (as well as their subjects) are spe-
cially interesting. Painting 10 is found between those of Balarāma and 
Kalki in the series of ten avatāras and identified in the lower margin as 
Buddha-Krṣṇa-Kalki avatāra (Baoudá-Quichená-Quallequỹ-outarom-). 
The commentary on this painting is intriguing: “The figure of Buddha, 
which means to say or to signify the divinity which destroys human 
beings [reference to Kalki?]. Gentiles give him several kinds of names. 
He is rather feared and they offer him more sacrifices [than to other 
deities].”35 The figure in this painting, wearing many ornaments and 
the Vaiṣṇava sectarian mark (ūrdhvapuṇḍra) on his forehead, is richly 
dressed. It cannot be Buddha, unless it is Kṛṣṇa prior to his incarnation 
as Buddha. Nor can it be Kalki who is depicted horse-faced in the fol-
lowing painting (11) and rightly identified as Kalki by the commentator. 
The figure in painting 77 is clad only in a loincloth, without orna-
ments but wearing a sectarial mark36 different from the two well-known 
Vaiṣṇava (ūrdhvapuṇḍra) and Śaiva (tripuṇḍra) marks. The explanation 
(e77) states: “Viṣṇu-Buddha-avatāra means fully naked. One has put 
on him a cloth which should not be there.”37 The meaning “fully naked”38 
could refer to the word digambara (lit. space-clothed) which is the 
designation of Jaina masters (tīrthaṅkaras) who are unclad. It may be re­- 
called that both Buddha and Jina Ṛṣabha (the first of the 24 tīrthaṅkaras) 
35	 La figure De Baoudá, quy veut dire ou signifier / La Divinite quy Detruit Les 
humains, Les jentils Le / noment deplusieurs sortes denoms jl Est bien aprehendé / Et 
jls Luy sacriffie plus quaux autres diuinites.
36	 This is perhaps a Smārta mark. It is also seen on the bodies of certain devotees 
of Śiva as well as Viṣṇu (in paintings 17–18, 136), of gods [Vāmana (6), Brahmā (72)] 
and of sages [Jamadagni (50), Sarpa-ṛṣi (67)]. 
37	 Vichenou Baouda Outarom veut / dire Tout nu Lon Luy amis vnne draperie / 
quy ne deuvoit pas y Estre.
38	 Buddha is translated as ‘naked’ also in another illustrated BnF manuscript 
(Estampes, Od 39 pet. fol.) which narrates (in Tamil and French) the story entitled 
“Metamorphose ou Incarnation deVichenou Endieu Baouta / autrement dit, nud.” 

=== PAGE 19 ===
43
Text and Paintings…
are included in the list of twenty-two avatāras of Viṣṇu.39 Perhaps here 
the  commentator has failed to distinguish between Buddha and 
Jina. But Buddha is not usually associated with nudity, although he 
is exceptionally depicted in iconography dressed in a loincloth.40 Or 
perhaps the commentator was recording here a tradition that conflates 
Buddha and Jina.
Some explanations are intriguing and their origin is difficult to 
locate. They may be minor traditions, purely oral or local, or imagined by 
the informant or the commentator himself. The story that Viṣṇu imposed 
on Hanumat (who is a monkey in the Rāmāyaṇa) the face of a monkey 
and a tail because he had not faithfully kept Viṣṇu’s secret (e28) could be 
an invention of the commentator or his informant. The explanation that 
Garuḍa (e29) was given a hooked beak and snakes to remind him that 
he had spoken too much, seems to be another invention. In fact, Garuḍa, 
Viṣṇu’s mount, is a rapacious bird, a natural enemy of snakes with whom 
he is often depicted. The commentary explains that Tumburu was given 
a horse’s head because he was a mocker (e40), whereas, according to 
Indian mythology, this celestial musician asked Śiva for a horse’s head, 
immortality and mastery of the musical art. Bhṛṅgi (e25) is, according 
to the Purāṇas, a devotee of Śiva who received a third leg from him to 
support his weakened body. But the commentator reports that “they 
say” (jls dise) that Bhṛṅgi, having stolen the extra leg from a sleeping 
companion, danced before Viṣṇu. The expression (of the commentary 
on Śaṅkara-Nārāyaṇa, e47) that it depicts a male and a female deity in 
a single body, could be a scribal error because it also rightly points out 
that it is contrary to the previous painting in which male and female are 
in a single body (e46, Ardhanārīśvara). 
39	 See Jaini 1977; Saindon 2003, 2004. 
40	 See Jaini 2016. We thank Professor Mudagamuwe Maithrimurthi for draw-
ing our attention to this article. A sculpture in the Vidyāśaṅkara temple at Śṛṅgeri 
(14th century?) depicts an avatāra of Viṣṇu in a naked human form. We thank ­Professor 
Catherine Clémentin-Ojha for this information.

=== PAGE 20 ===
44
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
The  interpretation (by the informants or the commentator) of 
Indian mythology and the role of certain deities in it sometimes seems 
strange. Thus, the purpose of Kṛṣṇa’s avatāra as Kalki is to destroy 
Mohammedans (Pour Detruire Les Mahometans, e11). Kṛṣṇa shouts to 
the gopīs “to make him salām” (quichena allors Leur Crya deLuy faire 
salam, e105). The Gentiles say that Yoganarasiṃha enters their bodies 
and torments them to death and takes away their children (e19). Kṛṣṇa 
spared the life of the snake Kāliya after being entreated by his wives 
“because he loved women” (Car jl aymoit Les femmes, e111). Pārvatī 
sent her son Gaṇeśa to stand on all roads to see if he could find a girl 
as beautiful as her (e44).41
The painting of certain deities is explained from an allegorical 
point of view. Thus, in the painting of the four-armed Matsyāvatāra, 
the  conch and the  disc, the  attributes carried respectively by two 
hands, are said to be the symbols of coolness and warmth; the other 
two hands making the gestures of granting boon (varada) and assuring 
protection (abhaya) are said to “show that he is looking at everything” 
(jl montre quil Regarde tout, e2). The dancing Naṭarāja of Chidambaram 
temple represents “lightness” (La Legerreté, e20). The fire that Kāla­
bhairava has on his head “indicates his anger” (Marque Sá colerre, 
e45) while the peacock that Kumārasvāmin rides “denotes vain glory” 
(Denote La vaine Gloire, e66) and Puruṣamṛga is half tiger “to be in any 
place he wants to go” (pour Estre Entout Endroit ou jl veut aller, e68).
The  commentary reiterates some Greco-Latin identifications 
made in the margins of the paintings. Indra is identified with Argus 
Panoptes (e12). The commentator says that he believes that the snake 
Kāliya whom Kṛṣṇa defeats is the giant snake Typhon (e80). Explain-
ing the painting of dancing Kṛṣṇa, the commentator says that the gods, 
jealous of the splendour of Kṛṣṇa’s city (Dvārakā), asked Neptune 
the Roman god of the seas to destroy it (e35). The temple icon of 
41	 This may be an interpretation of the frequent presence of Gaṇeśa’s icons on 
roadsides in ancient times, a practice still prevalent in contemporary India. 

=== PAGE 21 ===
45
Text and Paintings…
Subrahmaṇya, represented as a five-headed snake, is said to be Aescu-
lapius (the Roman god who carries a staff on which a snake is entwined) 
of the Gentiles (e79).
Other explanations involve the notions of Devil and devils. Thus, 
Viṣṇu takes the avatāra of the tortoise to “drive out the Devil’s malig-
nancy against men” (chasser Les malignyté / Du Diable contre les 
hommes, e3). Asuras and rakṣasas, painted with fangs, are identified as 
devils who enter the bodies of animals (elephant in the case of Gajāsura, 
e106) or change into animals (bull, e133) or take human bodies (Pūtanā, 
e130). The monster Bakāsura, slain by Kṛṣṇa, is said to be a form of 
the Devil (e132). But not all monsters are identified as devils (see, for 
example, e2, e32, e33, e89, e91, e92, e115, e120). Occasionally, French 
Christian terminology is applied to a divine aspect: Yoganārāyaṇa, seat-
ed in a lotus position on the mountain and resplendent with jewels, is 
described as Viṣṇu “in glory” (Engloire, e18). In imitation of the Chris-
tian patron saints, some deities are described as protectors of certain 
human groups. Thus Varuṇa “holds in his hand the destiny of the navi-
gators” (tient En Main La destinee des Nauigateurs, e16). 
The commentary at times presents moralising allegorical expla-
nations of the deities depicted in the paintings. Gods and goddesses 
are neither denigrated nor mocked. Some, who represent virtues, are 
good, others, who represent vices, are evil. The goddess Kāmākṣī “rep-
resents Charity” (e21). Agni is “the god of fire, who signifies lubric-
ity” (quy signifie La Lubricité, e13). Piṭāri-Kāli (e [48]) is referred to 
as “goddess of indecency” (deEsse de Limpudicite), which explains 
why she is always naked “because of her heat.”42 Kumārasvāmin is 
“the god of pride” (Dieu De la suberbé, e66). Pōlēramma is “wor-
shipped by the Gentiles because of her malignancy” (e23); this last term 
(malignyté), which is to be taken in a strongly negative sense, may be 
compared to the Christian designation of the Devil as “The Evil One.” 
Śanīśvara, the retributive god, is identified as “the deity who presides 
42	 Elle Est Toujours a Decouuer a cause desa / Chaleur.

=== PAGE 22 ===
46
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
over avarice and takes from everyone what he can” (e114). Narasiṃha 
is a “carni­vorous god without mercy” (e120).
Conclusion
Thus, Indien 745 is not a mere collection of paintings, but a book of 
information made by anonymous people: an Indian painter, Indian 
informants, a French commentator. It contains 137 static and narra-
tive paintings representing deities, mythological figures or scenes, and 
temples. These paintings, executed according to iconographic norms 
(attributes, physical characteristics, mounts, colours, etc.), are easily 
recognisable by Indians. They are without obvious European influence, 
although the constraints of the medium forced the painter to adapt his 
pictorial act. The format of the sheets, determined by the folding into 
quires, the texture and thickness of the French paper surely influenced 
the execution in a way and to a degree that cannot be precisely mea-
sured today. The painter plays with the constraints of the book format, 
through the intrusion of the figure into the margins, or the depiction of 
successive scenes within a single painting, for example. He also divides 
the painted surface into multiple frames that describe different moments, 
places and viewpoints at the same time. 
The commentator intends to present as much information as pos-
sible about the contents of the paintings. He seems to depend on local 
informants for classical, local and oral traditions. The origin of certain 
explanations is sometimes difficult to locate. The commentary, as well 
as the paintings, records variants or beliefs parallel to better-known 
traditions. That the commentator was a direct eye-witness of the Indian 
scene, proved by his preamble, adds to the value of his testimony in 
the opinion of his contemporaries. No wonder this aspect was high-
lighted in the description of the manuscript in the Catalogus of 1739.43
43	 For the importance of eyewitness accounts in the 17th–18th century Europe 
and the reaction to it, see Forberg 2014: 110 ff, 139.

=== PAGE 23 ===
47
Text and Paintings…
Unlike some publications of the 17th or early 18th century that ridi-
culed Indian deities or referred to them as monstrous,44 the commentator 
does not seek to present a caricatured idea of them. He explains them 
without an a priori aimed at a sensationalist effect, or even disinfor-
mation. No aesthetic assessment is used to discredit Indian customs 
and pantheon. The commentator focuses on the function and nature of 
the deities, although he sometimes expresses his moral opinion. His 
explanations reflect, if not empathy, at least an attempt to define the Indi-
an pantheon as objectively as possible on the basis of paintings. It is 
probably a working document open to further addition of information. 
In the  absence of any information about the  commentator, 
the intended audience, or how the book first came to France and then to 
the Royal Library in Paris, it is difficult to conjecture what the purpose 
of the book was. Was it initially intended for Indians themselves (local 
lords, pilgrims), for clerics and/or missionaries, for learned scholars or 
for an educated and curious public, as gifts for European patrons, or 
was it an artefact prized by collectors? 
The interesting hypotheses that paintings like those found in Indien 
745 may have served as iconographic models for craftsmen, or that they 
were intended for the pleasure of local kinglets or for sale to pilgrims 
at popular temples,45 require further evidence. It is hard to imagine that 
such paintings, bound and accompanied by French (or English) explana-
tions, were not commissioned by Europeans. 
The fact that a manuscript from the Jesuit milieu (Od 38 pet. fol.) 
contains direct or indirect copies of paintings of Indien 745 shows that 
Jesuit missionaries used this manuscript (or its model) for documentary 
and educational purposes. The space left by the commentator for pos-
sible additions by other persons suggests that this volume was an instru-
ment of collective reflection. Such persons could not have been scholars 
living in France but were probably fellow missionaries. It is known 
that Jesuits worked anonymously and collectively on their intellectual 
44	 On this subject, see Mitter 1992: 1–72.
45	 See Jakimowicz-Shah 1988: 18; Hurel 2011: 137.

=== PAGE 24 ===
48
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
works, to produce dictionaries and grammars for example, in India as 
in New France.46 
Once Indien 745 entered the Royal Library (and was described 
in the catalogue published in 1739), it was no longer used exclusively 
by missionaries. It is not known how many scholars, such as Dupuis at 
the end of the 18th century, consulted this particular manuscript or this 
kind of manuscript. Indien 745’s explanations, despite their pedagogi-
cal intent, probably did not receive the attention they deserved, perhaps 
because of the absence of an intellectual point of view, the succinctness 
of its information and the poor quality of its writing. They did not attract 
the due attention of the 20th-century scholars either.47 
Did not the freshness and absolute novelty of the images for 
the European eye, on the other hand, make this book fall into the realm 
of the exotic? The purchase of collections of South Indian paintings 
by the Bibliothèque royale / nationale, from the second half of the 18th 
century onwards testifies to the growing interest of collectors48 in texts 
they could not read49 and images they could not understand. 
For the Indian artist, the paintings of Indien 745 were complete 
in themselves without the addition of captions or further explanation. 
For French readers, the paintings combine ideally with the names and 
explanations to construct a representation of the beliefs and pantheon of 
the Gentiles. But the text, dependent on informants, on the fragmented 
46	 Colas 2011: 42–43; Colas 2018b: 46–48.
47	 Blochet (1900: 180–186) mentions the content of the paintings and the pre-
amble, but not the existence of explanations.
48	 The BnF (Département des Estampes) acquired collections of South Indian 
paintings in the 18th century from collectors such as Charles-Adrien Picard, the Count 
of Lally-Tollendal, the Count of Modave, or booksellers, see Hurel 2011. Modern cata-
logues seem to consider manuscripts consisting of paintings and texts mainly as paint-
ings and not as textual documents per se because they do not discuss the text-image 
relation, linguistic implications, often crop titles and commentaries from reproductions, 
etc. (e.g. Jakimowicz-Shah 1988, Dallapiccola 2010, Hurel 2011).
49	 See the disillusioned reflections in 1727 of Étienne Le Gac of the Carnate 
mission on the quest by the Royal Library for Indian manuscripts which, according to 
him, nobody could read in Paris, Colas 1997: 350 n. 7.

=== PAGE 25 ===
49
Text and Paintings…
comprehension of the commentator and on the exegetical link that 
he tries to establish with the paintings, is partial. Its connection with 
the images is therefore fragile. 
Finally, for French readers, what were the modalities of the back-
and-forth between the paintings and the explanations in Indien 745? 
The page containing the painting already forms in itself a unique visu-
al and intellectual whole consisting of three elements: the painting, 
the Indian name and an element of identity in French. This tripartition 
gives the viewer an immediate first understanding of the image: visual, 
nominative and semantic. To this first semiotic access the commentator 
adds a second for greater depth: the explanation, that is, a complemen-
tary analysis that concerns specific iconographic, cultural and social 
aspects relating to the figures. The author tries to create a coherent 
documentation in which the painting serves as an anchor for the inter-
pretation. But the explanation, filling the painting with further informa-
tion, shifts the painted page into a new perspective, that of exegetical 
distance, less immediate, more reflective: the semiological and even 
ontological destiny of the painting, its relationship with the explana-
tions, is henceforth determined by a milieu other than that of its creation, 
making Indien 745 an exceptional document.
References
Manuscripts
Bibliothèque nationale de France, Département des manuscrits:
Indien 745, https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b10538070m (24.11.2022).
Bibliothèque nationale de France, Département des Estampes:
Réserve Ye 1 pet. fol. (title on the back “ESTAMPES, Archives, 1750–1779”). 

=== PAGE 26 ===
50
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
Od 38 pet.fol. 
Od 40 pet. fol.
Library of the University of Warsaw:
Inw. zb. d. 21944/1–105.
Secondary sources
Bailey, G. A. 1999. Art on the Jesuit Missions in Asia and Latin America 
(1542–1773). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Becherini, M. 2017. Staging the Foreign: Niccolò Manucci (1638–ca. 1720) 
and Early Modern European Collections of Indian Paintings. Ph.D. Thesis. 
[New York]: Columbia University.
Blochet, E. 1900. Inventaire et description des miniatures des manuscrits orien-
taux conservés à la Bibliothèque nationale. Paris: Librairie Émile Bouillon. 
Brunot, F. 1939. Histoire de la langue française des origines à 1900, Tome IV: 
La langue classique (1660–1715), Première partie (Troisième édition). 
Paris: Armand Colin, 3rd edition.
Cabaton, A. 1912. Catalogue sommaire des manuscrits indiens, indo-chinois 
& malayo-polynésiens. Paris: Ernest Leroux. 
Catalogus Codicum Manuscriptorum Bibliothecae Regiae, Tomus ­Primus. 1739. 
Paris: Imprimerie royale. Codices indici: 434–448.
Chatelain, J.-M. 1992. Lire pour croire: mise en texte de l’emblème et art de 
méditer au XVIIe siècle. In: Bibliothèque de l’École des chartes, 150(2): 
321–351. https://doi.org/10.3406/bec.1992.450655.
Colas, G. 1997. Les manuscrits envoyés de l’Inde par les jésuites français entre 
1729 et 1735. In: F. Déroche and F. Richard (eds). Scribes et manuscrits 
du Moyen-Orient. Paris: Bibliothèque nationale de France: 345–362.
—. 2011. La contribution des jésuites du Carnate à la grammaire et à la lexi-
cographie du télougou. In: P.-S. Filliozat, J-P. Mahé and J. Leclant (eds). 
L’œuvre scientifique des missionnaires en Asie. Paris: Académie des Ins-
criptions et Belles-Lettres: 30–56.
—. 2018a. Contested Emotionality, Religious Icons in Ancient India. In: 
B. Schuler (ed.). Historicizing Emotions: Practices and Objects in India,

=== PAGE 27 ===
51
Text and Paintings…
China, and Japan. Leiden–Boston: Brill: 146–192. https://doi.org/10.1163/ 
9789004352964_008.
—. 2018b. Ippolito Desideri’s Tamil Papers, ARSI Manuscript Goa 76b. In: 
Buddhist-Christian Studies, 38: 42–60. https://doi.org/10.1353/bcs.2018.0004.
Colas, G. and U. Colas-Chauhan. 1995. Manuscrits telugu. Catalogue ­raisonné. 
Paris: Bibliothèque nationale de France.
Dallapiccola, A. L. 2010. South Indian Paintings: A Catalogue of the ­British Muse-
um Collection. London–Ahmedabad: British Museum/Mappin Publishing.
Dupuis, [Ch.-F.]. 1794–1795. Origine de tous les cultes ou Religion universelle, 
Deuxième partie du tome troisième. Paris: Agasse, An III de la République, 
Une et Indivisible [= sept. 1794-sept. 1795].
Guy, J. 2011. A Ruler and His Courtesans Celebrate Vasantotsava: Courtly and 
Divine Love in a Nayaka Kalamkari. In: N. N. Haidar and M. Sardar (eds). 
Sultans of the South: Arts of India’s Deccan Courts, 1323–1687. New York: 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art: 162–175.
Hurel, R. 2010. Miniatures & peintures indiennes: Collection du départe-
ment des Estampes et de la Photographie de la Bibliothèque nationale 
de France, Vol. I. Paris: Bibliothèque nationale de France.
—. 2011. Miniatures & peintures indiennes: Collection du département des 
Estampes et de la Photographie de la Bibliothèque nationale de France, 
Vol. II. Paris: Bibliothèque nationale de France.
Jakimowicz-Shah, M. 1988. Metamorphoses of Indian Gods. Calcutta: Seagull 
Books. 
Jaini, P. S. 1977. Jina Ṛṣabha as an Avatāra of Viṣṇu. In: Bulletin of the School 
of Oriental and African Studies, 40(2): 321–337. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0041977X00044074.
—. 2016. A Note on the Buddha Image as the Ninth Avatāra of Viṣṇu. In: 
Annual Report of the International Institute for Advanced Buddhology 
(ARIRIAB) at Soka University for the Academic Year 2015, 19: 3–6.
Mitter, P. 1992. Much Maligned Monsters: A History of European Reactions to 
Indian Art. Chicago–London: The University of Chicago Press (1st ed. 1977).
Muthuraj, J. G. 1986. A Bibliography of Christian Writings in Tamil in the 
Libraries of U. K. and Europe. Madurai: Tamil Theological Book Club.

=== PAGE 28 ===
52
Gérard Colas, Usha Colas-Chauhan, Francis Richard
Richard, F. 1989. Ephrem de Nevers et Zénon de Baugé, premiers auteurs 
­français d’ouvrages catholiques en tamoul. In: Moyen Orient & Océan 
Indien / Middle East & Indian Ocean, XVIe–XIXe s., 6: 151–163.
—. 1995. Les missions catholiques. In: Ph. Le Tréguilly and M. Morazé (eds). 
L’Inde et la France, deux siècles d’histoire commune, XVIIe–XVIIIe 
siècles: histoire, sources, bibliographie. Paris: CNRS-Editions: 65–73, 
213–217. 
Saindon, M. 2003. Le Buddha comme neuvième avatāra du dieu hindou 
Viṣṇu. In: Studies in Religion / Sciences Religieuses, 32(3): 299–309. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/000842980303200304.
—. 2004. Le Buddha comme avatāra de Viṣṇu et le mythe de Raji. In: Indo- 
Iranian Journal, 47(1): 17–44. https://doi.org/10.1163/15728536-04701004.
Sivaramamurti, C. 1994. South Indian Paintings. Delhi: National Museum 
(reprint of the 1968 edition).

=== PAGE 29 ===
53
Fig. 1. Diacritical marks and accents on transliterated names of deities
painting 15
painting 07
painting 10
painting 109e
painting 109

=== PAGE 30 ===
54
Fig. 2. Preamble, fol. 1r

=== PAGE 31 ===
Fig. 3. e 130, The bhūtaki Pūtanā
55

=== PAGE 32 ===
Fig. 4. 130, The bhūtaki Pūtanā
56

=== PAGE 33 ===
Fig. 5. 128, temple of Kāśīviśvanātha
57

=== PAGE 34 ===
Fig. 6. 31, Verdachelom (?) temple
58

