# SOURCE FILE: S-212_AppaRao_EmbodyingVedas_ch3.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\loop_A18\documents\S-212_AppaRao_EmbodyingVedas_ch3.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_3_colophons (3. ธรรมเนียมคัดลอก จารึกท้ายคัมภีร์ Colophons และนักคัดลอก)
# PAGES: 66 | TOTAL CHARS: 199411

=== PAGE 1 ===
3  The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
Having sketched the broad socio-historical and cultural contexts in which these 
schools have found their places in contemporary Maharashtra, I  now turn to the 
specifics. In this chapter, I  begin by presenting the official policy of the Indian 
government regarding religious schools, along with the impact these policies have on 
the transmission of the Veda. I then move to the sponsors and support organizations 
of these schools, thereby addressing the economic factors that dictate their operation. 
I will then present a typology of the schools I visited during my fieldwork, as a heuristic 
tool to analyze different discourses and practices around the ideal of the brāhmaṇa, 
as articulated and embodied by the members of these schools. 
3.1  Governmental Regulations
Understanding the modern development of Vedic schools and their current patronage 
systems requires some observations on the Indian government’s official policy on 
education.104 Under Article 21-A of the Indian Constitution, there exists a provision 
of “free and compulsory education to all children up to the age of fourteen years.”105 
The Right to Education Act (or RTE), which implements revised rules to both public 
and private schools, was signed on August 4, 2009, and came into effect on April 1, 
2010. It was intended to be valid for all schools and for all children of India. The 
former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said, on the day the act was implemented: 
“We are committed to ensuring that all children, irrespective of gender and social 
category, have access to education; an education that enables them to acquire the 
skills, knowledge, values and attitudes necessary to become responsible and active 
citizens of India.”106 The act lays down norms relating to student-teacher ratios, 
management, buildings and infrastructure, school working days and working 
hours, and teacher qualifications. However, these norms do not take into account 
traditional calendars or traditional subjects and methods that are vital to schools 
such as the Vedic pāṭhaśālās.107 For these reasons, religious and minority groups, as 
well as supporters of their schools, criticized the act. Controversy was also raised by 
104 Part of this and the following section are similar to those appearing in an article published in 2016 
in the proceedings of the 5th International Vedic Workshop entitled: “Trends of Standardization and 
Institutionalization in the Transmission of the Vedas: Examples from Contemporary Maharashtra.”
105 http://www.education.nic.in/natpol.asp#pol accessed on June 29, 2011.
106 http://www.pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=60001 accessed on February 8, 2012.
107 Additionally, it is important to mention that the Maharashtrian Hindu calendar follows the 
southern, amānta system with months ending in the no-moon day (amāvāsyā), rather than the northern, 
pūrṇimānta system, in which months end with the full-moon (pūrṇimā). Also, this system dates years 
according to the southern, Śaka era rather than the northern, Vikram era. (Feldhaus 2003: 183)

=== PAGE 2 ===

Governmental Regulations 
 65
the fact that the act stipulates a compulsory reservation of 25% for disadvantaged 
children in private schools.108 The implementation of the act created some anger 
and confusion with regards to its application across the country, particularly among 
the minority groups and NGOs who perceived themselves to be threatened by the 
new law.
A functionary of a prominent Vedic School in Kerala told the Times of India, upon 
the implementation of the RTE act: “Only children who are genuinely interested in 
learning through the Vedic system join our school. Many of the Vedic Schools are 
still loosely modeled on the gurukul system. Our pedagogy is different and also 
emphasizes an oral teaching. It will be difficult for us to give reservation the way 
RTE states [i.e. student-teacher ratios, etc.] or even have [a] school management 
committee. Most of our students are from poor background[s]. Moreover, since only a 
few hundred Vedic Schools are left in the country, exemption won’t have an adverse 
impact on mainstream education.”109
After negotiations with representatives of the Muslim minorities (such as from 
the Madrasa Board and the All India Muslim Personal Law Board), and pressure 
from a delegation from Congress leaders,110 madrasas were the first to be granted an 
exception from the act, and the Human Resource Development Ministry (HRD) issued 
a guideline in this regard, stating that such institutions are protected under Article 
29 and 30 of the Constitution, which guarantee the rights of minorities to establish 
and administer educational institutions. Subsequently, representatives of the Vedic 
schools also submitted a petition to the HRD Minister, Kapil Sibal, requesting 
exemption from the RTE and rejecting the letter they had received from the Maharṣi 
Sāṃdīpani Rāṣṭrīya Veda Vidyā Pratiṣṭhān asking them to comply with the act.111 
Religious institutions such as the Kāñci Kāmakoṭi Pīṭham, the Ahobila Maṭh, the 
Andayan Āśram, and the Ārya Samāj supported the representatives of the petition 
with their signatures. A few days later, the exception for Vedic schools was granted 
and the official guideline was amended under Section 35(1) of the RTE.
108 According to the RTE: a “[…] ‘child belonging to disadvantaged group’ means a child belonging 
to the Scheduled Caste, the Scheduled Tribe, the socially and educationally backward class or such 
other group having disadvantage owing to social, cultural, economical, geographical, linguistic, 
gender or such other factor, as may be specified by the appropriate Government, by notification”. 
(The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009. Published in The Gazette of India 
Extraordinary. New Delhi, August 21, 2009 p.2.)
109 http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2010-08-31/india/28291237_1_rte-act-vedic-
education-schools accessed on August 7, 2011. Square-braquets in the quote added by the author.
110 http://www.indianexpress.com/news/Keep-madrasas-out-of-RTE--Digvijaya-tells-PM/887071/ 
accessed on March 1, 2012.
111 The Maharṣi Sāṃdīpani Rāṣṭrīya Veda Vidyā Pratiṣṭhān is a branch from the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, Department of Education. For more on this institution, see subchapter 3.2.

=== PAGE 3 ===
66 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
Applicability of RTE to Minority Institutions – Institutions, including Madrasa and Vedic 
Pathshalas especially serving religious and linguistic minorities are protected under Article 
29 and 30 of the Constitution. The RTE Act does not come in the way of continuance of such 
institutions, or the rights of children in such institutions and schools of minority organizations 
covered within the meaning of section 2(n) of the Act, will be governed by the provisions of the 
RTE Act, 2009.112
Since the time of Indian Independence in 1947, the Indian government has been 
concerned with rescuing the cultural heritage of the country from extinction and, to this 
end, among other activities, it created the Sanskrit Commission in 1956 “to consider the 
question of the present state of Sanskrit Education in all its aspects”.113 The commission, 
although not focused on the oral transmission of the Veda, produced through its report a 
sketch of traditional schools of Sanskrit learning, including Vedic pāṭhaśālās. The picture 
portrayed by the report was one of a dilapidated tradition on the verge of extinction.
It is highly regrettable that, on the whole, there are, about many of these institutions, no signs 
of a living or growing organism but only symptoms of a decaying constitution. This unfortunate 
state of affairs has not escaped the attention of educationists, persons interested in Sanskrit, and 
the Governments.114
After portraying the situation of traditional and modern learning of Sanskrit and their 
allied subjects, the commission recommended a series of steps to be implemented by 
the Indian government in order to safeguard and revitalize Sanskrit learning. Among 
other specific points for the Sanskrit language, the commission recommended that: 
[...] special attention should be paid to the preservation of the Oral Tradition of the different 
Vedas and their recensions as current in different parts of India, this Oral Tradition being useful 
even from the point of view of linguistic and literary research; that provision should be made 
available in temples and religious institutions for the recitation of the Vedas, and that, where 
such provision already exists, it should be continued; that the surplus of temple funds which 
might be available, should be utilized for the maintenance of schools for the teaching of the 
Kantha-patha [oral115] of the Vedas; that, in those parts of India where the Oral Tradition of the 
Veda has died out, authorities of educational and religious Institutions should take steps to 
revive it; that the Research Institutes working in the field of the Veda should, wherever possible, 
utilize the services of the Pandits who have preserved the Oral Tradition of the Vedas; [and] 
should be helped by the Governments to rehabilitate themselves [...].116 
Even after the recommendations of the 1956 report and the government of India’s 
investment of considerable resources to create supervisory agencies, inaugurate new 
112 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=68827 accessed on August 8, 2012.
113 http://www.education.nic.in/cd50years/u/45/3Z/453Z0101.htm accessed on June 29, 2011.
114 Ibid.
115 kāṇṭhapāṭha literally means “throat recitation/learning” Monier-Williams 2011. 
116 http://www.education.nic.in/cd50years/u/45/3Z/453Z0C01.htm accessed on June 29, 2011.

=== PAGE 4 ===

Governmental Regulations 
 67
centers of Sanskrit learning, revive old centers, and finance publications, cultural events, 
and radio (and more recently, television) broadcasts for nation-wide consumption 
(all centered around the promotion of the language), only minimal improvements on 
traditional Sanskrit education with a focus on oral instruction and the memorization of 
texts have taken place. Moreover, traditional Vedic recitation was practically ignored by 
these programs, which aimed at promoting the Sanskrit language in general, and not 
specifically the preservation of the Vedas in their oral form.
UNESCO’s declaration in 2003 that Vedic recitation is an “intangible heritage 
of humanity” brought it to the spotlight of public attention. India’s Department of 
Culture and the Ministry of Tourism and Culture, aided by the Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for Arts (IGNCA) in New Delhi, took the initiative to submit Vedic chanting to 
the UNESCO as a candidate for global recognition. The Ministry of Culture claimed 
that it implemented IGNCA’s five year action plan to safeguard, protect, promote, and 
disseminate the Vedic oral tradition, encouraging various scholars and practitioners 
to revitalize their own branches (śākhā).117 Nonetheless, according to Nānājī Kāḷe and 
B. Pataskar, who were involved in the creation of the plan, 118 the aid did not reach all 
the recipients mentioned in the document — this including Kāḷe’s schools, which are 
among the custodians of rare branches of the Veda. 
Even after UNESCO’s declaration and the efforts of the Indian government through 
the Department of Culture’s plan, many schools across the country remained without 
financial aid or any other official recognition. As will be discussed below, important 
changes in the traditional transmission of knowledge have notably appeared, 
following India’s independence. These changes were brought about not only through 
the government’s direct intervention and regulation, but also through the lack of the 
same. Nanda (2009: 120-134) is one of the scholars who has convincingly shown the 
government’s direct and indirect support of religious institutions, including schools 
and trusts for the training of priests. She concludes that, in contemporary India, 
[…] the actual practice of secularism in India seems to be replicating the pre-modern, pre-Mughal 
Hindu model of the state-temple relationship. Elected ministers and bureaucrats see themselves 
in the mould of Hindu kings of yesteryears who considered it their duty to protect dharma. 
The temple priests and gurus, in turn, think nothing of treating elected officials as VIPs, if not 
literally as gods. The seamless partnership of faith and politics continues under the thin veneer 
of secularism (Nanda 2009: 139).
She has, nonetheless, not distinguished between traditional vedapāṭhaśālās and 
other types of schools with a religious curriculum and a different political agenda, 
117 Report of the Working Group on Art and Culture for XI Five-Year Plan and Proposals for XI Five-Year 
Plan (2007-12) & Annual Plan (2007-08) Ministry of Culture, Government of India. New Dehli, 2007. 
118 Personal communication, 6.9.2009.

=== PAGE 5 ===
68 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
such as the Dayanand Anglo-Vedic Schools (also known as DAVs)119 and others, 
which may have different aims, but in particular different curriculums than the 
vedapāṭhaśālās studied in this work.
3.2  “Money Matters”: The Economy of Vedic Schools
In most of the studies on the current Vedic tradition, the crucial factors of politics and 
economy are left out. A few recent exceptions who consider these important factors 
are, e.g., Lubin (2001a, 2001b), F. Smith (2000), Fuller (1979, 2001), and Knipe 
(2015). 
These two factors, and particularly the economic one, are of a decisive importance 
to the vedapāṭhaśālās. Not only is the existence of these schools completely dependent 
on financial resources but, in my opinion, the economic factors have a larger influence 
on the Vedic traditions than scholars have so far considered.
Whether a school can operate or not depends on whether its sponsors can provide a 
minimum subsistence for its members. This includes food, clothing, accommodation, 
medical facilities, and books and materials for students and teachers, as well as the 
salaries for the employees. The sponsors dictate, to a certain extent, not only the 
size and population of the school, and the infrastructure and facilities, but also the 
curriculum, the religious affiliation, the social and religious events, and the way the 
members of the school present themselves in society. The sponsors of these schools 
and the teachers have to come to terms with the way the school is managed, and agree 
on the needs and expectations of each side. Compromise on both sides is the unspoken 
rule. The attachment to institutions is obviously always linked to other aspects beyond 
just the financial one; as we have seen in previous chapters, hereditary, regional, and 
religious motives may influence the ties to a particular group or organization. 
It is not uncommon to see these traditional schools emerge and disappear in the 
course of only a couple of years. In fact, most of the schools I visited during my fieldwork 
are only 30 to 40 years old, although a very small number of others were founded a century 
or so ago, when the British promotion of secular education was weakening traditions 
of instruction that had previously been largely preserved within brāhmaṇa families. Of 
course, as we saw in subchapter 2.1, this does not mean that the formal transmission 
of Vedic knowledge is new in Maharashtra, but rather that the sponsoring system has 
undergone tremendous change, having moved away from family lines of transmission, 
these supported directly or indirectly by royal patronage, to mostly private institutional 
forms sponsored by India’s economical elite and the Hindu diaspora.
119 For more on the DAVs and their role within the colonial project, see, for example: Kumar 1990 
and Langohr 2001.

=== PAGE 6 ===

“Money Matters”: The Economy of Vedic Schools 
 69
Now, official governmental support comes through the Maharṣi Sāṃdīpani 
Rāṣṭrīya Veda Vidyā Pratiṣṭhān (MSRVVP), a branch of the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development in the Department of Education that was established in 
January 1987 as an autonomous organization and as a follow-up to the 1956 report of 
the Sanskrit Commission. The headquarters of this organization are now in Ujjain,120 
Madhya Pradesh where they moved in 1993. The organization’s official objectives are 
stated as follows on their website:121
(i) To preserve, conserve and develop the oral tradition of Vedic studies, for which the Pratishthan 
will undertake various activities such as, support traditional Vedic institutions and scholars, 
provide fellowships/scholarship, undertake production of audio/video tapes, etc.;
(ii) To foster the tradition of intonation and recitation through the human agency;
(iii) To encourage and ensure involvement of dedicated students in higher research in the field;
(iv) To provide for research facilities to students with the background of Vedic knowledge and to 
equip them with sufficient scientific and analytical outlook, so that modern scientific thought 
contained in the Vedas, particularly disciplines of mathematics, astronomy, meteorology, 
chemistry, hydraulics, etc. could be linked with modern science and technology and a rapport 
established between them and modern scholars;
(v) To establish, take over, manage or supervise Vedic pathashalas/research centres all over the 
country. Maintain or run them for any of the objects of the society;
(vi) To revive and administer such of the endowments and trusts as are defunct, or not properly 
run;
(vii) To give special attention to Shakhas which are extinct and for which human repositories can 
be identified, and to prepare a detailed list of pandits related to these Shakhas;
(viii) To ascertain the present status of oral traditions relating to the Vedas, particularly 
intonation and recitation peculiar to various regions, institutions and mathas in the country.122
The objectives and activities of the MSRVVP have been expanded in the past two or 
three years.123 Noteworthy is point (iv), which illustrates the trend observed by Nanda 
of mixing pseudo-science with religion in favor of a nationalist agenda (Nanda, 2003). 
120 Hindus consider Ujjain one of the seven sacred cities (saptapurī) and it is also the place where 
Lord Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma got their education from the sage, Sāṃdīpani.
121 http://msrvvp.nic.in/about.htm accessed on August 8, 2010.
122 As downloaded from http://msrvvp.nic.in/AnnualReport.pdf on 20.1.2012.
123 The aims of the MSRVVP have been articulated in different ways through the official channels 
of the organization, mainly through their website and annual reports. As of March 2012, the website 
(http://msrvvp.nic.in/about.htm) still shows a shorter list of objectives than the annual report quoted 
above. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
70 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
However, despite all of these objectives and the work of over 28 years, the MSRVVP 
has still not reached many vaidikas of Maharashtra. Although many vaidikas are 
aware of the MSRVVP, a good number of them are not willing to directly collaborate 
with it. In fact, this institution had so far given official financial support to only two 
out of the twenty-five schools that I visited during my fieldwork in 2009.124 The great 
majority of those schools get financial support from sources other than the Indian 
government. Moreover, according to the interviews and questionnaires filled in by my 
interlocutors in the schools I visited, even within those schools that do get financial 
support from official channels, the provided funding is far from sufficient to cover all 
of the respective school’s expenses.
One of the reasons for this, as provided by my aforementioned sources, is that the 
aid program for traditional Vedic schools is run according to a curricular supervision-
scheme developed by the MSRVVP. The curriculum of the MSRVVP program focuses 
mainly on the memorization of the saṃhitā of any of the available śākhās, and it 
consists of a program lasting six years. After four years, the student obtains the title of 
vedabhūṣaṇa and, after six, he is called vedavibhūṣaṇa.125 This curricular supervision 
by the MSRVVP does not suit the taste of many of the teachers and principals of the 
Vedic schools I visited, and they prefer to keep their pedagogic and organizational 
freedom rather than to become financially dependent on and vulnerable to scrutiny 
from a governmental organization. Additionally, they generally place little trust in the 
government, particularly when it comes to money. Some are afraid that, if financial 
aid is made available to them, it will not be provided with the needed regularity. 
Therefore, some schools look for financial support from non-governmental sources, 
including some of the institutions regarded as “prestigious” or “trustworthy” — such 
as the organizations of the Śaṅkarācāryas, local brāhmaṇa organizations (sabhās), 
private sponsors, other Hindu leaders, or a local temple trust. A minority of small 
(family) schools,126 with only one guru and a handful of students, prefer to bear the 
124 According to the report, 2009-2010 of the MSRVVP, the organization currently supports four 
schools in Maharashtra: “1. Ved Bhavan of M. Ghaisas (Pune), 2. Veda Vedang Sanskrit College, Kailas 
Math (Nashik) 3. Sachchidanand Veda Swadhayay Pratishthan (Takli) 4. Shri Sant Gyaneshwar Veda 
Vidya Pratishthan (Aurangabad)”. Additionally, it grants aid to several teachers and students in 
Maharashtra on an individual basis under the “Preservation of Oral Tradition of Vedic Recitation” 
scheme. I visited the first two schools during my fieldwork in 2009 and 2011; see Appendix 1.
125 Both titles mean “he, whose ornament is the Veda” or “that by which the Veda is adorned”, 
the second implying a higher rank. Both titles come from the verbal root ‘bhūṣ’ which, according to 
Monier-Williams (2011) means “to strive after, use efforts for, be intent upon”, as well as to “adorn, 
embellish, attire”, and with the intensifying prefix vi, it acquires the meaning: “to be brilliant, 
appear”. It implies that the person has orally mastered the Veda and is a brilliant reciter. Despite the 
few Sanskrit classes in their curriculum, the students who have obtained these titles are not expected 
to know the meaning of the texts they recite, but to reproduce the sounds in the accurate way (and 
neither are they required otherwise in the schools not sponsored by the MSRVVP. See subchapter 3.2.)
126 See more in subchapter 3.4.

=== PAGE 8 ===

“Money Matters”: The Economy of Vedic Schools 
 71
main expenses themselves (through the money obtained by providing priestly services 
and through private donations), and thereby maintain their financial independence 
from any official ties.127 
Despite all the efforts from the Indian government and the significant sums 
of money set aside for financial aid,128 sponsorship of Vedic schools has largely 
remained non-governmental. I do not know the exact figures of revenues from private 
donations and other income sources, but according to the interviews conducted with 
teachers and the management of these schools, federal aid (if they receive such help 
at all) is but a fraction of the income needed to support these schools. The result is 
that most of the sponsorship for these Vedic schools does not come from the Indian 
government, but from private donations. In addition to regular donations, monetary 
prizes, awards, and recognitions are regularly distributed to learned brāhmaṇas 
by diverse religious and educational organizations all over the country, which also 
contribute to the support of traditional Vedic schools.
The social environment has changed so much for the brāhmaṇa community in the 
last two centuries that, currently, very few brāhmaṇa families have among their family 
members an expert in Vedic recitation and rituals according to their hereditary śākhā. 
Very few parents can train their sons in Vedic recitation at home, even for the most 
basic of rituals (such as saṃdhyāvandana), having themselves lost the traditional 
knowledge which was expected of every brāhmaṇa some centuries ago. Even fewer are 
those who are willing to send their children to Vedic schools for priestly training. Even 
traditional brāhmaṇa families typically view secular schooling, completed up to at 
least tenth grade, as the minimum requirement for a successful life. The main reason 
for this is that Vedic students of today allegedly face very different opportunities for 
future employment than in the past — particularly since the creation of the Mandal 
commission in 1979 and the so-called reservation system that aims at diminishing 
discrimination on the basis of caste by securing seats in government and education 
127 This may change with the BJP and Narendra Modi as Primer Minister, in power since 2014. 
Modi has had a great acceptance among the brāhmaṇa communities in Maharashtra, and is seen 
as an ally who will not only “push towards economic growth and development”, but who will turn 
India into a “great Hindu nation”, as one of the graduates from a Vedic school studied here recently 
posted on Facebook. Narendra Modi’s announcement introducing a new Ministry of Yoga in 2014, 
being successful in passing a resolution in September 2014 (with a record number of 175 country co-
sponsors) for the observance of an International Day of Yoga was also much welcomed by several 
members of the Vedic schools presented in this work. The impact of the new Indian government on 
the preservation of Vedic recitation cannot be taken into consideration here, but it is worth noting that 
there is the possibility that increased economic and institutional support from the Indian government 
will begin to flow into these schools. 
128 According to the annual report, for the period 2009-2010, the MSRVVP granted 44,36,925 Rs to 
four Vedic schools of Maharashtra and 46,30,800 Rs to teacher-student(s) units under the scheme of 
“Preservation of Oral Tradition of Vedic Recitation”. Source: http://msrvvp.nic.in/GrantReleased.pdf 
accessed on January 20, 2012.

=== PAGE 9 ===
72 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
for the the socially or educationally backward, i.e. Other Backward Classes (OBC) 
and Scheduled Castes and Tribes. The implementation of the Mandal commission 
received strong opposition from upper-castes, and particularly brāhmaṇas, who 
estimated the allocation of quotas to be a form of racial discrimination, and contrary 
to the democratic principles of equality. In fact, brāhmaṇas have turned the issue 
around and have recently demanded that reservations be made for them on economic 
grounds. Anil Gachke of the Akhil Bharatiya Brahmin Mahasangh said that: “[S]ince 
2008, we have been seeking reservations on economic grounds and not on the basis 
of caste. Those who are not well-off financially must get quotas in education and 
jobs”.129
While the development of the secular (laukika) brāhmaṇa is not new, as we 
have seen in previous chapters, most brāhmaṇa males today typically spend most 
of their time engaged in active careers unrelated to traditional occupations. If their 
rural home communities cannot provide them with stable income from either family 
wealth or temple patrons, they must train to enter one of the many secular career 
options. Brāhmaṇas who wish to keep their traditional role as teachers of Sanskrit 
and allied subjects also have to undergo an official certification that will enable them 
to teach at government-sponsored institutions. The standardization of education in 
modern India that evolved from Western models of governance has clearly led to a 
severing of the traditional link between Vedic recitation, ritual, and Sanskrit study. 
In addition to this factor, state governments now exert pressure on all their citizens 
in urbanized areas to meet standards of secular education, which largely conflict with 
those of brāhmaṇa tradition. States in the south, but also in Maharashtra, are highly 
contentious about promoting English as a prerequisite for government jobs, and also 
as the required language of instruction for university study. Many brāhmaṇa families 
who I met were not willing to send their children to vedapāṭhaśālās, as they consider 
the associated opportunities for their children in a modern society to be of very little 
practical use in making a living. In fact, a website in favor of the revival of Vedic 
recitation states that some of the common “excuses” of brāhmaṇas now are that the 
traditional Veda study “is suitable for those who are not bright and who cannot pursue 
normal career[s;] namely it is for those failed in secular schools, the poor and the 
destitute.”130 Other reasons not to send one’s son to a Vedic school include the disparity 
of having a son educated traditionally and a daughter being ‘highly’ educated in the 
modern system. Some families lamented that a son educated traditionally would have 
trouble finding a bride, not to mention finding a way to financially sustain his family. 
One teacher confessed that his mother had been looking for “a suitable bride” for 
him to marry for several years. He said that it was very difficult for young men like 
129 http://www.dnaindia.com/mumbai/report-brahmins-too-demand-for-reservations-in-
maharashtra-2004800 accessed on August 17, 2014.
130 http://samhita.in/resistance.html accessed on August 7, 2010.

=== PAGE 10 ===

“Money Matters”: The Economy of Vedic Schools 
 73
him to find a girl who would be willing to “lead a traditional and austere life [...] girls 
nowadays want to lead modern lifestyles and have a rich husband, and have little 
interest for a vaidik life.”131
It is indeed mainly brāhmaṇa boys from low-income families who are sent to the 
vedapāṭhaśālās, in hopes of securing free education for them and thereby freeing the 
parents from the burden of having another mouth to feed. The pressure of securing 
a job as a priest as soon as they can perform the basic house rituals is generally 
significant, particularly among the most disadvantaged brāhmaṇa families.132 Indeed, 
richer brāhmaṇa families usually seek an English education for their offspring, in 
order that they be able to secure a well-paid job in the government, the booming IT 
industry, or the field of business administration. They hope their children will become 
engineers, doctors, MBAs, or IT specialists, and if possible, they hope to send their 
children abroad.133
Brāhmaṇa women’s roles have also shifted as men now mostly engage in pursuits 
unrelated to brāhmaṇa traditions. Currently, upper caste families expect that a girl 
should be college-educated, contrary to what had been generally expected of them 
prior to India’s independence, when women were expected to stay at home. While 
attitudes towards women working outside the domestic environment have begun to 
change, orthodox families are still inclined towards having women remain at home 
after marriage. One argument in favor of this, I heard from a female friend in Pune, 
is that, since the father is working all day, “the education of the children depends on 
the mother and the other women in the house.”134 The mother’s education, therefore, 
is crucial to guide the children, and will also ensure that children “get good marks in 
school.”135 Both the arguments are related, and it seems that one of the prime reasons 
for educating girls is not only to better their chances in the marriage market, but also 
to ensure that children in the family learn moral/religious values from them. 
Elder mothers, grandmothers, and in some cases widows attend weekly sessions 
of recitation, devotional singing, and commentary by a learned brāhmaṇa. At these 
sessions, women typically outnumber the few and mostly retired men. Technically, 
such practices draw on Purāṇic rather than on Vedic sources, yet sons raised in such 
homes do note that the women’s ritual enthusiasm has fuelled their own interests 
in Vedic study. While they are still barred from studying the Veda within traditional 
families, women are clearly welcomed and often even featured in the musical 
131 Anonymous interview, 4.3.2009.
132 Other scholars report the same situation in other parts of India; for example, Fuller and 
Narasimhan found that, in Tamil Nadu, “[m]any domestic priests, like temple priests, are poor” (2014: 
187-88). 
133 Cf. Fuller and Narasimhan (2008; 2014) for an example from Tamil Nadu.
134 Anonymous interview, 12.3.2009.
135 Idem.

=== PAGE 11 ===
74 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
recitation and study of Sanskrit epic and poetic literature.136 In the universities, many 
women pursue advanced degrees in Sanskrit literature and, amongst other things, 
traditional medicine. Several middle class brāhmaṇa families I met included women 
trained in such disciplines who had thus taken on the role of preserving Sanskrit 
culture, while their supposedly brāhmaṇa husbands had little time for anything but 
their profitable careers. While sons may be inspired by such maternal dedication to 
tradition, they are unlikely to find in their mothers and aunts any direct modelling of 
traditional male ritual roles.
A small number of students from rich families will be able to become teachers to 
their own and to their relatives’ and neighbours’ sons. These are the lucky few who 
need not worry about the secular influences of their work environments, since their 
family resources are explicitly dedicated to the preservation of the Vedic tradition. 
Other students whose families have connections with local temples, āśrams, or other 
religious organizations will become temple priests. 
One ex-student I know, who completed his basic studies from one of the Vedic 
schools, and who currently works in Pune in a sub-branch of a marketing firm 
established in California, has adopted Western clothes, dark glasses, and has cut off 
his sacred tuft (śikhā), leaving little room to identify him as a vaidika brāhmaṇa at 
first sight, except for perhaps his gold earrings (which he still wears). He is proud to 
have a job in an international company and have exposure to the latest technological 
developments. He likes Hollywood movies, and his all-time favorite movie is James 
Cameron’s Titanic. Due to the different time zones between the U.S.A. and India, 
and his highly-demanding job, he has to often work night shifts, leaving him little 
energy and time to do his daily worship (saṃdhyāvandana) and his daily recitation of 
the Veda (svādhyāya). Nevertheless, he is currently studying Sanskrit with a private 
tutor because he is planning to take an entry exam for the Benares Hindu University 
and continue his ‘traditional’ education. His long-term goal is to work as a religious 
teacher in the Indian Army, as a ‘Junior Commissioned Officer’ (JCO), or in one of the 
Hindu temples abroad. He often inquired about the demand for brāhmaṇa priests in 
Hindu temples in Germany, and whether I had contacts to whom I could introduce 
him for this kind of job. 
But most students of the vedapāṭhaśālās do not have the certainty of obtaining a 
secure job after they have completed their studies. Very few will try to get a university 
diploma in Sanskrit or allied studies from a prestigious university. The modern 
pressures exerted by the secular oversight of Sanskrit study is strong since the majority 
of Sanskrit teaching jobs are to be found at government-sponsored institutions, which 
include both large universities and small government centers. These students must 
adhere to the curricular standards of such secular institutions. To begin with, the 
completion of high school, and most particularly the study of English, is essential 
136 They have even ventured into taboo arenas such as priesthood. See footnote 96 above.

=== PAGE 12 ===

New Patrons of the Veda  
 75
if they wish to obtain employment teaching at the secondary or university level in 
government schools. Additionally, these universities often require that the aspirants 
cover a very different curriculum from what they have studied in their own Vedic 
school. Some students will even try to gain acceptance to an MBA program or a similar 
career track in order to make a living. 
Daily study at traditional Vedic schools is accompanied by Veda recitation and is 
framed by worship of the sun (sūryanamaskāra) at dawn and dusk (saṃdhyāvandana) 
with ritual offerings before meals. There is no place for such practices at government-
sponsored schools or at jobs outside of the Vedic epistemic community. Students in 
such settings are under no obligation to maintain the traditional Vedic rituals and 
ways of life. Indeed, the presence of women and lower-castes among traditional 
brāhmaṇas in their classrooms or workplaces demands that such traditional ways 
must be observed privately (if they can be observed at all). These radical changes in 
their daily lives, from being a Veda student to a house-holder in a modern society, 
challenge their traditional lifestyles and identities as custodians of the Veda.
3.3  New Patrons of the Veda 
The Śaṅkarācāryas and their organizations, mainly those of Sringeri and Kanchipuram 
maṭhas, have in the last few decades directed much of their efforts and resources to 
propagate, protect, and restore the Vedic tradition (including through the recitation 
of Vedic texts).137 These religious leaders have been credited, perhaps in something 
of a hyperbolic fabrication: “as the most Brahmanical of all Brahmans, they are also 
vital figures in constructing, perpetuating and defending Brahmanical Sanskritic 
Hinduism in south India” (Fuller and Narasimhan 2014: 200). These include, among 
other activities, organizing Vedic meetings (sammelanas which are occasionally 
also called “assemblies” sabhās), giving regular scholarships and pensions, and 
granting awards and recognition in public ceremonies to learned brāhmaṇas from 
around India. The Śaṅkarācāryas, who have a large following in south India, and 
particularly among the orthodox (mainly smārta) brāhmaṇa communities, possess 
important financial resources (including those coming from the Hindu diaspora) that 
are put at the disposal of Vedic schools. Sringeri is located in the state of Karnataka, 
and Kanchipuram in the neighbouring state of Tamil Nadu. Sringeri’s claim to having 
religious authority over the whole south (as the legitimate representative of the 
137 “Over the last couple of centuries, the activities of the Peetham towards the sustenance and 
propagation of Sanatana Dharma have intensified. The Jagadgurus of the Peetham began touring 
extensively establishing branches of Sri Sharada Peetham, Sringeri in holy towns and important 
locations, and setting up traditional learning schools or Pathashalas.” http://www.sringeri.net/
activities accessed on February 4, 2011.

=== PAGE 13 ===
76 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
“Southern tradition”, dakṣiṇāmnāya) has been challenged by Kanchipuram’s claim 
of being more authoritative than the other four monasteries because, unlike in their 
cases, it was not established by Śaṅkara’s main disciples, but by Śaṅkara himself 
(Clémentin-Ojha 2006). Both institutions also compete in their efforts to preserve 
the Vedas and the Vedic tradition. As an example of this preservation effort, the heads 
of the Sringeri and Kanchipuram maṭhas have made a tradition of celebrating their 
birthdays and other special occasions, such as ādiśaṅkarācārya jayantī (birthday 
of Śaṅkara) or gurupūrṇimā, by holding ritual Veda recitals (vedapārāyaṇa), 
examinations, and competitions across India, and awarding the most outstanding 
scholars in their respective areas of expertise.
The Veda Pośakā Sabhā was established by the 35th Śaṅkarācārya of Sringeri 
(1954–1989) specifically to conduct examinations of Veda recitation.138 According to 
their official website: 
The Peetham’s Veda Poshaka Sabha established 3 decades ago by Jagadguru Sri Abhinava 
Vidyatirtha Mahaswamiji conducts exams in higher Vedic studies. A number of students appear 
for the examinations conducted during the Shankara Jayanti Celebrations. Every year about 20 
highly qualified students in Krama and Ghana are certified by the Sabha and honoured in the 
presence of the Sringeri Jagadgurus.139 
The Kāñci Kāmakoṭi Pīṭham, through the Veda Rakshana Nidhi Trust established 
in 1958, has been running its own vedapāṭhaśālās throughout the country and 
conducting its own examinations twice every year.140 The certificates are handed out 
in a ceremony in the presence of the Śaṅkarācāryas of the Pīṭham (either Jayendra, 
Vijayendra, or both), usually in ādiśaṅkarācārya jayantī (April/May) and on the final 
day of navarātrī on daśaharā, also called vijayadaśamī (the ‘the victorious tenth’ day) 
(September/October). In many events organized by the Pīṭham in Kanchipuram and 
other parts of the country, brāhmaṇas are invited to recite portions from the four 
Vedas, or sometimes learned experts from a particular Veda are invited to perform 
a recital (vedapārāyaṇa) of the whole textual corpus of a particular śākhā.141 These 
brāhmaṇas in turn receive money and traditional tokens of appreciation as a ritual fee 
(dakṣinā), as well as public recognition from the heads of the Pīṭham.142 
138 See subchapter 3.7 for more on these examinations.
139 http://www.sringeri.net/activities/propogation-of-sanatana-dharma accessed on February 4, 
2011.
140 http://vrnt.org/ accessed on February 1, 2011.
141 According to some the Sringeri, maṭha has been traditionally connected with the Yajurveda, 
whereas the Kanchi maṭha is associated with the Ṛgveda.
142 These tokens can vary from time to time, but can include silk shawls, sacred ash (vibhūti lit. ‘great 
power, might, splendor’), kuṃkum (made from saffron or other flower petals) or sindūr (vermilion 
made from cinnabar), a coconut, flowers, betel leaves and nuts (tāmbūla), unbroken rice (akṣata), 
prayer beads (japamālā), gold, and/or sacred books or images. 

=== PAGE 14 ===

Today’s Vedic Schools in Maharashtra: a Typology 
 77
The Veda Rakshana Nidhi Trust lists the following mission statement: 
To strive every nerve to protect and preserve our holy Vedic heritage and pass it on to posterity.
To protect and preserve the age-old tradition of Vedic Adhyayanam (study).
To bring out more and more traditional Vedic Pandits, particularly in those sakhas on the verge 
of extinction.
To ensure that the society gets a steady stream of qualified Gurus to encourage, guide and enable 
Grahastas (house holders) in their Sroutha and Smartha Karma Anushtanam as prescribed.
To inform and educate the general public about the Vedic heritage, tradition and way of life.143
Many of the schools in Maharashtra which I visited have received monetary aid, or at 
least public recognition, from the Śaṅkarācāryas of Sringeri and/or Kanchipuram in 
this way.144 Vedamūrtis from several schools proudly showed me their awards, or they 
have pictures of themselves receiving the awards displayed on the walls of their schools 
and homes. This official support from the Śaṅkarācāryas gives the vedapāṭhaśālās 
and their gurus some kind of legitimation and prestige vis-à-vis the local community, 
from whom the main support and sponsorship of these schools comes from, and, at 
the same time, potentially attracts donors from the whole country, and even from 
among the Hindu diaspora across the globe. 
Of course, not only the Śaṅkarācāryas, but also many of the modern gurus 
discussed in subchapter 2.4 (and there are many more in Maharashtra, to say nothing 
of other states) have sponsoring schemes for Vedic schools. These charismatic leaders 
and the institutions they have fostered have unique ideological, philosophical, and 
spiritual traits, all of which need closer consideration. While the scope of this book 
does not permit me to deal with each of them in detail, I have pointed out here that 
the Vedic oral tradition of Maharashtra is now largely embedded in diverse Neo-
Hindu networks, without which the sponsorship of traditional Vedic schools might 
be unimaginable.
3.4  Today’s Vedic Schools in Maharashtra: a Typology
The Vedic schools in contemporary Maharashtra vary from being small family schools 
in which a father teaches his sons and a couple of students on to larger educational 
enterprises with up to a hundred students. They vary not only in size and infrastructure, 
143 http://vrnt.org/mission.php accessed on February 1, 2011.
144 Although, in general, it seems that the majority of the Vedic schools of Maharashtra have a 
proclivity towards the Sringeri maṭha, and less so to the one in Kanchipuram. 

=== PAGE 15 ===
78 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
but also in curricula. Some schools teach only one Veda, others all four. Some teach 
only up to a certain level, whereas others teach to the highest degree possible.145 
Some schools provide the students with practical sacrificial knowledge and others 
even teach some of the auxiliary sciences of the Vedas (vedāṅga), particularly kalpa 
or ritual actions (also known as karmakāṇḍa) and jyotiṣa (or, traditional astrology), 
which plays a crucial role in planning the proper time for a ritual. 
In this section, I present a typology146 of Vedic schools that crystalized during my 
observations of the Vedic schools. I have kept a brief general description of each of 
the schools in Appendix 1 as reference for the reader. I decided to propose a typology 
of the vedapāṭhaśālās of Maharashtra in consideration of the material obtained on 
the schools. As with all typologies, it implies a simplification of the heterogeneity 
and complexity of the topic for the sake of analysis. Typologies represent systems of 
classification which are created through the grouping of information into categories 
based on some perceived similarity. The three school types presented here are meant 
as heuristic categories, not essential types. 
I chose a triple template as a classification model, as based on the infrastructure 
of the schools. I  correlated the infrastructure (size) of the respective schools with 
other aspects that directly or indirectly affect the “traditional” transmission of 
knowledge. I  have called these: 1) ‘Gurukula’ Type, 2) ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā’147 Type, 
and 3) ‘Vedavidyālaya’ Type. These three Sanskrit terms often figure in the official 
names of Vedic schools, but this alone does not necessarily signify that the 
respective school would fit the same respective category of the school. Most of the 
founders, managers, teachers, and students of these schools consider themselves 
to be “authentic representatives of the gurukula system of education”; they would 
generally not see substantial differences among vedapāṭhaśālās and would definitely 
not seek to differentiate between the categories proposed here. I  have chosen to 
use these Sanskrit terms because of what they usually evoke: gurukula evokes the 
145 The highest degree of recitation is given to those who are able to recite the ghanapāṭha, preceded 
by kramapāṭha and jaṭāpāṭha, which are the most complex permutations (vikṛtis) that are most 
commonly learned in the schools of Maharashtra. The titles received for this level of recitation are 
commonly ghanapāṭhin, kramapāṭhin, and jaṭāpāṭhin, respectively; nonetheless the title/degree 
granted by the VŚS to those having passed the final examinations is vedacūḍāmaṇi, literally meaning 
“crest-jewel of the Veda.” Even with the trends of standardization, the traditional academic titles vary 
greatly across India (Michaels 2001: 3-16). The official titles used by the MSRVVP are vedabhūṣana 
and vedavibhūṣaṇa. For more on these titles and degrees, refer to subchapters 3.2, 3.7.6, and 3.8. 
146 I use the terms “type” and “typology” in the weberian sense of the words as referencing an “ideal 
type”.
147 A word of caution here: I use the term vedapāṭhaśālā to refer to Vedic schools in general accross 
this work, but in this typology, I refer to a particular form of institution and do not intend to imply 
here that all the Vedic schools presented here fit into the specific ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā’ type. See below the 
“Concluding Remarks on the Use of a Typology” p.104. 

=== PAGE 16 ===

Today’s Vedic Schools in Maharashtra: a Typology 
 79
“household of the guru”, the word pāṭhaśālā148 evokes a larger organizational and 
usually more impersonal structure, and finally I have used vidyālaya, which is a term 
often employed in larger educational institutions such as colleges and universities 
in India. In practice, nonetheless, the use of these terms is rather interchangeable, 
and one can encounter large non-residential and secular institutions using the term 
‘Gurukul’ or ‘Rishikul’ who do not explicitly offer an exclusive religious education 
based on the gurukula model or adhere to a strict Brāhmaṇical ideology.149 Modern 
Sanskrit schools focused in the study of the language,150 including those affiliated with 
the Rāṣṭrīya Saṁskṛta Sansthān, are also not to be confused with the vedapāṭhaśālās, 
whose main focus is the training in the recitation of the Veda.
Moreover, the schools fit only very broadly into this template, and each school has 
very unique characteristics and a unique history. The three types presented here are 
meant to be gross categories whose boundaries are quite permeable. In other words, 
the characteristics of one school type may be found in a vedapāṭhaśālā that could 
predominantly be assigned under another of the remaining two classifications. In 
truth, most of the schools present elements of all three classifications. Nonetheless, by 
taking a step back and artificially creating ‘ideal types’, one can better observe certain 
trends in the current state of the Vedic tradition. With this typology, I demonstrate 
how the tradition is being revitalized (or reconstructed) by perpetuating elements 
considered part of the “ancient Vedic tradition”, and also reconfiguring itself by 
consciously or unconsciously adding innovative elements that were originally alien 
to the tradition. I believe that by making this move and considering crucial factors 
that make up the network of these schools, one can predict certain trends in the 
transmission of the Vedas for the immediate future. 
3.4.1  The ‘Gurukula Type’
The first ideal type of school suggested here is the nuclear-family type. I have called 
this model the ‘Gurukula type’ since the Sanskrit term gurukula refers specifically to 
“the house or extended family of a guru.”151 How such a “house” of a guru looked 
in ancient India and how many members of the family or the clan lived in the same 
space is not relevant here, for I take the term to designate the contemporary Vedic 
148 The term gurukul is usually used in the vernacular (Marathi and Hindi) to translate to “school”.
149 All over India, from primary schools up to Engeneering colleges and institutes of Technology 
carry these names.
150 For an overview of traditional Sanskrit learning in contemporary India, see: Michaels 2001: 3-17.
151 Although, the word kula originally meant more than just the physical place: a herd, troop, 
flock, family, community, tribe etc. The composite later came to be understood as the place where 
instruction takes place, e.g. in the term gurukulavāsin or “resident of the house of the guru”, which 
was used for a student. Monier-Williams 2011.

=== PAGE 17 ===
80 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
schools which are maintained mainly through the efforts of an individual (the guru) 
and his close family members (wife and children).
In this model, the guru also teaches his own sons the Veda in the father-son 
tradition (pitāputraparamparā). He might take up a few more students beyond his 
sons, as his own material resources permit. He has no “school” in the Western sense 
of the word. He teaches the Veda to fulfill his own dharma as a brāhmaṇa and he 
ideally does not request money or support from unknown donors or from people 
outside of his community. 
The students live in the house of the teacher and are considered to be his sons, 
whether they are his own offspring or not. The pupils will also consider the wife of the 
guru as their own mother. The wife of the teacher in turn cares for the students as if 
they were her own progeny. The same goes for the daughters of the teacher if they live 
in the house. The students will help in the menial chores of the household and will 
take care of their own belongings. There is little sense of privacy and property since 
it all belongs to the family to some extent. In this model, there are no uniforms, no 
diplomas, and the guru is the only person to supervise the progress and development 
of the students. 
Not only are these types of schools becoming rare, but they are also much more 
difficult to find. They are usually not listed as “schools”, and sometimes they are 
found in very remote areas in which brāhmaṇas are still landowners (in some cases 
in the form of agrahāras), and they are able to live from whatever is produced in their 
land. Very few of these vaidikas are completely self-sufficient,152 but Knipe (1997; 
2015) and others have documented cases where one still finds such vaidikas in Andhra 
Pradesh, Kerala, and Karnataka. In Maharashtra, instruction occasionally takes 
place at the homes of learned men, and this setting is also known as a gṛhapāṭhaśālā 
(home-school). Usually, the students come to these teachers for the study of vikṛti 
permutations or for instruction in a particular subject, such as astrology (jyotiṣa). 
While occasionally a student may live with his teacher, these are often not residential 
schools, and students come only for a few hours every day. 
In my own fieldwork, there were only a few schools that currently come close to 
the ‘Gurukula type’: Vedamūrti Amol Jośī and his school in Beed, Vedamūrti Gopālrao 
Jośī and his school in Trimbak, and Vedamūrti Govindśāstrī and his school in Satara.153 
Even if today these schools are drastically diminishing, a significant number 
of the current teachers I met in my fieldwork studied under this model. Vivekśāstrī 
Goḍboḷe of Satara studied with his father in his own home and had only a single other 
sahādhyāyin (co-student). His own school used to function as a gurukula where he 
152 By ‘self-sufficient’, I mean free of the sponsorship of a second agency. Brāhmaṇas are, of course, 
dependent on the farmers that work on their lands and on the mercantile networks to sell their 
product (mainly paddy and in some cases coconut).
153 See: Appendix 1.

=== PAGE 18 ===

Today’s Vedic Schools in Maharashtra: a Typology 
 81
lived with his students until they obtained donations from Muktabodha Indological 
Research Institute in 1998 and could expand significantly.154 Ghaisas gurujī in Pune 
also learnt the Veda from his father, and his Ved Bhavan has grown slowly into a 
larger institution with more complex relations to its sponsors. Other teachers studied 
the Saṃhitā with their own fathers and then went away for further studies with other 
teachers in different schools. 
Nānājī Kāḷe, who has had his three sons learn the Veda in his āśram, from different 
teachers, would also fit this model since he established his school within his own 
land. The school grew slowly as he used his own resources and the assistance of his 
immediate family. However, due to other characteristics, his school fits better in the 
next template. Nonetheless, his youngest son, Caitanya Kāḷe, developed a very close 
relationship with his Sāmavedic guru and perfectly fits the ‘Gurukula type’ model. In his 
aim to revive all the branches of the Veda and become independent of outside experts 
in order to perform the Vedic rituals, Nānājī Kāḷe decided to have his own sons and 
students trained in all the śākhās available in India today. Since, according to Nānājī 
Kāḷe, there was no one in Maharashtra to teach the Sāmaveda at that time, he had no 
choice but to take Caitanya (along with another student of his āśram) to the Karikan 
Parameśvarī Temple near Honnavar in order to learn the rāṇāyanīya branch of the 
Sāmaveda from Vedamūrti Viśveśvar Bhaṭṭa. After a long trip by train, bus, and foot, 
they reached the home of the teacher, this being located on a hilltop in the dense forest 
of Karnataka, where the above-mentioned temple is located. After being accepted as 
students, the two boys stayed with his guru for ten years, isolated from the rest of the 
world until they mastered the Sāmaveda according to the rāṇāyanīya śākhā. 
The gurukula model as portrayed here is perhaps the most endangered one in 
modern India. The sources of income are limited to the personal earnings of the 
teacher, who needs to make extra efforts to both teach the Veda and earn money for 
his family. In previous times, many learned brāhmaṇas were landowners and could 
live from the profits of their land. Now, many teachers have to work in paurohitya 
(ritual services), astrology, or in any other job which renders the task of teaching the 
Veda with dedication to be more difficult than it is for someone who is fully sponsored 
to be an ācārya (teacher). Besides that, the attractive monthly salaries, the comfort 
of modern facilities, and the public recognition offered by larger sponsors attract 
both young and senior teachers to the second and third types of schools, as discussed 
below. 
154 The Muktabodha Indological Research Institute has several projects to “preserve endangered 
texts from the religious and philosophical traditions of classical India and make them accessible for 
study and scholarship worldwide.” So far, this is the only Vedic school that was sponsored by the 
institute until the Vedic school became an independent organization. The Muktabodha Indological 
Research Institute has announced that there are plans to “turn its attention to preserving other highly 
endangered areas of the Vedic oral tradition.” http://www.muktabodha.org/vedashala.htm accessed 
on August 2, 2012.

=== PAGE 19 ===
82 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
3.4.2  The ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā Type’
The ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā type’ of Vedic school refers to a communal school in which one 
or more teachers live with their students. It seeks to emulate the mythical āśramas 
described in the Purāṇic accounts, particularly those mentioned in the Mahābhārata 
and Rāmāyaṇa.
In this case, it is not an individual effort for personal gain or the fulfillment 
of dharma, but it is a communal enterprise. The main difference here is that these 
settlements largely depend on the sponsorship of a financially powerful patron. These 
schools seem to be a relatively recent development as based on the older hermitage 
(āśrama) model. In precolonial India, kings sponsored such settlements and 
institutions, and granted tax-free lands and entire villages to brāhmaṇa communities, 
as well as to monastic institutions (maṭhas).155 The brahmadeyas, also known as 
agrahāras, were lands given in donation to an assembly of brāhmaṇas or to individual 
families. Not infrequently, the work force to cultivate these lands, as well as cattle, 
was also gifted to them. In exchange, the brāhmaṇa villages were supposed to uphold 
Vedic learning and to perform rituals for the welfare of the kingdom. Inscriptions 
and other records across India attest to the existence of this system in precolonial 
India, and despite the land reforms of post-independent India, a few examples of 
landowning brāhmaṇa villages are still found in modern India.156 
While the ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā type’ is not to be equated to the āśramas and schools 
of the medieval agrahāras, they share a similar economic aspect which I  would 
like to emphasize. Both the agrahāras and the ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā type’ of schools are 
completely dependent on sponsorship, and while generally the individual teachers 
have a say in how to operate and manage the schools, it is the communal effort that 
maintains these schools. It is usually a public trust or a similar type of organization 
that pools needed resources together. Traditional and new methods of fundraising 
(such as through websites) are used to finance the regular activities of this type of 
schools.
Another main characteristic of this type of school is in their isolation from the rest 
of the world. These schools often imitate the āśrama model, which tries to minimize 
contact with the rest of society, while at the same time aiming to lead an exemplary 
life “according to the Vedas”. This isolation allows for a more ritually pure157 life 
by maintaining distance between themselves and various polluting elements. 
155 For the development of this form of patronage, see: Lubin 2005. 
156 For an example from coastal Andra Pradesh, see: Knipe 1997; for the Namputiris in Kerala, see: 
Parpola 2000.
157 On ritual purity, see subchapter 4.4. 

=== PAGE 20 ===

Today’s Vedic Schools in Maharashtra: a Typology 
 83
Pedagogically speaking, it also has the advantage of minimizing distractions from the 
urban world and creating an “environment conducive for Vedic learning.”158
Many of the schools I visited had originally aimed at some sort of seclusion from 
the outside world. They were originally either situated at the periphery of urban life 
(village or city), or more or less isolated from the rest of society. This isolation could 
be achieved either by locating the school at the outskirts of the village/city or in a sort 
of ghetto neighbourhood for brāhmaṇas, such as the western peṭhs159 in the old city 
of Pune. The rapid urbanization of the last few decades has often drastically changed 
the surrounding areas of these schools. As an example, according to Vedamūrti M. 
Ghaisas, when the Ved Bhavan160 school was inaugurated in the mid 1940s, it was 
completely isolated from the city — in a “green lush area, completely quiet and perfect 
for Vedic studies.” Now, large residential buildings, ‘colonies’, and business have 
enclosed it. Heavily loaded with traffic, the old Pune-Mumbai highway also passes in 
the vicinity of the school while the green and quiet surroundings of trees and grassy 
fields have been replaced by a fully urbanized neighbourhood. 
Schools of the ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā type’ tend to teach only one Vedic śākhā, and usually 
have no more than two or three teachers, each with smaller batches of students. These 
schools usually do not have any ambitions to expand their curriculum to other Vedic 
śākhās, or necessarily enlarge and improve the physical infrastructure of the school. 
They are also less proselytizing than the next type of school, and content themselves 
with the students who come to their schools and with the capacity of their current 
facilities. 
These schools already present a less intense intimacy than the previous model 
because the teachers often do not live directly on the campus, but in a house in the 
neighbourhood. The separation of space between the private sphere of the teacher’s 
house and the students’ housing also has social consequences. While the teachers 
may still be, to a large extent, responsible for the students and their development, the 
fact that there is a third party that at least partly deals with the economic aspect of 
the school releases the pressure on the teachers, who are otherwise the only wardens 
responsible for the boys’ welfare and education. 
3.4.3  The ‘Vedavidyālaya Type’
The ‘Vedavidyālaya type’ of school is also a larger communitarian type of school, 
similar to the ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā type’. It depends entirely on the financial support of 
sponsors. The difference here is that the efforts and the initiative does not come a 
158 Anonymous interview, 12.3.2009.
159 The peṭhs [Sk. pīṭha] are the old division of wards established mainly during the Peśva reign.
160 See: Appendix 1.

=== PAGE 21 ===
84 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
priori from the vaidikas — i.e. the teachers themselves — but from the sponsors. It is the 
sponsors, often Hindu organizations such as temple trusts or religious associations, 
who decide to have a vedapāṭhaśālā as part of their socio-cultural agenda. These 
organizations are the masterminds of the enterprise. Usually, teachers are called in as 
employees once the project has been conceived or is nearing completion. The agency 
of the teachers is in this model reduced to their pedagogical and ritual expertise, 
while the organizational and curricular decisions are largely made by the sponsors. 
The organizational and logistical structure of these schools is more complex, and 
many actors and interests are involved in the process of creating and maintaining 
such a school. The schools that fall under this template are either the main enterprise 
or just one of the many activities and projects run by the sponsors. 
Another characteristic of this model is the scale of the schools. Usually, they are 
conceived to have an expansive character in which the number of students and the 
breadth of the curriculum is taken as the measure of success of the school. The motto 
of the sponsors and founders of these schools seems to be: “the more students and 
the more Vedic branches, the better.” 
Teachers who are not locally available are hired from far away places to teach 
in the schools. These teachers might not speak the local language and may have a 
different cultural background and, therefore, initially have more difficulty relating 
to the students. With the import of a śākhā originally not present in the region, the 
members and sponsors of these schools seek to revive the Veda as a whole and thereby 
enhance its prestige. 
Schools of this type are, generally speaking, conceived as specialized schools 
where students are prepared to ‘serve the society’ at large. They are trained to be ‘role 
models’ for the Hindu society. These trusts are often financed by sponsors who have 
an interest in promoting a national identity that is specifically “Hindu” in character. 
The nationalistic nature of this project includes modern elements that better prepare 
the students for their future in a modern society. This is the main reason why topics 
such as English and computer lessons are added to the Vedic curriculum — to arm 
the students to better integrate themselves into today’s society at a later date. The 
following quote is found on the website of the Maharṣi Veda Vyās Pratiṣṭhān, which 
runs a number of Vedic schools in India:
In view of enabling the students to get acclimatized and conversant with modern technology 
education in computer science along with lessons in traditional knowledge is imparted in these 
schools. A student of our Vedic schools is expected to be a cultured, well-read, iron-willed leader 
of the society in future. His just being a Vedic scholar is not enough if he has to emerge winner 
in present circumstances. Hence, in our schools, conscious efforts are being taken to ensure all-
round development of the students.161
161 http://dharmashree.org/VedicSchools.html accessed on February 2, 2012.

=== PAGE 22 ===

Today’s Vedic Schools in Maharashtra: a Typology 
 85
Schools under this template, even if most of their young members are unconscious 
of their political participation, become embodiments of an ideological project, and 
the role model citizens of an idealized Hindu nation. It is important to note that the 
other two types of schools presented above are not exempt from the political sphere 
and are also prone to be mobilized toward joining the nationalistic project, or are 
instrumentalized to act in events which serve their cause; but, the integral difference 
with the other two models is that they have more freedom to decide whether they 
want to join in or not. Due to the interdependent nature of the relationship with their 
sponsors and their limited agency in organizational matters, the school members of 
the ‘Vedavidyālaya type’ are often automatically expected to participate in events 
organized by the trusts. 
It is in events such as the ones organized by the Hindū Janjāgṛti Samiti (HJS) that 
students and teachers get influenced by the Hindutvā ideology displayed in speeches 
and the manipulation of sacred symbols. Through images and narratives of heroic 
divinities such as Rāma, Hanumān, Paraśurāma, and Śivājī, as defenders of Hindu 
culture and the territory of India, nationalistic themes are easily introduced in the 
Vedic schools.
Some of the schools I  visited that best fit this template are the Śrī Samarth 
Sant Mahātmajī Vedavidyālay of Dhalegao, the Śrī Sadguru Nijānand Mahārāj 
Vedavidyālay of Alandi (both belonging to the Veda Vyāsa Pratiṣṭhān), the Kailās Maṭh 
Akhaṇḍānand of Nashik, and the Śrī Datta Devasthān of Ahmednagar. 162 Again, the 
template intends to serve as an extreme example in order to show certain tendencies 
and not to reflect the one-to-one nature of the school’s social reality.
3.4.4  Concluding Remarks on the Use of a Typology
The exercise of creating a typology of Vedic schools allows us to observe these 
schools as a sort of mental laboratory in which different ideals concerning the 
traditional education of the brāhmaṇa and that which is considered “Vedic” are being 
revived, reinvented, and reinterpreted in contemporary India. Some of the previous 
scholarship, especially as represented in textbooks on Indian religions, has assumed 
a linear historical development from Vedic Brāhmaṇism to Hinduism, in which 
the latter gets replaced or reintegrated by the former, where gṛhya replaces śrauta 
rituals, and where there is a tendency for the external ritualism to be replaced by the 
internalization of mystical experience. But here it not only becomes evident that we 
need to abandon this evolutionary view on Hinduism, but also that it might be fruitful 
to think of the term “Vedic” as a floating/empty signifier163 to which large chains of 
162 See: Appendix 1.
163 In the sense of: Laclau and Mouffe 1990: 28.

=== PAGE 23 ===
86 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
signifieds are being attached, and which may take on whatever meaning is ascribed 
to them. Diverse discourses around the transmission of the Veda and the pedagogical 
ideals of each individual school are entangled within a mesh of economic factors, 
geographic and ecological specifications, sectarian affiliations, family traditions and 
other social contexts. Approaching the Veda (or Vedas) through the notion of the 
empty signifier helps us to understand how this body of texts has been and continues 
to be able to gather contingent elements into a ‘stable’ field of meaning. In this way, 
the Veda, as a hegemonic apparatus and hence as an empty signifier, offers a certain 
stability to an otherwise heterogeneous field. 
By using this typology as a heuristic device to analyse these schools, we obtain 
a better understanding of how the same empty signifier (the ‘Vedas’ and that which 
is ‘Vedic’) is being articulated into unique discourses and practices in the context of 
modern Hinduism. While, in this model, the ‘Gurukula type’ emphasizes the household 
and intimate relationships, the ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā type’ emphasizes a more conservative 
notion of community, in which isolation and idealized space play an important role. The 
‘Vedavidyālaya type’, on the other hand, is more clearly embedded in larger discourses 
and networks; and while it is often an important symbol of religious prestige, such a 
school remains subservient to the overall ideology of the sponsors. 
As this typology shows, interpretations made regarding the Veda’s transmission 
and its contents are always dependent upon the outcome of struggles over various 
alternative representations and practices that compete over it and try to hegemonize 
their position. The following section will present how the oral transmission of the 
Veda takes place in these schools, and then Chapter 4 will elucidate the ways in which 
students and teachers become embodiments of their tradition, this by offering an 
overview of their daily lives.
3.5  Curricula of the Vedapāṭhaśālās in Maharashtra
The sacrifice to the Brahman is one’s own (daily) study (of the Veda). The juhū-spoon of this 
same sacrifice to the Brahman is speech, its upabhṛt the mind, its dhruvā the eye, its sruva mental 
power, its purificatory bath truth, its conclusion heaven. And, verily, however great the world he 
gains by giving away (to the priests) this earth replete with wealth, thrice that and more – an 
imperishable world does he gain, whosoever, knowing this, studies day by day his lesson (of the 
Veda): therefore let him study his daily lesson. 
–Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa XI.5.6.3164
What do the students of the Veda (brahmacārins) learn? Which texts are committed to 
memory and what other subjects are learned in traditional Vedic schools? How is the 
164 Eggeling 1900: 96.

=== PAGE 24 ===

Curricula of the Vedapāṭhaśālās in Maharashtra 
 87
study structured, and what do the classes look like? How is today’s practice different 
from ancient times? This chapter will address these questions. 
The curriculum taught in the vedapāṭhaśālās of Maharashtra is as varied as 
the schools themselves. Not only are most of the śākhās of the four Vedas surviving 
today represented in the various schools of Maharashtra, but we also find schools 
preserving even texts with the most complex recitation patterns (vikṛtis). 
The Vedic schools visited for this study vary in the amount of texts they memorize 
besides the Saṃhitā of their own śākhā165 — that is, the Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka 
texts, the learning of a second Saṃhitā (or passages of it), or even additional non-
Vedic texts such as the Bhagavadgītā. The second curricular difference one finds 
among these schools is that some schools offer training in the various recitation 
patterns (vikṛtis), this based on the word-by-word (padapāṭha) text of the Saṃhitā of 
a particular śākhā. Therefore, the two main curricular axes are, first, the ‘quantity’ 
of texts to be memorized, and second, the mastery over the recitation patterns of the 
root text (vikṛtis).
The main pedagogical differences concerning the memorization of the Vedic texts 
seem to be primarily curricular and, to a lesser extent, methodological. For example, 
the learning procedure166 of the Taittirīyasaṃhitā of the Kṛṣṇayajurveda seems to be 
virtually the same in all the schools I visited. The same applies for schools in which 
students learn the recitation of other Vedic texts belonging to the same śākhā. Larger 
variations in methodology occur when we compare one śākhā to another. The quasi-
identical Saṃhitā text of the Śuklayajurveda in its two recentions,167 for example, 
is learned and recited in a different way if it is undertaken in the kāṇva or in the 
mādhyandina style; and, of course, the differences grow when we compare different 
Vedas — i.e. the recitation of the same hymn, for example, in its Ṛgvedic tri-tonal 
version versus the musical rendering in Sāmavedic style. This is even more evident 
if we look at recitations outside of Maharashtra. A Namputiri ṛgvedin from Kerala 
will have a very different style of recitation, and also distinct pedagogical methods, 
compared to a ṛgvedin from the Koṅkaṇ area of Maharashtra, even if formally they 
belong to the same śākhā, i.e. śākala (cf. Staal 2001:3-16).
Apart from these differences, one needs to consider the other factors that affect 
the curricula and daily schedule of these schools. Adding other traditional subjects 
— varying from astrology (jyotiṣa), ritual sciences (karmakāṇḍa), and Sanskrit, to 
non-traditional subjects such as English and computer studies — has an impact in 
the amount of time and energy dedicated to a concentrated study of Vedic recitation 
165 Traditionally, one would always first learn one’s own recension (svaśākhā) and then proceed to 
learn another Veda. Nonetheless, at this time (at least in Maharashtra) the learning of a Veda is no 
longer necessarily linked to the Veda determined by birth. See below in this chapter. 
166 For the description of the teaching and learning procedures, see subchapter 3.7.
167 The Vājasaneyisaṃhitā of these two recensions (kāṇva and mādhyandina) varies only in a few 
passages, as noted in Weber 1852.

=== PAGE 25 ===
88 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
(vedapāṭha). Another crucial factor in this regard is the extra curricular chores the 
students and teachers have to perform, in or outside of their school, either in service 
to the master/school or for their own livelihood (in the cases of the teachers). 
In general, the core aim of the traditional Vedic schools visited during my 
fieldwork is to train their students to be able to recite from memory the complete 
Saṃhitā text of a particular śākhā. However, in a few schools, while the Saṃhitā text 
is generally taught to willing students, the minimum curriculum is not to master these 
texts, but instead a two-to-three-year paurohitya training is offered to students who 
are either unable or unwilling to finish the memorization of the whole Saṃhitā.168 
The paurohitya training enables a student to perform basic rituals such as the rites 
de passage (saṃskāras)169 and other simple domestic rituals with which they can 
earn their livelihood and/or officiate as family priests. This training is also optionally 
offered in some schools for students who opt to acquire only the priestly training. 
Nonetheless, the paurohitya training generally goes along or follows the vedapāṭha 
training. In some schools, this training is offered to weaker students, or students 
who started too late with their vedapāṭha training and are not able to memorize large 
quantities of texts. The paurohitya training, nevertheless, has less prestige among the 
learned community than a full curriculum in which a student memorizes the whole 
Veda. The general view is that the more the student has learned by heart and the 
more skillfully he can recite the Vedic mantras the better. In general, the occupation 
as a temple priest who has to deal with brāhmaṇa and non-brāhmaṇa clientele, and 
who is thus subjected to the pollution of the exchange of gifts (dāna and prasāda), is 
traditionally considered less pure and thus inferior by other brāhmaṇas.170 
The possibility to expand the curriculum beyond the Saṃhitā and paurohitya 
training is open and encouraged in most of the schools. This depends both on the 
individual students’ capacities and motivation, and on the teacher’s knowledge of 
further Vedic texts (Brāhmaṇas, Āraṇyakas, etc.) and/or the permutations of the 
Saṃhitā — starting with the padapāṭha and continuing up to the complex permutations 
168 Schools which exclusively offer paurohitya training were not considered in this study. The 
paurohitya training offered in the schools I visited is of secondary importance, and they generally 
present the training of vedapāṭha as their main curriculum. 
169 Michaels notes: “saṃskāra, formed from the same verbal root as ‘Sanskrit’ (saṃskṛta, which 
literally means ‘the totally and (correctly) formed [speech]’), is usually translated as ‘transition rite’, 
‘rite of passage’, or ‘sacrament’, but these terms only partially convey its significance. What is crucial, 
as Brian K. Smith has emphasized, is that with the saṃskāras, someone or something is made either 
suitable, appropriate, or equivalent (yogya) for a holy purpose, for example, as a sacrificial offering.” 
(Michaels 2004a: 74).
170 The subject of the gift and the gift in return in Brāhmaṇical culture has been discussed by many, 
as summarized by: Michaels 1997. On page 249 in this article, he concludes that: “The more ascetic 
the Brahmin, the worthier he is; the śrotriya [‘knower of the Veda’] is held to be the best priest, since 
he receives no gifts (cf. ŚBr XIII.4.3.14).”

=== PAGE 26 ===

Curricula of the Vedapāṭhaśālās in Maharashtra 
 89
(vikṛtis), such as ghana.171 Potentially, a vaidika brāhmaṇa can be embarking on a life-
long commitment of learning. As Knipe has aptly remarked in relation to the career 
opportunities of a brahmacārin: “[…] ‘the Veda’ with hundreds of primary, acolyte and 
commentarial texts provides unbounded territory for exploration” (2015: 36).
In some cases, such as the Taittirīya schools I visited in Satara, the students are 
encouraged and somewhat forced to learn beyond the Saṃhitā from the beginning 
onwards. This is so, because the syllabus often starts with an easier Vedic text to 
memorize other than the Saṃhitā, for example, with the Brāhmaṇa or the Āraṇyaka of 
this particular śākhā. While teachers still decide, most of the time, in which order they 
start their course, the syllabus has become a little more homogeneous in Maharashtra 
as a result of the standardization and the “official” segmentation of the curriculum 
through institutions that conduct Veda examinations, such as the Vedaśāstrottejak 
Sabhā in Pune (see below in subchapter 3.7.6). 
The curriculum of the vedapāṭhaśālās is therefore not homogeneous and 
completely fixed, although it revolves around the ideal mastery of at least the Saṃhitā 
text of a given śākhā. Parting from this point, the curriculum can expand in different 
directions. Either the student continues his studies of the padapāṭha recitation of the 
Saṃhitā text, and from there builds up to other permutations of the same (usually 
krama, then jaṭā, and lastly ghana, depending on the śākhā), or else he moves into 
other areas of Vedic studies such as karmakāṇḍa, jyotiṣa, or in some rare cases the 
study of vyākaraṇa, mīmāṃsā, nyāya, and vedānta. I should mention here that, at 
present, jaṭāpāṭhins and ghanapāṭhins can only be found in the Ṛgveda and in the 
Yajurveda (in both the white and black recensions). In the Sāmavedic traditions, we 
do not find these vikṛtis172 and, in the Atharvavedic traditions, it has become so rare 
that it can hardly be counted as a survival. 
The expansion of the curriculum into other areas of knowledge is rather rare in 
the schools I visited. The syllabus was fairly limited to the recitation of the Saṃhitās 
and its permutations (when available), as well as for the Brāhmaṇas, Āraṇyakas, and 
in a few cases also some of the Upaniṣads. Students who wish to continue their Vedic 
studies usually leave their foster school for another institution offering the chosen 
subject. This is generally looked upon as a specialization, and usually happens after 
their mastery of basic recitation skills in regard to the above-mentioned texts. 
171 Ghanapāṭha is the most difficult recitation style and usually comes only after krama and  jaṭā, 
which are the other two vikṛtis, most commonly learned in the schools of Maharashtra. Although, 
apart from these three other vikṛtis exist (such as mālā, śikhā, rekha, dhvaja, daṇḍa, ratha), they are 
almost extinct in Maharashtra. For more information on the vikṛtis, see: Appendix 2.
172 The Sāmaveda is based on the padapāṭha of the Ṛgveda, and therefore the natural (prakṛti) and 
the modified (vikṛti) recitations are ordered in a different way for their regular recitation and their 
application in ritual (cf. Staal 1995: 383-4; or Howard 1986: 201). Nonetheless, the Vedaśāstrottejak 
Sabhā in Pune offers examinations of the padapāṭha of the Pūrvārcika and Uttarārcika of the 
Sāmaveda for both the recensions.

=== PAGE 27 ===
90 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
The traditional śāstra schools,173 of which I found only one in Pune, specialize 
in teaching Sanskrit grammar, logic (nyāya), mīmāṃsā, and other exegetical and 
philosophical disciplines, but these do not train their students to fully recite the Veda, 
and neither is this a requirement to enter this school. At this time, Sanskrit colleges 
and universities have largely supplanted these traditional Sanskrit schools in India.174 
Training in the recitation of the Veda, as observed in my fieldwork, happened 
largely independent of the auxiliary Vedic disciplines, including the Sanskrit 
language. The learning of the meaning of the mantras is not necessarily condemned, 
as long as it does not hinder the proper memorization of the sounds of the Veda, but 
it is also not particularly encouraged by the teachers (who themselves have very basic 
Sanskrit knowledge, and are practically completely ignorant of Vedic Sanskrit).175 
Regardless, in the few cases in which the exegesis of the mantra is encouraged, it is 
usually confined to the learning of Sanskrit according to Pāṇini, and in very rare cases 
according to Vedic etymology (nirukta). In general, the meaning of the Vedic texts 
seems to be of secondary interest, if any interest at all, to most of the vaidikas I was 
in contact with. They would rather learn the ritual application of mantras (kalpa) and 
astrology (jyotiṣa), for which a minimum knowledge of Sanskrit is required or at least 
helpful, than pursue a deep study of Sanskrit and the philosophical systems in their 
original language.176 In contrast to the four exegetical sciences177 of the six auxiliary 
sciences to the Veda (ṣaḍaṅga), as well as the mastery in the six philosophical schools, 
the last two aṅgas (i.e. kalpa and jyotiṣa) allow the students to obtain knowledge of 
the ritual application of the Veda and to earn a living with the services they provide 
to the community.
It is probable that, in ancient India also, the curriculum was fragmented and 
that there was a lot of flexibility as far as the subjects of study and specialization in 
different areas of expertise were concerned within one’s śākhā/caraṇa. As mentioned 
in the introduction, two fundamentally different types of education have been 
consciously distinguished in Brāhmaṇical circles: the śāstrika (scholastic) and the 
vaidika (recitational).178 Although the distinction between vaidikas and śāstrikas has 
not been always clear-cut, experts in both traditions (exegetic and liturgical) have 
173 See below in this chapter for the differentiation between the two types of traditional schools, i.e. 
śāstrika and vaidika.
174 See: Deshpande 2001: 119-153 and Michaels 2001: 3-16.
175 The situation in South India seems not to be different from Maharashtra, as described by: Fuller 
1997: 14.
176 Many brāhmaṇas read translations or monographs of philosophical works in Marathi or Hindi, 
from which they gain basic knowledge in the philosophical texts of their interest. I have also found 
that the works of Vivekānanda and other Neo-vedānta authors are the most commonly found books 
in the libraries of the schools. 
177 Phonetics (śikṣā), grammar (vyākaraṇa), etymology (nirukta), and prosody (chandas).
178 See: Wujastyk 1981: 30; Aithal 1991: 6-12. 

=== PAGE 28 ===

Curricula of the Vedapāṭhaśālās in Maharashtra 
 91
rather been the exception than the rule.179 As will become clear below, one can hardly 
accomplish mastery over both tasks in a single lifetime. The curriculum and the aims 
of each system are different. While the śāstrika aims at understanding the texts and 
mastering the language (Sanskrit) to interpret them, the vaidika aims at mastering the 
sound forms of these texts and their ritual application with utmost exactitude. 
The minimum requirement for any reciter is the ability to properly recite the 
Saṃhitā of his own recension, as determined by birth (svaśākhā). The learning of 
one’s svaśākhā used to be a crucial requirement, as Scharfe has noted: 
[...] we find statements that one should study and practice the tradition (śākhā) of one’s ancestors 
– even to the exclusion of all others. Cross-overs were allowed only when some religious rite 
was omitted in one’s own school, but dealt with in another school; it must not, however, be 
opposed to the teachings of one’s own school. Most authorities, though, allow or even praise 
the study of other Vedas, provided their own tradition was learned first: the dvi-vedin, tri-vedin, 
and catur-vedin, i.e., scholars who have learned two, three or even all four Vedas were held in 
high esteem and carried that designation with pride. The harshest critique falls on those who 
study something else, i.e., worldly learning without learning their Vedic tradition first, and the 
Maitrī-upaniṣad would not allow a brahmin to study anything but Vedic knowledge. (Scharfe 
2002: 225-6)
While it is true that preference is given to one’s own recension (svaśākhā), in actual 
practice many brāhmaṇas have begun to study other Vedic śākhās in Maharashtra, 
and also elsewhere (cf. Howard 1986: 109). This is particularly prominent in those 
schools considered in danger of extinction, such as the Atharvavedic recensions, 
or those not well represented in the region — such as the schools of the Sāmaveda. 
Moreover, in most of the schools visited for this research, many students who were 
studying in a school belonging to a particular Vedic branch hailed by birth from a 
different Veda community. For example, in the Śrī Kṛṣṇayajurveda Pāṭhaśālā located 
in Satara, one finds many students whose original śākhā is not the Hiraṇyakeśī180 
taught there, and not even another śākhā belonging to the Yajurveda, but who hail 
from Deśastha Ṛgveda families and even from brāhmaṇa families (Padhye)181 from the 
neighbouring state of Goa. This is particularly interesting, as the old rivalry between 
Deśastha and Citpāvans (the later also called Koṅkaṇastha) has a long history. This 
relationship was particularly heated during the Peśva reign.182
179 Some examples of such recent prodigies who have mastered both disciplines are mentioned in: 
Howard 1986: 7-10; Knipe 1997: 310; and Deshpande 2001: 125ff.
180 The Hiraṇyakeśī śākhā came almost to extinction in Maharashtra. Originally, it was Citpāvan 
brāhmaṇas who preserved this śākhā in the Konkan region. 
181 The Padhye is a sub-branch of the Karhade brāhmaṇas who are, in its majority, ṛgvedins who 
follow the Āśvalāyana Śrautasūtra.
182 Cf. Pandit 1979.

=== PAGE 29 ===
92 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
In short, the curriculum is, at present, no longer bound to familiar denominations 
(svaśākhā), but one finds a broad mixture of familiar lineages within a single 
vedapāṭhaśālā. 
Having all the above considerations in mind regarding the variability of the 
curricula of the Vedic schools of Maharashtra, I will now focus on describing the 
curricula of these schools in detail, as well as the current teaching and learning 
methods for the recitation of the Veda, as observed in my fieldwork. To give an 
overview of the subjects taught in the pāṭhaśālās, I refer to Table 2:
Table 2. Curricula of subjects taught at the Vedic schools 183184185
Name of School 
Saṃhitā 
and śākhā183
Additional 
Vedic texts
Additional 
Auxiliary 
disciplines184 
vikṛtis185
Non-Traditional 
Subjects
1
Ved Bhavān
ṚV
AB, Aār
DG
+ghana 
-
2
Vedaśāstra Vidyālay 
(Patwardhan Pāṭhaśālā)
AV, ṚV
-
KK, Skt
-
English
3
Pune Vedapāṭhaśālā
ṚV, Tsaṃ
-
KK, śrauta*
-
-
4
Śrī Kṛṣṇayajurveda 
Pāṭhaśālā
Tsaṃ, [SV(R)]
TB, Tār,
Jyot, KK
+ghana 
English, HY, 
Computing
5
Śrī Umāśaṅkar 
Advaitavedānta 
Vidyāpīṭh
ṚV
AB, Aār
DG, Skt, TarkŚ, 
KK
+ghana 
-
6
Śrī Umāmaheśvar 
Vedapāṭhaśālā
Tsaṃ
TB, Tār,
KK
-
-
7
Śrī Borikar 
Vedapāṭhaśālā
ṚV
-
KK, Skt
-
-
8
Śrī Vedaśāstra Vidyā 
Saṃvardhan Maṇḍaḷ, 
“Śrī Vedapāṭhaśālā”
ṚV
AB
KK
+krama
- 
9
Vedaśālā Ratnagiri
ṚV, Tsaṃ
AB, TB, Tār, KK, śrauta
+krama
-
183 Please refer to the list of abbreviations given at the beginning of the book. Only the above mentioned 
recensions are currently available in Maharashtra, although attempts to revive the Atharvaveda 
Paippalada have been undertaken by Nānājī Kāḷe in his school, Śrī Yogīrāj Veda Vijñān Āśram. To my 
knowledge, there are no schools in the state learning the Jaiminīya branch of the Sāmaveda.
184 Some have indicated the teaching of śrauta rituals as part of. Nonetheless, it could not always be 
confirmed through observation. When not observed, it is marked with an asterisk (śrauta*). 
185 The ‘+’ sign implies the prerequisite of the presiding permutations and is to be interpreted as “up 
to”. This does not mean that all the students learn up to this level, but that the teacher has obtained 
mastery in the given recitation and can potentially teach it to his students; additionally, the given 
teacher has indicated this mastery in the questionnaires filled in by all the schools. 

=== PAGE 30 ===

Curricula of the Vedapāṭhaśālās in Maharashtra 
 93
Name of School 
Saṃhitā 
and śākhā
Additional 
Vedic texts
Additional 
Auxiliary 
disciplines
vikṛtis
Non-Traditional 
Subjects
10
Śrī Gaṇeśa 
Vedapāṭhaśālā
ṚV
-
KK
-
-
11
Vedaśāstra Saṃskṛt 
Pāṭhaśālā
ṚV
-
KK
+krama
-
12
Śrī Samārth Sant 
Mahātmajī  
Vedavidyālay
ṚV, VSaṃ(M), 
VSaṃ(K), SV(R), AV 
AB, TB, Tār, 
ŚB
KK
+krama 
(not all 
śākhās)
English, HY, 
Computing 
13
Vaidik Jñān   
Vijñān Saṃskṛt 
Mahāvidyālay
VSaṃ(M)
ŚB
DG, Skt, Jyot
+ghana
HY, English 
14
Kailās Maṭh 
Akhaṇḍānand
VSaṃ(M)
-
Skt
+pada
-
15
Śrī Guru Gaṅgeśvar 
Mahārāj Pāṭhaśālā
VSaṃ(M)
-
Skt
-
English, 
Computing 
16
Śrutismṛti Vidyāpīṭham VSaṃ(M)
-
KK
+ghana
-
17
Śrī Narasiṃha Sarasvatī 
Vedapāṭhaśālā
ṚV
AB
KK
+ghana 
-
18
Śrī Sadguru Nijānand 
Mahārāj Vedavidyālay
VSaṃ(M)
-
KK
-
-
19
Adhyātmik Pratiṣṭhān
VSaṃ(M)
ŚB
KK
+ghana 
-
20
Śrī Jagadguru 
Śaṅkarācārya Maṭh 
ṚV
-
KK
+krama
-
21
Vedānta Vidyāpīṭh  
(Śrī Dattavedasthān)
ṚV, VSaṃ(M), 
VSaṃ(K), Tsaṃ, 
SV(R),
AB, TB, Tār, 
ŚB
-
+krama 
(not all 
śākhās)
English
22
Śrutigandhā 
Vedapāṭhaśālā
ṚV
Aār, AB
KK, DG, 
+krama
-
23
Bhosle Vedaśāstra 
Mahāvidyālay
ṚV, Tsaṃ, VSaṃ(M), 
SV(R)
TB, Tār, ŚB
KK
+ghana 
-
24
Ārṣa Vijñāna Gurukulam ṚV
-
KK, śrauta*
+krama
-
25
Śrī Yogīrāj Veda Vijñān 
Āśram 186
ṚV, SV(R), AV 
[VSaṃ(M),VSaṃ(K), 
Tsaṃ,]
[Aār, AB, 
TB, Tār, ŚB],
KK, śrauta
(+ghana) ‘Traditional’ 
agriculture
186
186 Site of the training of students in almost all Vedic branches available, as indicated in the square 
parentheses. After completing their studies, ex-students opened branches of this school in several 
parts of India. At the time I was visiting the school in Barshi, they were currently only teaching the 
ṚV, SV(R), and AV. 

=== PAGE 31 ===
94 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
The table above does not provide any information on the amount of time spent 
on each subject, nor does it give us information about the batches of students that 
learn these subjects. Also, the fact that some of these schools offer several courses 
does not mean that all students learn the whole curriculum. As mentioned earlier, 
the curriculum of a student can move towards different directions depending on his 
aptitude, his inclination, and the encouragement and support he receives from his 
preceptors and family.
The following example illustrates this: in 2009, the 24 students of the Śrī 
Kṛṣṇayajurveda Pāṭhaśālā located in Satara were divided into three different 
batches according to their ages and the time they had already spent in the school. 
First, all students learn the main Vedic corpus of the Taittirīya school (i.e. Saṃhitā, 
Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka). This takes them approximately seven or eight years.187 
After learning this, or sometimes in parallel to this learning, additional subjects are 
imparted to the students, such as a weekly hour of English for the youngest students 
(not for the older ones, who are supposed to have the basics and can thus concentrate 
on their advanced studies) and one hour of computer science on a fortnightly basis. 
After this, students can continue learning the permutations of the Veda, according 
to their aptitude and interest, starting with the study of the padapāṭha, and then 
kramapāṭha, jaṭāpāṭha, and finally ghanapāṭha. In this particular school, of the ten 
students who have finished their basic education, six of them have taken interest 
in karmakāṇḍa (three of whom have already completed the course on this subject), 
and two other students have taken an interest in deepening their recitation up to 
kramapāṭha and are currently learning jyotiṣa. In addition to these variations in 
curriculum, two advanced students are particularly interested in computing and 
are taking classes at night in an institute outside of the school, while one of the 
graduate students was particularly inclined to learning Sanskrit language at a more 
advanced level. 
In sum, the above-mentioned school has the academic personnel to teach up to 
ghanapāṭha, the highest and most complex level of recitation, and the main teacher 
is also a renowned astrologer and Smārta ritualist, but not all students will become 
experts in all of these fields. Some will leave the school after the completion of 
the main curriculum or even before, and others will continue with one option or 
the other. Students who have a facility to memorize quickly, and have the stamina 
187 Depending on the amount of time dedicated daily to the study of these texts and the facility of 
the student to memorize the material. Scharfe, while trying to determine what the exact curricula 
of Vedic schools was, has observed that there are variations in modern times regarding the time 
needed to learn a particular Veda. “Modern reports give a shorter time frame: a full Vedic course at a 
pāṭhaśālā near Tirucci in Tamilnad took eight years to complete according to V. Raghavan, P. Aithal 
found courses lasting more than eight years with ten to twelve hours of learning each day, F. Staal five 
to six years among the Nambūtiris of Central Kerala or the Ṛgveda including the Krama-pāṭha (but, it 
seems, without Brāhmaṇas, etc.).” (Scharfe 2002: 247).

=== PAGE 32 ===

Curricula of the Vedapāṭhaśālās in Maharashtra 
 95
and discipline to continue, will become kramapāṭhins, or perhaps even jaṭā and 
ghanapāṭhins. Others will leave to learn a further Veda from another teacher or will 
learn an auxiliary science (vedāṅga).188
The curriculum of the schools of Maharashtra is structured either internally (as in 
the cases of the schools of the Maharṣi Veda Vyās Pratiṣṭhān), or by the external bodies 
who conduct examinations. The main external institutions are the Vedaśāstrottejak 
Sabhā of Pune, the Maharṣi Sāṃdīpani Rāṣṭrīya Veda Vidyā Pratiṣṭhān of Ujjain, 
and the maṭhas of the Śaṅkarācāryas of Sringeri and Kanchipuram.189 The yearly 
examinations conducted by these institutions segment the texts of each branch of 
the Vedas so that all schools now roughly follow the curriculum according to the 
order in which the exams are organized. The following list presents the curriculum 
for the Veda section as it is currently structured by the Vedaśāstrottejak Sabhā190 
for their yearly examinations.191 This list can be considered the master template of 
the Vedic schools of Maharashtra, even if (as shown in the table above) not all the 
schools reach the second and third “standards” (iyattā).192
As can be noted, the third standard does not state a time frame for the study 
of this segment of the curriculum. According to some of the school teachers and 
examiners, this is due to the fact that only a few students reach this stage, and each 
student takes a “different amount of time to master these recitations depending 
on his capacity and mind-power.”193 Besides this, students who have completed 
the second standard usually take up other activities and responsibilities, such as 
teaching in their respective schools or even marrying after the completion of the 
second standard, therefore, leaving considerably less time for study. 
188 F. Smith described to me in a personal communication the case of the pāṭhaśālā in 
Kumbakonam, where the best students become paṇḍitas, the second best become teachers of 
recitation, and the worst ones take up paurohitya. Knipe (2015) additionally describes the living 
ritual tradition in Andhra Pradesh of taking up a śrauta career by setting the three fires (tretāgni). 
This arduous ritual option has almost disappeared in Maharashtra, with only very few candidates 
continuing the hereditary tradition. A telling example of the minority in this state are the Kāḷe 
family from Barshi, and the students Śrī Yogīrāj Veda Vijñān Āśram. According to a survey done 
by him and his associates in 2004, there were 18 āhitāgnis left in Maharashtra (Shree Yogiraj 
Vedvijnan Ashram 2005: xi). 
189 For more on these institutions, see: subchapter 3.7.
190 The information comes from a brochure printed by the Sabhā in the year 1997. The brochures 
for the examinations are printed on a yearly basis, whereas a report on the activities of the 
organization, including details on the examinations, is distributed among the donors and members 
every two years.
191 For a detailed description of the role of the VŚS in the institutionalization process of the 
curriculum in Maharashtra, see below the subchapter 3.8.
192 iyattā f An allotted quantity. An allowance. A standard. Limits or bounds. (Vaze 1911: 55).
193 Interview with Kāḷe: 06.06.2009, Barshi.

=== PAGE 33 ===
96 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
Table 3. Curriculum for the Veda section for the examinations at the Vedaśāstrottejak Sabhā - First 
Standard
Ṛgveda Śākala Śākhā
Year 1
Ṛgvedasaṃhitā adhyāyas: 1-16
Year 2
Ṛgvedasaṃhitā adhyāyas: 17-32
Year 3
Ṛgvedasaṃhitā adhyāyas: 33-48
Year 4
Ṛgvedasaṃhitā adhyāyas: 49-64
Year 5
Aitayeyabrāhmaṇa pañcikās: 1-6
Year 6
Aitayeyabrāhmaṇa pañcikās: 7-9
and the Aitayeyāraṇyaka
Kṛṣṇayajurveda Taittirīya Śākhā
Year 1
Taittirīyabrāhmaṇa khaṇḍas: 1-2
Year 2
Taittirīyabrāhmaṇa 3rd khaṇḍa and Taittirīyāraṇyaka
Year 3
Taittirīyasaṃhitā khaṇḍas: 1-4
Year 4
Taittirīyasaṃhitā khaṇḍas: 4-7
Śuklayajurveda both Mādhyandina and Kāṇva recensions
Year 1
Vājasaneyisaṃhitā adhyāyas: 1-18
Year 2
Vājasaneyisaṃhitā adhyāyas: 19-40
Year 3
padapāṭha adhyāyas: 1-26
Year 4
padapāṭha adhyāyas: 27-40
kramapāṭha adhyāyas: 1-12
Year 5
kramapāṭha adhyāyas: 13-40
Sāmaveda both Rāṇāyanīya and Kauthuma recensions
Year 1
Pūrvārcika first adhyāya, complete agneya songs (gāna)
Year 2
Pūrvārcika adhyāyas 2 & 3, bṛhatyanta bahusāmi songs (gāna)
Year 3
Pūrvārcika complete, indrapuccha songs (gāna)
Year 4
Uttarārcika first half (10 adhyāyas), complete pavamāna songs (gāna)
Year 5
Uttarārcika second half and the forest song (āraṇyaka gāna)
Atharvaveda Śaunaka Śākhā
Year 1
Atharvavedasaṃhitā khaṇḍas: 1-10
Year 2
Atharvavedasaṃhitā khaṇḍas: 11-20
Year 3
Gopathabrāhmaṇa complete

=== PAGE 34 ===

Curricula of the Vedapāṭhaśālās in Maharashtra 
 97
Table 4. Curriculum for the Veda section for the examinations at the Vedaśāstrottejak Sabhā - 
Second Standard
Ṛgveda Śākala Śākhā
Year 1
Saṃhitā padapāṭha aṣṭakas: 1-4
Year 2
Saṃhitā padapāṭha aṣṭakas: 5-8
Year 3
Saṃhitā kramapāṭha aṣṭakas: 1-4
Year 4
Saṃhitā kramapāṭha aṣṭakas: 5-8
Kṛṣṇayajurveda Taittirīya Śākhā
Year 1
Saṃhitā padapāṭha khaṇḍas: 1, 3, 4 and khaṇḍa 2 praśnas 1-4
Year 2
Saṃhitā padapāṭha khaṇḍas: 5, 6, 7 and khaṇḍa 2 praśnas 5-8
Year 3
Saṃhitā kramapāṭha khaṇḍas: 1, 3, 4 and khaṇḍa 2 praśnas 1-4
Year 4
Saṃhitā kramapāṭha khaṇḍas: 5, 6, 7 and khaṇḍa 2 Saṃhitā ghanapāṭha
Śuklayajurveda both Mādhyandina and Kāṇva recensions
Year 1
Vājasaneyisaṃhitā jaṭāpāṭha 
Year 2
Vājasaneyisaṃhitā ghanapāṭha
Sāmaveda both Rāṇāyanīya and Kauthuma recensions
Year 1
Pūrvārcika padapāṭha complete; five adhyāyas of Uttarārcika; Ūhagāna 
daśarātraṃ and Ūhagāna saṃvatsara
Year 2
Uttarārcika padapāṭha: adhyāyas 6-10; ekāhaprabhṛti prayaścitta Ūhagāna.
Year 3
Uttarārcika padapāṭha second half, Ūhagāna kṣudraparva-rahasya and 
complete Mantrabrāhmaṇa
Atharvaveda Śaunaka Śākhā
Year 1
Atharvaveda padapāṭha khaṇḍas: 1-10
Year 2
Atharvaveda padapāṭha khaṇḍas: 11-20
Year 3
Atharvaveda kramapāṭha Complete

=== PAGE 35 ===
98 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
Table 5. Curriculum for the Veda section for the examinations at the Vedaśāstrottejak Sabhā - Third 
Standard
Ṛgveda Śākala Śākhā
No fixed time-frame 
jaṭāpāṭha and ghanapāṭha of the Ṛgvedasaṃhitā
Kṛṣṇayajurveda Taittirīya Śākhā
No fixed time-frame 
jaṭāpāṭha and ghanapāṭha of the Taittirīyasaṃhitā
Śuklayajurveda both Mādhyandina and Kāṇva recensions
No fixed time-frame 
Śatapathabrāhmaṇa
Sāmaveda both Rāṇāyanīya and Kauthuma recensions
No fixed time-frame 
Tāṇḍya Brāḥmaṇa, Ṣaḍviṃśa Brāhmaṇa
Atharvaveda Śaunaka Śākhā
No fixed time-frame 
jaṭāpāṭha and ghanapāṭha of the Atharvaveda
The curriculum is on the one hand very structured for the first part of the Vedic study 
— i.e. the core texts (Saṃhitā, Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka) — but on the other hand, 
there is more freedom of choice in how the students continue (or not) with their 
education. The structure of the examinations as practiced by institutions such as the 
Vedaśāstrottejak Sabhā are, in reality, only ideal schemes which are rarely followed 
ad pedem litterae. In practice, many of these schools do not send their students every 
year to the examinations, as students sometimes need longer (or shorter) amounts 
of time to learn the given curriculum. This particularly true for the schools of the 
‘Gurukula’ and ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā’type in which teachers can decide these matters more 
freely. Moreover, students who come from far away to Pune for the examinations 
might sit their examinations for two yearly units on the same occasion, instead of 
one for each, thus condensing the travel expenses into one year. Smaller schools 
will also make sure to send their students only once they are ready, which might not 
necessarily suit the calendar of the examinations, as it generally requires a week to 
ten days before the dīpāvali, one of the most popular Indian celebrations, that takes 
place in the month of Āśvayuja of the Hindu calendar (which usually falls in the 
month of October/November in the Gregorian calendar). Larger schools, which have a 
more-structured organization and a proper academic calendar, are less flexible with 
amendments to the curriculum.
From the accounts found in ancient literature, we cannot extract a clear curriculum 
valid for all the Vedic schools (not even for the schools of a single śākhā), even if the 
different systems of organizing the Vedic texts into segments points to a curricular 
structure in the oral transmission of the text (cf. Scharfe 2002: 249-50). One can 
assume, however, that each śākhā, and perhaps even individual schools belonging 
to the same śākhā, had their own system of organizing the curriculum. Scharfe, when 

=== PAGE 36 ===

Curricula of the Vedapāṭhaśālās in Maharashtra 
 99
referring to the Vedic curriculum in ancient India, notes: “We must also consider the 
possibilities that there were variations in educational practice from region to region 
and over long time-spans, especially when the study period was extended to run the 
full length of the year” (Scharfe 2002: 249), while Altekar also writes, “In ancient 
India there were no successive classes, examinations and clear-cut courses, as they 
exist in modern systems of education” (Altekar 1934: 110).
It is important to note that among the ṛgvedins of Maharashtra the claim of having 
the ‘ten books’ (daśagranthas) as their curriculum is not uncommon. These ten ‘books’ 
are the Saṃhitā, Brāhmaṇa, Āraṇyaka, Śikṣā, Kalpa, Vyākaraṇa, Nighaṇṭu, Nirukta, 
Chandas, and Jyotiṣa with the initial and primary focus in these schools being heavily 
placed on mastering the Saṃhitā, and sometimes the Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka,194 
but the actual requirement of knowledge of the other subjects, in particular the śikṣā, 
vyākaraṇa, and nirukta, is virtually non-existent. Galewicz (2011) also shows that 
a quasi-new canonization of the Ṛgveda into a single work containing the above-
mentioned daśagranthas is used in the Vedic schools of Maharashtra, and remarks 
that, even though the edition is common among the ṛgvedins, many people carrying 
this title have not studied in depth the portions beyond the Saṃhitā, Brāhmaṇa, and 
Āraṇyaka, plus the pada and krama permutations.
Among the kṛṣṇayajurvedins and sāmavedins, I did not encounter the claim of 
a mastery of the daśagranthas, but it is found among a few atharvavedins195 and 
occasionally among mādhyandina yajurvedins.
The curriculum is therefore not as uniform and clear-cut as it would seem to be 
at first sight. The Vedic education system of ancient India was perhaps so focused 
on its exact sonic transmission of its texts, and the curriculum grew so large, that 
family clans — which became the later śākhās — developed groups of specialists in 
the recitation of the Veda. These specialists became, as the auxiliary branches of 
knowledge grew, a small fraction within the brāhmaṇa intellectual occupations of 
each brāhmaṇa clan. 
Smritis are most disappointing as far as information about the curricula, method of teaching 
and examinations is concerned. They are content to observe that Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and 
Vaishyas should study the Vedas exclusively in the monsoon term, and the Vedas along with 
the Vedangas during the rest of the year. […] a little reflection will show that even the Brahmana 
community could not have been following this stereotyped curriculum throughout the several 
centuries of Ancient Indian History. The rise of new branches of knowledge must have affected 
the curriculum […] (Altekar 1983: 117). 
194 An alternative list of the daśagranthas includes padapāṭha and kramapāṭha instead of Nighaṇṭu 
and Āraṇyaka, but in a different order. 
195 Atharvavedins are in their majority ṛgvedins by birth, and have taken up the learning and teaching 
of this Veda to prevent it from extinction (cf. Howard 1986: 109; and Bahulkar, 2016). 

=== PAGE 37 ===
100 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
Scharfe points to the simplified versions of the Vedic corpus, or “shortcuts”, in 
which the student learns but a selection of hymns, and the first and last hymn in 
a section (anuvāka), or whatever the teacher considered adequate.196 Moreover, the 
daily recitation of the Veda (svādhyāya), considered the main duty of a brāhmaṇa, 
acquired a ritual structure and became a rite on its own called the brahmayajña. This 
daily ritual condenses the ideal and practice of giving and receiving instruction of the 
Veda into the recitation of a couple of Vedic mantras, this accompanied with simple 
ritual actions. This practice is still followed by many brāhmaṇas today, and is usually 
performed right after the daily practice of saṃdhyā. But the most extreme version of 
such a “short-cut” is perhaps the reduction of the whole Vedic corpus into a single 
mantra: the gāyatrī-mantra or, even more, into the Mantric monosyllable, oṁ.197 
3.6  Styles of Vedic Recitation 
As it was briefly pointed out above, according to tradition, there are two main modes 
for the recitation of the Veda; these are the natural modalities (prakṛti) and the 
permutations (vikṛti). In addition to these options, Vedic recitation can be done for its 
own sake as brahmayajña or in its ritual application (viniyoga), in which only portions 
of the mūla texts (i.e. saṃhitā) are used. In any case, whether the Veda is recited to 
oneself (svādhyāya) or for its ritual application, it has to be memorized, as has been 
shown above, according to the traditional methods through the mouth of a guru. 
Although the words of these texts themselves remain virtually unchanged, there 
exist different styles of recitation across India. The different styles of recitation 
represented in different locations across the country have been divided by some 
scholars (and by the communities of brāhmaṇas themselves) into South and North, 
which correspond largely to the geographic distribution of the ancient śākhās.198 
Influenced by factors such as the local languages, the recitations have developed 
unique styles which can be clearly distinguished from each other. A clear example 
of this is the White Yajurveda which is currently recited in two different styles as 
correlated to two slightly different textual recensions preserved in the two groups: 
kāṇva and mādhyandina. These differences, of course, go back to the different clans 
who preserved these texts in different regions of India and to the mythical founders 
of these śākhās according to the tradition.199 While there are few substantial changes 
196 Cf. Scharfe 2002: 249.
197 For a remarkable study on this syllable see: Moore Gerety 2015.
198 See: Gonda 1975: 44-45 and Witzel 1993.
199 These mythical figures are for the kāṇva śākhā and mādhyandina śākhā who were students of the 
famous sage Yājñavalkya according to the tradition. For more information on the language differences 
and regional distribution of these schools see: Witzel 1989.

=== PAGE 38 ===

Styles of Vedic Recitation  
 101
in the Vājasaneyisaṃhitā itself within the two śākhās, the recitation style is different. 
Without going into all the details of all the pecularities pertinent to the recitation 
styles200 of the kāṇva and mādhyandina śākhās, it will suffice to point out that the most 
notable differences between them is the use of handgestures (mudrās) that indicate 
the tones in the recitation of the Vājasaneyisaṃhitā: while kāṇva signals the tri-tonal 
marks of the text (udātta, anudātta and svarita) with up and down hand movements 
of the outstretched right arm (indicating only the anudātta and the svarita tones), the 
mādhyandina style “reads” the tonal marks of the same text differently altogether. The 
most important characteristic that can easily differentiate the two schools is that the 
mādhyandina style indicates the udātta middle-tone with a horizontal hand gesture, 
whereas the kāṇva allows only up and down hand movements. In fact, some teachers 
told me that this is exactly the reason why they are called mādhyandina śākhā, the 
word mādhya meaning “middle, meridian, central, in between” in Sanskrit. Therefore, 
while the actual content of the Vājasaneyisaṃhitā of the White Yajurveda may look 
almost the same in print, the oral recitation and the ritual practice of these two śākhās 
are evidently quite different from each other. 
A trend that can be observed in the contemporary Vedic schools of Maharashtra is, 
on one hand, an increase in the amount of śākhās and styles being revived in the state 
by importing traditions which were originally considered alien (or, for a long time, 
almost extinguished) in Maharashtra, and on the other hand a homogenization of 
recitational variations through standardization. The import/export of these recitation 
styles goes not without saying, particularly when it is an ‘artificial’ process, such as 
the reconstruction of a “tradition” from printed texts.201
The example of the Sāmaveda in Kerala, described by Staal (1961), might be an 
extreme one, but it is certainly not an isolated one, as Howard (1986) and others 
have shown. The Atharvaveda recitation has been revived in Benares through 
ṛgvedins, thereby adopting a distinctive ṛgvedīya style. The institutionalization of the 
curriculum and an increase in mobility has become an evident element to support a 
pan-Indian revival of the Vedas.
As we saw above in the examinations conducted in several institutions, greater 
mobility has slowly begun to blur the regional variations. Experts of Vedic branches 
are called in from other states not only to evaluate students, but also to teach in new 
Vedic schools.
200 It is noteworthy that even within the mādhyandina śākhā North Indian yajurvedins recite it 
in a different way from those of Maharashtra. For details on these two recitation styles and their 
differences see: Howard 1986.
201 For the case of the Sāmaveda in South India, see: Staal 1961: 66-67.

=== PAGE 39 ===
102 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
3.7  Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda
Besides the curricular variations discussed above, and the intrinsic differences in the 
recitation of each śākhā, one also finds methodological variations. These differences 
mainly refer to mnemotecnics, the intensity of the oral instruction, and the use of 
printed/handwritten manuscripts for the study of the Vedic texts. Other differences 
were found in schools regarding the “orthopraxy” of ritual behavior — i.e. the duties, 
rules, and regulations of daily life in regard to what is right and wrong while reciting 
or instructing the Veda (ritual purity, formality and restrictions) — as well as the 
protocols for relationships between teachers and students. These aspects will be 
dealt with in this section, which describes the procedures and modalities in which 
the Vedas are taught and studied, as observed during my fieldwork. 
Each Vedic recension has developed particularities in the recitation and oral 
transmission of the Veda. These particularities and styles have been textually preserved 
in the prātiśākhyas and other phonetic treatises of each śākhā. The scope and purpose 
of this work does not aim to study and synthesize all these treatises and practices, 
as have been developed over the centuries, neither to describe the differences in 
style that apply to the Vedic recitation of each recension. Therefore, in the following 
section, I have concentrated on giving a general and relatively overarching description 
of the methodology followed in the Vedic schools of Maharashtra. For more detailed 
information on each of the śākhās, or regional variations, the reader is referred to 
individual śikṣās and prātiśākhyas202, as well as to works such as the monographs of 
Staal and Howard on the recitation of the Nambudiris from Kerala and on the Vedic 
tradition in Benares, respectively.203 
I will focus here on the three main ways in which the Veda is formally studied. 
The first method common to all the śākhās is vedādhyāya, simply called santhā in 
Marathi,204 and in this context it refers to the specific technique for memorizing the 
Vedic corpus. The word comes from the Sanskrit saṃsthā which, among other things, 
has the connotation of “to fix or place upon.” In this case, it would refer to the placing 
or fixing of the Veda in the memory of the reciter. In such a session, the teacher (guru) 
is physically present to impart a given portion of the text to be learned on the given 
day. This technique introduces the new portions of the text to be learned by heart 
by the students in digestible segments. The specific content of the lessons and the 
technicalities — such as hand movements, intonation, and recitation style — of course 
vary from śākhā to śākhā, but the most widespread model in the schools I visited is 
202 For example, those edited by: Pataskar 2010a; Deshpande 2002; and Howard 1986. 
203 Staal 1961; Howard 1986. Additionally, Howard 1977, 1988a, 1988b on the Sāmavedic chant. 
204 saṃthā 1) Reading and conning in order to commit to memory. 2) The portion to be read and 
conned, a lesson (Molesworth 1857). 

=== PAGE 40 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 103
based on this type of repetition.205 The second type of lesson is the “revision” class, 
which is similar to the vedādhyāya. These sessions are generally called abhyāsa,206 
and consist of a technique called guṇaṇikā in Sanskrit, and guṇḍikā or guṇṇikā207 in 
Marathi. The main difference is the purpose of each lesson. While santhā is meant 
to introduce new material at a slower pace, in which smaller units (words or half 
pādas) are repeated twice (or trice) after the guru, the revision class or guṇḍikā 
method usually goes much faster and has the purpose of reviewing the material 
already introduced in the santhā sessions, and stringing the portions together. The 
third and last modality in which the Veda is learned is called svādhyāya and can also 
be translated as “recitation to one’s self”. Here, the student goes over the lessons by 
himself (or in small groups), making sure to completely memorize the text, usually 
aided by a printed edition of the text. 
In the next section, I will describe in detail the procedures of these three modalities 
of Vedic study (santhā, guṇḍikā, and svādhyāya), which are an integral part of a Vedic 
student’s daily schedule in the schools visited in Maharashtra. 
3.7.1  Spaces and Seating Arrangements for the Veda Instruction
Before going to the three modalities of Vedic study, I will briefly address the physical 
space in which instruction takes place, and I  will also briefly discuss seating 
arrangements. As we saw in the triple typology, the physical infrastructure of the 
‘school’ can vary drastically from one type to the next. While some schools have 
specific ‘classrooms’ where hundreds of students can sit, with the space being used 
exclusively for teaching and study, such as in the ‘Vedaviyālaya type’, in the other two 
types the learning spaces are used for diverse purposes. The classroom is often also 
the sleeping room. Even the pūjā room is used for a variety of purposes extending 
beyond religious practice. This is particularly so for smaller schools where space is 
limited and the space is weaved into the social life of the people who inhabit it. In the 
‘Gurukula type’ of school, where the model of joint-family is at the center of social 
interaction, there are no private spaces; or rather, they are demarcated by the norms 
of social interaction. For example, in relations of gender, the guru’s bedroom and the 
female quarters are taboo. In schools of the types ‘Vedapāṭhaśālā’ and ‘Vedavidyālaya’ 
the segregation of space is much more evident and there seems to be a clearer sense 
205 For a detailed illustration of these methods, see below. 
206 Some definitions given in Monier-Williams are: “reduplication; repetition; repetition of the last 
verse of a stanza or of the last word of a chapter; repeated or permanent exercise, discipline, use, 
habit, custom; repeated reading, study.” 
207 guṇṇikā 1) Reperusing and reciting in order to commit to memory, conning. The term evidently 
comes from guṇa > guṇita to be multiplied, or repeated over and over. 

=== PAGE 41 ===
104 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
of privacy. Here, students do not enter the guru’s house or quarters unless invited or 
in need of a particular service, and a clear sense of the guru’s family property versus 
that of the students is made apparent. 
In most of the schools visited, students sit with their teacher on the floor, either 
in the classroom or in the open (garden, porch, courtyard, etc.). Usually, students are 
facing the teacher in a semi-circle. Another very common way of sitting for this type of 
class involves half of the students facing one another in parallel rows, and the teacher 
sitting in the middle and at the head of the row, facing them in a sideways fashion 
(see plate 3).
Plate 3: Ved. M. Ghaisas and students of the Ved Bhavan sitting in the courtyard studying the Veda. 
Pune 2009.
The floor is often covered with a thin layer of cow dung and water solution, particularly 
if it is of a ritual enclosure (yajñaśālā). The students sit on square or rectangular mats 
made of different materials, the most common being white wool or cotton with a 
colourful border of silk (or similar fabrics), or more recently, colourful plastic stripes 
interwoven into different patterns. While students may have their own personal mat 
and never share their seat with other fellow students, in many schools, the sitting mats 
(particularly plastic ones) are interchangeable. They are also used to seat guests, and 
they serve as seats for other activities, such as eating lunch. Teachers in some schools 
have special seats. The most common is a wood stall that is raised a few centimeters 
from the ground on which the teacher puts his āsana (mat), which is usually of the 

=== PAGE 42 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 105
same material and form as those of the students. In a few cases, I observed that some 
teachers have special seats which are either considerably taller or have more layers of 
cloth, or even more rarely, the teacher will sit on a deerskin. The skin of a black deer is 
considered more auspicious than that of a spotted one, but both are considerably more 
prestigious than the use of a plastic mat.208 This practice contrasts with most of the 
prescriptions found in the Dharmasūtras regarding seats and sitting arrangements. In 
most of the schools I visited, the cardinal direction (north or east) for seating and the 
arrangement of teacher and students was not rigid for the Veda class, or at least not as 
relevant as the Dharmaśāstric rules instruct.209 For the personal svādhyāya, it seemed 
even less relevant. Also, the teaching enclosure is quite often not a fixed classroom 
(even if there might be one in the school for this purpose). Quite often, the instruction 
takes place alternatively in the courtyard, the garden under a tree, or some other spot 
within the school grounds. Sometimes, it is the students who suggest a particular spot 
and the teacher who agrees, but most of the time, it is the teacher who decides when 
and where to start a lesson. 
3.7.2  Introductory Lesson (Santhā) 
When a new section of the Veda is introduced to a student, the guru will initially break 
the verses or a long sentence into smaller units, which the students repeat after him, 
as will be shown below. Once the phrases have been memorized, the guru strings 
them into a whole sentence/paragraph, which is then repeated as a whole a couple 
of times in order to fix it mentally. Over time, longer and longer portions are strung 
together and committed to memory.
In the basic model for santhā, the teacher starts by reciting one-half of a pāda,210 
which the students repeat two or three times after him.211 The following illustration 
uses verse 1.024.01 from the Ṛgveda as an example. The letters a, b, c, d represent the 
pādas of the verse:
208 A brāhmaṇa teacher once asked me if I could bring him a deerskin from Europe since they are 
so difficult and expensive to obtain in India. Since the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 regarding the 
hunting and dealing of endangered animal species, such animal skin can not be obtained legally.
209 Usually, the auspicious direction is facing the north or the east. For example, GautDhS 1.54: 
“When he is given permission, he should sit at the teacher’s right facing the east or the north” 
(Olivelle 2000: 123).
210 The term pāda here is used broadly in both the sense of a “quarter of a verse”, as well as a 
fragment of a sentence or line. The santhā procedure is applied for the memorization of both prose 
as well as verse texts (or portions of them). For an example of prose fragmentation, see below in this 
chapter. 
211 It is usually ṛgvedins who repeat three times after the guru, whereas the rest of the śākhās usually 
only repeat twice.

=== PAGE 43 ===
106 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
a) kásya nūnáṃ katamásyāmṛtānām
b) mánāmahe cā́ru devásya nā́ma
c) kó no mahyā́ áditaye púnar dāt
d) pitáraṃ ca dṛśéyam mātáraṃ ca
teacher: kásya nūnáṃ (breath) 
students: kásya nūnáṃ / kásya nūnáṃ / kásya nūnáṃ (breath)
teacher: katamásyāmṛtānām (breath)
students: katamásyāmṛtānām / katamásyāmŕ̥tānām / katamásyāmŕ̥tānām (breath)
teacher: mánāmahe cā́ru (breath)
students: mánāmahe cā́ru / mánāmahe cā́ru / mánāmahe cā́ru (breath)
teacher: devásya nā́ma (breath)
students: devásya nā́ma / devásya nā́ma / devásya nā́ma (breath) 
teacher: kó no mahyā́ (breath)
students: kó no mahyā́ / kó no mahyā́ / kó no mahyā́ (breath)
teacher: áditaye púnar dāt (breath)
students: áditaye púnar dāt / áditaye púnar dāt / áditaye púnar dāt (breath)
teacher: pitáraṃ ca dṛśéyam (breath)
students: pitáraṃ ca dṛśéyam / pitáraṃ ca dr̥śéyam / pitáraṃ ca dṛśéyam (breath)
teacher: mātáraṃ ca (breath)
students: mātáraṃ ca / mātáraṃ ca / mātáraṃ ca (breath)
After this, via the same procedure, the instruction continues to the next verse, 1.024.02 
(agnér vayám prathamásyāmṛ́tānām...). 
Traditionally, the guru teaches new chapters for a period of ten consecutive 
days, as illustrated in the above example. In one normal day of instruction, around 
30 verses are repeated in this mode. Usually, it takes ten santhā sessions, plus ten 
revision sessions (guṇḍikā), as well as a varying number of svādhyāya sessions, for 
students to memorize a chapter.212 It takes approximately one month to master a 
chapter, depending upon the duration and frequency of the classes, the difficulty of 
the passage being studied, and the capacity of a student. An estimate given to me by 
one of the vaidikas as an example is the Puruṣasūkta, which is committed to memory 
by young boys in approximately six days of intensive study. Students who did not 
start their training at an early age (8-10 years old) usually take longer, from 10 days to 
two weeks to memorize the same sūkta. Most of the vaidikas consulted agreed that, in 
general, younger boys are able to accomplish more in less time.213
212 There are several methods to divide the different Vedic texts; here, by “chapter” I mean one 
anuvāka, but this can vary depending on the Vedic text being studied and the division system used in 
a particular school. For more on these divisions of text, see: Renou 1957: 1-18 and Scharfe 2002: 250.
213 Interview with V. Goḍboḷe, 03.03.2009, Satara and interview with A. Jośī, 06.07.2009, Beed.

=== PAGE 44 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 107
As shown in the example above, in the first (and occasionally also in the second) 
santhā sessions, the teacher recites half of a pāda, which students repeat twice in 
unison after him. During the second and third sessions, they repeat one or two full 
pādas after the guru, this being equivalent to half of a verse of four pādas.214 In the 
fifth and sixth sessions, the pupils repeat two complete verses after the guru. Then, 
from the seventh to the tenth santhā, they repeat more verses or sentences (vākyas) 
in a row, twice after the guru.215 One unit of ten repetitions, as mentioned above, is 
called santhā or, also, upadeśa. The guṇḍikā session, as will be shown below, serves 
to string the verses and portions together and to get the focus away from the printed 
text by increasing the speed of recitation.216
The above section described the santhā methodology, which is the most widely 
used in the schools I visited; however, there is a variation to the santhā technique 
which can also be observed in some schools of the region. The teacher starts by 
initially reciting the first pāda “a” of a verse once, with the students repeating. Each 
step then increases the number of pada repetitions in the following way: 
1) Teacher: a 
Students: a
2) Teacher: aa
Students: aa
…
7) Teacher: aaaaaaa
Students: aaaaaaa
The maximum number of pāda “a” repetitions is seven. By the end of the seven 
rounds, 28 repetitions of pāda “a” have been completed. After the seven rounds for 
the pāda “a”, repetitions for pāda “b” begin, according to the same procedure used 
for pāda “a”.
214 Verses can consist of four pādas varying from 5 to 27 syllables, depending on the metres. There 
are also verses that have a different division, e.g. the famous gāyatrī metre that has three instead of 
four pādas. For more on the division of the verses and Vedic prosody, see: Arnold 1905; Oldenberg 
1982; Winternitz (1986: 5-35), and Macdonell 1966: 436-447. 
215 In the case of the Yajurveda, a pañcāśat (i.e. fifthy words (padas)) are counted as a unit 
independent of the verses or phrases. 
216 According to M. Deshpande (1995: 131), “We are told [in the Kātyāyana’s Vārtttikas on Pāṇini 
1.1.70, and 1.4.109] that there are three speeds of pronouncing the mantras i.e. fast (druta), medium 
(madhyama), and slow (vilambita). Of these, the fast speed is supposed to be used when a student is 
reciting the mantras for his own study. In the ritual use of the mantras, one is supposed to use the 
medium speed. A teacher is supposed to use the slow speed to recite the mantras while teaching his 
students. Using an inappropriate speed at the wrong occasion creates unacceptable situations, and in 
this sense, the speed is a distinctive feature at this level.” 

=== PAGE 45 ===
108 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
After the four pādas of the verse (or sentences, in the case of prose) have been 
completed, the next procedure is followed:
1) Teacher: ab 
Students: ab
2) Teacher: abab
Students: abab
...
7) Teacher: ababababababab 
Students: ababababababab
The same procedure is repeated to cluster pādas “c” and “d” together. After this 
section of the lesson, the same method is applied to the complete verse. Finally, the 
method is repeated for the whole chapter/section (anuvāka).
While the first santhā technique is the most widespread one, the second santhā 
technique can be observed among some śuklayajurvedins, and occasionally among 
ṛgvedins in Maharashtra. Mohanathas (2003: 58-61) also described the second 
technique as the one prevalent in the schools she visited in Alandi. While Dubois 
(2013: 51-74), Aithal (1991: 12), Scharfe (2002: 244-5), Staal (1961: 59-61), and Fuller 
(1997: 8-9) have described the first type (although partly with other regional names.) 
The prose texts such as the Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka, as well as some portions 
of the Taittirīyāsaṃhitā, have no metre and, therefore, the pāda division of it is not 
used; instead, the division into sentences (vākya) is preferred. The santhā lesson here 
is comprised of ten sentences. The guru initially breaks the sentences into shorter 
units, which are easy to recall. As the guru breaks the phrases into clusters of words, 
he adheres to the rules of tone and accentuation (svara). This means that the accent 
of the final syllables will change according to those rules. Let me illustrate this with 
the first line of the śāntimantra in the Taittirīyāraṇyaka [4.1.1], which has particularly 
long sentences:

namo̍ vā̱ce yā co̍di̱tā yā cānu̍ditā̱ tasyai̍ vā̱ce namo̱ namo̍ vā̱ce namo̍ vā̱caspata̍ye̱ 
nama̱ ṛṣi̍bhyo mantra̱kṛdbhyo̱ mantra̍pratibhyo̱ mā māmṛṣa̍yo mantra̱kṛto̍ 
mantra̱pata̍ya̱ḥ parā̍du̱rmā’hamṛṣī̎nmantra̱kṛto̍ mantra̱patī̱nparā̍dāṁ vaiśvade̱vīṁ 
vāca̍mudyāsam̐ śi̱vamada̍stāṁ̱ juṣṭāṁ̎ de̱vebhyāśśarma̍ me̱ dyauśśarma̍ pṛthi̱vī 
śarma̱ viśva̍mi̱daṁ jaga̍t|
Teacher: namo̍ vā̱ce (breath) 
Students: namo̍ vā̱ce / namo̍ vā̱ce (breath)
Teacher: yā co̍di̱tā (breath) 
Students: yā co̍di̱tā / yā co̍di̱tā (breath)
Teacher: yā cānu̍ditā̍
Students: yā cānu̍ditā̍ / yā cānu̍ditā̍
… etc.

=== PAGE 46 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 109
Note that, when recited as an independent phrase, the final [tā̍] in cānu̍ditā̍ is not 
anudātta [tā̱], as in the original text, but stays svarita through the rules of svara.217
The santhā classes that I was able to observe lasted anywhere between one-and-
a-half to three hours, depending on the length of the chapter or the prose section to 
be learned. 
During the class, the teacher sits quietly and corrects the students when they 
make a mistake in pronunciation or recite the incorrect note of the mantra. From the 
reactions I observed from different teachers, and in my conversations with them, it 
seems that a tonal (svara) mistake is as grave as a mistake in pronunciation (if not being 
more serious). The svara mistakes are often not tolerated, and teachers put particular 
emphasis on correct accentuation, whereas stress on clear diction and articulation 
seems to be secondary. During a class, the teacher only corrects the students by 
repeating the word in the proper intonation and pronunciation, but does not give any 
additional instructions in the class. His corrections are sometimes accompanied by up 
and down movements of his right hand, these indicating the correct svaras. Of course, 
in branches where the mudrās or hand-movements accompanying the recitation are 
mandatory (Sāmaveda and both recentions of the White Yajurveda), the teacher will 
put special stress on their correct execution. 
Comparing the contemporary classes with the ideal ‘classes’ set for students and 
teachers, as presented in the dharmaśāstra literature and the Prātiśākhyas, one can 
trace elements, methods, and values that have prevailed (or have been reconstructed) 
from these sources. But we can also observe new elements, deviations, innovations, 
and contradictions. It is perhaps on the level of formal instruction that we have the 
greatest variations to the Dharmaśāstric rules. In most of the schools I visited, there 
was no conscious effort to abide by these rules. In fact, the majority of the teachers 
and students were not aware of them. This means that they had not read the texts 
concerned, or at least not thoroughly, and instead simply reproduced the style of 
teaching they had learned from their respective teachers. For example, during the 
formal instruction, the seating configurations were almost never followed the rules 
indicated by the Śāstric texts (and if they ever were, it seemed that it was rather by 
an embodied disposition that was informed by a conviction of their ancestors, as 
opposed to the personal conviction of the current teacher).
The lessons I observed during my fieldwork never started in the same way as that 
described in the Dharmaśāstric rules. The lesson usually started and ended with a 
217 The accentuation rules, as well as the pronunciation of particular words or syllables, are unique 
to each śākhā. These specific phonetic rules are only valid within the same recension, although 
variations in style are found even from region to region within the same Vedic branch. Notation 
systems for the accents also vary from śākhā to śākhā. Cf. Staal 1961: 27-30; and Scharfe 2012. For 
more examples of how the svaras change in the recitation of Ṛgveda, see: Dharmadhikari 2000. 

=== PAGE 47 ===
110 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
simple “hariḥ oṁ”,218 and none of the other formulas to address the guru described in 
the ancient texts were used.219 During class, I never saw any student ritually holding 
kuśa (or any other sacred grass) as it is prescribed in some Dharmasūtras.220 Once the 
material of the class has been covered according to the above mentioned method, 
both teachers and students close the class, usually by saying the mantra “hariḥ 
oṁ” or “oṁ” all together (usually, quickly and without giving it much emphasis, 
and at a speed and intonation common to normal language). Therefore, besides the 
recitation of this short mantra, there are no traces left of the formulas prescribed by 
the Dharmaśāstric literature to finish the class (cf. Scharfe 2002: 223-4).221 Once 
the class is over, the students bow to their teacher one by one and then disperse. 
Some of them complete a “full-praṇāma” (placing the whole body on the ground 
with the arms stretched in the añjali gesture); this expression of respect is also called 
daṇḍavat-praṇāma or the “stick-like prostration”. Alternatively, students prostrate by 
kneeling down and putting their forehead on the ground, close to the guru’s feet with 
the hands facing down. This is done whether the teacher is standing or sitting.
3.7.3  Revision Class (Guṇḍikā)
As described above, the santhā method is designed to introduce new material to the 
pupils. In this case, the revision class, called guṇḍikā, is designed to train the memory 
of the pupils, and aims particularly at getting the focus off of the printed text. The 
guṇḍikā exercise is done in ten revision sessions for the beginner students, and six 
for the advanced ones — i.e. those students having memorized a whole “book” (for 
example, the TB.) In the guṇḍikā method, the students recite one pañcāśat, under 
the supervision of the guru,222 for ten sessions. In this exercise, the dynamics of the 
recitation are different. While in the santhā sessions, the pupils repeat after the guru, 
in the guṇḍikā session, and the guru commonly only listens and corrects the recitation 
when necessary. It is also not the whole group simultaneously who recites the text back 
to the guru, but the pupils take turns in reciting the given material (either sentences 
or portions), as exemplified in the description above. Another very common method 
218 Or a similar invocation, such as “śrī gurubhyo namaḥ hariḥ oṁ”.
219 ŚāṅGS IV 8,12. ŚāṅGS IV 8,16 referred to by: Scharfe 2002: 224-5. See also: Mookerji 1998: 188.
220 ŚāṅGS II 7,5. “grasping young kuśa shoots with both hands — the right hand being on top —, 
[holding the shoots] between them”; ĀśvGS III 4,7, with Haradatta’s commentary; MānDhŚ II 71. Also 
cf. Kane 1962-75: 32.
221 According to the ŚGS IV 8,16, the class should end with the formula: “We have finished, sir!” 
(viratāḥ sma bho3ḥ) being recited by the students, the teacher responding with the words: virsṛṣṭaṃ; 
virāmas tāvad: “Dismissed! A rest, for the time being!” ŚGS IV 8,17 (virsṛṣṭaṃ; virāmas tāvad iti’ eke).
222 Although, as will be shown below, a replacement — usually an advanced student — can also 
accompany the pupils in this exercise. 

=== PAGE 48 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 111
within the guṇḍikā session is to let the pupil recite as much as he can by memory and, 
once he makes a mistake, or is unsure of the next sentence, the teacher asks the next 
student to continue from where the previous one faltered. The second student then 
recites until he makes a mistake, and then gives his turn to the next student, and 
so on. The students signal a completed round of the pañcāśat with one clap for one 
repetition and two claps for two repetitions. The whole process also happens without 
much verbal intervention from the teacher (except for when mistakes are made). 
Other than the actual recitation of the mantras, the class remains silent. 
In subsequent guṇḍikā sessions, whole verses or several pādas are taken together 
and without the aid of the printed text. The teacher starts by reciting the first sentence, 
with this modelling also the speed of the recitation, and this is then repeated by the 
students at the same pace. The teacher deliberately accelerates the tempo of the 
recitation to get the focus away from the printed text. The faster the recitation speed, 
the more difficult it becomes to read the whole words and sentences. The text becomes 
only a sort of aide-mémoire or map, which helps the student to roughly locate the 
passage in turn, which he has started to memorize. In fact, after a few of the guṇḍikā 
sessions, the student is not allowed to use the book and has to recite from memory. If 
a student makes a mistake while reciting, the teacher will emphasize the correction 
at a lower speed and by clearly articulating the correct pronunciation and intonation. 
The revision session (guṇḍikā) sometimes precedes the vedādhyāya in the same 
study session, although they are generally separate sessions. For the revision classes, 
the guru does not always have to be present. The role can be filled by an advanced 
student who already knows the portion if the teacher cannot attend the class for some 
reason. For the vedādhyāya class, the guru’s presence is indispensable.
For the passage being studied, the guṇḍikā session is introduced to the students 
only once they have finished the santhā sessions for the same passage. But it also 
happens that, while in the mornings new material is being introduced, the afternoon 
sessions are used for the revision classes, so that, while the new material is being 
introduced, the older lessons are being revised on the same day. 
The following is an example of a description of a guṇḍikā session, as observed in 
the Śrī Kṛṣṇayajurveda Pāṭhaśāla of Satara. At 8.30 a.m., the students are ready for 
their first class, after washing their hands and feet, and brushing their teeth. They 
gather in the courtyard on a colourful blanket with their āsanas, wooden bookstands, 
and books to begin their class. Three students have taken their places and set up the 
texts to recite in front of them. The three missing students are late for class. When 
they arrive, the guru has not yet arrived. After 15 minutes, the teacher comes by and 
the students become quiet. He tells them that this morning he has to go to Sajjengar 
for some business, and that one of the advanced students will be the guide for the 
revision session of the morning. An advanced student is called in by the guru and 
sits down with the students while the guru leaves for his business. Without much 
exchanging of words, the students swiftly start the class. The senior student takes 
the book of one of the students and familiarizes himself with the section they are 

=== PAGE 49 ===
112 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
learning. He starts by reciting directly the first verse (without “hariḥ oṁ” or any other 
opening formula) while the rest of the students immediately join in. All together, they 
recite the first mantra of the third chapter of the Taittirīyāraṇyaka. After this, they 
start the guṇḍikā exercise. This is a circular repetition of a chapter or section in which 
each student repeats one or several textual units (pāda), ‘chaining’ or ‘waving’ the 
mantra. The last word of the pāda is then repeated by the next student, who starts 
with the next pāda. This continues until the whole chapter has been recited at least 
once, although two and sometimes three repetions are common in one session. In 
this case, the students only recite one round and move to the next chapter. The senior 
student corrects them in the exact same way the guru would do it by saying the word 
in an emphatic tone, with the right way of recitation or by queing the student with the 
first two or three words if the student has failed to remember. If the student is unable 
to remember the correct sequence or has a sudden “blank” and cannot continue the 
sentence or section, then the guru (or, in this case, the senior student) signals with 
his finger the next student who is supposed to pick up where the previous student 
stopped. There are no interruptions in the recitation, except when mistakes are made. 
However, even when this is the case, there are no explanations of any kind. 
If a student needs to stand up to go to the bathroom or to get a drink, he does this 
with consent of the guru. The student does not speak while the recitation is going on, 
but signals his desire to go to the bathroom, sometimes by using the pan-Indian signal 
of raising the pinky finger. If there is a verbal intervention on the part of the student or 
the teacher (for example, if his mobile phone rings), the recitation simply continues. 
In some occasions, I  observed teachers taking phone calls or receiving visitors in 
another room, and while speaking with the other person, he would simultaneously 
correct his students when mistakes occurred in the recitation. The teacher would be 
listening to both the conversation and the recitation of his students. 
The class closes with the repetition of the last verse of the chapter, followed by 
a quick “oṁ”. The senior student stands up and leaves the courtyard. The rest of the 
students also stand up quickly and disperse. Usually, students offer their respect to 
their instructors by bowing to their feet, but this time there is no prostration, as the 
senior student has not yet gained that level of respect.
At times, one or more students may have some problems with the memorization 
or correct pronunciation of the passage. Usually, this happens when a student does 
not learn as diligently as the others during his personal study time (svādhyāya), or 
when he is distracted for some reason. Also, some students naturally learn faster than 
others. 
3.7.3.1  Grouping of Words
To aid the memorization, there are several mnemotechnic devices that help the 
reciter to retain and access the text at will. Each śākhā has its own tradition of such 
devices. Generally speaking, the inner logic and the mnemonic devices of each 

=== PAGE 50 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 113
Vedic branch can be divided into: metrical devices (i.e. the verse structure and its 
melodies or intonation), bodily gestures (mudrās), counting techniques, numbered 
lists (for example, the indexes called anukramaṇīs), visualizations,223 and the above 
description of chunking the verses into digestible units that can be more easily 
memorized. Then there are, of course, the famous permutation devices called vikṛtis.
In the Kṛṣṇayajurveda, the following mnemotechnic device is used: a break, 
ideally every 50 padas (words), called a pañcāśat224 is introduced, in which there is 
a pause in recitation, similar to the pause at the end of a sentence. At the end of the 
section concerned, the phrases at the breaks are repeated, and the phrase at the final 
break is then followed by the number of words that exist till the end of the section. 
Finally, at the end of a kāṇḍa, the first words of each anuvāka are repeated, as an aid 
to memorize the sequence of anuvākas. The break, being independent of the length of 
the verses or phrases, does not always coincide with the start of a verse or sentence. 
To illustrate this, let us consider the following example: the 5th praśna of the 4th kāṇḍa 
of Taittirīyasaṃhitā, more commonly known as Śatarudrīya, which consists of 11 
anuvākas.225
In the first anuvāka, the first break for the purpose of memorization after 
approximately 50 words is:
yāmiṣuṁ̍ giriśaṁta̱ haste̍ / bibha̱rṣyasta̍ve |
The “/” indicates the break where the student will pause to breathe in the recitation. 
This is only for study purposes, as, in the normal saṃhitā recitation, there would be 
no pause, and we would have:
yāmiṣuṁ̍ giriśaṁta̱ haste̱ bibha̱rṣyasta̍ve |
The next breaks are at “ye ce̱mām̐ ru̱drā a̱bhito̍ di̱kśu / śri̱tāḥ sa̍hasra̱śo’vai̍ṣā̱ṁ̱...”, 
then “hasta̱ iṣa̍va̱ḥ / parā̱ tā bha̍gavo vapa”, and “u̱bhābhyā̍m/u̱ta te̱ namo̍...”. At the 
end of the 1st anuvāka, the student will repeat all the break points, reciting: “haste̍ 
di̱kśiṣa̍va̱ u̱bhābhyā̍m dvāvi(gum̐)’śatiśca”, thus summarizing all the word groups. 
“dvāvi(gum̐)’śatiśca”, or “dvāviṁśat ca”, refers to the 21 words remaining from the 
last break to the end of the anuvāka. Note how, even in this final phrase, the rules of 
223 Patton’s (2004) observations on the visualization techniques at the Śrī Yogīrāj Veda Vijñān 
Āśram, in her book Bringing the Gods to Mind: Mantra and ritual in early Indian sacrifice, seem to be 
a rather unique trait of Nānājī Kāḷe’s school and when I was there in 2009 and 2011 these techniques 
were not, or only minimally, employed during class. 
224 It is not always the case that this break happens every 50 words; it can be anywhere between 40 
to 60. These breaks have been marked traditionally, and none of the vaidikas were able to give me the 
explanation for the irregularity in the counts. 
225 Starting with “om nama̍ste rudra ma̱nyava̍ u̱tota̱ iṣa̍ve̱ nama̍ḥ...”

=== PAGE 51 ===
114 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
saṃdhī and svara according to the Taittirīya style apply. At the end of the 11th anuvāka, 
which is the end of the 5th praśna, the first two words of each anuvāka are repeated 
following the same procedure, helping the student to memorize the sequence. 
This system enables the reciter to build word-clusters in his mind that he can then 
string together. This helps to identify the different text sections, and serves as a sort of 
index within which the reciter can quickly find the text portion he needs.
Another mnemotechnic device is the use of mantrapratīka, where certain mantras 
that have already appeared earlier in the saṃhitā are not recited again in full. Instead, 
only the first few words are uttered to “remind” the student of the whole verse or 
elided section. For example, there is the mahāśāntimantra at the start of the pravargya 
brāhmaṇa section (5th praśna), which is the final anuvāka of the pravargya mantras. 
These mantras form the 4th praśna of the Taittirīyāraṇyaka, which the student will 
already have learned by the time he learns this portion. The mantras begin with “śaṁ 
no̱ vāta̍ḥ pavatāṁ...”. While reciting during his studies, the student will simply recite 
“śannas tanno mā hā̍sīt”. Here, the word “śannas” = “śaṁ naḥ”, refers to the first two 
words of the anuvāka, and “mā hā̍sīt” to the last two words of the anuvāka. All the 
intervening words (about eight minutes of recitation) of this portion are understood 
to “have been recited.” 
These devices help the student memorizing new portions by their remembering 
these ‘shortcuts’ that have occurred before. This is quite similar to the methodology 
also employed by Pāṇini, who uses short formulas to imply rules or groups of 
grammatical units with certain characteristics.226 
3.7.3.2  Pattern Recognition
A student learning the Veda can identify certain patterns that help him memorize 
the text. Some mantras appear to be deliberately composed in a way that helps with 
memorization. For example, the Bhṛguvallī in the Taittirīyaopaniṣad has similar 
phrases and structures, which repeat themselves and make memorizing these 
mantras relatively easy. The patterns in the accentuation and metre are additional 
elements that aid memorization.227 
Sometimes, the text has mantras which contain numbers, like in the section 
known as the Camakam of Śatarudrīya mentioned above. Students may thus memorize 
the sequence of numbers as an aid to memorization. While reciting portions with 
numbers or, when a section of text needs to be repeated a number of times, the reciter 
usually counts with the help of his fingers. Using a complex system in which each 
226 For example, the first sūtra of the Aṣṭādhyāyī “vṛddhir ādaiC” denotes, by the term “aiC”, a group 
of phonemes {ā, ai, au}. Here, the capital “C” denotes a special meta-linguistic symbol. These symbols 
are called it or anubandhas in Pāṇinian grammar.
227 For more on the repetitions in the Veda, see, e.g.: Bloomfield 1916 and Gonda 1959.

=== PAGE 52 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 115
finger is divided into 3 sections (the phalanges), while using the thumb as a pointer, 
each phalanx228 can be counted to give a total of 12 counts on one hand. Furthermore, 
by using the other hand to mark five multiples of 12, one can extend the count up to 
60. 
Even if this is a great aid to memory, students still need to remember the right 
intonation (svaras) of the mantras, which is as important, if not more so, as the words 
themselves. Although students report that learning the accents is difficult, once 
they have become accustomed to it, the structure given through intonation helps the 
memorization of a certain passage. Therefore, the prose sections and those parts of 
the Veda, which are recited in monotone (ekaśruti), have in general no easy structure, 
and learning them requires extra effort on the part of the student. 
3.7.4  Self-study (Svādhyāya and Brahmayajña)
It is the soft recitation of the Veda that he should tirelessly perform every day at the proper time— 
for this is his highest Law, they say; others are called secondary Laws. 
–Mānavadharmaśāstra IV.147
In addition to the formal instruction of the Veda, as described above, the student will 
recite by himself each portion learned in class over and over again229 as part of his 
self-study. The self-study (svādhyāya) is one of the most important parts of the day 
of a brāhmaṇa student. At least a couple of hours of the day are spent in reciting for 
himself the portions to be memorized. The practice of brahmayajña,230 or svādhyāya, 
allows the student to revise sections he has learned over a period of days. This is 
sometimes done in pairs or in small groups where the participants need to revise the 
same portion or have the same difficulties with the text. Some students pair with their 
best friends to revise the lesson or portions of text they need to revise. Sometimes, 
however, after evaluating the performance of his students, the guru can order weaker 
students to study together during the regular free time until they have mastered the 
given portion, this while the students who have successfully memorized the portion 
228 The distal phalanx, middle phalanx, and proximal phalanx of each finger.
229 According to the students and teachers who were asked in different schools, usually a student 
repeats between 5 and 10 times the lesson previously studied in class.
230 The term brahmayajña can either refer to the daily recitation of the Veda in general or it can refer 
to the later ritualized and condensed recitation in which only a few verses of the Vedas are recited, 
and which usually follow right after the saṃdhyāvandana ritual. If not noticed otherwise, I have opted 
for the term svādhyāya to refer to the daily recitation of the Veda and as a technical term for the 
individual recitation for study purposes, and brahmayajña for the ritual of the same name. 

=== PAGE 53 ===
116 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
are able to go and play, or take care of other tasks in the school, such as watching after 
the cows or cleaning the stable (gośāla). 
In some schools, svādhyāya is mostly encouraged when the guru is absent from 
the school, or is in the school but taking care of other business besides teaching his 
students. Sometimes, if the guru is absent for longer periods throughout the day, the 
students are asked to memorize the lessons learned so far with him through self-study. 
When the guru comes back, he may often evaluate the students one by one to see if 
they have properly memorized the text. Students who have not properly memorized 
the text are usually punished by their being depriving of their free time, and asked to 
double their self-study efforts. This internal evaluation process as well as the formal, 
institutionalized examination procedure will be described in the following section. 
The students generally sit either alone or in duos in order to revise the lessons in 
which they are still weak. They sit with their books and choose a quiet corner of the 
school. Some of the children have a favorite corner of their own. When they recite 
alone, they do so by generally muttering with less amplitude, although some of them 
prefer to recite in a louder voice when they are not being watched or heard by anyone. 
There is no single technique to memorizing these lessons. Some students read 
the sentence one time, and repeat it without looking at the text a second time before 
moving to the next sentence. Others do several recitations of the same portion over 
and over again until they feel comfortable with it. In order to catch up with the rest 
of the group, the slower students will have to study during their free time, or they are 
are occasionally exempted from certain household chores so that they may devote 
themselves fully to the memorization of a text. 
3.7.5  The Written Text as a Mnemotic Map
Most schools use Indian printed editions or private manuscripts of the text used 
in class. Photocopies of either the manuscript or the printed edition are also not 
uncommon. They are often wrapped in a colourful silk cloth, particularly if they 
are hand-written manuscripts, although these are usually reserved for the teachers 
or kept in the school’s libraries, or even in teacher’s homes, as items of religious 
value worthy of being treasured. The printed books are usually covered in the way 
modern schoolbooks are protected: enveloped with plastic, paper, or both (the use 
of newspaper is not uncommon). Sometimes students decorate their printed books 
with stickers of all kinds, and particularly of Hindu gods, but also of other motifs like 
cartoons, as found in regular schools across India. 
The book is quite often placed on a wooden stall in front of the student. In the 
case of a manuscript or photocopies of the text, the stall is rather inconvenient, 
and the text is then placed on the silk napkin or on the wooden cover that protects 
the manuscript. Sometimes, a heavy object is also placed on the page in case the 

=== PAGE 54 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 117
classroom or the teaching enclosure is windy. In several cases, I observed the use of a 
piece of glass to allow better visibility of the text. 
In the Hindu traditions, sacred scriptures and books in general are considered to 
be holy objects in which the goddess of language, arts, and learning — Sarasvatī — 
abides, and thus in most vedapāṭhaśālās, the books are handled with great care and 
respect; in particular, this applies to manuscripts. However, in some of the schools, 
the pupils seem to be more careless while handling them. In these places, books are 
often damaged and teachers do not seem to encourage the proper care of them or 
punish the students when books are mishandled. Some vedapāṭhaśālās have private 
libraries in which Vedic books and manuscripts are kept. These are, nonetheless, 
rarely used for pedagogical purposes during the formal classes. They are there for 
private consultation of both students and teachers, and are usually well-kept. 
The use of the printed texts is not even remotely close to that of the role textbooks 
have in regular secular schools. Writing, as has been noted by many scholars 
previously, is only able to reproduce the multifaceted Vedic sound in a very limited 
way. As the great variety of Vedic manuscripts show, the notation systems developed 
to indicate elements of Vedic recitation, such as iterations and loops, mean that the 
manuscripts themselves can not reproduce sound. The particular pronunciation of 
words, and the pitch variations as well as hand-movements (mudrās), accompanying 
the recitation are missing in these notations. Therefore, human intervention is 
required which results in the the personal interpretation and style of the vaidikas in 
different regions. 
Anyone who attempts to reproduce the sound directly from the manuscripts, 
without the aid of a master expert in the sound, will never to do so correctly in the 
eyes of the tradition. There are too many vital elements intrinsic to the recitation of 
the Veda that are missing from the manuscripts, and which can only obtained from 
direct instruction from the guru. Therefore, printed texts can be considered as a type 
of linguistic ‘map’ which is occasionally referred to when one is lost. But the reciter 
does not look at the map constantly, or else they may overlook the landscape. Another 
comparison that can be useful here is of the notations used in music. The notation 
serves the music student in learning the piece, but the goal is to internalize the 
musical piece by heart so that he can produce a unique interpretation. The notations 
then serve the musician to guide his execution of the piece, but this interpretation 
cannot be learned by learning to read the notes on the paper alone; a music teacher is 
needed to learn how to play the piece and infuse it with feeling. 
3.7.6  Examinations
In the gurukula system, the evaluation process happens mainly internally, and as part 
of the teaching process. As shown above in the description of the methodology used 
in the schools to master the recitation of the Veda, the guru is making sure at each 

=== PAGE 55 ===
118 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
repetition that the student performs properly and so reproduces the text. Therefore, 
a formal examination system is indispensable. Moreover, the ritual application 
of certain parts of the text and the ritualized group recitations231 are further ways 
in which the proper recitation and application of mantras can be put to the test. 
Nonetheless, as will be shown below, formal examinations have increasingly become 
a crucial element in the education of the vaidikas of Maharashtra in recent years.
The inherent and continuous evaluation, which happens in the schools 
themselves or within the brāhmaṇa community in a rather informal way, is what I call 
internal evaluation. In contrast, the external evaluation is presumably a relatively 
new mode of testing the recitation ability and memory of a student.232 The external 
type of examination happens usually once a year, and it takes place outside the 
school, as organized by different independent organizations. For the past 150 years, 
in Maharashtra, it is mainly the Vedaśāstrottejak Sabhā located in Pune which 
has been gathering Vedic experts from all over the country to conduct the yearly 
examinations.233 Through the influence of Western education and the emergence of a 
new Sanskrit scholarship during the nineteenth century, traditional brāhmaṇas feared 
their education might not survive unless some special efforts were made. Therefore, 
in 1875, an ideologically heterogeneous group of brāhmaṇa enthusiasts founded the 
VŚS to protect against the extinction of the traditional Sanskrit education. The group 
had famous personalities from both sides: the reformists M. G. Ranade and M. M. 
Kunte on one hand, and the orthodox brāhmaṇas, such as Ram Dikshit Apte, Narayan 
Shastri Godbole, and Janardan Bhataji Abhyankar on the other (Desphande 2001: 
141).
231 Sammelanas and other ritual gatherings in which the whole Veda of one śākhā was recited are 
such an example. Galewicz (2005) has studied the ritualized recitation called anyōnyam (Mal.) among 
Nambudiri brāhmaṇas, which is an example of this.
232 It is difficult to determine how old the formal examinations and their methods are, but formal 
examination requires a certain institutionalization level, which was only possible in larger centres of 
learning, so that it is plausible that these kinds of methods appeared with larger institutions, such 
as the University of Taxila. Scharfe mentions a śalākā-parīkṣā common in Mithila and Navadvipa, in 
which “the examiners took a manuscript that was part of the syllabus, pierced it with a needle, and the 
student had to explain the last page run through by the needle.” (Scharfe 2002: 190). The question 
remains whether this method was used to examine Vedic recitation or for other subjects taught there. 
A similar practice, also well known in Maharashtra, but also difficult to assess historically, consists 
of the examiner taking a blade of grass and inserting it randomly into the Vedic manuscript or book. 
The student has then to recite the verses from that page onwards, as cued by the examiner giving the 
student the first two words.
233 Scholars such as Tucker (1976), Deshpande (2001, 2009, and 2010), and Rao (2010) have 
discussed other educational institutions and personalities in Pune during the educational reform of 
the nineteenth century. Additionally, the role of the Vaidika Saṃśodhana Maṇḍala in the preservation 
of the oral tradition of the Vedas should also be studied in the future.

=== PAGE 56 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 119
Among the most important activities of the Sabhā continue to be the annual 
examinations conducted for the Vedic schools of the state, and even beyond. Every 
year, hundreds of students from the Vedic schools in Maharashtra go through 
examinations in Veda recitation of the śākhā they have studied in one of the 
examination centers established by the VŚS.234 These exams have become quite 
popular in Maharashtra, and most of the Vedic schools send their students to these 
exams at some point during their studies. In these examinations, the students are 
tested by experts brought from all over India, as based on their abilities to properly 
recite a particular portion of the Veda from memory and without the aid of a printed 
text. Upon successful demonstration of his recitation skills, in a ceremony organized 
at the end of the examinations, the student is awarded a diploma that corresponds 
to the amount of text and style recited. The Vedaśāstrottejak Sabhā sees itself as an 
organization which promotes and certifies different experts in a wide spectrum of 
topics related to Vedic education. Officially, the examination cover the following 
sections: Veda; Auxiliary Sciences (vedāṅga); Veda Interpretation (vedārtha); 
Solemn Rituals (śrauta); Domestic Rituals (smārta); Sanskrit Grammar (vyākaraṇa); 
Logic (nyāyaśāstra); Philosophy in the following topics — pūrva-mīmāṃsā, advaita-
vedānta, viśiṣṭādvaita-vedānta, śuddhādvaita-vedānta, dvaita-vedānta, sāṃkhya-
yoga, dharmaśāstra; Astrology (grahajyotiṣa); purāṇa; Rhetorics (sahityaśāstra); 
Poetry (kāvya); and a combined examination (saṃkīrṇa). In practice, nonetheless, it 
is the Veda section which has the highest amount of students. The examinations in 
topics such as astrology or Hindu law are almost non-existent, and in the last couple 
of years, only a handfull of students have been granted a diploma in these subjects. 
It must also be noted that these additional subjects are, for the most part, not taught 
by the vedapāṭhaśālās as part of their curriculum. Other institutions and independent 
paṇḍitas train students in the exegetical disciplines. State-recognized universities 
and numerous other organizations, such as the Maharashtra Jyotiṣ Maṇḍaḷ in Pune, 
also examine students in these subjects. Moreover, the examinations, which do not 
concern the Vedic recitation and the Vedic ritual directly, are attended not only by 
brāhmaṇa students of the vedapāṭhaśālās, but also by students of other schools and 
people with various backgrounds, including women. 
Besides the Vedaśāstrottejak Sabhā, there are also similar yearly examinations 
organized by trusts that sponsor their own schools. The two institutions known to 
me are the Maharṣi Veda Vyās Pratiṣṭhān and the Sahasrabuddhe Maṭh, both based 
in Pune, although the examinations of the former can be conducted elsewhere. In 
2009, I had the opportunity to attend the examinations organized by the Maharṣi 
Veda Vyās Pratiṣṭhān (MVVP) in Dhalegaon on the premises of the largest school of 
the institution. The examinations lasted three days, in which the recitation of the 
234 In 2011, 460 students were examined in the examination centres organized by the Vedaśāstrottejak 
Sabhā in Nashik, Sawantawadi, Satara, Beed, and Pune.

=== PAGE 57 ===
120 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
four Vedas, as well as other subjects taught in the schools of the Pratiṣṭhān, were 
tested. Students from the Maharashtrian schools belonging to this organization were 
examined by experts brought in from as far as Puri, Orissa for the occasion. According 
to the organizers, they also admit students from other schools or individuals who 
wish to take the examination organized by them, although the great majority of 
students come from schools under the same institutional umbrella. In fact, during 
the examinations organized in 2009, I saw only one external student who took the 
examination. The MVVP has examination centers in different parts of the country 
where many other pupils took the examinations in Vedic recitation in the same period 
of time. The external student came from a Vedic school in Tamil Nadu, who at the time 
had a 10-day vacation, which he spent with his family in Mumbai. It was his father 
who came to know about the exam and decided to enrol his 13-year-old son in the 
examination for the first four kāṇḍas (chapters) of the Taittirīyasaṃhitā. It was the 
proximity from Mumbai and the diploma that his son was to receive which motivated 
him to bring him to Dhalegaon. 
Some schools also send their students to be examined outside of Maharashtra. 
The official body of the government established in Ujjain, the Maharṣi Sāṃdīpani 
Rāṣṭrīya Veda Vidyā Pratiṣṭhān (MSRVVP) among others, conducts examinations for 
schools across India. Nonetheless, only three of the schools I visited said they sent 
their students to the exams organized by the government through the pratiṣṭhān.235 
Other important centers where the exams are being conducted on a yearly basis are 
the Sringeri and Kanchipuram maṭhas in South India.236 In fact, both heads of these 
maṭhas have made it a tradition to celebrate their respective birthdays by holding 
examinations for brāhmaṇas of all of India and awarding the most outstanding 
vaidikas with diplomas and prizes, not only in cash, but also in gold rings, shawls, 
garlands, or other tokens for keeping the oral tradition of Vedic recitation alive.237
As discussed above, in the section regarding the curriculum, the segmentation into 
yearly units is mainly marked by the examinations given at the different organizations. 
The external evaluation system through these yearly mass examinations has become 
235 While the MSRVVP was founded by the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department 
of Education, of the Government of India, it is an ‘autonomous organization’. More information is 
available in subchapter 3.1.
236 There are other organizations spread across India, but another important organization outside 
of Maharashtra, which since 1994 has increasingly attracted vaidikas from all over India (including 
Maharashtrians) to their examinations, is the Veda Nidhi Trust which is attached to the Avadhoota 
Peetham in Mysore, Karnataka and was founded by Śrī Gaṇapati Saccidānanda. The trust also honors 
reciters from all the Vedic branches, giving them generous monetary awards and stipends. Another 
important source of support comes from the Sri Venkateswara Veda Parirakshana Trust, established 
by the famous Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam (TTD) in Andhra Pradesh, which not only conducts 
examinations, but has many schemes providing funding to many vaidikas in that region. 
237 See subchapter 3.3 for more on the Śaṅkarācāryas of Kanchipuram and Sringeri. 

=== PAGE 58 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 121
prominent in Maharashtra. Most of the students of the schools I  visited attended 
the exams of the VŚS in Pune, the exams in the Śaṅkarācāryas’ maṭhas, or the ones 
organized through MVVP, and, in some cases they attended multiple examinations at 
different organizations. 
Over last century, particularly in Maharashtra, formal examination procedures 
have become increasingly institutionalized. There were no formal examination 
procedures in Dharmaśāstric times (or previous to the colonial rule), nor diplomas 
and degrees. 
There was no final examination. Classes were small, and teacher and student were in daily 
contact and communication, affording the teacher a good appreciation of his students’ progress 
(or the lack of it). (Scharfe 2002: 291)
There was, presumably in earlier times, much more practical application of the 
memorized texts in a ritual setting in which the actual knowledge of an individual 
was in evidence, for there were probably more and larger sacrifices in which the Vedic 
mantras were used. This is but only a small portion of the corpus for, as we know, 
the use of Vedic mantras in the ritual constitute just a fraction of the Saṃhitā text, 
not to mention the other texts, which are not recited during the Vedic ritual, such 
as the Brāhmaṇas and the Āraṇyakas. Therefore, one has to assume that there were 
other moments in which the knowledge of the vaidikas could have been tested. The 
brāhmaṇa gatherings (sammelanas) of today in which the whole Saṃhitā is ritually 
recited (pārāyaṇa) are also examples of this. What is certain is that an overarching 
standardization of curricula into learning segments of the Vedic corpus was certainly 
not seen until the appearance of institutions such as the VŚS a couple of centuries 
ago. 
This new type of external examination and institutionalization of Vedic 
knowledge can be seen as a “mimetic strategy”, as Jaffrelot calls it238 (although, to 
what extent this is really “strategic” in this case still needs to be examined carefully). 
I would argue that, in many cases, the ‘strategy’ is not so much a conscious effort of 
the vaidikas themselves, but rather of their sponsors and the social pressures they 
are confronted with on a daily basis. Politicians who would like to see the brāhmaṇa 
community go back to an ideal “golden age” in which all scientific development and 
modern discoveries are all contained in the Vedas, and in Vedic culture, see this as an 
opportunity to show how “scientific and relevant the Vedic tradition is”. 
On the other hand, the examinations are events that allow the community of 
brāhmaṇas to come together and strengthen their relations. A teacher from a school 
in central Maharashtra told me that one of the reasons why he made the effort to go 
238 The term he uses in French is “mimétisme stratégique”, and was coined in his writings on Hindu 
Nationalism; see, e.g., Jaffrelot 1994a, 1999.

=== PAGE 59 ===
122 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
with his students every year to the examinations was to “maintain good relations with 
other good Brahmins.”239 
In the schools I visited, gurus who often need to be away from the school have 
more difficulty in ensuring the proper memorization of the text of their students 
without recurring to more sessions of formal evaluation than gurus in schools where 
the teacher is always present in the school. This is due to the fact that, if the teacher is 
present, then he is able to better assist the students and correct potential mistakes on 
time. Wrongly learned material without assistance leads to more effort and time from 
the part of both, students and teachers.
3.7.6.1  The Veda Examinations in the VŚS
There are two modalities in which the exams can be given at the VŚS: partial and 
complete. The partial exams (bhāgaśaḥ-parīkṣā) are meant to segment the curriculum 
into a yearly syllabus for which students get a certification for their ‘partial’ 
qualifications; and the complete exams (sampūrṇa-parīkṣā), on the other hand, are 
a sort of final examination in which all the material of all the bhāgaśaḥ exams for 
a given śākhā is covered in a single session.240 For the third-standard examinations 
(advanced exams), there are no partial exams and the student has to be able to 
recite the whole material given in that standard, whether it is advanced recitation 
of permutations (vikṛtis) or additional texts of that Vedic branch. A student who has 
completed the first standard (iyattā) obtains the honorary title of abhijña (lit. ‘one who 
understands or is acquainted with’), a student having completed the second standard 
that of kovida (lit. ‘experienced, learned, skilled, proficient’), and someone who has 
finished all three standards receives the title of cūḍāmaṇi (lit. ‘crest-jewel’).241 
The examinations at the VŚS are scheduled once per year and last for 
approximately ten days, prior to the dīpāvali celebration around October. The exact 
dates are announced a few months before, and the schedule for each subject is 
distributed in advance to the participating schools. The VŚS hires the best expert 
vaidikas available in the region or from other parts of India for all of the subjects to 
be examined.242 Some of these experts might be very young, although most of the 
gurus have ample experience in their area of expertise and often have impressive 
239 Interview, A. Jośī 16.04.2009, Beed.
240 For details on the curricular segmentation of the exams, please refer to the subchapter on the 
curricula of the Vedic schools: 3.2.
241 Taken from the pamphlet for the exams of 2009 of the VŚS. As mentioned previously and noted 
by Michaels (2001: 3-17), these titles and degrees are not necessarily pan-Indian, even if efforts of 
standardization are being made. See subchapter 3.8. 
242 Usually, the VŚS pays for the examiners’ transportation and other travel expenses. A symbolic 
renumeration is also offered to the experts who are generally honored with traditional tokens of 
respect at the closing ceremony. 

=== PAGE 60 ===

Modalities of Teaching and Studying the Veda 
 123
curricula. While the majority of both experts and students comes from the State of 
Maharashtra, others come from remote places and even from other states such as 
Karnataka, Orissa, or Tamil Nadu for the examinations. In recent years, the VŚS 
has opened smaller examination centers in other parts of Maharashtra in order to 
facilitate the certification of students. In this way, a greater number of students can be 
examined without their having to travel such long distances. Nonetheless, the main 
examination center remains at the headquarters of the VŚS in Pune, where about 400 
students took the examinations in 2009, and 460 in 2011.243 
A nominal fee of 25 Rs per student is charged for the examination, which also 
includes a meal on the day of the examination and a diploma in the case of success. 
The exams run for several days, although only one day is needed for each examination. 
The exam sessions happen on the premises of the Sābhā. This includes several rooms, 
some of which are reserved for very simple accommodation, in which the examiners 
who come from afar can stay overnight or rest during the breaks. According to some of 
the directors of this organization, “due to lack of funds and manpower”, the premises 
are quite neglected, but this does not hinder the Sābhā from continuing to be the most 
prestigious examination center of Maharashtra. 
Many of the exams take place simultaneously in the different rooms of the 
building, including the library, the grand hall, and administrative offices. The 
examinations usually are done in groups, but sometimes, if there is only one student, 
the examination can also happen individually. This is particularly so for the advanced 
examinations such as krama- or ghanapāṭha. Usually, the students are not examined 
by their own teacher. That is, if the teacher of a student’s school is the examiner, 
he will be sent to another examiner in order to avoid bias. Two experts in the same 
session often conduct the test. 
In some cases, the examiners and the students know each other well from other 
occasions during which they have had the opportunity to interact. If the relations are 
on good terms, this may increase the confidence of the students, who can feel more 
at ease in a familiar context. For example, during the examinations of the VŚS in 
2009, students from the Śrī Kṛṣṇayajurveda Pāṭhaśālā were examined by Vedamūrti 
A. Abhyankar, whom they knew quite well. They had spent time together on several 
occasions in the past. Some of the advanced students had spent some time with him 
in his school in a village in Karnataka, studying with him, while the younger students 
knew Vedamūrti A. Abhyankar from his regular visits to their home-school in Satara. 
Vedamūrti A. Abhyankar is a close friend of the main teacher and director of their 
school Vedamūrti Vivekśāstrī Goḍboḷe. This circumstance played to the advantage of 
243 According to the numbers published in the annual reports of the VŚS, student numbers at the 
annual examinations are, overall, on the rise, thus suggesting that more brāhmaṇas are opting for 
Vedic education. However, this contrasts with the statements of most of the brāhmaṇas I talked to in 
the schools, who have an overall more pessimistic view on the state of the Vedic tradition. 

=== PAGE 61 ===
124 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
the students, for it made the examination less stressful for them, as they were already 
quite nervous. On that occasion, Vedamūrti S. Bhatt, who served as a supervisor, 
accompanied Vedamūrti A. Abhyankar.
The general procedure for the examination is as follows: The exam starts by 
briefly invoking Gaṇeśa244 or by reciting “hari oṁ”. Then the examiner gives a word or 
a small sentence from a random portion of the section to be examined. He does this 
either by simply recalling a portion from memory and cuing the student with the first 
two words, or by opening a page of the printed edition randomly and selecting the 
portion the student has to recite. After this signal, he chooses one of the students by 
pointing with hand movements to continue the phrase until completing the mantra 
or the unit of that section. Then he chooses randomly from another section of the 
text and indicates to the next student to start reciting that mantra. The procedure 
continues like this until all of the students have recited a mantra, and then the cycle 
starts again with a new portion. Sometimes, he chooses two students to recite the 
same portion together, alternating the pairs. 
The examiner evaluates the students by deducting five points when a given 
student makes a mistake in pronunciation or intonation. Memory failures are also 
penalized by deducting five points per memory blank. The total marks are 100 for the 
partial exam and 200 for the complete exam. When a student makes a small mistake, 
the examiner signals it with his hand or by shaking his head. The student then tries 
to recite the portion correctly and, if he manages to do so, he continues; otherwise, 
the examiner corrects him by reciting the word correctly. Usually, average students 
can easily identify the given portion and can immediately start the recitation. The 
challenge is to continue without making mistakes or forgetting large portions. When 
memory fails, a student quickly starts to mumble the text to himself from the last 
portion until he remembers or reaches the last sentence where he stopped, and 
then he makes a second attempt to continue the portion. If the student has been 
successful, then he carries on until he finishes the portion, or if he cannot remember, 
either the examiner gives him a second chance by reciting the next few words for him, 
or simply asks the next student in the semi-circle to continue where the last student 
left off; or he might also ask the next student to repeat the portion anew. Depending 
on the capacity of the students, the guru may ask for a different random portion of 
the text. Sometimes, you can see the eagerness of other students in an exam to recite 
the portion that one of their fellow students has forgotten. They will sit mumbling 
inaudibly and moving their hands or head as if wanting to hint at the correct lines. 
Sometimes, when the examiner sees this, he asks the mumbling student to continue 
the portion aloud.
244 Among the kṛṣṇayajurvedins, some verses (or the whole) of the Atharvaśīrṣa (also known as 
Gaṇapatyatharvaśīrṣopaniṣad) is recited to open the examination.

=== PAGE 62 ===

Trends of Standardization and Institutionalization 
 125
The examiners, as in a regular Veda class, do not speak much during the 
examination and also do not give instructions — on the procedure or otherwise. 
Students are usually nervous and quiet during the exams — for their reputation, 
as well as that of their school, is at stake. Teachers, particularly those from smaller 
schools who consider their pupils not yet ready for the examination, do not send them 
until they have mastered the portion to be examined. This is one of the reasons why 
the ideal yearly curriculum as set by the VŚS does not always fit a school’s calendar. 
Certain schools with institutional freedom or with a different yearly calendar may 
accept new students in the middle of the year, though they first need to catch up 
and adapt to the school’s routine. While it is not unusual in the examinations to see 
students perform poorly, one rarely sees them fail completely. In 2009, an examiner 
passed some of the students whose performance was rather poor, but not before 
giving them a good scolding and telling their teacher that they needed to practice 
more for the next year. 
Most examiners do not prepare for the examinations, and while some of them 
bring printed copies of the text along, they usually do not use it, except for in randomly 
picking the portions for the exam. The examiners get a ‘marks-sheet’ provided by 
the VŚS with the list of the students taking the examination, in order to grade them 
accordingly. During the exams, I observed that these sheets were seldom used, except 
perhaps at the beginning of the exam in order to identify the students present. At 
the completion of an exam, the grading occurs behind closed doors. Officially, the 
examiners are not allowed to reveal the results to the students until the closing 
ceremony; however, in reality, they are quite often informed after the deliberation. 
This is particularly the case if the student and examiner already know each other. 
Each exam lasts about one or two hours, depending upon the amount of students 
taking an exam and the portion to be examined. The exams that cover the entire śākhā 
(sampūrṇa) last for at least three or four hours. There are no pauses, except during 
the longer sampūrṇa examinations, where after the saṃhitā portion, students and 
teachers take a brief bathroom pause and sometimes drink chai. The chai is brought 
by one of the employees or volunteers of the VŚS. After only a few minutes, they 
continue with the Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka parts until they finish the examination. 
Evidently, not all the material is covered (this would take days), only a few randomly 
selected portions of the texts being examined.
3.8  Trends of Standardization and Institutionalization
There are several organizations attached to various charismatic leaders and other 
important organizations in Maharashtra that have been vital for the support of the 
oral traditions of the Veda in this region. 
These exams have inspired other organizations, such as the Maharṣi Veda Vyās 
Pratiṣṭhān, to come up with their own evaluative system by organizing their own 

=== PAGE 63 ===
126 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
examinations that also follow a similar curriculum. There are several examination 
sessions offered by different institutions across the country,245 and students may take 
more than one exam for the same section of the Veda.246 
These formal examination procedures, and their awards and diplomas (see plate 
4), have become increasingly institutionalized in Maharashtra over the last century 
or so. One must also remember that the demand of the general public for a “better 
education” of priests has also encouraged the production of more credentials and 
validations, such as the ones distributed by the VŚS. An example of this is seen in 
how, increasingly, teachers and organizations encourage their students to obtain more 
diplomas in their field of expertise, and also in how “refresher-courses” for priests 
(and similar workshops that are specifically tailored to meet the ritual demands of 
the clientele) are in vogue across India. Interestingly enough, these demands hardly 
include the skill to recite complex patterns or the memorization of larger portions of 
text, but rather focus on the ability to explain the meaning of the mantras and the 
ritual actions. The studies of Fuller (2003) and of Hüsken (2010) illustrate the effects 
of the pressure from the clientele as well as from the government.
As we know from Scharfe’s study, there were no formal examination procedures 
in Dharmaśāstric times (or previous to the colonial rule), nor diplomas and degrees. 
“There was no final examination. Classes were small, and teacher and student were 
in daily contact and communication, affording the teacher a good appreciation of his 
students’ progress (or the lack of it).” (Scharfe 2002: 291)
This new standardization is not without consequence for the tradition. These 
exams slowly managed to segment Vedic learning into a syllabus that is now generally 
followed by the schools of Maharashtra in order to accommodate an annual exam 
system. Teachers have begun to instruct the students specifically in preparation for 
these exams. This means that it becomes more difficult for them to teach in a different 
order than the one given by the exam organizers. This also hinders them from being 
attentive to their students’ particular learning capacities and developments. Fixing 
the curriculum of any śākhā to learning the saṃhitā portion in a period of six years 
(as the MSRVVP has done), and giving the impression that higher studies247 are not 
essential for a brāhmaṇa’s education, reflects not only a lack of knowledge regarding 
245 The exams, as part of the birthday celebration of the Śaṅkarācārya of Sringeri mentioned above, 
are one example of this.
246 The spirit seems to be, the more diplomas and public recognition the better. This seems to be 
true particularly for advanced students reciting the permutations (vikṛtis) of the Vedas, who can 
sometimes be encountered in exams in Pune (VŚS), Sringeri (Śaṅkarācārya’s maṭha), and one of the 
centres of the MSRVVP, for example in Ujjain.
247 Such as the study of the recitation of permutations (vikṛtis) or the ten-books (daśagrāntha), 
which are part of the traditional curriculum in certain Vedic branches. 

=== PAGE 64 ===

Trends of Standardization and Institutionalization 
 127
traditional regulations stipulating authentic learning of the Vedic corpus,248 but it 
also risks reducing or abrading the Vedic education. 
This process, of course, is yet another clear example of a social change that has at 
least some of its roots in the experience of colonial rule. Tucker explains how:
[…] new elites were arising to join or supplant the old. Under British rule the orthodox Brāhmaṇs 
of western Maharashtra faced a steady erosion of their position in society. For the maintenance 
of orthodoxy at least three groups were significant: teachers (pantojis), temple and household 
priests (bhats) and the shastris. The modern decline of these professions is still very imperfectly 
understood, but some indicators of their difficulties are available. Traditional Marathi education 
began with elementary studies of arithmetic, reading and writing. Several boys studied in the 
home of a Brāhmaṇ teacher who was in many instances also a household priest; their fees and 
donations gave him a very modest income. A majority of the students in the region around Poona 
were Brāhmaṇs, but only a few of these went on to further studies in the Sanskrit classics, the 
Vedas or the shastras. The indigenous teachers were thus highly vulnerable to competition 
from English-educated teachers in government or missionary schools from the 1840s onwards. 
(Tucker 1976: 333)
These trends of standardization through the bureaucratization of traditional 
education hint to a process of adaptation to global modernization developements 
that are often conditioned by socio-economic criteria such as the ‘productivity’ and 
‘marketability’ of traditional knowledge. Now, it could be said that, at least at the level 
of the family priest, a thorough mantric knowledge is perceived as secondary. Only 
the actual mantras used in the ritual are considered necessary. With this, the very 
life-purpose of the traditional vaidika brāhmaṇa is indirectly questioned in a ritual 
economy of replacement. This directly reflects the location of traditional learning and 
religious practice within a modern context, and what constitutes legitimate claims to 
an authentic reproduction of this knowledge system. Examples of this tension include 
half-trained purohitas, the recent phenomenon of women priestesses (strī-purohitās), 
and in rare cases even Dālits who can replace the twice-born dvija men by learning 
the necessary rites without having to study in the traditional education system in 
order to learn the whole traditional curricula. This ritual market is influenced by the 
laws of supply and demand, in which the client who sponsors the ritual — knowingly 
or unknowingly — dictates what is authentic for the tradition and what is not.
In this view, it can be said that the orthodox custodians of the Vedic tradition 
and their supporters have also found strategies to better “sell” their practices and 
lifestyles. To put it in a Bourdieuian way, the students and teachers in the Vedic 
schools described in this work, consciously or unconsciously, adapt to their modern 
environment. This is obvious through the introduction of English and computing 
classes, the distribution of diplomas (plate 4), the new framing of the Vedic ritual, 
248 The Saṃhitās vary considerably in length, form, and recitation style (accentuation, pitch, hand 
gestures or the lack of them, etc.), and therefore require different skills and time for mastery. 

=== PAGE 65 ===
128 
 The Vedic Schools in Contemporary Maharashtra
and their universalistic rhetoric. These are some examples of the construction of a 
new type of cultural capital that fits the demands of the contemporary market. These 
adaptations are driven just as much by the students as by their sponsors, who have 
embodied this discourse that promotes a traditional education which is suited for 
modern India.
Plate 4: (left) Diploma of the VŚS for the first examination in Vedic recitation (praveśaparīkṣā), Pune 
2009. (right) Certificate for Sāmaveda recitation of the MVVP from the examinations in Dhalegaon, 
2009.
Many of the schools I visited remain generally sceptical and threatened by discourses 
of “modernity”. They consciously try to avoid contact with what is perceived as 
“modern”. Others have expressed the need to join the project of modernity by 
appropriating values such as “democracy”, “gender equality”, “human rights”, 
“universalism”, and “religious freedom”. While there is no clear pattern on which 
type of school is more conservative than another, I  would argue that schools 
sponsored by larger trusts attached to less orthodox gurus tend toward a more liberal 
and universalistic practice of what they understand as “Vedic”. These practices and 
discourses are garbed in popular Neo-Vedāntic terms, such as sanātana-dharma.
The case of the young Dālit woman who successfully learned to recite the 
Śuklayajurvedasaṁhitā in the mādhyandina style under the Guru Gaṅgeśvar Mahārāj 
Vedapāṭhaśālā in Nashik, in the traditional way mentioned in subchapter 2.2, is a 

=== PAGE 66 ===

Trends of Standardization and Institutionalization 
 129
good example of this point.249 While all women were categorically rejected by most 
of the schools I visited, the trust that runs the school and the Ved Mandir takes pride 
in presenting her as an example of their progressive and modern views on both caste 
and gender. This stance vis-à-vis caste and gender is coherent with the philosophical/
religious worldview as exposed by Gaṅgeśvarānand and his followers who, in turn, 
could be labelled as distinctively Neo-Hindu and strongly aligned with the reform 
movements of the nineteenth century.
The circulation of cultural elements in dynamic ways has been characteristic 
of what we have come to call “modern Hinduism”. Halbfass pointed to the “self-
representation of Hinduism which grew out of its encounter with the West” (Halbfass 
1990: 344), and Romila Thapar has called this new adaptation and homogenization of 
a variety of religions “syndicated Hinduism” (Thapar 2001: 54-81). One can observe 
how, even in apparently the most orthodox sections of traditional Hinduism, a shift 
has occurred from a soteriological knowledge anchored in traditional values to a more 
functional and simplified tradition in ‘service of the nation’ and the ‘modern citizen’. 
This has contributed to a decline of the more advanced forms of erudition (the paṇḍita 
and the śrauta ritualist). 
249 The dharmaśāstra literature and other classical texts influenced by Brāhmaṇical ideology point 
to the fact that at least two similar or mutually intelligible languages or variant registers of the same 
language were to be used: Sanskrit by male brāhmaṇas and Prakrit by śūdras (lower classes) and 
women. Punishments expressed in the GautDhS 12: 4-6 propose pouring molten tin and lac into 
the ears of non-twice born (lower class) people who listened intentionally to a Vedic recitation that 
includes Sanskrit mantras. If he were to recite Vedic texts, his tongue should be cut out, and if he 
remembered or taught them, his body should be cut into pieces (Olivelle 2000: 147).

