# SOURCE FILE: S-216_Littunen_SocialLifeManuscript.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\loop_A17\documents\S-216_Littunen_SocialLifeManuscript.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_3_colophons (3. ธรรมเนียมคัดลอก จารึกท้ายคัมภีร์ Colophons และนักคัดลอก)
# PAGES: 31 | TOTAL CHARS: 70527

=== PAGE 1 ===
Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024): 106–136 DOI 10.14434/tc.v17i2.40320
The Social Life of a Manuscript
Textual Networks from North India 
to Nepal and Beyond1
Olli-Pekka Antero Littunen
Abstract
This essay follows the life of a palm-leaf manuscript, now preserved in Nepal, 
containing a collection of Hindu texts about the city of Varanasi in North India. 
Looking at the physical properties of this manuscript, as well as the various additions 
and alterations it has undergone, one can discover more about the social history 
of the individuals and communities involved in creating, using, and transporting 
the manuscript. The manuscript contains texts about a network of religious sites in 
Varanasi, but because it was transported to Nepal after its creation, it also serves 
as evidence of connections beyond the city itself. I argue that this manuscript forms 
part of various larger networks: firstly, it connects locations in Varanasi at the 
level of narrative; secondly, it forms a link between North India and Nepal by being 
transported; and lastly, it participates in a network of information exchange between 
South Asia and Europe through microfilms and digital photographs.
The history of committing Sanskrit texts to writing goes back at 
least two thousand years.2 Nepal is one of the most important sources of 
the Sanskrit manuscripts that attest this written tradition. Often, such 
manuscripts are studied for their literary content, using a text-critical 
approach. Investigating these manuscripts not only as texts but also as 
physical objects, however, can reveal still other information: reading the 
additions and alterations they have undergone as evidence of their dynamic 
	 1.	 This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) 
under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program 
under grant agreement no. 101054849 (PURANA). I would like to thank Peter 
Bisschop, Elizabeth Cecil, Camillo Formigatti, and the anonymous reviewers 
for their constructive and extremely helpful feedback. All remaining mistakes 
are mine.
	 2.	 The textual tradition of the Mahābhārata epic probably first arose between 50 
BCE and 50 CE (Fitzgerald 2018, 91).

=== PAGE 2 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  107
material histories3 can help us retrace the social contexts in which the 
manuscripts were used.
I focus here on the life of one specific manuscript that has been used 
and altered in multiple different contexts. The manuscript contains a 
compendium of Sanskrit texts about sacred sites in the city of Varanasi, a 
famous pilgrimage destination in Uttar Pradesh, North India, associated 
with the deity Śiva.4 It was produced between the 12th and 14th century 
CE, not in Varanasi itself, but most likely in the Mithila region, in what is 
now North India and southern Nepal.5 
The transportation of the manuscript from North India to Nepal is 
evidence of networks of exchange that cut across the boundaries of 
the present-day nation-states. The manuscript can be understood as 
being mobile across multiple such networks. First, it contains narrative 
accounts about a group of religious sites in Varanasi that are connected 
by their sacred power. Secondly, the manuscript itself was physically 
on the move: it was transported out of North India, ultimately reaching 
Nepal to end up in its present location, the Kaiser Library in Kathmandu. 
In the process of being transported via this network, it must have 
changed hands between various individuals (such as scholars, scribes, 
religious teachers, royalty, etc.). Thirdly, it was microfilmed and later 
photographed, allowing it to participate in yet another network, namely 
a global scholarly exchange of analog and digital media.6
	 3.	 That is, as living and evolving entities; for an overview of the notion of living 
texts and how it developed, starting in New Testament studies and solidifying 
in the work of David Parker in the late 1990s (e.g. Parker 1997, especially 
chapter 12), see Chen 2018, 8–15. It should be noted that every written text that 
can be discussed may be understood to be “alive”, at least in some sense; the 
only time a text can truly be dead is when no one knows it exists. Thus, living 
texts are a spectrum — some are more alive than others.
	 4.	 The city has been continuously inhabited since at least the 8th century BCE, 
first as a commercial center and then as a religious one (Bakker 1996, 33). 
It has existed in various forms and taken many names, such as Avimukta, 
Kāśī, and more recently, Banāras/Benāres. I use Varanasi (without diacritics) 
throughout the text, because it is the official name of the city.
	 5.	 The dating of the manuscript cannot be established more precisely as of yet. The 
manuscript itself contains no mention of the date of its initial production. The 
reasons for dating it between the 12th and 14th century CE, and for tracing it to 
Mithila instead of Varanasi, are discussed in greater detail below. For the sake 
of simplicity, I use the dichotomy of (North) India vs. Nepal to designate the 
area where the manuscript was most likely produced and where it ended up.
	 6.	 For other research regarding the usage and movement of manuscripts and how 
manuscripts can betray their socio-historical contexts, see e.g. Balbir 2017 

=== PAGE 3 ===
108  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
Networks created through transportation, which may be considered an 
element of intangible cultural heritage shared by various contemporary 
nation-states, often feature in scholarly discussion on manuscripts and 
other physical objects (see e.g. Flood & Fricke 2023). The research 
presented here contributes to this important and ongoing conversation on 
transcultural and transregional circulation and reception, looking beyond 
the objects or texts themselves.
Part I: The Contents of the Manuscript
A manuscript’s textual content is intimately linked with its use and thus 
with its social reality as a physical object. The manuscript I discuss here 
contains a Vārāṇasīmāhātmya compendium.7 The Māhātmya (“greatness”, 
“glorification”) genre consists of texts written in praise of a specific entity, 
on the Cambridge University Library collection of Jain manuscripts and the 
people involved in the manuscripts’ circulation; Brockmann 2014 on scribal 
annotations and how they can serve as proof of a learned scribe; De Simini 
2017 on a Nepalese manuscript that is connected with a specific king, has been 
provided with an index for ease of use, and whose scribal additions indicate that 
it was used in public recitation; Formigatti 2014 on manuscript movement in 
South and Central Asia; Formigatti 2017 on the Cambridge University Library 
collection (that is, on manuscripts’ movement and use also beyond South Asia); 
Formigatti 2015 and Ratié 2018, both on manuscript annotations in North 
India and Nepal; Sander 1991 on the material properties, provenance, and 
contents of Central Asian manuscripts; Van der Putten 2022 on manuscript 
libraries in the Dutch East Indies and what the collections’ manuscripts can tell 
us about their owners and borrowers; and Van Schaik & Galambos 2012 on 
a manuscript recording the pilgrimage of a Chinese Buddhist monk. See also 
Kohs & Kienitz 2022 for a brief discussion on how manuscripts have agency: 
as magical objects, they can influence humans and shape entire communities, 
forging social and cultural relations in the process.
	 7.	 I use the title “Vārāṇasīmāhātmya compendium” to avoid burdening the reader 
with too much Sanskrit and to emphasize the nature of the text as a compendium 
containing Vārāṇasīmāhātmyas. Vārāṇasīmāhātmyasaṃgraha (lit. “Compendium 
of Māhātmyas of Vārāṇasī”) is the latest title given to the compendium, as used 
by Bisschop 2021. See Bisschop 2007 and 2013 for the title “Vārāṇasīmāhātya 
compendium”, which I use here. See also Mersch 2013 for “Vārāṇasīmāhātmya 
Compendium” (with a capital C), and Bisschop 2016 for “a compendium of 
Vārāṇasīmāhātmyas”.

=== PAGE 4 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  109
most often a place or deity.8 The Māhātmyas in this compendium are 
attributed to various texts called the Purāṇas, “primordial account[s] of 
primordial things” (Fitzgerald 2014, 42), a voluminous body of texts that 
narrate stories related to the main deities of Hinduism.9 Māhātmyas are 
embedded in the frame texts that the Purāṇas contain. The compendium 
does not retain these frame texts in quoting Māhātmyas, and the original 
narrative context is stripped away. Because the compendium’s citations 
of the Māhātmyas often do not correspond to the Purāṇas in their current 
printed forms, one can understand the texts within the manuscript as 
representing an intermediary phase in the Purāṇas’ evolution.10 These 
texts are not static — people change them, add to them, and adapt them 
according to shifting social realities.11
The purpose of the Māhātmyas is perhaps best illustrated by an 
example. One of the places mentioned in the compendium (in chapter 30) 
is a sacred pond called Piśācamocana, where a demonic being (piśāca) 
	 8.	 For some of the most crucial and recent work on Māhātmyas, see e.g. Ambach, 
Buchholz, and Hüsken 2022; Bakker 1986; Bisschop 2021; Eck 1999; 
Feldhaus 1995 and 2003; and Sathyanarayanan & Czerniak-Drożdżowicz 
2023.
	 9.	 It should be noted that Purāṇas are not fossilized texts, but have continuously 
evolved and adapted amid changing socio-religious contexts (and, to a lesser 
extent, scribal transmission). Purāṇas are primordial texts in a rhetorical 
sense; it is not the case that all the material found in them is ancient. They are 
a dynamic, “productive genre of recording history” (Fitzgerald 2014, 42) that 
shapes the present and the future, serving as the foundation for many of the 
traditions and practices now associated with what can be called Hinduism.
10.	 Though now lost as such, the source texts the creators of the compendium had 
were Purāṇas that changed their names over time, became incorporated in other 
Purāṇas, or disappeared as overlapping texts became more popular. Some of the 
texts as they now appear in the manuscript are clearly altered versions of older 
texts, adapted to the context of Varanasi. As the compendium does not include 
all the Hindu religious sites in the city, a compiler may have wanted to create a 
collection of Māhātmya texts to glorify a specific set of locations. See Hazra 
1940 for some approximate dates of Purāṇas, and Bisschop 2021, 6–7 for a 
chart of this manuscript’s attributions to the Purāṇas.
11.	 Using existing material to create new texts in a way that makes it clear that the 
material has been reused and made to fit a new purpose can be called “adaptive 
reuse” (Freschi & Maas 2017, 13–14). The South Asian tradition abounds in 
textual reuse, in the form of both direct quotations and the creation of new material 
by combining and adapting earlier texts. For various accounts of such reuse in the 
South Asian context, see the edited volume by Freschi & Maas (2017).

=== PAGE 5 ===
110  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
attained liberation (mocana) by following the advice of an ascetic named 
Śaṅkukarṇa, who was performing worship there. The text states that a 
pilgrim who visits the site and drinks the water there that has been offered 
to Śiva will also be liberated. In other words, the texts normally mention 
the locations, the events that occurred there, and the prospective rewards 
for worshippers (most often liberation). The importance of these texts 
is thus related to their being emplaced; their sanctity was connected to 
“spiritually charged natural places and the shrines that proliferated around 
them” (Cecil 2020, 2).12 Many locations described in the compendium 
may be identified by the same names even today, and in this way, the 
Māhātmyas grant access to the physical reality of Varanasi’s past. Even 
if one cannot be sure that the locations are the same now as they were 
hundreds of years ago, the social history of the manuscript becomes more 
evident when the manuscript and its texts can be linked to existing places.
The manuscript is a rich and unique resource due to three characteristics: 
the intermediate state of its texts; its various levels of additions and corrections; 
and the geographical connections the manuscript forms. Mithila had a long-
lasting political, religious, social, and scholarly influence on Nepal, especially 
in the 14th century CE (Slusser 1982, 68); connections between Nepal and 
Varanasi in particular go back to at least the second millennium CE, but 
were most likely present already in the first millennium (Gaenszle 2006, 
304). Libraries in Kathmandu preserve manuscripts produced in Varanasi as 
early as the 12th century CE (Bisschop 2021, 19).13 In addition to discussing 
Varanasi itself, what distinguishes the manuscript in question is how it bears 
the marks of various geographical and social contexts through its successive 
alterations. These alterations, made during various phases of the manuscript’s 
12.	 Similarly to Cecil’s notion of how a “geographically emplaced vision actually 
suggests a more inclusive tradition” (Cecil 2020, 28), the emplaced nature of 
these Māhātmyas points toward Varanasi being understood as a place that can 
grant liberation to anyone who spends time and performs worship there. Even 
if the texts themselves often refer directly only to individuals from the higher 
classes, the liberating power of Varanasi as an emplaced, religiously charged 
site extends beyond the upper strata of society. For more details, see Cecil 
2020, 26–29.
13.	 These other manuscripts are not Māhātmyas, and thus do not focus on 
Varanasi or its sacred sites, but instead discuss other topics such as law and 
proper conduct. The manuscripts in question are those of the Bṛhatkālottara, 
Harivaṃśa, Jayadrathayāmala, and Manusmṛti (Bisschop 2021, 19). They 
have been filmed by the Nepalese-German Manuscript Preservation Project 
(NGMPP) on reels A 27/5, A 996/3, C 44/4, and A 43/1, respectively.

=== PAGE 6 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  111
life, are evidence of the manuscript’s role in the communities and lives of 
those who have had access to it.
Part II: The Manuscript and Its Communities
Palm-leaf manuscripts were most often copied on demand, being 
commissioned by private individuals or even royal libraries for use in their 
collections (Hanneder 2017, 232–33). Copying also ensures the survival of 
a textual tradition: palm-leaf manuscripts quickly deteriorate in the South 
Asian climate and need to be recopied to preserve their contents.14 Due 
to its more favorable climate, palm-leaf manuscripts can survive longer 
in Nepal than in India. The oldest dated manuscripts in Nepal are from 
the 9th century; older manuscripts also exist — likely from the 6th to 8th 
centuries CE — but are undated.15
14.	 Many factors can have a negative effect on the health of a manuscript, such as 
air quality and climate; insects and rodents; improper handling and storage; 
destructive restoration attempts; and staining (Wiland et al. 2022, 250–54).
15.	 One manuscript, that of a medical text called the Suśrutasaṃhitā, dates 
to 878 or 879 CE, while a manuscript of the early Skandapurāṇa dates 
to 811 CE (Harimoto 2011, 87–90; and 2017, 361). A manuscript of the 
Pārameśvaratantra from Nepal, now at Cambridge University Library 
(Add.1049.1), has been dated to 829 CE (2017, 361). Some fragments of the 
so-called “Gilgit manuscripts” that have been found in Nepal, originally 
from the Northwest of the Indian subcontinent, can be dated between the 
6th and 8th centuries CE (2011, 100). The oldest extant manuscript in Nepal 
is a Buddhist Daśabhūmikasūtra manuscript from the 6th century CE at the 
latest (93–95); see Harimoto (2011, 93, footnote 6) for more manuscripts of 
approximately the same age. See also Matsuda (1996, xv–xviii), who dates 
the Daśabhūmikasūtra manuscript between the 5th and 7th centuries CE. The 
manuscript bundles Matsuda used for his publication have been filmed by the 
NGMPP on reels A 38/5 and A 39/13; see Harimoto (2011, 93, footnote 7) for 
more details. On the Suśrutasaṃhitā manuscript, see Wujastyk et al. 2023. 
The Suśrutasaṃhitā manuscript (Kesar Library Accession No. 699) has been 
filmed by the NGMPP on reel C 80/7. The early Skandapurāṇa manuscript 
(National Archives Kathmandu accession number 2–229) has been filmed 
by the NGMPP on reel B11/4. The Skandapurāṇa Project, a long-standing 
initiative to edit and translate the voluminous early Skandapurāṇa has been 
ongoing since the 1990s; see https://www.universiteitleiden.nl/en/research 
/research-projects/humanities/the-skandapurāṇa-project. See also Adriaensen, 

=== PAGE 7 ===
112  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
The manuscript discussed here can be dated sometime between the 12th 
and 14th centuries CE. The most likely scenario is that the manuscript was 
produced in Mithila just before or during the early 14th century, and then 
taken to Nepal. It was probably copied from earlier manuscripts written 
in Varanasi itself.16 The script of the manuscript in question is remarkably 
close to that of other manuscripts produced in Mithila around the 14th 
century (Diwakar Acharya, personal communication, 2023). Furthermore, 
the extensive cultural relations between 14th-century Mithila and Nepal 
add support to this hypothesis.17
The Production of the Manuscript and Its Alterations
At least two or (more likely) three people participated in the original 
production of the manuscript, which was later altered by two “readers” 
in Nepal in the 16th and 17th centuries CE (see Appendixes 1 and 2 for 
details).18 The two readers in Nepal, and at least one person reading the 
manuscript before it reached Nepal, felt the need to change and add to it.
Bakker, & Isaacson 1998, 32 for details regarding the manuscript of the early 
Skandapurāṇa.
16.	 Dated manuscripts in a similar script were produced in Varanasi between the 
12th and 13th centuries (Bisschop 2021, 19). The quality of the palm leaves of 
these manuscripts, however, is different; in the manuscript discussed here, the 
leaves appear to be thicker and of a more brittle and inferior quality. In any case, 
as we do not know the earliest storage conditions of any of these manuscripts, 
we cannot base our conclusion solely on its physical and palaeographical 
properties. See footnote 13 above for the manuscripts.
17.	 It is also worth noting that although the texts deal with Varanasi, the first 
chapter starts by mentioning the sage Yājñavalkya, who is in Mithila (see 
Appendix 1.4). A first text that explicitly locates itself in Mithila could have 
been purposely selected to make the compendium fit that geographical and 
cultural context.
18.	 For the purposes of the manuscript under study, it is impossible to draw a clear 
distinction between the authors, scribes, compilers, readers, and reciters of the 
exemplar being copied. All of these distinctions may overlap when it comes 
to the production and transmission of old palm-leaf manuscripts. I use the 
term “scribe” to refer to a range of practices that involve applying ink to palm 
leaves, but when more precise distinctions are necessary, I use other terms — 
such as “reader” — to indicate specific sub-functions of the scribes. See “The 
Final Folios” and Appendix 1.3 below for details regarding the dates of the two 
readers in Nepal.

=== PAGE 8 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  113
There are two types of alterations. The first are corrections made in Old 
Nāgarī script — that is, the script in which the manuscript was originally 
written — to indicate minor alterations, such as changing short vowels to 
long vowels or vice versa. The second are corrections and additions made 
in Nepālākṣarā script (by the two readers in Nepal) — that is, a different 
script than used in the original production of the manuscript (see Fig. 1, 
below).19 These Nepālākṣarā alterations have two layers: one fainter and 
more worn — i.e., older — and another with darker, more recently added 
ink. The use of two different scripts is relevant: the Old Nāgarī script helps 
in dating and placing the manuscript in question, while the presence of the 
Nepālākṣarā script shows that the manuscript continued to be used even 
after it entered Nepal.
Figure 1. Folio 111 verso, with 6 lines of text Old Nāgarī and various marginal and 
in-text corrections and alterations in Nepālākṣarā script (mainly in darker ink).20
The fact that the chapters of the manuscript were not originally numbered 
— all the chapter numbering was added only later — also attests to the 
continued use of the manuscript (see Appendix 1.5 for examples). The 
orange ink that often embellishes the chapter numbering (see Appendixes 
1.3 and 1.5) helps in quickly identifying where the chapters end. Based on 
similarities in the darkness of the ink and the stroke size, the numbering 
was likely added by the later reader in 17th-century CE Nepal.
The production process involved professional scribes, who copied 
existing material to create the manuscript as we now have it. If the 
19.	 I have chosen to use the ambiguous descriptive term “Nepālākṣarā” (lit. 
“Nepalese syllable”, in the feminine gender to indicate a script) for the 
corrections and additions made in Nepal, following the approach of Vincenzo 
Vergiani (2017, 81, footnote 6). The parts written in Nepālākṣarā script are often 
inconsistent in their use of diacritics, smudged, and messy, making it difficult 
to more precisely identify the script. Various scripts exist for writing Sanskrit, 
and the same script can be used to write different languages (see e.g. Salomon 
1998 for an overview of Indic writing systems as related to epigraphy). 
20.	 All the images in this article have been reproduced with the permission of Peter 
Bisschop.

=== PAGE 9 ===
114  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
manuscript was produced in Mithila by copying material originally 
produced in Varanasi, the scribes might have been sponsored by local 
Maithili brahmins or royalty who were interested in texts about the 
sanctity of Varanasi. If these scribes were in Varanasi, they might have 
been employed by the Gāhaḍavālas, who had seized control of the area 
from the Kalacuri dynasty at the end of the 11th century CE (Bakker & 
Isaacson 2004, 66–67).
Scribes commissioned to copy manuscripts were often “illiterate, 
uneducated, or uninterested” and paid according to the number of syllables 
they wrote (Hanneder 2017, 224). Such circumstances inevitably lead to 
later corrections made by more literate readers (224).21 If one assumes that 
the initial scribes were indeed not interested in correcting their mistakes, 
it is feasible that these minor corrections were made by a more literate 
and interested individual who could be called a “supervisor”. However, 
even if later readers in Nepal or a supervisor checking the manuscript 
were more literate than the initial scribes, it does not mean that they 
objectively improved the texts; they merely changed them according to 
their understanding of Sanskrit and each text’s content.
Further, the palm leaves are protected by wooden covers (see Figs. 2 
and 3, below), which were likely added only after the original production 
of the manuscript.22 The manuscript is incomplete — perhaps due to 
missing folios in an earlier manuscript that it was copied from — as the 
text abruptly cuts off in the concluding chapter.23
21.	 It was also common for a scribe to write down what another person read 
aloud from an earlier manuscript (Sathaye 2017, 54), leading to further 
misunderstandings and errors.
22.	 Various manuscripts with similar wooden covers, of comparable size and 
relatively close in age to the manuscript discussed here, are now at the Cambridge 
University Library. See Hiraṇyasaptaka, Khaḍgapūjāvidhi (Add.1691.1), 4.5 x 
31.5 cm, likely 12th century CE; Jayamaṅgalā (Add.2251.1), 4.5 x 30.5 cm, 
likely 13th century CE; and Kriyākāṇḍakramāvalī (Add.1406), 4.4–5.4 x 31.1–
31.4 cm, ca. 14th or 15th century CE. Adding unwritten leaves and wooden 
covers to manuscripts is common, as they protect and stabilize the manuscript 
(Ciotti 2023, 157).
23.	 Here, the term “folio” means a single palm leaf, consisting of two sides, “recto” 
and “verso”, which signify the un-numbered and numbered sides of the palm leaf, 
respectively. The manuscript is simultaneously multiple-text and composite. A 
multiple-text manuscript is a manuscript that contains multiple texts, but is a result 
of a single production process — differentiating it from a “composite manuscript” 
which is created from already existing, independent units (Friedrich & Schwarke 

=== PAGE 10 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  115
The Titles of the Manuscript
More evidence of continued use can be found in the various titles of 
the manuscript. There are two types of titles: namely, those that call the 
manuscript a compendium, and those that do not. There are two titles on 
the top wooden cover (see Fig. 2, below). The first one, on the left side, was 
likely added by one of the readers in Nepal. The text is unclear, but the title 
is loosely translatable as “Compendium on the Essence of Kāśī [. . .]”.24 
The second, on the right side, is also unclear and very faint, but it was 
most likely written in Nepal as well. This second title can be rendered as 
“Māhātmya of Varanasi”.25 The cataloguers at the Kaiser Library affixed a 
paper label to the cover, containing a title that would later be altered; other 
details about the manuscript are provided on a different paper label.26 The 
earlier title on this paper label translates to “Compendium on the Essence 
of Varanasi”, the later one to “Māhātmya of Varanasi”.27 On the first folio, 
yet another title was written, also in Nepal;28 most likely, this title is also 
supposed to mean “Māhātmya of Varanasi”. The latest title, “Compendium 
of Māhātmyas of Varanasi”, was suggested by Peter Bisschop (2021, 7).29 
2016, 15–16). The bulk of the manuscript was created during a single production 
process. Up to and including folio 145, it is presumably a single codicological unit. 
Folio 146 has additional material that was likely not part of the original production 
process, and 147, the last folio, might have been added later. However, doubts can 
also be raised about folio 12 being a part of the same codicological unit, as it is the 
only folio that has two string holes. See more details in Appendixes 1 and 2. For a 
discussion of composite and multiple-text manuscripts and codicological units, see 
e.g. Formigatti 2015, 9–50; Friedrich & Schwarke 2016; and Bausi, Friedrich, 
& Maniaci 2019.
24.	 Nepālākṣarā; Kāśīsārapraṭhisaṃgraha(ja)ro (sic). Round brackets in Sanskrit 
words signify unclear syllables. Note that Kāśī, as mentioned above, is another 
name for Varanasi.
25.	 Very faint Nepālākṣarā (?); Vārnāsīmahātmyaḥ (sic; for Vārāṇasīmāhātmyaṃ).
26.	 Devanāgarī script; explaining that the manuscript is a palm-leaf manuscript, 
has 144 folios, and is written in the “Newārī” script (see Fig. 2, below). The 
identification of the script is incorrect, and the manuscript has 145 numbered 
folios and two unnumbered ones. See Appendix 1 and footnote 48 below for 
details. The Devanāgarī script could be called the most prolific successor of the 
aforementioned (old) Nāgarī script, as it is the primary script used for various 
languages in present-day South Asia.
27.	 Devanāgarī; before correction, Vārāṇasīsārapraṭhisaṃgraha; after correction, 
Vārāṇasīmāhātmya.
28.	 Nepālākṣarā; Vārnāśāmahātmaḥ, preceded by the number 1 (sic; see Fig. 4, below).
29.	 Vārāṇasīmāhātmyasaṃgraha.

=== PAGE 11 ===
116  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
This suggested title is a hypothetical, reconstructed one, based on the various 
other titles and the nature of the manuscript as containing a compendium 
of Māhātmyas. In sum, the titles of the manuscript reveal two slightly 
different understandings of its contents. To some — such as Bisschop and 
the person who wrote the title on the left side of the top wooden cover — it 
was clear that the manuscript contained a compendium of texts. However, 
for others, such as the person who wrote the second title on the right side of 
the cover, the manuscript might have represented a more general, singular 
text: a “Māhātmya of Varanasi” instead of a compendium.
Figure 2. The top wooden cover.
Figure 3. The bottom wooden cover.
Figure 4. Folio 1 recto.
The Final Folios
Besides the alterations and titles of the manuscript, the last numbered 
folio and two additional folios placed after it at the end of the manuscript 
also provide useful information regarding when and how the manuscript 
was used. The verso of the last numbered folio has notes written in 
Nepālākṣarā. These notes — based on the script, the handwriting, and the 

=== PAGE 12 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  117
presence of two layers of text (one older and one newer) — were made by 
two different scribes, likely the two readers in Nepal. The two layers of 
text seem to match the two types of Nepālākṣarā alterations made to the 
manuscript. The notes contain words of praise, but most importantly, two 
numbers indicating years corresponding to 1530 and 1669 CE (see Fig. 5, 
below). Besides the years, the notes also mention two months and days (see 
Appendix 1.3 for details). These dates may well correspond to the times 
when the two Nepalese readers used and altered the manuscript amid a 
recitation or reading in a public or private ritual context. 
Figure 5. Folio 145 verso, containing words of praise and two dates.
The two additional folios contain unclear astronomical calculations 
(in a variant of Maithilī script), likely connected with the times when 
the manuscript was used. These calculations are presented in the form of 
charts. A tentative reading of these charts is that there are three columns, 
of which the first indicates the date, the second the position of the moon 
(perhaps giving lunar calendar details for solar months [Diwakar Acharya, 
personal communication, 2023]), and the third additional information. It 
could be that what we see in the charts is a monthly program of ritual use; 
yet another option is that the charts indicate when earlier material was 
copied onto these specific palm leaves. 
The recto of the last additional folio contains the start of another text 
(see Fig. 6, below), also in a similar Maithilī script, whereas its verso 
Figure 6. Folio *146 verso, containing astronomical calculations, and folio *147 
recto, containing the start of another text.

=== PAGE 13 ===
118  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
side is blank. This last folio was perhaps added to protect the rest of 
the manuscript before the addition of the wooden covers, as it bears no 
relation to the charts or other contents of the manuscript. These additional 
folios offer another piece of evidence to suggest that the manuscript was 
produced in Mithila.
Transporting the Manuscript
Another indication of the importance of the manuscript is its transportation.30 
The act of transporting the manuscript from North India to Nepal implies 
a larger network involving the movement of individuals and information 
between these two areas. From the time of the manuscript’s production 
between the 12th to 14th centuries CE and 1530 CE (the time of the earlier 
reader in Nepal), one cannot know how the manuscript was used or where 
it circulated. Somewhere within this timeframe, the manuscript was 
brought to Nepal from the South, most likely from Mithila, but perhaps 
from Varanasi itself. 
Nepalese nobility going on pilgrimage to Varanasi — an activity 
entailing donations, ancestral rites, and even the establishment of temples 
— has been a popular phenomenon at least since the start of the second 
millennium CE (Gaenszle 2006, 304–05).31 Similarly, figures from 
Varanasi are also recorded as having visited Nepal. An inscription likely 
dating from 1143/1144 CE tells of a religious teacher who traveled from 
Varanasi to Nepal and initiated several princes while there (Bakker & 
Isaacson 2004, 72–74).32 The Kalacuri kings who controlled 11th-century 
Varanasi had advisors who were part of a wider religious network, serving 
30.	 For other accounts of the importance of manuscript transportation, see e.g. 
Formigatti 2014.
31.	 A noble called Luṃgu Bhāro built the Gajendramokṣa Nārāyaṇ temple in 
1576 CE; king Siddhinarasiṃha Malla visited on a pilgrimage in 1652 CE, and 
king Pṛthvī Nārāyaṇ Śāh in the mid-18th century CE; and (then ex-)king Raṇa 
Bahādur Śāh went into exile in Varanasi from 1800 to 1804 CE (Gaenszle 
2006, 305). For more details and examples, see Gaenszle 2006.
32.	 Namely Rudraśiva, a teacher of the Śaiva Siddhānta tradition. For more on 
Śaiva Siddhānta, see e.g. Davis 1991. See Davis 2000 for an introduction to the 
Mattamayūras, the specific Śaiva Siddhānta sect in question. See also Chudal 
(2020, 34–35), who writes about several later Nepalese intellectuals who 
migrated to Varanasi in the 19th and 20th centuries CE to print and publish 
literature. Education in Sanskrit, English, medicine, and engineering was 
another reason people from Nepal went to Varanasi (37–38).

=== PAGE 14 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  119
kings far beyond the Kalacuri kingdom (Smith 2017, 269–71).33 Although 
not attested in textual or epigraphical sources, it is possible that this 
religious network reached Mithila as well.
Mithila was intricately connected with Nepal through royalty and the 
movement of learned individuals, who most likely brought manuscripts 
with them (Regmi 1965, 294–95). The Malla kings of Nepal often had 
marriage partners from Mithila, and after Mithila was conquered in the 
early 14th century, king Harasiṃha escaped toward Nepal with his family, 
followed by others, among whom were many Maithili brahmins (Slusser 
1982, 65–66). Although Harasiṃha himself seems to have died on the way, 
his family and many of the Maithili intelligentsia reached their destination 
(Slusser 67; Brinkhaus 1987, 83). Especially after 1380 CE, and during 
the reign of king Jayasthitirājamalla (1382–1395 CE), there was significant 
immigration from Mithila to Nepal (Petech 1984, 128; 137).34 Amid these 
waves of migration, brahmins from Mithila became famous for their high 
level of knowledge and were highly sought after in Nepal.35
Although it is now clear that Varanasi had connections with Nepal, due 
to the other evidence presented above — its physical properties, script, and 
final folios — it is more likely that the manuscript was brought to Nepal 
by someone from Mithila. It is plausible that the manuscript was taken to 
Nepal by a Maithili brahmin in the wake of Harasiṃha in the early 14th 
century, during the immigration wave after 1380 CE, or by someone else 
who arrived before 1530 CE (the date of the earlier reader in Nepal).36
33.	 This religious network was also Śaiva Siddhānta.
34.	 In fact, Jayasthitirājamalla himself might have been from Mithila (Petech 1984, 
127–29; Slusser 1982, 58). Brinkhaus (1991, 118) disagrees, instead proposing 
that this origin was attributed to him by later Malla kings who considered the 
unknown nature of Jayasthitirājamalla’s past a blemish on their own dynastic 
history. See also Formigatti 2016, 55 and Regmi 1965, esp. 273–77 and 350.
35.	 King Yakṣamalla brought Maithili brahmins to supervise the national Paśupati 
shrine in the 15th century, and in the 17th century, king Śivasiṃha — through 
a gift exchange with the king in Mithila — got four brahmins sent to Nepal to 
replace his inept family priest (Slusser 1982, 66). See also Formigatti 2016 for a 
discussion of the cultural history of Nepal between the 14th and 17th centuries CE.
36.	 Manuscripts were sometimes produced as gifts to be donated to gain merit, 
but due to the inferior quality of the manuscript in question, gifting was 
likely not the case here. A manuscript made to be gifted, especially to royalty, 
would presumably have been of better quality. See Sathaye 2017, 62–65 for 
an (idealized) account of manuscript gifting, involving public recitation, as 
described in a Sanskrit text.

=== PAGE 15 ===
120  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
In sum, the manuscript is evidence of an information network that 
connected North India with Nepal and involved the transportation of palm-
leaf manuscripts. This network was associated with royalty, brahmins, and 
religious teachers. Additionally, as the texts of the manuscript chart and 
praise religious sites within Varanasi, a network is created linking places 
in the city itself. 
The Manuscript Post-Circulation
As the manuscript has not been on the move throughout its entire 
history, it is now time to turn to the life of the manuscript at its current 
location, where it has been kept ever since its physical movement 
ceased. The manuscript is currently housed at the Kaiser Library in 
Kathmandu, named after its founder, Keśar (Kaiser) Śamśer Rāṇā 
(1892–1964). Keśar Rāṇā was a member of the Nepalese royalty, held 
various civil and military positions throughout his life, and was an avid 
collector of literary material since his youth (Dimitrov & Tamot 2007, 
26–28). This manuscript and others like it began to be collected in his 
library sometime after 1909. When the manuscript was acquired by 
Keśar Rāṇā, it was most likely still being read, or at least being glanced 
through by himself and those he deemed worthy to view his collection. 
After initially being opened for permitted scholars starting in 1951, 
when the Nepal Cultural Council was formed under Keśar Rāṇā’s 
patronage, his collection was finally made publicly available in 1968, 
a few years after his death (29–30). Notably, while in the possession of 
Keśar Rāṇā and the Kaiser Library, the manuscript was taken out of 
circulation. It was no longer transported to other locations, and in this 
way, the geographical connections formed by the manuscript — as a 
physical object — came to an end at the Kaiser Library. 
In 2007, the manuscript was still in a manuscript room that was not 
environmentally monitored, and where manuscripts were kept bound in 
cloth in ordinary metal cupboards (Dimitrov & Tamot 2007, 35).37 A 
37.	 It should be noted that various traditional methods can help preserve 
manuscripts, although it is unclear if any such methods were employed for the 
manuscript discussed here. Red dye in South Asia often contains compounds 
that deter fiber-eating insects and block ultraviolet light. Fabric colored yellow 
with turmeric protects against fungi and repels insects; cotton absorbs moisture; 
and silk deters bookworms (Houghteling 2023, 71–73). Manuscripts placed in 
manuscript boxes can be wrapped with colored cloth, and the boxes themselves 
can also be treated to prevent insect damage (71–72). The place of storage 

=== PAGE 16 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  121
project aimed at improving the facilities of the Kaiser Library was already 
in motion by that year. However, the 2015 Nepal earthquake severely 
damaged the library, with further renovations being planned in 2019 
(Sijapati 2019). The level of success of the renovations remains unclear to 
me; in other words, the current condition of the manuscript is a mystery, 
at least for now.
The Copy of the Manuscript
Having discussed the palm-leaf manuscript itself and the networks 
its physical transportation created, I will now discuss its paper copy, 
which serves as evidence of the continued life of its textual content. 
The copy is written in Devanāgarī script.38 It has a slightly different 
title, written in Nepālākṣarā: “Māhātmya of Varanasi as told in various 
Purāṇas”.39 There is another, partially illegible and overwritten title, 
also in Nepālākṣarā, namely Matsyapurāṇa, signifying that the text 
had previously been identified with the Purāṇa of that name. The age 
and provenance of the copy are unclear, but it might have been produced 
in the Kathmandu valley or in the plains further south, perhaps by 
Maithili brahmins, in the 18th century CE (Diwakar Acharya, personal 
communication, 2023).40
If the compendium had been deemed important in the early second 
millennium, one would have expected more surviving copies. However, 
can also matter, as smoke produced in kitchens can help keep insects away 
(76). See also Ciotti 2023, 177–81 for a discussion on wrapping manuscripts 
in textiles. A project testing the use of storage to protect against insects in a 
controlled environment, undertaken by the Asa Archives in Kathmandu with 
the aim of storing rolled palm-leaf manuscripts can serve as an example of a 
successful modern attempt at conservation (Takagi, Chudo, & Maeda 2005, 
under “Photography, Measuring, Record Keeping and Storage”).
38.	 The copy was privately owned by Praveen Sharma at the time of microfilming. 
It is incomplete, and in its total length of 144 folios, it records the text only up 
to the verso side of the 87th folio of the palm-leaf manuscript.
39.	 Nānāpurāṇoktavārāṇasīmahātmyaṃ (sic; see Fig. 7). Note that an NGMPP 
label placed before the start (and again photographed at the end) of the paper 
manuscript has corrected °mahātmyaṃ to °māhātmyaṃ. Further, the fact that 
the two titles are in Nepālākṣarā instead of Devanāgarī signifies that they were 
probably added after the original production of the copy.
40.	 The NGMPP label indicates a date of filming, but the label is faded from this 
part and quite unclear. The date may be 11 September 1979.

=== PAGE 17 ===
122  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
it is certainly important from a scholarly perspective, and the existence 
of the paper manuscript itself is noteworthy, as it signifies the fact that 
the compendium was considered at least important enough to be copied 
to a new medium. The relatively good physical condition of the copy can 
mean that for most of its existence, it has been in a place where it was 
not extensively used, such as a private collection. One could thus say that 
although the compendium was not the most popular, it had an audience of 
early connoisseurs (at least one person in India and another in Nepal) who 
wanted to ensure its survival.
Figure 7. Folio 1 recto of the paper apograph (digitized microfilm).
Part III: Digital Means of Accessing the 
Manuscript and Their Impact on Research
The transportation of microfilms and color photographs from Nepal to 
Europe creates yet another network of information exchange — albeit 
one that revolves around academic purposes. This later network has been 
formed indirectly, through analog and digital means, rather than involving 
the transportation of the physical manuscript itself.
The means I have to access the palm-leaf manuscript consists of color 
photographs taken in April 2010.41 There are also two microfilms of the 
41.	 I have been kindly provided these photographs by Peter Bisschop. As for the 
paper copy, I have been able to consult black and white digital images of the 
microfilm (NGMPP reel E 766/7).

=== PAGE 18 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  123
manuscript, made for academic use by the Nepalese-German Manuscript 
Preservation Project (NGMPP).42
There is an observable trend for scholars researching manuscripts to 
rely more on digital reproductions than on consulting the original copies.43 
The upside is that photographs and digital scans of the microfilms are easy 
to access on a computer and may preserve information that is now lost in 
the physical manuscripts.44 The downside is that the quality and thickness 
of the palm leaves are difficult to estimate based on images, as is identifying 
differences between the ink of the earlier text and that of later additions, 
and distinguishing whether an unclear blot of ink is a stain or a meaningful 
addition. The difference between using color photographs and viewing a 
physical manuscript may be small, and perhaps insignificant when it comes 
to research based mainly on the textual material, for which digital images are 
usually sufficient. In the words of Dick van der Meij discussing the digitization 
of manuscript collections in Indonesia: “[. . .] codicologists and philologists 
still need to consult physical manuscripts if only to get the ‘feel’ of them, to 
smell them, to touch the paper and see how the ink and other writing agents 
have attached to it” (2017, 148). Viewing a manuscript in person can thus help 
us place and date it more accurately and provide more information about its 
contents and the individuals involved in its creation and use.
42.	 One microfilm is in Berlin, Germany; another, at the National Archives of 
Kathmandu (Dimitrov & Tamot 2007, 31). The original negatives are housed 
in Kathmandu. The microfilms were made at the Kaiser Library by the NGMPP 
in one of two phases, namely 28 October 1975 to 31 August 1976 or 30 October 
1983 to 31 January 1984. Alongside all the other microfilms created by the 
NGMPP, these two phases of microfilm creation produced 124 microfilm reels 
in total, containing 1168 manuscripts — that is, more than 100,000 folios, 
containing approximately 1350 separate texts. Of these manuscripts, 486 are 
old palm-leaf manuscripts (Dimitrov & Tamot 2007, 31). Overall, the NGMPP 
has done an invaluable job cataloguing manuscripts in Nepal, reproducing 
“virtually all the manuscripts (around 190,000) held in Nepalese collections.” 
(Vergiani 2017, 80).
43.	 There are exceptions, however; see e.g. Formigatti 2015 and Klebanov 2021.
44.	 Regarding the microfilms in Kathmandu, some were already showing signs 
of deterioration in 2007, and it is unclear how many still survive at the present 
time (Diwakar Acharya, personal communication, 2023; Dimitrov & Tamot 
2007, 35). Additionally, if one looks at the long-term situation, microfilms and 
paper copies have shorter lifespans than palm-leaf manuscripts themselves. 
Due to the easily ignitable nature of the earlier type of microfilm, acetate-based 
microfilms began being used, and such microfilms unfortunately disintegrate 
after only a few decades (Hanneder 2017, 223–24).

=== PAGE 19 ===
124  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
Conclusion
The manuscript in question and others like it were shaped by their 
environments, and in return, shaped the communities involved. This 
manuscript combines the mythical with the geographical, the textual 
with the physical: it forms a part of multi-layered networks connecting 
religious sites in Varanasi through narrative, linking North India and 
Nepal by being physically transported between these areas, and forging an 
information network between South Asia and Europe through microfilms 
and photographs. Its lifespan has been significantly extended by the 
climate of Nepal. The longevity of the manuscript allows contemporary 
scholars access to historical phases in the life of the text, which may not 
have been preserved had the manuscript remained in India. These phases, 
evinced through alterations in the manuscript, suggest the contributions of 
individual agents and networks over time.
A detailed understanding of manuscripts as material texts contributes 
to a clearer picture of when the manuscripts were created, how they 
were used, and what they can tell us about the communities surrounding 
them. As a result, our knowledge about the centuries-old connections 
between North India and Nepal can become more nuanced, providing 
us with a more detailed picture of networks involving sacred sites, the 
transportation of manuscripts, and the sharing of information. Considering 
various aspects of physical objects, texts, and individuals — even if some 
information inevitably remains speculative — is crucial to producing more 
interdisciplinary and widely applicable research.
Leiden Institute for Area Studies (LIAS), Leiden University

=== PAGE 20 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  125
Appendix 1 — Manuscript Details45
1.1. Previous editions of the texts of the manuscript
Parts of the manuscript have previously been edited and studied: chapters 
1–13 by Peter Bisschop (2021), chapter 23 by Sanne Mersch, and chapters 
19 and 30–32 by myself (Littunen 2022).
1.2. Conventions and symbols
*	 	
missing syllable / reconstructed title or numbering
()	 	
encloses unclear syllables
--	 	
encloses deleted syllables
++	
encloses added syllables
ac		
before correction (ante correctionem)
pc		
after correction (post correctionem)
1.3. Description
Physical location: Kaiser Library, Kathmandu, Nepal. Accession number 66 / 
0009. Microfilmed by the Nepalese-German Manuscript Preservation Project 
(NGMPP) on 12 September 1987. Reel no. C 6/3, inventory number 85289. 
Photographed in Kathmandu on April 19, 2010.
Date of production, place, scribe(s), and readers: Between the 12th and 
14th centuries CE. Presumably either Mithila or Varanasi. Scribe(s) unknown. 
Corrected twice by unknown readers in Nepālākṣarā: in 650 Nepāla/1530 CE, 
on the 14th day of the lunar fortnight in the Vaiśākha month (corresponding to 
April–May), and in 789 Nepāla/1669 CE, on the 13th day of the lunar fortnight 
of the Mārgaśīrṣa month (corresponding to November–December).
Titles: Kāśīsārapraṭhisaṃgraha(ja)ro (Nepālākṣarā, added to the left 
side of the wooden cover, likely by a reader in 1530 CE or 1669 CE, after 
the original production of the manuscript); Vārnāsīmahātmyaḥ (very faint, 
on the right side of the wooden cover; unclear script with no top line); 
Vārāṇasīsārapraṭhisaṃgraha (Devanāgarī, black ink, added by Kaiser 
Library cataloguers but later changed to Vārāṇasīmāhātmya, being corrected 
in blue ink); Vārnāśāmahātmaḥ (Nepālākṣarā, folio 1 recto, likely added by a 
reader in Nepal).
45.	 The description provided here largely follows the approach of Camillo 
Formigatti (2022, 189–95).

=== PAGE 21 ===
126  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
Languages: Sanskrit verses in the main body of the text; Maithilī prose (?) 
in the last (unnumbered) folio, containing the start of another text, possibly 
dealing with prāyaścitta (expiation) related to the candrāyaṇa vow.
Material, extent, and dimension: oblong palm leaf; 147 folios, of which 
145 numbered folios (numbering on folio 145 is partially illegible)46 and 2 
unnumbered folios at the end; folio height approximately 4.7 cm, width 32 cm.
Condition: incomplete. The text cuts off in the (presumably) last chapter. 
Some folios have holes and/or torn edges (Kaiser Library cataloguers note 
worm damage). Almost all the folios have akṣaras that are either faded or 
smudged, and thus hard to read. Folios 13v–14r are almost entirely faded 
and smudged. Some akṣaras in the manuscript have been retraced, which 
has created more smudging.
Binding and covers: original binding holes, but no string. Wooden 
covers. On the front cover, kāśīsārapraṭhisaṃgraha(ja)ro (left side) and 
vārnāsīmahātmyaḥ (right side, very faint; script unclear, with no top line). 
Labels affixed to the front cover: vārāṇasīsārapraṭhisaṃgraha (in black 
ink), changed to vārāṇasīmāhātmya with the addition of tārapatrako patra 
144 nevārīakṣara naṃ 066 (in blue ink). On the back cover, no text.47
Script and scribes: at least two, likely three hands alternate without a 
clearly distinguishable pattern in the original production process of the 
manuscript. It is often difficult to distinguish whether the change in 
writing is a result of a change in the scribe or the stylus used. First, second, 
and third (?) hands: Old Nāgarī script in black ink, some parts darker 
and others more faint. Fourth and fifth hand (first and second reader in 
Nepal): Nepālākṣarā in black ink, corrections and additions throughout the 
manuscript. Orange color often added to daṇḍas, chapter numbering, and 
symbols, sometimes to speaker changes and folio numbering, and once to 
an entire colophon (on 99r).48
Foliation: Nepālākṣarā numerals, mid-left margin, verso.
46.	 One can make out three numbers, of which the penultimate one is partially 
legible, and the last one is legible. The last number is 5, and the penultimate one 
most likely a 4. Thus, it is relatively certain that the numbering of the folio is 
145.
47.	 It should be noted that the term “binding” might not be the most accurate for 
palm-leaf manuscripts, as they are not “bound” in the same way as a book 
would be. See Ciotti 2023 for more information about manuscript binding 
across various traditions.
48.	 A label made at the Kaiser Library during the photographing process in 
2010, placed before the start of the manuscript, identifies the script as being 
old/Eastern (prācīn) “Newārī”, but this identification is incorrect. Only the 
alterations made in Nepal are in a script that could be called Newārī.

=== PAGE 22 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  127
Layout: 4–6 lines per page (12 folios with 6 lines, 89 with 5 lines, and 44 
with 4 lines), approximately 55–60 akṣaras per line, and 9–10 verses per 
folio. One string hole, approximately in the middle of the folios in a blank 
space; except for folio 12, which has two string holes and three columns 
of text (the left string hole is the same size and in the same position as the 
holes on the other folios, the second is smaller and only slightly to the right, 
leaving the middle column of text very narrow, accommodating only 5 or 
6 akṣaras). Thus, folio 12 may be part of another codicological unit (see 
Fig. 12, below).49 Folios *146–*147 are also part of another codicological 
unit. They contain new material, namely astronomical calculations and the 
start of a new text in Maithilī. Folio *147 was likely added to protect the 
manuscript before the addition of the wooden covers.
Marginalia: some marginal corrections, mainly single words or syllables.
Date of acquisition: unknown. Acquired by Keśar Śamśer Rāṇā 
presumably in the late 19th/early 20th century CE, and placed in the 
Kaiser Library on or after 1909 CE.
1.4. Incipit and explicit
The excerpts are reproduced diplomatically, with no attempt made to 
reconstruct or correct the text, except by introducing word separation. Note that 
the incipt and explicit are from two different texts and have been reproduced 
here mainly to show the start of the compendium’s texts as set in Mithila (in 
the incipit) and the abrupt ending of the compendium (in the explicit).
Incipit: [1v] oṃ namaḥ śivāya // mithilāsthaṃ mahātmānaṃ mājñavalkyaṃ 
mahāmuniṃ / devarātaśutaṃ śāntaṃ ṛṣisaṃghaiḥ samāvṛtaṃ // 
brāhmaṇair vedatatvajñaiḥ śrūtimantraviśāradaiḥ // yatibhi * * * mais tu 
purāṇārthaviśāradaiḥ //.50
Explicit: [145r] sāktāya caiva tapase aisvaryaniyamāya ca / namo 
yogarahasyāya yogadāpanamo stu mahyaṃ sarvvā-sarvvā-tmanā kāmaṃ 
prayacchabhagava -/- t prabho / yanmamṛtyubhayaṃ deva pramāryayitum 
arhasi / majjamānaṃ mahādeva trāhimāṃ-trāhimāṃ- saraṇāgataṃ / sa 
evaṃ stūyamānā.
49.	 One might assume that the second string hole is a result of piercing the palm 
leaf in the wrong place, as the hole has seemingly not been used for string. 
However, there are instances where two holes have been made in a palm-leaf 
manuscript, and the second has deliberately not been used (Ciotti 2023, 163).
50.	 For an edited version of the incipit, see Bisschop 2021, 25: mithilāsthaṃ 
mahātmānaṃ yājñavalkyaṃ mahāmunim / devarātasutaṃ śāntam ṛṣisaṃghaiḥ 
samāvṛtam // 1 // brāhmaṇair vedatattvajñaiḥ śrutimantraviśāradaiḥ / yatibhir 
mokṣakāmais tu purāṇārthaviśāradaiḥ // 2 //.

=== PAGE 23 ===
128  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
1.5. Chapter numbering
This list provides five examples of chapter numbering. All the chapter 
numbering was added after the original production of the manuscript.
51.	 For a study on symbols in South Asian manuscripts, see Bhattarai 2020, 
especially chapter 3.
Chapter 1 (folio 9 recto). Pc, darker ink, marginal addition (left). Additional 
siddham symbol after number.51
Chapter 3 (folio 13 recto). Pc, darker ink. Puṣpikā created from a simple 
circle symbol.
Chapter 14 (folio 74 recto). Pc. 4 has likely been corrected from a 3. Puṣpikā 
created from an earlier character (cha). A possible siddham symbol under 
the numbering, on the left side of the puṣpikā.

=== PAGE 24 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  129
Chapter 21 (folio 83 verso). Pc, marginal addition (top). Unclear due to a 
hole.
Chapter 28 (folio 99 recto). Pc, darker ink, marginal addition. No daṇḍas.

=== PAGE 25 ===
130  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
Appendix 2 — Scribal Comparison
2.1. Characters and diacritics
The first column on the left indicates the initial corresponding to the 
scribe (A or B), the second the consonant in question, and the top line 
the added diacritic. This chart does not consider the possibility of a third 
scribe, as it is not clear whether the change that could indicate a third 
scribe is that of the stylus or the person themselves. For the possible 
third scribe, see Figs. 10 and 11 below.

=== PAGE 26 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  131
2.2. Layout
Figure 8. Folio 60 recto, written by the first scribe.
Figure 9. Folio 60 verso, written by the second scribe. Note that although the hand 
changes, the layout is the same as in 60 recto.
Figure 10. Folio 65 recto, showing a change from the second to a possible third 
scribe.
Figure 11. Folios 87 verso to 88 recto, displaying a change of layout and stylus, and 
a change to a potential third scribe. Note that the use of the thinner stylus starts from 
the end of 87 verso, at a pāda break, instead of at the start of 88 recto.
Figure 12. Folio 12 verso, showing a second string hole and a three-column layout.

=== PAGE 27 ===
132  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
Works Cited
Manuscripts
Hiraṇyasaptaka, Khaḍgapūjāvidhi. Cambridge, Cambridge University Library, MS 
Add.1691.1. https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-01691-00001/.
Jayamaṅgalā. Cambridge, Cambridge University Library, MS Add.2251.1. https://cudl 
.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-02251-00001/.
Kriyākāṇḍakramāvalī. Cambridge, Cambridge University Library, MS Add.1406. 
https://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-ADD-01406/.
Vārāṇasīmāhātmya compendium (*Vārāṇasīmāhātmyasaṃgraha). Kathmandu, 
Kaiser Library, MS accession number 66. NGMPP reel C 6/3. Apograph: Private 
collection, Praveen Sharma. NGMPP reel E 766/7.
Printed and Digital Sources
Adriaensen, R., H.T. Bakker, and H. Isaacson. 1998. The Skandapurāṇa Vol I: 
Adhyāyas 1–25. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Ambach, Malini, Jonas Buchholz, and Ute Hüsken, eds. 2022. Temples, Texts, 
and Networks: South Indian Perspectives. Heidelberg: Heidelberg Asian Studies 
Publishing.
Bakker, Hans. 1986. Ayodhyā. Groningen: Forsten.
 ———. 1996. “Construction and Reconstruction of Sacred Space in Vārāṇasī”. Numen, 
43.1: 32–55.
Bakker, Hans T., and Harunaga Isaacson. 2004. The Skandapurāṇa Vol IIA: 
Adhyāyas 26–31.14: The Vārāṇasī Cycle. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Balbir, Nalini. 2017. “The Cambridge Jain Manuscripts: Provenances, Highlights, 
Colophons”. In Indic Manuscript Cultures through the Ages: Material, Textual, 
and Historical Investigations, edited by Vincenzo Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo, and 
Camillo Alessio Formigatti, 47–76. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Bausi, Alessandro, Michael Friedrich, and Marilena Maniaci. 2019. The Emergence 
of Multiple-Text Manuscripts. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Bhattarai, Bidur. 2020. Dividing Texts: Conventions of Visual Text-Organisation in 
Nepalese and North Indian Manuscripts. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Bisschop, Peter C. 2007. “Notes on a Vārāṇasīmāhātmya Compendium”. Newsletter 
of the NGMCP, 5: 21–23.
———. 2013. “The Abode of the Pañcamudrās: A Yoginī Temple in Early Medieval 
Vārāṇasī”. In “Yoginī” in South Asia: Interdisciplinary Approaches, edited by 
Istvan Keul, 47–60. London: Routledge.
———. 2016. “A 12th-century Vārāṇasīmāhātmya and its Account of a Hypethral 
Yoginī-Temple”. In Tantric Studies: Fruits of a Franco-German Project on Early 
Tantra, edited by Dominic Goodall and Harunaga Isaacson, 113–33. Pondicherry: 
Institut Franc̨ais De Pondichéry; École Franc̨aise D’Extrême-Orient.

=== PAGE 28 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  133
———. 2021. The Vārāṇasīmāhātmya of the Bhairavaprādurbhāva: A 12th-Century 
Glorification of Vārāṇasī. Puducherry: Institut Franc̨ais De Pondichéry; École 
Franc̨aise D’Extrême-Orient.
Brinkhaus, Horst. 1987. The Pradyumna-Prabhāvatī Legend in Nepal: A Study of the 
Hindu Myth of the Draining of the Nepal Valley. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag 
Wiesbaden GmbH.
———. 1991. “The Descent of the Nepalese Malla Dynasty as Reflected by Local 
Chroniclers”. Journal of the American Oriental Society, 111: 118–22.
Brockmann, Christian. 2014. “Scribal Annotation as Evidence of Learning in 
Manuscripts from the First Byzantine Humanism: The ‘Philosophical Collection’”. 
In Manuscript Cultures: Mapping the Field, 1: 11–34. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Cecil, Elizabeth A. 2020. Mapping the Pāśupata Landscape. Narrative, Place, and 
the Śaiva Imaginary in Early Medieval North India. Leiden: Brill.
Chen, Ruixuan. 2018. The Nandimitrāvadāna: A Living Text from the Buddhist 
Tradition. PhD dissertation, Leiden University.
Chudal, Alaka Atreya. 2020. “Nepali Intellectuals in Exile: The History of Nepali 
Printing in 19th- and 20th-Century Benares”. Journal of South Asian Intellectual 
History, 3: 34–59.
Ciotti, Giovanni. 2023. “Strategies for Binding Pothi Manuscripts”. In Tied and 
Bound: A Comparative View on Manuscript Binding, edited by Alessandro Bausi 
and Michael Friedrich, 155–89. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Davis, Richard H. 1991. Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshipping Śiva in 
Medieval India. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
———. 2000. “Praises of the Drunken Peacocks”. In Tantra in Practice, edited by 
David Gordon White, 131–45. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
De Simini, Florinda. 2017. “Long Live the King (and His Manuscripts)!”. In Manuscript 
of the Month 2015–2017. Accessed November 17, 2023. https://www.csmc.uni 
-hamburg.de/publications/mom-1/mom-2015-2017.pdf. 
Dimitrov, Dragomir, and Kashinath Tamot. 2007. “Kaiser Shamsher, his Library and 
his Manuscript Collection”. Newsletter of the NGMCP, 3: 26–36.
Eck, Diana L. 1999 [1982]. Banaras: City of Light. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Feldhaus, Anne. 1995. Water and Womanhood: Religious Meanings of Rivers in 
Maharashtra. New York: Oxford University Press.
 ———. Connected Places: Region, Pilgrimage, and Geographical Imagination in 
India. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Fitzgerald, James L. 2010. “Mahābhārata”. In Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism, 
edited by K. A. Jacobson, H. Basu, A. Malinar, and V. Narayanan. Leiden: 
Brill.
 ———. 2014. “History and Primordium in Ancient Indian Historical Writing: Itihāsa 
and Purāṇa in the Mahābhārata and Beyond”. In Thinking, Recording, and Writing 
History in the Ancient World, edited by Kurt A. Raaflaub, 41–60. Oxford: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

=== PAGE 29 ===
134  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
Flood, Finbarr Barry, and Beate Fricke. 2023. Tales Things Tell: Material Histories 
of Early Globalisms. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Formigatti, Camillo Alessio. 2014. “Travelling Books”. In Buddha’s Word. The Life 
of Books in Tibet and Beyond, edited by Mark Elliott, Hildegard Diemberger, 
and Michela Clemente, 19–24. Cambridge: Museum of Archaeology and 
Anthropology, University of Cambridge.
———. 2015. Sanskrit Annotated Manuscripts from Northern India and Nepal. PhD 
dissertation, University of Hamburg.
———. 2017. “Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Cambridge University Library: Three 
Centuries of History and Preservation”. In Indic Manuscript Cultures through 
the Ages: Material, Textual, and Historical Investigations, edited by Vincenzo 
Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo, and Camillo Alessio Formigatti, 3–45. Berlin: De 
Gruyter.
Freschi, Elisa, and Philipp A. Maas, 2017. “Introduction: Conceptual Reflections 
on Adaptive Reuse”. In Adaptive Reuse, Aspects of Creativity in South Asian 
Cultural History, edited by Elisa Freschi and Philipp A. Maas, 1–25. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz.
Friedrich, Michael, and Cosima Schwarke. 2016. One-Volume Libraries: Composite 
and Multiple-Text Manuscripts. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Gaenszle, Martin. 2006. “Nepali Places: Appropriations of Space in Banaras”. In 
Visualizing Space in Banaras: Images, Maps, and the Practice of Representation, 
edited by Martin Gaenszle and Jörg Gengnagel, 303–23. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz.
Hanneder, Jürgen. 2017. “Pre-modern Sanskrit Authors, Editors, and Readers”. In 
Indic Manuscript Cultures through the Ages: Material, Textual, and Historical 
Investigations, edited by Vincenzo Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo, and Camillo Alessio 
Formigatti, 223–38. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Harimoto, Kengo. 2011. “In Search of the Oldest Nepalese Manuscript”. Rivista 
Degli Studi Orientali, Nuova Serie, 84: 85–106.
———. 2017. “The Dating of the Cambridge Bodhisattvabhūmi Manuscript Add. 
1702”. In Indic Manuscript Cultures through the Ages: Material, Textual, and 
Historical Investigations, edited by Vincenzo Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo, and 
Camillo Alessio Formigatti, 355–76. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Hazra, R.C. 1940. Studies in the Purāṇic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs. 
Dacca: The University of Dacca.
Houghteling, Sylvia. 2023. “Clothing the Book: Texts, Textiles, and an Ethics of 
Care”. In Old Stacks, New Leaves: The Arts of the Book in South Asia, edited by 
Sonal Khullar, 67–91. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Klebanov, Andrey. 2021. “On the Textual History of the Suśrutasaṃhitā (1): A Study 
of Three Nepalese Manuscripts”. Ejournal of Indian Medicine, 12: 1–64.
Kohs, Michael, and Sabine Kienitz. 2022. “Agency: How Manuscripts Affect and 
Create Social Realities”. Manuscript Cultures: Agency: How Manuscripts Affect 
and Create Social Realities, 19, 3–6.

=== PAGE 30 ===
O-P. A. Littunen : The Social Life of a Manuscript  |  135
Littunen, Olli-Pekka Antero. 2022. Māhātmyas as Evolving Entities: A Text-Critical 
Study of a Selection of Vārāṇasīmāhātmyas Attributed to the Brahmapurāṇa. MA 
dissertation, Leiden University.
Matsuda, Kazunobu. 1996. Two Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Daśabhūmikasūtra 
Preserved at The National Archives, Kathmandu. Tokyo: The Centre for East 
Asian Cultural Studies for UNESCO, The Toyo Bunko.
Mersch, 
Sanne. 
2013. 
Travelling 
Through 
Time 
and 
Space 
with 
the 
Kapālamocanamāhātmya in the Vāyupurāṇa. MA dissertation, Leiden University.
Parker, David C. 1997. The Living Text of the Gospels. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Petech, Luciano. 1984. Mediaeval History of Nepal (c. 750–1482). Roma: Istituto 
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Ratié, Isabelle. 2018. “For an Indian Philology of Margins: The Case of Kashmirian 
Sanskrit Manuscripts”. In L’espace du sens: Approches de la philologie indienne. 
The Space of Meaning: Approaches to Indian Philology, with the collaboration of 
Michaël Meyer, edited by Silvia D’Intino and Sheldon Pollock, 305–54. Paris: 
Collège de France and Difusion De Boccard.
Regmi, D.R. 1965. Medieval Nepal: Part 1 (Early Medieval Period 750–1530 A.D.). 
Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Salomon, Richard. 1998. Indian Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions 
in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the Other Indo-Aryan Languages. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Sander, Lore. 1991. “The Earliest Manuscripts from Central Asia and the Sarvāstivāda 
Mission”. In Corolla Iranica: Papers in Honour of Professor Dr. David Neil 
Mackenzie on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday on April 8th, 1991, edited by 
Ronald E. Emmerick and Dieter Weber, 133–50. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Sathaye, Adheesh. 2017. “The Public Life of Sanskrit Manuscripts”. In Traces of 
Words: Art and Calligraphy from Asia, edited by Fuyubi Nakamura, 53–66. 
Vancouver: Figure 1 Publishing.
Sathyanarayanan, R, and Marzenna Czerniak-Drożdżowicz. 2023. The Holy 
Island in the Kāverī: A Hagiotopography. Critical Edition and Translation of the 
Śrīraṅgamāhātmya. Pondicherry: Institut Franc̨ais De Pondichéry; École Franc̨aise 
D’Extrême-Orient.
Sijapati, Alisha. 2019. “Three of Nepal’s largest public libraries were badly damaged 
in the 2015 earthquake. Only one has risen from the debris.”. Accessed September 
13, 2023. https://kathmandupost.com/national/2019/04/02/three-of-nepals-largest 
-public-libraries-were-badly-damaged-in-the-2015-earthquake-only-one-has 
-risen-from-the-debris.
Slusser, Mary Shepherd. 1982. Nepal Mandala: A Cultural Study of the Kathmandu 
Valley. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Smith, Travis. 2007. The Sacred Center and its Peripheries: Śaivism and the Vārāṇasī 
Sthala-Purāṇas. PhD dissertation, Columbia University.

=== PAGE 31 ===
136  |  Textual Cultures 17.2 (2024)
Takagi, N., Yoriko Chudo, and Reiko Maeda. 2005. “Conservation and Digitisation 
of Rolled Palm Leaf Manuscripts in Nepal”. Accessed September 25, 2023. https://
asianart.com/articles/tamsuks/index.html.
Van der Meij, Dick. 2017. Indonesian Manuscripts from the Islands of Java, Madura, 
Bali and Lombok. Leiden: Brill.
Van der Putten, Jan. 2022. “Customised Manuscripts to Shape a Community 
of Readers? Overbeck’s Collection of Rental Manuscripts from Palembang 
(Indonesia)”. Manuscript Cultures: Agency: How Manuscripts Affect and Create 
Social Realities, 19: 183–94.
Van Schaik, Sam, and Imre Galambos. 2012. Manuscripts and Travellers: The Sino-
Tibetan Documents of a Tenth-century Buddhist Pilgrim. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Vergiani, Vincenzo. 2017. “A Tentative History of the Sanskrit Grammatical 
Traditions in Nepal through the Manuscript Collections”. In Indic Manuscript 
Cultures through the Ages: Material, Textual, and Historical Investigations, edited 
by Vincenzo Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo, and Camillo Alessio Formigatti, 77–130. 
Berlin: De Gruyter.
Wiland, J., Rick Brown, Lizzie Fuller, Lea Havelock, Jackie Johnson, Dorothy 
Kenn, Paulina Kralka, Marya Muzart, Jessica Pollard, and Jenny Snowdon. 
2022. “A Literature Review of Palm Leaf Manuscript Conservation — Part 1: A 
Historic Overview, Leaf Preparation, Materials and Medial, Palm Leaf Manuscripts 
at the British Library and the Common Types of Damage”. Journal of the Institute 
of Conservation, 45.3: 236–59.
Wujastyk, D., Jason Birch, Andrey Klebanov, Madhu K. Parameswaran, 
Madhusudan Rimal, Deepro Chakraborty, Harshal Bhatt, Vandana Lele, and 
Paras Mehta. 2023. On the Plastic Surgery of the Ears and Nose: The Nepalese 
Version of the Suśrutasaṃhitā. Heidelberg: Heidelberg Asian Studies Publishing.

