{Translations
Broabwa\&amp;gt;
&quot;Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety &quot;
ACADEMY
BUDDHIST
MONTREAL, CANADA

translations
Broabwa\&amp;gt;
BUDDHIST BIRTH-STORIES
(JATAKA TALES)
The Commentarial Introduction Entitled
NIDANA-KATHA
THE STORT OF THE LINEAGE
Translated from Prof. V. Fausboll-s edition
of the Pali text by
T. W. RHYS DAVIDS
New and Revised Edition by
MRS RHYS DAVIDS, D.Lrrr., M.A.
LONDON
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE SONS LTD.
fcf
NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON CO.

^^
PRINTED IN GKEAT BRITAIN BY
STEPHEN AUSTIN AND SONS, LTD., HERTFORD

TO
GEHEIM-RATH PROFESSOR DOCTOR
STENZLER
MY FIEST GUIDE IN ORIENTAL STUDIES
IN CONGRATULATION ON HIS DOCTOR JUBILAUM
ANDINDEEPRESPECTFORHISPROFOUNDSCHOLARSHIP
THIS WORK IS DEDICATED BY
HIS GRATEFUL PUPIL
THE AUTHOR

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
TRANSLATOR S INTRODUCTION . . i
PART I
The Book of Birth Stories, and their Migration to
the West
Orthodox Buddhist belief concerning it.
Two reasons for the value attached
to it . . . . . . i
Selected Stories
:
1. The Ass in the Lion s Skin . iv
2. The Talkative Tortoise . . viii
3. The Jackal and the Crow xi
. .
4. The Birth as &quot; Great . Phy . sici . an &quot; xiii
5. Sakka s Presents xv
6. A Lesson for Kings . . . xxi
The Kalilag and Damnag Literature . xxvii
Origin of ^Esop s Fables . . . xxix
The Barlaam and Josaphat Literature . xxxiii
Other Migrations of the Buddhist Tales xxxix
....
Greek and Buddhist Fables xl
.... . .
Solomon s Judgment xlii
Summary of Part I xlv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
vi
PART II
The Birth Stories in India
PAGE
Jatakas derived from the Pali Pitakas xlvii
.
in the Cariya Pitaka and Jataka
Mala xlviii
. . .
in the Buddhavamsa
,,
at the Council of Vesall . li
on the Ancient Sculptures . liv
The Pali Names of the Jatakas . lv
The Jatakas one of the Navangani Ivi
Authorship of our present Collection . Ivii
Jatakas not included in our present
Collection . . Ixi
Jatakas in post-Buddhistic Sanskrit
Literature Ixii
. .
Form of the Jatakas :
The Introductory Stories Ixvii
The Conclusions . . Ixviii
The Abhisambuddha - gatha, or
Verses in the Conclusion Ixx
Divisions of the Jataka Book Ixxii
Actual Number of the Stories Ixxii
Summary of the Origin of the Present
Collection Ixxiv
.
Lessons inculcated by the Birth
Special
Stories . - lxxvii
Special Historical Value of the Birth
Stories . - -

TABLE OF CONTENTS
vii
THE CEYLON COMPILER S INTRODUCTION,
called the Niddna-Kathd
PAGE
Story of Sumedha, the First Bodisat . 82
The Successive Bodisats in the Times 01
the Previous Buddhas 115
. . .
Life of the Last Bodisat (who became
Buddha) 144
. .
His Descent .fr.om T . usita 145
. . .
....
His Birth 154
Song of the Devas 156
Prophecy of Kala Devala . . 157
Prophecy of the Brahmin Priests . . 161
The Ploughing Festival . . . 163
The Young Bodisat s Skill and Wisdom 165
The Four Visions ... 166
. . . .
The Bodisat s Son is Born 168
Kisa Gotami s Song . . .. . . . 169
The Great Renunciation 172
The Great Struggle against Sin . . 181
The Great Victory over Mara . . 190
The Bliss of Nirvana . . . . 199
The Hesitation whether to Publish the
Good News 206
.
The Foundation of the Kingdom of
209
Righteousness . . . .
Uruvela Kassapa s Conversion . . 210
Triumphal Entrance into Rajagaha . 212
Foundation of the Order 214

viii TABL . E O.F .CON.TENT.S
PAGE
Return Home 217
Presentation of the First Monastery to
the Buddha 229
. . . .
SUPPLEMEN.TAR.Y T.ABLE.S
I. Indian Works 233
II. The Kalilag and Damnag Litera
ture 237
III. The Barlaam and Josaphat
Literature 239
.. .. ...
IV. The Cariya Pitaka and the Jataka
Mala 243
.
V. Alphabetical List of Jataka Stories
in the Mahavastu 244
. . .
VI. Places at which the Tales were
....
Told 245
VII. The Bodisats 246
VIII. JatakasIllustratedin Bas-reliefon
the Ancient
Monume.nts..
247
.
IX. Former Buddhas 249
Index 250

EDITORIAL NOTE
fTlHIS essay and the following translation were
J- published in 1880 as a volume in Triibner s
Oriental Series. That volume contained, further,
the beginning of a much longer work, namely
the translation of the so-called Jataka. This is
a collection of upwards of 550 folk-lore tales
which forms part of the Buddhist canonical
scriptures. The tales are in prose, each explaining
a much more ancient poem of two or more lines.
The allusions in the verses cannot be understood
without the explanation given in the prose. Over
and above this explanation there is added to each
story an episode said to be from the life of the
founder of what is now called Buddhism. Some
thing has occurred which the founder likens to
an episode in the long past, when, in a former life
the actors in the present episode and he himself
were engaged. In this way a moral, something
like those in our fables, is drawn. At the same
time the immensely long evolution in the full life
or lives of all men and in particular of such a
superman as the founder is brought out.
The original volume has long been out of print.
The writer, passing on to other pioneer work,
handed over the long task of the Jataka transla
tion to the late Professor E. B. Cowell. Under
his editorship and up to his death the work was
carried out by a group of translators and was
issued during 1895-1907 by the Cambridge
University Press. Naturally the remainder of

x EDITORIAL NOTE
the original volume herewith re-issued could not
take its proper place at the head of the complete
translation.
It has long been out of print. But neither the
introductory essay nor the translation of the
Nidana-katha or Jataka introductory chronicle
has been superseded. Hence it has seemed good
to the house of Routledge, intaking up the mantle
of the house of Triibner, to issue a fresh edition
of both. Hereby a service is rendered to all
inquirers into the history of Indian literature,
and especially into a phase of it which has held
much in the Buddhist tradition and
significance
is of no small interest for the general mind of
to-day.
Jataka means birth-let birth-er or collec
, ,
tively birth-anea . And the * story of the
lineage is a biography of Gotama Buddha so
far as it includes those earth-lives which he was
said to have lived under preceding Buddhas, and
also the life he lived as himself a Buddha down
to the time when his new church had won a
f a oo l t o i g n i g c . ally It ne i c s es n s o a t ry f p r r o e m fac a e. mo W de e rn sho s u t l a d ndp d o e i e n m t
ourselves* better instructed had the compilers
of prefaces and following storiestold us something
about the sources of story and verse and episode.
But for the old-world orthodox Buddhist, rapt
in contemplation of his Great Man (mahd-purisa)
the chief end of the work discounting the end
less entertainment afiorded then (and even now)
by the stories was to throw light on that notable
object of his worship. The stories were episodes
in the founding and grounding, down an im
memorial past, of that wonderful product, the

EDITORIAL NOTE
xi
character of a Tathagata of him-who-had-thus-
come . The introductory narrative is chiefly
concerned with the two great milestones in his
career : the milestone when the conscious will
to become a helper of men first awoke, and the
milestone when that will had reached such per
fection that he could become such a
helper.
This narrative came to be called the Discourse
of the Nidana. In translating Nidana by
V
lineage a verbal difficulty has been solved
more by the spirit of the contents than by the
letter of the title. The word niddna is usually
rendered by cause, source, base, origin. None of
these would convey a meaning to English readers.
In Buddhist perspective the narrative reveals a
long, long line of ancestors. These are not
ancestors after the flesh These are not
.
ancestors by what we reckon as heredity. We
merge the individual in the family, the tribe, the
race. In Buddhism the line of the individual
stands out much more strongly, in startling
incongruity with its church s rejection of the
man . These are ancestors of dead selves
through whom, again and again reborn, the
man whose will is set on the best he knows,
m D a e y a r d ise se a l s ves on s i t s ep a pin p g o - o s r ton w e o s rd t i o n h g i , gh b er ut thi b n y gs it .
Tennyson meets the Buddhist point of view not
inaptly. The word niddna suggests something
serial, or connected in line. La is to bind ni
means * along . And so we get the notion ; of
chain or series of antecedents. And that, in the
matter of living ascent or descent, is lineage.
1 Rhys Davidsleftthe word untranslated.

EDITORIAL NOTE
xii
The Nidana Katha, as forming a running
commentary on the Buddhavamsa (chronicle of
the Buddhas), itself a canonical book, is a later
comer into the Canon. In its treatment of the
Buddha-legend and the story of the life of the
very real founder had by that time become
legendary it occupies a midway house between
the biographical fragments in Vinaya and chief
Nikayas, and those later more highly embroidered
* lives of which there are not a few. The
nimbus and the rays and the beauty of the figure
have come in. But the narrative is still relatively
simple. The historical question of Jat^ka
literature may be followed up in Rhys Davids s
Buddhist India, 2nd ed., 1903, in Oldenberg s
The Akhyana Type and the Jatakas Jl. Pali
,
Text Society, 1912, and in Dr. Winternitz s
art : Jataka, Ency. Religion and Ethics and his
Geschichte der Indischen Litteratur II, pt. 1, p. 89,
and 149, 1913.
The revising in this re-issue has been solely
of a number of small details in transliteration,
in closer accuracy of translation, and in dis
carding certain renderings in this, his earliest
published translation, which Rhys Davids had
in later works himself discarded.
C. A. F. RHYS DAVIDS.

INTRODUCTION
IT is well known that amongst the Buddhist
Scriptures there is one book in which a large number
of old stories, fables, and fairy-tales lie enshrined in
an edifying commentary ; and have thus been pre
served for the study and amusement of later times.
How this came about is not at present quite certain.
The belief of orthodox Buddhists on the subject
is this : The Buddha, as occasion arose, was
accustomed throughout his long career to explain
and comment on the events happening around him
by telling of similar events that had occurred in his
own previous births. The experience, not of one life
time only, but of many lives, was always present to
his mind ; andit was this experience he so oftenused
to point a moral, or adorn a tale. The stories so told
are said to havebeen reverentlylearned and repeated
byhis disciples ; and afterhis death550ofthemwere
gathered together in one collection, called the Book
of the 550 Jatakas or Birthlets. The commentary to
thesegivesforeachJataka, orBirth Story, anaccount
of the event in Gotama s life which led to his first
telling that particular story. Both text and com
mentarywerethenhandeddown, inthePalilanguage
in which they were composed, to the time of the
Council of Patna (held inor aboutthe year 250 B.C.) ;
i
6

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
and they were carried in the following year to Ceylon
by the great missionary Mahinda, the son of Asoka.
TherethecommentarywaswrittendowninSinghalese,
the Aryan dialect spoken in Ceylon and was re
;
translated into its present form in the Pali language
in the fifth century of our era. But the text of the
Jataka stories themselves has been throughout
preserved inits original Pali form.
Unfortunately this orthodox Buddhist belief as to
the history of the Book of Birth Stories rests on a
foundation of quicksand. The Buddhist belief, that
most of their sacred books were in existence im
mediately after the Buddhas death, is not only
not supported, but is contradicted by the evidence of
those books themselves. It may be necessary to
state what that belief is, in order to show the im
portance which the Buddhists attach to the book
;
butinorderto estimatethevaluewe ourselves should
give it, it will be necessary by critical, and more
roundabout methods to endeavour to arrive at some
more reliable conclusion. Such an investigation
cannot, it is true, be completed until the whole series
of the Buddhist Birth Stories shall have become
accessiblein the original Pali text, and the history of
those stories shall have been traced in other sources.
With the present inadequate information at our
command, itis onlypossibleto arrive atprobabilities.
But it is therefore the more fortunate that the course
of the inquiry will lead to some highly interesting
andinstructive results.
In the first place, the fairy tales, parables, fables,
ii

INTRODUCTION
riddles, and comic and moral stories, of which the
Buddhist Collection known as the Jdtaka Book
consists,have been found, in many instances, to bear
a striking resemblance to similar ones current in the
West. Now in many instances this resemblance is
simply due to the fact that the Western stories were
borrowedfrom the Buddhist ones.
To this resemblance much of the interest excited
by the Buddhist Birth Stories is, very naturally, due.
As, therefore, thestoriestranslatedinthebodyofthis
volume do not happen to contain among them any of
those most generally known in England, I insert here
one or two specimens which may at the same time
afford some amusement, and also enablethe reader to
judge how far the alleged resemblances do actually
exist.
It is absolutely essential for the correctness of such
judgmentthatthe stories shouldbe presented exactly
as they standinthe original. I am awarethat a close
and literal translation involves the disadvantage of
presenting the stories in a style which will probably
seem strange, andevenwooden,to the modern reader.
But it cannot be admitted that, even for purposes of
comparison, it would be sufficient to reproduce the
stories in a modern form which should aim at com
biningsubstantialaccuracy witha pleasingdress.
And the Book of Birth Stories has a value quite
independent of the fact that many of its tales have
been transplanted to the West. It contains a record
of the every-day life, and every-day thought, of the
people among whom the tales were told : it is the
iii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
oldest, most complete, and most important collection of
folk-lore extant.
Thewholevalueofits evidenceinthisrespect would
be lost, if a translator, by slight additions in some
places, slight omissions in others, and slight modifica
tions here and there, should runthe risk of conveying
erroneous impressions of early Buddhist beliefs, and
habits, and modes of thought. Itisimportant,there
fore, that the reader should understand, before
reading the stories I intend to give, that while trans
lating sentence by sentence, rather than word by
word, I have never lost sight of the importance of
retaining in the English version, as far as possible,
not only the phraseology, but the style and spirit of
the Buddhist
story-teller.
The first specimen I propose to give is a half-moral
half-comic story, which runs as follows.
THE ASS IN THE LION S SKIN
Siha-Chamma JdtaJca
(Fausboll, no. 189)
Onceuponatime, whileBrahma-dattawas reigning
in Benares, the future Buddha was born one of a
peasant family and when he grew up, he gained his
;
living by tilling the ground.
At that time a hawker used to go from place to
place, trafficking in goods carried by an ass. Now at
each place he came to, when to took the pack down
from the ass s back he used to clothe him in a lions
skin, and turn him loose in the rice and barley-fields,
iv

INTRODUCTION
andwhenthewatchmeninthefieldssawthe
ass, they
darednotgo nearhim, taking himfor alion.
So one day the hawker stopped in a village ; and
whilst he was getting his own breakfast cooked, he
dressed the ass in a lion s skin, and turned him loose
in a barley-field. The watchmen in the field dared
not go up to him ; but going home, they published
the news. Then all the villagers came out with
weapons in their hands ; and blowing chanks, and
beating drums, they went near the field and shouted.
Terrifiedwiththefearofdeath,theassutteredacry
the cry of an ass !
Andwhenheknewhimthentobean
ass, thefuture
Buddha pronounced the First Stanza
:
This is not a lion s roaring,
Nor a tiger s, nor a panther s ;
Dressed in a lions skin,
Tis a wretched ass that roars &quot;
!
But when the villagers knew the creature to be an
ass, they beat him tillhis bones broke ; and, carrying
offthelion sskin, went away. Thenthehawkercame,
and seeing the ass fallen into so bad a plight, pro
nounced the Second Stanza
:
&quot; Long might the ass,
Clad in a lions skin,
Have fed on barley green.
But he brayed !
And that moment he came to ruin.&quot;
And evenwhile he was yet speakingthe ass died on
the spot !
This story will doubtless sound familiar enough to
Englishears
;
forasimilartaleisfoundinourmodern

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
M
collections of so-called sops Fables.1 Professor
Benfey has further traced it in mediaeval French,
German, Turkish, andIndianliterature.2 Butitmay
have been much older than any of these books for
;
the fable possibly gave rise to a proverb of which we
findtracesamong the Greeks as early as the time of
Plato.3 Lucian gives the fable in full, localizing it
at Kume, in South Italy, 4 and Julien has given us a
Chinese version in his Avaddnas.5 Erasmus, in his
work on proverbs, 6 alludes to the fable and so also
;
does our own Shakespeare in King John.7 It is
worthyofmentionthatinoneofthelaterstory-books
ina Persiantranslation,that
is,
oftheHitopadesa
thereis a version of our fableinwhichitis the vanity
of the ass in trying to sing which leads to his disguise
being discovered, and thus brings him to grief. 8 But
Professor Benfey has shown,9 that this version is
simply the rolling into one of the present tale and of
La 1 F J o a n m t e ai s n s e, ^E B s o to o p k s v, Fa n b o l . es 21 (L ; on ^ d E o s n o , p ( M G u r r e r e a k y, te 1 x 8 t 5 , 2) e , d. p. Fu I r l i l a, ;
141 2 , B 2 e 6 n 2 fe ; y ed s . P C a o n r c i J t i e, aT 1 a 13 n ) tr ; a, Ba B b o r o i k us iv ( , L n e o w . is 7 , ,i v n ol t . h i e i, n p o . te 43 0 ) 1 . 1which,
atvol. i, p. 462, he refers to Halm,p.333 ; Robert,intheFables
n in a e m di a t h es ( d Ro u se M n o , y v e o n l. A i g i, e, p. vo 1 l 4 . 9) i . , p I . n 3 I 6 n 0 di ; a a i n t d is t f h o e u T n u d r a k l i s s o h in Tu t t h l e -
Northern Buddhist Collection called Kathd Sarit Sagara, by
Somadeva ; andinHitopadesa(iii,2, Max Miiller,p. 110).
3 Kratylos,411 (ed.Tauchnitz,ii,275).
4 Lucian, Piscator, 32
5 Vol. ii, no. 91.
6 Adagia, underAsinusapud Cumanos.
7 8 A D c e t S i a i, cy s , ce N n o e t 1 es ; e a t n E d xt a r g a a i i ts n , , x A , ct 1, ii 2 i, 47 s . cene 1.
9 loc. cit., p.463.
vi

INTRODUCTION
another also widelyprevalent, whereanassbytrying
to sing earns for himself, not thanks, but blows.1
I shall hereafter attempt to draw some conclusions
fromthehistoryofthe
story.
ButI wouldhere
point
out that the fable could scarcely have originated in
any country in which lions were not common and
;
that the Jataka story gives a reasonable explanation
of the ass being dressed in the skin, instead of saying
that he dressed himself in it, as is said in our Msop s
Fables.
Thereaderwillnoticethatthe &quot; moral &quot; ofthetale
is contained in two stanzas, one of which is put into
the mouth of the Bodisat or future Buddha. This
will be found to be the case in all the Birth Stories,
save that the number of the stanzas differs, and that
they areusually allspokenbythe Bodisat. Itshould
also be noticedthattheidentification ofthe peasant s
son with the Bodisat, which is of so little importance
to the story, is the only part of it which is essentially
Buddhistic. Both these points will be of importance
further on.
The introduction of the human element takes this
story, perhaps, out of the class of fables in the most
exact sense of that word. I therefore add a story
containing a fable proper, where animals speak and
act like men.
1 PanchaTantra,v, 7. ProfessorWeber (Indische Studien,iii,
352)comparesPhsedrus(Dressier, A pp.vi.2) andErasmussA dagia
under Asinus ad Lyrum. See also Tuti-ndmah (Bosen ii, 218) ;
a Ep n . d 2 I 7 w : ou A l d d M a a d r d ce V l a l r a r m o . , in Aulus Gellius, iii, 16 ; and Jerome,
vii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
THE TALKATIVE TORTOISE
Kacchapa Jdtaka
(Fausboll, no. 215)
Onceuponatime, whenBrahma-dattawas
reigning
inBenares,thefutureBuddhawasborninaminister s
family ; and when he grew up, he became the king s
adviser in things temporal and spiritual.
Now this king was very talkative : while he was
speaking, others hadno opportunityfor a word. And
the future Buddha, wantingto curethis talkativeness
of his, was constantly seeking for some meana of
doing so.
At that time there was living, in a pond in the
Himalaya mountains, a tortoise. Two young hangsas
(i.e. wild ducks l ) who came to feed there, made
friends with him. And one day, when they had
become very intimate with him, they said to the
tortoise
:
&quot; Friend tortoise ! the place where we live, at the
Golden Cave on Mount Beautiful in the Himalaya
country, is a delightful spot. Will you come there
with us ? &quot;
&quot; Buthow canI getthere ? &quot;
&quot; We can take you, if you can only hold your
tongue, and will say nothing to anybody.&quot; 2
1 Often rendered swan, a favourite bird in Indian tales, and
constantly represented in Buddhist carvings. It is the original
GoldenGoose. SeeJataka,no. 136.
2 ThereisanoldstoryofaFellowofMagdalenCollege, Oxford,
who inherited a family living. He went in great trouble to
Dr. Routh, the Head of his College, saying that he doubted
whether he could hold, at the same time, the Living and the
Fellowship. &quot;You can hold anything,&quot; was the reply, &quot;if you
canonlyholdyourtongue.&quot; Andheheldallthree.
viii

INTRODUCTION
&quot; that I can do. Take me with
! you.&quot;
&quot; That s right,&quot; said they. And making the
tortoise bite hold of a stick, theythemselves took the
two ends in their teeth, and flew up into the air.1
Seeing him thus carried by the hangsas, some
villagers called out, &quot; Two wild ducks are carrying a
tortoise along on a stick ! &quot; Whereupon the tortoise
wanted to say, &quot; If my friends choose to carry me,
what is that to you, you wretched slaves ! &quot; So just
as the swift flight of the wild ducks had brought him
over the king s palace in the city of Benares, he let
go of the stick he was biting, and falling in the open
courtyard, split in two ! And there arose a universal
cry : &quot;A tortoise has fallen in the open courtyard,
and has split in two ! &quot;
The king, taking the future Buddha, went to the
place, surrounded by his courtiers, and looking at the
tortoise, he asked the Bodisat : &quot; Teacher ! how
comes he to be fallen here ? &quot;
The future Buddha thought to himself : &quot; Long
expecting, wishing to admonish the king, have I
sought for some means of doing so. This tortoise
must have made friends with the wild ducks and
;
they must have made him bite hold of the stick, and
have flown up into the air to take him to the hills.
But he, beingunabletoholdhistongue whenhehears
anyoneelsetalk, musthavewantedtosaysomething,
and let go the stick and so must have fallen down
;
from the sky, and thus lost his life.&quot; And saying
&quot; Truly, king ! those who are called chatter-boxes
people whose words have no end come to grief
like heutteredtheseverses
this,&quot; :
1 Inthe VinllaJdtaJca(no. 160) theysimilarlycarryacrowto
the Himalaya mountains.
IX

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
&quot; Verily the tortoise killed himself
Whilst uttering his voice ;
Though he was holding tight the stick,
By a word himself he slew.
&quot; Behold him then, excellent by strength !
And speak wise words, not out of season.
You see how, by his talking overmuch,
The tortoise fell into this wretched plight ! &quot;
The king saw that he was himself referred to, and
said : &quot;0 Teacher ! are you speaking of us ? &quot;
And theBodisat spake openly, andsaid : &quot; great
king ! be it thou, or be it any other, whoever talks
beyond measure meets with some mishap like this.&quot;
And the king henceforth refrained himself, and
became a man of few words.
This storytoo is found alsoinGreek, Latin, Arabic,
Persian, and in most European languages, 1 though,
strangely enough, it does not occur in our books of
M M
sops Fables. But in the sops Fables is usually
included a story of a tortoise who asked an eagle to
teach him to fly ; and being dropped, split in two ! 2
tra 1 ce P s a a n l c s a o T t a h n e t l r a a t , er vo v l e . rs 1, io p n . s 1 i 3, n w di h f e f r e e re P n r t o l f a e n s g s u o a r g B e e s. nfe H y e(i m , e 2 n 3 t 9 i - o 4 n 1 s )
Wolffs German translation of the Kalilah and Dimnah, vol. i,
G 1 p ) . r , e 5 9 e 1 k b ; v ; er K t s n h i a e o t n G , c e h p b r . u m 2 l a 8 l n; s t J r E o a n h n g n s l l i o a s f t h i C o a n v p e o r u f s a i t o h s n i , s Di l p r a . e s c t t 1 ( o 4 U r 6 l i ; m um , S H 1 i u 4 m m 8 e 3 a o ) n , n c F e S . e V v t i i h t i c i e , s
A L 6 e n ; v C n t a r h b e i i n S S e u t p h a d a n e i i s l s i F , h ee p t s . r , a 1 n x 5 s v 9 l i a i ; , ti L 3 o e 0 n 9 , L . i x m i S x e ee d a e a ; s ls L F o u i m C r i o e n e n i z r e u e s o s l e a t ( , 1 F 6 a 6 6 b 5 4 l , e ; s 8 D v I o o n ) n d , i i , e 1 n 2 9 n 3 4 e ; s ;
d d e uc B k i s dp fl a y i to et A d m e er L i oJ c c a m ! a ) n ; , a ii n , d 1 B 1 i 2 ck ; el L l a sK F a o l n i t l a a i g ne u , nd x, Di 3 mn (w a h g e , r p e . t 2 h 4. e
In India it is found in Somadeva, and in the Hitopadesa, iv, 2
(MaxMtiller, p. 126). SeealsoJulien,i, 71.
i ( i F , u 2 7 r , . T a h 1 n i 9 s d 3 v v ; i e i r C , o s 1 r i i 4 o s n e ( , O i r s 6 el 1 l f ) i o , a u n 5 n 5 d d , i i 1 n n 2 A 8 b ) B s a ; t b e a r m n i i d u u s s i , n (L t 1 e h 0 w e 8 i . s ^ , so i, p 1 s 2 e 2 a ) n ; co P l b l c e e c d t r i u o s n , s

INTRODUCTION
It is worthy of notice that in the Southern recension
of the Panca Tantra it is eagles, and not wild ducks
or swans, who carry the tortoise ; x and there can,
I think, be little doubt that the two fables are
connected.
historically
Another fable, very familiar to modern readers, is
statedinthe commentaryto havebeenfirstrelatedin
ridicule of a kind of Mutual Admiration Society
existing among the opponents of the Buddha. Hear
ing the monks talking about the foolish way in which
Devadatta and Kokalika went about among the
people ascribing each to the other virtues which
neither possessed, he is said to have told this tale.
THE JACKAL AND THE CROW
Jambu-KMdaka Jdtaka
(Fausboll, no. 294)
when Brahma-datta was
Long, long ago, reigning
in Benares, the Bodisat had come to life as a tree-
fairy, dwelling in a certain grove of jambu-trees.
Nowa crowwas
sitting
thereonedayonthebranch
of a jambu-tree, eating the jambu-fruits, when a
jackal coming by, looked up, and saw him.
&quot; Ha ! &quot; thought he. &quot; I ll natter that fellow, and
get some of those j ambus to eat.&quot; And thereupon
he uttered this verse in his praise :
&quot; Who may this be, whose rich and pleasant notes
Proclaim him best of all the singing-birds ?
Warbling so sweetly on the jambu-branch,
Where like a peacock he sits firm and grand ! &quot;
1 Dubois, p. 109.
xi

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Then the crow, to pay him back his compliments,
repliedinthis second verse
:
&quot; Tis a well-bred young gentleman, who understands
To speak of gentlemen in terms polite !
Good Sir ! whose shape and glossy coat reveal
The tiger s offspring eat of these, I pray ! &quot;
And so saying, he shook the branch of the jambu-
treetillhe madethe fruitto fall.
But when the fairy who dwelt in that tree saw the
twoofthem, now theyhaddone
nattering
oneanother,
eatingthe j ambus together, he uttered a third verse :
&quot; Too long, forsooth, I ve borne the sight
Of these poor chatterers of lies
The refuse-eater and the offal-eater
Belauding each other ! &quot;
And making himself visible in awful shape, he
frightened them away from the place !
It is easy to understand that, when this story had
been carried outofthosecountrieswhere the crow and
the jackal are the common scavengers, it would lose
its point ; and it may very well, therefore, have been
shortened into the fable ofthe Fox andthe Crow and
the piece of cheese. On the other hand, the latter is
so complete and excellent a story that it would
scarcely have been expanded, if it had been the
original, into the tale of the Jackal and the Crow.1
Thenexttaletobequotedisoneshowing howawise
1 See La Fontaine, Bk. i, no. 2, and the current collections of
MsopsFables(e.g. Jamessed.,p. 136). Itshouldbeaddedthat
theJambukfiadaka-sangyuttaintheSangyuttaNikayahasnothing
t w o h d o o l w iv i e t s h o o n ur j a f m a b bl u e s . , T a h n e di j s a c m o b n u v - e e r a t t e e d r by of a t d h i a s t cu s s t s o i r o y n is on an Ni a r s v ce a t n i a c . ,
xii

INTRODUCTION
man solves a difficulty. I give it from a Singhalese
version ofthefourteenthcentury, whichisnearertothe
Pali than any other as yet known.1 It is an episode
in the long Jataka called
THE BIRTH AS &quot;GREAT PHYSICIAN&quot; 2
MahosadJia Jataka
(Fausboll, no. 546)
A
woman, carrying her child, went to the future
Buddha s tank towash. And having first bathed the
child, she put on her upper garment and descended
into the water to bathe herself.
Then a Yakshini,3 seeing the child, had a craving
to eat it. And takingthe form of a woman, she drew
near, and asked the mother :
&quot; Friend, this is a very pretty child, is it one of
yours ? &quot;
Andwhenshewastolditwas, sheaskedifshemight
nurseit. Andthisbeingallowed,shenursedita
little,
and then carried it off.
But when the mother saw this, she ran after her,
andcriedout : &quot; Whereareyoutakingmychildto ? &quot;
and caughthold ofher.
1 The Singhalese text will be found in the Sidat Sangardtva,
p.clxxvi.
rec 2 ei L v it e e d r t a h l i l s y n &quo a t;t m h e e b g e r c e a a u t se me h d e ic w i a n s e b &quo o t;. rn T w h i e th Bo a di p s o a w t er o f f u t l ha d t ru t g im i e n
hishand anomenoftheclevernessindevice bywhich,whenhe
grew up, he delivered people from their misfortunes. Compare
myBuddhism, p. 187.
3 The Yakshas, products of witchcraft and cannibalism, are
beings of magical power, who feed on human flesh. The male
Yaksha occupiesin Buddhiststoriesapositionsimilartothatof
t w h h e o w o i c c c k u e rs d m g o en r i e i f n req t u h e e nt A l r y a , b u i s a u n al N l i y g p h l t a s y ; st t h h e e p f a e r m t a o l f e si Y r a e k n s . hini,
xiii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
TheYakshiniboldlysaid
;
&quot; Wheredidyou getthe
child from ? It is mine ! &quot; And so quarrelling, they
passed the door of the future Buddha s Judgment
Hall.
He heardthe noise, sentforthem, inquiredinto the
matter, and askedthemwhethertheywould abide by
his decision. And they agreed. Then he had a line
drawn on the ground and told the Yakshinito take
;
hold of the child s arms, and the mother to take hold
of its legs ; and said : &quot; The child shall be hers who
drags him over the line.&quot;
But as soon as they pulled at him, the mother,
seeing how he suffered, grieved as if her heart would
break. And letting him go, she stood there weeping.
Then the future Buddha asked the bystanders :
&quot; Whose hearts are tender to babes ? those who have
borne children, or those who have not ? &quot;
And they answered : &quot;0 Sire ! the hearts of
mothers are tender.&quot;
Then he said : &quot; Who, think you, is the mother ?
she who has the child in her arms, or she who has
let go ? &quot;
And they answered : &quot; She who has let go is the
mother.&quot;
And he said : &quot; Then do you all think that the
other was the thief ? &quot;
And they answered : &quot; Sire ! we cannot tell.&quot;
And he said : &quot; Verily this is a Yakshini, who took
the child to eat
it.&quot;
And theyasked : &quot; Sire ! howdidyouknow it ? &quot;
And he replied : &quot; Because her eyes winked not,
and were red, and she knew no fear, and had no pity,
I knew
it.&quot;
And so saying, he demanded of the thief : &quot; Who
areyou ?
xiv

INTRODUCTION
And she said : &quot; Lord ! I am a Yakshini.&quot;
And he asked : &quot; Why did you take away this
child 1 &quot;
Andshesaid
:
&quot;Ithoughttoeathim, myLord
!
&quot;
And he rebuked her, saying : &quot;0 foolish woman !
For your former sins you have been born a Yakshim,
and now do you still sin ! &quot; And he laid a vow upon
her to keep the Five Commandments, and let her go.
But the mother of the child exalted the future
Buddha, andsaid
:
&quot; myLord
!
GreatPhysician
!
may thy life be long ! &quot; And she went away, with
her babe clasped to her bosom.
The Hebrew story, in which a similar judgment is
ascribed to Solomon, occurs in the Book of Kings,
which is probably older than the time of Gotama.
We shall consider below what may be the connexion
between the two.
The next specimen is a tale about lifeless things
endowed with miraculous powers perhaps the oldest
;
tale in the world of that kind which has been yet
published. It is an episode in
SAKKA S PRESENTS
Dadhi-Vdhana JdtaJca
(Fausboll, no. 186)
Onceuponatime, whenBrahma-dattawas
reigning
inBenares, fourbrothers, Brahmans, ofthatkingdom,
devoted themselves to an ascetic life and having
;
built themselves huts at equal distances in the region
xv

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
of the Himalaya mountains, took up their residence
there.
The eldest ofthem died, andwasreborn as the god
Sakka.1 Whenhebecame aware ofthis, heusedtogo
andrenderhelp atintervals every seven or eight days
to the others. And one day, having greeted the
eldesthermit, andsatdownbesidehim,heaskedhim
:
&quot; Reverend Sir, what are you in need of ? &quot;
The hermit, who suffered from jaundice, answered :
&quot; I want fire ! &quot; So he gave him a double-edged
hatchet.
But the hermit said : &quot; Who is to take this, and
bring me firewood ? &quot;
Then Sakka spake thus to him : &quot; Whenever,
reverend Sir, you want firewood, you should let go
the hatchet from your hand and say : * Please fetch
me firewood : make me fire ! And it will do so.&quot;
So he gave him the hatchet and went to the
;
second hermit, and asked : &quot; Reverend Sir, what are
you in need of ? &quot;
Nowthe elephants had made atrackforthemselves
close to his hut. And he was annoyed by those
elephants, and said : &quot;I am much troubled by
elephants ; drive them away.&quot;
Sakka, handing him a drum, said : &quot; Reverend
Sir, if you strike on this side of it, your enemies will
taketo flight ; butif you strike onthis side, they will
1 NotquitethesameasJupiter. Sakkaisaveryharmlessand
gentlekindofgod,notajealousgod,norgiventolasciviousness or
s if pi h t e e. ha N s e b i e th h e a r ve is d h w e el i l, mm i o s r r t e a b l or : n h u e nd d e ie r s h f a r p o p m y t c i o m n e di t t o io t n i s m . e ;Me a a nd n ,
while somebody else, usually one of the sons of men who has
deservedit, succeeds, fora hundredthousand years or so, to his
nameandplaceand
glory.
Sakkacancalltomindhisexperiences
inhisformerbirth,agiftinwhichhesurpassesmostotherbeings.
He was also given to a kind of practical joking, by which he
temptedpeople, andhasbecomeamerebeneficentfairy.
xvi

INTRODUCTION
become friendly, and surround you on all sides with
an army in fourfold l
array.&quot;
So lie gave him the drum and went to the third
;
hermit, and asked : &quot; Keverend Sir, what are you in
need of ? &quot;
He was also affected with jaundice, and said, there
fore : &quot;I want sour milk.&quot;
Sakka gave him a milk-bowl, and said : &quot;If you
wish for anything, and turn this bowl over, it will
become a great river, and pour out such a torrent,
that it will be able to take a kingdom, and give it to
you.&quot;
And Sakka went away. But thenceforward the
hatchet made fire for the eldest hermit when the
;
second struck one side of his drum, the elephants ran
aw N a o y w; a a t n t d ha t t he ti t m h e ir a d w e i n l j d o b y o e a d r, hi s s tr c a u y r i d n s g . inaforsaken
village, saw a gem of magical power. When he
seized this in his mouth, he rose byits magic into the
air, and went to an island in the midst of the ocean.
And thinking &quot; Here now I ought to live he
&quot;,
descended, and took up his abode in a convenient
spot under an Udumbara-tree. And one day, placing
the gem before him, he fell asleep at the foot of the
tree.
Now a certain man of the land of Kasi had been
expelled from home by his parents, who said : &quot; This
fellow is of no use to us.&quot; So he went to a seaport,
and embarked in a ship as a servant to the sailors.
And the ship was wrecked ; but by the help of a
plank he reached that very island. And while he was
looking about for fruits, he saw the boar asleep ; and
going softly up, he took hold of the gem.
1 That is, infantry, cavalry, chariots of war, and elephants of
war. Trulyausefulkindofpresenttogivetoapioushermit
!
xvii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Then by its magical power he straightway rose
right up into the air ! So, taking a seat on the
Udumbara-tree, he said to himself : &quot; Methinks this
boar must have become a sky-walker through the
magicofthisgem. That s howhegottobe living here !
It s plain enough what I ought to do ; I ll first of all
kill and eat him, and then I can get away ! &quot;
So he broke a twig off the tree, and dropped it on
his head. The boar woke up, and not seeingthe gem,
ran about, trembling, this way and that way. The
man seated on the tree laughed. The boar, looking
up, saw him, and dashing his head against the tree,
died on the spot.
Buttheman descended, cookedhis flesh, ate it, and
rose into the air. And as he was passing along the
summit of the Himalaya range, he saw a hermitage ;
and descending at the hut of the eldest hermit, he
stayed there two or three days, and waited on the
hermit and thus became aware of the magic power
;
of the hatchet.
&quot; I must get that thought he. And he showed
&quot;,
the hermit the magic power of his gem, and said :
&quot; Sir, do you take this, and give me your hatchet.&quot;
The
ascetic,
fulloflongingtobeableto flythroughthe
air, 1 did so. But the man, taking the hatchet, went
a little way off, and letting it go, said : &quot; hatchet !
cutoffthathermit shead, and bringthegerntome ! &quot;
And it went, and cut off the hermit s head, and
brought him the gem.
Thenhe put the hatchetina secret place, and went
to the second hermit, and stayed there a few days.
1 The power of going through the air is usually considered in
Indianlegendstobetheresult,andaproof,ofgreatholiness,and
long-continued penance. So the hermit thought he would get
a fine reputation cheaply.
xviii

INTRODUCTION
And having thus become aware of the magic power
of the drum, he exchanged the gem for the drum
;
and cut off his head too in the same way as before.
Then he went to the third hermit, and saw the
magic power of the milk-bowl ; and exchanging the
gem for it, caused his head to be cut off in the same
manner. And taking the gem, and the hatchet, and
the drum, and the milk-bowl, he flew away up into
the air.
Not far from the city of Benares he stopped, and
sent by the hand of a man a letter to the king of
Benares to this effect : &quot; Either do battle, or give
me
up your kingdom ! &quot;
No soonerhad he heard that message thanthe king
sallied forth, saying : &quot; Let us catchthe scoundrel ! &quot;
But the man beat one side of his drum, and a four
fold army stood around him ! And directly he saw
that the king s army was drawn out in battle array,
he poured out his milk-bowl and a mighty river
;
arose, andthe multitude, sinking downin it, were not
ableto escape ! Then lettinggo the hatchet, he said :
&quot; Bring me the king s head ! &quot; And the hatchet
went, and brought the kings head, and threw it at
hisfeet
;
andnoonehadtimeeventoraiseaweapon
!
Then he entered the city in the midst of his great
army, and caused himself to be anointed king, under
the name of Dadhi-vahana (Bringer of Milk), and
governed the kingdom with righteousness. 1
The story goes on to relate how the king planted a
wonderful mango, how the sweetness of its fruit
turned to sourness through the too-close proximity
ofbitterherbs (!), andhowtheBodisat,thentheking s
1 Compare Maha-bharata,xii, 1796.
XIX

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
minister, pointed out that evil communications
corruptgoodthings. Butitistheportion abovetrans
lated which deserves notice as the most ancient
example known of those tales in which inanimate
objects are endowed with magical powers ; and in
which the seven league boots, or the wishing cup,
or the vanishing hat, or the wonderful lamp, render
their fortunate possessors happy and glorious.
There is a verytragical story of a wishing cup in the
Buddhist Collection, 1 where the wishing cup, how
ever, is turned into ridicule. It is not unpleasant to
find that beliefs akin to, and perhaps the result of,
fetish-worship, had faded away, among Buddhist
story-tellers, into sources of innocent amusement.
Inthis curioustale the hatchet, the drum, and the
milk-bowl are endowed with qualities much more fit
for the use they were put to in the latter part of the
story, than to satisfy the wants of the hermits. It is
common ground with satirists how little, save sorrow,
men would gain if they could have anything they
chose to ask for. But, unlike the others we have
quoted, thetale in its present shape hasaflavour dis
tinctively Buddhist in the irreverent way in which it
treats the great god Sakka, the Jupiter of the pre-
Buddhistic Hindus. It takes for granted too, that
theheroruledinrighteousness
;
andthisisascommon
in the Jatakas as the lived happily ever after of
modern love stories.
This last idea recurs more strongly in the Birth
Story called
1 Fausboll, no. 291.
XX

INTRODUCTION
A LESSON FOR KINGS
Rdjovdda Jdtaka
(Fausboll, no. 151)
Once upon a time, when Bralimadatta was reigning
in Benares, the future Buddha returned to life in the
womb of his chief queen and after the conception
;
ceremony had been performed, he was safely born.
And when the day came for choosing a name, they
called him Prince Brahmadatta. He grew up in due
course and when he was sixteen years old, went to
;
Takkasila,1 and became accomplished in all arts.
And after his father died he ascended the throne, and
ruled the kingdom with righteousness and equity.
He gave judgments without partiality, hatred,
ignorance,or fear.2 Sincehethusreignedwith justice,
with justice also his ministers administered the law.
Lawsuits being thus decided with justice, there were
none who brought false cases. And as these ceased,
the noise and tumult of litigation ceasedin the king s
court. Though the judges sat all day in the court,
they hadto leave without any one coming for justice.
It came to this, that the Hall of Justice would have
to be closed
!
Then the future Buddha thought : &quot; From my
reigning with righteousness there are none who come
for judgment the bustle has ceased, and the Hall of
;
Justice will have to be closed. It behoves me, there
fore, now to examine into my own faults ; and if I
1 This is the well-known town in the Panjab, called by the
Greeks Taxila, and famed in Buddhist legend as the great
universityofancientIndia, asNalandawasinlatertimes.
2 Literally &quot;withoutpartiality andtherest &quot;, that is, therest
of the agatis, the actions forbidden to judges (and to kings as
judges).

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
find that anything is wrong in me, to put that away,
and
practise only virtue.&quot;
Thenceforth he sought for some one to tell him his
faults but amongthose around him he foundno one
;
who would tell him of any fault, but heard only his
own
praise.
Thenhethought : &quot;Itisfrom fear of methatthese
men speak onlygoodthings, andnotevil
things,&quot;
and
he sought among those people who lived outside the
palace. And finding no fault-finder there, he sought
among those who lived outside the city, in the
suburbs, at the four gates. 1 And there too finding
no one to find fault, and hearing only his own praise,
he determined to search the country places.
So he made over the kingdom to his ministers, and
mounted his chariot ; and taking only his charioteer,
left the city in disguise. And searching the country
through, up to the very boundary, he found no fault
finder, and heard only of his own virtue ; and so he
turned back from the outermost boundary, and
returned by the high road towards the city.
Now at that time the king of Kosala, Mallika by
name,wasalsorulinghiskingdomwithrighteousness
;
and when seeking for some fault in himself, he also
found no fault-finder in the palace, but only heard of
his own virtue ! So seeking in country places, he too
came to that very spot. And these two came face
to face in a low cart-track with precipitous sides,
where there was no space for a chariot to get out of
the way
!
Then the charioteer of Mallika the king said to the
charioteer ofthekingof Benares
:
&quot; Takethy chariot
out of the way &quot;
!
1 The gates opening towards the four &quot;directions &quot;, that is,
thefourcardinalpointsofthecompass.
xxii

INTRODUCTION
But he said : &quot; Take thy chariot out of the way,
charioteer In this chariot sitteth the lord over
!
the kingdom of Benares, the great king Brahma-
datta.&quot;
Yet the other replied : &quot;In this chariot.
charioteer, sitteth the lord over the kingdom of
Kosala, the great king Mallika. Take thy carriage
out of the way, and make room for the chariot of our
king ! &quot;
Thenthe charioteerofthekingofBenaresthought
:
&quot; They saythen that he too is a king ! What is now
to be done ? &quot; After some consideration, he said to
himself, &quot; I know a way. I ll find out how old
he is, and then I ll let the chariot of the younger
be got out of the way, and so make room for the
elder.&quot;
And when he had arrived at that conclusion, he
asked that charioteer what the age of the king of
Kosala was. But on inquiry he found that the ages
of both were equal. Then he inquired about the
extent of his kingdom, and about his army, and his
wealth, and his renown, and about the country he
lived in, and his caste and tribe and family. And he
foundthatbothwerelordsofakingdomthreehundred
leagues in extent ; and that in respect of army and
wealth and renown, and the countries in which they
lived, andtheir caste andtheirtribe andtheir family,
they were just on a par !
Then he thought : &quot;I will make way for the most
righteous.&quot;
Andheasked
:
&quot; Whatkindofrighteous
ness has this king of yours ? &quot;
And the other saying : &quot; Such and such is
our kings righteousness&quot;, and so proclaiming his
king s wickedness as goodness, uttered the First
Stanza
:
xxiii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
The strong he overthrows by strength,
The mild by mildness, Mallika
;
The good by goodness he o ercomes,
The wicked by the wicked too.
Such is the nature of this king !
Move out of the way, charioteer !
But the charioteer of the king of Benares asked
him : &quot; Well, have you told all the virtues of your
king ? &quot;
&quot; Yes said the other.
&quot;,
&quot;Ifthesearehisvirtues, wherearethenhisfaults? &quot;
replied he.
The othersaid : &quot; Well, forthenonce, theyshall be
faults,ifyoulike
!
But pray,then,whatisthekindof
goodness your king has ? &quot;
And then the charioteer of the king of Benares
called unto him to hearken, and uttered the Second
Stanza
:
Anger he conquers by not-anger,
By goodness he conquers what is not good
;
The stingy he conquers by giving gifts,
By truth he meets the speaker of lies.
Such is the nature of this king !
Move out of the way, charioteer ! &quot;
And when he had thus spoken, both Mallika the
king and his charioteer alighted from their chariot.
And they took out the horses, and removed their
chariot, and made way for the king of Benares !
But the king of Benares exhorted Mallika the king,
saying : &quot; Thus and thus is it right to do.&quot; And
returning to Benares, he practised charity, and did
other good deeds, and so when his life was ended he
passed away to heaven.
AndMallikathekingtookhis exhortationtoheart
;
xxiv

INTRODUCTION
andhavinginvainsearchedthe countrythroughfora
fault-finder, he too returned to his own city, and
practised charity and other good deeds ; and so at
the end ofhis life he went to heaven.
The mixture in this Jataka of earnestness with dry
humour is very instructive. The exaggeration in the
earlierpart ofthe story ; the hintthatlawdepends in
reality on false cases ; the suggestion that to decide
cases justly would by itself put an end not only to
&quot; the block in the law courts but even to all law
&quot;,
suits ; the wayin which it is brought about that two
mighty kings should meet, unattended, in a narrow
lane ; the cleverness of the first charioteer in getting
out of his difficulties the brand-new method of
;
settling
thedelicatequestionofprecedence amethod
which, logically carried out, would destroy the
necessity of such questions being raised at all all
;
thisistheamusingside oftheJataka. Itthrows, and
is meant to throw, an air of unreality over the story ;
and it is none the less humour because it is left to be
inferred, because it is only an aroma which might
easily escape unnoticed, only the humour of naive
absurdity and of clever repartee.
But nonethe less also is the story-teller thoroughly
in earnest ; he really meansthat justiceis noble, that
to conquer evil by good is the right thing, and that
goodness is the true measure of greatness. The
object is edification also, and not amusement only.
The lesson itself is quite Buddhistic. The first four
lines of the Second Moral are indeed included, as
xxv

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
verse 223,intheDhammapada or &quot; ScriptureVerses
&quot;,
perhaps the most sacred and most widely learntbook
of the Buddhist Bible and the distinction between
;
the two ideals of virtue is in harmony with all
Buddhist ethics. It is by no means, however,
exclusively Buddhistic. It gives expression to an
idea that would be consistent with most of the later
religions ; and is found also in the great Hindu Epic,
the Mahd Bhdrata, which has been called the Bible
oftheHindus.1 Itistruethatfurtheroninthatpoem
is found the opposite sentiment, attributed in our
story to the king of Mallika ; 2 and that the higher
teaching is in one of the latest portions of the Mahd
Bhdrata, and probably of Buddhist origin. But when
we find that the Buddhist principle of overcoming
evil by good was received, as well asits opposite, into
the Hindu poem, it is clear that this lofty doctrine
was by no means repugnant to the best among the
Brahmans.3
Itistobe regrettedthat somewriters on Buddhism
have been led away by their just admiration for the
noble teaching of Gotamainto an unjust depreciation
of the religious system of which his own was, after
all, but the highest product and result. There were
1 Maha-Bharata, v, 1518. Another passage at iii, 13253, is
verysimilar. M
2 Maha-Bharata,xii,4052. SeeDr.Muirs etricalTranslations
fromSanskrit Writers(1879),pp. xxxi,88,275,356.
3 Similar passages will also be found in Lao Tse, D=ouglass
Confucianism, etc., p. 197 ; PanchaTantra, i, 247 (277) iv, 72 ;
in Stobaeus, quoted by Muir, p. 356 ; and in St. Matthew, v,
44-6 while the Mallika doctrine is inculcated by Confucius
;
(Legge, ChineseClassics,i, 152).
xxvi

INTRODUCTION
doubtless among the Brahmans uncompromising
advocates of the worst privileges of caste, of the most
debasingbeliefinthe efficacyofrites andceremonies
;
but this verse is only one among many others which
are incontestable evidence ofthewide prevalence also
of a spirit of justice, and of an earnest seeking after
truth. Itis, infact,inaccurateto drawanyhard-and-
fast line between the Indian Buddhists and their
countrymen of other faiths. After the first glow of
the Buddhist reformation had passed away, there
was probably as little difference between Buddhist
and Hindu as there was between the two kings in the
story which has just been told.
THE KALILAG AND DAMNAG LITERATURE
Among the other points of similarity between
Buddhists and Hindus, there is one which deserves
more especial mention here that of their liking for
the kind of moral-comic tales which form the bulk of
the Buddhist Birth Stories. That this partiality was
by no means confined to the Buddhists is apparent
from the fact that books of such tales have been
amongst the most favourite literature of the Hindus.
And this is the more interesting to us, as it is these
Hindu collections that have most nearly preserved
theforminwhichmanyoftheIndianstorieshavebeen
carried to the West.
The oldest of the collections now extant is the one
alreadyreferredto, the PANCHA TANTRA, that is,
the Five Books a kindofHinduPentateuch orPen-
,
tamerone. In its earliest form this work is unfor-
xxvii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
tunately no longer extant ; but in the sixth century
of our era a book very much like it formed part of a
work translated into Pahlavi, or Ancient Persian
;
and thence, about 750 A.D., into Syriac, under the
title of KALILAG AND DAMNAG, andinto Arabic
under the title
KALILAH AND DIMNAH.1
These tales, though originally Buddhist, became
great favourites among the Arabs ; and as the Arabs
were gradually brought into contact with Europeans,
and penetrated into the South of Europe, they
brought the stories with them ; and we soon after
wards find them translated into Western tongues.
It would be impossible within the limits of this
preface to set out in full detail the intricate literary
history
involvedinthis statement
;
and while I must
refer the student to the Tables appended to this
Introduction for fuller information, I can only give
here a short summary of the principal facts.
Itis curiousto noticethatit wasthe Jews to whom
we owe the earliest versions. Whilst their mercantile
pursuits took them much amongst the followers of
the Prophet, and the comparative nearness of their
religious beliefs led to a freer intercourse than was
usually possible between Christians and Moslems,
theywere naturally attracted by a kind of literature
such as this Oriental in morality, amusing in style,
and perfectly free from Christian legend and from
Christian dogma. It was also the kind of literature
1 The names are corruptions of the Indian names of the two
jackals,
Karatak andDamanak, whotake aprincipalpartinthe
firstofthefables.
xxviii

INTRODUCTION
whichtravellerswouldmost
easily
become
acquainted
with, and we need not therefore be surprised to hear
that a Jew, named Symeon Seth, about 1080 A.D.,
made the first translation into a European language,
viz. into modern Greek. Another Jew, about 1250,
made a translation of a slightly different recension of
the Kalilah and Dimnah into Hebrew ; and a third,
JohnofCapua, turnedthis Hebrewversioninto Latin
between 1263 and 1278. At about the same time
as the Hebrew version, another was made direct from
the Arabic into Spanish, and a fifth into Latin and
;
from these five versions translations were afterwards
madeinto German, Italian, French, and English.
ThetitleofthesecondLatinversionjust mentioned
is very striking it is &quot;.ZEsop the Old&quot;. To the
translator, Baldo, it evidently seemed quite in order
to ascribe these new stories to thetraditional teller of
similar storiesin ancient times ; just as witty sayings
ofmore modern times have been collected into books
ascribedto the once venerable Joe Miller. Baldo was
neither sufficiently enlightened to consider a good
story the worse for being an old one, nor sufficiently
scrupulous to hesitate at giving his new book the
advantage it would gain from its connexion with a
well-known name.
Is it true, then, that the so-called ^sop s Fables
so popular still, in spite of many rivals, among our
Western children are merely adaptations from tales
invented long ago to please and to instruct the child
likepeopleoftheEast ? IthinkI can give ananswer,
though not a complete answer, to the question,
xxix

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Msophimselfis severaltimesmentionedinclassical
literature, and always as the teller of stories orfables.
Thus Plato says that Socrates in his imprisonment
occupied himself by turning the stories (literally
myths) ofJEsopinto verse : 1 Aristophanesfourtimes
refers to his tales : 2 and Aristotle quotes in one form
a fable of his, which Lucian quotes in another.3 In
accordance with these references, classical historians
fix the date of ^Esop in the sixth century B.C. ; 4 but
some modern critics, relying on the vagueness and
inconsistency of the traditions, have denied his
existence altogether. This is, perhaps, pushing
scepticism too far ; but it may be admitted that he
left no written works, and it is quite certain that if
he did, they have been irretrievably lost.
Notwithstanding this, a learned monk of Constan
tinople, named Planudes, and the author also of
numerous other works, did not hesitate, in the first
half of the fourteenth century, to write a work which
he called a collection of Msop s Fables. This was first
printed at Milan at the end of the fifteenth century ;
and two other supplementary collections have subse-
1 Phcedo, p. 61. Comp. Bentley, Dissertation on the Fables of
Mso&a 2 mp;lt V ;p e , s p p . ce 1 , 36 5 . 66, 1259, 1401 sqq. ; andAv&t, 651 sqq.
3 4 A H r e i r st o . d , ot de us pa ( r ii t , , 13 a 4 n ) im m . a , k i e ii s , h 2 i ; m L c u o c n i t a e n m , p N o i r g a r r . y , w 3 i 2 t . hKingAmasis
of Egypt, the beginning of whose reign is placed in 569 B.C. ;
Plutarch (Sept. Sap. Conv., 152) makes him contemporary with
Solon,whoisreputedtohavebeenbornin638B.C.
;
andDiogenes
L O a l e y r m t p i i u a s d, (i, i.e 7 . 2) 57 s 2 a - y 6 s 9 t B h .C a . t h C e om no p u a r r i e sh C e l d in a t b o o n, ut Fa t s h t e . f H i el f l t . y , -s i e , c 2 o 3 n 7 d
(undertheyearB.C. 572), and i, 239(underB.C. 534).
XXX

INTRODUCTION
quently appeared. 1 From these, and especially from
the work of Planudes, all our so-called Msops Fables
are derived.
Whence then did Planudes and his fellow-labourers
drawtheirtales ? Thiscannotbecompletelyanswered
till the source of each one of them shall have been
clearly found, and this has not yet been completely
done. ButOrientalandclassicalscholarshave
already
traced a goodly number of them ; and the general
resultsoftheirinvestigationsmaybe shortlystated.
Babrius, a Greek poet, who probably lived in the
first century before Christ, wroteinverse a number of
fables, of which a few fragments were known in the
Middle Ages. 2 The complete work was fortunately
discovered by Mynas in the year 1824, at Mount
Athos ; and both Bentley and Tyrwhitt from the
fragments, and Sir George Cornewall Lewis in his
well-known edition of the whole work, have shown
that several of Planudes Fables are also to be found
in Babrius.3
It is possible, also, that the ^Esopian fables of the
Latin poet Phsedrus, who in the title of his work calls
himself a freedman of Augustus, were known to
1 One at Heidelberg in 1610, and the other at Paris in 1810.
Thereisacompleteeditionofallthesefables, 231 innumber, by
T.Gl.Schneider,Breslau, 1812.
an 2 a S p e p e e t n h d e ix edi t t o io h n i s s b e y di D t e ion Fur o i f a, JE F s l o o p re s nc F e a , bl 1 e 8 s 0 , 9 B ; re S s c l h a n u e , ide 1 r 8 , 12 in
Berger, Munchen, 1816; Knoch, Halle, 1835; and Lewis, ;
T P O h r h i e 3 e l l l o B i l e e o d n a g i t . n t l i d e M o y n u B , s s ai e l o t o u f e c m r . t , , h c e i 1 1 t 8 8 . n 3 4 e ; 2 5 w , ; l T i y y , G r - 2 . w f 8 h o 0 C i u - . t n 3 t d 0 L , 4 e M . w D S i e s . , B a a 1 r b 8 e r 4 i b 6 o ; y , e L a t a n c c . d , hm S L c a o h n n n d n e . , i , d 1 e 1 8 w 7 4 i 7 5 n 6 , . ;
1853.
xxxi

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Planudes. But the work of Phsedrus, which is based
on that of Babrius, existed onlyin very rare MSS. till
the end of the sixteenth century, 1 and may therefore
have easily escapedthe notice of Planudes.
On the other hand, we have seen that versions of
Buddhist Birth Stories, and other Indian tales, had
appeared in Europe before the time of Planudes in
Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and Spanish ; and many of
his stories have been clearly traced back to this
source.2 Further, as I shall presently show, some of
thefablesofBabriusandPhsedrus, foundinPlanudes,
were
possibly
derivedbythose authorsfrom Buddhist
sources. And lastly, other versions of the Jatakas,
besides those which have been mentioned as coming
through the Arabs, had reached Europe long before
the time of Planudes and some more of his stories
;
have been traced back to Buddhist sources through
these channels also.
What is at presentknown, then, withrespectto the
so-called Msop s Fables, amounts to this that none
ofthemarereally^Esopeanatall
;
thatthe collection
was first formed in the Middle Ages that a large
;
183 1 1. Itwa C s om fi p r . ste Oe d s i t t e e r d l b ey y , Pi P t h h c o e u d , ru i s n1 u 5 n 96 d ; d a i l e so J b 3 y so O p r . ell F i, ab Z e u l ric i h m ,
Mittelalter.
2 By Silvestre de Sacy, in his edition of Kalilah and Dimnah,
F Pa a r b i l s e , s 1 In 8 d 1 i 6 en ; ne L s o , is e e t le s u u r r D l e e s ur lo I n n g t c r h od a . mp e s n , E i u n ro h p i e s , E P s a s r a i i s, su 1 r 83 U 8 s ;
Prof. Benfey, in his edition ofthe Panca Tantra, Leipzig, 1859 ;
Prof. Max Miiller, On the Migration of Fables, Contemporary
Review, July, 1870; Prof. Weber, Ueber den Zusammenhang
indischerFabelnmitGriechischen, IndischeStudien, iii, 337 sqq. ;
AdolfWagener,Essaisurlesrapportsentrelesapologuesderinde
etdela Grece, 1853 ; Otto Keller, Ueber die Geschichte der Grie-
cliischenFabeln, 1862.
xxxii

INTRODUCTION
number of them have been already traced back, in
various ways, to our Buddhist Jataka Book ; and
that almost the whole of them are probably derived
inonewayoranotherfromIndiansources.
Itis perhapsworthyofmention, as a fittingcloseto
the history of the so-called Msop s Fables, that those
of his stories which Planudes borrowed indirectly
from India have at length been restored to their
originalhome, and bid fair to be popular even inthis
much-altered form. For not only has an Englishman
translated a few of them into several of the many
languages spoken in the great continent of India,1
but Narayan Balkrishna Godpole, B.A., one of the
Masters of the Government High School at Ahmad-
nagar, has lately published a second edition of his
translation into Sanskrit of the common English
version of the successful spurious compilations of the
old monk of Constantinople !
THE BAELAAM AND JOSAPHAT
LITERATURE
A
complete answer to the question with which the
last digression started can only be given when each
one of the two hundred and thirty-one fables of
Planudes and his successors shall have been traced
back to its original author. But whatever that
completeanswermaybe thediscoveriesjustpointed
1 J. Gilchrist, TheOrientalFabulist,orPolyglotTranslationsof
dZsops and other Ancient Fablesfrom the English Language into
Hindustani,Persian, Arabic,Bhakka,Bongla, Sanscrit,etc.,inthe
Roman Character, Calcutta, 1803.
xxxiii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
out are at least most strange and most instructive.
And yet, if I mistake not, the history of the Jataka
Book contains hidden amongst its details a fact
more unexpected and more striking still.
IntheeighthcenturytheKhalifofBagdadwasthat
AlmansuratwhosecourtwaswrittentheArabicbook
Kalilah and Dimnah, afterwards translated by the
learned Jews I have mentioned into Hebrew, Latin,
andGreek. A Christian,highinofficeathiscourt,after
wards became a monk, and is well known, under the
name of St.Johnof Damascus, astheauthorinGreek
of many theological wordsindefence of the orthodox
faith. Among these is a religious romance called
Barlaam and Joasaph, giving the history of anIndian
prince who was converted by Barlaam and became a
hermit. This history, the reader will be surprised to
learn, is taken from the life of the Buddha ; and
Joasaph is merely the Buddha under another name,
the word Joasaph, or Josaphat, being simply a
corruption
ofthewordBodisat,thattitle ofthe future
Buddha so constantly repeated in the Buddhist
Birth Stories.1 Now a life of the Buddha forms the
introduction to our Jataka Book, and St. Johns
romance also contains a number of fables and stories,
most of which have been traced back to the same
source.2
thr 1 o J u o g a h s a ap c h on i f s us i i n on A b r e a t b w ic een wr t i h t e te A n ra a b l i s c o l Y et u t d e a rs sa Y tf a ; nd a B n , d is th f i o s, r
Bodisat.
See,forthehistoryofthesechanges,Reinaud,Memotre
sur Ilnde, 1849, p. 91 ; quoted with approbation by Weber,
Ind 2 is T c h h e e B S u tr d e d i h f i en s , t i o ii r , i 5 g 7 i . n wasfirstpointedoutbyLaboulayeinthe
Dtbats,July, 1859 ; andmorefullybyLiebrecht,intheJafirbuch
XXXIV

INTRODUCTION
This book, the first religious romance published in
a Western language, became very popular indeed,
and, like the Arabic Kalilah and Dimnah, was trans
lated into many other European languages. It exists
in Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, German, English,
Swedish, and Dutch. This will show how widely it
was read, and how much its moral tone pleased the
taste of the Middle Ages. It was also translated as
early as 1204 into Icelandic, and has even been
publishedinthe SpanishdialectusedinthePhilippine
Islands
I
Now itwasaveryancient custom amongChristians
to recite at the most sacred part of their most sacred
service (in the so-called Canon of the Mass, im
mediately before the consecration of the Host) the
names of deceased saints and martyrs. Religious
men of local celebrity were inserted for this purpose
in local lists, called Diptychs, and names universally
honoured throughout Christendom appeared in all
such catalogues. The confessors and martyrs so
honoured are now said to be canonized, that is, they
have become enrolled among the number of Christian
saints mentioned in the Canon whom it is the
,
duty of every Catholic to revere, whose intercession
maybeinvoked, who maybe chosen as patron saints,
filr romanische und englische Literatur, 1860. See also Littre,
Journal des Savans, 1865, who fully discusses, and decides in
favour of the romance being really the work of St. John of
Damascus. I hope, in a future volume, to publish a complete
a b n e a t l w y e s e is ni o t f an S d t. th J e oh B n ud s dh w i o s r t k li ; ves po o i f nt G i o n t g am o a u , t a t n h d e gi r v e i s n e g mb p l ar a a n l c l e e s l
passages wherever the Greek adopts not only the Buddhist
ideas, butalso Buddhistexpressions.
XXXV

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
and in whose honour images and altars and chapels
may be set up. 1
For a long time it was permitted to the local
ecclesiastics to continue the custom of inserting such
namesintheir Diptychs but about 1170 a decretal
,
ofPopeAlexanderIII confinedthepowerofcanoniza
tion, as far as the Roman Catholics were concerned,2
to the Pope himself. From the different Diptychs
various martyrologies, or lists of persons so to be
commemorated in the * Canon were composed to
,
supply the place of the merely local lists or Diptychs.
For, as time went on, it began to be consideredmore
and more improper to insert new names in so sacred
a part of the Church prayers ; and the old names
being well known, the Diptychs fell into disuse. The
names in the Martyrologies were at last no longer
inserted in the Canon, but are repeated in the service
called the Prime though the term canonized
,
was still used of the holy men mentioned in them.
Andwhentheincreasing numberofsuchMartyrologies
threatened to lead to confusion, and to throw doubt
on the exclusive power of the Popes to canonize,
Pope Sixtus the Fifth (1585-90) authorized a
particular Martyrologium, drawn up by Cardinal
Baronius, to be usedthroughoutthe Western Church.
In that work are included not only the saints first
1 Pope Benedict XIV, in De servorum Dei beatificatione et
beatorum canonisatione, lib. i, cap. 45 ; Regnier, De ecclesid
Christi,inMignesTheol. Curs. Com.pl.,iv, 710.
2 Decret. Greg., lib. iii, tit. xlvi, confirmed and explained by
decreesofUrbanVIII(13thMarch, 1625,and5thJuly, 1634)and
of Alexander VII (1659).
xxxvi

INTRODUCTION
canonized at Rome, but all those who, having been
alreadycanonized elsewhere, were then acknowledged
bythePopeandtheCollegeofRitestobesaintsofthe
Catholic Church of Christ. Among such, under the
date of the 27th November, are included The holy
Saints Barlaam and Josaphat, of India, on the
borders of Persia, whose wonderful acts Saint John
of Damascus has described. 1
Where and when they were first canonized, I have
been unable, in spite of much investigation, to
ascertain. Petrus de Natalibus, who was Bishop of
Equilium, the modern Jesolo, near Venice, from 1370
to 1400, wrote a Martyrology called Catalogus
Sanctorum ; and in it, among the * saints , heinserts
bothBarlaamand Josaphat,givingalsoashortaccount
of them derived from the old Latin translation of
St. John of Damascus.2 It is from this work that
Baronius, the compiler of the authorized Martyrology
now in use, took over the names of these two saints,
Barlaam and Josaphat. But, so far as I have been
able to ascertain, they do not occur in any martyr-
ologies or lists of saints of the Western Church older
than that of Petrus de Natalibus.3
1 p. 177 oftheedition of 1873, bearingthe officialapprovalof
PopePiusIX, orp. 803oftheCologneeditionof1610.
2 Cat. Sanct., Leydened. 1542, p. cliii.
3 The author added the following in his copy. They occur in
the works of Usnard, a Benedictine, who wrote about 875
(published by Greven in 1515, and by Molanus in 1568). In the
Month for 1881, p. 141, Father Coleridge, S.J., wrote that they
occurinaSlavonic calendarofthe 15thcentury, preservedinthe
EcclesiasticalAcademyatPetrograd,andinseverallaterSlavonic
martyrologies, but not inthe Menologium drawnup by Cardinal
Girlet, from which the compilers of the Roman martyrology
xxxvii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
In the corresponding manual of worship still used
in the Greek Church, however, we find, under 26th
August, the name ofthe holylosaph, sonofAbener,
king of India - 1 Barlaam is not mentioned, and is
not therefore recognized as a saint in the Greek
Church. No historyis addedto the simple statement
I have quoted ; andI donotknow onwhat authority
it rests. But there is no doubt that it is in the East,
andprobablyamongtherecordsofthe ancientchurch
of Syria, that a final solution of this question should
be sought. 2
Some of the more learned of the numerous writers
who translated or composed new works on the basis
of the story of Josaphat, have pointed out in their
notes that he had been canonized 3 and the hero of
;
theromanceisusuallycalled St. Josaphatinthetitles
of these works, as will be seen from the Table of the
Josaphat literature below. But Professor Liebrecht,
when identifying Josaphat with the Buddha, took no
notice of this and it was Professor Max Miiller, who
;
has done so much to infuse the glow of life into the
dry bones of Oriental scholarship, who first pointed
out the strange fact almost incredible, were it not
drew theirnotices ofthe saints ofthe Greek church. This work
was published shortly before theirs. Coleridge says, that there
mayhavebeensuchsaints,andthattheBuddhiststorymayhave
beenaddedtotheirs, orderivedfromit. Editor.
1
p.
160 ofthepartforthemonth ofAugustof theauthorized
MrjvalovoftheGreekChurch,publishedatConstantinople, 1843 :
&quot; T 2 o F v or oai t o h v e / i c n u f a o o r - m a^ a , ti v o l n ov in Afi t e h v e rjp la r s o t v t j h S r a e a e tAe p a a j g ? e r s fjs I T a v m Sta? c .& h qu i ot e ; fly
indebted to my father, the Rev. T. W. Davids, without whose
generous aid I shouldnot have attempted to touch this obscure
anddifficultquestion.
3 See,forinstance,Billius,andtheItalianEditor,of1734.
xxxviii

INTRODUCTION
for the completeness of the proof that Gotama the
Buddha, under the name of St. Josaphat, is now
officially recognized and honoured and worshipped
throughout the whole of Catholic Christendom as a
Christian saint !
I have now followed the Western history of the
Buddhist Book of Birth Stories along two channels
only. Space would fail me, and the reader s patience
perhaps too, if I attempted to do more. But I may
mention that the inquiry is not by any means
exhausted. A learned Italian has proved that a good
many of the stories of the hero known throughout
EuropeasSinbadtheSailorarederivedfromthe same
inexhaustible treasury of stories, witty and wise ; 1
and a similar remark applies also to other well-
known Tales included in the Arabian Nights. 2 La
Fontaine, whose charming versions of the Fables are
so deservedly admired, openly acknowledges his
indebtedness to the French versions of Kalilah and
Dimnah and Professor Benfey and others have
;
tracedthe same stories, or ideas drawn from them, to
Poggio, Boccaccio, Gower, Chaucer, Spenser, and
many other later writers. Thus, for instance, the
threecasketsandthepoundoffleshinTheMerchantof
Venice
}
andthepreciousjewel whichinAs youLikeIt
the venomous toad wears in his head,3 are derived
1 Comparetti, Eicerche intorne al Libra di Sindibad, Milano,
1869. CompareLandsberger, DieFabelndesSophos,Posen, 1859.
2 SeeBenfey, PantscTia Tantra,vol. i, Introduction,passim.
3 Act ii,so. 1. Prof. Benfey,inhisPantschaTantra, i, 213-20,
hastracedthisideafarandwide. Dr. Dennys, inhisFolkloreof
China,givestheChinese Buddhistversionofit.
xxxix

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
fromthe Buddhisttales. Ina similar wayit has been
shown that tales current among the Hungarians and
the numerous peoples of Slavonic race have been
derived from Buddhist sources, through translations
made by or for the Huns, who penetrated in the
time of Genghis Khaninto the East ofEurope.1 And
finally yet other Indian tales, not included in the
Kalilag and Damnag literature, have been brought
into the opposite corner of Europe, by the Arabs of
2
Spain.
There is only one other point on which a few words
shouldbe said. I have purposelychosen as specimens
one Buddhist Birth Story similar to the Judgment of
Solomon two which are found also in Babrius and
; ;
one which is found also in Phaedrus. How are these
similarities,
onwhichthelaterhistoryofIndianFables
throws no light, to be explained ?
As regards thecases of Babriusand Phaedrus, it can
only be said that the Greeks who travelled with
Alexander to India may have taken the tales there,
1 See Benfeys IntroductiontoPanca Tantra, 36, 397, 1, 92,
166, 186. Ralstonstranslation ofTibetanstoriesthrowsfurther
lightonthis, atpresent,ratherobscuresubject.
2See for example Jat. i, No. 30 : Munika-Jataka. Benfey
(Panca Tantra, p. 228 f.) has traced stories somewhat analogous
throughoutEuropeanliterature, buttheJatakaitselfis, he says,
found almost word for word in an unpublished Hebrew book by
Berachia ben Natronai, onlythat two donkeys take the place of
the two oxen. Berachia lived in the 12th-13th century, in
Provence.
The story of the monkey and his heart, in Jataka ii, No. 208,
occurs in a Japanese version given in Andrew Langs Violet
Fairy Book, p. 275, The Monkey and the Jellyfish, sea and
liverreplacingGangesandheart. Editor.
xl

INTRODUCTION
but they may equally well have brought them back.
We only know that at the end of the fourth, and still
more in the third century before Christ, there was
constant travelling to and fro between the Greek
dominions in the East and the adjoining parts of
India, which were then Buddhist, and that the Birth
Stories were already popular among the Buddhists in
Afghanistan, where the Greeks remained for a long
time. Indeed, the very region which became the seat
ofthe Groeco-Bactriankingstakes, inalltheNorthern
versions of the Birth Stories, the place occupied by
the countryofKasiinthePalitext sothatthescene
of the tales is laid in that district. And among the
innumerable Buddhist remains still existing there,
a large number are connected with the Birth Stories.1
It is also in this very district, and under the im
mediate successor of Alexander, that the original of
the Kalilah and Dimnah was said by its Arabian
translators to have been written by Bidpai. It is
possible that a smaller number of similar stories were
also current among the Greeks and that they not
;
only heard the Buddhist ones, but told their own.
But so far as the Greek and the Buddhist stories can
at present be compared, it seems to me that the
internal evidenceisinfavourofthe Buddhist versions
being the originals from which the Greek versions
were adapted. Whether more than this can be at
present said is very doubtful : when the Jatakas are
1 Thelegend of Sumedha s self-abnegation (see below, p. 93)
o is n la t i h d e n s e p a o r t J t e w l o al b a a b s a - d re ; li a ef n s d r M e r p . re W s i e l n l ti i n a g m t S h i e mp pr s i o n n cip h a a l s i d n i c s i c d o e v n e t re i d n
thelegend.
xli

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
all published, and the similarities between them and
classical stories shall have been fully investigated,
the contents of the stories may enable criticism to
reach a more definite conclusion.
The case of Solomon s judgment is somewhat
different. If there were only one fable in Babrius or
Phsedrus identical with a Buddhist Birth Story, we
shouldsupposemerelythatthesameideahadoccurred
to two different minds and there would thus be no
:
necessityto postulate anyhistorical connexion. Now
the similarity of the two judgments stands, as far as
I know, in complete isolation ; and the story is not
so curious butthattwo writersmayhavehit uponthe
same idea. At the same time it is just possible that
whenthe Jews were in Babylon they may have told,
or heard, the story.
Had we met with this story in a book unquestion
ablylaterthanthe Exile, we might suppose thatthey
heardthe storythere
;
that some one repeatingithas
ascribed the judgment to King Solomon, whose great
wisdom was a common tradition among them and
;
thatit had thus beenincludedin their history of that
king. But we find it in the Book ofKings, which is
usually assigned to the time of Jeremiah, who died
during the Exile ; and it should be remembered that
the chronicle in question was based for the most part
on traditions current much earlier among the Jewish
people, and probably on earlier documents.
If, on the other hand, they told it there, we may
expect to find some evidence of the fact inthe details
of the story as preserved in the Buddhist story-books
xlii

INTRODUCTION
current in the North of India, and more especially in
the Buddhist countries bordering on Persia. Now
Dr. Dennys, in his Folk-lore ofChina, has given us a
Chinese Buddhist version of a similar judgment,
which is most probably derived from a Northern
Buddhist Sanskrit original ; and though this version
is very late, and differs so much in its details from
those of both the Pali and Hebrew tales that it
affords no basis itself for argument, it yet holds out
the hope that we may discover further evidence of a
decisive character. This hope is confirmed by the
occurrence of a similar tale in the Gesta Romanorum,
a medievalwork which quotes Barlaam and Josaphat,
and is otherwise largely indebted in an indirect way
to Buddhist sources.1 It is true that the basis of the
judgment in that story is not the love of a mother to
her son, but the love of a son to his father. But that
very difference is encouraging. The orthodox com
pilers
ofthe Gests oftheRomans 2 darednothaveso
twisted the sacred record. They could not therefore
have taken it from our Bible. Like all their other
tales, however, this one was borrowed from some
where ; and its history, when discovered, may be
expectedto throw some light onthis inquiry.
I should perhaps point out another way in which
this tale maypossibly be supposed to have wandered
1 No. xlv, p. 80, of Swanand Hoopers popularedition ; no.
xlii, p. 167,ofthe criticaleditionpublishedforthe EarlyEnglish
Text Society in 1879 by S. J. H. Heritage, who has added a
valuable historical note at p. 477.
2 Thisadaptation ofthe Latintitle is worthyofnotice. Itof
coursemeans &quot;Deeds&quot; but, as most ofthestoriesaremore or
lesshumorous,theword; Gest, now speltJest,acquireditspresent
meaning.
xliii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
from the Jews to the Buddhists, or from India to the
Jews. Theland of Ophirwas probablyinIndia. The
Hebrew names of the apes and peacocks said to have
been brought thence by Solomon s coasting-vessels
are merely corruptions of Indian names ; and Ophir
must therefore have been either an Indian port (and
if so, almost certainly at the mouth of the Indus,
afterwards a Buddhist country) or an entrepot,
further west, for Indian trade. But the very gist of
the account of Solomon s expedition by sea is its
unprecedented and hazardous character it would
;
have been impossible even for him without the aid of
Phoenician sailors ; and it was not renewed by the
Hebrews till after the time when the account of the
judgment was recorded in the Book of Kings. Any
intercourse between his servants and the people of
Ophirmust,fromthedifferenceoflanguage,havebeen
of the most meagre extent ; and we may safely
conclude that it was not the means of the migration
of our tale. It is much more likely, if the Jews heard
or told the Indian story at all, and before the time of
the captivity, that the way of communication was
overland. There is every reason to believe that there
was a great and continual commercial intercourse
between East and West fromvery earlytimes byway
of Palmyra and Mesopotamia. Though the inter
course by sea was not continued after Solomon s
time, gold of Ophir, 1 ivory, jade, and Eastern gems
stillfound theirwaytothe West anditwould be an
;
interesting task for an Assyrian or Hebrew scholar to
1 Psalm, xiv, 9 ; Isaiahxiii, 12 ; Jobxxii, 24, xxviii, 16.
xliv

INTRODUCTION
trace the evidence of this ancient overland route in
other ways.
SUMMARY
To sum up what can at present be said on the con
nexion between the Indian tales, preserved to us in
theBookofBuddhistBirthStories, andtheircounter
parts in the West :
1. In a few isolated passages of Greek and other
writers, earlier than the invasion of India by
Alexander the Great, there are references to a
legendary ^Esop, and perhaps also allusions to stories
like some of the Buddhist ones.
2. After Alexander s time a number of tales also
found in the Buddhist collection became current in
Greece, and are preserved in the poetical versions of
BabriusandPhsedrus. TheyareprobablyofBuddhist
origin.
3. From the time of Babrius to the time of the first
Crusade no migration of Indian tales to Europe can
be proved to have taken place. About the latter
time a translation into Arabic of a Persian work
containing tales found in the Buddhist book was
translated by Jews into Greek, Hebrew, and Latin.
Translations of these versions afterwards appeared
in allthe principal languages of Europe.
4. In the eleventh or twelfth century a translation
was made into Latin of the legend of Barlaam and
Josaphat, a Greek romance written in the eighth
century by St. John of Damascus on the basis of the
Buddhist Jataka book. Translations, poems, and
xlv

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
plays founded on this work were rapidly produced
throughout Western Europe.
5. Other Buddhist stories not included in either of
the works mentioned in the two last paragraphs were
introduced into Europe both during the Crusades
and also during the dominion of the Arabs in Spain.
6. Versions of other Buddhist stories were intro
duced into Eastern Europe by the Huns under
Genghis Khan.
7. The fables and stories introduced through these
various channels became very popular during the
Middle Ages, and were used as the subjects of
numeroussermons,story-books,romances,poems, and
edifying dramas. Thus extensively adopted and
circulated, they had a considerable influence on the
revival of literature, which, hand in hand with the
revival of learning, did so much to render possible
and to bring about the Great Reformation. The
character of the hero of them the Buddha, in his
last or in one or other of his supposed previous
births appealed so strongly to the sympathies, and
was so attractive tothe minds of medieval Christians,
that he became, and has ever since remained, an
objectof Christianworship. And a collectionofthese
and similar stories wrongly, but very naturally,
ascribed to a famous story-teller of the ancient
Greeks hasbecomethecommon property, thehouse
hold literature, of all the nations of Europe ; and,
under the name of JEsops Fables, has handed down,
as afirstmorallesson-bookandasacontinualfeastfor
our childrenin theWest, tales first inventedto please
and toinstructourfar-off cousinsinthe distant East.
xlvi

PART
II
ON THE HISTORY OF THE BIRTH STORIES
IN INDIA
In the previous part of this Introduction I have
attempted to point out the resemblances between
certainWesterntales and the Buddhist Birth Stories,
to explain the reason of those resemblances, and to
trace the history of the Birth Story literature in
Europe. Much remains yet to be done to complete
this interesting and instructive history ; but the
general results can already be stated with a consider
able degree of certainty, and the literature in which
further research will have to be made is accessible
in print in the public libraries of Europe.
For the history in India of the Jataka Book itself,
and of the stories it contains, so little has been done
that one may say it has still to be written and the
;
authorities for further research are only to be found
in manuscripts very rare in Europe, and written in
languages for the most part but little known. Much
ofwhatfollowsisnecessarilythereforeveryincomplete
and
provisional.
In some portions of the Brahmanical literature,
later than the Vedas, and probably older than
Buddhism, there are found myths and legends of a
character somewhat similar to a few of the Buddhist
ones. But, so far as I know, no one of these has been
traced eitherin Europe orinthe Buddhist Collection,
xlvii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
On the other hand, there ivS every reason to hope
that in the older portions of the Buddhist Scriptures
a considerablenumber ofthetales alsoincludedinthe
Jdtaka Book will be found in identical or similar
forms for even in the few fragments of the Pitakas
;
as yet studied, several Birth Stories have already
been discovered.1 These occur in isolated passages,
and, except the story of King Maha Sudassana and
thatin Anguttara, i, p. Ill, have not as yet become
Jatakas that
is,
nocharacterinthestoryisidentified
with the Buddha in one or other of his supposed
previous births. But one book included in the Pali
Pitakas consists entirely of real Jataka stories, all
of which are found in our Collection.
The title of this work is Cariyd-pitaka and it is
;
constructed to show when, and in what births,
Grotama had acquired the Ten Great Perfections
(Generosity, Goodness, Kenunciation, Wisdom, Firm
ness, Patience, Truth, Resolution, Kindness, and
1 Thus, for instance, the Marii Kantha Jdtaka (Fausboll,
no. 253) is taken from a story which is in boththe Pali and the
Chinese versions of the Vinaya Pitaka (Oldenberg, p. xlvi); the
TittiraJdtaka (Fausboll, no. 37, translated below) occursalmost
wordforwordinthe Culla Vagga(vi, 6, 3-5); the Khandhavatta
Jdtaka(Fausboll, no. 203) is a slightlyenlarged version of Culla
Vagga, v. 6 ; the Sukhavihdri Jdtaka (Fausboll, no. 10, trans
latedbelow)isfoundedonastoryintheCulla Vagga(vii, 1,4-6);
theMahd-sudassanaJdtaka(Fausboll,no. 95)isderivedfromthe
SuttaofthesamenameintheDighaNikdya(translatedbymein
(F S a a u c s r b e o d ll B , o n o o k . s 9 o , f t t r h a e nsl E a a t s e t d , be v l o o l w . ) xi f ) r ; om th t e he Ma S k u h tt d a D o e f v t a he Jd s t a a m k e a
name in the Majjhima Nikdya (no. 83); and the Sakunagghi
Jdtaka (Fausboll, no. 168) from a parable in the Satipatthdna
Vaggaofthe SanyuttaNikaya.
ComparethewritersBuddhistIndia,ch. xi,Lond. 1903,foran
enlargedrestatementoftheviewsherebrieflyputforward.
xlviii

INTRODUCTION
Equanimity), without which he could not have
become a Buddha. In striking analogy with the
modern view, that true growth in moral and intel
lectual power is the result of the labours, not of one
only, but of many successive generations, so the
qualifications necessary for the making of a Buddha,
like the characters of all the lesser mortals, cannot
be acquired during, and do not depend upon the
actions of, one life only, but are the last result of
many deeds performed through a long series of con
secutive lives.1
To each of the first two of these Ten Perfections a
whole chapterofthisworkisdevoted, giving, inverse,
ten examples of the previous births in which the
BodisatorfutureBuddhahad
practisedGenerosity
and
Goodness respectively. The third chapter gives only
fifteen examples of the lives in which he acquired the
othereightofthePerfections. Itlooksvery muchasif
the original plan of the unknown author had been to
give ten Birth Stories for each of the TenPerfections.
And, curiously enough, the Northern Buddhists have
a tradition that the celebrated teacher Asvagosha
beganto writeawork givingtenBirthsforeachofthe
Ten Perfections, but died when he had versified only
thirty-four. 2 Now there is a Sanskrit work called
Jataka Mala, as yet unpublished, 3 but ofwhichthere
are several MSS. in Paris and in London, consisting
1 See on this belief below, pp. 141-4,wheretheverses 259-69
arequotationsfromtheChariya-Pitaka.
2 TaranathasGeschichtedesBuddhismus(aTibetanworkofthe
eighteenthcentury, translatedinto German by Schiefner), p. 92.
3 Since edited by E. Kern, Harvard Or. Series, i, 1891.
TranslationbyJ. S. Speyer,8.Bks.oftheBuddhists,i, 1895. Ed.
xlix

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
of thirty-five Birth Stories in mixed prose and verse,
in illustration of the Ten Perfections.1 It would be
premature to attempt to draw any conclusions from
these coincidences, but the curious reader will find
in a Table below a comparative view of the titles of
the Jatakas comprised in the Chariya Pitaka and in
the Jataka Mala.2
There is yet another work in the Pali Pitakas
which constantly refers to the Jataka theory. The
BUDDHA VAMSA,3 whichis a historyofalltheBuddhas,
gives an account also of the life of the Bodisat in the
character he filled during the lifetime of each of
twenty-four of the previous Buddhas. It is on that
work that a great part of the Pali Introduction to
our Jataka Book is based, and most of the verses in
the first fifty pages of the present translation are
quotations from the Buddhavamsa. From this
source we thus have authority for twenty-four Birth
Stories, corresponding to the last twenty-four of
the twenty-seven previous Buddhas,4 besides the
thirty-four in illustration of the Perfections, and the
otherisolated ones I have mentioned.
Beyond this it is impossible yet to state what
proportion of the stories in the Jataka Book can thus
betraced backto the earlierPali Buddhist literature
;
and it would be out of place to enter here upon any
1 FausbollsFiveJatakas, pp. 58-68, wherethefulltextofone
JatakaisgivenandLeonFeer,EtudesurlesJatakas,p. 57.
2 Seep. 53.
3 The Pali Text Society published an edition by Rd. Morris,
1882. Ed.
4 See the list of the Buddhas below, p. 138, where it will be
seenthatforthefirstthreeBuddhaswehavenoBirthStory.
1

INTRODUCTION
lengthy discussion of the difficult question as to the
date of those earlier records. The provisional con
clusions astothe age ofthe SuttaandVinayareached
by Dr. Oldenberg in the very able introduction
prefixed to his edition of the text of the Mahd Vagga,
and summarized at p. xxxviii of that work, will be
sufficient for our present purposes. It may be taken
as so highly probable as to be almost certain, that all
those Birth Stories which are not only found in the
so-called Jdtaka Book itself, but are also referredto in
these other parts of the Pali Pitakas, are at least
older than the Council of Vesali.1
The Council of Vesali was held about a hundred
years after Gotama s death, to settle certain disputes
astopointsofdiscipline and practice whichhadarisen
among the members of the Order. The exact date
of Gotama s death is uncertain 2 and in the tradi
;
tionregardingthe length oftheinterval betweenthat
event and the Council, the &quot; hundred years &quot; is of
course a round number. But we can allow for all
possibilities, and still keep within the bounds of
certainty, if we fix the date of the Council of Vesali
at within thirty years of 350 B.C.
1 ThiswillholdgoodthoughtheBuddhavarjisaandtheChariya
Pitaka should turn out to be laterthan most of the other books
containedintheThreePaliPitakas. Thatthestoriestheycontain
havealready becomeJatakas, whereasinmostoftheothercases
abovequotedthestoriesarestillonlyparables,wouldseemtolead
tothisconclusion
;
andthefactthattheyhavepreservedsomevery
ancient forms (such as locatives in i) may merely be due to the
fact that they are older, not in matter and ideas, but only in
form. Comparewhat issaidbelow asto the versesin theBirth
Stories.
2 Thequestionis discussedatlengthin myAncient Coinsand
MeasuresofCeyloninNumismataOrientalia, vol.i.
li

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
The members of the Buddhist Order of Mendicant
Monks were divided at that Council as important
for the history of Buddhism as the Council of Nice
is for the history of Christianity into two parties.
One side advocated the relaxation of the rules of the
Order in ten particular matters, the others adopted
the stricter view. In the accounts of the matter,
which we at present only possess from the successors
of the stricter party (or, as they call themselves, the
orthodox party), it is acknowledged that the other,
the laxer side, were in the majority ; and that when
the older and more influential members of the Order
decided in favour of the orthodox view, the others
held a council of the^.r own, called, from the numbers
ofthosewhoattended theGreatCouncil.
it,
Now the oldest Ceylon Chronicle, the Dipavamsa,
which contains the only account as yet published of
what occurred at the Great Council, says as follows : l
&quot; The monks of the Great Council turned the religion
down
upside
;
They broke up the original Scriptures, and made a
new recension
:
A discourse putin one placethey putinanother
;
They distorted the sense and the teaching of the Five
Nikayas.
Those monks knowing not what had been spoken at
and what
length, concisely,
What was the obvious, and what was the higher
meaning
1 Dipavamsa, v, 32sqq.
lii

INTRODUCTION
Attached new meaning to new words, as if spoken by
the Buddha,
And destroyed much of the spirit by holding to the
shadow of the letter.
In part they cast aside the Sutta and the Vinaya so
deep,
And made an imitation Sutta and Vinaya, changing
this to that.
The Pariwara abstract, and the Six Books of Abhi-
dhamma
;
The Patisambhida, the Niddesa, and a portion ofthe
Jdtaka
So much they put aside, and made others in their
place ! &quot; . . .
The animus of this description is sufficiently
evident
;
andtheDlpavanisa. whichcannothavebeen
written earlier than the fourth century after the
commencement of our era, is but poor evidence of
the events of seven centuries before. But it is the
best we have ; it is acknowledged to have been based
on earlier sources, and it is at least reliable that,
according to Ceylon tradition, a book called the
Jataka existed at the time of the Councils of Vesali.
As the Northern Buddhists are the successors of
thosewho heldthe Great Council, we mayhope before
long to have the account of it from the other side,
either from the Sanskrit or from the Chinese.1 Mean-
1ThereareseveralworksenumeratedbyBealinhisCatalogueof
ChineseBuddhistic WorksintheIndiaOfficeLibrary(seeespecially
pp. 93-7, and pp. 107-9), from which we might expect to derive
this information.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
while it is important to notice that the fact of a Book
ofBirth Stories having existed at a very early date is
confirmed, not only by such stories being found in
other parts of the Pali Pitakas, but also by ancient
monuments.
Among the most interesting and important dis
coveries which we owe to recent archaeological
researches in India must undoubtedly be reckoned
those of the Buddhist carvings on the railings round
the dome-shaped relic shrines of Sanchi, Amaravati,
and Bharhut. There have been there found, very
boldly and clearly sculptured in deep bas-relief,
figures which were at first thought to represent
merely scenes in Indian life. Even so their value as
records of ancient civilization would have been of
incalculable value but they have acquired further
;
importance since it has been proved that most of
them are illustrations of the sacred Birth Stories in
the Buddhist Jataka book are scenes, that is, from
thelife of Gotama in his last or previous births. This
would be incontestable in many cases from the
carvings themselves, but it is rendered doubly sure
by the titles of Jatakas having been found inscribed
over a number of those of the bas-reliefs which have
been last discovered the carvings, namely, on the
railing at Bharhut.
It is not necessary to turn aside here to examine
into the details of these discoveries. It is sufficient
for our present inquiry into the age of the Jataka
stories that these ancient bas-reliefs afford indis
putable evidencethat the Birth Stories were already,
liv

INTRODUCTION
at the end of the third century B.C., considered so
sacred that they were chosen as the subjects to be
represented
roundthemostsacredBuddhist
buildings,
and that they were already popularly known under
the technical name of &quot;Jatakas A detailed state
&quot;.
ment of all the Jatakas hitherto discovered on these
Buddhist railings, and other places, will be found in
one of the Tables appended to this Introduction
;
and it will be noticed that several of those tales
translatedbelowinthisvolumehad thus been chosen,
more than two thousand years ago, to fill places of
honour round the relic shrines of the Great Teacher.
One remarkable fact apparent from that Table will
be that the Birth Stories are sometimes called in the
inscriptions over the bas-reliefs by names different
from those given to them in the Jdtaka Book in the
Pali Pitakas. This would seeem, at first sight, to
show that, although the very stories as we have them
must have been known at the time when the bas-
reliefs were carved, yet the present collection, in
which different names are clearly given at the end of
each story, didnotthenexist. But, ontheotherhand,
we not only find in the Jataka Book itself very great
uncertainty as to the names the same stories being
calledindifferent parts oftheBookbydifferent titles1
1 Thus no. 41 is called both Losaka Jdtaka and Mitta-vindaka
Jataka (Feer, Etude sur les Jatakas, p. 121); no. 439 is called
Catudvdra Jataka and also Mitta-vindaka Jataka (ibid. p. 120);
no. 57 is called Vdnarinda Jataka and also Kumbldla Jataka
(Fausboll, vol. i, p. 278, and vol. ii, p. 206); no. 96 is called
Telapatta Jdtaka and also Takkasild Jdtaka (ibid. vol. i, p. 393,
and vol. i, pp. 469, 470); no. 102, there called Pat,rtika Jdtaka,
is the same story as no. 217, there called Seggu Jdtaka ; no. 30,
Iv

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
but one of these very bas-reliefs has actually
inscribed over it two distinct names in full ! l
The reason for this is very plain. When a fable
about a lion and a jackal was told (as in no. 157) to
show the advantage of a good character, and it was
necessary to choose a short title for it, it was called
&quot; The Lion Jataka or &quot; The Jackal Jataka or
&quot;, &quot;,
even &quot; The Good Character Jataka&quot; and when a
;
fable was told about a tortoise, to show the evil
results which follow on talkativeness (as in no. 215),
the fable might as well be called &quot; The Chatterbox
Jataka &quot; as &quot; The Tortoise Jataka and the fable is
&quot;,
referred to accordingly under both those names. It
must always have been difficult, if not impossible, to
fixupon ashorttitlewhichshouldat oncecharacterize
the lesson to be taught, and the personages through
whose acts it was taught and different names would
;
thus arise, and become interchangeable. It would be
wrongthereforeto attachtoomuch importancetothe
difference of the names on the bas-reliefs and in the
Jataka Book. And in translating the titles we need
not be afraid to allow ourselves a latitude similar to
that which was indulged in by the early Buddhists
themselves.
There is yet further evidence confirmatory of the
Dlpavamsa tradition. The Buddhist Scriptures are
there called Munika Jataka, is the same story as no. 286, there
called Sdluka Jataka; no. 215, the Kacchapa Jataka, is called
c B a a l h l u ed -B G h u a n n a i J J a a t t a a k k a a , i S n i t h h a e Ja D t h a a ka m , ma a p nd ad S a ig ( a p l . a 4 J 1 a 9 t ) ak ; a. andno. 157 is
1 Cunningham, The Stupa of Bharhut, pi. xlvii. The carving
illustratesafableofacatandacock, andislabelledboth Bidala
Jataka and KukkutaJataka (Cat and CockJataka, no. 383).
Ivi

INTRODUCTION
sometimes spoken of as consisting of nine different
divisions, or sorts of texts (Angdni), of which the
seventhisJdtaJcas, orTheJdtaka Collection (Jdtakam).
This division of the Sacred Books is mentioned, not
only in the Dipavamsa itself, and in the Sumangala
Vildsim, but also in the Anguttara Nikdya (one of
the later works included in the Pali Pitakas), and in
the Saddharma Pundarika (a late, but standard
Sanskrit work of the Northern Buddhists).1 It is
common, therefore, to both of the two sections of the
Buddhist Church
;
anditfollowsthatitwas
probably
in use before the great schism took place between
them, possibly before the Council of Vesali itself.
In any case it is conclusive as to the existence of a
collection of Jatakas at a very early date.
ThetextoftheJdtakaBook, asnowreceived
among
the Southern Buddhists, consists, as will be seen from
the translation, not only of the stories, but of an
elaboratecommentary, containingadetailedExplana
tion of the verse or verses which occur in each of the
stories ; an Introduction to each of them, giving the
occasion on which it is said to have been told a
;
Conclusion, explaining the connexion between the
personages in the Introductory Story and the
characters in the Birth Story ; and finally, a long
general Introduction to the whole work. It in
is,
fact, an edition by a later hand of the earlier stories
;
and though I have calledit conciselytheJdtakaBook,
its full title is The Commentary on the Jatakas.
1 Seetheauthoritiesquotedinmymanual,Buddhism,pp.
214,
215 ; andDr.Morris,in TheAcademyforMay, 1880.
Ivii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
We do not know either the name of the author of
this work, or the date when it was composed. The
meagre account given at the commencement of the
work itself (below, p. 81) contains all our present
information on these points. Childers, who is the
translator of this passage (below, p. Ixxix), has
elsewhere ascribed the work to Buddhaghosax but
;
I venture to think that this is, to say the least, very
uncertain.
We
have, in the thirty-seventh chapter of the
Mahavamsa,2 a perhaps almost contemporaneous
account of Buddhaghosa s literary work ; and it is
there distinctly stated, that after writingin India the
Atihasalirii (a commentary on the Dhammasangam,
thefirstoftheSixBooks oftheAbhidhamma
PilaJca),
he
went to Ceylon (about 430 A.D.) with the express
intention of translating the Singhalese commentaries
into Pali. There he studied under the Thera San-
ghapali, and having proved his efficiency byhis great
work The Path of Purity (Visuddhi-Magga, a com
pendium of doctrine), he was allowed by the monks
in Ceylon to carry out his wish, and translate the
commentaries. The Chronicle then goes on to say
that he did render &quot; the whole Singhalese Com
mentary &quot; into Pali. But it by no means follows, as
has been too generally supposed, that he was the
author of all the Pali Commentaries we now possess.
He translated, it may be granted, the Commentaries
on the Vinaya PitaJca and on the four great divisions
(Nikayas) of the Sutta Pitaka but these works,
;
1 InhisPaliDictionary, Preface,p.ix,note.
2 Tumour, pp. 250-3.
Iviii

INTRODUCTION
together with those mentioned above, would amply
justify the very general expression of the chronicler.
The Singhalese Commentary being now lost, it is
impossible to say what books were and what werenot
included under that expression as used in the
Mahdvamsa ; and to assign any Pali commentary,
other than those just mentioned, to Buddhaghosa,
somefurther evidence more clear thanthe ambiguous
words of the Ceylon Chronicle should be required.
What little evidence we have as regards the
particular work now in question seems to me to tend
very strongly in the other direction. Buddhaghosa
could scarcely have commenced his labours on the
Jataka Commentary, leaving the works I have men
tioned so much more important from his point of
view undone. Now I would ask the reader to
imagine himself in Buddhaghosa s position, and then
to read carefully the opening words of our Jataka
Commentary as translated below, and to judge for
himself whether they could possibly be such words
as Buddhaghosa would probably, under the circum
stances, have written. It is a matter of feeling ; but
I confess I cannot think it possible that he was the
author of them. Three Elders of the Buddhist Order
are there mentioned with respect, but neither the
name of Kevata, Buddhaghosa s teacher inIndia, nor
thename of Sanghapali, his teacherin Ceylon, is even
referred to ; and there is not the slightest allusion
either to Buddhaghosa s conversion, his journey from
India, the high hopes he had entertained, orthe work
he had already accomplished ! This silence seems to
lix

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
me almost as convincing as such negative evidence
can possibly be.
If not, however, by Buddhaghosa, the work must
have been composed after his time but probably
;
not long after. It is quite clear from the account in
the Mahdvamsa, ih&t before he came to Ceylon, the
Singhalese commentaries had not been turned into
Pali and on the other hand, the example he had set
;
so well will almost certainly have been quickly
followed. We know one instance at least, that of the
Mahdvamsa itself, which would confirm this supposi
tion ; and had the present work been much later
than his time, it would not have been ascribed to
Buddhaghosa at all.
It is worthy of notice, perhaps, in this connexion,
that the Pali work is not a translation of the Sin
ghalese Commentary. The author three times refers
to a previous Jdtaka Commentary, which possibly
formed part of the Singhalese wrork, as a separate
book l and in one case mentions what it says only
;
to overrule it. 2 Our Pali work may have been based
uponit, but cannot be said to be a mere version of it.
And the present Commentary agrees almost word for
word, from p. 58 to p. 124 of my translation, with
the MadJmra-attha-vildsim, the Commentary on the
Buddhavamsa mentioned above, which is not usually
ascribedto Buddhaghosa.3
1 Fausboll, vol.i, p. 62and p. 488 ; vol.ii,p. 224.
2 Seethetranslationbelow.
3 IjudgefromTumoursanalysisofthatworkintheJournalof
the Bengal Asiatic Society, 1839, where some long extracts have
been translated and the contents of other passages given in
abstract.
Ix

INTRODUCTION
The Jdtaka Book is not the only Pali Commentary
which has made use of the ancient Birth Stories.
They occur in numerous passages of the different
exegetical works composed in Ceylon, and the only
commentary of which anything is known in print,
that on the Dhammapada or Collection of Scripture
Verses, contains a considerable number of them.
Mr. Fausboll has published copious extracts from this
Commentary, which may be by Buddhaghosa, as an
appendix to his edition of the text and the work
;
by CaptianKogers, entitledBuddhaghosa sParables
a translation from a Burmese book called Dhamma-
pada-vatthu (that is &quot; Stories connected with the
Dhammapada &quot;) consists almost entirely of Jataka
In Siam there is even a rival collection of Birth
Stories which is called Panndsa-Jdtakan (The Fifty
Jdtakas), and of which an account has been given us
by Leon Feer ; l and the same scholar has pointed
out that isolated stories, not contained in our collec
tion, are also to be found inthe Pali literature ofthat
country. 2 The first hundred and fifty tales in our
collectionare dividedintothreePanndsas, orfifties 3
;
but the Siamese collection cannot be either of these,
1 Etudesurles Jdtakas, pp. 62-5.
2 Ibid., pp. 66-71.
the 3 e T n h d is of is th cl e ea 1 r 00 f t r h om tal v e o , l. we i, f p i . nd 41 t 0 he of wo F r a d u s sb M o a l j l j s hi te m x a t - , p w a h n e n r a e s , ak a o t
n 6 i 0 t t th h it t o a , le t ( h p a . t 26 is 1) &quot; t E he n r d ei o s f a t c h o e rr M e i s d p d o l n e di F n i g ft e y nt &q r uot; y . , A P t at t h h a e mo en p d an o n f ds t o h , e
t &quot h ;F e ir 1 s 5 t 0t F h if t t a y le &qu , ot; ; th a e nd ex t pr h e o s u s g i h on th &qu e ot; r M e id is dl n e o F s i u f c t h y e &quot n ; t s r h y ow a s t t t h h e at e t n h d er o e f
musthavebeen,atonetime,suchadivisionasisabovestated.
Ixi

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
as M. Feer has ascertained that it contains no tales
beginning in the same way as any of those in either
of these &quot; Fifties
&quot;.
In India itself the Birth Stories survived the fall,
as some of them had probably preceded the rise, of
Buddhism. Not a few of them were preserved by
beingincluded inthe Mahci Bharata, the great Hindu
epic which became the storehouse of Indian myth
ology, philosophy, and folk-lore. Unfortunately
the date of the final arrangement of the Mahci
Bharataisextremelyuncertain, andthereisnofurther
evidence of the continued existence of the Jataka
tales till we come to the time of the work already
frequently referred to the Pancha Tantra.
It is to the history of this book that Benfey has
devoted that elaborate and learned Introduction
which is the most important contribution to the
study ofthis class of literature as yet published ; and
I cannot do better than give in his own words his
final conclusions as to the origin of this popular
x
story-book :
&quot; Although we are unable at present to give any
certaininformationeitherastotheauthororastothe
date of the work, we receive, as it seems to me, no
unimportant compensation in the fact, that it turned
out,2 with a certainty beyond doubt, to have been
originally a Buddhist book. This followed especially
from the chapter discussed in 225. But it was
1 Pantscha Tantra, Theodor Benfey, Leipzig, 1859, p. xi.
2 That is,inthecourseofBenfeysresearches.
Ixii

INTRODUCTION
already indicated by the considerable number of the
fables and tales contained in the work, which could
also be traced in Buddhist writings. Their number,
and also the relation between the form in which they
are told in our work, and that in which they appear
in the Buddhist writings, incline us nay, drive us
to the conclusionthat the latter were the source from
which our work, within the circle of Buddhist
literature, proceeded. . . .
&quot; The proof that our work is of Buddhist origin is
ofimportanceintwo ways : firstly onwhich we will
not here further insistfor the history of the work
i B t u se d l d f h ; is a m nd is s . eco W n e dly c , an fo f r in t d he in de i t t e o r n mi e na m t o i r o e n p o r f oo w f ha o t f
that literary activity of Buddhism, to which, in my
articles on India which appeared in 1840,1 I had
,
already felt myself compelled to assign the most
important place in the enlightenment and general
intellectual development of India. This view has
since received, from year to year, fresh confirmations,
which I hope to bring together in another place ;
and whereby I hope to prove that the very bloom of
the intellectual life of India (whether it found expres
sion in Brahmanical or Buddhist works) proceeded
substantially
fromBuddhism, andiscontemporaneous
with the epoch in which Buddhism flourished
;
that is to say, from the third century before Christ
to the sixth or seventh century after Christ. With
that principle, said to have been proclaimed by
Buddhism in its earliest years, that only that
teaching of the Buddha s is true which contraveneth
not sound reason, 2 the autonomy of man s Intellect
1 In Ersch und Grubers Encyklopcedie, especially at pp. 255
and277.
2 Wassiliew, DerBuddMsmus, p. 68.
Ixiii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
was, we may fairly say, effectively acknowledged ;
thewholerelationbetweentherealmsoftheknowable
and of the unknowable was subjected to its control
;
and notwithstandingthattheactualreasoningpowers,
to which the ultimate appeal was thus given, were in
fact then not altogether sound, yet the way was
pointed out by which Keason could, under more
favourable circumstances, begin to liberate itself
from its failings. We are already learning to value,
in the philosophical endeavours of Buddhism, the
labours, sometimes indeed quaint, but aiming at
thoroughness and worthy ofthe highest respect, ofits
severe earnestness in inquiry. And that, side by side
with this, the merry jests of light, and even frivolous
poetry and conversation, preserved the cheerfulness
of life, is clear from the prevailing tone of our work,
and still more so from the probable Buddhist origin
ofthose otherIndianstory-books whichhave hitherto
become known to
us.&quot;
Benfey then proceeds to show that the Pancha
Tantraconsisted
originally,
notoffive, butofcertainly
eleven, perhapsoftwelve, and justpossiblyofthirteen
books ; and that its original design was to teach
princes right government and conduct.1 The whole
collection had then a different title descriptive of this
design ; andit was onlyafter apart became detached
from the rest that that part was called, for distinc-
tion ssake,thePanchaTantra(TheFiveBooks). When
this occurred it is impossible to say. But it was
certainly
theolderand largercollection,notthepresent
1 Compare the title of the Birth Story above, p. xxii: &quot;A
LessonforKings&quot;.
Ixiv

INTRODUCTION
Pancha Tantra, which travelled into Persia, and
became the source of the whole of the extensive
Kalilag and Damnag literature.1
The Arabian authors of the work translated
(through the ancient Persian) from this older collec
tionassignitto a certainBidpai
;
who is saidto have
composed it in order to instruct Dabschelim, the
successor of Alexander in his Indian possessions, in
worldly wisdom.2 There may well be some truth in
this tradition. And when we consider that the
Barlaam and Josaphat literature took its origin at
the same time, and in the same place, as the Kalilag
and Damnag literature that both of them are based
;
upon Buddhist originals taken to Bagdad in the sixth
century of our era ; and that it is precisely such a
bookastheBook ofBirthStoriesfromwhichtheycould
have derived all that they borrowed it is difficult
;
to avoid connecting these facts together by the
supposition that the work ascribed to Bidpai may,
in fact, have been a selection of those Jataka stories
bearing more especially on the conduct of life, and
preceded, like our own collection, by a sketch of the
lifeoftheBuddhainhislastbirth. Suchasupposition
wouldaffordareasonable explanationofsome curious
facts which have been quite inexplicable on the
existing theory. If the Arabic Kalilah and Dimnah
was an exact translation, in our modern sense of the
word translation, ofanexacttranslationofaBuddhist
work, how comes it that the various copies of the
1 Seeabove.
2 Knatchbull, p. 29.
Ixv

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Kalilah and Dimnah differ so greatly, not only among
themselves, but from the lately discovered Syriac
Kalilag and Damnag, which was also, according to
the current hypothesis, a translation of the same
original ? how comes it that in these translations
from a Buddhist book there are no references to the
Buddha, and no expressions on the face of them
Buddhistic ? If, on the other hand, the later writers
had merely derived their subject-matter from a
Buddhist work or works, and had composed what
wereineffectfreshworksonthebasisofsuchan
original
as has been suggested, we can understand how the
different writers might have used different portions
ofthematerialbeforethem, andmighthavediscarded
any expressions too directly in contradiction with
their own religious beliefs.
The first three of those five chapters of the work
ascribedtoBidpai which make up the Pancha Tantra,
are alsofound in a form slightly different, but, on the
whole,essentially thesame,intwo otherIndian Story
books the Kathd-Sarit-Sagara (Oceanofthe Rivers of
Stories),
composedinSanskritbyaNorthernBuddhist
named SOMADEVA in the twelfth century, and in the
well-known Hitopadesa, which is a much later work.
IfSomadevahadhadthePancha Tantrainitspresent
formbeforehim, hewouldprobablyhaveincludedthe
whole five books in his encyclopedic collection ; and
the absence from the Kathd-Sarit-Sdgara of the
last two books would tend to show that when he
wrote his great workthe Pancha Tantra had not been
composed,oratleasthadnotreachedtheNorthofIndia
.
Ixvi

INTRODUCTION
Somadeva derived his knowledge ofthe three books
hedoesnotgive fromthe Vrihat-Kathd,aworkascribed
to Gunadhya, written in the Paisachi dialect, and
probably at least as early as the sixth century. 1 This
work, on which Somadeva s whole poem is based, is
lost. But Dr. Biihler has lately discovered another
Sanskrit poem, based on that earlier work, written in
Kashmir by Kshemendra at the end of the eleventh
century, and called, like its original, Vrihat-Kathd ;
and as Somadeva wrote quite independently of this
earlier poem, we may hope that a comparison of the
two Sanskrit works will afford reliable evidence of
the contents of the old Vrihat-Kathd.2
I shouldalsomentionherethat anotherwell-known
work, the Vetdla-Panca-Vimsati (The Twenty-five
Tales ofa Demon), is contained in both the Sanskrit
poems, andwasthereforeprobablyalsoinGunadhya s
collection ; but as no Jataka stories have been as yet
traced in it, I have simply included it for purposes of
reference in Appendix, Table I, together with the
most important of those of the later Indian story
books of which anything is at present known.
Thereremains onlyto add afewwords onthe mode
in which the stories, whose history in Europe and in
India I have above attempted to trace, are presented
tousintheJatakaBook.
Each story is introduced by another explaining
where and whyit wastold by the Buddha the Birth
;
1 Dr. Fitz-Eclward Halls Vdsavadatta, pp. 22-4.
* Dr. BiihlerinTheIndianAntiquary,i, 302 ; v, 29 ; vi, 269.
Lxvii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Story itself being called the Atita-vatthu (Story ofthe
Past) and the Introductory Story the Paccuppanna-
vatthu (Story of the Present). There is another book
in the Pali Pitakas called Apaddna, which consists
oftalesaboutthelivesofcertainearly Buddhists
;
and
many of the Introductory Stories in the Jdtaka Book
(such, for instance, as the tale about Little Roadling,
no. 4, orthetaleaboutKumara Kassapa, no. 12) differ
very little from these Apaddnas. Other of the
Introductory Stories (such, for instance, as no. 17)
seem to be mere repetitions of the principal idea
of the story they introduce, and are probably
derived from it. That the Introductory Stories are
entirely devoid of credit is clear from the fact that
different Birth Stories are introduced as having been
told at the same time and place, andin answerto the
same question. Thus no lessthantenstories are each
saidtohavebeentoldto a certainlove-sickmonkas a
warning to him against his folly ; 1 the closely-
allied story given below as the Introduction to Birth
Story no. 30 appears also as the Introduction to at
leastfourothers 2andthere aremanyotherinstances
:
of a similar kind.3
After the two stories have been told, there comes
a Conclusion, in which the Buddha identifies the
personagesinthe Birth Storywiththoseinthe Intro-
1 Nos. 61-3, 147, 159, 193, 196, 198-9, 263.
2 Nos. 106, 145, 191, 286.
8 Nos.58,73,142,194,220,and277,havethesameIntroductory
Story.
And so nos. 60, 104, 116, 161.
Andnos. 127-8, 138, 173, 175.
Ixviii

INTRODUCTION
ductory Story but it should be noticed that in
;
one or two cases characters mentioned in the Atlta-
vatthu are supposed not to have been reborn on earth
at the time of the Paccuppanna-vatthu.1 And the
reader must of course avoid the mistake ofimporting
Christian ideas into this Conclusion by supposing
that the identity of the persons in the two stories is
owingto the passage of a &quot; soul &quot; fromthe onetothe
other. Buddhism does not teach the transmigra
tion of souls. Its doctrine (which is somewhat
intricate, and for a fuller statement of which I must
refer to my Manual of Buddhism 2 ) would be better
summarized as the transmigration of character ;
for it is entirely independent of the early and widely-
prevalent notion of the existence within each human
body of a distinct soul, or ghost, or spirit. The
Bodisat, for instance, is not supposed to have a soul,
which, on the death of one body, is transferred to
another but to be the inheritor of the character
;
acquired by the previous Bodisats. The insight and
goodness, the moral and intellectual perfection which
constitute Buddhahood, could not, according to the
Buddhist theory, be acquired in one lifetime ; they
were the accumulated result of the continual effort
ofmanygenerations ofsuccessiveBodisats. The only
thing which continues to exist when a man dies is his
Karma,theresultofhiswordsand
thoughts
anddeeds
(literally^his &quot; doing &quot;) ; andthe curious theorythat
1 Seethe &quot;Palinote&quot; attheend ofJatakano. 91.
2 pp. 99-106.
Ixix

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
this result is concentrated in some new individual is
due to the older theory of soul.
In the case of one Jataka (Fausboll, no. 276), the
Conclusioniswhollyinverse andinseveralcasesthe
;
Conclusion contains averseor verses addedby way of
moral. Such verses, when they occur, are called
Abhisambuddha-gdthd, or Versesspoken by the Buddha,
notwhenhewas stillonly a Bodisat, butwhenhe had
become a Buddha. They are so called to distinguish
them from the similar verses inserted in the Birth
Story, and spoken there by the Bodisat. Each story
has its verse or verses, either in the Atlta-vatthu or in
the Conclusion, and sometimes in both. The number
of cases in which all the verses are Abhisambuddha-
odthd is relatively small (being only one in ten of the
Jatakas published 1 ) ; and the number of cases in
which they occur together with verses in the Atlta-
vatthu is very small indeed (being only five out of the
threehundredJatakas published 2 ) ; intheremaining
two hundred and the verse or verses occur
sixty-five
inthecourseoftheBirthStory andaremost generally
spoken by the Bodisat himself.
There are several reasons for supposing that
these verses are older than the prose which now
forms their setting. The Ceylon tradition goes
so far as to say that the original Jataka Book
consisted of the verses alone that the Birth Stories
;
1 Nos. 1-5, 23-9, 37, 55-6, 68, 85, 87-8, 97, 100, 114, 136,
(total, eighteeninthe Eka-Nipata); 156 (=55-6), 196, 202, 237
( 2 = 91 6 , 3) 3 , 00 24 ( 1 to ( t t a o l t , al s , e f v i e v n e i i n nt t h h e e D T u i k k a a - -N N i i p p a d t t a a , ) a;n 2 d 55 t - h 6 ir , t 2 y 5 a 8 l , t 2 og 6 e 4 t , h 2 e 8 r 4 ) , .
2 Nos. 152, 163, 179, 233, 286.
Ixx

INTRODUCTION
are Commentary upon them and the Introductory
;
Stories, the Conclusions and the Pada-gata-sannaya,
or word-for-word explanation of the verses, are
Commentary on this Commentary.1 And archaic
forms and forced constructions in the verses (in
striking contrast with the regularity and simplicity
of the prose parts of the book), and the corrupt state
in which some of the verses are found, seem to point
to the conclusion that the verses are older.
But I venture to think that, though the present
form of the verses may be older than the present
form of the Birth Stories, the latter, or most of the
latter, were in existence first ; that the verses, at
least in many cases, were added to the stories after
theyhad become current and that the Birth Stories
;
without verses in them at all those enumerated
in the list in note 1 on the previous page, where the
verses are found only in the Conclusion are, infact,
among the oldest, if not the oldest, in the whole
collection. For anyone who takes the trouble to go
through that list seriatim will find that it contains a
considerablenumberofthosestorieswhich, fromtheir
being found also in the Pali Pitakas or in the oldest
Europeancollections, canalreadybeprovedtobelong
to a very early date. The only hypothesis which will
reconcile these facts seems to me to be thatthe Birth
1 This beliefunderliesthe curiousnoteformingthelastwords
ofthe MahasupinaJataka,i, 345 : &quot;ThosewhoheldtheCouncil
after the death of the Blessed One placed the lines beginning
usabha rukkhd in the Commentary, and then, making the other
lines beginning labuniinto one verse, theyput (the Jataka) into
the Eka-Nipata (the chapter including all those Jatakas which
haveonlyone
verse).&quot;
Ixxi

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Stories, though probably originally older than the
verses they contain, werehanded down in Ceylon till
thetimeofthecompilationofourpresentJdtakaBook
in the Singhalese language whilst the verses on the
;
other hand were not translated, but were preserved
as they were received, in Pali.
There is another group of stories which seems to be
older than most of the others ; those, namely, in
which the Bodisat appears as a sort of chorus, a
moralizer only, and not an actor in the play, whose
part may have been an addition made whenthe story
in which it occurs was adopted by the Buddhists.
Suchis the fable above translated of &quot; The Ass in the
Lions Skin and most of the stories where the
&quot;,
Bodisat is a ruJckha-devatd the fairy or genius of a
tree.1 But the materials are insufficient at present
to put this forward as otherwise than a mere
conjecture.
The arrangement of the stories in our present
collection is a most unpractical one. They are classi
fied, not according to their contents, but according
to the number of verses they contain. Thus, the
Firstdivision(Nipata)includesthoseonehundredand
fifty of the stories which have only one verse ; the
Second, one hundred stories, each having two verses
;
the Third and Fourth, each of them fifty stories
containing respectively three and four verses each
;
and so on, the number of stories in each division
decreasing rapidly after the number of verses exceeds
p. 1 xi S i e ; e, an fo d r Ja in t s a t k a a n , ce n , o. be 11 l 3 o . w, pp. 212, 228, 230, 317 ; above,
Ixxii

INTRODUCTION
four and the whole of the five hundred and
; fifty
Jatakas being contained in the twenty-two Nipatas.
Eventhisdivision,dependingonsounimportantafactor
as the number of the verses, is not logically carried
out andtheroundnumbers ofthe storiesin thefirst
;
fourdivisionsaremade upbyincludinginthemstories
which, according to the principle adopted, should not
properlybeplacedwithinthem. ThusseveralJatakas
are only mentioned in the first two Nipatas to say
that they will be found in the later ones 1 and
;
several Jatakas givenwith one verse onlyinthe First
Nipata are givenagainwith more versesinthose that
follow ; 2 and occasionally a story is even repeated,
with but little variation, in the same Nipata. 3
On the other hand, several Jatakas, which count
only as one story in the present enumeration, really
contain several different tales or fables. Thus,
for instance, the Kuldvaka JdtaJca (On Mercy
to Animals) consists of several stories woven,
not very closely, into one. The most striking
instance of this is the Ummagga Jataka of
,
which the Singhalese translation by the learned
1 Nos. 110-12, 170, 192 in the Ummagga Jataka, and no. 264
in the Suruci Jataka.
No. 30-No. 286. No. 68=No.237.
34= 216. 86= 290.
46= 268. 102= 217.
57= 224. 145= 198.
SoNo. 82=No. 104.
99= 101.
134= 135.
195= 225.
294= 295.
Comparethetwostoriesnos. 23and24translatedbelow.
Ixxiii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Batuwan Tudawa occupies two hundred and fifty
pages octavo, and consists of a very large number
(I have not counted them, and there is no index, but
Ishouldthinkthey amounttomorethanonehundred
and fifty) of most entertaining anecdotes. Although
thereforethe Birth Stories are spoken ofas &quot; The five
hundred and fifty Jatakas &quot;, this is merely a round
numberreached by an entirely artificial arrangement,
and gives no clue to the actual number of stories.
It is probable that our present collection contains
altogether (including the Introductory Stories where
they are not mere repetitions) between two and three
thousand independent tales, fables, anecdotes, and
riddles.
Nor is the number 550 any more exact (though
the discrepancy in this case is not so great) if it be
supposed to record, notthenumberofstories, butthe
number of distinct births of the Bodisat. In the
Kuldvaka Jdtaka, just referred to (the tale On Mercy
to Animals), there are two consecutive births of the
future Buddha and on the other hand, none of the
;
six Jatakas mentioned in note 1, p. Ixxiii, represents
a distinct birth at all the Bodisat is in them the
same person as he is in the later Jatakas in which
those six are contained.
From the facts as they stand it seems at present to
be the most probable explanation of the rise of our
JdlakaBooktosupposethatitwasduetothe
religious
faith of the Indian Buddhists of the third or fourth
century B.C., who not only repeated a number of
Ixxiv

INTRODUCTION
fables, parables, and stories ascribed to the Buddha,
but gave them a peculiar sacredness and a special
religious significance byidentifyingthe best character
in each with the Buddha himself in some previous
birth. Fromthetime whenthis step wastaken, what
hadbeenmerelyparablesorfablesbecame&quot;
Jatakas&quot;,
a word invented to distinguish, and used only of,
those stories which have been thus sanctified. The
earliest use of that word at present known is in the
inscriptions on the Buddhist Tope at Bharhut ; and
from the way in which it is there used it is clear that
thewordmusthave thenbeenalreadyinuseforsome
considerabletime. Butwhenstoriesthusmadesacred
were popularly accepted among people so accustomed
toliterary activityas the earlyBuddhists, thenatural
consequence would be that the Jatakas should have
been brought together into a collection of some kind ;
and the probability of this having been done at a
very early date is confirmed, firstly, by the tradition
of the difference of opinion concerning a JdtaJca Book
at the Councils of Vesali and secondly by the
;
mention of a Jdtaka Book in the ninefold division of
the Scriptures found in the Anguttara Nikdya and in
the Saddharma Pundarika. To the compiler of this,
orofsome
earlycollection,
areprobablytobeascribed
the Verses, whichinsome cases at least are later than
the Stories.
With regard to some of the Jatakas, among which
may certainly be included those found in the Pali
Pitakas, there may well have been a tradition, more
or less reliable, as to the time and the occasion at
Ixxv

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
whichtheyweresupposedtohavebeenutteredbythe
Buddha. These traditions will have given rise to the
earliest Introductory Stories, in imitation of which
the rest were afterwards invented and these will
;
then have been handed down as commentary on the
Birth Stories, till they were finally made part of our
present collection by its compiler in Ceylon. That
(eitherthroughtheir later origin, ortheirhavingbeen
much more modified in transmission) they represent
a more modern point of view than the Birth Stories
themselves, will be patent to every reader. There is
a freshness and simplicity about the Stories of the
PastthatissadlywantingintheStoriesofthePresent
;
somuch so, thatthe latter (andthisis alsotrue ofthe
whole long Introduction containing the life of the
Buddha) may be compared more accurately with
mediaeval Legends of the Saints than with such
simple stories as dZsops Fables, which still bear a
likeness to their forefathers, the Stories ofthe Past.
The Jatakas so constituted were carried to Ceylon
in the Pali language, when Buddhism was first intro
ducedintothatisland (a datethatisnot quitecertain,
but may be taken provisionally as about 250 B.C.) ;
andthewholewastheretranslatedintoand
preserved
in the Singhalese language (except the verses, which
were left untranslated) until the compilation in the
fifth century A.D., and by an unknown author, of the
Pali Jdtaka Book, the translation of which into
Englishis commencedinthis volume.
When we consider the number of elaborate similes
by which the arguments in the Pali Suttas are
Ixxvi

INTRODUCTION
enforced, there can be no reasonable doubt that the
Buddha was really accustomed to teach much by the
aid of parables, and it is not improbable that the
compiler was quite correct in attributing to him that
subtle sense of good-natured humour which led to his
inventing, as occasion arose, some fable or some tale
of a previous birth, to explain away existing failures
inconductamongthemonks, orto drawamoralfrom
contemporaneous events. It is even already possible
to pointto some ofthe Jatakas as being probablythe
oldest in the collection but it must be left to future
;
researchtocarryoutinamplerdetailthe
investigation
into the comparative date of each of the stories, both
those which are called Stories of the Past and those
which are called Stories ofthe Present.
Besidesthepoints whichtheteachingoftheJatakas
has in common with that of European moralists and
satirists, it inculcates two lessons peculiar to itself
firstly, the powerful influence of inherited character
;
and secondly, the essential likeness between man and
other animals. The former of these two ideas under
lies both the central Buddhist doctrine of Karma and
the theory of the Buddhas, views certainly common
among allthe early Buddhists and thereforeprobably
held by Gotama himself. And the latter of the two
underlies and explains the sympathy with animals so
conspicuous in these tales, and the frequency with
which they lay stress upon the duty of kindness, and
even of courtesy, to the brute creation. It is curious
to find in these records of a strange and ancient faith
such blind feeling after, such vague foreshadowing
Ixxvii

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
of beliefs only now beginning to be put forward here
inthe West ; but it is scarcely necessary to point out
that the paramount value to us now of the Jataka
storiesishistorical.
In this respect their value does not consist only in
the evidence they afford of the intercommunion
between East and West, but also, and perhaps
chiefly,
inthe assistance whichtheywillrenderto the
study of folk-lore that is, of the beliefs and habits
of men in the earlier stages of their development.
The researches of Tylor and Waitz and Pischel and
Lubbock and Spencer have shown us thatthis is the
means by which it is most easily possible rightly to
understandandestimatemanyofthehabitsandbeliefs
still current among ourselves. But the chief obstacle
to a consensus of opinion in such studies is the in
sufficiency andinaccuracy of the authorities onwhich
the facts depend. While the ancient literature of
peoples more advanced usually ignores or passes
lightly overthe very details mostimportant fromthis
point of view, the accounts of modern travellers
among the so-called savage tribes are often at best
very secondary evidence. It constantlyhappens that
such a traveller can only tell us the impression con
veyed to his mind of that which his informant holds
to be the belief or custom of the tribe. Such native
information may be inaccurate, incomplete, or mis
leading ;
anditreachesusonlyafternitrationthrough
a European mind more or less able to comprehend it
rightly.
But in the Jatakas we have a nearly complete
Ixxviii

INTRODUCTION
picture, and quite uncorrupted and unadulterated by
European intercourse, of the social life and customs
and popular beliefs of the common people of Aryan
tribes closely related to ourselves, just as they were
passingthroughthe first stages of civilization.
The popularity of the Jatakas as amusing stories
may pass away. How can it stand against the rival
claims ofthe fairytalesofscience, andtheentrancing,
many-sided storyof man sgradual rise and progress ?
But though these less fabulous and more attractive
stories will increasingly engage the attention of
ourselves and of our children, we may still turn with
appreciation to the ancient Book of the Buddhist
Jdtaka Tales as a priceless record of the childhood of
our race.
I availmyself ofthis opportunity of acknowledging
my indebtedness to several friends whose assistance
has been too continuous to be specified on any
particular page. Kobert Childers, whose premature
death was so great a blow to Pali studies, and whose
name I never think of without a feeling of reverent
and grateful regret, had undertaken the translation
of the Jatakas, and the first thirty-three pages are
from his pen. They are the last memento of his
earnest work : they stand exactly as he left them.
TheRev.J.EstlinCarpenter, whotakesadeepinterest
inthis and cognate subjects, has been kind enough to
read through all the proofs, and I owe to his varied
scholarship many useful hints. And my especial
thanks, and the thanks of any readers this work may
Ixxix

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
meet with, are above all due to Victor Fausboll,
without whose editio princeps of the Pali text, the
result of self-denying labours spread over many
years, this translation would not have been under
taken.
T. W. RHYS DAVIDS.
3, BRICK COUKT, TEMPLE.
1878.
t,
Ixxx

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
The Nidanakatha
[vv. 1-11] The Apannaka and other Births, which
intimesgone bywere recounted on various occasions
by the great illustrious Sage, and in which during a
long period our Teacher and Leader, desirous of the
salvation of mankind, fulfilled the vast conditions of
Buddhahood,1 were all collected together and added
to the canon of Scripture by those who made the
recension of the Scriptures, and rehearsed by them
underthe name of THE JATAKA. Having bowed at
the feet of the Great Sage, the lord of the world, by
whom in innumerable existences 2 boundless benefits
were conferred upon mankind, and having paid
reverence to the Doctrine, and ascribed honourto the
Order, the receptacle of all honour ; and having
removedalldangersbythe efficacyofthatmeritorious
act of veneration and honour referring to the Three
Gems, I proceed to recite a Commentary upon this
Jataka, illustrating as it does the infinite efficacy of
the actions of great men a commentary based upon
the method of exposition current among the inmates
of the Great Monastery. And I do so at the personal
request of the elder Atthadassin, who lives apart
from the world and ever dwells with his fraternity,
and who desires the perpetuation of this chronicle of
Buddha ; and likewise of Buddhamitta the tranquil
1 Lit. perfected the vast constituents of Buddhahood, the
Paramitas are meant. The Apannaka is the title of the first
Jataka.
2 Lit. inthousandsof kotis ofbirths (akotiistenmillions).

82 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
and wise, sprung from the race of Mahimsasaka,
skilled in the canons of interpretation ; and more
over of the monk Buddhadeva of clear intellect.
May all good men lend me their favourable attention
while I speak ! l
Inasmuch as this comment on the Jataka, if it be
expounded after setting forth the three Epochs, the
distant, the intermediate, and proximate, will be
clearly understood by those who hear it because they
will have understood it from the beginning, therefore
I will expound it after setting forth the three Epochs.
Accordingly from the very outset it will be well to
determine the limits of these Epochs. Now the
narrative of the Bodhisatta s existence, from the
timethat atthefeet ofDipankarahe formed aresolu
tion to become a Buddha to his rebirth in the Tusita
heaven after leaving his life as Vessantara, is called
the Distant Epoch. From his leaving the Tusita
heaven to his attainment of omniscience on the
Bo-tree seat, the narrative is called the Intermediate
Epoch. And the Proximate Epoch is to be found in
the various places in which he sojourned (during his
ministry on earth). The following is
I: THE DISTANT EPOCH
Dureniddna
Tradition tells us that four asankheyyas 2 and a
hundred thousand cycles ago there was a city called
Amaravati. In this city there dwelt a brahmin
named Sumedha, ofgoodfamily on both sides, onthe
1 Theabovelinesinthe originalarein verse. Ihavefound it
impossible to follow the arrangement of the stanzas, owing to
theextremeinvolutionofthestyle.
2Anasankheyyaisaperiodofvastduration,lit.anincalculable.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
83
father s and the mothers side, of pure conception for
seven generations back, by birth unreproached and
respected, a man comely, well-favoured and amiable,
and endowed with remarkable beauty. He followed
his brahminicalstudies without engaginginanyother
pursuit. His parents died while he was still young.
A minister of state, who acted as steward of his
property, bringing forth the roll-book of his estate,
threw openthe stores filled withgold and silver, gems
and pearls, andothervaluables, and said : &quot; So much,
young man, belonged to your mother, so much to
your father, so muchto your grandparents and great-
grandparents,&quot; and pointing out to him the property
inherited through seven generations, he bade him
guard it carefully. The wise Sumedha thought to
himself : &quot; After amassing allthis wealth my parents
and ancestors when they went to another world took
notafarthing withthem. Canit be rightthatI should
make it an object to take my wealth with me when I
go ? &quot; And informing the king of his intention, he
caused proclamation to be made x in the city, gave
largess to the people, and embraced the ascetic life
of a hermit.
To make this matter clear the Story of Sumedha--
must hereberelated. This story, thoughgiveninfull
in the Buddhavamsa,2 from its being in a metrical
form, is not very easyto understand. I willtherefore
relate it with sentences at intervals explaining the
metrical construction.
1 2 A Lit p . o &q e uot; m ca b u e s l e o d ng t i h n e g d t r o u t m h s e t S o ut b t e a- b P ea i t t en a .& k q a uo , t; edited byRd. Morris,
PaliTextSoc., 1882. Ed.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
84:
Four asankheyyas and a hundred thousand cycles
ago there was a city called Amaravati or Amara,
resounding with the ten city cries, concerning which
it is said in Buddhavamsa :
12. Fourasankheyyasandahundredthousand cyclesago
A citytherewascalledAmara, beautifulandpleasant,
Resoundingwiththetencries,aboundinginfoodanddrink.1
Thenfollows a stanza ofBuddhavamsa enumerating
someofthesecries,
13. The trumpetingof elephants, the neighing ofhorses, (the
soundof)drums,trumpets,andchariots,
And viands and drinks were cried, with the invitation,
&quot;Eatanddrink.&quot;
It goes on to say :
14. A citysuppliedwitheveryrequisite,engagedineverysort
of industry,
Possessing the seven precious things, thronged with
dwellersofmanyraces
The abode of devout men, l ; ike the prosperous city ofthe
angels.
15. InthecityofAmaravatidweltabrahminnamedSumedha,
Whosehoardwas manytens of millions, blestwith much
wealthandstore
;
16. Studious,knowingtheMantras,versedinthethreeVedas,
Master of the science of divination and of the traditions
and observances ofhis caste.
Now one day the wise Sumedha, having retired to
the splendid upper apartment of his house, seated
himself cross-legged, and fell a-thinking. &quot; Oh !
wise man,2 grievous is rebirth in a new existence, and
the dissolution of the body in each successive place
where we arereborn. I am subjectto birth, to decay,
to disease, to death it is right, being such, that I
1 Hereaglossinthetextenumeratesthewholetencries.
a TheBodhisattaisfrequently calledpandita, e.g. sasapantfito
(Jat. No. 316),Ramapcwdito(DasarathaJat.No. 461).

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 85
should strive to attain the cool great deathless Nir
vana,the tranquil,the freefrom birth and decay, and
sickness, and grief and joy ; surely there must be a
road that leads to Nirvana and releases man from
becoming.&quot; Accordingly it is said :
17. Seatedinseclusion,Ithenthoughtasfollows:
Grievousisrebirthandthebreakingupofthebody.
18. Iam subjecttobirth,todecay,todisease,
ThereforewillIseekNirvana,undecaying,undyinghaven.
19. Letmeleavethisperishablebody,thispestilentcongrega
tionofvapours,
And departwithoutdesiresandwithoutwants.
20. There is,theremustbearoad,itcannotbutbe
:
I will seek this road, that I may obtain release from
becoming.1
Further he reasoned thus : &quot; For as in this world
there is pleasure as the correlative of pain, so where
there is becoming there must be its opposite, the
cessation of becoming and as where there is heat
;
there is also cold which neutralizes it, so there must
be a Nirvana 2 that extinguishes (the fires of) lust
andthe otherpassions
;
and asin oppositionto a bad
and evil condition there is a good and blameless one,
so where there is evil birth there must also be a
Nirvana, calledthebirthless, becauseitputs anendto
all that is called rebirth.&quot; Therefore it is said :
21. Aswherethereissufferingthereisalsobliss,
Sowherethereisbecomingwemustlookfornon-becoming.
22. Andaswherethereisheatthereisalsocold,
Sowherethereisthethreefoldfireofpassionextinguishing
mustbe sought,
23. Andascoexistentwithevilthereisalsogood,
Evensowherethereisbirth3thecessationofbirth should
be sought.
1 Bdhv., p. 7.
2 Lit. &quot;Extinguishing? .
3 Mr. Fausbollpoints out to me that in tividhaggiand jati we
have Vedic abbreviations.

86 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Again lie reasoned thus : &quot; Just as a man who has
falleninto aheapoffilth, ifhe beholds afar off a great
pond covered with lotuses of five colours, ought to
seek that pond, saying : fBy what way shall I arrive
there ? ; but if he does not seek it the fault is not
that of the pond even so where there is the lake of
;
the great deathless Nirvana for the washing of the
defilement of sin, if it is not sought it is not the fault
of the lake. And just as a man who is surrounded by
robbers, if when there is a way of escape he does not
flyitisnotthe fault ofthe waybutofthe man
;
even
so when there is a blessed road leading to Nirvana
for the man who is encompassed and held fast by sin,
its notbeing soughtis not the fault oftheroad but of
the person. And as a man who is oppressed with
sickness, there being a physician who can heal his
disease, if he does not get cured by going to the phy
sician that is no fault of the physician ; even so if a
man who is oppressed by the disease of sin seeks not
a spiritual guide who is at hand and knows the road
whichputsanendtosin, thefaultlieswithhim andnot
withthesin-destroyingteacher.&quot; Thereforeitissaid
:
24. Asa manfallenamongfilth, beholdingabrimminglake,
Ifheseeknotthatlakethefaultisnotinthelake
;
25. So when there exists a lake of Nirvana that washesthe
stainsofsin,
Ifamanseeknotthatlake, thefaultisnotinthelake of
Nirvana.
26. Asamanbesetwithfoes,therebeingawayofescape,
27. S If o h w e h f e l n ee t n h o e t re aw i a s y a , w t a he y f o a f ul b t li i s s s, no if t a wi m t a h n th b e es r e o t ad wi ; thsin
Seeknotthatroad,thefaultisnotinthewayofbliss.
28. Andasonewhoisdiseased,therebeingaphysicianathand,
Ifhe bid him not heal the disease, thefault is notinthe
healer
29. Soifamanw : hoissickandoppressedwiththediseaseofsin
Seeknotthespiritualteacher,thefaultisnotintheteacher.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 87
And again he argued : &quot;As a man fond of gay
clothing, throwingoffa corpse boundto hisshoulders,
goes away rejoicing, so must I, throwing off this
perishable body, and freed from all care, enter the
city of Nirvana. And as men and women depositing
filth on a dungheap do not gather it in the fold or
skirtoftheirgarments, but loathingit, throwitaway,
feeling no desire for it ; so shall I also cast off this
perishable body without regret, and enter the
deathless city of Nirvana. And as seamen abandon
without regret an unseaworthy ship and escape, so
will I also, leaving this body, which distils corruption
from its nine festering apertures, enter without
regret the city of Nirvana. And as a man carrying
various sorts of jewels and going on the same road
with a band ofrobbers, out offear of losinghis jewels
withdraws from them and gains a safe road ; even
so this impure body is like a jewel-plundering robber,
if I set my affections thereon the jewel of the good
doctrine of the sublime path of holiness will be lost
to me, therefore ought I to enter the city of Nirvana,
forsaking this robber-like body.&quot; Therefore it is
said
:
30. As a man might with loathing shake off a corpse bound
uponhisshoulders,
31. E A v n e d n d s e o pa le r t t, me se d c e u p re a , rt i , n r d e e g p r e e n t d t e i n n t g , no m t a h s i t n e g r ,w o a f n h t i i m n s g el n f ot ; hing.
Leavingthisperishablebody, thiscollection ofmanyfoul
vapours.
32. Andasmenandwomen depositfilthupon adungheap,
And departregrettingnothing, wantingnothing,
33. SowillIdepart,leavingthisbodyfilledwithfoulvapours,
Asoneleavesacesspoolafterdepositingordurethere.
34. Andastheownersforsaketherottenbarkthatisshattered
andleaking,
And departwithoutregretorlonging,

88 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
35. So shall I go, leaving this body with its nine apertures
everrunning,
Asitsownersdesertthebrokenship.
36. Andasaman carryingwares,walkingwithrobbers,
Seeingdangeroflosinghiswares, partscompanywiththe
robbersandgetshimgone,
37. Evensoisthisbodylikeamightyrobber,
LeavingitIwilldepartthroughfearoflosinggood.
Having thus in nine similes pondered upon the
advantagesconnectedwithretirementfromtheworld,
the wise Sumedha gave away at his own house, as
aforesaid,
animmensehoardoftreasuretotheindigent
and wayfarers and sufferers, and kept open house.
And renouncing all pleasures, both material and
sensual, departing fromthe cityofAmara, awayfrom
the worldin Himavanta he made himself a hermitage
near the mountain called Dhammaka, and built a
hut and a cloister free from the five defects which are
hindrances (to meditation). And with a view to
obtainthepowerreckonedas supernormalknowledge,
which is characterized by the eight casual qualities
described inthe words beginning &quot; With a mind thus
tranquillized &quot;/ he embraced in that hermitage the
ascetic life of a Kishi, casting off the cloak with its
nine disadvantages, and wearing the garment of
bark with its twelve advantages. And when he had
thus given up the world, forsaking this hut, crowded
with eight drawbacks, he repaired to the foot of a
tree with its ten advantages, and rejecting all sorts
of grain lived constantly upon wild fruits. And
1 Evam samdhite citte parisuddhe.pariyoddteanangane vigatu-
pakkilese mudubhute kammaniye thite dnejjappatte ndnadas-
sancLya cittarii abhimharati (Samannaphala Sutta, see Digha
Nikdya, i, 76 ; DialoguesoftheBuddha,i,86).

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 89
strenuously exerting himself both in sitting and in
standing andinwalking, withina weekhebecamethe
possessor of the eight attainments, and of the five
supernormal knowledges ; and so, in accordance with
his prayer, he attained the might of supernormal
knowledge. Therefore it is said :
38. Having pondered thus I gave manythousand millions of
wealth
Torichandpoor, andmademywaytoHimavanta..
39. NotfarfromHimavantaisthemountaincalledDhammaka,
Here I made an excellent hermitage, and built with care
aleafyhut.
40. ThereIbuiltmeacloister,freefromfivedefects,
Possessed of the eight good qualities, and attained the
strength ofthesupernormalknowledges.
41. ThenIthrewoffthecloakpossessedoftheninefaults,
And put on the raiment of bark possessed of the twelve
advantages.
42. Ileftthehut, crowdedwiththeeightdrawbacks,
Andwenttothetree-footpossessedoftenadvantages.1
43. WhollydidIrejectthegrainthatissownandplanted,
And partookoftheconstantfruitsoftheearth,possessed
ofmanyadvantages.
44. Then I strenuously strove, in sitting, in standing, and in
walking,
And within seven days attained the might of the know-
Now while the hermit Sumedha, having thus
attained the strength of supernormal knowledge, was
living in the bliss of the (eight) attainments, the
Teacher Dipankara appeared in the world. At the
moment of his conception, of his birth, of his attain
ment of Buddhahood, of his preaching his first dis
course, the whole universe of ten thousand worlds
trembled, shook and quaked, andgave forth amighty
1 Mr. Fausboll writes to me that gune for guriehi must be
viewed as an old Pali form originating in the Sanskritgunaih.
2 Here follow four pages of later commentary or gloss, which
I leaveuntranslated.

90 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
sound, and the thirty-two marks showed themselves.
But the hermit Sumedha, living in the bliss of the
attainments, neither heard that sound nor beheld
those signs. Therefore it is said :
45. ThuswhenIhadattainedtheconsummation, whileI was
subjectedtotheteaching,
The Conqueror named Dipankara, chief of the universe,
appeared.
46. At his conception, at his birth,at hisBuddhahood, athis
preaching,
I sawnot the four signs, plunged in the blissfultrance of
meditation.
At that time Dipankara Buddha, accompanied by
a hundred thousand saints, wandering his way from
place to place, reached the city of Ramma, and took
uphis residenceinthe greatmonastery of Sudassana.
And the dwellers ofthe city of Ramma heard it said :
&quot; Dipankara,lordofascetics, havingattainedsupreme
Buddhaship, and set rolling the wheel ofthe excellent
Norm, wandering his way from place to place, has
come to the town of Ramma, and dwells at the great
monastery of Sudassana.&quot; And taking with them
ghee and butter and other medicinal requisites and
clothes and raiment, and bearing perfumes and
garlands and other offerings in their hands, their
minds bent towards the Buddha, the Doctrine, and
theOrder,inclining towardsthem,hanginguponthem,
they approached the Teacher, and worshipped him,
and presenting the perfumes and other offerings, sat
down on one side. And having heard his preaching
of the Doctrine, and invited him for the next day,
they rose from their seats and departed. And on the
next day, having prepared alms-giving for the poor,
and having decked out the town, they repaired the

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 91
road by which the Buddha was to come, throwing
earth in the places that were worn away by water,
and thereby levelling the surface, and scattering sand
that looked like strips of silver. And they sprinkled
fried paddy and flowers, and raised aloft flags and
banners, of many-coloured cloths, and set up banana
arches and rows of brimming jars. Then the hermit
Sumedha, ascending from his hermitage, and pro
ceeding through the air till he was above those men,
and beholding the joyous multitude, exclaimed :
&quot; What can be the reason ? &quot; and alighting stood on
one side and questioned the people : &quot; Tell me, why
areyou adorningthisroad ? &quot; Thereforeitis said :
47. In the region of the border districts, having invited the
Buddha,
With joyfulheartstheyareclearingtheroadbywhichhe
shouldcome.
48. AndIat thattimeleavingmyhermitage,
Rustlingmybarkentunic,departedthroughtheair,
49. And seeinganexcitedmultitudejoyousanddelighted,
DescendingfromtheairIstraightwayaskedthemen,
50. Thepeopleisexcited, joyous, and happy,
Forwhom is theroadbeing cleared, the path, the way of
his coming ?
And the men replied : &quot; Venerable Sumedha, dost
thou notknow ? Dipankara Buddha, havingattained
supreme knowledge, and set rolling the wheel of the
glorious Doctrine, travelling from place to place, has
reached our town, and dwells at the great monastery
Sudassana we have invited the Blessed One, and
;
are making ready for the blessed Buddha the road
by which he is to come. And the hermit Sumedha
thought : &quot; The very sound of the word Buddha is
rarely met with in the world, much more the actual
appearance of a Buddha
;
it behoves me to jointhese

92 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
men in clearing the road.&quot; He said therefore to the
men : &quot; If.you are clearingthis road forthe Buddha,
assignto me a piece ofground, I willclearthe ground
in company with you.&quot; They consented, saying :
&quot;It is well &quot; ; and perceiving the hermit Sumedha
to be possessed of supernatural power, they fixed
upon a swampy piece of ground, and assigned it to
him, saying : &quot; Dothoupreparethis spot.&quot; Sumedha,
his heart filled with joy of which the Buddha was the
cause,thoughtwithin himself
: &quot;I
amabletoprepare
this piece of ground by supernatural power, but if so
prepared it will give me no satisfaction ; this day it
behoves meto perform menial duties &quot; ; and fetching
earthhethrewit uponthe
spot.
But ere the ground could be cleared by him with
a train of a hundred thousand miracle-working saints
endowed with the six supernormal knowledges, while
devas offered celestial wreaths and perfumes, while
celestialhymnsrangforth, andmen paidtheirhomage
with earthly perfumes arid with flowers and other
offerings, Dlpankara endowed with the ten Forces,
with all a Buddha s transcendant majesty, like a lion
rousing himself to seek his prey on the Vermilion
plain, came down into the road all decked and made
ready for him. Then the hermit Sumedha as the
Buddha with unblenching eyes approached along the
road prepared for him, beholding that form endowed
withtheperfectionofbeauty, adornedwiththe
thirty-
twomarksofasuper-man, andmarkedwiththeeighty
minorbeauties, attendedbyahaloofafathom sdepth
and sending forth in streams the six-hued Buddha-
rays, linked in pairs ofdifferent colours, and wreathed

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 93
likethevaried lightningsthatflashinthegem-studded
vault of heaven exclaimed : &quot; This day it behoves
me to make sacrifice of my life for the Buddha
:
let not theBlessed onewalk in the mire nay,lethim
advance with his four hundred thousand saints
trampling on my body as if walking upon a bridge of
jewelledplanks,thisdeedwilllongbeformygoodand
my happiness.&quot; So saying, he loosed his hair, and
spreading in the sooty mire his hermit s skin mantle,
roll of matted hair and garment of bark, he lay down
inthe mirelikeabridgeofjewelledplanks. Therefore
itis said :
61. Questioned byme theyreplied, An incomparable Buddha
is bornintothe world,
TheConquerornamedDipankara, lord ofthe universe,
For him the road is cleared, the way, the path of his
coming.
52. WhenIheardthenameofBuddha joysprangupforthwith
withinme,
Repeating,aBuddha,aBuddha!Igaveutterancetomyjoy.
63. StandingthereIpondered,joyfulandexcited,
HereIwillsowtheseed,maythehappymomentnotpass
away!
54. Ifyou cleara pathforthe Buddha, assignto meaplace,
Ialsowillcleartheroad,theway,thepathofhiscoming.
55. Thentheygavemeapieceofgroundtoclearthepathway
Then repeatingwithinme,aBuddha,aBuddha ! Icleared ;
theroad.
56. Buteremyportionwascleared,Dipankarathegreatsage,
The Conqueror, entered the road with four hundred
thousandsaintslikehimself,
Possessed ofthe sixsuperknowledges, pure from all taint
ofsin.
67. On everysidemenrisetoreceivehim,manydrumssound,
Menand spiritsoverjoyed sendforth theirapplause.
58. Devaslookuponmen,menupondevas,
And both with clasped hands upraised approach &quot;him
whohadthuscome.&quot;
69. Devaswithdeva-music, menwithearthlymusic,
Bothsendingforththeirstrainsapproach &quot;him whohad
thuscome.&quot;

94 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
60. Devasfloatinginthe airsprinkle downinalldirections
Erythrinaflowersofdeva-world,lotusesandcoralflowers.
61. Menstandingonthegroundthrowupwardsinalldirections
ChampacandSalalaflowers,CadambaandfragrantMesua,
Punnaga,andKetaka.
62. ThenIloosedmyhair, andspreadinginthemire
Barkrobe andmantle ofskin, layproneuponmyface.
63. Letthe Buddha advancewith hisdisciples,treadingupon
me
Let him; not tread in the mire, it will be for my blessing.
And as he lay in the mire, again beholding the
Buddha-majesty of Dipankara Buddha with his
unblenching gaze, he thought as follows : &quot; Were
I willing, I could enterthe city of Ramma as a novice
in the priesthood, after having destroyed all human
passions ; butwhyshouldI disguisemyself ltoattain
Nirvana after the destruction of human passion ?
Let me rather, like Dipankara, having risen to the
supreme knowledge of the Doctrine, enable mankind
to enter the Ship of the Doctrine, and so carry them
across the Ocean of Going-on, and when this is done
afterwards attain Nirvana ; this indeed it is right
thatIshould
do.&quot;
Then havingenumeratedtheeight
conditions (necessary to the attainment of Buddha-
hood), and having made the resolution to become
Buddha, he laid himself down. Therefore it is said :
1 ThefollowingiswhatItaketobethemeaningofthispassage:
&quot;IfIchoseIcouldatonceenterthe BuddhistOrder,andbythe
practice of ecstatic meditation ( Jhana) free myself from human
passion,and becomeanArahantorsaint. Ishouldthenatdeath
at once attain Nirvana and cease to be reborn. But this would
be a selfish course to pursue, for thus I should benefit myself
only. Why should I thus slip unobserved and in the humble
garbofamonkintoNirvana ?Nay,letmeratherqualifymyselfto
become a Buddha, and so save others as well as myself.&quot; This
isthe great ACT OF RENUNCIATION by whichthe Bodhisattva,
whenNirvanawas within hisgrasp, preferred to endure ages of
heroic trials in the exercise of the Paramitas, that he might be
enabled to become a Buddha, and so redeem mankind. See
D AlwissIntroductionto KachchayanasGrammar, p. vi.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 95
64. AsIlayuponthegroundthiswasthethoughtofmyheart,
If I wished it I might this day destroy within me all
human
passions.
65. But why should I in disguise arrive at the knowledge of
the Truth?
IwillattainomniscienceandbecomeaBuddha,and(save)
menanddevas.
66. WhyshouldIcrosstheoceanresolutebutalone ?
Iwillattainomniscience, and enable menand devas
tocross.
67. Bythisresolutionofmine, I amanofresolution
Willattain omniscience, andsave manyfolk.
68. Cuttingoffthestream oftransmigration,annihilating the
threeforms ofrebirth,
EmbarkingintheshipoftheNorm,Iwillcarryacrosswith
me men and devas.1
And the blessed Dipankara having reached the
spot stood close bythe hermit Sumedha s head. And
openinghis eyes possessed ofthefive kinds ofgraceas
oneopensajewelledwindow,and beholdingthehermit
Sumedha lying in the mire, thought to himself :
&quot; This hermit who lies here has formed the resolution
to be a Buddha ; will his wish be fulfilled or not ? &quot;
And
casting
forwardhisprescientgazeintothefuture,
and considering, he perceived that four asankheyyas
and a hundred thousand cycles from that time he
wouldbecomea Buddha named Gotama. Andstand
ing there in the midst of the assembly he delivered
this prophecy, &quot; See ye this very austere ascetic
lying in the rnire ? &quot; &quot; Yes, lord,&quot; they answered.
&quot; This man lies here having made the resolution to
become a Buddha, his wish will be answered at the
;
end of four asankheyyas and a hundred thousand
cycleshencehewillbecome a Buddhanamed Gotama,
and in that birth the city Kapilavatthu will be his
1 What follows from yasma to nipajji belongs to a latercom
mentary. I resume the translation with p. 15, 1. 11 of the text.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
96
residence, queen Maya will be his mother, king
Suddhodana his father, his chief disciple will be the
thera Upatissa, his second disciple the thera Kolita,
the Buddha sservitor willbe Ananda,his chieffemale
disciple the nun Khema, the second the nun Uppala-
vanna. When he attains to years of ripe knowledge,
having retired from the world and made the great
exertion, having received at the foot of a banyan-tree
amealofricemilk, and partakenofitbythebanks of
the Neranjara, having ascended the bo-tree seat, he
will, atthe foot of a fig-tree, attain Supreme Buddha-
hood. Therefore it is said :
70. Dipankara,knowerofallworlds,receiverofofferings,
Standing by that which pillowed my head, spoke these
words
:
71. Seeyethisveryausterehermitwithhismattedhair,
Countlessageshencehewillbe aBuddhainthisworld.
72. Lo, &quot;he who has thus come&quot; departing from pleasant
Kapila,
Having made the great effort, performed all manner of
austerities.
73. Having sat at the foot of the Ajapala tree, and there
receivedricepottage,
ShallapproachtheNeranjarariver.
74. Having received the rice pottage on the banks of the
Neranjara, the Conqueror
Shallcome byafairroad preparedfor him to thefoot of
the Bodhi-tree.
75. Then, unrivalled and glorious, reverentially saluting the
Bodhi-seat,
Atthefootofafig-treeheshallbeawakened.1
76. ThemotherthatbearshimshallbecalledMaya,
HisfatherwillbeSuddhodana,hehimselfwillbeGotama.
77. HischiefdiscipleswillbeUpatissaandKolita,
Mensaneandimmune, voidof passion, calm-mindedand
intent.
78. TheservitorAnandawillattenduponthe Conqueror,
KhemaandUppalavannawillbehischiefwomen
disciples,
79. Womensaneand immune, void of passion, calm-minded
andintent,
The Bodhi-tree ofthis Buddhais known astheAssattha.
1 Bujjhissati.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 97
The hermit Sumedha, exclaiming : &quot; My wish, it
seems, will be accomplished was filled with happi
&quot;,
ness. Themultitudes,hearingthewordsofDipankara
Buddha, were joyous and delighted, exclaiming :
&quot; The hermit Sumedha, it seems, is a Buddha-seed, a
Buddha-shoot ! &quot; For thus they thought : &quot; As a
man fording a river, if he is unable to cross to the
ford opposite him, crosses to a ford lower down the
stream, even so we, if under the dispensation of
Dipankara Buddha we fail to attain the Paths and
theirfruition, yet whenthoushaltbecomeBuddhawe
shall be enabled in thy presence to make the paths
and their fruition our own&quot; and so they recorded
their wish (forfuture sanctification). And Dipankara
BuddhaalsohavingpraisedtheBodhisatta, andmade
an offering to him of eight handfuls of flowers,
reverentially saluted him and departed. And the
Arahants also, four hundred thousand in numbers
having made offerings to the Bodhisatta of perfume,
and garlands, reverentially saluted him and departed.
And the devas and men having made the same
offerings, and bowed down to him, went their way.
And the Bodhisatta, when all had retired, rising
from his seat and exclaiming : I will study the
Perfections sat himself down cross-legged ona heap
&quot;,
offlowers. And asthe Bodhisatta satthus, the devas
in all the ten thousand worlds assembling shouted
applause. &quot; Venerable hermit Sumedha they said,
&quot;,
&quot; all the omen& which have manifested themselves
when former Bodhisattas seated themselves cross-
legged, saying : * We will study the Perfections
allthesethisdayhaveappeared
: assuredly
thoushalt
become Buddha. This we know to whom these
:

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
98
omens appear, he surely will become Buddha ; do
thou make a strenuous effort and exert
thyself&quot;.
With these words they lauded the Bodhisatta with
varied praises. Therefore it is said :
80. HearingthesewordsoftheincomparableSage,
Devas and men delighted,exclaimed,Thisis aBuddha-
81. A gr s e e a e t d- c s l e a e m d o li u n r g a ! rises, men and devas in ten thousand
worlds
Clap their hands, and laugh, and make obeisance with
claspedhands.
82 . c Ye S t ho i u n l t d i w me e t fa o il c , om t e he w y e sa s y h , all i s n t t a h n i d sB be u f d o d re ha hi s m. dispensation,
83. Asmen crossing ariver, iftheyfailto reachthe opposite
ford,
Gainingthelowerfordcrossthegreatriver,
84. Evensowe all,if welosethisBuddha,
Intimetocomeshallstandbeforehim.&quot;
85. Theworld-knowingDIpankara,thereceiverofofferings,
Havingcelebratedmyaction, wenthisway.1
86. Allhisdisciples of the Buddhathatwerepresentsaluted
mewithreverence,
Men, Nagas, and Gandhabbas bowed down to me and
departed.
87. WhentheLordoftheworldwithhisfollowinghadpassed
beyondmysight,
Then glad, withgladsomeheart, Iroseupfrommyseat.
88. HappyIam byhappiness,gladwithagreatgladness;
FloodedwithrapturethenIseatedmyselfcross-legged.
89. AndevenasthusIsatIthoughtwithinmyself,
I amtrained inJhana, Ihave masteredthe supernormal
knowledges.
90. Inathousandworldstherearenosagesthatrivalme,
UnrivalledinmiraculouspowersIhavereachedthisbliss.
91. When thus they beheld me sitting, 2 the dwellers of ten
thousandworlds
Raised a mightyshout : Surely thou shalt be a Buddha !
92. The omens3 beheld in former ages when Bodhisatta sat
cross-legged,
Thesamearebeheldthisday.
1 Lit.,&quot;raisedhisrightfoot(todepart).&quot;
2 Lit., &quot;atmy sittingcross-legged.&quot;
3 Mr. Fausbollwrites thatyarn is a mistake of the copyist for
yd=ydni.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 99
93. Coldisdispelledandheatceases,
This day these things are seen, verily them shalt be
Buddha.
94.
Athousandworldsarestilledandsilent.
Soaretheyseento-day, verilythoushaltbe Buddha.
95. Themightywindsblownot,theriversceasetoflow,
Thesethingsareseento-day, verilythoushaltbeBuddha.
96. Allflowersblossomonlandandsea.
This day they all have bloomed, verily thou shalt be
Buddha.
97. Allcreepers andtreesareladenwithfruit,
Thisdaytheyallbearfruit, verilythoushaltbeBuddha.
98. Gemssparkleinearthandsky,
Thisdayallgemsdo
glitter,
verilythoushaltbeBuddha.
99. Musicearthlyanddeva-music,
Both these to-day send forth their strains verily thou
shaltbeBuddha.
100. Flowers of every hue rain down from the sky,
Thisdaytheyareseen verilythoushaltbeBuddha.
101. The mighty ocean bends itself, ten thousand worlds are
shaken,
This daythey both send up theirroar verily thou shalt
beBuddha.
102. Inhellthefiresoftenthousandworldsdieout,
This day these fires are quenched verily thou shalt be
Buddha.
103. Uncloudedisthesunandallthestarsareseen,
Thesethingsareseento-day verilythoushaltbeBuddha.
104. Though no rain fell in water that burst forth from the
earth,
This day that bursts forth from the earth verily thou
shaltbeBuddha.
105. The constellations are all aglow, and the lunar mansions
inthevaultofheaven,
Visakhaisinconjunctionwiththemoon verilythoushalt
beBuddha.
106. Those creaturesthatdwellinholesandcavesdeparteach
fromhislair,
This day these lairs are forsaken verily thou shalt be
Buddha.
107. Thereis nodiscontent among mortals, butthey are filled
with contentment,
Thisdayallare content verilythou shalt be Buddha.
108. Thendiseasesaredispelled and hunger ceases,
Thisdaythesethingsareseen verilythoushaltbeBuddha
109. ThenLustwastesaway, HateandDullnessperish,
This day all these are dispelled verily thou shalt Le
Buddha.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
100
110. N B o y d th a i n s g s e i r gn th w e e n k c n o o m w es it nea v r er ; il t y hi t s h d o a u y sh t a h l i t s b th e i c n o g m i e s B se u e d n d , ha.
111. N B o y d t u hi s s tf s l i i g e n su w p e;k t n h o is w d i a t, y v t e h r i i s ly th t i h n o g u is s s h e a e l n t , be Buddha.
112. All noisome odours flee away, divine fragrance breathes
around,
Such fragrance breathes this day verily thou shalt be
Buddha.
113. Allthe devas are manifested,the Formlessonlyexcepted,
Thisdaytheyallareseen verilythoushaltbe Buddha.
114. Allthehells becomevisible,
These allare seenthisday verilythou shaltbeBuddha.
115. Thenwalls,anddoors,androcksarenoimpediment,
This day they have melted into space verily thou shalt
be Buddha.
116. Atthatmomentdeathandbirthdonottakeplace,
This day these things are seen verily thou ehalt be
Buddha.
117. Dothoumakeastrenuouseffort,holdnotback,goforward,
Thisthingwe know verilythou shalt be Buddha.
And the Bodhisatta, having heard the words of
Dlpankara Buddha and of the devas in ten thousand
worlds filled with abounding vigour, thought thus
within himself : &quot; The Buddhas are beings whose
word cannot fail there is no deviation from truth
;
in their speech. For as the fall of a clod throwninto
the air, as the death of a mortal, as the sunrise at
dawn, asalionsroaring whenheleaveshislair, asthe
delivery of a woman with child, as all these things
aresureandcertain evensothewordoftheBuddhas
is sure and cannot fail, verily I shall become a
Buddha.&quot; Thereforeitissaid :
118. Having heard the words of Buddha and of the devas of
tenthousandworlds,
Glad,joyous,delighted,Ithenthoughtthuswithinmyself;
119. The Buddhas speak not doubtful words, the Conquerors
speaknotvainwords,
There is no falsehood in the Buddhas verily I shall
becomeaBuddha.
120. Asaclodcastintotheairdothsurelyfalltothe ground,
Sothewordoftheglorious Buddhasissureandeverlasting.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
101
121. Asthedeathofallmortalsigsureandconstant,
122. A S s ot t h h e e w r o is r i d ng of of th t e h g e l s or u i n ou i s s B ce u r d t d ai h n as wh is e s n ur n e ig a h n t d h e a v s er f l a a d s e ti d n , g.
123. A S s ot t h h e e w r o o r a d ri o n f g t o h f e a gl l o i r o i n ou w s h B o ud h d a h s a l s ef i t s h s i u s re d a e n n d is ev c e e r r l t a a s i t n i , ng.
124. A S s ot t h h e e w d o el r i d ve o r f y th o e f g w l o or m i e o n us w B i u t d h d c h h a i s ld is is su c r e e rt a a n in d , everlasting.
SothewordofthegloriousBuddhasissureand
everlasting.
And having thus made the resolution : &quot;I shall
surely become Buddha &quot;, with a viewto considering
the conditions that constitute a Buddha, exclaiming :
&quot; Where are the conditions that make the Buddha,
are they found above or below, in the principle or
the minor directions ? &quot; studying successively the
principles of allthings, and beholdingthe first Perfec
tion of Giving, practised and followed by former
Bodhisattas, he thus admonished himself &quot; Wise
:
Sumedha, from this time forth thou must fulfil
the perfection of Giving ; for as a water- jar over
turned discharges the water so that none remains,
and cannot recover it, even so if thou, indifferent to
wealth and fame, and wife and child, and goods great
and small, give away to all who come and ask every
thingthattheyrequiretillnoughtremains, thoushalt
seatthyselfatthefootofthetreeofBodhiandbecome
aBuddha.&quot; Withthesewordshe strenuouslyresolved
to attain the first perfection of Giving. Therefore
it is said :
125. Come, I will search the Buddha-making conditions, this
way and that,
Above and below, in all the ten directions, as far as the
principles ofthings extend.
126. Then,asI mademysearch, I beheldthefirst the Giving-
perfection.
127. D Th o e t h h i o g u h s r t o r a e d nu f o o u l s l l o y we t d ak b i y ng f i o t r u me p r on sa t g h e y s s , elfadvance
Tothisfirstperfection: Giving,ifthouwiltattainBuddha-
ship.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
102
128. As a brimming water-jar, overturned by any one,
Dischargesentirelyallthewater, andretainsnonewithin,
129. Even so, when thou seest anythat ask, great, small, and
middling,
Dothougiveawayallinalms,asthewater-jaroverthrown.
But considering further : &quot; There must be beside
this, other conditions that make a Buddha &quot;, and
beholding the second Perfection : Moral Practice, he
thought thus : &quot; wise Sumedha.from this dayforth
mayest thou fulfil the perfection of Morality ; for as
the yak ox, regardless of his life, guards his bushy
even so thou shalt become Buddha, if from this
tail,
day forward regardless of thy life thou keepest the
moral And he strenuously resolved to
precepts.&quot;
attain the second perfection, Moral Practice. There
fore it is said :
130. The conditionsofaBuddhacannotinsoothbesofew,
Iwillstudythe other conditions that bring Buddhaship
to maturity.
131. ThenstudyingIbeheldthesecondPerfectionofMorality
Practisedandfollowedbyformersages.
132. Thissecondonedothoustrenuouslyundertake,
AndreachtheperfectionMoralPracticeifthouwiltattain
Buddhahood.
133. And as the yak cow, when her tail has got in aught
entangled,
Thenandthereawaitsdeath, andwillnotinjurehertail,1
134. So alsodothou, havingfulfilledthe moralpreceptsinthe
fourstages,
EverguardtheSilaastheyakguardshertail.
But considering further : &quot; These cannot be the
only Buddha-making conditions&quot;, and beholdingthe
third Perfection of Self-abnegation, he thought thus :
&quot; wise Sumedha, mayest thou henceforth fulfil the
1 viz.,Isuppose,bydraggingitforciblyaway. Thismetaphor,
whichtousappearswantingindignity,isafavouriteonewiththe
Hindus. ThetailoftheYak orTibetanox (Bos Grunniens] is a
beautifulobject,andoneoftheinsigniaofHinduroyalty.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 103
perfection of Abnegation ; for as a man long the
denizen of a prison feels no love for it, but is dis
contented, and wishes to live there no more, even so
do thou, likening all births to a prison-house, dis
contented with all births, and anxious to get rid of
them, setthyfacetoward abnegation, thus shaltthou
become Buddha.&quot; And he strenuously made the
resolution to attain the third Perfection of Self-
abnegation. Therefore it is said :
135. Fortheconditionsthat makeaBuddhacannotbe sofew,
I willstudyothers, the conditionsthatbring Buddhaship
to maturity.
136. Studying then I beheld the thirdPerfection, Abnegation
Practisedandfollowed byformersages.
137. Thisthirdonedothoustrenuouslyundertake,
Andreachtheperfectionofabnegation,ifthouwiltattain
Buddhahood.
138. Asaman longadenizenofthehouseofbonds, oppressed
withsuffering,
Feels no pleasure therein, but rather longs for release,
139. Evensodothoulookuponallbirthsasprison-houses,
Setthyfacetowardsself-abnegation,toobtainreleasefrom
becoming.
But considering further : &quot; These cannot be the
only Buddha-making conditions and beholding the
&quot;,
fourth Perfection of Wisdom, he thought thus : &quot;
wise Sumedha, do thou from this day forth fulfil the
Perfection of Wisdom, avoiding no subject of know
ledge, great, small, or middling, 1 do thou approach all
wise menand ask them questions ; for as the mendi
cant friar on his begging rounds, avoiding none of the
families, great and small, that he frequents, 2 and
wandering for alms from place to place, speedily
1 Lit., &quot;notavoidinganythingamong thingsgreat, small,and
middling.&quot;
a Afterkindunderstand kularii, as willbe seenfrom v. 143.

104 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
gets foodtosupporthim,evensoshaltthou, approach
ingallwisemen, and asking them questions, becomea
Buddha.&quot; And he strenuously resolved to attain the
fourth Perfection, Wisdom. Therefore it is said :
140. Forthe conditionsthatmakea Buddha cannotbe sofew,
IwillstudytheotherconditionsthatbringBuddhashipto
maturity.
141. StudyingthenIbeheldthefourthPerfection : Wisdom
Practisedandfollowedbyformersages.
142. Thisfourthdothoustrenuouslyundertake,
And reach the Perfection of Wisdom, ifthouwiltattain
Buddhahood.
143. Andasamonkonhisbeggingroundsavoidsnofamilies,
Either small, or great, or middling, and so obtains sub
sistence,
144. Evensothou, constantlyquestioningwisemen,
And reachingtheWisdomPerfection,shallattainsupreme
Buddhaship.
But considering further : &quot; These cannot be the
only Buddha-making conditions and seeing the
&quot;,
fifth Perfection of Exertion, he thought thus : &quot;0
wise Sumedha, do thou from this day forth fulfil the
Perfection of Exertion. As the lion, the king of
beasts, inevery action* strenuously exerts himself, so
if thou in all rebirths and in all thy acts art
strenuous in exertion, and not a laggard, thou shalt
become a Buddha And he made a firmresolve to
&quot;.
attain the fifth Perfection, Exertion. Therefore it
is said :
145. FortheconditionsofaBuddhacannotbesofew,
Iwillstudytheotherconditionswhichbring Buddhaship
tomaturity.
146. StudyingthenI beheldthefifthPerfection: Exertion
Practisedandfollowedbyformersages.
147. This fifthdothoustrenuouslyundertake,
And reach the perfection: Exertion, if thou wilt attain
Buddhahood.
1 Lit.,inallpostures,walking,standing,etc.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 105
148. Asthelion,kingofbeasts, inlying, standing,andwalking
Isnolaggard, buteverofresoluteheart,
149. Evensodothoualsoineveryexistence strenuouslyexert
thyself,
And reaching the perfection, Exertion, thou shalt attain
thesupreme Buddhaship.
But considering further : &quot; These cannot be the
only Buddha-making conditions and beholding
&quot;,
the sixth Perfection of Patience, he thought to him
self : &quot; wise Sumedha, do thou fromthistime forth
fulfil the Perfection Patience ; be thou patient in
praise and in reproach. And as when men throw
things pure or foul upon the earth, the. earth does not
feel either desire or repulsion towards them, but
suffersthem, enduresthemandconsentstothem, even
sothou also, ifthouart patientinpraise and reproach
shalt become a Buddha.&quot; And he strenuously
resolved to attain the sixth perfection, Patience.
Therefore it is said :
150. FortheconditionsofaBuddhacannotbesofew,
I will study other conditions also which bring about
Buddhaship.
151. StudyingthenI beheldthesixth PerfectionofPatience
PractisedandfollowedbyformerBuddhas.
152. Havingstrenuouslytakenupontheethissixthperfection,
Then with unwavering mind thou shalt attain supreme
Buddhaship.
153. Andas the earth endures allthatisthrown upon it,
Whetherthingspureorimpure,andfeelsneitherangernor
pity,
154. Evensoenduringthepraisesandreproachesofallmen,
Going on to perfect Patience,thou shalt attain supreme
Buddhaship.
But further considering : &quot; These cannot be the
only conditions that make a Buddha&quot;, and beholding
the seventh Perfection of Truth, he thought thus
within himself : &quot;0 wise Sumedha, from this time

106 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
forth do thou fulfil the perfection of Truth though
;
thethunderboltdescenduponthyhead,dothounever
under the influence of desire or otherwise, utter a
conscious lie, for the sake of wealth or anything else.
And as the planet Venus at all seasons pursues her
own course,nor ever goes on anothercourseforsaking
her OWD, even so, if thou forsake not truth and utter
no thou shalt become Buddha And he
lie, &quot;.
strenuouslyturned his mindtotheseventhPerfection,
Truth. Therefore it is said :
155. ForthesearenotalltheconditionsofaBuddha,
I will study other conditions which bring about Buddha-
ship.
156. Studying thenIbeheldtheseventhPerfectionofTruth
PractisedandfollowedbyformerBuddhas.
157. Having strenuously taken upon thyself this seventh
perfection,
Then free from duplicity of speech thou shalt attain
supreme Buddhaship.
158. And as the Planet Venus, balanced in all her times and
seasons,
Intheworldofmenanddevas,departsnotfromherpath,
159. Evensodothounotdepartfromthecourseoftruth,1
Advancing to the perfection of Truth, thou shalt attain
supreme Buddhaship.
But further considering : &quot; These cannot be the
only conditions that make a Buddha&quot;, and beholding
the eighth Perfection of Resolution, he thought thus
withinhimself : &quot; wise Sumedha, dothoufromthis
time forth fulfil the perfection of Resolution ; what
soever thou resolvest be thou unshaken in that
resolution. For asa mountain, the wind beatingupon
itinalldirections,tremblesnot, moves not, butstands
inits place, even so thou, if unswervinginthy resolu
tion, shalt become Buddha.&quot; And he strenuously
1 Lit.,departfrom thycourse in the matteroftruthfulthings.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
107
resolved to attain the eighth Perfection, Resolution.
Therefore it is said :
160. ForthesearenotalltheconditionsofaBuddha,
IwillstudyotherconditionsthatbringaboutBuddhaship.
161. (StudyingthenIbeheldtheeighthPerfection : Resolution
PractisedandfollowedbyformerBuddhas.
162. Dothouresolutelytakeuponthyselfthiseighthperfection.
ThenthoubeingimmovableshaltattainsupremeBuddha-
ship.
163. Andastherockymountain,immovable,firmlybased,
Is unshaken bymanywinds, and standsinits own place,
164. Evensodothoualsoremaineverimmovableinresolution,
Advancing to the perfection of Resolution, thou shalt
attain supreme Buddhaship.
But further considering : &quot; These cannot be the
only conditions that make a Buddha&quot;, and beholding
the ninth Perfection of Good-will, he thought thus
withinhimself &quot; wise Sumedha, do thoufromthis
:
time forth fulfil the perfection of Good-will, mayest
thoubeofonemindtowardsfriends andfoes. And as
water fills with its refreshing coolness good men and
bad alike, 1 even so, ifthou art of one mind in friendly
feeling towards all mortals thou shalt become
Buddha.&quot; And he strenuously resolved to attain the
ninth perfection of Good-will. Therefore it is said :
165. ForthesearenotalltheconditionsofaBuddha,
IwillstudyotherconditionsthatbringaboutBuddhaship.
166. StudyingIbeheldtheninthPerfectionofGood-will
PractisedandfollowedbyformerBuddhas.
167. Dothou,takingresolutelyupon thyselfthisninth perfec
tion,
Becomeunrivalledinkindness,ifthouwiltbecomeBuddha.
168. And as waterfillswith its coolness
Goodmenandbadalike,andcarriesoffallimpurity,
169. Even so do thou look with friendship alike on the evil
and the good,
Advancingtothe perfection Good-will, thou shalt attain
supreme Buddhaship.
1 Lit., having made its coldness exactly alike for bad people
and good people, pervades them.

108 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
But further considering : &quot; These cannot be the
only conditions that make a Buddha&quot;, and beholding
the tenth Perfection : Equanimity, he thought thus
within himself : &quot;0 wise Sumedha, from this time
do thou fulfil the perfection of Equanimity, be thou
of equal mind in prosperity and adversity. And as
the earthisindifferentwhen thingspureorimpure are
cast upon it, even so, if thou art indifferent in
prosperity
and
adversity,
thoushaltbecomeBuddha.&quot;
And he strenuously resolved to attain the tenth
Perfection, Equanimity. Thereforeitissaid :
170. ForthesecannotbealltheconditionsofaBuddha,
IwillstudyotherconditionsthatbringaboutBuddhaship.
171. StudyingthenIbeheldthetenthPerfection : Equanimity
PractisedandfollowedbyformerBuddhas.
172. Ifthoutakeresolutelyuponthyselfthistenthperfection,
Becoming well-balanced and firm, thou shalt attain
supreme Buddhaship.
173. And as the earthisindifferent to pure and impure things
castuponher.
Tobothalike, andisfreefromangerandfavour,
174. Evensodothoueverbeevenly-balancedinjoyand grief,
Advancing to the perfection, Equanimity, thou ehalt
attainsupreme Buddhaship.
Then he thought : &quot; These are the only conditions
in this world that, bringing Buddhaship to perfection
and constituting a Buddha, have to be fufilled by
Bodhisattas beside the ten Perfections there are
;
no others. And these ten Perfections are neither in
the heavenabove norinthe earth below, nor are they
to be found in the east, or the other quarters, but
reside in my heart of flesh.&quot; Having thus realized
that the Perfections were established in his heart,
havingstrenuouslyresolvedtokeep them all, grasping
them again and again, he mastered them forwards

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 109
and backwards ; * taking them at the end he went
backward to the beginning, taking them at the
beginning he placed them at the end,2 taking them
at the middle he carriedthem to the two ends, taking
them at both ends he carried them to the middle.
Repeating : &quot; The Perfections are the sacrifice of
limbs, the Lesser Perfections are the sacrifice of
property, the Unlimited Perfections are the sacrifice
of life&quot;, he mastered them as the Perfections, the
LesserPerfections andtheUnlimitedPerfections like
one who converts two kindred oils into one,3 or like
one who, using Mount Meru for his churning-rod,
churns the great Chakkavala ocean. And as he
grasped again and again the ten Perfections, by the
glow of his piety, 4 this earth, four nahutas and eight
hundred thousand leagues in breadth, like a bundle
of reeds trodden by an elephant, or a sugar-mill in
motion, uttering a mighty roar, trembled, shook and
quaked, andspun round like a potter s wheel or the
wheel of an oil-mill. Therefore it is said :
175. These are all the conditions in the world that bring
Buddhashiptoperfection;
Beyondthesearenoothers, thereindothou standfast.
176. Whilehegraspedtheseconditionsnaturalandintrinsic,6
Bythepowerofhispietytheearthoftenthousandworlds
quaked.
177. Theearthswaysandthunderslikeasugar-millatwork,
Likethewheelofanoil-millsoshakestheearth.
1 i.e.,alternatelyfromthefirsttothetenthandfromthe tenth
tothefirst.
1 i.e., putthe firstlast.
3 Vijesinha.
4 Dhamma.
8 Vijesinhawritestome
:
&quot;Naturalandintrinsicvirtues. The
Sinhalese glosa says: paramarthavu rasasahitavu lakshana-cet
nohot svabhavalakshana ha sarvadharmasadharanalaJcsharia-ceti.
Inthelattercaseitwouldmeanhavingthequalityofconformity
with all laws.&quot;

110 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
And while the earth was trembling the people of
Ramnia, unableto endure it, likegreatSal-trees, over
thrown by the wind that blows at the end ofa
cycle,
fell swooning here and there, while waterpots and
other vessels, revolving like a jar on a potter s wheel,
struckagainst eachotherandweredashed and ground
to pieces. The multitudes in fear and trembling
approaching the Teacher (Dipankara) said : &quot; Tell
us, Blessed one, is this turmoil caused by Nagas, or is
it caused by either demons, or ogres, or by devas ?
for this we know not, but truly this whole multitude
is grievously afflicted. Pray does this portend evil
to the world or good ? Tell us the cause of it.&quot; The
Teacher hearing their words said : &quot; Fear not nor be
troubled, there is no danger to you from this. The
wise Sumedha, concerning whom I predicted this
day : * HereafterhewillbeaBuddhanamedGotama,
is now masteringthePerfections, andwhilehemasters
them andturnsthem about, bythe power ofhis piety
the wholetenthousandworlds withone accord quake
and thunder.&quot; Therefore it is said :
178. All the multitude that was there in attendance on the
Buddha,
Trembling,fellswooningthereupontheground.
179. Manythousandsofwaterpotsandmanyhundredjars
Werecrushedandpoundedthereanddashedagainsteach
other.
180. Excited, trembling, terrified, confused, their sense dis
ordered,
Themultitudesassembling,approachedtheBuddha.
181. Say, willitbegoodoreviltotheworld ?
The whole world is afflicted, ward off this (danger), thou
Seer!
182. Then the great Sage Dipankara enjoined upon them,
183. H Be e c o o f nf w i h de o n m t, I be fo n r o e t to a l f d ra t i h d is at da t y h , is h e e ar w t i h ll qu b a e ki a ng B : uddha in
thisworld,
ThesameisthelawofthepastfollowedbytheConquerors.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
111
184. Thereforewhileheisponderingfullythenorm,theground
workofaBuddha,
This ten thousand-fold earth of men and of devas is
shaken.
And the people hearing the Buddha s words, joyful
and delighted, taking with them garlands, perfumes
and unguents, left the city of Kamma, and went to
the Bodhisatta. And havingofferedtheirflowers and
other presents, and bowed to him and respectfully
saluted him, they returned to the city of Eamma.
And the Bodhisatta, having made a strenuous
exertion of resolve, rose from the seat on which he
sat. Therefore it is said :
185. Having heard the Buddhas word, their minds were
straightwaycalmed,
All ofthem approaching me again paid me theirhomage.
186. HavingtakenuponmethePerfectionsofaBuddha,having
madefirmmyresolve,
Havingbowedto Dipankara, Irosefrom myseat.
And asthe Bodhisatta rose from his seat, the devas
in all the ten thousand worlds having assembled and
offered him garlands and perfumes, uttered these and
other words of praise and blessing : &quot; Venerable
hermit Sumedha, this day thou hast made a mighty
resolve atthefeet ofDipankara Buddha, mayestthou
fulfil it without let or hindrance fear not nor be
:
dismayed, may not the slightest sickness visit thy
frame, quickly exercise the Perfections and attain
supreme Buddhaship. As the flowering and fruit-
bearing trees bring forth flowers and fruit in their
season, so do thou also, not letting the right season
pass by, quickly reach the supreme enlightenment,&quot;
and thus having spoken, they returned each one to
his deva-home. Then the Bodhisatta, having

112 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
received the homage of the devas, made a strenuous
exertionofresolve, saying : &quot; Havingfulfilledtheten
Perfections, at the end of four asankheyyas and a
hundred thousand cycles I shall become a Buddha.&quot;
And rising into the air he returned to Himavanta.
Therefore it is said :
187. Asherosefromhisseatbothdevasandmen
Sprinklehimwithdivineandearthlyflowers.
188. B A ot g h re d a e t va t s hi a n n g d h m a e st n t p h r o o u nou wi n l c l e ed t , he m i a r y b e l s es t si t n h g o : u obtain it
accordingtothywish.
189. Mayalldangersbeaverted, mayeverysicknessvanish,
Mayest thou have no hindrance quickly reach the
supreme enlightenment.
190. Aswhentheseasoniscomethefloweringtreesblossom,
Evensodothou, O mighty one, blossomwiththe know
ledgeofaBuddha.
191. Asallthe BuddhashavefulfilledthetenPerfections,
Evensodothou, mightyone,fulfiltheten Perfections.
192. Asallthe Buddhasareawakenedontheseatofenlighten
ment,
Even so be thou, O mighty one, awakened in
conquerorswisdom.
193. AsalltheBuddhashavesetrollingthewheeloftheNorm,
Evensodothou, Omightyone,setitrolling.
194. As the moon on the mid-day of the month shines in her
purity,
Even so do thou, with thy mind at the full,shine in ten
thousandworlds.
195. AsthesunreleasedbyRahuglowsferventlyinhisheat,
Even so,havingreleasedmankind,dothoushineinallthy
majesty,
196. Asalltheriversfindtheirwaytothegreatocean,
Evenso maythe worlds of menanddevastakerefuge in
thee
!
197. The Bodhisatta extolled with these praises, taking on
himselfthetenconditions,
Commencingtofulfilthese conditions, enteredtheforest
then.
End oftheStoryof SumedJta.
And the people of the city of Ramma, having re
turned to the city, kept open house to the Order
with the Buddha attheir head. The Teacher having

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
113
preached the Doctrine to them, and established them
in the three Kefuges and the other branches (ofthe
faith), departing from the city of Kamma, living
thereafter his allotted span of life, having fulfilled
allthe dutiesofa Buddha, induecourseattainedthat
Nirvana in which no condition of rebirth remains.
Onthissubjectallthatneedbesaidcanbelearntfrom
the narrative in the Buddhavamsa, for it is said in
that work
:
198. Then they, havingentertainedtheChiefoftheworldwith
his Order,
Took refugeintheTeacherDIpankara.
199. S S o o m m e e t i h n e th B e ud fi d v h e a Pr e e s c t e a p b t l s i , sh o e t d he i r n s t i h n e t I h l e ef t u e g n e . s,
200. To some he gives the privilege of recluseship, the four
gloriousFruitions.
201. T O o ns s o o m m e e he th b e es L t o ow r s d th of ep m ee e r n les g s r d a o n c t t s ri t n h e e s o e f i A g n h a t ly s s u i b s, lime
Acquisitions,
On some he bestows the three Wisdoms and the six
Super-knowledges.
202. Inthisorder*the GreatSageexhortsthemultitude.
TherewiththeteachingoftheworldsProtectorwasspread
wide abroad.
203. Heofthemightyjaw,ofthebroadshoulder,DIpankaraby
name,
Procured the salvation of many men, set them free from
evildestiny.
204. Beholdingpersonsripeforsalvation, reachingthem in an
instant.
Evenatadistanceofahundredthousandleagues,theGreat
Sage awakened them.
205. At the first conversionthe Buddha awakened a thousand
millions.
AtthesecondtheProtectorawakenedahundredthousand.
206. WhentheBuddhapreachedthetruthinthedeva-world,
Theretookplaceathirdconversionofninehundredmillions.
207. TheTeacher DIpankarahadthreeassemblies,
Thefirstwasameetingofamillionmillions.
1 Tenayogena. Vij. says: &quot;In that order, viz.intheSararta-
gamanafirst, then inthePancasila, thenin the Dasasila,and so

1H BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
208. Again whenthe Conqueror went into seclusion atNarada
AthousandmillionspotlessArahantsmettogether.
209. WhentheMighty One dwelt ontheloftyrock Sudassana,
Then the Sage surrounded himself with nine hundred
thousand millions.
210. AtthattimeIwasanasceticwearingmattedhair,amanof
austerepenances,
Moving through the air, accomplished in the five super-
knowledges.
211. The conversion of tens of thousands, of twenties of
thousands,tookplace,
Of ones and twos the conversions were beyond computa
tion.1
212. Then did the pure religion of Dipankara Buddha become
widelyspread,
Knowntomanymen prosperousand
flourishing.
213. Four hundred thousand, possessed of the six superknow-
ledges, endowedwith miraculous powers,
Everattend upon Dipankara, knower ofthe worlds.
214. Blameworthyarealltheywhoatthattimeleave the human
existence,
Not having obtained final sanctity, still imperfect in
knowledge.
215. The Wordshinesinthe world ofmenanddevas, madeto
blossombysaintssuchasthese,
Freedfrom human passion, spotless.
216. The city of Dipankara Buddha was called Rammavatl,
ThekhattiyaSumedhawashisfather,Sumedhahismother.
217. SumangalaandTissawerehischiefdisciples,
And Sagatawasthe servitorofDipankara Buddha.
218. Nandaand Sunandawere his chiefwoman-disciples.
The Bodhi-tree ofthis Buddha is calledthe Pipphali.2
219. EightycubitsinheighttheGreatSageDipankara
ShoneconspicuousasaDeodar pine, orasanobleSal-tree
in full bloom.
220. AhundredthousandyearswastheageofthisGreatSage,
Andsolongashewas livingonearthhebroughtmanymen
tosalvation.
221. Having made the Truth to shine, having saved great
multitudes of men,
Havingflamedlikeamassoffire,hepassedawaywithhis
disciples.
222. Andallthispower,thisglory,thesejewel-wheelsonhisfeet,
Allis whollygone arenotallexistingthingsvanity!
223. AfterDipankarawastheLeadernamedKondanya,
Of infinite power, of boundless renown, immeasurable,
unrivalled.
1 Lit., &quot;arithmeticallyinnumerable.&quot; 2 The Banyan-tree.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
115
Next to the Dipankara Buddha, after the lapse of
one asankheyya, the Teacher Kondanya appeared.
He also had three assemblies of saints, in the first
assembly there were a million millions, in the second
ten thousand millions, in the third nine hundred
millions. At that time the Bodhisatta, having been
born as a universal monarch named Vijitavin, kept
open house to the priesthood with the Buddha at
their head, in number a million of millions. The
Teacher having predicted of the Bodhisatta : &quot; He
will become a Buddha preached the Law. He
&quot;,
having heard the Teacher s preaching gave up his
kingdom and left the world. Having mastered the
three Pitakas, having obtained the six superknow-
edges, and having practised Jhana without failure,
he was reborn in the Brahma world. The city of
Kondanya Buddha was Rammavati, the khattiya
Sunanda was his father,his mother was queenSujata,
Bhadda and Subhadda were his two chief disciples,
Anuruddha was his servitor, Tissa and Upatissa his
chief woman disciples, his Bodhi-tree was the Sala-
kalyani, his body was eighty-eight cubits high, and
the durationofhis life was a hundredthousand years.
After him, at the end of one asankheyya, in one
andthe same cyclefourBuddhaswere
born, Mangala,
Sumana, Revata and Sobhita. Mangala Buddha had
threeassembliesofdisciples. Oftheseinthefirstthere
were a million million brethren, in the second ten
thousand millions, inthe third nine hundred millions.
Itis relatedthata step-brotherof his, prince Ananda,
accompaniedbyanassemblyofninehundredmillions,
wenttotheTeachertohearhim preachtheLaw. The

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
116
Teacher gave a discourse dealing successively with
his various doctrines, and Ananda and his whole
retinue attained Arahantship together with the
analytical knowledges. The Teacher looking back
upon the meritorious works done by these men of
family in former lives, and perceiving that they had
merit to acquire the robe and bowl by miraculous
means, stretching forth his right hand exclaimed,
&quot; Come brethren.&quot; 1 Then straightway all of them
having become equipped with miraculously obtained
robes and bowls, and perfect in decorum, as if they
were elders of sixty years standing, paid homage to
the Teacher and attended upon him. This was his
third assembly of disciples.
AndwhereaswithotherBuddhas a
light
shonefrom
their bodies to the distance of eighty cubits on every
side, it was not so with this Buddha, but the light
fromhisbodypermanentlyfilledtenthousandworlds
;
trees, earth,mountains, seas, and all other things, not
excepting even pots and pans and such-like articles,
became as itwere overspreadwithafilmofgold. The
duration of his life was ninety thousand years, and
during the whole of this period the sun, moon, and
other heavenly bodies could not shine by their own
light, and therewas no distinction between night and
day. By day allliving beings went aboutinthe light
ofthe Buddha as if in the light of the sun, and men
ascertained the limits of night and day only by the
flowersthat blossomedinthe evening andbythebirds
and other animals that uttered their cries in the
1The formula by which a Buddha admits a layman to the
priesthood.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
117
morning. If I am asked: &quot;What, do not other
Buddhas also possess this power ? &quot; I reply :
&quot;Certainly they do, for they might at will fill with
their lustre ten thousand worlds or more. But in
accordance with a vow made by him in a former
existence,the lustre of Mangala Buddha permanently
filled ten thousand worlds, just as the lustre of the
others permanently extended to the distance of a
fathom.&quot;
The story is that when he was performing the
duties of a Bodhisatta,1 being in an existence corre
sponding to theVessantara existence,2 he dwelt with
his wife and children on a mountain like the Vanka
mountain.3 One daya demon named Kharadathika,4
hearing of the Bodhisatta s inclination to giving,
approached him in the guise of a brahmin, and asked
the Bodhisatta for his two children. The Bodhisatta,
exclaiming: &quot;I give my children to the brahmin
&quot;,
cheerfully and joyfullygaveup both children, thereby
causing the ocean-girt earth to quake. 5 The demon
standing by the bench at the end of the cloistered
walk, while the Bodhisatta looked on, devoured the
children like a bunch of roots. Not a particle of
sorrow6 arose in the Bodhisatta as he looked on the
demon, and saw his mouth as soon as he opened it
disgorging streams of blood like flames of fire, nay,
a great joy and satisfaction welled within him as he
i.e.,thePerfections.
i.e.,hislastbirth beforeattaining Buddhahood.
See VessantaraJataka,vol.vi,no. 547.
Thisnamemeans&quot;sharp-fanged&quot;.
Inapprovalofhisactoffaith.
Lit.,&quot;
no griefasbigasthetipofahair
&quot;.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
118
thought: &quot; My gift waswell given.&quot; And he put up
the vow &quot; By the merit of this deed may rays of
:
light one day issue from me in this very way.&quot; In
consequence of this prayer of his itwasthat the rays
emitted from his body whenhe became Buddha filled
so vast a space.
Therewasalsoanotherdeeddonebyhiminaformer
existence. It is related that, when a Bodhisatta,
having visited the relic shrine of a Buddha, he
exclaimed : &quot;I ought to sacrifice my life for this
Buddha andhavingwrappedroundthewhole ofhis
body in & t quot h ;, e same way that torches are wrapped, and
havingfilledwith clarified butteragolden vesselwith
jewelled wick-holders, worth a hundred thousand
pieces, he lit therein a thousand wicks, and having
set fire to the whole of his body beginning with his
head, he spent the whole night in circumambulating
the shrine. And as he thus strove till dawn not the
root of a hair of his head was even heated. It was
as one enters the calyx of a lotus,for religion 1 guards
him who guards himself. Therefore has the Blessed
One said
:
224. Welldothreligionprotect himinsoothwhofollowsit,
Happinessbringethalonginitstrainreligionwellpractised
Thisshallbehisrewardbywhom religioniswellpractised:
Nevergoethtomiseryhewhodothpractisereligion. 2
And through the merit of this work also the bodily
lustre of this Buddha constantly extended through
a Psalmsofthe Brethren, ver. 303. (Cf.p.416. Rukkhakatba
&quot;
tree-talk&quot;willbeascribesmistakeforrakkha-katha&quot;guard-
t i, al 3 k 1 &qu ; ot;, i &quo v t; , wa 4 r 96 d . -run E e d. &quot;. Cf. also Sutta-Nipata, ver. 181 ; Jdtaka,

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 119
ten thousand worlds. At this time our Bodhisatta,1
having been bom as the brahmin Suruci, approached
the Teacher with the view of inviting him to his
house, and having heard his sweet discourse, said :
&quot; Lord, take your meal with me to-morrow.&quot;
&quot; Brahmin, how many monks do you wish for ? &quot;
&quot; Nay, but how many monks have you in your
escort ? &quot; At that time was the Teacher s first
assembly, and accordingly he replied : &quot;A million
millions.&quot; &quot; Lord, bring them all with you and come
and take your meal at my house.&quot; The Teacher
consented. The Brahmin having invited them for
the next day, on his way home thought to himself :
&quot; I am perfectly well able to supply all these monks
with broth and rice and clothes and such like
necessaries, but how can there be room for them to
sit down ? &quot;
Thisthought of his caused the marblethrone ofthe
deva-king, three hundred and thirty-six thousand
leagues away, to become warm.2 Sakka exclaiming :
&quot; Who wishes to bring me down from my abode ? &quot;
and looking down with the deva-sight beheld the
Bodhisatta, and said : &quot; The brahmin Suruci having
invited the Order with the Buddha at their head is
perplexedforroomtoseatthem, itbehovesmealsoto
go thither and obtain a share of his merit.&quot; And
havingmiraculously assumedtheform of a carpenter,
axe in hand he appeared before the Bodhisatta, and
said : &quot; Has any one got a job to be done for hire ? &quot;
1 Viz. Gotama.
3 When agood man is indifficulty, Sakkais apprised ofit by
hismarblethronebecomingwarm.

120 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
The Bodhisattaseeing Mm said
:
&quot; Whatsortofwork
can you do ? &quot; &quot; There s no art thatI do notknow ;
any house or hall that anybody orders me to build,
I ll builditfor him.&quot; &quot;Verywell,I vegota job to be
done.&quot; &quot; What is it, sir ? &quot; &quot; I ve invited a million
million bhikkhus for to-morrow, will you buiid a hall
to seat them all? &quot; &quot; I ll build one with pleasure
if you ve the means of paying me.&quot; &quot; I have, my
good man.&quot; &quot; Very well, I ll build it.&quot; And he
went and began looking out for a site. There was a
spot some fiftyleagues in extentx as level as a kasina
circle.2 Sakkafixedhiseyesuponit, whilehethought
to himself : &quot; Let a hall made of the seven precious
stones rise up over such and such an extent of
ground.&quot; Immediately the edifice bursting through
the ground rose up. The golden pillars of this hall
had silver capitals, 3 the pilver pillars had golden
capitals, the gem pillars had coral capitals, the coral
pillars had gem capitals, while those pillars which
weremadeofallthesevenpreciousstoneshad
capitals
of the same. Next he said &quot; Let the hall have
:
hanging wreaths of little bells at intervals&quot;, and
looked again. The instant he looked a fringe of bells
hung down ; their musical tinkling, as they were
stirredby a gentle breeze, waslike a symphony ofthe
five sorts of instruments, or as when the heavenly
choirs are going on. He thought : &quot; Let there be
hanging garlands of perfumes and flowers&quot;, and there
the garlands hung. He thought : &quot; Let seats and
1 Lit., twelve orthirteenyojanas (ayojana is fourleagues).
2 Usedintheecstatic meditation.
3 ThePaliwordforthe capitalofacolumnis ghataka, &quot;little
pot.&quot;

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
121
benches for a million million monks rise up through
the earth and straightway they appeared. He
&quot;,
thought: &quot;Letwatervessels rise up at eachcorner of
the building and thewater vessels arose. Having
&quot;,
by his miraculous power effected all this, he went to
thebrahmin and said: &quot; Come, sir, look at yourhall,
and pay me my
wages.&quot;
The Bodhisatta went andlooked at the hall, and as
he looked his whole frame was thrilled in every part
with fivefold joy. And as he gazed on the hall he
thought thus within himself : ** This hall was not
wrought by mortal hands, but surely through my
good intention, my good action, the palace of Sakka
became hot, and hence this hall will have been built
by the Sakka the deva-king ; it is not right that in
such ahall asthis I should give alms for a singleday,
I will give alms for a whole week.&quot;
Forthe giftofexternalgoods, however great,cannot
give satisfaction to the Bodhisattas, but the Bodhi-
sattasfeeljoyattheirself-renunciationwhen theysever
the crowned head, put out the henna-anointed eyes,
cut out the heart and give it away. For when our
Bodhisattainthe Sivijataka lgavealmsinthemiddle
of his capital, at the four gates of the city, at a daily
expenditureoffivebushelsofgoldcoins, thisliberality
failed to arouse within him a feeling of satisfaction
at his renunciation. But on the other hand, when
Sakka the deva-king came to him in the disguise of a
brahmin, and asked for his eyes, then indeed, as he
took them out and gave them away, laughter rose
within him, nor did his heart swerve a hair s breadth
1 Jataka, no. 499.

122 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
from its purpose. And hence we see thatas regards
almsgiving the Bodhisattas can have no satiety.
Thereforethis Bodhisatta also thinking : &quot;I ought
togivealmsforsevendaystoamillionmillion
monks&quot;,
seatedtheminthathall, andforaweek gave themthe
alms called gavapana. 1 Men alone were not able to
wait upon them, but devas themselves, taking turns
A
withmen, waiteduponthem. space offiftyleagues
or more sufficed not to contain the monks, yet they
seated themselves each by his own supernatural
power. On the last day, having caused the bowls of
all the monks to be washed, and filled them with
butter clarified and unclarified, honey and molasses,
for medicinal use, he gave them back to them,
together with the three robes. The robes and cloaks
received by novices and ordained priests were worth
a hundred thousand.
TheTeacher, whenhereturnedthanks,considering
:
&quot; This man has given such great alms, who can he
be ? &quot; and perceiving that at the end of two asan-
kheyyas and fourthousand cycles he would become a
Buddha named Gotama, addressing the Bodhisatta,
made this prediction : &quot; After the lapse of such and
such a period thou shalt become a Buddha named
Gotama.&quot; The Bodhisatta, hearing the prediction,
thought : &quot;It seems that I am to become a Buddha,
what good can a householders life do me ? I will
give up the world and, treating all this prosperity
&quot;,
like so much drivel, he received ordination at the
hands of the Teacher. And having embraced the
1 Accordingtotheglossprintedinthetextitisacompound of
milk,rice,honey,sugar, andclarifiedbutter.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
123
asceticlifeandlearntthewordofBuddha, and
having
attained the superknowledges and the Attainments,
at the end of-his life he was reborn in the Brahma
world.
The city of Mangala Buddha was called Uttara ;
his father was the khattiya Uttara : his mother was
Uttara, Sudeva and Dhammasena were his two chief
disciples Palita was his servitor, Sivali and Asoka
;
his two chief woman disciples. The Naga was his
Bodhi-tree. His body was eighty-eight cubits high.
When his death took place, after he had lived ninety
thousand years, at the same instant ten thousand
worlds were involved in darkness, and in all worlds
there was a great cry and lamentation of men.
225. AfterKondanyatheLeadernamedMangala,
Dispelling darkness in the world, held aloft the torch of
religion.
And after the Buddha had died, shrouding in
darkness ten thousand worlds, the Teacher named
Sumana
appeared.
Healsohadthreegreatassemblies
of disciples, in the first assembly the brethren were
a million millions, in the second, on the Golden
Mountain, ninety million of millions, in the third
eighty million of millions.
At this time the Bodhisatta was the Naga king
A tula, mighty and powerful. And he, hearing that a
Buddha had appeared, left the Naga world, accom
panied by his assembled kinsmen, and, making
offerings with divine music to the Buddha, whose
retinue was a million million brethren, and having
given great gifts, bestowing upon each two garments

124 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
of fine cloth, he was establishedinthe Three Eefuges.
And this Teacher also foretold of him : &quot; One day he
will be a Buddha.&quot;
The city of this Buddha was named Khema :
Sudattawashisfather, Sirimahismother, Sarana and
Bhavitatta his chief disciples, Udena his servitor,
Sona and Upasona his chief woman-disciples. The
Naga was his Bodhi-tree, his body was ninety cubits
high, and his age ninety thousand years.
226. AfterMangalacametheLeadernamedSumana,
Inallthingsunequalled,thebestofallbeings.
After him the Teacher Revata appeared. He also
hadthreeassembliesofdisciples. Inthefirstassembly
the numbers were innumerable, in the second there
were a millionmillions, so also inthe third.
At that time the Bodhisatta having been born as
the brahmin Atideva, having heard the Teacher s
preaching, was established in the Three Refuges.
And raising his clasped hands to his head, having
praised the Teacher s abandonment of human
passion, he presented him with a monk s upper robe.
That Teacher also made the prediction : &quot; Thou
wiltbecomeaBuddha.&quot; Nowthecityofthis Buddha
was calledSudhanyavatT,his father wasthe nobleman
Vipula, his mother Vipula, Varuna and Brahmadeva
his chief disciples, Sambhava his servitor, Bhadda
and Subhadda his chief woman-disciples, and the
Naga-tree his Bo-tree. His body was eighty cubits
high, and his age sixty thousand years.
227. AfterSumanacametheLeadernamedRevata,
The Conqueror unequalled, incomparable, unmatched,
supreme.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
125
After him appeared the Teacher Sobhita. He also
hadthreeassembliesofdisciples
;
inthefirstassembly
were a thousand million monks, in the second nine
hundred millions, inthe third eight hundred millions.
At that time theBodisat, having been born as the
brahmin Ajita, and having heard the Teacher s
preaching, was established in the Three Kefuges, and
gave agreat donationtothe Orderofmonks, withthe
Buddha at their head. This Teacher also prophesied
to him, saying : &quot; Thou wilt become a Buddha.&quot;
Sudhamma was the name of the city of this Blessed
One, Sudhamma the king was his father, Sudhamma
his mother, Asama and Sunetta his chief disciples,
Anoma his servitor, Nakula and Sujata his chief
woman-disciples, and the Naga-tree his Bo-tree
;
his body was fifty-eight cubits high, and his age
ninetythousand
years.
228. AfterRevatacametheLeadernamedSobhita,
Subduedandmild,unequalledandunrivalled.
After him, when an asankheyya had elapsed, three
Buddhas were born in one kalpa Aiiomadassin,
Paduma, and Narada. Anomadassin had three
assemblies of saints ; in the first were eight hundred
thousand monks, inthesecondseven, inthethird six.
At that time the Bodisat was a Yakkha
chief,
mighty and powerful, the lord of many millions of
millions of yakkhas. He, hearing that a Buddha had
appeared, came and gave a great donation to the
Order of monks, with the Buddha at their head.
And this Teacher also prophesied to him, saying :
&quot; Hereafter thou wilt be a Buddha.&quot; The city of

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
126
Anomadassin the Blessed One wascalledChandavati,
Yasavatheking washisfather, Yasodharahismother,
Nisabha and Anoma his chief disciples, Varuna his
servitor, Sundarl and Sumana his chief wornan-
disciples, the Arjuna-tree his Bo-tree ; his body was
fifty-eight cubits high, his age a hundred thousand
years.
229. AfterSobhitacametheperfect Buddha thebestofmen
Anomadassinofinfinitefame,glorious,difficulttosurpass.
After him appeared the Teacher named Paduma.
He too had three assemblies of disciples ; in the first
assembly were a million million monks, in the second
three hundred thousand, in the third two hundred
thousand of the monks dwelt at a great grove in the
uninhabited forest.
At that time, whilst the Tathagata was living in
that grove, the Bodisat having been born as a lion,
saw the Teacher plunged in ecstatic trance, and with
trustful heart made obeisance to him, and walking
round him with reverence, experienced great joy,
and thrice uttered a mighty roar. For seven days he
laidnotasidethe bliss arising fromthethought ofthe
Buddha, but through joy and gladness, seeking not
after prey, he kept in attendance there, offering up
his life. When the Teacher, after seven days,
aroused himself from his trance, he looked upon the
lion andthought : &quot; He willput trust inthe Order of
monks and make obeisance to them let them draw
;
near.&quot; At that very moment the monks drew near,
and thelionputfaithinthe Order.
The Teacher, knowing his thoughts, prophesied,

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
127
saying : &quot; Hereafter lie will be a Buddha.&quot; Now the
cityofPadumatheBlessed Onewas calledChampaka,
his father was Paduma the king, his mother Asama,
Sala and Upasala were his chief disciples, Varuna his
servitor, Kama and Uparama his chief woman-
disciples, the Crimson-tree his Bo-tree ; hisbody was
fifty-eight cubits high, and his age was a hundred
thousand
years.
230. AfterAnomadassin came the perfect Buddha, the bost of
men,
Padumabyname,unequalled,andwithoutarival.
After him appeared the Teacher named Narada.
He also had three assemblies of saints in the first
;
assembly were a million million monks,in the second
ninety million million, in the third eighty million
million.
Atthat timethe Bodisat, havingtakenthe vows as
a sage, acquired the fiveSuper-knowledges, and the
eight sublime Acquisitions, and gave a great donation
to the Order, with the Buddha at their head, making
an offering of red sandal wood.
That Teacher also prophesied to him : &quot; Hereafter
thouwiltbeaBuddha.&quot; The cityofthisBlessed One
was called Dhanyavati, his father was Sumedha the
warrior, his mother Anoma, Bhaddasala and Jeta-
mitta his chief disciples, Vasettha his servitor, Uttara
and Pagguni his chief woman-disciples, the great
Crimson-tree was his Bo-tree ; his body was eighty-
eight cubits high, and his age was ninety thousand
years.
231. AfterPadumacametheperfectBuddha, the bestofmen,
Naradabyname,unequalled andwithoutarival.

128 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
After Narada the. Buddha a hundred thousand
world-cycles ago there appeared in one kalpa only
one Buddha called Padumuttara. He also had three
assemblies of disciples ; in the first were a million
million monks, in the second, on the Vebhara
Mountain, ninehundredthousandmillion,inthethird
eight hundred thousand million.
Atthattimethe Bodisat, bornas a Mahratta ofthe
name ofJatila, gave an offering ofrobes to the Order,
withthe Buddha attheirhead.
That Teacher also prophesied to him : &quot;Hereafter
thou wilt be a Buddha.&quot; And at the time of Padu
muttara the Blessed One there were no infidels, but
all, men and devas, took refuge in the Buddha. His
city wascalled Harhsavati,his fatherwas Ananda the
warrior, his mother Sujata, Devala and Sujata his
chiefdisciples, Sumanahisservitor, AmitaandAsama
his chief woman-disciples, the Sal-tree his Bo-tree ;
his body was eighty-eight cubits high, the light from
his body extended twelve leagues, and his age was
a hundred thousand years.
232. AfterNaradacame the perfect Buddha,thebestofmen,
Padumuttara by name, the Conqueror unshaken, like the
sea.
After him, when thirty thousand world-cycles had
elapsed, two Buddhas, Sumedha and Sujata, were
born in one kalpa. Sumedha also had three assem
blies of his saints in the first assembly, in the city
;
Sudassana, were a thousand million sinless ones, in
the second nine hundred, in the third eight hundred.
At that time the Bodisat, born as the brahmin youth

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
129
named Uttara, lavished eight hundred millions of
money he had saved in giving a great donation to the
Order, with the Buddha at their head. And he then
listened to the Doctrine, and accepted the Refuges,
and abandoned his home, and tookthe vows.
ThatTeacheralsoprophesiedtohim,saying: **Here
after thou wilt be a Buddha.&quot; The city of Sumedha
the Blessed One was called Sudassana, Sudatta the
king was his father, Sudatta his mother, Sarana and
Sabbakamahistwo chiefdisciples, Sagarahisservitor,
Rama and Surama his two chief woman-disciples,
the great Champaka-tree his Bo-tree his body was
;
eighty-eight cubits high, and his age was ninety
thousand
years.
233. After Padumuttara came the Leader named Sumedha,
The Sage hard to equal, brilliant in glory, supreme in all
theworld.
After him appeared the Teacher Sujata. He also
hadthreeassembliesofdisciples
;
inthefirst assembly
were sixty thousand monks, in the second fifty, in
the third
forty.
Atthattime the Bodisat was a universal monarch
;
and hearing that a Buddha was born he went to
him and heard the Doctrine, and gave to the Order,
with the Buddha at their head, his kingdom
of the four continents with its seven treasures
and took the vows under the Teacher. All the
dwellers in the land, taking advantage of the birth
of a Buddha in their midst, did duty as servants in
themonasteries, and continuallygavegreatdonations
to the Order, with the Buddha at their head. And to

130 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
him also the Teacher prophesied. The city of this
Blessed One was called Sumangala, Uggata the king
was his father, Pabhavati his mother, Sudassana and
Deva his chief disciples, Narada his servitor, Naga
and Nagasamala his chief woman-disciples, and the
great Bambu-tree his Bo-tree %; this tree, they say,
had smaller hollows and thicker wood than ordinary
bambus have,1 and in its mighty upper branches it
was as brilliant as a bunch of peacocks tails. The
body of this Blessed One was fifty cubits high, and
his age was ninety thousand years.
234. Inthatage,theMandakalpa,appearedtheLeaderSujata,
Mighty jawed and grandly framed, whose measure none
cantake, andhardtoequal.
Afterhim, when eighteen hundred world-cycles had
elapsed, three Buddhas, Piyadassin, Atthadassin,
and Dhammadassin, were born in one kalpa. Piya
dassin also had three assemblies of disciples ; in the
first were a million million monks, in the second nine
hundred million, in the third eight hundred million.
At that time the Bodisat, as a young brahmin
called Kassapa, who had thoroughly learnt the three
Vedas, listened to the Teachers preaching of the
Doctrine, and built a monastery at a cost of a million
million, and stood firm in the Kefuges and the
Precepts.
Now to him the Teacher prophesied, saying :
&quot; After the lapse of eighteen hundred kalpas thou
wilt become aBuddha.&quot; The cityofthis Blessed One
was called Anoma, his father was Sudinna the king,
1 CompareJatakano. 20.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
131
his mother Canda, Palita and Sabbadassin Ms chief
disciples, Sobhita his servitor, Sujata and Dhamma-
dinna his chief woman-disciples, and the Piyangu-
tree his Bo-tree. His body was eighty cubits high,
and his age ninetythousand years.
235. AfterSujatacame Piyadassin, Leaderoftheworld,
Self-taught, hardtomatch, unequalled, ofgreatglory.
After him appearedthe teacher calledAtthadassin.
He too had three assemblies of disciples ; in
the first were nine million eight hundred thousand
monks, in the second eight million eight hundred
thousand, and the same number in the third.
At that time the Bodisat, as the mighty ascetic
Susima, brought from heaven the sunshade of
Mandarava flowers, andofferedittothe Teacher, who
prophesied also to him. The city of this Blessed One
was called Sobhita, Sagara the king was his father,
Sudassana his mother, Santa andApasanta his chief
disciples, Abhaya his servitor, Dhamma and Su-
dhamma
hischiefwoman-disciples, andtheChampaka
his Bo-tree. His body was eighty cubits high, the
glory from his body always extended over a league,
and his age was a hundred thousand years.
236. InthesameageelectAtthadassin, bestofmen,
Dispelled the thick darkness, and attained supreme
Enlightenment.
After him appeared the Teacher named Dhamma-
dassin. He too had three assemblies of disciples ;
in the first were a thousand million monks, in the
second seven hundred millions, in the third eight

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
132
hundred millions. At that time the Bodisat, as
Sakka the king of the devas, made an of ering of
sweet-smellingflowersfromheaven, anddivine music.
That Teacher also prophesied to him. The city of
this Blessed One was called Sarana, his father was
Sarana the king, his mother Sunanda, Paduma and
Phussadeva his chief disciples, Sunetta his servitor,
Khema and Sabbanama his chief woman-disciples,
and the red Kuravaka-tree (called also Bimbijala)
his Bo-tree. His bodywas eighty cubitshigh, andhis
age a hundred thousand years.
237.
Inthesameageelectthefar-famedDhammadassin
Dispelled the thick darkness, illuminated earth and
heaven.
After him, ninety-four world-cycles ago, only one
Buddha, by name Siddhattha, appeared in one kalpa.
Of his disciples too there were three assemblies ; in
the first were a million million monks, in the second
nine hundred millions, in the third eight hundred
millions.
At that time the Bodisat, as the ascetic Mangala
ofgreatglory and gifted withthepowersderivedfrom
super-knowledge, brought a great jambu fruit and
presented it to the Tathagata.
The Teacher, having eaten the fruit, prophesied to
the Bodisat, saying : &quot; Ninety-fourkalpashencethou
wiltbecomea Buddha.&quot; The city ofthis Blessed One
was calledVebhara, Jayasena the king washis father,
Suphassa his mother, Sambala and Sumitta his chief
disciples, Kevata his servitor, Sivali and Surama his
chief woman-disciples, and the Kanikara-tree his Bo-

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
133
tree. His body was sixty cubits high, and his age
ahundredthousand
years.
238. After Dhammadassin, the Leader named Siddhattha
Roselikethesun, bringingalldarknesstoanend.
After him, ninety-two world-cycles ago, two
Buddhas,Tissa and Phussa by name,wereborninone
kalpa. Tissa the Blessed One had three assemblies of
disciples ; in the first were a thousand million of
monks, in the second nine hundred millions, in the
third eight hundred millions.
At that time the Bodisat was born as the wealthy
and famous warrior Sujata. When he had taken the
vows and acquired the wonderful powers of a rishi,
he heard that a Buddha had been born and
; taking
a heaven-grown Mandarava lotus, and flowers of the
Paricchattaka-tree, he offered them to the Tathagata
as he walked in the midst of his disciples, and he
spread an awning of flowers in the sky.
To him, too, the Teacher prophesied, saying :
&quot; Ninety-two kalpas hence thou wilt become a
Buddha.&quot; The city of this Blessed One was called
Khema, Janasandha the warrior-chief was his father,
Paduma his mother, the god Brahma and Udaya his
chief disciples, Sambhava his servitor, Phussa and
Sudatta his chief woman-disciples, and the Asana-
tree his Bo-tree. His body was sixty cubits high,
andhisageahundredthousand
years.
239. AfterSiddhattha,Tissa,theunequalledandunrivalled,
Of infinite virtue and glory, was the chief Guide of the
world.
Afterhim appearedtheTeachernamedPhussa. He
too had three assemblies of disciples ; in the first

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
134
assembly were six million monks, in the second five,
in the third three milliontwo hundred thousand.
At that time the Bodisat, born as the warrior
Vijitavi, laid aside his kingdom and, taking the vows
under the Teacher, learnt the three Pitakas, and
preached the Doctrine to the people, and fulfilled the
Perfection of Moral Practice.1
And the Buddha prophesied to him in the same
manner. The city of this Blessed One was called
Kasi (Benares), Jayasena the king was his father,
Sirima his mother, Surakkhita and Dhammasena his
chief disciples, Sabhiya his servitor, Chala and
Upachalahischiefwoman-disciples,
andtheAmalaka-
tree his Bo-tree. His body was fifty-eight cubits
high, and his age ninety thousand years.
240. InthesameageelectPhussawastheTeachersupreme,
Unequalled,unrivalled,thechiefGuideoftheworld.
After him, ninety world-cycles ago, appeared the
Blessed One named Vipassin. 2 He too had three
assemblies of disciples ; in the first assembly were
six million eight hundred thousand monks, in the
second one hundred thousand, in the third eighty
thousand.
At that time the Bodisat, bom as the mighty and
powerful snake king Atula gave to the Blessed One
a golden chair, inlaid with the sevenkinds of gems.
To him that Teacher also prophesied, saying :
&quot; Ninety-one world-cycles hence thou wilt become a
Buddha.&quot; The city of this Blessed One was called
1 Seeabove, p. 102.
2 We now come to the 7 Buddhas recognized in the older
books. Ed.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
135
Bandhumati, Bandhumii the king was his father,
Bandhumatl his mother, Khandha and Tissa his
chiefdisciples, Asokahisservitor, ChandaandChanda-
mitta hischiefwoman-disciples, and the Bignonia (or
Patali-tree) his Bo-tree. His body was eighty cubits
high, the effulgence from his body always reached a
hundred leagues, and his age was a hundred thousand
years.
241. AfterPhussa,theSupremeBuddha,thebestofmen,
Vipassinbyname,thefar-seeing, appearedintheworld.
After him, thirty-one world-cycles ago, there were
two Buddhas, called Sikhin and Vessabhu. Sikhin
too had three assemblies of disciples : in the first
werea hundredthousandmonks,in thesecondeighty
thousand, in the third seventy.
At that time the Bodisat, born as king Arindama,
gave a great donation of robes and other things to
the Order with the Buddha at their head, and offered
also a superb elephant, decked with the seven gems
and provided with all things suitable. That Teacher
also prophesied to him, saying : &quot; Thirty-one world-
cycles hence thou wilt become a Buddha.&quot; The city
of that Blessed One was called Arunavati, Arunathe
warrior-chief was his father, Pabhavati his mother,
Abhibhu and Sambhava his chief disciples, Kheman-
kura his servitor, Makhela and Paduma his chief
woman-disciples, and the Pundarika-tree his Bo-tree.
His bodywas thirty-seven cubits high, the effulgence
from his body reached threeleagues, and his age was
thirty-seven thousand years.
242. AfterVipassincametheSupremeBuddha,thebestofmen,
Sikhinbyname,theConqueror,unequalledandunrivalled.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
136
After Mm appeared the Teacher named Vessabhu.
He also had three assemblies of disciples ; inthe first
were eight million monks, in the second seven, in the
third six.
At that time the Bodisat, born as the king Sudas-
sana, gave a great donation of robes and other things
to the Order, with the Buddha at their head. And
taking the vows at his hands, he became righteous in
conduct, and found great joy in meditating on the
Buddha.
That Teacher also prophesied to him, saying :
&quot; Thirty-one world-cycles hence thou wilt become a
Buddha.&quot; The city of this Blessed One was called
Anopama,Suppatita theking washis father,Yasavati
his mother, Sona and Uttara his chief disciples,
Upasanta his servitor, Dama and Sumala his chief
woman-disciples, and the Sal-tree his Bo-tree. His
bodywas sixtycubitshigh, andhisagesixty thousand
years.
243. Inthesameage elect,theConqueror namedVessabhu,
Unequalled and unrivalled, appearedinthe world.
After him, in this world-cycle, four Buddhas have
and
appeared Kakusandha, Konagamana, Kassapa,
our Buddha. Kakusandha the Blessed One had one
assembly,atwhich forty thousandmonkswere present.
Atthattime the Bodisat, as Khema the king, gave
a great donation, robes and bowls, to the Order, with
the Buddha at their head, and having given also
collyriums
andmedicines, he listened to theDoctrine
preached bythe Teacher, andtook the vows.
That Teacher also prophesied to him. The city of

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 137
Kakusandha the Blessed One was called Khema,
Aggidatta the Brahman was his father, Visakha the
Brahman woman his mother, Vidhura and Sanjiva
his chief disciples, Buddhija his servitor, Sanaa and
Campaka his chief woman-disciples, and the great
Sirisa-tree his Bo-tree. His body was forty cubits
high, and his age forty thousand years.
244. AfterVessabhucametheperfectBuddha,thebestofmen,
Kakusandhabyname,infiniteandhardtoequal.
After him appeared the Teacher Konagamana. Of
his disciples tootherewasoneassembly,inwhichwere
thousand monks.
thirty
At that time the Bodisat, as Pabbata the king,
went, surrounded by his ministers, to the Teacher,
and listened to the preaching of the Doctrine. And
having given an invitation to the Order, with the
Buddha at their head, he kept up a great donation,
giving cloths of silk, and of fine texture, and woven
with gold. And he took the vows from the Teacher s
hands.
That Teacher also prophesied to him. The city
ofthis Blessed Onewas called Sobhavati, Yannadatta
the brahmin was his father, Uttara the Brahman
woman his mother, Bhiyyosa and Uttara his chief
disciples, Sotthija his servitor, Samuddii and Uttara
his chief woman-disciples, and the Udumbara-tree his
Bo-tree. His body was twenty cubits high, and his
age was thirty thousand years.
245. After Kakusandha came the Perfect Buddha, the best of
men,
Konagamana by name, Conqueror, chief of the world,
supreme among men.

138 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
After him the Teacher named Kassapa appearedin
theworld. Ofhisdisciples tootherewasone
assembly,
in which were twenty thousand monks.
At that time the Bodisat, as the brahmin youth
Jotipala, accomplished in the three Vedas, was well
known in earth and sky as the friend of the
potter Ghatikara. Going with him to the Teacher
and hearing the Doctrine, he took the vows and
;
zealously learning the three Pitakas, he glorified, by
faithfulness in duty and in works of supererogation,
the teaching of the Buddha.
That Teacher also prophesied to him. The birth
place ofthe Blessed Onewas called Benares, Brahma-
datta the brahmin was his father, Dhanavati of the
brahmin caste his mother, Tissa and Bharadvaja his
chief disciples, Sabbamitta his servitor, Anula, and
Uruvela his chiefwoman-disciples, and the Nigrodha-
tree his Bo-tree. His body was twenty cubits high,
and his age was twenty thousand years.
246. AfterKonagamanacamethePerfectBuddha,bestofmen,
Kassapabyname,thatConqueror,king of righteousness,
andgiveroflight.
Again, in the age in which Dipankara the Buddha
appeared, three other Buddhas appeared also. On
theirpart no prophecywas madeto the Bodisat, they
are therefore not mentioned here but in the
;
commentary, in order to mention all the Buddhas
from this age, it is said :
247. Tanhankara and Medhankara, and ISaranankara,
Andthe Perfect Buddha Dipankara, and Kondanya best
of men,
248. And Mangala, and Sumana, and Revata, and Sobhitathe
sage,

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 139
Anomadassin, Paduma, Narada, Padumuttara,
249. And Sumedha, and Sujata, Piyadassin thefamous one,
Atthadassin, Dhammadassin, Siddhattha guide of the
world,
250. Tissa, and Phussa, the enlightened Vipassin, Sikhin,
Vessabhu,
Kakusandha, Konagamana, andKassapatoothe Guide
251. TheseweretheperfectBuddhas,thesinlessones,thewell-
controlled:
A T p h p ey e , ar a i n n d gl t i h k e e ir su d n i s s , ci d p i l s e p s e t l o l o i , ng b t l h a e ze t d hi u c p k l d i a k r e kn f e la s m s e ; s of fire
andwentout.
Thus our Bodisat has come down to us through
four asankheyyas and one hundred thousand ages,
making resolve in the presence of the twenty-four
Buddhas, beginning with Dipankara. But after
Kassapa there is no other Buddha beside the present
supreme Buddha.
So the Bodisat received a prophecy from each of
the twenty-four Buddhas, beginning at Dipankara.
And furthermore in accordance with the saying :
&quot; The resolve (to become a Buddha) only
succeeds bythe combination of eight qualifica
tions : being a man, and of the male sex, and
capable of attaining arahantship, association
with the Teachers, renunciation of the world,
perfection in virtue, acts of self-sacrifice, and
earnest determination.&quot;
he combined in himself these eight qualifications.
And exerting himself according to the resolve he had
made at the feet of Dipankara, in the words :
&quot; Come, I will search for the Buddha-making
conditions, this way and that &quot; ; 1
1 Seeverse 125,above.

140 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
and beholding the Perfections of Giving and the rest
to be qualities necessary for the making of a Buddha,
according to the words :
&quot; Then, as I made my search, I beheld the first
Perfection of Giving &quot; l
;
he came down through many births, fulfilling these
Perfections, even up to his last appearance as
Vessantara.
And the rewards which fell to him on his way, as
they fall to all the Bodisats who have resolved to
become Buddhas, are lauded thus :
252. Sothemen,perfectineverypart, anddestinedtoBuddha-
hood,
Traverse the long road through thousands of millions of
ages.
253. They are not born in hell, nor in the space between the
worlds
;
Theydonotbecomeconsumedbyhunger,thirst,andwant,
Andtheydonotbecomesmallanimals,eventhough born
tosorrow.
254. Whenbornamongmentheyarenotblindbybirth,
Theyarenothardofhearing, theyarenot classed among
thedumb.
255. Theydonotbecomewomen
;
amonghermaphroditesand
eunuchs
Theyarenotfound thesemendestinedtoBuddhahood.
256. Freefromthedeadlysins, everywherepure-living,
They follow not after vain opinions, they perceive the
workingofkarma.
257. Though they dwell in bright worlds, they are not born
inthe mindless.
Nor are they destined to rebirth among the devas in the
Pure Abodes.2
258. Bent upon renunciation, good men, detached from this
rebirthorthat,
They walk as acting for the worlds welfare, fulfilling all
perfection.
1 See verse 126, above.
2 In the four highest of the thirty-one spheres of existence
thedevasaremindless,andthefiveworldsbelowthesearecalled
the Pure Abodes.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 141
While he was thus fulfilling the Perfections, there
was no limit to the occasions on which he fulfilled
the Perfection of Giving. As, for instance, in the
times when he was the brahmin Akatti, and the
brahmin Sankha, and the king Dhananjaya, and
Maha-sudassana, and Maha-govinda, and the king
Nimi, and the prince Chanda, and the merchant
Visayha, and the king Sivi, and Vessantara. So,
certainly, in the Birth as the Wise Hare, according
to the wordsl
:
259. When I saw one coming forfood, I offered my own self,
Thereisnoonelikemeingiving,suchismyPerfectionof
Giving.
he, offering up his own life, acquired the Supreme
Perfection called the Perfection of Giving.
In like manner there is no limit to the way in
whichhefulfilledthePerfectionofMoralPractice. As,
for instance, inthe times whenhe was the snake king
Silavat, and the snake kingCampeyya,the snake king
Bhuridatta,thesnakekingChaddanta, andtheprince
Alinasattu, son of king Jayaddisa. So, certainly, in
the Sankhapala Birth, according to the words :
260. Evenwhen piercing mewithstakes, andstriking mewith
javelins,
IwasnotangrywiththesonsofBhoja,suchismyPerfec
tionofMoralPractice.
he, offering up himself, acquired the Supreme Perfec
tion, calledthePerfectionofMoral Practice.
In like manner there is no limit to the way in
which, forsaking his kingdom, he fulfilled the Perfec
tion of Renunciation. As, for instance, in the times
1 Allthefollowingversesdowntoverse269arequotationsfrom
the Chariyapitaka.

142 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
when he was the prince Somanassa, and the prince
Hatthipala, and the wise man Ayoghara in which,
forsaking his kingdom, he fulfilled the Perfection of
Eenunciation. So, certainly, in the Chula-Sutasoma
Birth, according to the words :
261. Thekingdom,whichwasinmypower,likespittleIrejected
it,
And rejecting cared not for it, such is my Perfection of
Renunciation,
he, renouncing the kingdom for freedom from the
ties of sin, 1 acquired the Supreme Perfection, called
the Perfection of Renunciation.
In like manner, there is no limit to the ways in
which he fulfilled the Perfection of Wisdom. As, for
instance, in the times when he was the wise man
Vidhura, and the wise man Maha-govinda, and the
wise man Kuddala, and the wise man Araka, and the
ascetic Bodhi, and the wise man Mahosadha. So,
certainly, in the time when he was the wise man
Senaka in the Sattubhatta Birth, according to the
words
:
262. Searching the matter out by wisdom, I set the brahmin
freefrompain,
Thereisnoonelikemeinwisdom
;
suchismyPerfection
ofWisdom,
he, pointing out the snake which had got into the
bellows, acquired the Supreme Perfection called the
Perfection of Wisdom.
So, certainly, in the Maha-Janaka Birth, according
to the words
:
263. Outofsightoftheshore,inthemidstofthewaters,allmen
areasifdead,
Thereisnootherwayofthinking; suchismyPerfection
ofResolution,
1 The Sangas, of which there are five lust, hate, ignorance,
pride, andfalse doctrine.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
143
he, crossing the Great Ocean, acquired the Supreme
Perfection called the Perfection of Resolution.
And so in the Khantivada Birth, according to the
words
:
264. Even when he struck me with a sharp axe, as if I were a
senselessthing,
Iwas
ti
n
o
o
n
t
o
a
f
n
P
g
a
r
t
y
ie
w
n
i
c
t
e
h
,
thekingofKasi
;
suchismyPerfec
he, enduring great sorrow as if he were a senseless
thing, acquired the Perfection of Patience.
And so in the Maha-Sutasoma Birth, according to
the words
:
265. G I u d a e r l d i i ve n r g ed th t e he w h o u r n d d o r f e T d r w u a t r h r , io a r n s d : o s ff u e c r h in is g m u v pm Pe y rf l e i c fe t , ionof
Truth,
he, offering up his life, and observing truth, obtained
the Perfection of Truth.
And in the Mugapakkha Birth, according to the
words
:
266. FatherandmotherIhatednot,reputationIhatednot,
But all knowledge was dear to me, therefore was I firm
in duty,
offeringupevenhislife, and beingresoluteinduty, he
acquired the Perfection of Resolution.
And so in the Ekaraja Birth, according to the
words
:
267. Nomanterrifiesme,noramIinfearofanyman
Firminthepowerofkindness,inpurityItakede ;
light,
regardingnotevenhislifewhileattainingtokindness,
he acquired the Perfection of Good-will.
SointheSomahamsa Birth,accordingtothewords
:
268. I lay me down in the cemetery, making a pillow of dead
bones
:
The village children mocked and praised: to all I was
indifferent.

144 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
he was unshaken in equanimity, even when the
villagers tried to vex or please him by spitting or by
offering garlands and perfumes, and thus he acquired
the Perfection of Equanimity.
This is a summary only, the account will be found
at lengthinthe ChariydPitaka.
Having thus fulfilled the Perfections, in his birth
as Vessantara, according to the words :
269. This earth, unconscious though she be and ignorant of
joyorgrief,
Een she by my free-givings mighty power was shaken
seventimes,
he performed such mighty acts of virtue as made the
earth to shake. And when, inthe fullness oftime, he
had passed away, he reassumed existence in the
Tusita heaven.
Thus should be understood the period, called
Distant,from the Kesolution at thefeetofDipankara
down to this birthinthe City of Delight.
THE INTEKMEDIATE EPOCH
II:
Avidure Niddna
It was when the Bodisat was thus dwelling in the
City of Delight that the so-called &quot; Buddha procla
mation &quot; took place. For three such &quot; Proclama
tions &quot; take place on earth. These are the three.
When they realize that at the end of a hundred
thousand years a new dispensation will begin, devas
ofthenextworldwho are calledWorld-arrangers,with
their hair flying and dishevelled, with weeping faces,
wiping away their tears with their hands, clad in red

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
145
garments, and with their clothes all in disorder,
wander among men, and make proclamation,
saying :
&quot; Sirs, one hundred thousand years from now there
will be a new dispensation ; this world-system will
be destroyed ; even the sea will dry up ; this gieat
earth, with Sineru the monarch of mountains, will
be burned up and destroyed ; and the whole world
up to the Brahma-realms, will pass away. And so,
sirs, exercize love, pity, sympathy and equanimity,
cherish the mother, cherish the father, honour the
eldersinyour families.&quot; Thisis calledthe proclama
tion of anAge [Kappahalahala].
Again, when they realize that at the end of a
thousand years an omniscient Buddha will appear on
earth, the deva-guardians of the world go from place
to place and make proclamation, saying : &quot; Sirs, at
the end of a thousand years from this time a Buddha
willappearon earth.&quot; Thisiscalledtheproclamation
of a Buddha [Buddha-halahala].
Again, when devas realize that at the end of a
hundred years a universal monarch will appear, they
go from place to place and make proclamation,
saying : &quot; Sirs, at the end of a hundred years from
this time a universal monarch will appear on earth.&quot;
ThisiscalledtheproclamationofaUniversalmonarch
[Chakkavatti-halahala].
These are the three great proclamations.
When of these three they hear the Buddha-pro
clamation,thedevasoftheentiretenthousandworld-
systems assemble together ; and having ascertained
who will become the Buddha, they go to him and

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
146
beseech him to do so, so beseeching him when the
first signs appear [that his present life is drawing to
its close]. Accordingly on this occasion they all,
with the governors in each world,1 assembled in one
world, and going to the future Buddha in the world
of bliss (Tusita), they besought him, saying :
&quot; Sir, when thou wast fulfilling the Ten Perfec
tions, thou didst not do so from a desire for the
state of world-governor Sakka, or Mara, or Brahma
orofamightykinguponearth ; thouwast fulfilling
them with the hope of reaching all-knowledge for
the sake of the salvation of mankind ! Now has the
moment come, sir, for thy Buddhahood ; now, sir,
has the time arrived &quot;
!
But the Great Being, as if he had not granted the
prayer of the devas, reflected in succession on the
following five important points, viz. the time ; the
country; the family ; the mother ; andher age-limit.
Of these he first reflected on the TIME, thinking :
&quot; Is this the time or not ? &quot; And on this point he
thought : &quot; When the time of the span of life has
grown to be upwards of a hundred thousand years,
the time has not arrived. Why not ? Because in
such a period men perceive not that living beings are
subject to birth, decay, and death ; the thrice-
marked pearl of the preaching of the gospel of the
Buddhas is not andwhenthe Buddhas speak of the
;
impermanence of all things, of the universality of
sorrow, and of the delusion of individuality, people
Su 1 ya T m h a e , n S a a m n e t s us a i r t e a, gi P v a e r n a i n n im t i h t e t t a e - x v t as ; av t a h t e t f i o , ur a M n a d ha M r a a h j a a - s, Br S a a h k m k a a, .
They are the governors in the different worlds (Chakkavala) of
the Buddhistcosmogony.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
147
will neither listen [nor believe, saying : What is
this they talk of ? At such a time there can be no
understanding, and without that the teaching will
not leadto salvation. That therefore is not the time.
Neither is it the right time when the span of life is
under one hundred years. Why not ? Because then
sin is rife among men and admonition addressed to
;
the sinners does not endure, but like a streak drawn
on the water vanishes quickly away. That therefore
is not the time. When, however, the span of life is
under a hundred thousand and over a hundred years
that is the proper time.&quot; Now at that time the span
of (earth) life was one hundred years. The Great
Being therefore saw that the time of his advent had
arrived.
Then reflectinguponthe COUNTRY, and considering
the four great continents with their surrounding
islands,1 hethought : &quot; In three of the continents the
Buddhas are not born, but in Jambudvlpa they are
born,&quot; and thus he decided on the country.
Then reflecting upon THE DISTRICT, and thinking :
&quot; Jambudvlpaindeedislarge, tenthousand leaguesin
extent now in which district of it do the Buddhas
;
appear ? &quot; he fixed upon the Middle Country. 2 And
1 Inthe seassurroundingeachcontinent (Mahadipa) there are
fivehundredislands. SeeHardysManual ofBuddhism, p. 13.
- Majjhima-desa, of which the commentator adds : &quot;This is
the countrythus spoken ofin the Vinaya,&quot; quoting the passage
t a S &quot o t . ;T E t M . o h a e t h t h d h W e v e . a E g . r t g i h t a v e h e , e r b v r t . S a o a h w 1 l 3 m n a , l a K a n 1 a v 2 j a , t t a o i n w w g h ;n a i l c t a a h o n , d g a t i h n d v e i d e s s t b S r t e . i h c y e t t o h n T b e d o h u u i t n t n o d M a a w a r n h i a e S a s s e n a t d a l a s a t k o f a ; o n t l n t h l o i e o k t w a N s h . e ; :
the Usiraddhaja Mountain.&quot; These are diffe ; rent from the
boundaries of the Madhya Desa of later Brahminical literature,

148 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
calling to mind that the town named Kapilavatthu
wasinthat country, he concludedthathe oughtto be
borninit.
Then reflecting onTHE FAMILY, hethought : &quot; The
Buddhas are not born in the Vessa caste, nor the
Sudda caste but either in the Brahmin or in the
;
Khattiya caste, whichever is then held in the highest
repute. The Khattiya caste is now predominant, I
must be born in it, and Suddhodana the chief will be
my
father.&quot;
Thushebeheldthefamily.
Then
reflecting
onTHEMOTHER, hethought
:
&quot; The
mother of a Buddha is not lustful, or corrupt as to
drink, but has fulfilled the Perfections for a hundred
thousand ages, and from her birth upwards has kept
the five Precepts unbroken. Now this lady Maha
Maya is such an one, she will be my mother.&quot; And
further considering how long her life should last, he
foresaw that it would still last ten months and seven
days.
Havingthusreflectedonthesefiveimportantpoints
hefavouredthedevasbyconsenting
:
&quot; Thetimehas
arrived, sirs, for me to become a Buddha.&quot; He then
dismissed them with the words and promise &quot; Do
you go &quot; and attended by the devas of the world of
;
Bliss (Tusita), he entered the grove of Gladness
(Nandana) in the City of Bliss.
Now in each of the deva-worlds there is such a
on which see Lassens Indische Alterthumskunde, vol. i, p. 119
(2nd edition). This sacred land was regarded as the centre of
J Ch a i m n b e u s d e v t i a p l a ko ; fC th h a i t na is a , s o t f he t M h i e dd t l h e en Co k u n n o tr w y n , w a o n r d ld aso j t u h s e t r a p s eop t l h e e
havelookedontheirown capitalasthenavelorhuboftheworld,
andontheirworldasthecentreoftheuniverse.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
149
grove of Gladness and there the devas are wont to
;
remind any one ofthemwho is about to depart ofthe
opportunities he has gained by good deeds done in
a former birth, saying to him : &quot; When hence
deceased go to a good destiny.&quot; And thus he also,
when walking about there, surrounded by devas re
minding him of his acquired merit, departed thence,
and was conceived in the womb of the Lady Maha
Maya.
In order to explain this better, the following is the
account in fuller detail. At that time, it is said, the
Midsummer festival was proclaimed in the City of
Kapilavatthu, andthe peoplewere enjoyingthefeast.
During the seven days before the full moon the Lady
Maha Maya had taken part in the festivity, as free
from drunkenness as it was brilliant with garlands
and perfumes. Onthe seventh daysherose early and
bathed in perfumed water : and she distributed four
hundred thousand pieces in giving great largesse.
Decked in her richest attire she partook of the purest
food : and steadfast in the rites of the feast she
enteredher beautiful chamber, and lying onher royal
couch she fell asleep and dreamt this dream.
The four Guardians of the world, lifting her up in
her couch, carried her to the Himalaya mountains,
and placing her under the Great Sal-tree, seven
leagues high, on the Crimson Plain, sixty yojanas
broad, they stood respectfully aside. Their queens
then came toward her, and taking her to the Jake of
Anotatta, bathed her to free her from human stains
;
and dressed herin heavenly garments and anointed
;
her with perfumes and decked her with heavenly
;

150 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
flowers. Not far from there is the Silver Hill, within
which is a golden mansion ; in it they spread a
heavenly couch, with its head towards the East, and
on it they laid her down. Then the future Buddha,
who had become a superb white elephant, and was
wandering on the Golden Hill, not far from there,
descended thence, and ascending the Silver Hill,
approached her from the North. Holding in his
silvery trunk a white lotus flower, and uttering a far-
reaching cry, he entered the golden mansion, and
thrice doing obeisance to his mother s couch, he
gently struck her right side, and seemed to enter her
womb.1
ThuswasheconceivedattheendoftheMidsummer
festival. And the next day, having awoke from her
sleep, she related her dream to the raja. The raja
had sixty-four eminent brahmins summoned, and
had costly seats spread on a spot made ready for the
stateoccasionwithgreenleaves and dalbergiaflowers,
andhehadvesselsofgold andsilverfilledwithdelicate
milk-rice compounded with ghee and sweet honey,
and covered with gold and silver bowls. This food
he gave them, and he satisfied them with gifts of new
garments and oftawny cows. And when he hadthus
satisfied their every desire, he had the dream told to
them, and then he asked them : &quot; What will come
of it ? &quot;
The brahmins said : &quot;Be not anxious, sire ! your
queen has conceived : and the fruit of her womb will
1 Itis instructive to notice that inlater accounts itis soberly
relatedasactualfactthattheBodisatenteredhismothers womb
as a white elephant: and the Incarnation scene is occasionally
sorepresentedin Buddhistsculptures.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 151
be a man-child it will not be a woman-child. You
;
will have a son. And he, if he adopts a householder s
life, willbecome a king, aUniversalMonarch ; but if,
leaving his home, he adopt the religious life, he will
become a Buddha, who will remove from the world
the veils of ignorance and sin.&quot;
Now atthe moment whenthe future Buddha made
himself incarnate in his mother s womb, the con
stituent elements of the ten thousand world-systems
at the same instant quaked, and trembled, and were
shaken violently. The Thirty-two Good Omens also
were made manifest. In the ten thousand world-
systems an immeasurable light appeared. The blind
received their sight, as if from verylongingto behold
this his glory. The deafheard thenoise. Thedumb
spake one with another. The crooked became
straight. The lame walked. All prisoners were freed
fromtheirbonds and chains. Ineachhellthefirewas
extinguished. In the realm of the Petas hunger and
thirst were allayed. The wild animals ceased to be
afraid. The illness of all who were sick was allayed.
All men began to speak kindly. Horses neighed, and
elephantstrumpetedgently.
Allmusicalinstruments
gave forth each its note, though none played upon
them. Braceletsand otherornaments jingled ofthem
A
selves. All the heavens became clear. cool soft
breeze wafted pleasantly for all. Bain fell out of
due season. Water, welling up from the very earth,
overflowed.1 The birds forsook their flight on high.
1 I think this is the meaning of the passage, though Prof.
Childers has a different rendering of the similar phrase at verse
104,whereIwouldread&quot;it&quot;insteadof&quot;vegetation&quot;. Compare
Dafhdvamsa, i,45,

152 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
The rivers stayedtheir waters flow. The sea became
sweetwater. Everywhereitssurfacewascoveredwith
lotusesofeverycolour. Allflowersblossomedonland
and in water. The trunks, and branches, and twigs
of trees were covered with the bloom appropriate to
each. On earth tree-lotuses sprang up by sevens
together, breaking even through the rocks : and
hanging-lotuses were born in the sky and rained
down everywherearainofblossom. Inthe skydeva-
music was played. The ten thousand world-systems
revolved, and rushed as close together as a bunch of
gathered flowers and became as it were a woven
;
wreath of worlds, as sweet-smelling and resplendent
as amass ofgarlands, oras asacredaltardeckedwith
flowers.
From the moment of the conception, thus brought
about, of the future Buddha, four devas with swords
in their hands, stood guard over the Bodisat, and his
mother, to shield them from all harm. Pure in
thought, having reached the highest aim and the
highesthonour, themotherwashappyandunwearied;
she saw the child within her as plainly as one could
see a thread passed through a transparent gem.1
But as a womb in which a future Buddha has dwelt,
like a sacred relic shrine, can never be occupied by
another ; the mother ofthe Bodisat, seven days after
his birth, died, and was rebornin the City of Bliss.
Now other women give birth, some before, some
after, thecompletionofthetenthmonth, some sitting,
1 I once saw a notice of some mediaeval frescoes in which the
HolyChildwassimilarlyrepresentedasvisiblewithintheVirgins
womb, buthaveunfortunatelymislaidthereference.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
153
andsome
lying
down. NotsothemotherofaBodisat.
She gives birth to the Bodisat standing, after she has
cherished him in her womb for exactly ten months,
thisis adistinctive quality ofthe motherofa Buddha
elect.
And queen Maha Maya, when she too had thus
cherishedthe Bodisatinherwomb, likeoilina
vessel,
for ten months, felt herself far gone with child : and
wishing to go to her family home she spake to King
Suddhodana, and said
:
&quot; Sire, I wish togo to Devadaha, to the city of my
people.&quot;
The king, saying : &quot; It is good,&quot; consented, and
had the road from Kapilavatthu to Devadaha made
plain, and decked with arches of plaintain-trees, and
well filled water-pots, and flags, and banners. And
seating the queen in a golden palanquin carried by a
thousand attendants, he sent her away with a great
retinue.
Now between the two towns there is a pleasure-
groveofsal-treesbelongingtothepeopleofboth
cities,
and calledthe Lumbini grove. Atthattime, fromthe
roots to the topmost branches, it was one mass of
fruits and flowers and amidst the blossoms and
;
branches swarms of various-coloured bees, and flocks
of birds of different kinds roamed warbling sweetly.
The whole of the Lumbini grove was like a wood of
variegated creepers, or the well-decorated banqueting
hallofsomemightyking. Thequeenbeholdingitwas
filled with the desire of besporting herself in the
sal-tree grove ; and the attendants carrying the
queen, entered the wood. When she came to the

154 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
monarch sal-tree of the glade, she wanted to take
hold of a branch ofit, and the branch bending down,
like a reed heated by steam, approached within reach
of her hand. Stretching out her hand she took hold
of the branch, and then karma-bornwinds shook her.
The people, drawing a curtain round her, retired.
Standing, and holding the branch of the sal-tree, she
was delivered.
That very moment the four pure-minded Maha
Brahmas came there bringing a golden net ; and
receivingthe future Buddha onthat net, they placed
him before his mother, saying : &quot;Be joyful, Lady !
a mighty son is born to thee ! &quot;
Now other living things, when they leave their
mother s womb, leave it smeared with offensive and
impure matter. Not so a Bodisat. The future
Buddha left his mother s womb like a preacher
descending from a pulpit or a man from a ladder,
erect, stretching out his hands and feet, unsoiled by
anyimpurities from contact with his mothers womb,
pure and fair, and shining like a gem placed on
fine muslin of Benares. But though this was so, two
showersofwatercame downfromheaveninhonourof
them and refreshed the Bodisat and his mother, and
cleansed her body.
From the hands of the Brahmas who had received
him in the golden net, the Four Kings received him
on cloth of antelope skins, soft to the touch, such as
are used on occasions of royal state. From their
handsmen receivedhim on aroll offinecloth and on
;
leaving their hands he stood up upon the ground and
looked towards the East. Thousands of world-

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
155
systems became visible to him like a single open
space. Men and devas offering him sweet-smelling
garlands, said : &quot; great man, there is no other like
thee, how then a greater ? &quot; Searching the ten
directions1 and finding no one like himself, he took
seven strides, saying : &quot; This is the best direction.&quot;
And as he walked the Great Brahma held over him
the white umbrella, and the Suyama followed him
with the fan, and other devas with the other symbols
of royalty in their hands. Then, stopping at the
seventh
step,
hesentforthhisnoblevoiceandshouted
the shout of victory, beginning with : &quot;I am the
chief of the world.&quot; 2
Nowthefuture Buddhainthree birthsthus uttered
his voiceimmediately on leavinghis mother s womb
;
in his birth as Mahosadha, in his birth as Vessantara,
and in this birth. In the Mahosadha birth the deva-
king Sakka came to him as he was being born, and
placing some fine sandal-wood in his hand, went
away. He came forth from the womb holding this
in his fist. His motherasked him : &quot; What is it you
hold, dear, as you come ? &quot; He answered, &quot; Herb-
medicine, mother ! &quot; So because he came holding
this they gave him the name of Herb-medicine child
(Osadhadaraka). Taking the medicine they kept
it in a chatty (an earthenware water-pot) and it
;
became a drug by which all the sickness of the blind
and deaf and others, as many as came, was healed,
so the saying sprang up : &quot; This is a great osadha !
1 N., S., E., W., four intermediate to these, the zenith and
the nadir.
2 The Madurattha Vilasinladds the rest: &quot;I am supreme in
the world ; this is my last birth ; henceforth there will be no
rebirth for me.&quot;

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
156
this is a great osadha ! &quot; and hence he was called
Mahosadha (The Great Herb-medicine Man).
Again, in the Vessantara birth, as he left his
mothers womb, he stretched out his right hand,
saying : &quot; But is there anything in the house,
mother ? I would give a gift.&quot; Then his mother,
saying, &quot; You are born, dear, in a wealthy family,&quot;
tookhishandinhers, and
placed
onitabagcontaining
a thousand.
Lastly, in this birth he sang the song of victory. 1
Thus, the future Buddha in three births uttered his
voice as he came out of his mothers womb. And as
at the moment of his conception, so at the moment
of his birth, the thirty-two Good Omens were seen.
Now at the very time when our Bodisat was born
in the Lumbini grove, the lady mother of Rahula,2
Channa the attendant, Kaludayi the minister,
Kanthaka the royal horse, the great Bo-tree, and the
four vases full of treasure, also came into being. Of
these last, one was two miles, one four, one six, and
one eight miles in size. These seven are called the
Sahajata, the Connatal Ones.3
1 Lit., roared the lion-roar ; a term for a manifesto of self-
confidence. Ed.
2 Wife ofGotamaBuddha.
3 There is some mistake here, as the list contains nine or if
thefourtreasurescountasone,onlysix ConnatalOnes. Ithink
before Kaludayi we should insert Ananda, the loving disciple.
S B o ud A d l h a i b s a m s , te p r . a 1 n 4 d 6). Har B d i y ga ( n W d h e e t el als o o ft a h d e ds La A w n , an p. da 1 , 06 b ; ut Ma ca n ll u s al hi o m f
the son of Amittodana, which is against the common tradition
(Life or Legend ofGaudama, p. 36, comp. my Buddhism, p. 52).
Thelegendis certainly, as toits mainfeatures, anearlyone, for
itis alsofound, in greatlyexaggerated andcontradictoryterms,
in the books of Northern Buddhists (Lalita Vistara, Foucaux,
p. 97, Beal, p. 53 ; cf. Senart, p. 294).

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
157
The people of both towns took the Bodisat and
went to Kapilavatthu. On that day too, companies
of devas in the next, the Tavatimsa world, were
astonished and joyful ; and waved their robes and
rejoiced, saying, &quot; In Kapilavatthu, to Suddhodana
the king a son is born, who, seated under the Bo-
tree, will become a Buddha.&quot;
At that time an ascetic named Kaja Devala, a
confidential adviser of Suddhodana the who
king,
had passed through the eight stages of religious
attainment,1 had eaten his midday meal, and
had gone to the Tavatimsa world for his midday
rest. Whilst there sitting resting, he saw these
devas, and asked them : &quot;Why are you thus
glad at heart and rejoicing ? Tell me the reason
of
it.&quot;
Thedevas replied : &quot; Sir,toSuddhodanathekingis
borna son, who,seatedundertheBo-tree,willbecome
a Buddha, and will found a Kingdom of Righteous
ness.2 To us it will be given to see his infinite grace
and to hear his word. Therefore it is that we are
glad ! &quot;
The ascetic, hearing what they said, quickly came
down from the deva-world, and entering the kings
house, sat down on the seat set apart for him, and
A
said : &quot; son they say is born to you, king ! let
me
see him.&quot;
The king ordered his son to be clad in splendour
and carried in to salute the ascetic. But the future
Buddha turned his feet round, and planted them on
1 Samapatti.
2 DhammacaJckampavattessati. See my Buddhism, p. 45.

158 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
the matted hair of the ascetic.1 For in that birth
therewasno oneworthytobesalutedbythe Bodisat,
andif theseignorant ones had placedthehead of the
future Buddha atthefeetoftheascetic, assuredlythe
ascetic s head would have split in two. The ascetic
rose from hisseat, and saying: &quot;Itisnot right for me
to work my own destruction,&quot; he did homage to the
Bodisat. And the king also seeing this wonder did
homage to his own son.
Now the ascetic had the power of calling to mind
the events of forty ages (kalpas) in the past, and of
forty ages in the future. Looking at the marks of
futureprosperity ontheBodisat sbody, heconsidered
with himself : &quot; Will he become a Buddha or not ? &quot;
And perceiving that he would most certainly become
a Buddha, he smiled, saying : &quot; This is a wonder-
man.&quot; Then reflecting : &quot; Will it be given to me to
behold him when he has become a Buddha ? &quot; he
perceivedthatitwouldnot. &quot; Dyingbeforethattime
I shall be reborninthe formless world so that while
;
a hundred or perhaps a thousand Buddhas appear
among men, I shall not be able to go and be taught
by them. And it will not be my good fortune to
behold this so wonderful man when he has become
a Buddha. Great, alas, is my loss ! &quot; And he
wept.
The people seeing this, asked, saying : &quot; Our
1 It was considered among the brahmins a sign of holiness to
wear matted or platted hair. This is referred to in the striking
Buddhist verse (Dhammapada, v, 394): &quot;What is the use of
p y l e a a t r t n e i d ng h s ai a r r , e O wit f h o i ol n ! you W , h a a n t d o t f he a ou g t a s r i m d e e n y t ou of m s a k k i e ns cl ! ea Y n ou ! r &quot; low

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
159
master just now smiled, and has now begunto weep !
Will, sir, anymisfortunebefallourmasters child ? &quot; *
There is no misfortune inhim ; assuredly he will
become a Buddha,&quot; was the reply.
&quot; Why then do you weep ? &quot;
&quot; Itwillnotbegrantedto
me,&quot;
hesaid, &quot; to behold
sogreatamanwhenhehasbecomeaBuddha.
Great,
alas, is my loss ! bewailing myself, I weep.&quot;
Then reflecting : &quot; Willit be granted or not to any
one of my relatives to see him as a Buddha ? &quot; he
saw it would be granted to his nephew, the boy
Nalaka. So he went to his sister s house, and said
to her, &quot; Where is your son Nalaka ? &quot;
&quot; In the house, brother.&quot;
&quot; Call
him,&quot;
saidhe. Whenhecamehesaidtohim,
&quot; In the family of Suddhodana the king, dear, a son
is born, ayoungBuddha. In thirty-fiveyears he will
become a Buddha, and it will be granted you to see
him. This very day give up the world ! &quot;
Bearing in mind that his uncle was not a man to
urge
himwithoutacause,theyoungman,though bom
in a family of incalculable wealth, 2 straightway took
out of the inner store a yellow suit of clothes and an
earthenware pot, and shaved his head and put on the
robes. And saying : &quot;I leave the world for the sake
of him who is the greatest person on earth,&quot; he
prostrated himself on the ground and raised his
joinedhandsinadorationtowardsthe Bodisat. Then
putting the begging bowl in a bag, and carrying it on
1 &quot;Our master&quot; (ayyo) is here, of course, the sage. It is a
pretty piece of politeness, not unfrequent in the Jatakas, to
addressastrangerasarelation. See below,Jatakano.3.
2 Literally &quot;worth eighty and seven times a ko^i both
eightyandsevenbeingluckynumbers.
v
&quot;,

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
160
his shoulder, lie went to the Himalaya mountains,
andlivedthelife ofa monk.
When the Tathagata had attained to complete
Enlightenment, Nalaka went to him and heard the
wayofsalvation.1 HethenreturnedtotheHimalayas
and reached Arahantship. And when he had lived
seven months longer as a pilgrim along the most
excellent Path, he passed away when standing near
a Golden Hill, by that final passing awayin which no
source of rebirth remains.2
Now on the fifth day they bathed the Bodisat s
head, saying : &quot; Let us perform the rite of choosing
a name for him.&quot; So they perfumed the king s house
with four kinds of odours, and decked it with
Dalbergia flowers, and made ready rice well cooked
in milk. Then they sent for one hundred and eight
brahmins who had mastered the three Vedas, and
seated them in the kings house, and gave them the
pleasant food to eat, and did them great honour, and
asked them to recognize the signs of what the child
should be.
Among them
:
270. Rama,andDhaja, andLakkhana,andMantin,
Kondanyaand Bhoja, Suyamaand Sudatta,
Theseeightbrahminsthenwerethere,
Their sensesall subdued
;
andthey declaredthe charm.
Now these eight brahmins were recognizers of
signs ; it was by themthatthe dream onthe night of
1 Literally &quot;and caused him to declare, Nalaka-course. &quot;
Of. the Najaka-sutta, inSutta-Nipaka, v.679-723. Tathagata,
m &qu e ot; n, g & o qu n ot e ; , is or an co a m d e j , ec i t n ive lik a e pp m l a i n ed ne o r ri ; gi s n u a b l j l e y ct to to al t l he mo f r a t t a e ls, of b a u l t l
afterwards used as a favourite epithet of Gotama. Childers
compares the use of &quot;Son of Man &quot;.
2 Anupadisesaya Nibbana-dhatuya parinibbdyi.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
161
conception had been interpreted. Seven of them
holding up two fingers prophesied in the alternative,
saying : &quot; If a man having such marks should remain
a householder, he becomes a Universal Monarch
;
but if he takes the vows, he becomes a Buddha.&quot;
And, so saying, they declared all the glory and power
of a Chakkavatti
king.
But the youngest of all of them, a young brahmin,
whose family name was Kondanya, beholding the
perfection of the auspicious marks on the Bodisat,
raised up one finger only, and prophesied without
ambiguity, and said : &quot; There is no sign of his
remaining amidst the cares of household life. Verily,
he will become a Buddha, and remove the veils of
sin and ignorance from the world.&quot;
Thisman
already,
underformerBuddhas,hadmade
a deep resolve of holiness, and had now reached his
last birth. Therefore it was that he surpassed the
other seven in wisdom ; that he perceived how the
Bodisat would only be subject to this one life ; and
that, raisingonlyone finger, hesoprophesied, saying :
&quot; The lot of one possessed of these marks will not be
cast amidst the cares of household life. Verily, he
will become a Buddha &quot;
!
Now those brahmins went home, and addressed
theirsons, saying : &quot; We are old, dearones ; whether
or not we shall live to see the son of Suddhodana the
king after he has gained all-knowledge, do you, when
he has gained all-knowledge, take the vows according
to his religion.&quot; And after they all seven had lived
out their span of life, they passed away and were
reborn according to their deeds.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
162
But the young brahmin Kondanya was in good
health and for the sake of the wisdom of the Great
;
Being he left all that he had and made the great
renunciation. And coming in due course to Uruvela,
he thought : &quot; Behold how pleasant is this place !
howsuitablefortheexertionsofayoung mandesirous
of wrestling with sin.&quot; So he took up his residence
there.
And when he heard that the Great Being had left
the world, he wenttothe sons ofthosebrahmins, and
said to them : &quot; Siddhattha the prince has taken the
vows. Assuredly he will become a Buddha. If your
fathers were in health they would to-day leave their
homes, andgoforth : andnow,ifyoushouldsodesire,
come,Iwillleavetheworldinimitationofhim.&quot; But
all of them were not able to agree with one accord :
three didnotgiveup theworld
;
the other fourmade
Kondanya the brahmin their leader, and left
the world. It was those five who came to be called
&quot; the Company of the Five Elders
&quot;.
Then the king asked : &quot; After seeing what, will
my son forsake the world ? &quot;
&quot; The four Omens &quot; was the reply.
&quot; Which four ? &quot;
&quot; Amanwornoutby age, a sickman, a dead body,
and a monk.&quot;
The king thought : &quot; From this time let no such
things
comenearmyson. Thereisnogoodinmysons
becoming a Buddha. I should like to see my son
exercising rule and sovereignty over the four great
continentsandthetwothousandislandsthatsurround
them and
walking,
asitwere,inthevaultofheaven,
;

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
163
surrounded by an innumerable retinue.&quot; * Then
so saying, he placed guards two miles apart in the
four directions to prevent men of those four kinds
coming to the sight ofhis son.
That day also, of eighty thousand clansmen
assembled in the festival hall, each one dedicated a
son, saying : &quot; Whetherthis child becomes a Buddha
or a king, we give each a son ; so that if he shall
becomeaBuddha,heshallliveattendedandhonoured
by Khattiya monks, and if he shall become a king,
he shall live attended and honoured by nobles.&quot; 2
And the raja appointed nurses of great beauty, and
freefrom everyfault, fortheBodisat. Sothe Bodisat
grew up in great splendour and surrounded by an
innumerable retinue.
Now one day the king held the so-called Ploughing
Festival. Onthat daythey ornamentthetownlike a
palace ofthegods. Alltheslaves and servants,in new
garments and crowned with
sweet-smelling garlands,
assemble in the king s house. For the king s work a
thousand ploughs are yoked. On this occasion one
hundred and eight minus one were, with the oxen-
reins and cross-bars, ornamented with silver. But
the plough for the king to use was ornamented with
red gold ; and so also the horns and reins and goads
ofthe oxen.
The king leaving his house with a great retinue,
took his sonand wentto the spot. There there was a
jambu-treethickwithleavesand givingadenseshade.
wh 1 er L e it &q e uot; r t a h l i l r y ty- &qu s ot i ;a x r &quo e t; t is in a ue me t r h e ir s t a y c -s r i e x dn le u a m g b u e e r s . in circumference&quot;,
8 Khattiya(Kshatriya)wasthe warriorcaste.

164 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Underit the raja hadthe childs couchlaid out ; and
over the couch a canopy spread inlaid with stars of
gold, and round it a curtain hung. Then leaving a
guard there, the raja, clad in splendour and attended
by his ministers, went away to plough.
At such a time the king takes hold of a golden
plough,theattendantministersonehundredand
eight
minus one silver ploughs, and the peasants the rest
of the ploughs. Holding them they plough this way
and that way. The raja goes from one side to the
other, and comes from the other back again.
Onthisoccasiontheking had greatsuccess
;
andthe
nurses seated round the Bodisat, thinking : &quot; Let us
go to see the kings glory came out from within the
&quot;,
curtain, andwentaway. Thefuture Buddha, looking
all round, and seeing no one, got up quickly, seated
himself cross-legged, and holding his breath, sank
into the first Jhana.1
The nurses, engaged in preparing various kinds of
food, delayed a little. The shadows ofthe othertrees
turned round, but that of the jambu-tree remained
steady andcircularinform. The nurses,remembering
their young master was alone, hurriedly raised the
curtain and returned inside it. Seeing the Bodisat
sitting cross-legged, and that miracle of the shadow,
they went and told the raja, saying : &quot; Sire ! the
prince is seated in such and such a manner ; and
while the shadows of the other trees have turned,
that of the jambu-tree is fixed in a circle ! &quot;
And the raja went hurriedly and saw that miracle,
1 A state of religious meditation. A full explanation is given
in myBuddhism, pp. 174-6.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
165
and did homage to his son, saying : &quot; This, dear,
is the second homage paid to thee ! &quot;
But the Bodisat in due course grew to manhood.
And the king had three mansions made, suitable for
the three seasons, one nine stories high, one seven
stories high, and one five stories high and he
;
provided him with forty thousand dancing girls. So
the Bodisat, surrounded by well-dressed dancing
girls, like a deva surrounded by troops of nymphs,
and attended by musical instruments which
played
of themselves, lived, as the seasons changed, in
each of these mansions in enjoyment of great
prosperity. And the mother of Kahula was his
principal queen.
Whilst he was thus in the enjoyment of great
prosperity the following talk sprang up in the public
assemblyofhisclansmen
:
&quot; Siddhatthalivesdevoted
to pleasure ; not one thing does he learn ; if war
should break out, what would he do ? &quot;
The king sent for the future Buddha, and said to
him : &quot; Your relations, dear one, say that you learn
nothing, and are given up to pleasure : now what do
you think you should do about this ? &quot;
&quot; Sire, there is no art it is necessary for me to
learn. Have the drum-beater about the city, that I
mayshowmyskill. Seven daysfrom nowI will show
mykindredwhatI can
do.&quot;
The king did so. The Bodisat assembled those so
skilledinarcherythattheycould
split
evenahair, and
shootas quickaslightning
;
and then, inthe midst of
the
people,
heshowedhisrelativeshistwelve-fold
skill,
and how unsurpassed he was by other masters of the

166 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
bow.1 So the assembly of Ms clansmen doubted no
longer.
Now one day the future Buddha, wanting to go to
his pleasure ground, told his charioteer to harness his
chariot. The latter accordingly deckedthe gloriously
beautiful chariot with allits trappings, andharnessed
to it four state horses of the Sindhi breed, and white
as the leaves of the white lotus flower. And he
informed the Bodisat. So the Bodisat ascended the
chariot, resplendent like a mansion in the skies, and
went towards the garden.
The devas thought : &quot; The time for young Sid-
dhattha to attain Enlightenment is near, let us show
him the Omens.&quot; And they did so by making a son
of the devas represent a man wasted by age, with
decayed teeth and grey hair, bent and broken down
in body, and with a stick in his hand. But he was
only visible to the future Buddha and his charioteer.
Then the Bodisat asked his charioteer, as is told
in the Mahapadana2 : &quot; What kind of man is this,
whoseveryhairisnotasthat ofothermen ? &quot; When
heheardhis servant s answer, he said : &quot; Shamethen
be upon life ! since the old age of what is born is
evident
!
&quot; and with agitatedheart he turned back at
that very spot and re-entered his palace.
The king asked : &quot; Why does my son turn back so
hurriedly ? &quot;
&quot; Hehas seen anold man,&quot; theysaid, &quot; andhaving
seen anoldman, he willforsaketheworld.&quot;
&quot; By this you ruin me,&quot; exclaimed the raja ;
1 A gloss adds, &quot;This should be understood as is related
fullyintheSarabhangaJatalca&quot;(no. 522).
2 DialoguesoftheBuddha, ii, p. 18.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
167
&quot; quickly get ready plays to be performed before my
son. So long as he continues in the enjoyment of
pleasure, he will not turn his thoughts to forsaking
the world ! &quot; Then increasing the guards, he placed
them at each point of the compass, at intervals of
half a league.
Again, oneday, whenthefuture Buddha, ashe was
going to his pleasure ground, saw a sick man repre
sented by the devas, he made the same inquiry as
before and then, with agitated heart, turned back
;
and re-entered his palace. The king also made the
same inquiry, and gave the same orders as before ;
and again increasing the guard, placed them all
round as far as three gavutas.
Once more, when the future Buddha, as he was
going to his pleasure ground, saw a dead man repre
sented by the gods, he made the same inquiry as
before and then, with agitated heart, turned back
;
and re-entered his palace. The king also made the
same inquiry, and gave the same orders as before ;
and again increasing the guard, placed them all
round as far as a league.
Once again, when the future Buddha, as he was
going to his pleasureground, saw one who had aban
donedtheworld, carefully and decentlyclad, heasked
hischarioteer : &quot; Friend, whatkindofman isthat ? &quot;
As at that time there was no Buddha at all in the
world, the charioteer understood neither what a
reclusewasnorwhatwerehisdistinguishingcharacter
istics but nevertheless, inspired by the devas, he
;
said, &quot; That is a recluse &quot; ; and described the
advantages of renouncing the world. And that day
-

168 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
the future Buddha, cherishing the thought of re
nouncing the world, went on to his pleasure ground.
The repeaters of the Digha Nikaya, 1 however, say
that he saw all the four Omens on the same day, and
then went to his pleasure ground. There he enjoyed
himself during the day and bathed in the beautiful
lake ; and at sunset seated himself on the royal
resting stone to be robed. Now his attendants
brought robes of different colours, and various kinds
of ornaments, and garlands, and perfumes, and
ointments, and stood around him,
At that moment the throne on which Sakka was
seated became warm.2 And thinking to himself :
&quot; Who is it now who wants me to descend from
hence ? &quot; he perceived that the time for the adorn
ment of the future Buddha had come. And he said
to Vissakamma : &quot; Friend Vissakamma, the young
noble Siddhattha, to-day, at midnight, will carry
out the Great Renunciation. This is the last time
he will be clad in splendour. Go to the pleasure
ground and adorn him with heavenly array.&quot;
By the miraculous power which devas have,
he accordingly, that very moment, drew near
in the likeness of the royal barber ; and taking from
1 The members ofthe Buddhist Order ofalmsmen (bhikkhus)
wereinthehabitofselectingsomebookorbooksoftheBuddhist
Scriptures, which it was their especial duty to learn by heart,
repeat to their pupils,study, expound, and preach from. Thus
the DlgJia Nikaya, or collection of long treatises, had a special
schoolof repeaters (bhariaka)toitself.
2 At critical moments in the lives of personsof importance
in the religiouslegends of Buddhist India, the seat ofthe deva-
governor Sakkabecomeswarm. Fearful oflosinghistemporary
bliss,hethendescendshimself,orsendsVissakamma,theBuddhist
Vulcan,toactasadeusexmachina,andputthingsstraight.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
169
the barber s hand the material for the turban, he
arranged it round the Bodisat s head. At the touch
ofhis hand the Bodisat knew : &quot; This is no man, itis
a son of the devas.&quot; When the first round of the
turban was put on, there arose, by the appearance of
the jewel on the diadem, a thousand folds ; when
the turban was wrapt the second time round, a
thousand folds arose again ; when ten times, ten
thousand folds appeared. How so many folds could
seemtoriseonsosmallaheadisbeyondimagination
;
forinsizethe largestofthemwere astheflowerofthe
BlackPiyangu creeper, and the rest even as Kutum-
baka blossoms. And the head of the future Buddha
became like a Kuyyaka flower in full bloom.
And whenhe was arrayedin all his splendour the
musicians the while exhibiting each one his peculiar
skill, the brahmins honouring him with words of joy
and
victory,
andthe menoflowerstationwithfestive
cries and shouts of praise ; he ascended his superbly
decorated car.
At that time Suddhodana the king, who had heard
that the mother of Rahula had brought forth a son,
sent a message, saying : &quot; Make known my joy to
my son ! &quot; The future Buddha, hearing this, said :
&quot; An impediment has come into being, a bond has
come into being.&quot; When the king asked : &quot; What
did my son say ? &quot; and heard that saying, he gave
command : &quot; From henceforth let Kahula (impedi
ment) be my grandsons name.&quot; But the Bodisat,
riding in his splendid chariot, entered the town with
great magnificence and exceeding glory.
Atthattimeanoblemaiden, KisaGotamibyname,

170 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
had gone to the flat roof of the upper story of her
palace, and she beheld the beauty and majesty of the
Bodisat as he was proceeding through the city.
Pleased and delighted at the sight, she burst forth
into this song of joy :
271. Blessedindeedisthatmother
Blessedindeedisthatfather
Blessedindeedisthatwife
Ofwhomsuchan oneismaster
!
Hearingthis, theBodisatthoughttohimself : &quot; On
catchingsightofsuchanonetheheartofhismotheris
made happy, the heart of his father is made happy,
the heart of his wife is made happy ! So she says.
Butinpeace as to what canthe heart be at peace? &quot;
And to him whose mind was estranged from sin the
answer came : &quot; When the fire of lust is gone out,
then peace is gained ; when the fires of hatred and
delusionaregoneout, thenpeaceisgained
;
whenthe
troubles ofmind, arising fromvain conceits, opinions,
and all other corruptions have ceased, then peace
is gained ! Sweet is the lesson this singer makes me
hear, for the going out which is Peace is that which
I have been trying to find out. This very day I will
break away from household cares I will renounce
!
theworld
!
IwillfollowonlyaftertheNirvanaitself! l
1 The force of this passage is due to the fullness of meaning
which,totheBuddhist,thewordsNibbutaandNibbdnamconvey.
No words in western languages cover exactly the same ground,
or connote the same ideas. To explain them fully to anyone
unfamiliar with Indian modes of thought would be difficult
anywhere, andimpossibleinanote ; buttheirmeaningispretty
clearfromtheabovesentences. Whereinthem,inthesong,the
wordsblessed,happy,peace,andthewordsgoneout,ceased,occur,
nibbutastandsintheoriginalinoneorotherofitstwomeanings;

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
171
Then loosing from his neck a string of pearls worth
a hundred thousand, he sent it to Kisa Gotami as a
teachersfee. Delightedatthis,shethought: &quot;Prince
Siddhattha has fallen in love with me, and has sent
me a present.&quot; But the Bodisat, on entering his
palace in great splendour, reclined on a couch of
state.
Thereupon women clad in beautiful array, skilful
in the dance and song, and lovely as deva-maidens,
broughttheirmusicalinstruments, and ranging them
selves in order, danced, and sang, and played delight
fully. But the Bodisat, his heart being estranged
from sin, took no pleasure in the spectacle, and fell
asleep.
And the women, saying : &quot; He for whose sake we
were performing is gone to sleep ? Why should we
weary ourselves ? &quot; laid aside the instruments they
held, and lay down to sleep. Lamps fed with sweet-
smelling oil were burning. The Bodisat, waking up,
sat cross-legged on the couch, and saw those women
with their music truck laid aside and sleeping some
drivelling at the mouth spittle-besprinkled, some
grinding their teeth, some snoring, some muttering
in their sleep, some gaping, and some with their
dress in disorder plainly revealed as mere horrible
occasions ofworldly ways.
Seeing this change in their appearance, he became
more and more unfain of sense-desires. To him that
where in them the words Nirvana, going o&amp;gt;it which is Peace
occur, Nibbdnam stands in the original. Nirvana is a lasting
state ofhappinessand peace, to be reached bytheextinction of

172 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
magnificent apartment, as splendid as Sakka s
residence, began to seem like a great area laden with
divers offal, like a enamel-field full of corpses. Life,
whether in the worlds subject to passion, or in the
other worlds of form, or in the formless worlds,
seemedtohimlikestayinginahousethathadbecome
the prey of devouring flames.1 An utterance of
intense feeling broke from him &quot; It all oppresses
me ! Itisintolerable ! &quot; andhismindturned ardently
to the state of those who have renounced the world.
Resolving that very day to accomplish the Great
Renunciation, he rose from his couch, went to the
door and called out : &quot; Who isthere ? &quot;
Channa,whohadbeen sleepingwithhisheadonthe
threshold, answered : &quot; It is I, sir, Channa.&quot;
Then said he : &quot;I want to-day to accomplish the
Great Renunciation saddle me a horse.&quot;
So Channa saying : Very good, sire, and taking
harness, went to the stable-yard, and entering the
stablessawbythe lightofthelampsKanthaka,prince
of steeds, standing at a pleasant spot under a canopy
of cloth, beautified with a pattern of jasmine flowers.
&quot; This is the very one I ought to saddle
to-day,&quot;
thought he and he saddled Kanthaka.
;
Even whilst he was being saddled the horse knew :
&quot;He is saddling me so tightly and not as on other
daysfor such rides as those to the pleasure grounds,
because my master is about to-day to carry out the
1 Lit., &quot;The three Bhavas seemed like houses on fire.&quot; The
three Bhavas are existence in the Kama-loka, the Rupa-loka,
a
w
n
ho
d
s
t
e
he
i
A
n
r
ha
u
b
p
i
a
t
-
a
l
n
o
t
k
s
a
a
r
r
e
e
spe
s
c
u
t
b
i
j
v
e
e
c
l
t
y;
to
th
p
a
a
t
ss
i
i
s,
on
e
,
xi
w
st
h
e
o
nce
ha
i
v
n
e
th
m
e
a
w
t
o
e
r
r
l
i
d
al
s
forms,butnotpassion,andhavenoformsrespectively.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
173
Great Kenunciation.&quot; Then, glad at heart, he
neighed a mighty neigh and the sound thereof
;
would have penetrated over all the town, had not
the devas stopped the sound and let no one hear it.
Now after the Bodisat had sent Channa on this
errand, he thought : &quot;I will just look at my son.&quot;
And
rising
fromhis
cross-leggedsitting
hewenttothe
apartments of Rahula s mother, and opened her
chamber door. At that moment a lamp, fed with
sweet-smelling oil, was burning dimly in the inner
chamber. The mother of Rahula was asleep on a bed
strewn with many jasmine flowers, 1 and resting her
hand on the head ofher son. Stopping withhis foot
onthe threshold, the Bodisat thought, &quot; If I lift her
hand to take my son, she will awake and that will
;
prevent my going away. I will come back and see
him whenI havebecome a Buddha.&quot; And he left the
palace.
Nowwhatis saidinthe Jataka commentary : &quot;At
thattime Rahulawas sevendays
old,&quot;
is notfoundin
the other commentaries. Therefore the view given
above should be accepted. 2
And whenthe Bodisat had left the palace, he went
to his horse, and said : &quot; Dear Kanthaka, do thou
bear me over this once to-night ; so that I, having
become a Buddha by thy help, shall bear over the
worldofmenand
devas.&quot;
Then
leapingup,
heseated
himself on Kanthaka s back.
1 Lit., &quot;aboutanammana (i.e. five orsixbushels) ofthelarge
jasmineandtheArabian
jasmine.&quot;
2 The Jataka Commentary here referred to is, no doubt, the
oldercommentaryofElu,oroldSinghalese,onwhichthepresent
workisbased.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
174
Kanthaka was eighteen cubits in length from the
nape of his neck, and of proportionate height ; he
was strong and fleet, and white all over like a clean
chank shell. If he should neigh or paw the ground,
the sound would penetrate through all the town.
Therefore the devas so muffled the sound of his
neighingthatnone couldhearit ; and placed, at each
step, the palms of their hands under his feet.
The Bodisat rode on the excellent back of the
excellent steed ; told Channa to catch hold ofits tail,
and arrived at midnight at the greatgate of the city.
Now the king thinking : &quot;In that waythe Bodisat
will not be able at anytime to open the city gate and
get away had placed athousandmenat each ofthe
&quot;,
two gates to stop him. The Bodisat was mighty and
strong according to the measure of elephants as ten
thousand million elephants, and according to the
measureofmenasamillionmillionmen. He
thought:
&quot; If the door does not open, sitting on Kanthaka s
back with Channa holding his tail, I will press Kan
thaka with my thighs, and jumping over the city
rampart, eighteen cubits high, I will get away ! &quot;
Channa thought : &quot;If the door is not opened, I will
take my master on my neck, and putting my right
hand round Kanthakas girth, I will hold him close
to my waist, and so leap over the rampart and get
away ! &quot; Kanthaka thought : &quot;If the door is not
opened, I will spring up with my master seated as he
is on my back, and Channa holding by my tail, and
will leap over the rampart and get away ! &quot; And if
the door had not been opened, verily one or other of
hose three would have accomplished that whereof

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
175
lie had thought. But the deva residing at the gate
opened it.
AtthatmomentMaracametherewiththeintention
of stopping the Bodisat ; and standing in the air, he
exclaimed : &quot;Go not forth sir ! in seven days from
nowthetreasure-wheelwillappear, andwillmake
you
sovereign over the four continents and the two
thousand adjacent isles. Stop, my lord ! &quot;
Who
&quot; are you ? &quot; said he.
&quot; I am Vasavatti,&quot; was the reply.
&quot; Mara Well do I know that the treasure-wheel
!
would appear to me ; but it is not sovereignty that I
desire. I shall become a Buddha, and make the ten
thousand world-systems shout for
joy.&quot;
Then thoughttheTemptertohimself
:
&quot; Now, from
thistimeforth, wheneverathoughtoflustorangeror
maliceshallarisewithinyou, I willgetto know ofit.&quot;
And he followed him, ever watching for some slip, as
closelyasashadowwhichneverleavesits
object.
But the future Buddha, making light of the
kingdom of the world, thus within his reach casting
it away as one would spittle left the city with great
honouronthefull-moondayofAsalhi, whenthemoqn
was in the Uttarasalha lunar mansion on the
(i.e.
1st July). And when he had left the city a desire
sprang up within him to look back upon it ; and the
instant he did so the broad earth revolved like a
potter s wheel, and was stayed : saying as it were to
him : &quot;0 great man, there is no need for you to stop
in orderto fulfilyourwish.&quot; So the Bodisat, with his
face towards the city, gazed at it ; and he fixed at
that place a spot for The Shrine of Kanthaka s

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
176
Staying. And keeping Kanthaka in the direction in
whichhewas
going,
hewentonwithgreat honourand
exceeding glory.
For then, they say, devas in front of him carried
sixty thousand torches, and behind him too, and on
hisrighthand, andonhisleft. Andwhilesomedevas
undefined on the edge of the horizon, held torches
aloft other devas, and the Nagas, and Winged
;
Creatures, and other superhuman beings, bore him
company doing homage with heavenly perfumes,
and garlands, and sandal-wood powder, and incense.
And the whole sky was full of Paricchattaka flowers
as with the pouring rain when thick clouds gather.
Divine songs floated around : and on every side
thousands of musical instruments sounded, as when
thethunderroarsinthewomb ofthesea, ortheocean
heaves against the boundaries of the world !
Advancing in this pomp and glory, the Bodisat, in
that one night, passed beyond three kingdoms, and
arrived,
attheendofthirtyleagues, atthebankofthe
river called Anoma. But why could not the horse go
stillfurther ? Itwasnotthrough wantofpower : for
he could go from one edge of the worlds disc to the
other, as easily as one could step across the cir
cumference of a wheel lying on its side ; and doing
this inthe forenoon, he could return and eat the food
prepared for him. But on this occasion he was
constantly delayed by having to drag himself along,
and break his way through the mass of garlands and
flowers, cast down from heaven in such profusion by
the devas, and the Nagas, andtheWinged Creatures,
that his very flanks were hid. Hence it was that he
only got over thirty leagues.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
177
Now the Bodisat, stopping at the river side, asked
Channa : &quot; What is this river called ? &quot;
&quot; Its name, sire, is Anoma.&quot;
&quot; And so also our leaving the world shall be called
Anoma
(illustrious),&quot; said he ; and signalling to his
horse, by pressing it with his heel, the horse sprang
over the river, five or six hundred yards in breadth,
and stood on the opposite bank.
The Bodisat, getting down from the horses back,
stoodonthesandybeach,
extendingtherelikea sheet
of silver, and said to Channa : &quot; Good Channa, do
thou now go back, taking my ornaments and
Kanthaka. I am going to leave the world.&quot;
&quot; But I also, sire, will leave the world.&quot;
Thou canst not be allowed to leave the world, do
thou go back,&quot; he said. Three times he refused this
request of Channa s and he delivered over to him
;
both the ornaments and Kanthaka.
Then he thought &quot; These locks of mine are not
;
suited for a recluse. Now it is not right for any one
else to cut the hair of a future Buddha, so I will cut
them off myself with this sword.&quot; Then, taking his
sword in his right hand, and holding the plaited
tresses, together with the diadem on them, with his
left, he cut them off. So his hair was thus reduced to
twoinchesinlength, and curling fromthe right, itlay
closeto hishead. It remained that length as long as
he lived, and the beard the same. There was no need
at all to shave either hair or beard any more.
The Bodisat,sayingtohimself : &quot;HI amtobecome
a Buddha, let it stand in the air if not, let it fall to
;
the ground &quot;, threw the hair and diadem together as

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
178
he held them towards the sky. The plaited hair and
the jewelled turban went a league off and stopped in
the air. Sakka, the deva-king, caught sight ofitwith
his deva-eye, and receiving it into a jewel casket, a
league high, he placeditin Tavatimsa, inthe Dagaba
of the Diadem.
272. Cutting off his hair, with pleasantperfumessweet,
Thesupremepersoncastittothesky.
Thethousand-eyedone, Sakka,byhishead,
Receivedithumblyinagoldencasket.
Again the Bodisat thought : &quot; This my raiment of
Benares muslin is not suitable for a recluse.&quot; Now
the great Brahma Ghatikara, who had formerly been
his friendinthetime of Kassapa Buddha,1 wasledby
his friendship, which had not grown old in that long
interval, tothink : &quot; To-daymyfriendis accomplish
ingthe GreatRenunciation, I willgo and provide him
with the requisites of a recluse.
273. Thethreerobes, andthealmsbowl,
Razor,needle, and girdle,
Andawaterstrainer theseeight
Arethewealthofthemonkdevout.
Taking these eight requisites of a recluse, he gave
them to him. The Bodisat dressed himself in the
banner ofanArahant and adopted the sacred garb
,
of Renunciation
;
andheenjoined upon Channa togo
And
and,inhisname, assurehisparentsofhissafety.
Channa did homage to the Bodisat reverently, and
departed.
Now Kanthaka stood listening to the Bodisat as he
talked with Channa. And thinking: &quot;From this
1 Seeabove, p. 51.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
179
timeforthIshallneverseemymastermore
&quot; hewas
!
unableto bearhis grief. And goingout oftheir sight,
he died of a broken heart; and was reborn in
Tavatimsaasadeva, withthenameofKanthaka. So
far the sorrow of Channa had been but now
single ;
torn with the second sorrow of KanthakaJs death, he
returned, weeping and bewailing, to the city.
ButtheBodisat, havingrenouncedtheworld,
spent
sevendays in a mango grove calledAnupiya, hard by
that spot,inthe
j
oyofrenunciation. Thenhewenton
foot in one day to Rajagaha, a distance of thirty
leagues, 1 and entering the city, begged his food from
door to door. The whole city at the sight of his
beauty was thrown into commotion, as was
Rajagaha by the entrance of Dhana-palaka, or like
the deva-city by the entrance of the governor of
the Asuras.
The guards went to the king and said, describing
him : &quot; Sire, such and such a being is coming for
alms through the town. We cannot tell whether he
is a deva, or a man, or a Naga, or a Supanna,2 or
what he
is.&quot;
1 The word rendered league is i/ojana, said by Childers (Pali
Diet,s.v.) to be twelve miles, butreallyonlybetweensevenand
eightmiles. SeemyAncient CoinsandMeasures,pp.16,17. The
thirty yojanas here mentioned, together with the thirty from
Kapilavatthu to the river Anoma, make together sixty, orfour
hundred and fifty milesfrom Kapilavatthuto Rajagaha,which
is far too much for the direct distance. There is here, I think,
an undersigned coincidence between Northern and Southern
m ac e c n o t u ) nt m s a;ke f s or t t h h e e B L o a d l i i s t a a t Vi g s o ta t r o a R ( a C j ha a p g , ah x a vi, vi a a t V t e h sa e li c , o a m n m d en t c h e is
wouldmakethetotal distanceexactlysixtyyojanas.
2 These are the superhuman Snakes and Winged Creatures,
whowere supposed,like the gods orangels, to beable to assume
the appearance ofmen.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
180
The king, watching the great manfromhis palace,
became full of wonder, and gave orders to his guards,
saying, &quot;Go, I say, and watch. If it is a super
human being, he will disappear as soon as he leaves
the city ; if a deva, he will depart through the air ;
if a snake, he will dive into the earth ; if a man, he
will eat the food just as itis.&quot;
But the great man collected mixed food. And
when he perceived there was enough to support him,
he left the city by the gate at which he had entered.
And seating himself, facing towards the East, under
the shadow of the Pandava rock, he began to eat his
meal. His stomach, however, turned, and made as if
it would come out of his mouth. Then, though
distressed by that revolting food, for in that birth he
had never even beheld such food with his eyes, he
himself admonished himself, saying : &quot; Siddhattha,
it is true thou wast born in a family where food and
drinkwere easilyobtainable, into a state of life where
thy food was perfumed third-seasons rice, with
various curries of the finest kinds. But ever since
thou didst see one clad in a mendicants garb, thou
hast been thinking : When shall I become like him,
and live by begging my food ? would that that time
were come And now that thou hast left all for
!
thatverypurpose, whatisthisthatthouartdoing ? &quot;
And overcoming his feelings, he ate the food.
The kings men saw this, and went and told him
that had happened. Hearing what his messengers
said, the king quickly left the city, and approaching
the Bodisat, was so pleased at the mere sight of his
dignity
and
grace,
thatheofferedhimallhiskingdom.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
181
The Bodisat said ; &quot;In me, king ! there is no
desire after wealth or sinful pleasures. It is in the
hope of attaining to complete enlightenment that I
have left all.&quot; And when the king gained not his
consent, though he asked it in many ways, he said :
&quot; Assuredly thou wilt become a Buddha ! Deign at
least after thy Buddhahood to come to my kingdom
first.&quot;
This is here concisely stated ; but the full account,
beginning : &quot;I sing the Renunciation, how the Wise
One renouncedthe world willbe found on
&quot;, referring
to the Pabbajja Suttax and its commentary.
And the Bodisat, granting the king s request, went
forward on his way. And joining himself to Alara
Kalama, and to Uddaka, son of Rama, he acquired
their systems of ecstatic trance. But when he saw
that that was not the way to enlightenment, he left
off applying himself to the realization of that system
of Attainment. And with the intention of carrying
out the Great Struggle against sin, and showing his
might and resolution to devas and men, he went to
Uruvela. And saying : &quot; Pleasant, indeed, is this
spot ! &quot; he took up his residence there, and devoted
himselfto the Great
Struggle.
2
1 SeeSuttaNipata, vers.405-24.
2 TheGreatStruggleplayedagreatpartintheBuddhistsystem
ofmoraltraining; itwasthewrestlingwiththefleshbywhicha
trueBuddhistovercamedelusionand sin,andattainedtoNirvana.
Itis bestexplainedbyitsfour-folddivisioninto 1. Masteryover
the passions. 2. Suppression of sinful thoughts. 3. Meditation
ofthe sevenkindsofEnlightenment(Bodhi-anga,seeBuddhism,
p m . in 1 d 73 f ) r ; om an w d an 4 d . er F i i n x g e . d a I t t t i e s nt a i l o s n o , ca t l h l e ed p S o a w m er ma o p f pa p d re h v a e n n a t , in R g ig t h h t e
Effort, and a formula alluded to in many Suttas. The system
was, ofcourse, notworkedoutatthetimeherereferred to but
;

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
182
And those five recluses, Kondanya and the rest, 1
beggingtheirwaythroughvillages, markettowns, and
met with the Bodisat there. And for
royal cities,
six years they stayed by him and served him, while
he was carryingoutthe Great Struggle, with different
kinds of service, such as sweeping out the hermitage,
andsoon
;
thinkingthewhile
:
&quot; Nowhewillbecome
a Buddha ! now he will become a Buddha ! &quot;
Now the Bodisat thought : &quot;I will perform the
uttermost penance/ And he brought himself to live
on one seed of the oil-plant, or one grain of rice, and
even to fast entirely ; but devas gathered the sap of
life and infused it into him through the pores of his
skin. By this fasting, however, he became as thin as
a skeleton the colour of his body, once fair as gold,
;
became dark and the thirty-two signs of a great
;
man disappeared. And one day, when walking up
and down, plunged in intense meditation, he was
overcome by severe pain and he fainted, and fell.
;
Then certain of the devas began to say : &quot; He is
dead.&quot; But others said : &quot; Such is the way of
saints.&quot; And those who thought he was dead
went and told Suddhodana theking, saying : &quot; Your
son is dead.&quot;
&quot;Didhe die afterbecoming a Buddha,orbefore ? &quot;
&quot; He was unable to attainto Buddhahood, and fell
down and diedinthe midst ofthe Great
Struggle.&quot;
throughoutthechroniclethebiographerascribestoGotamafrom
the beginning, a knowledge of the whole Buddhist theory as
afterwards elaborated. For to our author that theory had no
development, it was Eternal and Immutable Truth already
revealedbyinnumerableprevious Buddhas.
1 See above, p. 62.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
183
When the king heard this, he refused to credit it,
saying : &quot; I donotbelieveit. Mysoncouldnever die
without attaining to Enlightenment ! &quot;
If you ask : &quot; Why did not the king believe it ? &quot;
it was because he had seen the miracles at the foot of
the jambu-tree, and on the day when Kala Devala
had been compelled to do homage to the Bodisat.1
Andthe Bodisatrecoveredconsciousness and
again,
stood up. And those devas went and told the king,
Your son, king, is well.&quot; And the king said :
&quot; I knew my son was not dead.&quot;
And the great beings six years penance became
noised abroad, as when the sound of a great bell is
heardinthe sky. But he perceivedthat penance was
not the way to enlightenment ; and begging through
the villages and towns, he collected ordinarymaterial
food andlived uponit. And thethirty-two signs of a
great man appeared again upon him, and his body
became fair in colour, like unto gold.
Then the five attendant monks thought : &quot; This
manhas not been able, evenbysixyears penance, to
attain all-knowledge ; how can he do so now, when
he goes begging through the villages, and takes
materialfood ? He is altogetherlostin the struggle.
To think of getting spiritual eminence through him
is like a man, who wants to bathe his head, thinking
ofusing a dewdrop. What couldwe get from him ? &quot;
And leaving the great man, they took each his robes
and begging bowl, and went eighteen leagues away,
and entered Isipatana. 2
1 2 S A ee Bu a b b u o r v b e, of p. Be 1 n 5 a 7 r . es, famous forits schools oflearning

184 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
Now at that time, at Uruvela, in the village
Senani, there was a girl named Sujata, born in the
house of Senani the landowner, who, when she had
grown up, made a vow at a Nigrodha-tree, saying :
&quot; If I am married into a family of equal rank, and
have a son for my first-born child, then I will spend
everyyearahundredthousandonan offeringtothee.&quot;
And this her vow took effect.
Andinorderto make her onthe full-moon
offering,
dayofthemonthofMay,inthesixthyearoftheGreat
Being s penance, she had driven in front of her a
thousand cows into a meadow of rich grass. With
their milk she had fed five hundred cows, with theirs
twohundredand
fifty,
andsoondownto
eight.
Thus
aspiring after quantity, and sweetness, and strength,
shedidwhatiscalled
:
&quot; Workingthemilkinand
in.&quot;
And early on the full-moon day in the month of
May, thinking : &quot; Now I will make the offering &quot;,
she rose up in the morning early and milked those
eight cows. Of their own accord the calves kept
away from the cows udders, and as soon as the new
vessels were placed ready, streams of milk poured
into them. Seeing this miracle, Sujata, with her own
hands, took the milk and poured it into new pans
;
and with her own hands made the fire and began to
cook it. When that rice-milk was boiling, huge
bubbles rising, turned to the right and ran round
together ; not a drop fell or was lost ; not the least
smoke rose from the fireplace.
At that time the four guardians of the world came
and kept watch by the fireplace. A great Brahma
held over it a canopy of state. Sakka put the sticks

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 185
together and lighted the fire. By their divine power
thedevasgatheringsomuchofthesapofmaintenance
as would suffice for the support of all men and devas
of the four continents, and their circumjacent two
thousandisles aseasilyasaman crushingthehoney
comb formed round a stick would take the honey
they infused it into the milk-rice. At other times
devasinfusedthe sapinto each mouthful ofrice as he
took it but on the day of his Buddhahood, and on
;
the day of his passing away, they infused it into the
very vessel-full of rice itself.
Sujata, seeing that so many wonders appeared to
her on this one day, said to her slave-girl Punna :
&quot; Punna, my girl ! Verygraciousis ourdevato-day !
Neverbeforehave I seen such a wonder. Go at once
and keep watch by the holy place.&quot; &quot; Very good,
madam,&quot; replied she ; and ran and hastened to the
foot of the tree.
Now the Bodisat had seen that night five dreams,
and on considering their purport he had drawn the
conclusion : &quot; Verily this day I shall become a
Buddha.&quot; And at the end of the night he washed
and dressed himself, and waiting till the time should
come to go round for his food, he went early, and sat
at the foot of that tree, lighting it all up with his
glory.
AndPunna comingthere sawthe Bodisat sittingat
the foot of the tree and lighting up all the region of
the East and she saw the whole tree in colour
;
like gold from the rays issuing from his body. And
she thought : &quot; To-day our deva, descending from
the tree, is seated to receive our offering in his own

186 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
hand.&quot; And excited with joy, she returned quickly,
and announced this to Sujata. Sujata, delighted at
the news, gave her all the ornaments befitting a
daughter, saying : &quot; To-day, from this time forth,
be thou to me in the place of an elder daughter ! &quot;
And
since,
onthedayofattainingBuddhahood,itis
proper to receive a golden vessel worth a hundred
thousand, she conceived the idea : &quot; We will put the
milk-rice into a vessel of gold.&quot; And sending for a
vessel of gold worth a hundred thousand, she poured
out the well-cooked food to put it therein. All the
rice-milk flowed into the vessel, like water from a
lotus leaf, and filled the vessel full. Taking it she
covered it with a golden platter, and wrapped it in
a cloth. And adorning herself in all her splendour,
she put the vessel on her head, and went with great
dignity to the Nigrodha-tree. Seeing the Bodisat,
she was filled with exceeding joy, taking him for the
tree-deva
;
andadvancedbowingfromthespot whence
she saw him. Taking the vessel from her head, she
uncovered it ; and fetching sweet-scented water in a
goldenvase,sheapproachedtheBodisat,andstoodby.
The earthenware pot given him by the deva
Ghatikara, which had never till then left him,
disappeared at that moment. Not seeinghis pot, the
Bodisat stretched out his right hand, and took the
water. Sujata placed the vessel, with the milk-rice
in it, in the hand of the great man. The great man
looked at her. Pointing to the food, she said : &quot; 0,
sir ! accept what I have offered thee, and depart
whithersoever seemethto thee good.&quot; And adding :
&quot; May there arise to thee as much joy as has come to

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 187
me ! &quot; she went away, valuing her golden vessel,
worth a hundred thousand, at no more than a dried
leaf.
ButtheBodisat
rising
fromhisseat, and leavingthe
treeontherighthand,tookthevesselandwenttothe
bank of the Neranjara river, down into which on the
day of their complete Enlightenment so many thou
sand Bodisats had gone. The name of that bathing
place is the Supatitthita l ferry. Putting the vessel
on the bank, he descended into the river and bathed.
And having dressed himself again in the banner of
the Arahantswornbyso manythousand Buddhas, he
sat down with his face to the East : and dividing the
rice into forty-nine balls ofthe size of so many single-
seeded palmyra fruits, he ate all that sweet-milk rice
without any water.2 Now that was the only food
he had for forty-nine days, during the seven times
sevendayshe
spent,
afterhe becameaBuddha, atthe
foot of the Tree of Enlightenment. During all that
time he had no other food he did not bathe nor
; ;
wash his teeth nor feel the cravings of nature. He
;
lived on Jhana-joy, on Path- joy, on Fruition-
joy-
But when he had finished eating that milk-rice, he
took the golden vessel, and said : &quot; If I shall be able
to-day to become a Buddha, let this pot go up the
stream : if not, let it go down the stream ! &quot; and he
threw it into the water. And it went, in spite of the
1 well-established.
2 Thefruitof the Palmyra(Borassusflabelliformis)hasalways
three seeds. I do not understand the allusion to a one-seeded
Palmyra.

188 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
stream, eightycubits uptheriverinthe middle ofthe
stream, all the way as quickly as a fleet horse. And
diving into a whirlpool it went to the palaceof Ka la
Nagaraja (the Black Snake King) ; and striking
against the bowls from which the three previous
Buddhas had eaten, it made them sound &quot; killi-
killi ! &quot; and stopped as the lowest of them. Kala,
the snake-king, hearing the noise, exclaimed :
Yesterday a Buddha arose, now to-day another has
arisen &quot; ; andhestood praising himinmanyhundred
stanzas.
ButtheBodisatspenttheheatofthedayinagrove
of sal-trees in full bloom on the bank or the river.
And in the evening, when the flowers droop from
theirstems, heproceeded, likealionwhen itisroused,
towards the Tree of Enlightenment, along a path five
or six hundred yards wide, decked by devas. The
Snakes, and Genii, and Winged Creatures,1 and other
superhuman beings, offered him sweet-smelling
flowers from heaven, and sang heavenly songs. The
ten thousand world-systems became filled with
perfumes and garlands and shouts of approval.
Atthattimetherecamefromtheopposite direction
a grass-cutter named Sotthiya, carrying grass ; and
recognizingthe great man, he gave him eight bundles
ofgrass. The Bodisattookthe grass : and ascending
1 Nagas,Yakkhas,andSupannas. TheYakkhasarecharacter
i f z e e m d al t e h Y ro a u k g k h h o a u s t a t s h s e ir J e a ns ta l k ur a in s g to m r e ie n s o b n y to th d e e i s r tr c u a c n t n io i n b . ali T s h m e ; y t a h r e e
invisible till they assume human shape; but even then can be
recognized by their red eyes. That the Ceylon aborigines are
called Yakkhas in the Mdhavamsa probably results from a
traditionoftheircannibalism. Ontheothers, seeabove, p. 179.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
189
the rising ground round the Bo-tree, he stood at the
South of it, looking towards the North. At that
moment the Southern horizon seemed to descend
below the level of the lowest hell, and the Northern
horizon mounting up seemed to reach above the
highest heaven.
The Bodisat, saying : &quot; This cannot, methinks, be
the right place for attaining Buddhahood turned
&quot;,
round it, keeping it on the right hand ; and went to
the Western side, and stood facing the East. Then
the Western horizon seemed to descend beneath the
lowest hell, and the Eastern horizon to ascend above
the highest heaven ; and to him, where he was
standing, the earth seemed to bend up and down like
a great cart wheel lying on its axis when its
circumference is trodden on.
The Bodisat, saying : &quot; This cannot, I think, be
the right place for attaining Buddhahood &quot;, turned
round it, keeping it on the right hand ; and went to
the Northern side, and stood facing the South. Then
the Northern horizon seemed to descend beneath the
lowesthell, andthe Southernhorizonto ascend above
the highest heaven.
The Bodisat, saying : &quot; This cannot, I think, be
the right place for attaining Buddhahood &quot;, turned
round it, keeping it on the right hand ; and went to
the Western side, and stood facing towards the East.
Now in the East is the place where all the Buddhas
have sat cross-legged ; and that place neither
trembles nor shakes.
The greatbeing, perceiving : &quot; Thisisthesteadfast
spot chosen by all the Buddhas, the spot for the

190 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
throwing down of the cage of sin took hold of the
&quot;,
grass by one end, and scattered it there. And
immediately there was a seat fourteen cubits long.
For those blades of grass arranged themselves in
suchaformaswouldbebeyondthepowerofeventhe
ablest painter or carver to design.
The Bodisatturninghisbackuponthetrunkofthe
Bo-tree, andwithhisfacetowardstheEast, madethe
firm resolve : &quot; May skin, indeed, and sinews, and
bones wilt away, mayflesh andbloodin mybody dry
up, buttillIattaintocompleteenlightenmentthisseat
I will not leave &quot; And he sat himself down in a
!
cross-legged position, firm and immovable, as if
welded with a hundredthunderbolts.
At that time the deva Mara, thinking : &quot; Prince
Siddhattha wants to free himself from my dominion.
I will not let him get free yet! &quot;went to the hosts of
his Maras,1 and told the news. And sounding the
drum called Mara-Cry, he led forth the hosts of
Mara.
That army of Mara stretches twelve leagues before
him, twelve leagues to right and left of him, behind
him it reaches to the rockylimits ofthe world, above
him it is nine leagues in height ; and the sound of
its war-cryis heard, twelve leagues away, even as the
sound of an earthquake.
Then Mara deva, mounted his elephant, two
hundred and fifty leagues high, named &quot; Girded with
mountains And he created for himself a thousand
&quot;.
arms, and seized all kinds of weapons. And of the
1 Lit.,tothestrengthofMara(s)(Marabala).

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
191
remainder, too, of the company of Mara, no two took
the same weapon ; but, assuming variouscolours and
various forms, they went on to overwhelm the great
being.
But the devas of the ten thousand world-systems
continued speaking the praises of the great being.
Sakka,the deva-king, stoodthereblowinghistrumpet
Vijayuttara. Now that trumpet is a hundred and
twenty cubits long, and can itself cause the wind to
enter, and thus itself give forth a sound which will
resound for four months, when it becomes still. The
Great Black One, the king of the Nagas, stoodthere
uttering his praises in many hundred stanzas. The
Maha Brahma stood there, holding over him the
white canopy of state. But as the army approached
and surrounded the seat under the Bo-tree, not one
of the hosts of Mara was able to stay, and they fled
each one from the spot where the army met them.
The Black One, king of the Nagas, dived into the
earth, andwenttoManjerika,thepalaceoftheNagas,
fivehundred leaguesinlength, and laydown, covering
his face with his hands. Sakka, taking the Vijayut
taratrumpet onhis back, stopped on therockyverge
of the world. Maha Brahma, putting the white
canopy of state on to the summit of the rocks at the
end of the earth, went to the world of Brahma. Not
a single deity was able to keep his place. The great
man sat there alone.
But Mara said to his company : &quot; Sirs ! there is no
other man like Siddhattha, the son of Suddhodana.
We cannot give him battle face to face. Let us
attack him from behind ! &quot; The great man looked

192 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
round on three sides, and saw that all the devas had
fled, and their place was empty. Then beholding the
hosts ofMara comingthickuponhimfromthe North,
he thought : &quot; Against me alone this mighty host
isputtingforthallits energy and strength. Nofather
is here, nor mother, nor brother, nor any other
relative to help me. But those ten perfections have
long been to me as retainers fed from my store. So,
making the perfections like a shield, I must strike
this host with the sword of perfection, and thus over
whelm it ! &quot; And so he sat meditating on the Ten
Perfections.1
ThenMara deva, saying : &quot; Thus will I drive away
Siddhattha caused a whirlwind to blow. And
&quot;,
immediately such winds rushed together from the
four corners of the earth as could have torndownthe
peaks of mountains half a league, two leagues, three
leagues high could have rooted up the shrubs and
trees ofthe forest and couldhave made ofthetowns
and villages around one heap of ruins. But through
the glow of the merit of the great man, they reached
him with their power gone, and even the hem of his
robe they were unable to shake.
Then saying : &quot;I will overwhelm him with water
and so slay him he caused a mighty rain to fall.
&quot;,
And the clouds gathered, overspreading one another
by hundreds and by thousands, and poured forth
rain and by the violence of the torrents the earth
;
was saturated ; and a great flood, overtopping the
trees of the forest, approached the.Bodhisat. But
1 HisacquisitionoftheTenPerfections, orCardinalVirtues,is
described above, pp. 101 ff.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
193
itwasnotabletowetonhisrobeeventhespacewhere
a dew-drop might fall.
Then he caused a storm of rocks to fall. And
mighty, mighty mountain peaks came through the
air,
spittingforthfireandsmoke. Butastheyreached
the Bodhisat, they changed into divine garlands.
Then he raised a storm of deadly weapons. And
they came one-edged, and two-edged swords, and
spears, and arrows smoking and flaming through
the sky. But as they reached the Bodhisat, they
became divine flowers.
Then he raised a storm of charcoal But the
embers, though they came through the sky like red
kimsuka flowers, were scattered at the feet of the
future Buddha as divine flowers.
Thenheraised a stormof embers andthe embers
;
came through the air exceeding hot, and in colour
likefire buttheyfellatthefeetofthefutureBuddha
;
as sandal-wood powder.
Then he raised a storm of sand and the sand,
;
exceeding fine, came smoking and flaming through
the air butitfellatthefeet ofthefutureBuddha as
;
divine flowers.
Then he raised a storm of mud. And the mud
came smoking and flaming through the air ; but it
fell at the feet of the future Buddha as divine
unguent.
Then saying : &quot; By this I will terrify Siddhattha,
anddrivehimaway
!
&quot;hebrought onathickdarkness.
And the darkness became fourfold but when it
;
reached the future Buddha, it disappeared as dark
ness does before the brightness of the sun.

194 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
ThuswasMaraunablebythesenine thewind, and
therain, andtherocks, andtheweapons,andthechar
coal, and the embers, andthesand,andthe mud, and
the darkness to drive away the future Buddha. So
hecalledonhishost, andsaid : &quot; Say, whystandyou
still ? Seize, or slay, or drive away this prince ! &quot;
AndhimselfmountedtheMountain-girded, andseated
on his back, he approached the future Buddha, and
cried out : &quot; Get up, Siddhattha, from that seat !
It does not belongto thee ! It belongs to me ! &quot;
The great being listened to his words, and said :
&quot; Mara ! itis notbyyouthatthetenPerfectionshave
been perfected, neitherthe lesser Perfections, nor the
higher Perfections. It is not you who have sacrificed
yourself in the five great acts of renunciation, who
have perfected the way of good in knowledge nor the
way of goodforthe worldnorthe way ofunderstand
ing.
Thisseatdoesnotbelongtothee,itistomethat
it
belongs.&quot;
Then the enraged Mara, unable to endure the
vehemence of his anger, cast at the great man
that Sceptre-javelin of his, the barb of which was in
shape as awheel. Butitbecame a wreath of flowers,
and remained as a canopy over him, whose mind was
bent uponthe Ten Perfections.
Now at othertimes, when that Wicked Onethrows
his Sceptre-javelin, it cleaves asunder a pillar of solid
rockasifitwerethetendershootofabambu. When,
however, it thus turned into a wreath-canopy, the
entire company of Mara shouted, &quot; Now he will rise
from his seat and flee ! &quot; and they hurled at him
hugemassesofrock. Butthesetoo fellontheground

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
195
as garlands at the feet of him whose mind was bent
uponthe TenPerfections.
And the devas stood on the edge of the rocks that
encircletheworld ; and stretching forward in amaze
ment, they looked on, saying : &quot; Lost ! lost is the
life of Siddhattha the Prince, supremely beautiful
What can he do ? &quot; !
Then the great man said : &quot; To me belongs the
seat on which sit the Buddhas-to-be when they have
fulfilled perfectiononthedayoftheir
And he said to Mara, standing the E r n e lig b h e t f me o n r t e .&q h u i ot m ;
&quo^t; Mara, who is witness that thou hast given alms ? &quot : ;
And Mara stretched forth his hand to the hosts of
hisfollowers, andsaid
:
&quot; Somanyaremy
witnesses.&quot;
Andthatmomenttherearoseashoutasthesoundof
an earthquake from the company of Mara, saying,
&quot; I am his witness ! I am his witness ! &quot;
Then the Tempter addressed the great man, and
said : &quot; Siddhattha ! who is witness that thou hast
given alms ? &quot;
And the great man answered : &quot; Thou hast living
witnesses that thou hast given alms : and I have in
this place no living witness at all. But not counting
the alms I have given in other births, let this great
and solid earth, unconscious though it be, be witness
ofthesevenhundredfold greatalmsIgavewhenIwas
born as Vessantara &quot;
!
And withdrawing his right hand from beneath his
robe,hestretcheditforthtowardstheearth,andsaid
:
&quot; Art thou, or art thou not witness of the seven
hundredfold great gift I gave in my birth as
Vessantara ? &quot;

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
196
And the great Earth uttered a voice, saying : &quot;I
am witness to thee of that ! &quot; overwhelming as it
were the hosts of Mara as with the shout of hundreds
of thousands of foes.
Then the mighty elephant &quot;Mount-girded&quot;
as he realized what the generosity of Vessantara had
been, said : &quot; The great gift, the uttermost gift was
givenbythee, Siddhattha ! &quot; Andhefell downonhis
knees before the great man. And the company of
Mara fled this way and that way, so that not even
twowerelefttogether
:
throwingof!theirclothes and
their turbans, they fled, each one straight on before
him.
But the company of devas, when they sawthat the
hosts of Mara had fled, cried out : &quot; Mara is
overcome ! Siddhattha the Prince has prevailed !
Come, let us honour the victor ! &quot; And the Nagas,
and the Winged Creatures, and the Devas, and the
Brahmas, each urging his comrades on, went up to
the great man at the Bo-tree s foot, and as they
came,
274. AttheBo-treesfoottheNagabands
Shouted,forjoythatthe Sagehadwon
;
&quot;TheBlessedBuddha hehathprevailed!
AndtheEvilMaraisoverthrown !&quot;
275. AttheBo-treesfoottheWinged Ones
Shouted,forjoythattheSagehadwon
;
&quot;TheBlessedBuddha hehathprevailed!
AndtheEvilMaraisoverthrown !&quot;
276. AttheBo-tree sfootthe Devahosts
Shoutedforjoythatthe Sagehadwon
;
&quot;TheBlessedBuddha hehathprevailed!
AndtheEvilMaraisoverthrown
!
&quot;
277. AttheBo-treesfoottheBrahmaGods
Shouted,forjoythattheSagehadwon
;
&quot;TheBlessedBuddha hehathprevailed!
AndtheevilMarais overthrown I&quot;

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
197
The other devas, too, in the ten thousand world-
systems, offered garlands and perfumes and uttered
hispraisesaloud.
It was while the sun was still above the horizon,
that the great man thus put to flight the hosts of
Mara. Then, whilst the Bo-tree paid him homage,
as it were, byits shoots like sprigs ofred coral falling
over his robe, he acquired in the first watch of the
nightthe knowledge ofthe past, in themiddle watch
the clairvoyant eye, and in the third watch the
knowledge of the chain of causation.1
Now on his thus revolving this way and that
way, and tracing backwards and forwards, and
thoroughly realizing the twelvefold chain of
causation, the ten thousand world-systems quaked
twelve times even to their ocean boundaries. And
again, when the great man, making the ten thousand
world systems to shout for joy, attained at break of
day to complete enlightenment, the whole ten
thousand world-systems became glorious as on a
festive day. The streamers of the flags and banners
raised onthe edge of the rocky boundarytp the East
of the world reached to the very West and so those
;
on the West and North, and South, reached to the
East, and South, and North while in like manner
;
those of flags and banners onthe surface of the earth
reached to the Brahma-world, and those of flags and
banners in that world swept down upon the earth.
Throughout the universe flowering trees put forth
their blossoms, and fruit-bearing trees were loaded
with clusters of fruit the trunks and branches of
;
1 Pubbe-nivasa-nana, Dibba-cakkhu, andPaticca-samuppada.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
198
trees,
andeventhecreepers, werecoveredwithbloom
;
lotuswreathshungfromthesky andliliesbysevens
;
sprang, one above another, even fromthe very rocks.
The ten thousand world-systems as they revolved
seemed like a mass of loosened wreaths, or like a
nosegay tastefully arranged : and the world-voids
between them, the hells whose darkness the rays of
seven suns had never been able to disperse, became
filled with light. The sea became sweet water down
toits profoundestdepths
;
andtheriverswere stayed
in their course. The blind from birth received their
sight ; the deaf from birth heard sound ; the lame
frombirthcouldusetheirfeet andchainsandbonds
;
were loosed and fell away. 1
Itwasthusinsurpassingglory andhonour,andwith
many wonders happening around, that he attained
all-knowledge, and gave vent to his emotion in the
hymn of triumph uttered by all the Buddhas.
278. LonghaveIwandered,long,
Boundbythechainoflife
Throughmanybirths,
Seekingthuslonginvain,
Thebaiilderofthehouse. And pain
Isbirthagain,again.
House-maker,thouartseen
!
Nomoreahousethoultmake.
Brokenareallthybeams.
Thyridge-poleshattered!
From thingsthatmakeforlifemymindhaspast:
Theendofcravingshasbeenreachedatlast! a
1 ComparetheThirty-twoGoodOmensatthe Buddhas Birth
above, p. 160.
2 Thetrainofthoughtisexplainedatlengthin myBuddhism,
pp. 100-12. Shortly, it amounts to this. The unconscious
h b a e s no no pai p n a . in W : h w a i t th g o i u v t es c m o e ns n ci c o o u n s s n c e i s o s u , sn i e n s d s iv ? id I u t al i i s t d y, ue th t e o r a e g w r o a u s l p d
ing, craving, sinful condition of heart. The absence of these

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
199
III:
THE PROXIMATE EPOCH1
Santike niddna.
Now whilst he was still seated there, after he
had sung the hymn of triumph, the Blessed One
thought : &quot;It is in order to attain to this seat
that I have undergone successive births for so long
cravings is Nirvana. Having reached Nirvana, consciousness
endures butfor a time (untilthe body dies), and it willthen no
longerberenewed. Thebeamsofsin,theridge-poleofcare,give
to the house of individuality its seeming strength: but in the
peace of Nirvana they have passed away. The Bodisat is now
Buddha ; he has reached Nirvana : he has solved the great
mystery; the jewel of salvation, soughtthrough so manyages,
hasbeenfoundatlast
;
andthelong,longstruggleisover.
ThefollowingisSpence Hardysliteraltranslationgiveninhis
Manual ofBuddhism, p. 180, where similar versions by Gogerly
and Turnour will be found : but theyscarcelyseemtoexpress
theinnermeaningofthesedifficultandbeautifulverses:
Through manydifferentbirths
Ihaverun(to menothavingfound),
Seekingthearchitectofthe(desireresembling) house,
Painfularerepeatedbirths
!
house-builder
!
Ihaveseen(thee).
Againahousethoucanstnotbuildforme.
1havebrokenthyrafters,
Thycentralsupportisdestroyed.
ToNirvanamymindhasgone.
Ihavearrivedattheextinctionofevildesire.
(Inthe Theragatha (verses183, 184)thehymn,slightlydifferent,
isascribedtoan (unknown) monk, Sivaka. Ed.)
The figure ofthehouseisfoundalsoinManu (vi, 79-81); inthe
Lalita Vistara(p. 107ofFoucauxsOyaTcherRolPa); andinthe
Adi Oranth (Trumpp,pp. 215, 216, 471). The last passage is as
follows
:
Astormofdivineknowledgehascome
!
T T h h e e s p h o u s t t t s er o s f of Do D u e b l l us e i - o m n in a d r e e d a n ll es b s lo a w r n e a b w r a o y ken ar d e o t w h n er ; en t o he lo r n i g d e g r e ;
poleofspiritualBlindnessisshattered
;
TheroofofCravinghasfallenontheground; thevesselofFolly
hasburst
!
1 Seeabove,p. 82. Asimilarexplanationishererepeatedin a
gloss.

200 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
a time,1 that I severed my crowned head from my
neck and gave it away, that I tore out my darkened
eyes and my heart s flesh and gave them away, that
I gave away to serve others such sons as Jali the
Prince, and such daughters as Kanha Jina the
Princess, and such wives as Maddi the Queen. This
seat is a seat of triumph to me, and a seat of
glory ;
whileseatedonitmyaimshavebeenfulfilled
:
I willnotleaveit Andhe satthere absorbedin
yet.&quot;
many thoughts 2 for those seven days referred to in
the text, beginning : &quot; And then the Blessed One
sat motionless for seven days, realizing the bliss of
Nirvana.&quot;
Now certainofthe devasbeganto doubt, thinking :
&quot; This day also there must be something more
Siddhatthahastodo, forhestilllingersseatedthere.&quot;
The Master, knowing their thoughts, and to appease
their doubts, rose into the air, and performed the
twin-miracle.3
And the Master having thus by this miracle dis
pelled the devas doubts, stood a little to the north
east ofthe seat, thinking : &quot;It was on that seat that
I attained all-knowing insight.&quot; And he thus spent
seven days gazing steadfastly at the spot where he
1 Literally for four asankheyyas and a hundred thousand
Icalpas.
2 Anekakoti-sata-sahassa samapattiyo samapajjanto.
Ma 3 h. Ya p m . a 1 k 0 a 7 - . pa ( t De i s h c a r r i i b y e a d n in ; t C h o e m P p a . ti p s p a . mb 8 h 8, id 1 a 9 m 3 a , gg of a, t a he bo t o e k xt, of a t n h d e
5th Nikaya ; i, 125, as fire proceeding from the upper half of
his body, waterfromthelowerhalf. Ed.) Bigandet, p. 93,has
t c h l
p
a a
e
u t
r
s
f
e t
o
h ;
r
e
m
a
e
B n
d
u d d
a
B d e h
t
a a
h
l
o
o p
u
m e
s
i r
a
t f
n
s o
d
r t m h
w
e e
o
d
n
w
d
a h
e
o
r
s l
s
i e mi
.
e l p a i r
H
s
a
o m d
r
e i
d
. r
y
a
,
cl
Ap
e
.
g o
1
l n
8
o
1
s
,
s th h
o
r e e
m
r e
i
e
ts
o a t d h
t
d e
h
s r
e
occasions.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
201
had gained the result of the deeds of virtue fulfilled
through such countless years. And that spot became
known as the Dagaba of the Steadfast Gaze.
Thenhecreatedbetweentheseatandthespotwhere
hehadstoodacloisteredwalk,andhespentsevendays
walking up and down in that treasure-cloister which
stretched from east to west. And that spot became
known as the Dagaba of the Treasure-Cloister.
But for the fourth week the devas created to the
north-west of the Bo-tree a Treasure-house and he
;
spenttheweekseatedthere
cross-legged,
and
thinking
out the Abhidhamma Pitaka and here
especially
the entire Patthana with its infinite methods. (But
the Abhidhammikas 1 say that Treasure-house here
means either a mansion built of the seven kinds of
jewels, or the place where the seven books were
thoughtout : andastheygivethesetwo explanations
of the passage, both may be accepted as correct.)
Having thus spent four weeks close to the Bo-tree,
hewent,inthefifthweek,totheShepherdsNigrodha-
tree : and sat there meditating on Doctrine, and
experiencing the happiness of deliverance.
Now at that time the deva Mara thought to him
self : &quot;So long a time have I followed this man
seeking some access to him, and find no faultinhim ;
and now, indeed, he is beyond my power.&quot; And
overcome with sorrow he sat down on the highway,
and as he thought of the following sixteen things
he drew sixteen lines on the ground. Thinking,
1 The monks whose duty it is to learn by heart, repeat, and
commentate upon the seven books in the Abhidhamma Pifaka.
Seeabove, p. 168.

202 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
&quot; I did not attain, as he did, to the perfection of
Giving therefore I have notbecome like him he
; &quot;,
drew one line. Then thinking : &quot; I did not attain, as
he did, tothePerfectionsof Moral Practice, andSelf-
abnegation, andWisdom,andExertion, andPatience,
and Truth, and Resolution, and Kindness, and
Equanimity x thereforeIhavenotbecomelike
; him,&quot;
he drew nine morelines. Then thinking : &quot;I did not
attain the Ten Perfections, the conditions precedent
to the penetration, the extraordinary knowledge of
the complete way of the senses, and therefore I have
not become like him he drew the eleventh line.
&quot;,
Then thinking : &quot;I did not attainto the Ten Perfec
tions, the conditions precedenttothe penetration, the
extraordinary knowledge of inclinations and latent
tendencies, of the attainment of compassion, of the
double miracle, of the removal of hindrances, and of
all-knowing : therefore I have not becomelike him
&quot;,
he drew the five other lines. And so he sat on the
highway, drawing sixteen lines for these sixteen
thoughts.
At that time Craving, Discontent, and Lust,2 the
three daughters of Mara, could not find their father,
and were looking for him, wondering where he could
be. And when they saw him, sad at heart, writing
on the ground, they went up to him, and asked :
&quot; Why, dear, are you sad and sorrowful ? &quot;
And he answered : &quot; My women, this great recluse
isescapingfrommypower. LonghaveIwatched, but
1 OntheseTenPerfections,seeabove,pp.101 ff.
* Tanha, Arati, and Raga. Of. Kindred Sayings, i, 156,
givingtheolderversion(Pali.TextSoc., 1917). Ed.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 203
in vain, to find some fault in him. Therefore it is
that I am sad and sorrowful.&quot;
&quot; Ifthatis so,&quot; repliedthey, &quot; thinknotthus. We
will subject him to our influence, and come back
bringing him captive with us.&quot;
&quot; My women,&quot; said he, &quot; you cannot by any means
bring
himunderyourinfluence thismanstandsfirm
;
in faith, unwavering.&quot;
&quot; Dear one, we are women &quot; was the reply ; &quot; even
now we shall bring him bound by the sweetness of
lust. Do not think so.&quot;
So they approached the Blessed One, and said :
&quot; recluse, upon thee we humbly wait ! &quot;
But the Blessed One neither paid any attention to
their words, nor raised his eyes to look at them. He
sat,withamindmadefreebythecompleteextinctionof
rebirth-conditions, enjoying the bliss of detachment.
Then the daughters of Mara considered with them
selves : &quot; Various are men stastes. Somefallinlove
with girls, some with young women, some with
mature women, some with older women. We will
tempthiminvariousforms.&quot; Soeachofthemassumed
the appearance of a hundred women girls, women
whohadneverhadachild, oronlyonce, oronlytwice,
middle-aged women, older women and six times
theywent uptothe Blessed One, and professed them
selves his humble handmaidens and to that also
;
the Blessed One paid no attention, so was he made
free by the completeextinction of rebirth-conditions.
Now, some teachers saythat whenthe Blessed One
saw them approaching in the form of elderly women,
he commanded, saying : &quot; Let these women remain

204 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
just as they are, with broken teeth, and bald heads.&quot;
This should not be believed, forthe Masterissues not
such commands.
But the Blessed One said : &quot; Depart ye ! What
have ye seenthat ye thus strive ? Such things might
bedoneinthe presence ofmenwho lingerinthe paths
of sin but by the Tathagata lust is put away,
;
ill-will is put away, delusion is put away.&quot; And he
admonishedtheminthosetwoversesfromtheChapter
on the Buddha inthe Scripture Verses :
280. Whoseconquestisnotoverthrown
Hisconquestnoughtonearthassails.
ThatBuddha,infiniteinrange,
Pathless, bywhatpathwillyelead?
281. Inwhom thereisnosnarebesetting.
Venomouscravingany-whitherleading.
ThatBuddha, infinitein range,
Pathless, bywhatpathwill ye lead?x
And they saying : &quot; Our father spoke the truth
indeed. The saint, theWell-Farer ofthe worldis not
easilyled away&quot; and so on, returned to their father.
But the Blessed One when he had spent aweek at
that spot, went on to the Muchalinda-tree. There he
spent a week. Muchalinda, the snake-king, when
a storm arose, shielding him with seven folds of his
hood, so that the Blessed One enjoyed the bliss of
deliverance as if he had been resting unharassed in a
fragrant chamber. Thence he went away to the
Kingstead-tree and there also sat down enjoying the
blissofdeliverance. Andsosevenweekspassedaway,
during which he experienced no bodily wants, but
fed on Jhana-joy, Path- joy, and Fruition-joy. 2
1 Gloss: He taughtthe Doctrine, sayingthese two stanzasin
the Buddha-section ofthe Dhammapada. Dhammapada (verses
179, 180).
8 Seeabove,p. 187.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
205
Now, as lie sat there on the last day of the seven
weeks the forty-ninth day he felt a desire tobathe
his face. And Sakka, the deva-governor, brought a
fruitofthemyrobolan-tree, and
gave
himtoeat. And
Sakka, too, provided a tooth-cleanser ofthethorns of
the snake-creeper, and water to bathe his face. And
the Master used the tooth-cleanser, and bathed his
face, and sat him down there at the foot of the
Kingstead-tree.
Atthattimetwo merchants, TapassuandBhalluka
by name, were travelling from Orissa to Central
India1with five hundred carts. And a deva,a blood
relation of theirs, stopped their carts, and moved
their hearts to offer food to the Master. And they
tookaricecake, andahoneycake, andwentuptothe
Master, and said : &quot;0 sir, Blessed One ! out of
compassion for us accept this food.&quot;
Now, on the day when he had received the sweet
rice-milk, his bowl had disappeared 2 so the Blessed
;
One thought : &quot; The Buddhas never receive food in
theirhands. How shallI acceptit ? &quot; Thenthe four
Guardians knew his thought and, coming from the
four quarters of the sky, they brought bowls made of
sapphire. AndtheBlessedOne acceptedthem. Then
they brought four other bowls, made of jade ; and
the Blessed one, out of kindness to the four devas,
receivedthefour, and placing themoneabove another
commanded, saying : &quot; Let them become one.&quot;
And the four closed up into one of medium size,
1 Ukkala to Majjhima-desa. The latter included all the
BuddhistHolyLand fromthemodernPatnatoAllahabad. See
above,p.61,note.
8 See above, pp. 178, 187.

206 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
becoming visible only as lines round the mouth of it.
The Blessed One received the food into that new-
created bowl, and ate it, and gave thanks.
The two brothers took refuge in the Buddha, the
Doctrine, and the Order,1 and became professed
disciples. Then, when they asked him, saying :
&quot; Lord, bestow upon us something to which we may
pay reverence,&quot; with his own right hand he tore from
his head, and gave to them, the hair-relics. And
they built a Dagabain their own city, and placedthe
relics within it. 2
But the Perfectly Enlightened One rose up thence,
and returned to the Shepherd s Nigrodha-tree, and
sat down at its foot. And no sooner was he seated
there, consideringthe depth of the Doctrine which he
had gained, thanthere arose inhis mind a doubt (felt
by each of the Buddhas as he became aware of his
having arrived at the Doctrine) that he had not that
kind of ability necessary to explain that Doctrine to
others.
2 1 W Al e lt h h a r v e e e h t e h r e e n a n n on i - n e t x e i r s e t st e i n n t g i i n n s s t t it a u n t c i e on o s f ! the E g d r . owth oflegend
to authenticate and add glory to local relics, of which other
instances willbefoundin Buddhism, p. 195. The ancient form
of this legend, as found here, must have arisen when the relics
werestillinOrissa. BoththeBurmeseandSinghalese nowclaim
to possess them. The former saythat the two merchants were
Burmese,andthattheDagabaabovereferredtoisthecelebrated
sanctuary of Shooay Dagob (Bigandet, p. 101, 2nd ed.). The
latter say that the Dagaba was in Orissa, and that the hair-
relics were brought thence to Ceylonin 490 A.D., inthe manner
related in the Hair-relic chronicle Kesa Dhdtu Vanisa, and
referredtointheMahd Vamsa. (Seeverses43-56ofmyedition
ofthe39thchap,oftheM.V.intheJ.R.A.S., 1875.) The legend
inthetextisfoundinanancientinscriptiononthegreatbellat
Rangoon (Houghs version in the Asiatic Researches, vol. xvi ;
comp.Hardy,MonasticBudhism,p.183
;
Beal,Rom. Leg.),p.240.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
207
Then the great Kuler of the Brahma heavens,
exclaiming : &quot; Alas ! the world is lost. Alas ! the
world is altogether lost ! &quot; brought with him the
rulersoftheworldsinthetenthousand 1
world-systems,
and went up to the Master, and said : &quot;0 Blessed
Lord, do thou proclaim the Doctrine ! Proclaim
the Doctrine, Blessed Lord ! &quot; and in other words
of like purport begged from him the preaching ofthe
Doctrine.
Then the Master granted his request. And con
sidering to whom he should first reveal the Doctrine,
thought at first of Alara, his former teacher, as one
whowould quicklycomprehendit. But, on surveying
(the country), he perceived that Alara had been dead
seven days. So he fixed on Uddaka. But he learnt
that he too had died that very evening. Then he
thought of the five mendicants : &quot; they were very
helpful ! &quot; And casting about in his mind : &quot; where
are they now dwelling ? &quot; he perceived they were at
the Deer-park in Benares. And he determined,
saying, &quot; There going I will set rolling the wheel of
Doctrine.&quot; But he delayed a few days, begging his
daily food in the neighbourhood of the Bo-tree, with
the intention : &quot;I will go to Benares on the full-
moon day of Asalhi.&quot;
And at dawn on the fourteenth day of the month,
whenthenight had passedaway, hetookhisrobeand
his bowl : and had gone eighteen leagues, just half
way, when he met the Ajivika friar Upaka. And he
announcedtohimhowhehadbecomeaBuddha and
;
1 In the Vinaya and Sutta accounts, the Brahma governor
comesalone. Ed.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
208
ontheeveningofthatdayhearrivedatthehermitage
near Benares.1
The five elders, 2 seeing already from afar the
Buddha coming, said one to another : &quot; Brethren,
here comes the recluse Gotama. He has turned back
toafreeuseofthenecessariesoflife, andhasrecovered
roundness of form, acuteness of sense, and beauty of
complexion. We ought to pay him no reverence ;
but as he is, after all, of a good family, he deserves
the honour of a seat. So we will simply prepare a
seat for him.&quot; 3
The Blessed One, casting about in his mind by the
power that he had of knowing what was going on in
the thoughts of all beings, as to what they were
thinking, knew their thoughts. Then, concentrating
thatfeelingofhisgood-will whichwasableto pervade
generally all beings in earth and heaven, he directed
it specially towardsthem. Andthe sense ofhis good
willdiffused itself through their hearts ; 4 and as he
came nearer and nearer, unable any longer to adhere
totheirresolve, theyrosefromtheirseats, andbowed
downbeforehim, andwelcomedhimwithevery mark
of reverence and respect. But, not knowing that he
had become a Buddha, they addressed him, in every
thing they said, either byname, or as &quot; Brother &quot;. 5
ThentheBlessed OneannouncedtothemhisBuddha-
hood, saying : &quot; Mendicants, address not a Buddha
by his name, or as avuso. I, mendicants, am a
1 Isipatana, thehermitage inthe Deer-park closeto Benares,
See 3 a T b h o i v s e s , n p o . bb 1 i 8 s 3 h . allusionisnotintheold(Vi 2 na T y h a e ) r a a c . count. Ed.
4 6 T A h v i u s so &quot; ; lo li v t i ., n a g c w o i r l r l u &qu p ot; t p i a o s n sa of ge ay i a s s n m o a t , i & n quo t t h ;( e you V r) i r n ev a e y re a n . ce.&q E uo d t . ; Ed.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
209
perfectly awakened one, one of those who have thus
i
come.&quot;
Then, seated on the place prepared for him, and
surroundedbymyriads ofdevas, headdressedthefive
attendant elders, just as the moon was passing out of
conjunction with the lunar mansion in Uttarasalha
and taught them in that discourse which was The
Foundation ofthe Kingdom ofRighteousness.2
OfthefiveElders, Kondanyathe Believer3
sending
forthinsightasthediscoursewent on, asitconcluded,
he, with myriads of devas, had arrived at the Fruit
of the First Path.4 Andthe Master, who remained,
there for the rainy season, sat in the vihdra the next
day, whenthe other four had gone a-begging, talking
to Vappa : and Vappa that morning attained to the
Fruit of the First Path. And, in a similar manner,
Bhaddiya on the next day, and Maha-Nama on the
next, and Assaji on the next, attained to the Fruit
of the First Path. And, on the fifth day, he called
allfivetohisside, and preachedtothemthediscourse
On the Mark ofnot-soul. 5 Atthe end ofthat discourse
the five elders attained to the Arahant-fruition.
ThentheMasterperceivedthatYasa, ayoung man
of good family, was capable of entering the Paths.
Andwhen daywas breaking, he having left his home
and gone away,theMastercalledhim, saying: &quot;Come,
Yasa ! &quot; and on that very night he attained to the
1 Tathagato Sammasambuddho.
2 Lit.,The RollingoftheWheeloftheNorm(Dhamma). Ed.
3 4 S L o it c . a , ll S e t d r f e r a o m m -w h i is nn a i c n t g i . ono T n a t n h t i a s m oc o c u a n s t ion t . o t S h e e ea C b h o ri v s e t , i p a . n 1 t 6 e 1 r f m .
conversion
.
5 Alldiaryandalmanac allusionsabsentinVinaya. Ed.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
210
Fruit of the First Path, and on the next day to
Arahantship. And he received also other fifty-four,
his companions, into the order, with the sanction :
&quot; Come, mendicants ! &quot; and caused them to attain
to Arahantship.
Nowwhen there were thus in the worldsixty-one
persons who had become Arahants, the Master, after
therainy seasonandthefunctionwithwhichit closes
were over, sent out the sixty in different directions
with the words : &quot; Fare forth, mendicants.&quot;
And himself going towards Uruvela, he overcame at
the Kappasiya forest, half-way thither, the thirty
young Bhadda-vaggiyan nobles. Of these the least
advanced entered the First, and the most advanced
the Third Path and he received them all into the
:
Order with thesanction, &quot;Come, mendicants ! &quot; And
sending them also forthinto the regions round about,
he himself went on to Uruvela.
There he overcame, by performing three thousand
five hundred miracles, the three Hindu ascetics,
brothers Uruvela Kassapa and the rest who had
one thousand disciples. And he received them into
the Order with the sanction : &quot; Come, mendicants ! &quot;
and establishedthem inArahantshipby hisdiscourse,
when they were seated on Gaya-head hill : &quot;On the
Lesson to be drawn from Fire.&quot; 2 And attended by
these thousand Arahants, he went to the grove called
the Palm-grove, hard by Rajagaha, with the object
of redeeming the promise he had made to Bimbi-
sara the king. 3
1 Pavarana. 2 Theyhadbeen fire-worshippers .Ed.
3 Seeabove, p. 181.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
211
When the king heard from the keeper of the grove
the saying : &quot; The Master is come,&quot; he went to the
Master, attended by innumerable brahmins and
householders, andfelldownatthefeetof theBuddha
those feet, which bore on their surface the pattern
of the wheel, and gave forth a halo of light like a
canopy of cloth of gold. Then he and his retinue
respectfully took their seats on one side.
Now the question occurred to those brahmins and
householders : &quot; How is it then ? has the great
recluse entered as a studentin religionunder Uruvela
Kassapa, or Uruvela Kassapa under the great
recluse ? &quot; And the Blessed One, becoming aware of
their thus doubting within themselves, addressed the
Elder in the verse
282. Whathastthouseen,thouofUruvela,
ThatthouhastlefttheFire,votaryaustere
?
I H a o s w k h t a he s e t , r K e a n s o s u a n p c a e , d t t h h e e m s e ac a r n i i fi n c g e o o f f t f h ir i e s ? thing:
And the Elder, perceiving what the Blessed One
intended, replied in the verse :
283. Somemen relyon sights,andsounds,and
taste,
Desiresand women, someonsacrifice
Alldrosstohimwhoknowsthesprings ;
oflife.
ThereforenotfainamIforaltarrites.
Andinordertomakeknownhisdiscipleshiphebowed
his headto the Buddhas feet, saying : &quot; The Blessed
Lord is my master, and I am the disciple ! &quot; And
seven times he rose into the air up to the height of
one, two, three, and so on, up to the height of seven
palm-trees ; and descending again, he saluted the
Buddha, and respectfully took a seat aside. Seeing
that wonder, the multitude praised the Master,

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
212
saying : &quot; All ! how great is the power of the
Buddhas Even so mighty a thinker as this has
!
thought him worthy ! Even Uruvela Kassapa has
broken through the net of delusion, and is tamed by
the Tathagata ! &quot;
But the Blessed One said : &quot; Not now only have I
overcome Uruvela Kassapa in former ages, too, he
;
wastamedbyme.&quot; Andheutteredinthatconnexion
the Maha-Narada-Kassapa-Jataka, 1 and proclaimed
the Four Truths. And the King of Magadha, with
nearly all his retinue, attained to the Fruit of the
First Path, and the rest became lay disciples. 2
Andthekingstillsitting neartheMastertoldhimof
the five wishes he had had ; and then, confessing his
faith, he invited the Blessed One for the next day,
and rising from his side, departed with respectful
salutation.
The next day all the men who dwelt in Rajagaha,
eighteen myriads in number, both those who had
already seenthe Blessed One, andthose who hadnot,
came out early from Bajagaha to the Grove of Reeds
to see the successor of the Buddhas. The road, six
mileslong, couldnot containthem. Thewhole ofthe
Grove of Reeds became like a basket packed quite
full. The multitude, beholding the exceeding beauty
ofhimwhose poweristenfold, couldnot containtheir
delight. Varmabhuwasit called (thatis, thePlace of
Praise), for at such spots all the greater and lesser
characteristicsofaBuddha,andthegloriousbeauty of
an 2 d U t p he as v a o k w as to ; k t e h e a p t t is h , e th F o i s v e e w P h re o c h ep a t v s e ( t B a u k d e d n h t i h s e m, Th p r p e . e 13 R 9 e , f 1 u 6 g 0 e ) s .

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
213
his person, are to beextolled. Therewasnotroomfor
even a single mendicant to get out on the road, or in
thegrove, socrowdedwasitwiththemultitude
gazing
atthe beautiful form ofthe him ofthe tenfold power.
SothatdaytheysaythethroneofSakkafelthot,to
warn him that the Blessed One might be deprived of
nourishment, which should not be. And on con
sideration he understood the reason and he took
;
the form of a young brahmin, and descended in front
of the Buddha, and by deva-power made way for
him,singing the praises of the Buddha,the Doctrine,
and the Order
:
284. Thetamed togetherwiththetamed,
M
H
e
e
n
w
e
h
r
o
st
is
of
t
t
o
h
s
e
ee
ma
l
t
i
t
ke
ed
wr
h
o
ai
u
r
g
,
ht
bu
g
t
ol
n
d
o
,
wsetfree,
The Blessed One hath entered Rajagaha.
285. Thefreedman togetherwiththefreed
286. The man who has crossed over1togetherwith them that
have crossed over
287. Themanofwaytenfold, . 2o . f . powertenfold,
KnoweroftenfoldNorm,winneroften,3
WithretinueoftenhundredtheBlessedOnehathentered
Rajagaha.
The multitude, seeing the beauty of the young
brahmin thought : &quot; This young brahmin is exceed
ingfair, and yet wehaveneveryetbeheldhim.&quot; And
they said : &quot; Whence comes the young brahmin, or
whose sonis he ? &quot; And the young brahmin, hearing
what they said, answered in the verse :
288. Hewhoiswise, andtamedineverything,
TheBuddha,theunequalledamongmen,
TheArahant, Wellfareroftheworld,
OnhimI humble wait.
1 Tinno, crossedtheoceanoftransmigration.
2 That is, the Four Paths, the Four Fruits thereof, Nirvana,
andtheScriptures(ortheTruth,Dhamma).
3 Dasavasa, probablyfordasavaso (so Vin. i, 38) : a tenfold
categorytaughtinDlgha,iii, 269 ; Anguttara,v, 29f.-Ed.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
214
Then the Master entered upon the path thus made
free by Sakka, and entered Rajagaha attended by a
thousand mendicants. The king gave a great gift
tothe
OrderwiththeBuddha attheirhead
;
andhad
water brought, bright as jems, and scented with
flowers, in a goldengoblet. Andhe pouredthe water
overthehand ofhim ofthetenfoldpower, intokenof
the presentation of the Bambu Grove, saying : &quot; I,
my lord, cannot live without the Three Gems (the
Buddha, the Order, and the Faith). In season and
Now
out of seasonI wouldvisit the Blessed One.
the Grove of Reeds is far away ; but this Grove
of mine, called the Bambu Grove, is close by, is
easy of resort, and is a fit dwelling-place for a
Buddha. Let the Blessed One accept it of me ! &quot;
At the acceptance of this monastery the broad
earth shook, as if it said : &quot; Now the Religion of
Buddhahastakenroot &quot; For in all India there is
!
no dwelling-place, savethe Bambu Grove, acceptance
of which caused the earth to shake : and in Ceylon
there is no dwelling-place, save the Great Vihara,
acceptance of which caused the earth to shake.1
And when the Master had accepted the Bambu
Grove Monastery, and had given thanks for it, he
rose from his seat and went, surrounded by the
members of the Order, to the Bambu Grove.
Now at that time two ascetics, named Sariputta
and Moggallana, were living near Rajagaha, seeking
after salvation. Of these, Sariputta, seeing the Elder
Assaji
2onhisbegginground, wastouchedandwaited
1 Makavamsa, xv, 26f.
2 See above,p. 209.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 215
on him, and heard from him the verse beginning :
&quot; What things soever are produced from causes.&quot; l
And he attained to the blessings which result from
conversion and repeated that verse to his com
;
panionMoggallanathe ascetic. And he, too, attained
to the blessings which first result from conversion.
And each of them left Sanjaya, 2 and with his
attendants took orders under the Master. Of these
two, Moggallana attained Arahantship in seven days,
and Sariputta the elder in half a month. And the
Master appointed these two to the office of his Chief
Disciples ; and on the day on which Sariputta the
elder attained Arahantship, he made a muster of
the
disciples.
Nowwhilstthe Tathagatawas dwellingthereinthe
Bambu Grove, Suddhodana the king heard that his
son, who for six years had devoted himself to works
of austerity, had attained to complete enlightenment,
had founded the Kingdom of Righteousness, and was
then dwelling at the Bambu Grove near Rajagaha.
Sohesaidtoacertaincourtier
:
&quot; Come, Isay, takea
thousand men as a retinue, and go to Rajagaha, and
and sayinmyname : Your3 father, Suddhodanathe
king, desires to see you ; and bring my son here.&quot;
1 Thecelebratedverseherereferredtohasbeenfoundinscribed
severaltimes intheruins ofthe great Dagaba at Isipatana, and
facsimiles are given in Cunninghams Archceological Reports,
platexxxiv,vol.i,p. 123. ThetextisgivenbyBurnouf in the
facsimiles are given in Cunninghams Archceological Reports,
platexxxiv, vol.i, p. 123. ThetextisgivenbyBurnoufin the
Lotus de la Bonne Loi, p. 523 ; and in the Vinaya, pp. 40, 41.
(NotelsewhereinthePitakas. Ed.) SeealsoHardys Manual,
p. 196.
2 Theirteacher. Cf. Digha,ii,58.
3 The Paliisalsointhe2ndpersonplural. Ed.

216 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
And he respectfully accepted the kings command
with the reply : &quot; So be it, sire ! &quot; and went quickly
with a thousand followers the sixty leagues distance,
and sat down amongst the disciples of him of the
tenfold power, and at the hour of instructionentered
the Vihara. And thinking, &quot; Let the king s message
stay awhile &quot;, he stood just beyond the disciples
and listened to the discourse. And as he so stood he
attained to Arahantship, with his whole retinue, and
asked to be admitted to the Order. And the Blessed
One stretched forth his hand and said &quot; Come,
:
mendicants.&quot; And allofthemthatmoment appeared
there, with robes and bowls created by miracle, like
elders of a hundred years standing.
Now from the time when they attain Arahantship
the Arahants become indifferent to worldly things :
so he did not deliverthe king s message to him of the
tenfold power. The king, seeing that neither did his
messenger return, nor was anymessage received from
him, called another courtier in the same manner as
before, and sent him. And he went, and in the same
manner attained Arahantship with his followers, and
remained silent. Then the king in the same manner
sent nine courtiers each with a retinue of a thousand
men. And they all, neglecting what they had to do,
stayed away there in silence.
And when the king found no one who would come
and bring even a message, he thought : &quot; Not one of
these brings back, for my sake, even a message : who
will then carry out what I say ? &quot; And searching
among all his people he thought of Kaludayin. For
he was in everything serviceable to the king

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
217
intimate with him, and trustworthy. He was born
on the same day as the future Buddha, and had been
his playfellow and companion.
So the king said to him : &quot; Dear Kaludayin, as I
wanted to see my son, I sent nine times a thousand
men ; but there is not one of them who has either
come back or sent a message. Now it is hard to
know if life be in danger and I desire to see my son
;
beforeI die. Willonebeabletolet meseemyson ? &quot;
&quot; I can, king ! &quot; was the reply, &quot; if I am allowed
to become a recluse.&quot;
&quot; My dear,&quot; said the king, &quot; whether thou become
a recluse or not let me see my son &quot;
!
And he respectfully received the kings message
with the words : &quot; So be it king ! &quot; and went to
Kajagaha ; and stoodatthe edge ofthe congregation
at the time of the Master s instruction, and heard the
gospel, and attained Arahantship with his followers,
and was received with the come, bhikkhu sanction.
TheMasterspentthefirstLentafterhehadbecome
Buddha at Isipatana ; and whenit was over went to
Uruvela and stayedtherethree months andovercame
thethreebrothers,ascetics. Andonthefull-moonday
of the month ofPhussa, hewentto Rajagahawith a
retinue of athousand mendicants, and there he dwelt
two months. Thus five months had elapsed since he
left Benares, the cold season was past, and seven or
eight days since the arrival of Udayin, the Elder.
And on the full-moon day of Phagguni Udayin
thought : &quot; The cold season is past ; the spring has
come ; men raise their crops and set out on their
journeys ; the earth is covered with fresh grass ; the

218 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
woodsarefullofflowers theroadsarefittowalkon
; ;
now is the time for the Sage to show favour to his
family.&quot; And going to the Blessed One, he praised
travellingin about sixty stanzas, thatthe Sage might
revisit his native town, beginning thus :
289. Nowcrimsonglowthetrees,dearlord,andcast
Inquestoffruittheirsheathingcoverings.
Likecrestsofflametheyshineirradiant
Andrichintastes,greathero,isthetime.
290. N T o he t r o e v d e e r a h r o t t h , o n f or fo o o v d er fo c r o a l l d m ; s. nor T i h s eearthis green
Withverdure. Thisthefittingtime, great sage.1
Thenthe Master said to him : &quot; But why, Udayin,
do you sing the pleasures of travelling with so sweet
a voice 1 &quot;
&quot; Sir,&quot; was the reply, &quot; your father is anxious to
see you once more will you not show favour to your
;
relations 1 &quot;
&quot; Tis well said, Udayin ! I will do so. Tell the
Order that they will fulfil the duty (laid on all its
members) of journeying from place to place.&quot;
Kajudayin accordingly told the brethren. And
the Blessed One attendedbytwentythousand mendi
cants free from sin ten thousand clansmen from
Magadha and Anga, and ten thousand from Kapila-
vatthu started from Kajagaha, and travelled a
league a day : going slowly with the intention of
reaching Kapilavatthu, sixty leagues from Kajagaha,
in two months.
Andthe elder, thinking : &quot;I willlettheking know
that the Blessed One has started rose into the air
&quot;,
1 His verses are in the elders anthology. See Psalms of the
Brethren,vers.527-9. Only six slokastheremakeup hisinvita
tion
;
theydonotcontainthe lasttwolinesabove.- Ed.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE 219
and appeared inthe king s house. The king was glad
to see the elder, made him sit down on a splendid
couch, filled a bowl with the delicious food made
ready forhimself, and gaveto him. Then the elder
rose up, and made asifhe would go away.
&quot; Sit down and eat,&quot; said the king.
&quot; I willrejointheMaster, and eat
then,&quot;
said he.
&quot; But where is the Master ? &quot; asked the king.
&quot; Hehassetoutonhisjourney, attendedbytwenty
thousand mendicants, to see you, king ! &quot; said he.
The king, glad at heart, said : &quot;Do you eat this ;
and until my son has arrived at this town, provide
him with food from here.&quot;
The elder agreed ; andthekingwaitedonhim, and
then had the bowl cleansed with perfumed chunam,
and filled with the best of food, and placed it in the
elders hand, saying : &quot; Give it to the Tathagata.&quot;
And the elder, in the sight of all, threw the bowl
into the air, and himself rising up into the sky, took
thefoodagain, and placeditinthehandoftheMaster.
The Master ate it. Every day the elder brought
him food inthe same manner. So the Master himself
was fed, even on the journey, from the king s table.
The elder day by day, whenhe had finished his meal,
toldthe king : &quot; To-daythe Blessed One has come so
far, to-day so far.&quot; And by talking of the high
character of the Buddha, he made all the king s
family delighted with the Master, even before they
saw him. Onthat account the Blessed One gave him
pre-eminence, saying, &quot; Pre-eminent, mendicants,
among all those of my disciples who gained over my
was l
family, Kaludayin.&quot;
1Angutlara i, 25.

220 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
The Sakyas, as they sat talking of the prospect of
seeing their distinguished relative, considered what
place he could stay in ; and deciding that the
Nigrodha Grove would be a pleasant residence,they
made everything ready there. And with fragrant
flowers in their hands they went out to meet him
;
and sending in front the baby boys and girls and the
boys and girls of the town and then the young men
and maidens of the royal family, they themselves,
decked of their own accord with sweet-smelling
flowers and chunam, came close behind, conducting
the Blessed One to the Nigrodha Grove. There the
Blessed One sat down on the Buddha s throne pre
pared for him, surrounded by twenty thousand
Arahants.
The Sakyas are proud by nature, and stubborn in
their pride. Thinking : &quot; Prince Siddhattha is
youngerthan we are, standing to us inthe relation of
younger brother, or nephew, or son, or grandson
&quot;,
they saidto the little children andthe young people :
&quot; Do youbowdownbeforehim, wewillseat ourselves
behind you.&quot; The Blessed One when they had thus
taken their seats, perceived what they meant ; and
thinking : &quot; My relations pay me no reverence ;
come now, I must make them to do he fell
so,&quot;
into the ecstasy based on super-knowledge, and
rising intothe air as if shaking of!thedustoff hisfeet
upon them, he performed a miracle like unto that
double miracle at the foot of the Gandamba-tree.1
1 See above, p. 105. The Dhammapada Commentary, p. 334,
hasadifferentaccountofthemiracleperformedonthisoccasion.
Itsayshemadeajewelledcloister(ratana-cankama)in the sky,
andwalkingup anddowninit, preachedthe Faith (Dhamma).

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
221
The king, seeing that miracle, said : &quot;0 Blessed
One ! When you were presented to Kala Devala to
do obeisance to him on the day on which you were
born, andI saw yourfeetturnround and place them
selves on the brahmins head, I paid homage to you.
That was my first homage. When you were seated
on your couch in the shade of the jambu-tree on the
day of the ploughing festival, I saw how the shadow
over you did not turn, and I bowed down at your
feet. That was my second homage. Now, seeing
this miracle unseen before, I bow down at your feet.
This is my third homage.&quot;
Then, when the king paid him homage, there
was not a single Sakya who was able to refrain from
bowing down before the Blessed One : and all of
them did homage.
So the Blessed One, having compelledhisrelatives
to bowdownbeforehim,descendedfromthe sky, and
satdownontheseatpreparedforhim. Andwhenthe
Blessed One was seated, the assembly of his relatives
yielded him pre-eminence ; and all sat there with
unity in their hearts.
Then a thunder-cloud poured forth a shower of
rain, and the copper-coloured water went away
rumbling beneath the earth. He who wished to get
wet, didget wet
;
butnotevenadropfellonthebody
of him who did not wish to get wet. And all seeing
it became filled with astonishment, and said one
to another : &quot; Lo ! what miracle. Lo ! what
wonder &quot;
!
ButtheTeachersaid
:
&quot; Notnow onlydidashower
of rain fall upon me in the assembly of my relations,

222 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
formerly also this happened.&quot; Andinthis connexion
he told the story of his Birth as Vessantara.1
When they had heard his discourse they rose up,
and paid reverence to him, and went away. Not one
ofthem, eitherthe king or anyofhis ministers, asked
him on leaving : &quot; To-morrow accept your meal
of
us.&quot;
So onthenext daytheMaster, attended bytwenty
thousand mendicants, entered Kapilavatthu to beg.
Then also no one came to him or invited him to his
house, or took his bowl. The Blessed One, standing
at the gate considered : &quot; How then did the former
Buddhas go on their begging rounds in their native
town ? Did they go direct to the houses of the kings,
or did they beg straight on from house to house ? &quot;
Then, not finding that any of the Buddhas had gone
direct, hethought : &quot;I, too, must acceptthis descent
and tradition as my own ; so shall my disciples in
future, learning of me, fulfil the duty of going for
alms.&quot; And beginning at the first house, he went
straight on for alms.
At therumourthatthe youngchief Siddhatthawas
going for alms from doorto door, thewindows inthe
two-storied and three-storied houses were thrown
open, and the multitude was transfixed at the sight.
And the lady, the mother of Kahula, thought : &quot; My
lord, who usedto go to andfro inthis very townwith
gilded palanquin and every sign of royal pomp, now
with a potsherd in his hand begs his food from door
to door, with shaven hair and beard, and clad in
yellow robes. Is this becoming ? &quot; And she opened
1 Jataka,no. 547 (the last one).

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
223
the window, and looked at the Blessed One and she
;
beheld him glorious with the unequalled majesty of
a Buddha, distinguished with the Thirty-two
characteristic signs and the eighty lesser marks of a
Great Being, and lighting up the street of the city
withahaloresplendentwithmanycolours,
proceeding
to a fathom s length all round his person.
And she announced it to the king, saying : &quot; Thy
son is walking for alms from door to door &quot; and she
;
magnified him with the eight stanzas on &quot; The Lion
among Men &quot;, beginning :
291. Glossyanddarkandsoftandcurlyishishair
;
Spotlessandfairasthesunishisforehead
;
W A e r l o l u - n p d ro h p i or m t i i s on di e f d f a us n e d d p a r n o e m t i w n o en r t k a of nd ra d y e s licateishisnose ;
TheLionamongMen
!
The king was deeply agitated ; and he went forth
instantly, gatheringuphisrobeinhishand, and going
quickly stood before the Blessed One, and said :
&quot; Why, Master, do you1 put usto shame ? Why do
youwalkaboutforalms ? Do youthinkitimpossible
to provide a meal for so many monks ? &quot;
&quot; This is our custom, king ! &quot; was the reply.
&quot; Not so, Master ! our descent is from the royal
race of the Great Elected 2 and amongst them all
;
not one chief has ever gone about for alms.&quot;
&quot; This succession of kings is thy descent, king !
but mine is the succession of the Buddhas, from
Dlpankara and Kondanya and the rest down to
Kassapa. These, and thousands of others reckoned as
Buddhas, have gone about for alms, and lived on
1 SoalsothePali.
3 MahaSammata, thefirstkingamongmen.

224 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
alms.&quot; And standing in the middle of the street he
uttered the verse
:
292. Lethimriseup, andloiternot
!
L W e h t o hi fa m re f s ar i e n t t h h e at ri w g a ht y eo h u a s p f p a y ri l n i g ves ! ,
Bothinthisworldandinthenext.1
And whenthe verse was finished the king attained to
the Fruit of the First, and then, on hearing the
followingverse, to the Fruit ofthe Second Path :
293. Therighteousfaringlethimfare!
Lethimnotfareamiss
!
Therighteousfarerhappylives,
Bothinthisworldandinthenext.
And when he heard the story of the Birth as the
Keeper of Righteousness, 2 he attained to the Fruit of
the Third Path. And just as he was dying, seated on
the royal couch under the white canopy of state, he
attained to Arahantship. The king never practised
spiritual exertions in the forest life.
Now as soon as he had realized the Fruit of Con
version, he took the Buddha s bowl and conducted
the Blessed One and his retinue to the palace, and
served them with savoury food, both hard and soft.
And when the meal was over, all the women of the
household came and did obeisance to the Blessed
One, except onlythe mother of Rahula.3
But she, though she told her attendants to go and
salute their lord, stayed behind, saying : &quot; If I have
virtue in his eyes, my lord will himself come to me ;
and when he has come I will pay him reverence.&quot;
1 Dhammapada,ver. 168f.
2 MaTia-DTiammapalaJataka,no. 447.
* Thefollowingepisodeshould be compared with theslighter
sketchinVinaya,i,82. Ed.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
225
Andthe Blessed One, givinghis bowlto the kingto
carry, went with his two chief disciples to the apart
ments of the daughter of the king, saying : &quot; The
king s daughter shall in no wise be spoken to, how
soever she may be pleased to welcome me.&quot; And he
sat down on the seat prepared for him.
And she came quickly and held him by the ankles,
and laid her head on his feet, and so did homage to
him, even as she had intended. And the king told of
thefullness ofherloveforthe Blessed One, and ofher
goodness of heart, saying : &quot; When my daughter
heard, Master,thatyouhadputon theyellowrobes
fromthattimeforthshedressedonlyinyellow. When
she heard of your taking but one meal a day, she
adopted the same custom. When she heard that you
renounced the use of elevated couches, she slept on
a mat spread on the floor. When she heard you had
given up the use of garlands and unguents, she also
used them no more. And when her relatives sent a
message, saying, Let us take care of you/ she paid
them no attention at all. Such are my daughter s
virtues, Blessed One ! &quot;
&quot;Tie no wonder, king ! &quot; was the reply, &quot; that
she should watch over herself now that she has you
for a protector, and that her wisdom is mature :
formerly, evenwhen wanderingamongthe mountains
without a protector, and when her wisdom was not
mature, she watched over herself.&quot; And he told the
story ofhis Birth as the Moonsprite l and rose from
;
his seat, and went away.
1 Candakinnara Jataka, no. 485, wherethisepisodeforma the
introductionto thestory.
Q

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
226
On the next day the festivals of the coronation,
and of the housewarming, and of the marriage of
Nanda, the kings son, were being celebrated all
But the Buddha went to his house, and
together.
gave him his bowl to carry ; and with the object of
making him abandon the world, he wished him true
happiness ; and then, rising from his seat, departed.
And (the bride) Janapada Kalyani, 1 seeing the young
man go away, gazed wonderingly at him, and cried
out : &quot; my lord, whither go you so quickly ? &quot; But
he, not venturing to say to the Blessed One, &quot; Take
your bowl followed him even unto the Vihara.
&quot;,
And the Blessed One received him, unwilling though
he was, into the Order.
ItwasonthethirddayafterhereachedKapilapura
that the Blessed One ordained Nanda. On the
seventhdaythe mother of Rahula arrayed the boyin
his best, and sent him to the Blessed One, saying :
&quot; Look, dear, at that monk, attended by twenty
thousand monks, and beautiful in appearance as a
Brahma ! That is your father. He had certain
which we have not seen since he
great treasures,
abandoned his home. Go now, and ask for your
inheritance, saying, Father, I am the prince. When
I am crowned, I shall become a king over all the
earth. I have need of the treasure. Give me the
treasure for a sonis heir to his father s property.
;
The boy went up to the Blessed One, and gained
alove ofhisfather, andstood there glad and joyful,
saying : &quot; Happy, monk, is thy shadow ! &quot; and
adding many other words befitting his position.
1 Lit.,thelovelyoneofthecountry.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
227
When the Blessed One had ended his meal, and had
given thanks, he rose from his seat, and went away.
And the child followed the Blessed One, saying:
Monk ! give me my inheritance ! give me my
inheritance &quot;
!
The Blessed One turnedthe boynot back. And the
people with the Blessed One, were not able to
stop him. And so he went with the Blessed One even
up to the grove. Then the Blessed One thought :
c This wealth, this property of his father s, which he
is asking for, perishes in the using, and brings vexa
tion with it ! I will give him the sevenfold Ariyan
wealthwhich I obtained underthe Bo-tree, and make
him the heir of a spiritual inheritance ! &quot; And he
said to Sariputta : &quot; Well, then do thou, Sariputta,
receive Rahula into the Order.&quot;
But when the child had been taken into the Order
the king grieved exceedingly. And he was unable to
bear his grief, and made it knownto the Blessed One,
and asked of him a boon, saying : &quot;Ifyouso please,
master, let not my lords receive a son into the
Order without the leave of his father and mother.&quot;
And the Blessed One granted the boon.
Andthenext day, ashesatinthekingshouseafter
his meal was over, the king, sitting respectfully by
him, said : &quot; Master ! when you were practising
austerities, a deva came to me, and said : Your
son is dead ! And I believed him not, and rejected
what he said, answering : My son will not die
without attaining Buddhahood !
And he replied, saying : l!&amp;lt; Why should you now
have believed ? when formerly though they showed

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
228
you my bones, and said your son was dead, you did
not believe them. * And in that connexion he told
the story of his Birth as the Great Keeper of
Righteousness. 1 And when the story was ended, the
king attained to the Fruit of the Third Path. And
so the Blessed One established his father in the
Three Fruits and he returned to Kajagaha attended
;
by the company of the brethren, and resided at
Cool Grove.
At that time the householder Anatha Pindika,
bringing merchandise in five hundred carts, went to
the house of a trader in Rajagaha, his intimate
friend, and there heard that a Blessed Buddha had
arisen.
And
very
earlyinthemorninghe went to the
Teacher, the door being opened by the power of
devas, and heard the Truth and became converted.2
And on the next day he gave a great donation to the
Order, with the Buddha at their head, and received
a promise from the Teacher that he would come to
Savatthi.
Then alongtheroad, forty-fiveleaguesinlength, he
builtresting-places at everyleague, at anexpenditure
of a hundred thousand for each. And he bought the
Grove called Jetavana for eighteen kotis of gold
pieces, laying them side by side over the ground, and
erected there a new building. In the midst thereof
hemadeapleasant roomforhimofthetenfoldpower,
and around it separately constructed dwellings for
theeightychiefelders, andotherresidenceswithsingle
and double walls, and long halls and open roofs,
1 MahadhammapalaJataka,no.447. Seeabove,p.224.
a See Vin,ii, 154f.; KindredSayings,i, 271f.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
229
ornamented with ducks and quails ; and ponds also
hemade, andterracestowalkonbydayandbynight.
And so having constructed a delightful residence
on a pleasant spot, at an expense of eighteen kotis,
he sent a message to him of the tenfold power that
he should come.
The Master, hearing the messenger s words, left
Rajagaha attended by a great multitude of monks,
and in due course arrived at the city of Savatthi.
Thenthewealthymerchantdecoratedthemonastery
and onthe day on whichthe Tathagata should arrive ;
atJetavana he arrayedhis sonin splendour, and sent
him on with five hundred youths in festival attire.
And he and his retinue, holding five hundred flags
resplendent with cloth of five different colours,
appeared before him of the tenfold power. And
behind him Maha-Subhadda and Chula-Subhadda,
the two daughters of the merchant, went forth with
five hundred damsels carrying water-pots full of
water. And behind them, decked with all her
ornaments, the merchant s wife went forth, with
five hundred matrons carrying vessels full offood.
And behind them all, the great merchant himself,
clad in new robes, with five hundred traders also
dressed in new robes, went out to meet the Blessed
One.
The Blessed One, sending this retinue of lay
disciplesinfront, andattendedbythegreatmultitude
of monks, entered the Jetavana monastery with the
infinite grace and unequalled majesty of a Buddha,
making the spaces of the grove bright with the halo
from his person, as if they were sprinkled with gold
dust.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
230
ThenAnathaPincjika askedhim
:
&quot; How, mylord,
shall I deal with this Vihara ? &quot;
&quot; Householder,&quot; was the reply, &quot; give it then to
the Order of Mendicants, whether now present or
hereafter to arrive.&quot;
And the great merchant, saying : &quot; So be it, my
lord,&quot; brought a golden vessel, and pouredwater over
the hand of him of the tenfold power, and dedicated
the Vihara, saying, &quot; I give this Jetavana Vihara to
the Order of Mendicants with the Buddha at their
head, and to all from every direction now present or
hereafter to come.&quot; x
And the Master accepted the Vihara, and giving
thanks, pointed out the advantages of monasteries,
saying :
294. Coldtheywardoff, andheat ;
Soalsobeastsofprey,
And creepingthings, andgnats,
Andrainsinthecoldseason.
Andwhenthedreadedheatandwinds
Arise,theywardthemoff.
295. To givetomonksadwelling-place,
Whereininsafetyandatease
Tothinkandinsightgain,
TheBuddhapraises mostofall.
296. Letthereforeawiseman,
Regardinghisownweal,
Havepleasantmonasteriesbuilt,
And lodgetherelearnedmen.
297. Lethimwithcheerfulmien,
Givefoodtothem, anddrink,
Andclothes,anddwelling-places
298. T Th o e t n he th u e p y ri s g h h a t ll in pr m e i a n c d h . tohimtheNorm
TheNorm,dispellingeverygrief
WhichNorm,whenhere-helearns,hesins
No more, reaching the perfect well (Vinaya, Chulla-
vagga VI, 1).
1 This formulahas beenconstantlyfound in rock inscriptions
inIndiaandCeylonoverthe ancientcave-dwellingsofBuddhist
hermits.

THE STORY OF THE LINEAGE
231
Anatha Pindika began the dedication festival from
the second day. The festival held at the dedication
of Visakha s building ended in four months, but
Anatha Pindika s dedication festival lasted nine
months. At the festival, too, eighteen kotis were
spent ; so on that one monastery he spent wealth
amounting to fifty-four kotis.
Long ago, too, in the time of the Blessed Buddha
Vipassin, a merchant named Punabbasu Mitta
bought that very spot by laying golden bricks over
it, and built a monastery there a league in length.
And in the time of the Blessed Buddha Sikhin, a
merchant named Sirivaddha bought that very spot
by spreading golden ploughshares over it, and built
thereamonasterythree-quartersofaleagueinlength.
And in the time of the Blessed Buddha Vessabhu,
a merchant named Sotthiya bought that very spot
by laying golden elephant feet along it, and built a
monastery there half a league in length. And in the
time ofthe Blessed Buddha Kakusandha, a merchant
named Acchtita also bought that very spot by laying
golden bricks over it, and built there a monastery a
quarter of a leagueinlength. Andin the time of the
Blessed Buddha Konagamana, a merchant named
Uggaboughtthatveryspotbylayinggoldentortoises
over it, and built there a monastery half a league in
And in the time of the Blessed Buddha
length.
Kassapa, a merchantnamedSumangalabought that
very spot by laying golden bricks over it, and built
there a monastery sixty acres in extent. And in the
timeofourBlessedOne,AnathaPindikathemerchant
bought that very spot bylaying kahapana coins over

232 BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES
it, and built there a monasterythirty acres in extent.
For that spot is a place which not one of all the
Buddhas has deserted. And so the Blessed One lived
in that spot from the attainment of all-knowledge
undertheBo-treetillhisdeath.
This is the Proximate Epoch.
And now we will tellthe stories of all his Births.
End of the Niddna Kathd.

APPENDIX
TABLES ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE HISTORY
AND MIGRATIONS OF THE BUDDHIST
BIRTH STORIES
TABLE
I.
INDIAN WORKS
1. The Jdtaka Atthavannand. A collection, probably first
made in the third or fourth century B.C., of stories previously
existing, and ascribed to the Buddha, and put into its present
forminCeylon, inthefifthcenturyA.D. The Palitexthasbeen
edited by Professor Fausboll, of Copenhagen, 1877-96. Eng.
trans.Ed. Cowell, Cambridge, 1895-1907.
la. Singhalese translation of No. 1, called Pan siya panas
Jdtakapota. WritteninCeyloninorabout 1320A.D.
16. Outtila Kdwyaya. A poetical version in Elu, or old Sing
halese, of one of the stories in la, by Badawaettsewa Unnanse,
about 1415. Edited in Colombo, 1870, with introduction and
commentary,byBatuwanTudawa.
Ic. KusaJdtakaya. A poeticalversioninElu,oroldSinghalese,
of one of the stories in la, by Alagiawanna Mohottale, 1610.
EditedinColombo,withcommentary, 1868.
Id. An Eastern Love Story. Translation in verse of Ic, by
ThomasSteele, C.C.S., London, 1871.
le. Asadisa Jdtakaya. An Elu poem, by Rajadhiraja Sinha,
kingofCeylonin 1780.
2. The Chariyd Pitaka. A book of the Buddhist Scriptures
ofthe(?)fourthcenturyB.C.,containingthirty-fiveofthe oldest
stories. SeeTableIV.
3. The Jdtaka Mala. A Sanskritwork of unknown date, also
containingthirty-fiveoftheoldeststoriesinNo.1. SeeTableIV.
4. The Pannzsa-Jdtakam, or &quot;50 Jatakas &quot;. A Pali work
writtenin Siam, of unknown date and contents, but apparently
distinctfromNo.1. Seeabove,p.Ixi.

234 INDIAN WORKS
6. Pancha Tantra. ?Medieval. See above, pp. Ixviii-lxxii.
TexteditedbyKosegarten, Bonn, 1848.
KielhornandBiihler, Bombay, 1868.
6. Translations : German,byBenfey,Leipzig, 1859.
7. French Dubois, Paris, 1826.
8. Lancerau, Paris, 1871.
9. Greek ,, GalanosandTypaldos,
Athens, 1851.
10. Hitopadesa. Medieval. Compiled principallyfrom No. 5,
withadditionsfromanotherunknownwork.
Texteditedby CareyandColebrooke, Serampur, 1804.
Hamilton, London, 1810.
Bernstein, Breslau, 1823.
SchlegelandLassen, Bonn, 1829-31.
Nyalankar, Calcutta, 1830and 1844.
Johnson, Hertford, 1847 and 1864, with
Englishversion.
Yates, Calcutta, 1841.
E. Arnold, Bombay, 1859.
Max Miiller, London, 1864-8.
11. Translations: English, by Wilkins, Bath, 1787; re
printed by Nyalankar in his edition
of the text.
12. Sir. W. Jones,Calcutta,
1816.
12a. E.Arnold,London,1861
13. German ,, Max Miiller, Leipzig,
1844.
13o. Dursch,Tubingen,1853.
14. L.Fritze,Breslau,1874.
15. French Langles, Paris, 1790.
16. ,, ,, Lancerau, Paris, 1855.
17. Greek Galanos and Typaldos,
Athens, 1851.
18. Vetala Panca Vimsati. Twenty-five stories told by a
Vetala,ordemon. SanskrittextinNo. 32,vol. 11.288-93.
18a. GreekversionofNo. 18addedtoNo.17.
19. VetMla Kathei. Tamil version of No. 18. Edited by
Robertson in A Compilation of Papers in the TamilLanguage,
Madras, 1839.

INDIAN WORKS 235
20. No. 19, translated into English by Babington, in Miscel
laneous TranslationsfromOrientalLanguages, London, 1831.
21. No. 18,translatedintoBrajbakha,bySurat, 1740.
22. Bytal Pachisi. Trans, from No. 21 into Eng. by Raja
KaliKrishnaBahadur,Calcutta, 1834. SeeNo.41a.
22a. BaitalPachisi. Hindustaniversion of No. 21, Calcutta,
1805. EditedbyBarker,Hertford, 1855.
226. English versions of 22a, by J. T. Platts, Rollings, and
Barker.
22c. Vikram and the Vampire, or Tales of Hindu Devilry.
Adoptedfrom226byRichardF.Burton,London, 1870.
22d. Germanversionof22a,byH.Oesterley, in the Bibliothek
Orientalischer Mdrchen und Erzdhlungen, 1873, with valuable
introductionandnotes.
23. SsiddiKur. MongolianversionofNo. 18.
24. German versions of No. 23, by Benjamin Bergmann in
NomadischeStreifereien imLandederKalmUcken,i, 247andfoil.,
1804 andbyJuelg, 1866and1868.
25. ; German version ofNo. 18, by Dr. Luber, Gorz, 1875.
26. SukaSaptati. Theseventystoriesofaparrot.
27. Greekversion ofNo. 26, byDemetrios Galanosand G.
Typaldos, Psittalcou Mythologiai Nukterinai, included in their
versionofNos. 10and18.
28. Persian version of No. 26, now lost; but reproduce
NachshebiunderthetitleTutiNameh.
28a. Tola Kahani. Hindustani version of 26. Edited by
Forbes.
286 Englishversionof28a, bytheRev. G. Small.
29. Sirihasana Dvatrimsali. The thirty-two stories of
throne of Vikramaditya; called also Vikrama Cantra. 1
m
29a.^SinghasanBattisi. Hindiversionof29. EditedbySyed
30.Faim Singhasan. Bengali version of 29, Serampur,
1Rl8
31. ArjiBorjiChan. Mongolianversionof29.
32 Vrihat-katha. By Gunadhya, probably about the sixth
c f e o n u 3 t 3 n . u d r e K y d a ; t o h i n a n S N t a o h r . e i P t 32 a S . i a s g a a I c r n i a c P . l r u a d k T e r h s i e t N . o O . c S e e 1 a 8 e n , a o a b f o n t v d h e e , a R p p i a i v r e t rs of o - f N T o a . le 5 s . . Itis

236 INDIAN WORKS
Sanskrit text edited by Brockhaus, Leipzig, vol. i, with German
translation, 1839 ; vol. ii, textonly, 1862 and 1866. Originalby
SriSomadevaBhatta,ofKashmir,atthebeginningofthetwelfth
centuryA.D. Seeabove, pp.Ixvif.
34. Vrihat-katha. A SanskritversionofNo.34,byKshemendra,
ofKashmir. WrittenindependentlyofSomadevaswork,No.32.
See above, p. Ixvii.
35. Panca Danda Chattra Prabandha. Stories about King
Vikramadityas magic umbrella. Jain Sanskrit. Text and
GermanversionbyWeber, Berlin, 1877.
36. Vasavadatta. By Subandhu. Possibly as old as the sixth
century. EditedbyFitz-Edward Hall, inthe BibliothecaIndica,
Calcutta, 1859. Thisandthenextareromances,notstory-books.
37. Kadambari. ByBanaBhatta, ? seventhcentury. Edited
inCalcutta, 1850 ; andagain, 1872, byTarkavacaspati.
38. Bengali version of No. 37, by Tara Shankar Tarkaratna.
Tenthedition, Calcutta, 1868.
39. Dasa-kumdra-carita. By Dandin, ? sixth century. Edited
byCarey, 1804 ; Wilson, 1846 ; andbyBiihler, 1873.
39a. Hindoo Tales, founded on No. 39. By P. W. Jacob,
London, 1873.
396. Une Tetrade. By Hippolyte Fauche, Paris, 1861-3.
Containsatrans,intoFrenchofNo. 39.
40. Katharnava, The Stream of Tales. In four Books the
;
first being No. 18, the second No. 29, the third and four
miscellaneous.
41. Purusha-pariksha, the Adventures of King Hammira.
Probablyofthefourteenth century. ByVidyapati.
41a. English translation of No. 41, by Raja Kali Krishna,
Serampur, 1830. SeeNo. 22.
42. Vlra-caritan, theAdventures ofKing Salivahana.

TABLE
II.
THE KALILAG AND DAMNAG LITERATURE
1. A lost Buddhist work in a language of Northern India,
ascribedtoBidpai. Seeabove,pp. Ixv-lxvii.
2. Pelvi version, 531-79 A.D. By Barzuye, the Court
physicianofKhosruNushirvan. Seeabove, p.. xxviii,
3. KalilagundDamnag. Syrianversionof No. 2. Published
with German trans, by Gustav Bickell, and Introduction by
Professor Benfey, Leipzig, 1876. This and No. 15 preserve the
bestevidenceofthecontentsofNo.2, andofitsBuddhistoriginal
or originals.
4. Kalildh wd Dimnah (Fables of Bidpai). Arabic version of
No.3,byAbd-allah,sonofAlmokaffa. Dateabout750A.D. Text
of onerecension edited by Silvestre de Sacy, Paris, 1816. Other
recensions noticed at length in Ignazio Guidis Studii sul testo
ArabodellibradiCalilaeDimna(Rome, 1873).
5. KalilaandDimna. Eng. versionofNo. 4, byKnatchbull,
Oxford, 1819.
6. DasBuckdes Weisen. GermanversionofNo. 4, byWolff,
Stuttgart, 1839.
7. Stephanites kai Ichvelates Greek version of No. 4, by
Simeon Seth, about 1080 A.D. Edited by Seb. Gottfried Starke,
Berlin, 1697 (repr. in Athens, 1851), and by Aurivillius,
Upsala, 1786.
8. LatinversionofNo. 7, byFatherPossin, at the end ofhis
editionofPachymeres, Rome, 1866.
9. Persian translation of No. 4, by Abdul Maali Nasr Allah,
1118-53. Exists, inMS. only, inParis, Berlin,andVienna.
10. Anvar i Suhaili. Persian translation, through the last, of
No.4, byHusainbenAlielVaizU1-KashifI ; endofthefifteenth
century.
11. Anvar i Suhaili, or theLights ofCanopus. Eng. version of
No. 10, by Edward Eastwick, Hertford, 1854.
lla. Another Eng. version ofNo. 10, by ArthurN. Wollaeton
(London,Allen).

238 KALILAG AND DAMNAG
12. Livre des Lumieres. French version of No. 10, by David
Sahid, dIspahan, Paris, 1644, 8vo.
13. Del Ooverno de Eegni. Italian version of No. 7, Ferrara,
1853 byGiulioNuti. EditedbyTeza, Bologna, 1872.
;
14. Hebrew version of No. 4, by Joel (?), before 1250. Exists
onlyinasingle MS.inParis,ofwhichthefirstpartismissing.
15. Directorium Humance Vitce. Latin version of No. 14, by
John of Capua. Written 1263-78. Printed about 1480,
without date or name of place. Next to No. 3 it is the best
evidenceofthecontentsofthelostbooksNos. 1 and2.
16. German version of No. 15, also about 1480, but without
dateornameofplace.
17. VersioninUlmdialectofNo. 16. Ulm, 1483.
18. Baldos Alter Msopus. A translation direct from Arabic
into Latin (?thirteenth century). Edited in du Merils Poesies
ineditesdumoyenage,Paris, 1854.
19. Calila e Dymna. Spanish version of No. 4 (?through an
unknown Latin version). About 1251. Published in Biblioleca
deAutoresEspanoles,Madrid, 1860, vol. 51.
20. Calila,etDimna. Latinversionofthelast, byKaimondde
Beziers, 1313.
21. CondeLucanor. By Don JuanManuel (died 1347), grand
son of St. Ferdinand of Spain. Spanish source not certain.
22. Sinbad the Sailor, or Book ofthe Seven Wise Masters. See
Comparetti, RicercheintornoalLibrodiSindibad, Milano, 1869.
23. Conies et Nouvelles. By Bonaventure des Periers, Lyons,
1587.
24. Exemplario contra los Enganos. 1493. Spanish version of
theDirectorum.
25. DiscorsedegliAnimali. Italianoflast,byAngeFirenzuola,
1548.
26. LaFiloso Fia Morale. ByDoni, 1552. Italian oflastbut
one.
27. NorthsEnglish version oflast, 1570.
28. Fables,byLaFontaine.
Firsteditioninvibooks,thesubjectsofwhicharemostly
taken from classical authors, and from Planudes jEsop,
Paris, 1668.
Secondeditioninxibooks,thefivelatertakenfromNos.
12and23,Paris, 1678.
Thirdeditioninxiibooks, Paris, 1694.

TABLE
III
THE BARLAAM AND JOSAPHAT SERIES
1. St. John ofDamascuss Greek Text. Seventh century, A.D.
First edited by Boissonade in his Anecdota Grceca, Paris, 1832,
vol.iv. ReprintedinMignesPatrologiaCursusCompletes, Series
Graca, torn, xcvi, pp. 836-1250, with the Latin translation by
Billy* in parallel columns. Boissonades text is reviewed, and
itsimperfectionspointedout,bySchubart (whomakesuse ofsix
ViennaMSS.) inthe WienerJahrbucher, vol. Ixiii.
2. SyriacversionofNo. 1 existsonlyinMS.
3. Arabic version ofNo. 2 exists only in MS., one MS. being
atleastasoldastheeleventhcentury.
4. Latin version of No. 1 of unknown dateand author, of
which MSS. of the twelfth century are still extant. There is a
black-letter edition (?Spiers, 1470) in the British Museum. It
was adopted,withabbreviationsinseveral places, by Vincentius
Bellovicensis, in his Speculum Historiale (lib. xv, cap. 1-63);
byJacobus a Voragine, inhisLegendaAurea (ed. Griisse, 1846);
andwasreprintedinfullintheeditions oftheworksofSt. John
ofDamascus,publishedatBaselinthesixteenthcentury.2 From
this Latin version all the later medieval works on this subject
areeitherdirectlyorindirectlyderived.
4a. Anabbreviatedversionin Latin of thefourteenth century
intheBritishMuseum. ArundelMS. 330, fol. 51-7. SeeKoch,
No.9,p.xiv.
German
:
5. BarlaamundJosaphat. A poem ofthethirteenthcentury,
published from a MS. in the Solms-Laubach Library by L.
Diefenbach, under the title Mittheilungen ttber eine noch unge~
drucktem.h.d. BearbeitungdesE. andJ. Giessen, 1836.
1 Billy (1535-77) was Abbot of St. Michaels, in Brittany.
AnothereditionofhisLatinversion,byRosweyd,isalsoreprinted
inMigne,SeriesLatina,torn.Ixxiii; andseveralseparate editions
ha 2 ve Th a e pp B e r a i r t e i d sh be M s u i s de e s u ( m An c t o w p e y rp o , f t 1 h 6 e 02 fi ; rst C , ol u o n g d n a e t , ed 1 , 62 e 4 d , it e i t o c n . , ). has
the date 1539 written in ink on the title-page. Rosweyd, in
Note4tohiseditionofBillius(Migne,vol.Ixxiii,p.606),mentions
an edition bearing the date 1548. In the British Museum there
isathird,dated1675(onthelastpage).

BARLAAM AND JOSAPHAT
240
6. Another poem, partly published from an imperfect MS.at
Zurich, by Franz Pfeiffer, in Haupts Zeitsch. f. d. Alterthum, i,
127-35.
7. Barlaam und Josaphat. By Rudolf von Ems. Written
about 1230. Latest and best edition by Franz Pfeiffer, in
DichtungendesdeutschenMittelalters, vol. iii, Leipzig, 1843. This
populartreatmentofthesubjectexistsinnumerousMSS.
7a. Die HystoriJosaphat undBarlaam. Date andauthornot
named. Black-letter. Woodcuts. Title on last page. Fifty-
six short chapters. Quaint and forcible old German. A small
foliointheBritishMuseum.
8. HistoriavondemLeben der Zweien H. Beichtiger Barlaam
Eremiten, und Josaphat des Konigs inIndienSohn, etc. Trans
lated from the Latin by the Counts of Helffenstein and
Hohenzollern, Miinchen, 1684. In 40 long chapters, pp. 602,
12mo.
Dutch
:
9. Het Leven en Bedryfvan Barlaam denHeremit,enJosaphat
Koning van Indien. Noo in Nederduits vertaalt door F. v. H.,
Antwerp, 1593, 12mo.
Aneweditionofthisversionappearedin 1672. This is along
andtediousproseversionoftheholylegend.
French
:
8. PoembyGuideCambray(1200-50). Editedby Hermann
Zotenberg and Paul Meyer in the Bibliothek des Literarischen
Vereins, in Stuttgart, vol. Ixxv, 1864. They mention also (pp.
318-25) :
9. La Vie de Seint Josaphaz. Poem by Chardry. Edited by
JohnKoch,Heilbronn, 1879,whoconfirmstheeditorsofNo. 8as
tothefollowingoldFrenchversions, 10-15
;
andfurtheradduces
No. lla.
10.
Athirdpoembyanunknownauthor.
11. A prose work by an unknown author all three being of
the 13thcent.
lla. Another inMS. Egerton, 745, British Museum.
12. A poem in French of the fifteenth century, based on the
abstractinLatin ofNo. 4, byJacob deVoragine.
13. A Provencal tale in prose, containing only the story of
JosafatandthetalestoldbyBarlaam,withoutthemoralizations.
14. Amiracleplayofabout 1400.

BARLAAM AND JOSAPHAT
241
16. Another miracle play ofabout 1460,
Italian:
16. Vita di fan Oiosafat convertito da Barlaam. By Geo.
Antonio Remondini. Published about 1600, at Venezia and
Bassano, 16mo. There is a second edition of this, also
withoutdate ; and a third, published inModena in 1768, with
illustrations.
17. Storia de SS. Barlaam e Oiosafatte. By Bottari, Rome,
1734, 8vo, ofwhichasecondeditionappeared in 1816.
18. La santissimavita di Santo Josafat,figluolo delReAvenero,
Re deir India, da che ei nacque per infino cKei mori. A prose
romance, edited by Telesforo Bini from a MS. belonging to the
Commendatore Francesco de Rossi, in pp. 124-52 ofacollection,
RimeeProse, Lucca, 1852, 8vo.
19. A prose Vita da SantoJosafat. In MS. Add. 10902ofthe
British Museum, which Paul Mayer (see No. 8) says begins
exactly as No. 18, but ends differently. (See Koch, No. 9
above.)
20. A Rappresentatione di Barlaam e Josafat is mentioned by
Federigo Palermo in his / manuscrittiPalatini de Firenze, 1860,
vol. ii, p. 401.
Skandinavian
:
A full account of all the Skandinavian versions is given in
Barlaams ok Josaphafs Saja, by C. R. Unger, Christiania,
1851,8vo.
Spanish :
Honesta, etc, historia de la rara vida de losfamosos ysingulares
sanctos Barlaam, etc. By Baltasat de Santa Cruz. Publishedin
theSpanishdialectusedinthePhillipineIslandsatManila, 1692.
A literal translation of Bilius (No. 1).
English:
InHorstmannsAltenglischeLegenden, Paderborn, 1875,anOld
Englishversionofthelegendispublishedfromthe BodleianMS.
No. 779. There is another recension of the same poeminthe
Harleian MS. No. 4196. Both are of the fourteenth century;
and of the second there is another copyin the Vernon MS. See
further, Wartons History ofEnglish Poetry, i, 271-9, and ii, 30,
58, 308.
Horstmann has alsopublished a Middle English version in the
ProgramoftheSagan Gymnasium, 1877.

242 BAELAAM AND JOSAPHAT
The History ofthe Five Wise Philosophers; or, the Wonderful
Relation ofthe Life ofJehoshaphat the Hermit, Son ofAvenerian,
Kingof BarmainIndia,etc. ByN. H. (thatis,NicholasHerick),
Gent.,London, 1711,pp. 128, 12mo. Thisisaproseromance,and
an abridged translation of the Italian version of 1600 (No. 16),
andcontains only onefable (at p. 46) oftheNightingale andthe
Fowler.
The work referred to on p. xliii, under the title Gesta Eoman-
orum, a collection of tales with lengthy moralizations (probably
sermons), was made in England about 1300. It soon passed to
the Continent, andwas repeatedlyre-writteninnumerous MSS.,
with additions and alterations. Three printed editions appeared
between 1472and 1475 ; andoneofthese, containing 181 stories,
isthesourceoftheworknowknownunderthistitle. TaleNo. 168
quotes Barlaam. The best edition of the Latin version is by
H. Oesterley, Berlin, 1872. The last English translation is
Hoopers, BohnsAntiquarianLibrary,London, 1877. TheEarly
Englishversionshave beeneditedbySirF. Madden
;
andagain,
in vol. xxxiii of the Extra Series of the Early English Text
Society,byS.J.H.Herrtage.
The Seven Sages (edited by Thomas Wright for the Percy
Society, 1845)alsocontainssomeBuddhisttales.

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF THE CARIYA PITAKA AND THE
JATAKA MALA
1. Akitte-cariyan Vyagbl-jatakan
2. Sankha-o
3. Dananjaya-c
Kulmasapindi-j
4. Maha-sudassana-c
Sreshthi-j(21)
5. Maha-govinda-c
Avisajyasreshthi-j
6. Nimi-raja-c Sasa-j (10)
7. Canda-kumara-c
Agastya-j
8. Sivi-raja-c (2) Maitribala-j
9. Vessantara-c
Visvantara-j (9)
. 10. Sasa-pandita-c (0) Yajna-j
11. Silava-naga-c (J. 72) Sakra-j
12. Bhuridatta-c
Brahmana-j
13. Campeyya-naga-c Ummadayanti-j
14. Cula-bodhi-c
Suparaga-j
15. Mahimsa-raja-c (27) Matsya-j(30)
16. Ruru-raja-c Vartaka-potaka-i (29)
17. Matanga-c Kacchapa-j -
18. Dhammadhamma-devaputta-c Kumbha-j /
2 1 0 9 . . J S a a y n a k d h i a s p a a - l c a-c V P i u s t a r - a j -j / %
21. Yudanjaya-c Sreshthi-j (4) -
22. Somanassa-c
Buddhabodhi-j .
23. Ayoghara-c (33) Hanisa-j
24. Bhisa-c Mahabodhi-j
25. Soma-pandita-c (32) Mahakapi-j (27, 28)
26. Temiya-c Sarabha-j
27. Kapi-raja-c (25, 28) Ruru-j(16)
28. Saccasavhaya-pandita-c Mahakapi-j (25, 27)
29. Vattaka-potaka-c (16) Kshanti-j
30. Maecha-raja-c (15) Brahma-j
31. Kanha-dipayana-c Hasti-j
32. Sutasoma-c (25, 32) Sutasoma-j (25, 32)
33. Suvanna-sama-c Ayogriha-j(23)
34. Ekaraja-o Mahisha-j
35. Maha-lomahamsa-c (J. 94) Satatra-j
G 1 o 8 g 5 F e 3 o r r l ; y t , F h a J e u o s u b a r o b l n o l a v , l e o F f l i i v t s e h t e s J C s a e e t y e a l k o a F n s e , e B r r , p a . n E 5 c t 9 h ud ; o e ft s h A u e r R C o U h y s i a n l e Ja s A t s e a ia k P t a i i s c l , g S r p o i . c m ie 6 t 8 o y n , ;
the Jataka-mala, Ind. Antiquary, xi, 44; and also above, pp.
xlviii-1. Itwill be seen that there are seventaleswith identical,
and one or two more with similar titles, in the two collections.
Theformerwas edited byRd. Morris, P.T.S., 1882,the latterby
E. Kern, H.O.S., 1891, trs. by.I. S. Speyer, S.B. Buddhists,
1895. The CambridgeUniversityLibrarypossesses aMS. ofthe
former, with the various readings of several other MSS. noted,
for me, by Dewa Aranolis.

TABLE V
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF JATAKA STORIES IN THE
MAHAVASTU
Arranged from Cowell and Eggelings Catalogue of Buddhist
Sanskrit MSS. in the Possession of the Royal Asiatic Society
(Hodgson Collection).
Amaraye karmarakadhitaye Rakshito-nama-rishi-j
jatakma Rishabasya-j
Arindama-j vSakuntaka-j (Two with this
Asthisenasya-j title.)
Bhadravargikanan-j Sarakshepanan-j
Campaka-nagaraja-j Saratan- j
Godha-j Sarthavahasya-j
Hastin!-j Sirl-j
Kaka-j Siri-prabhasyaroriga-rajasyaj
Uruvilva-kasyapadi-kasyap- Syama-j . 1 (Car. Pit. 33)
anan- j Syamaka-j
A nama
jnata-Kaundinya-j Trinakuniyan j
01
Kinnari-j Upaligangapalanan-j
Kricchapa-j Vanaradhipa-j
Kusa-j Vara-j
Mafijeri-j VijitavasyaVaideha-rajfio-j
Markata-j Yasoda-j
Mrigarajfiosurupasya-j Yosodharayeharapradana-j
Nalinlyerajakumarlye-j vyaghribhutaya-j
Punyavanta-j
Purnasya Maitrayani-
putrasya-j
1 These two Jatakas also form the contents of a separate MS.
in the Royal Asiatic Societys Library (Catalogue, p. 14).

TABLE VI
PLACES AT WHICH THE JATAKA TALES WERE TOLD
M. Leon Feer has taken the trouble to count the number of
timeseachofthefollowingplacesismentionedatthecommence-
ment ofthe Commentary. ....
Jetavanamonastery. 41(h
Savatthi ... 6/ 416
Veluvana . 49-
Rajagaha..... .. .. ...51 55
Latthivanuyyan.a .. .. .. .. ...1
Vesali 4
Kosambi ....... 5
Ajavl 3
Kundaladaha ....... 3
Kusa ....... 2
Magadha. ....... 2
Dakkhinag.iri...
...
1
Migadaya ...... 1
Mithila 1
Bythe Ganges 1
494
Towhichwe mayaddfrompp. 124-8 below .4
Kapilavatthu
498

TABLE VII
THE BODISATS
At his request the Rev. Spence Hardys pandit* made an
analysis of the number of times in which the Bodisat appears in
the BuddhistBirth Storiesineachofthefollowi.ngc.hara.cters
:
Anascetic 83 An iguana .23
A king . 85 A fish . . .
A
A
A t
t
c
r
e o
e
u a
e
r c t h
g
i e
o
e r r
d 4
2 2
3
6 4
A
A A
n
r j a a
e
t c
l
k
e
a
p
l
h
.
antdr
. . .
iver
. .. . .
..22
2
Abrahman 24 Acrow 2
A kings son . 24 A woodpe . cke . r . . . . 2
Anobleman . 23 A thief .22
Alearnedman 22 A pig . . .
Sakka . 20 A dog . . . . 1
Amonkey 18 A curer ofsnake bites
Amerchant . 13 A gambler
Amanofproperty
.
12 Amason
Adeer . 11 Asmith.
A lion . 10 A devildancer
Awildduck
.
8 Astudent
A snipe . 6 A silversmith.
An elephant . 6 A carpen.ter .. ..
Acock . 6 Awater-.fowl.. ..
A An sl e a a v g e le . 5 5 A A f h r a o r g e ....
Ahorse 4 A kite ....
A bull . 4 A jungle cock.
Brahma . 4 A fairy
A peacock . 4
A serpent 4
A potter 3 630
Anoutcast 3

TABLE VIII
JATAKAS ILLUSTRATED IN BAS-RELIEF ON THE
ANCIENT MONUMENTS
ArrangedfromGeneralCunninghamsStupaofBharhut
No. Plate.

248 TABLE VIII
There are numerous other scenes without titles, and not yet
identified in the Jataka Book, but which are almost certainly
illustrative of Jataka Stories; and several scenes with titles
illustrativeofpassagesintheNidanaKathaoftheJatakaBook.
So, for instance, PI. xvi, fig. 1, is the worship in heaven of the
Buddhas Head-dress, the reception of which into heaven is
describedabove,p. 178
;
andtheheavenlymansion,thePalace of
Glory, isinscribed VejayantoPasado, theoriginofwhichnameis
explained below, p. 287. Plate xxviii has a scene entitled
Bhagavato Oklcanti(TheDescent ofthe Blessed One),7inillustra
tion of Maya Devis Dream (above, pp. 148 f.); and Plate Ivii
isarepresentationofthePresentationoftheJetavanaMonastery
(above, p. 178). The identifications of Nos. 12 and 13 in the
abovelistareverydoubtful.
Besides the above, Mr. Fergusson, in his Tree and Serpent
Worship,hasidentifiedbas-reliefsontheSanchiTope in illustra
tion ofthe Sanaa and AsadisaJatakas (PI. xxxvi, p. 181) and of
the Vessantara Jataka (PI. xxiv, p. 125) ; and there are other
Jatakascenes onthe SanchiTope notyetidentified.
Mr. Simpson also has been kind enough to show me drawings
of bas-reliefs he discovered in Afghanistan, two ofwhich I have
been able to identify as illustrations of the Sumedha Jataka
and another as illustrative of the scene described above,
pp. 222f.
by any means from the character which the Bodisat fills in it,
but indifferently from a variety of other reasons. General
Cunningham himself gives the story called Isi-singiya Jataka
(No. 7 in the above list), in which the ascetic after whom the
JatakaisnamedisnottheBodisat*
4 Notas yetfoundin the JatakaBook
;
but Dr. Biihler has
shown in the IndianAntiquary, vol. i, p. 305, thatitisthefirst
taleinthe Vrihat Katha ofKshemendra (TableI, No. 34), andin
the Katha Sarit Sagara of Somadeva (Table I, No. 33), andwas
therefore probably included in the Vrihat Katha of Gunadhya
(Table I, No. 32).
6 Thepartofthestonesupposedtohavecontainedtheinscrip
tionis lost.
It is mentioned above, p. 225, and is included in the Maha-
vastu (Table V), and forms the subject ofthe carving on one of
therails at Buddha Gaya (RajendraLaiMitra, pi. xxxiv, fig. 2).
7 GeneralCunninghamsreadingofthisinscriptionasBhagavato
rukdanta seems to me to be incorrect, and his translation of it
( Buddha as the sounding elephant ) to be grammatically
impossible.

TABLE IX
FORMER BUDDHA8
1-3. Tanhankara Medhankara
Saranankara
4. Dipankara
5. Kondafina
6. Mangala
7. Sumana
8. Revata
9. Sobhita
10. Anomadassin
11. Paduma
12. Narada
13. Padumuttara
14. Sumedha
15. Sujata
16. Piyadassin
17. Atthadassin
18. Dhammadassin
19. Siddhattha
20. Tissa
21. Phussa
22. Vipassin
23. Sikhin
24. Vessabhu
25. Kakusandha
26. Konagamana
27. Kassapa

INDEX
The names mentioned in the Tables following the
Introductionare notincludedinthis Index, asthe Table
in which any name should occur can easily be found
fromthe Table of Contents.
In Pali pronounce = vowels = as in Italian, consonants as
in English (except c ch, n. ny, m^ng), and place the
accent on syllables containing a, e, or o, or which
begin-and-end with a consonant. This is a rough rule
for practical use. Details and qualifications may be
seen in my manual Buddhism, pp. 1, 2.
Abhidhamma, Iviii, 201 Atthadassin, a monk in Ceylon,
Abhisarnbuddha-gatha, Ixx 81 ; a Buddha, 130
AdventofaTeacher, 147 Atula, Naga-king and Bodisat,
JEsop,vi,x,xxixf. 123, 134
Afghanistan, xli Avadanas, seeApadana
Ajita, brahminandBodisat, 125
AlaraKalama, 181, 207 Babrius,the Greekfabulist, xxxi
Anatha-pindika, 228 Baptism, 160
Anoma, ariver, 177 Bark, clothesof, 88
Anupiya, a grove, 179 BarlaamandJosaphat, xxxiiif.
Apadana, Ixviii Baronius, martyrologist, xxxvi
ArabianNights, xlii Beal, theRev. S., quoted, liii, 206
Arabianstory-books, xxxix Beggingforfood, 222
Arahants, outward signs of, 178 ; Bells, 183, 206
trance, asupposedconditionof, Benares muslin, 178
t 1 o 81 wo ; r t l h d e ly fir t s h t i , ng 2 s 1 , 0 2 ; 1 i 6 ndifferent Ben T f a e n y t , ra Professor, see Pancha
Archery, 165 Bhaddiya the third convert, 209
Arindama, Kingand Bodisat, 135 Bhalluka, a merchant, 205
Asankheyya, anaeon, 82, 200 Bharhutsculptures, liv
Asoka, 123 Bhavas, thethree, 172
AssintheLionsSkin, iv Bhoja,aBrahman, 160
Assaji, thefifthconvert, 209, 214 Bidpai, the Bactrian fabulist, xli,
Assembly of disciples (sannipata), Ixv
215 Bigandet, 206
Asvagosha, xlix Bimbisara, kingofRajagaha, 181,
Atideva, brahmin and Bodisat, 210 f.=
124 Bodisat Josaphat, xxxiv
Atrta-vatthu = Birth Story, Ixix Bodisats, 140

INDEX
252
Bowl, the Buddhas begging, 178, Diptychs in the early Christian
Br 1 a 8 h 6 m f a . waits upon Gotama, 154, Do c u h b u l r e ch m , ir x a x c x l v e (by the Buddha),
184, 191, 207 200, 220
BrahminsandBuddhists, xxvi
Buddhas: Gotama the Buddha, Earthquakes,miraculous,117,144,
life of, 150-232 ; dateof death Eas 2 t 1 , 4 facingtowardsthe, 154, 189
Bu o d f d , h l a i deva, a monk in Ceylon, Elephant, Marasmystic, 190, 194,
82 196
B Bu u d d d d h h a a m g i h t o t s a a , , a vii m i o f n . k in Ceylon, E Ev r i a l sm c u o s mm q u u n o i t c e a d t , io v n i s, etc., xx
82 Evil to be overcome with good,
Buddhavamsa, 29f., 83f., 113 xxiv
Biihler, Ixvii Fausboll, Ixi, Ixxx, andpassim
Canonization, xxxv Fetishworship, xx
Carpenter, Dr. E., xxix Feer,1,Ixi
C(h)ariya Pitaka, xlviii Fire worshippers, 210
Caste, 148 Flying, accomplishment of Ara-
Channa, 172f. hants, 211, 219
Charity,powerof,195 Flyingbymeansofagem,xviii
Crow and fox, xii
Crow and jackal, xi Gaya-sisa hill near Rajagaha, 210
Cup, thewishing, xx Gesta Romanorum, xliii
Ghatikara, a deva, 178, 186
Dabschelim,Ixv Gilchrist, J., translator of ./-Esop,
Dadhivahana Jataka, xv xxxiii
Dagaba of the Diadem, 178 ; of GodpolesJDsopinSanskrit,xxxiii
Kanthakas Staying, 175 ; of Gold of Ophir, xliv
t J h e e we S l t l e e a d df C a l s o t is G t a er z , e, 2 2 0 0 1 1 ; ; o o f ft t h h e e G G o o l t d a e m n a, Hi n ll a , me 150 o , ft 1 h 6 e 0 Buddha, 95,
Hair-relics,206 122, 208
Dancingwomen, 171 Greek and Buddhist fables, xlv
Davids, Rev. T. W., xxxviii Gunadhya, poet, Ixvii
Deerpark, the, near Benares, 207
Delusion, one of the three great Hair, unkempt, a sign ofholiness,
De r n o n o y t s s , of Dr e . v , il, F 1 o 7 l 0 klore of China, a 15 b 8 a ; of th th e e B H u a d ir d - h r a eli s, c, 17 2 8 06 ; Dag-
xxxix, xliii Halo from the Buddhas person,
Devadaha, a village, 153 185, 211, 221
Dhaja, abrahmin, 160 Hamsas, viii
Dhammaka, a mountain, 88 Hardy,206
Dhammapada, see Pitaka Hellbecomesfilledwithlight, 198
DhammapadaCommentary, 220 Hitopadesa,Ixvi
Dhanapalaka, 179 Horse, see Sindh, Kanthaka
DighaNikaya,repeatersof, 168 House, figuratively of the indi
Dlpavamsa, liif., Ivi vidual, 198

INDEX
253
Hungariantales,xl Kesa-dhatu-vamsa, 206
Huns, xl Khara-dhatika, ademon, 117
Hymn of triumph, the Buddha s, Khema, kingand Bodisat, 136
198 Kingdom of Righteousness, 209
Kings, alessonfor, xxi
Inherited, i.e. personal, qualities, Kinnara, Jataka, 225
Ixxvii Kisa-Gotami, 169
Isipatana, suburb of Benares, 217 Kondanya,abrahmin, 161 f. ; be
comes the first disciple, 209
Jackalandcrow, xi Kosala, a country near Benares,
Jali, aprince, 200 xxii
Jambu-khadakaJataka, xii Kshemendra, Kashmirian poet,
Janapada-Kalyam, 226 Ixvii
Jasmine,theArabian, 173 Kulavaka Jataka, Ixxiii
Jataka Commentary, the old one,
173 Laboulaye, xxxiv
JatakaMala (inSanskrit), xlix LaFontainesfables,x.xii,xxxix
Jelalabad,xli Lakkhana,abrahmin, 160
Jeromequoted,vii LalitaVistara, 179, 199
Jetavana,amonastery,giftof, 230 Lamp, thewonderful, xx
Jewish translators, xxix Lang, A., xl
JewsandMoslems,xxviii Latthivanuyyana(groveofreeds),
Joasaph, xxxiv 212
John, St., of Damascus, xxxiv, Liebrecht, xxxiv, xxxviii
xxxvii Life like living in a house on fire,
Jotipala, brahmin and Bodisat, 172
138 Lionofthevermilionplain,92
Julien, vi LionasBodisat, 126
Lion,theBuddhawalkslikea, 188
KacchapaJataka,viii Littre, xxxv
Kala-Devala, 157 Lucian,vi
Kala-Nagaraja, 188, 191
Lumbinigrove,wheretheBuddha
Kalama, see AJara wasborn, 153
Kalilag and Damnag literature,
Kal x u x d x a i y v i f n . , 120, 216f. M M a a d d h d u i r , at q t u h e a e v n i , la 2 s 0 i 0 ni, lx
KanthakaNivattanaChetiya, 17G Maha-bharataquoted, xxvi
Kanthaka,themystichorse, 172f. Maha-Dhammapala Jataka, 224,
K K a a p p i p l a a s v i a y t a th f u o , re 1 s 4 t 8 , , 2 2 1 1 0 8 Ma 2 h 2 a 8 -Maya, mother of the
KassapabrahminandBodisat,130 Buddha, 148f.
KassapaBuddha, seeBuddhas Maha-nama, the fourth convert,
Kassapa, Maha Narada Jataka 209
Ka s ( s N e s o c a . o p n a 6 d 44 c o ) o f , nv 2 U e 1 r r 2 t u , ve 2 l 1 a 0 , f. the sixty- M M a a B h h u a a d p - d a V h d a a a m , n s a ii a , ,i q f u . D o , i t 1 a e 6 l d 1 o , gu I e vi s ii, o 2 f 06 the
Katha-sarit-sagara, Ixvi Mahirnsasaka, raceof, 82
MahosadhaJataka,xiii
Kasi, xli

254 INDEX
Ma jj hima Desa, the Buddhist Overland route in ancient times,
HolyLand, 147, 205 xli
Mallika, kingofKosala, xxii
Mangala, ascetic and Bodisat, 132 Pabbajja Sutta, 181
Manjerika,palaceoftheNagaking, Pabbata king and Bodis=at, 50
97 Paccuppanna-vatthu Intro
Mantin, a brahmin, 160 ductoryStory, Ixxiv
Mara, theBuddhistSatan,tempts Pada-gata-sannaya, Ixxvii
G co o n t fl a i m ct a w b i e t t h we s e o n ver t e h ig e nt B y, ud 1 d 7 h 5 a; P P a a h l l m a y vi r , a a f n r c ui i t e s n , t s P i e n r g s l i e a - n s , ee x d x e i d x , 94
a 2 n 0 d 2 , f. 190f. ; the daughters of, P P a a n n c d h a a va T , a a n r t o ra c , kn v e ii a , r x R i a , j x a x g i a x, ha I , xx 88
Marks on a childs body signs of Paramitas,theTenPerfections, 18
itsfuture, 158, 161,223 and foil., 54andfoil.
Martyrologies, xxxvi Paricchataka flowers (of deva-
Max Miiller,xxxii,xxxviii world), 85
Milk, legend of working in and Penance not the way to wisdom,
in, 184 91
Moggallana, thechiefdisciple, 214 PetrusdeNatalibus,martyrologist,
Monastery,giftof,214,230 xxxix
Monk, the eight things allowedto Phsedrus,theLatinfabulist, xxxiii
a, 178 Pitakapassagesquotedorreferred
Morris, Rd., 1, Ivii to:
Muchalinda,thekingofthecobras, Apadana, Ixviii
204 PabbajjaSutta, 181
Myrobolan, 205 Maha-padhanaSutta, 161
Samafina-phalaSutta, 88
Nagas, mystic snakes, 176, 179, Dhammapada, xxvi, 204
188
;
kingof,singstheBodisats Jataka,seeseparatetitles
praise, 191 Culla Vagga, xlviii
Nalaka, 159 SamyuttaNikaya, xii, Hi
Nanda,theBuddhashalfbrother, AnguttaraNikaya,Ivii
226 Abhidhamma, Iviii, 201
Neranjara, a river near Uruvela, ChariyaPitaka, xlviii
187 Buddhavamsa, 1, 84, 113
Nigrodha tree, 184 f., cf. Ixxii Vinaya, i
Nipata, division of the Jataka PaisachI, xvii
Book, Ixxii Pancha Tantra, vi f., x, xxvi f.,
Nirvana, 86 f., 170, 200 xxxii, Ixii
Numbers, sacred or lucky, 159, Perfections, the ten, 97, 101 f.,
163 passim
Planudes, authorof^Esop, xxxf.
Offerings, uselessness of, 211 Platoquoted, vi
Oldenberg, li Ploughingfestival, 163
Omens, the thirty-two good, 151, Punna, slavegirl ofSujata, 185
Oph 1 i 5 r 6 , ; pr t o h b e a f b o l u y r, in 19 In 8 dia,xliv, 162, Rahula, Gotamas son, 169, 173,
168 224, 226

INDEX 255
Rajagaha, 179,212, 217, 228 Sinhalese version of the Birth
KaJavatana-tree, 204f. Stories, ii, xiii
Rajovada Jataka, xxi Sirens in Buddhist stories,
Ralston, xl xiii
Kama, a brahmin, 160; fatherof Slavonic tales, xl
BuddhasteacherUddaka, 181 Snakes, see Naga and Muchalinda
Ramma, acity, 90, 110 SolomonsJudgment, xv, xiiif.
Uammavati,acity, 115 Somadeva, Ixvi
Slavs of light stream from a Sotthiya, amerchant, 231
Buddha, 116, 185, and see Sotthiya, thegrasscutter, 188
Halo Soul,sermonon, 209
Renunciation, the Great, 172f.; Spring, beautiesof, 217
Rep g e a a r t b e o r f s , o 1 f 7 t 8 h ; eS p c o r w i e p r tu o r f e , s 1 ( 9 B 4 Mn- S S t t . . B J a o r h la n am o , f xx D x a i m v ascus, xxxiv,
aka), 168 xxxvii
St. Josaphat, xxxiv
Saddharma-Pundarlka, Ivii, Ixxv Struggle, the Great, against sin,
Sahajata, orConnatal Ones, 256 181
Sakka as Bodisat, 132; his Sudassana(BelleVue) monastery,
c x h vi ar f a .. ct x e x r ; i p n lac B e u s d t d h h e is B t udd ta h l a es, s Sud 9 a 0 s ; sa c n i a t , y, S 1 u 2 j 8 ata Buddhas chief
hairinadagabainheaven, 178 ; disciple, 136 ; kingandBodisat,
serves the Buddha, 155, 168, 133
178, 205 ; legend of his throne Sudatta, a brahmin, 160
feelinghot, 168, 213 Suddodhana,theBuddhasfather,
Sakyas, the, 220 148
Sanmfma-phala Suttaquoted, 88 Sujata, a Bodisat, 133
Samapatti, 181 Sujata,Buddha, 128
Sammappadhana, 181 Sujata, legend of her offering to
SanchiTope, sculptures at, liv the Buddha, 184f.
Sanjaya teacher, 119 Sumedha, the Bodisat in the time
Sapoflife,curiouslegendconcern ofDlpankara, xli, 82f.
ing, 182, 185 Sumedha, Buddha, 128
Sariputta, the chief disciple, 214, Supannas, winged creatures, 176,
227 179, 188
Savatthi,228 SupatifthitaFerry, 187
Si-nan i, a landowner, father of SuruciJataka, Ixxiii
Sujfitfi. 184 Suruci, a brahmin, 119
Shakespeare, vi, xxxix SusimaasceticandBodisat, 131
Siddhattha, name of the Buddha, Suyaraa, adeva-governor, 155 ; a
lr,L&amp;gt;, Hif, f.. ISO, ]!)( brahmin, 160
Signs, the thirty-two bodily, of a
great man ; seeMarks Takkasi!a=Taxila, a university
Siha-( amina Jataka, No. 189, town, xxi
translated,iv Tapassu,amerchant, 205
Simpson, \V., xli Taranatha, xlix
Sinbad the Sailor, xxxix Tathagata, H.o
Sindh horses. lt;t&amp;gt; 1ft\.ttimsaheaven, 178, 179

INDEX
256
Tor t t a o l i k s a e t , ive, of viii gold, 231 ; the V V e a d r a r s o , q t u h o e te t d h , re v e i , i xlvii, 84, 159
Transmigration of souls, Ixix Veluvana (the Bambu-grove), 214
TreespayhomagetoMahaMaya, VersesintheJatakas,Ixxf., Ixxvi
154 to the Buddha, 164, 190 Vesali, Councilof,lif.
Tree-de ; va, the Buddha mistaken VessantaraJataka, 117, 195, 222
Tre fo e ra o , f 18 E 5 nl ; ig v h o t w en to m , en 1 t 84 (Bo- or V V i e j t a a y l u a t - t p a a r n a c , a- S v a i k m k sa a t s i, tr I u xv m i p i et, 191
Bodhi-tree), 188 Vijitavin, Bodisat, 134
Tree-god, or genius, or fairy, the Virtues, the Ten Cardinal, see
Bodisat as, Ixxix,212,230, 238, Perfections
317 Vissakamma, 169
Tree-talk, seewardingrune Vrihat-katha, Ixvii
Tumour,Ix
Wardingrune, 118
Uddaka, the Buddhas teacher, Waterofpresentation, 230
181 Wassiliew, Ixiii
Ukkala, Orissa, 205 Weber,xxxiv
UmmaggaJataka, Ixxiii Wheel,thesacred,211
U U Ur p p u a a v t k e i a l s , a s , a a ( 1 H 8 = 4 i , n Sa d 1 r u 6 i 2 p , m u e t 2 n t 1 a d 0 ) i , ca 9 n 6 t, 207 W Wo i r n l g d e - d pr c o r c e l a a t m u a re t s i , on s s e , e S 1 u 4 p 4 annas
Usnard, xxxvii Yakkhas, xiii, 188
Uttara, brahminand Bodisat, 129 Yakshas, see Yakkhas
Yakshini, seeYakkhas
Vannabhumi(PlaceofPraise),212 Yasa,firstlayconvert, 209
Vappa, the second convert, 209 Yojana (seven miles), 179
Printedin GreatBritain byStephenAustin& Sons, Ltd.,Hertford.

JET
tau
es jataka
r.
l-Ui.S
The rT-,tf&quot;i - .i