.1 A T A K A M A L A
(GARLAND OF BIRTH-STORIES).
TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT
BY
J. S. SPE Y EH.
fCW//•//««/ /row roA A', />. 385^
XXXI.
THE STORY OF SUTASOMA.
(Sutasomajataka)
Meeting with a virtuous person, in wliatever way it may
have been occasioned, promotes salvatiou. Thus considering,
he who longs for salvation must strive after the inter-
course with virtuous persons. This will be taught as follows.
In the time when our Lord was a Bodhisattva, he hap-
pened to be born, it is said, in the illustrious royal
family of the Kauravas, that dynasty wide-famed for its
glory, who owing to their iutentness on possessiug virtues
possessed the deep-rooted affection of their subjects and
the splendour of whose power had put their proud neigh-
bours to vassalage. Mis father gave him the- name of
Sutasoma, for he looked as lovely as Soina (the Moougod),
his face being irradiated by the nimbus of his hundreds
of virtues. Like the moon in the bright half' of the month ,
his loveliness and grace increased every day. Having in
course of time attained skill in the Vedas with their
angas and in the upa vedas ', and having been also
' As to the angas see the first note on story VII. the up. a vc das are ex-
plained in the tirst note on story XIX.

6Ï7
initiated in the worldly arts and sciences, including the
additional ones ' , he became an object of esteem and love
to his people and might be called a kinsman of virtues,
so to speak. Por he was inclined to be a decided helper
of virtues -, his regard for them was ever increasing, and
he kept himself under restraint to preserve them carefully.
i—2. Good conduct (cïla), learning, charity, mercy, self-
command, majesty, forbearance, wisdom, patience, humility,
modesty, shame, judgment, loveliness, renown, civility,
retentiveness, strength, puren ess of mind, these and such
were the excellent properties which dwelt with him. Em-
bellished by his youth, as it were, and deriving an addi-
tional charm from the holiness and loftiness of his person,
they were like his constituent parts, as the (sixteen) kalüs
of the moon. *
And for this reason the king, his father, raised him to
the illustrious rank of heir-apparent, judging him the proper
person for ruling his subjects, for he knew his high aspi-
rations and the holiness of his nature.
3. But as he was fond of learning, he was a great lover
of religious sentences well-turned and paid the most dis-
tinguished reward to those who attended him with well-
said sentences.
Once it was the season of spring, and the power of
the month of flowers had decorated the suburban parks.
The young offshoots of shrubs and trees overspread them
with a soft brilliancy; the flowers opening gave them
a charming and laughing aspect; fresh grass-plots, like
smooth woollen carpets, were extending all around over
their grounds; their ponds with unstained and blue water
were covered with the petals of lotuses white and blue;
' These worldly arts and sciences are the so-called kalas, the total number
of which is sixty-four, partly tine arts, partly manual arts and handicrafts.
* So elsewhere the pious are called „partisans of virtue" (guuapakshaprl-
tinah). See I', i. st. VII., st. 31.
" Indian astronomy divides the moon's disc in sixteen equal parts, named
k a 1 A s: in this measure they express the size of the illuminated part and the
extent of eclipses. The exactness of the comparison would appear more, if the
number of virtues of young Sutasomn were also sixteen. But I count nineteen. If
retentiveness (medha), judgment (mati) and wisdom (dhf) might be computed
together as one virtue, and majesty (tejali) with strength (bala) as an other,
we would have exactly

the humming noise of' numbers of roaming bees was heard
in them; crowds of bold cuckoos and peacocks showed
themselves; and breezes, agreeable by their mildness, fra-
trraney and coolness blew over them. The splendour of
those gardens roused gladness in the minds of men. So
the High-minded One, walking about escorted by a small
body of guards went out to one of those pleasure-grounds
in order to divert himself.
4. Its groves resounded with the chants of the he-cuckoo,
its various trees were bending under the weight of their
flowers, and the grace of the gardens was enhanced by
their charming arbouis, artfully arranged. Rambling through
his groves in the company of his wives he resembled
one enjoying the fruit of his merit in Nandana (the gar-
dens of the Celestials).
5. There he delighted in the songs of the females blending
with the soft tones of musical instruments, in their dances
charmingly executed with exciting coquetry and graceful '
gesticulation, in their brilliant amorous play in conse-
quence of their excitement by liquors, but no less in the
loveliness of the forest.
Now, while he was staying there, some brahman who
professed himself a speaker of well-said sentences approached.
After being received in an honorific manner, he sat down
in that place, ravished by the contemplation of the prince's
beautiful figure. So the Great Being, though he was
enjoying at that time the sport allowed to his age and
fallen to his share as the effect of the power of his rich
store of merit (gathered in previous existences), was never-
theless affected with great regard for that brahman. Yet,
before reaping the profit of his coming, that is to say,
before hearing his sentences, there suddenly arose a con-
fused noise, checking the sounds of song and music,
destroying the merriment of the company engaged in
playful occupation, and rousing fear and anxiety in the
women. On hearing this uproar he bade the guardians
of his harem kindly to inquire about the matter. Then
his doorkeepers hastily went to him, alarmed and with
The reading of the mss. lalitn is the right one.

JaTAKAMaLa. 619
saddened faces expressive of their fear and anxiety. They
related him this: «Majesty, that man-eater Kalinashapada,
the. son of Sudasa is approaching, the cruel disposition
of whose mind exceeds even that of the giants, for as if
he were an incarnation of the God of Death, he is in
the habit of destroying liundreds of men. Looking dreadful
and terrible like a giant, that embodied Terror of the World
of superhuman strength, vigour and insolence is coming
to this very place. Our guards are dispersed. Terror devoured
the courage of your warriors, consternation dissolved their
ranks and put also your chariots, horse and elephants into
disorder. Therefore Your Majesty must be on your guard
for your defence or reflect on the proper measures to be
taken now." Then Sutasoma, though knowing it well,
asked them: «Who is that man whom you call the son
of Sudasa ?" And they said to him: "Is it then unknown
to Your Majesty that there was a king of that name,
who having gone out a hunting, carried away by his
horse penetrated into the very heart of the forest. There
he cohabited with a lioness who having become pregnant
after some time was delivered of a male human child.
Some foresters took up that boy and brought him to Sudasa,
who being childless, brought him up as his son and when
he passed away to the city of the Celestials ' left him
his successor. So he came to the possession of his proper
royal dignity, but by the fault of his maternal origin he
was fond of raw flesh. Once having tasted human flesh
and liking its relish surpassing any other flesh, he com-
menced to kill and eat the very inhabitants of his capi-
tal. Then the townsmen prepared to put him to death.
The son of Sudasa, being afraid of them, made this pro-
mise to the goblins - who are wont to enjoy offerings of
human flesh and blood: 'If 1 am saved from this peril,
I shall perform a sacrifice of one hundred royal princes to the
goblins.' So he was saved from that peril of life. And now
he carried oft' by force many , many royal princes, and so he
' in other terms: „when he died."
* Those goblins are here called bhütas, but this is of course a generic
appellation; cp. vol. VIII of the Bz/V/rage» p. 25^ note 1 (story VIII).

620 jftTAKAM&ta.
is also come here in order to carry away ' Your Majesty,
too. You have heard the matter; deign to give us your
orders, Majesty."
Now the Bodhisattva, who knew already formerly
the aberration of mind of the son of Sudasa and his
wicked behaviour caused by it, felt compassion with him.
So he set his mind on the design of curing him, and
since he trusted himself to possess the qualities adapted
to the extinction of the monstrous abnormity of his con-
duct, the information about Sudasa's son drawing near,
like a welcome news, roused within him the sense of
gladness. And with firmness he spoke in this manner:
6. «This man who dispossessed from his royalty because of
his fondness of human flesh -' acts like a madman utterly
unable to govern himself, having left his royal duties
and destroyed his (former) good repute and merit, such a
person, 1 suppose, is in a state deserving commiseration.
7. //This so being, what opportunity is there for me of
using force now or what room for alarm and fear from
the side of such a one? Rather will I utterly destroy his
wickedness without employing effort, violence and prowess.
8. «And now that man who would deserve commiseration
from my side, if even he went away from me, comes
himself to the place, where I am staying. For this reason
it befits me to show him hospitality. For in this way the
virtuous act towards guests visiting them.
//Therefore, it suffices that each of you minds his ordi-
nary duty." So he instructed the guard of his harem. And
turning to his female life-guards who with eyes great and
bewildered with anxiety and with throats almost choked
by agitation prepared to bar the way of the monster, he
made them desist from that purpose, addressing them with
comforting words, and went forward in the direction of
that alarming noise. And he saw his royal army dispersed
and on flight, pursued by the sou of Sudasa, whose
' Upahartum is ol' course a misprint tor apahart u m.
* Though it is not expressly narrated in the foregoing, it is here a matter
of course that the son of Sudasa was expelled from his capital by his own
people niter he began to eat them. The piili redaction in the Jiltaka gives
n detailed account of that expulsion.

621
appearance was dreadful. His soiled garments, loosely kept
together with a girdle, hung around his body; his hair
dressed with a diadem of bark and coarse with dust was
dishevelled and hanging down his face wholly covered
with a thick, rugged beard which lay upon it like darkness;
his eyes rolling with wrath and anger looked tremendous;
he brandished his sword and shield. The prince fearless and
free from anxiety, called out to him: "Halloo, here I am,
I Sutasoma. Turn to me. What are you troubling yourself
with vexing that poor people?" These words of challenge
stirred the pride of the son of Sudusa, and turning from
thence like a lion he perceived the Bodhisattva (waiting
for him) alone, unarmed and placidly looking according
to his nature. On seeing him he exclaimed: //you are the
very man I am seeking", and anon without delay went
hastily and with impetuosity to him and placing him on
his shoulder ran off. And the Bodhisattva considering with
solicitude that his mind was still troubled with agitation
and his heart infatuated by wrath and arrogance kindled
by the insolence of his rejoicing at the royal forces put to
flight, thought it was now no proper time for admonition and
persisted in his attitude of unconcern. On the other hand,
the son of Sudasa having obtained his wish and thinking
himself to have made a gain of importance entered much
rejoiced the stronghold where he had his residence.
9—11). That unholy dwelling, when appearing from afar to the
eyes of the travellers caused them to be frozen with hor-
ror; for it offered an aspect as dreadful as the dancing-
place of giants and spectres. ' It was encumbered with
corpses of men slain, and wet with blood horribly moistening
its ground; it seemed to threaten every one (approaching)
with the cries of jackals roaring there most inauspiciouslv;
and the trees standing on its area, exposed to the disco-
louring smoke of many funeral piles, bore leaves rough
and dark-red, the abode of vultures and crows.
Having set down the Bodhisattva in that place, he took
his rest for a while, his looks intently lixed on the face
of his victim, charmed as he was by his surpassing beauty.
Meanwhile the Bodhisattva remembered that poor brahman
' In other terms: as dreadful as a cemetery.
5e Volgr. X. •!

62 Z JftTAKAMi'lLa.
come to him in order to get some present for his senten-
ces, whom he had not yet paid the due honour and who
must still be, waiting for his return to the gardens with
hope in his heart. And he entered upon this reflection:
/'Alas! oh!
11, «That brahman came to me from afar, bringing to me
the present of his sentences and tilled with hope. What will
he do now on hearing my being rapt?
12. "Afflicted by a burning sorrow on account of the de-
struction of his hope and vexed with fatigue felt the keener
in consequence of his despair, he will either sigh, com-
miserating my fate, or chide his own destiny."
While the Great Being was reflecting in this manner
and his mind accustomed to commiserate (the sufferings
of others) was sore with grief on account of that brahman,
tears welled up in His eyes. The soil of Sudasa, seeing
those tears, began to laugh aloud and said: "Do leave off.
13. "You are renowned for your wisdom proved by many
different virtues. But, having come into my power, you
too shed tears!
"Verily, this is a true saying:
14. "In calamities constancy has no effect, and in cases of
sorrow learning is of no use. No being is to be found,
indeed, who does not shake, being stricken.
"Therefore, tell me the truth.
15. «Do you bewail your life dear to yourself, or your
wealth, the instrument of pleasures, or your relations or
perhaps your royal rank? Or is it the recollection of your
father who loves his son so much or that of your own
children who uow weep for you, which makes these tears
burst from your eyes?"
The Bodhisattva said:
16. "It is not the thought either of my life or my parents,
children, relatives and wives, or the recollection of the
pleasures of royalty, that moves me to tears; but some
brahman who is come to me hopeful, relying on the well-
said sentences he brings. Forsooth, hearing my being carried
off, he must grieve with despair. This I remembered and
hence my eyes are wet with teal's.
17. "For this reason you ought to give me leave in order

that I may refresh the, heart of that brahman , now distressed
with the grief of disappointment, pouring on it the. water
of honorific reward , and on the other hand 1 may take
from him the honey-sweet sayings he offers me.
18. //After thus paying my debt to that brahman, I shall
come back to you again, that I may be also free from
debt with respect to you, and afford gladness to your eyes
beholding me. returning here.
19. "Never suspect me however, troubling your mind with
the thought, this may be some contrivance of mine to go
oft'. Those like me, o king, follow a way dill'erent from
that on which other people are wont to walk."
The son of Sudfisa spoke.:
211. «What you say, as if it were something worth regard,
is a thing which utterly exceeds belief. Who, indeed,
being released from the mouth of' Death and having recovered
his freedom of movement, would go to meet it once more ?
21. /'If having passed the danger of death hard to overcome,
you be in safety in your brilliant palace, say, what reason may
there exist, that should induce you to come here back to me?"
The Bodhisattva spoke: "How? Does Your Honour not
understand the motive of my returning here, though it is
a strong one, to be sure? Have I not promised, L shall
come back? Therefore, do no suspect me any longer,
taking me for an equal of the villain. Am 1 not Sutasoma?
22. "It is true that some, out of cupidity and fear of
death, leave veracity, as if it were a straw. But to the
virtuous veracity is their property and life; therefore they
do not give it up even in a dangerous situation.
23. "Neither life nor the pleasures of this world will preserve
from mishap him who has fallen from veracity. Who, then,
should leave veracity for the sake of these objects? that virtue
which is a rich source of praise, glory and happiness?
24. "But in a person who is seen walking on the road of sin
and in whom there does not appear any effort to lead a
holy life, a pious behaviour becomes a matter of disbelief.
Now, what of the kind did you perceive in my person
that you should suspect even me?
25. «If 1 should really have been afraid of you, or attached
to the pleasures (of my royal state), or if my mind should

have been devoid of compassion, do you not think I
would have met an adversary so famous for his ferocity
as you, in full armour and prepared to tight, as becomes
one proud of his valour?
2(i. "But it may be that 1 did even desire that conversation
with you. Why, after satisfying the labour of that brahman,
I shall come back to you of my own accord. Persons like
me, forsooth, do not utter an untruth."
Now these words of the Bodhisattva irritated Sudïlsa,
as if they spoke of something fanciful, and he entered
upon this reflection: «Verily, he does greatly boast of
his veracity and righteous behaviour. Well then, 1 will
see them, both his attachment to truth and his love of
righteousness. What matters to me his loss, after all? I
have already my full number of one hundred royal princes
whom I subdued by the overwhelming strength of my arm;
with ///«// I may perform my sacrifice to the goblins accor-
ding to my want." After thus considering he said to the
uAsx^iViV.tWru;.• "•W«!ïV dïYe'Q", gvr. We WTSA (J\>•«••• jocrr• jSuün/arWss
in keeping your promise and your righteousness.
27. «Go and having done for that brahman what he longs
for , return soon , meanwhile I will dress your funeral pile."
And the Bodhisattva promised him he would do so.
Then he set out for his palace, where he was welcomed
by his household. Having sent for that brahman , he learnt
from him a tetrad of gut has. The Great Being, whom
the hearing of those well-said sentences procured an intense
gladness, praised the brahman with kind words and marks
of honour, and valuing each gat ha at the rate of one
thousand (pieces of gold), rewarded him with the wealth
so much desired for.
Now his father, intending to avert him from expenses out
of place aud extravagant, availed himself of this opportunity
and admonished his son in friendly terms. «My dear, he said,
when rewarding well-said sentences you should know the
limit, should not you? You have to maintain a large
retinue; besides, the splendour of kings depends on the
affluence of their treasury. Por this reason I tell you this.
28. «Rewarding a well-said sentence with one hundred is
a very high estimation. It is not fit to exceed this limit.

ufiLa. 625
If a mau however wealthy is too liberal, he will never retain
the splendour of his riches for a long time,
ill). '/Wealth is the chief' instrument of success and an
effective one; for no pleasure is attainable in defiance of
wealth. Fortune, indeed, like a harlot, disregards a king
who lacks an abundant treasury."
The Bodhisattva spoke:
30. "If it should be at all possible to settle a limit to the
value of well-said sentences, Majesty, I would not incur
your reprehension, to be sure, if I were to deliver even
my royal rank to purchase them.
31. "Verily, such sayings by hearing which a inau gains
placidity of mind, his love for salvation is strengthened
and the darkness (of ignorance) disappears (from his intellect)
by the increase of his wisdom , — ought they not to be
bought even at the price of one's own flesh?
»"52—33. «Holy texts are a light which destroys the darkness of
delusion (moha); they are the highest wealth, a wealth
beyond the reach of thieves and the rest ' ; the weapon
to hurt that enemy whose name is infatuation; the best
counsellor and- adviser as to a man's course of conduct;
an unalterable friend even in time of distress; the painless
medicine of the disease called sorrow; a mighty army
strong enough to crush the army of vices; the highest
treasure of glory and bliss.
34—37. "Moreover, the splendid possession of holy texts is the
principal course of eloquent speech, that precious thing. When
meeting with virtuous persons, this possession affords the op-
portunity of making a present of great value; iu the assemblies
it conciliates the favour of the learned; in disputes and contro-
versies it casts its light sunlike and destroys the arrogance
and fame of envious adversaries. Its immense superiority is
exhibited by the expression of delight and the high colour in
the eyes and on the faces of even common people, when they
are enraptured with ecstasy and applauding with the
clapping of hands. Further it enables its possessor to
demonstrate a matter with plain argument and in a gra-
ceful way, owing to his quotations from manifold treatises
' Compare note to story III, stanza 21.

626
and sacred books. By its softness, its culture and its
loveliness, eloquence may be compared to a string of
unfaded garlands or to the blazing lustre of a fine and
tempered flame, and (finally) it needs makes glory arise
to its owner. So making use of sacred texts is a pleasant
way to success.
38. "And those who learn them become released from the
vices obstructing the road to the threefold prosperity '
and are accordingly induced to betake themselves to that
road: and conforming their behaviour to the precepts
involved in those texts and making it excellent, they
easily cross the dangerous passage through existences.
39. "For so many excellent properties holy texts are famous.
Now then, having got them like a present, how should
I, being able to reward the giver of them, not have
honoured him in return? Or how could I (doing so,)
transgress your order?
40. «I will go, therefore, to the son of Sudasa. I do not
want either the toil of the. royal dignity or that other
solicitude 1 would incur by following the way of wickedness,
if I were to transgress my duty of keeping my engagement
to come back."
These words alarmed his father who moved by his
affection replied with earnest entreaty: //Verily, it is but
for your good, my dear, that I spoke so. You must not
take offence at it, will you? May your enemies come into
the power of Sudasa! In fact, you made him the 'promise
to return to him, and for this reason you, being wont to
keep your faith, wish to act up to your promise. Never-
theless , I shall not allow it. No sin is incurred, forsooth,
by following the way of untruth, if one may thereby
save one's own life and also for the sake of one's parents
and other persons venerable. Why should you exert yourself
to avoid this precept, which is prescribed by the Veda?
Besides, those who are skilled in the science of politics
proper for kings proclaim the attachment to Righteousness
(dharm a) in such cases as where it evidently causes
damage to material interests (artha) and pleasures (kama)
to be mismanagement and an evil habit. No more then
' viz. of the triad of d h a r m a. art ha and k a m a.

J&TAKAM&L&. 827
of that obstination, with whicli you grieve in v heart and
disregard your own interest. — But you will object, my
dear, that acting thus is dishonourable and in contradiction
with righteousness and it is for this reason that you
cannot resolve on violating your promise, having never
been accustomed to do anything like that. Yet, why
should you violate your promise? Here I have an army
of footmen, chariots, horse and elephants prepared for war aud
ready to march for your rescue. They make up an excellent
body of warriors attached to your person, yea, a legion
of heroes skilled iu arms and having distinguished them-
selves in many battles. In short, these forces arc dreadful
like a violent stream of water. Well, come to him sur-
rounded by that army and bring him either to submission
or to death. In this manner you shall have fulfilled your
promise and at the same time saved your life."
The Bodhisattva replied : »I am not able to promise one
thing, Majesty, and perform another, nor can I strike at
such people as deserve pity being immersed in the mud of
wicked habits and moving in the direction of Hell, whom
I reckon my friends after their relations have abandoned
them and there is nobody to protect them. Further, you
must consider also this.
•11. «That man-eater performed for me something generous
and difficult to be done (by others), since he dismissed
me out of his power, relying on my faith.
42. "So it is thanks to him that I got those holy stanzas,
father. 1'or this reason he is my benefactor and is especi-
ally entitled to be an object of my commiseration.
«Cease also to be afraid of any misfortune threatening
me, Majesty. How should he be capable of injuring me
when I come back to him, as I went?" So speaking the
High-minded One persuaded his father to give him leave. Then
declining the entreaties of his confidents and his faithful
army who were eager to prevent his going away, he set
out for the dwelling of the son of Sudilsa, alone and free
from fear and sadness, for he was keeping his faith and
marched with the aim of softening his heart, to the
happiness of men. As soon as the son of SudAsa saw the
Great Beiug approaching from afar, he became exceedingly

628
astonished , and his esteem and propensity for him increased.
Not even his cruelty long practised and deep-rooted in
his defiled mind could prevent him from entering, forsooth,
upon a thought like this: «Ah! Ah!!!
43. "This is the wonder of wonders, to be sure, the marvel
of marvels! That prince's lofty veracity exceeds all that
may be expected of men and deities!
41. "To me, a person as cruel-natured as Death, he comes
back of himself, setting aside fear aud anxiety! Ah! What
a constancy! Bravo for his veracity!
45. «Justly, indeed, the renown of his truth-speaking is
wide-spread, as he now gave up his life and royal state
to keep his faith!"
While he was thus affected with amazement and admi-
ration , the Bodhisattva drew near saying:
46'. //I have obtained that treasure of well-said sentences,
I have rewarded the indigent man who presented me with
it, and gladness has been procured to my mind, thanks
to you. Now 1 am back here. Eat me, if such is your
desire, or use me as a victim at your sacrifice."
The son of Sudasa spoke:
47. "I am not in a hurry to eat you; moreover, this funeral
pile is still smoky, and flesh will get its proper relish
only when roasted on a smokeless tire. Let us hear mean-
while these well-said sentences."
The Bodhisattva replied: «Of what use is it to you,
in such a state, to listen to holy sentences?
48. "You adopted this mode of living merciless to your subjects
for the sake of your belly. Now these stanzas praise right-
eousness. Righteousness does not go together with injustice.
49. «Following the wicked livelihood of rakshasas and having
left the way of the pious, ' you do not possess faith,
still less righteousness. What shall you do with holy texts?"
This contempt roused the impatience of the son of
Sudasa. He answered: *Do not speak so, sir.
50. * Where is that king, say, who does not kill with his
bent bow in his park the mates of the hinds of the forest?
' In other terms: „having transgressed the precepts of morality." Instead of
s a m t y a k t A r t h u p a t h a s y a , I read s a m t y a k t a r y a p a t h a s y a.

JaTAKAMaLa. 629
If I in a similar way kill men for my livelihood, I am
the unjust one, it is said, not those killers of deer!"
The Bodhisattva spoke:
51. "Neither do those stand on the ground of righteousness
whose bent bows are directed against the fleeing and
frightened deer. But by far more reprehensible than those
is a man-eater. Human beings, indeed, occupy by their
birth the highest place (in the scale of creatures) and are
not allowed to serve as food."
Now, though the Bodhisattva had spoken very harsh words
to the son of Sudasa, the friendliness of his nature exer-
cised such a power that it outweighed the ferocious
nature of the man-eater. So he quietly heard this reproval,
only he laughed aloud at it, then he spoke: "Say, Sutasoma.
52. "Since, after 1 had released you and you reached your
home, that lovely residence resplendent with the lustre of
royal dignity , you came back to me, for this reason you
are not skilled in political wisdom, methinks."
The Bodhisattva said: » You are wrong. On the contrary,
I «»/ skilled in political wisdom, and for this very reason
I do not put it- into effect.
53. "What, in truth, is the worth of skill in an art, resorting
to which entails the certain fall from righteousness with-
out bringing about happiness?
«Moreover, I tell you,
54. "Those who are wise in directing their actions along
the way of political wisdom, commonly get into calamities
after dentil. Therefore 1 put aside the winding paths of
artful politics and keeping my faith, came back.
55. «Also for this reason I show I am skilled in the mana-
gement of affairs, that leaving untruth I delight in vera-
city. For no action is declared by competent judges in
the science of politics to be well-managed which is un-
connected with good reputation, satisfaction and interest."
The son of Sudasa spoke :
56. «What is that interest you perceive to be attained
by holding on veracity, that giving up your own dear
life, your relations who shed tears at your departure, and
the charming pleasures attending on royalty you returned
to me in order to keep your faith before all?"

630 J&TAKAMaLa.
The Modhisattva spoke: "Many excellent virtues are the
consequence of holding on veracity. Hear but the succinct
account of them.
57. «Veracity surpasses splendid garlands by its lovely grace
and any sweet flavour by its sweetness, and inasmuch as
it produces merit, that excellent good, without toil, it is
superior to every kind of penance and the troublesome
pilgrimages to tirthas.
58. "Affording to glory the opportunity of spreading in the
world, Veracity is the way to its penetrating the whole
Universe [the three worlds]. It is the entrance-door of the
abode of the Celestials, the bridge to cross the swamps
of s am sar a. '"
Then the son of Suda.su exclaimed: "excellent! right!",
and bowing to him and casting an admiring look on him
said again:
59. "The other men come into my power, are paralysed by
affliction and fear robs them of their courage. In you, on
iiV? é'óYtóiW/, / sï?é' iï s-pfeu'ditf Mpm^iïi'tófóïï. 1 sfffjftyYSSe,
you are not afraid of death, my prince."
The Bodhisattva spoke:
60. "That stnte being unavoidable even with ever so great
exertion, how should there be room for cowardous fear
with respect to it, which is moreover something wholly
unfit for prevention?
"Nevertheless and though knowing the natural course
of things in the world, people are poltroons against death.
61. «It is the vexation of their mind in consequence of their
wickedness, it is because they were wanting in exerting
themselves to perform good actions, it is their apprehension
of sufferings in the other world. That conscience makes
them torpid from anxiety that they have to die.
62. "But I do not remember having done anything that
should torture my conscience, and consequently 1 have
imbibed pure actions in my very nature. Who then,
clinging to Righteousness, should be in fear of death H
63. "Nor do I remember having made gifts to the indigent,
which did not tend to the «rlndness of both the mendicants
' Cp. note on story I, St.

J&TAKAMai/l. 681
and myself. Who, having in this manner obtained content-
ment by his gifts clinging to Righteousness, should be in
fear of death?
64. "Even when reflecting for a long time, I never recollect
to have taken any step towards evil, not even in my
thoughts. So the path to Heaven is cleared for me. Why
should I conceive fear of' death?
65. "On brahmans, on my relations and friends, on
my dependents, on the poor, on ascetics who are the
ornaments of their hermitages I bestowed much wealth,
giving according to the worthiness of the recipients; what
each of them was in want of', that was done for him.
66. "I built hundreds of magnificent monuments, hospices,
court-yards, hermitages, halls and tanks, and by this I
obtained satisfaction. Therefore I do not fear death. Why,
dress me for your sacrifice or eat me." .-...' , .
On hearing this language, the son of SudAsa was moved
to tears of tenderness, the hairs on his body bristled, the
darkness of his wicked nature vanished, and looking with
reverence up to the Bodhisattva, he exclaimed: «Beware!
Do not speak of evil!
67. "Verily, may he who should wish evil to such a being
like you, o foremost of princes, take the poison llala-
hala ' knowingly or eat a furious serpent or flaming iron
or may his head, also his heart, burst asunder iuto one
hundred pieces!
"Therefore you may tell me also those holy sentences.
Touched to tenderness as 1 am by the Hower-shower of
your words, my curiosity to hear them waxes stronger.
Attend also to this.
68. «I have beholden the ugliness of my conduct in the
mirror of Righteousness. O that now my mind, touched
by emotion, may be (appearing to you, as it is) craving
for the Law!"
Now the Bodhisattva, considering the eagerness of his desire
for hearing the, Law, knew him to have become a tit
vessel. He spoke: "Being then desirous of hearing the
' The llalahiila or Knlaküta poison was produced at the churning of the ocean.
iva swallowed it, lest it should devour the Universe, see Mhbh. 1, 18,41 foil.

632
Law, it is right that you listen to its preaching in the
proper attitude suitable for that act. Look here.
69—7)! '-Sitting on a lower seat, which is the token of lovely
modesty; enjoying the honey of the (sacred) words with
eyes expanding from gladness, so to speak; bending one's
mind calm and pure to the most intense reverential atten-
tion — so one must listen devoutly to the preaching of the
Law, as a sick man to the words of a doctor."
Then the son of Sud;"isa covered a slab of stone with
his upper garment and having offered this higher seat to
the Bodhisattva, sat down himself on the naked earth
before the eyes of the Bodhisattva. After which , keeping
his looks fixed with attention on his face, he invited the
Great Being: '/Speak now, sir" '. Then the Bodhisattva
opened his mouth and filling as it were the forest with
his voice deep and loud like the lovely sound of a uew-
formed rain-cloud, spoke:
71. "Meeting a virtuous person but once and perchance will suffice to
//Friendship strong and for ever, not wanting repeated
rejoining."
On hearing this guthfi the son of Sudfisa exclaimed
'/well said! well said!" and nodding his head and waving
his lingers said to the Bodhisattva: "go on, go on."
Then the Bodhisattva uttered the secoud gat ha.
72. '/From virtuous persons thou sliouldst never keep remote,
"But follow those; to worship them thyself devote.
«Their fragrance-spreading virtues uncompelled must
//Attain him who stands near them, as does flower-dust."
The son of SudAsa spoke:
73. "Doing your utmost, o virtuous one, to reward well-said
sentences, you employed your wealth in the right manner,
indeed, rightly you did not mind trouble.
"Go on, go on."'
The Bodhisattva spoke:
71. "The ears of kings, from jewels shining and from gold,
«With their possessors lose their beauty growing old.
//But not to pious conduct old age has access.
' This formula (b r ü hi d A n i in miirsh a) and the whole of this ceremonial
shows a striking likeness to the observances prescribed for the instruction in
the Veda of a pupil by his spiritual teacher.

633
"So strong a love of virtues pious men possess. '
(The other replied): «This is as a shower of ambrosia,
to be sure. O, how great a satisfaction you made me!
Go on, go on."
The Bodhisattva spoke :
75. "How distant Earth from Jleaven is, the East
"How far from Sunset and both Ocean's shores
//From one another. Greater distance keeps
"Separed of virtue and of wrong the lores."
Then the son of Sudasa who in consequence of his
gladness and surprise was filled with affection and reverence
for the Bodhisattva said to him :
7G. "Lovely are the gat has I heard from you. Their mag-
nilicent conteuts are expressed with an artful choice of
very distinguished words. You have by reciting them pro-
cured gladness to me. Let me honour you in return by
offering you four boons.
//Therefore, choose whatever you desire from my side."
Then the Bodhisattva, astonished at this offering, and
esteeming him for it, spoke: //Who are you that you
should bestow boons F
77. "You have no power over yourself, being dominated
by a passion for sinful actions. Say what boon , then, shall
you give to another, you whose heart is averse to pious
conduct ?
78. "It might be that 1 were to declare the boon I would
ask, but that your mind would be disinclined to give it.
Who, being compassionate,'- would like to provoke such a
calamity? Enough, enough you have done for me."
On these words the son of Sudasa was somewhat ashamed
and lowering his face said to the Bodhisattva: "1 beg
\ our Honour not to have so mean an opinion of me.
79. "I shall give you your boons, even if it were to cost
my life. Therefore, choose freely, prince, be it what it
may be that you desire."
The Bodhisattva spoke: «Well then,
' Op. /)/m;H;Hn/>(7rf(7, vs. 151.
* Inasmuch as by his naming the four boons he would bring about for the
man-eater an opportunity of breaking his faith, he might become the unvoluntary
cause to his neighbour of infernal punishment. Cp. story XXTV, stanza 32. '

684
80. //Give me these four precious boons. Take the vow of
veracity; give up injuring living beings; release your pri-
soners all, uobody excepted; and never more eat human
flesh, o you hero among men!"
The son of' Sudilsa said:
SJ. //I grant you the first three, but choose another fourth
boon. Are you not aware of this that 1 am unable to
desist from eating human flesh ?"
The Bodhisattva spoke: «Ah! Indeed! There you are!
Did not I say 'who are you that you should bestow
boons?' Moreover,
82. «How can you keep the vow of veracity and refrain
from injuring others, o king, if you do not part with
the habit of being an eater of human flesh?
/'Fie upon you!
83. '/Did not you say before you were willing to give
these boons even at the risk of your life? But now you
act quite otherwise.
84. «And how should you abstain from injury, killing
men in order to get their flesh? And this so being, what
may be the value of the three boons you did grant me?'
The son of Sudasa spoke:
85. «How shall I be able to give up that very habit, be-
cause of which I renounced my kingdom, bore hardship
in the wilderness and suffered myself to kill my right-
eousness and destroy my good renown ?"
The Bodhisattva replied: //For this very reason you
ought to give it up.
80. «How should you not leave that state because of which
you have lost your righteousness, your royal power, your
pleasures and your good renown ? Why cling to such an
abode of misfortune?
87. //Besides, it is but the vilest among men who repent
having given. How, then, should this meanness of mind
subdue a person like you?
//Stop then , stop that following after mere wickedness.
You ought to stir up yourself now. Is Your Honour not
the son of Sudasa ?
88. /'Meat examined by physicians and dressed by skilful
(cooks) is at your disposal. You may take the iiesh of

885
domestic animals, of fishes living in waterbasins and also
venison. With such meat satisfy jour heart, but pray,
desist from the reprehensible habit of eating human flesh.
89. «How do you like to stay in this solitary forest and
prefer it to your relations and children and your attendance
(once) beloved, to enjoying the melodious songs at night,
the grave sounds of drums reminding of water-clouds, and
the other various pleasures of royalty?
90. «It is not right, o monarch, that you allow yourself
to be dominated by your passion. Take rather that line
of conduct which is compatible with righteousness (dharina)
and interest (artha). Having, all alone, vanquished in
battle kings with their whole, armies, do not become a
great coward now when you have to wage war with your
passion.
91. '/And have you not to mind also the next world, o
lord of men? For this reason you must not cherish what
is bad because it pleases you. Jiut you ought to pursue
that which is favourable to your renown and the way to
which is a lovely one and to accept it, which is your
good, even though you dislike it, taking it as a medicine."
Then the son of Sudasa was moved to tenderness and
tears, which barred his throat with emotion. He threw
himself before the Bodhisattvn and embracing his feet
exclaimed:
92. //Justly your fame pervades the world in all directions,
spreading about the flower-dust of your virtues and the
scent of your merit. For example, who else but you
alone, forsooth, could have felt compassion for such an
evildoer as I was, accustomed to a cruel livelihood, which
made me resemble a messenger of Death?
93. //You are my master, my teacher, yea, my deity. I
honour your words accepting them with (bowed) head.
Never more I shall feed on human flesh, Sutasoma.
Everything you told me I shall accomplish according to
your words.
94. //Well then, those princes whom I brought here to be
victims at my sacrifice, and who vexed by the sufferings
of imprisonment lost their splendour and are overwhelmed
by grief, them let us release together, none excepted."

636 jaTAKAM&Lft.
The Bodhisattva, having promised him his assistance,
set out with him to the very place, where; those royal
princes were kept in confinement. And no sooner had
they seen Sutasoma than understanding that they were
set at liberty, they became filled with extreme gladness.
95. At the sight of Sutasoma the; royal princes became
radiant with joy, and the loveliness of laughter burst out
on their faces, in the same way as in the beginning of
autumn the groups of waterlilies, invigorated by the
moon-beams, are breaking open.
And the Bodhisattva having come to them addressed
them with comforting and kind words and after making
them take an oath not to do harm to the son of Sudilsa,
released them. Then together with the son of Sudusn and
followed by those royal princes he set out for his kingdom,
and having there made to the princes and the son of
Sudfisa an honourable reception according to their rank,
he reestablished them each on his royal throne.
In this manner meeting with a virtuous person, in
whatever way it may have been occasioned, promotes sal-
vation; accordingly he who longs for salvation must strive
after the intercourse with virtuous persons. This story
may also be told when praising the Tathagata: 'So Buddha
the Lord always intent on doing good was a friend even
to strangers still in his previous existences.' Likewise it
is to be told, when discoursing on listening with atteiiT
tion to the preaching of the excellent Law: 'In this
manner hearing the excellent Law tends to diminishing
wickedness and acquiring virtues.' Also it is to be told
when extolling sacred learning: 'In this manner sacred
learning has many advantages.' Likewise when discoursing
on veracity : 'In this manner speaking the truth is approved
by the virtuous and procures a large extent of merit.'
And also when glorifying veracity this may be propounded :
'In this manner the virtuous keep their faith without
regard of their life, pleasures or domination.' Likewise,
when praising commiseration.
In the pali Jiltaka there arc two jtUnkns headed Sulnsoma, one
Cullasutasomaj. (n. ;>?"•> Fausböll) and one Mahasutasomaj. (n. Ö37 j'Wrf.)

JaTAKAM(lL&. 637
The former has nothing to do with our story, but the latter relates it
in the main in quite the same way as our author. Yet, as it is very
extensive — this number fills 55 pages in Fausböïl's ed. V, 4.%—"ill —
many more particulars are added there. In that recension the man-eater
is a king of Benares, whose proper name is never mentioned. When
still a boy setting out for Takshacilft to study, he had happened to
meet with Sutasoma going with the same object thither and to make
friendship with him. The one hundred royal princes, afterwards carried
off by him when he had become the p o ris Ad a (man-eater), were
at that time their fellowstudents. After receiving the royal dignity at
Benares, he becomes a man-eater not in consequence of his maternal
origin — his father is lirahmadatta, not Sudasa, his mother is no
lioness — but by the fault of his cook. Having become addicted to
the evil habit of feeding on human flesh , he first ordered his victims
to be taken out of the prisons, afterwards this store of supply having
been exhausted, he commanded his cook to assail his townsmen unawares
and stealthily and kill them severally as often as was wanted for his
necessity. The murders, however, could not fail to be discovered, and
the king refusing to renounce his evil habit was not put to death, but
banished owing to the intercession of" Kalahatthi, his chief minister
who had fruitlessly exerted himself to turn his master off from his
wickedness. — The splendid sentences communicated to Sulasoma by
the brahman are said there to have the Buddha Kassapa for their author:
it may be pointed out that the brahman reads them from a book to
Sutasoma, but Sutasoma recites them by heart to the man-cater. When
allowing him to return home, the man-eater makes Sutasoma lake a
solemn oath, touching his sword and spear, to come back after satisfying
the brahman (p. 481, stanza 36.)
The metrical part of this pali recension is made up of 123 stanzas
unequally distributed between the prose text. By far the majority of
them arc different from the 95 stanzas of Cüra; often the same content
has been expressed in a quite dissimilar style, cp. f. i. pali st. 04—71
with (jAira 61—06. The four sentences recited by the brahman (pftli
40—43 = 74—77), though embellished by Cura, point at the same
redaction. Moreover there is a close connexion between pftli 54 --50 and
Qura 47—19, also pali 57, 58 and 9- >">". "1, but especially between
pftli 59 , 60 n—rf and C. 52 and 54. Compare also pftli 72 . 80 , 102
with Q. 67 , 78 , 93 foil, respectively.
A very short and uncomplete skeleton of this tale makes up n. 32
of the Cariya-pitaka. Prof. Kern has translated it in a very
interesting paper on the mixture of Oaivism and Buddhism in the isle
of Java, shown by the Old-Javanese poem Sutasoma (see IV/\S7«K<?«
TH ü/ÉYfcrf<W/'//,ije// rffr A'oi/. .IAVU/C/IHV zw» Trt'/«'i/.sc//rt/>/>r// a/V/. ür//i';'A*H;/r/c
3^ Reeks, dl. V. p. 8—43, especially note on p. 21). This Javanese
poem, composed by Tantular, a manuscript of which belongs to the
Leiden University Library, is based on some unknown work named
Bauddhakftvya. not mentioned in Bunyiu Nanjio's Catalogue.
5e Volgr. X. 43

688 JS\TAKAMAL&.
XXXII.
THE STORY OF AYOGRHA '
(A y o g r h a j a t a k a)
To those whose mind has been seized by emotion
(sam v eg a) - eveu the brilliancy of royalty does not obstruct
the way to salvation. Thus considering one must make
oneself familiar with the emotional state, as will be taught
in the following.
In yon time, when our Lord was still a Bodhisattva,
seeing the world exposed to the assaults of hundreds of
calamities: diseases, old age, death, separation from beloved
persons and so on, and understanding that it was woe-
begone, without protector, without help, without guidance,
He was impelled by His compassion to take the deter-
mination of saving the creatures according to His exceedingly
good nature, bringing about again and again the good
and the highest happiness even of people averse to him
and unknown to him. Ln that time, then, he once took
his birth, it is said, in some royal family distinguished
for their modest behaviour and their surpassing lustre,
which in consequence of their being intent on possessing
the affection of their subjects was manifested by the
steadiness of their prosperity and riches as well as by the
submissiveness of their proud vassals. His very birth adorned
both that court and that capital, always sympathizing with
their masters in weal and woe, with the brilliant show of
a festival day.
1—2. (At the court) a large, distribution of gifts tilled the
hands and satisiied the minds of brahmans, aud the
attendance were proud of their very brilliant festival
garments. ' (Outside the palace) the streets were filled
with the tones of many instruments blending to one
indistinct noise and with the merry sounds of siugiug,
' That ayogrha is the name of the pi ince, not an appellative, appears
from the pftli recensions. Me was named so, since he was bred in the „iron
house" (ayogrha).
* Compare the last note on story XXIX.
• Apparently the attendants had received that new attire as a present.

639
jesting, laughing, as the gladness of the hearts manifested
itself by various merriment, dancing and wantonness. Every-
where people meeting told each other with exultation
and embraces the happy news, which caused to them the
same contentment as a present, and they magnified the
felicity of their king.
3. The doors of the prisons were opened and the prisoners
set at liberty. ' Flags floating at the tops of the houses
decorated the places, and the ground was covered with
fragrant powders and (lowers and moistened with odorous
liquors. So adorned the town bore the lovely and bright
appearance of a festival.
4. From the splendid dwellings of the wealthy abundant
showers of different goods: clothes, gold, jewels etc. poured
down, so that it seemed as if Felicity, doing her best
to pervade the world, imitated with a lovely sport Ganga
in madness. -
Now in that time it happened as a rule that the princes
born to that king soon died. Supposing that rule to be
the effect of goblin-power '• he ordered, with the object
of saving the. life of that son, the building which was
to serve for lying-in chamber to be wholly constructed of
iron, ornamented with figures wrought of jewels, gold and
silver; the preservative, rites destructive of goblins were
performed there, according to the precepts ordained by the
Veda and expounded in the Science of Spirits; and likewise
the different customary auspicious ceremonies which have
the effect of securing prosperity. As to his son, he had
the j atakarma * and the other sacraments performed
to him in that iron-house, and let him grow up there.
Owing to that most careful guard but no less to the
' It is plain that v i g h a t i t a is a misprint instead of v i g h a 11- i t a.
' The presents strewed about are compared either with the cascade of the
Ganges at Gangadvara, where the river rushes into the valley, or with the
mythological account of Oangn hurling down from heaven to earth at the instances
of Bhagïratha.
' In the pali redaction the new-born children are in fact carried away by a
goblin, a female y a k s h a.
* ('p. note 1 on story XII. The king has those sacraments performed by his
p u r o h i t a , the king's constant and customary representative in sacrificial and
ceremonial matters.

640 J.iTAKAMaL&.
power of the store of merit which belonged to the excellent
goodness of his nature, no goblins overpowered the Great
Being. In course of time, after being administered the
sacraments and initiatory rites, he was instructed by
teachers illustrious for their knowledge of the sacred texts,
their extraction and behaviour, who were renowned and
honoured as scholars and attached to the virtues of tran-
quillity, modesty and discretion. Having learnt from them
many branches of science and being favoured by the
loveliness of youth which made his figure grow fuller
day by day ', further displaying that attachment to mo-
desty which was innate to him, he became an object of the
greatest love both to his relations and the people at large.
5. People go after a virtuous person, though no relation
nor acquaintance of theirs, with the like joy as if they
honoured a friend. It is the brilliancy of his virtues which
is the cause thereof. -
6. In the season of autumn, when the Moon freely shooting
his beams all around is the laugh of Heaven, say what
kind of relation does there exist for the people to him?
So then the Great Being was enjoying the bliss that
had fallen to his share as the effect of the power of his
merit. He was petted with plenty of objects of celestial
brilliancy standing at his disposal, and his father who
loved him much and bore him high esteem was no more
anxious about him, trusting (he would be safe). Now
once on the opportunity of the Kaumudi-festival ' coming
back by course of time, it happened that the Bodhisattva
was desirous of contemplating the lovely beauty and the
display of brilliancy in his capital. Having obtained the
permission of his father he mounted the royal chariot to
take a drive. This chariot was embellished with fair orna-
ments of gold, jewels and silver; gay flags and banners
of various colours were floating aloft on it; its horses
well-trained and swift were adorned with golden harnesses;
it was driven by a charioteer distinguished by his dexterity,
' Though not expressed, it is plain that the image of the waxing moon is
present to the mind of our author.
* Compare the stanzas 1 and 2 of story XYlll.
• See vol. VIII, p. 443 of the Biy«/>-og««.

641
skill, comeliness, purity, modesty and firmness and followed
by a retinue adorned with a picturesque and brilliant attire and
armour. Preceded by the delightful tones of musical in-
struments the prince with his train passed through the
capital in many directions, and as he was wholly intent
on beholding its splendour, he let his eyes full of curiosity
roam about, while passing through the streets crowded
with townsmen and landsmen in their lovely festival array,
who all along his way received him with praise and
worship, folded hands and bent heads and pronounced
blessings over him. Nevertheless, though the contemplation
of this beautiful spectacle was a proper occasion for con-
ceiving a great rejoicing within his mind, he regained
by it the remembrance of his former births. So familiar
to his nature was the feeling of s a in v e g a.
7. "Alas (he thought), piteous is the state of the world and
displeasing because of its unsteadiness. The brilliant splend-
our of this Kaumudi-day, how soon it will exist but in
the memory!
8. "And yet, such being the condition of all creatures,
how mindless of- danger are men, that they hurry after
rejoicings untroubled, though every way around them is
obstructed by death.
9. «Disease, old age and death, three enemies of irresistible
strength stand near ready to strike, and there is no escape
from the dreadful world hereafter. How then may there
be opportunity for merriment to an intelligent being?
10. «The clouds that poured out streams of water with tremend-
ous noise, almost in auger, imitating, as it were, the
uproar of great seas, the clouds with their golden garlands
of flashing lightnings, being born of agglomeration come
again to dissolution.
11. "The rivers that flowing with increased rapidity carried
away trees together with the river-banks, upon which they
had their roots, afterwards and by course of time assume
again a mean appearance, as if they were burut away
by sorrow.
12. "The violence of the wind, too, blowing down peaks
of mountains, dispersing masses of clouds, rolling and
stirring up the waves of the ocean, becomes extinguished.

64&
13. "With high and blazing flame sparkling about, the
tire burns away the grass, then it abates and ceases. By
turns the different beauties of the groves and forests
appear and disappear, time going.
14. «Which union does there exist which has not its end
in separation? what felicity which is unattainable to mishap?'
Since inconstancy, then, is proper to the course of
worldly things, that mirth of the multitude is a very
inconsiderate one."
In this manner the High-minded One reasoned within
himself. Utterly touched with emotion his heart became
averse to that rejoicing and festival mirth; he no longer
paid attention to the picturesque groups of the people
nocking to embellish the capital. In this disposition of
mind he perceived that he had already got again to his
palace. His emotion waxed still by this, and considering
that there is no other refuge but Righteousness, since it
is unconcerned with sensual pleasures, he made up his
mind to embrace the state of a virtuous life. At the first
opportunity lie visited the king, his father, and with
folded hands asked his leave to set out for the penance-forest.
15. «Taking the vow of world-renunciation I wish to bring
about the good of my Self, and I want your leave which
1 shall hold for a favour and a guidance."
16. On hearing this request of his well-beloved son the king,
as if he were an elephant wounded by an empoisoned
arrow or a deep sea shaken by the wind, was taken by
a shiver, for his heart was sore with grief.
17. And desiring to withhold him, he embraced him affec-
tionately and in a faltering voice obstructed by his tears
spoke: «My son, what have you made up your mind for
to leave us so of a sudden?
18. "Who is that man who being a cause of displeasure to you ,
causes his own ruin rousiug in this manner Death (against
himself)? Say, whose relations have to shed tears of sorrow ?
' This sentence is expressed in a similar way in a eloka, recurring several
times in Divynvadana (p. 27 in line; 11X1; 486)
s a r v e k s h a y a n t a n i c a y a h p a t a n A n t A l.i s a m u c c h r a y a h
s a m y o g A v i p r a y o g a n t A m a r a o a n t a m e a j f v i t a m.
Cp. also s«/>ra story VI, st. 7.

a. 643
19. «Or do you perhaps apprehend or did you hear any
improper act of mine? Then, say on that I may put an
end to it. But myself do not perceive anything of the kind."
The Bodhisattva spoke:
20. «What improper act may be found in you being thus
intent to show me your affection? And who would be
capable of assailing me with grief?"
«But why then do you want to leave us?" replied the
king with tears. Then the Great Being answered: "Because
of the peril of death. Do but consider, Majesty.
21. "From the very night when a man obtains his residence
in the maternal womb, he moves to death, o hero among
men, inarching without interruption in that direction
day after day.
22. «May a man be ever so skilled in the management
of his affairs, ever so strong, nobody escapes Death or Old
Age, both of whom infest every place in this world. For
this reason I «ill resort to the forest to lead a virtuous life.
23. "Haughty princes vanquish by bold attack whole armies
in splendid battle-array of footmen, horse, chariots and
elephants; but they are powerless to defeat that enemy
named Death, though he is alone. Therefore 1 am resolved
on taking my refuge to Righteousness.
24. «Guarded by their forces made up of brisk horses and
elephants and footmen and chariots, the princes succeed in
making their escape from their enemies; but all princes
since Manu together with their armies succumbed helplessly
to the superior power of that enemy whose name is Death.
25. "Furious elephants crush in battle with their postlt;-like
tusks the gates of towns, the bodies of men, chariots
and other elephants. Yet the same tusks that were victorious
even over town-walls do not enable them to push back
Death when meeting them.
26. "Skilled archers pierce with their arrows in battle their
enemies though being far and sheltered by shield and
armour strong and artfully wrought; but they never hit
that enemy of old, named Death.
27. "Lions may abate the martial lustre of elephants rending
open with their sharp claws the frontal globes of those,
and with their roars they may pierce the ears and frighten

644 J&TAKAMHLii.
the hearts of their adversaries: but when encountering
Death, their insolence and strength are broken, and they
fall asleep.
28. «Kings inflict punishment on their enemies having sinned
against them according to the measure of their guilt: but
if their enemy whose name is Death has greatly sinned
against them, they are powerless to enforce their law-
sentences upon him.
29. // Likewise kings may submit a foe who has offended
them by means of the (well-known) expedients: conciliation
and the rest; ' but Death, that ferocious enemy whose
insolence is strengthened with the long duration of his
hatred is not to be put to quiet with such craft.
30. '/Serpents in wrath bite men, and the poison of their
pointed teeth has the burning effect of a lire awfully
blazing, kindled as it is by their anger; but against Death,
though always clever in doing harm and therefore deserving
puuishment, their effort of biting is deficient.
31. "If a man has been bitten by serpents, however furious,
medical men will appease the poison by means of charms
and medicines; but Death is a serpent with imperishable
teeth and irresistible poison, //« power cannot be put
down by charms, medicines and the like.
32. "Garudas will stir up the abode of crowds of playing
fishes, shaking with the napping of their wings the water
out of the seas with a thunderlike dreadful noise, then
seize the serpents with their outstretched fangs; yet they
are unable to destroy Death in this boisterous manner.
33. Tigers by their surpassing swiftness overtake the deer
of the forest running away from fear, and easily smashing
them upon the earth, as if playing, with the thunderbolt
of their unequalled claws, drink their blood; but they
have no skill to proceed in the same way with Death.
34. It may happen perchance that a deer having come
within the reach of a tiger-mouth with its tremendous
' The four expedients (u p A y a) are conciliation (s A m a n), bribery (d a n a),
causing dissensions (b h c d a) and punishment by violence (d a p ij a). See
f. i. Kulluka on Manu 7, Iu7. — In the parallel stanza of the pftli redaction
it is said that one who has offended a king may he able to soften him (by
proving his innocence, says the commentary) etc.

645
teeth, makes his escape even then. But who having reached
the mouth of Death with big teeth named disease or old
age or grief, can become sound again?
35. "Demons (g rah as), deformed and ferocious-looking
drink up the vital strength and absorb the lives bf the
meu they hold with a strong grasp ' ; but when the time
has come also for them to wage war with Death, they
no longer possess their insolence and heaviness.
36. «Such as are masters in magic arts may subdue those
demons, if they come up to do harm to godly persons ,
by the use of penance-power, evil-averting spells and
medicinal herbs; but against that demon, whose name is
Death, there is no remedy at all.
37. "Such as are skilled in the art of bringing about
magical illusions, perplex the eyes of a great assembly. *
Yet Death, too, must have still some power, that /iw
eye is not bewildered even by those.
38. "Both those who by their charms made of effect
because of their penance-power, checked the virulence of
poison, and the excellent physicians who extinguished
the diseases of inen, even Dhanvantari and his likes,
have disappeared. Therefore my mind is bent to practise
righteousness in the forest.
39. «The Vidyadharas » owing to their might made up of
manifold spells and powers, make themselves visible and
again invisible, go through the air or descend to the
earth. Nevertheless, when meeting Death, they too have
lost their might.
40. "The lords of the Celestials (the Devas) drive back
the Asuras in spite of their haughtiness, and inversely
themselves in spite of their haughtiness are driven back
by the Asuras. Yet, even both armies combined, a host
that would march with just pride against any adversary ,
are not able to defeat Death.
41. «Understanding this ferocity of nature of Death, our
' In the pali redaction these demons are specified by the names of yakkhrt,
pisaca and petA ( = skr. p re U h) , different classes of goblins.
* Jugglers may effect illusions of the kind. The fourth act of the R a t n A v a 1 i
affords an instance of that i n d r a j A 1 a.
' Cp. the first note on p. 211 s«/>ra.

646
enemy, and his irresistibleness, 1 am no longer pleased
with the life at home. It is not from anger that I will
leave nor in consequence of diminished affection, but I have
resolved upon a life of righteousness in the forest."
The king said: '/But what hope do you set upon the
forest-life, the danger of death being thus irremediable?
what hope on taking the vow of a holy life?
42. «Shall not Death our enemy attain you also in the
forest? Did not the Rshis die who kept their vows of
righteousness in the forest? In every place that course
of life you wish to adopt is practicable, indeed. What
profit, then , do you see in leaving your home and resorting
to the forest?"
The Bodhisattva spoke:
43. "No doubt, Death equally visits those at home and
those in the forest, the righteous as well as the vicious.
Yet the righteous have no reason for remorse, and right-
eousness is nowhere easier to be attained than in the
/uioat, Cu fjc sure.
"Your Majesty deign to consider this.
44. . «The house is an abode of' carelessness (about one's
moral and religious duties), of infatuation, sensual love,
concupiscence, hatred, of everything opposite to righteousness.
What opportunity of applying oneself to it may be found
at home?
45. «A householder is distracted by many bad occupations;
the care of earning and guarding his goods agitates his
mind, which is also troubled by calamities arising or
approaching. At what time may a householder take the
way of tranquillity ?
46. "In the forest, on the other hand, after leaving that
multitude of bad occupations and being freed of the
solicitude for worldly goods, a man is at his ease and
may strive for tranquillity exclusively and with a satisfied
mind. So he will come to happiness and righteousness
and glory.
47. "Not his wealth nor his power preserves a man, nothing
but his righteousness. It is righteousness that procures
him great happiness, not affluence of riches. And to a
righteous man death is even a cause of gladness. For

J&TAKAM&L&. 647
iio danger of mishap exists for him who is devoted to a
holy life.
48. And as good and evil are discriminated by their different
characteristic marks and separated from each other by the
discrepancy of the actions belonging to either, in the
same way the result, too, of wickedness is mishap, but
that of beautiful righteousness a happy state."
In this manner the Great-minded One persuaded his
father. He obtained his father's leave and renouncing his
brilliant royal bliss, as if it were a straw, took his
residence in the penance-grove. Having acquired there
dhyauas of immense extent and established mankind
in them, he mounted to Brahma's world.
In this manner even the brilliancy of royalty does not
obstruct the way of salvation to those whose mind has
been seized by emotion {sain v eg a). Thus considering
one must make oneself familiar with the emotional state.
This is also to be told, when expounding the right con-
ception of death : 'So the thought that one may die soon
causes the sense of sainvega. Likewise when expounding
that death should always be present to our mind, and
when teaching the temporariness of everything: 'So all
phenomena (sains kar a) ' are perishable.' Also, when
inculcating the tenet of taking no delight in whole the
Universe. 'So nothing which has form (samskrta) * is
reliable.' And also with this conclusion: 'So this world is
helpless and succourless.' Also this may be propounded:
'In this manner it is easy to resort to a holy life in the
forest, but not so when a householder.'
We have two pAli redactions of this story, one in the J a t a k a-book,
where if makes up n. filO (Fausb. IV, 491—499) and another, n. 23
(111 :)) ol' the Cariyapitaka. The former agrees upon the whole with
our author, save some small discrepancies. It is not on the occasion of
• anityal> sarvasainsk&rah, one of .he most popular sayings of
the Lord.
2 Properly speaking, the samskrta is the phenomenon, and the s a m-
sk&rah are the 'fashions' or 'forms' of the perceptible objects as well of the
perceiving mind. But the latter term is not rarely likewise indicative of' the things
or objects (see Childers, £>«.7/o;;ii;v , s. v. sahkhAro) and the former is here
nearly a synonym of nimar ü p a.

648
a festival that the prince becomes disgusted with the world . but after
living up to his sixteenth within the narrow limits of the ,iron house",
his guard against goblins , having never before set his foot outside of
it, he at once is freed from his confinement and designed by his
father to the succession on the throne. Being touched by this sudden
change the Bodhisat desires to leave the world. He expounds the reasons
for his renunciation in twenty-four stanzas of the same purport as st.
21—41 and 44—48 of (,'ura. Partly the correspondence is still greater,
since most of them make up obviously the frame-work of the embellished
and elegantly wrought verses of the JAtakamftlA. Compare
pali 1,2 with Qüra 21,22 : pali 17 with (,:Cira 27 and :«
3 and o „ . 23 18 . 37
4 „ 24 19,20 „ „ 30,31
6,7 „ 25,26 • - )1 1 ,- T - ) »» » 38,39
12,23 „ 35,36 16 „ 10
14,15 „ 28,29 23,24 „ » 47,48
In consequence of this sermon not only the B. obtains leave to
become an ascetic, but his father, his mother, the ministers and the
whole population of the kingdom — which in both p&li redactions is
Benares — follow his example. They take their residence in some
place on the Himalaya, where they dwell in a large hermitage of the
size of lienares, which Sakka has built for them by Vissakamma.
The OAriyapitaka gives but a very fragmentary account of
this tale.
XXXIÏ1.
THE STOKY OF THE BUJWALO.
(mahishajataka).
Forbearance deserves this name only *if there exists
some opportunity of showing it, no otherwise. Thus con-
sidering the virtuous appreciate their iujurer, deeming
him a profit. This will be shown by the following.
The Bodhisattva, it is said, one time lived in some
forest-region a wild buffalo-bull of grim appearance,
owing to his being dirty with mud and so dark of com
plexiou that he resembled a moving piece of a dark-blue
cloud. Nevertheless, though in that animal-state, in which

JltTAKAMaLa. 649
there prevails complete ignorance and it is difficult to
come to the conception of righteousness, he iu consequence
of his keen understanding exerted himself to practise
righteousness.
1. Compassion, as if it had taken affection for him in
return for his long obsequiousness, never left him. But
some power too, either of his karma or his nature must
be taken into account to explain the fact that he was so.
2. And it is for this reason, forsooth, that the Lord '
declared the mystery of the result of karma to be
inscrutable, since He, though compassion was at the
bottom of his nature, obtained the state of a beast, yet even
in this condition retained his knowledge of righteousness.
3. Without karma the series of existences cannot exist,
it is also an impossibility that good actions should have
evil as their result. But it must be the influence of small
portions of (evil) karma that caused him now and then,
notwithstanding his knowledge of righteousness, to be iu
such (low) states. -
Now some wicked monkey, knowing his natural goodness
which had manifested itself in course of time and under-
standing from his habitual mercy that angi-r and wrath
had no power over him, took the habit of vexing the
Great Being very much by different injuries. «From him
I have nothing to fear" so he thought.
4. A rascal is never more eager to insult and never displays
greater insolence than towards people meek and merciful.
Against those he performs his worst tricks, for he sees
no danger from their side. But with respect to those from
whence a suspicion of danger, however slight, strikes him ,
he will behave o so modestly, like an honest man; his
petulance is put to quiet there.
Sometimes, then, while the Great Being was calmly
asleep or nodding from drowsiness, that monkey would
of a sudden leap upon his back. Another time having
' In his Buddha-existence, of course.
* This apology is not superfluous, indeed. Though the fables of animals are
adopted of old as an integrant part of the stock of sacred lore of the Buddhists,
the contradiction between the low existences of the most virtuous ones and the
doctrines about the karma is as great as possible.

fiöO jaTAKAMalA.
climbed on (his head) , as if he were a tree, he swung
repeatedly (between his horns). ' Sometimes again, when
he was hungry, he. would stand before his ieet, obstructing
his grazing. It happened also now and then that he rubbed
his ears with a log. When he was longing for bathing,
he would sometimes climb on his head and cover his eyes
with his hands. Or having mounted on his back he would
ride him perforce, and holding a stick in his hand coun-
terfeit Yama. * And the Bodhisattva, that Great Being,
forbore all that unbecoming behaviour of the monkey
without, irritation and anger, quite untroubled, for he
considered it a beneiit, as it were.
5. It is the very nature of the wicked, indeed, to walk
aside from the way of decent behaviour, whereas forbear-
ance of their rashness is something like a beneiit to the.
virtuous, owing to their habitual practice.
Now surely, some yaksha who was scandalized at those
insults of the Great Being or perhaps wished to try his
the buffalo-bull, placed himself in his way, saying: «Be
not so patient. Are you the slave of that wicked monkey by
purchase or by loss at game or do you suspect any danger
from his part or do you not know your own strength that
you suffer yourself to be so abused by him as to become
his riding animal? Verily, my friend,
"The thunderbolt, of your pointed horns swnng with
rapidity could pierce a diamond or, like the thunder-
bolt, cleave huge trees. And these your feet treading with
furious anger would sink iu the mountain-rock as in mud.
"And this body of yours is like a rock solid and com-
pact, the spleudid strength of its muscles makes its beauty
perfect. So your power is well-known to the vigorous by
nature, and you would be hard to approach even to a lion.
' Here I have in a certain degree used the pAli redaction as a commentary on
the text of Ciira. Cp. Faush. Jataka II, 385 ,24 u c c ft r a p a s s ft v a m k n t v ft
s ili g e g a o h i t v a olambanto nangutthe g a h c t v ft cl o 1 i> y a n t o
kill
* The common representation of Yama is sitting on the back of a buffalo with
a staff in his hand. See f. i. Varfthamihira Brhatsamhita 58, 57 d a v> d I Yamo
mahishagai

651
8. "Therefore, either crush him with your hoof by an
energetic effort, or destroy his insolence with the sharp
edges of your horns. Why do you forbenr this rogue of
a monkey tormenting you and causing pain to you, as if
you were powerless?
9. "Where is it ever seen that an evil-doer is brought to
reason by a cure consisting in n virtuous behaviour to-
wards him, condescendence, modesty and kindness? This
treatment being applied to such a one who is only to be
cured by pungent and burning and harsh remedies, his
insolence will wax like a disease arising from the phlegm." '
Then the Eodhisattva looking at the yaks ha spoke to
him mild words expressive of his adherence to the virtue
of forbearance.
10. "Surely, I know him a tickle-minded one- and always
fond of iniquity, but for this very reason it is right,
forsooth, that I put up with him.
11. "What forbearance is that, practised towards somebody
of greater strength, whom it is impossible to retaliate?
And with respect to virtuous people standing firm in honesty
and decent behaviour, what is there to be forborne at all?
12. "Therefore we ought to forbear the injuries by a feeble
one, though having the power of revenge. Better bearing
insults from such a one than getting rid of virtues.
J'3. «Ill treatment by a powerless one is the best opportunity,
forsooth, for showing virtues. With what purpose, then,
should the lover of virtues make use of his strength in
such cases to the effect of the loss of his iirmuess of mind? *
14. «Besides, the opportunity for forbearance, that always
beneficial virtue, being difficult to obtain inasmuch as it
depends on others, what reason should there be to indulge
in anger just then when that opportunity has been afforded
by another?
15. "And if I should not use forbearance against him
who disregarding the damage of his own righteousness
' Indian medicine divides the diseases in three classes, according to their
origin from one of the three humors: phlegm (kap ha), wind (v ft t a) and
bile (p i 11 a).
* Cp. the note on story VI, st. 34.

652 J&TAKAM&Lït. i '
(d h a r in a) acts as if he endeavoured to cleanse my sins
say who else would be ungrateful if not I?"
The yaksha spoke: «Then you will never be delivered
from his vexations.
10. "Who may be able, to chastize the ill behaviour of a
rascal having no respect for virtues, unless he sets aside
humble forbearance ?"
The Bodhisattva spoke:
17. "It is not suitable for him who longs for happiness to
pursue comfort or prevention of discomfort by indulging
to the wish of hurting another. The result of such actions
will not tend to the production of happiness.
18. «My persisting in patient endurance is, in fact, an
admonition to awake his conscience. If he does not under-
stand it, he will assail afterwards others of a hasty temper
who will obstruct his wrong way.
19. "And having been ill treated by such a one, he will
no more do these things, neither to my likes. For having
received punishment, he will not act in this (unbecoming)
manner again. And so 1 will get rid of him."
On these words the yaksha, affected with gladness,
amazement and respect, praisingly exclaimed: //Well said!
well said!" and moving his head and shaking his (extended)
lingers magnified the Great Being with kind words like these:
20. "How is it possible that beasts should possess a conduct
like this? How did you come to that degree of regard of
virtues? Having assumed with some purpose or other this
animal-shape you must be somebody who practises penance
in the penance-forest!"
After thus eulogizing him he threw the wicked moiikey
oft' his back and taught him a preservative charm; after
which he disappeared on the very spot.
In this manner, then, forbearance deserves this name
only if there exists some opportunity of showing it, no
otherwise: thus considering the virtuous appreciate their
injurer, deeming him a profit. So is to be said when dis-
coursing on forbearance. And this may also be said: 'In
this manner is shown the imperturbable tranquillity of
the Bodhisattvas even when in the state of beasts; how,

653
indeed, should it become a human being or one who has
taken the vow of a homeless life to be deiicient in it?'
This story is also to be told, when praising the Tathagata
and when discoursing on listening with attention to the
preaching of the Law.
Of this story there are at least two redactions extant in the p&Ii
Tipitaka, n. 278 of the J&taka (Fausb. II, ;S85—;S8H) and Cariya-
pitaka 15= 11,5. In the JAtaka-text it is not the yaks ha that
protects the B. but the expectation of vs. 18—IV s«/>ra is fulfilled;
another buffalo of an irascible nature being likewise vexed by the
monkey, kills him with his horns and hoofs. Of the three clokas of the
Jataka redaction the third is identical with vs. In of the Car-Pit., the
reading of which aTiiï e is to be preferred, cp. also st. VM of our author.
XXXiV.
THE STOKY OF THE WOOD-PECKER,
(Catapattraj a taka).
Even when provoked a virtuous person is uncapable to
betake himself to wickedness, having never learnt to do
so. This will be taught as follows.
The Bodhisattva, is is said, lived in some place of a
forest a wood-pecker distinguished by his beautiful and
lovely feathers of manifold colours. But though in that
state, owing to his habitual compassion, he did not follow
the livelihood of his kind, a sinful one since it needs
involves injuries to living beings.
1. With the young shoots of the trees, the sweet and
delicious flavours of their flowers and with their fruits of
different hue, scent and relish he kept such diet as was
dictated by his contentment.
2. He manifested his care for the interests of others by
preaching to others the precepts of righteousness on proper
opportunities, by helping the distressed according to
5c Volgr. X. " 43

654
his power and by preventing the base-minded from im-
modest actions. '••"
The whole multitude of' animals, thus protected by the
Wre.it Heing, thrived and were happy; for in him they
possessed as it were a teacher, a kinsman, a physician,
a king.
3. As they, being well protected by the greatness of his
mercy, increased in virtues, to the same extent his pro-
tection endowed them, though making up a collection of
substances, with increase of qualities. '
Now one time, when the Great Being, according to
his pity for the creatures, was rambling from forest to
forest, it happened that he saw in some part of the wood
a lion who overcome by an exceedingly heavy pain was
sprawling on the earth, as if he were hit with a poisonous
arrow, having his manes disarranged and dirty with dust.
And drawing near to him moved by compassion, he asked
him: "What is the matter, king of quadrupeds? You are
seriously ill, indeed, I see.
4. «Is this illness caused by exhaustion after indulging
too much in boldness against elephants? or in excessive
running after deer? Or are you hit with an arrow by a
hunter? Or lias some disease seized you?
5. //Say then, what ails you, if at least it may be told
to me. Likewise tell me what may be done for you in
this case. And if perhaps I possess some power for the
benefit of my friends, you must enjoy the profit I may
bring about by it and recover your health. •"
The lion spoke: «Virtuous king of birds, this illness
is not the effeot of exhaustion nor is it caused by disease
or occasioned by a hunter's arrow. But it is the fragment
of a bone that sticks here in my throat. As if it were
the point of an arrow, it causes heavy pain to me. I can
' The /XMM<<> of this stanza is lost in translation. The term sattvakftya
admits of two acceptations, according to its being applied to the philosophical and
to the ordinary use of the word sattva. So the same compound may signify
„a body of animals" and „a collection of substances." Similarly the term gun a
means „virtue" as well as „quality."
* The last pa da of this cloka looks corrupt in the original, yet without
encumbrance of the main sense which is evident.

JaTAKAMfllil. 655
neither swallow it down nor throw it up. Therefore, it
is now the time of assistance by friends. Now, if you
know the way to make me sound, well, do it." Then
the Hodhisattva, owing to the keenness of his intellect,
thought out some means of extracting the object which
was the cause of his pain. Taking a piece of wood large
enough to bar his mouth, he spoke to the lion: "Open
your mouth as wide as you ever can." After he had done
so, the Bodhisattva having placed the log tightly between
the two rows of his teeth, entered the bottom of his throat.
With the top of his beak he seized that fragment of bone
sticking athwart in it at one edge and having loosened
it, took it at another edge and at last drew it out. And
while retiring he dropped the log which barred the lion's
mouth.
G. No wound-healer, however skilled in his art and clever,
would have succeeded even with great effort in extracting
that extraneous substance., yet ^ pulled it out, thanks
to his keen intellect though uot exercised by professional
training ' but proper to him through hundreds of existences.
7. After taking away together with the bone the pain and
anguish caused by it, he felt no less gladness having
relieved his painful fellow-creature than the lion did feel
being released from the pain-causing object.
This, indeed, is the essential property of a virtuous person.
8. A virtuous person having effected the happiness of another
or stopped his mischief even with difficulty, will enjoy
a greater amount of excessive gladness than he would on
account even of prosperity happening to himself and
easily obtained.
So the Great Being having relieved his pain, was rejoiced
in his heart, lie took leave of the lion and having
received his thanks went his way.
Now some time after it happened that the wood-pecker
flying about with his outspread wings of a lovely beauty
could nowhere get any suitable food and was caught by
hunger which burnt his limbs. Then he saw that same
lion feasting on the flesh of a young antelope fresh killed.
" Cp. the beginning of story XIV, B»>rfrags« VIII, p. 452.

656
His mouth and claws and the lower end of his manes
being tinged with the blood of that animal, he resembled
a fragment of a cloud in autumn, immersed in the glow
of twilight.
9. Yet, though he was his benefactor, he did not venture
to address him with words of request, disagreeable to
the ear; for however skilled in speech, shame imposed
him a temporary obligation of silence.
10. Nevertheless, as his wants required provision, he walked
up and down before his eyes in a bashful attitude. But
that scoundrel, though well aware of him, did not at
all invite him to join in the repast.
11. Like seed sown on a rock, like an oblation poured
out on ashes that have lost their heat, of that very nature
is at the time of fruit a beneüt bestowed on an ungrateful
person and the flower of the vidula-reed.
Then the Bodhisattva thought: «Surely, he does not
know me again", and approaching him with a little more
confidence, asked him for a share, supporting his demand
with a proper benediction after the manner of mendicants.
12. «Much good may it do you, lord of quadrupeds, who
earn your livelihood by your prowess! I beg you to honour
a mendicant, which is an instrument to you to gather
good repute and merit."
But the lion disregarding this kind blessing, unacquainted
as he was with the behaviour of the pious (arya), owing
to his habitual cruelty and selfishness, fixed an oblique
look on the Bodhisattva, as if he were willing to burn
him down with the flame of his anger blazing out of his
fiery eyes, and said: «No more of this.
13. //Is it not much that you are alive after entering the
mouth of somebody like me, a devourer of sprawling
deer, not knowing unmanly mercy?
14. //It is to insult me that you dare molest me thus
another time with a demand. Are you weary of your
life? You wish to see the other world, I suppose."
This refusal and the harsh words expressing it filled
the Bodhisattva with shame. He flew directly upward to
the sky, telling him iu the language of his extended
wings he was a bird, and went his way.

657
Now some forest-deity who was indignant at this injury
or who wanted to know the extent of his virtuous con-
stancy , mounted also to the sky and said to the Great
Being: '/Excellent one among birds, for what reason do
you forbear this injury inflicted by that scoundrel on
you, his benefactor, though you do possess the power of
revenge? What is the profit of overlooking that ungrateful
one in this manner?
15. "He may be ever so strong, you are still able to blind
him by a sudden assault on his face. You may also rob
the flesh of his repast from between his very teeth. Why
then do you forbear his insolence?"
In that moment the 15odhisattva, though having been
ill-treated and insulted and notwithstanding the provocation
of the forest-deity, manifested the extreme goodness of
his nature, saying: "Enough, enough of this manner of
proceeding. This is no way followed by our likes.
16. "It is out of mercy, not with the desire of gain, that
the virtuous take care of a person in distress, nor do they
mind whether the other understands this or not. What
tit opportunity for anger may arise in such case?
17. "Ingratitude cannot but tend to the deception of the
ingrateful one himself. Who, indeed, wishing a service
in return, will do good to him a second time?
18. "As to the benefactor, lie obtains merit and the result
of it in the world hereafter in consequence of his self-
restraint, and an illustrious renown still in this world.
19. -/Moreover, if the benefit has been performed in order
to practise a righteous action , what should it be regretted
for afterwards? If done with the purpose of getting so-
mething in return, it is a loan, not a benefit.
20. "He who because of the ingratitude of his neighbour
prepares to do him harm, such a one, forsooth, after
first earning a spotless repute by his virtues, will sub-
sequently act after the manner of elephants.
21. "If ray neighbour by the infirmity of his mind does
not know to return the benefit, he will never obtain the
lovely lustre inherent to virtues; but, say, what reason
should there exist for a sentient being to destroy on
account of that his own lofty renown?

658
"But this rule sceins to me most becoming to the ease.
22. »He in whose heart a service done by a virtuous person
did not rouse a friendly disposition, such a one is to
be left, but gently, without harshness and auger."
Then the deity, rejoiced at his well-said sentences
praised him repeatedly exclaiming: «well said! well said!"
and adding many kind words.
23. "While being exempt of the toil caused by matted
hair and a bark garment, thou art a Rshi, thou art a
holy ascetic knowing the future! It is not the dress,
forsooth, that makes the Muni, but he who is adorned
by virtues is the real Muni here."
After thus distinguishing him and honouring him he
disappeared on the very spot.
In this manner, then, a virtuous person is uncapable
of betaking himself to wickedness, even though provoked,
having never learnt to do so. So is to be said when
eulogizing the virtuous. And when discoursing on for-
bearance this story is also to be adduced with this conclusion:
'In this manner a man practising forbearance will rarely
meet with enmity, rarely with reproach, and will be
beloved and welcome to many people.'' When praising
tranquillity, it may be told with these words: 'In this
manner the wise being great in tranquillity preserve their
own lustre of virtues.' Likewise when glorifying the Tathagata
and praising the cultivation of an excellent nature: 'In
this manner a good nature being always striven after does
not pass away even when in the state of beasts.'
The corresponding tale in Ihc pali .1 a t a k a is not that of the same
name s a t a p a 11 aj a t a k a (F. II, 387), but n. 308 the j a v a s a-
kupajAtaka ,the tale of the swift bird" (F. Ill, p. 25—27). It is
much shorter and does not contain the intervention of some deity. Of
the four clokas in it, the second has the same purport sind partly even
the same wording as (jura's st. 13, and the fourth shows a strong
likeness to (jura's st. 22.

A SINHALESE INSCRIPTION OF 1745 A. IX,
found engraved on an old cannon uow lying in the Eoyal Museum
of Amsterdam; deciphered from a pencil rubbing famished hj
Professor Dr. Ktvni of the University of Leydeu.
TRANSCRIPT.
(1) Saka-warsa ckwadahüsa'-sa — siya-hahi-hata'a piimini
(2) Krödha-namwü meinn warsa yehi ïswarfidhipatiwü a -
(3) ntima-winsatiyehidi sata — ra K oral e Disawa labi ti
(4) bena Lewuke-tenaunti — hawisin * wiiilakiirawfi da
(5) kkawapu kalatuwa kkuwayi
TRANSLATION.
This is the cannon which Lewukc, the minister holding [the
office of] Disawa over the Four Koralcs, has had made and pre-
sented [to the Hollanders] in the year named Krodha, which
has become the 1667th of the Saka era [which is] in the last
vins'ati (period of 20 years) of the cycle under the regency of
Iswara (Jupiter cyclus).
' from Snnskr. ckawnra-dasasata?
' Tenanniiha = ton a + n + w a h a. Tcna (Sanskr. s t h a n a) is here
used to mean „a poison in possession ol' a place or situation". Wiiha is from
Sanskr. b h a w a t. through some such prakritic form as h a w a t changed by
metathesis to wahat and then to waha or wiiha. This, as well as wahandii.
wahansc and wlinse are terms of respect.