^ o
_
I
^^mmilES/^
-<- ^
^
V
^.OECAU—FO/?
-
^
3'
c^^''
?
-
r c
^
?
\MEI'NIVER^//^ ^^^
3^
DC =
IdJiNVSOV^'' ''^Aa3AlNa3\\V
11nh*nv
/-I-
imi}
^EyNIVER% ^Vl-OSANCElfj-^^
,\^EUNIVER% ^lOSANGElfx,
\TIIP,RARY/7^ .(N',

,
AWtUNIVtRi"//, ^lOSANCElfj> A:jNtLIBRARYQ^
o ^
vfys =o 2
"'/OJIIVDJO^ <rji30NVS01^'^ '^/5a3AINfl3WV '^<{/0dnv3do>^
^,OFCALIFO% AMEUNIVERS/A vjclOSANCElfj> ^,OFCALIFO%
o
^'vl;va8n^V' AINiT3WV
.\^EUNIVERS'//, v>;lOSANGElfj> A^ILIBRARYQ^ AWEUNlVERSy/,
o
o
^/ia3AIN(l3WV '^.I/OJIIVDJO^'
\\\EUNIVERi//, ^lOSANCElfj^ ^^OFCA1IFO% ^OFCAllFOff^ ^MEUNIVERS-//-
>- >-
"^i
nwv
^P-...,,
AWEUNIVER%
-sV,lllBKAirr6'/. in-Of, ^
^.
o<r
CO _^
^
'/ojnvjjo>^ ^OJIWOJO^ %Jl]AINil3^^^
AWEUNIVER^//) ^lOSANCElfj> ^OFCAUF0%
Or
C?'
>-
vr
'^OAavuaiH^^ "^(JAwaan-^^^' '^^J^iljONYSOV"^"^^ ''^/Sii3AiNfl-3l\V' -i^AiivaaiH^^
;\\EUNIVER^//, vh;lOSANCElfj> ^N^.l-IIBRARY^^.
^y>EUNIVER%
o
o
%a3AlNn-3WV
,UEUNIVERS/, ..^lOSANCElfj- OFCAIIFOP/' ^WEUNIVERiy/i
,
L"-*"
<
rtilMj
o
-< i
^^ILIBRARYQr^ -5>^lLIBRARYQr^ ^MEUNIVERVa v^lOSANCElfj> ^^ILIBRARY^^
o
=
<:

\

THE JATAKA
OR
STORIES OF THE BUDDHAS FORMER BIRTHS

Honion: C. J. OLAY AND SONS,
CAMBKIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
AVE MARIA LANE.
©laBgofa: 263, ARGYLE STEBET.
iLcipjig: F. A. BROCKHAUS.
jj gork: MACMILLAN AND CO.

\
SCEtlE FROM THE STUPA OF BHARHlil ILLUSTRATING JATAKA 46
(from Cunningham, PI. XLV, 5.)

:
THE JATAKA
OR
STORIES OF THE BUDDHA'S
FORMER BIRTHS.
TRANSLATED FROM THE PALI BY VARIOUS HANDS
UNDER THE EDITORSHIP OF
PnOFESSOR COWELL.
E. B.
VOL.
\.
TRANSLATED BY
ROBERT CHALMERS,
B.A.
OF ORIEL COLLEGE, OXFORD.
CAMBRIDGE
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS,
1895
[All Rights reiterved.]

:
©ambitDge
PRINTED BY J. & C. F. CLAY,
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

3L
I4I1_
PREFACE.
It was an almost isolated incident in Greek literary liistory^
when Pythagoras claimed to rememberhis previouslives. Heracleides
Ponticus relates that he professed to have been once born as ^tha-
lides, the son of Hermes, and to have then obtained as a boon from
his father ^dovra koI reXevroyvra fivy/juyv 'e-)(eiv twv crvix^aivovTcov^.
Consequently he remembered the Trojan war, where, as Euphorbus,
he was wounded by Menelaus, and, as Pythagoras, he could still
recognise the shield which Menelaus had hung up in the temple of
Apollo at Branchidse and similarly he remembered his subsequent
;
birth as Hermotimus, and then as Pyrrhus, a fisherman of Delos.
But in India this recollection of previous lives is a common feature
in the histories ofthe saints and heroes of sacred tradition ; and it is
especially mentioned by Manu^ as the effect of a self-denying and
pious life. The doctrine of Metempsychosis, since the later Vedic
period, has played such an important part in the history of the
national character and religious ideas that we need not be surprised
to find that Buddhist literature from the earliest times (although
giving a theory of its own to explain the transmigration) has always
included the ages of the past as an authentic background to the
founder's historical life as Gautama. Jataka legends occur even in
the Canonical Pitakas; thus the Sukha-vihari Jataka and the
Tittira Jataka, which are respectively the 10th and the 37th in this
volume, are found in the Culla Vagga, vii. 1 and vi. 6, and similarly
the Khandhavatta Jataka, which will be given in the next volume, is
found in the Culla Vagga v. 6 and there are several other examples.
;
So too one of the minor books of the Sutta Pitaka (the Cariya
Pitaka) consists of 35 Jatakas told in verse; and ten at least
^ But comparethe account ofAristeasofProconnesusin Hdt. iv. 14, 15.
- DiogenesLaert. viii. 1.
3 iv. 148.
2014953

;
Preface.
VI
of these can be identified in the volumes of our present collection
already published ; and probably several of the others will be traced
when it is all printed. The Sutta and Vinaya Pitakas are generally
accepted as at least older than the Council of Vcsali (380 u.c. ?)
and thus Jataka legends must have been always recognised in
Buddhist literature.
This conclusion is confirmed by the fact that Jataka scenes are
found sculptured in the carvings on the railings round the relic
shrines of Sanchi and Amaravati and especially those of Bharhut',
where the titles of several Jatakas are clearly inscribed over
some of the carvings. These bas-reliefs prove that the birth-
legends were widely known in the third century B.C. and were then
considered as part of the sacred history of the religion. Fah-hian,
when he visited Ceylon, (400 A.D.), saw at Abhayagiri "representa-
tions of the 500 bodily forms which the Bodhisatta assumed during
his successive births'V' ^-nd he particularly mentions his births as
Sou-ta-nou, a bright flash of light, the king of the elephants, and an
antelope^. These legends were also continually introduced into the
religious discourses'* which were delivered by the various teachers in
the course of their wanderings, whether to magnify the glory of the
Buddhaor to illustrate Buddhist doctrinesand precepts by appropriate
examples, somewhat in the same way as mediaeval preachers in
Europe used to enliven their sermons by introducing fables and
popular tales to rouse the flagging attention of their hearers^
It is quite uncertain when these various birth-stories were put
together in a systematic form such as we find in our present Jataka
collection. At first they were probably handed down orally, but
their growing popularity would ensure that their kernel, at any rate,
would ere long be committed to some more permanent form. In
fact there is a singular parallel to this in the ' Gesta Romanorum ',
which was compiled by an uncertain author in the 14th century and
contains nearly 200 fables and stories told to illustrate various
virtues and vices, many of them winding up with a religious
application.
' One ofthose isgiven as the frontispiece to this volume, sec No. 40.
- Beal's transl. p. 157.
=* Hiouen-thsang twicerefers toJatakas,Julien,i. 137, 197.
* See Prof, M. M. Kiint^'spaper, Journ. R. A. S. Ceylon, viii. 123.
5 In the curious description of the Buddhist grove in the Harsha-carita, viii.,
Bana mentions owls "which repeated the Bodhisattva's jatakas, having gained
illuniinatiou by continuallyhearing them recited."

Preface. vii
Some of the birth-stories are evidently Buddhistic and entirely
depend for their point on some custom or idea peculiarto Buddhism
;
but many are pieces of folk-lore which have floated about the world
for ages as the stray waifs of literature and are liable everywhere to
be appropriated by any casual claimant. The same stories may thus,
in the course of their long Avanderings, come to be recognised under
widely different aspects, as when they are used by Boccaccio or Poggio
merely as merry tales, or by some Welsh bard to embellish king
Arthur's legendary glories, or by some Buddhist samana or mediteval
friar to add point to his discourse. Chaucer unwittingly puts a
Jataka story into the mouth of his Pardonere when he tells his tale
of 'the ryotoures three
' ;
and another appears in Herodotus as the
popular explanation of the sudden rise of the Alcmgeonida3 through
Megacles' marriage with Cleisthenes' daughter and the rejection of
his rival Hippocleides.
The Pali work, entitled ' the Jataka ', the first volume of which
is now presented to the reader in an English form, contains 550
Jatakas or Birth-stories, which are arranged in 22 nipatas or books.
This division is roughly founded on the number of verses {gclthas)
which are quoted in each story ; thus the first book contains
150 stories, each ofwhich only quotes one verse, the second 100, each
of which quotes two, the third and fourth 50 each,which respectively
quote 3 and 4, and so on to the twenty-first with 5 stories, each of
which quotes 80 verses, and the twenty-second with 10 stories, each
quoting a still larger number. Each story opens with a preface
called the paccuppannavatthii or 'story of the present', which relates
the particular circumstances in the Buddha's life which led him to
tell the birth-story and thus reveal some event in the long series
of his previous existences as a bodhisatta or a being destined to attain
Buddha-ship. At the end there is always given a short summary,
Avhere the Buddha identifies the different actors in the story in their
—
present births at the time of his discourse, it being an essential
condition of the book that the Buddha possesses the same power as
that which Pythagoras claimed but with a far more extensive range,
since he could remember all the past events in everybeing's previous
existences as well as in his own. Every story is also illustrated by
one or more gathas which are uttered by the Buddha while still a
Bodhisatta and so playing his part in the narrative but sometimes
;
the verses are put into his mouth as the Buddha, when they are
called ahhisamhuddha-gatha.

Preface.
viii
Some of these stanzas are found in the canonical book called the
Dhamniapada and many of the Jataka stories are given in the old
;
Commentary on that book but with varying details, and sometimes
associated with verses which are not given in our present Jataka
text. This might seem to imply that there is not necessarily a strict
connexion between any particular story and the verses which may
be ([noted as its moral ; but in most cases an apposite stanza would
of course soon assert a prescriptive right to any narrative which
it seemed specially to illustrate. The language of the gathas is
much more archaic than that of the stories ; and it certainly seems
more probable to suppose that they are the older kernel of the work,
and that thus in its original form the Jataka, like the Cariya-pitaka,
consisted only of these verses. It is quite true that they are
generally unintelligible without the story, but such is continually the
case with proverbial sayings ; the traditional commentary passes by
word of mouth in a varying form along with the adage, as in the
well-known ov (^ypovrU 'liriroKkeihrj or our own ' Hobson's choice',
until some author writes it down in a crystallised form\ Occasionally
the same birth-story is repeated elsewhere in a somewhat varied
form and with different verses attached to it ; and we sometimes find
the phrase iti vittharetabbaui^, which seems to imj)ly that the narrator
is to amplify the details at his discretion.
The native tradition in Ceylon is that the original Jataka Book
consisted of the gathas alone, and that a commentary on these,
containing the stories which they were intended to illustrate, was
written in very early times in Singhalese. This was translated
into Pali about 430 A.U. by Buddhaghosa, who translated so many
of the early Singhalese commentaries into Pali ; and after this the
Singhalese original was lost. The accuracy of this tradition has
been discussed by Professor Rhys Davids in the Introduction to
the first volume of his 'Buddhist Birth Stories''; and we may
safely adopt his conclusion, that if the prose commentary was
not composed by Buddhaghosa, it was composed not long after-
wards; and as in any case it was merely a redaction of materials
1 "We have an interesting illustration of the proverbial character of some of the
Jataka stories in the Saiikhya Aphorisms, iv. 11, "he who is without hope is happy
like Pihgala," which finds its explanation in Jat, 330. It is also referred to in the
Mahabh. xii. 6520.
^ Ase.g.Fausboll, iii. p. 49.5. Cf. Divyavad. p. 377, 1.
' See also several papers in the eighth volume of the Jonrnal of the Ceylon
Branch oftheli. A. Society.

Preface. ix
handed down from very early times in the Buddhist community, it is
not a question of much importance except for Pali literary history.
The gcithas are undoubtedly old, and they necessarily imply the
previous existence of the stories, though not perhaps in the exact
words in which we now possess them.
The Jatakas are preceded in the Pali text by a long Introduction,
the Nidana-katha, which gives the Buddha's previous history both
before his last birth, and also during his last existence until he
attained the state ofa Buddha^ This hasbeen translated by Professor
Rhys Davids, but as it has no direct connexion with the rest of the
work, we have omitted it in our translation, which commences with
the first Birth-story.
We
have translated the quasi-historical introductions which
always precede the different birth-stories, as they are an essential
—
part ofthe plan of the original woik, since they link each tale with
some special incident in the Buddha's life, which tradition venerates
as the occasion when he is supposed to have recalled the forgotten
scene of a long past existence to his contemporaries. But it is an
interesting question for future investigation how far they contain any
historical data. They appear at first sight to harmonise with the
framework ofthe Pitakas ;— but I confess that I have no confidence in
their historical credibility, they seem to me rather the laboured
invention of a later age, like the legendary history of the early
centuries of ancient Rome, But this question will be more easily
settled, when we have made further progress in the translation.
The Jatakas themselves are of course interesting as specimens
of Buddhist literature but their foremost interest to us consists in
;
their relation to folk-lore and the light which they often throw on
those popular stories which illustrate so vividly the ideas and
superstitions of the early times of civilisation. In this respect they
possess a special value, as, although much of their matter is peculiar
to Buddhism, they contain embedded with it an unrivalled collection
ofFolk-lore. They are also full of interest as giving a vivid picture
of the social life and customs of ancient India. Such books as
Lieutenant-Colonel Sleeman's 'Rambles' or Mr Grierson's 'Bihar
Peasant Life' illustrate them at every turn. They form in fact an
ever-shifting panorama of the village life such as Fah-hian and
Hiouen-thsang saw it in the old days before the Muhammadan
^ This latter portion partly corresponds to the well-known Lalita-vutara of the
Northern Buddhists,

X Preface.
conquest, when Hindu institutions and native rule prevailed in every
province throughout the land. Like all collections of early popular
tales they are full of violence and craft, and betray a low opinion of
woman but outbursts of nobler feeling are not wanting, to relieve
;
the darker colours.
Professor Rhys Davids first commenced a translation of the
Jataka in 1880, but other engagements obliged him to discontinue it
after one volume had appeared, containing the Nidanakatha and
40 stories. The present translation has been undertaken by a band
of friends who hope, by each being responsible for a definite portion,
We
to complete the whole within a reasonable time. are in fact
a guild of Jataka translators, greshthi-pilrva vayam grenih; but,
although we have adopted some common principles of translation
and aim at a certain general uniformity in our technical terms and
in transliteration, we have agreed to leave each individual translator,
within certain limits, a free hand in his own work. The Editor only
exercises a general superintendence, in consultation with the two
resident translators, Mr Francis and Mr Neil.
Mr R. Chalmers of Oriel College, Oxford, has translated in the
present volume the first volume of Prof FausboU's edition of the
Pali text (five volumes of which have already appeared). The
second volume will be translated by Mr W. H. D. Rouse, late fellow
of Christ's College, Cambridge, who will also be responsible for the
fourth the third will be translated by Mr H. T. Francis, Under-
;
Librarian of the University Library at Cambridge, and late fellow of
Gonville and Caius College, and Mr R. A. Neil, fellow and assistant-
tutor ofPembroke College, who hope also to undertake the fifth'.
COWELL.
E. B.
1 A completeindex will begiven at theend of thelastvolume.

TO
PROFESSOR T. W. RHYS DAVIDS, LL.D., PH.D.,
THIS VOLUME IS INSCEIBED
BY
HIS FBIEND AND PUPIL
THE TRANSLATOR
C, J.

)
CONTENTS.
PAGE
PREFACE V
1. APANNAKA-JATAKA 1
(Two merchants travel with caravans across a desert. One, be-
guiledbygoblins, throws awayhis drinking-water in the desert and
is devoured with all his people and cattle; the other completes his
journey safely.)
2. VANNUPATHA-JATAKA 9
(Travelling across a desert, a caravan through mistake throws
awayits water, &c. Intheirdespair the leader has a well dug, till
far down water is found, and perseverance saves the caravan from
death.
3. SERIVANIJA-JATAKA 12
(Two hawkers are successivelyoffered byits unwitting owners a
golden bowl. The greedy hawker over-reaches himself, whilst the
honest one isrichly rewarded.)
4. CULLAKA-SETTHI-JATAKA 14
(A young man picks up a dead mousewhichhe sells, and works
upthiscapital tillhebecomesrich.)
5. TANDULANALI-JATAKA . 21
(An incompetent valuer declares 500 horses worth a measure of
rice, which measure of rice in turn he is led to declare worth all
Benares.)
6. DEVADHAMMA-JATAKA 23
(Twoprincesgoing down to a hauntedpoolare seizedbyan ogre
;
the third, by correctlydefining 'godlike,' saves hisbrothers.)
7. KATTHAHARI-JATAKA 27
(A king refuses to recognize his son by a chance amour; the
motherthrows the child into the air, praying that, if he be not the
king's son, hemay be killed byhis fall. Thechildrests in mid-air,
andthekingrecognizes him ashis son.)
8. GAMANI-JATAKA 29
62

)
Contents.
•^[y
PAGE
MAKHADEVA-JATAKA 30
9.
(Aking, findingagreyhair inhis head, renounces his throne to
prepareasahermitfordeath.)
SUKHAVIHARI-JATAKA 32
10.
(Aking who becomes a Brother proclaims the happiness he has
found.)
LAKKHANA-JATAKA 34
II.
(Two stags; one through stupidityloses all his following, whilst
theotherbringshisherdhomein safety.)
/ 12.^' NIGRODHAMIGA-JATAKA 36
(Deer in a royal park, to avoid being hunted, decide that lots
shallbecast to select adailyvictim. The lot havingfallenonadoe
bigwithyoung, thekingof the deer offers himself as a substituteat
the block and saves not only his own life but also the lives of all
livingcreatures.)
KANDINA-JATAKA 42
13.
(Amountain-stag, enamoured of adoe, isbyherallowed tofalla
preyto ahunter ; thedoeescapes.)
VATAMIGA-JATAKA 44
14.
(Byabaitofhoneyedgrass awildantelope isluredbyslowdegrees
intoapalace.)
KHARADIYA-JATAKA 46
15. .
(Adeerwhich would not come to be taught the ruses of deer, is
caught in atrap.)
16. TIPALLATTHAMIGA-JATAKA 47
(A deer which had learnt the ruses of deer, being caught in a
snare, effects its escape.)
17. MALUTA-JATAKA 50
(A tiger and a lion disputewhether it is the dark or the light
halfofthemonthwhich is cold.
18. MATAKABHATTA-JATAKA 51
/_
(Agoat, which was tobe sacrificed by abrahmin, shows signs of
greatjoyandofgreatsorrow. Itexplainsthereasonforeachemotion.)
19. AYACITABHATTA-JATAKA 53
(Offering sacrificetogetreleasefromavow,isnottrue 'Release.')
20. NALAPANA-JATAKA 54
(Thirsty monkeys came to a pool haunted by an ogre. Their
leadermiraculouslyblows theknots out of canes and with these the
monkeys safelyslake their thii-st.)

.
Contents. xv
PAGE
21. KURUNGA-JATAKA 57
(Ahunter up atree throwsdownfruits tolure a deer within aim.
The deer detectstheartificeand escapes.)
22. KUKKURA-JATAKA 58
(Carriage-strapshavingbeengnawed bypalace dogs, a kingorders
all otherdogs to be killed. The leader of a pack of dogs reveals the
truth by causing an emetic to be applied to the royal dogs of the
palace.)
23. BHOJAJANIYA-JATAKA 61
(A charger fallswounded when his rider has captured six out of
seven kings. Seeing that a hack is being saddled in his place, the
charger asks to be saddled again, makes alast effort and dies in the
hourofvictory.)
24. AJANNA-JATAKA 63
(A story similar to the above about two chariot horses, one of
whom iswounded andis about to bereplacedby a sorrybeast.)
25. TITTHA-JATAKA 64
(A royal charger refuses to take his bath because a hack had
bathed at the spot.)
26. MAHILAMUKHA-JATAKA 67
. . . . . .
(An elephant listening to robbers' talk, kills his mahout ; by
listening to virtuous converse he becomes good again.)
27. ABHINHA-JATAKA 69
(An elephant, missing his playmate, the dog, refuses to eat until
thedogis restoredto him.)
28. NANDIVISALA-JATAKA 71
(How byincivil words to his bull a brahmin lostabet, which by
civilitytothe animalheafterwards won.)
29. KANHA-JATAKA 73
(How a bull drew 500 carts in order to earn moneyfor his poor
mistress.)
30. MUNIKA-JATAKA 75
(Ahard-worked ox is discontentedwith his own hard fare, when
he sees alazypig being fattened up. Another ox explains tliat the
pig is being fattened to be eaten ; and the discontented ox accepts
hisposition.)
31. KULAVAKA-JATAKA 76
(Through the practice of goodness tending to the diminution of
crime in his village, a man is falsely accused bythe headman and
sentenced to be trampled to death by elephants. The elephants

xvi Contents.
PAGE
refuse to harm bim. Being released, be builds a caravansery, in
which good work (against his wish) three out of four of his wives
take part. At death he is reborn as Sakka. His three good wives
are reborn in heaven. He seeks out the fourth and exhorts her to
goodness. As a crane she refuses to eat a fish which shewed signs
oflife; reborn awoman,sheis eventuallyborn a Titan andespoused
by Sakka.)
NACCA-JATAKA 83
32.
—
(The animals choose kings. The daughter of the king of the
birds (the Golden Mallard) choosesthe peacockforherhusband. In
dancingforjoythepeacockexposeshimselfandisrejected.)
SAMMODAMANA-JATAKA
33.
(Quails caught in a net, rise up in a body with the netandescape
severaltimes. After a time theyquarrel and are caught.)
MACCHA-JATAKA 87
34.
(An uxorious fish being caught, fears his wife may misconstrue
his absence. Abrahmin setshimfree.)
VATTAKA-JATAKA 88
35.
(Ababy-quailisabout to be engulfedin ajungle-fire, when byan
'ActofTruth
'
he quenchesthe flamesround him.)
36. SAKUXA-JATAKA 91
(Atree inwhich birds dwell is grinding its boughs together and
beginning to smoke. Thewise birds flyaway ; the foolish ones are
burnt.)
37. TITTIKA-JATAKA 92
(Apartridge, a monkeyand an elephant livingtogether, decide to
obeythesenior. Toproveseniorityeachgiveshisearliestrecollection.)
38. BAKA-JATAKA 1^95
(A crane by pretending that he was taking them to a big lake,
devours all thefish ofapond. Awisecrab nipsthebird'shead off.)
39. NANDA-JATAKA 98
(How a slave was made to tell where his master's father had
buried his hoard.)
40. KHADIRANGARA-JATAKA 100
(In order to stop a Treasurer from giving alms to a Pacceka
Buddha, Mara interposes a yawning gulf of fire. Undaunted, the
Treasurer steps forward, to be borne up by a lotus from which he
tendershis almstoMara's discomfiture.)

)
Contents. xvii
PAGE
41. LOSAKA-JATAKA 105
(Howa Brother throughjealousgreed was condemned to rebirths
entailing misery and hunger. Finally, when reborn a man, he is
deserted by his parents and brings suiifering on those around him.
On board ship, he has to be cast overboard ; on a raft he comes to
successive island palaces of goddesses, and eventually to an cgre-
islandwhere he seizes the leg of an ogress in form of a goat. She
kicks him over the sea to Benares, and he falls among the king's
goats. Hoping to get back to thegoddesses, he seizes a goat by the
leg, onlyto be seized as athiefandto be condemned to death.)
42. KAPOTA-JATAKA 112
(A pigeon lives in a kitchen. A greedy crow makes friends with
him, and, being also housed in the kitchen, plans an attack on the
victuals. Thecrowis tortured to death, and thepigeon flies away.)
43. VELUKA-JATAKA 114
(A man rearsa viper, which in the endkillsitsbenefactor.
44. MAKASA-JATAKA 116
(Amosquito settles on a man's head. To kill it, his foolish son
strikesthe man'shead with an axe with fa.tale.ffect..)
45. ROHINI-JATAKA . . . . . 117
(Like thelast; a pestle takes the place ofthe axe.)
46. ARAMADUSAKA-JATAKA 118
(Monkeys employed to water a pleasaunce pull up the trees in
order tojudge by the size of therootshow muchwater togive. The
treesdie.)
VARUNI-JATAKA 120
47.
(Seeing customers whet their thirst with salt, a young potman
mixes salt in thespirits for sale.)
48. VEDABBHA-JATAKA 121
(Captured by robbers, a brahmin makes treasure rain from the
sky ; a second band kills him because he cannot repeat the miracle.
Mutual slaughter leaves only two robbers with the treasure. One
poisonsthe other's fo'odandishimselfslain by his fellow.)
NAKKHATTA-JATAKA 124
49.
(A chaplain thwarts amarriage on the ground that the dayfixed
is unlucky. The bride is given to another.)
DUMMEDHA-JATAKA 126
50.
(To put a stop to sacrifices of living creatures, a king vows to
offer aholocaust ofsuch astakelife, &c. Sacrifices cease.)

)
Contents.
XVlll
PAGE
.128
SI- MAHASiLAVA-JATAKA . . • -• • •
(Agoodkingmeets evilwith good. Refusing to sanction war, he
is
capturedandburiedaHvein a charnel-grove. Howhe escapes the
jackals, actsas umpirefor ogres, andregainshis sovereignty.)
CtJLAJANAKA-JATAKA l^'^
52.
PUNNAPATI-JATAKA 134
53.
(Rascals drug spirits for purposes of robbery. Their intended
victimdiscoversthe plot because they do not drink the liquor them-
selves.
)
PHALA-JATAKA 135
54.
(How in defianceofwarnings greedyfellows ateapoisonous fruit.
Howtheirleaderknewitmustbepoisonous thoughitlookedexactly
likeamango.)
PANCAVUDHA-JATAKA 137
55.
(HowPrinceFive-weaponsfoughttheogreHairy-grip,and,though
defeated, subduedtheogrebyfearlessness.)
KANCANAKKHANDHA-JATAKA 140
56.
(A farmer finds a heavy nugget of gold. By cutting it up into
four pieces, he is able to carry it away.)
Q7 VANARINDA-JATAKA 142
(How the crocodile layon arock to catch the monkey, and how
thelatteroutwitted the crocodile.)
TAYODHAMMA-JATAKA 144
58.
(Amonkey gelds all his male offspring. One escapes ; the father,
seeking to kill him, sends his son to an ogre-haunted pool. By
cleverness the son escapes death.)
BHERIVADA-JATAKA 146
59.
(A drummer bytoo much drumming isplundered by robbers ina
forest.)
60. SAMKHADHAMANA-JATAKA 147
(Asimilarstoryaboutaconchblower.
61. ASATAMANTA-JATAKA 147
(The wickedness of women shewn by the endeavour of a hag to
killhergood son in orderto facilitate an intriguewith ayouth.)
62. ANDABHUTA-JATAKA 151
(Another story of the innate wickedness of women. A girl is
bred up from infancy among women only, without ever seeing any
man butherhusband. The story ofher intrigue with a lover and of
herdeceitstowardherhusband.)

)
Contents. XIX
PAGE
67,. TAKKA-JATAKA " 155
(Awicked princess seduces a hermit who devotes himself to her.
Being carried off by a robber chief, she lures the hermit toher new
home in order that he may be killed. His goodness saves him and
heringratitude destroysher.)
64. DURAJANA-JATAKA 158
(Wivesa bar to the higherlife.)
65. ANABHIRATI-JATAKA 160
(Women common toall.)
66. MUDULAKKHANA-JATAKA 161 ^
(How ahermit fellinlove andwascured.)
67. UCCHANGA-JATAKA 164
(A woman's husband, son and brother are condemned to death.
Being offered a choice which she will save, she chooses her brother
andgives the reason.)
6^. SAKETA-JATAKA 166
(Why a brahmin and hiswife claimed theBuddha astheirson.
69. VISAVANTA-JATAKA 167
(Aviper bites a man and refuses under threat of death to suck
out thepoison.)
70. KUDDALA-JATAKA 168
(Privatepropertyabar to the higherlife. Conquest over self the
highest conquest. Sakka builds a monastery for a sage and a con-
vertedpeople.)
71. VARANA-JATAKA 172
(How a lazy fellow, who picked green boughs for firewood, hurt
himselfandinconvenienced others.)
yz. SILAVANAGA-JATAKA
(The story ofthegood elephant and the ungrateful man.)
SACCAMKIRA-JATAKA 177
72).
(Theingratitude of a prince, and the gratitude of a snake, a rat
andaparrot.) ^f
RUKKHADHAMMA-JATAKA
74.
(Union is strength, among trees as among men.)
75. MACCHA-JATAKA 183
(How the goodfish ended a drought and savedhis kinsfolk.)
76. ASAMKIYA-JATAKA 185
(Acaravan is savedby awakeful hermit from beinglooted.)

XX Contents.
PAGE
MAHASUPINA-JATAKA 187
(Sixteen wonderfuldreams and theirinterpretation.)
illIsa-jataka 195
(Howa miser was cured by his father reappearing on earth and
distributing the son'swealthinthe exact semblance ofthe son.)
kharassara-jataka 202
79-
(A village headman privily incites robbers to carry off the taxes
collectedfor theking.)
80. BHIMASENA-JATAKA 203
(A valiant dwarfand a cowardlygiant. The dwarfdoes thework,
and thegiant gets the credit. The giant's growing pride is brought
lowin theface ofdanger
;
the dwarfishonoured.)
<®
SURAPANA-JATAKA 206
I
(Theeffectsofstrongdrink onhermits.)
82. MITTAVINDA-JATAKA 209
(See No. 41.)
KALAKAXXI-JATAKA 209
(Not the namebuttheheart within makesthe man.)
84. ATTHASSADVARA-JATAKA 211
(Thepaths to spiritual welfare.)
KIMPAKKA-JATAKA 212
(LikeNo. 54.)
86. SiLAVlMAMSANA-JATAKA 213
(The brahmin who stole inorderto see whether he was esteemed
forgoodness orotherwise. The good cobra.)
87. MAMGALA-JATAKA 215
(The follyofsuperstitiousbeliefin omensand thelike.)
SARAMBHA-JATAKA 217
(LikeNo. 28.)
KUHAKA-JATAKA 218
(The hypocritical hermit who stole the gold, but punctiliously
returned a strawwhich wasnothis.)
90. AKATANNU-JATAKA 220
. ,
(Amerchant is befriended by amerchantinanother country, but
refuses to return the service. The revenge taken by the good mer-
chant'sservants.)

Contents. xxi
PACE
91. LITTA-JATAKA 221
(A sharper swallows dice which had been poisoned in order to
teach him a lesson.)
92. MAHASARA-JATAKA 222
(A queen's jewels are stolen by monkeys. Certain innocent per-
sonsconfesstothe theft. Howthemonkeys are proved to be the real
culprits, andhowthejewels are recovered.)
VISSASABHOJANA-JATAKA
93.
(Alion's fatalpassion foradoe.)
LOMAHAMSA-JATAKA
94.
(The futility ofascetic self-mortification.)
MAHASUDASSANA-JATAKA
95.
(How King Sudassanadied.)
96. TELAPATTA-JATAKA
(A prince wins a kingdom byresisting the fascinations of lovely
ogresses. Akingwhoyields, is eaten, with all his household.)
97. NAMASIDDHI-JATAKA 237^^
(Discontented with his name, a youth travels till he learns that
thenamedoesnotmake theman.)
98. KUTAVANIJA-JATAKA 239
(Arogue is hidden in ahollow tree, to feign to be the Tree-sprite
who is to act as umpire in a dispute. A Ike hghted at the bottom
ofthe tree exposes thecheat.)
99. PAROSAHASSA-JATAKA 240
(Abrahmin dies and states his spiritualattainmentsin a formula
whichonly one ofhispupils understands.)
100. ASATARUPA-JATAKA 242
(A beleaguered city is captured by cutting off supplies of water
andfirewood.)
101. PAROSATA-JATAKA
(
=No.
99.)
102. PANNIKA-JATAKA
(To testhis daughter'svirtue, a man makes love toher.)
103. VERI-JATAKA
(Amerchantrejoicesthat he has outstripped robbersandreached
hishomein safety.)

XXII Contents.
PAGE
104. MITTAVINDA-JATAKA 246
(AnadditionalfragmentofNo. 41.)
DUBBALAKATTHA-JATAKA 246
105.
(An elephant, having escaped from the trainer's goad, lives in
constant dread.)
106. UDANCANI-JATAKA 248
(Ayoung hermit, seducedbyagirl,is disenchantedbythenumber /^"^
oferrands shemakes him run.)
107. SALITTAKA-JATAKA 249
(A skilful marksman reduces a talkative brahmin to silence by
flickingpellets ofgoat'sdungdownthe latter's throat.)
108. BAHIYA-JATAKA 251
(Occasional decencya passport togreatness.)
KUNDAKAPUVA-JATAKA 252
109.
(A Tree-sprite, whose worshipper feared his gift was too mean,
asksforthe gift andrewards the poorman byrevealing the site of a
biiriedhoard ofmoney.)
SABBASAMHARAKA-PANHA 254
I 10.
111. GADRABHA-PANHA 254
112. AMARADEVi-PANHA 254
113. SIGALA-JATAKA 255
(Being belated in a city, a jackal, by a lying promise to reveal
buried treasure, induces a brahmin to carry him safely out of the
city. The greedy brahmin reaps only indignities from the ungrateful
beast.)
I 14. MITACINTI-JATAKA 256
(Of threefishes, two through follyare caught ina net ; the third
and wiserfishrescues them.)
115. ANUSASIKA-JATAKA 257
(A greedy bird, after cunningly warning other birds against the
dangersofthehigh roadonwhich she found food, isherself crushed
todeathby a carriage on that road.)
116. DUBBACA-JATAKA 259
(Being in liquor, an acrobat undertakes to jump more javelins » ^^
than he can manage, and is killed.)
I 17. TITTIRA-JATAKA 260
(A busybody is killed for his chatter by a jaundiced man ; and
thepiping ofa partridge attracts the hunterwho kills it.)

)) 1
Contents. xxui
PAGK
118. VATTAKA-JATAKA 261
(Aquail, being caught by a fowler, starves itself till no one will
buy it, andin the end escapes.)
119. AKALARAVI-JATAKA 2G3
(Acockwhich crowed in and out ofseason has its neck wrung.)
120. BANDHANAMOKKHA-JATAKA 204
(A queen, who had committed adultery with sixty-four footmen
and failedinher overtures to the chaplain, accuses thelatterofrape.
Herevealsherguilt andhis own innocence.)
121. KUSANALI-JATAKA 207
(A grass-sprite and a tree-sprite are friends. The former saves
thelatter'stree from the axebyassuming the shape of a chameleon
and making thetreelook full ofholes.
122. DUMMEDHA-JATAKA 269
(Beingjealous of hiselephant, aking seeksto makeit fall overa
precipice. The elephant flies through the air with its mahout to
another and more appreciative master.)
123. NANGALlSA-JATAKA 27
(A stupid youth, being devoted to his teacher, props up the
latter's bed with his own leg all night long. The grateful teacher
yearns to instruct thedullard and tries to make him compare things
together. The youth sees a likeness to the shaft of a plough in a
snake, an elephant, sugar-cane and curds. The teacher abandons
all hope.)
124. AMBA-JATAKA 273
(In time of drought, a hermit provides water for the animals,
who in gratitudebringhim fruit enough forhimselfand 500others.)
125. KATAHAKA-JATAKA 275
(A slave, educated beyond his station, manages by forging his
master's name to marry arich wife in another city. He giveshim-
selfairstill his oldmaster comes,who, while notbetrayingtheslave,
teachesthewife verses wherebyto restrain herhusband'sarrogance.)
126. ASILAKKHANA-JATAKA 277
(Effectsof two sneezes. One losta sword-tester his nose, whilst
theotherwon aprincess forherlover.
KALANDUKA-JATAKA 280
127.
(A slave like the one in No. 125 is rebuked for arrogance to his
wife bya parrot whoknewhim athome. Theslave isrecaptured.)

)
xxiv Contents.
PAGE
128. BILARA-JATAKA 281
(A jackal, under guise of saintliness, eats rats belonging to a
troop with which he consorts. His treachery is discovered and
avenged.)
129. AGGIKA-JATAKA 283
(A similar storyabout rats and a jackalwhose hair had all been
burnt offexcepta top-knotwhich suggestedhohness.)
130. KOSIYA-JATAKA 284
(The alternative of the stick or adraught of nauseous filth cures
awife offeignedillness. ....
131. ASAMPADANA-JATAKA . . 286
(Abenefactoris repulsedby the man hehad befriended. Hearing
of this ingratitude, the king gives all the ingrate's wealth to the
benefactor, who refuses to take backmore than his own.)
132. PANCAGARU-JATAKA 288
(LikeNo. 96. Theking is thankfulto have passed throughgreat
perilstogreat dominion.)
133. GHATASANA-JATAKA 290
(Becausethewaters of hislake werebefouledbybirdsroostingin
an overhanging tree, a Naga darts flames among the boughs. The
wisebirdsfly away ; the foolish stayand are killed.)
134. JHANASODHANA-JATAKA 291
(LikeNo. 99.)
135. CANDABHA-JATAKA 292
(Like No. 99.)
136. SUVANNAHAMSA-JATAKA 292
(The father of a familydies, leaving his familydestitute. Being
reborn abird with goldenplumage, anddiscovering the condition of
his family, the father gives them a feather at a time to sell. The
widowin hergreedplucks all his feathers out, only to find that they
aregoldnomore.)
137. BABBU-JATAKA 294
(Amousecaughtbysuccessivecatsbuysthem offbydailyrations
of meat. Li the end, the mouse, ensconced in crystal, defies the
cats, who dash themselvesto piecesagainst the unseen crystal.)
138. "^DHA JATAKA 297
(Ahermittriesin vain to catch a lizard to eat.)

Contents. XXV
PAGE
139. UBHATOBHATTHA-JATAKA 298
(A fisherman, having hooked a snag, and thinking it a monster
fish, wishes to keep it all to himself. How he lost his clothes and
hiseyes, andhowhiswife was beaten and fined.)
140. KAKA-JATAKA 300
(A wanton crow having befouled the king's chaplain, the latter
prescribes crows' fat for the burns of the king's elephants. The
leader of the crows explains tothe king that crows haveno fat and
that revenge aloneprompted the chaplain'sprescription.)
141. GODHA-JATAKA 302
(Achameleon betraysa tribe ofiguanas to ahunter.)
142. SIGALA-JATAKA 304
(In order to catch a jackal, a man pretends to bedead. To try
him, thejackal tugsat the man's stick andfinds hisgrip tighten.)
143. VIROCANA-JATAKA 305
(Ajackal, after attendingalion in the chase, imagineshecankill
a quarry as well as the lion. In essaying to kill an elephant, the
jackalis killed.)
144. NANGUTTHA-JATAKA 307
(A votary of the God of Fire, having a cow to sacrifice to his
deity, finds that robbers have driven it off. If the god, he reflects, v%
cannotlookafterhis own sacrifice, how shallheprotecthis votary?)
145. RADHA-JATAKA 309
(A brahmin asks two parrots to keep an eye on his wife during
his absence. They observe her misconduct and report it to the
brahmin, without essaying the hopeless task of restraining her.)
146. KAKA-JATAKA 310
(Ahen crow having been drowned in the sea, other crows try to
balethe seaout with their beaks.)
147. PUPPHARATTA-JATAKA 312
(In ordertohave smartholiday attire, a wife makes her husband
break into the royal conservatories. Being caught and impaled, he
has only the onegriefthat hiswifewill not have herflowers towear.)
148. SIGALA-JATAKA 314
(Ajackal eats hisway into adead elephant's carcass and cannot
get out.)

XXVI Contents.
PAGE
EKAPANNA-JATAKA 316
149.
(By the analogy of a poisonous seedling, a wicked prince is re-
formed.)
150. SANJIVA-JATAKA 319
(Ayouth, who has learnt the charm forrestoring thedead tolife,
tries it on a tiger, with fatal effectstohimself.)
INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 323
ERRATA.
P. 30,1. 36, read ' Hewhohas trodden...'
P. 113,last1., read Cf. Vol. 11. p. 362 (Pjili text).

rraised he the Blessed One, the Arahat, the perfect Buddha.
BOOK I.—EKANIPATAi.
No.
1.
APANNAKA-JATAKA,
[95.] This2discourse regardingTruthwas delivered bytheBlessedOne, wliile
he was dwelling in the Great Monastery at Jetavananear Savatthi.
But who, 3'ou ask, was it that led up to this tale?
Well; it was the Treasurer's five hundred friends, disciples ofthe soplii.sts'l
For, onedayAnatha-pindika* the Treasurer,tookhisfriends the five luuidred
disciples of other schools, and went off with them to Jetavana, whither also he
had a great store brought of garlands, perfumes, and unguents, together with
oil, honey, molasses, cloths, and cloaks. After due salutation to the Blessed
One, he made his offering to him of the garlands and the like, and handed over
to the Order of the Brethren the medicinal oil and so forth together with the
cloths ; and, this done, he took his seat on one side eschewing the six faults in
1 The canonical text of the Jiitaka book, which consists exchisively of <juthds or
stanzas, is divided into 'books,' or niputas, according to the number of gdthds. The
presentvolume contains the 150 storieswhichiUustrate, and form the commentaryof,
a single gdthd in each case, and compose the first book. The laterbookscontain an
increasing number of[idthds and adecreasing number of stories : e.g. the second book
contains 100 two-gathfistories, the third book 50 three-gfitha stories, and so on. The
total number of the books or nipdtas is 22, 21 of which form tlie text of the five
publishedvolumes of the Pali text. The nipdtas are subdivided into vagijdx, orsetsof
about 10stories, named as a rule after their first story. It has not been thought
desirabletocumberthe translation with these subdivisions.
2 TheIntroductory Storyusuallybeginsbyquoting, as a catchword, the first words
ofthe subsequentgdtJid.
' Literally 'sectaries'; but usually translated 'heretics,' aterm which has come to
have too theological a connotation to be applicable to pliilosophcrs. The six rivals
with whom Gotama had chiefly to compete were Pfirana Kassapa, Makkhali Gosfila,
Ajita Kesa-kambali, Pakudha Kaccfiyana, Sanjaya Belatthi-putta, and Nigantlia
Nata-putta (see, e.g., the SdmaHilaphala Sittta in theD'igha Nikdya, Vol. i. p. 47).
* This is a surname, meaning literally 'feeder of the poor.' His ordinary name
was Sudatta. See the account in the Vinaya (CuUavagga, vi. 4, 'J) of how hebought
from Prince Jeta the latter's grove for as muchmoney as would pave theground, and
how be built thereon the Great Monastery fortheBuddlia.
C. J, 1

The Jataka. Bool I.
s t i o t o ti k ng t ' h d ei o r wn seats Li c k l e o w s i e se b , v t t h h o e se si d d i e sc o i f ple A s na o t f h o a t - h p e i r n s d c i h k o a o , ls —g s a a z i i n n t g ed up th o e n B t u h d e d M h a a s , te a r n ' d s
countenance •'lorious as'the full moon, upon his excellent presence endowed with
the sio-ns and^marks of Buddhahood and encompassed to a fathom's length with
light, and upon the rich glory that marks a Buddha, a glory which issued as it
were in paired garlands, pair upon pair.
Then, though in thunderous tones as of a young lion roari_ng i.n txihe -Kr,edi
Valley or as ofa storm-cloud in the rainyseason, bringing down as it were m the
Ganges ofthe Heavensi [96] and seemingto weave a chaplet of jewels,—yet a
voice of eightfold perfection, the charm of which ravished the ear, he preached
to them the Truth in a discourse full of sweetness and bright with varied
be;iuty.
Tliey, after hearing the Master's discourse, rose up with hearts converted,
and with due salutation to the Lord of Knowledge, burst asunder the other
doctrines inwhichtheyhad takenrefuge,and betook themselves totheBuddhaas
theirrefuge. Thenceforth without ceasing theyused to go with Anatha-pindika,
carryingin theirhands perfumes and garlands and the like, to hear the Truth in
the Monastery ; and theyabounded incharity,kept theCommandments,andkept
theweekly fast-day.
Now the Blessed One went from Savatthi back to Riljagaha again. As soon
as the Buddha had gone, theyburst asunder their new foith, and returning to
the otherdoctrines as theirrefuge, reverted to their original state.
After some seven or eight"months' stay, the Blessed One came back to
Jetavana. Once again too did Anatha-pindika come with those friends of his to
the Master, makehis salutation and offering of perfumes and the like, and take
his seat on one side. And the friends also saluted the Blessed One and took
theirseats in like manner. Then did Anatha-pindika tell the Blessed One how,
when the Buddhahad departed on his alms-pilgrimage, his friends had forsaken
their refuge for the old doctrines again, and had reverted to their original
state.
Openingthe lotus of his mouth, as though it were a casket of jewels, scented
with scents divine and filled with divers perfumes by virtue of his having ever
spoken aright throughout m—yriad reons, the Blessed One made his sweet voice
come forth,as he enquired: "Isthereporttruethatyou,discijiles,haveforsaken
the Three Refuges^for the refuge ofotherdoctrines?"
And when they, unable to conceal the fact, had confessed, saying, "It is true.
Blessed One," then said the Master, "Disciples, not between the bounds of hell-'
below and the highest heaven above, not in all the infinite worlds that stretch
right and left, is there the equal, much less the superior, of a Buddha in the
excellences which spring from obeying the Commandments and from other
Aartuous conduct."
Then he declared to them the excellences of the Three—Gems as they are
revealedinthesacredtexts,thefollowingamongstthenumber, "Ofallcreatures.
Brethren, whether footless &c., of these the Buddha is the chief"; "Whatsoever
riches there be in this or in other worlds—&c."; and "Verily the chief of the
faithful &c." Thence he went on to say: "No disciples, male or female, who
seekrefuge in the Three Gems that are endowed with such peerless excellences,
are ever reborn into hell and the like states; but, released from all rebirth
into states of suffering, they pass to the Realm of Devas and there receive great
glory. Therefore, in forsaking such a refuge for that offered by other doctrines,
you havegoneastray."
' i.e.theMilkyWay.
2 i.e.theBuddha, the Truth he preached, and theBrotherhoodhe founded. Infra
thistriadis spoken ofasthe 'Three Gems.'
3 Strictly speaking Buddhism knows no hells, only purgatories, which—though
placesoftorment—aretemporaryandeducational.

;
iVo. 1. 3
(Aud herethe following sacred texts should be cited to make it clear that
none who, to find release and the supreme good—, have .souglit refuge in tlio 'I'lircf
Gems, shall be reborn into states ofsuffering:
[97] Those who have refuge in the Buddha found.
Shall not ])ass hence to states of sutfering
Straightway, when they shall quit their human fi'ame,
A Deva-form these faithful ones shall fill'.
Those who have refuge in the Doctrine found
&c., &c.
Those who have refuge in the Oi'der found
&c., &c.
— They're manifold the refuges men seek,
The mountain peak, the forest's solitude,
{and so on down to)
When he this refuge shall have sought and found,
Entire release is his from every paiu.)-
But th—e Master did not end his teaching to them atthis ]ioint; for he went
on to say: "Disciples, meditation on the thought of the Buddha, meditation on
thethought of the Truth, meditation on the thought of the Brotherhood, tliis it
is that gives Entry to and Fruition of the First, the Second, the Third, and tlie
Fourth Paths to Bliss''." And when hehad preached the Truth to them in these
and other ways, he said, "In forsaking such a refuge as this, you have gone
astray."
(And herethe gift of the several Paths to those who meditate on the thought
of the Bud—dha and so forth, should be made clear by such scriptures as the
following: "One thing there is, Brethren, which, if practised and developi^d,
conducesto utterloathing of the world's vanities, to the cessation of passion, to
the end of bein—g, to peace, to insight, to enlightenment, to Nirvana. What is
this onething? The meditation on tlie thought ofthe Buddha.") —
When he had thus exhorted the disciples, the Blessed One said, "So tooin
times past, disciples, the men who jumped to the fatuous conclusion tliat wliat
was no refuge was a real refuge, fell a preyto goblins inademon-haunted wilder-
ness and were utterly destroyed; whilst the men who clave to tlie absolute
and indisputable truth, prospered in the selfsame wilderness." And when he
had said this, he became silent.
Then, rising up from his seat and saluting the Blessed One, the layman
Anatha-pindika burst into—praises, and with clasped hands raised in reverence to
his forehead, spoke thus: "It is clear to us. Sir, that in these i)resent days
these disciples were led by error into forsaking the supreme refuge. But the
l>ygone destruction of those opinionated ones in tlie demon-haunted wilderness,
and the prospering of the men who clave to the truth, are liidden from us and
known only to you. [98] May it please the Blessed One, as though causing tin-
full moon to rise in the sky, to make this thingclearto us."
1 The word (leva, which I have retained in itsPah form, means an 'an^'ol,' latlur
than a'god,'in the god-less creed of theBuddhist. See hereon Rhys Davids in liis
'Buddhist Suttas,' page 162.
- Dhammapada, v. 188—192. ^ See note on p. 8.
1—2

The JdtaJca. Booh I.
Then said the Blessed One:—"It was solely to brush away the worlds
difficulties that by the display of the Ten Perfections! through myriad aeons
I won omniscience. Give earand hearken,as closely as ifyou were fillinga tube
ofg H o a ld vi w n i c t ^ h th li u o s n's ex m c a i r te r d ow t . h " e Treasurer's attenti.on, he made clear xtih,e xtuh-ing it.ih,at4.
re-birth had concealed from them, as though he were releasing the full moon
from the upperair, the birthplace ofthe snows.
Once on a time in the city of Benares in the Kasi country there was
a kin'' named Brahmadatta. In those days the Bodhisatta was born into
a merchant's family, and growing up in due course, used to journey about
trading with five hundred carts, travelling now from east to west and
now from west to east. There was also at Benares another young mer-
chant, a stupid blockhead, lacking resource.
Now at the time of our story the Bodhisatta had loaded five hundred
carts with costly wares of Benares and had got them all ready to start.
And so had the foolish young merchant too. Thought the Bodhisatta,,
"If this foolish young merchant keeps me company all along, and the
thousand carts travel along together, it will be too much for the road ; it
will be a hard matter to get wood, water, and so forth for the men, or
grass for the oxen. Either he or I must go on first." So he sent for the
other and laid his view before him, saying, "The two of us can't travel
together; would you rather go first or last?" Thought the other, "There
will be many advantages ifI go on first. I shall have a road which is not
yet cut up ; my oxen will have the pick of the grass ; my men will have
the pick of the herbs for curry; the water will be undisturbed; and,
lastly, I shall fix my own price for the barter of my goods." Accordingly
he replied, "I will go first, my dear sir." [99]
The Bodhisatta, on the other—hand, saw many advantages in going last,
for he argued thus to himself: "Those who go first will level the road
where it is rough, whilst I shall travel along the road they have already
travelled; their oxen will have grazed off the coarse old grass, whilst
mine will pasture on the sweet young growth which will spring up in its
place; mymen will find a fresh growth ofsweet hei'bs for curry where the
old ones have been picked ; where there is no water, the first caravan will
have to dig to supply themselves, and we shall drink at the wells they
dug. Haggling over prices is killing work ; whereas I, following later,
shall barter my wares at the prices they have alreadyfixed." Accordingly,
seeing all these advantages, he said to the other, "Then go you first, my
dear sir."
! i.e.almsgiving,goodness,renunciation,wisdom,energy,patience,truth, resolution,
—
loving-kindness, andequanimity. (See the Cariya Pitaka, pp. 45 7 of the Pali text
editedby Dr Morris for the Pali Text Society); see also JatakaNo. 35 &e.

No.
1. 5
"Very well, I will," said the foolish mercliant. Aiul hv yokoil his
carts and set out. Journeying along, he left human haljitations behind
himandcame to theoutskirts ofthe wilderness. (Now wildernesses are of
—
the five following kinds: robber wildernesses, wild-beast wildernesses,
drought wildernesses, demon wildernesses, and famine wildernesses. The
first is when the way is beset by robbers ; the second is when the way is
beset by lions and other wild beasts ; the third is when there is no bathing
or water to be got ; the fourth is when the road is beset by demons ; and
the fifth is when no roots or other food are to be found. And in this
fivefold category the wilderness in question was both a drought, and a
demon, wilderness.) Accordingly this young merchant took great big
water-jars on his carts, and filling them with water, set out to cross
the sixty leagues of desert which lay before him. Now when he hud
reached the middle of the wilderness, the goblin who haunted it said
to himself, "1 will make these men throw away their stock of water, and
devour them all when they are faint." So he [100] framed by his magic
power a delightful carriage drawn by pure white young bulls. With a
retinue of some ten or twelve goblins bearing bows and quivers, swords
and shields, he rode along to meet them like a mighty lord in this carriage,
with blue lotuses and white water-lilies wreathed round his head, with wet
hair and wet clothes, and with muddy carriage-wheels. His attendants,
too, in front and rear of him went along with their hair and clothes wet,
with garlands of blue lotuses and white water-lilies on their heads, and
with bunches of white lotuses in their hands, chewing the esculent stalks,
and dripping with water and mire. Now the leaders of caravans have the
following custom whenever the wind blows in their teeth, they ride on
:
in front in their carriage with their attendants round them, in order to
escape the dust ; but when the wind blows from behind them, then they
ride in like fashion in the rear of the column. And, as on this occasion
the wind was blowing against them, the young merchant was riding in
front. When the goblin became aware of the merchant's approach, he
drew his carriage aside from the track and greeted him kindly, asking him
whitherhe was going. The leader ofthe caravan too caused his carriageto
be drawn aside from the track so as to let the carts pass by, whilst he
stayed by the way and thus addressed the goblin: "We are just on our
way from Benares, sir. But I observe that you have lotuses and water-
lilies on your heads and in your hands, and that your people are chewing
the esculent stalks, and that you are all muddy and drii)ping with wet.
Pray did it rain while you were on the road, and did you come on pools
covered with lotuses and water-lilies?"
Hereon the goblin exclaimed, "What did you say? Why, yonder
appears the dark-green streak of the forest, and thence onward there is
nothing but water all through the forest. It is always raining there ; the

The Jataka. Book I.
pools are full; and on every side are lakes covered with lotuses and water-
lilies." Then as the Hue of carts [101] passed by, he asked where they
were bound for. "To such and such a })lace," was the reply. "And what
wares have you got in this cart and in this%" "So and so." "And what
might you have in this last cart which seems to move as if it were heavily
ladea?" "Oh, there's wtiter in that." "You did well to carrywater with
you from the other side. But there is no need for it now, as water is
abundant on ahead. So break the jars and throw the water away, that
you may travel easier." And he added, " Now continue on your way, as
we have stopped too long already." Then he went a little way further on,
till he was out of sight, when he made his way back to the goblin-city
where he dwelt.
Such was the folly of that foolish merchant that he did the goblin's
—
bidding, and had hisjai's broken and the water all thrown away, without
saving so much even as would go in the palm of a man's hand. Then he
ordered the carts to drive on. Not a di'op of water did they find on
ahead, and thirst exhausted the men. All day long till the sun went
down they kept on the march but at sunset they unyoked their carts
;
and made a laager, tethering the oxen to the wheels. The oxen had no
water to drink, and the men none to cook their rice with ; and the tired-
out baud sank to the ground to slumber. But as soon as night fell,
the goblins came out from their city, and slew every single one of those
men and oxen ; and when they had devoured their flesh, leaving only
the bare bones, the goblins departed. Thus was the foolish young mer-
chant thesole cause ofthe destruction of that whole band, whose skeletons
were strewn in every conceivable direction, whilst the five hundred carts
stood thei'e with their loads untouched.
Now the Bodhisatta allowed some six weeks to pass by after the
starting of the foolish young merchant, before he set out. Then he pro-
ceeded from the city with his five hundred carts, and in due course
came to the outskirts of the wilderness. Here he had his water-jars
filled and laid in an ample stock of water ; and by beat of— drum he had
his men assembled in camp [102], and thus addressed them : "Let not so
much as a palmful of water be used without my sanction. There are
poison trees in this wilderness; so let no man among you eat any leaf,
flower, or fruit which he has not eaten before, without first asking me."
With this exhortation to his men, he pushed on into the wilderness with
his 500 carts. When he had reached the middle of the wilderness, the
goblin made his appearance on the Bodhisatta's path as in the former case.
But, as soonas he became aware ofthe goblin, the Bodhisatta saw thi'ough
him; for he thought to himself, "There's no water here, in this 'Waterless
Desert.' This pei-son with his red eyes and aggressive bearing, casts no
shadow. Very likely he has induced the foolish young merchant who

No. 1. 7
preceded me, to throw away all bis water, aud then, waiting till they were
worn out, has eaten up the merchant with all his men. But he doesn't
know my cleverness and ready wit." Then he shouted to the goblin,
" Begone We're men of business, and do not throw away what water we
!
have got, before we see where more isto comefrom. But, when wedo see
more, we may be trusted to throw this water away and lighten our carts."
The goblin rode on a bit further till he was out of sight, and then
betook himselfback to his home in the demon city. But when the gol)lin
had gone, the Bodhisatta's men said to him, "Sir, we heard from those
men that yonder is the dark-green streak of the forest appearing, where
they said it was always raining. They had got lotuses on their heads aud
water-lilies in their hands and were eating the stalks, whilst their clotlu^s
and hair were wringing wet, with water streaming ofi"them. Let us throw
away our water and get on a bit quicker with lightenedcarts." On hearing
these words, the Bodhisatta ordered a halt and had the men all mustered.
"Tell me," said he; "did any man among you ever hear before today that
there was a lake or a jjool in this wilderness?" "No, sir," was the
answer, "why it's known as 'the Waterless Desert'."
"We havejust been told bysomepeople thatitisi-ainingjust on ahead,
in the belt of forest; now how far does a rain-wind carry?" [103] "A
league, sir." "And has this rain-wind reached any one man here1 " "No,
sir." "How far off can you see the crest of a storm-cloud?" "A
league, sir." "And has any one man here seen the top of even a single
storm-cloud?" "No, sir." "How far off can you see a flash of light-
ning?" "Four or five leagues, sir." "And has any one man here seen
a Hash of lightning?" "No, sir." "How far offcan a man hear a peal
of thunder?" "Two or three leagues, sir." "And has any man here
heard a peal of thunder?" "No, sir." "These are not men but goblins.
They will return in the hope of devouring us when we are weak and faint
after throwing away our water at their bidding. As the young merchant
who went on before us was not a man of resource, most likely he has been
fooled into throwing his water away and has been devoured when exhaus-
tion ensued. We may expect to find his live hundred carts standing just
as they were loaded for the start; weshall come on them today. Press on
with all possible speed, without throwing away a drop ofwater."
Urging his men forward with these words, he proceeded on his way till
he came upon the 500 carts standingjust as they had been loaded and the
skeletons of the men and oxen lying strewn in every direction. He had
his carts unyoked and ranged in a circle so as to form a strong laager ; he
saw that his men and oxen had their supper early, and thatthe oxen were
made to lie down in the middle with the men round them ; and he himself
with the leading men ofhis baud stood on guard, sword in hand, through
the three watches of the night, waiting for the day to dawn. On the

—
8 Tlie Jataka. Book I.
morrow at daybreak when he had had his oxen fed and everythiug needful
done, he discarded his own weak carts for stronger ones, and his own
common goods for the most costly ofthe derelict goods. Then he went on
to liis destination, where he bartered his stock for wares of twice or three
times their value, and came back to his own city without losing a single
man out ofall his comi)any.
[104] This story ended, the Master said, "Thus it was, layman, that in
times past the fatuous came to utter destruction, whilst those who clave to the
truth, escaping from the demons' hands, reached their goal in safetyand came
back to their homes again." And when he had thus linked the two stories
together, he, as the Buddha, spoke the following stanza for tlie purposes of this
lesson on the Truth :
Then some declared the sole, the peerless truth;
But otherwise the false logicians spake.
Let him that's wise from this a lesson take.
And firmly grasp the sole, the peerless truth.
[105] Thus did the Blessed One teach this lesson respecting Truth. And
he went on to say : "What is called walking by truth, not only bestows the
thi'ee ha})py endowments, the six heavens ofthe realms of sense, and the endow-
ments of the higher Realm of Brahma, but finally is the giver of Arahatship
[106]; whilst what is called walking by untruth entails re-birth in the four
states of punishment or in the lowest castes of mankind." Further, the Master
went on to expound in sixteen ways the Four Truthsi, at the close of which all
those five hundred disciples were established in the Fruit ofthe First Path-.
Havingdelivered his lesson and his teaching, and having told the two stories
and established the connexion lin—king them together, the Master concluded by
identifying the Birth as follows:- "Devadatta was the foolish young merchant
ofthose days ; his followerswere the followers ofthat merchant ; the followers of
the Buddha were the followers ofthe wise merchant, who was myself."
^ These four cardinal truths of Buddhism are asfollows: — (i) individualexistence
is pain; (ii) cravings cause the continuance of individual existence; (iii) with the
disap23earance of cravings, individualexistence also woulddisappear; and (iv) cravings
disappear by followiug the Noble Eightfold Path pointed out by the Buddlia. (See
hereonKhysDavids' Hibbert Lecturefor 1881.)
- The normal road to the Buddhist ideal after conversion is divided into four
successive stages, called the catulro mag(jd or 'fourpaths.' Thefirst of these is that
trodden bythe sotCipanno (one 'who has entered the stream' which flows down tothe
ocean of Nirvana), who is assured of ultimately reaching his goal but has first to
undergo sevenmore existences noneofwhichcan bein a stateofsuffering the second
;
path is that trodden by the sakaddgdml, the disciple whose imperfections have been
so far eradicated that he has only to 'return' to a human-form once more before
attainingNirvana ; the third path is that of the aiuujdnu, the disciple who will 'not
return' toearth, butwill attain thegoalfrom aBrahmarealm
;
whilst the fourth and
lastisArahatship, whichisNirvana. Each of these four stagesisfurther subdivided
into two sub-stages, the lower called 'the path,' and the higher 'the fruit.' (See
Maha-parinibbana Sutta aud the commentary thereonofthe Sumaiigala Vilasini.)

No. 2. 9
[^Note. See Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 1R47
where Gogerly has given a translation ofthis Jataka, as also ofthe ind, ;3ril, 4tli
6th, and 38th, with a briefintroduction to the .lataka-book. Sec also page 108
of Hardy's Mamial of Budldsm, and (iogerly in the Ceylon Friend for August
1838. This Jataka is quoted in the iMilinda-pahlio, p. 289 of Kliys Davids'
translation in Vol. 35 ofSacredBooh ofthe East. There is an Apannaka-Sutta
in the Majjhima-Nikaya (No. 60), but it does not appear to be connected with
this, the Apannaka-Jataka.]
No. 2.
VANNUPATHA-JATAKA.
—
'''Untiring, deep they dug." This discourse was delivered by tlie Blessed One
whilsthe was dwellingat Savatthi.
About whom, you ask?
About a Brotherwho gave up persevering.
Tradition says that, whilst the Buddha was dwelling at Savatthi, therecauic
to Jetavana a scion of a Savatthi family, who, on hearing a discourse by the
Master, realised that Lusts breed suffering, and was admitteil to the first stage
of the Brotherhood. After five years passed in preparing for admission to full
Brotherhood1, when he had learnt two summaries and hail trained liimself in
the methods of Insight, he obtained from the Master a theme for meditation
which commended itself to him. Retiring to a forest, he pa.ssed tliere tiic
rainy season; but for all his striving during the three months, he could not
develope a glimmer or an inkling of Insight. So the thought came to iiim,
"The Master said there were four types of men, and I must belong to the
lowest of all; in this birth, methinks, there is neither Path nor Fruit for me.
Whatgood shall I do by living in the forest? Back to the Master I will go, and
live my life beholding the glories of the Buddha's presence and listening to his
sweet teachings." And back again to Jetavana he came.
Now his friends and intimates said, "Sir, it was you who obtained from the
Mastera theme for meditation and departed to live the solitary life of a sage.
Yet here you are back again, going about enjoying fellowship. Can it be that
you have won the crown of tlie Brother's vocation and that you will ne\er know
re-birth?" "Sirs, as I won neither Bath nor Fruit, J felt myself doomed to
futility, and so gave up persevering and came l)ack." "You have done wrong.
Sir,in shewingafaint heartwhenyou had devoted yom'selfto the doctrine ofthe
dauntless Master. [107] Come, let us bring you to the Buddha's notice." And
they took him with them to the jMaster.
^ The terms pabhajjd and upasampadd, which denote the two stages of initiation
for a Brother of theBuddhist Order, andare comparable with the successive degrees
ofBachelor and Masterin a Faculty, suggest the successive ordinations ofDeacon and
Priest. But, as it is misleading to use Christian phraseology in speaking of tlic
Buddhist philosophy, theseconvenient terms have been eschewed in the translation.
Aswill be seen from the Vinaya (Mahfivagga i. 4'.)—51), fifteen was thenormal age for
pabhajju and twentyfor upasampada, the interval beingthat of fiveyears mentioned in
thetext.

!
10 The Jataka. Booh I.
When the Master beccanie aware of their comiug, he said, "Brethren, you
liriugwithyou this Brotheragainst his will. What has hedone?"
''"sir, afterdevoting himselfto so absolutely true a doctrine, this Brotherhas
given uj) persevering in the solitary life ofa sage, and is come back."
Then said the Master to him, "Is it true, as they say, that you, Brother,
Iiave given iq) persevering f "It is true. Blessed One." "But how comes it
that,afterdevotingyourselfto suchadoctrine,you,Brother,shoidd b> the one tci
show yourself not a man desiring little, contented, solitary, and determined, but
a man kicking perseverance 'i Was it not you who were so stout-hearted in
byg(Mie days / Was it not by you single-handed, tliauks to your perseverance,
tiiat in a sandy desert the men and the oxen belonging to a caravan of five
hundred carts got water and were cheered ? And how is it that, now, you are
giving in?" These woi'ds sufficed togive heart to that Brother.
Hearing this talk, the Brethren asked the Blessed One, saying, "Sir, the
present faintheartedness ofthis Brotheris clear to us ; but hidden from us is the
knowledge ofhow, by the perseveranceof this single man, the men and oxen got
water in a sandy desert and were cheered. This is known only to you who are
omniscient; pray tell us about it."
"Hearken, then. Brethren," said the Blessed One; and, ha\ing excited their
attention, he made clear the tiling that re-birth had concealed fromthem.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was king in Benares iu Kasi the
Bodhisatta was born into a trader's family. When he was grown up, he
used to travel about trading with 500 carts. On one occasion he came
to a sandy wilderness sixty leagues across, the sand of which was so fine
that,whengrasped, it slipped through the fingers oftheclosedfist. As soon
as the sun got up, it grew as hot as a bed of charcoal-embers and nobody
could walk upon it. Accordingly, those traversing it used to take fire-
wood, water, oil, rice and so forth on their carts, and only travelled by
night. At dawn they used to range their carts in a circle to form a
laager, with an awning spread overhead, and after an early meal used to
sit in the shade all the day long. When the sun went down, they had
their evening meal ; and, so soon as the ground became cool, they used to
yoke their carts and move forward. Travelling on this desert was like
voyaging over the sea; a 'desert-pilot,' as he was called, had to convoy
them over by knowledge of the stars [108]. And this was the way in
which our merchant was now travelling that wilderness.
When he had only some seven more miles before him, he thought to
himself, "To-night will see us out of this sandy wilderness." So, after
they had had their supper, he ordered the wood and water to be thrown
away, and yoking his carts, set out on the road. In the front cart sat the
pilot upon a couch looking up to the stars in the heavens and directing
the course thereby. But so long had he been without sleep that he was
tired out and fell asleep, with tlie result that he did not mark that the
oxen had turned round and were retracing their steps. All night the
oxen kept on their way, but at dawn the pilot Avoke up, and, observing the
disposition of tlie stars overhead, shouted out, "Turn the carts round

—
No. 2.
1 1
turn the carts round!" And as they turned the carts round and were
forming them into line, the day broke. "Why tliis is wlien; we camped
yesterday," cried the people of the caravan. "All our wood and water is
gone, and we are lost." So saying, they unyoked their carts and made a
laager and spread the awning overhead ; then each man Hung himself
down in despair beneath his own cart. Thought the Bodhisatta to liimself,
"If I give in, every single one will perish." 8o he ranged to and fro
while it was still early and cool, until he came on a clump of kusa-gra,ss.
"This grass," thought he, "can only have grown up here thanks to tlie
l^resence of water undei'neath." So he ordered a si)ade to be brouglit and
a hole to be dug at that spot. Sixty cubits down they dug, till at that
depth the spade struck on a rock, and everybody lost heart. But the
Bodhisatta, feeling sure there must be water under that rock, de-
scended into the hole and tookhis stand upon the rock. Stoopingdown, he
applied his ear to it, and listened. Catching the sound of water flowing
beneath, he came out and said to a serving-lad, "My boy, if you give in,
we shall all perish. So take heart and courage. Go down into the hole
with this ii'on sledge-hammer, and strike the rock."
Obedient to his master's bidding, [109] the lad, resolute where all
others had lost heart, went down and struck the rock. The rock which
had dannned the stream, split asunder and fell in. Up rose the water in
the hole till it was as high as a palm-tree ; and everybody drank and
bathed. Then they chopped up their spare axles and yokes and other
surplus gear, cooked their rice and ate it, and fed their oxen. And as
soon as the sun set, they hoisted a flag by the side of the well and
travelled on to their destination. There they bartered away their goods
for twice and four times their value. With the proceeds they returned to
their own home, where they lived out their term of life and in the end
passed away to fai'e thereafter according to their deserts. The Bodhisatta
too after a life spent in charity and other good w^orks, passed awaylikewise
to fare according to his deserts.
When the Supreme Buddhahad delivered this discourse, he,the All-Knowing
One himself, uttered this stanza:
Untiring, deep they dug that sandy track
Till, in the trodden way, they water found.
So let the sage, in perseverance strong,
Flag not nor tire, until his heart find Peace.
[110] This discourse ended, he preached the Four Truths, at the close
^vilereof the fainthearted Brother was established in the highest Fruit of all,
which is Ai'ahatship.
Having told these two stories, the Master established t—he connexion linking
them both together, and identihed tlie Birth l)y saying: "This fainthc;irtcd
Brother of to-cU\y was in those days the servnig-lad who, persevering, broke the
rock and gave water to all the people ; the Duddha's followers were the restof
the people ofthe caravan ; and I myselfwas their leader."

12 The Jataha. Book I.
No. 3.
SERIVANIJA-JATAKA.
"J/ in this faith." This lesson too was taught by the Blessed One while
atSavatthi, also about a Brotherwho gave up persevering.
For, when the man was brought by the Brethren exactly as in the foregoing
case, the Mastersaid, "You, Brother, who afterdevotingyom-selfto thisglorious
doctrinewhichbestows Path and Fruit, [111] aregivinguppersevering,willsuffer
long, like the hawker ofSeri who lost a golden bowl worth a hundred thousand
pieces."
The Brethrenasked the Blessed One to explain this to them. The Blessed
One made cleara thingconcealedfrom them by re-birth.
Once on a time in the kingdom of Seri, five aeons ago, the Bodhisatta
dealt in pots and pans, and was called 'the Serivan.' In the company of
another dealer in the same wares, a greedy fellow who was also known
as 'the Serivan,' he came across the river Telavaha and entered the city
of Andhapura. Apportioning the streets between the two of them, he
set about hawking his wares round the streets of his district, and the
other did the same in his district.
Now in that city there was a decayed family. Once they had been
rich merchants, but by the time ofour story they had lost all the sons and
brothers and all their wealth. The sole survivors were a girl and her
grandmother,and they got their Jiving by working for hire. Nevertheless,
they had got in their house the golden bowl out of which in the old days
the great merchant, the head of the family, used to eat; but it had been
thrown among the pots and pans, and having been long out of use, was
grimed over with dirt, so that the two women did not know that it was
gold. To the door of their house came the greedy hawker on his round,
crying, "Waterpots to sell ! Waterpots to sell !" And the damsel, when
she knew he was there, said to her grandmother, "Oh, do buy me a
trinket, grandmother."
"We're very poor, dear; what can we offer in exchange for it?"
"Why
here's this bowl which is no good to us. Let us change that
for it."
The old woman had the hawker brought in and seated, and gave him
the bowl, saying, "Take this, sir, and be so good as to give your sister
something or other in exchange."
The hawker took the bowl in his hand, turned it over, and, suspecting
it was gold, scratched a line on the back of it with a needle, whereby he

No. 3. 13
knew for certain that it was real gold. Then, thinking that he would cet
the pot without giving anything whatever for it to the women, he cried,
"What'sjthevalue ofthis, pray? Why itisn't worth halfafarthing!" [112]
And therewithal he threw the bowl on the groi;nd, rose up from his seat
and left the house. Now, as it had been agreed between the two hawkei-s
that the one might try the streets which the other had already been into,
the Bodhisatta came into that same street and appeared at the door of the
house, crying, "Waterpots to sell " Once againthe damsel made the same
!
request of her grandmother ; and the old woman replied, "My dear, the
first hawker threw our bowl on the ground and flung out of the house.
What have we got left to offer now ? "
"Oh, but that hawker was a harsh-spoken man, grandmother dear;
whilst this one looks a nice man and speaks kindly. Very likely he would
take it." "Call him in then." So he came into the house, and they gave
him a seat and put the bowl into his hands. Seeing that the bowl was
gold, he said, "Mother, this bowl is worth a hundred thousand pieces; I
haven't its value with me."
"Sir, the first hawker who came here said that it was not worth half a
farthing so he threw it to the groundand wentaway. It must have been
;
the efficacy of your own goodness which has turned the bowl into gold.
Take it; give us something or other for it; and go your way." At the
time the Bodhisatta had 500 pieces of money and a stock worth as much
more. The whole of this he gave to them, saying, "Let me retain my
scales, my bag, and eight pieces of money." And with their consent he
took these with him,and departed with all speed to the river-side where he
gave his eight coins to the boatman and jumped into the boat. Sub-
sequently that greedy hawker had come back to the house, and had asked
them to bring out their bowl, saying he would give them something or
other for it. But the old woman flew out at him with these words,
"You made out that our golden bowl which is worth a hundred thousand
pieces was not worth even a half-farthing. But there came an upright
hawker (your master, I take it), who gave us a thousand pieces for it and
took the bowl away."
Hereupon he exclaimed, "He has robbed me of a golden bowl worth
a full hundred thousand pieces; he has caused me a terrible loss." And
intense sorrow came upon him, so that he lostcommand over himself and
became like one distraught. [113] His money and goods he flung away at
the door of the house ; he threw off his upper and under cloths ; and,
armed Avith the beam of his scales as a club, he tracked the Bodhisatta
down to the river-side. Finding the latter already crossing, he shouted to
the boatman to put back, but the Bodhisatta told him not to do so. As
the other stood theregazingandgazing at the retreatingBodhisatta, intense
sorrow seized upon him. His heart grew hot; blood gushed from his lips;

14 The J atoka. Book I.
and his heart cracked like the mud at the bottom ofa tank, which the sun
has dried up. Through the hatred which he had contracted against the
Bodhisatta, lie perished then and there. (This was the tirst timeDevadatta
conceived a "rudge against the Bodhisatta.) The Bodhisatta,after a life
spent in charity and other good works, passed away to fare according to
his deserts.
When the Supreme Buddha had ended this lesson, he, theAll-Knowing One
himself, uttered this stanza:-^
If in this faith you prove remiss, and fail
T — o win the goal whereto its teachings lead,
Then, like tlie hawker called 'the Serivan^,'
Full long you'll rue the prize your folly lost.
After having thus delivered his discourse in such a way as to lead up to
Arahatship, the Master expounded the Four Truths, at the close whereof the
fainthearted Brother was established in that highest Fruit of all, which is
Arahatship.
And, after telling the two stories, the Master made the connexion linking
them both together, and identified the Birtn by saying in conclusion, "In those
days Devadatta was the foolish hawker; and I myself was the wise and good
hawker."
No. 4.
CULLAKA-SETTHI-JATAKA.
[114] ''With humbleststart." This story was told by the Master about the
Elder named Little Wayman, while in Jivaka's Mango-grove^ near Rajagaha.
And here an account of Little Wayman's birth must be given. Tradition tells
us tliat the daughter of a rich merchant's family in Rajagaha actually stooped to
intimacywith a slave. Becomingalarmed lest her misconduct should get known,
she said to the slave, "We can't live on here ; for if my motlier and father come
to know ofthis sin of ours, they will tear us limb from limb. Let us go and live
afaroff" So with their belongings in theirhands they stole together out by the
hardly-opened door, and fled away, they cared not whither, to find a shelter
beyond the ken of her fimily. Then they went and lived together in a certain
place, with the result that she conceived. And when her full time was nearly
come, she told her husband and said, "If I am taken in labour away from kith
and kin, that will be a trouble to both of us. So let us go home." First he
1 The scholium here gives the rascal's name as 'Serivil,' not recognisingthat the
gatha-word 'Serivdyam^ represents the 'saudhi ' ofSerivo (not Serivd) withayam, just
asdiikkhdyainonp. 168 ofVol. i. ofthe text represents dukklio ayam.
2 Jivaka, a prominent lay-follower of the Buddha, was physician to the Magadha
King SeniyaBimbisara. See, forhishistory, the account in the Vinaya (Mahavagga
vni. 1).

No. 4. 15
agreed to start to-day, and then he put it off till the morrow ; and so he let the
days slip by, till she thought to herself, "This fool is so conscious of his grout
ofience that he dares not go. One's parents are one's hcst friends so whether
he goes or stays, I must go." So, when he went out, slie ])ut all he ; r household
matters in orderand set oft' home, telling her next-door neighl)Our where.she was
going. Returning home, and not finding his wife, hut discovering from the
neighbours that she had started oft'home, he hurried after her and came up with
her " o W n ha th t e 's ro t a h d is ; , a m n y d d t e h a e r n l a " n s d ai t d he h r e e . she was taken in la])our.
"I have given birth to a son, my husband," said she.
Accordingly, as the very thing had now happened wliich was the (tnly reason
for the journey, they both agreed that it was no good going on now, and so
tiu-ned back again. And as their child had been born by tlie way, they called
him 'Wayman.'
[115] Not long after, she became with child again, and everything fell out
as before. And as this second child too was born by the way, thev called him
'Wayman' too, distinguishing the elder as 'Great Wayman' and the youngeras
'Little Wayman.' Then, with both their children, they again went back to their
own home.
Now, as they were living there, their way-child heard other boys talking of
t h h e ei h r ad u n n ' c t le g s ot an re d la g t r i a o n n d s fa li t k h e er t s he an o d th g er ra b n o d y m s. oth " er O s h; y s e o s, he my as d k e e a d r, h " is s m ai o d th h e is r m wl o i t e h t e he r i ; -
"but they don't live here. Your grandfather is a wealthy mercliant in the city
ofRajagaha, and you have plenty of relations there." "Why don't we go there,
mother?" She told the boy the reason why they stayed away but, as the
;
children kept on speaking about these relations, she said to her husband, "The
children are always plaguing me. Are my parents going to eat us at sight
'?
Come, let us shew the children theirgrandfather's family." "Well, I don't m — ind
taking them there; but 1 really could not face yourparents." "All right; so
long as, some way or other, the children come to see their grandfather's family,"
said she.
So those two took their children and coming in due course to Rajagaha put
up in a public rest-house by the city gate. Then, taking with them the tv/o
children, the woman caused their coming to be made known to her parents.
The latter, on hearing the message, returned this answer, "True, it is strange to
be without childi'en unless one has renoiniced the world in quest of Arahatship.
Still, so great is theguilt of the ]M\\r towards us that they may not stand in our
sight. Here is a sum-of money for them: let them take this and retire to live
where they will. But the children they ma}' send here." Then the merchant's
daughter took the money so sent her, and despatched the children by the
—
messengers. So the children grew up in their grandftxther's house, Little
Wayman being of tenderyears, while Great W^iyman used to go with his gi'and-
father to hear the Buddha preach the Truth. And by constant hearing of the
Truth from the Master's own lips, the lad's heartyearned to renouncethe world
for the life ofa Brother.
"With yourpermission,"said he to his grandfather, "I should like tojoin the
Brotherhood." "What do I hear?"cried the old man. "Why, it would give me
greaterjoy to see youjoin the Order than to see the whole world join. I'ecome
a Brother, ifyou feel able." And he took him to the Master.
"Well, merchant," said the Master, "have you brought your boy with you?"
"Yes, sir; this is my grandson, who wishes to join your Brotherhood." [H^J]
Then the Master sent for a Mendicant, and told him to admit the lad to the
Order; and the Mendicant repeated the Formula of tlic Perishable Body^ and
^ Buddhism teaches theimpermanence oftilings, and chiefofthe trains of thought
for realising this doctrine is the meditation on tlie body and its 32 iminirities (soc
Sutta Nipata i. 11, and tlie 12th Jataka infrn). At the present day everynovice in
Ceylon, when invested with the yellow robe of the Order, repeats the verses which
enumerate the33 impurities,

—
!
16 The Jcital-a. Booh I.
admitted the ladas anovice. When the latterhad learned byheartmanywords
of the Buddha, and was old enough, he was admitted afull Brother. He now
gave himselfup to earnest thought till he wonArahatship ; and ashe passed his
days in the enjoyment of Insight and the Paths, he thought whether hecould
not impart the like happiness to Little Wayman. So he went to his grandfather
the merchant, and said, "C4reat merchant, with your consent, I will admit Little
Wayman to the Order." "Pray do so, reverend sir," was the reply.
Then the Elder admitted the lad Little Wayman and established him in the
Ten Commandments. But Little Wayman proved a dullard with fourmonths'
:
study he failed to get by heartthis single stanza:
Lo like a fragrant lotus at the dawn
!
Of day, full-blown, with virgin wealth of scent,
Behold the Buddha's glory shining forth,
As in the vaulted heaven beams the sun
For, we are told, in the Buddhahood of Kassapa this Little Wayman, having
himself attained to knowledge as a Brother, laughed to scorn a dull Bi-other who
was learning a passage by heart. His scorn so confused his butt, that the latter
could not learn orrecite the passage. And now, in consequence, on joining the
Brotherhood he himself proved a dullard. Each new line he learned drove the
last out of his memory ; and four months slipped away whilehewas struggling
with this single stanza. Said his elder brother to him, "Wayman, you are not
e(|ual to receiving this doctrine. Li four whole months you have been unable to
leai-n a single stanza. How then can you hope to crown your vocation with
supreme success? Leave the monastery." But, though thus expelled by his
brother. Little Wayman was so attached to the Buddha's creed that he did not
want to becomea layman.
Now at that time Great Wayman was acting as steward. And Jivaka
Komarabhacca, going to his mango-grove with a large present of peifumesand
flowers for the Master, had presented his offei-ing and listened to a discourse;
then, rising from his seat and bowing to the Buddha, he went up to Great
Wayman and asked, "How many Brethren are there, reverend sir, with the
Master?" "Just 500, sir." "Will you bring the 500 Brethren, with the Buddha
at their head, to take their meal at my house to-morrow?" "Lay-disciple, one
ofthem named Little Wayman is a dullai-d and makes no progressin the Faith,"
said the Elder; "I accept the invitation for everyonebut him."
[117] Hearing this. Little Wayman thought to liimself, "In accepting the
invitation for all these Brethren, the Eldercarefully acce])ts so as to exclude me.
This])roves thatmy brother's affection for me is dead. What have I to do with
this Faith? I will become alayman and live in the exercise ofcharity and other
good works of a lay character." And on the morrow early he went forth,
avowedly to becomea layman again.
Now at the first break of day, as he was surveying the world, the Master
became aware of this; and going forth even earlier than Little Wayman, he
paced to and fro by the porch on Little Wayman's road. As the latter came out
of the house, he observed the Master, and with a salutation went up to him.
"Whitheraway atthis hour. Little Wayman?" said the Master.
"My brother has expelled me from the Order, sir and I am going to wander
;
forth."
"LittleWayman, as it was under me that you took the vows, why did you
not, when expelled by your brother, come to me ? Come, what have you to do
W
wi
a
t
y
h
m
a
an
la
a
y
n
m
d
an'
s
s
eat
li
e
f
d
e?
hi
Y
m
ou
at
s
t
h
h
al
e
l
d
s
o
t
o
o
r
p
o
w
f
it
h
h
is
m
o
e.
w
"
n p
S
e
o
rf
s
u
a
m
y
e
in
d
g,
ch
h
a
e
mb
t
e
o
r
o
.
k L
T
i
h
tt
e
l
n
e
giving him a perfectly clean cloth which he had supernaturally created, the
Mastersaid, "Face towards the East, and as youhandle this cloth, repeat these
words—'Removal of Impurity; Removal of Impurity.'" Then at the time
appointed the Master, attended by the Brotherhood, went to Jivaka's house and
sat down on the seat sot for him,

— —
No. 4. 17
Now Little Wayman, with his gaze fixed on the sun, sat handling the cloth
and repeating the words, "Removal of Impurity; Removal of Inqmrity." And
as he kept handling the piece of cloth, it grew soiled. Then he thought, "Just
now this piece of cloth was quite clean but my personality has destroyed its
original state and made it dirty. Imp ; ermanent indeed arc all compounded
things !" And even as he realised Death and Decay, he won the Arahat's
Illumination. Knowing that Little Wayman's mind had won Illumination, the
Master sent forth an apparition and in this semblance ofhimselfappeared before
him, as if seated in front of him and saying, "Heed it not, Little Wayman, tliat
this mere piece of cloth has become dirty and stained with impurity within
thee are the impurities of lust and otherevil things. Remove them." A; nd the
apparition uttered these stanzas:
Impurity in Lust consists, not dirt;
And Lust we term the real Impurity.
Yea, Brethren, whoso drives it from his breast,
He lives the gospel of the Purified.
[118] Impurity in Wrath consists, not dirt;
And Wrath we term the real Impurity.
Yea, Brethren, whoso drives it from his breast,
ffe lives the gospel of the Purified.
Delusion is Impurity, not dirt;
We term Delusion real Impurity.
Yea, Brethren, whoso drives it from his breast,
ffe lives the gospel of the Purified.
At the close ofthese stanzas Little Wayman attained to Ai-ahatship with the
four branches ofknowledgei,whereby he straightway came to have knowledge of
all the sacred texts. Tradition has it that, in ages past,when he was aking and
was making a solemn procession round his city, he wiped the sweat from his
brow with a spotless cloth which he was wearing; and the cloth was stained.
Thoughthe, "It is this bodyofmine which has destroyed the original pin-ityand
whiteness of the cloth, and dirtied it. Impermanent indeed are all composite
things." Thus he grasped the idea of impermanence ; and hence it came to pass
that it was theremoval ofimpurity which worked his salvation.
Meantime, Jivaka Komarabhacca offered the Water of Donation''^; but the
Master put his hand over the vessel, saying, "Are there no Brethren, Jivaka, in
the monastery?"
Said Great Wayman, "There are no Brethren there, reverend sir." "Oh yes,
there are,Jivaka,"said the Master. "Hi,there!" saidJivaka to a servant ; "just
you go and see whether or not there are anyBrethren in the monastery."
At that moment Little Wayman, conscious as he was that his brotherwas
declaring there were no Brethren in the monastery, determined to shew him
there were, and so filled the whole mango-grove with nothing but Brothers.
Some were ma — king robes, others dyeing, whilst others again were repeating the
sacred texts: each of a thousand Brethren he made unlike all the others.
Finding this host of Brethren in the monastery, the man returned and said
that the whole mango-grove was full ofBrethren.
But as regards the Elder up in the monastery
Wayman, a thousand-fold self-multiplied,
Sat on, till bidden, in that pleasant grove.
1 These four branches were (i) understanding of the sense of the sacred books,
(ii) understanding of their ethical truth, (iii) ability to justify an interpretation
grammatically, logically, *c., and (iv) the power ofpublic exposition.
- When a gift was made, the donor poured waterover the hand of thedonee. The
gift that was here made by Jivakawas the foodbestowed on theBrotherhood, as the
Milinda-pafiho explains (p. 118) in itsversion ofthis story.
C. J. '^

—
" "
18 The JdfaJca. Booh I.
"Nowgo back,"said the Master to the man, "and say 'The Mastersendsfor
him whose name is Little Wayman.'
But when the man went and delivered his message, a t,housand mout,his
answ B e a r c e k d, ca "I me a t m he Li m tt a l n e A w V it a h ym t a he n r ! epo 1 r a t, m " L T i h t e tl y e a W ll ay s m ay aT t i he ! y " are 'Little Wayman,'
reve " r W e e n l d l si n r o ." w go hack," said the Master, "and take by the hand, t.,he ^ farst, one otr
them who says he is Little Wayman, [119] and the others will all vanish." The
man did as he was bidden,andstraightwaythe thousand Brethren vanished from
sight. The Eldercame back with the man.
When the meal was over, the Master said, "Jivaka, take Little Wayman's
bowl he will return thanks." Jivaka did so. Then like a young lion roaring
defian ; ce, the Elder ranged the whole of the sacred texts through in his address
of tlianks. Lastly, the Master rose from his seat and attended by the Order
returned to the monastery, and there, after the assignment of tasks by the
Brotherhood, he rose from his seat and, standingin the doorway ofhis perfumed
chamber, delivered a Buddha-discourse to the Brotherhood. Ending with a
theme which he gave out for meditation, and dismissing the Brotherhood, he
retired into his perfumed chamber, and lay down lion-like on his right side to
rest.
Ateven, the orange-robed Brethren assembled together from all sides in the
Hall ofTruth and sangthe Master's praises, even as though they were spreading
acurtain oforange cloth round him as they sat.
"Brethren," it was said, "Great Wayman failed to recognise the bent of
Little Wayman, and expelled him from the monastery as a dullard who could
not even learn a single stanza in four whole months. But the All-Knowing
Buddhabyhis supremacy in the Truth bestowed on him Arahatship with all its
supernatural knowledge, even while a single meal was in progress. And by that
knowledgehegrasped thewholeofthe sacred texts. Oh ! liowgreat is aBuddha's
power!
Now the Blessed One, knowing full well the talk that was going on in the
Hall of Truth, thought it meet to go there. So, rising frcmi his Buddha-couch,
he doiuied his two orange under-cloths, girded himselfas with lightning, arrayed
himself in his orange-coloured robe, the ample roVie ofa Buddha, and came forth
to the Hall of Truth with the infinite grace of a Buddha, moving with the royal
gait of an elephant in the plenitude of his vigour. Ascending the glorious
Buddha-throne set in the midst of the resplendent hall, he seated himself upon
t—he middle of the throne emitting those six-coloured rays which mark a Buddha, i
like the newly-arisen sun, when from the peaks of the Yugandhara Mountains
he illumines the depths of the ocean. Immediately the All-Knowing One came
into the Hall, the Brotherhood broke off their talk and were silent. Gazing
round on the company with gentle loving-kindness, the Master thought within
himself, "This company is perfect! Not a man is guilty of movinghand or foot
i
r
m
ev
p
e
r
r
o
e
p
n
e
c
r
e
ly
a
;
nd
no
a
t
we
a
o
s
f
ou
t
n
h
d
e
,
m
n
a
o
j
t
est
a
y
c
a
o
n
u
d
gh
gl
o
o
r
ry
sn
o
e
f
ez
t
e
he
is
Bu
t
d
o
dh
b
a
e
,
h
n
e
o
a
t
rd
a
!man In
w
t
o
h
u
e
l
i
d
r
dare to speakbefore I did, even ifI sat here in silence all my lifelong. But it is
my part to begin ; and I will open the conversation." Then in his sweet divine
tones he addressed the Brethren and said, [120] "What, pray, is the theme of
this conclave? And what was the talk which was broken off?"
"Sir," said they, "itwas no profitless theme, but your own praises that we
were tellinghere in conclave."
And when they had told him word forword what they had been saying, the
Master said, "Brethren, through me Little Wayman has just now risen togreat
things in the — Faith; in times past it was to great things in the way of wealth
thathe rose, but equally through me."
The Brethren asked the Master to ex^jlain this ; and the Blessed One made
clear in these words a thing which succeeding existences had hidden from
them
:

No. 4. 19
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares in Kasi,
the Bodhisatta was born into the Treasurer's family, and growing up, was
made Treasurer, being called Treasurer Little. A wise and clever man
was he, with a keen eye for signs and omens. One day on hisway to wait
upon the king, he came on a dead mouse lying on the road and, taking
;
note of the ]>osition of the stars at that moment, he said, "Any decent
young fellow with his wits about him has only to pick that mouse up, and
he might start a business and keep a wife."
His words were overheard by a young man ofgood family but reduced
circumstances, who said to himself, "That's a man who has always got a
reason for what he says." And accordingly he picked up the n)ouse,
which he sold for a farthing at a tavern for their cat.
With the fiirthing he got molasses and took drinking water in a water-
pot. Coming on flower-gatherers returning from the forest, he gave each
a tiny quantity ofthe molasses and ladled the water oiit tothem. Each of
them gave him a handful of flowers, with the proceeds of which, next day,
he came back again to the flower grounds provided with more molasses
and a pot ofwatei\ That day the flower-gatherers, before they went, gave
him flowering plants with half the flowers left on them ; and thus in a
little while he obtained eight pennies.
Later, one rainy and windy day, the wind blew down a quantity of
rotten branches and boughs and leaves in the king's pleasaunce, and the
gardener did not see how to clear them away. [121] Then up came the
young man with an offer to remove the lot, if the wood and leaves might
be his. The gardener closed with the offer on the spot. Then this apt
pupil of Treasurer Little repaired to the children's playground and in a
very little while had got them by bribes of molasses to collect every stick
and leaf in the place into a heap at the entrance to the pleasaunce. Just
then the king's potter was on the look out for fuel to fire bowls for the
palace, and coming on this heap, took the lot off his hands. The sale of
his wood brought iii sixteen pennies to this pupil of Treasurer Little, as
well as five bowls and other vessels. Having now twenty-four pennies in
all, a plan occurred to him. He went to the vicinity of the city-gate with
a jar full of water and supplied 500 mowers with water to drink. Said
they, "You've done us a good turn, friend. What can we do for you?"
"Oh, I'll tell you when I want your aid," said he; and as he went about,
he struck up an intimacy with a land-trader and a sea-trader. Said the
former to him, "To-morrow there will come to town a horse-dealer with
500 horses to sell." On hearing this piece of news, he said to the mowers,
"I want each ofyou to-day to give me a bundle of grass and not to sell
your own grass till mine is sold." "Certainly," said they, and delivered
the 500 bundles of grass at his house. Unable to get grass for his horses
elsewhere, the dealer purchased our friend's grass for a thousand pieces.
2—2

—
,
20 The JdtaJca. Bool I.
Only a few days later his sea-trading friend brought him news of the
arrival ofa large ship in port; and another plan struck him. He hired
for eight pence a well appointed carriage which plied for hire by the hour,
and went in great style down to the port. Having bought the ship on
credit and deposited his signet-ring as security, he had a pavilion pitched
hard by and said to his people as he took his seatinside, "When merchants
are being shewn in, let them be passed on by tliree successive ushers into
my presence." [122] Hearing that a ship had arrived in port, about a
hundred merchants came down to buy the cargo only to be told that they
;
could not have it as a great merchant had already made a payment on
account. So away they allwent to the young man ; and the footmen duly
announced them by three successive ushei-s, as had been arranged before-
hand. Each man of the hundred severally gave him a thousand pieces
to buy a share inthe ship and then afurther thousand each to buy him out
altogether. So it was with 200,000 pieces that this pupil of Treasurer
Little returned to Benares.
Actuated by a desii-e to shew his gratitude, he went with one hundred
thousand pieces to call on Treasurer Little. "How did you come by all
this wealth?" asked the Treasurer. "In four short months, simply by
following your advice," replied the young man and he told him the whole
;
story, starting with the dead mouse. ThoughtLord HighTreasurerLittle,
on hearing all this, "I must see that a young fellow ofthese parts does not
fall into anybody else's hands." So he married him to his own grown-up
daughter and settled all the family estates on the young man. And at
the Treasurer's death, he became Treasurer in that city. And the
Bodhisatta passed away to fare according to his deserts.
[123] His lesson ended, the Supreme Buddha, the All-Knowing One him-
self, repeated this stanza:
With humblest start and trifling capital
A shrewd and able man will rise to wealth,
E'en as his breath can nurse a tiny flame.
Also the Blessed One said, "It is through me, Brethren, that Little
Wayman has just now risen to great things in the Faith, as in times past to
gi-eat things in the way of wealth." His lesson thus finished, the Master made
the connexion between the two stories he had told and identified the Birth in
these concluding words, "LittleWaymanwasinthose days the pupil ofTreasurer
Little, and I myselfLord High Treasurer Little."
[Note. The 'Introductory Story' occurs in Chapter vi. of Capt. T. Eogers'
Budd/iag/iosha'sParables,butthe'StoryofthePast'there givenis quite different.
See Mrs Bode's ' Women Leaders oftheBuddhistReformation ' in the J. R.A. S.
189.3, p. 556. See also Bhammapada, p. 181, and compare Chapter xxxv.
of the Diri/diKidrlna, edited by Cowell and Neil, 1886. The whole Jataka, in an
abbreviated form, forms the story of 'The Mouse Merchant' at pages 33, 34 of
the first volume of Tawney's translation of the Kathd Sarit Sdgara. See also
Kalilah andDimnah, Chapter xviii. (Knatchbull, page 358).]

No. 5. 21
No. 5.
TANDULANALI-JATAKA.
—
"Dost ask how much a peck ofrice is worth?" Thi.s was told by the Mjuster,
whilst at Jetavana, about the Elder Udayi, called the Dullard.
At that time the reverend Uabba, the Mallian, was manciple to the Brother-
hoodi. When in the early morning Uabba was allotting the checks for rice,
sometimes it was choice rice and sometimes it was an inferior quality which fell
to the share of the Elder Udayi. On days when he received the inferiorquality,
he used to make a commotion in the check-room, by demanding, "Is Dabbathe
only one who knows how to give out checks] Don't we know (" One day when
he was making a commotion, they handed him the check-basket, saying, "Here!
you give the checks out yourself to-dayI" Thenceforth, it was Udayi who gave
out the checks to the Brotherhood. But, in his distribution, he could nottell the
best from the inferior rice; nor did he know what seniority- w;is entitled to the
best rice and what to the inferior. So too, when he was making out the roster,
he had not an idea ofthe seniority ofthe Brethren thereon. Consequently, when
the Brethren took up their places, he made a mark on the ground or on the wall
to shew that one detachment stood here, and another there. Next day there
were fewer Brethren ofone grade and more of another in the check-room ; where
there were fewer, the mark was too low down where the numberwas greater, it
;
was too high up. But Udayi, quite ignorant ofdetachments, gave out the checks
simply according to his old marks.
Hence, the Brethren said to him. "Friend Udayi, the mark is too high up
or too low down ; the best rice is for those of such and such seniority, and the
inferior quality for such and such others." But he put them back with the
argument, "Ifthis mark is whei-e it is, what are you standing here for? Why am
I to trustyou1 It's my mark I trust."
Then, the boys and novices [124] thrust him from the check-room, crying,
"Friend Udayi the Dullard, when you give out the checks, the Brethren are
docked of what they ought to get you're not fit to give them out get you gone
from here." Hereupon, a great up ; roararose in the check-room. ;
Hearing the noise, the Master asked the Elder Ananda, saying, "Anauda,
there is a great uproarin the check-room. What is the noise about?"
The Elder explained it all to the Buddha. "Ananda," said he, "this is not
the only time when Udayi by his stupidity has robbed others of their profit ; he
didjust the same thing in bygone times too."
The Elder asked the Blessed One for an explanation, and the Blessed One
madeclearwhat had been concealed by re-birth.
Once on a time Bralimadatta was reigning in Benares in Kasi. In
those days our Bodhisatta was his valuer. He used to value hoi'ses,
elephants, and the like ; and jewels, gold, and the like ; and he used to
pay over to the owners of the goods the proper price, as he fixed it.
1 See Vinaya, Vol. ni. p. 158.
2 Compare Vinaya, Vol. ii. p. 167, and commentary thereon {Sdmauta-pdsCtdihd)
for the right of seniors, according to the roster, to be servedfirst. The manciple was
to call out theroster.

:
22 Th<i Jataka. Book I.
But the king was greedy and his greed suggested to him this thought
"This vahier with his style of valuing will soon exhaust all the riches in
my house; I must get another valuer." Opening his window and looking
out into his courtyard, he espied walking across a stupid, greedy hind in
whom he saw a likely candidate for the post. So the king had the man
sent for, and asked him whether he could do the work. "Oh yes," said
the man ; and so, to safeguard the royal treasure, this stupid fellow was
appointed valuer. After this the fool, in valuing elephants and horses and
the like, used to fix a price dictated by his own fancy, neglecting their
true worth ; but, as he was valuer, the price was what lie said and no
other.
At that time tliere arrived from the north country' a horse-dealer with
500horses. Thekingsentforhisnewvaluer andbade him valuethe horses.
And the price he set on the whole 500 horses was just one measure of
rice, which he ordered to be paid over to the dealer, directing the horses
to be led off to the stable [125]. Away went the horse-dealer to the old
valuer, to whom he told what had happened, and asked what was to be
done. "Give him a bribe,"said the ex-valuer, "and put this point to him:
' Knowing as we do that our horses are worth just a single measure of
rice, we are curious to learn from you wliat the precise value ofa measure
of rice is; could you state its value in the king's presence%' If he says
he can, then take him before the king; and I too will be there."
Readily following the Bodhisatta's advice, the horse-dealer bribed the
man and put the question to him. The other, having expressed his ability
to value a measure of rice, was promptly taken to the palace, whither also
went the Bodhisatta and many other ministers. With due obeisance the
horse-dealer said, "Hire, I do not dispute it that the price of 500 horses is
a single measure of rice; but I would ask your majesty to question your
valuer as to the value of that measure of rice." Ignorant of what had
passed, the king said to the fellow, "Valuer, what are 500 horses worth?"
"A measure of rice, sire," was the reply. "Very good, my friend ; if 500
horses then are worth one measure of rice, what is that measure of rice
woi'th]" "It is worth all Benares and its suburbs," was the fool's
reply.
(Thus we learn that, having first valued the horses at a measure of
hill-paddy to please the king, he was bribed by the horse-dealer to estimate
that measure of rice at the worth of all Benares and its suburbs. And
that though the walls ofBenares were twelve leagues round bythemselves,
while the city and suburbs together were three hundred leagues round
!
1 In the Ceylon K. A. S. J. 1884, jj. 127, it is argued from the indefinite use of
rUtara-pathaforallcountries north of Benaresthatthe date of writingmustbebefore
the3rdcenturyB.C., when Buddhisticembassieswere sent toMysoreand North Canara
and when theDakshinapathawasfamiliar.

! ;
No. 6. 23
Yet the fool priced all this vast city and its suburbs at a single measure
of rice !)
[126J Hereupon the ministers clapped their hands and laughed merrily.
"We used to think," they said in scorn, "that the earth and the realm
were beyond price but now we learn that the kingdom of Benares
;
together with its king is only worth a single measure of rice ! What
talents the valuer has How has he retained his post so long? But truly
!
the valuer suits our king admirably."
Then the Bodhisatta repeated this stanza':
D — ost ask how much a peck of rice is worth I
Why, all Benares, both within and out.
Yet, strange to tell, five hundred horses too
Are worth precisely this same peck of rice
Thus })ut to open shame, the king sent the fool packing, and ga\e the
Bodhisatta the office again. And when his life closed, the Bodhisatta
passed away to fare according to his deserts.
His lesson ended and the two stories told, the Master made the c—onnexion
linking both together, and identified the Birth by saying in conclusion, "Udayi
the Dullard was the stupid rustic valuer of those days, and I myself the wise
valuer."
No. 6.
DEVADHAMMA-JATAKA.
—
" Those onli/ 'godlike' calir This storywas told by the Blessed One while at
Jetavana, about a wealthy Brother.
Tradition tells us that, on the death of his wife, a squire of Savatthi joined
the Brotherhood. When he was joining, he caused to be built for liimself a
chamber to live in, a room for the fire, and a store-room ; and not till he
had stocked his store-room with ghee, rice, and the like, did he finally join.
Even after he had become a brother, he used to send for his servants and
make them cook him what he liked to eat. He was richly provided witli the
requisites-^,—having an entire change of clothingfor night and another forday
and he dwelt aloofon the outskirts ofthe monastery.
1 The textofthisstanzadoes not occurin Fausb.ill's Tali text, butisgiven byL6on
Feeratpage520of theJournalAsiatique for 1876 and is embodied in the 'Corrections
andAdditions' of Fausboll. That the stanza originally formed part of the Sinhalese
recension is shewn by the quotation of the opening words as the 'catchword' at the
commencement oftheJataka. Seealso Dicksonin CeylonJ. R. A. S. 1884, p. 185.
- I.e. an alms-bowl, threecloths, a girdle, arazor, a needleandawater-strainer.

"
24 The Jdtaka. Book I.
One day when he had taken out his cloths and bedding and had spread
them out to dry in his chamber, a number of Brethren from the country,
who were on a pilgrimagefrommonasterytomonasteryi,cameintheirjourneying
to his cell and found all thesebelongings.
"Whose are these?" they asked. "Mine, sirs," he replied. "What, sir?"
they cried; "this upper-cloth and that as well ; this under-cloth as well as
that; and that bedding too,—is it all yours?" "Yes, nobody's but mine."
"Sir," said they, "the Blessed One has only sanctioned three cloths ; and
yet,thouglitlieBuddha,towhose doctrine you have devoted yourself,is so simple
in liis wants, you forsooth have amassed all this stock of requisites. Come !
we must take you before the Lord of Wisdom." And, so saying, they went
offwith him to the Master.
Becoming aware of their presence, the Master said, [127] "Wherefore is it,
Brethren, that you have brought the Brother against his will?" "Sir, this
Brother is well-oft'and has quite a stock of requisites." "Is it true. Brother, a.s
they say, that you are so well-off'?" "Yes, Blessed One." "But why, Brother,
have you amassed these belongings? Do not 1 extol the virtues of wanting
little, contentment, and so forth, solitude, and determined resolve?"
Angered by the Master's words, he cried,—"Then I'll go about like this!"
And, flinging oft' his outer clothing, he stood in their midst clad only in his
waist-cloth.
Then, as a moral support to him, the Master said, "Was it notyou, Brother,
who in bygone days were a seekerafter the shamefacedness that fears to sin, and
even when you were a water-demon lived for twelve years seeking after that
shamefacedness? How then comes it that, after vowing to follow the weighty
doctrineoftheBuddha,youhave flung off'your outer robes and stand here devoid
ofshame?
At the Master's word, his sense of shame was restored he donned his robes
;
again,and, saluting the Master, seated himselfatthe side.
The Brethren having asked the Blessed One toexplain to them the matterhe
had mentioned, the Blessed One made clear what had been concealed fromthem
by re-birth.
Once on a time Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares in Kasi. The
Bodhisatta, having come to birth in those days as the king's sou by tlie
queen, was duly named Prince Mahimsasa. By the time he could run
about, a second son was born to the king, and the name they gave this
child was Prince Moon; but by the time he could run about, the
Bodhisatta's mother died. Thenthe king took another queen, who was his
joy and delight and their love was crowned with the birth ofyet another
j
prince, whom they named Prince Sun. In his joy at the birth of the boy,
the king promised to grant her any boon she might ask on the child's
behalf. But the queen treasured up the promise to be fulfilled at her own
good time hereafter. Later, when her son had grown up, she said to the
king, "Sire, when my boy was born, you granted me a boon to ask for
him. Let him be kins."
' I take this to be the meaning of senusana-curiku, in contradistinction to the
ordinarycdrikdin which thedestinationwasuncertain andinwhichalmswerereceived
from thelait}'.

No. 6. 25
"Nay," said the king ; "two sons have I, ratliaiit as flaming fires; T
cannot give the kingdom to your son."' But wlien he saw tliat, undaunted
by this refusal, the queen kept phiguing liim time after time, to grant lici-
request, [128] the king, fearing lest the woman sliould plot evil against
his sons, sent for them and said, "My chilth'en, when Prince 8un was horn,
I granted a boon ; and now his mother wants the kingdom for him. 1
haveno wishto give himthekingdom butwomenarenaturallywicked,and
;
she will be plotting evil against you. You had better retire to the forest,
to return at my death to rule in the city which belongs by right to our
house." So saying, with tears and lamentations, the king kissed liis two
sons on the head and sent them forth.
As the princes were leaving the palace after their adieux to their
father, who should see them but Prince Sun himself, who was playing in
the courtyard? And no sooner did he learn what was the matter than he
made up his mind to go with his brothers. So he too went off in their
company.
The three came to the region of the Himalayas ; and here the
Bodhisatta, who had turned aside from the road andwas sitting at the foot
of a tree, said to Prince Sun, "Run down to the pool yonder. Sun dear;
drink and bathe there; and then bring us too some water back in a lotus-
leaf."
(Now that pool had been delivered over to a certain water-sprite by
Vessavana\whosaid to him, "With the exception ofsuch as know what is
truly god-like, all that go down into this pool are yours to devour. Over
those that do not enter the waters, you have no power granted to you."
And thenceforth the water-sprite used to ask all who went down into the
pool what was truly godlike, devouring everyone who did not know.)
Now it was into this pool that Prince Sun went down, quite un-
suspiciously, with the result that he was seized by the water-sprite, who
said to him, "Do you know what is truly godlike1" "O yes," said he;
"the sun and moon." ''You dont know," said the monster, and hauling
the prince down into the depths of the water, imprisoned him there in iiis
own abode. Finding that his brotherwas a long time gone, the Bodhisatta
sent Prince Moon. He too was seized by the water-sprite and asked
whether he knew what was truly godlike. "Oh yes, I know," said he;
"the four quarters of heaven are." "You don't know," said the water-
sprite as he hauled this second victim offto the same prison-house.
Finding that this second brother too tarried long, the Bodhisatta felt
sure that something had happened to them. So away he went after them
and tracked their footsteps down into the water. [129] Realising at once
1 This is another name for Kuvera, the Hindu Phitus, half-brother of Riivana,
the demon-king of Ceylon in the Rilmfiyana. As appear.s from JAtaka No. 7^, Vessa-
vanahadruleover Tree-sprites as well as Water-sprites, holding hisoflice from Sakka.

—
26 The Jatiika. Jhok I.
that the pool must be the domain of a water-sprite, he girdedon his sword,
and took his bow in his hand, and waited. Now when the demon found
tliat the Bodhisatta had no intention ofentering the water, he assumed the
shapeofa forester, and in this guise addressedtheBodhisatta thus : "You're
tired with your journey, mate ; why don't you go in and have a bathe and
a drink, and deck yourself with lotuses 1 You would travel onccmifortably
afterwards." Uecoguising him at once for a demon, the Bodhisatta said,
"It is you who have seized my brothers." "Yes, it was," was the reply.
"Why '?" ''Because all whogo down into this pool belongto me." "What,
all?" "Not those who know what is truly godlike ; all save these are
mine." "And do you want to know the godlike? " "I do." "If this be
so, I will tell you what is truly godlike." "Do so, and I will listen."
"I should like to begin," said the Bodhisatta, "but I am travel-stained
with my journey." Then the water-sprite bathed the Bodhisatta, and
gave him food to eat and water to drink, decked him with flowers,
s})rinkled him with scents, and lai(i out a couch for him in the midst of a
gorgeous pavilion. tSeating himself on this couch, and making the water-
sprite sit at his feet, the Bodhisatta said, "Listen then and you shall hear
what the truly godlike is." And he repeated this stanza:
Those only 'godlike' call who shrink from sin.
The white-souled tranquil votaries of Good.
[132] And when the demon heard this, he was pleased, and said to the
Bodhisatta, "Man of wisdom, I am pleased with you, and give you up one
of your brothers. Which shall I bring1 " "The youngest." " Man of
wisdom, though you know so well what the truly godlike is, you don't act
on your knowledge." "How so1" "Why, you take the younger in
preference to the elder, without regard to his seniority." "Demon, I not
only know but pi-actise the godlike. It was on this boy's account that we
sought refuge in the fox'est; it was for him that his mother asked the
kingdom from our father, and our father, refusing to fulfil her demaud,
consented to our flight to the refuge ofthe forest. With us came this boy,
nor ever thought of turning back again. Not a soul would believe me if I
were to give out that he had buen devoured by a demon in the forest; and
it is the fear of otlium that impels me to demand 1dm at your hands."
"Excellent! excellent! O man of wisdom,"cried the demonin approval;
"you not only know but practise the godlike." [133] And in token of his
pleasure and ajiproval he brought forth the two brothers and gave them
both to the Bodhisatta.
Then said the latter to the water-sprite, "Friend, it is in consequence
of your own evil deeds in times past that you have now been born a
demon subsisting on the flesh and blood of other living creatures; and in
this present birth too you are continuing to do evil. This evil conduct

No. 7. 27
will for ever bar you from escaping re-birth in hell and the other
evil states. Wherefore, from this time forth renounce evil and live
virtuously,"
Having worked the demon's conversion, the Bodhisatta continued to
dwell at that spot under his protection, mitil one day he read in tlu; stars
that his father was dead. Then taking the water-sprite with him, he
returned to Benares and took possession of the kingdom, making Prince
Moon his viceroy and Prince Sun his generalissimo. For the water-sprite
he made a home in a pleasant spot and took measures to ensure his being
provided with the choicest garlands, flowers, and food. He himself ruled
in righteousness until he passed away to fare according to his deeds.
His lesson ended, the Master preached the Truths, at the close wlieroof that
Brotherwon the Fruit of tlic First Path. And the All-knowing Buddlia, liaviiig
told the two stories, made the connexion linking the two together, and identified
the Birth, by saying, "The well-to-do Brother was the water-demon of those
days ; Ananda was Prince Sun, Sai-iputta Prince Moon, and I myself the eldest
brother. Prince Mahimsasa."
[N'ote. See Fausboll's Dhammapada, p. 302, and TenJdtahis, p. 88.]
No. 7.
KATTHAHARI-JATAKA.
—
" Your son am I." This story was told by the ]\Iaster while at Jcbxvana
about the story of Vasabha-Khattiya, which will be found in the Twelfth
Book in the Bhaddasala-jataka^ Tradition tells us that she was the daughterof
Mahanama Sakka by a slave-girl named Naganuuidii, and that she afterwards
became the consort of the king of Kosala. She conceived a son by the king
butthe king, coming to know of her servile origin, degraded her from her rank, ;
and also degraded her son Vidudabha. Mother and son never came outside
the palace.
Hearing of this, the Master at early dawn came to the palace attended
by five hundred Brethren [134], and, sitting down on the seat prepared for
him, said, "Sire, where is Vasabha-Khattiya?"
Then theking told him what had happened,
"Sire, whose daughter is Vasabha-Khattiya?" "I\Iahanama's daughter, sh-."
"When she came away, to whom did she come as wife?" "To me, sir." "Sire,
she is a king's daughter; to a king she is wed; and to a king she bore her
1 No. 46.5,

"
28 Tlw Jataka. Book I.
son. Wherefore is that son not in authority over the realm which owns his
father's sway? In bygone days, a monai-ch who had a son by a casuali faggot-
gatherer gave that son his sovereignty."
The king asked the Blessed One to explain this. The Blessed One made
clear what had been concealed from him by re-birth.
Once on a time in Benares Brahmadatta the king, having gone in great
state to liis pleasaunce, was roaming about looking for fruits and flowers
wlien he came on a woman who was merrily singing away as she picked
up sticks in the grove. Falling in love at first sight, the king became
intimate with her, and the Bodhisatta was conceived theu and there.
Feeling as heavy within as though weighed down with the bolt of Indi-a,
the woman knew that she would })ecome a mother, and told the king so.
He gave her—the signet-ring from his finger and dismissed her with
these words : "If it be a girl, spend this ring on her nurture ; but if it
be a boy, bring ring and child to me."
When the woman's time was come, she bore the Bodhisatta. And
when he could run about and was playing in the playground, a cry
would arise, "No-father has hit me!" Hearing this, the Bodhisatta ran
away to his mother and asked who his father was.
"You are the son of the King of Benares, my boy," "What proof
of tliis is thei'e, mother?" "My son, the king on leaving me gave me
this signet-ring and said, ' If it be a girl, spend this ring on her nurture
;
but if it be a boy, bring ring and child to me.'" "Why then don't
you take me to my father, mother1
[135] Seeing that the l)oy's mind was made up, she took him to the
gate of the palace, and bade their coming be announced to the king.
Being summoned in, she entered and bowing before his majesty said,
"This is your son, sire."
The king knew well enough that this was the truth, but shame before
all his court made him reply, "He is no son of mine." "But here is your
signet-ring, sire you will recognise that." "Nor is this my signet-ring."
;
Then said the woman, "Sire, I have now no witness to prove my words,
except to appeal to truth. Wherefore, if you be the father of my child,
I pray that he may stay in mid-air ; but if not, may he fall to earth
and be killed." So saying, she seized the Bodhisatta by the foot and
threw him up into the air.
1 The word miihiittikutjameans, literally, "momentary," or perhaps may be trans-
lated "svith whom heconsorted but a little while." Professor Kiinte (Ceylon E. A. S.
Journal, 1884, p. 128) sees iu the word areference to the Muhurta (mobotura) form of
marriage, which "obtains among the Mahrathas other than the Brahmanas," and
which he compares with the familiar Gandharva form, i.e. (legal) union by mutual
consent, on the spur ofthe moment, without anypreliminary formalities.

—
!
No. 8. 29
Seated cross-legged in mid-air, the Bodhisatta in sweet tones repeated
this stanza to his father, declaring the truth :
Your son am I, great monarch ; rear me, Sire
The king rears others, but much more his child.
Hearing the Bodhisatta thus teach the truth to him from miil-air, the
king stretched out his hands and cried, "Come to me, my boy! None,
none but me shall rear and nurture you !" A thoiisand hands were
stretched out to receive the Bodhisatta [136] but it was into the arms of
;
the king and of no other that he descended, seating himself in the king's
lap. The king made him viceroy, and made his mother queen-consort.
At the death of the king his father, he came to the throne by the title
of King Katthavahana — the faggot-bearer — , and after i-uling his realm
righteously, passed away to fare according to his deserts.
His lesson to the king of Kosala ended, and histwo stories told, the Ma.ster
made th—e connexion linking them both together, and identified the Birth by
saying : "Mahamaya was the mother of those days. King Suddhodana was
the father, and I myselfKing Katthavahana."
[Note. Cf.Dhammapada, p. 218,Jdtaka No. 465,and Rogers' Bvcld/iaf/hnska's
Parables, p. 146. See also an endeavour, in the Ceylon R.A.S. Journal, 1884,
to trace this Jataka back to the story of Dushyanta and r'akuntula in tlie
MahCibhCirata and to Kalidasa's drama ofthe Lost King.]
No. 8.
GAMANI-JATAKA.
—
" Theirheart's desire." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana
abouta Brother who gave up persevering. In this Jataka both the Intrfxluctory
Story and the Story of the Past will be given in the Eleventh P.ook in c-onncxion
—
with the Samvara-jataka* the incidents are the same botli for that Jataka
;
and for this, but the stanzas are different.
Abiding stedfast in the counsels of the Bodhisatta, Prince (Janiani, finding
himself—though the youngest of a hundred l)i'others- surrounded by thijse
hundred brothers as a retinue and seated beneath the white eanopy of kingship,
' No. 462.

—
30 The Jdtaka. Book I.
contemplated his glory and thought—"All this glory I owe to my teacher."
And, ill hisjoy, he burst into this heartfelt utterance:
Their heart's desire' they reap, who hurry not;
Know, Giiniani, ripe excellence is thine.
[137] Seven or eight days after he had become king, all his brothers
departed to their own homes. King Gamani, after ruling his kingdom in
rju'hteousncss, passed away to fare accordingto his deserts. The Bodhisatta also
passed away to fare accordingto his deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master preached the Truths, at the close whereof
the faint-hearted Brotlier won Arahatship. Having told the two stories, the
Master shewed the connexion linking them both together and identified the
Birth.
No. 9.
MAKHADEVA-JATAKA.
''Lo! these grey Aa/rs."—This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana about the Great Renunciation, which has already been related in
the Nidana-Katha-.
On this occasion the Brethren sat praising the Eenunciation of the Lord
of Wisdom. Entering the Hall of Truth and—seating himself on the Buddha-
s a e s at y , ou th s e it M h a e s r t e er in th c u o s nc a l d a d v r e e V ssed the Brethren : "What is your theme.Brethren,
"It isnaughtelse,sir,than thepraiseofyourown Renunciation." "Brethren,"
rejoined the Master, "not only in these latter days has the Tathagata^ made a
Renunciation in bygone days too he similarly renounced the world."
The Brethr ; en asked the Blessed One for an explanation ofthis. The Blessed
One made clear what had been concealed from them by re-birth.
1 Astothealternative ofthegloss ("phalasati asapbalam," i.e. "'the desire ofthe
fruit—' means 'the fruit of the desire'") Professor Kiinte (Ceylon R. A. S. J. 1884)
says "theinversion requiresa knowledge of metaphysical grammar such as was not
cultivated in India before the 6th centuryA.D....Tlie gloss was written about the Brah-
minical andJainrevival."
^ See p. 61 at seqq. of Vol, i. of FausboU's text for this account of how Prince
Siddhattha, thefutureBuddha, renouncedtiieworld for the Truth.
^ The meaning of this frequently recurring title of the Buddha is far from — clear,
and the obscurity is deepened by the elaborate gloss of Buddhaghosa at pp. 59 68 of
the Humaivjdla-vilasini, where eight different interpretations are given. Perhaps the
w is or m d uc m h ay to m b e e a s n ai ' d He for wh th o e h v a i s ew tr p o u d t t f h o e r p w a a t rd h o w n hi p c . h 82 th o e f e V a o r l li . er xi B ii u . d o d f ha th s e t S r a o c d r ' e ; d b B u o t o t k h s er o e f
the East, that the meaning is 'He whohas arrived there,' i.e. atemancipation.

— —
No.
9. 31
Once on a time in Mithila in the realm of Videlia there was a
king named Makhadeva, who was righteous and ruled righteously. For
successive periods of eighty-four thousand years lie had respectively
amused himself as prince, ruled as viceroy, and reigned as kin". All
these long years had he lived, when one day he said to his barber,
"Tell me, friend barber, when you see any grey hairs in my head."
So one day, years and years after, [138] the barber did find among the
raven locks of the king a single grey hair, and he told the king so.
"Pull it out, my friend," said the king; "and lay it in my palm." The
Vjarber accordingly plucked the hair out with his golden tongs, and laid it
in the king's hand. The king had at that time still eighty-four thousand
years more to live but nevertheless at the sight of that one grey hair
;
he was filled with deep emotion. He seemed to see the King of Death
standingoverhim, ortobecoopedwithin a blazing hut of leaves. "Foolish
Makhadeva !" he cried ; "grey hairs have come upon you before you
have been able to rid yourself of depravities." And as he thought
and thought about the appearance ofhis grey hair, he grew aflame within
;
the sweat rolled down from his body ; whilst his raiment oppressed Jiim
and seemed intolei-able. "This very day," thought he, "will I renounce
the world for the Brother's life."
To his barber he gave the grant of a village, which yielded a hundred
thousand pieces of money. He sent for his eldest son and said to him,
"My son, grey hairs are come upon me, and I am become old. I have
had my fill of human joys, and fain would taste the joys divine the
;
time for my renunciation has come. Take the sovereignty upon yourself
as for me, I will take up my abode in the pleasaunce called Makhadeva's ;
Mango-grove, and there tread the ascetic's path."
As he was thus bent on leading the Brother's life, his ininisteis drew
near and said, "What is the reason, sire, why you adopt tin; Brother's
lifer'
Taking the grey hair in his hand, the king repeated this stanza to liis
ministers :
Lo, these grey hairs that on my head appear
Are Death's own messengers that come to rob
My life. 'Tis time I turned from worldly thing.s,
And in the hermit's path sought saving peace.
[139j And after these words, he renounced his sovereignty that self-.same
day and became a recluse. Dwelling in that very Mango-grove of
Makhadeva, he there during eighty-four thousand years fostered tlie
Four Perfect States within himself, and, dying with insight full and
unbroken, was reborn in the Realm of Brahma. Passing thence, he
became a king again in Mithila, under the name of Niini, and after
uniting his scattered family, once more became a hermit in that same

32 The JataJca. Book I.
Mango-gi-ove, winniug the Four Perfect States and passing thence once
more to the Realm of Brahma.
After repe^iting liis statement that he had similarly renomiced the world
in bygone days, the IMaster at the end of his lesson preached the Four Truths.
Some^'entered the First Path, some the Second, and some the Third. Having
told the two stories, the Master shewed the connexion between them and
identified the Birth, by saying:—"In those days Ananda was the barber,
Rahulathe son, and I myselfKing Makhadeva."
[Note. See Majjhima-Nikaya, Sutta No. 83 of which is entitled the Makha-
deva Sutta. According to Leon Feer (J. As. 1876, p. 516) the Bigandet MS.
calls this the Devaduta-jataka. Bigandet in his Life or Legend of Gaudama
a (p n . d 40 i 8 n ) g w i h v i e c s h a v t e h r e si d o o n in of gs th o i f s J K a i t n a g ka, Ne in mi wh ( i = ch Ni t m he i k a i b n o g ve is ) n a a r m e ed gi M v i en ngg in ad g e r w e a a , t
detail. See Upham's Mahavansi, vol. I. p. 14, and the 'Nemy' Jataka referred
to by him as the 544th Jataka. See also Cariyd-Pital-a, p. 76, and Plate
XLViii. (2) of the Stnpa of Bharhut, where the name is carved Magha-deva,
a spelling which is retained in modern Burmese manuscripts of the Majjhima
Sutta from which this Jataka was manifestly compiled.]
No. 10.
SUKHAVIHARI-JATAKA.
—
[140] "The man ivho guards not." This story was told by the Master
while in the Anupiya Mango-grove near the town of Anupiya, about the Elder
Bhaddiya (the Happy), who joined the Brotherhood in the company of the
sixyoung nobleswithwhom was Upalii. Ofthese theElders Bhaddiya,Kimbila,
Bhagu, and Upali attained to Arahatship the Elder Ananda entered the First
;
Path the Elder Anuruddha gained all-seeing vision and Devadatta obtained
the po ; wer of ecstatic self-abstraction. The story of th ; e six young nobles, up to
the events at Anfipiya, will be related in the Khandahala-jataka^.
The venerable Bhaddiya, who used in the days of his royalty to guard
himself as though he were appointed his own tutelary deity, bethought him
of the state of fear in which he then lived when he was being guarded by
numerous guards and when he used to toss about even on his royal couch
in his private apartments high up in the palace and with this he compared
the absence of fear in which, now that he was a ; n Arahat, he roamed hither
and thither in forests and desert places. And at the thought he burst into
this heartfelt utterance—"Oh, happiness Oh, happiness!"
!
I Cf. Oldenberg's Vinaya, Vol. ii. pp. 180—4 (translated at p. 232 of Vol. xx. of
the Sacred Books of the Eaut), for an account of the conversion of the six Sakyan
princes and thebarber Upali.
- No. 534 in Westercaard'slist; not vet edited bvFausboll.

"
No. 10. 33
This the Brethren reported to the Blessed One, saying, "The venerable
Bhaddiya is declaring the bliss he has won,"
"Brethren," said the Blessed One, "this is not the first time that Bhaddiya's
life has been happy; his life was no less happy in bygone days."
The Brethren asked the Blessed One to explain this. Tho Blossod One
made clear whathad been concealed from them by re-birth.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, tlie
Bodhisatta was born a wealthy northern braliniin. Realising the (nil of
lusts and the blessings that flow from renouncing the world, he abjured
lusts, and retiring to the Himalayas there became a hermit and won
the eight Endowments. His following waxed great, amounting to five
hundred ascetics. Once when the rains set in, he quitted the Himalayas
and travelling along on an alms-pilgrimage with his attendant ascetics
thi'ough village and town came at last to Benares, where he took uj)
his abode in the royal pleasaunce as the pensioner of the king's bounty.
After dwelling here for the four rainy months, he came to the king
to take his leave. But the king said to him, "You are old, reverend sir.
Wherefore should you go back to the Himalayas'? Send your pupils back
thither [141] and stop here yourself."
The Bodhisatta entrusted his five hundred ascetics to the care of
his oldest disciple, saying, "Go you with these to the Himalayas I
;
willstop on here."
Now that oldest disciple had once been a king, but had given up
a mighty kingdom to become a Brother ; by the due performance of the
rites appertaining to concentrated thought he had mastered the eight
Endowments. As he dwelt with the ascetics in the Himalayas, one day a
longing came upon him to see the master, and he said to his fellows,
"Live on contentedly here ; I will come back as soon as I have paid
my respects to the master." So away he went to the master, paid his
respects to him, and greeted him lovingly. Then he lay down by the side
ofhis master on a mat which he spread there.
At this point appeared the king, who had come to the pleasaunce
to see the ascetic and with a salutation he took his seat on one side.
;
But though he was aware of the king's presence, tliat oldest disciple
forbore to rise, but still lay there, crying with passionate earnestness,
"Oh, happiness ! Oh, happiness !
Displeased that the ascetic, though he had seen him, had not risen,
the king said to the Bodhisatta, "Reverend sir, this ascetic must have liad
his fill to eat, seeing that he continues to lie there so happily, exclaiming
with such earnestness."
"Sire," said the Bodhisatta, "of old this ascetic was a king as } ou
are. He is thinking how in the old days when he was a layman and
3
c. J.

—
34 The Jataka. Booh I.
lived in regal pomp with many a man-at-arms to guard him, he never
knew such happiness as now is his. It is the happiness of the Brother's
life, and the happiness that Insight brings, wliich move him to this
heartfelt utterance." And the Bodhisatta further repeated this stanza
to teach the king the Truth :
The man who guards not, nor is guarded, sire.
Lives happy, freed from slavery to lusts.
[142] Appeased by the le.sson thus taught him, the king made his salu-
tation and returned to his palace. The disciple also took his leave of his
master and returned to the Himalayas. But the Bodhisatta continued to
dwell on there, and, dying with Insight full and unbroken, was re-born in
the Realm of Brahma.
Ilis lesson ended, and the two stories told, the Master shewed the connexion
liiikiui,' them both together, and identified the Bii'th by saying,—"The Elder
Bhaddiya wasthedisciple ofthose days,and I myselfthemaster ofthe company
ofascetics."
—
[iVote. For the Introductory Story compare CuUavagga, vii. 1. 5 .]
No. 11.
LAKKHANA-JATAKA.
"77te up-ight man.^' — This story was told by the Master in the Bamboo-
grove near Riljagaha about Devadatta. The story of Devadatta* will be
related, u]» to the date oftheAbhimara-employment,in the Khandahrda-jfitaka^;
up to the date of his dismissal from the office of Treixsurer, in the Cullahamsa-
jataka''; and, up to the date of his being swallowed up by the earth, in the
Sixteenth Book in the Samudda-vanija-jataka*.
For, on the occasion now in question, Devadatta, through failing to carry the
Five Points which he had pressed for, had made a schism in the Brotherhood
and had gone off with five hundred Brethren to dwell at Gaya-sisa. Now, these
Brethren came to a riper knowledge ; and the Master, knowingthis, called the
—
^ See CuUavagga, vii. 1— et seqq. The "Five Points" of Devadatta are there
given (vii. 3. 14) as follows: "The Brethren shalllive all their lifelongin the forest,
subsist solely on doles collected out of doors, dresssolely in rags picked out of dust-
heaps, dwellunder treesand never under a roof, never eat fish or flesh." These five
points were all more rigid in their asceticism than the Buddha's rule, and were
formulated byDevadatta inorderto outbidhiscousin and master.
2 Cf. p. 32, note 2.
3 No. 5.33.
•* No. 4r,o.

No. 11. 35
two chief disciples^ and said, "Saripvitta, ymir five hundred pupils who were
perverted by Devadatta's teaching and went off with In'in, have nf)\v come to a
riper knowledge. (lO thither with a nuiulior of Ih-etliren, preacli the Tnitli to
them, enlighten these wanderers respecting the I'atlis and tlie Fruits, and bring
them hack with you."
They went thither, preached the Truth, enlightened them respecting the
Paths and the Fruits, and next day [143] at dawn came liack again with those
Brethren to the Bamboo-grove. And wiiilst Sariputta was standing there after
saluting the B.lessed One on his return, the Brethren spoke thus to iiiiii in prai.so
of the Elder Sariputta, "Sir, very bright was the glory of our elder brother, tlie
Cixptain ofthe Truth, as he returned with a following of live huiulred Brethren
whereas Devadatta has lostall his following." ;
"This is not the only time, Bretln-en, when glory has been Sariputta's on his
r S e o tu t r o n o t w h i i t s h is a n f o o t ll t o h w e in o g nl o y f t h i i m s e k w i h ns e f n ol D k e ; va l d i a k t e t g a lo h r a y s w l a o s st h h i i s s t f o o o ll i o n w b in y g gone he da l y o s s . t
it also in bygone days." ;
The Brethren asked the Blessed One to explain this to them. Tlie Bles.sed
One made clear what had been concealed by i-e-biith.
Once on a time in the city of Eajagalia in the kingdom of Miigadlia
there rukxl a certain king of Magadha, in wliose days tlie Boilhi-satta came
to life as a stag. Growing np, he dwelt in the forest as the leader of a
lierd of a thousand deer. He had two young ones named Luckie and
Blackie. When he grew old, he handed his cliarge over to liis two sons,
placing five hundred deer under the care of each of them. And so now
these two young stags were in charge ofthe herd.
Towards harvest-time in Magadha, when the crops stand tliick in tlu;
fields, it is dangerous for the deer in the forestsround. Anxious to kill the
creatures that devour their crops, the peasants dig pitfalls, fix stakes, set
stone-traps, and plant snares and other gins; so that many deer are slain.
Accordingly, when the Bodhisatta marked that it was crop-time, he
sent for his two sons and said to them, " My children, it is now the time
when crops stand thick in the fields, and many deer meet their death at
this season. We who are old will make shift to stay in one spot ; but you
will retire each with your herd to the mountainous tracts in the forest and
come back when the crops have been carried." " Very good," said his
two sons, and departed with their herds, as their father bade.
Now the men who live along the route, know quite well the times at
which deer take to tlie hills and return thence. And [144] lying in wait
in hiding-places liere and there along the route, they shootand kill numbers
of them. The dullard Blackie, ignorant of the times to travel and the
1 The two chief disciples, of whom only one is named in the text, were Silriimtta
(surnamed 'tlie Captain ofthe Faith') and Moggallfma,twoBrahmin friends, originally
followers of a wandering ascetic, whose conversion to Buddhism is related m the
Mahavagga, i. 23—. Unlike this Jataka, the Vinaija account {Ciillaraii.jit, vn. 4) of
there-conversion of thebacksliders givesa shareofthecredit to Moggallana.
3—3

—
I
36 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
times to halt, kept his deer on the march early and late, Loth at dawn and
in the gloaming, approaching the very confines of the villages. And the
peasants, in aniLush or in the open, destroyed numbers of his herd. Hav-
ing tlius by his crass folly worked the destruction of all these, it was with
a very few survivors that he reached the forest.
Luckie on the other liand, being wise and astute and full of resource,
never so much as approached the confines of a village. He did not travel
by day, or even in the dawn or gloaming. Only in the dead of night did
he move and the result was that he reached the forest without losing a
;
single head of his deer.
Four months they stayed in the foi-est, not leaving the hills till the
crops were carried. On the homeward way Blackie byrepeatinghisformer
folly lost the rest of his herd and returned solitary and alone ; whereas
Luckie had not lost one of his herd, but had brought back the whole five
hundred deer, when he appeared before his parents. As he saw his two
sons returning, the Bodhisatta framed this stanza in concert with the herd
ofdeer
:
The upright kindly man hath his reward.
Mark Luckie leading back his troop of kin,
While here comes Blackie shorn of all his herd.
[14/)] 8uch was the Bodhisatta's welcome to his son; and after living
to a good old age, he passed away to fare according to his deserts.
At the close of his lesson, when the Master had repeated that Sariputta's
glory and Devadatta's loss had both had a parallel in bygone days, he shewed
the connexion linking the two stories together and identified the Birth, by
saying, "Devadattawas the Blackie of those days his followers were Blackie's
;
following; Saripiitta was the Luckie of those days, and his following the
Buddha's followers ; Eahula's mother was the mother of those days ; and I
myselfwas the father."
\Note. SeeDhammapada, p. ]46, for the above verse and fora parallel to the
Introductory Story ofthis Jataka.]
No. 12.
NIGRODHAMIGA-JATAKA.
—
''Keep onlyuith the Banyan DeerT This story was told by the Masterwhile
at Jetavana about the mother of the Elder named Prince Kassapa. The
daughter, we learn, of a wealthy merchant of Kajagaha was deeply rooted in
goodness and scorned all temporal things ; she had reached her final existence,
and within her breast, like a lamp in a pitcher, glowed hersure hope of winning

" I
No. 12. 37
Arahatship. As soon as she reached knowledge of herself, slie took no joy in a
worldly life but yearned to renounce the world. With this aim, she said to her
mother and father, "My dear parents, my heart takes no joy in a worldly life
fain woidd I embrace the saving doctrine of the Buddha. Sutler me to take ;
the vows."
"What, my dear/ Ours is a very wealthy family, and you are our only
daughter. You cannottake the vows."
Havingfailed to win her parents' consent, though she asked them again anil
again, she thought to herself, "Be it so then; when I am married into another
family, I will gain my husband's consentand take the vows." And when, being
gi'owu up, sheentered anotherfamily, she proved adevoted wife and lived a life
of goodness and virtue^ in her new home. Now it came to pass that she con-
ceived, though she knew it not.
There was a festival proclaimed in that city, [146] and everybody kept
holiday, the city being decked like a city of the gods. But she, even at the
height ofthe festival, neitheranointed herself nor put on any finery, going about
in her every-day attire. So her husband said to her, "My dear wife, everybody
is holiday-making ; butyou do not put on your bravery."
"My lord and master," she replied, "the body is tilled with two-and-thirty
component parts. Wherefore should it be adorned 1 This bodilyframe is not
w of oo an d ge ; li i c t o t r ak a e r s ch n a o n t gel it i s c b m i o r u th ld fi ; -o i m t i t s h n e ot w m o a m d b e o o f f l g o o t l u d s , -f j l e o w w e e l r s s , , o w r h y i e t l e lo o w r s r a e n d dal o - r
b a l n u d e ; bo i r t n is of no m t or h t l a l l ed p w a i r t e h nt a s n ; y t i h m e mo q r u t a a li l ti b e a s ls t a h m a . t m N a a r y k , i i t t i a s r b e re t d he of we c a o r r i ru n p g ti a o n n i , l
wasting away, the decay and destruction of the merely transient ; it is fated to
swell a graveyard, and is devoted to lusts ; it is the source of sorrow, and
the occasion of lamentation ; it is the abode —of all diseases, and the repository
of the workings of Karma. Foul within, it is always excreting. Yea, a.s
all the world can see, its end is death, passing to the charnel-house, there to be
the dwelling-place of worms'-^ [l^l']. What should I achieve, my bridegroom, by
tricking out thi V s body ? Would not its adornment be like decoratingthe outside
ofa close-stool
"My dear wife," rejoined the young merchant, "if you regard this body as so
sinful, why don'tyou become a SisterI"
"If I am accepted, my husband, I will take the vows this very day." "Very
good," said he, "I will get you admitted to the Order." And after he had shewn
lavish bounty and hospitality to the Order,heescort — edher with a large following
to the nunnery and had her admitted a Sister, but of the following of
Devadatta. Great was her joy at the fulfilment of her desire to become a
Sister.
As her time drew near, the Sisters, noticing the change in her person, the
swelling in her hands and feet and her increased size, said, "Lady, you seem
abou S " t o I t t c o h a e b nn e S o c i t s o t m e t e e r l s l a , b l m r a o o d u t i g h e h s e t r ; h ; I e w r o h n b l a e y t fo k d r n o e e o s D w e i v t I a m d h a e a t v a t e n a, l I e s d ay a in v g i , rt " u L o o u r s d l , if t e h ." isyounggentle-
woman, who was admitted a Sister with the reluctant consent of her husband,
has now proved to be with child but whether this dates from before her
admission to the Orderor not, we ca ; nnot say. What are we to do now?"
Not being a Buddha, and not having any charity, love or pity, Devadatta
thought thus:—"It will be a damaging report to get abroad that one of my
Sisters is with child, and that I condone the offence. My course is clear;—
must expel this woman from the Order." Without any enquiry,starting forward
as ifto thrustaside amass ofstone, he said, "Away, and expel this woman!"
Receiving this answer, they arose and with reverent salutation withdrew to
their own nunnery. But the girl said to those Sisters, "Ladies, I)evadatt;i the
Eider is notthe Buddha. My vows were taken not under Devadatt;\, but under
1 Or, perhaps, "was beautiful."
^ Along stringofrepulsivestanzas asto the anatomy ofthe body ishereomitted.

38 The Jdtaka. Book I.
the Buddha, the Foremost of the world. Rob me not of the vocation 1 won so
f h o a r rd J l e y ta ; v b a u n t a, ta a k n e d m j e ou b r e n f e o y r i e ng th o e v M er as t t h e e r f i o it rty J - e t t i a v v e an l a e . a " gues So th t i h t e h y er se f t ro o m ut li w a i j t a h ga h h e a, r
came in due course to their destination, where with reverent salutation to the
Master, they laid the matterbefore him.
Thought the Master, "Albeit the child was conceived while she was still of
the laity, yet it will give the heretics an occasion to say that the ascetic Gotama
[1-18] liiis taken a Sister expelled by Devadatta. Therefore, to cut short such
talk, this case nmst be heard in the presence of the king and his court." So on
the morrow he sent for Pasenadi king of Kosala, the elder and the younger
Anatha-pindika, the lady Visakha the great lay-disciple, and other well-known
^Mji-sonages—; and in the evening when the four classes of the faithful—wei'e all
assembled Brothers, Sisters, and lay-disciples, both male and female he said
to the Elder Upali, "Go, and clear uj) this matter of the young Sister in the
presence ofthe four classes ofmy disciples."
"It shall be done, reverend sir," said the Elder, and forth to the assembly he
went ; and there, seating himself in his place, he called up Visakha the lay-
discii)lc in sightof the king, and placed the conduct ofthe enquiry in her hands,
.saying, "Firstascertain the precise day of the precise month on which this girl
joined the Order, Visakha and thence compute whether she conceived before
;
or since that date." Accordingly the lady had a curtain put up as a screen,
behind which she retired with the girl. Spectatis manibus, pedibus, umbilico,
ipso ventrepuella3, the lady found, on comparing the days and months, that the
conception had taken place before the girl had become a Sister. This she
reported to the Elder, who proclaimed the Sister innocent before all the
assembly. And she, now that her innocence was established, reverently saluted
the Order and the Master, and with the Sisters returned toher own nunnery.
When her time was come, she bore the son strong in spirit, for whom she
hatl prayed at the feet of the Buddha Padumuttara ages ago. One day, when
the king was passing by the lunuiery, he heard the cry of an infant and asked
his courtiers what it meant. They, knowing the facts, told his majesty that the
cry came from the child to which the young Sister had given birth. "Sirs,"
said the king, "the care ofchildren is a clog on Sisters in their religious life
let us take charge of him." So the infant was handed over by the king's ;
command to the ladies ofhisfamily, and brought up as a prince. When the day
came for him to be named, he was called Kassapa, but was known as Prince
Kassapa because he was brought up like a prince.
At the age of seven he was admitted a novice under the Master, anda full
Brother when he was old enough. As time went on, he waxed famous among
the expounders of the Truth. So the blaster gave him precedence, saying,
"Brethren, the first in eloquence among my disciples is Prince Kassapa."
Afterwards, by virtue of the Vammika Sutta^, he won Arahatship. So too his
mother, the Sister, grew to clear vision and won the Supreme Fruit. Prince
Kassapa the Elder shone in the faith of the Buddha [149] even as the full-moon
in the mid-he;iven. Now one day in the afternoon when the Tathagata on
return from his alms-round had addressed the Brethren, he passed into his
perfumed chamber. At the close of his address the Brethren spent the daytime
either in their night-quarters or in their day-quarters till it was e—vening, when
they assembled in the hall of Truth and spoke as follows : "Brethren,
Devadatta, because he was not a Buddha and because he had no charity, love or
pity, was nigh being the ruin of the Elder Prince Kassapa and his reverend
mother. But the All-enlightened Buddha, being the Lord of Truth and being
perfect in charity, love and pity, has proved their salvation." And as they sat
there telling tlie praises of the Buddha, he entered the hall with all the grace of
a Buddha, and asked, as he took his seat, what they were talking of as they sat
together.
"Ofyourown virtues, sir," said they, and told him all.
1 The 23rd Suttaof the Majjltiiaa-Nilalya.

No. 12. 39
"This is uot the tirst time, Brethren," said he, "th;it the Tathagatii htm
proved the salvation and refuge of these two : he wa.s the same to them in the
past also."
Then, on the Brethren asking him to explain this to tlieni, he revealed wliiit
I'c-birth had hidden from them.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Btsnares, llic B(»dlii
satta was born a deer. At liis birth he was golden of hue ; his eyes were
like roundjewels
;
the sheen of his horns was as of silver; his mouth was
red as a bunch of scarlet cloth; his four hoofs were as though laccpuM-ed
;
his tail was like the yak's ; and he was as big as a young foal. Attended
byfivehundreddeer, hedweltintheforest under thename ofKing Banyan
Deer. And hard by him dwelt another deer also with an attendant herd of
live hundred deer, who was named Branch Deer, and was as golden of hue;
as the Bodhisatta.
In those days the king of Benares was passionately fond of hunting
and always had meat at every meal. Every day ho mustered the whole of
his subjects, townsfolk and countryfolk alike, to the detriment of their
business, and went hunting. Thought his people, "This kingof ours stops
all our work. Suppose we were [150] to sow food and supply water for
the deer in his own pleasaunce, and, having driven in a number of deer, to
bar them in and deliver them over to the king!" So they sowed in the
pleasaunce grass for the deer to eat and sxipplied Avater for them to
drink, and opened the gate wide. Then they called out the townsfolk and
set out into the forest armed with sticks and all mannerof weapons to find
the deer. They surrounded about a league of forest in order to catch
the deer within their circle, and in so doing surrounded the haunt of the
Banyan and Branch deer. As soon as they perceived the deer, they i)ro-
ceeded to beat the trees, bushes and ground with their sticks till they
drove the herds outof their lairs; then theyrattled their swords and spears
and bows with so great a din that they drove all the deer into the
pleasaunce, and shut the gate. Then they went to the king and said,
"Sire, you put a stop to our work by always going a-hunting; so we have
driven deer enough from the forest to fill your pleasaunce. Henceforth
feed on them."
Hereupon the king betook himself to the pleasaunce, and in looking
over the herd saw among them two golden deer, to whom he granted
immunity. Sometimes he Avould go of his own accord and shoot a deer to
bring home ; sometimes his cook would go and shoot one. At first sight
of the bow, the deer would dash off trembling for their lives, but after
receiving two or three wounds they grew weary and faint and were slain.
The herd of deer told this to the Bodhisatta, whosentfor Branch anil said,
"Friend,the deer are being destroyed in gi-eat numbers and, though they
;

"
40 The Jdtaka. Book I.
caimot escape death, at least let them not be needlessly wounded. Let the
deer go to the block' byturns, one dayone from my herd, and next dayone
—
from yours, the deer on whom the lot falls to go totheplaceof execution
and lie down with its head on the block. In this wise the deer will escape
wounding." The other agreed; and thenceforth the deer whose turn it
was, used to go [1-51] and lie down with its neck ready on the block. The
cook used to go and carry offonly the victim which awaited him.
Now one day the lot fell on a pregnant doe of the herd of Branch, and
she went to Branch and said, "Lord, I am with young. When I have
brought forth my little one, there will be two of us to take our turn.
Order me to be passed over this turn." "No, I cannot make your turn
another's," said he; "you must bear the consequences of your own fortune.
Begone!" Finding no favour with him, the doe went on to the Bodhisatta
and told him her story. And he answered, "Very well; you go away,
and I will see that the turn passes over you." And therewithal he went
himself to the place of execution and lay down with his head on the block.
Cried the cook on seeing him, "Why here's the king of the deer who was
granted immunity ! What does this mean %" And off he ran to tell the
king. The moment he heard of it, the king mounted his chariot and
"My
arrived with a large following. friend the king of the deer," he said
on beholding the Bodhisatta, "did I not promise you your lifel How
comes it that you are lying here?''
"Sire, there came to me a doe big with young, who prayed me to let
her turn fall on another ; and, as I could not pass the doom of one on to
another, I, laying down my life for her and taking her doom on myself,
have laid me down here. Think not that there is anything behind this,
your majesty."
" My lord the golden king of the deer," said the king, "never yet saw
I, even among men, one so abounding in charity, love and pity as you.
Therefore am I pleased with you. Arise ! I spare the lives both of you
and ofher."
"Though two be spared, what shall the rest do, O king of men?" "I
spare their lives too, my lord." "Sire, only the deer in your pleasaunce
will thus have gained immunity; what shall all the rest do?" "Their
lives too I spare, my lord." "Sire, deer will thu« be safe; but what will
the rest of four-footed creatures do1 " [152]. "I spare their lives too, my
lord." "Sire, four-footed creatures will thus be safe; but what will the
docks of birds do?" "They too shall be spared, my lord." "Sire, birds
will thus be safe ; but what will the fishes do, who live in the water 1
"I spare their lives also, my lord."
After thus interceding with the king for the lives of all creatures, the
1 Fordhammaganclika seeJut. n. 124; in. 41.

—
No. 12. 41
Great Being arose, established the king in the Five OommandmentH,
saying, "Walk in righteousness, great king. Walk in rigliteousness
andjustice towards parents, children, townsmen, and countryfolk, so that
when this earthly body is dissolved, you may enter the bliss of heaven."
Thus, with the grace and charm that marks a Buddha, did he teach the
A
Truth to the king. few days he tarried in the pleasauncc for the king's
instruction, and then with his attendant herd he passed into the forest
again.
And that doe brought forth a fawn fair as the op(!ning l)ud of the
lotus, who used to phty about with the Branch deer. Seeing tliis Ids
"My
mother said to him, child, don't go about witli him, only go al)out
with the herd of the Banyan deer." And by way of exhortation, siie
repeated this stanza :
Keep only with the Banyan deer, and slmn
T Is he de B at r h a , nc m h y de c e h r i ' l s d, he in rd B ; an m y o a r n e 's we co l m c i o ) m ai e iy f . ar
Than e'en the amplest term of life with Branch.
Thenceforth, the deer, now in the enjoyment of immunity, used to eat
men's crops, and the men, remembering the immunity granted to them,
did not dare to hit the deer or drive them away. So they assemlded in
the king's courtyard and laid the matter before the king. Said he, "Wluai
the Banyan deer won my favour, [153] I promised him a boon. 1 will
forego my kingdom rather than my promise. Begone! Not a man in my
kingdom may harm the deer."
But when this came to the ears of the Banyan deer, he called his heid
together and said, "Henceforth you shall not eat the crops of others."
And having thus forbidden them, he sent a message to the men, saying,
"From this day forward, let no hiisbandman fence his field, but merely
indicate it with leaves tied up round it." And so, we hear, began a j>lan
of tying up leaves to indicate the fields; and never was a deer known to
trespass on a held so marked. For thus they had been instructed by the
Bodhisatta.
Thus did the Bodhisatta exhort the deer of his herd, and thus did ht^
act all his life long, and at the close of a long life passed away witli them
to fare according to his deserts. The king too abode by the Bodhisatta's
teachings, and after a life spent in good works })assed away to lare
according to his deserts.
At the close of this lesson, when the ]\Iaster had repeated tliat, a-s now, so in
bygone days also he had been the salvation of the pair, he preached the Four
Truths. He then shewed the connexion, Unking togetherthe twostories ho had
told, and identified the Birth by saying,—"Devadatta was the Branch Deer of

42 The Jataka. Book I. i
tliuso liay.s, ;uRi his loI lowers were that deer's herd; the nun was the doe, auJ
rrincc Kassapa was her oftspring; Anaiidawas the king; and 1 luysulfwas King
Banyan Deer."
[Not(-. This Jataka is referred to in Milindapaiiho (page 289 ofRhys Davids'
transition), and is figured in Phites xxv. (1) and XLiii. (2) of Cunningham's
Stupa of liharhut and in the frontispiece to this Vohnnc. Sec also .lulien's
IfIIen Thsang, II. .3()1—. For the .stanza and the Introductory Story see
Dliammapada, pp. 327 330.]
No. 13.
KAXDINA-JATAKA.
—
^'Cnrxed he the dart of loce." This story was told l>y the Master while at
Jetavanaab(nit the teniptati(Mi caused to Brethren hythewives oftheir nunidane
life. This will be related in the Indriya-jataka' in the Eighth Book. Said the
Blessed One to the Brother, "Brother, it was because of this very woman that in
bygone days you met your death and were roasted overglowing embers." The
Brethren asked the Ble.ssed One to explain this. The Blessed One made clear
what had })een concealed from them by re-l)irth.
[154] (Henceforth we shall omit the words respecting the Brethren's request
for an explanation and the making cle;ir what had been concealed by re-birth
and we shall only say "told this story of the p—ast." When only this is said, all ;
the rest is to besuppliedand repeatedasabove, therequest, thesimileofsetting
free the moon fi-oni the clouds, and the makingclear what had been concealed by
re-birth.)
Once on a time in tin; kingdom of Magadha the king was reigning in
Rajagaha, and when the crops were grown the deer were exposed to great
perils, so that they retired to the forest. Now^ a certain mountain-stag of
the forest, having become attached to a doe who came from near a village,
was moved by his love for her to accompany her when the deer returned
home from the fore.st. 8aid she, "You, sir, are but a simi)le stag of the
forest, and the neighbourhood of villages is beset with peril and danger.
So don't come down with us." But he because of his great love for her
would not stay, but came with her.
1 No! 423.

—
! !
No. 13. 43
WJieu they knew that it was the time for the ileer to couu; down tV
the liills, the Magadha folk posted themselves in ambush by the road ;uid
;
a hunter was lying in wait just by the road along which the pair wen;
travelling. Scenting a man, the young doe suspected that a hunter was in
ambush, and let the stag go on first, following herself at some distance.
With a single arrow the hunter laid the stag low, and the doe seeing him
struck was off like the wind. Tlien that hunter came forth from his
hiding-place and skinned the stag and lighting a fire cooked the; sweet
flesh over the embers. Having eaten and drunk, he took ofT home th(!
remainder ofthe bleeding carcass onhiscarrying-poleto nigale hischililren.
Now in those days the Bodhisatta was a fairy dwelling in that very
grove of trees, and he marked what had come to pass. "Twas not father
or mother, but passion alone tiiat destroyed this foolish deer [155]. The;
—
dawn of passion is bliss, but its end is sorrow and suffering, the painful
loss of hands, and the misery of the five forms of bonds and blows. To
cause another's death is accounted infamy in this world ; infamous too is
the land which owns a woman's sway and rule and infamous are the men
;
who yield themselves to women's dominion." And tlier(;withal, while the
other fairies of the wood apjtlauded and offered i)erfumes and flowers and
the like in homage, the Bodhisatta wove the three infamies into a single
stanza, and made the wood re-echo with his sweet tones as he taught tlu;
ti'uth in these lines:
Cursed bo the dart of love that works men pain
I
Cursed be the land where women rule su[)reme
And cursed the fool that bows to woman's sway
Thus in a single stanza were the three infamies comprised by the
Bodhisatta, and the woods re-echoed as he taught the Truth with all the
mastery and grace ofa Buddha [156].
His lesson ended, the Master preached the Four Truths, at the close whereof
the love-sick Brother was established in the Fruit of the First Path. Having
told the two stories, the Master shewed the connexion linking the two together,
and identified the Birth.
(Henceforward, we shall omit the -words 'Ha\-ing told the two stories,'
and simply say 'shewed the comiexion...;' the words omitted arc to be sup|)lied
as before.)
"In those days," said the Master, "the love-sick Brother was the mountjiin-
stag; his mundane wife was the young doc, and I was myself the fairy who
preached the Truth shewingthe sin ofpassion."
[Sotc. See page 330 ofBenfcy's Pa/ica-Tan(ra.]

44 The Jataka. Book I.
No. 14.
VATAMIGA-JATAKA.
" There'snothingworse." This storywas told bythe Master while at Jetavaua,
about theElder Tissa, called Direct-alms the Less. Traditionsaysthat,whilethe
Masterwas dwelling at the Bamboo-grove near Rajagaha, the scion of a wealthy
house, Prince Tissa by name, coming one day to the Bamboo-grove and there
hearing a discourse from the Master, wished tojoin the Bi-otherhood, but, being
refused because his parents would not give their consent, obtained their consent
l)y following Rattha-pala'si example and refusing food for seven days, and finally
took the vows with the Master.
About a fortnight after admitting this young man, the Masterrepaired from
theBamboo-grovetoJetavana,wheretheyoungnoblemanundertooktheThirteen
Obligations''^ and passed his time in going his round for alms from house to
house, omitting none. Under the name of the Elder Tissa Direct-alms the
Less, he became as bright and shining a light in Buddhism as the moon in
the vault ofheaven.
A festival having been proclaimed at this time at Rajagaha, the Elder's
mother and father laid in a silver casket t—he trinkets he used to wear as a
layman, andtook it to heart, bewailing thus, "At otherfestivals our son used
to wear this or that bravery as he kept the festival; and he, our only sou,
has been taken away by the sage Gotama to the town of Savatthi. Where
is our son sitting now or standing?" Now a slave-girl who came to the house,
noticed the lady ofthe house weeping, and asked her why she was weeping and
;
the lady told her all,
"What, madam, was your son fond of?" "Of such and such a thing,"
replied the lady. "Well, if you will give me authority in this house, I'll fetch
your son back." "Very good," said the lady in assent, and gave the girl her
expenses and despatched her with a large following, saying, "Go, and manage to
fetch myson back."
So away the girl rode in a palanquin to Savatthi, where she took up lier
residence in the street which the Elder used to frequent for alms. [157]
Surrounding herself with servants of her own, and never allowing the Elder
to see his father's people about, she watched the moment when the Elder
entered the street and at once bestowed on him an alms of victual and drink.
And when she had bound him in the bonds of the craving of taste, she got
him eventually to seat himself in the house, till she knew that hergifts of food
as alms had put him in her power. Then she feigned sickness and lay down in
an inner chamber.
In thedue course ofhis round for alms at the proper time, the Eldercame to
the door of her house; and her people took the Elder's bowl and made him
sit down in the house.
When he had seated himself, he said, "Where is the lay-sister?" "She's
ill, sir; she would beglad to seeyou."
Bound as he was by the bonds of the craving of taste, he broke his vow
and obligation, and went to where the woman was lying.
1 See liatthapdla-sutta in theMajjhhmi-Nlkdya (No. 83), translated in the Ceylon
R. A. S. Journal, 1847. See also Vinaya, Vol. iii. pages 13and 148.
^ These are meritorious ascetic practices for quelling the passions, of which the
thirdisan undertaking to eat no foodexcept alms received direct fromthegiverinthe
Brother'salms-bowl. Hence "ticket-food" (JatakaNo. 5) wasinadmissible.

No. 14. 45
Then she told him the reason of hercoming, and so wrought on him that, all
because of his being bound by the bonds of the cravingof taste, slie made him
f p o a r l s a a n k q e ui t n he an B d ro c t a h m e e rh b o a o c d k ; wi w t h h e a n la h r e ge w f a o s llo i w n in h g e t r o p ll o a w j e a r g , ah s a h a e ga p in u . t him in the
All this was noised abroad. Sitting in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren
discussed the matter, saying, "Sirs, it is reported that a slave-girl lias bound
in the bonds of the craving of taste, and has carried oft", the Elder Tissa the
Less, called Direct-alms." Entering the Hall the ]\[aster sat down on his
jewelled seat, and said, "What, Brethren, is the subject of discussion in this
conclave?" They told him the incident.
"Brethren," said he, "this is not the first time that, in bondage to the
c p r o a w v e i r ng in of li t k a e st m e a , n h n e er h . a " s fa X l w le d n s i o nt s o ay h i e n r g, po h w e er to ; ld in th b i y s g s o t n o e ry da o y f s th t e oo pa h s e t. fell into her
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares he had a
gardener named Sanjaya. Now there came into the king's pleasaunce a
Wind-antelope, which fled away at the sight of Safljaya, but the latter let
it go without ten'ifying the timid creature. After several visits the
antelope used to roam about in the pleasaunce. Now the gardener was
in the habit ofgathering flowers and fruits and taking them day by day to
the king. Said tlie king to him one day, "Have you noticed anything
strange, friend gardener, in the pleasaunce?" "Only, sir, that a Wind-
antelope has come about the grounds." "Could you catch it, do you
think?" "Oh, yes; if I had a little honey, I'd bring it right into your
majesty's palace.''
The king ordered the honey to be given to the man and he went off"
with it to the pleasaunce, wliere he first anointed with the honey the grass
at the spots frequented by the antelope, [158] and then hid himself.
When the antelope came and tasted the honied grass it was so snared by
tlie lust of taste that it would go nowhere else but only to the pleasaunce.
Marking the success of his snare, the gardener began gradually to show
himself. The appearance of the man made the antelo])e take to flight for
the first day or two, but growing familiar with the sight of him, it
gathered confidence and gradually came to eat grass from the man's hand.
He, noting that the ci-eature's confidence had been won, first strewed the
path as thick as a cai'pet with broken boughs; then tying a gourd full
of honey on his shoulder and sticking a bunch of grass in his waist-cloth,
he kept dropping wisps of the honied grass in front of the antelope till at
last he got it right inside the palace. No sooner was the antelope inside
than they shut the door. At sight of men the antelope, in fear and
trembling for its life, dashed to and fro about the hall; and the king
coming down from his chamber above, and seeing the trembling creature,
said, "So timid is the Wind-antelope that for a whole week it will not
revisit a spot where it has so much as seen a man ; and ifit lias once been
frightened anywhere, it never goes back there again all its life long. Yet,

—
46 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
ensnared by the lust of taste, this wild thing from the jungle has actually
come to a place like this. Truly, my friends, there is nothing viler in the
world than this lustof taste." And he ])ut his teaching into this stanza :
There's nothing worse, men say, than taste to snare,
At home or with one's friends. Lo! taste it was
That unto Safijaya deliver'd up
The jungle-haunting anteloi)e so wild.
And with these words he let the antelope go back to its forest again.
[159] When the Master had ended his lesson, and had repeated what hehad
said as to that Brother's having fallen into that woman's power in bygone
days as well as in the present time, he shewed the connexion and identified
the Birth, by saying, "In those days this slave-girl was Saiijaya, Direct-alms the
Less was the wind-antelope, and I myselfwas the King ofBenares."
No. 15.
KHARADIYA-JATAKA.
—
"For when a deer." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana
about an unruly Brother. Tradition says that this Brother was unruly and
would not heed admonition. Accordingly, the Master asked him, saying, "Is it
true, as they say, that you are unruly and will not heed admonition?"
"Itis true. Blessed One,'' was the reply.
"So too in bygone days," said the Master, — "you were unruly and woiild
not heed the admonition of the wise and good, with the result that you were
caughtin a gin and met your death." And so saying, he told this story of the
past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was in Benares the Bodhisatta was
born a deer and dwelt in the foi'est at the head of a herd of deer. His
sister brought her son to him, saying, "Brother, this is your nephew;
teach him deer'sruses." And thussheplaced hersonimdertheBodhisatta's
care. Said the latter to his nephew, "Come at such and such a time and
I will give you a lesson." But the nephew made no appearance at the
time appointed. And, as on that day, so on seven days did he skip his
lesson and fail to learn the ruses of deer; and at last, as he was roaming
about, he was caught in a gin. His mother came and said to the
Bodhisatta, " Brother, was not your nephew taught deer's I'uses?"

—
No. 15. 47
"Take no thought for the iinteachable rascal," said the Bodhisatta
;
[160] "your son failed to learn the ruses ofdeor." And so saying, having
lost all desire to advise the scapegrace even in his deadlyperil, he repeated
this stanza:
For when a deer has twice four hoofs to run
And liranching antlers armed with countless tines,
And when by seven tricks he's saved himself,
1 teach him then, Kharadiya, no more.
But the hunter killed the self-willed deer that was caught in thesnare,
and departed with its flesh.
When the Master had ended this lesson in support of wliat he had said as to
the imruliness ofthe Brother in bygone daysas well as in the present,he shewed
the connexion, and identified the Birth, by saying "In those days this unruly
Brother was the nephew-deer, Uppala-vanna^ was the sister, and I myself the
deer who gave the admonition."
[JVote. In thegathCiIhave translatednotthemeaningless kfthlhiofFausbilll's
text, nor the easy variant hllehi, which is substituted in the gloss, but Laidhi,
the more difficult reading which occurs in some Sinhalese mss, and which is
read by Fausboll in the analogous story No. 16. This reading is also given
by Dickson in J. R. A. S. Ceylon, 1884, p. 188, from the Jataka Pela Sanne.
If kCdehi be read, the translation becomes, "I do not try to teach one who
has played truant seven times." In the J. R. A. S. Ceylon, 1884, p. 125,
Kiinte says, "I have little doubt thatlaldhi is the original form of the populai-
sing-song, and h'lle/u a mistake for it, and that on this mistake the granunarian
compiler has built up his silly little story about the deer who would not go
to school."]
No. 16.
TIPALLATTHA-MIGA-JATAKA.
"In all three postures."—This story was told by the Master while dwelling
in the Badarika Monastery in Kosambi, about the Elder Rahula whose li(!art
was set on observing the rules ofthe Brotherhood.
Once when the Master was dwelling in the Aggalava Temple lianl l)y the
town of Alavl, many female lay-disciples and Sisters used to flock thither
to hear the' Truth preached. The preaching was iu the daytime, but as tune
1 See the interesting Life of this theri iu Mrs Bode's 'Women Leaders of the
Buddhist Keformation' (J. R. A. S. 1893, pp. 540—552), where it is explained that
Uppala-vanna "cameby that name because she hada skin Hke the coloiu- iu the lieart
ofthedark-blue lotus."

48 The Jdtaka. Book I.
^Yore on, the women did not attend, and there were only Brethren and men
disciples present. Tlien the preaching took place in the evening; and at
t o h n e es cl w os i e th the th E e ld l e a r y- I di h s - c e i t p h l r e c s n r l e a t y ir d e o d w e n ac t h o to re h s i t s i o n wn the ch S a e m r b v e i r ce . -hal B l u . t t W h h e e y n oun t g h e ey r
fell asleep, loud was the snoring and snorting and gnashing of teeth as they
lay [161] After a short slumber some got up, and reported to the Blessed
One the impropriety which they had witnessed. Said he, "If a Brother sleeps
in the company of Novices, it is a Pacittiya offence (requiring confession and
,il>solution)." And after delivering this pi-ecept he went away to Kosambl.
Thereon the Brethren said to the Reverend Bilhula, "Sir,the Blessed Onehas
laid down this precept, and nowyouwill please find quarters ofyourown." Now,
before this, the Brethren, out ofrespect for the father and because ofthe anxious
desire ofthe son to observe therules ofthe Brotherhood,hadwelcomedtheyouth
as if the place were his;—theyhad fitted up a little bed for him, and had given
him acloth to make a pillow with. But on the day of our story they would not
e R v a e h n uT g a iv w e e h n i t m ne h i o t u h s e e r -r t o o o t m h , e s B o u f d e d a h rf a ul as we b r e e in t g h h e i y s o fa f th t e r r a -, ns n g o r r es t s o in S g a . ri _ p T ut h t e a, e C xc a e p l t l a e i n n t
of the Faith, as being his preceptor, nor to the Great Moggallana as beinghis
teacher, nor to the ElderAnandaas being his uncle ; but betook himself to the
liuddha's jakes and took up his abode there as though in a heavenly mansion.
Now in a Buddha'sjakesthe dooris always closely shut : the levelled floor is of
n p i e g r h f t um l e on d g e a ar l t a h m ; p f b l u o r w n e s rs th a e n re d . ga B r u la t nd i s t w a a re s f n e o s t to t o h n i e s d sp r l o e u n n d d ou t r he wh w i a c l h ls p ; r a o n m d pte al d l
Rilhula to take up his residencehere. Nay, it was simply because the Brethren
had told him to find quarters for himself, and because he reverenced instruction
and yearned to observe the rules of the Order. Indeed, from time to time the
Brethren, to test him, when they saw him comingfrom quite a distance, used to
throw down a hand-broom or a little dust-sweepings, and then ask who had
thrown it down, after Rahula had come in. "Well, Rahula came that way,"
would be the remark, but neverdid the futiu'e Eldersay he knew nothingabout
it. On the contrary, he \ised to remove the litter and humbly ask pardon of the
Brother, nor go away till he was assured that he was pardoned;—so anxious was
he to observe therules. And it was solely this anxiety which made him take up
his dwelling in thejakes.
Now, though day had not yet dawned, the Master halted at the door of
thejakes and coughed 'Ahem.' 'Ahem,' responded the Reverend Rahula. "Who
is there?" said the Buddha. "It is I, Rahula," was the reply; and out came
the young man and bowed low. "Why have you been sleeping here, Rahula?"
"Because I had nowhere to go to. Up till now, sir, the Brethren have been
very kind to me; but such is their present fear of erring [162] that they won't
give me shelter any more. Consequently, I took up my abode here, because
I thoughtit a spot where I should not come into contact with anybody else."
Then thought the Master to himself, "If they treat even Rahula like this,
what will they not do to other youths wliom they admit to the Order?" And
his heart was moved within him for the Truth. So, at an early hourhehad the
Brethren assembled,and questioned the Captain of the Faith thus, "I suppose
you at all events, Sariputta, knowwhere Rahula is now quartered? '
"No, sir, I do not."
"Sariputta, Rahula was living this day in the jakes. Sariputta, if you treat
Rahula like this, what will not be your treatment of other youths whom you
admit to the Order? Such treatment will not retain those who join us. In
future, keep your Novices in your own quarters for a day or two, and only
on the third daylet them lodge out, taking care to acquaintyourself with their
l<xlging." With this rider, the Masterlaid down the precept.
Gathering together in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren spoke of the goodness
of Rahula. "See, sirs, how anxious was Rahula to observe the rules. When
told to find his own lodging, he did not say, 'I am the son of the Buddha;
what haxeyou to do with quarters? Vou turn out!' No; not a single Brother
did he oust, but quartered himselfin thejakes."

— —
; ;
No. 16. 49
As they were talking thus, the Mastercame to the Hall and took his scat on
his throne ofstate, saying, "What is the subject ofyour talk, brethren/"
"Sir," was the reply, "we were talking of the anxiety of Rahula to keep
the rules, nothingelse."
Then said the Master, "This anxiety Rahula h;is shewn not only now,
but also in tlie past, when he had been born an animal." And sosiiying, he told
thisstory ofthe past.
Once on a time a certain king of Magadha was reigning in Riijagaba;
and in those days the Bodhisatta, having been born a stag, was living in
the forest at the head of a herd of deer. Now his sister brouglit Iier son
to him, saying, "Brother, teach your nephew here the ruses of deer."
"Certainly," said the Bodhisatta; "go away now, my boy, and come back
at such and such a time to be taught." Punctually at the time his uncle
mentioned, the young stag was there and received instruction in the ruses
ofdeer.
One day as he was ranging the woods he was caught in a snare and
uttered the plaintive cry of a captive. Away fled the herd and told the
mother of her son's capture. She came to her bi'other and asked him
whether his nephew had been taught the ruses ofdeer. "Fear not; [163]
your son is not at fault," said the Bodhisatta. "He has learnt thoroughly
deer's ruses, and will come back straightway to your great rejoicing."
And so saying, he repeated this stanza:
In all three postures—on his back or sides
Your son is versed ; he's trained to use eight hoofs',
And save at midnight never slakes hi.s thirst
As he lies couched on earth, he lifeless seems.
And only with his under-nostril breathes.
Six tricks2 my nephew knows to cheat his foes.
[164] Thus did the Bodhisatta console his sister by shewing her how
thoroughly her son had mastered the ruses of deer. Meantime the young
stag on being caught in the snare did not struggle, but lay down at full
length^ on his side, with his legs stretched out taut and rigid. He pawed
up the ground round his hoofs so as to shower the grass and earth about
relieved nature; let his head fall; lolled out his tongue; beslavered his
body all over; swelled himself out by drawing in the wind ; turned up his
eyes; breathed only with the lower nostril, holding his breath with the
upper one; and made himself generally so rigid ami so stifl" as to look like
a corpse. Even the blue-bottles swarmed round him ; and here and there
crows settled.
1 This the commentator explains as having two hoofs on each foot, reffrriiij,' to
thecloven hoofofthedeer.
2 I.e. the three mentioned in line 1, and the three mentioned in lines 2, H, and 5,
respectively.
» See infra p. G2, 1. 10.
4
c. J.

50 The Jataka. Booh I.
The hunter came up and smacked the stag on the belly with his hand,
remarking, "He must have been caught early this morning ; he's going
bad already." So saying, the man loosed the stag from his bonds, saying
to himself, "I'll cut him up here where he lies, and take the flesh home
with me." But as the man guilelessly set to work to gather sticks and
leaves (to make a fire with), the young stag rose to his feet, shook himself,
stretched out his neck, and, like a little cloud scudding before a mighty
wind, sped swiftly back to his mother.
Afterrepeating what hehad said asto Rahula's having shewn no less anxiety
in time past to keep rules than in the present, the Master made the connexion
and identified the Birth by saying, "Rahula was the young stag of those days,
Uppala-vanna his mother, and I the staghis uncle."
[^Note. According to Feer (J. As. 1876, p. 516) this Jataka is also called
SilUiCd-Cimd in the Bigandet lis. The substance of the Introductory Story
occurs in the Viriai/a, Vol. iv. page 16.]
No. 17.
MALUTA-JATAKA.
—
"/)!. light or dark." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana
about two Brethren who had joined the Brotherhood in their old age. Tradition
says [165]that they were living in a forest-dwelling in the Kosala country, and
that one was named the Elder Dark and the other the Elder Light. Now one
day Light said to Dark, "Sir, at what time does what is called cold appear?"
"It appears in the dark half of the month." And one day Dark said to Light,
"Sir, at what time does what is called cold appear?" "It appears in the liglit
halfofthe month."
As the pail' of them together could not solve the question, they went to the
Master and with due salutation asked, saying, "Sir, at what time does what is
called cold apjiear?"
After the Master had heard what they had to say, he said, "Brethren, in
e b x y i g s o t n e e nce d s ay h s av a e lso b , ec I o a m n e sw c e on r f e u d se f d or in yo y u ou t r hi m s i s n a d m s e i." que A s n ti d on so ; s b a u y t ing y , ou h r e t p o r l e d vi t o h u i s s
story ofthepast.
^ The compound bhavasaihkhepagatattd occurs here and in the next Jataka, and
also Vol. I. p. 463 and Vol. ii. p. 137. The meaning of the word appears to be that
by re-birth events in previous existences havebecome jumbled up together so thatno
distinct memory remains. A Buddha has the power of remembering the wholeofliis
pastexistences.

—
No. 18. 51
Once on a time at the foot of a certain mountain there were ]ivin<'
together in one and the same cave two friends, a lion and a tiger. The
Bodhisatta too was living at the foot of the same hill, as a hermit.
Now one day a dispute arose between the two friends about the cold.
The tiger said it was cold in the dark half of the month, whilst the lion
maintained that it was cold in the light lialf. As the two of them
together could not settle the question, they put it to the Bodhisiitta. H<!
repeated this stanza:
In light or dark half, whensoe'er the wind
Doth blow, 'tis cold. For cold is caused by wind.
And, therefore, I decide you both are right.
Thus did the Bodhisatta make peace between those friends.
[166] AVTien the ^Masterhad ended his lesson in support of what hehad said
as to his having answered the same question in l)'ygone days, he preaclied tlic
Four Truths, at the close whei'eof both of the Elders won the Fruit of the First
Path. The Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth, by saying,
"Dark was the tiger of those days, Light the lion, and I myself the ascetic who
answered the question."
No. 18.
MATAKABHATTA-JATAKA.
"Iffolk but kne7v."—T\-iis story was told by the Master while at Jetavaua
about Feasts for the Dead. For at this time the folk were putting to death
goats, sheep, and otheranimals, and offering them up as what is called a Feast
for the Dead, for the sake of their departed kinsmen. Finding tliem thus
engaged, the Brethren asked the ^Master, saying, "Just now, sir, tlic folk are
taking the lives of many living creatures and offering them up as what iscalled
a Feast for the Dead. Can it be, sir, that there is any good in this?"
"No, Brethren," replied the Master ; "not even when life is taken with the
object of providing a Feast for the Dead, does any good arise thcirefi-om. In
bygone days the wise, preaching the Trutli from mid-air, and shewing the evil
consequences of the practice, made the whole continent renounce it. But n()w,
when their previous existenceshave become confused in their minds,the practice
has sprung upafresh." And, so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadattawas reigningin Benares, abrahmin,
who was versed in the Three Vedas and world-famed as a teacher, Ix'iug
minded to offer a Feast for the Dead, had a goat fetclied and said to his
4—2

" ;
52 The Jataha. Book I.
pupils, "My sons, take this goat down to the river and bathe it; then
hang a garland round its neck, give it a pottle of grain to eat, groom it a
Vjit, and bring it back."
"Very good," said they, and down to the river they took the goat,
where they bathed and groomed the creature and set it on the bank.
The goat, becoming conscious of the deeds of its past lives, was overjoyed
at the thought that on this very day it would be freed from all its misery,
and laughed aloud like the smashing of a pot. Then at the thought that
the brahmin by slaying it would bear the misery which it had borne, the
goat felt a great compassion for the brahmin, and wept with a loud voice.
"Friend goat," said the young brahmins [167], "your voice has been loud
both in laughter and in weeping ; what made you laugh and what made
you weep?
"Ask me your question before your master."
So with the goat they came to their master and told him of thematter.
After hearing their story, the master asked the goat why it laughed and
why it wept. Hereupon the animal, recalling its past deeds by its— power
of remembering its former existences, spoke thus to the brahmin : "In
times past, Ijrahmin, I, like you, was a brahmin versed in the mystic texts
of the Vedas, and I, to offer a Feast for the Dead, killed a goat for my
offering. All through killing that single goat, I have had my head cut off
five hundred times all but one. This is my five hundredth and last birth
and I laughed aloud when I thought that this very day I should be freed
from my misery. On the other hand, I wept when I thought how, whilst
I, who for killing a goat had been doomed to lose my head five hundred
times, was to-day being freed from my misery, you, as a penalty for
killing me, would be doomed to lose your head, like me, five hundred
times. Thus it was out ofcompassion for you that I wept." "Fear not,
goat," said the brahmin ; "I will not kill you." "What is this you say,
brahmin % " said the goat. "Whether you kill me or not, I cannot escape
death to-day." "Fear not, goat; I will go about with you to guardyou."
"Weak is your protection, brahmin, and strong is the force of my
evil-doing."
Setting the goat at liberty, the brahmin said to his disciples, "Let us
not allow anyone to kill this goat;" and, accompanied by the young men,
he followed the animal closely about. The moment the goat was set free,
it reached out its neck to browse on the leaves of a bush growing near
the top of a rock. And that very instant a thunderbolt struck the rock,
rending off a mass which hit the goat on the outstretched neck and tore
offits head. And people came crowding round.
[168] In those days the Bodhisatta had been born a Tree-Fairy in that
selfsame .spot. Uy his supernatural powers he now seated himself cross-
legged in mid-air while all tlio crowd looked on. Thinking to himself, 'U

"
No. 19. 53
these creatures only knew the fruit of evil-doing, perhaps they would
desist f — rom killing,' in his sweet voice he taught thcin the Truth in this
stanza
:
If folk but knew the penalty would be
Birth unto sorrow, living things would cease
From taking life. Stern is the slayer's doom.
Thus did the Great Being preach the Truth, scaring his hearers with
the fear of hell; and the people, hearing him, were so terrified at
the fear of hell that they left ofl' taking life. And the JJodliisatUi after
establishing the multitude in the Commandments by preaching the Truth
to them, passed away to fare according to his deserts. The jicople, too,
remained steadfast in the teaching of the Bodhisatta and spent their liveii
in charity and other good works, so that in the end they thronged the City
ofthe Devas.
Hislesson ended, the Master shewed the connexion, and identified the Birth
by saying, "In those days I was the Tree-fairy."
No. 19.
AYACITABHATTA-JATAKA.
[169] ''Take thought of life hereafter." This story was told by the
blaster while at Jetavana aliout the offering of a sacrifice luuler vow to gods.
Tradition says that in those days folk when going a journey on business, usetl to
slay living creatiu-es and of—fer them as a sacrifice to gods, and set out on their
way, after making this vow, "If we come safely back with a profit, we will give
you another sacrifice." And when they did come safely back with a profit, the
idea thatthiswas all due to gods made them slay a number of living creatums
and offer them uj) as a sacrifice to obtain arelease from their vow.
When the Brethren became aware ofthis, they asked the Blessed One,saying,
"Can there be any good in this, sir/
The Blessed One told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time in the Kasi country the squire ofa certain little village
had promised a sacrifice to the Fairy of a banyan-tree which stood at the
entrance to the villase. Afterwards when he returned, he slew a number

—
54 The Jataka. Book I.
ofcreatures and betook himself to the tree to get released from his vow.
But the Tree-Fairy, standing in the fork of its tree, repeated this stanza:
Take thought of life hereafter when you seek
'llelease'; for this release is bondage strict.
Not thus the wise and good release themselves
For this, the fool's release, in bondage ends. ;
Thenceforth, men refrained from such taking of life, and by walking in
righteousness thronged thereafter the city of the Devas.
His lesson ended, the Mastershewed the connexion and identified the Birth,
by saying, "I was the Tree-fairy ofthose days."
[JVote. Feer mentions a second title, Panavadha-Jdtaka (J. As. 1876, p.
516).]
No. 20.
NALAPANA-JATAKA.
[ITU] '^Ifound the footprintsP This story was told by the Master whilst
journeying on an alms-pilgrimage through Kcjsala, when he had come to the
village of Nalaka-pana (Cane-drink) and was dwelling at Ketaka-vana nearthe
Pool of Nalaka-pana, about cane-sticks. In those days the Brethren, after
bathing in the Pool of Nalaka-pana, made the novices get them cane-sticks for
needle-cases1, but, finding them hollow throughout, went to the Master and said,
"Sir, we had cane-sticks got in orderto provide needle-cases and from top to
bottom they are quite hollow. Now how can that be?" ;
"Brethren," said the Master, "such was my ordinance in times gone by."
And, so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
In past times, we are told, there was a thick forest on this spot. And
in the lake here dwelt a water-ogre who used to devoureveryonewho went
down into the watex-. In those days the Bodhisattahad come to lifeas the
king of the monkeys, and was as big as the fawn ofa red deer ; he lived in
that forest at the head of a troop of no less than eighty thousand monkeys
1 In the Vinaya, {CiiUav. v. 11), theBuddha is made to allow "the use of a needle-
casemadeofbamboo."

—
"
No. 'ZO. 55
—
whom he shielded from harm. Thus did he coiiii«el his s\il»jects; ''My
friends, in this forest there are trees that are poisonous and lakes tliat are
haunted by ogres. Mind to ask me first liefore you either (sat any fruit
which you have not eaten before, or drink of any wattu- wliere you have
not drunk before." "Certainly," said they readily.
One day they came to a s})ot they had never visited before. As they
were searching for water to drink after their day's wanderings, they came
on this lake. But they did not drink on the contrary they sat down
;
watching for the coming of the Bodhisatta.
When he came up, he said, "Well, my friends, why don't you drink?
"We waited for you to come."
"Quite right, my friends," said the Bodhisatta. Then he made a cir-
cuit of the lake, and scrutinized the footprints round, with the result that
he found tliat all the footsteps led down into the water and none came up
again. "Without doubt," thought he to himself, "this is the haunt of an
ogre." So he said to his followers, "You are quite right, my friends, in
not drinking of this water ; for the lake is haunted by an ogre."
When the water-ogre realised that they were not entering his domain,
[171] he assumed the shape of a horrible monster with a blue belly, a
white face, and bright-red hands and feet ; in this shape he came out from
the water, and said, "Why are you seated here"? Go down into the lake
and drink." But the Bodhisatta said to him, "Are not you the ogre of
this water'?" "Yes, I am," was the answer. " Do you take as your prey
all those who go down into this water?" "Yes, I do; from small birds
upwards, I never let anything go which comes down into my water. I
will eat the lot of yon too." "But we shall not let you eat us." "Just
drink the water." "Yes, we will diink the water, and yet not fall into
your power." "How do you propose to drink the water, then?" "Ah,
you think we shall have to go down into the water to drink whereas we
;
shall not enter the water at all, but the whole eighty thousand of us will
take a cane each and drink therewith from your lake as easily as we could
through the hollow stalk of a lotus. And so you will not be able to eat
us." And he repeated the latter half of the following stanza (the first
half being added by the Master when, as Buddba, he recalled the inci-
dent):
I found the footprints all lead down, none back.
With canes we'll drink you shall not take my life.
;
So saying, the Bodhisatta had a cane brought to him. Tlien, calling to
mind the Ten Perfections displayed by him, he recited them in a .solemn
asseveration', and blewdown the cane. [172] Straightway the cane became
1 Literally "madeatruth-act." If this is done with iuteution, a miracle instantly
follows. Cf. No. 35 &c.

56 The Jataka. Book I.
hollow throughout, withoutasingleknotbeingleftinallitslength. In this
fashion he had another and another brought and blew down them. (But
ifthis were so, he could never have finished ;— and acc — ordingly the forego-
ing sentence must not be understood in this literal sense.) Next the
Bodhisatta made the tour of the lake, and commanded, saying, "Let all
canes throwing here become hollow throughout." Now, thanks to the
"reat virtues of the saving goodness of Bodhisattas, their commands are
always fulfilled. And thenceforth every single cane that grew round tliat
lake became hollow throughout.
(In this Kapjya, or Era, there are four miracles w — hich endure through
the whole Era. What are the fonrl Well, they are first, the sign ofthe
hare in the moon', which will last through the whole Era ; secondly, the
spot where the fire was put out as told in the Vattaka Jataka^, which
shall remain untouched by fii-e throughout the Era ; thirdly, on the site
of Ghatlkara's house^ no rain shall ever fall while this Era lasts and
;
lastly, the canes that grow round this lake shall be hollow throughout
during the whole of the Era. Such are the four Era-miracles, as they are
called.)
After givingthiscommand, the Bodhisattaseated himselfwithacane in
his hands. All the other eighty thousand monkeys too seated tliemselves
round the lake, each with a cane in his hands. And at the same moment
when the Bodhisatta sucked the water up through his cane, they all drank
too in the same manner, as they sat on the bank. This was the way they
drank, and not one of them could the water-ogre get ; so he went off in a
rage to his own habitation. The Bodhisatta, too, with his following went
back into the forest.
When the Masterhad ended his lesson and had repeated what he had said as
to the hoUowness of the canes being the result of a former ordinance of his
own, he shewed the connexion, and identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta
was the water-ogre of those days ; my disciples were the eighty thousand
monkeys ; and I was the monkey-king, so fertile in resource."
1 See Jataka No. 316, and Tawney's Kathd-Sarit-Sdgara, Vol. n. p. 66, where a
number of passages bearing on this symbol are referred to, and Benfey's Pafica-
Tantra, i. 349, See also Cariyu-Pitaka, p. 82.
* No. 85.
3 See the (unpublished) Gbatikara Sutta (No.81 oftheMajjhimaNikaya),Bhimma.
pada, p. 349, and Milinda-panha, p. 222.

;
No. '2i. 57
No. 21.
KURUNGA-JATAKA.
—
[173] "y/ic antelope tiiows well." This storywas told ])y tlic Ma.stor wliilo at
the Bamboo-grove about Dcvadatta. For onco when tlio J'retlircii wore gatlicivd
together in tlie Hall ofTi'uth,theysattalking reproachfullyof Devadatt^i,saying,
"Sirs, with a view to destroy the Buddha Devaelatta hired bowmen, hurleil down
a sl r a o y c t k, he an L d or l d et of loo W s i e s t d h o e m e i l ." eph E a n n t t e D r h i a n n g a a - n p d al s a e k a a ti ; ng in hi e m v s e e r l y f w o a n y t h h e e g s o e e a s t p a r b e o p u a t re t d o
for him, the Master asked, saying, "Sirs, what is the theme you arc discussing
hei'e in conclave?" "Sir," was the reply, "we were discussing the wickedness of
Devadatta, saying that he was always going about to slay you." Said the
Master, "It is not only in these present days, J)rethreu, that Devadatta goes
about —seeking to slay me; he went about with the like intent in bygone days
also, but was unable to slay me." And so saying, he told this story of the
past.
Once on a time when Bi'ahmadatta was reigning in Benares, tiie
Bodhisatta came to life as an antelope, and used to live ou fruits in liis
haunts in the forest.
At one period he was subsisting on the fruit of a sepaniii-tree.
And there was a village hunter, whose method was to l)uild a platform
in trees at the foot of which he found the track of deer, and to watch
aloft foi* their coming to eat the fruits of the trees. When the deer came,
he brought them down with a javelin, and sold the flesh for a living.
This hunter one day marked the tracks of the Bodhisattaat the footof the
tree, and made himself a platform up in the boughs. Having breakfasted
early, he went with his javelin into the forest and seated himself on his
platform. The Bodhisatta, too, came abroad early to eat the fruit of that
tree ; but he was not in too great a liurry to approach it. " For," thought
he to himself, "sometimes these platform-buildinghunters build themselves
"
platforms in the boughs. Can it be that this can have happened here1
And he halted some way offto reconnoitre. Finding that the Bodhisatta
did not approach, the hunter, still seated aloft on his platform, [174] threw
fruit down in front of the antelope. Said the latter to himself, " Here's
the fruit coming to meet me; I wonder if there is a hunter up there."
So he looked, and looked, till he caught sight of the hunter in the tree
but, feigning not to have seen the man, he shouted, " My worthy tree,
hitherto you have been in the habit of letting your fruit fall straight to
1 See Vinaya, CuUavagga, vii. 3, for details ofDevadatta'sattempt to kill (iotainu.
Inthe Vinaya, theelephant is named NAlagiri.

—
58 The Jataka. Book I.
the gi-ouiid like a peudaut creeper; but to-day you have ceased to act like
a tree. And therefore, as you have ceased to behave as becomes a tree, I
too must change, and look for food beneath anothertree." And so saying,
he repeated this stanza :
The antelope knows well the fruit you drop.
I like it not; some other tree I'll seek^
Then the hunterfrom his platform hurled hisjavelinatthe Bodhisatta,
crying, "Begone ! I've missed you this time." Wheeling round, the
Bodhisatta halted and said, '• You may have missed vie^ my good man
;
but dfipeiid upon it, you have not missed the reward of your conduct,
namely, tlie eight Large and the sixteen Lesser hells and all the live forms
of bonds and torture." With these words the antelope bounded offon its
way ; and the hunter, too, climbed down and went his way.
When the Master had ended this discourse and had repeated what he had
said about Devadatta's going about to slay him in bygone days also, he shewed
the connexion and identified the Birth, by saying, "Devadatta was the platform-
hunter ofthose days, and I myselfthe antelope."
No. 22.
KUKKURA-JATAKA.
—
[175] ''Thedogs that in the royalpalacegrow." This story was told by the
Master while at Jetavana, about acting for the good of kinsfolk, as will be
related in the Twelfth Book in the Bhaddasala-jataka-. It was to drive home
that lesson that he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the result
ofa past actofthe Bodhisatta was that he came to life as a dog, and dwelt
in a great cemeteiy at the head ofseveral hundred dogs.
Now one day, the king set out for his pleasaunce in his chariot of
state drawn by milk-white horses, and after amusing himself all the day
in the grounds came back to the city after sunset. The carriage-harness
^ SeeDhammapada, pp. 147, 331.
- No. 465.

No. 22. 5y
they left in the courtyard, still hitched ou to the clmriot. In the ni'dit
it rained and the harness got wet. Moreover, the king's dogs came down
from the ui)per chambers and gnawed the leather work and stra))s. Next
day they told the king, saying, "Sire, dogs have got in through the mouth
of the sewer and have gnawed the leather work and straps of your
majesty's carriage." Enraged at the dogs, the king said, " Kill every dog
you see." Then began a great slaughter of dogs; and the creatures,
6nding that they were being slain whenever they were seen, repaired to
the cemeterytothe Bodhisatta. "What isthe meaning,"asked he, "of your
assemlding in such numbers?" They said, "The king is so enraged at the
report that the leather work and straps of his carriage have been gnawetl
by dogs within the royal precincts, that he has ordered all dogs to \)v.
killed. Dogs are being destroyed wholesale, and great peril has arisen."
Thought the Bodhisatta to himself, "No dogs from without can get
into a place so closely watched; it must be the thoroughbred dogs inside
the palace who have done it. At present nothing happens to tlie real
culprits, while the guiltless are being put to death. What if I were to
discoverthe culpritsto the king and so save the lives ofmy kith and kin?"
He comforted his kinsfolk by saying, "H:ive no fear; I will save you.
[176] Only wait here till I see the king."
Then, guided by the thoughts of love, and calling to mind the Ten
Perfections, he made his way alone and unattended into the city, com-
manding thus, "Let no hand be lifted to throw stick or stone at me."
Accordingly, when he made his appearance, not a man grew angry at the
sight of him.
The king meantime, after ordering the dogs' destruction, had taken
his seat in the hall of justice. And straight to him ran the Bodhisatta,
leaping under the king's throne. The king's servants tried to get him
out ; but his majesty stoj^ped them. Taking heart a little, the Bodhisatta
came forth from under the throne, and bowing to the king, said, "Is
it you who are having the dogs destroyed?" "Yes, it is I." "What
is their offence, king of men?" "They have been gnawing the straps
and the leather covering my carriage." "Do you know the dogs wlio
actually did the mischief?" "No, I do not." "But, your majesty, if
you do not know for certain the real culprits, it is not right to order the
destruction ofevery dog that is seen." "It was because dogs had gnawed
the leather of my carriage that I ordered them all to be killed." " J)o
your people kill all dogs without e — xception ; or are there some dogs who
are spared?" "Some are spared, the thorough-bred dogs of my own
palace." "Sire, just now you were saying that you had ordered the
universal slaughter of all dogs wherever found, because dogs had gnawed
the leather of your carriage; whereas, now, you say tiiat the thorough-
bred dogs of your own palace escape death. Therefore you are following

— —
'
60 The Jdtaka. Book I.
the four Evil Courses of partiality, dislike, ignorance and fear. Such
courses are wrong, and not kinglike. For kings in trying cases should
be as unbiassed as the beam of a balance. But in this instance, since
the royal dogs go scot-free, whilst poor dogs are killed, this is not the
impartial doom of all dogs alike, but only the slaughter of poor dogs."
And moreover, the Great Being, lifting up his sweet voice, said, "Sire, it
is not justice that you are performing," and he taught the Truth to the
—
king in this stanza : [177]
The dogs that in the royal palace grow,
The well-bred dogs, so strong and fair of form,
Not these, but only we, are doomed to die.
Here's no impartial sentence meted out
To all alike; 'tis slaughter of the poor.
After listening to the Bodhisatta's words, the king said, "Do you in
your wisdom know who it actually was that gnawed the leather of my
carriage1" "Yes, sire." "Who was it?" "The thorough-bred dogs
that live in your own palace." " How can it be shewn that it was they
who gnawed the leather?" "I will prove it to you," "Do so, sage."
"Then send for your dogs, and have a little butter-milk and kusa-grass
brought in." The king did so.
Then said the Great Being, "Let this grass be mashed upinthebutter-
milk, and make the dogs drink it."
—
The king did so; with the result that each several dog, as he drank,
vomited. And they all brought up bits of leather ! "Why it is like a
judgment of a Perfect Buddha himself," cried the king overjoyed, and
he did homage to the Bodhisatta by offering him the royal umbrella. But
the Bodhisatta taught the Truth in the ten stanzas on righteousness in the
Te-sakuna Jataka^, beginning with the vk^ords:
Walk righteously, great king of princely race.
Then having established the king in the Five Commandments, and
having exhorted his majestyto be steadfast, the Bodhisatta handed back to
the king the white umbrella ofkingship.
At the close of the Great Being's words, [178] the king commanded
that the lives of all creatures should be safe from harm. He ordered that
all dogs from the Bodhisatta downwards, should have a constant supply of
food such as he himself ate; and, abiding by the teachings of the Bodhi-
satta, he spent his life long in charity and other good deeds, so that when
he died he was re-born in the Deva Heaven. The 'Dog's Teaching
endured for ten thousand years. The Bodhisatta also lived to a ripe old
age, and then passed away to fare according to his deserts.
No. 521.

No. 2;}. 61
When the Master had ended this lesson, and had said, "Not only now,
Brethren, does — the Buddha do what profits liis kimhvd ; in former times alsn he
did the like," he shewed the connexion, and identified the I'irth hy sjiyinj^,
"Ananda was the king ofthose days, the liuddlia's fcjllowers were the othei-s,and
I myselfwas the dog."
No. 23.
bhojajaniya-jAtaka.
—
"Though prosti'ate noiv." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana about a Brother who gave up persevering. For it was then that
the Master addressed that Brother and said, "Bretln'en, in bygone days the wise
and good persevered even amid hostile surroundings, and, even when they were
wounded, still did not give in." And, so saying, he told this story of the past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodlii-
satta came to life as a thoroughbred 8indh horse and was made the king's
destrier, surrounded by all pomp and state. He was fed on exquisite
three-year old rice, which was always served vip to him in a golden dish
worth a hundred thousand pieces of money ; and the ground of ids stall
was perfumed with the four odours. Round his stall were hung ciimson
curtains, while overhead was a canopy studded with stars ofgold. On tlio
walls were festooned wreaths and garlands of fragrant flowers; and a himp
fed with scented oil was always burning thei'e.
Now all the kings round coveted the kingdom of Benares. Once seven
kings encompassed Benares, and sent a missive to theking, saying, "Either
yield up your kingdom to us or give battle." Assembling his ministers,
the king of Benares laid the matter before them, and asked them what lie
was to do. Said they, "You ought not to go oiit to do battle in person,
sire, in the first instance. [179] Despatch such and such a knight out (ii-st
to tight them and later on, ifhe fails, we will decide what to do."
;
Then the king sent for that knight and said to him, "Canyou figlit tin-
seven kings, my dear knight?" Said he, "Give me butyour noltle destrier,
and then I could fight not seven kings only, but all the kings in India."
"My dear knight, take my destrier or any other horse you plea.so, and do
battle." "Very good, mysovereign lord,"said the knight; and with a bow-
he passed down from the upper chamlx^rs of the ])alace. Th«'n he had the
noble destrier led out and sheathed in mail, aiming liimself too c.-ip:'i-|>ie.

62 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
andgirding on his sword. Moimted on his noble steed he passedoutofthe
city-gate, and witli a lightning charge broke down the first camp, taking I
one king alive and bringing him back a prisoner to the soldiers' custody.
Returning to the field, he broke down the second and the third camps,
and so on until he captured alive five kings. The sixth camp he had
just broken down, and had captured the sixth king, when his destrier
received a wound, which streamed with blood and caused the noble animal
sharp pain. Perceiving that the horse was wounded, the knight made it
lie down at the king's gate, loosened its mail, and set about arming another
horse. As the Bodhi-satta layat full length on his side, he opened his eyes,
and gathered what the knight was doing. "My rider," thought he to
himself, "is arming another horse. That other horse will never be able to
break down the seventh camp and capture the seventh king ; he will lose
all that I have accomplished. This peerless knight will be slain ; and the
king, too, will fall into the hands of the foe. I alone, and no other horse,
can break down that seventh camp and capture the seventh king." So, as
he lay there, he called to the knight, and said, "Sir knight, there is no
horse but I who can break down the seventh camp and capture the
seventh king. I will not throw away what I have already done only
;
have me set upon my feet and clad again in my armour." And so saying,
—
he repeated this stanza: [180]
Though prostrate now, and pierced with darts, I lie.
Yet still no hack can match the destrier.
So harness none but me, charioteer.
The knight had the Bodhisatta set upon his feet, bound up his wound,
and armed him again in proof. Mounted on the destrier, he broke down
the seventh camp, and brought back alive the seventh king, whom he
handed over to the custody of the soldiers. They led the Bodhisatta too
up to the king's gate, and the king came out to look upon him. Then
said the Great Being to the king, "Great king, slay not these seven
kings ; bind them by an oath, and let them go. Let the knight enjoy all
the honour due to us both, for it is not right that a warrior who has
presented you with seven captive kings should be brought low. And
as for yourself, exercise charity, keep the Commandments, and rule your
kingdom in righteousness and justice." When the Bodhisatta had thus
exhorted the king, they took off his mail ; but when they were taking it
offpiecemeal, he passed away.
The king had the body burned with all respect, and bestowed great
honour on the knight, and sent the seven kings to their homes after
exacting from each an oath never to war against him any more. And he
I'uled his kingdom in righteousness and justice, passing away when his
life closed to fare thereafter according to his deserts.

—
No. 24. 63
Then the Master said, "Thus, Brethren, in bygone days the wise and good
persevered evenamidhostilesurroundings,and,even wlion wounilodsogrievously,
still did no — t give in. Whereas you who have devoted yourself to so saving
a doctrine, how comes it that you give up persevering?" After whicli, he
preached the Four Truths, at the close whereof the faint-hearted Brother
won Arahatship. His lesson ended, the Master [181] shewed the connexion,
and identified the Birth by saying, "Ananda was the king of those days,
Sariputta the knight, and 1 myselfthe tliorougli-bicd Sindh lutrse."
No. 24.
AJANNA-JATAKA.
—
^^jVo matter when or where." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana about another Brother who gave up persevering. But, in this case, he
addressed that Brother and said, "Brethren, in bygonedays the wise and good
still persevered even when wounded." And, so saying, he told this story of the
past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, there
were seven kings who encompassed the city, just as in the foregoing story.
So a warrior who fought from a chariot harnessed two Sindh horses (a
pair of brothers), and, sallying from the city, broke down six canij)s and
captured six kings. Just at this juncture the elder horse was wounded.
On drove the charioteer till he reached the king's gate, where he took tlu^
elder brother out of the chariot, and, after unfastening the horse's mail as
he lay upon one side, set to work to arm another horse. Realising the
warrior's intent, the Bodhisatta had the same thouglits pass through his
head as in the foregoing story, and sending for the chai-iotcci-, rc|ifatr(]
this stanza, as he lay :
No matter when or where, in weal or woe,
The thorough-bred fights on ; the hack gives in.
The charioteer had the Bodhisatta set on his feet and liarnestied. Tlien
he broke down the seventli camp and took prisoner tlie seventh king, with
whom he drove away [182] to the king's gate, and there took out the
noble horse. As he lay upon one side, the Bodhisatta gave the same coun-
sels to the king as in the foregoing story, and then expired. The king had
the body burned with all respect, lavished honouis on the chaiiolii r, ;inil

64 The Jataka. Book I.
after ruling his kingdom in righteousness passed away to fare thereafter
uccordins: to his deeds.
His lesson ended, the Master preached the Truths (at the close whereof
that Brotlior won Arahatship) ; and identihed the Birth by saying, "The Elder
Ananda was the king, and the Perfect Buddha was the horse ofthosedays."
No. 25.
TITTHA-JATAKA.
—
"Changethou thespot.''' This storywastold bytheMasterwhileatJetavana,
about an ex-goldsmith, who had become a Brotherand was co-resident with the
Captain ofthe Faith (Sariputta).
Now, it is only a Buddha who has knowledge of the hearts and can read
the thoughts of men ; and therefore through lack of this power, the Captain
ofthe Faith had so little knowledge of the heart and thoughts ofhis co-resident,
as to prescribe impurity as the theme for meditation. This was no good
to that Brother. The reason why it was no good to him was that, according
to tradition, he had invariably been born, throughout live hundred successive
births, as a goldsmith; and, ciMisequently, the cumulative effect of seeing
alisolutely pure gold for so long a time had made the theme of impurity viseless.
He spent four months without being able to get so much as the first inkling
of the idea. Finding himself unable to confer Arahatship on his co-resident,
the Captain of the Faith thought to himself, "This must certainly beone whom
none but a Buddha can convert ; I will take him to the Buddha." So at
early dawn he came with the Brother to the Master.
"What can it be, Sariputta," said the Master, "that has brought you here
with this Brother?" "Sir, I gave him a theme for meditation, and after four
months he has not attained to so much as the first inkling of the idea; so
I brought him to you, thinkingthat here was one whom none but a Buddha can
convert." "What meditation, Sfiriputta, did you prescribe for him?" "The
meditation on impurity, Blessed One." "Sariputta, it is not yours to have
knowledge of the hearts and to read the thoughts of men. Depart now alone,
and in the evening come back to fetch your co-resident."
After thus dismissing the Elder, the Master had that Brother clad in a nice
under-cloth and a robe, kept him constantly at his side when he went into
town for alms, and saw that he received choice food of all kinds. Returning to
the Monastery once more,surrounded bytheBrethren,the Masterretired during
the daytime [183] to his perfinned chamber, and at evening, as he walked about
the Monastery with that Brother by his side, he made a pond appearand in it
a great clump of lotuses out of which grew a great lotus-flower. "Sit here,
Brother," he said, "and gaze at this flower." And, leaving the Brother seated
thus, he retired to his perfumed chamber.
That Brother gazed and gazed at that flower. The Blessed One made it
decay. As tlie Brother looked at it, the flower in its decay farled; the petals

— — —
No. 25. 65
fell off, beginning at the rim, till in a little while all were gone; then the
stamens fell away, and only the i)ericarp was left. As he looked, tliat lirother
thought within himself, "Even now, this lotus-flower was lovely and fair; vet its
colour is de]iarted, its petals and stamens have fallen away, and only the
pericarp is left standing. Decay has come upon this beautiful lotus; what may
not befall my body? Transitory are all compounded things!" An;! witli the
thought he won Insight.
Knowing that tlie Brother's mind had risen to Insight, the Master, seated an
he was in his perfumed chamber, emitted a radiant semblance of himself,
aiid uttered this stanza:
Pluck out self-love, as with the hand you pluck
The autumn water-lily. Set your heart
On naught but this, the ]ierfect Path of Peace,
And that Extinction which the Buddha taught.
At the close of this stanza, that Brother won Arahatshi]). At the thought
that he would never be born again, never be troubled with existence in any
shape hereafter, he burst into a heartfelt utterance beginning with tliese
stanzas
:
He who has lived his life, whose thought is ripe
He who, from all defilements purged and free, ;
Wears his last body; he whose life is pure,
Whose subject senses own him sovereign lord;
He, like the moon that wins her way at last
From Rahu's jaws\ has won supreme release.
The foulness which enveloped me, which wrought
D — el A u s s , io t n r ' i s ck u e t d te w r it d h ar t k h ne o s u s s , an I d d r i a s y p s e , ll t e h d e ; beaming sun
niumines heaven with a flood of light.
After this and renewed utterances ofjoy, he went to the Blessed One and
saluted him. The Elder, too, came,and after due salutation to the Master, went
away with his co-resident.
When news of all this spread among the Brethren, [184] they gathered
together in the Hall of Truth and there sat praising the virtues of tlie Lord
of Wisdom, and saying, "Sirs, through not knowing the hearts and thoughts
of men, the Elder Sariputta was ignorant of his co-resident's disposition. But
the Master knew, and in a single day liestowed on him Arahatshi[) together
with perfected scholarship. Oh, how great are the marvellous powers of a
Buddha!"
Entering and taking the seat set ready for him, the Master asked, saying,
"What is the theme ofyour discourse here in conclave. Brethren?"
"Naught else, Blessed One, than this,—that you alone had knowledge of the
heart, and could read the thoughts, of the co-resident of tlie Captain of tlie
Faith."
"This is no marvel. Brethren; that I, as Buddha, should now know that
Brother's disposition. Even in bygone days I knew it ecjually well." And, so
saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares. In those days
the Bodhisatta used to be the king's director in things t.-iii].oral and
spiritual.
1 Rfihu was a kind of Titan who was thought to cansn eclipses by triii|)onirily
swallowing tlie sun and moon.
^
C. J.

—
G6 Tlie Jdtaha. Booh I.
At this time folk had washed another horse, a sorry beast, at the bath-
inc'-place of the king's state-charger. And when the groom was for
leading the state-charger down into the same water, the animal was so
affronted that he would not go in. So the groom went off to the king
and said "Please your Majesty, your state-chai'ger won't take his
bath."
Then the king sent the Bodliisatta, saying, "Do you go, sage, and find
out why the animal will not go into the water when they lead him down."
"Very o'ood, sire," said the Bodliisatta, and went his way to the waterside.
Here he examined the horse; and, finding it was not ailing in any way, he
tried to divine what the reason could be. At last he came to the conclu-
sion that some other horse must have been washed at that place, and that
the charger had taken such umbrage thereat that he would not go into the
water. So he asked the grooms what animal they had washed first in the
—
water. "Another horse, my lord, an ordinary animal." "Ah, it's his
self-love that has been offended so deeply that he will not go into the
water," said the Bodhisatta to himself; "the thing to do is to wash
him elsewhere." So he said to the groom, "A man will tire, my friend, of
even the daintiest fiire, ifhe has it always. And that's how it is with this
horse. He has been washed here times without number. Take him to
other waters [185], and there bathe and water him." And so saying, he
repeated this stanza:
Change thou the spot, and let the charger drink
Now here, now there, with constant change of scene.
For even milk-rice cloys a man at last.
After listening to his words, they led the horse offelsewhere, and there
watered and bathed him all-right. And while they wei'e washing the
animal down after watering him, the Bodhisatta went back to the king.
"Well," saidthe king; "has my horsetakenhisdrink and bath, myfriendi"'
"He has, sire." "Why would he not do so at first? " "For the follow-
ing reason," said the Bodhisatta, and told the king the whole story.
"What a clever fellow he is," said the king; "he can read the mind even
of an animal like this." And he gave great honour to the Bodhisatta, and
when his life closed passed away to fare according to his deserts, Tlie
Bodhisatta also passed away to fare likewise according to his deserts.
When the Masterhad endedhislesson and had repeated what hehad said as
to his knowledge, in the past as well as the present, of that Brother's disposi-
tion, he shewed the connexion, and identified the Birth by saying, "This Brother
w wi a s s e t m h in e is s t t e a r t .' e " -charoer of those days; Ananda was tlie king ; and I myself the

No. 26. 67
No. 26.
MAHILAMUKHA-JATAKA.
—
"Through hearingfirst." This story was told by the Master while at the
Bamboo-grove, about Devadatta, who, having secured the adherence of Prince
Ajata-sattu, had attained both gain and honour. Prince Ajata-sattu had a
Monastery built for Devadatta at Gaya-sisa, and every day brought to him [186]
five hundredkettlesofperfumedthree-year-oldriceflavouredwithallthechoicest
flavourings. All this gain and honour brought Devadatta a great following,
with whom Devadatta lived on, without ever stirring out ofhis Monastery.
At that time there were living in Rajagaha two friends, of whom one
had taken the vows under the Master, whilst the other had taken them iinder
Devadatta. And these continued to see one another, either casually or by
visitingtheMonasteries. NowonedaythediscipleofDevadattasaid to the other,
"Sir, why do you daily go round for alms with the sweat streaming oft' you?
Devadatta sits quietly at Gaya-sisa and feeds on the best of fare, flavoured
with all the choicest flavourings. There's no way like his. Why breed misery
for yourself? Why should it not be a good thing for you to come the first
thing in the morning to the Monastery at Gaya-sisa and there drink our rice-
gruel with a relish after it, try our eighteen kinds of solid victual, and enjoy our
excellent soft food, flavom-ed with all the choicest flavom'ings?"
Beingpressed time aftertimetoaccept theinvitation,the other began towant
to go, and thenceforth used to go to Gaya-sisa and there eat and eat, not forget-
ting however to return to the Bamboo-grove at the proper hovir. Nevertheless
he could not keep it secret always ; and in a little while it came out that
he used to hie oft' to Gaya-sisa and there regale himself with the food provided
for Devadatta. Accordingly, his friends asked him, saying. "Is it true, as they
say, thatyou regale yourself on the food provided for Devadatta?" "Who said
that?" said he. "So-and-so said it." "It is true, sirs, that I go to Gaya-sisa
and eat there. But it is not Devadatta who gives me food ; others do that."
"Sir, Devadatta is the foe of the Buddhas; in his wickedness, he has secured
the adherence of Ajata-sattu and by unrighteousness got gain and honour
for himself. Yet you who have taken the vows according to this faith which
leads to salvation, eat the food which Devadatta gets by unrighteousness.
Come; let us bring you before the Master." And, taking with them the
Brother, they went to the Hall ofTruth.
When the Master became aware oftheir presence,he said, "Brethren, are you
bringing this Brother here against his will?" "Yes, sir; this Brother, after
taking the vows under you, eats the food which Devadatta gets by unrighteous-
ness." "Is it true, as they say, that you eat the food which Devadattagets by
unrighteoiLsness?" "It was not Devadatta, sir, that gave it me, but others."
"Raise no quibbles here. Brother," said the Master. "Devadatta is a man of
bad conduct and bad principle. Oh, how could you, who have taken the vows
here, eat Devadatta's food,whilstadhering to mydoctrine? Butyou have always
been prone to being led away, and have followed in turn every one you meet."
And, so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
5—2
II

;
68 The Jfltaha. Bool: I.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta became his minister. In those days the king had a state-
elephant [187], named Damsel face, who was virtuous and good, and never
hurt anybody.
Now one day some burglars came close up to the elep—hant's stall by
night and sat down to discuss their plans in these words: "This is the
way to tunnel into a house ; this is the way to break in through the walls
before carrying off the plunder, the tunnel or breach in the walls ought
to be made as clear and open a-s a road or a foi'd. In lifting the goods,
you shouldn't stick at murder ; for thus there will be none able to resist.
A
burglar should get rid of all goodness and virtue, and be quite pitiless,
a man of cruelty and violence." After having schooled one another in
these counsels, the burglars took themselves off. The next day too they
came, and many other days besides, and held like converse together, till
the elephant came to the conclusion that they came expressly to instruct
him, and that he must turn pitiless, cruel, and violent. And such indeed
he became. No sooner did his mahout appear in the early morning than
the elephant took the man in his trunk and dashed him to death on the
ground. And in the same way he treated a second, and a tliird, and every
person in turn who came near him.
The news was brought to the king that Damsel-face had gone mad and
was killing everybody that he caught sight of. So the king sent the
Bodhisatta, saying, "Go, sage, and find out what has perverted him."
Away went the Bodhisatta, and soon satisfied himself that the
elephant showed no signs of bodily ailment. As he thought over the
possible causes of the change, he came to the conclusion that the elephant
must have heard persons talking near him, and have imagined that they
were giving him a lesson, and that this was what had pervei-ted the
animal. Accordingly, he asked the elephant-keepers whether any persons
had been talking together recently near the stall by night. "Yes, my
lord," was the answer; "some burglars came and talked." Then the
Bodhisatta went and told the king, saying, "There is nothing wrong, sire,
with the elephant bodily he has been perverted by overhearing some
;
burglars talk." "Well, what is to be done nowl" "Order good men,
sages and brahmins, to sit in his stall and to talk of goodness." "Do so,
my friend," said the king. Then the Bodhisatta set good men, sages and
Vji'ahmins, in the stall [188], and bade them talk of goodness. And they,
taking their seats hard by the elephant, spoke as follows, "Neither mal-
treat nor kill. The good should be long-suffering, loving, and merciful."
Hearing this the elephant thought they must mean this as a lesson for
him, and resolved thenceforth to become good. And good he became.
"Well, my friend," said the king to the Bodhisatta; "is he good
now?" "Yes, your majesty," said the Bodhisatta; "thanks to wise and

—
; ;
No. 27. G'J
good men the elephant who was so perverted has become himself agaiu."
And so saying, he repeated this stanza:
Through hearing first the burglars' wicked talk
Damsel-face ranged abroad to wound and kill
Through hearing, later, wise men's lofty words
The noble elephant turned good once more.
Said the king, "He can read the mind even of an animal !" And he
conferred great lionour on the Bodhisatta. After living to a good old
age, he, with the Bodhisatta, passed away to fare according to his deserts.
—
Said the Master, "In the past,too,you followed everyone you met. Brother
hearing burglars talk, you followed what they said and hearing the wise aud
;
good talk, you followed what they said." His lesson ended, he shewed the con-
nexion, and identified the Birth, by saying, "The traitorous Brother was the
Damsel-face ofthose days, Ananda the king, aud I myselfthe minister."
No. 27.
ABHINHA-JATAKA.
—
"iVo morsel can he eat." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a lay-disciple and an aged Elder. [189]
Ti'adition says that there were in Savatthi two friends, of whom onejoined
the*Brotherhood but used to go every day to the other's house, where his
friend used to give him an alms of food and make a meal himself, and then
accompany him back to the Monastery, where he sat talking all the livelong day
till the sun went down, when he went back to town. And his friend the
Brother xised to escort him on his homeward way, goingas far as the city-gates
beforeturning back.
The intimacy of these two became known among the Brethren, who were
sitting one day in the Hall of Truth, talking about the intimacy which existed
between the pair, when the Master, entering the Hall, asked what was the
subject oftheir talk ; and the Brethren told him.
"Not only now, Brethren, are these two intimate with one another," said the
Master; "they were intimate in bygone days as well." And, so saying, he told
this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, tlie
Bodhisatta became his minister. In those days there was a dog which
used to go to the stall ofthe elephant ofstate, and eat the gobbets of rice
which fell where the elepliaut fed. Haunting the place for the food's sake,

—
70 Tlie Jataka. Book I.
the dog grew very friendly with the elephant, and at last would never eat
except with him. And neither could get on without the other. The dog
used to disport himself by swinging backwards and forwards on the
elephant's trunk. Now one day a villager bought the dog of the mahout
and took the dog home with him. Thenceforward the elephant, missing
the dog, refused either to eat or drink or take his bath ; and the king was
told of it. His majesty despatched the Bodhisatta to find out why the
elephantbehaved likethis. Proceedingto theelephant-house,theBodhisatta,
seeing how sad the elephant was, said to himself, "He has got no bodily
ailment ; he must have formed an ardent friendship, and is sorrowing at
the loss of his friend." So he asked whether the elephant had become
friends with anyone.
"Yes, my lord," was the answer; "there's a very warm friendship
between him and a dog." "Where is that dog now?" "A man took it
off'." "Do you happen to know where that man lives?" "No, my lord."
The Bodhisatta went to the king and said, "There is nothing the matter
with the elephant, sire; but he was very friendly with a dog, [190] and it
is missing his friend which has made him refuse to eat, I imagine." And
so saying, he repeated this stanza:
No morsel can he eat, no rice or grass;
And in the bath he takes no pleasure now.
Methinks, the dog had so familiar grown,
That elephant and dog were closest friends.
"Well," said the king on hearing this; "what is to be done now,
sageV "Let proclamation be made by beat ofdrum, your majesty, to the
effect that a man is i-eported to have carriedoff"adog ofwhich the elephant
of state was fond, and that the man inwhose house that dog shall befound,
shall pay such and such a penalty." The king acted on this advice ; a,nd
the man, when he came to hear of it, promptly let the dog loose. Away
ran the dog at once, and made his way to the elephant. The elephant
took the dog up in his trunk, and placed it on his head, and wept and
cried, and, again setting the dog on the ground, saw the dog eat first and
then took his own food.
"Even the minds of animals are known to him," said the king, and he
loaded the Bodhisatta with honoui's.
Thus the Master ended his lesson to shew that the two were intimate in
bygone days as well as at that date. This done, he unfolded the Four Truths.
(This unfolding of the Four Truths forms part ofall the other Jatakas
;
but we
shall only mention it where it is expressly mentioned that it was blessed unto
fruit.) Then he shewed the connexion, and identified the Birth by saying,
"The lay-disciple was the dog of those days, the aged Elder was the elephant,
and I myselfthe wise minister." [191]

No. 28. 71
No. 28.
NANDIVI8ALA-JATAKA.
—
"Speak oidi) words of Hndness.^' This story was told by the Master while at
Jctavana, about the bitter words spoken by the Six^. For, in tliosc days the
Six, when they disagreed with respectable Brethren, used to taunt, revile and
jeer them, and load them with the ten kinds of abuse. This the Brethren
reported to the Blessed One, who sent for the Six and asked whether tliis charj^e
was true. On their admitting its truth, he rebuked them, saying, "Brethren,
hard words gall even animals in bygone days an animal made a man who had
:
used harsh language to-him lose a thousand pieces." And, so saying, he told
this story ofthe past.
Once on a time at Takkasila in the land of Gandhara there was a king
reigning there, and the Bodhisatta came to life as a bull. When he was
quite a tiny calf, he was presented by his owners to a brahmin who came
—
in theybeing known to give away presents ofoxen to such-likeholymen.
The brahmin called itNandi-Visala(Great-Joy), and treated it like his own
child, feeding the young creature on rice-grviel and rice. When the
Bodhisatta grew up, he thought thus to himself, "I have been brought up
by this brahmin with great pains,and all India cannotshow the bull which
can draw what I can. How ifI were to repay the brahmin the cost of my
nurture by making proof of my strength1" Accordingly, one day he said
to the brahmin, "Go, brahmin, to some merchant rich in herds, and wager
him a thousand pieces that your bull can draw a hundred loaded carts."
The brahmin wenthiswayto a merchant and got into a discussion with
him as to whose oxen in the town were the strong. "Oh, so-and-so's,
or so-and-so's," said the merchant. "But," added he, "there are no oxen in
the town which can compare with mine for real strength." Said the
bi-ahmin, "I have a bull who can pull a hundred loaded carts." "Where's
such a bull to be found?" laughed the merchant. "I've got him at home,"
said the brahmin. "Make it a wager." "Certainly," said the brahmin,
and staked [192] a thousand pieces. Then he loaded a hundred carts with
sand, gravel,and stones,and leashed the lot together, one behind the other,
by cords from the axle-tree of the one in front to the trace-bar of its
successor. This done, he bathed Nandi-Visala, gave him a measure of
perfumed rice to eat, hung a garland round his neck, and harnessed him all
^ The 'Six ' were notorious Brethren who are always mentioned as defying the
rulesof the Order.

—
!;
72 The Jataka. Book I.
alone to the leading cart. The brahmin in person took his seat upon the
pole, and flourished his goad in the air, shouting, "Now then, you rascal
pull them along, you rascal!"
"I'm not the rascal he calls me," thought the Bodhisatta to himself
andso he planted his four feet like so many posts, and budged not an inch.
Straightway, the merchant made the brahmin pay over the thousand
pieces. Hismoneygone, the brahmintook his bull out ofthecartandwent
home, where he lay down on his bed in an agony of grief. When Nandi-
Visala strolled in and found the brahmin a prey to such grief, he went up
to him and enquired ifthe brahmin were taking a nap. "How should I be
taking a nap, when I have had a thousand pieceswon of me ? " "Brahmin,
all the time I have lived in your house, have I ever broken a pot, or
squeezed up against anybody,or made messes about ? " "Never, my child."
"Then, why did you call me a rascal1 It's you who are to blame, not I.
Go and bet him two thousand this time. Only remember not to miscall me
rascal again." When he heard this, the brahmin went off"to the merchant,
and laid awager of two thousand. Just as before, he leashed the hundred
carts to one another and harnessed Nandi-Visala, very spruce and fine, to
the leading cart. Ifyou ask how he harnessed him, well, he did it in this
—
way: first, he fastened the cross-yoke on to the pole; then he put the
bull in on one side, and made the other fast by fastening a smooth piece
of wood from the cross-yoke on to the axletree, so that the yoke was
taut and could not skew round either way. Thus a single bull could draw
a cart made to be drawn by two. So now seated on the pole, the brahmin
stroked Nandi-Visala on the back, and called on him in this style, "Now
then, my fine fellow
!
pull them along, my fine fellow !" With a single
pull the Bodhisatta tugged along the whole string of the hundred carts
[193] till the hindermost stood where the foremost had started. The
merchant, rich in herds, paid up the two thousand pieces he had lost to
the brahmin. Other folks, too, gave large sums to the Bodhisatta, and
the whole passed into the hands of the brahmin. Thus did he gain greatly
by reasonof the Bodhisatta.
Thus laying down, by way of rebuke to the Six, the rule that hard words
please no one, the Master, as Buddha, uttered this stanza:
Speak only words of kindness, never words
Unkind. For him who spoke hiui fail-, he moved
A heavy load, and brought him wealth, for love.
When he had thus ended his lesson as to speaking only words of kindness,
the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Ananda was the ])rahniin of those
days, and I myselfNandi-Visala."
\_Note. The substance ofthis story occurs in the Vinaya, Vol. iv, page 5.]

No. -20. 73
No. 29.
KANHA-JATAKA.
—
" Wit/t hciirii loiidsy This story was told by tlic Master wliilc at ,leta\'aiia,
about the Double Miracle, which, together with the Descent from Heaven, will
be related in the Thirteenth I>ook, in the Sarabhaniiga-jataka'.
After he had i)erfornied the Doul)lc Miracle and had made a stay in Hea\en,
the All-knowing Buddha descended at the city of Saihkassa on the day of the
Great Pavarana- Festival, and thence passed with a large following to Jetavana.
Gatheringtogether in the HallofTruth, the Brethren sat praising thevirtues
of the Master, saying, "Sirs, peerless is the Buddha; none may bear the yoke
borne l)y the Buddha. The Six teachers, though they protested so often that
the}', and they only, would perform miracles, yet not a single miracle did they
work. ! how peerless is the MasterI"
EnteringtheHallandaskingthethemewhichtheBrethren werediscussingin
conclave [194], the Master was informed that their theme was no other than his
own virtues. "Brethren," said the Master, "who shall now bear the yoke borne
by me? Even in bygone days, when I came to life as an animal, I was un-
matched." And, so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as a bull. And while he was still a young calf, his
owners, who had been lodging with an old woman, made him over to her
in settlement of their i*eckoning. She reared him like her own child,
feeding him on rice-gruel and rice and on other good cheer. The name
he l)ecame knoAvn by was "Granny's Blackie." Growing up, he used to
range about with the other cattle of the village, and was as black as jet.
The village urchins used to catch hold of his horns and ears and dewlaps,
and have a ride or they would hold on to his tail in play, and mount on
;
his back.
One day he thought to himself, "My mother is very poor; she has
painfully reared me, as if I were her own child. What if I were to earn
some money to ease her hard lot?" Thenceforth he was always looking out
for ajob. Now, one day a young merchant at the head of a caravan came
with five hundred waggons to a ford the bottom of which was so rough
that his oxen could not pull the waggons through. And even when he
took out the five hundred pairs ofoxen and yoked the lot together to form
one team, they could not get a single cart by itselfacross the river. Close
1 No. 483.
'^ The festivalat the end of the lainy season (Mahdvai/jja iv. Ij.

74 The Jataka. Book I.
by that ford the Bodhisatta was about with the other cattle of the village.
And the young merchant, being a judge of cattle, ran his eye over the
herd to see whether amoug them there wasathorough-bred bull who could
pull the waggons across. When his eyefell on the Bodhisatta, he felt sure
lie would do; and, to find out the Bodhisatta's owner, he said to the
herdsmen, "Who owns this animall If I could yoke him on and get my
waggons across, I would pay for his services." Said they, "Take him and
harness him, then he has got no master hereabouts."
;
But when the young merchant slipped a cord [195] through the
Bodhisatta's nose and tried to lead him off, the bull would not budge. For,
we are told, the Bodhisatta would not go till his pay was fixed. Under-
standing his meaning, the merchant said, " Master, if you will pull these
five hundred waggons across, I will pay you two coins per cart, or a
thousand coinsin all."
It now required no force to get the Bodhisatta to come. Away he
went, and the men harnessed him to the carts. The first he dragged over
with a single pull, and landed it highand dry; and in like manner he dealt
with the whole string of waggons.
TheyoungmerchanttiedroundtheBodhisatta'sneckabundlecontaining
five hundred coins, or at the rate of only one for each cart. Thought the
Bodhisatta to himself, "This fellow is not paying me according to contract!
I won't let him move on!" So he stood across the path of the foremost
waggon and blocked the way. And try as they would, they could notget
him out ofthe way. "I suppose he knows I've paid him short," thought
the merchant; and he wrapped up a thousand coins in a bundle, which he
tied round the Bodhisatta's neck, sayiug, "Here's your pay for pulling the
waggons across." And away went the Bodhisatta with the thousand
pieces ofmoney to his "mother."
"What's that round the neck of Granny's Blackie?" cried the children
of the village, running upto him. But the Bodhisatta made at them from
afar and madethem scamper off, so that he reached his "mother"all right.
Not but what he appeared fagged out, with his eyes bloodshot, from
dragging all those five hundred waggons over the river. The pious
woman, finding a thousand pieces of money round his neck, cried out,
"Where did you get this, my child? " Learning from the herdsmen
what had happened, she exclaimed, "Have I any wish to live on your
earnings, my child? Why did you go through all this fatigue1 " So
sayiug, she washed the Bodhisatta with warm water and rubbed him
all over with oil; she gave him drink and regaled him with due victuals.
And when her life closed, she passed away, with the Bodhisatta, to fare
according to her deserts.

—
"
No. 30. 75
When he had ended this leasou to sshew that the Buddha was umuatcliod
in the past as then, he shewed the connexion by uttering, as Buddha, this
stanza:
[196] With heavy hmds to carry, with had roads.
They harness 'Blackie'; he soon draws the hjad.
After his lesson to shew that only 'Blackie' could draw the load, he shewed
the connexion, and identified the Birth by saying, "Uppala-Vanna was the old
woman ofthose days, and I myself'Granny's Blackie.'"
No. 30.
MUNIKA-JATAKA.
—
"Then eiir// not pour Mimika." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana about being seduced by a 2>himp young woman, as will be related in
the Thirteenth Book in the Culla-Narada-Kassapa-jatakai.
Then the Master asked that Brother, saying, "Is it true. Brother, as they
say, that you are passion-tost?" "It is true, sir," was the reply. "Brother,"
said the Master, "she is your bane; even in bygone days,you met yourend and
were made into a relish for the company on hermarriage-day." And so saying,
he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as an ox, named Big Red, on the squire's estate in
a certain hamlet. And he had a younger brother vi^ho was known as
Little Red. There were only these two brothers to do all the draught-
work of the family. Also, the squire had an only daughter, whose hand
was asked in marriage for his son by a gentleman of the town. And the
parents of the girl, with a view to furnishing dainty fare [197] for the
wedding guests, began to fatten uj) a pig named Munika.
Observing this, Little Red said to his brother, "All the loads that
have to be drawn for this household are drawn by you and me, my
bi'other ; but all they give us for our pains is sorry grass and straw to eat.
Yet here is the pig being victualled on rice ! What can be the reason why
he should be treated to such fare?
i No. 477.

—
76 The Jataka. Book I.
Said his brother, " My dear Little Red, envy him not ; for the pig
eats the food of death. It is but to furnish a relish for the guests at
their daughter's wedding, that the family are feeding up the pig. "Wait
but a little time and the guests will be coming. Then will you see that
pig lugged out of his quarters by the legs, killed, and in process of
conversion into curry." Atid so saying, he repeated this stanza:
Then envy not poor Munika; 'tis death
— He eats. Contented munch your frugal chafi",
The pledge and guarantee of length of days.
Not long afterwards the guests did arrive and Munika was killed and
;
cooked into all manner of dishes. Said the Bodhisatta to Little Red,
"Did you see Munika, dear brother?" "I have indeed seen, brother, the
outcome of Munika's feasting. Better a hundred, nay a thousand, times
—
than such food is ours, though it be but grass, straw, and chaff; for our
fare harms us not, and is a pledge that our lives will not be cut short."'
When he had ended his lesson to the effect that the Brother had thus in by-
gone days been brought to his doom by that young woman and had been made
into arelish for the company [198], he preached the Truths, at the close whereof
the passion-tost Brother reached the First Path of Salvation. Also the Master
shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "The passion-tost
Brother was the pig Munika ofthose days, the youngwoman is the samein both
cases, Ananda was Little Red, and I myselfBig Red."
\^Note. See hereon Benfey's Pahca-Tantra,page 228, where the migrations of
this popular story are traced. See also Jatakas Nos. 286 and 477.]
No. 31.
KULAVAKA-JATAKA.
"Let all theforest's nestlings."—Thin story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a brother who drank water without straining it'.
Tradition says that two young Brotherswho were friends went from Savatthi
into the country, and took up their abode in a pleasant spot. After staying
here as long as they wanted, they departed and set out for Jetavanain order to
see the Perfect Buddha.
^ Asto the rules for filteringwater, see Vinnija Cnllaragga v. 13.

No. 31. 77
One of them carried a strainer; the other had none; so both of them used
the same strainer before drinking. One day they fell out. The owner of the
strainer did not lend it to his companion, but strained and drank alone by
himself.
As the other was not allowed the strainei', and as he could not endure liis
thirst, he drank water without straining it. In due course Ijoth reached
Jetavana and with respectful salutation to the Master took their seats. After
friendly words ofgreeting, he asked whence tliey had come.
"Sir," said they, "we have been living in a hamlet in the Kosala country,
whence we have come in order to see you." "I trust you have arrived as good
friendsasyoustartedi" Saidthebrotherwithout astrainer,"Sir,he fell out with
me on the road and would — not lend — me his strainer." Said the other, "Sir, lie
didn'tstrainhiswater,but wittingly drank itdownwithalltlieliving things it
contained." "Is this report true. Brother, that you wittingly drank off water
with all the livingthingsitcontained?" "Yes,sir,I did drink unstrained water,"
was the reply. "Brother, the wise and good ofbygone days, when flying in rout
along the deep in the days of their sovereignty over the City of the Devas,
thought scorn to slay living-creatures in order to secure power for themselves.
Rather, they turned their chariot back, sacrificing great glory in order to save
the lives of the young of the Garulas'." And, so saying, he told this story of
the past.
[199] Once on a time thei'e was a king of Magadha reigning at
Rajagaha in the land of Magadha. And just as he who is now Sakka
came to life in his pi'eceding birth in the hamlet of Macala in tlie land
of Magadha, even so was it in the selfsame hamlet that the Bodhisatta
came to life in thosedays as a young noble. When the day for his naming
came, he was named 'Prince Magha,' but when he grew up, it was as
' Magha the young Brahmin ' that he was known. His parents took a
wife for him from a family of equal rank with their own and he, with a
;
family of sons and daughters growing up round him, excelled in charity,
and kept the Five Commandments.
Inthatvillagethere werejustthirty families, and one daythe men were
standing in the middle of the villnge transacting the affairs of the village.
The Bodhisatta had kicked aside the dust from where he was standing,
and was standing there in comfort, when up came another and took his
stand there. Then the Bodhisatta made himself another comfortable
—
.standing-place, only to have it taken from him like the first. Again aTid
again the Bodhisatta beganafresh untilhe had made comfortable standing-
—
places for every man there. Another time he put up a pavilion, which
later on he pulled down, building a hall with benches and a jar of water
inside. Another time these thirty men were led by the Bodhisatta to
^ Ganilas werewingedcreatures of a supernatural order, the inveterate foes of the
Nagas, whosedomain wastliewater. Of. {f.fi.) JStaka No. \'A.

78 The Jdtaha. Booh I.
become like-minded with himself; he established them in the Five Com-
mandments, and thenceforth used to goabout with them doinggoodworks.
And they too doing good works, always in the Bodhisatta's company, used
to get up early and sally forth, with razors and axes and clubs in their
hands. With their clubs they used to roll out of the way all stones that
lay on the four highways and other roads of the village the trees that
;
would strike against the axles of chariots, they cut down ; rough places
they made smooth causeways they built, dug water-tanks, and built a
;
hall ; they shewed charity and kept the Commandments. In this wise
did the body of the villagers generally abide by the Bodhisatta's teachings
and keep the Commandments.
Thought the village headman to himself, "When these men used to
get drunk and commit murders and so forth, I used to make a lot of
money out of them not only on the price of their drinks but also by the
fines and dues they paid. But now here's this young brahmin Magha
bent on making them keep the Commandments ; he is putting a stop to
murders and other crime." [200] And in his rage he cried, "I'll make
them keep the Five Commandments !" And he repaired to the king,
saying, "Sire, there is a band of robbers going about sacking villages and
committing other villanies." When the king heard this, he bade the
headman go and bring the men before him. And away went the man and
hauled up as prisoners before the king every one of those thirty men,
representing them to be the rascals. Without enquiry into their doings,
the king commanded offhand that they should be trampled to death by
the elephant. Forthwith they made them lie down in the king's court-
yard and sent for the elephant. The Bodhisatta exhorted them, saying,
"Bear in mind the Commandments ; love the slanderer, the king and the
elephant as yourselves." And they did so.
Then the elephant was brought in to trample them to death. Yet
lead him as they might, he would not approach them, but fled away
—
trumpeting loudly. Elephant after elephant was brought up; but they
all fled away like the first. Thinking that the men must have some drug
about their persons, the king ordered them to be searched. Search was
—
made accordingly, but nothing was found; and so they told the king.
"Then they must be muttering some spell," said the king; "ask them
whether they have got a spell to mutter."
The question being put to them, the Bodhisatta said they had got a
spell. And this the king's people told his majesty. So the king had them
all summoned to his presence and said, "Tell me your spell."
The Bodhisatta made answer, "Sire, we have no other spell than this,
that not a man among the whole thirty of us destroys life, or takes what
is not given, or misconducts himself, or lies ; we drink no strong drink ;
we abound in lovingkindness ; we shew charity ; we level the roads.

No. 31. 79
—
dig tanks, and build a public hall; this is our spell, oui' safeguard, and
our strength."
Well-pleased with them, the king gave them all the wealth in the
slanderer's house and made him their slave ; and he gave them the
elephant and the village to boot.
Thenceforward, doing good works to their hearts' content, theysent for
a carpenter and caused him to put up a large hall at the meeting of the
four highways; but [201] as they had lost all desire for womankind, they
would not let any woman share in the good work.
Now in those days there were four women in the Bodhisatta's house,
whose names were Goodness, Thoughtful, Joy, and Highborn. Of
these Goodness,—finding herself alone with the carpenter, gave him a
douceur, saying, "Brother, contrive to make me the jirincipal person in
connexion with this hall."
"Very good," said he. And before doing any other work on the
building, he had some pinnacle wood dried, which he fashioned and bored
and made into a finished pinnacle. This he wrapped \ip in a cloth and
laid aside. When the hall was finished, and it was time to put on the
pinnacle, he exclaimed, "Alas, my masters, there's one thing we have not
made." "What's thati" "Why, we ought to have a pinnacle." "All
right, let one be got." "But it can'tbe made out of green wood; we ought
to have a pinnacle which had been cut some time ago, and fashioned, and
bored, and laid by." "Well, what is to be done now 1 " "Why, have a
look round to see if anybody has got such a thing in his house as a ready-
made pinnacle for sale." As they looked round accordingly, they found
one in the house of Goodness, but could not buy it of her for any money.
"If you will make me a partner in the good work," said she, "I will give
it you for nothing."
"No," was the reply, " we do not let women have a share in the good
work."
Then said the carpenter to them, "My masters, what is this you
say? Save the Realm of Brahma, there is no place from which
women are excluded. Take the pinnacle, and our work will be
complete."
Consenting, they took the pinnacleand completed their hall. Theyhad
benches put up, and jars of water set inside, providing also a constant
supply ofboiled rice. Round the hall they built a wall with a gate, strew-
ing the space inside the wall with sand and planting a row of fan-palms
outside. Thoughtful too caused a pleasaunce to be laid out at this spot,
and not a flowering or fruit-bearing tree could be named which did not
grow there. Joy, too, caused a water-tank to be dug in the same place,
covered over with the five kinds of lotuses, beautiful to V)ehold. High-
born did nothing at all.

—
80 The Jdtaka. Book I.
—
The Bodhisatta fulfilled these seven injunctions, to cherish one's
mothei", to cherish one's father, to honour one's elders, to speak ti-uth, [202]
ta avoid harsh speech, to eschew slander, and to shun niggardliness:
Whoso supports his parents, honours age,
Is gentle, friendly-spoken,—slandering —not,
— Unchurlish, truthful, lord not slave of wrath,
Him e'en the Thirty Three^ shall hail as Good.
Such was the praiseworthy state to which he grew, and at his life's
close he passed away to be reborn in the Realm of the Thirty-three as
Sakka, king of Devas and there too were his friends reborn.
;
In those days there were Asuras dwelling in the Realm of the Thirty-
three. Said Sakka, King of Devas, "What good to us is a kingdom
which others share?" So he made the Asuras drink the liquor of the
Devas, and when they were drunken, he had them hurled by the feet on
to the steeps of Mount Sineru. They tumbled right down to ' The Asura
—
Realm,' as it is called,^ a region on the lowest level of Mount Sineru,
equal in extent to the Realm of the Thirty-three. Here grows a tree,
resembling the Coral Tree of the Devas, which lasts for an aeon and is
called the Pied Trumpet-flower. The blossoms of this tree shewed them
at once that this was not the Realm of Devas, for there the Coral Tree
blooms. So they cried, "Old Sakka has made us drunk and cast us into
the great deep, seizing on our heavenly city." "Come," theyshouted, "let
us win back our own realm from him by force of arms." And uj) the
sides ofSineru they climbed, like ants up a pillar.
Hearing the alarm given that the Asuras were up, Sakka went out
into the great deep to give them battle, but being worsted in the fight
turned and fled away along crest after crest of the southern deep in his
'Chariot of Victory,' which was a hundred and fifty leagues long.
Now as his chai-iot sped along the deep, it came to the Foiest of the
Silk-Cotton Trees. Along the track of the chariot these mighty trees
were mowed down like so many ])alms, and fell into the deep. And as
the young ofthe Garujas hurtled through the deep, loud were theirshrieks.
Said Sakka to Matali, his charioteer, "Matali, my friend, what manner of
noise is this? [203] How heartrending it sounds." "Sire, it is the
united cry of the young Garulas in the agony of their fear, as their foi'CvSt
is uprooted by the rush of your chariot." Said the Great Being, "Let
them not be troubled because of me, friend Matali. Let us not, for
' One of the clevalokas, or angelic realms, of Buddhist cosmogony, was the
Tdvatir'asa-bhavanam, or 'Eealm of the Thirty-three,' so called because its denizens
were subject to thirty-three Devas headed by Sakka, the Indra of the pre-buddhist
faith. Every world-system, it may liere be added, had a Sakka of its own, as is
indicated infra.

— — —
No. 31. 81
empire's sake, so act as to destroy life. Eather will I, for their sake, give
my life as a sacrifice to the Asuras, Turn the car back," And so saying,
he repeated this stanza :
Let all the forest's nestlings, Matali,
Escape our all-devouring chariot.
I offer up, a willing sacrifice.
My life to yonder Asuras ; these poor birds
Shall not, through me, from out their nests be torn.
At the word, Matali, the charioteer, turned the chariotround, andmade
for the Realm ofDevas byanother route. Butthemoment theAsuras saw
him begin toturnhischariot round, they cried out that the Sakkas ofother
worlds were surelycoming up; "it must be his reinforcements which make
him turn his chariot back again." Trembling for their lives, they all ran
away and never stopped till they came to the Asura Realm. And Sakka
entering heaven, stood in the midst of his city, girt round by an angelic
host of his own and of Brahma's angels. And at that moment through
the riven earth there rose up the 'Palace of Victory,' some thousand
—
leagues high, so-called because it arose in the hour of victory. Then, to
prevent the Asuras from coming back again, Sakka had guards set in five
—
places, concerning which it has been said :
[204] Impregnable both cities stand ! between.
In fivefold guard, watch Nagas, Garulas,
Kumbhandas, Goblins, and the Four Great Kings
!
But when Sakka was enjoying as king of Devas the glory of heaven,
safely warded by his sentinels at these five posts. Goodness died and was
reborn as a handmaiden ofSakka once more. And the effect ofher gift of
—
the pinnacle was that there arose for her a mansion named 'Goodness'
studded with heavenly jewels, five hundred leagues high, where, under a
white heavenly canopy ofroyal state, sat Sakka, kingof Devas, ruling men
and Devas.
Thoughtful, too, died, and was once more born as a handmaiden of
Sakka ; and the effect of her action in respect of the pleasaunce was such
that there aroseapleasauncecalled
'
Thoughtful's Creeper-Grove.' Joy, too,
died and was reborn once more as one of Sakka's handmaidens ; and the
fruit of her tank was that there arose a tank called 'Joy' after her. But
Highborn, [205] having performed no act of merit, was reborn as a crane
in a grotto in the forest.
''There's no sign of Highborn," said Sakka to himself; "I wonder
where she has been reborn." And as he considered the matter, he dis-
covered her whereabouts. So he paid her a visit, and bringing her back
withhim to heaven shewed her the delightful city ofthe Devas, the Hallof
Goodness, Thoughtful's Creeper-Grove, and the Tank called Joy. "These
three," said Sakka, "have been reborn as my handmaidens by reason of
c. J. 6

82 The Jcitaka. Book I.
the good works they did but you, having done no good work, have been
;
reborn in the brute creation. Henceforth keep the Commandments."
And having exhorted her thus, and confirmed her in the Five Command-
ments, he took her back and let her go free. And thenceforth she did
keep the Commandments.
A short time afterwards, being curious to know whether she really was
able to keep the Commandments, Sakka went and lay down before her in
the shape of a fish. Thinking the fish was dead, the crane seized it by
the head. The fish wagged its tail. "Why, I do believe it's alive," said
the crane, and let the fish go. "Veiy good, very good," said Sakka;
"you will be able to keep the Commandments," And so saying he went
away.
Dying as a crane. Highborn was reborn into the family of a potter in
Benares. Wondering where she had got to, and at last discovering her
whereabouts, Sakka, disguised as an old man, filled a cart with cucumbers
of solid gold and sat in the middle of the village, crying, "Buy my
cucumbers buy my cucumbei's !" Folk came to him and asked for them.
!
"I only jjart with them to such as keep the Commandments," said he,
"do you keep them?" "We don't know what you mean by your 'Com-
mandments '; sell us the cucumbers. — " "No ; I don't want money for
my cucumbers. I give them away, but only to those that keep the
Commandments." "Who is this wag1" said the folk as they turned
away. Hearing of this, Highborn thought to herself that the cucumbers
must have been brought for her, and accordingly went and asked for some.
"Do you keep the Commandments, madam 1 " said he. "Yes, I do," was
the reply. "It was for you alone that I brought these here," said he, and
leaving cucumbers, cart and all at her door he departed.
Continuing all her life long to keep the Commandments, Highborn
after her death was reborn the daughter of the Asura king Vepacittiya,
and for her goodness was rewarded with the gift of great beauty. When
she grew up, her father mustered the Asuras together to give his daughter
her pick of them for a husband. [206] And Sakka, who had searched and
found out her whereabouts, donned the shapeofan Asura,and came down,
saying to himself, "If Highborn chooses a husband really after her own
heart, I shall be he."
Highborn was arrayed and brought forth to the place of assembly,
where she was bidden to select a husband after her own heart. Looking
round and observing Sakka, she was moved by her love for him in a
bygone existence to choose him for her husband. Sakka carried her oflT to
the city of the devas and made her the chief of twenty-five millions of
dancing-girls. And when his term of life ended, he passed away to fare
according to his deserts.

No. 32. 83
His lesson ended, the Master rebuked that Brother in these words, "Thus,
Brethren, the wise and good of bygonedays when they were rulers of the Devas,
forbore, even at the sacrifice of their own lives, to be guilty of slaughter. And
can you, who have devoted yourself to so saving a creed, drink unstrained water
with all the living creatures it contains1" And he shewed the connexion and
identified the Birth, by saying, "Anandawas then Matali the charioteer, and I
Sakka."
[JVote. Compare the commentary on Dhammapada, pp. 184 et seqq.; and
CuUa-vagga v. 13 in vol. ii. of Oldenberg's Vinaya (translated at page 100
of vol. XX. ofthe Sacred Books of the East) for the incidents of the Introductory
Story. For the incident of Sakka and the Asuras in the Story of the Past, see
Jataka-mCda, No. 11 (J.R.A.S. 1893, page 315).]
No. 32.
NACCA-JATAKA.
^'^ Apleasing note." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about a Brotherwith manybelongings. The incident is just the same as in the
Devadhamma-jatakasupra^.
"Is this report true, Brother," said the Master, "that you have many be-
longings?" "Yes, sir." "Why have you come to own so many belongings?"
Withoutlisteningbeyondthispoint,theBrother tore oflfthe whole ofhis raiment,
and stood stark naked before the Master, crying, "I'll go about like this!"
"Oh, fie!" exclaimed every one. The man ran away, and reverted to the lower
state of a layman. Gathering together in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren
talked of his impropriety in behaving in that manner right before the Master.
In camethe Master and asked whatwas the theme of discussion in the conclave.
"Sir," was the answer, "we were discussing the impropriety of that Brother,
and saying that in your presence and right before all the four classes of your
followers2 he had so farlost all sense of shame as to stand there stark naked as
a village-urchin, and that, finding himself loathed by everyone, he relapsed to
thelowerstate and lost the faith."
Said the Master, "Brethren, this is not the only loss his shamelessness has
caused him for in bygone days he lost a jewel of a wife just as now he has
lostthejewe ; l ofthe faith." And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
[207] Once on a time, in the first cycle of the world's liistory, the
quadrupeds chose the Lion as their king, the fishes the monster-fish
Ananda, and the birds the Golden Mallard^ Now the King Golden
1 No. 6.
2 i.e. Brethren, Sisterp, lay-brothers, and lay-sister8.
3 Cf. No. 270.
6—2

—
;
84 The Jdtaha. Book I.
Mallard had a lovely young daughter, and her royal father granted her
any boon she might ask. The boon she asked for was to be allowed to
choose a husband for herself; and the king in fulfilment of his promise
mustered all the birds together in the country of the Himalayas. All
manner of biids came, swans and peacocks and all other bii-ds; and they
flocked together on a great plateau of bare rock. Tlien the king sent for
his daughter and bade her go and choose a husband after her own heart.
As she reviewed the crowd of birds, her eye lighted on the peacock with
his neck of jewelled sheen and tail of varied hue ; and she chose him, say-
ing, "Let tliis be my husband." Then the assembly of the birds went up
to the peacock and said, "Frieiad peacock, this princess, in choosing her
husband from among all these birds, has fixed her choice on you."
Carried away by his extreme joy, the peacock exclaimed, "Until this
day yoii have never seen how active I am —j" and in defiance ofall decency
he spread his wings and began to dance; and in dancing he exposed him-
self.
Filled with shame. KingGolden Mallard said, "This fellow has neither
modesty within his heart nor decency in his outward behaviour; I cer-
tainly will not give my daughter to one so shameless," And there in the
midst ofall that assembly ofthe birds, he repeated this stanza :
A
pleasing note is yoiu"s, a lovely back,
A neck in hue like lapis lazuli
A fathom's length your outstretched feathers reach.
Withal, your dancing loses you my child.
Right in the face of the whole gathering King Royal Mallard gave his
daughter to a young mallard, a nephew of his. Covered with shame at
the loss of the mallard princess, [208] the peacock rose straight up from
the place and fled away. And King Golden Mallard too went back to his
dwelling-place.
"Thus, Brethren," said the Master, "this is not the only time his breach
of modesty has caused him loss just as it has now caused him to losethejewel
of the faith, so in bygone days ; it lost him a jewel of a wife." When he had
ended this lesson, he shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying,
"The Brother with the many belongings was the peacock of those days, and
I myselfthe Koyal Mallard."
{Note. See Plate xxvii. (11) of the Stupa ofBharhut (where a fragment of a
carving of this story is figured), Benfey's Pahca-Tantra I. p. 280, and Hahn's
Sagewiss. Studien, p. 69. Cf. also Herodotus, vi. 129.]

No. 33. 85
No. 33.
SAMMODAMANA-JATAKA.
" While concordreicfns." This story was told by the Masterwhile dwelling in
the Banyan-grove near Kapilavatthu, about a squabble over a porter's head-pad,
as will be related in the Kunala-jatakai. —
On this occasion, however, the Master spoke thus to his kinsfolk: "My
lords, strife among kinsfolk is unseemly. Yes, in bygone times, animals, who
had defeated their enemies when theylived in concord, came to utterdestruction
when theyfell out." And at the request of his royal kinsfolk, he told this story
ofthepast.
Onceuponatimewhen BrahmadattawaskingofBenares,theBodhisatta
was born a quail, and lived in the forest at the head of many thousands of
quails. In those days a fowler who caught quails came to that place; and
he used to imitate the note ofa quail till he saw that the birds had been
drawn together, when he flung his net over them, and whipped the sides
of the net together, so as to get them all huddled up in a heap. Then
he crammed them into his basket, and going home sold his prey for a
living.
Now oneday the Bodhisattasaidto those quails, "Thisfowlerismaking
havoc among our kinsfolk. I have a device whereby he will be unable to
catch us. Henceforth, the very moment he throws the net over you, let
each one put his head through a mesh and then all of you together must
fly away with the net to such place as you please, and there let it down on
a thorn-brake this done, we will all escape from our several meshes."
;
"Very good," said they all in ready agreement.
On the morrow, when the net was cast over them, they did just as the
—
Bodhisatta had told them : they lifted up the net, [209] and let it down
on a thorn-brake, escaping themselves from underneath. While the fowler
was still disentangling his net, evening came on ; and he went away
empty-handed. On the morrow and following days the quails played the
same trick. So that it became the regular thing for the fowler to be
engaged till sunset disentangling his net, and then to betake himself home
empty-handed. Accordingly his wife gi-ew angry and said, "Day by day
you return empty-handed; I suppose you've got a second establishment to
keep up elsewhere."
1 No. 536.

—
B6 The Jdtaha. Book I.
"No,mydear," said the fowler; "I've no second establishment to keep
lip. The fact is those quails have come to work together now. The mo-
ment my net is over them, off they fly with it and escape, leaving it on a
thorn-brake. Still, they won't live in unity always. Don't you bother
yourself ; as soon as they start bickering among themselves, I shall bag
the lot, and that vvil] bring a smile to your face to see." And so saying, he
repeated this stanza to his wife :
While concoi'd i-eigns, the birds bear off the net.
When quarrels rise, they'll fall a prey to me.
Not long after this, one of the quails, in alighting on their feeding-
ground, trod by accident on another's head. "Who trod on my head 1 "
angrily cried this latter. "I did but I didn't mean to. Don't be angry,"
;
said the first quail. But notwithstanding this answei", the other remained
as angry as before. Continuing to answer one another, they began to
bandy taunts, saying, "I suppose it is you single-handed who lift up the
net." As they wrangled thus with one another, the Bodhisatta thought
to himself, "There's no safety with one who is quarrelsome. The time
has come when they will no longer lift up the net, and thereby they will
come to great destruction. The fowler will get his opportunity. I can
stay here no longer." And thereupon he with his following went
elsewhere.
Sure enough the fowler [210] came back again a few days later, and
first collecting them together by imitating the note of a quail, flung his
net over them. Then said one quail, "They say when you were at work
lifting the net, the hair ofyour head fell off. Now's your time; lift away,"
The other rejoined, "When you were lifting the net, they say both your
wings moulted. Now's your time ; lift away."
But whilst they were each inviting the other to lift the net, the fowler
himselflifted the net for them and crammed them in a heapintohisbasket
and bore them offhome, so that his wife's face was wreathed with smiles.
"Thus, sire," said the Master, "such a thing as a quarrel among kinsfolk
is unseemly quarrellingleads onlyto destruction." His lesson ended,he shewed
;
the connexion, and identified the Birth, by saying, "Devadatta was the foolish
quail ofthose days, and I myselfthe wise and good quail."
\^Note. See for the migrations of this story Beufey's Fahca-Tantra i. 304,
and Fausboll in R.A.S. Journal, 1870. See also Julien's Avaddiias, Vol, i,
page 155.]

" ; ;;
No. 34. 87
No. 34.
MACCHA-JATAKA.
—
'"y^s not the cold." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about being seduced bythe wife ofone's mundane life beforejoining theBrother-
hood. Said the Master on this occasion, "Is it true, as I hear. Brother, that
you are passion-tost? "
"Yes, Blessed One."
"Because ofwhom1
"My former wife, sir, is sweet to touch ; I cannot give herup ! " Then said
the Master, "Brother, this woman is hurtful to you. It was through herthat in
bygone times too you were meeting your end, when you were saved by me."
And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta became his family-priest.
In those days some fishermen had cast their net into the river. And a
great big fish came along amorously toying with his wife. She, scenting
the net as she swam ahead of him, made a circuit round it and escaped.
But her amorous spouse, blinded by passion, sailed right into the meshes
of the net. As soon as the fishermen felt him in their net, they hauled it
in and took the fish out ; they did not kill him at once, butflung him alive
on the sands. [211] "We'll cook him in the embers for our meal," said
they; and accordingly they set to work to light a fire and whittle a spit to
roast him on. The fish lamented, saying to himself, "It's not the torture
ofthe embers or the anguish of the spit or anyother pain that grieves me
but only the distressing thought that my wife should be unhappy in the
belief that I have gone ofi"with another." And he repeated this stanza
:
'Tis not the cold, the heat, or wounding net
'Tis but the fear my darling wife should think
Another's love has lured her spouse away.
Just then the priest came to the riverside with his attendant slaves
to bathe. Now he understood the language of all animals. Therefore,
when he heard the fish's lamentation, he thought to himself, "This fish is
lamenting the lament of passion. If he should die in this unhealthy state
of mind, he cannot escape rebirth in hell. I will save him." So he went
to the fishermen and said, "My men, don't you supply us with a fish
every day for our curry V "What do you say, sir1 " said the fishermen
"praytake awaywith you anyfish you maytake a fancy to." "We don't
need any but this one only give us this one." "He's yours, sir."
;

88 TJie Jataka. Book I.
Taking the iish in his two hands, the Bodhisatta seated himself on the
bank and said, "Friend fish, if I had not seen you to-day, you would have
And
met your death. Cease for the future to be the slave of passion."
with this exhortation he threw the fish into the water, and went into the
city.
[212] Hislesson ended, the Master preached the Truths, at the close whereof
the passion-tost Brother won the First Path. Also, the Master shewed the
connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "The former wife was the female
fish of those days, the passion-tost Brother was the male fish, and 1 myself the
family-priest."
\_N'ote. Compare Jatakas Nos. 216 and 297.]
No. 35.
VATTAKA-JATAKA.
—
" With wings that fly not." This story was told by the Master, whilst on
an alms-pilgrimage through Magadha, about the going-out of a jungle fire.
Once the Master, whilst on an alms-pilgrimage through Magadha, went on
his morning round for alms through a certain hamlet in that country; on
his return, after his meal, he went out again followed by the company of
the Brethren. Just then a great fire broke out. There were numbers of
Brethren both in front of the Master and behind him. On came the fire,
spreading far and wide, till all was one sheet of smoke and flame. Hereupon,
some unconverted Brethren were seized with the fear of death. "Let us make a
counter fire," they cried; "and then the big fire will not sweep over the ground
we have fired." And, with this view, they set about kindling a fire with their
tinder-sticks.
But others said, "What is this you do. Brethren1 You are like such as
mark not the moon in mid-heaven, or the sun's orb rising with myriad rays
from the east, or the sea— on whose shores they stand, or Mount Sineru towering
before their very eyes, when, as you journey along in the company of him
who is peerless among devas and men alike, you give not a thought to the
All-Enlightened Buddha, but cry out, 'Let us make a fire !' You know not
the might of a Buddha ! Come, let us go to the Master." Then, gathering
together from front and rear alike, the Brethren in a body flocked round
the Lord of Wisdom. At a certain spot the Master halted, with this mighty
assembly of the Brethren surrounding him. On rolled the flames, roaring
as though to devour them. But when they approached the spot where the
Buddha had taken his stan—d, they came no nearer than sixteen lengths, but
there and then went out, even as a torch plunged into water. It had no
power to spread over a space thirty-two lengths in diameter.

"
No. 35. 89
r
The Brethren burst into praises of the Master, saying, "Oh how great are
!
the virtues of a Buddha! For, even this lire, thougli lacking sense, could
not sweep over the spot where a Buddha stood, but went out like a torch in
water. Oh ! how marvellous are the powers ofa Buddha !
[213] Hearing their words, the Master said, "It is no present power of mine,
Brethren, that makes this fire go out on reaching this spot of ground. It is
the power of a former 'Act of Truth' o—f mine. For in this spot no fire will
burn throughout the whole of this seon, the miracle being one which endures
foran seoni." _
Then theElderAnandafolded a robe intofour and spread it for theMaster to
sit on. The Master took his seat. Bowing to the Buddha as he sat cross-
legged there, the Brethren too seated themselves around him. Then they asked
him, saying, "Only the present is known to us, sir; the past is hidden from
us. Make it known to us." And, at their request, he told this story of the
past.
Once upon a time in this selfsame spot in Magadha, it was as a quail
that the Bodhisatta came to life once more. Breaking his way out of the
shell of the egg in which he was born, he became a young quail, about as
big as a large ball". And his parents kept him lying in the nest, while
they fed him with food which they brought in their beaks. In himself, he
had not the strength either to spread his wings and fly through the air, or
to lift his feet and walk upon the ground. Year after year that spot was
always ravaged by a jungle-fire; and it was just at this time that the
flames swept down on it with a mighty roaring. The flocks of birds, dai't-
iug from their several nests, were seized with the fear of death, and flew
shriekingaway. Thefatherand motheroftheBodhisattawereas frightened
as the others and flew away, forsaking the Bodhisatta. Lying there in the
nest,theBodhisattastretched forthhisneck, andseeingthe flamesspi-eading
towards him, he thought to himself, "Had I the power to put forth my
wings and fly, I would wing my way hence to safety; or, if I could move
my legs and walk, I could escape elsewhere afoot. Moreover, my parents,
seized with the fear of death, are fled away to save themselves, leaving
me here quite alone in the world. I am without protector or helper.
What, then, shall I do this day ] " —
Then this thought came to him : "In this world there exists what is
termed the EflBcacy ofGoodness, and what is termed the Efiicacy of Truth.
There are those who, through their having realised the Perfections in past
ages, have attained beneath the Bo-treetobeAll-Enlightened ; who, having
won Release by goodness, tranquillity and wisdom, possess also discern-
ment of the knowledge of such Release; ["^l-i] who are filled with truth,
compassion, mercy, and patience ; whose love embraces all ci'eatures alike ;
whom men call omniscient Buddhas. There is an efficacy in the attributes
they have won. And I too grasp one truth ; I hold and believe in a single
1 Seeabove, page56. ^ SeeMorris, JournalP. T. S. 1884, p. 90.

— — —
;
90 The Jataka. Booh I.
principle iu Nature. Therefore, it behoves me to call to mind theBuddhas
of the past, and the Efficacy they have won, and to lay hold of the true
belief that is in me touching the principle of Nature ; and by an Act of
Truth to make the flames go back, to the saving both of myself and of the
rest of the birds."
Therefore it has been said :
There's saving grace in Goodness in this world
There's truth, compassion, purity of life.
Thereby, I'll work a matchless Act of Truth.
Remembering Faith's might, and taking thought
On those who triumphed in the days gone by.
Strong in the truth, an Act of Truth I wrought.
Accordingly, the Bodhisatta, calling to mind the efficacy of the
Buddhas long since past away, performed an Act of Truth in the name of
the true faith that was in him, repeating this stanza :
With wings that fly not, feet that walk not yet.
Forsaken by my parents, here I lie !
Wherefore I conjm-e thee, dread Lord of Fire,
Primaeval Jataveda, turn go back
! !
Even as he performed his Act of Truth, Jataveda went back a space of
sixteen lengths ; and in going back the flames did not pass away to the
forest devouring everything in their path. No ; they went out there and
then, like a torch plunged in water. Therefore it has been said :
[215] I wrought my Act of Truth, and therewithal
The sheet o—f blazing fire left sixteen lengths
Unscathed, like flames by water met and quenched.
And as that spot escaped being wasted by fire throughout a whole aeon,
the miracle is called an 'seon-miracle.' When his life closed, the Bodhi-
satta, who had performed this Act of Truth, passed away to fare according
to his deserts.
"Thus, Brethren," said the Master, "it is not my present power but the
efficacy of an Act of Truth performed by me when a young quail, that has
madetheflamespass over this spot inthejungle." His lessonended,hepreached
the Truths, at the close whereof some won the First, some the Second, some the
Third Path, while others again became Arahats. Also, the Master shewed
the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "My present parentswere the
parents ofthose days, and I myselfthe king ofthe quails."
[Note. The story and the verses occur in the Cariyd-Pitaka, p. 98. See
reference to this story under Jataka No. 20, supra.
For the archaic title ofJataveda here given to Fire, compareJataka, No. 75,
as to a similar useofthe archaic name Pajjunna.']

—
No. 36. 91
No. 36.
SAKUNA-JATAKA.
—
"Yedem'zensof air." This story was told by the Master while at Jutavaiia,
aljouta Brother whose cell was burntdown.
TraditionsaysthataBrother,havingbeengiven athemeformeditation l)y the
Master, went from Jetavana to the land of Kosala and there abode in a dwelling
in a forest hard by a border-village. Now, during the very first month of
his dwelling there, his cell was burnt down. This he reported to the villagers,
saying, "My cell has been burnt down; I live in discomfort." Said they,
"The land is suffering from drought just now; we'll see to it when we have
irrigated the fields." When the irrigation was over, they said they must do
t w h h e e ir n s t o h w e in f g enc fi e r s st w ; er w e he p n ut th u e p, s t o h w e i y ng ha w d as fir d s o t n t e o , d t o hey th h e a w d ee t d h i e ng fe a n n ce d s t t h o e r p e u a t pi u n p g, ;
and the threshing; till, what with one job and another which they ke])t
mentioning, three whole months passed by.
After three months spent in the open air in discomfort, that Brother had
developed his theme for meditation, but could get no further. So, after the
Pavarana-festival which ends the Rainy Season, he went back again to the
Master, and, with due salutation, took his seat aside. After kindly words
of greeting, the Master said, "Well, Brotlier, haveyou lived happily through the
Rainy Season ? Did your theme for meditation end in success?" The Brother
told him all that had happened, adding, "As I had no lodging to suit rnc,
my theme did not end in success."
Said the Master, "In ))ygone times, Brother, even animals knew what
suited them and what did not. How is it that you did not know?" And
so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
[216] Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a bird and lived round a giant tree with branching
boughs, at the head of a company of birds. Now one day, as the boughs
of this tree were grinding one against the other, dust began to fall, soon
followed by—smoke. WhentheBodhisatta became aware of this, he thought
to himself: "If these two boughs go on grinding against one another
like this, they will produce fire ; and the fire will fall and catch hold of
the old leaves, and so come to set fire to this tree as well. We cannot live
on here; the proper thing to do is to hasten off elsewhere." And he
repeated this stanza to the company ofbirds :
Ye denizens of air, that in these boughs
Have sought a lodging, mark the seeds of fire
This earthborn tree is breeding ! Safety seek
In flight ! Our trusted stronghold harboiu-s death !
The wiser birds who followed the Bodhisatta's counsels, at once rose up
in the air and went elsewhere in his company. But the foolish ones said.

92 The Jataka. Book I.
" It is always likethis with him ; he's always seeingcrocodiles in a drop of
water." And they, heeding not the Bodhisatta's words, stopped where they
were. In a very short time, jnst as the Bodhisatta had foreseen, flames
really did break out, and the tree caught fire. When the smoke and flame
ai'ose, the birds, blinded by the smoke, were unable to get away ; one by
one they dropped into the flames and were destroyed.
"Thus, Brethren," said the Master, "iu bygone times even animals who were
dwelling in the tree-top, knew what suited them and what did not. How is it
that you did not know.^" [217] His lesson ended, he preached the Truths, at
the close whereof that Brother won the Fruit of the First Path. Also, the
^Master shewed the connexion, and identified the Birth by saying, "The Buddha's
disciples were then the birds who hearkened to the Bodhisatta, and I myselfwas
the wise and good bird."
No. 37.
TITTIRA-JATAKA.
—
"i^or they who honourage.'''' This story was told by the Master whilst on his
way to Savatthi, about the way in which the Elder Sariputta was kept out
ofa night's lodging.
For, when Anatha-pindika had built his monastery, and had sent word
that it wasfinished,theMasterleftRajagahaandcametoVesali,settingoutagain
on his journey after stopping at the latter place during his pleasure. It was
now that the disciples of the Six hurried on ahead, and, before quarters could
be taken for the Elders, monopolized the whole of the available lodgings, which
they distributed among their superiors, their teachers, and themselves. When
the Elders came up later, they could find no quarters at all for the night. Even
Sariputta's disciples, for all their searching, could not find lodgings for the
Elder. Being without a lodging, the Elder passed the night at the foot of
a tree near the j\Iaster's quarters, either walkingup and down orsitting at the
foot ofatree.
At early dawn the ]\Iaster coughed as he came out. The Elder coughed too.
"Who is that?" asked the Master. "It is I, Sariputta, sir." "What are you
doing here at this hour, Sariputta?" Then the Elder told his story, at the
close of which the Master thought, "Even now, while I am still alive, the
Brethren lack courtesy and subordination what will they not do when I am
dead and gone?" And the thought filled ; him with anxiety for the Truth.
As soon as day had come, he had the assembly of the Brethren called together,
and asked them, saying, "Is it true. Brethren, as I hear, that the adherents
of the Six went on ahead and kept the Elders among the Brethren out of
lodgings for the night1" "That is so. Blessed One," was the reply. Thereupon,
with a reproofto the adherents ofthe Six and as alesson to all,he addressed the
Brethren, and said, "Tell me, who deserves the best lodging, the best water, and
the best rice, Brethren?"

No. 37. 93
Someanswered,"HewhowasanoblemanbeforehebecameaBrother." Others
said, "He who was originally a brahmin, or a man of means." Others severally
said, "The man versed in the Rules of the Order; the man who can expound
the Law ; the men who have won the first,second,third,orfourth stage ofmystic
ecstasy." Whilst others again said, "The man in the First, Second, or Third
Path of Salvation, oran Arahat ; one who knows the Three Great Truths ; one
who has the Six Higher Knowledges."
After the Brethren had stated whom they severally thought worthiest of
precedence in the matter of lodging and the like, the Master said, [218] "In
the religion which I teach, the standard by which precedence in the matter
of lodging and the like is to be settled, is not noble birth, or having been a
brahmin,or having beenwealthybefore entryinto the Order ; tlie standard is not
familiaritywith the Rules ofthe Order,withtheSuttas, orwiththe Metaphysical
Books1; nor is it either the attainment of any of the four stages of mystic
ecstasy, or the walkingin any of the Four Paths of salvation. Brethren, in my
religion it is seniority which claims respect of word and deed, sahitation, and
all due service; it is seniors who should enjoy the best lodging, the best water,
and the best rice. This is the true standard, and therefore the senior Brother
ought to have these things. Yet, Brethren, here is Sariputta, who is my chief
disciple, who has set rolling the Wheel of Minor Truth, and who deserves to
have a lodging next after myself. And Sariputta has spent this night without a
lodging at the foot of a tree ! If you lackrespect and subordination even now,
what will be your behaviour as time goesby?"
And for their fvu'ther instruction he said, "In times past, Brethren, even
animals came to the conclusion that it was not proper for them to live without
respect and subordination one to another, or without the ordering of their
common life; even these animals decided to find out which among them was
the senior, and then to shew him all forms of reverence. So they looked into
the matter, and having found out which of them was the senior, they shewed
him all forms of reverence, whereby they passed away at that life's close to
people heaven." And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time, hai'd by a great banyan-tree on the slopes of the
—
Himalayas, there dwelt three friends, a partridge, a monkey, and an
elephant. And they came to lack respect and subordination one to
another, and had no ordering of their common life. And the thought
came to them that it was not seemly for them to live in this way, and
that they ought to find out vi^hich of their number was the senior and to
honour him.
As they were engaged thinking which was the oldest, one day an idea
struck them. Said the partridge and the monkey to the elephant as they
all three sat together at the foot of tliat banyan-tree, " Friend elephant,
how big was this banyan when you remember it first?" Said the
elephant, "When I was a baby, this banyan was a mere bush, over which
I used to walk ; and as I stood astride of it, its topmost branches used
just to reach up to my belly. I've known the tree since it was a mere
bush."
1 i.e. thethree divisions, or 'threebaskets,' oftheBuddhist scriptures.
I

—
;
94 The Jataka. Book I.
Next the monkey was asked the same question by the other two and
;
he replied, "My friends, when I was a youngling, [219] I had only to
stretch out my neck as I sat on the ground, and I could eat the topmost
sprouts of this banyan. So I've known this banyan since it was very
tiny."
Then the partridge was asked the same question by the two others;
and he said, "Friends, of old there was a great banyan-tree at such and
such a spot; I ate its seeds, and voided them here; that was the origin of
this tree. Therefore, I have knowledge of this tree from before it was
born, and am older than the pair ofyou."
Hereupon the monkey and the elephant said to the sage partridge,
"Friend, you are the oldest. Henceforth you shall have from us acts of
honour and veneration, marks of obeisance and homage, respect of word
and deed, salutation, and all due homage; and wewill followyourcounsels.
You for your part henceforth will please impart such counsel as we need."
Thenceforth the partridge gave them counsel, and established them in
the Commandments, which he also undertook himself to keep. Being
thus established in the Commandments, and becoming respectful and
subordinate among themselves, with proper ordering of their common
life, these three made themselves sure of rebirth in heaven at this life's
close.
— —
"The aims of these three" continued the Master "came to be
known as the 'Holiness of the Pai-tridge,' and if these three animals.
Brethren, lived together in respect and subordination, how can you, who
have embraced a Faith the Rulesof which are so well-taught, live together
without due respect and subordination? Henceforth I ordain, Brethren,
that to seniority shall be paid respect of word and deed, salutation, and all
due service; that seniority shall be the title to the best lodging, the best
water, and the best rice; and nevermore let a senior be kept out of
a lodging by a junior. Whosoever so keeps out his senior commits an
offence."
It was at the close of this lesson that the Master, as Buddha, repeated
this stanza:
For they who honour age, in Truth are versed
Praise now, and bliss hereafter, is their meed.
[220] When the Master had finished speaking of the virtue of reverencing
age, he made the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "Moggallana
was the elephant of those days, Sariputta the monkey, and I myself the sage
partridge."

No. 38. 95
[JVote. Seethis story in the Vinaya, Vol. li. page 161 (translated at page 193
of Vol. XX. of the SacredBooks of the East), and in Jnlien's Avaddnas, Vol. II.
page 17. Reference is madetothisJatakaby namein liuddliaghosa'sSumangahi-
Vildsinl., page 178 bnt his quotation, though it purports to be from the Tlttira-
;
Jatakxi, is from the above passage in the Vinaiia. Prof. Cowell has traced its
history in YCymmrodor, October 1882.]
No. 38.
BAKA-JATAKA.
—
''Guile profits not^ This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
abouta tailoring Brother.
Tradition says that at Jetavana dwelt a Brother who was exceedingly skilful
in all operations to be performed with a robe, such as cutting, joining, ar-
ranging, and stitching. Because of this skill, he used to fashion ro—bes and so
got the name of 'The Robe-tailoi'.' What, you ask, did he do? Well, he
exercised his craft on old bits of cloth and turned out a nice soft robe, which,
after the dyeing was done, he would enhance in colour with a wash containing
flourto make adressing, and rub it with a shell, till he had made it quite smart
and attractive. Then he would lay his handiwork aside.
Being ignorantofrobe-making. Brethrenused to come to himwith brand-new
cloth, saying, "We don't know how to make robes; you make them for us."
"Sirs," he would reply, "a robe takes a long time making; but I have one
which is just finished. You can take that, if you will leave these cloths in
exchange." And, so saying,hewould take his out and shew it them. And they,
marking only its fine colour, and knowing nothing of what it was made of,
thought it was a good strong one, and so handed over their brand-new cloth to
the 'Robe-maker' and went off with the robe he gave them. When it got
dirty and was being washed in hot water, it revealed its real character, and
the worn patches were visible here and there. Then the ownersregretted their
bargain. Everywhere that Brother became well-ki^own forcozeningin this way
all who came to him.
Now, there was a robe-maker in a hamlet who used to cozen everybodyjust
as the brother did at Jetavana. [221] This man's friends among the Brethren
.said to him, "Sir, they say that at Jetavana there is a robe-maker who cozens
everybody just like you." Tlien the thought struck him, "Come now, let me
cozen that city man!" So he made out ofrags a very finerobe,which he dyed a
beautiful orange. This he put on andwent to Jetavana. The moment the other
saw it, he coveted it, and said to its owner, "Sir, did you make that robe?"
"Yes, I did, sir," was the reply. "Let me have that robe, sir; you'll get another
in its place." "But, sir, we village-Brethren find it hard to get the Requisites;
ifI give you this, what shall I have to wear myself?" "Sir, I have some brand-
new cloth at my lodging; take it and make yourself a robe." "Reverend sir,
d he o r ? ein Ta h k a e ve it. I " sh A e n w d n h m a y vin o g wn coz h e a n n e d d iw t o h r e k o ; t b h u e t r , b i y f y e o x u ch s a p n e g a i k ng th t u h s e , r w a h g a -r t ob c e an for I
the new cloth, he went his way.
After wearing the botched robe in his turn, the Jetavana man was washing
it not long afterwards in warm water, when he liecame awai-e that itwas made
out of rags; and he was put to shame. The whole of the Brotherhood heard
the news that the Jetavana man had been cozened by a robe-tailor from the
country.

96 The Jataha. Booh I.
Now, one daythe Brethren were seated in the Hall of Truth, discussing the
news, when the Master entered and asked what they were discussing and they
;
told him all about it.
Said the Master, "Brethren, this is not the only occasion of the Jetavana
h ro e b h e a - s ma b k e e e r n 's c c o o z z e e n n e i d ng no tr w ic b k y s ; th i e n b m y a g n on f e ro t m im t e h s e a c l o s u o nt h r e y, did so j w us a t s t h h e e t s o a o me i , n b an y d g , on a e s
times." And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time the Bodhisatta came to life in a certain forest-haunt
as the Tree-sprite of a tree which stood near a certain lotus-pond. In
those days the water used every summer to fall very low in a certain
—
pond, not very big, which was plentifully stocked witli fish. Catching
sight of these fish, a certain crane said to himself, "I must find a way to
cajole and eat these fish." So he went and sat down in deep thought by
the side of the water.
Now when the fishes caught sight ofhim, they said, "Of what are you
thinking, my lord, as you sit thereT' "I am thinking about you," was
the reply. "And what is your lordship thinking aboixt usV "The
—
water in this pool being low, food scarce, and the heat intense, I was
wondering to myself, as I sat here, what in the world you fishes would
do." "And what are we to do, my lordl" "Well, if you'll take my
advice, [222] 1 will take you up one by one in my beak, and carry you all
offto a fine large pool covered with the five varieties of lotuses, and there
put you down." "My lord," said they, "no crane ever took the slightest
thought for fishes since the world began. Your desire is to eat us one by
one." "No I will not eat youwhile you trust me," said the crane. "If
;
you don't take my word that there is such a pond, send one of your
number to go with me and see for himself." Believing the crane, the fish
presented to him a great big fish (blind of one eye, by the way), who they
thought would be a match for the crane whether afloat or ashore ; and
they said, "Here's the one to go with you."
The crane took the fish off" and put him in the pool, and after shewing
him the whole extent of it, bi'ought him back again and put him in along
with the other fish in his old pond. And he held forth to them on the
chai-ms ofthe new pool.
After hearing this report, they grew eager to go there, and said to the
crane, "Very good, my lord please take us across."
;
First of all, the crane took that big one-eyed fish again and carried
him off"to the edge of the pool, .so that he could see the water, but actually
alighted iu a Varana-tree which grew on tlie bank. Dashing the fish
—
down in a fork of the tree, he pecked it to death, after which he picked
him clean and let the bones fall at the foot of the tree. Then back he
went and said, "I've thrown him in who's the next? " And so he took
;
the fish one by one, and ate them all, till at last when he came back, he

—
;;
No. 38. 97
could not find another left. But there was still a crab remaining in the
pond; so the crane, who wanted to eat him up too, said, "Mister crab, I've
taken all those fishes away and turned them into a fine large pool covered
all over with lotuses. Come along; I'll take you too." "How will you
carry me across1" said the crab. "Why, in my beak, to be sure," said
the crane. "Ah, but you might drop me like that," said the crab; "I
won't go with you." "Don't be frightened; I'll keep tight hold of you
all the way." Thought the crab to himself, "He hasn't put the fish in the
pool. But, if he would really put me in, that would be capital. If he
—
does not, why, I'll nip his head off and kill him." So he spoke thus to
the crane, "You'd never be able to hold me tight enough, friend crane
whereas we crabs have got an astonishingly tight grip. [223] If I might
take hold of your neck with my claws, I could hold it tight and then
would go along with you."
Not suspecting that the crab wanted to trick him, the crane gave his
assent. With his claws the crab gripped hold of the crane's neck as with
the pincers of a smith, and said, " Now you can start." The crane took
him and shewed him the pool first, and then started ofi"for the tree.
"The pool lies this way, nunky," said the crab; "but you're taking
me the other way." "Very much your nunky dear am I!" said the
crane; "and very much my nephew are you
!
I suppose you thought me
your slave to lift you up and cai-ry you about ! Just you cast your eye on
that heap of bones at the foot of the tree; as I ate up all those fish, so I
will eat you too." Said the crab, "It was through their own folly that
those fish were eaten by you ; but I shan't give you the chance of eating
me. No ; what I shall do, is to kill ijoit. For you, fool that you were,
did not see that I was tricking you. If we die, we will both die together
I'll chop your head clean off." And so saying he gripped the crane's
weazand with his claws, as with pincers. With his mouth wide open, and
tears streaming from his eyes, the crane, trembling for his life, said,
"Lord, indeed I will not eat you
!
Spare my life! "
"Well, then, just step down to the pool and put me in," said the crab.
Then the crane turned back and stepped down as directed to the pool, and
placed the crab on the mud, at the water-edge. But the crab, before
entering the water, nipped off the crane's head as deftly as if he were
cutting a lotus stalk with a knife.
The Tree-fairy who dwelt in the tree, marking this wonderful thing,
made the whole forest ring with applause repeating this stanza in sweet
tones:
Guile profits not your very guileful folk.
Mark what the guileful crane got from the crab!
C. J.

98 The Jfltaka. Book I.
[224] "Brethren," said the Master, "this is not the first time this fellow has
been cozened by the robe-maker from the comitry ; in the pasthe was cozened
in just the same mannei'." His lesson ended, he shewed the connexion, and
identified the Birth, by saying, "The Jetavana robe-maker was [the crane] of
those days, the robe-maker from the country was the crab, and I myself the
Tree-Fairy."
[iVote. See Benfey's PaTtca-Tantra (i. 175), Tawney's Kathd-Sarit-Sdgara (ir.
31), and Rhys Davids' Birtk Stories (page 321), for the'migrations ofthis popular
story.]
No. 39.
NANDA-JATAKA.
''•Methinhs the gold."—Hhia story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about a co-resident pupil ofSariputta.
Tradition says that this Brother was meek and docile, and was zealous in
ministering to the Elder. Now, on one occasion the Elder departed with the
leave ofthe INIastei-, on an alms-pilgrimage, and came to South Magadha. When
he got there, that Brother grew so pi'oud-stomached that he would not do
what the Elder told him. Moreover, ifhe was addressed with, "Sir, do this," he
quarrelled with the Elder. The Elder could not make out whatpossessed him.
After making his pilgrimage in those parts, he came back again to Jetavana.
The moment he got back to the monastery at Jetavana, the Brother became
again what he had always been.
The Elder told this to the Buddha, saying, "Sir, a co-resident of mine is in
one place like a slave bought for a hundred pieces, and in another so proud-
stomached that an order to do anything makes him quarrel."
Said the Master, "This is not the first time, Sariputta,thathe has shewn this
disposition ; in the past too, if he went to one place, he was like a slave bought
for a hundred pieces, whilst, if he went to another place, he would become
quarrelsome and contentious." And, so saying, by request of the Elder, he told
this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life again as a squire. Another squire, a friend of his,
was an old man himself, but had [225] a young wife who had borne him a
son and heir. Said the old man to himself, "As soon as I am dead, this
girl, being so young as she is, will mai-ry heaven knows whom, and spend
all my money, instead of handing it over to my son. Wouldn't it be my
best course to bury my money safely in the ground?"
So, in the company of a household slave ofhis named Nanda, he went
to the fore-st and buried his riches at a certain spot, saying to the slave,

"
!
No. 39. 99
"My good Natida, reveal this treasure to my son after 1 am gone, and
don't let the wood be sold."
After giving this injunction to his slave, the old man died. In due
course the son grew up, and his mother said to him, "My son, your
father, in the com})any of Nanda, buried his money. Get it back and look
after the propertyof the family." So one day he said to Nanda, " Nunky,
is there any treasure which my father buried1 " " Yes, my lord."
" Where is it buried1 " " In the forest, my lord." " Well, then, let us go
there." And he took a spade and a basket, and going to the scene, said to
Nanda, " Well, nunky, where's the money 1 " But by the time Nanda had
got up to the treasure and was standing right over it, he was .so puffed up
by the money that he abused his master, saying, "You servant ofa slave-
wench's son how should you have any money here1
!
The young gentleman, pretending not to have heard this insolence,
simply said, "Let us be going then," and took the slave back home with
him. Two orthree days later, he returned to the place but again Nanda
;
abused him, as before. Without any abusive rejoinder, the young gentle-
man came back and turned the matter over in his mind. Thought he to
himself, "At starting, this slave always means to reveal where the money
is; but no sooner does he get there, than he falls to abusing me. The
reason of this I do not see; but I could find out, if I were to ask my
father's old friend, the squire." So he went to the Bodhisatta, and laying
the whole business before him, asked his friend what was the real reason
of such behaviour.
Said the Bodhisatta, "The spot at which Nanda stands to abuse you,
my friend, is the place where your father's money is buried. Therefore, as
soon as he starts abusing you again, say to him, ' Whom are you talking
to, you slave?' Pull him from his perch, take the spade, dig down,
remove your family treasure, and make the slave carry it home for you."
—
And so saying, he repeated this stanza: [226]
Methinks the gold and jewels buried lie
Where Nanda, low-born slave, so loudly bawls
Taking a respectful leave of the Bodhisatta, the young gentleman went
home, and taking Nanda went to the spot where the money was buried.
Faithfully following the advice he had received, he broiTght the money
away and looked after the family property. He remained steadfast in the
Bodhisatta's counsels, and after a life spent in charity and other good
works he passed away to fare according to his deserts.
Said the Master, "In the past too this man was similarly disposed." His
lesson ended,he shewed the connexion,and identified the Birth, bysaying,"Sari-
putta's co-resident was the Nanda of tliose days, and T tlie wise and good
squire."
7—2

100 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
No. 40.
KHADIRANGARA-JATAKA.
"/'ar rather icill I headlong plmige."—l!\\\fi story was told by the Master
while at Jetavana, about Axiatha-pindika.
For Aiiatha-puidika, who had lavished fifty-four crores on the Faith of the
BuddhaovertheMonasteryalone,andwhovaluednaughtelse saveonl}'theThree
Gems, used to — go every day while the Master was at Jetavana to attend the
Great Services, once at daybreak, once after breakfast, and once in the
evening. There were intermediate services too; but he never went empty-
handed, forfear the Novices and lads shoidd look to see what he had brought
with him. When he went in the early morning [227], he used to have rice-gruel
t th a e ke e n ve u n p in ; g, af h t e er br br o e u a g k h f t as p t e , rf g u h m e e e, s, bu g t a t r e l r a , nd h s on a e n y d , c m l o o l th a s s . ses, So an m d uc t h he di l d ik h e e ; e a x n p d en i d n
day after day, that his expense knew no — bounds. Moreover, many traders
borrowed money from him on their bonds, to the amount of eighteen crores
and the great merchant never called the money in. Fm"thermore, another ;
eighteen crores ofthe family property,which were biu-ied in theriver-bank, were
washed out to sea, when the bank was swept away by a storm ; and down rolled
the brazen pots, with fastenings and seals unbroken, to the bottom of the oc—ean.
In his house, too, there was always rice standing ready for 500 Brethren, so
that the merchant's house was to the Brotherhood like a pool dug where foiir
roads meet, yea, like mother and father was he to them. Therefore, even the
All-Enlightened Buddha used to go to his house, and the Eighty Chief Elders
f t o o u o r N; t o h an w g d a h t t i h e s e w h a n o y u u m s d b e w e e w r l a t o s f a s o e t f v a h e i e r n r y B s w r to e h r t o i h e r s w en a hi s p g a h a ss a h i n e n r d g et i h i n c a . d an s d W ev h o e u e n t n w po a t r s h t e a b l e A s y l ; o l- n a E n d n d l m i e o g a v h s e t u r e r n t e e h . d e
Buddha came into the house, she could not stay in her abode on high, but came
downwith her children to the ground-floor; and she had to do the like whenever
the Eighty ChiefElders orthe other Elders came in and out. Thought she, "So
long as the ascetic Gotama and his disciples keep coming into this house, I can
have no peace here ; I can't be eternally coming downstairs to theground floor.
I must contrive to stop them from comingany more to this house." Soone day,
when the business manager had retired to rest, she appeared before him in
visible shape.
"Who isthat?" said he.
"It is I," was the reply; "the fairy who lives over the fourth gateway."
"Whatbringsyouhere?" "You don't see whatthemerchantisdoing. Heedless
of his own futm'e, he is drawing upon his resources, only to enrich the ascetic
Gotama. He engages in no traffic; he undertakes no business. Advise the
merchant to attend tohisbusiness, and arrange that the asceticGotama withhis
disciples shall come no more into the house."
Then said he, "Foolish Fairy, if the merchant does spend his money, he
spends it on the Faith of the Buddha, which leads to Salvation. Even if
he were to seize me by the hair and sell me for a slave, I will say nothing.
Begone!"
Another day, she went to the merchant's eldest son and gavehim the same
advice. And he flouted her in just the same manner. But to the merchant
himselfshe did not so much as dare to speak on the matter.
Now by dint of unending munificence [228] and of doing no business, the
merchant's incomings diminished and his estate grew less and less; so that he
sank by degrees into poverty, and liis table, his dress, and his bed and food were
nolonger what they had once been. Yet, in spite of his altered circumstances.

—
!
No. 40. 101
he continued to entertain the Brotherhood, tliough he was no longer able to feast
theui. So one daywhen he had made liis bowandtaken hisseat, theMastersaid
to him, "Householder, aregifts beinggiven at yourhouse?" "Yes, sir,"saidho
"but there's only a little sour husk-porridge, left over from yesterday." "Be not ;
distressed, householder, at the thought that you can only offer what is mi-
palatable. If the heart be good, the food given to Buddhas, Pacceka Buddhas^
and their disciples, cannot but be good too. And why?—Because of the great-
ness of the fruit thereof.— For he who can make his heart acceptable cannot
give an unaccej)tablegift, as is to betestified by the following passage:
For, if the heart have faith, no gift is small
To Buddhas or to their disciples true.
'Tis said no service can be reckoned small
That's paid to Buddhas, lords of great renown.
Mark well — what fruit rewarded that poor gift
Of pottage, dried-up, sour, and lacking salt'-^."
Also, he said this further thing, "Householder, in giving this unpalatable
gift, you are giving it to those who have entered on the Noble Eightfold Bath.
Whereas 1, when in Velama's time I stirred up all India by giving the seven
things of price, and in my largesse poured — them forth as though i had made
into one mighty stream the five great rivers, I yet found none who had reached
the Three Kefuges or kept the Five Commandments; for rare are those who
are worthy of offerings. Therefore, let not your heart be troubled by the
thought that your gift is unpalatable." And so saying, he repeated the
Velamaka Sutta'^.
Now that fairy who had not dared to speak to the merchant in the days of
his magnificence, thought that now he was poorhe would hearken to her, and so,
entering his chamljer at dead of night she appeared before him in visible shape,
standing in mid-air. "Who's thatT' said the merchant, when he became aware
of her presence. "I am the fairy, great merchant, who dwells over the fourth
gateway." "What bringsyou here'^" "Togive you counsel." "Proceed, then."
"Great merchant, you take no thought for your own future or for your own
children. You have expended vast sums on the Faith ofthe ascetic Gotama; in
fact, by long-continued [229] expenditure and by not undertaking new business
you have been brought by the ascetic Gotama to poverty. But even in your
p of ov y e o r u t r y y ho o u u s d e o th n i o s t v s e h r a y ke da o y ft" ju t s h t e t a h s e ce s t a ic me Gota W m h a at! t T h h ey e h a a s v ce e ti h c a s d a o r f e y i o n u a c n a d nn o o u t t
!
be recovered. That may be taken for certain. But henceforth don't you go
yourself to the ascetic Gotama and don't let his disciples set foot inside your
house. Do not even turn to look atthe ascetic Gotama but attend to your trade
and traffic in orderto restore the family estate."
Then he said to her, "Was this the counsel you wanted to give me?"
"Yes, it was."
Said the merchant, "The mighty Lord ofWisdom has made me proofagainst
a hundred, athousand, yea against a hundred thousand fairies suchas you are
My faith is strong and steadfast as Mount Sineru! My substance has been
expended on the Faith that loads to Salvation. Wicked are your words ; it is a
blow aimed at the Faith of the Buddhas by you, you wicked and impudent
w h i o t u c s h e . an I d c s a e n e n k o s t he l l i t v e e r u e n l d se e w r he t r h e e !" sam H e ea r r o i o n f g w t i h t e h se y w o o u r ; ds be of oft t ' ha a t t c o o n n c v e er f t r e o d m m m a y n
and elect disciple, she could not stay, but repairing to her dwelling, took her
1 AllBuddhashaveattainedto completeillumination ; butaPaccekaBuddhakeeps
hisknowledge to himself and, unlike a 'Perfect Buddha,' does not preach the saving
truthtohis fellow-men.
- Thefirst two lines are from the Viiiidna-vatthu, page44.
'^ This Sutta isreferredtoat page 234 ofthe Sumahgala-Vilasini, butis otherwise
unknownas yet to European scholars.

—
102 The Jataha. Book I.
children by the hand and went forth. But thrjugh she went, she was minded, if
she could not find herself a lodging elsewhere, to appease the merchant and
return to dwell in his house and in this mind she repaii'ed to the tutelary deity
;
of the city and with due salutation stood before him. Being asked what had
brought her thither, she said, "My lord, I have been speaking imprudently to
Anatha-pindika, and he in his anger has turned me out of my home. Take me
to him and make it up between us, so that he may let me live there again."
"But what was ityou said tothe merchant?" "I told iiim for the future not to
support the Buddha and the Ordei-, and not to let the ascetic Gotama setfoot
again in his house. This is what I said, my lord." "Wicked wereyour words;
it was a blow aimed at the Faith. I cannot take you with me to the merchant."
Meeting with no support from him, she went to the Four Great Eegents of the
world. And being repulsed by them in the same mannci', she went on to Sakka,
king of Devas, and told him her story, beseeching him still more earnestly, as
follows, "Deva, finding no shelter, I wander about homeless, leading my children
by the hand. Grant me ofyour majesty some place wherein todwell."
And he too said to her, "You have done wickedly; it was a blow aimed at
the Conqueror's Faith. I cannot speak to the merchant on yourbehalf But I
can tell you one way [230] wherel)y the merchant may be led to pardon you."
"Pray tell me, deva." "Men have had eighteen crores of the merchant on
bonds. Take the semblance of his agent, and without telling anybody repair to
theirhouses withthebonds,inthecompanyof.some younggoblins. Standinthe
middle oftheir houses with the bond in one hand and areceipt in the other, and
terrify them with your goblin power, saying, 'Here's yom- acknowledgment of
the debt. Our merchant did not move in the matter while he was affluent; but
now he is poor, and 3'ou must pay up the money you owe.' By your goblin
power obtain all those eighteen crores of gold and fill the merchant's empty
treasuries. He had another ti-easure buried in the banks of the river AciravatI,
but when the bank was washed away, the treasiu'e was swept into the sea. Get
thatbackalsobyyoursupernaturalpower and store itinhistreasuries. Further,
there is anothersum ofeighteen crores lying unowned in such and such a place.
Bring thattoo and jwur the money into his empty treasuries. When you have
atoned by the recovery of these iifty-four crores, ask the mei'chant to forgive
you." "Very good, deva," said she. And she set to work obediently, and did
just as she had been bidden. When she had recovered all the money, she went
into the merchant's chamber at dead of night and appeared before him in visible
shape standing in the air.
The merchant asking who wna there, she replied, "It is I, great merchant,
the blind and foolish fairy who lived over yourfourth gateway. In the greatness
of my infjxtuate folly I knew not the virtues of a Buddha, and so came to say
what I said to you some days ago. Pardon me my fault At the instance of
Sakka, king ofDevas, I have made atonement by recoverin ! g the eighteen crores
owing to you, the eighteen crores which had been washed down into the sea, and
another eighteen crores which were lying unowned in such and such aplace,
making fifty-four crores in all, which I have poured into your empty treasure-
chamtters. The sum you expended on the Monastery at Jetavana is now made
up again. Whilst I have nowhere to dwell, I am in misery. Bear not in mind
what I did in my ignorant folly, great merchant, but pardon me."
Anatha-pindika, hearing what she said, thoiight to himself, "She is a fairy,
and she says she has atoned, and confesses her fault. The Master shall consider
this and make his virtues known to her. I will take her befoi'e the All-En-
lightened Buddha." So he said, "My good fairy, if you want me to pardon you,
ask me in the presenceofthe master." "Very good," said she, "I will. Take me
along with you to the Master." "Certainly," said he. And earlyin the morning,
when night wasjust passing away, hetook her with him to the IMaster, and told
the Blessed One all that she had done.
Hearing this, the Master said, "You see, householder, how the sinful man
regards sin [231] as excellent before it ripens to its fruit. But when it has
ripened,thenhesees sin to be sin. Likewise the good man looks on hisgoodness

No. 40. 103
as sill before it ripens to its fruit; but wlicn it ripens, he sees it to be—goodness."
And so saying, he repeated these two stanzas from the Dhaniniapada:
The sinner thinks his sinful deed is good,
So long as sin has ripened not to fruit.
But when his sin at last to ripeness grows,
The sinner surely sees "'twas sin I wrought."
The good man thinks his goodness is but sin.
So long as it has ripened not to fruit.
But when his goodness unto ripeness grows.
The good man surely sees "'twas good I wrought^"
At tiie close of these stanzas that fairy was established in the Fruit of the
First Path. She fell at the Wheel-marked feet of the Master, crying, "Staiiietl
as I was with passion, depraved by sin, misled by delusion, and blinded by
ignorance, I spoke wickedly because I knew not your virtues. Pardon me!"
Then she received pardon fr(jm the JNlaster and from the great merchant.
At this time Anatha-pindika sang his own praises in t.he Master's presence,
saying, "Sir, though this fairy did her best to stop me from giving support to
t st h o e p B m u e dd f h r a om a g n i d vi h n i g s g f if o t l s l , ow y i e n t g, I s g h a « ve co t ul h d em no s t til s l u ! cce W e a d s; a n n o d t t t h h i o s u g g o h od s n h e e ss tr o i n ed m t y o
part?"
Said the Master, "You, householder^ are a converted man and an elect
disciple; your ftiith is firm and your vision is purified. No marvel then that
ycni were not sto][)ped by this impotent fairy. The marvel was that the wise and
good of a bygone da}', when a Buddha had not appeared, and when knowledge
had not ripened to its full fruit, should from the heart of a lotus-tiower have
given gifts, although Mara, lord of tlie Realm of Lusts, appeared —in mid-heaven,
shouting, 'If you give gifts, you shall be roasted in this hell,' and shewing
them therewithal a pit eighty cubits deep, tilled with red-hot embers." And so
saying, at the request ofAnatha-pindika, he told this stoiy ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life in the family of the Lord High Treasurer of
Benares, and was brought up in the lap of all luxury like a royal prince.
By the time he was come to years ofdiscretion, being barely sixteen years
old, he had made himself perfect in all accomplishments. At his father's
death he filled the office of Lord High Treasurer, and built six almonries,
one at each ofthe four gates ofthe city, one in the centre of the city, and
one at the gate ofhis own mansion. Very bountiful was he [232], and he
kept the commandments, and observed the fest-day duties.
JSTow one day at breakfast-time when dainty fare ofexquisite taste and
variety was being brought in for the Bodhisatta, a Pacceka Buddha rising
from a seven days' trance of mystic ecstasy, and noticing that it was
time to go his rounds, bethought him that it would be well to visit the
Treasurer of Benares that morning. So he cleaned his teeth with a tooth-
stick made from the betel-vine, washed his mouth with water from Lake
Anotatta, put on his under-cloth as he stood on the tableland of Manosila,
fastened on his girdle, donned his outer-cloth ; and, equipped with a bowl
1 The versesare Nos. 119 and 120 in the Dliammapada.

—
!
104 The Jataka. Book I.
whioli lie called into being for the pui'ijose, he passed through the air and
arrived at the gate ofthe mansionjust as the Bodhisatta's breakfast was
taken in.
As soon as the Bodhisatta became aware of his presence there, he rose
at once from his seat and looked at the attendant, indicating that a service
was required. "What am I to do, my lord?'' "Bring his reverence's
bowl," said the Bodhisatta.
At that very instant Mara the Wicked rose up in a state of great
excitement, saying, "It is seven days since the Pacceka Buddha had food
given him if he gets none to-day, he will perish. I will destroy him and
;
stop the Treasurer too from giving." And that very instant he went and
called into being within the mansion a pit of red-hot embers, eighty cubits
deep, filled with Acacia-charcoal, all ablaze and aflame like the great hell
of Avici. When he had created this pit, Mara himself took his stand in
mid-air.
When the man who was on his way to fetch the bowl became aware of
this, he was terrified and started back. " What makes you start back, my
man]" asked the Bodhisatta. "My lord," was the answer, "there's a
great pit of red-hot embei-s blazing and flaming in the middle of the
house." And as man after man got to the spot, they all were panic-
stricken, and ran away as fast as their legs would carry them.
Thought the Bodhisatta to himself, " Mara, the Enthraller, must have
been exerting himself to-day to stop me from alms-giving. 1 have yet to
learn, however, that I am to be shaken by a hundred, or by a thousand,
Maras. We will see this day whose strength is the stronger, whose might
is the mightier, mine or Mara's." So taking in his own hand the bowl
which stood ready, he passed out from the house, and, standing on the
brink of the fiery pit, looked up to the heavens. Seeing Mara, he said,
" Who are you 1 " "I am Mara," was theanswer.
"Did you call into being this pit of red-hot embers ? " "Yes, I did."
[233] "Why? " "To stop you from alms-giving and to destroy the life
of that Pacceka Buddha." " I will not permit you either to stop me from
my alms-giving or to destroythe life of the Pacceka Buddha. I am going
to see to-day whether your strength or mine is the greater." And still
standing on the brink of that fiery pit, he cried, " Reverend Pacceka
Buddha, even though I be in act to fall headlong into this pit ofred-hot
embers, I will not turn back. Only vouchsafe to take the food I bring."
And so saying he repeated this stanza :
Far rather will I headlong plunge amain
F V u o l u l ch i s n af t e h , is si g r u , lf at of my hell h , an t d h s an to st t o a o k p e t t o hi s s h a a l m m e s I
With these words the Bodhisatta, grasping the bowl offood, strode oii
with undaunted resolution right on to the surface of the pit of fire. But

No. 41. 105
even as he did bO, there rose up to the surfuce through all the eighty
cubits of the pit's depth a large and peerless lotus-flower, which received
the feet of the Bodhisatta And from it there came a measure of pollen
which fell on the head ofthe Great Being, so that his whole body was as
it were sprinkled from head to foot with dust ofgold ! Standing right in
the heart of the lotus, he poured the dainty food into the bowl of the
Pacceka Buddha.
And when the latter had taken the food and returned thanks, he ilung
his bowl aloft into the heavens, and right in the sight of all the people he
hiuiself rose Ijodily into the air likewise, and passed awaytotheHimalayas
again, seeming to tread a track formed of clouds fantastically sliaj)ed.
And Mara, too, defeated and dejected, j)assed away back to his own
abode.
But the Bodhisatta, still standing in the lotus, preached [234] the
Truth to the people, extolling alms-giving and the commandments ; after
which, girt round by the escorting multitude, he passed into his own
mansiononce more. And all his life long he shewed charity and did other
goodworks, till in the end he passed away to fare according to his deserts.
Said the Master, "It was no marvel, layman, that you, with your discern-
ment of the truth, were not overcome now by the fairy; the real mai'vel was
what the wise and good did in bygone days." His lesson ended, the Master
shewed the connexion, and identified the Birthby saying, "The Pacceka JJuddha
ofthose days passed away, never to be born again, i was myself the Treasurer
of Benares who, defeating Mara, and standing in the heart of the lotus, placed
alms in the bowl ofthe Pacceka Buddha."
[iVote. See Giles, 'Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio,' i. 396.]
No. 41.
LOSAKA-JATAKA.
—
"The headstrong man" This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, aboutthe Elder Losaka Tissa.
'Who,' you ask, 'was this Elder Losaka Tissa^' Well; his father was a
fisherman in Kosala, and he was the bane of his family and, when a Brother,
;
never had anything given to him. His previous existence ended, he hatl been
conceived by a certain fisherman's wife in a fishing-village ofa thousand families
in Kosala. And on theday he was conceived all those thousand fjxmilies, net in
hand, went fishing in river and pool but failed to catch one .single tish; and

106 The Jataka. Book I.
the like bad fortune dogged them from th;it day forward. Also, before his birth,
the village was destroyed seven times by tire, and visited seven times by the
king's vengeance. So in time it came to passthat thepeople fell into a wretched
plight. Reflecting that snch had not been their lot in formei' days, but that now
they were going to rack and ruin, they concluded that there must be some
breeder of misfortune among them, and resolved to divide into two bands. This
they did and therewere then two bandsoffive hundred families each. Thence-
;
forward, ruin dogged the band which included the parents of the future Losaka,
whilstthe otherfive hundred families throveapace. Sothe former resolved to go
on halving their numbers, and did so, mitil this one family was parted from all
the rest. Then they knew that the breeder of misfortune wtis in that family,
and with blows drove them away. [235] With difficulty could his mother get a
livelihood; but, when her time was come, she gave bii'th to her son in a
certain place. (He that is born into his last existence camiot be killed. For
like a lampwithin ajar, even so securely within his breast burns theflameofhis
destiny to become an Arahat.) The mother took care of the child till he could
nui about, and when he could run about then she put a potsherd in his hands,
and, bidding him go into a house to beg, ran away. Thenceforward, the solitary
child used to beg his food thereabouts and sleep where he could. He was un-
washed and unkempt, and made a living after the fashion of a mud-eating
goblin^ When he was seven years old, he was picking up and eating, like a
cr<nv, lump by lump, any rice he could find outside a house door where they
flung away the rinsings ofthe rice-pots.
Sariputta, Captain of the Faith, going into Savatthi on his round for alms,
noticed the child, and, wondei'ing what village the hapless creature came from,
was filled with love for him and called out "Come here." The child came,
bowed to the Elder, and stood before him. Then said Sariputta, "What village
do y " o I u a b m elo d n e g sti to t , ut a e n , d si w r h ," er s e aid arc th y e ou c r hi p l a d; ren " t f s or I " my parents said they were tii-ed
out, and so forsook me, and went away."
"Would you like to become a BrotherT' "Indeed I should, sir; l)ut who
would receive a poor wretch like me into the Order?" "I will." "Then, pray
let me become a Brother."
The Eldergavethe child a meal and took him to the monastery, washed him
with his own hands, and admitted him a Novice first and a full Brotherafter-
wards, whcm he was old enough. In his old age he was known as Elder Losaka
Tissa; he was always unlucky2, and butlittle wasgiven to him. The story goes
that, no matter how lavish the charity, he never got enough to eat, but onlyjust
enough to keep himself alive. A single ladle of rice seemed to fill his alms-bowl
to the brim, so that the charitable thought his bowl was full and bestowed the
rest of their rice on the next. When rice was being put into his bowl, it is said
that the rice in the giver's dish used to vanish away. And so with every kind of
food. Even when, as time went by, he had developed Discernment and so won
the highest Fruit which is Arahatship, he still got but little.
In the fullness of time, when the materials which determined his separate
existence'' were outworn, the day came for him to pass away. And the Captain
' On the authority of ^ahhxxti,paHisu-pisacaha are said to form the fourth class of
Petm (i^retas) or 'ghosts' (who were cursed at once with cavernous maws and with
mouths no bigger than a needle's eye, so that theirvoracity was never satisfiedeven in
their customary coprophagic state). But neither Hardy's Manual of Buddhism
(p. 58) nor the Milinda {]}. 294) mentionspaihsu-pisucahd as one of thefourclasses of
Petas.
'^ Beadingnippiiuuo instead of nippanuo. See CeylonR.A.S. Journal, 1884, p. 158;
andcompare apunno on p. 236, line 20 ofthe Pali original.
' As protoplasm is 'the physicalbasis of life,' so dyii-samkhdrd areitsmoralbasis
according to Buddhist ideas. ThisLebensstoff it is the aim of Buddhism to uproot,
so that there maybe no re-birth.

No. 41. 107
of the Fiiith, as he meditated, had knowledge of thi.s, and thought to hiui.self,
h ' a L s os e a n k o a ug T h iss t a o w e i a l t l .' pa S ss o a h w e a t y oo t k o- t d h a e y E ; l a d n e d r a to n - d da c y am a e t t a o ny Sa r v a a t t e th I i w f i o l r l a s l e m e s. that Bu h t e ,
because Losaka was with him, it was all in vain that Sariputta hold out his
hand for alms in populous Savatthi ; not so much as a bow was vouchsafed him.
So he bade thePoldergobackandseathimselfinthesitting-hallofthe jMonastery,
and collected food which he sent with a message [23(5] tliat it was to be given to
Losaka. Those t<j whom he gave it took the food and went tlicir way, but,
forgetting all about Losaka, ate it themselves. So when Sariputta rose up, and
was entering the monastery, Losaka came to him and saluted him. Sariputta
sto[)ped, and turning round said, "Well, did you get the food, brotherr'
"I shall, no doubt, get it in good time," said the Elder. Sariputta Wiis
greatly troubled, and looked to sec what hour it was. But noon was ])assed^
"Stay here, lirother," said Sariputta; "and do not move"; and he made Lo.saka
Tissa sit down in the sitting-hal), and set out for the palace of the king of
Kosala. The king bade his bowl be taken, and saying that it was past noon ;ind
therefore not the time to eat rice, ordered his bowl to be filled with tiie four
sweet kinds of food^. With this he returned, and stood bef(.)re him, bowl in
hand, bidding the sage eat. But the Elder was ashamed, because of the
revei'ence he had towards Sariputta, and would not eat. "Come, brother Tissa,"
s b a o i w d l S l a e r f i t p m ut y ta h , an "' d t , is ev I er n y u t i l s i t in s g ta i n n d it wi w t o h ul t d he v b a o ni w s l h ; a s w i a t y. y ' o ' u down and eat. If the
So the venerable p]Idcr Losaka Tissa ate the sweets, whilst the exalted
Captain of the Faith stood holding the bowl; and thanks to tlic hitter's merits
and efficacy the food did not vanish. So the Elder Losaka Tissa ate as nnich as
he wanted and was satisfied, and that selfsame day passed away by that death
whereby existence ceases for ever.
The All-Enlightened Buddha stood by, and saw the body Ijurned and they
;
built a shrine for the collected ashes.
Seated in conclave in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren said, "Brethren,
Losaka was imlucky, and little was given to him. How came he with liis
unluck and his neediness to win the glory ofArahatship?"
Entering the Hall, the Master asked what they were talkingabout ; and they
told him. "Brethren," said he, "this Brother's own actions were the cause both
ofhis receiving so little,andofhis becomingan Arahat. In bygone days he had
prevented others from receiving, and that is why he received so little himself.
But it was by his meditating on sorrow, transitoriness, and the absence of an
abiding principle in things, that he won Arahatship for himself." And so
saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once uijon a time, in tlie days of the Buddha Kassapa, there was a
Brother who lived the village life and was maintained by a country squire.
He was regular in his conduct as a Brother^, virtuous in his lite, and was
filled to overflowing with insight. Tliere was also an Elder, an Arahat,
who lived with his fellows on terms of equality, and at the time of the
story paid a first visit to the village where lived the sqiiire who sui)ported
1 i.e. nomore rice could be eaten that day. If a shadow of a finger's breadth is
cast byan upright stick, astrictBrother will not eat riceandlike foods.
2 Honey, ghee, butter, and sugar.
3 Pakatatto is explained byRhys Davids and Oldenberg in the note topage 340 of
Vol. XVII. of the SacredBooks of the East as meaning aBrother "who has not made
himselfliable to any di.scii5linaryproceeding, has committed no irregularity."

108 The Jataka. Book I.
this Brother. So pleased was the squire [237] with the very demeanour of
the Elder that, taking his bowl, he led him into the house and with every
mark of respect invited him to eat. Then he listened to a short discourse
by the Elder, and at its close said, with a bow, "Sir, pray do notjourney
further than our monastery close by; in the evening I will come and call
upon you there." So the Elderwent to the monastery, salutingthe resident
Brother on his entrance ; and, lirst courteously asking leave, took a seat by
his side. The Brother received him with all friendliness, and askedwhether
any food had been given him as alms.
"Oh yes," replied the Elder. "Where, pray?" "Why, in your village
close by, at the squire's house." And so saying, the Elder asked to be
shewn his cell and made it ready. Then laying aside his bowl and robe,
and seating himself, he became absorbed in blissful Insight and enjoyed
the bliss of the Fruits of the Paths.
In the evening came the squire, with servants carrying flowers and
l)erfunies and lamjjs and oil. Saluting the resident Brother, he asked
whether a guest had appeared, an Elder. Being told that he had, the
squire asked where he was and learned which cell had been given him.
Then the squire went to the Elder and, first bowing courteously, seated
himself by the Elder's side and listened to a discourse. In the cool of the
evening the squire made his offerings at the Tope and Bo-Tree, lit his
lamp, and departed with an invitation to both Elder and Brother to come
up to his house next day for their meal.
"I'm losing my hold on the squix'e," thought the Brother. "If this
Elder stops, I shall count for nothing with him." So he was discontented
and fell a-scheming how to make the Elder see that he must not settle
down there for good. Accordingly, when the Elder came to pay his
respects in the early morning, the Brother did not open his lips. The
Arahat read the other's thoughts and said to himself, "This Brother
knows not that I shall never stand in his light either with the family that
supports him or with his Brotherhood." And going back to his cell, he
became absorbed in the bliss ofInsight and in the bliss of the Fruits.
Next day, the resident Brothei-, having first knocked gingerly on the
gong', and having tapped on the gong with the back of his nail, went off
alone to the squire's house. Taking from him his alms-bowl, the squire
bade him be seated and asked where the stranger was.
"I know no news of your friend," said the Brother. "Though I
knocked on the gong and tapped at his door, I couldn't wake him. I can
1 For gandi meaning 'a gong,' cf. Jut. iv. 306 ; but see note p. 213 of Vol. xx. of
S. B. K. It is doubtful what kapitthena can mean. Can the true reading be
[punadivase) nakhapitthcna, i.e. 'with the back of his nail'? TheresidentBrother's
object was to go through the form of waking the guest without disturbing his
slumbers.

"
No. 41. 109
only presume that his dainty fare [238] here yesterday has disagreed with
him and that he is still a-bed in consequence. Possibly such doings may
commend themselves to you."
(Meantime the Arahat, who had waited till the time came to go his
round for alms, had washed and dressed and risen witli bowl and robe in
the air and gone elsewhere.)
The squire gave the Brother rice and milk to eat, with ghee and sugar
and honey in it. Then he had his bowl scoured with perfumed chunam
powder and filled afresh, saying, "Sir, the Elder must be fatigued with
his journey ; take him this." Without demur the Brother took the food
and went his way, thinking to himself, "If our friend once gets a taste of
this, taking him by the throat and kicking him out of doors won't get rid
ofhim. But how can I get rid of it? If I give it away to a human
being, it will be known. If I throw it into the water, the ghee will float
on top. And as for throwing it away on the ground, that will only bring
all the crows of the district flocking to the spot." In his perplexity his
eye fell on a field that had been fired, and, scraping out the embers, he
flung the contents of his bowl into the hole, filled in the embers on the
top, and went ofi"home. Not finding the Elder there, he thought that the
Arahat had understood his jealousy and departed. " Woe is me," he
cried, "for my greed has made me to sin."
And thenceforth sore affliction befell him and he became like a living
ghost. Dying soon after, he was re-born in hell and there was tormented
for hundreds of thousands of years. By reason of his ripening sin, in five
hundred successive births he was an ogre and never had enough to eat,
except one day when he enjoyed a surfeit of offiil. Next, for five hundred
more existences he was a dog, and here too, only on one single day had his
—
fill of a vomit of rice ; on no other occasion did he have enough to eat.
Even when he ceased to be a dog, he was only born into a beggar family
in a Kasi village. From the hour of his birth, that family became still
more beggared, and he never got half as much water-gruel as he wanted.
And he was called Mitta-vindaka [239].
Unable at last to endure the pangs of hunger' that now beset them, his
father and mother beat him and drove him away, crying, "Begone, you
curse!
Inthecoui'seofhis wanderings, thelittle outcastcameto Benares, where
in those days the Bodhisatta was a teacher of world-wide fame with five
hundred young Brahmins to teach. In those times the Benaresfolkused to
give day by day commons of food to poor lads and had them taught free,
and so this Mitta-vindaka also became a charity scholar under the Bodhi-
satta. But lie was fierce and intractable, always fighting witli his fellows
^ ReadingcJwfakadiikkhaw forFausboll'sj(7^(/,7/(/(//,A7/(M/i.

110 The Jataka. Book I.
and heedless of his master's reproofs ; and so the Bodhisatta's fees fell oflf.
And as he qnai-relled so, and would not brook reproof, the youth ended by-
running away, and came to a border-village where he hired himself out for
a living, and married a miserably poor woman by whom he had two chil-
dren. Later, the villagers paid him to teacli them what was true doctrine
and what was false, and gave him a hut to live in at the entrance to their
village. But, all because of Mitfca-vindaka's coming to live among them,
the king's vengeance fell seven times on those villagers, and seven times
were their homes burned to the ground ; seven times too did their water-
tank dry up.
Then they considered the matter and agreed that it was not so with
them before Mitta-vindaka's coming, but that ever since he came they had
l>een going from bad to worse. So with blows they drove him from their
village; and forth he went with his family, and came to a haunted forest.
And there the demons killed and ate his wife and children. Fleeing
thence, he came after many wanderings to a village on the coast called
Gambhira, arriving on a day when a ship was putting to sea and he
;
hii'ed himself for service aboard. For a week the ship held on her way,
but on the seventh day she came to a complete standstill in mid-ocean, as
though she had run upon a rock. Then they cast lots, in order to rid
them of their bane ; and seven times the lot fell on Mitta-vindaka. So
they gave him a raft of bamboos, and laying hold of him, cast him over-
board. And forthwith the ship made way again [240].
Mitta-vindaka clambered on to his bamboos and floated on the waves.
Thanks to his having obeyed the commandments in the times of the
Buddha Kassapa, he found in mid-ocean four daughters of the gods dwell-
ing in a palace of crystal, with whom he dwelt happily for seven days.
Now palace-ghosts enjoy happiness only for seven days at a time and
;
so, when the seventh day came and they had to depart to their punish-
ment, they left him with an injimction to await their return. But no
sooner were they departed, than Mitta-vindaka put off on his raft again
andcame to where eight daughters of the gods dwelt in a palace of silver.
Leaving them in turn, he came to where sixteen daughters of the gods
dwelt in a palace ofjewels, and thereafter to where thirty-two dwelt in a
palace of gold. Paying no regard to their words, again he sailed away and
came to a city ofogres, set among islands. And there an ogress was rang-
ing about in the shape of a goat. Not knowing that she was an ogress,
Mitta-vindaka thought to make a meal off the goat, and seized hold of the
creature by the leg. Straightway, by virtue of her demon-nature, she
hurled him up and away over the ocean, and plump he fell in a thorn-
brake on the slopes of the dry moat of Benares, and thence rolled to
earth.
Now it chanced that at tliat time thieves used to frequent that moat

—
No. 41. Ill
and kill the King's goats; and the goatherds had hidden themselves hard
by to catch the rascals.
Mitta-vindaka picked himself up and saw the goats. Thoiight he to
himself, " Well, it was a goat in an island in the ocean that, being seized
by the leg, hurled me here over seas. Perha})s, if I do the same by one of
these goats, I may get hurled back again to where the daughters of the
gods dwell in their ocean palaces." So, without thinking, he seized one of
the goats by the leg. At once the goat began to bleat, and the goatherds
came running up from every side. They laid hold of him at once, crying,
"This is the thief that has so long lived on the King's goats." And they
beat him and began to haul him away in bonds to the King.
Just at that time the Bodhisatta, with his five hundred yoimg Brah-
mins round him, was coming out of the city to bathe. Seeing and recog-
nising Mitta-vindaka, he said to the goatherds, ''Why, this is a pupil of
mine, my good men; what have you seized him for?" "Master," said they,
'*we caught this thief in the act of seizing a goat by the leg, and that's
why we've got hold of him." "Well," [241] said the Bodhisatta, "sup-
pose you hand him over to us to live with us as our slave." "All right,
sir," replied the men, and letting their prisoner go, they went their way.
Then the Bodhisatta asked Mitta-vindaka where he had been all that long
time; and Mitta-vindaka told him all that he had done.
"'Tis tlu'ougli not hearkening to those who wished him well," said
the Bodhisatta, " that he has suffered all these misfortunes." And Ik;
i-ecited this stanza :
The headstrong man who, when exhorted, pays
No heed to friends who kind — ly counsel give,
Shall come to certain harm, like Mittaka,
When by the leg he seized the grazing goat.
And in those times both that Teacher and Mitta-vindaka passed away,
and their after-lot was accordin;:' to theirdeeds.
Said the Master, "This Losakawas himselfthe cause bothofhis getting little
and of his getting Arahatship." His lesson ended, he shewed the connexion and
identified the Birth by saying, "The Elder Losaka Tissa was the Mitta-vindaka
ofthose days, and I the Teacher ofworld-wide fame^."
1 Compare Nos. 82, 104, 369, 439, Petavatthu No. 43, Avaddna-Sataka No. 50,
J. As. 1878, and Ind. Antiq. x. 293. A dubious attempt to trace in the wauderings of
Mittaviuda the germ of part of the wanderings of Ulysses, has been made by the
Bishop ofColombo in the Cei/lon R. A. ,<?. .Tovrmtl, 1884.

112 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
No. 42.
KAPOTA-JATAKA.
"T'/ie headstrongman."—This storywas told by theMasterwhile atJetavana,
about a certain greedy Brother. His greediness will be related in the Ninth
Book in the Kaka-Jatakai.
But on this occasion the Brethren told the Master, saying, "Sir, this Brother
is greedy."
Said the Master, "Is it true [242] as they say,Brother, that you are greedy?"
"Yes, sir," was the reply.
"So too in bygone days, Brother, you were greedy, and by reason of your
o-reediness lost yourlife; also you caused the wise and good to lose theirhome."
And so saying he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benare-s,the Bodhi-
satta was born a pigeon. Now the Benares folk ofthose days, as an act of
goodness, used to hang up straw-baskets in divers places for the shelter
and comfort of the birds; and the cook of the Lord High Treasurer of
Benares hung up one of these baskets in his kitchen. In this basket the
Bodhisatta took up his abode, sallying out at daybreak in quest of food,
and returning home in the evening; and so he lived his life.
But one day a crow, flying over the kitchen, snuffed up the goodly
savour from the salt and fresh fisli and meat there, and was filled with
longing to taste it. Casting about how to have his will, he perched hard
by, and at evening saw the Bodhisatta come home and go into the kitchen.
"Ah ! " thought he, "I can manage it through the pigeon."
So back he came next day at dawn, and, when the Bodhisatta sallied
out in quest of food, kept following him about from place to place like his
shadow. So the Bodhisatta said, "Why do you keep with me, friend?"
"My lord," answered the crow, "your demeanour has won my admira-
tion; and henceforth it is my wish to follow you." "But your kind of
food and mine, friend, is not the same," said the Bodhisatta; "you will
be hard put to it if you attach yourself to me." " My lord," said the
crow, "when you are seeking your food, I will feed too, by your side."
"So be it, then," said the Bodhisatta; "only you must be earnest." And
with this admonition to the crow, the Bodhisatta ranged about pecking up
grass-seeds; whilst the other went about turning over cowdung and pick-
' This isauinadvertence of thecompiler. There is noKaka-jatakain the9tlibook,
thoughthereisin theCth (No.395), where itis stated that 'the Introdnctory Story has
alreadybeenrelated.' SeeNos. 274 and375.

—
No. 42. 113
ing out the insects underneath till he had got his fill. Then back he came
to the Bodhisatta and remarked, "My lord, you give too much time to
eating; excess therein should be shunned."
And when the Bodhisatta had fed and reached home again at evening,
in flew the crow with him into the kitchen [243].
"Why, our bird has brought another home with him;" exclaimed the
cook, and hung up a second basket for the crow. And from that time on-
ward the two birds dwelt together in the kitchen.
Now one day the Lord High Treasurer had in a store offish which the
cook hung up about the kitchen. Filled with greedy longing at the sight,
the crow made up his mind to stay at home next day and treat himself to
this excellent fare.
So all the night long he lay groaning away ; and next day, when the
Bodhisatta was starting in search of food, and cried, "Come along, friend
crow," the crow replied, "Go without me, my lord; for I haveapainin my
stomach." "Friend," answered the Bodhisatta, " I never heard of crows
having pains in their stomachs before. True, crows feel faint in each of
the three night-watches; but if they eat a lamp-wick, their hunger is
appeased for the moment^ You must be hankering after the fish in the
kitchen here. Come now, man's food will not agree with you. Do not
give way like this, but come and seek your food with me." "Indeed, I
am not able, my lord," said the crow. "Well, your own conduct will
shew," said the Bodhisatta. "Only fall not a prey to greed, but stand
steadfast." And with thisexhortation, awayhe flew to find his daily food.
The cook took several kinds of fish, and dressed some one way, some
another. Then lifting the lids off" his saucepans a little to let the steam
out, he put a colander on the top of one and went outside the door, where
he stood wiping the sweat from his brow. Just at that moment out
popped the crow's head from the basket. A glance told him that the cook
was away, and, "Now or never," thought he, "is my time. The only
question is shall I choose minced meat or a big lump?" Arguing that it
takes a long time to make a full meal of minced meat, he resolved to take
a large piece of fish and sit and eat it in his basket. So out he flew and
alighted on the colander. "Click" went the colander.
"What can that be? " said the cook, running in on hearing the noise.
Seeing the crow, he cried, "Oh, there's that rascally crow wanting to eat
my master's dinner. I have to work for my master, not for that rascal !
What's he to me, I should like to know i " So, first shutting the door, he
caught the crow and plucked every feather [244] off" his body. Then, he
pounded up ginger with salt and cumin, and mixed in sour buttermilk
finally sousing the crow in the pickle and flinging him back into his
1 Cf. Vol. II. p. 262.
C. J. 8

—
114 The Jdtaka. Book I.
basket. And there the crow lay groaning, overcome by the agony of his
pain.
At evening the Boclhisatta came back, and saw the wretched plight of
the crow. "Ah! greedy crow," he exclaimed, "you would not heed my
words, and now your — own greed has worked you woe." So saying, he
repeated this stanza :
The headstrong man who, when exhorted, pays
No heed to friends who kindly counsel give.
Shall surely perish, like the greedy crow,
Who laughed to scorn the pigeon's warning words.
Then, exclaiming "I too can no longer dwell here," the Bodhisatta
flew away. But the crow died there and then, and the cook flung him,
basket and all, on the dust-heap.
Said the Master, "Youwere greedy, Brother, in bygone times,just as you are
now ; and all because of your greediness the wise and good of those dayshad to
abandon theirhomes." Having ended this lesson, the Master preached the Four
Truths, at the close whereof that Brother won the Fruit of the Second Path.
Then the Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth as follows:
"Thegreedy Brotherwas the crow ofthose times, and I the pigeon."
No. 43.
VELUKA-JATAKA.
"T'/ie headstrong «ia>i."— This story was told by the Master while at Jeta-
vana, about a certain headstrong Brother. For the Blessed One asked him
whetherthe report was true that he was headstrong, and the Brother admitted
thatit was. "Brother,"saidtheMaster, "this is notthe first timeyouhave been
headstrong : you were just as headstrong in former days also, [245] and, as the
result of your headstrong refusal to follow the advice of the wise and good, you
met your end by the bite ofa snake." And so saying, he told this story of the
past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a wealthy family in the Kingdom of Kasi.
Having come to years of discretion, he sawhow from passion springs pain
and how true bliss comes by the abandonment ofpassion. So he put lusts
from him, and going forth to the Himalayas became a hermit, winning by
fulfilment of the ordained mystic meditations the five orders of the

— —
No. 43. 115
Higher Knowledge and tlie eight Attainments. And as he lived his
life in the rapture of Insight, he came in after times to have a large
following of five hundred hermits, whose teacher he was.
Now one day a yoxing poisonous viper, wandering about as vipers do,
came to the hut of one of the hermits ; and that Brother grew as fond
of the creature as if it were his own child, housing it in ajoint of hamboo
and shewing kindness to it. And because it was lodged in a joint of
bamboo, the viper was known by the name of "Bamboo." Moreover,
because the hermit was as fond of the viper as if it were his own child,
they called him "Bamboo's Father."
Hearing that one of the Bi'ethren was keeping a viper, the Bodhisatta
sent for that Brother and asked whether the report was true. When
told that it was true, the Bodhisatta said, "A viper can never be trusted;
keep it no longer."
"But," urged the Brother, "my viper is dear to me as a pujnl to
—
a teacher; T could not live without him." "Well then," answered the
Bodhisatta, "know that this very snake will lose you your life." But
heedless of the master's warning, that Brother still kept the pet he could
not bear to part with. Only a very few days later all the Brethren
went out to gather fruits, and coming to a spot where all kinds grew
in plenty, they stayed there two or three days. With them went
"Bamboo's Father," leaving his viper behind in its bamboo prison. Two
or three days afterwards, when he came back, he bethought him of feeding
the creature, and, opening the cane, stretched out his hand, saying, "Come,
my son; you must be hungry." But angry with its long fast, the viper
bit his outstretched hand, killing him on the spot, and made its escape into
the forest.
Seeing him lying there dead, the Brethren came and told the Bodhi-
satta [246], who bade the body be burned. Then, seated in their midst, he
exhorted the Brethren by I'epeating this stanza :
The headstrong man, who, when exhorted, pays
No heed to friends who kindly counsel give,
Like 'Bamboo's father,' shall be brought to nought.
Thus did the Bodhisatta exhort his followers ; and he developed
within himself the four Noble States, and at his death was re-born into
the Brahma Realm.
Said the Master, "Brother, this is not the first time you have shewn yourself
headstrong youwere no less headstrongin times gone by,and therebymet your
death from ; a viper's bite." Having ended his lesson, the Master shewed the
connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "In these days, this.headstrong
Brother was 'Bamboo's Father,' my disciples were the baud of disciples, and I
myselftheirteacher."
8—2

116 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
No. 44.
MAKASA-JATAKA.
—
'^Sense-lacking friends.''' This story was told by the Master whilst on an
alms-pilgrimage in Magadha, about some stupid villagers in a certain hamlet.
Tradition says that, after travelling from Savatthi to the kingdom of Magadha,
he was on his round in that kingdom when he arrived at a certain hamlet, which
was thronged with fools. In this hamlet these fools met together one day, and
debated together, saying, "Friends, when we are at work in the jungle, the
mosquitos devour us; and that hinders our work. Let us, arming ourselves
with hows andweapons,go to war with the mosquitos and shoot or hew them all
to death." So oft' to the jungle they went, and shouting, "Shoot down the
mosquitos," shot and struck one another, till they were in a sad state and
returned only to sink on theground in or within the village or at its entrance.
Surrounded by the Order ofthe Bi'cthren, the Master came in quest of alms
to that village. The sensible minority among the inhabitants no sooner saw
the Blessed One, than they erected a pavilion at the entrance to their village
and, after bestowing large alms on the [247] Brotherhood with the Buddha at its
head, bowed to the Master and seated themselves. Observing wounded men
lying around on this side and on that, the Master asked those lay-brothers,
saying, "There are numbers of disabled men about what has happened to
;
them?" "Sir," was the reply, "they went forth to war with the mosquitos, but
only shot one another and so disabled themselves." Said the Master, "This is
not the first time that these foolish people have dealt out blows to themselves
instead ofto the mosquitos they meant to kill; in former times, also, there were
those who, meaning to hit a mosquito, hit a fellow-creature instead." And so
saying, at those villagers' request he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta gained his liveliliood as a trader. In those days in a border-
village in Kasi there dwelt a number of carpenters. And it chanced that
one of them, a bald grey-haired man, was planing away at some wood,
with his head glistening like a copper bowl, when a mosquito settled
on his scalp and stung him with its dart-like sting. —
Said the carpenter to his son, who was seated hard by, "My boy,
there's a mosquito stinging me on the head; do drive it away." "Hold
still then, father," said the son; "one blow will settle it."
(At that very time the Bodhisatta had reached that village in the way
of trade, and was sitting in the carpenter's shop.)
"Rid me of it," cried the father. "All right, father," answered the
son, who was behind the old man's back, and, raising a sharp axe on high
—
with intent to kill only the mosquito, he cleft his father's head in twain.
So the old man fell dead on the spot.
Th—ought the Bodhisatta, who had been an eye-witness of the whole
scene, "Better than such a friend is an enemy with sense, whom fear

—
No. 45. 117
of men's vengeance will deter from killing a man." And he recited these
lines:
Sense-lacking friends are worse than foes with sense;
Witness the son that sought the gnat to slay,
But cleft, poor fool, his father's skull in twain. [248]
So saying, the Bodhisatta rose up and departed, passing away in after
days to fare according to his deserts. And as for the carpenter, his body
was burned by his kinsfolk.
"Thus, laybrethren," said the Master, "in bygone times also therewere those
who, seeking to hit a mosquito, struck down a fellow-creature." This lesson
ended, he shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "In those
days I was myself the wise and good trader who departed after repeating the
stanza."
No. 45.
ROHINI-JATAKA,
—
''Se7ise-lacking friends." This story was told by the Master while at Jeta-
vana,about a maid-servantofthe Lord High Treasurer,Aniltha-pindika. For he
is said to have had a maid-servant named Rohini, whose aged mother came to
where the girl was pounding rice, and lay down. The flies came round the old
woman and stung her as with a needle, so she ci-ied to her daughter, "The flies
are stinging me, my dear; do drive them away," "Oh! I'll drive them away,
mother," said the girl, lifting her pestle to the flies which had settled on her
mother. Then, crying, "I'll kill them I", she smote her mothersuch a blow as to
kill the old woman outright. Seeingwhat she had done the girl began to weep
and cry, "Oh mother, mother "
! !
The news was brought to the Lord High Treasurer, who, after having the
body burnt, went his way to the Monastery, and told the Master what had
happened. "This is not the first time, layman," said the Mastei-, "that in
Rohini's anxiety to kill the flies on her mother, she has struck her motherdead
with a pestle; she did precisely the same in times past." Then at Anatha-
pindika's request, he told this story ofthe past.
Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born the son of the Lord High Treasurer, and came to
be Lord High Treasurer himself at his father's death. And he, too, had a
maid-servant whose name was Rohini. And her mother, in like manner,
went to where the daughter was pounding I'ice, and lay down, and called

—
"
118 The Jataka. Book I,
out, 'Du drive these tlies oft' me, my dear,' and in just the same way-
she struck her mother with a pestle, and killed her, and began to weep.
Hearing of what had happened, [249] the Bodhisatta reflected: 'Here,
in this world, even an enemy, with sense, would be preferable,' and recited
these lines :
Sense-lacking friends are worse than foes with sense,
Witness the girl whose reckless hand laid low
Her mother, whom she now laments in vain.
In these lines in praise of the wise, did the Bodhisatta preach the
Truth.
"This is not the first time, layman," said the Master, "that in Rohinl's
anxiety to kill flies she has killed her own mother instead." Thi—s lesson ended,
he shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying: "The mother
and daughter of to-day were also mother and daughter of those b}'gone times,
and I myselfthe Lord High Treasm-er."
No. 46.
i-RlMADUSAKA-JATAKA.
—
'•''' Tisknoicledger This story was told l)y the Master in a certain hamlet i)f
Kosala about one who spoiled a pleasaunce.
Tradition says that, in the course of an alms-journey among the [)eople of
Kosala, the Master came to a certain hamlet. A squire of the place invited the
Buddha to take the mid-day meal at his house, and had his guest seated in the
pleasaunce, where he shewed hospitality to the Brotherhood with the Buddha at
its head, aud courteously gave them leave to stroll at will about hisgrounds. So
the Brethren rose up and walked about the grounds with the gardener. Ob-
serving in their walk a bare space, they said to the gardener, "Lay-disciple,
e tr l e s e ew n h o e r re sh i r n ub t . he H p o le w as c a o u m n e c s e t t h h i e s r ? e is abundant shade ; but here there's neither
"Sirs," replied the man, •'when these grounds were being laid out, a village
lad, who was doing the watering, pulled up all the young trees hereabouts and
then gave them much or little [250] water according to the size of theirroots.
So the young trees withered and died off; and that is why this space is bare."
Drawing near to the Master, the Brethren told him this. "Yes, Brethren,"
said he, "this is not the first time that village lad has spoiled a pleasaunce; he
did precisely the same in bygone times also." And so saying, hetold this story
ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, a festival
was proclaimed in the city; and at the first summoning notes of the festal
drum out poured the townsfolk to keep holiday.

No. 46. 119
Now in those clays, a tribe of inoiikeys was living in the king's
pleasauuce; and the king's gardener thought to himself, "They 're holiday-
making up in the city. I'll get the monkeys to do the watering for
me, and be offto enjoy myself with the rest." So saying, he went to the
king of the monkeys, and, first dwelling on the benefits his majesty and
his subjects enjoyed from residence in the pleasaunce in the way of flowers
and fruit and young shoots to eat, ended by saying, "To-day there's
holiday-making up in the city, and I'm ofl' to enjoy myself. Couldn't you
water the young trees while I'm away?"
"Oh! yes," said the monkey.
"Only mind you do," said the gardener; and off he went, giving the
monkeys the water-skins and wooden watering-pots to do the work
with.
Then the monkeys took the watei'-skins and watering-pots, and fell to
watering the young trees. "But we must mind not to waste the water,"
observed their king; "as you water, first pull each young tree up and
look at the size of its roots. Then give plenty of water to those whose
I'oots strike deej), but only a little to those with tiny roots. When this
water is all gone, we shall be hard put to it to get more."
"To be sure," said the other monkeys, and did as he bade them.
At thisjunctuie a certain wise man, seeing the monkeys thus engaged,
asked them whythey pulled up tree after tree and watered them according
to the size of their roots.
"Because such are our king's commands," answered the monkeys.
Their reply moved the wise man to reflect how, with every desire
to do good, the ignorant and foolish only succeed in doing harm. And he
recited this stanza: [251]
'Tis knowledge crowns endeavoiu- with success.
F — or fools are thwarted by their foolishness,
Witness the ape that killed the garden trees.
With this rebuke to the king of the monkeys, the wise man departed
with his followers from the pleasaunce.
Said the Master, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that this village lad
has spoiled pleasaunces; he was just the same in bygone times also." His
lesson ended, he shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "The
village lad who spoiled this pleasaunce was the king of the monkeys in those
days, and I was myselfthe wise and good man."
[JVote. Cf. Nos. 268 and 271; and see the scene sculptured in the Stupa of
Bharhut, Plate xlv, 5, as represented in the frontispiece ofthis volume.]

120 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
No. 47.
VARUNI-JATAKA.
—
'"TYs knowledge." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana
about one who spoiled spirits. Tradition says that Anatha-pindikahad a friend
who kept a tavern. This friend got ready a supply of strong spirits which he
sold forgold and for silveri, and his tavern was crowded. He gave orders to his
aj^prentice to sell for cash only, and went oft'himselfto bathe. This apprentice,
while serving out the grog to his customers, observed them sending out for salt
and jagghery and eating it as a whet. Thought he to himself, "Therecan'tbe
any salt in our liquor; I'll put some in." So he put a pound ofsalt in a bowl of
grog, and served it out to the customers. And they no sooner took a mouthful,
than they spat it out again, saying, "What have you been up to?" "I saw you
sending forsalt after drinking our liquor,so I mixed some salt in." "And that's
how you've spoilt good liquor, you boobj^," cried the customers, and with abuse
they got up one afteranotlierand flung out of the tavern. When the keeper of
the tavern came home, and did not see [252] a single customer about, he asked
where they had all got to. So the ap})rentice told him what had happened.
Rating him for his folly, the man went oft" and told Anatha-pindika. And the
latter, thinking the storyagood one to tell, repaired to Jetavana,whereafterdue
obeisance he told the Master all about it.
"This is not the first time, layman," said the Master, "that this apprentice
has spoiled spirits. He did just the same once before." Then at Anatha-
pindika's request, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was the Treasurer of Benares, and had a tavern-keeper who
lived under his ])rotection. This man having got I'eady a supply of
strong spirits, which he left his apprentice^ to sell while he himself went
offto bathe, during his absence his apprentice mixed salt with the liquor,
and spoiled itjust in the same way. When on his return the young man's
guide and master- came to know what had been done, he told the story
to the Treasurer. 'Truly,' said the latter, 'the ignorant and foolish, with
every desire to do good, only succeed in doing harm.' And he recited
this stanza
:
'Tis knowledge crowns endeavour with success;
— For fools are thwarted by their foolishness,
Witness Kondanna's salted bowl of grog.
In these lines the Bodhisatta taught the truth.
^ Apparently regardedas a 'Jewish ' proceeding, as opposed to normalbarter.
- With a dry humour, the Paliapplies to thepublicanand his apprentice the terms
normallyappUed to a religious teacherand hispupil.

No. 48. 121
Said the Master, "Layman, this same person spoiled spirits in the past as
now." Then he shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "He
who spoiled the spirits now was also the spoiler of the spirits in those bygone
days, and I myselfwas then the Treasurer ofBenares."
No. 48.
VEDABBHA-JATAKA.
—
^^Misguided effort." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana
about a self-willed Brother. Said the Master to that Brother, "This is not the
first time, Brother, that you have been self-willed you were of just the same
disposition in bygone tunes also [253]; and therefor ; e it was that, as you would
not follow the advice ofthe wise and good, you came to be cut in two by a sharp
sword and were flung on the highway; and you were the sole cause why a
thousand men met their end." And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, there
was a brahmin in a village who knew the charm called Vedabbha. Now
this charm, so they say, was precious beyond all price. For, if at a
certain conjunction of the planets the charm was repeated and the gaze
bent u[)wards to the skies, straightway from the heavens there rained the
—
Seven Things of Price, gold, silver, pearl, coral, catseye, ruby, and
diamond.
In those days the Bodhisatta was a pupil of this brahmin ; and one
day his master left the village on some business or other, and came
with the Bodhisatta to the country of Ceti.
—
In a forest bythe way dwelt five hundred robbers knownas "the De-
—
spatchers" who made the way impassable. And these caught the Bodhi-
satta and the Vedabbha-brahmin. (Why, you ask, were they called the
—
Despatchersl Well, the story goes that of eveiy two prisoners they
made they used to des2:>atch one to fetch the ransom ; and that's why
they were called the Despatchers. If they captured a father and a son,
they told the father to go for the ransom to free his son ; if they caught a
mother and her daughter, they sent the mother for the money; if they
caught two brothers, they let the elder go and so too, if they caught
;
a teacher and his pupil, it was the pupil they set free. In this case,
therefore, they kept the Vedabbha-brahmin, and sent tlie Bodhisatta for

122 The Jataka. Book I.
the ransom.) And the Bodhisatta said with a bow to his master, "In
a day or two I shall surely come back; have no fear; only fail not to
do as I shall say. To-day will come to pass the conjunction of the
planets which brings about the rain of the Things of Price. Take heed
lest, yielding to this mishap, you repeat the charm and call down the
precious shower. For, if you do, calamity will certainly befall both you
and this band of robbers." With this warning to his master, the Bodhi-
satta went his way in quest ofthe ransom.
At sunset the robbers bound the brahmin and laid him by the heels.
Just at this moment the full moon rose over the eastern horizon, and
the brahmin, studying the heavens, knew [254] that the great conjunction
was taking place. '"Why," thought he, "should I suffer this misery?
By repeating the charm I will call down the precious rain, pay the
robbers the ransom, and go free." So he called out to the robbers,
"Friends, why do you take nie a prisoner1" "To get a ransom, reverend
sir," said they. "Well, if that is all yon want," said the brahmin, "make
haste and untie me; have my head bathed, and new clothes put on me;
and let me be perfumed and decked with flowers. Then leave me to
myself." The robbers did as he bade them. And the bi-ahmin, marking
the conjunction of the planets, repeated his charm with eyes uplifted
to the heavens. Forthwith the Things of Price poured down from the
skies The robbers picked them all up, wrapping their booty into bundles
!
with their cloaks. Then with their brethren they marched away; and
the brahmin followed in the rear. But, as luck would have it, the party
was cajitured by a second band of five hundred robbers! "Why do you
seize us?" said the first to the second band. "For booty," was the answer.
"If booty is what you want, seize on that brahmin, who by simply gazing
up at the skies brought down riches as rain. It was he who gave us all
that we have got." So the second band of robbers let the first band go,
and seized on the brahmin, crying, "Give us riches too!" "It would
give me great pleasure," said the brahmin; "but it will be a year before
the requisite conjunction of the planets takes place again. If you will
only be so good as to wait till then, I will invoke the precious shower for
you."
"Rascally brahmin!" cried the angry robbers, "you made the other
band richoff-hand, but want us to wait a whole year " And they cut him
!
in two with a sharp sword, and flung his body in the middle of the road.
Then hurrying after the first band of robbers, they killed every man of
them too in hand-to-hand fight, and seized the booty. Next, they divided
into two companies and fought among themselves, company against com-
pany, till two hundred and fifty men were slain. And so they went on
killing one another, till only two were left alive. Thus dul those thousand
men come to destruction.

No. 48. 123
Now, when the two survivors had managed to carry off the treasure
they hid it in the jungle near a village; and one of them sat there, sword
in hand, [255] to guard it, whilst the other went into the village to get
rice and have it cooked for supper.
"Covetousness is the root of ruin " mused he* that stopped by the
I
treasure. "When my mate comes back, he'll want half of this. Suppose
I kill him the moment he gets back." So he drew his sword and sat
waiting for his comrade's return.
Meanwhile, the other had equally reflected that the booty had to be
halved, and thought to himself, "Suppose I poison the rice, and give it
him to eat and so kill him, and have the whole of the treasure to
myself." Accordingly, when the rice was boiled, he first ate his own share,
and then put poison in the rest, which he carried back with him to the
jungle. But scarce had he set it down, when the other robber cut him
in two with his sword, and hid the body away in a secluded spot.
Then he ate the poisoned rice, and died then and there. Thus, by
reason of the treasure, not only the brahmin but all the robbers came to
destruction.
Howbeit, after a day or two the Bodhisatta came backwith the ransom.
Not finding his master where he had left him, but seeing treasure strewn
all round about, his heart misgave him that, in spite of his advice, his
master must have called down a shower of treasure from the skies, and
that all must have perished in consequence ; and he proceeded along the
road. On his way he came to where his master's body lay cloven in twain
upon the way. "Alas ! " he cried, "he is dead through not heeding my
wai'ning." Then with gathered sticks he made a pyre and burnt his
master's body, making an offering of wild flowers. Furtheralong the road,
he came upon the five hundred "Despatchei's," and further still upon the
twohundred and fifty, and so on by degrees until at last he came to where
lay only two corpses. Marking how of the thousand all but two had
perished, and feeling sure that there must be two survivors, and that these
could not refrain from strife, he pressedon tosee where they had gone. So
on he went till he found the path by which with the treasure they had
turnedinto thejungle
;
and there he found the heap of bundles oftreasui-e,
and one robber lying dead with his rice-bowl ovei'turned at his side.
Realising the whole story at a glance, the Bodhisatta set himself to search
for the missing man, and at last found his body in the .secret spot whereit
had been flung [256]. "And thus," mused the Bodhisatta, "through not
following my counsel my master in his self-will has been the means of
destroying not himselfonly but a thousand others also. Truly, they that
' Or perhaps a full stop should be inserted after eva ti, thewords "Covetousness
...ruin" beingtreated as a maximquotedparentheticallyby the author.

—
124 The Jataka. Book I.
seek their own gaiu bymistaken and misguidedmeans shall leap ruin,even
as my master." And he repeated this stanza:
Misguided effort leads to loss, not gain;
Thieves killed Vedabbha and themselves were slain.
—
Thus spake tlie Bodhisatta, and he went on to say, " And even as my
master's misguided and misplaced effort in causing the rain of treasure
to fall from heaven wrought both his own death and the destruction of
others with him, even so shall every other man who by mistaken means
seeks to compass his own advantage, utterly perish and involve others in
his destruction." With these words did the Bodhisatta make the forest
ring; and in this stanza did he preach the Truth, whilst the Tree-fairies
shouted applause. The treasure he contrived to carry offto his ownhome,
where he lived out his term oflife in the exercise of almsgiving and other
good works. And when his life closed, he departed to the heaven he had
won.
you Sa w i e d re th s e elf M - a w s i t ll e e r c , l i " n Th b i y s go is ne no t t im t e h s e a f s irs w t el t l im ; e. an B d ro b t y her y , ou y r ou se w l e fw r i e ll se y l o f- u wi c ll a e m d e;
to utter destruction." His lesson ended, he identified the Birth by saying,
"The selfwilled Brotherwas the Vedabbha-brahmin ofthose days, and I myself
his pupil."
\_Note. Dr Richard ]\Iorris was the first to trace in this Jataka an early
form of Chaucer's Pardoner's Tale (see Contemporary Review for May, 1881)
Mr H. T. Francis and Mr C. H. Tawney independently traced the same;
connection in the Academy^ Dec. 22, 1883 (subsequently reprinted in an enlarged
form), and in the Cambridge Journal of Philology^ Vol. xii. 1883. See also
Clouston's Popidar Tales andFictions.]
No. 49.
NAKKHATTA-JATAKA.
—
[257] "The fool may watch." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana about a certain Naked-ascetic. Tradition says that a gentleman of
the country near Savatthi asked in marriage for his son a young Savatthi lady of
equal rank. Having fixed a day to come and fetch the bride, he subsequently
consulted a Naked-ascetic who was intimate with his family, as to whether the
stars were favourable for holding the festivities that day.
"He didn't ask me in the first instance," thought the indignant ascetic, "but
having already fixed the day, without consulting me, just makes an empty

!
No. 49. 125
reference to me now. Very good ; I'll teach him a lesson." So he made answer
that the stars were not favourable for that day ; that the nuptials ought not to
be celebrated thatday ; and that, if they were, great misfortune would come of
it. And the countryfamilyintheir faith in their ascetic did notgo for the l)ride
that day. Xow the bride's friends in the town had made all their preparations
for celebrating the nuptials, and when they saw that the other side did not
come, they said, "It was they who fixed to-day, and yet they have not come;
and we have gone to great expense about it all. Who are these peoi)le, forsooth?
Let us marry thegirl to someone else." So they found another bridegroom and
gave the girl to him in marriage with all the festivities they had already pre-
pared.
Next day the comitry pa—rty came to fetch the bride. But the Savatthi
people rated them as follows: "You country folk are a bad lot you fixed the
dayyourselves, and then insulted us by not coming. We have giv ; en the maiden
to another." The country party started a quarrel, but in the end went home the
way they came.
Now the Brethren came to know how that Naked-ascetic had thwarted the
festivity,and they began to talk the matter overin the HallofTruth. Entering
the Hall, and learning on enquiry the subject of their conversation, the Master
said, "Brethren, this is not the first time that this same ascetic has thwarted
the festivities ofthat family; out ofpique with them, he didjust the same thing
once before." And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, some
townsfolk had asked a countiy-girl in marriage and had named tlie day.
Having already made the arrangement, they asked their family ascetic
whether the stars were j^ropitious for the ceremony on that day. Piqued
at their having fixed the day to suitthemselves without first taking counsel
with hiin, the ascetic madeup his mind to thwart their marriage festivities
for that day; [258] and accordingly he made answer that the stars were
not favourable for that day, and that, if they persisted, grave misfortune
would be the result. So, in their faith in the ascetic, they stayedat home
Wheu thecountry folk found that the town party did not come, they said
among themselves, "It was they who fixed the marriage for to-day, and
now they have not come. Who are they, forsooth1 " And they married
the girl to someone else.
Next day the townsfolk—came and asked for the girl; but they of the
country made this answer : "Yon town-people lack common decency.
You yourselves named the day and yet did not come to fetch the bride.
As you stopped away, we married her to someone else." "But we asked
our ascetic, and he told us the stars were unfavourable. That's why we
did not come yesterday. Give us the girl." "You didn't come at the
proper time, and now she's another's. How can we marry her twice over?"
Whilst they wrangled thus with one another, a wise man from the town
came into the country on business. Hearing the townsfolk explain that
they had consulted their ascetic and that their absence was due to the
unfavourable disposition of the stars, he exclaimed, " What, forsooth, do

—
;
126 The Jataka. Booh I.
the stars matter'? Is not the lucky thing to get the girl?" And, so
saying, he repeated this stanza :
The fool may watch for 'lucky days,'
Yet luck shall always miss
'Tis luck itself is luck's own star.
What can mere stars achieve?
As forthetownsfolk, as theydidnot get thegirl for all their wrangling,
thev had to o;o oft" home asfain !
Said the Master, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that this Naked-
ascetic has thwarted that family's festivities; he did just the same thing in
bygone times also." His lesson ended, he shewed the connexion and identified
the Birth by saying, "This ascetic [259] was also the ascetic of those days, and
the families toowere the same ; I myselfwas thewise and good manwhouttered
the stan/a."
No. 50.
DUMMEDHA-JATAKA.
—
"J thousand evil-doers^ This story was told by the Master while at Jeta-
vana, about actions done for the world'sgood, as will beexplained in the Twelfth
Book in the Maha-Kanha-jatakai.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benaies, the
Bodhisatta was reborn in the womb of the Queen Consort. When he was
born, he was named Prince Brahmadatta on his name-day. By sixteen
years ofage he had been well educated atTakkasila, had learned the Three
Vedas by heart, and was versed in the Eighteen Branches of Knowledge.
And his father made him a Viceroy.
Now in those days the Benares folk w^ere much given to festivals to
'gods,' and used to shew honour to 'gods.' It was their wont to massacre
numbers of sheep, goats, poultry, swine, and other living creatures, and
perform their rites not merely with flowers and perfumes but with gory
1 No. 469.

No. 50. 127
carcasses. Thought the destined Lord of Mercy to himself, "Led astray
by superstition, men now wantonly sacrifice life; the multitude are for
the most part given up to irreligion : but when at my father's death I
succeed to my inheritance, I will find means to end such destruction
of life. " I will devise some clever stratagem whereby the evil shall be
stopped without harming a single human being." In this mood the prince
one day mounted his chariot and drove out of the city. On the way he
saw a crowd gathered together at a holy banyan-tree, praying to the fairy
who had been i-eborn in that tree, to grant them sons and daughters,
honour and wealth, each according to his heart's desire. Alighting from
his chariot the Bodhisatta drew near to the ti'ee and behaved as a wor-
shipper so far as to make offerings of perfumes and flowers, sprinkling the
tree with water, and pacing reverently round its trunk. Then mounting
his chariot again, he went his way back into the city.
Thenceforth the ])rince made like journeys from time to time to the
tree [260], and worshipped it like a true believer in 'gods.'
In due course, when his father died, the Bodhisatta ruled in his stead.
Shunning the four evil courses, and ])ractising the ten royal virtues, lie
ruled his people in righteousness. And now that his desire had come to
pass and he was king, tiie Bodhisatta set himself to fulfil his former
resolve. So he called together his ministers, the brahmins, thegentry, and
the other orders of the people, and asked the assembly whether they knew
how he had madehimself king. But no man could tell.
"Have you ever seen me reverently worshipping a banyan-tree with
perfumes and the like, and bowing down before it?"
"Sire, we have," said they.
" Well, I was making a vow ; and the vow was that, if ever I became
king, I would offer a sacrifice to that tree. And now that by help of the
god I have come to be king, I will offer my promised sacrifice. So
prepare it with all speed."
" "M Bu y t v w o h w a , t "s a a r i e d w t e he to ki m n a g, ke " i w t as of t 1 h " is: — All such as are addicted to the
Five Sins, to witthe slaughter of living creatui-esand so forth, and all such
as walk in the Ten Paths of Unrighteousness, them will I slay, and with
their flesh and their blood, with their entrails and their vitals, I will make
my offering. So proclaim by beat of drum that our lord the king in
the days of his viceroyalty vowed that if ever he became king he would
slay, and offer up in a sacrifice, all such of his suVyects as break the
Commandments. And now the king wills to slay one thousand of such
as are addicted to the Five Sins or walk in the Ten Paths ofUnrighteous-
ness ; with the hearts and the flesh of the thousand shall a sacrifice be
made in the god's honour. Proclaim this that all may know throughout
the city. Of those that ti-ansgress after this date," added the king, " will

—
128 The Jdtaha. Book I.
I slay a thousand, and offer them as a sacrifice to the god in discharge of
my vow." And to make his meaning clear the king nttered this stanza :
A thousand evil-doers once I vowed
In pious gratitude to kill;
And evil-doers form so huge a crowd,
That I will now my vow fulfil. [261]
Obedient to the king's commands, the ministers had proclamation made
by beat of drum accordingly throughoutthe length and breadth ofBenares.
Such was the effect of the proclamation on the townsfolk that not a soul
persisted in the old wickedness. And throughout the Bodhisatta's reign
not a man was convicted of transgressing. Thus, without harming a single
one ofhis subjects,the Bodhisatta made them observe the Commandments.
And at the close ofa life of alms-giving and other good works he passed
away witli his followers to throng the city of the devas.
Said the Master, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that the Buddha has
acted for the world's good he acted in like manner in bygone times as well."
;
His lesson ended, he shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying,
"The Buddha's disciples Avere the ministers of those days, and I myself was
the King ofBenares."
No. 51.
MAHASlLAVA-J ATAKA.
—
"Toil on, my brother.'' This story was told by the Masterwhileat Jetavana,
about a Brother who had given up all earnest eftbrt. Being asked by the Master
whether the report was true that he was a backslider, the Brother [262] said
it was true. "How can you, Brother," said the Master, "grow cold in so
saving a faith? Even when the wise and good of bygone days had lost their
kingdom, yet so undaunted was theirresolution that in the end they won back
their.sovereignty." And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life again as the child ofthe queen ; and on his name-
day they gave him the name of Prince Goodness. At the age of sixteen
his education was complete and later he came at his father's death to be
;
king, and ruled his ])eople righteously under the title of the great King

" ;
No. 51. 129
Goodness. At each ofthe four city-gates he built an almonry, another in
—
the heart of the city, and yet another at his own palace-gates, six in all
and at each he distributed alms to poor travellers and theneedy. He kept
the Commandments and observed the fast-days ; he abounded in patience,
loving-kindnesf?, and mercy ; and in righteousness he ruled the land,
cherishing all creatures alike with the fond love of a father for his baby
boy.
Now one of the king's ministers had dealt treacherously in the king's
harem, and this became matterofcommon talk. The ministers reported it
to the king. Examining into the matter himself, the king found the
minister's guilt to be clear. So he sent for the culprit, and said, "O
blinded by folly ! you have sinned, and are not worthy to dwell in my
kingdom take your substance and your wife and family, and go hence."
;
Driven thus from the realm, that minister left the Kasi country, and,
entering the service of the king of Kosala, gradually rose to be that
monarch's confidential adviser. One day he said to the king of Kosala,
"Sire, the kingdom of Benares is like a goodly honeycomb untainted by
flies; its king is feebleness itself; and a trifling force would sufiice to
conquer the whole country."
Hereon, the king ofKosala reflected that the kingdom ofBenares was
large, and, considering this in connexion with the advice that a trifling
force could conquer it, he grew suspicious that his adviser was a hireling
suborned to lead him into a trap. "Traitor," he cried, "you are paid to
say this!
"Indeed I am not," answered the other; "I do but speak the truth.
If you doubt me, send men to massacre a village over his border, and see
whether, when they are caught and brought before him, the king does not
let them oS"scot-free and even load them with gifts."
"He shows a very bold front in making his assertion," thought the
king ; "I will test his counsel [26-3] without delay." And accordingly
he sent some of his creatures to harry a village across the Benares border.
The rufiians were captured and brought before the king of Benares, who
asked them, saying, "My children, why have you killed my villagers?"
"Because we could not make aliving," said they.
"Then why did you not come to meV said the king. "See that you
do not do the like again."
And he gave them presents and sent them away. Back they went
and told this to the king of Kosala. But this evidence was not enough to
nerve him to the expedition and a second band was sent to massacre
;
another village, this time in the heart of the kingdom. These too were
likewise sent away with presents by the king of Benares. But even this
evidence was not deemed strong enotigh; and a third party was sent to
plunder the very streets of Benares And these, like their forerunners,
!
c. J. 9

130 TJie Jdtaka. Book I.
were sent away with presents Satisfied at last that the king of Benares
!
was an entirely good king, tlie king of Kosala resolved to seize on his
kingdom, and set out against him with troops and elephants.
Now in thesedaystheking of Benares had a thousand gallant warriors,
—
who would face the charge even of a rut elephant, whom the launched
—
thunderbolt of Indra could not terrify, a matchless band of invincible
heroes ready at the king's command to reduce all India to his sway
!
These, hearing the king of Kosala was coming to take Benares, came to
their sovereign with the news, and prayed that they might be despatched
against the invader. "We will defeat and capture him, sire," said they,
"before he can set foot over the border."
"Not so, my children," said the king. "None shall sufter because of
me. Let those who covet kingdoms seize mine, if they will." And he
refused to allow them to march against the invader.
Then the king of Kosala crossed the border and came to the middle-
country and again the ministers went to the king with renewed entreaty.
;
But still the king refused. And no^ the king of Kosala appeared outside
the city, and sent a message to the king bidding him either yield up the
kingdom or give battle. "I fight not," was the message of the king of
Benax'es in reply ; "let him seize my kingdom."
Yet a third time the king's ministers came to him and besought him
not to allow the king of Kosala to enter, but to permit them to overthrow
and capture him before the city. Still refusing, the king bade the city-
gates be opened, [264] and seated himself in state aloft upon his royal
throne with his thousand ministei's round him.
Entering the city and finding none to bar his way, the king of Kosala
jiassed with his armyto theroyal palace. The doors stood open wide and
;
there on his gorgeous throne with his thousand ministers around him sate
the great King Goodness in state. "Seize them all," cried the king of
Kosala; "tie their hands tightly behind their backs, and away with them
to the cemetery ! There dig holes and bury them alive up to the neck, so
that they cannot move hand or foot. Thejackals will come at night and
give them sepulchre "
!
At the bidding of the rufiianly king, his followers bound the king of
Benares and his ministers, and hauled them off". But even in this hour
not so much as an angry thought did the great King Goodness harbour
against the ruffians ; and not a man among his ministers, even when they
were being marched off in bonds, could disobey the king,—so perfect is
said to have been the discipline among his followers.
So King Goodness and his ministers were led ofi" and buried up to the
neck in pits in the cemetery,—the king in the middle and the others on
either side of him. The ground was trampled in upon them, and there
they were left. Still meek and free from anger againsthis oppressor, King

No. 51. 131
Goodness exhorted liis companions, saying, "Letyour hearts be filled with
naught butlove and charity, my children."
Now at midnight the jackals came trooj^ing to the banquet of human
flesh; and at sight of the beasts the king and his companions raised a
mighty shout all together, frightening the jackals away. Halting, the
A
pack looked back, and, seeing no one pursuing, again came forward.
second shovit drove them away again, but only to return as before. But
the third time, seeing that not a man amongstthem all pursued, thejackals
thought to themselves, "These must be men who are doomed to death."
They came on boldly even when the shout was again being raised, they
; —
did not turn tail. On they came, each singling out his prey, the chief
jackal making for the king, and the otherjackals for his companions[265].
Fertile in resoui-ce, the king marked the beast's approach, and, raising his
throat as if to receive the bite, fastened his teeth in the jackal's throat
with a grip like a vice ! Unable to free its throat from the mighty grip of
the king'sjaws, and fearing death, thejackal raised a great howl. At his
cry ofdistress the pack conceived that their leader must have been caught
by a man. With no heart left to approach their own destined prey, away
they all scampered for their lives.
Seeking to free itselffj-om the king's teeth, the trapped jackal plunged
madly to and fro, and thereby loosened the earth above the king. Here-
upon the latter, letting the jackal go, put forth his mighty strength, and
by plunging from side to side got his hands free Then, clutching the
!
brink ofthe pit, he drew himself wp, and came forth like a cloud scudding
before the wind. Bidding his companions be of good cheer, he now set to
work to loosen the earth round them and to get them out, till with all his
ministers he stood free once more in the cemetery.
Now it chanced that a corpse had been exposed in that part of the
cemetery which lay between the respective domains oftwo ogres ; and the
ogres were disputing over the division ofthe spoil.
"We can't divide it ourselves," said they "but this King Goodness is
;
i-ighteous; he will divide it for us. Let us go to him." So they dragged
the corpse by the foot to the king, and said, "Sire, divide this man and
give us each our shai-e." "Certainly I will, my friends," said the king.
"But, as I am dirty, I must bathe first."
Straightway, by their magic power, the ogi-es brought to the king the
scented water prepared for the usurper's bath. And when the king had
bathed, they brought him the robes which had been laid out for the
usurper to wear. When he had put these on, they brought his majesty
a boxcontaining the four kinds ofscent. When he had perfumed himself,
they brought flowers of divers kinds laid out upon jewelled fans, in a
casket of gold. When he had decked himselfwith the flowers, the ogi-es
asked whether they could be of any fui'ther service. And the king gave
9—2

132 The Jataha. Book I.
them to iinderstand [266] that he was hungry. So away went the ogres,
and returned with rice flavoured with all the choicest flavours, which had
been prepared for the usurper's table. And the king, now bathed and
scented, dressed and arrayed, ate ofthe dainty fare. Thereupon the ogres
brought the usurper's perfumed water for him to drink, in the usui'per's
own golden bowl, not forgetting to bring the golden cup too. When the
king had drunk and had waslied his mouth and was washing his hands,
they brought him fragrant betel to chew, and asked whether his majesty
had any further commands. ''Fetch me," said he, "by your magic power
the sword of state which lies by the usurper's pillow." And straightway
the sword was brought to the king. Then the king took the corpse, and
setting it upright, cut it in two down the chine, giving one-half to each
ogre. This done, the kingwashed the blade, and girded it on his side.
Having eaten their fill, the ogres were glad of heart, and in their
gratitude asked the king what more they could do for him. " Set me by
yourmagicpower," said he, "in the usurpers chamber, and set each of my
ministers back in his own house." "Certainly, sire," said the ogres ; and
forthwith it was done. Now in that hour the usurper was lying asleep on
the royal bed in his chamber of state. And as he slept in all tranquillity,
the good king struck him with the flat of the sword upon the belly.
Waking up in a fright, the usurper saw by the lamp-light that it was tlie
great King Good—ness. Summoning up all his courage, he rose from his
couch and said : "Sire, it is night ; a guard is set ; the doors are barred ;
and none may enter. How then came you to my bedside, sword in hand
and clad in robes of splendour1 " Then the king told him in detail all
the story ofhis escape. Then the usurper's heart was moved within him,
and he ciied, "O king, I, though blessed with human nature, knew not
your goodness ; but knowledge thereof was given to the fierce and cruel
ogres, whose food is flesh and blood. Henceforth, I, sire, [267] will not
plot against such signal virtue as you possess." So saying, he swore an
oath of friendship upon his sword and begged the king's forgiveness. And
he made the king lie down upon the bed of state, while he stretched
himself upon a little couch.
On the morrow at daybreak, when the sun had risen, his whole host
ofevery rank and degree was mustered by beat of drum at the usurper's
command ; in their presence he extolled King Goodness, as if raising the
full-moon on high in the heavens ; and right before them all, he again
asked the king's forgiveness and gave him back his kingdom, saying,
"Henceforth, let it be my charge to deal with rebels; rule thou thy
kingdom, with me to keep watch and ward." And so saying, he passed
sentence on the slanderous traitor, and with his troops and elephants went
back to his own kingdom.
Seated in majesty and splendour beneath a white canopy ofsovereignty

— —
No. 52. 133
upou a throne of gold with legs as of a gazelle, the great King—Goodness
contemplated his own glory and thought thus within himself; "Had I
not persevered, I should not be in the enjoyment of this magnificence, nor
would my thousand ministers be still numberedamong the living. It was
by perseverance that I recovered the royal state I had lost, and saved the
lives of my thousand ministers. Verily, we should strive on unremittingly
with dauntless hearts, seeing that the fruit of perseverance is so excellent."
And therewithal the king broke into this heartfelt utterance :
Toil on, my brother; still in hope stand fast;
Nor let thy courage flag and tii'e.
Myself I see, who, all my woes o'erpast,
Am master of my heart's desire.
Thus spoke the Bodhisatta in the fulness of his heart, declaring how
sure it is that the earnest effort of the good will come to maturity. After
a life spent in right-doing he passed away to fare thereafter according to
his deserts. [268]
His lesson ended, the Master preached the Four Truths, at the close whereof
the backsliding lirother won Arahatship. The Master shewed the connexion
and identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta was the traitorous minister of
those days,the Buddha's discipleswere the thousand ministers,and I myselfthe
great King Goodness."
[N'ote. Cf. the Volsung-Saga in Hagen's Helden Sagen, iii. 23, and Journ. of
Fhilol. xii. 120.]
No. 52.
CULA-JANAKA-JATAKA.
—
"Toil on, my hroUierP This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about another backsliding Brother. All the incidents that are to be related
here, will be given in the Maha-janaka-Jataka^
The king, seated beneath the white canopy of sovereignty, recited this
stanza:
"Toil on, my brother; still in hope stand fast;
Faint not, nor tire, though harassed sore.
Myself I see, who, all my woes o'erpast.
Have fought my stubborn way ashore.
Here too thebacksliding Brother won Arahatship. The All-wise Buddhawas
KingJanaka.
1 One ofthelast Jatakas, not yetedited.

134 Tlie Jdtaka. Booh I.
No. 53.
PUNNAPATI-JATAKA.
" What? Leave ?«;tos;ec^."—This story was told by the ]\Iaster while at
Jetavana, about some drugged liquor.
Onceon a time the tip[)lers of Savatthi met to take counsel, saying, "We've
not got the price ofa drink left; how are we to getit?"
"Cheer up!" said one rufiian; "I've a little plan."
"What may that be?" cried the others.
"It's Anatba-pindika's custom," said the fellow, "to wear his rings and
richest attire, when going to wait upon the king. Let us doctor some liquor
with a stupefyingdrug and fit up a drinking-booth, in whichwewillall besitting
when Anatha-i)indika passes by. 'Come and join us, Lord High Treasurer,'
we'll cry, and ply him with our liquor till he loses his senses. Then let us
relieve him ofhis rings and clothes, and get the price ofadrink."
His plan mightily pleased the other rogues, and was duly carried out. As
Anatha-pindikawas returning, they went out to meet him and invited him [269]
to come alongwith them ; for they had got some rare liquor, and he must taste
it before he went.
"What?" thought he, "shall a believer, who has found Salvation, touch
strongdrink? Howbeit, though I have no craving for it, yetwill I expose these
rogues." So into their booth he went, wheretheir pi'oceedings soon shewed him
that theirliquor was drugged and he resolved to make theluscals taketo their
;
heels. So he roundly charged them with doctoring their liquorwith a view to
drugging strangers first and robbing them afterwards. "You sit in the booth
you have opened, and you praise up the liquor," said he; "but as for drinking
it, not one of you ventures on that. If it is really undrugged, di'ink away at
ityourselves." This summary exposure made the gang taketo their heels, and
Anatha-pindika went ott' home. Thinking he might as well tell the incident to
the Buddha, he went to Jetavana and related the story.
"This time, layman," said the Master, "it is you whom these rogues have
tried to trick; so too in the past they tried to trick the good and wise of those
days." So saying, at hishearei*'s request, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was Treasurer of that city. And then too did the same gang
of tipplers, conspiring together in like manner, drug liquor, and go forth
to meet him in just the same way, and made just the same overtures.
The Treasurer did not want to drink at all, but nevertheless went with
them, solely to expose them. Marking their proceedings and detecting
their scheme, he was anxious to scare them away and so represented that
it would be a gross thing for him to drink spirits just before going to the
king's palace. "Sit you here," said he, "till I've seen the king and am
on my way back ; then I'll think about it."
On his return, the rascals called to him, but the Treasurer, fixing his
eye on the drugged bowls, confounded them by saying, "I like not your

No. 54. 135
ways. Hei-e stand the bowls as full now as when I left you; loudly as
you vaunt the praises of the liquor, yet not a drop passes your own lips.
Why, if it had been good liquor, you'd have taken your own share as
—
well. This liquor is drugged ! " And he repeated this stanza :
What? Leave untasted drink you vaunt so rare?
Nay, this is proof no honest liquor's there. [270]
After a life of good deeds, the Bodhisatta passed away to fare according
to his deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The rascals of
to-day were also the rascals of those bygone days; and I myself was then
TreasurerofBenares."
No. 54.
PHALA-JATAKA.
—
" When near a village." This was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about a lay brotherwho was skilled in the knowledge of fruits. Itappears that
a certain squire of Savatthi had invited the Brotherhood with the Buddha at
their head, and had seated them in his pleasaunce, where they were regaled with
ricc-gruel and cakes. Afterwards he bade his gardener go round with the
Brethren and give mangoes and other kinds of fruits to their Reverences. In
obedience to orders, the man walked about the grounds with the Brethren, and
could tell by a single glance up at the tree what fruit was green, what nearly
ripe, and what quite ripe, and so on. And what he said was always found true.
So the Brethren came to the Buddha and mentioned how expert the gardener
was, and how, whilst himselfstanding on the ground, he could accuratelytell the
condition of the hanging fruit. "Brethren," said the Master, "this gardener is
notthe only one who has had knowledge of fruits. A like knowledge was shewn
by the wise andgood of former days also." And so saying, he told this story of
the past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a merchant. When he grew up, and was trading
with five hundred w^aggons, he came one day to where the road led
through a great forest. [271] Halti—ng at the outskirts, he mustered the
caravan and addressed them thus : "Poison-trees grow in this forest.
Take heed that you taste no unfamiliar leaf, flower, or fruit without first
consulting me." All promised to take every care; and the journey into

!!'
136 The Jataka. Book I.
the forest began. Now just within the forest-border stands a village, and
just outside that village grows a What-fruit tree. The What-fruit tree
exactly resembles a mango alike in trunk, branch, leaf, flower, and fruit.
And not only in outward semblance, but also in taste and smell, the
— —
fruit ripe or unripe mimics the mango. If eaten, it is a deadly poison,
and causes instant death.
Now some greedy fellows, who went on ahead of the caravan, came to
this tree and, taking it to be a mango, ate of its fruit. But others said,
"Let us ask our leader before we eat"; and they accordingly halted by
the tree,—fruit in hand, till he came ii[). Per-ceiving that it was no mango,
he said : "This * mango ' is a What-fruit tree ; don't touch its fruit."
Having stopped them from eating, the Bodhisatta turned his attention
to those who had already eaten. First he dosed them with an emetic,
and then he gave them the four sweet foods to eat; so that in the end
they recovered.
Now on former occasions caravans had halted beneath this same tree,
and had died from eating the poisonous fruit which they mistook for
mangoes. On the morrow the villagers would come, and seeing them
lying there dead, would fling tliem by the heels into a secret place,
departing with all the belongiiigs of the caravan, waggons and all.
And on the day too of our story these villagers failed not to hurry at
daybreak to the tree for their expected spoils. "The oxen must be ours,"
—
said some. "And we'll have the waggons," said others; whilst others
again claimed the wares as their share. But when they came breathless
to the tree, there was the whole caravan alive and well
"How came you to know this was not a mango-tree1" demanded the
disappointed villagers. "We didn't know," said they of the caravan; " it
was our leader who knew."
So the villagers came to the Bodhisatta and said, "Man of wisdom,
what did you do to tind out this tree was not a mango1'
"Two things told me," replied the Bodhisatta, and he rej^eated this
stanza:—[272]
When near a village grows a tree
Not hard to climb, 'tis plain to me,
— Nor need I further proof to know,
No wholesome fruit thereon can grow
And having taught the Truth to the assembled multitude, he finished
hisjourney in safety.
"Thus, Brethren," said the Master, "in bygone days the wise and goodwere
experts in fruit." His lesson ended, he shewed the connexion and identified the
Bulh by saying, "The Buddha's followers were then the people of the caravan,
and I myselfwas the caravan leader."

No. 55. 137
No. 55.
PANCAVUDHA-JATAKA,
—
" When no Attachment.''^ This story was told by the Master while at Jeta-
vana, about a Brother who had given up all earnest eftbrt.
Said the Master to him, "Is the report true, Brother, that you are a back-
slider?"
"Yes, Blessed One."
"In bygonedays, Brother,"said the Master, "the wise andgood won a throne
by their dauntless perseverance in the hourofneed."
And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, it was as
his queen's child that the Bodhisatta came to life once more. On tlie day
when he was to be named, the parents enquired as to their child's destiny
from eight hundred brahmins, to whom they gave their hearts' desire in
all pleasures of sense. Marking the promise which he shewed of a
glorious destiny, these clever soothsaying brahmins foretold that, coming
to the throne at the king's death, the child should be a mighty king
endowed with every virtue ; famed and renowned for his exploits with
five weapons, he should stand peerless in all Jambudlpa'. [273] And
because of this prophecy of the brahmins, the parents named their son
Prince Five-Weapons.
Now, when the prince was come to years of discretion, and was
sixteen years old, the king bade him go away and study.
"With w^hom, sire, am I to study"?" asked the prince.
"With the world-famed teacher in the town of Takkasila in the
Gandhara country. Here is his fee," said the king, handing his .son a
thousand pieces.
So the prince went to Takkasila and was taught there. When he was
leaving, his master gave him a set of five weapons, armed with which,
after bidding adieu to his old master, the prince set out from Takkasila for
Benares.
On his way he came to a forest haunted by an ogre named Hairy-grip
;
and, at the entrance to the forest, men who met him tried to stop him,
saying :—"Young brahmin, do not go through that forest; it is the haunt
1 This was one of the four islands, or dipfi, of which the earth was supposed to
consist; itincluded India, and represented tlie inhabited woild to the Indian mind.

138 The Jataka. Book I.
of the ogre Hairy-grip, and he kills every one he meets." But, bold as a
lion, the self-reliant Bodhisatta pressed on, till in the heart ofthe forest he.
came on the ogre. The monster made himself appear in stature as tall as
a palm-tree, with a head as big as an arbour and huge eyes like bowls,
with two tusks like turnips andthe beak ofahawk ; his belly wasblotched
with purple and the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet were
;
blue-black! "Whither away?" cried the monster. "Halt! you are my
prey." "Ogre," answered the Bodhisatta, "I knew what I was doing
when entering this forest. You will be ill-advised to come near me. For
with a [)oisoned arrow I will slay you where you stand." And with this
defiance, he fitted to his bow an arrow dipped in deadliest poison and shot
it at the ogre. But it only stuck onto themonster'sshaggy coat. Then he
shot another and another, till fifty were spent, all of which merely stuck
on to the ogre's shaggy coat. Hereon the ogre, shaking the arrows ofi" so
that they fell at his feet, came at the Bodhisatta ; and the latter, again
shouting defiance, drew his sword and struck at the ogre. But, like the
arrows, his sword, which was thirty-three inches long, merely stuck fast iu
the shaggy hair. Next the Bodhisatta hurled his spear, and that stuck
fast also. Seeing this, he smote the ogre with his club ; but, like bis
other weapons, that too stuck fast. And thereupon the Bodhisatta
shouted, "Ogre, you never heard yet of me, [274] Prince Five-Weajjons.
When I ventured into this forest, I jnit my trust notin my bow and other
weapons, but in myself! Now will 1 strike you a l)low which shall crush
you into dust." So saying, the Bodhisatta smote the ogre with his right
hand ; but the hand stuck fast upon the hair. Then, in turn, with his
left hand and with his right and left feet, he struck at the monster, but
hand and feet alike clave to the hide. Again shouting "I will crusli you
into dust !" he butted the ogre with his head, and that too stuck fast.
Yet even when thus caught and snared in fivefold wise, the Bodhisatta,
as he hung upon the ogre, was still fearless, still undaunted. And the
monster thought to himself, "This is a very lion among men, a hero
without a peer, and no mere man. Though he is caught in the clutches of
an ogre like me, yet not so much as a tremor will he exhibit. Never,
since I first took to slaying travellers upon this I'oad, have I seen a man
to equal him. How comes it that he is not frightened?" Not daring to
devour the Bodhisatta ofiliand, he said, "How is it, young brahmin, that
you have no fear of death 1 "
"Why should I?" answered the Bodhisatta. "Each life must surely
have its destined death. Moreover, within my body is a sword of
adamant, which you will never digest, if you eat me. It will chop your
inwards into mincemeat, and my death will involve yours too. Therefoi'e
it is that 1 have no foar." (By this, it is said, the Bodhisatta meant
the Sword of Knowledge, which was within him.)

—
;
No. 55. 139
Hereon, the ogre fell a-thinking. "This young brahmin is speaking
the ti'uth and nothing but the truth," thought he. "Not a morsel so big
as a pea could I digest of such a hero. I'll let him go." And so, in fear
ofhis life, he let the Bodhisatta go free, saying, "Young brahmin, you are
a lion among men ; I will not eat you. Go forth from my hand, even as
the moon from the jaws of Rahu, and return to gladden the hearts of
your kinsfolk, your friends, and your country."
"As for myself, ogre," answered the Bodhisatta, "I will go. As for
you, it was your sins in bygone days that caused you to be reborn a
ravening, murderous, flesh-eating ogre ; and, if [275] you continue in sin
in this existence, you will go on from darkness to darkness. But, having
seen me, you will be unable thenceforth to sin any more. Know that
to destroy life is to ensure re-birth either in hell or as a brute or as a
ghost or among the fallen spirits. Or, if the re-birth be into the world
of men, then such sin cuts short the days of a man's life."
In this and other ways the Bodhisatta shewed the evil consequences of
the five bad courses, and the blessing that comes of the five good courses
and so wrought in divers ways upon that ogre's fears that by his teaching
he converted the monster, imbuing him with self-denial and establishing
him in the Five Commandments. Then making the ogre the faiiy of that
forest, with a right to levy dues', and charging him to remain stedfast,
the Bodhisatta went his way, making known the change in the ogre's
mood as he issued from the forest. And in the end he came, armed with
the five weapons, to the city of Benares, and presented himself before his
parents. In later days, when king, he was a righteous ruler; and after a
life spent in charity and other good works he passed away to fare there-
after according to his deserts.
This lesson ended, the ]\Iaster, asBuddha, recited this stanza:
When no attachment hampers heart or mind.
When righteousness is practised peace to win.
He who so walks, shall gain the victory
And all the Fetters utterly destroy'-^.
When he had thus led his teaching up to Arahatship as its crowning point,
the Masterwent on to preach the Four Truths, at the closewhei-eofthat Brother
won Arahatship. Also, the Master shewed the connexion, and identified the
Birth by saying, "Ahgulimala'^ was the ogre of those days, and I myself Prince
Five-Weapons.
^ Or, perhaps, "to whom sacrifices shouldbeoffered." Thetranslation in the text
suggestsapopulartheory oftheevolutionofthe tax-collector. Seealso No. 155.
2 See Nos. 56 and 156.
3 Aiigulunrda, a banditwho worea necklace of his victims' fingers, was converted
by theBuddha and became an Arahat. Cf. Majjhima Nlkdya No. 86.

140 Tlic Jataka. Book 1.
No. 56.
KANCANAKKHANDHA-JATAKA. [276]
—
" Wlien gladness." This story was told by the Master while at Savatthi,
about a certain Brother. Tradition says that through hearing the JMaster
preach ayounggentleman of Savatthi gavehis heart to the precious Faith' and
became a Brother. His teachers and masters proceeded to instruct him in the
whole ofthe Ten Prece]:)ts ofMorality, one after the other, expounded to him the
Short, the Medium, and the Long Moralities^, set forth the Morality which rests
on self-restraint according to the Patimokkha^, the ]\Iorality which rests on self-
restraint as to the Senses, the Morality which rests on a blameless walk
of life, the Morality which relates to the way a Brother may use the
Requisites. Thought the young beginner, "There is a tremendous lot of this
t M h o e ra g l o i o t d y ; of a b n e d in I g s a ha b l r l ot u h n e d r ou at bt a e ll d , l i y f f o o n i e l t c o an f n u o lf t il ke al e l p I th h e av r e ule v s ow o e f d. Mora Y l e i t ty w ' h \ at My is
best course is to go back to the world, take a wife and rear children, living a life
of almsgivingand other good works." So he told his superiors what he thought,
sayingthat he proposed to return to the lowerstate of a layman, and wished to
hand back his bowl and robes. "Well, if it be so with you," said they, "at least
take leave of the Buddha before you go;" and they brought the young man
beforethe Master in the Hall ofTruth.
"Why, Brethren," said the Master, "are you bringing this Bi'other to me
against his will?"
"Sir, he said that Morality was more than he could observe, and wanted
togive back his robes and bowl. So we took him and brought him to you."
"But why, Brethren," asked the Master, "did you burthen him with so
much? He can do what he can, but no more. Do not make this mistake again,
and leave me to decide what should be done in the case."
Then, turning to the young Brother, the blaster said, "Come, Brother what
concern have you with Morality in the mass? Do you think you could ; obey
just three moral rules?"
"Oh, yes. Sir."
"Well now, watch and guard the three avenues of the voice, the mind, and
the body ; do no evil whether in word, or thought, or act. Cease not to be a
Brother, but go hence and obeyjust these three rules."
"Yes, indeed. Sir, I will keep them," here exclaimed thegladyoung man, and
back he went with his teachers again. And as he was keepinghis three rules,
he thought within himself, "I had the whole of Morality told me by my in-
structors but because they were not the Buddha, they could notmake megrasp
;
even this much. Whereas [277] the All-Enlightened One, by reason of his
Buddhahood, and of his being the Lord of Truth, has expressed so much
Morality in onlythree rules concerning the Avenues, and has made me under-
stand it clearly. Verily, a very present help has the Masterbeen to me." And
1 Or perhaps ratanasdsanain means 'the creed connected with the (Three) Gems,'
viz. theBuddha, theDoctrine, andthe Order.
—
- Theseare translatedin llhys Davids' "Buddhist Suttas," pp. 189 200.
3 The Patimokkha is translated and discussed in Pt i. of the translation of the
VinayabyKhysDavidsand Oldenberg (S. B. E. Vol. 13).

No. 56. 141
he won Insight and in a few days attained Arahatship. When this came to the
ears of the Brethren, they spoke of it when met together in the Hall of Truth,
telling how the Brother, who was going back to the world because he could not
hope to fulfil Morality, had been furnished by the Master with three I'ulus
embodyingthe whole of Morality, and had been made to grasp those three rules,
and so had been enabled by the Master to win Arahatship. How marvellous,
they cried, was the Buddha.
Entering the Hall at this point, and learning on enquiry the subject oftheir
talk, the Master said, "Brethren, even a heavy burthen becomes light, if taken
piecemeal and thus the wise and good of past times, on finding a huge mass of
;
gold too heavy to lift, first broke it up and then were enabled to bear their
treasure away piece by piece." So saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as a farmer in a village, and was ploughing one
day in a field where once stood a village. Now, in bygone days, a wealthy
merchant had died leaving buried in this field a huge bar of gold, as thick
round as a man's thigh, and four whole cubits in length. And full on this
bar struck the Bodhisatta's plough, and there stuck fast. Taking it to be
a spreading root of a tree, he dug it out ; but discovering its real nature,
he set to work to clean the dirt off the gold. The day's work done, at
sunset he laid aside his plough and gear, and es.sayed to shoulder his
treasure-trove and walk off with it. But, as he could not so much as lift
it, he sat down before it and fell a-thinking what uses he would put it to.
"I'll have so much to live on, so much to bury as a treasure, so much
to trade with, and so much for charity and good works," thought he to
himself, and accordingly cut the gold into four. Divi.sion made his
burthen easy to carry ; and he bore home the lumps of gold. After a
life of charity and other good works, he jjassed away to fare thereafter
accordinsf to his deserts.
—
Hislesson ended, the Master, as Buddha, recited this stanza: [27ff\
When gladness fills the heart and fills the mind.
When righteousness is practised Peace to win,
He who so walks shall gain the victory
And all the Fetters utterly destroy.
And when the Master had thus led his teaching up to Arahatship as its
crowning point, he shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying,
"In those days I myselfwas the man who got the nugget ofgold."

142 The Jdtaha. Book I.
No. 57.
VANARINDA-JATAKA.
"Whoso, mo7ihi/-Hn(/."—Thin story was told by the Master, while at the
Bamboo-grove, about Devadatta's going about to kill him. Being informed of
Devadatta's murderous intent, the Master said, "This is not the first time.
Brethren, that Devadatta has gone about seeking to kill me; he did just the
same in bygone days, but failed to work his wicked will." And so saying, he
told this story ofthepast.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life again as a monkey. When full-grown, he was
as big as a niare's foal and enormously strong. He lived alone on the
banks of a river, in the middle of which was an island whereon grew
mangoes and bread-fruits, and other fruit-trees. And in mid-stream, half-
way between the island and the river-bank, a solitary rock rose out of the
water. Being as strong as an elephant, the Bodhisatta used to leap from
the bank on to this rock and thence on to the island. Here he would eat
his fill of the fruits that grew on the island, returning at evening hy the
way he came. And such was his life from day to day.
Now there lived in those days in that river a crocodile and his
mate ; and she, being with young, was led by the sight of the Bodhisatta
journeying to and fro to conceive [279] a longing for the monkey's
heart to eat. So she begged her lord to catch the monkey for her.
Promising that she should have her fancy, the crocodile went off and
took his stand on the rock, meaning to catch the monkey on his evening
journey home.
After ranging about the island all day, the Bodhisatta looked out at
evening towards the rock and wondered why the rock stood so high out
of the water. For the story goes that the Bodhisatta always marked the
exact height of the water in the river, and of the rock in the water. So,
when he saw that, though the water stood at the same level, the rock
seemed to stand higher out of the water, he suspected that a crocodile
might be lurking there to catch him. And, in order to find out the facts
of the case, he shouted, as though addressing the rock, "Hi! rock!"
And, as no reply came back, he shouted three times, "Hi! rock!" And

-
No. 57. 143
as the rock still kept silence, the monkey called out, "How comes it,
friend rock, that you won't answer me to-day?"
"Oh!" thought the crocodile; "so the rock's in the habit of answering
the monkey. I must answer for the rock to-day." Accordingly, he
shouted, "Yes, monkey; what is it?" "Who are you?" said the Bodhi-
satta. "I'm a crocodile." "What are you sitting on that rock for?"
"To catch you and eat your heart." As there was no other way back, the
only thing to be done was to outwit the crocodile. So the Bodhisatta
cried out, "There's no help for it then but to give myself up to you. Open
your mouth and catch me when Ijump."
Now you must know that when crocodiles open their mouths, their
eyes shut'. So, when this crocodile unsuspiciously opened his mouth, his
eyes shut. And there he waited with closed eyes and open jaws Seeing
!
this, the wily monkey made a jump on to the crocodile's head, and thence,
with a spring like lightning, gained the bank. When the cleverness of
this feat dawned on the crocodile, he said, "Monkey, he that in this
world [280] possesses the four virtues overcomes his foes. And you, me-
—
thinks, possess all four." And, so saying, he repeated this stanza:
Whoso, monkey-king, like you, combines
Truth, foresight, fixed resolve, and fearlessness.
Shall see his routed foemen turn and flee.
And with this praise of the Bodhisatta, the crocodile betook himself to
his own dwelling-place.
Said theMaster, "Thisisnotthefirst time then, Brethren,thatDevadattahas
goneabout seeking tokill me he did just the same in bygone days too." And,
;
having ended his lesson, the Master sliewed the connexion and identified the
Birth by saying, "Devadatta was the crocodile of those days,the brahmin-girl
Ciiica^ was the crocodile's wife, and I myselfthe Monkey-King."
[Note. Cf No. 224 {KurnhhUa-jutal-a). A Chinese version is given by Beal
in the ' Romantic Legend ' p. 231, and a Japaneseversion in Griffin's'FairyTales
from Japan.']
1 Thisassertion is not in accord with the facts ofnatural history.
2 Heridentificationhere as thecrocodile's wicked wifeisdue to thefactthat Cinca,
who was a "female ascetic of rare beauty," was suborned by Gotama's enemies to
simulatepregnancyandchargehim withthe paternity. How the deceit was exposed,
—
is told inDhanunapada, pp. 338 340.

X44 The Jdtaha. Booh I.
No. 58.
TAYODHAMMA-JATAKA.
—
" 117(050, likeyou." Thisstory was told by the Master while at the Bamboo-
grove also upon the subject ofgoing about to kill.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, Devadatta
came to life again as a monkey, and dwelt near the Himalayas as the
lord of a tribe of monkeys all of his own begetting. Filled with fore-
bodings that his male offspring might grow up to oust him from his
lordship, he used to geld [281] them all with his teeth. Now the Bodhi-
satta had been begotten by this same monkey ; and his mother, in order
to save her unborn progeny, stole away to a forest at the foot of the
mountain, where in due season she gave birth to the Bodhisatta. And
when he was full-grown and had come to years of understanding, he was
gifted with marvellous strength.
"Where is my father*?" said he one day to his mother. *'He dwells
at the foot of a certain mountain, my sou," she replied; "and is king
of a tribe of monkeys." "Take me to see him, mother." "Not so, my
son ; for your father is so afraid of being supplanted by his sons that
he gelds them all with his teeth." "Never mind; take me there, mother,"
said the Bodhisatta; "I shall know what to do." So she took him with
her to the old monkey. At sight of his son, the old monkey, feeling sure
that the Bodhisatta would grow np to depose him, resolved by a feigned
embrace to crush the life out of the Bodhisatta. "Ah! my boy!" he
cried; "where have you been all this long timel" And, making a show
of embracing the Bodhisatta, he hugged him like a vice. But the
Bodhisatta, who was as strong as an elephant, returned the hug so
mightily that his father's ribs were like to break.
Then thought the old monkey, "This son ofmine, if he grows up, will
certainly kill me," Casting about how to kill the Bodhisatta first, he
bethought him of a certain lake hard Ijy, where an ogre lived who might
eat him. So he said to the Bodhisatta, "I'm old now, my boy, and should
like to hand over the tribe to you to-day you shall be made king. In a
;
lake hard by grow two kinds of water-lily, three kinds of blue-lotus, and
five kindsof white-lotus. Goand pick me some." "Yes, father," answered

—
No. 58. 145
the Bodhisatta; aud oli" he started. Ap])voaching the lake with caution,
he studied the footprints on its banks and marked how all of them led
down, to the water, but none ever came Viack. Kealising that the lake was
haunted by an ogre, he divined that his father, being unable himself to kill
him, wished to get him killed[282] bythe ogre. "But I'll get the lotuses,"
said he, "without going into the water at all." So he went to a dry
spot, and taking a run leaped from the bank. In his jump, as he was
clearing the water, he plucked two flowers which grew up above the
surface of the water, and alighted with them on the opposite bank. On
his way back, he plucked two more in like manner, as he jumped and
— ;
so made a heap on both sides of the lake, but always keeping out of
the ogre's watery domain. When he had picked as many as he thought
he could carry across, and was gathering together those on one bank,
the astonished ogre exclaimed, "I've lived a long time in this lake, but
I never saw even a human being so wonderfully clever Here is this
!
monkey who has picked all the flowers he wants, and yet has kept safely
out of range of my power." And, parting the waters asunder, the ogre
came up out of the lake to where the Bodhisatta stood, and addressed
him thus, "O king of the monkeys, he that has three qualities shall have
the mastery over his enemies ; and you, methinks, have all three." And,
so saying, he repeated this stanza in the Bodhisatta's praise:
Whoso, like you, monkey-king, combines
Dexterity and Valour and Resource,
Shall see his routed foemen turn and flee.
His praises ended, the ogre asked the Bodhisatta why he was gathering
the flowers.
"My father is minded to make me king of his tribe," said the Bodhi-
satta, "and that is why I am gathering them."
"But one so peerless as you ought not to carry flowers," exclaimed
the ogre; "I will carry them for you." And so saying, he picked up the
flowers and followed with them in the rear ofthe Bodhisatta.
Seeing this from afar, the Bodliisatta's father knew that his plot had
failed. "I sent my son to fall a prey to the ogre, and here he is return-
ing safe and sound, with the ogre humbly carr-ying his flowers for him !
I am undone!" cried the old monkey, and his heart burst asunder [283]
into seven pieces, so that he died then and there. And all the other
monkeys met together and chose the Bodhisatta to be their king.
His lesson ended, the Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth
by saying, "Devadattawas then the king ofthe monkeys, and I his son."
10
C. J.

—
;
146 The Jataka. Booh I.
No. 59.
BHERIVADA-JATAKA.
"&'o not /oo/ar."--This story was told bythe Masterwhile at Jetavaua,about
acertain self-willed Brother. Asked by the Master whether the report was true
that he was self-willed, the Brother said itwas true. "This is not the first time,
Brother," said the Master, "that you have shewn yourself self-willed you were
justthe same in bygone times as well." And so saying, he told this st ; ory of the
past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was I'eigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as a drummer, and dwelt in a village. Hearing
that there was to be a festival at Benares, and hoping to make money
by playing his drum to the crowds of holiday-makers, he made his way
to the city, with his son. And there he played, and made a great deal
of money. On his way home with his earnings he had to pass through
a forest which was infested by robbers and as the boykept beating away
;
at the drum without ever stopping, the Bodhisatta tried to stop him by
—
saying, "Don't behave like that, beat only now and again, as if some
great lord were passing by."
But in defiance of his father's bidding, the boy thought the best way
to frighten the r-obbers away was to keep steadily on beating away at
the drum.
At the first notes of the drum, away scampered the robbers, thinking
some great lord was passing by. But hearing the noise keep on, they
saw their mistake and came back to find out who it really was. Finding
only two persons, they beat and robbed them. "Alas!" cried the Bodhi-
satta, "by your ceaseless drumming you have lost all our hard-earned
takings!" And, so saying, he repeated this stanza:
Go not too far, but learn excess to shun
For over-drumming lost what drumming won. [284]
Hislesson ended, the Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth
b fa y th s e a r. y " mg, "This self-willed Brother was the son of those day ^ s, ' and I my ^ self the

—
No. 60. 147
No. 60.
SAMKHADHAMANA-JATAKA.
—
"Go not toofar." Thisstorywas told bythe Master while atJetavana,about
anotherself-willed person.
Once on a time when Bralimadatta was reigning iu Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as a conch-blower, and went upto Benareswith his
father to a public festival. There he earned a great deal of money by
his conch-blowing, and started for home again. On his way through a
forest which was infested by robbers, he warned his father not to keep on
blowing his conch ; but the old man thought he knew better how to keep
the robbers off, and blew away hard without a moment's pause. Accord-
ingly, just as in the pi-eceding story, the i-obbers returned and plundered
the pair. And, as above, the Bodhisatta repeated this stanza :
Go not too far, bvit learn excess to shun;
For over-blowing lost what blowing won.
His lesson ended, the Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth
by saying, "This self-willed Brother was the father of those days, and I myself
hisson."
No. 61.
ASATAMANTA-JATAKA.
[285] "/m hist unbridled."—This story was told by the Masterwhile at Jeta-
vana, about a passion-tost Brother. The Introductory Story will be related in
theUmmadanti-jatakai. Butto thisBrothertheMastersaid, "Women, Brother,
are lustful, profligate, vile, and degraded. Why be passion-tost for a vile
woman?" And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
1 No. 527.
10—2

148 The Jdtaha. Booh I.
Once on a time wlieu Bralimadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as a brahmin in the city of Takkasila in the
Gandhara country; and by the time he had grown up, such was his
proficiency in the Three Vedas and all accomplishments, that his fame as
a teacher spread through all the world.
In those days there was a brahmin family in Benares, unto whom a
son was born; and on the day of his birth they took fire and kept it
always burning, until the boy was sixteen. Then his parents told him
how the fire, kindled on the day of his birth, had never been allowed to
go out; and they bade their son make his choice. If his heart was set
on winning entrance hereafter into the Realm of Brahma, then let him
take the fire and retire with it to the forest, there to work out his desire
by ceaseless worship of the Lord of Fire. But, if he preferred the joys
of a home, they bade their son go to Takkasila and there study under
the world-famed teacher with a view to settling down to manage the
property. "I should surely fail in the worship of the Fire-God," said
the young brahmin; "I'll be a squire." So he l:)ade farewell to his father
and mother, and, with a thousand pieces of money for the teacher's fee,
set out for Takkasila. There he studied till his education was complete,
and then betook himself home again.
Now his parents grew to wish him to forsake the world and to worship
the Fire-God in the forest. Accordingly his mother, in her desire to
despatch him to the forest by bringing home to him the wickedness of
women, was confident that his wise and learned teacher would be able
to lay bare the wickedness of the sex to her son, and so she asked whether
he had quite finished his education. "Oh yes," said the youth.
[286] "Then ofcourse you have not omitted the Dolour Texts?" "I
have not learnt those, mother." "How then can you say your education
is finished1 Go back at once, my son, to your master, and return to
lis when you have learnt them," said his mother.
"Very good," said the youth, and off" he started for Takkasila once
more.
Now his master too had a mother, — an old woman of a hundred and
—
twenty years of age, whom with his own hands he used to bathe, feed
—
and tend. And for so doing he was scorned by his neighbours, so much
so indeed that he resolved to depart to the forest and there dwell with
his mother. Accordingly, in the solitude of a forest he had a hut built
in a delightful spot, where water was plentiful, and after laying in a
stock of ghee and rice and other provisions, he carried his mother to her
new home, and there lived cherishincr her old ag-e.
Not finding his master at Takkasila, the young brahmin made en-
quiries, and finding out what had happened, set out for the forest, and
presented himself respectfully before his master, "What brings you

—
No. 61. 149
back so soon, my boy'r' said the lattei-. "I do not think, sir, 1 learned
the Dolour Texts when I was with you," said the youth, "But who told
you that you had to learn the Dolour Texts?" "My mother, master," was
the reply. Hereon the Bodhisatta reflected that there were no such texts
as those, and concluded that his pupil's mother must have wanted her
son to learn how wicked women were. So he said to the youth that it
was all right, and that he should in due course be taught the Texts in
question. "From to-day," said he, "you shall take my place about my
mother, and with your own hands wash, feed and look after her. As
you rub her hands, feet, head and back, be careful to exclaim, 'Ah,
Madam! if you are so lovely now you are so old, what must you not
have been in the heyday of your youth !' And as you wash and perfume
her hands and feet, burst into praise of their beauty. Further, tell me
without shame or reserve every single word my mother says to you. Obey
me in this, and you shall master the Dolour Texts ; disobey me, and you
shall remain ignorant of them for ever."
Obedient to his master's commands, the youth did all he was bidden,
and so persistently praised the old woman's beauty that she thought he
had fallen in love with her; and, blind and decrepit though she was,
passion was kindled within her[287]. So one dayshe broke inonhiscom-
pliments by asking, "Is your desire towards me?" "It is indeed, madam,"
answered the youth; "but my master is so strict." "If you desire me,"
said she, "kill my son!" "But how shall I, that have learned so much
—
from him,^ how shall I for passion's sake kill my master?" "Well then,
ifyou will be faithful to me, I will kill him myself."
(So lustful, vile, and degraded are women that, giving the rein to lust,
a hag like this, and old as she was, actually thirsted for the blood of so
dutiful a son
!)
Now the young brahmin told all this to the Bodhisatta, who, com-
mending him for reporting the matter, studied how much longer his
mother was destined to live. Finding that her destiny was to die that
very day, he said, " Come, young brahmin; Iwill put her tothe test." So
he cut down a fig-tree and hewed out of it a wooden figure about his own
size, — which he wrapped up, head and all, in a robe and laid upon his own
bed, with a string tied to it. "Now go with an axe to my mother," said
he; "and give her this string as a clue to guide her steps."
So away went the youth to the old woman, and said, "Madam, the
master is lying down indoors on his bed; I have tied this string as a clue
to guide you; take this axe and kill him, if you can." "But you won't
forsake me, will you?" .said she. "Why should I?" was his reply. So
she took the axe, and, rising uj) with trembling limbs, groped her way
along by the string, till she thought she felt her son. Then she bared
—
the head of the figure, and thinkinsc to kill her son at a single blow

— —
150 The Jataka. Book I.
—
brought down the axe right on the figure's throat, only to learn by the
thud tliat it was wood! "What are you doing, mother?" said the Bodhi-
satta. With a shriek that she was betrayed, the old woman fell dead to
the ground. For, says tradition, it was fated that she should die at that
very moment and under her own roof.
Seeing that she was dead, her son burnt her body, and, when the
flames of the pile were quenched, graced her ashes with wild-flowei-s.
Then with the young brahmin he sat at the door of the hut and said,
"My son, there is no such separate passage as the 'Dolour Text.' [288]
It is women who are depravity incarnate. And when your mother sent
you back to me to learn the Dolour Texts, her object was that you
should learn how wicked women are. You have now witnessed with your
own eyes my mother's wickedness, and therefrom you will see how lustful
and vile women are." And with this lesson, he bade the youth depart.
Bidding farewell to his master, the young brahmin went home to his
parents. Said his mother to him, "Have you now learnt the Dolour
Texts?"
"Yes, mother."
"And what," she asked, "is your final choice? will you leave the
world to worship the Lord of Fire, or will you choose a family life?"
"Nay," answered the young brahmin; "with my own eyes have I seen
the wickedness of womankind ; I will have nothing to do with family life.
I will renounce the woi'ld," And his convictions found vent in this
stanza:
In lust unbr—idled, like devouring fire.
Are women, frantic in their rage.
The sex renouncing, fain would I retire
To find peace in a hermitage.
[289] With this invective against womankind, the young brahmin took
leave of his parents, and renounced the world for the hermit's life,
whei-ein winning the peace he desired, he assured himself of admittance
after that life into the Realm of Brahma.
"So you see. Brother," said the Master, "how lustful, vile, and woe-bringing
are women." And after declaring the wickedness of women, he preached the
FourTruths, at the close whereof that Brother won the Fruit of the First Path.
Lastly, the Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying,
"Kapilaini was the mother ofthose days, Maha-Kassapa wasthe father, Ananda
the pupil, and I myselfthe teacher."
1 Herhistoryisgiven in J. K. A. S. 1893, page 786.

—
No. 62. 151
No. 62.
ANDABHUTA-JATAKA.
—
"Blindfold, a-luting." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavaua,
about another passion-tost person.
Said the Master, "Is the report true thatyou arepassion-tost, Brother?"
"Quite true," was the reply.
"Brother, women can not be warded in days gone by the wise who kept
watch overa woman from the moment she ; was born, failed nevertheless to keep
hersafe." And so saying, he told this stoiy ofthe past.
Once on. a time when Brahmadatta was reigning ia Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as the child of the Queen-consort. When he grew
up, he mastered eveiy accomplishment and when, at his father's death,
;
he came to be king, he proved a righteous king. Now he used to play at
dice with his chaplain, and, as he flung the golden dice upon the silver
table, he would sing this catch for luck :
'Tis nature's law that rivers wind
Trees grow of wood by law of kin ; d
;
And, given opportunity.
All women work iniquity.
[290] As these lines always made the king win the game, the chaplain was
in a fair way to lose every penny he had in the woi'ld. And, in order
to save himself from utter ruin, he resolved to seek out a little maid
that had never seen another man, and then to keep her under lock and
key in his own house. "For," thought he, "I couldn't manage to look
after a girl who has seen another man. So I must take a new-born
baby girl, and keep her under my thumb as she grows up, with a close
guard over her, so that none may come near her and that she may be
true to one man. Then I shall win of the king, and grow rich." Now
he was skilled in prognostication ; and seeing a poor woman who was
about to become a mother, and knowing that her child would be a girl,
he paid the woman to come and be confined in his house, and sent her
away after her confinement with a j)resent. The infant was brought up
— —
entirely by women, and no men other than himself were ever allowed
to set eyes on her. When the girl grew up, she was subject to him and
he was her master.
Now, while the gii'l was growing up, the chaplain forbore to play
with the king; but when she was grown up and under his own control.

—
X52 Th£, Jataha. Book I.
he challenged the king to a game. The king accepted, and play began.
But, when in throwing the dice the king sang his lucky catch, the
chaplain added,—"always excepting my girl." And then luck changed,
and it was now the chaplain who Avon, while the king lost.
Thiiikin" the matter over, the Bodhisatta suspected the chaplain had
a virtuous girl shut up in his house; and enquiry proved his suspicions
true. Then, in order to work her fall, he sent for a clever scamp, and
asked whether he thought he could seduce the girl. "Certainly, sire,"
said the fellow. So the king gave him money, and sent him away with
orders to lose no time.
With the king's money the fellow bought perfumes and incense and
aromatics ofall sorts, and opened a perfumery slioj) close to the chaplain's
house. Now the chaplain's house was seven stories high, and had seven
—
gateways, at each of which a guard was set, a guard of women only,
and no man but the brahmin himself was ever allowed toenter. The very
baskets that contained the dust and sweepings [291] were examined before
they were passed in. Only the chaplain was allowed to see the girl, and
she had only a single waiting-wornan. This woman had money given her
to buy flowers and perfumes for her mistress, and on her way she used to
pass near the shop which the scamp had opened. And he, knowing very
well that she was the girl's attendant, watched one day for her coming,
and, rushing out of his shop, fell at her feet, clasping her knees tightly
with both hands and blubbering out, " my mother where have you
!
been all this long time?"
And his confederates, who stood by his side, cried, "What a likeness
!
Hand and foot, face and figure, even in style of dress, they are identical !"
As one and all kei)t dwelling on the marvellous likeness, the poor woman
lost her head. Crying out that it mustbe her boy, shetoo burst into tears.
And with weeping and tears the two fell to embracing one another. Then
said the man, "Where are you living, mother?"
"Up at the chaplain's, my son. He has a young wife of peerless
beauty, a very goddess for grace; and I'm her waiting-woman." "And
whither away now, mother?" "To buy her perfumes and flowers."
"Why go elsewhere for them] Come to me for them in future," said
the fellow. And he gave the woman betel, bdellium, and so forth, and
all kinds of flowers, refusing all payment. Struck with the quantity of
flowers and perfumes which the waiting-woman brought home, the girl
asked why the brahmin was so pleased with her that day. "Why do you
say that, my dear?" asked the old woman. "Because of the quantity of
things you have brought home." "No, it isn't that the brahmin was
free with his rnqney," said the old woman "for I got them at my son's."
And from that day forth she kept the mo ; ney the brahmin gave her, and
got her flowers and other things free of charge at the man's shop.

No. 62. 153
And he, a few days later, made out to be ill, and took to his bed.
So when the old woman came to the shop and asked for her son, she was
told he had been taken ill. Hastening to his side, she fondly stroked
his shoulders, as she asked what ailed him. But he made no reply.
"Why don't you tell me, my son"?" "Not even if I were dying, could I
tell you, mother." "But, if you don't tell me, [292] whom are you to
tell?" "Well then, mother, my malady lies solely in this that, hearing the
praises of your young mistress's beauty, I have fallen in love with her.
If I win her, I shall live; if not, this will be my death-bed." "Leave
that to me, my boy," said the ol
—
d woman cheerily; "and don't worry
yourself on this account." Then with a heavy load of perfumes and
—
flowers to take with her she went home, and said to the brahmin's young
wife, "Alas! here's my son in love with you, merely because I told him
how beautiful you are ! What is to be done 1 "
"If you can smuggle him in here," replied the girl, "you have my
leave."
Hereupon the old woman set to work sweeping together all the dust
she could find in the house from top to bottom ; this dust she put into a
huge flower-basket, and tried to pass out with it. When the usual search
was made, she emptied dust over the woman on guard, who fled away
under such ill-treatment. In like manner she dealt with all the other
watchers, smothering in dust each one in turn that said anything to her.
And so it came to pass from that time forward that, no matter what the
old woman took in or out of the house, there was nobody bold enough to
search her. Now was the time The old woman smuggled the scamj)
!
into the house in a flower-basket, and brought him to her young mistress.
He succeeded in wrecking the girl's virtue, and actually stayed a day or
—
two in the upper rooms, hiding when the chaplain was at home, and
enjoying the society of his mistress when the chaplain was off" the
premises. A day or two passed and the girl said to her lover, "Sweet-
heart, you must be going now." "Very well; only I must cuff" the
brahmin first." "Certainly," said she, and hid the scamp. Then, when
the brahmin came in again, she exclaimed, "Oh, my dear husband, I
should so like to dance, if you would play the lute for me." "Dance
away, my dear," said the chaplain, and struck up forthwiili. "But I
shall be too ashamed, if you're looking. Let me hide your handsome face
first with a cloth; and then I will dance." "All right," said he; "if
you're too modest to dance otherwise." So she took a thick cloth and tied
it over the brahmin's face so as to blindfold him. And, blindfolded as he
was, the brahmin began to play the lute. After dancing awhile, she cried,
"My dear, I should so like to hit you once on the head." "Hit away,"
said the unsuspecting dotard. Then the girl made a sign to her paramour;
andhesoftlystole upbehind the l)rahmin [293] and smote him on thehead.

— —
! ;
154 The Jataka. Booh I.
Such was tlie force of the blow, that the brahmin's eyes were like to start
out ofhis head, and a bump rose up on the spot. Smarting with pain, he
called to the girl to give him her hand; and she placed it in his. "Ah !
it's a soft hand," said he; "but it hits hard !"
Now, as soon as the scamp had struck the brahmin, he hid ; and when
he was hidden, the girl took the bandage off the chaplain's eyes and
rubbed his bruised head with oil. The moment the brahmin went out,
the scamp was stowed away in his basket again by the old woman, and so
carried out of the house. Making his way at once to the king, he told
him the whole adventure.
Accordingly, when the brahmin was next in attendance, the king
proposed a game with the dice; the brahmin was willing ; and the dicing-
table was brought out. As the king made his throw, he s — ang his old
catch, and the brahmin—i — gnorant of the girl's naughtiness added his
"always excepting my girl," and nevertheless lost
Then the king, who did know what had passed, said to his chaplain,
"Why except herl Her virtue has given way. Ah, you dreamed that
by taking a girl in the hour of her birth and by placing a sevenfold guard
round her, you could be certain of her. Why, you couldn't be certain of
a woman, even if you had her inside you and always walked about with
her. No woman is ever faithful to one man alone. As for that girl of
yours, she told you she should like to dance, and having first blindfolded
you as you played the lute to her, she let her paramour strike you on the
head, and then smuggled him out of the house. Where then is your
exception?" And so saying, the king repeated this stanza:
Blindfold, a-luting, b — y his wife beguiled,
The brahmin sits, who tried to rear
A paragon of virtue undefiled
I
Learn hence to hold the sex in fear.
[294]Insuch wise didtheBodhisattaexpoundtheTruthtothebrahmin.
And the brahmin went home and taxed the girl with the wickedness of
which she was accused. "My dear husband, who can have said such a
thing about me?" said she. "Indeed I am innocent ; indeed it was my
own hand, and nobody else's, that struck you ; and, if you do not believe
me, I will brave the ordeal offi^re to prove that no man's hand hastouched
me but yours; and so I will make you believe me." "So be it," said the
brahmin. And he had a quantity of wood brought and set light to it.
Then the girl was summoned. "Now," said he, "if you believe your own
story, brave these flames!"
Now before this the girl had instructed her attendant as follows:
"Tell your son, mother, to be there and to seize my hand just as I am
about to go into the fire." And the old woman did as she was bidden
and the fellow came and took his stand among the crowd. Then, to

—
!
No. 63. 155
delude the brahmin, the girl, standing there before all the people,
exclaimed with fervour, "No man's hand but thine, brahmin, has ever
touched me ; and, by the truth of my asseveration I call on — this fire to
harm me not." So saying, she advanced to the burning pile, when up
dashed her i)aramour, who seized her by the hand, crying shame on the
brahmin who could force so fair a maid to enter the flames ! Shaking her
hand free, the girl exclaimed to the brahmin that what she had assei'ted
was now undone, and that she could not now brave the ordeal of fire.
"Why not?" said the brahmin. "Because," she replied, "my asseveration
was that no man's hand but thine had ever touched me [295] and now
;
here is a man who has seized hold of my hand !" But the brahmin,
knowing that he was tricked, drove her from him with blows.
Such, we learn, is the wickedness of women. What crime will they
not c — ommit ; and then, to dece — ive their husbands, what oaths will they not
take aye, in the light of day that they did it not ! So false-hearted are
they ! Therefore has it been said :
A sex composed of wickedness and guile,
Unknowable, uncertain—as the path
Of fishes in the water, womankind
Hold truth for falsehood, falsehood for the truth !
As greedily as cows seek pastures new.
Women, unsated, yearn for mate on mate.
As sand unstable, cruel as the snake.
Women know all things ; naught from them is hid
"Even so impossible is it to ward women," said the Master. His lesson
ended, he preached the Truths, at the close whereof the passion-tost Brother
won the Fniit of the First Pat—h. Also the Master shewed the connexion and
identified the Birth by saying : "In these days I was the King ofBenares."
\_Note. The cuffing of the brahmin is the subject of a Bharhut sculpture,
Plate 26, 8. For a parallel to the trick by which the girl avoids the ordeal of
fire, seeFolklore 3. 291.]
No. 63.
TAKKA-JATAKA.
—
" Wrathful are women." Thisstorywas told l)ythe Masterwhile at Jetavana,
about another passion-tost Brother. When on being questioned the Brother
confessed that he was passion-tost, the Master said, "Women are ingrates and
treacherous; why are you passion-tost because of them?" And he told this
story of the past.

156 T]^^ Jataka. Book I.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta, who had chosen an anchorite's life, built himself a hermitage
by the banks of the Ganges, and there won the Attainments and the
Higher Knowledges, and so dwelt in the bliss of Insight. In those days
the Lord High Treasurer of Benares had a fierce and cruel daughter,
known as Lady Wicked, who used to revile and beat her servants and
slaves. And one day they took their young mistress [296] to disport
herself in the Gauges ; and the girls were playing about in the water,
when the sun set and a great storm burst upon them. Hereon folks
"Now
scampered away, and the girl's attendants, exclaiming, is the
time to see the last of this creature 1" threw her right into the river
and hurried oft*. Down poured the rain in torrents, the sun set, and
darkness came on. And when the attendants reached home without
tlieir young mistress, and were asked where she was, they replied that she
had got out of the Ganges but that they did not know where she had gone.
Search was made by her family, but not a ti-ace of the missing girl could
be found.
Meantime she, screaming loudly, was swept down by the swollen
stream, and at midnight approached where the Bodhisatta dwelt in his
hermitage. Hearing her cries, he thought to himself, ''That's a woman's
voice. I must rescue her from the water." So he took a torch of grass
and by its light descried her in the stream. "Don't be afraid ; don't
be afraid !" he shouted cheerily, and waded in, and, thanks to his vast
strength, as of an elephant, brought her safe to land. Then he made
a fire for her in his hermitage and set luscious fruits of divers kinds
before her. Not till she had eaten did he ask, "Where is your home, and
how came you to fall in the river1 " And the girl told him all that
had befallen her. "Dwell here for the present," said he, and installed
her in his hermitage, whilst for the next two or three days he himself
abode in the open air. At the end of that time he bade her depart, but
she was set on waiting till she had made the ascetic fall in love with her
;
and would not go. And as time went by, she so wrought on him by her
womanly grace and wiles that he lost his Insight. With her he con-
tinued to dwell in the forest. But she did not like living in that solitude
and wanted to be taken among people. So yielding to her importunities
he took her away with him to a border village, where he supported her by
selling dates, and so was called the Date-Sage', And the villagers paid
1 There is a play here upon the word takha, which caunot well be rendered iu
English. The word takka-pamlito, which I have rendered 'Date Sage,' would^by
itself—mean ^Logic Sage,' whilst his living was got takkaih vikkinitvd 'by selling
dates: There is the further difficulty that the latter phrase may equally well mean
'by selling buttermilk.'

No. 63. 157
liini to teach them what weie lucky and unlucky seasons, and gave him
a hut to live in at the entrance to their village.
Now the border was harried by robbers from the mountains and they
;
made a raid one day [297] on the village where the pair lived, and looted
it. T — hey made the poor villagers pack up their be — longings, and off they
went with the Treasurer's daughter amongthe rest totheir own abodes.
Arrived there, they let everybody else go free; but the girl, because of her
beauty, was taken to wife by the robber chieftain.
And when the Bodhisatta leax'ned this, he thoughttohimself, "She will
not endure to live away from me. She will escape and come back to me."
And so he lived on, waiting for her to return. She meantime was very
happy with the robbers, and only feared that the Date-sage would come to
carry her away again. "I should feel more secure," thought she, "if he
were dead. I must send a message to him feigning love and so entice him
here to his death." So she sent a messenger to him with the message
that she was unhappy, and that she wanted him to take her away.
And he, in his faith in her, set out forthwith, and came to the
entrance of the robbers' village, whence he sent a message to her. "To
fly now, my husband," said she, "would only be to fall into the robber
chieftain's hands who would kill us both. Let us put off our flight
till night." So she took him and hid him in a room ; and when the
robber came home at night and was inflamed with strong drink, she said
to him, "Tell me, love, what would you do if your rival were in your
power "
]
And he said he would do this and that to him.
"Perhaps he is not so far away as you think," said she. "He is
in the next room."
Seizing a torch, the robber rushed in and seized the Bodhisatta and
beat him aboutthe head and body to his heart's content. Amid the blows
the Bodhisatta made no cry, only murmuring, "Cruel ingrates ! slanderous
traitors!" And this was all he said. And when he had thus beaten,
bound, and laid by the heels the Bodhisatta, the robber finished his
supper, and lay down to sleep. In the morning, when he had slept off"his
over-night's debavich, he fell anew to beating the Bodhisatta, who still made
no cry but kept repeating the same four words. And the robber was
struck with this and asked why, even when beaten, he kept saying
that. [298]
"Listen," said the Date-Sage, "and you shall hear. Once I was a
hermit dwelling in the solitude of the forest, and there I won Insight.
And I rescued this woman from the Ganges and helped her in her need,
and by her allurements fell from my high estate. Then I quitted the
forest and supported her in a village, whence she was carried off by
robbers, And she sent me a message that she was unhappy, entreating

—
158 The Jataka. Booh I.
me to come and take her away. Now she has made me fall into your
hands. That is why I thus exclaim."
This set the robber a-thinking again, and he thought, "If she can feel
so little for one who is so good and has done so much for her, what injury
would she not do to me ? She must die." So having reassured the
Bodhisatta and having awakened the woman, he set out sword in hand,
pretending to her that he was about to kill him outside the village. Then
bidding her hold the Date-Sage he drew his sword, and, making as though
to kill the sage, clove the woman in twain. Then he bathed the Date-
Sage from head to foot and for several days fed him with dainties to his
heart's content.
"Where do you purpose to go now?" said the robber at last.
"The world," answered the sage, "has no pleasures for me. I will
become a hermit once more and dwell in my former habitation in the
forest."
"And I too will become a hermit," exclaimed the robber. So both
became hermits together, and dwelt in the hermitage in the foi-est, where
they won the Higher Knowledges and the Attainments, and qualified
themselves when life ended to enter the Realm of Brahma.
Aftertellingthesetwo stories, the Master shewed the connexion, by reciting,
as Buddha, this stanza:
Wrathful are women, slanderers, ingrates,
The sowers of dissension and fell strife!
Then, Brother, tread the path of holiness,
And Bliss therein thou shalt not fail to find.
[299] His lesson ended, the Master preached the Truths, at the close whereof
the passion-tost Brother won the Fruit of the First Path. Also, the Master
identified the Birth by saying, "Ananda was the robber-chief of those days, and
I myselfthe Date-Sage."
No. 64.
DURAJANA-JATAKA.
"Thinh'st ^/io?«."—This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about alay-brother. Tradition says that there dwelt at Savatthi a lay-brother,
who was stablished in the Three Gems and the Five Commandments, a devout
lover of the Buddha, the Doctrine and the Brotherhood. But his wife was a
sinful and wicked woman. On days when she did wrong, she was as meek as a
slave-girl bought for a hundred pieces whilst on days when she did not do
;

—
No. 64. 159
wrong, she played my lady, passionate and tyrannical. The husband could not
make her out. She worried him so much that he did not go to wait on the
Buddha.
One day he wentwith perfumes and flowers, and had taken his seatafter due
salutation, when the Master said to him :— "Pray how comes it, lay-brother,
that seven or eight days have gone by without your coming to wait upon the
Buddha?" "My wife, sir, is one day like a slave-girl bought for a hundred
pieces, while another day finds her like apassionate and tyrannical mistress. I
cannot make her out ; and it is because she has worried me so that I have not
been to wait upon the Buddha."
Now, when he heard these words, the Master said, "Why, lay-brother, you
have already been told by the wise and good of bygone days that it is hard to
understand the nature of women." And he went on to add "but his previous
existences have come to be confused in his mind, so that he cannot remember."
And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to be a teacher of world-wide fame, with five liundred
young brahmins studying under him. [300] One of these pupils was
a young brahmin from a foreign land, w^ho fell in love with a woman
and made her his wife. Though he continued to live on in Benares,
he failed two or three times in his attendance on the master. For,
you should know, his wife was a sinful and wicked woman, who was
as meek as a slave on days when she had done wrong, but on days when
she had not done wrong, played my lady, passionate and tyrannical. Her
husband could not make her out at all; and so worried and harassed by
her was he that he absented himself from waiting on the Master. Now,
some seven or eight days later he renewed his attendances, and was asked
by the Bodhisatta why he had not been seen of late.
"Master, my wife is the cause," said he. And he told the Bodhisatta
how she was meek one day like a slave-girl, and tyrannical the next how
;
he could not make her out at all, and how he had been so worried and
harassed by her shifting moods that he had stayed away.
"Precisely so, young brahmin," said the Bodhisatta ; "on days when
they have done wrong, women humble themselves before their husbands
and become as meek and submissive as a slave-girl; but on days when
they have not donewrong, then theybecome stiff-necked and insubordinate
to their lords. After this manner are womensinful and wicked ; and their
nature is hard to know. No heed should be paid either to their likes or
to their dislikes." And so saying, the Bodhisatta repeated for the edifica-
tion of his pupil this Stanza:
—
Think'st thou a woman loves thee—? be not glad.
Think'st thou she loves thee not1 forbear to grieve.
Unknowable, uncertain as the path
Of fishes in the water, women prove.

;
160 The Jdtaka. Book I.
[301] Such was the Bodhisatta's instruction to his pupil, who thence-
forward paid no heed to his wife's caprices. A.nd she, hearing that her
misconduct had come to the ears of the Bodhisatta, ceased from that time
forward from her naughtiness.
So too this lay-brother's wife said to herself, "The Perfect Buddha himself
knows, they tell me, of my misconduct," and thenceforth she sinned no more.
His lesson ended, the Master ijreached the Truths, at the close whereof the
lay-brother won the Fruit of the First Path—. Then the Master shewed the con-
nexion and identified the Birth by saying "This husband and wife were also
the husband and wife ofthose days, and I myselfthe teacher."
No. 65.
ANABHIRATI-.TATAKA.
—
'^Like highways^ This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
aboutjust such another lay-brotheras the last. This man, when on enquiry he
assured himselfof his wife's misconduct, came to words with her, with the result
that he was so upset that for seven or eight days he failed in his attendance.
One day he came to the monastery, made his bow to the Blessed One and took
his seat. Being asked why he had been absent for seven or eight days, he
replied, "Sir, my wife has misconducted herself, and I have been so upset about
her that I did not come."
"Lay-brother," said the Master, "long ago the wise and good told you not to
be angered at the naughtiness found inwomen,but to preserveyourequanimity
this, however, you have forgotten, because re-birth— has hidden it from you."
And so saying, he told—at that lay-brothei-'s request this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a teacher of world-wide reputation, as in the foregoing
story. And a pupil of his, finding his wife unfaithful, was so affected by
the discovery that he stayed away for some days, but being asked one day
by his teacher what was the reason of his absence, he made a clean breast
of it. Then said his teacher, "My son, there is no private property in
women : they are common to all. [302] And therefore wise men knowing

— —
No. 66. 161
their frailty, ai'e not excited to anger against them." And so saying, he
repeated this stanza for his pupil's edification:
Like highways, rivers, courtyards, hostelries,
Or taverns, which to all alike extend
One universal hospitality,
Is womankind and wise men never stoop
To wrath at fr ; ailty in a sex so frail.
Such was the instruction which the Bodhisatta imparted to his pupil,
who thenceforward grew indifferent to what women did. And as for his
wife, she was so changed by hearing that the teacher knew what she was,
that she gave up her naughtiness thenceforth.
So too that lay-brother's wife, when she heard that the Master knew what
shewas, gave up her naughtiness theuceforth.
His lesson ended, the Master preached the Truths, at the close whereof the
lay-brotherwon the Fruit of the First Path. Also the Master shewed the con-
nexion and identified the Birth by saying, "This husband and wife were also
the husband and wife ofthose days, and I myselfthe brahmin teacher."
No. 66.
MUDULAKKHANA-JATAKA.
—
"Till Oentle-heart was 7ni7ie." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about concupiscence. Tradition says that a young gentleman of
Savatthi, [303] on hearing the Truth preached by the Master, gave his heart to
the Doctrine of the Three Gems. Renouncing the world for the Brother's life,
he rose to walk in the Paths, to practise meditation, and never to slacken in his
pondering over the theme he had chosen for thought. One day, whilst he was
on his round for alms through Savatthi, he espied a woman in brave attire, and,
for pleasure's sake, liroke through the higher morality and gazed upon her!
Passion was stirred within him, he became even as a fig-tree felled by the axe.
From that day forth, imder the sway of passion, the palate of his mind, as of
his body, lostall its gust; like a brute beast, he took nojoy in the Doctrine, and
suffered his nails and hair to grow longand his'robes to grow foul.
When his friends among the Brethren became aware of his troubled state of
mind, they said, "Why, sir, is your moral state otherwise than it was?" "My
joy has gone," said he. Then they tookhim to the Master,who asked them why
they had brought that Brother there against his will. "Because, sir, his joy is
gone." "Is that true, Brother]" "It is. Blessed One." "Who has troubled
you?" "Sir, I was on my round for alms when, violating the higher morality,
I gazed on a woman and passion was stirred within me. Therefore am I
;
C.J. 11

162 The Jdtaka. Book I.
troubled." Then said the Master, "It is little marvel, Brother, that when,
violatingmorality, you were gazing for pleasure's sake on an exceptional object,
you were stirred by passion. Why, in bygone times, even those who had won
the five Higher Knowledges and the eight Attainments, tho.se who by the might
of Insight had quelled their passions, whose hearts were purified and whosefeet
could walk the .skies, yea even Bodhisattas, through gazing in violation of
morality on an exceptional object, lost theirinsight, were stirred by passion, and
came to great sorrow. Little recks the wind which could overturn Mount
Sineru, ofa bare hillock no bigger than an elephant ; little recks a wind which
could uproot a mighty Jambu-tree, of a bush on the face of a clifi"; and little
recks a wind which could dry up a vast ocean, of a tiny pond. Ifpassion could
breed folly in the supremely-enlightened and pure-minded Bodhisattas, shall
passion be abashed before you ? Why, even purified beings are led a.stray by
passion, and those advanced to the highest honour, come to shame." And so
saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a rich brahmin family in the Kasi country.
When he was grown up and had finished his education, he renounced all
Lusts, and, forsaking the world for the hermit's life, went to live in the
solitudes of the Himalayas, There by due fulfilment of all preparatory
forms of meditation, he won by abstract thought the Higher Knowledges
and the ecstatic Attainments ; and so lived his life in the bliss of mystic
Insight.
[304] Lack of salt and vinegar brought him one day to Benares, where
he took up his quarters in the king's pleasaunce. Next day, after seeing
to his bodily needs, he folded up the red suit of bark which he commonly
wore, threw over one shoulder a black antelope's skin, knotted his tangled
locks in a coil on the top of his head, and with a yoke on his back from
which hung two baskets, set out on his round in quest ofalms. Coming
to the palace-gates on his way, his demeanour so commended him to the
king that his majesty had him brought in So the ascetic was seated on a
couch of great splendour and fed with abundance of the daintiest food.
And when he thanked tlie king, he was invited to take up his dwelling
in the pleasaunce. The ascetic accepted the offer, and for sixteen years
abode in the pleasaunce, exhorting the king's household and eating of the
king's meat.
Now there came a day when the king must go to the borders to put
down a rising. But, before he started, he charged his queen, who.se name
was Gentle-heart, to minister to the wants of the holy man. So, after
the king's departure, the Bodhisatta continued to go when he pleased to
the palace.
One day Queen Gentle-heart got ready a meal for the Bodhisatta; but
as he was late in coming, she betook herself to her own toilette. After
bathing in pei-fumed water, she dressed herself in all her splendour,

No. 66. 163
and lay clown, awaiting his coming, on a little couch in the spacious
chamber.
Waking from rapture of Insight, and seeing how late it was, the
Bodhisatta transported himself through the air to the palace. Hearing
the rustling of his bark-robe, the queen started up hurriedly to receive
him. In her hurry to rise, her tunic slipped down, so that her beauty
was revealed to the ascetic as he entered the window ; and at the sight, in
violation of Morality he gazed for pleasure's sake on the marvellous
beauty of the queen. Lust was kindled within him ; he was as a tree
felled by the axe. At once all Insight deserted him, and he became
as a crow with its wings clipped. Clutching his food, still standing, he
ate not, but took his way, all a-tremble with desire, from the palace to his
hut in the pleasaunce, set it down beneath his wooden couch and thereon
lay for seven whole days a prey to hunger and thirst, enslaved by the
queen's loveliness, his heart aflame with lust.
On the seventh day, the king came back from pacifying the border.
After passing in solemn procession round the city, he entered his palace.
[305] Then, wishing to see the ascetic, he took his way to the pleasaunce,
and there in the cell found the Bodhisatta lying on his couch. Thinking
the holy man had been taken ill, the king, after first having the cell
cleaned out, asked, as he stroked the sufferer's feet, what ailed him.
"Sire, my heart is fettered by lust; that is my sole ailment." "Lust for
whom 1 " "For Gentle-heart, sire." "Then she is yours ; I give her
to you," said the king. Then he passed with the ascetic to the palace, and
bidding the queen array herself in all her splendour, gave her to the
Bodhisatta. But, as he was giving her away, the king privily charged the
queen to put forth her utmost endeavour to save the holy man.
"Fear not, sire," said the queen ; " I will save him." So with the
queen the ascetic went out from the palace. But when he had passed
through the great gate, the queen cried out that they must have a house
to live in; and back he must go to the king to ask for one. So back he
went to ask the king for a house to live in, and the king gave them a
tumble-down dwelling which passers-by used as a jakes. To this dwelling
the ascetic took the queen ; but she flatly refused to enter it, because of
its filthy state.
"What am I to do1" he cried. " Why, clean it out," she said. And
she sent him to the king for a spade and a basket, and made him remove
all the filth and dirt, and plaster the walls with cowdung, which he had to
fetch. This done, she made him get a bed, and a stool, and a rug, and a
water-pot, and a cup, sending him for only one thing at a time. Next,
she sent him packing to fetch water and a thousand other things. So off
he started for the water, and filled up the water-pot, and set out the
water for the bath, and made the bed. And, as he sat with her upon the
11—2

—
"
164 Tlie Jdtaka. Booh I.
bed she took him by tlie whiskers and drew him towards her till they
were face to face, saying, "Hast thou forgotten that thou art a holy man
and a brahmin?
Hereon he came to himself after his interval of witless folly.
(And here should be repeated thetextbeginning, "Thus the hindrances
of Lust and Longing are called Evils because they spring from Ignorance,
Brethren [306] that which springs from Ignorance creates Darkness.")
;
So when he had come to himself, he bethought him how, waxing
stronger and stronger, this fatal craving would condemn him hereafter to
the Four States of Punishment'. "This self-same day," he cried, "will I
restore this woman to the king and fly to the mountains !" So he stood
with the queen before the king and said, "Sire, I want your queen no
longer; and it was only for her that cravings were awakened within
me." And so saying, he repeated this Stanza :
Till Ge—ntle-heart was mine, one sole desire
I had, to win her. When her beauty owned
Me lord, desire came crowding on desire.
Forthwith his lost power of Insight came back to him. Rising from
the earth and seating himself in the air, he preached the Truth to the
king ; and without touching earth he passed through the air to the
Himalayas. He never came back to the paths of men ; but grew in love
and charity till, with Insight unbroken, he passed to a new birth in the
Realm of Brahma.
Hislesson ended, the Master preached the Truths, at the closewhereof that
Brother won Arahatship itself. Also the Master shewed the connexion and
identified the Birth by saying, "Ananda was the King of those days, Uppala-
vanna was Gentle-heart, and I the hermit."
No. 67.
UCCHANGA-JATAKA.
"^ son's mi eas9/Jind."—Thin storywas told bythe Masterwhile atJetavana,
about a certain country-woman.
Forit fell out once in Kosala that three men were ploughingon the outskirts
of acertain forest, and that robbers plundered folk in that forest and made their
escape. [307] The victims came, in the course of a fruitless search for the
rascals, to where the three men were ploughing. "Here are the forest robbers,
^ Hell, thebrute-creation, ghostdoin, devildom.
i

——
'
No. 67. 165
disguised as husbandmen," they cried, andhauled the trio off as prisoners to the
KingofKosala. Now time aftertime there came to the king's palace a woman
who with loud lamentations begged for "wherewitli to be covered." Hearing lier
cry, the king ordered a shift to be given her ; but she refused it, saying tliis was
not what she meant. 80 the king's servants came back to his majesty and said
that what the woman wanted was not clothes but a husband'. Then the king
had the woman brought into hispresence and asked her whether she reallydid
mean a husband.
"Yes, sire," she answered ; "for a husband is a woman's real covering, and
she that lacks a husband—even though she be clad in garments costing a
thousand pieces — goes bare and naked indeed."
(And to enforce this truth, the following 8utta should be recited here :
Like kingless kingdoms, like a stream run dry,
So bare and naked is a woman seen,
Who, having brothers ten, yet lacks a mate.)
Pleased with the woman's answer, the king asked what relation the three
prisoners were to her. And she said that one was her husband, one her l)rothcr,
and one her son. "Well, to mark my favour," said the king, "I giveyou one of
the three. Which will you take?" "Sire," was her answer, "if 1 live, I can get
a an n o o t t h h e e r r h br u o s t b h a er n . d a S n o d g a i n v o e th m e e r m so y n b ; ro b t u h t er a . s S m i y re. p " are P n l t e s as a e r d e w d i ea t d h , t I he ca w n o n m e a v n e , r t g h e e t
king set all three men at liberty ; and thus this one woman was the means of
saving three persons from peril.
When the matter came to the knowledge of the Brotherhood, they were
lauding the woman in the Hall of Truth, when the Master entered. Learning
on enquiry what was the subject of their talk, he said, "This is not the first
time. Brethren, that this woman has saved those three from peril; she did the
same in days gone by." And, so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, three men
were ploughing on the outskirts of a forest, and everything came to pass
as above.
Beingasked by the king which of the three she would take, the woman
said, ''Cannot your majesty give me all three1 " ''No," said the king, *' I
cannot." [308] " Well, if I cannot have all three, give me my brother."
"Take your husband or your son," said the king. " What matters a
brother?" "Tlie two former I can readily replace," answered the woman,
"but a brother neverI" And so saying, she repeated this stanza:
A An so a n mp ' l s e an cho e i a c s e y t f h i r n o d n ; gs of pu h b u l s i b c an w d ay s s. too But where
Will all my pains another brother find I
"She is quite right," said the king, well-pleased. And he bade all
three men be fetched from the prison and given over to the woman. She
took them all three and went her way.
1 Cf . 'femme couverte.

166 The Jataka. Book I.
"So yoii see, Brethren," said tlie Master, '•that this same woman once before
saved these same three men from peril." His lesson ended, he made the con-
nexion and identified the Birth by saying, "The woman and the three men of
to-day wore also the woman and men ofthose bygone days ; and I was then the
king."
— —
[NQfg — Qf foj. the idea ofthe verse Herodotus iii. 118 120, Sophocles Anti-
gone 909 912 and see this passage discussed in the Indian Antiquary for
;
December, 1881.]
No. 68.
SAKETA-JATAKA.
—
"The man thy mind rests on." This story was told by the Master, while at
Aiijanavana, about a certain brahmin. Tradition says that when the Blessed
One with his disciples was entering the city of Saketa, an old brahmin of that
place, who was going out, met him in the gateway. Falling at the Buddha's
feet, and clasping him by the ankles, the old man cried, "Son, is it not the duty
of children to cherish the old age of their parents? [309] Why have you not let
us seeyou all thislongtime '? At last I have seen you ; come, letyour mother
see you too." So saying, he took the Master with him to his house and there
;
the Master sat upon the seat j)repared for him, with his disciples around him.
Then came the brahmin's wife, and she too fell at the feet of the Blessed One,
crying, "My son, where have you been all this time l Is it not the duty of
children to comfort their parents in their old age " Hereon, she called to her
'I
sons and daughters that their brother was come, and made them salute the
Buddha. And in their joy the aged pair shewed great hospitality to their
guests. After his meal, the Master recited to the old people the Sutta concern-
ingold-age1 ; and,whenhehadended, both husband and wife won fruition of the
Second Path. • Then rising up from his seat, the Master went back to Afija-
navana.
Meetingtogether in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren fell to talking aboutthis
thing. It was urged that the brahmin must have been well aware that Suddho-
dana was the father, and Mahamaya the mother, of the Buddha yet none the
less, he and his wife had claimed the Buddha as their own son,— ; and that with
s t a h i e d, Ma " s B t r e e r t ' h s re as n s , en t t h . e a W ge h d at pa c i o r u w l e d re it r a i l g l ht me i a n n cl '? aim H i e n a g ri m n e g a t s he t i h r ei t r al s k o , n. t " he A Ma n s d te s r o
saying, hetold this story ofthe past.
Brethren, in ages past this brahmin was my father in 500 successive
births, my uncle in a like number, and in 500 more my grandfather. And
1 The Jara-sutta of the Sutta-nipata, page 152 of Fausboll's edition for the Piili
Text Society.

No. 69. 167
in 1500 successive births his wife was respectively my mother, my aunt,
and my grandmother. So I was brought up in 1500 births by this
brahmin, and in 1500 by his wife.
And therewithal, having — told of these 3000 birtlis, tlie Master, as
Buddha, recited this Stanza:
The man thy mind rests on, with whom thy heart
Is pleased at first sight,—place thy trust in him.
[310] His lesson euded, the Master shewed the connexion and identified the
Birth by saying, "This brahmin and his wife were the husband and wife in all
those existences, and 1 the child."
[iVote. See also No. 237.]
No. 69.
VISAVANTA-JATAKA.
—
''•Mayshavier This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana about
Sariputta, the Captain of the Faith. Tradition says that in the days when the
Elderusedtoeatmeal-cakes, folkscame to the monastery withaquantityofsuch
cakes for the Brotherhood. After the Brethren had all eaten their fill, much
remained over
;
and thegivers said, "Sirs, take some for those too who are away
in the village."
Just then a youth who was the Elder's co-resident, was away in the village.
F w o a r s h ge i t m ti a ng po v r e t r i y on la w te a ^ s , t t h a i k s en po ; rt b i u o t n , w as as he gi d v i e d n n t o o t t r h e e tu E r l n d , er a . nd W i h t e w n as t f h e i l s t p t o h r a t t io i n t
had been eaten by the Elder, the youth came in. Accordingly, the Elder
explained the case tohim,saying, "Sir, I have eaten the cakes set apart foryou."
"Ah !" was the rejoinder, "we have all of us got a sweet tooth." The Great
Elder was much troubled.
"From this day forward," he exclaimed, "I vow never to eat meal-cakes
again." And fi'om that day forward, so tradition says, the Elder Sariputta never
touched meal-cakes again This abstention became matter of common know-
!
ledge in the Brotherhood, and the Brethren sat talking of it in the Hall of
Truth. Said the Master, "What are you talking of. Brethren, as you sit here V
When they had told him, he said, "Brethren, when Sariputta has once given
anything up, he never goes back to it again, even though his life be at stake."
And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
1 i.e. close on to mid-day, after which the food could not properly be eaten. See
note, page 107.

—
"
168 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
Once on a time, wlieu iJialiinadatta was I'eigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a family of doctors skilled in the cure of snake-
l>ites, and when he grew up, he practised for a livelihood.
Now it fell out that a countryman was bitten by a snake ; and without
delay his relatives quickly fetched the doctor. Said the Bodhisatta,
"Shall I extract the venom with the usual antidotes, or have the snake
caught and make it suck its own poison out of the wound ] " " Have the
snake caught and make it suck the poison out." So he had the snake
caught, and asked the creature, saying " Did you bite this man?" " Yes,
I did," was the answer. [311] "Well then, suck your own poison out of
the wound again." "What 1 Take back the poison I have once shed !
cried the snake ; "I never did, and I never will." Then the doctor made
a tire with wood, and said to the snake, "Either you suck the poison out,
or into the fire you go."
"Even though the flames be my doom, I will not take back the poison
I have once shed," said the snake, and repeated the following stanza:
May shame be on the poison which, once shed.
To save my life, I swallow down again !
More welcome death than life by weakness bought !
With these words, the snake moved towards the fire ! But the doctor
barred its way, and drew out the poison with simples and charms, so that
the man was whole again. Then he unfolded the Commandments to the
snake, and set it free, saying, "Henceforth do harm to none."
—
And the Masterwent on to say, "Brethren, when Sariputta has once parted
with anything, he never takes it back again, even though his life be at stake."
His lesson ended, he shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying,
"Sariputta was thesnake ofthose days, and I the doctor."
No. 70.
KUDDALA-JATAKA.
"The co?ij?<es^"—This story was told by the Master whileat Jetavana, about
the Elder named Cittahattha-Sariputta. He is said to have been ayouth of a
good family in Savatthi ; and one day, on his way home from ploughing, he
turned in to the monastery. Here he received from the bowl ofa certain Elder
sonie damty fare, rich and sweet, which made him think to himself,—"Day and
night I am toilingaway with my hands at divers tasks, yet never do I taste food

—
;'
No. 70. 169
so sweet. I must turn Bn)tlier myself!" vSo he joined the Brotherhood, but
aftersix weeks' zealous application to high thinking, fell underthe dominion of
Lusts and off he went. His belly again proving too much for him, [312] l)ack he
came to join the Brotherhood once more, and studied the Abhidhamma^. In
this way, six times he left and came backagain but when for the seventh time
he became a Brother, he mastered the whole s ; even books of the Abhidhamma,
and by much chanting of the Doctrine of the Brothers won Discernment and
attaine—d to Arahatship. Now his friends among the Brethren scott'ed at him,
saying "Can it be, sir, that Lusts have ceased to spring up within your
heart?"
"Sirs," was the reply, "I have now gotbeyond mundane life henceforth."
He h—aving thus won Arahatship, talk thereof arose in the Hall t)f Truth, as
follows: "Sirs,though all the while he was destined to all thegloriesofArahat-
ship, 3'et six times did Cittaliattha-Sariputta renounce the Brotherhood ; truly,
verywrongis the unconverted state."
Returning to the Hall, the JMaster asked what they were talking about.
Being told, he said, "Brethren, the worldling's heart is light and hard to curb
material things attract and hold it fast ; when once it is so held fast, it cannot
be released in a trice. Excellent is the mastery of such a heart ; oncemastered,
it bringsjoy and happiness :
'Tis good to tame a headstrong heart and frail,
By passion swayed. Once tamed, the heart brings bliss.
Itwasbyreasonofthis headstrong quality oftheheart, however,that, forthe
sake of a pretty spade which they could not bring themselves to throw away, the
wise and good of bygone days six times reverted to the world out of sheer
cupidity but on the seventh occasion they won Insight and subdued their
cupidity." ; And so saying, he told this story ofthepast.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life again as a gardener, and grew up. 'Spade Sage
was his name. With his spade he cleared a patch of ground, and grew
pot-herbs, pumpkins, gourds, cucumbers, and other vegetables, by the sale
of which he made a sorry living. For, save only that one spade, he had
nothing in the world Resolving one day to forsake the world for the
!
religious life, he hid his spade away, and became a recluse. But thoughts
ofthat spade rose in his heart and the passion of greed overcame him, so
that for the sake ofhis blunt spade he reverted to the world. [313] Again
and again this happened six times did he hide the spade and become a
— ;
recluse, only to renounce his vows again. But the seventh time he
bethought him how that blunt spade had caused him again and again to
backslide; and he made up his mind to throw it into a great river before
he became a rechise again. So he carried the spade to the i*iver-side, and,
fearing lest if he saw where it fell, he should come back and fish it out
again, he whirled the spade thrice round his head by the handle and flung
—
1 The third, and latest, ofthePitakas, perhaps compiled from the Nikfiyas of the
Sixtta-pitaka.

—
"
170 The Jataka. Book I.
it with the strength ofan elephant right into mid-stream, shutting his eyes
tight as he—did so. Then loud rang his shout of exultation, a shout like a
lion's roar, "I have conquered ! I have conquered !
Now just at that moment the King of Benares, on his way home from
quelling disorder on the border, had been bathing in that very river, and
was riding along in all his splendour on the back of his elephant, when he
heard the Bodhisatta's shout of triumph. "Here's a man," said the king,
"who is proclaiming that he has conquered. I wonder whom he has
conquered. Go, bring him before me."
So the Bodhisatta was brought before the king, who said to him, "My
good man, I am a conqueror myself ; I have just won a battle and am on
my way home victorious. Tell me whom you have conquered." "Sire,"
said the Bodhisatta, "a thousand, yea, a hundred thousand, such victories
as yours are vain, if you have not the victory over the Lusts within your-
self. It is by conquering greed within myself that I have conquered my
Lusts." And as he spoke, he gazed upon the great river, and by duly
concentrating all his mind upon the idea of water, won Insight. Then by
virtue of his newly-won transcendental powers, he rose in the air, and,
seated there, instructed the King in the Truth in this stanza:
The conquest that by further victories
Must be upheld, or own defeat at last,
Ls vain True conquest lasts for evermore
! !
[314] Even as he listened to the Truth, light shone in on the king's
darkness, and the Lusts of his heai't were quenched his heart was bent
;
on renouncing the world ; then and there the lust for royal dominion
passed away from him. "And where will you go now?" said the king to
the Bodhisatta. "To the Himalayas, sire; there to live the anchorite's
life." "Then I, too, will become an anchorite," said the king ; and he
departed with the Bodhisatta. And with the king there departed also the
— whole army, all the brahmins and householders and all the common folk,
in a word, all the host that was gathered there.
TidingscametoBenares that their king, on hearing the Truth preached
by the Spade Sage, was fain to live the anchorite's life and had gone forth
with all his host. "And what shallwe do here?" cried the folk of Benares.
And thereupon, from out that city which wastwelve leagues about, all the
inhabitants went forth, a train twelve leagues long, with whom the Bodhi-
satta passed to the Himalayas.
Then the throne of Sakka, King of Devas, became hot beneath him
'.
Looking out, he saw that the Spade Sage was engaged upon a Great
^ Onlythemeritsof agood man strugglingwith adversitycould thus appeal to the
mercy-seatoftheArchangel.

No. 70. 171
Renunciation'. Marking the numbers of his following, Indra took thought
how to house them all. A — nd he sent for Vissakamma, the architect ofthe
Devas, and spoke thus: "The Spade Sage is engaged upon a Great
Renunciation, [315] and quarters must be found for him. Go you to the
Himalayas, and thei-e on level ground fashion by divine power a hermit's
demesne thirty leagues long and fifteen broad."
"It shall be done, sire," said Vissakamma. And away lie went, and
did what he was bidden,
(What follows isonly a summary ; the full details will b(; given in the
Hatthipala-jataka", which forms one narrative with this.) Vissakamma
caused a hermitage to arise in the hermit's demesne drove away all the
;
noisy beasts and birds and fairies; and made in each cardinal direction a
path just broad enough for one person to pass along it at a time. This
done, he betook himself to his own abode. The Spade Sage with his host
of people came to the Himalayas and entered the demesne which Indra
had given and took possession of the house and furniture which Vissa-
kamma had created for the hermits. First of all, he renounced the world
himself, and afterwards made the people renounce it. Then he portioned
out the demesne among them. They abandoned alltheirsovereignty, which
rivalled that of Sakka himself; and the whole thirty leagues of the
demesne were filled. By due performance of all the other^ rites that
conduce to Insight, the Spade Sage developed perfect good-will within
himself, and he taught the people how to meditate. Hereby they all
won the Attainments, and assured their entry thereafter into the Brahma-
Realm, whilst all who ministered to them qualified for entry thereafter
into the Realm ofDevas.
"Thus, Brethren," said the Master, "the heart, when passion holds it fast, is
hard to release. When the attributes ofgreed spring up within it, they are hard
to chase away, and even persons so wise and good as the above are thereby
rendered witless." His lesson ended, he preached the Truths, at the close
whereof some won the First, some the Second, and some the Third Path, whilst
others again attained to Arahatship. Further, the blaster shewed the con-
nexion and identified the Birth by saying, "Ananda was the king of those
days, the Buddha's followers were the followers, and I myselfthe Spade Sage."
1 It is only when a future Buddha renounces the world for the religious Hfe, that
his 'going forth' is termed a Great Kenunciation. Of. p. 61 of Vol. i. of FausboU's
textasto Gota
—
ma's'going forth.'
^ No. 509, where, however, no further detailsarevouchsafed.
^ As shewn above, hehad already arrived at Insight through tlie idea ofwater.

172 Tkc Jataka. Book 1.
No. 71.
VAUANA-JATAKA.
—
[;5I(;] ''Learn tinm from him." Tlii.s .story was told hy tlic M;i.stcr while at
•h^tiivaiia, al)out tlio Elder named 'J'i.ssa the Squire's Son. Tradition say.s that
one day tlnrty younggentle)nen ofSavatthi, who were all friends of one another,
took [)erl'unie.s and liower.s and rol>es, and .set out with a large retinue to Jeta-
vana, in order to hear the Master preach. Arrived at Jctavana, they sat awhile
in the several enclosures—in the enclosure of the Iron-wood trees, in the
enclosureof the Sfd-trees, and so forth,- till at evening the Master passed from
his fragrant sweet-smelling piifimied chamlier to the Hall ofTrutii and took his
seat on the gorgeous liuddiia-seat. Then, with their following, these young men
went to the Hall of Trutii, made an oliering of perfunu^s and flowers, bowed
down at his feet those blessed feetthat were — gloriousasfull-hlown lotus-llowers,
and luiro impi'inted on the sole the Wheel! and, taking their seats, listened
to the Truth, 'i'lien the thought came into their minds, "J^et us take the vows,
.so far as we understand the Truth [ireaeheil !>} tlie Master." Accordingly, when
the Jjlessed One left the JIall, they ap[)roaclied him and with duo oheisant-c
asked to he admitted to the lirotheriiood ; and the Master admitted them to the
brotherhood. VVimiing the favour of their teachers and directors they received
full lirotherhood,and after li\eyears' residence with their teachers and dii'ectors,
by wiiich time they had got l)y heai't the two Abstracts, had come to know what
was proper and what was improper, had leai'nt the three moiles of e.\pressing
thanks, and had stitched and dyad robes. At this stage, wisliing toembrace the
ascetic life, they obtained the consent of their teachers and directors, and
ai)proached the blaster. Jiowing before him they took their seats, saying, "Sir,
we are troubled bythe round ofexistence, dismayed by birth, decay, disease, and
dcatii give us a theme, by thinkingon which we may get free from the elements
whicli ; occasion existence." The Master tin-ned over in his mind the eight and
thirty themes of thought, and therefrom selected a suitable one, which he
expounded to them. And then, after getting tiieir theme from the IVIaster, they
bowed and witli a ceremonious farewell i)assed from his presence to their cells,
and after gazing on their teachcns and directors went forth with bowl and rolx;
tocml)race tlici asietii'. life.
Now amongst them was a Brother named the Elder Tissa the Squire's Son,
a weak and irresolute man, a slave to the pleasures of tlie taste. Thought he to
himself, "1 shall never be able to live in the forest, to strive with .strenuous
effort, and subsist on doles offood. What is the gooil ofmy going? I will turn
back." And so he gave up, and afteraccompanying those Jirothers some way he
turned back. As to the other Brothers, they came in the ccnirse of theiralms-
pilgrimage tlir<nigh Ko.sala to a certain border-village, [-517] hard by which in a
wooded spot tiiey kept the Jlainy-.season, and by three months' .striving and
wrestling got the germ of Discernment and won Arahat.ship, making the earth
shout for joy. At the end of the Itainy-season, after celebrating the Bavarana
festival, they .set out thence to announce to the Ma.stcr the attainments they
had won, and, coming in due cour.se to Jetavana, laid aside their bowls and
robes, paid a visit to their teachers and directors, and, being an.xious to sec the
JMe.ssed One, went to him and with due obei.sancc took their seats. The Master
greeted them kindly and they aimounced to the Bl('s.sed One the attainments
they had won, receiving praise froni him. Hearing the Master speaking in their
praise, the Elder Tis,sa the Squire's Son was lillcd with a desire to live the life
of a recluse all by himself. I^ikewi.sc, those other Jirothers asked and received
the Master's pernnssion to return to dwell in that self-same spot in the forest.
And with due obeisance they went to theircells.

No. 71. 173
Now tho Elder Ti.s.sa the Squire's Son that very iii^ht was inflated with a
yearninf^ to })egiii liis austerities at once, and wliilst ])rai;tising witli excessive
zeal and ardour the methods of a rechise and sleeping in an uprij^dit posture hy
the side of his plaidc-hed, soon after tlie nii(hlle watch of the nigiit, round lie
turned and down he fell, hi-eakin^' his thigh-hone; and severe ])ains set in, so
that the oth(!r Brothers had to luu'se him and were dcsharred from J^oing.
Accordint^ly, wIkmi they a,])peai'ed at the hour for waitinj^ on tlie liuddha, he
asked them whether they h.id not yesterday askt^l his leave to start to-day.
"Yes, sir, we did; hut our fi-iend the Klder Tissa the S(piii'e's Son, while
rehearsing the metiiods of a nn-luse with gi'eat vigour but out ofsc^ason, (h'opjied
oft' to slee]) and fell over, breaking his thigh ; and that is why ourdeparture has
been thwarted." "This is not tlie first time, Brethren," said the Mastc^r, "that
this man's backsliding has caused him to strive with unseasonable zeal, and
thereby to delay your depai'ture ; he delaycil your d(!parture in the past also."
And hereupon, at their retpiest, ho told tliis stoiy ofthe past.
Onceona timeatTakkasila in the king<lom ofCJandliara tlui iJodhisatta
was a teacher of world-wide fame, witli 500 young bralnnins as pupils.
One day thes(! pu))ils set out for thi^ forest to gatluM' firewood for tluiir
master, and busied themselves in gathering sticks. Amongst tlieni was a
lazy fellow who canK^ on a huge forest tree, which he imagined to be dry
and rotten. So he thought that lu; could safely indulge in a nap fiist, and
at the last moment climb up [31H] and break some branches off to carry
home. Accordingly, lie spread out his outer robe and fell asl(;ep, snoring
loudly. All the otluir young brahmins were on their way home; with their
wood tied up in faggots, when th(!y came upon the slec^pei-. Jfaving
kicked him in the back till he awokt;, they left him and went their way.
He sprang to his feet, and rubbed his eyes for a tini(!. Then, still half
asleep, lu; Ijegan to climlt the tree. But one Itranch, which he was
tugging at, snapped off short; and, as it sprang uj), the end struck him in
the ey(!. Clapping nne hand ovc^r his wounded eye, Ik; gathered gi'een
boughs with th'' other. Then climbing down, he coided his faggot, and
after hurrying away honx! with it, flung his green wood on tin; top of tln^
others' faggots.
That same day it chanced that a country family invited tlu^ master to
visit them on the niori-ow, in ordf^r that they might givf^ him a brahmin-
feast. And so th(i mastf^rcalled his ])upils together,and, t(^lling tlnsm of th(i
journey they would have to mak(! to the village on tluf morrow, said tlu^y
could not go fasting. "So have some rice-gruel made early in tlui
morning," said he ; "and eat it bcifore starting. There you will have food
given you for yourselves and a portion for me. Bring it all honu; with
you."
Ho they got up early next morning and i-oused a maid to get them
their breakfast nsady b(rtimes. And offshe went for wood to light tin; fir((.
The green wood lay on the to[) of the stack, and she laid her fire with it.
And she blew and blew, hut could not get her tire to burn, and at last the

: ;
174 The Jataka. Book I.
sun «ot up. "It's broad daylight now," said they, "and it's too late to
start." And they went offto their master.
"What, not yet on your way, my sons1 " said he. " No, sir ; we have
not started." "Why, pray ?" "Because that lazy so-and-so, when he
went wood-gathering with us, lay down to sleep under a forest-tree; and,
to make up for lost time, he climbed up the tree in such a hurry that he
hurt his eye and brought home a lot ofgreen wood, which he threw on the
top of our faggots. So, when the maid who was to cook our rice-gruel
went to the stack, she took his wood, thinking it would of course be dry
and no fire could she light before the sun was up. And this is what
stopped our going."
Hearing what the young brahmin had done, the master exclaimed that
a fool's doings had caused all the mischief, and repeated this stanza
[319] Learn thou from him who tore green branches down,
That tasks deferred are wrought in tears at last.
Such was the Bodhisatta's comment on the matter to hispupils ; and at
the close ofa life of charity and other good works he passed away to fare
accoi'dina: to his deserts.
Said the Master, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that this man has
thwarted you ; he did the like in the past also." His lesson ended, he shewed
the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "The Brotherwho has broken
his thigh was the yomig bi-ahmin of those days who hiu-t his eye ; the Buddha's
followers were the rest of the young brahmins ; and I myself was the brahmin
their master."
No. 72.
SiLAVANAGA-JATAKA.
—
^^Ingratitude lacks more.'" This story was told by the Master while at the
Bamboo-gi-ove about Devadatta. The Brethren sat in the Hall ofTruth, saying,
"Sirs, Devadatta is an ingrate and does not recognisethe virtues of the Blessed
One." Returning to the Hall, the Masterasked what topic theywerediscussing,
and was told. "This is not the first time, Brethren,^' said he, "that Devadatta
h n a e s ver pr k o n ve o d wn an my ing v r i a r t t e ue ; s. h " e w A a n s d ju s s o t s t a h y e ing s , am a e t t i h n ei b r y r g e o q n u e es d t ay h s e t a o l l so d , th a i n s d st h o e ry ha o s f
the past.

;
No. 72. 175
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was conceived by an elephant in the Himalayas. When born,
he was white all over, like a mighty mass of silver. Like diamond balls
were his eyes, like a manifestation of the five brightnesses'; red was his
mouth, like scarlet cloth; like silver flecked with red gold was his trunk
and his four feet were as if polished with lac. Thus his person, adorned
withthe tenperfections, was ofconsunirnate beauty. When he grew up, all
the elephants of the Himalayas in a body [320] followed him as their
leader. Whilst he was dwelling in the Himalayas with a following of
80,000 elephants, he became aware that there was sin in the herd. So,
detaching himselffrom the rest, he dwelt in solitude in the forest, and the
goodness of his life won him the name of Grood King Elephant.
Now a forester of Benares came to the Himalayas, and made his way
into that forest in quest of the implements of his craft. Losing his
bearings and his way, he roamed to and fro, stretching out his arms in
despair and weeping, with the fear of death before his eyes. Hearing the
man's cries, the Bodhisatta was moved with compassion and resolved to
help him in his need. So he approached the man. But at sight of the
elephant, offran the forester in great terror^. Seeing him run away, the
Bodhisatta stood still, and this brought the man to a standstill too. Then
the Bodhisatta again advanced, and again the forester ran away, halting
once more when the Bodhisatta halted. Hereupon the truth dawned on
the man that the elephant stood still when he himself ran, and only
advanced when he himself was standing still. Consequently he concluded
that the creature could not mean to hurt, but to help him. So he valiantly
stood his ground this time. And the Bodhisatta drew near and said,
" Why, friend man, are you wandering about here lamentiugl"
"My lord," replied the forester, "I have lost my bearings and my way,
and fear to perish."
Then the elephant brought the man to his own dwelling, and there
entertained him for some days, regaling him with fruits of every kind.
Then, saying, "Fear not, friend man, I will bring you back to the haunts
of men," the elephant seated the foi*ester on his back and brought him to
where men dwelt. But the ingrate thought to himself, that, ifquestioned,
he ought to be able to reveal everything. So, as he travelled along on the
elephant's back, he noted the landmarks of tree and hill. At last the
elephant brought him out of the forest and set him down on the high I'oad
to Benares, saying, "There lies your road, friend man : Tell no man,
whether you are questioned or not, of the place of my abode." And with
this leave-taking, the Bodhisatta made his way back to his own abode.
Arrived at Benares, the man came, in the course of his walks through
^ This isapplied to aBodhisatta'seyesin Jat. vol. iii. 344, 9.
^ A solitary elephant, or 'rogue,'being dangerous tomeet.

\
176 The Jataka. Book I.
the city, to the ivory-workers' bazaar, where he saw ivory being worked
into divers forms and shapes. And he asked the craftsmen [321] whether
they would give anything for the tusk ofa living elephant.
"What makes you ask such a question ? " was the reply, "A living
elephant'.s tusk is worth a great deal more than a dead one's."
"Oh, then, I'll bring you some ivory," said he, and off he set for
the Bodhisatta's dwelling, with provisions for the journey, and with a
sharp saw. Being asked what had brought him back, he whined out that
he was in so sorry and wretched a plight that he could not make a living
anyhow. Wherefore, he had come to ask for a bit of the kind elephant's
tusk to sell for a living ! "Certainly ; I will give you a whole tusk,"
said the Bodhisatta, "if you have a bit of a saw to cut it off with."
"Oh, I brought a saw with me, sir." "Then saw my tusks off, and take
them away with you," said the Bodhisatta. And he bowed his knees till
he was couched upon the earth like an ox. Then the forester sawed off
both of the Bodhisatta's chief tusks ! When they were off, the Bodhisatta
took them in his trunk and thus addressed the man, "Think not, friend
man, that it is because I value not nor prize these tusks that I give them
to you. But a thousand times, a hundred-thousand times, dearer to rae
are the tusks of omniscience which can ciimprehend all things. And
therefore may my gift of these to you bring me omniscience." With these
words, he gave the pair of tusks to the forester as the price of omniscience.
And the man took them off, and sold them. And when he had spent
the money, back he came to the Bodhisatta, saying that the two tusks had
only brought him enough to pay his old debts, and begging for the rest of
the Bodhisatta's ivory. The Bodhisatta consented, and gave up the rest
of his ivory after having it cut as before. And the forester went away
and sold this also. Returning again, he said, "It's no use, my lord I
;
can't make a living anyhow. So give me the stumps of your tusks."
"So be it," answered the Bodhisatta and he lay down as before.
;
Then that vile wretch, trampling upon the trunk of the Bodhisatta, that
sacred trunk which was like corded silver, and clambering upon the future
—
Buddha's temples, which were as the snowy crestofMount Kelasa, kicked
at the roots ofthe tusks till he had cleared the flesh away. Then he sawed
out the stumps and went his way. But scarce had the wretch passed out
of the sight of the Bodhisatta, when the solid earth, inconceivable in its
vast extent, [322] which can support the mighty weight of Mount Sineru
and its encircling peaks, with all the world's unsavoury filth and ordure,
—
now burst asunder in a yawning chasm, as though unable to bear the
burthen ofall that wickedness And straightway flames from nethermost
!
Hell enveloped the ingrate, wrapping him round as iii a shroud ofdoom,
and bore him away. And as the wretch was swallowed u|i in the bowels
ofthe earth, the Tree-fairy that dwelt in that forest made the region echo

No. 73. 177
—
with these words : "Not even the gift of worldwide empire can satisfy
the thankless and ungrateful " And in the following stanza the Fairy
— !
taught the Truth :
Ingratitude lacks more, the more it gets;
Not all the world can glut its appetite.
With such teachings did the Tree-fairy make that forest re-echo. As
for the Bodhisatta, he lived out his life, passing away at last to fare
according to his deserts.
Said the Master, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that Devadatta has
proved an ingrate; he wasjust the same in the past also." His lesson ended, he
identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta was the ungrateful man of those
days, Sariputta the Tree-fairy, and I myselfGood King Elephant."
[JVote. Cf Milinda-panho 202, 29.]
No. 73.
SACCAMKIRA-JATAKA.
—
''They knexv the icorld." This story was told by the Master while at the
Bamboo-grove, aboutgoing about to kill. For, seated in the Hall of Truth, the
Brotherhood was talking of Devadatta's wickedness, saying, "Sirs, Devadatta
has no knowledge of the Master's excellence ; he actually goes about to kill
him!" Here the Master entered the Hall and asked what they were discussing.
[323] Being told, he said, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that Devadatta
has gone about to kill me; he didjust the same in bygone days also." And so
saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares. He had a son
named Prince Wicked. Fierce and cruel was he, like a scotched snake
;
he spoke to nobody without abuse or blows. Like grit in the eye was this
prince to all folk both witliin and without the palace, or like a ravening
—
ogre, so dreaded and fell was he.
One day, wishing to disport himselfin the river, he went with a large
retinue to the water side. And a great storm came on, and utter darkness
set in. "Hi there ! " cried he to his servants ; "take me into mid-stream,
12
C. J.
I

178 Tlie Jataka. Book I.
bathe me there, and then bring me back again." So they took him into
mid-stream and there took counsel together, saying, "What will the king
doto us? Let US kill this wicked wretch here and now ! So in you go,
you pest!" they cried, as they flung him into the water. When they
made their way ashore, they were asked where the prince was, and replied,
"We don't see him ; finding the storm come on, he must have come out of
the river and gone home ahead of us."
The courtiers went into the king's presence, and the king asked where
his son was. "We do not know, sire," said they "a storm came on, and
;
we came away in the belief that he must have gone on ahead." At once
the king had the gates thiown open ; down to the riverside he went and
bade diligent search be made up and down for the missing prince. But
no trace ofhim could be found. For, in the darkness ofthe storm, he had
been swept away by the current, and, coming across a tree-trunk, had
climbed on to it, and so floated down stream, crying lustily in the agony
of his fear ofdrowning.
Now there had been a rich merchant living in those days at Benares,
who had died, leaving forty crores buried in the banks of that same river.
And because of his craving for riches, he was reborn as a snake at the
spot under which lay his dear treasux"e. And also in the selfsame spot
another man had hidden thirty crores, and because of his craving for
riches was re-born as a rat at the same spot. In rushed the water into
their dwelling-place ; and the two creatures, escaping by the way by which
the water rushed in, were making their way athwart the stream, when
they chanced upon the ti^ee-trunk to which the prince was clinging. [324]
The snake climbed up at one end, and the rat at the other ; and so both
got a footing with the prince on the trunk.
Also there grew on the river's bank a Silk-cotton tree, in which lived
a young parrot ; and this tree, being uprooted by the swollen waters, fell
into the river. The heavy rain beat down the parrot when it tried to fly,
and it alighted iu its fall upon this same tree-trunk. And so there were
now these four floating down stream together upon the tree.
Now the Bodhisatta had been re-born in those days as a brahmin in
the North-West country. Renouncing the world for the hermit's life on
reaching manhood, he had built himself a hermitage by a bend of the
river; and there he was now living. As he was pacing to and fro, at
midnight, he heard the loud cries of the prince, and thought thus within
:—
himself "This fellow-creature must not perish thus before the eyes of
so merciful and compassionate a hermit as I am. I will rescue him from
the water, and save his life." So he shouted cheerily, "Be not afraid! Be
not afraid !" and plunging across stream, seized hold ofthe tree byoneend,
and, being as strong as an elephant, drew it in to the bank with one long
pull, and set the prince safe and sound upon the shore. Then becoming

;
No. 73. 179
aware of the snake and the rat and the parrot, he carried them to his
hermitage, and there lighting a fire, warmed the animals first, as being
the weaker, and afterwards the prince. This done, he brought fruits of
various kinds and set them before his guests, looking after the animals
first and the prince afterwards. This enraged the young prince, who said
within himself, "This rascally hei'mit pays no respect to my royal birth,
but actually gives brute beasts precedence over me." And he conceived
hatred against the Bodhisatta
A !
few days later, when all four had recovered their strength and the
waters had subsided, the snake bade farewell to the hermit with these
words, "Father, you have done me a great service. I am not poor, for I
have forty crores of gold hidden at a certain spot. Should you ever
want money, all my hoard shall be yours. You have only to come to the
spot and call 'Snake.'" Next the rat took his leave with a like promise
to the hermit as to his treasure, bidding the hermit come and call out
'Rat.' [325]Thentheparrot badefarewell,saying, "Father, silverandgold
have I none ; but should you ever want for choice I'ice, come to where
I dwell and call out 'Parrot;' and I with the aid of my kinsfolk will give
you many waggon-loarls of rice." Last came the prince. His heart was
filled with base ingratitude and with a determination to put his benefactor
to death, if the Bodhisatta should come to visit hii7i. But, concealing his
intent, he said, "Come, father, to me when I am king, and I will bestow
on you the Four Requisites." So saying, he took his departure, and not
long after succeeded to the throne.
The desire came on the Bodhisatta to put their professions to the test
and first of all he went to the snake and standing hard by its abode, called
out 'Snake.' At the word the snake darted forth and with every mark
of respect said, "Father, in this place there are forty crores in gold. Dig
them up and take them all." "It is well," said the Bodhisatta; "when I
need them, I will not forget." Then bidding adieu to the snake, he went
on to where the rat lived, and called out 'Rat.' And the rat did as the
snake had done. Going next to the parrot, and calling out 'Parrot,' the
bii-d at once flew down at his call from the tree-top, and respectfully asked
whether it was the Bodhisatta's wish that he with the aid of his kinsfolk
should gather paddy for the Bodhisatta from the region round the Hima-
layas. The Bodhisattadismissed theparrotalso with apromise that, if need
arose, he would not forget the bird's offer. Last of all, being minded to
test the king in his turn, the Bodhisatta came to the royal pleasaunce, and
on the day after his arrival made his way, carefully dressed, into the city
on his round for alms. Just at that moment, the ungrateful king, seated
in all his royal splendour on his elephant of state, was passing in solemn
procession round the city followed by a vast retinue. Seeing the Bodhi-
satta from afar, he thought to himself, "Here's that rascally hermit come
12—2

— —
180 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
to quarter himself and his appetite on me. I must have his head off
before he can publish to the world the service he rendered me." With
this intent, he signed to his attendants, and, on their asking what was
his pleasure, said, "Methinks yonder rascally hermit is here to importune
me. See that the pest does not come near my person, but seize and bind
him; [326] flog him at every street-corner; and then march him out of
the city, chop off his head at the place of execution, and impale his
body on a stake."
Obedient to their king's command, the attendants laid the innocent
Great Being in bonds and flogged him at every street-corner on the way
to the place of execution. But all their floggings failed to move the
Bodhisatta or to wring from him any cry of "Oh, my mother and father !"
All he did was to repeat this Stanza :
They knew the world, who framed this proverb true
'A log pays better salvage than some men.'
These lines he repeated wherever he was flogged, till at last the wise
among the bystanders asked the hermit what service he had rendered
to their king. Then the Bodhisatta told the whole story, ending with
—
the words, "So it comes to pass that by rescuing him from the torrent I
brought all this woe upon myself. And when I bethink me how I have
left unheeded the words of the wise of old, I exclaim as you have heard."
Filled with indignation at the recital, the nobles and brahmins and all
classes with one accord cried out, "This ungrateful king does not recognise
even the goodness of this good man who saved his majesty's life. How
can we have any profit from this king] Seize the tyrant !" And in
their anger they rushed upon the king from every side, and slew him
I
there and then, as he rode on his elephant, with arrows and javelins and
stones and clubs and any weapons that came to hand. The corpse they
dragged by the heels to a ditch and flung it in. Then they anointed the
Bodhisatta king and set him to rule over them.
As he was ruling in righteousness, one day[327]thedesirecameon him
again to try the snake and the rat and the parrot; and followed by a
large retinue, he came to where the snake dwelt. At the call of 'Snake,'
out came the snake from his hole and with every mark of respect said,
"Here, my lord, is your treasure ; take it." Then the king delivered the
forty crores of gold to his attendants, and proceeding to where the rat
dwelt, called, 'Rat.' Out came the rat, and saluted the king, and gave up
its thirty crores. Placing this treasure too in the hands of his attendants,
the king went on to where the parrot dwelt, and called 'Parrot.' And in
like manner the bird came, and bowing down at the king's feet asked
whether it should collect rice for his majesty, "We will not trouble you,"
said the king, "till rice is needed. Now let us be going." So with the

No. 74. 181
seventy crores of gold, and with the rat, the snake, and the parrot as well,
the kingjourneyed back to the city. Here, in a noble palace, to the state-
story of which he mounted, he caused the treasure to be lodged and
guarded • he had a golden tube made for the snake to dwell in, a crystal
casket to house the rat, and a cage of gold for the parrot. Every day too
by the king's command food was served to the three creatures in vessels of
—
gold, sweet parched-corn for the parrot and snake, and scented rice for
the rat. And the king abounded in charity and all good works. Thus in
harmony and goodwill one with another, these four lived their lives; and
when their end came, they passed away to fare according to their deserts.
Said the Master, "This is not the first time, Brethren, that Devadatta has
gone about to kill me ; he did the like in the past also." His lesson ended, he
shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta was King
Wickedinthosedays,Siiriputtathesnake, Moggallanatherat,Ananda theparrot,
and I myselfthe righteous King who won a kingdom."
No. 74.
RUKKHADHAMMA-JATAKA.
—
" United,forest-like." This story was told by the Masterwhile at Jetavana,
about a quarrel concerning water which had brought woe upon his kinsfolk.
Knowing of this, he passed through the air, sat cross-legged above the river
Rohinl, and emitted rays of darkness, startling his kinsfolk. Then descending
from mid-air, he seated himself on the river-bank and told this story with refer-
ence to that quarrel. (Only a summary is given here; the full details will be
related in the Kunala-jataka'.) But on this occasion the Master addressed his
kinsfolk, [.328] saying, "It is meet, sire, that kinsfolk should dwell together in
concord and unity. For, when kinsfolk are at one, enemies find no opportunity.
Not to speak of human beings, even sense-lacking trees ought to stand together.
For in bygone days in the Himalayas a tempest struck a Sill-forest yet,
because thetrees, shrubs, bushes, and creepers of that forest were interlace ; d one
with another, the tempest could not overthrow even a single tree but passed
harmlessly over their heads. But alone in a courtyard stood a mightytree ; and
though it had many stems and branches, yet, because it was not miited with
other trees, the tempest uprooted it and laid it low. Wherefore, it is meet that
you too should dwell together in concord and unity." And so saying, at their
request he told this story ofthe past.
1 No. 536.

—
X82 The Jataka. Book I.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
6rst King Vessavana^ died, and Sakka sent a new king to reign in his
stead. After the change, the new King Vessavana sent word to all trees
and shrubs and bushes and plants, bidding the tree-fairies each choose out
the abode that liked them best. In those days the Bodhisatta had come
to life as a tree-fiiiry in a Sal-forest in the Himalayas. His advice to his
kinsfolk in choosing their habitations was to shun trees that stood alone
in the open, and to take up their abodes all round the abode which he
had cliosen in that Sal-forest. Hereon the wise tree-fairies, following the
Bodliisatta's advic—e, took up their quarters round his tree. But the
foolish ones said, "Why should we dwell in the forest? let us rather
seek out the haunts of men, and take uj) our abodes outside villages,
towns, or capital cities. For fairies who dwell in such places receive
the richest offerings and the greatest worship." So they departed to the
haunts of men, and took up their abode in certain giant trees which grew
in an open space.
Now it fell out upon a day that a mighty tempest swept over the
country. Naught did it avail the solitary trees that years had rooted
them deep in the soil and that they were the mightiest trees that grew.
Their brandies snai)ped; their stems were broken ; and they themselves
were uprooted and flung to earth by the tempest. But when it broke on
the Sal-forest of interlacing trees, its fury was in vain ; for, attack where
it might, not a tree could it overthrow.
The forlorn fairies whose dwellings were destroyed, took their children
in their arms and journeyed to the Himalayas. There they told their
sorrows to the fairies of the Sal-forest, [329] who in turn told the Bodhi-
satta of their sad return. "It was because they hearkened not to the
words of wisdom, that they have been brought to this," said he ; and he
unfolded the truth in this stanza :
T Un h i e te s d t , or f m ore o s ' t- e l r i t k h e r , ow s s ho t u h l e d s k o i l n i s t f a o r l y k tr s e t e a . nd ; •
So spake the Bodhisatta ; and when his life was spent, he passed away
to fare according to his deserts.
ki.ns ^ f J o ^ l ^ k a ^ t ^® an M y as r t a e te r s w h e o n u t ld o b n e u t n o it s e a d y , , a " nd Th l u o s v , ing si l r y e, dw r e e l f l le t ct og h et o h w er m i e n e c t on i c t o i r s d t a h n a d t
unity." Hislessonended,theMasteridentifiedtheBirthbysaying,"TheBuddha's
followerswere thefairies ofthosedays, and I myselfthe wise fairy."
^ A name ofKuvera.
I

;
No. 75. 183
No. 75.
MACCHA-JATAKA.
—
"Pajjunna, thunder!" This story the Master told while at Jetavana, about
the rain he caused to fall. For in those days, so it is said, there fell no rain in
Kosala ; the crops withered ; and everywhere the ponds, tanks, and lakes dried
up. Even the pool ofJetavana by the embattled gateway of Jetavanagave out
and the fish and tortoises buried themselves in the mud. Then came the crows
and hawks with their lance-like beaks, and busily picked them out writliing and
wriggling, and devoured them.
As he marked how the tishes and the tortoises were bei—ng destroyed, the
Master's heart was moved with compassion, and he exclaimed, "This day [330]
must I cause rain to fall." So, when the night grew day, after attending to his
bodily needs, he waited till it was the proper hour to go the round in quest of
alms, and then, girt round by a host of the Brethren, and perfect with the
perfection of a Buddha, he went into Savatthi for alms. On his way back to the
monastery in the afternoon from his round foralms inSavatthi, he stopped upon
the steps—leading down to the tank of Jetavana, and thus addressed the Elder
Ananda: "Bring me a bathing-dress, Ananda for I would bathe in the tank of
;
Jetavana." "But surely, sir," replied the Elder, ''the water is all dried up, and
only mud is left." "Great is a Buddha's power, Ananda. Go, bring me the
bathing-dress," said the Master. So the Elder went and bi'ought the bathing-
dress, which the Master donned, using one end to go round his waist, and
covering his body up—with the other. So clad, he took his stand upon the tank-
steps, and e.\claimed, "I would fain bathe in the tank ofJetavana."
That instant the yellow-stone throne of Sakka grew hot beneath him, and he
sought to discover the cause, llealising what was the matter, he summoned the
King ofthe Storm-Clouds, and said, "The Master is standing on the steps ofthe
tank of Jetavana, and wishes to bathe. Make haste and pour down rain in a
single toiTent over all the kingdom of Kosala." Obedient to Sakka's command,
the King of the Storm-Clouds clad himself in one cloud as an under garment,
and another cloud as an outer garment, and chaunting the rain-songi, he darted
forth eastward. And lo he appeared in the east as a cloud of the bigness of a
!
threshing-floor, which grew and grew till it was as big as a hundred, as a
thousand, threshing-floors; and he thundered and lightened, and bending down
his face and mouth deluged all Kosala with torrents of rain. Unbroken was the
downpour, quickly filling the tank of Jetavana, and stopping only when the
water was level with the topmost step. Then the Master bathed in the tank,
and coming up out of the water donned his two orange-coloured cloths and his
girdle, adjusting his Buddha-robe around him so as to leave one shoulder bare.
In this guise he set forth, surrounded by the Brethren, and passed into his
Perfumed Chamber, fragrant with sweet-smelling flowers. Here on the Buddha-
seat he sate, and when the Brethren had performed their duties, he rose and
exhorted the Brotherhood from the jewelled steps of his throne, and dismissed
them from his presence. Passing now within his own sweet-smelling odorous
chamber, he stretched himself, lion-like, upon hisright side.
At even, the Brethren gathered together in the Hall of Truth, and dwelt on
the forbearance and loving-kindness of the Master. "When the crops were
withering, when the pools were drying up, and the fishes and tortoises were in
grievousplight, then did he in his compassion come forth asasaviour. Donning
a bathing-dress, he stood on the steps of the tank of Jetavana, and in a little
1 In the J. E. A. S. (New Series) 12, 286, is given aMegha-sutra.

—
a
184 The Jataha. Book I.
space made the rain to pour down from the heavens till it seemed like to over-
whelmallKosalawithitstorrents. Andbythetimehereturnedtothe Monastery,
he had freed all alike from their tribulations both ofmind and body."
[331] So rantheir talkwhenthe Master came forth from his Perfumed Cham-
berinto the Hall ofTruth,and asked whatwas their theme ofconversation ; and
they told him. "This is not the first time. Brethren," said the Master, "that
the Blessed One has made the rain to fall in the hour of general need. He did
thelike when born into the brute-creation, in the days when he was King of the
Fish." Andsosaying, he told this story ofthe past:
Once on a time, in this self-same kingdom of Kosala and at Savatthi
—
too, there was a pond where the tank of Jetavana now is, a pond fenced
in by a tangle of climbing plants. Therein dwelt the Bodhisatta, who
had come to life as a fish in those days. And, then as now, there was a
drought in the land ; the crops withered ; water gave out in tank and
pool ; and the fishes and tortoises buried themselves in the mud. Like-
wise, when the fishes and tortoises of this pond had hidden themselves in
its mud, the crows and other birds, flocking to the spot, picked them out
with their beaks and devoured them. Seeing the fate of his kinsfolk, and
knowing that none but he could save them in their hour of need, the
Bodhisatta resolved to make a solemn Profession of Goodness, and by its
efficacy to make rain fall from the heavens so as to save his kinsfolk from
—
certain death. So, parting asunder the black mud, he came forth,
mighty fish, blackened with mud as a casket of the finest sandal-wood
which has been smeared with collyrium. Opening his eyes which w^ere as
washen rubies, a—nd looking up to the heavens he thus bespoke Pajjunna,
King of Devas, "My heart is heavy within me for my kinsfolk's sake,
mygood Pajjunna. How comes it, pray, that, when I who am righteous am
distressed for my kinsfolk, you send no rain from heaven? For I, though
born where it is customary to prey on one's kinsfolk, have never from my
youth up devoured any fish, even of the size of a grain of rice; nor have
I ever robbed a single living creature of its life. By the truth of this my
Protestation, I call upon you to send rain and succour my kinsfolk."
Therewithal, he called to Pajjunna, King of Devas, as a master might
call to a servant, in this stanza : — [332]
Pajjunna, thunder ! Baflae, thwart, the crow !
Breed sorrow's pangs in him ; ease me of woe !
In such wise, as a master might call to a servant, did the Bodhisatta
call to Pajjunna, thereby causing heavy rains to fall and relieving
numbers from the fear of death. And when his life closed, he passed
away to fare according to his deserts.

"
No. 76. 185
"So this is not the first time, Brethren," said the Master, "that the Blessed
Onehas caused the rain to fall. He did the like in bygone days, when he was a
fish." His lesson ended, he identified the Birth by saying, "The Buddha's
disciples were the fishes ofthose days, Ananda was Pajjunna, KingofDevas,and
I myselfthe King ofthe Fish."
[Note. Cf. Cixriya-pitaka (P.T.S. edition) page 99.]
No. 76.
ASAMKIYA-JATAKA.
—
"TTie village breeds nofearin me." This story was told bythe Master while
atJetavaua, abouta lay-brother who lived at Savatthi. Tradition says that this
man, who had entered the Paths and was an earnest believer, was once journey-
ing along on some business or other in the company of a leader of a caravan in
;
the jungle the carts were iniyoked and a laager was constructed and the good
man began to pace up and down at the foot of a certain tre ; e hard by the
leader.
Now five hundred robbers, who had watched their time, had surrounded the
spot, armed with bows, clubs, and other weapons, with the object of looting the
encampment. [333] Still unceasingly that lay-brother paced to and fro. "Surely
that must be their sentry," said the robbers when they noticed him ; "we will
wait till he is asleep and then loot them." So, being unable to surprise the
cam — p, they stopped where they were. Still that lay-brother kept pacing to and
fro, all through the first watch, all through the middle watch, and all through
the last watch of the night. When day dawned, the robbers, who had never had
their chance, threw down the stones and clubs which they had brought, and
bolted.
His business done, that lay-brother came back to Savatthi, and, approaching
the Master, asked him thisquestion, "In guarding themselves. Sir,do men prove
guardians ofothers1
"Yes, lay-brother. In guarding himself a man guards others in guarding
;
others, he guards himself."
"Oh, how well-said, sir, is this utterance of the Blessed One ! When I was
joiu-neying with a caravan-leader, I resolved to guard myself by pacing to and
fro at the foot ofa tree, and by so doing I guarded the whole caravan."
Said the Master, "Lay-brother,in bygone days too thewise and good guarded
others whilstguarding themselves." And, so saying, at the lay-brother's rec^uest
he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as a brahmin. Arriving at yeai'S of discretion,
he became aware of the evils that spring from Lusts, and so forsook the

—
;
186 The Jdtaka. Book I.
world to live as a recluse in the country round the Himalayas. Need of
salt and vinegar having led him to make a pilgrimage for alms through
the countryside, he travelled in the course of his wanderings with a
merchant's caravan. When the caravan halted at a certain spot in the
forest, he paced to and fro at the foot of a tree, hard by the caravan,
enjoying the bliss ofInsight.
Now after supper five hundred robbers surrounded the laager to
plunder it; but, noticing the ascetic, they halted, saying, "If he sees us,
he'll give the alarm ; wait till he drops off to sleep, and then we'll plunder
them." But all through the livelong night the ascetic continued to
pace up and down ; and never a chance did the robbers get ! S—o they
flung away their sticks and stones and shouted to the caravan-folk ; "Hi,
there ! you of the caravan ! If it hadn't been for that ascetic walkingabout
under the tree, we'd have plundered the lot of you. Mind and fete him
tomorrow!" And so saying, they made off. When the night gave place to
light, thepeople saw the clubs and stoneswhich the robbers had cast away,
[334] and came in fear and treml>liug to ask the Bodhisattawithrespectful
salutation whether he had seen the robbers. "Oh, yes, I did, sirs," he
replied. "And were you not alarmed or afraid at the sight of so many
robbers1" "No," said the Bodhisatta; "the sight of robbers causes what
is known as fear only to the rich. As for me,—I am penniless; why
should I be afraid 1 Whether I dwell in village or in forest, I never have
any fear or dread." And thei-ewithal, to teach them the Truth, he
repeated this stanza;
The village breeds no fear in me
No forests me dismay.
I've won by love and charity
Salvation's perfect way.
When the Bodhisatta had thus taught the Truth in this stanza to the
people of the caravan, peace filled their hearts, and they shewed him
honourand veneration. All hislifelonghe developed the Four Excellences,
and then was re-born into the Brahma Realm.
His lesson ended, the Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth
by saying, "The Buddha's followers were the caravan-folk of those days, and I
theascetic."

No. 77. 187
No. 77.
MAHASUPINA-JATAKA.
—
''Bullsfirst, andtrees." This story was told by the Master whileat Jetavana
about sixteen wonderful dreams. For in the last watch of one night (so tra-
dition says) the King of Kosala, who had been asleep all the night, dreamed
sixteen great dreams, [335] and woke up in great fright and alarm as to what
they might portend for him. So strong was the fear of death upon him that he
could not stir, but lay there huddled up on his bed. Now, when the night grew
light, his brahmins and chaplains came to him and with due obeisance asked
whether his majesty had slept well.
"How could I sleep well, my directors?" answered the king. "Forjust at
daybreak I dreamed sixteen wonderful dreams, and I have been in terror ever
sinc " e W!e T s e h l a l ll me b , e m ab y le di t r o e j c u t d or g s e , , w o h n a h t ea it ri a n ll g m t e h a e n m s . . " "
Then the king told them his dreams, and asked what those visions would
entail upon him.
The brahmins fell a-wringing their hands! "Why wring your hands,
brahmins?" asked the king. "Because, sire, these are evil dreams." "What
will come of them?" said the king. "One of three calamities, — harm to your
kingdom, to yourlife, or to your riches." "Is there a remedy, or is there not?"
"Undoubtedly these dreams in themselves are so threatening as to be without
remedy ; but none the less we will tind a remedy for tliem. Otherwise, what
boots our much study and learning?" "What then do you propose to do to
avert the evil?" "Wherever four roads meet, we would offer sacrifice, sire."
"J\Iy directors," cried the king in his terror, "my life is in your hands; make
haste and work my safety." "Large sums of money, and large supplies of food
of every kind will be ours," thought the exultant brahmins; and, bidding the
king have no fear, theydeparted from the palace. Outside the town they dug a
sacriticial pit and collected a host of fourfooted creatures, perfect and without
blemish, and a multitude ofbirds. But still they discovered something lacking,
and back they kept coming to the king to ask for this that and the other. Now
their doings were watched by Queen Mallika, who came to the king and asked
whatmade these brahmins keepcoming to him.
"I envy you," said the king; "a snake in your ear, and you not to know of
it!" "What does your majesty mean?" "I have dreamed, oh such unlucky
d ar r e ea a m n s xi ! ous Th t e o b of r l' a e h r m s i a n cr s if t i e c l e l s m t e o t a h v e e y rt po t i h n e t e t v o il. one A o n f d th t r h e i e s c i a s l w am h i a t t ie b s r ; in a g n s d t t h h e e m y
here so often." "But has your majesty consulted the ChiefBrahmin both ofthis
world and ofthe world ofdevas?" "Who, pray, may he be, mydear?" askedthe
king. "Know you not that chiefest personage of all the world, the all-knowing
and pure, the spotless master-brahmin? Surely,he, the Blessed One, will under-
stand your dreams. Go, ask him." "And so I will, my queen," said the king.
And away he went to the monastery, salutedthe Master,and sat down. "What,
pray, brings your majesty here so early in the morning?" asked the Master in
his sweet tones. "Sir," said the king, "just before daybreak [336] I dreamed
sixteen wonderful dreams, which so terrified me that I told them to the
brahmins. They told me that my dreams boded evil, and that to avert the
threatened calamity they must offer sacrifice wherever foiu* roads met. And so
they are busy with their preparations, and manyliving creatures have the fear
of death before their eyes. But I pray you, who are the chiefest personage in
the world ofmen and devas, you int — o whose ken comes all possible knowledge of
things past and present and to be, I pray you tell me what will come of my
dreams, Blessed One."

—
!
The Jataka. Book I.
"True it is, sire, that there is none other save me, who can tell what your
dreams signify or what will come of them. I will tell you. Only tirst of all
relate to me your dreams as they appeared to you."
" I will, sir," said the king, and at once began this list, following the order of
the dreams' appearance:
Bulls first, and trees, and cows, and calves,
Horse, dish, she-jackal, waterpot,
A pond, raw rice, and sandal-wood,
And gourds that sank, and stones that swam*,
With frogs that gobbled up black snakes,
A crow with gay-plumed retiime,
And wolves in panic-fear of goats
"How wasit, sir, that I had the following one of my dreams? Methought,
four black bulls, like collyrium in hue, came from the four cardinal directions to
theroyal courtyard with avowed intent to fight ; and people flocked togetherto
see the bull-fight, till a great crowd had gathered. But the bulls only made a
show offighting, roared and bellowed, and finallywent oflfwithout fightingat all.
This was my firstdream. Whatwill come ofit/"
"Sire, that dream shall have no issue in your days or in mine. But here-
after, when kings shallbe niggardly and unrighteous, and when folk shall be un-
righteous, in — days when the world is perverted, when good is waning and evil
waxingapace, in those days of the world's backsliding there shall fall no rain
from the heavens, thefeet ofthe storm shall belamed,thecrops shallwither,and
famine shall be on the laud. Then shall the cloudsgather asiffor rain from the
fourquarters ofthe heavens ; there shall be haste first to carry indoors the rice
and crops that the women have sj^read in the sun to dry, for fear the harvest
should get wet and then with spade and basket in hand the men shallgo forth
;
to bank up the dykes. As though in sign of c — oming rain, the thunder shall
bellow, the lightning shall flash from the clouds, but even as the bulls in youi*
dream, that fought not, so the clouds shall flee away without raining. This is
what shall come of this dream. But no harm shall come therefrom to you;
[337] for it was with regard to the future that you dreamed this dream. What
the brahmins told you, was said onlyto getthemselves a livelihood." And when
the Master had thus told the fulfilment of this dream, he said, "Tell me your
second dream, sire." —
"Sir," said the king, "my second dream was after this manner: Methought
little tiny trees and shrubs burst through the soil, and when they had gi-own
scarce a span or two high, they flowered and bore fruitI This was my second
dream ; what shall come ofit?"
"Sire," said the Master, "this dream shall have its fulfilment in days when
the world hasfallen into decay and when men are shortlived. In times to come
the passions shall be strong; quite young girls shall go to live with men, and it
shall be with them after the manner of women, they shall conceive and bear
children. The flowers typify their issues, and the fruit their oflTspring. But
you, sire, have nothing to fear therefrom. Tell me your third dream, O great
king."
"Methought, sir, I saw cowssuckingthe milk of calves which they had borne
thatselfsame day. This was my third dream. What shall comeofit?"
"This dream too shall have its fulfilment only in days to come, when respect
shall cease to be paid to age. For in the future men, shewing no reverence for
parents or parents-in-law, shall themselves administer the family estate, and,
if such be theirgood pleasure, shall bestow food and clothing on the old folks,
but shall withhold theirgifts, if it be not theirpleasure togive. Then shall the
oldfolks, destitute and dependent, exist by favour of their own children, like big
cows suckled by calves a day old. But you have nothing to fear therefrom.
Tellmeyour fourthdream."
^ See Maha-Vira-Carita, p. 13, Mahabharataii. 2196.

No. 77. 189
"Methought, sir, I saw men unyoking a team of draught-oxen, sturdy and
strong, and setting young steers to draw the load ; and the steers, proving un-
equal to the task laid on them,refused and stood stock-still,so that wains moved
not on their way. This was my fourth dream. What shall come ofit?"
"Here again the dream shall not have its fulfilment until the future, in the
days of unrighteous kings. For in days to come, unrighteous and niggardly
kings shallshew no honourtowise lordsskilled in precedent,fertile in expedient,
and able to get through business; nor shall appoint to the courts of law and
justice aged councillors of wisdom and of learning in the law. Nay, they shall
honour the very young and foolish, and appoint such to preside in the courts.
And these latter, ignorant alike of state-craft and of practical knowledge, shall
not be able to bear the burthen of their honours or to govern, but because of
their incompetence shall throw off the yoke of office. Whereon the aged and
wise lords, albeit right ableto cope with all difficulties, sh—all keep in mind how
they were passed over, and shall decline to aid, saying: 'It is no business of
ours; we are outsiders; let the boys of the inner circle see to it.' [338] Hence
they shall stand aloof, and ruin shall assail those kings on every hand. It shall
be even as when the yoke was laid on the young steers, who were not strong
enough for the burthen, and not upon the team of sturdy and strong draught-
oxen, who alone were able to do the work. Howbeit, you have nothing to fear
therefrom. Tell me your fifth dream."
"Methought, sir, I saw a horse with a mouth on eitherside, to whichfodder
was given on both sides, and it ate with both its mouths. This was my fifth
dream. Whatshall come ofit1"
"This dream too shall have its fulfilment only in the future, in the days of
unrighteous and foolish kings, who shall appoint unrighteous and covetous men
to bejudges. These base ones, fools, despising the good, shall take bribes from
both sides as they sit in the seat ofjudgment, and shall be filled with this two-
fold corruption, even as the horse that ate fodder with two mouths at once,
Howbeit, you have nothing to fear therefrom. Tell me your sixth dream."
"Methought, sir, I saw people holding out a well-scoured golden bowl worth
a hundred thousand pieces, and begging an old jackal to stale therein. And I
saw the beastdo so. This was my sixth dream. What shall come ofit?"
"This dream too shall only have its fulfilment in the future. For in the
days to come, unrighteous kings, though sprung of a race of kings, mistrusting
the scions of their old nobility, shall not honour them, but exalt in their stead
the low-born ; whereby the nobles shall be brought low and the low-boi-n raised
to lordship. Then shall the great families be brought by very need to seekto
live by dependence on the upstarts, and shall oft'er them their daughters in
marriage. And the union of the noble maidens with the low-born shall belike
unto the staling of the old jackal in the golden bowl. Howbeit, you have
nothingto feartherefrom. Tell me your seventh dream."
"A man was weaving rope, sir, and as he wove, he threw it down at his feet.
Under his bench lay a hungry she-jackal, which kept eating the rope as he wove,
but without the man knowing it. This is what I saw. This was my seventh
dream. What shall come ofit?"^
"This dream too shall nothave its fulfilment till the future. For in days to
come, women shall lust after men and strong drink and finery and gadding
abroad and after the joys of this world. In their wickedness and profligacy
these women shall drink strongdrink with their paramours ; they shall flaunt in
garlands and perfumes and unguents; and heedless of even the most pressing of
their household duties, they shall keep watching for their paramours, even at
crevices high up in the outer wall ; aye, they shall pound up the v — ery seed-corn
that should be sown on the morrow so as to provide good cheer; in all these
ways shall they plunder the store won by the hard work of their husbands in
field and byre, devouring the poor men's substance even as the hungry jackal
underthe bench ate up the rope of the rope-maker as he wove it. [339] How-
beit, you have nothing to fear therefrom. Tell meyour eighth dream."
J Gf. the story ofOcnus in Pausanias x. 29,

190 The Jataka. Booh I.
"Methought, sir, I saw at a palace gate a big pitcher which was full to the
brim and stood amid a nmnber of empty ones. And from the four cardinal
points, and from the four intermediate points as well, there kept coming a
constant stream of people of all the four castes, carrying water in pipkins and
pouringit into the full pitcher. And the wateroverflowed and ran away. But
none the less they still kept on pouring more and more water into the over-
flowing vessel, without a single man giving so much as a glance at the empty
pitchers. This was my eighth dream. What shall come ofit?"
"This dream too shall nothave its fulfilmentuntilthe future. For indays to
come the world shall decay; the kingdom shall grow weak, its kings shall grow
poorand niggardly the foremost among them shall have no more than 100,000
pieces of money in ; his treasury. Then shall these kings in their need set the
whole ofthe country-folkto work for them;—for the kings'sake shall the toiling
folk, leaving their own work, sow grain and pulse, and keep watch and reap and
thresh andgarner
;
forthekings'sakeshalltheyplantsugar-canes,makeanddrive
sugar-mills, and boil down the molasses; for the kings' sake shall they lay out
flower-gardensand orchards, and gather in the fruits. And as they gather in all
the divers kinds of produce they shall fill the royal garners to overflowing, not
givingso much as a glance attheir own empty barns at home. Thus it shall be
like filling up the full pitcher, heedless of the quite-empty ones. Howbeit, you
have nothingto feartherefrom. Tell me your ninth dream."
"Methought, sir, I saw a deep pool with shelving banks all round and over-
grown with the five kinds of lotuses. From every side two-footed creatures and
four-footed creatures flocked thither to drink of its waters. The depths in the
middle were muddy, but the water was clear and sparkling at the margin
where the various creatui-es went down into the pool. This was myninth dream.
What shall come ofit?"
"This dream too shall not have its fulfilment till the future. For in days to
come kings shall grow unrighteous ; they shall rule after their own will and
pleasure, and shall not execute judgment according to righteousness. These
kings shall hungerafter riches andwax fat on bribes ; theyshall notshewmercy,
love and compassion toward their people, but be fierce and cruel, amassing
wealth by crushing their subjects like sugar-canes in a mill and by taxing them
even to the uttermost fixrthing. Unable to i)ay the oppressive tax, the people
shall fly from village and town and the like, and take refuge upon the borders of
the realm ; the he — art of the land shall be a wilderness, while the borders shall
teem with people, even as the waterwas muddy in the middle of the pool and
clear at the margin. Howbeit, you have nothing to fear therefrom. [340] Tell
me yourtenth dream."
"Methought, sir, I saw rice boiling in a pot without getting done. By not
getting done, I mean that it looked as though it were shai-j^ly marked off and
kept apart, so that the cooking went on in three distinct stages. For part was
sodden, part hard and raw, and partjust cooked to a nicety. Thiswas my tenth
dream. Whatshall come ofit?"
"This dream too shall not have its fulfilment till the future. For in days
to come kings shall grow unrighteous ; the people surrounding the kings shall
grow unrighteous too, as also shall brahmins and householders, townsmen, and
countryfolk; yes, all people alike shall grow unright—eous, not excepting even
sages and brahmins. Next, theirvery tutelarydeities the spirits— to whom they
oft'er sacrifice, the spirits of the trees, and the spirits of the air shall become
unrighteous also. The very winds that blow over the realms of these un-
righteous kings shall grow cruel and lawless ; they shall shake the mansions of
the skies and thereby kindle th — e anger of the spirits that dwell there, so that
they will not suffer rain to fall or, if it does rain, it shall not fall on all the
kingdom at once,nor shall thekindlyshower fall on all tilled or sown lands alike
to help them in theirneed. And, as in the kingdom at large, so in each several
district and village and over each separate pool or lake, the rain shall notfall at
one and the same time on its whole expanse; if it rain on the upper part, it
shall not rain upon the lower; here the crops shall be spoiled by a heavy down-

No. 77. 191
pour, there wither for very drought, and here again thrive apace with kindly
showers —to water them. So the crops sown within the confines of a single
kingdom like the rice in the one pot—shall have no uniform character.
Howbeit, you have nothing to fear therefrom. Tell me your eleventh dream."
"Methought, sir, I saw sour buttermilk bartered for precious sandal-wood,
worth 100,000 pieces of money. This was my eleventh dream. What shall
come ofit?"
—
"This dream too shall not have its fulfilment till tlie future in the days
when mydoctrine is waning. For in days to come many greedy and shameless
Brethren shall arise, who for their belly's sake shall preach the very words
in which I inveighed against greed! Because they have deserted by reason
of their belly and have taken their stand on the side of the sectaries', they
shall fail to make their preaching lead up to Nirvana. Nay, their only
thought, as theypreach, shall be by fine words and sweet voices to induce men
to give them costly raiment and the like, and to be minded to give such gifts.
Others again seated in the highways, at the street-corners, at the doors of kings'
palaces, and so forth, shall stoop to preach for money, yea for mere coined
kahapanas, half-kahapanas, padas, or masakasI^ And as they thus barter away
forfood or raiment or for kahapanas and half-kahapanas my doctrine the worth
whereof is Nirvana, they shall be even as those who bartered away for sour
buttermilk precious sandal-wood worth 100,000 pieces. [341] Howbeit, you have
nothingto feartherefrom. Tell me your twelfth dream."
"Methought, sir, I saw empty pumpkins sinking in the water. What shall
come ofit?"
"This dream also shall not have its fulfilment till the future, in the days of
unrighteous kings, when the world is perverted. For in those days shall kings
shew favour not to the scions of the nobility, but to the low-born only and
;
these latter shall become great lords, whilst the nobles sink into poverty. Alike
in the royal presence, in the palace gates, in the council chamber, and in the
courts ofjustice, the words of the low-born alone (whom the empty pumpkins
typify) shall be stablished, as though they had sunk down till they rested on the
bottom. So too in the assemblies of the Brotherhood, in the greater and l—esser
conclaves, and in enquiries regarding bowls, robes, lodging, and the like, the
counsel only ofthe wicked and the vile shall be considered to have saving power,
not that of the modest Brethren. Thus everywhere it shall be as when the
empty pumpkins sank. Howbeit, you have nothing to fear therefrom. Tell me
yourthirteenth dream."
Hereupon the king said, "Methought, sir, I saw huge blocks of solid rock, as
bigas houses, floating like ships upon the waters. What shall come ofit?"
"Thisdream also shall not have its fulfilment before such times as those of
which I have spoken. For in those days unrighteous kings shall shew honourto
the low-born, who shall become great lords, whilst the nobles sink into poverty.
Not to the nobles, but to the upstarts alone shall respect be paid. In the royal
presence, in the council chamber, or in the courts ofjustice, the words of the
nobles learned in thelaw (and it is they whom the solid rocks typify) shall drift
idly by, and not sink deep into the hearts of men when they speak, the up-
;
stai-ts shall merely laugh them to scorn, saying, 'What is this these fellows are
saying?' So too in the assemblies of the Brethren, as afore said, men shall not
deem worthy of respect the excellent— among the Brethren
;
the words of such
shall not sink deep, but drift idly by, even as when the rocks floated upon the
waters. Howbeit, you have nothing to feartherefrom. Tell me your fourteentli
dream."
"Methought, sir, I saw tiny frogs, no bigger than minute flowerets, swiftly
pursuing huge black snakes, chopping them up like so many lotus-stalks and
gobblingthem up. What shall come ofthis?"
* Reading titthakardnaihpakhhe, asconjecturedbyFausboll.
^ See Vinaya ii. 294 for the same list; and see page 6 of Rhys Davids' "Ancient
CoinsandMeasures ofCeylon" in Numismata Orientalia (Tritbner).

192 TJie Jdtaha. Book I.
"This dream too shall nothave its fulfilment till those days to come such as
those of which I have spoken, when the world is decaying. For then shall
men's passions be so strong, and theirlusts so hot, that they shall be the thralls
ofthe veryyoungest oftheirwives for the time being, atwhose sole disposalshall
be slaves and hired servants, oxen, buftalos and all cattle, gold and silver, and
everything that is inthe house. Should the poor husband ask where the money
(say) or a robe is, at once he shall be told that it is where it is, that he should
mind his own business, and not be so inquisitive as to what is, oris not, in her
house. And therewithal in divers ways thewives with abuse and goadingtaunts
shall establish their dominion over their husbands, as over slaves and bond-
servants. [342] Thus shall it be like as when the tiny frogs, no bigger than
minute flowerets, gobbled up the bigblack snakes. Howbeit, you havenothing
to fear therefrom. Tell me your fifteenth dream."
"Methought, sir, I saw a village crow, in which dwelt the whole of the Ten
Vices, escorted by a retinue of those birds which, because of their golden sheen,
are called Royal Golden Mallards. What shall come ofit?"
"This dream too shall not have its fulfilment till the future, till the reign of
weaklingkings. In days to come kings shall arise who shall know nothing about
elephants or otherarts,and shall be cowards in the field. Fearingto be deposed
and cast from their royal estate, they shall raise to power not their peers but
their footmen, bath-attendants, barbers, and such like. Thus, shut out from
royal favour' and unable to support — themselves, the nobles shall be reduced to
dancingattendance on the upstarts, as when the crow had Royal Golden Swans
for a retinue. Howbeit, you have nothing to fear therefrom. Tell me your
sixteenth dream."
"Heretofore, sir, it always used to be panthers that prey — ed on goats; but
methoug — ht I saw goats chasing panthers and devouring them munch, munch,
munch ! whilst at bare sight of the goats afar oft", terror-stricken wolves fled
quaking with fear and hid themselves in their fastnesses in the thickets Such
was my dream. What shall come ofit?"
"This dream too shall not have its fulfilment till the future, till the reign of
unrighteous kings. In those daysthe low-bornshall be raisedto lordship and be
made royal favourites, whilst the nobles shall sink into obscurity and distress.
Gaining influence in the courts of law because of their favour with the king,
these upstarts shall claim perforce the ancestral estates, the raiment, and all the
property of the old nobility. And when these latter plead their rights before
the courts, then shall the king's minions have them cudgelled an—d bastinadoed
and taken by the throat and cast out withwords ofscorn,such as: 'Know your
place, fools! What? do you dispute with us/ The king shall know of your
insolence, and wewill have your hands and feet choppedoft'and other correctives
applied!' Hereupon the terrified nobles shall aflfirm that their own belongings
really belong to the overbearing upstarts, and will tell the favourites to accept
them. And they shall hie them home and there cower in an agony of fear.
Likewise, evil Brethren shall harry at pleasure good and worthy Brethren, till
these latter, finding none to help them, shall flee to the jungle. And this
oppression of the nobles and of the good Brethren by the low-born and by the
evil brethren, shall be like the scaring of wolves by goats. Howbeit, you have
nothing to fear therefrom. For this dream too has reference to future times
only. [343] It was not truth, it was not love for you, that prompted the
brahmins to prophesy as they did. No, it was greed of gain, and the insight
that is bred ofcovetousness, that shaped all their self-seeking utterances."
Thus did the Master expound the import of these sixteen great dreams,
adding,—"You, sire, are not the first to have these dreams; they were dreamed
by kings of bygone days also ; and, then as now, the brahmins found in them a
pretext for sacrifices; whereupon, at the instance of the wise and good, the
Bodhisatta was consulted, and the dreams were expounded bythem of oldtime
1 Here the Pali interpolates the irrelevant remark that "the word hi is nothing
morethan aparticle."

;
iVo. 11. 193
injust the same manner as they have now been expounded." And so saying, at
the king's request, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a brahmin in the North country. When he came
to years of discretion he renounced the world for a hermit's life; he won
the higher Knowledges and the Attainments, and dwelt in the Himalaya
country in the bliss that comes from Insight.
In those days, in just the same manner, Brahmadatta dreamed these
dreams at Benares, and enquired of the brahmins concerning them. And
the brahmins, then as now, set to work at sacrifices. Amongst them was
a young brahmin uf learning and wisdom, a pupil of the king's chaplain,
—
who addressed his master thus: "Master, you have taught me the Three
Vedas. Is there not therein a text that says 'The slaying of one creature
giveth not life to another"?" "My son, this means money to us, a gi-eat
deal of money. You only seem anxious to spare the king's treasury !"
"Do as you will, master," said the young brahmin; "as for me, to what
end shall I tarry longer here with you ?" And so saying, he left him, and
betook himself to the royal pleasaunce.
That—selfsame day the Bodhisatta, knowing all this, thought to
himself: "If I visit to-day the haunts of men, I shall work the deliver-
ance of a great multitude from their bondage." So, passing through the
air, he alighted in the royal jjleasaunce and seated himself, radiant as a
statue of gold, upon the Ceremonial Stone. The young brahmin drew
near and with due obeisance seated himself by the Bodhisatta in all
friendliness. Sweet converse passed ; and the Bodhisatta asked whether
the young brahmin thought the king ruled righteously. "Sir," answered
the young man, "the king is righteous himself; but the brahmins make
him side with evil. Being consulted by the king as to sixteen dreams
which he had dreamed, the brahmins clutched at the opportunity for
sacrifices [344] and set to work thereon. Oh, sir, would it not be a good
thing that you should offer to make known to the king the real import of
his dreams and so deliver great numbers of creatures from their dread?"
"But, my son, I do not know the king, nor he me. Still, if he should
come here and ask me, I will tell him." "I will bring the king, sir," said
the young brahmin ; "if you will only be so good as to wait here a minute
till I come back," And having gained the Bodhisatta's consent, he went
before the king, and said that there had alighted in the royal pleasaunce
an air-travelling ascetic, who said he would expound the king's dreams
would not his majesty relate them to this ascetic?
When the king heard this, he repaired at once to the pleasaunce with
a large retinue. Saluting the ascetic, he sat down by the holy man's
13
c. J.

— —
4
;
ID The Jdtaka. Booh I.
side, and asked whether it was true that he knew what would come of his
dreams. "Certainly, sire," said the Bodhisatta ; "but first let me hear
the dreams as you dreamed them." "Readily, sir," answered the king
and he began as follows:
Bulls first, and trees, and cow.s, and calves,
Horse, dish, she-jackal, water{)ot,
A pond, raw rice, and sandal-wood,
And gourds that sank, and stones that swam,
and so forth, ending up with
And wolves in panic-fear of goats.
And his majesty went on to tell his dreams in just the same manner as
that in which King Pasenadi had described them. [345]
"Enougli," said the Great Being; "you have nothing to fear or dread
from all this." Having thus reassured the king, and having freed a great
nniltitude from bondage, the Bodhisatta again took up his position in mid-
air, whence he exhorted the king and e—stablished him in the Five
Commandments, ending with these words: "Henceforth, O king, join
not with the brahmins in slaughtering animals for sacrifice." His teach-
ing ended, the Bodliisatta passed straight through the air to his own
abode. And the king, remaining stedfast in the teaching he had heard,
passed away after a life of alms-giving and other good works to fai*e
according to his deserts.
I
His lesson ended, the Master said, "You have nothing to fear from these
dreams; away with the sacrifice!" Having had the sacrifice removed, and
having saved the li\-es of a multitude of creatures, he shewed the connexion and
identified the Birth by saying, "Ananda was the king of those days, Sariputta
the young Brahmin, and I the ascetic."
{Pcdi note. But after the passing of the Blessed One, the Editors of the
Great Eedaction put the three first lines into the Conunentary, and making
the lines from 'And gourds that sank' into one Stanza (therewith) put the
whole story into the First Book.) ',
[Note. Cf Sacy's Kahlah and Dimnah, chapter 14; Benfey's Paucatantra
§ 225; J.R.A.S. for 1893 page 509; and Eouse ('A Jataka in Pausanias') in
'Folklore' i. 409 (1890).]
1 I am not at all sure that this is the correct translation of this difficult and
corrupt passage.

No. 78. 195
No. 78.
ILLiSA-JATAKA.
"Both squint."-'1h\^ story was told by the Master while at Jetavaua, about
a miserly Lord High Treasurer. Hard by the city of Eajagaha, as we are told,
was a town named Jagghery, and here dwelt a certain Lord High Ti-easurcr,
known as the Million^iire Miser, who was worth eighty crores! Not .so much as
the tiniest drop of oil th;iia blade of grass will take up, did he either give away
or consume for his own enjoyment. So he made no use of all his w — ealth either
for his family or for sages and brahmins: it remained unenjoyed, like a pool
haunted by demons. Now, it fell out on a day that the Master ai'ose at dawn
moved with a great compassion, and as he reviewed those ripe for conversion
throughout the universe, he became aware that this Treasurer with his wife
some four hundred miles away were destined to tread the Paths ofSalivation.
Now the day before, the Lord High Treasurer had gone his way to the palace
to wait upon the king, and was on his homeward way when he saw a country-
bumpkin, who was quite empty within, eating a cake stufted with gruel. The
sight awoke a cravi—ng within him ! But, arrived at his own house, [346] he
thought to himself, "If I say I should like a stuffed cake, a whole host of
m pe u o c p h le of wi m ll y w r a i n c t e a t n o d sh g a h r e e e m an y d m s e u a ga l r. ; an I d mu t s h t at n't me s a a n y s a g w e o tt r i d ng to t a hr s o o u ul g . h " ev S e o r h s e o
walked about, wrestling with his craving. As hour after hour passed, he grew
yellowerand yellower, and tlie veins stood out like cords on his emaciated frame.
Unable at last to bear it any longer, he went to his own room and lay down
hugging his bed. But still not a word would he say to a soul for fear of wasting
his substance Well, his wife came to him,and, strokinghis back, said "What
isthe matter,
!my
husband?"
:
"Nothing," said he. "Perhaps the king has been cross to you?" "No, he
has not." "Have your children or servants done anything to annoy you?"
"Nothing of that kind, either." "W—ell, then, have you a cravingfor anything?"
But still not a word would he say, all because of his preposterous fearthat he
might waste his substance; but lay there speechless on his bed. "Speak,
husband," said the wife; "tell me what you have a craving for." "Yes," said he
with a gulp, "I have got a craving for one thing." "And what is that, my
husband?" "I should like a stuffed cake to eat!" "Now why not have said so
a o t f J o a n g c g e h ? ery Y . o " u'r " e W r h ic y h t e r n o o u u bl g e h a ! bo I u 'l t l t c h oo e k m? cak T e h s e e y no m u u g s h t t w o o f r e k as t t o t e h a e rn wh t o h l e e ir t o o w w n n
meal." "Well then, I'll cook only enough for ourstreet." "How rich you are!"
"Then, I'll cook just enough for our own household." "How extravagant you
are!" "Verygood, I'll cook only enough for ourchildren." "Whybotherabout
them?" "Very good then, I'll only provide for our two selves." "Why should
you be in it?" "Then, I'll cookjust enough for you alone," said the wife.
"Softly," said the Lord High Treasurer; "there are a lot— of people on the
watch forsigns of coo — king in this place. Pick out broken rice, being careful to
leave the whole grain, and take a brazierand cooking-pots andjust a verylittle
milk and ghee and honey and molasses; then up with you to the seventh story
of the house and do the cooking up there. There I will sit alone and undis-
turbed to eat."
Obedient to his wishes, the wife had all the necessary things carried up,
climbed all the way up herself, sent the servants away, and despatclied word to
the Treasurer to come. Up he climbed, shutting and bolting doorafterdooras
heascended, till at last he came to the seventh floor, the door of which he also
shut fast. Then he sat down. His wife lit the fire in the Imiziei-, put licr
pot on, and set about cooking the cokes,
13—2

!
196 The Jataka. Booh I.
Now in the early morning, the Master had said to the Elder Great Mog-
gallana,—"Moggallana, this Miser Millionaire [347] in the town ofJaggherynear
Kajagaha, wanting to eat cakes himself, is so afraid of letting others know, that
he is^having them cooked for him right up on the seventh story. Go thither;
convert the man to self-denial, and by transcendental power transporthusband
and wife, cakes, milk, ghee and all, here to Jetavaua. This day I and the five
hundred Brethren will stay at home, and I will make the cakes furnish them
with ameal."
Obedient to the Master's bidding, the Elder by supernatural powerpassed to
the town of Jagghery, and rested in mid-air before the chamber-window, duly
clad in hisunder and outer cloths, bright as a jewelled image. The unexpected
sight of the Eldermade the Lord High Treasurer quake with fear. Thought he
to himself, "It was to escape such visitors that I climbed up here: and now
there's one ofthem atthe window!" And,failingtorealise the comprehensionof
that which he must needs comprehend, he—sputtered with rage, like sugar and
salt thrown on the fire, as he burst out with "What will you get, sage, by your
simply standingin mid-air — ? Why, you may pace up and down till you've made
a path in the pathless air, and yetyou'll stillget nothing."
The Elder began tojjace to and fro in his place in the air! "What will you
get by pacing to and —fro?" said the Treasiu-er! "You may sit cross-legged in
meditation in the air, but still you'll get nothing." The Elder sat down with
legs crossed! Then said the Treasurer, "What will you get by sitting there?
You may come and stand on the window-sill but even that won't getyou any-
;
thing!" The Eldertook his stand on the window-sill. "What will you get by
standing on the window-sill? Why, you may belch smoke, and yet you'll still
getnothing!" said the Treasurer. Then the Elder belched forth smoke till the
wholepalacewas filled with it. The Treasurer's eyes began to smart as though
pricked with needles ; and, fo—rfearat last that his house might be set on fire, he
checked himself from adding "You won't get anything even if you burst into
flames." Thought he to himself, "This Elder is most persistent! He simply
w sa o i n d 't to go hi a s w w a i y fe, em " p M t y y- d h e a a n r d , e c d oo ! k I on m e us li t ttl h e av ca e k j e u a st nd on gi e ve ca i k t e to gi t v h e e n sa h g i e m. t " o ge S t o r h i e d
ofhim."
So she mixed quite a little dough in a crock. But the dough swelled and
swelled till it filled the whole crock, and grew to be a great big cake! "What a
lotyou must have used!" exclaimed the Treasurerat the sight. And he himself
with the tip ofa spoon tooka very little ofthe dough, and put that in the oven
tobake. But that tinypiece ofdough grew largerthan the first lump ; and, one
after another, every piece of dough he took became everso big ! Then he lost
heart and said to his wife, "You give him a cake, dear." But, as soon as she
took one cake from the basket, at once all the other cakes stuckfast to it. .So
she cried out to her husband that all the cakeshad stuck together, and that she
could not part them.
"Oh, I'll soon partthem," said he,—butfound he could not
Then husband and wife both took hold ofthe mass ofcakes at the cornerand
tried to get them apart. But tug as they might, they could make no more
impression together than they did singly, on the mass. Now as the Treasurer
was pullingaway at the cakes, he burst into a perspiration, and his craving left
him. Then said heto his wife, "I don'twant the cakes [348] givethem,basket
and all, to this ascetic." And she approached the Elder ; with the basket in her
hand. Then the Elder preached the truth to the pair, and proclaimed the
excellence of the Three Gems. And, teaching that giving was true sacrifice, he
madethe fruits of charity and othergood works to shine forth even as the full-
moon in theheavens. Won by the Elder's words,the Treasurersaid, "Sir, come
hither and sit on this couch to eatyour cakes."
"Lord High Treasurer," said the Elder, "the All-Wise Buddha with five
hundred Brethren sits in the monastery waiting a meal of cakes. If such be
yourgood pleasure, I would ask you to bring your wife and the cakes with you,
and let us begoingto the Master." "Butwhere,sir, is the Mtisterat thepresent
M

—
No. 78. 197
time?" "Five and forty leagues away, in the monastery at Jetavana." "How
areweto get all thatway, sir, without losing a long time on the road?" "If it
be your pleasure. Lord High Treasurer, I will transport you thither by my
transcendental powers. The head of the staircase in your house shall remain
where it is, but the bottom shall be at the main-gate of Jetavana. In thiswise
will I transport you to the Masterin the time which it takes to go downstairs."
"So be it, sir," said the Treasurer.
The — n the Elder, keeping the top of the staircase where it was, commanded,
saying, "Let the foot of the staircase be at the main-gate of Jetavana." And
w s i o fe it t c o a J m e e ta t v o an p a as q s ui ! ck I e n r t th h i a s n w t a h y ey d c i o d u t l h d e g E e l t d d e o r w t n ra t n h s e po s r t t air t s h . e Treasurerand his
Then husband andwifecame before the Masterand said meal-timehad come.
And the Master, passing into the Eefectory, sat down on the Buddha-seat
prepared for him, with the Brotherhood gathered round. Then the Lord High
Treasiirer poured the Water of Donation over the hands of the Brotherhood
with the Buddha at its head, whilst his wife placed a cake in the alms-bowl of
the Blessed One. Ofthishe took whatsufficed to supportlife, asalsodidthefive
hundred Brethren. NexttheTreasurerwentroundottering milkmixedwithghee
and honeyandjagghery
;
and the MasterandtheBrotherhood broughttheirmeal
to a close. Lastly the Treasurerand his wife ate their fill, but still there seemed
no end to the cakes. Even when allthe Brethren and the scrap-eaters through-
out the monastery had all had a share, still there was no sign of the end
approaching. So they told the Master, saying, "Sir, the supply of cakes grows
no smaller."
"Then throw themdown by the greatgate ofthe monastery."
So they threw them away in a cave not far from the gateway ; and to this
day a spot called 'The Crock-Cake,' is shown atthe extremity ofthat cave.
The Lord High Treasurer and his wife approached and stood before the
Blessed One, who returned thanks ; and at the close of his words of thanks, the
pairattained Fruition of the First Path of Salvation. Then, taking their leave
ofthe Master,the two mounted the stairs at the great gate and foundthemselves
in their own home once more. [349] Afterwards, the Lord High Treasurer
lavished eighty crores ofmoney solely on the Faith the Buddha taught.
Next day the Perfect Buddha, returning to Jetavana after a round for alms
in Savatthi, delivered a Buddha-discourse to the Brethren before retiring to the
seclusionofthe Perfumed Chamber. At evening,the Brethren gathered together
in the Hall of Truth, and exclaimed, "How great is the power of the Elder
Moggallana In a moment he converted a miser to charity, brouglit him with
!
the cakes to Jetavana, set him before the Master, and stablished him in salva-
tion. How great is the power of the Elder!" As they sat talking thus of the
goodness of the Elder, the Master entered, and, on enquiry, was told of the
subject of their talk. "Brethren," said he, "a Brother who is the converter of a
household, should approach that household without causing it annoyance or
—
vexation, even as the bee when it sucks the nectar from the flower; in such
wise should he draw nigh to declare the excellence of the Buddha." And in
praise ofthe Elder Moggallana, he recited this stanza :
Like bees, that harm no flower's scent or hue
But, laden with its honey, fly away.
So, sage, within thy village walk thy wayi.
Then, to set forth still more the Elder's goodness, he said,—"This is not the
first time. Brethren, that the miserly Treasurer has been converted by IMoggal-
lana. In other days too the Elder converted him, and taught him how deeds
andtheireffects are linked together." So saying, he told this story ofthe past.
This is verse 49 ofthe Dhammapada.

"
198 Tlte Jataka. Book I.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, there
was a Treasurer, Illlsa by name, who was worth eighty crores, and had all
the defects which fall to the lot of man. He was lame and crook-backed
and had a squint he was anunconverted infidel, and a miser, nevergiving
;
of his store to others, nor enjoying it himself ; his house was like a pool
haunted by demons. Yet, for seven generations, his ancestors had been
bountiful, giving freely of their best; but, when he became Treasurer, he
bi-oke through the ti-aditions of his house. Burningdownthe almonry and
driving the poor with blows from his gates, he hoarded his wealth.
One day, when he was returning from attendance on the king, he saw
a yokel, who had journeyed far and was a-weary, seated on a bench, and
filling a mug from a jar of rank spirits, and drinking it off, with a dainty
morsel of stinking dried-fish as a relish. The sight made the Treasurer
feel a thirst for spirits, but he thought to himself, [350] "If I drink,
others will want to drink with me, and that means a ruinous expense."
So he walked about, keeping his thirst under. But, as time wore on, he
could do so no longer ; he grew as yellow as old cotton ; and the veins
stood out on his sunken frame. On a day, retiring to his chamber, he
lay down hugging his bed. His wife came to him, and rubbed his back,
as she asked, "What has gone amiss with my lord?
(What follows is to be told in the words of the former story.) But,
when she in her turn said, "Then I'll only brew liquor enough for
you," he said, "Ifyou make the brew in the house, there will be many on
the watch ; and to send out for the spirits and sit and drink it here,
is out of the question." So he produced one single penny, and sent a
slave to fetch him a jar of spii-its from the tavern. When the slave came
back, he made him go from the town to the riverside and put the jar
down in a remote thicket. "Now be off!" said he, and made the slave
wait some distance off, while he filled his cup and fell to.
Now the Treasurer's father, who for his charity and other good works
had been re-born as Sakka in the Realm of Devas, was at that moment
wondering whether his bounty was still kept up or not, and became aware
of the stopping of his bounty, and of his son's behaviour. He saw how
his son, breaking through the traditions of his house, had burnt the
almonry to the ground, had driven the poor with blows from his gates,
and how, in his miserliness, fearing to share with others, that son had
stolen away to a thicket to drink by himself. Moved by the sight, Sakka
cried, "I will go to him and make my son see that deeds must have their
consequences; I will work his conversion, and make him charitable and
worthy of re-birth in the Realm of Devas." So he came down to earth,
and once more trod the ways of men, putting on the semblance of the
Treasurer Illisa, with the latter's lameness, and crookback, and squint.
In this guise, he entered the city of Rajagaha and made his way to the

JVo. 78. i;)<j
palace-gate, where he bade his coming be announced to the king, "Let
him approach," said the king; and he entered and stood with due
obeisance before his majesty.
"What brings you here at this unusual hour. Lord High Treasurer1 "
said the king. "I amcome, Sire, because I have in myhouseeightycrores
of treasure. Deign to have them carried to fill the royal treasury."
"Nay, my Lord Treasurer; [351] the treasure within my palace is greater
than this." "Ifyou, sire, will not have it, I shall give it away to whom I
will." "Do so by all means, Treasurer," said the king. "So be it, sire,"
said the pretended Illlsa, as with due obeisance he departed from the
presence to the Treasurer's house. The servants all gathered round him,
but not one could tell that it was not their real master. Entering, he
stood on the thi*eshold and sent for the porter, to whom he gave orders
that if anybody resembling himself should appear and claim to be master
of the house they should soundly cudgel such a one and throw him out.
Then, mounting the stairs to the upper story, he sat down on a gorgeous
couch and sent for Illisa's wife. When she came he said with a smile,
"My
dear, let us be bountiful."
At these words, wife, children, and servants all thought, "It's a long
time since he was this way minded. He must have been drinking to be
so good-natured and generous to-day." And his wife said to him, "Be as
bountiful as you please, my husband." "Send for the crier," said he,
"and bid him proclaim bybeat of drum all through the citythat everyone
who wants gold, silver, diamonds, pearls, and the like, is to come to the
house of Illlsa the Treasurer." His wife did as he bade, and a large
crowd soon assembled at the door carrying baskets and sacks. Then
Sakka bade the treasure-chambers be thrown open, and cried, "This is my
gift to you ; take what you will and go your ways." And the crowd
seized on the riches there stored, and piled them in heaps on the floor and
filled the bags and vessels they had brought, and went off laden with the
spoils. Among them was a countryman who yoked Illisa's oxen to Illisa's
carriage, filled it with the seven things of price, and journeyed out of the
city along the highroad. As he went along, h—e drew near the thicket,
and sang the Treasurer's praises in these words : "May you live to be a
hundred, my good lord Illlsa What you have done for me this day will
!
enable me to live without doing another stroke of work. Whose were
these oxen] — yours. Whose was this carriage? — yours. Whose the
wealth in the carriage]—yours again. It was no father or mother who
gave me all this; no, it came solely from you, my lord."
These words filled the Lord High Treasurer with fear and trembling.
"Why, the fellow is mentioning my name in his talk," said he to himself.
"Can the king have been distributing my wealth to the peoph;1" [352]
At the bare thouijht he bounded from the bush, and, recognizing his own

"
200 The Jataka. Booh I.
oxen and cart, seized the oxen by the cord, crying, "Stop, fellow; these
oxen and this cart belong to me." Down leaped the man from the cart,
angrily exclaiming, "You rascal! Illlsa, the Lord High Treasurer, is
"ivinf^ away his wealth to all the city. What has come to you 1 " And he
sprang at the Treasurer and struck him on the back like a falling thunder-
bolt, and went off with the cart. Illlsa picked himself up, trembling in
every limb, wiped off the mud, and hurrying after his cart, seized hold of
it. Again the countryman got down, and seizing Illlsa by the hair,
doubled him up and thumped him about the bead for sometime ; thentak-
ing him by the throat, he flung him back the way he had come, and drove
off. Sobered by this rough usage, Illfsa hurried off home. There, seeing
folk making offwith the treasure, he fell to laying hands on here a man
and there a man, shrieking, "Hi! what's this? Is the king despoiling
me?" And every man he laid hands on knocked him down. Bruised
and smarting, he sought to take refuge in his own house, when the porters
stopped him with, "Holloa, you rascal ! Whei-e might you be going?
And first thrashing him soundly with bamboos, they took their master by
the throat and threw him out of doors. "There is none but the king left
to see me righted," groaned Illlsa, and betook himself to the palace.
"Why, oh why, sire," he cried, "have you plundered me like this?"
"Nay, it was not I, my Lord Treasurer," said the king. "Did you
not yourself come and declare your intention of giving your wealth away,
ifI would not accept it? And did you not then send the crier round and
carry out your threat1 " "Oh sire, indeed it was not I that came to you
on such an errand. Your majesty knows how near and close I am, and
how I never give away so much as the tiniest drop of oil which a blade of
grass will take up. May it please your majesty to send for him who has
given my substance away, and to question him on the matter,"
Then the king sent for Sakka. And so exactly alike were the two
that neither the king nor his court could tell which was the real Lord
High Treasurer. Said the miser Illlsa, "Who, and what, sire, is this
Treasurer? /am the Treasurer."
"Well, really I can't say which is the real Illlsa," said the king. "Is
there anybody who can distinguish them for certain?" "Yes, sire, my
wife." So the wife was sent for and asked which of the two was her
husband. And she said Sakka was her husband and went to his side.
[353] Then in turn Illlsa's children and servants were brought in and
asked the same question ; and all with one accord declared Sakka was the
real Lord High Treasurer. Here it flashed across Illlsa's mind that he
had a wart on his head, hidden among his hair, the existence ofwhich was
known only to his barber. So, as a last resource, he asked that his barber
might be sent for to identify him. Now at this time the Bodhisatta was
his barber. Accordingly, the barber was sent for and asked if he could

—
;
No. 78. 201
distinguish the real from the false lllisa. "I could tell, sire," said he,
"if I might examine their heads." "Then look at both their Leads,"
said the king. On the instant Sakka caused a wart to rise on his head
!
After examining the two, the Bodhisatta reported that, as both alike had
got warts on their heads, he couldn't for the life of him say which was the
real man. And therewithal he uttered this stanza:
Both squint both halt both men are hunchbacks too
W A h n i d ch bot of h t h h a e ; ve tw w o ar t t h s e a r l e ; i a k l e I ! lll 1 sa ca is n . not tell
Hearing his last hope thus fail him, the Lord High Treasurer fell into a
tremble ; and such was hisintolerable anguish at the loss of his beloved
riches, that down he fell in a swoon. Thereupon Sakka put forth his
transcendental powers, and, rising in the air, addressed the king thence
in these words: "Not lllisa am I, O king, but Sakka." Then those
around wiped IllTsa's face and dashed water over him. Recovering, he
rose to his feet and bowed to the ground before Sakka, King of Devas.
Then said Sakka, "Illlsa, mine was the wealth, not thine; I am thy
father, and thou art my son. In my lifetime I was bountiful toward the
poor and rejoiced in doing good ; wherefore, I am advanced to this high
estate and am become Sakka. But thou, walking not in tny footsteps,
art grown a niggard and a very miser; thou hast burnt my almonry to
the ground, driven the poor from the gate, and hoarded thy riches. Thou
hast no enjoyment thereof thyself, nor has any other human being; [354]
but thy store is become like a pool haunted by demons, whereat no man
may slake his thirst. Albeit, if thou wilt rebuild mine almonry and show
bounty to the poor, it shall be accounted to tliee for righteousness. But,
if thou wilt not, then will I strip thee of all that thou hast, and cleave thy
head with the thunderbolt of Indra, and thou shalt die."
At this threat lllisa, quaking for his life, cried out, " Henceforth I
will be bountiful." And Sakka accepted his promise, and, still seated in
mid-air, established his son in the Commandments and preached the Truth
to him, departing thereafter to his own abode. And Illlsa was diligent in
almsgiving and other good works, and so assured his re-birth thereafter in
heaven.
"Brethren," said the Master, "this is not the first time that Moggallana has
converted the miserly Treasurer in bygone days too the same man was con-
;
verted by him." His lesson ended, he shewed the connexion and identified the
Birth bysaying, "This miserlyTreasurer was the lUisa ofthose days,MoggalLana
was Sakka, King ofDevas, Ananda was theking, and I myselfthe barber."
INoie. Respectingthis story, seean article by the translator in the Joi(,rnal
of the Royal Asiatic Society for January 1892, entitled "The Lineage of the
'Proud King'."]

—
202 The Jataha. Book I.
No. 79.
KHARASSAllA-JATAKA.
—
"//e gave the rohhers time." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a certain Minister. He, 'tis said, ingratiated himself with the
king, and, after collecting the royal revenue in a border-village, privily arranged
with a band of robbers that he would marc — h the men ott" into the jungle,
leaving the village for the rascals to plunder, on condition that they gave him
half tlae booty. Acc(jrdingly, at daybreak when the place was left unprotected,
down camethe robbers, who slew and ate the cattle, looted the \'illage, and were
oft" with their booty before he came back at evening with his followers. But it
was a very short time before his knavery leaked out and came to the ears of the
king. And the king sent for him, and, as his guilt was manifest, he was
degraded and another headman put in his place. Then the king went to the
Masterat Jetavana and told him what had happened. "Sire," said the Blessed
One, "the man has only shewn the same disposition now which he shewed in
bygonedays." Then at the king's request he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was i-eigning in Benares, he
appointed a certain Minister to be headman of a border-village; and every-
thingcame to pass as in the above case. Now in those days the Bodhisatta
was making the round ofthe border-villages in the way oftrade, [355] and
had taken up his abode in that very village. And when the headman was
marching his men back at evening with drums a-beating, he exclaimed,
"This scoundrel, who privily egged on the robbers to loot the village, has
waited till they had made offto the jungle again, and now back he comes
—
with drums a-beating, feigning a happy ignorance of anything wrong
having happened." And, so saying, he uttered this stanza :
He gave the robbers time to drive and slay
The cattle, burn the houses, capture folk
A — n A d s t o h n en no wit m h ore d , ru f m o s r s a u -b c e h at a ing s , on h i o s me de h a e d^ ;marched,
In such wise did the Bodhisatta condemn the headman. Not long
after, the villany was detected, and the rascal was punished by the king
as his wickedness deserved.
^ Thescholiast's explanation is, that a son who isso lost to all decencyandshame,
ceases ipsofaclo to be a son, and that his mother is sonlessevenwhileher sonis still
alive.
I

;
No. 80. 208
"This is not the first time, sire," said the king, "that he has been of this
disposition he was just the same in bygone days also." His lesson ended, the
;
Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by saying, "The headman
of to-day was also the headman of those days, and I myself the wise and good
man who recited the stanza."
No. 80.
BHIMASENA-JATAKA.
—
"Vuu vaunted your prowess." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, abouta certain l)raggart among the Brethren. Tradition says that he
used to gather round him Brethren of all ages, and go about deluding everyone
with lying boasts about his nol)le descent. "Ah, Brethren," he would say,
"there's no family so noble as mine, no lineage so peerless. I am a scion of
the highest of princely lines; no man is my equal in birth or ancestral estate
there is absolutely no end to the gold and silver and other treasures we possess.
Our very slaves and menials are fed on rice and meat-stews, and arc clad in the
best Benares cloth, with the choicest Benares perfumes to perfume themselves
—
withal; whilst I, because I have joined the Brotherhood, [356] have to content
myselfwith this vile fare and this vile garb."
But another Brother, after enquiring into his family estate, exposed to the
Brethren the emptiness of this pretension. So the Brethren met in the Hall
of Truth, and talk began as to how that Brother, in spite of his vows to leave
worldly things and cleave only to the saving Truth, was going about deluding
the Brethren with his lying boasts. Whilst the fellow's sinfulness was being dis-
cussed, the Master entered and enquired what their topic was. And they told
him. "This is not the first time. Brethren," said the Master, "that he has gone
about boa.sting; in bygone days too he went about boasting and deluding
people." And so saying, he UAd this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahniadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a brahmin in a market-town in the North country,
and when he was grown up he studied under a teacher of world-wide fame
at Takkasila. There he learnt the Three Vedas and theEighteen Branches
ofknowledge, and completed his education. And he became known as the
sage Little Bowman. Leaving Takkasila, he came to the Andhra country
in search of practical experience. Now, it hap])ened that in this Birth the
Bodhisatta was somewhat of a crooked little dwarf, and he thought to
himself, "IfI make my appearance before any king, he's sure to ask what
a dwarf like me is good for; why should I not use a tall broad fellow as
my stalking-horse and earn my living in the shadow of his more imposing

204 The Jataka. Book I.
personality?" So he betook himself to the weaveiV quarter, and there
es^jying a huge weaver named Bhiinasena, saluted him, asking the man's
name. "Bhimasena' is my name," said the weaver. " And what makes a
fine big man like you work at so sorry a trade?" "Because I can't get a
livin"- any other way." " Weave no more, friend. The whole continent
can shew no such archer as I am ; but kings would scorn me because I am
a dwarf. And so you, friend, must be the man to vaunt your prowess
with the bow, and the king will take you into his pay [357] and make you
ply your calling regularly. Meantime I shall be behind you to perform
the duties that are laid upon you, and so shall earn my living in your
shadow. In this manner we shall both of us thrive and prosper. Only do
as I tell you." "Done with you," said the other.
Accordingly, the Bodhisatta took the weaver with him to Benares,
acting as a little page of the bow, and putting the other in the front ; and
when they were at the gates of the palace, he made him send word of his
coming to the king. Being summoned into the royal presence, the pair
entered together and bowing stood before the king. "What brings you
hei'e?" said the king. "1 am a mightyarcher," said Bhimasena; "there is
no archer like me in the whole continent." "What pay would you want
to enter my service?" "A thousand pieces a fortnight, sire." "What is
this man of yours?" "He's my little page, sire." " Very well, enter my
service."
So Bhimasenaentered the king's service
;
but itwasthe Bodhisattawho
did all his work for him. Now in those days there was a tiger in a forest
in Kclsi which blocked a frequented high-road and had devoured many
victims. When this was reported to the king, he sent for Bhimasena and
asked whether he could catch the tiger.
"How could I call myself an archer, sire, if I couldn't catch a tiger?"
The king gave him largesse and sent him on the errand. And home to
the Bodhisatta came Bhimasena with the news. "All right," said the
Bodhisatta; "away you go, my friend." "But are you not coming too?"
"No, I won't go ; but I'll tell you a little plan." "Please do, my friend."
"Well don't you be rash and approach the tiger's lair alone. What you
will do is to muster a strong band ofcountryfolk to march to the spot with
a thousand or two thousand bows ; when you know that the tiger is
aroused, you bolt into the thicket and lie down flat on your face. The
countryfolk will beat the tiger to death ; and as soon as he is quite dead,
you bite off" a creeper with your teeth, and draw near to the dead tiger,
ti-ailing the creeper in your hand. At the sight of the dead body of the
brute, you will burst out with— ' Who has killed the tiger? I meant to
lead it [358] by a creeper, like an ox, to the king, and with this intenthad
1 The namemeans "onewhohas or leads a terrible army;" it is the name of the
second Pandava.

—
! ; ;
No. 80. 205
just stepped into the thicket to get a creeper. I must know who killed the
tiger before I could get hack with my creeper.' Thenthe countryfolk will
be very frightened and bribe you heavily not to report them to the king
you will be credited with slaying the tiger • and the king too will give you
lots of money."
"Very good," said Bhimasena; and offhe went and slew the tigerjust
as the Bodhisatta had told him. Having thus made the road safe for
travellers, back he came with a large following to Benares, and said to the
king, '*I have killed the tiger, sire; the foi'est is safe for travellers now."
Well-pleased, the king loaded him with gifts.
Another day, tidings came that a certain road was infested with a
buffalo,and thekingsent Bhimasena to kill it. Following the Bodhisatta's
directions, he killed the buffalo in the same way as the tiger, and returned
to the king, who once more gave him lots ofmoney. He was a great lord
now. Intoxicated by his new honoiirs, he treated the Bodhisatta with
contempt, and scorned to follow his advice, saying, "I can get on without
you. Do you think there's no man but yourself?" This and many other
harsh things did he say to the Bodhisatta.
Now, a few days later, a hostile king marched upon Benares and
beleaguered it, sending a message to the king summoning him either to
surrender his kingdom or to do battle. And the king of Benares ordered
Bhimasenaouttofighthim. So Bhimasenawasarmedcap-a-i)ieinsoldierly
fashion and mounted on a war-elephant sheathedin complete armour. And
the Bodhisatta, who wassei-iously alarmed that Bhimasena might got killed,
armedhimself cap a-jjiealso andseated himselfmodestlybehind Bhimasena.
Surrounded by a host, the elephant«passed out of the gates ofthe city and
arrived in the forefront of the battle. At the first notes of the martial
drum Bhimasena fell a-quaking with fear. *'Ifyou fall offnow, you'll get
killed,"saidtheBodhisatta,andaccordinglyfastened acord roundhim,which
he held tight, to prevent him from falling offthe elei>hant. But the sight
ofthe field of battle proved too much for Bhimasena, and the fear of death
was so sti-ong on him that he fouled the elephant's back. "Ah," said the
Bodhisatta, "the present does not tally with the past. Then you affected
the warrior ; now your prowess is confined to befouling the elephant you
ride on." And so saying, he uttered this stanza :
[359] You vaunted your prowess, and loud was your boast
You swore you would vanquish the foe
But is it consistent, when faced with their host,
To vent your emotion, sir, so?
When the Bodhisatta had ended these taunts, he said, " But don't you
be afraid, my friend. Am not I here to protect you 1 " Then he made
Bhimasena get off the ele])hant and bade him wash himselfand go home.
"And now to win renown this day," said the Bodhisatta, raising his
I

206 TJie Jataha. Book I.
battle-cry as he dashed into the fight. Breaking through the king's
camp, he dragged the king out and took him alive to Benares. In great
joy at his prowess, his royal master loaded him with honours, and from
that day forward all India was loud with the fame of the Sage Little
Bowman. To Bhimaseua he gave lai-gesso, and sent him back to his own
home; whilst he himself excelled in charity and all good works, and at
his death jiassed away to fare according to his deserts.
"Thus, Brethren," said the Master, "this is not the first time that this
Brother has been a braggart ; he was just the same in bygone days too." His
lesson ended, the Master shewed the connexion and identified the Birth by
saying, "This braggart Brother was the Bhunasena of those days, and I myself
the Sage Little Bowman."
No. 81.
SURAPANA-JATAKA,
[360] " We dranh.^—Thxii story was told by the Master about the Elder
Sagata, while he was dwelling in the Ghosita-park near Kosambl.
For, after spending the rainy season at Savatthi, the Master had come on an
alms-pilgrimage to a market-town named Bhaddavatika, where cowherds and
goatherds and farmers and wayfarers respectfully besought him not to go down
to the Mango Ferry; "for," said they, "in the Mango Ferry, in the demesne of
the naked ascetics, dwells a poisonous and deadly Naga, known as the Niiga of
the Mango Ferry, who might harm the Blessed One." Feigning not to hear
them, though they repeated their warning thrice, the Blessed One held on his
way. Whilst the Blessed One was dwelling near Bhaddavatika in a certain
grove there, the Elder Sagata, a servant of the Buddha, who had won such
supernatural powers as a worldling can possess, went to the demesne, piled a
couch of leaves at the spot where the Naga-king dwelt, and sate himself down
cross-legged thereon. Being unable to conceal his evil nature, the Niiga raised
a great smoke. So did the Elder. Then the Naga sent forth flames. So too
did the Elder. But, whilst the Naga's flames did no harm to the Elder, the
Elder's flames did do harm to the Naga, and so in a short time he mastered the
Naga-king and established him in the Refuges and the Commandments, after
which he repaired back to the ]\Iaster. And the Master, afterdwellingas long
as it pleased him at Bhaddavatika, went on to Kosambl. Now the story of the
Naga's conversion by Sagata, had got noised abroad all over the countryside,
and thetownsfolk of Kosambl went forth to meet the Blessed One and saluted
him, after which they passed to the Elder Sagata and saluting him, said, "Tell
us, sir, what you lack and we will furnish it." The Elder himself remained

No. 81. 207
silent; but the followers of the Wicked Six^ made answeras follows:—"Sirs, to
those who have renounced the world, white spirits are as rare as they are
acceptable. Do you think you could get the Elder some clear wliite spirit?"
"To be sure we can," said the townsfolk, and invited tlic Master to take his
meal with them next day. Then they went back to their own town and
arranged that each in his own h<nise should offer clear white spirit to the
Elder, and accordingly they all laid in a store and invited the Elder in and
plied him with the liquor, house by house. So deep were his potations that,
on his way out of town, the Elder fell prostrate in the gateway and tliere lay
hiccoughing nonsense. On his way back from his meal in the town, the Master
came on the Elder lying in this state, and bidding the Brethren carry Sagata
home, [361] passed on his way to the pai-k. The Brethren laid the Ekler down
with his head at the Buddha's feet, but he turned round so that he came to lie
with his feet towards the Buddha. Then the Master asked his question,
"Brethren,does Sagata shew that respect towards me now that heformerlydid?"
"No, sir." "Tell me. Brethren, who it was that mastered the Naga-king of the
Mango Ferry?" "It was Sagata, sir." "Think you that in his present state
Sagata could master even a harmless water-snake?" "That he could not, sir."
"Well now. Brethren, is it proper to drink that which, when drunk, steals away
a man's senses?" "It is improper, sir." Now, after discoursing with the
Brethren in dispraise of the Elder, the Blessed One laid it down as a precept
that the drinking of intoxicants was an offence requiring confession and absolu-
tion after which he rose up and passed into his perfumed chamber.
;
Assembling together in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren discussed the sin of
spirit-drinking, saying, "What a great sin is the drinking of spirits, sirs, seeing
that it has blinded to the Buddha's excellence even one so wise and so gifted
as Sagata." Entering the Hall of Truth at this iM)int, the Master asked what
t t o h p e ic fi t i' h st ey ti w m e e re t d h i a s t cu t s h s e i y ng w;h a o nd ha t d hey re t n o o ld un h c i e m d . th " e Br w e o t r h l r d en, h " av s e aid lo h s e t , t " h t e h i i r s s i e s n n s o e t s
through drinking spirits the very same thing took place in liygone days."
And so saying, he told this ; story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a northern bralnnin-family in Kasi and when
;
he grew up, he renounced the world for the hermit's life. He won the
Higher Knowledges and the Attainments, and dwelt in the enjoy-
ment of the bliss of Insight in the Himalayas, with five hundred pupils
around him. Once, when the rainy season had come, his pupils said to
him, "Master, may we go to the haunts of men and bring back salt
and vinegar?" "For my own part, sirs, I shall remain here; but you
may go for your health's sake, and come back when the rainy season
is over."
"Very good," said they, and taking a respectful leave of their master,
came to Benares, where they took up their abode in the royal pleasaunce.
On the morrow they went in quest of alms to a village just outside the
city gates, where they had plenty to eat ; and next day they made their
way into the city itself. The kindly citizens gave alms to them, and the
king wassoon informed that five hundred hermits from tlie Himalayas had
^ Seenote on pape 71.

—
208 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
taken up their abode iu the royal pleasaunce, and that they were ascetics
of great austerity, subduing the flesh, and of great virtue. Hearing this
good character of them, the king went to the pleasaunce and graciously
made them welcome [362] to stay there for four months. They promised
thattheywould, and thenceforthwerefed in the royal palace and lodged in
the pleasaunce. But one day a drinking festival was held in the city, and
the king gave the five hundred hermits a large supply of the best spirits,
knowing that such things rarely come in the way of those who renounce
the world and its vanities. The ascetics drank the liquor and went back
to the pleasaunce. There, in drunken hilarity, some danced, some sang,
whilst others, wearied ofdancing and singing, kicked about their rice-ham-
—
pers and other belongings, after which they lay down to sleep. "When
they had slept offtheir drunkenness and awoke to see the traces of their
revelry, they wept and lamented, saying, " We have done that which we
ought not to have done. We have done this evil because we are away
from our master." Forthwith, they quitted the pleasaunce and returned
to the Himalayas. Laying aside their bowls and other belongings, they
saluted their master and took their seats. "Well, my sons," said he,
"were you comfortable amid the haunts of men, and were you spared
weary journeyings in quest of alms? Did you dwell in unity one with
another?"
"Yes, master, we were comfortable; but we drank forbidden drink, so
that, losing our senses and forgetting ourselves, we both danced and
sang." And by wa}^ of setting the matter forth, they composed and
repeated this stanza :
We drank, we danced, we sang, we wept ; 'twas well
That, when we drank the drink that steals away
The senses, we were not transformed to apes.
"This is what is sure to happen to those who are not living under
a master's care," said the Bodhisatta, rebuking those ascetics; and he
exhorted them saying, "Henceforth, never do such a thing again."
Living on with Insight unbroken, he became destined to re birth there-
after in the Brahma Realm.
[36.3] His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth (and henceforth we
shallomit the words 'shewed the connexion'), by saying,—"My disciples were
thebaud ofhermits ofthose days, and I theirteacher."

— —
No. 82. 209
No. 82.
MITTAVINDA-JATAKA.
—
"No more to dwell." This story was told hy the Master while at Jetavana,
about a self-willed Brother. The incidents ofthis Birth, which took place in the
days of the Buddha Kassapa, will be related in the Tenth Book in the Mahil-
MittavindakaJataka*.
Then the Bodhisatta uttered this Stanza :
No^more to dwell in island palaces
Of crystal, silver, or of sparkling gems,
With flinty headgear thou'rt invested now;
Nor shall its griding torture ever cease
Till all thy sin be purged and life shall end.
So saying, tlie Bodhisatta passed to his own abode among the Devas.
And Mittavindaka, having donned thatlieadgear, suffered grievous tomnent
till his sin had been spent and he passed away to fare according to his
deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth, by saying, "This self-
willed Brotherwas the Mittavindaka ofthose days, and I myselfthe Kingofthe
Devas."
No. 83.
KALAKANNI-JATAKA. [364]
—
"-4friendishe." Thisstorywas told bythe MasterwhileatJetavana,about
a friend ofAnatha-pindika's. Tradition says that the two had made mud-pies
together, and had gone to the same school but, as years went by, the friend,
;
whose name was 'Curse,' sank into great distress and could not make a living
anyhow. So he came to the rich man, who was kind to him, and paid him to
look after all his property; and the poor friend was employed under Anfitha-
pindika and did all his business forhim. Aft—erhe hadgone up to the rich man's
it was a common thingto hear in the house "Stand up, Curse," or "Sit down,
Curse," or "Have your dinner. Curse."
1 No. 439. SeeNo. 41, and Divy;1vadana, p. 603, &c.
c. J. 14

—
210 Tlie Jataha. Booh I.
One day the Treasurer's friends and acquaintances called on him and said,
"Lord Treasurer, don't let this sort ofthing go on in yourhouse. It's enough to
scare an ogre to hear such ill-omened observations as—'Stand up, Curse,' or
e d 'S q o i u t a w l i d t o ; h w h n e h , ' i ' s m C a ? u " r m s i e, " s ' e N r o o a t r bl s ' e o H ," a wr v r e e e t p c l y h i o e , u d r d A o n d g a i g t n e n h d e a r - b , p y i C n u m d r i i s s e k f . a o ' r ; tu " T n a e h . n e a m m W e a h n o y nl is y ha s n v e o e r t ve a y s n o y t u t o r h d i s e n o n g c o i t t a e o l
a man, and the wise do not measure a man i)y his name ; nor is itproperto wax
superstitious aboiit mere sounds. Neverwill I throw over, for his mere name's
sake, the friend with whom I made mud-pies as a child." And he rejected their
advice.
One day thegreat man departed to visit a village of which he was headman,
leaving the other in charge of the house. Hearing of his departiire certain
robbers made up their mind to break into thehouse ; and, arming themselves to
the teeth,theysurrounded it in the night-time. But 'Curse'had a suspicion that
burglars might beexpected,and wassittingupforthem. Andwhenheknewthat
they had come, he ran about as if to rouse his people, bidding one sound the
conch,anotherbeatthe dnmi, till he had the whole house fidl ofnoise, as though
he were rousinga whole army of servants. Said the robbers, "The house is not
so empty as we were told the master must be at home." Flinging away their
;
stones, clubs and other weapons, away they bolted for their lives. Next day
great alarm was caused by the sight of all the discarded weapons ly—ing round
thehouse
;
and Curse was lauded to the skies by .such praises as this: "If the
house had not been patrolled byone so wise as this man, the robbers would have
simply walked in at their own pleasure and have phuidered the house. The
Treasurerowes this strokeofgood luck to his staunchfriend." And the moment
the merchant came back from his village they hastened to tell him the whole
story. "Ah," said he, "this is the trusty guardian of my house whom you
wanted me to get rid of. IfI had taken your advice and gotridofhim, I should
be a beggar to-day. It's not the name but the heart within that makes the
man." So saying he raised his wages. And thinking that here was a good
story [365] to tell, offhe went to the Master and gave him a complete account of
it ail, right through. "This is not the fir.st time, sir," said the Master, "that
a friend named Curse has saved his friend's wealth from lobbers ; the like hap-
pened in bygone days as well." Then, at Aniltha-pindika's request, he told this
story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a Treasurer of great renown ; and he had a friend whose
name was Curse, and so on as in the foregoing story. When on his return
from his zemindary the Bodhisatta heard what had happened he said to
his friends, "If I had taken your advice atid got rid of my trusty friend, I
should liave been a beggar to-day." And he repeated this stanza:
A
friend is he that seven steps will go
To help us^; twelve attest the comrade true.
A
fortnight or a month's tried loyalty
— Makes kindred, longer time a second self.
Then how shall I, who all these years have known
My friend, be wise in driving Curse away ?
His lesson ended,the Master identified the Birth bysaying, "Ananda was the
Curse ofthose days, and I myselfthe Treasurer ofBenares."
^ See Griffith's"OldIndian Poetry," p. 27; and Panini's rule, v. 2. 22.

—
;
No. 84. 211
No. 84.
ATTHASSADVARA-JATAKA. [36G]
—
'^Seek health" This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana, about a
boy who was sage in matters relating to spiritual welfare. When he was only
seven yearsold,theboy, whowasthe son ofa verywealtliy Treasurer, manifested
great intelligence and anxiety for his si)iritual welfare; and one day came to his
fatherto ask what were tlie Paths lead—ing to spii-itual welfare. The father could
not answer, but he thought to himself, "This is a very difficult question; from
highest heaven to nethermost hell there is none that can answer it, save only the
All-knowing Buddha." So he took the child with him to Jetavana, with a
quantity ofperfumes and flowers and unguents. Arrived there, he did reverence
to the Master, bowed down be—fore him, and seating himself on one side, spoke as
follows to the Blessed One: "Sir, this boy of mine, who is intelligent and
anxious for his spiritual welfare, has asked me what are the Paths leading to
spiritual welfare ; and as I did not know, I came to you. Vouchsafe, O Blessed
One, to resolve this question." "Lay-brother," said the Master, "this selfsame
question was asked me by this very child in former times, and I answered it for
him. He knew tlie answer in bygone days, but now he has forgotten because of
change ofbirth." Then, at the father's request, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Bralimadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a very wealthy Treasurer and he had a son who, when
;
only seven years old, manifested great intelligence and anxiety for his^
spiritual welfare. One day the child came to his father to ask what were
the Paths leading to spiritual welfare. And his father answered him by
repeating this stanza ;
Seek Health, the supreme good; be virtuous;
Hearken to elders from the scriptures learn
;
C — onform to Truth ; and burst Attachment's bonds.
For chiefly these six Paths to Welfare lead.
[367] In this wise did the Bodhisatta answer his son's question as to
the Paths that lead to spiritual welfare ; and the boy from that time
forward followed those six rules. After a life spent in charity and other
good works, the Bodhisatta passed away to fare thereafter according to
his deserts.
Hislesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This child was
also the child ofthose days, and I myselfthe Lord Treasurer."
14—2

;
212 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
No. 85.
KIMPAKKA-JATAKA.
—
"Js they ivho ate." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavaiia,
about aconcupiscent Brother. Tradition saystherewas a scion ofagood family
who gave his heart to theBuddha'sdoctrineandjoinedtheBrotherhood. Butone
day as he was going his round for alms in Savatthi, he was there stirred to
concupiscence bythe sight of a beautifully dressed woman. Being brought b}'
his teachers and directors before the Master, he admitted in answer to the en-
quiries of the Blessed One that the spirit ofconcupiscence had entered into him.
Then said the Master, "Verily the five lusts of the senses are sweet in the hour
of actual enjoyment, Brother; but this enjoyment of them (in that it entails
the miseries of re-birth in hell and the other evil states) is like the eating
of the fruit of the AMiat-fruit tree. Very fair to view is the What-fruit, very
fragrant and sweet ; but when eaten, it racks the inwards and brings death. In
otherdays,through ignorance [368]ofitsevil nature,a multitudeofmen, seduced
by the beauty, fragrance and sweetnessofthe fruit,atethereofsothattheydied."
Sosaying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta came to life as the leader of a caravan. Once whenjourneying
with five hundred caits from East to West, he ca—me to the outskirts of a
forest. Assembling his men, he said to them : "In this forest grow
trees that bear poisonous fruit. Let no man eat any unfamiliar fruit
without first asking me." When they had ti-aversed the forest, they came
at the other border on a What-fruit tree with its boughs bending low with
their burthen offruit. In form, smell and taste, its trunk, boughs, leaves
and fruit resembled a mango. Taking the tree, from its misleading
appearance and so forth, to be a mango, some plucked the fruit and ate
but others said, "Let us speak to our leader before we eat." And these
latter, plucking the fruit, waited for hinx to come up. When he came, he
ordered them to fling away the fruit they had plucked, and had an emetic
administered to those who had already eaten. Of these latter, some
recovered ; but such as had been the first to eat, died. The Bodhisatta
reached his destination in safety, and sold his wares at a profit, after
which he travelled home again. After a life spent in charity and other
good works, he passed away to fare according to his deserts.

—
No. 86. 213
It was when he had told this story, that the Master,as Buddha, uttered this
stanza:
As they who ate the What-fruit died, so Lusts,
When ripe, slay him who knowing not the woe
They breed hereafter, stoops to lustful deeds.
Having thus shewn that the Lusts,which are so sweetin the houroffruition,
end by slaying their votaries, the Master preaclied the Four Truths, at the close
[369] whereof the concupiscent Brother was converted and won the Fruit of the
First Path. Of the rest of the Buddha's following some won the First, some
the Second, and some the Third Path, whilst others again became Arahats.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "My disciples
were the people ofthe caravan in those days, and I their leader."
No. 86.
SiLAVIMAMSANA-JATAKA.
—
"Ncmght cancompare." This storywastoldbythe Masterwhile atJetavana,
about a brahmin who put to the test his reputation forgoodness. This Brother,
who was maintained by the King of Kosala, had sought the Three Refuges ; he
kept the Five Commandments, and was versed in the Three Vedas. "This is
a good man," thought the King, and shewed him great honour. But that
Brother thought to himself, "The King shews honour to me beyond other
brahmins, and has manifested his great regard by making me his spiritual
director. But is his favour due to my goodness or only to my Ijirth, lineage,
family, country and accomplishments? I must clear this up without delay."
Accordingly, one day when he was leaving the palace, he took unbidden a coin
from a treasurer's counter, and went his way. Such was the treasurer's venei-a-
tion for the brahmin that he sat perfectly still and said not a word. Next day
the brahmin took two coins ; but still the official made no remonstrance. The
third day the brahmin took a whole handful of coins. "This is the third day,"
cried the tre—asurer, "that you have robl)ed his Majesty;" and he shouted out
three times, "I have caught the thief who robs the treasury." In rushed a
crowd ofpeople from every side, crying, "Ah, you've long been posingas a model
of goodness." And dealing him two or three blows, they led him before the
King. In great sorrow the King said to him, "What led you, brahmin, to do so
wicked a thingT' And he gave orders, saying, "Off with him to punishment."
"I am no thief, sire," said the brahmin. "Then why did you take money from
the treasury?" "Becauseyou shewed me such gretit honour, sire, and because I
made up my mind to find out whetherthat honourwas paid to my birth and the
like or only to my goodness. That was ray motive, and now I know for certain
(inasmuch as you order me off to punishment) that it was my goodness and not
mybirth and otheradvantages,that won me your majesty's favour. Goodness I
knowtobe the chiefand supremegood ; I know too that to goodness [370] 1 can

214 The Jataka. Book I.
neverattain iu this life, whilst I remain a layman, living in the midst of sinful
pleasures. Wherefore, this very day I would fain go to the Masterat Jetavana
and renounce the world for the Brotherhood. Grant me your leave, sire." The
King consenting, the brahmin set out forJetavana. His friends and relations in
a body tried to turn him from his purpose, but, finding their efforts of no avail,
left him alone. He came to tlie Master and asked to beadmittedtothe Brother-
hood. After admission to the lower and higher orders, he won by application
spiritual insight and became an Arahat, whereon he drew near to the IMastei',
saying, "Sir, my joining the Order has borne the Supreme Fruit,"—thereby
signifyingthathe hadwon Arahatship. Hearingofthis,theBrethren,assembling
in the Hall ofTruth,spoke withone another ofthe virtues oftheKing'schaplain
who tested his own reputation forgoodness and who, leaving the King, had now
risen to be an Arahat. Entering the Hall, the Master asked what the Brethren
were discussing, and they told him. "Not without a precedent, Brethren," said
he, "is the action of this brahmin in putting to the test his reputation for
goodness and in working out his salvation after renouncing the world. The like
was done by the wise and good ofbygone days as well." And so saying, he told
thisstory ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahniadatta was reigning in Benares, the
—
Bodhisatta was liis chaplain, a man given to charity and other good
works, whose mind was set on righteousness, always keeping unbroken
the Five Commandments. And the King honoured him beyond the otlier
brahmins ; and everything came to pass as above.
But, as the Bodhisatta was being brought in Ijonds l)ef()re the King,
he came where some snake-charmers were exhibiting a snake, which they
laid hokl of by tlie tail and the throat, and tied round their necks.
Seeing this, the Bodhisatta begged the men to desist, for tlie sn;ike might
bite them and cut their lives short. "Brahmin," reidied the snake-
charmers, "this is a good and well-behaved cobra; he's not wicked like
you, who for your wickedness and misconduct are being hauled off in
custody."
Thought the Bodhisatta to liimself, "Even cobias, if they do not bite
or wound, are called 'good.' How much more must this be the case with
those who have come to be human beings ! Verily it isjust this goodness
which is the most excellent thing in all the world, nor [371] does aught
surpass it." Tlien he was brought before the King. "What is this, my
friends'?" said the King. "Here's a thief who has been robbing your
majesty's treasury." "Away witli liim to execution." "Sire," said the
brahmin, "I am no thief." "Then how came you to take the money —1 "
Hereon theBodhisatta madeanswerpi-ecisely asabove, endingasfollows:
"This then is why I have come to the conclusion that it is goodness which
is the highest and most excellent thing in all the world. But be that as
it may, yet, seeing that the cobra, when it does not bite or wound, must
simply be called 'good' and nothing more, for this reason too it is

—
No. 87. 215
goodness alone which is the highest and most excellent of all things."
Then in praise ofgoodness he uttered this stanza
:
Naught can compare with Goodness; all the world
Can not its equal show. The cobra fell,
If men account it 'good,' is saved from death.
After preaching the truth to the King in this stanza, the Bodhisatta,
abjuring all Lusts, and renouncing the world for the hermit's life, repaired
to the Himalayas, where he attained to the five Knowledges and the
eight Attainments, earning for himselfthe sure hope of re-birth thereafter
in the Brahma Realm.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "My disciples
were the King's following in those days, and I myselfthe King's chaplain."
[iVoie. Compare Nos. 290, 330, and 362 ; and see Peer'sEtudes sur leJdtaka.]
No. 87.
MAMGALA-JATAKA.
—
" Whoso renounces." This storywas told by the Master while atthe Bamboo-
grove about a brahmin who was skilled in the prognostications [372] which can
bedrawnfrompiecesofclothi. Tradition says that at Rajagaha dwelt a brahmin
who was superstitious and held false views, not believing in the Three Gems.
This brahmin was very rich and wealthy, abounding in substance; and a female
mouse gnawed a suit of clothes of his, which was lying by in a chest. One day
after bathing himself all over, he called for this suit, and then was told of the
mischiefwhichthemousehaddone. "Iftheseclothesstop in the house,"thought
he to himself, "they'll bring ill-luck; such an ill-omened thing is sure to bring
a for cu w r h se o . soe It ve i r s o h u a t s o t f h t e h m e q wi u l e l st b i r o i n ng t<.) m g i i s v f e or t t h u e n m e t o o n a a n l y l o a f ro m u y nd ch h i i l m d . ren I or m s u e s r t va h n a t v s e;
them thrown away in a charnel-grouud-; but how? I cannot hand them to
servants ; for they might covet and keep them, to the ruin of my house. JNIy
son must take them." So he called his son, and telling him the whole matter
bade him take his charge on a stick, without touching the clothes with his hand,
and liing them away in a charnel-ground. Then the sou was to bathe himself
all over and return. Now that morning at dawn of day the Master looking
^ Cf. TevijjaSuttatranslatedby RhysDavidsin "Buddhist Suttas," p. 197.
^ An umaka-susdna was an open space or grove in which corpses were exposed
for wild-beasts to eat, in order that the earth might not be defiled. Cf. the Parsee
'Towers ofSilence.'

;
216 The Jatakct. Booh I.
round to see what persons could be led to the truth, became aware that the
fetherand sonwere predestined to attain salvation. So he betook himselfin the
guise ofa hunter on liis wayto hunt,to the charnel-ground,and sate down at the
entrance, emitting the six-coloured rays that mark a Buddha. Soon there came
to the spot the young brahmin, carefully carrying the clothes as his father had
bidden him, on the end of his stick,—just as though he had a house-snake to
carry.
"What are you doing,young brahmin?" asked the Master.
"]\Iygood Gotamai," ^^s the reply,"this suit ofclothes,havingbeen gnawed
by mice, is like ill-luck personified, and as deadly as though steeped in venom
wherefore my father, fearing that a servant might covet and retain the clothes,
has sent me with them. I promised that I would tlirow them away and bathe
afterwards; and that's the errand that has brought me here." "Throw the suit
away, then," said the Master; and the young brahmin did so. "They will just
suit me," said the Master, as he picked up the fate-fraught clothes before the
young man's very eyes, regardless of the latter's earnest warnings and repeated
entreaties to him not to take them; and he departed in the direction of
the Bamboo-grove.
Home in all haste ran the young brahmin, to tell his father how the Sage
Gotama had declared that the clothes would just suit him, and had persisted,
in spite of all warnings to the contrary, in taking the suit away with him to the
Bamboo-grove. "Those clothes,"thoughtthe brahmin to himself,"are bewitched
and accursed. Even the sage Gotama cannot wear them without destruction
befalling him ; and that would Vu-ing me into disrepute. 1 will give the Sage
abundanceof other gtirments and get him to throw that suit away." So with a
large number of robes he started in company of his son forthe Bamboo-grove.
A—Vhen he came upon theMaster hestoodrespectfullyon one side and spoke thus,
"Is it indeed true, as I hear,that you,mygood Gotama,[373] picked up a suit
of clothes in the charnel-ground?" "Quite true, brahmin." "My good Gotama,
that suit is accursed ; if you make use of them, they will destroy you. If you
stand in need of clothes, take these and throw away that suit." "Brahmin,"
replied the Master, "by open profession I have renounced the world, and am
content with the rags that lie by the roadside or bathing-places, or are thrown
away on dustheaps or in charnel-grounds. Whereas you have held your super-
stitious in bygone days, as well as at the present time." So saying, at the
brahmin'srequest, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time there reigned in the city of Rajagaha, in the kingdom
of Magadha, a righteous King of Magadha. In those days the Bodhisatta
came to life again as a brahmin of the North-west. Growing up, be
renounced the world for the hermit's life, won the Knowledges and the
Attainments, and went to dwell in the Himalayas. On one occasion,
returning from the Himalayas, and taking up his abode in the King's
pleasaunce, he went on the second day into the city to collect alms.
Seeing him, the King had him summoned into the palace and there
—
provided with a seat and with food, exacting a promise from him that
he would take up his abode in the pleasaunce. So the Bodhisatta used to
receive his food at the palace and dwell in the grounds.
—
' In Pali hlio Gotama, a form of familiar address. Brahmins are always repre-
sentedas presuming to say hho tothe Buddha.

—
No. 88. 217
Now in those days there dwelt in that city a brahmin known as
Cloth-omens. And he had in a chest a suit of clothes which were gnawed
by mice, and everything came to pass just as in the foregoing story. But
whenthe son was on hisway tothecharnel-ground the Bodhisattagot there
first and took his seat at the gate ; and, picking up the suit which the
young brahmin threw away, he returned to the pleasaunce. When the
son told this to the old brahmin, the latter exclaimed, "It will be the
death of the King's ascetic" ; and entreated the Bodhisatta to throw that
suit away, lest he should perish. But the ascetic replied, "Good enough
for us are the rags that are flung away in charnel-grounds. We have
no beliefin superstitions about luck, which are not approved by Buddlias,
Pacceka Buddhas, or Bodhisattas and therefore no wise man ought to
;
be a believer in luck." Hearing the truth thus expounded, tlie brahmin
forsook his errors and took refuge in the Bodhisatta. And the Bodhisatta,
preserving his Insight unbroken, earned re-birth thereafter in the Brahma
Realm. [374.]
Having told this story, the Master, as Buddha, taught the Truth to
the brahmin in this stanza
:
Whoso renounces omens, dreams and signs,
That man, from superstition's errors freed,
Shall triumph o'er the paired Depravities
And o'er Attachments to the end of time.
When the Master had thus preached his dcjctrinc to the l)rahiain in the form
of this stanza, he proceeded further to jn-each the Four Truths, at the close
whereof that brahmin, with his son, attained to the First Path. The Master
identified the Birth bysaying, "The father and son ofto-daywere also the father
and son ofthose days, and I myselfthe ascetic."
No. 88.
SARAMBHA-JATAKA.
''Speak /!-i/ic%."—This story was told 1)}^ the Master while at Sfivattlii, aV)Out
the precept touching abusive language. The introductory story and the story of
the past are the same as in the Nandivisala-jataka above'.
But in tliis case [375] there is the difference that tlie Bodhisatta was an
ox named Sarambha, and belonged to a brahmin of Takkasila in the kingdom
1 No. 28.

—
218 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
of(iandhara. Aftci- tellingthe story ofthepast,the Master,as Buddha, uttered
this stanza:
Si)cak kindly, revile not your fellow;
Love kindness; reviling breeds sorrow.
"An W a h n e da n t w l a ie s Ma th s e ter br h a a h d mi e n nde o d f h t i h s os l e ess d o a n ys h , e U i p de p n a t l if a i v e a d nn t a he h B i i s rth wif b e y , s a a n y d ing 1 ,
Sarainbha."
No. 89.
KUHAKA-JATAKA.
^'How plausible.'^ This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana
aboluUtta knave. The details ofhis knaverywill be related in the Uddfda-jatakai.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, there
lived hard l)y a certain little village a shifty rascal of an ascetic, of the
class which wears long, matted hair. The squire of the place had a
hermitage built in the forest for him to dwell in, and used to provide
excellent fare for him in his own house. Taking the matted-haired rascal
to be amodelofgoodness, and living as hedid in fear of robbers, the squire
brought a hundred pieces of gold to the hermitage and there buried them,
bidding the ascetic keep watch over them. "No need to say that, sir, to
a man who has renounced the world ; we hermits never covet other folks'
goods." "It is well, sir," said the squire, who went offwith full confidence
in the other's protestations. Then the rascally ascetic thought to himself,
"there's enough here [376] to keep a man all his life long." Allowing a
few days to elapse first, he removed the gold and buried it by tlie wayside,
returning to dwell as before in his hermitage. Next day, after a meal of
rice at the squire's house, the ascetic said, "It is now a long time, sir, (
since I began to be supporte — d by you ; and to live long in one j^lace
is like living in the world, which is forbidden to professed ascetics.
Wherefore I must needs depart." And though the squire pi'essed him to
stay, nothing could overcome this determination.
1 No. 487.

—
No. 89. 219
"Well, then, if it luust be so, go your way, sir," said the squire and
;
he escorted the ascetic to the outskirts before he left him. After going a
little way the ascetic thought that it would be a good thing to cajoh; the
squire ; so, putting a straw in his matted hair, back he turn(!d again.
"What brings you back 1 " asked the squire. "A straw from your roof,
sir, had stuck in my hair ; and, as we hermits may not take anything
which is not bestowed upon us, I have brought it back to you." "Throw it
down, sir, aiid go your way," said the squire, who thought to liimself,
"Why, he won't take so much as a straw which does not belong to him
!
What a sensitive nature!" Highly delighted with the ascetic, the squire
bade him farewell.
Now at that time it chanced that the Bodhisatta, who was on his way
to the border-district for trading purjioses, had halted for the night at
that village. Hearing what the ascetic said, the sus[)icion was aroused in
his mind that the rascally ascetic must have robbed the squire of some-
thing and he asked the latter whether he had deposited anything in the
;
ascetic's care.
—
"Yes, a hundred pieces ofgold."
"Well, just go and see ifit's all safe."
Away went the squire to the hermitage, and looked, and found his
money gone. Running back to the Bodhisatta, he cried, "It's not there."
"The thief is none other than that long-haired rascal of an ascetic," said
the Bodhisatta; "let us pursue and catch him." So away they hastened
in hot pursuit. When they caught the rascal they kicked and cuffed him,
till he discovered to them where he had hidden the money. When lie
procured the gold, the Bodhisatta, looking at it, scornfully remarked
to the ascetic, "So a hundred pieces of gold didn't trouble your conscience
so much as that sti'aw!" And he rebuked him in this stanza :
How plausible the story that the rascal told
How heedful of the straw I How heedless of ! the gold I
[37—7] When the Bodhisatta had rebuked the fellow in this wise, he
added, "And now take care, you hypocrite, that you don't play such a
trick again." When his life ended, the Bodhisatta 2'assed away to fare
thereafter according to his deserts.
His le«S(in ended,the Master said, "Thus you see, Brethren,that this lirother
was as knavish in the past as he is to-day." And he identitied the Birtli by
saying, "This knavish Brother was the knavish ascetic of those days, and I the
wise and srood man."

220 The Jataka. Booh I.
No. 90.
AKATANxNU-JATAKA.
—
"The manungrateful." This story was tokl bythe Master while at Jetavana,
alM)ut Aiiatha-pindika.
On the borders, so the tale goes, there lived a merchant, who was a corre-
spondent and a friend of An.itha-pindika's, but they had never met. There
came a time when this merchant loaded five hundred carts with local produce
and gave orders to the men in charge to go to the great merchant Anatha-
pindika, and barter the wares in his correspondent's shop for their value, and
bring back the goods received in exchange. So they came to Savatthi, and
found Anatha-pindika. First making him a present, they told him their
business. "You are welcome," said the great man, and ordered them to be
lodged there and provided with money for their needs. After kindly encpiiries
after their master's health, he bartered their merchandise and gave them the
goods in exchange. Then they went back to Lheir own district, and reported
what had happened.
Shortly afterwards, Anatha-pindika similarly despatched five hundred carts
with merchandise to the very district in which they dwelt ; and his people,
when they had got there, went, present in hand, to call upon the border
merchant. "Where do you come fromT' said he. "From Savatthi," replied
they ; "from your correspondent, Anatha-pindika." "Anyone can call himself
Anatha-pindika," said he with a sneer and taking their present, he bade them
;
begone, giving them neither lodging nor douceur. So they bartered theirgoods
for themselves and brought back the wai'cs in exchange to Savatthi, with the
story ofthe reception they had had.
Now it chanced [378] that this border merchant despatched another caravan
of fiv^e hundred carts to Savattlii ; and his people came with a present in their
hands to wait upon Anatha-pindika. But, as soon as Anatha-pindika's people
caught sight ofthem, they said, "Oh, we'll see, sir,that they are properly lodged,
fed, and supplied with money for their needs." And they took the strangers
outside the city and bade them unyoke their carts at a suitable spot, adding
that rice and a douceur would come from Anatha-pindika's house. About the
middle watch of the night, having collected a band of serving-men and slaves,
they looted the whole caravan, carried off every garment the men had got,
drove away their oxen, and took the wheels off the carts, lea\'ing the latter
but removing the wheels. "Without so much as a shirt among the lot of them,
the terrified strangers sped away and managed to reach their home on the
border. Then Anatha-pindika's people told him the whole story. "This capital
story," said he, "shall be niy gift to the Master to-day;" and away he went and
told it to the Master.
"This is not the first time, sir," said the Master, "that this border merchant
has shewn this disposition; he was just the same in days gone by." Then, at
Anatha-pindika's request, hetold the followingstory ofthe past.
Once ou a time when Brahmadatta was reignino; in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a very wealthy merchant in that city. And he too had as
a correspondent a l>order merchant whom he had never seen and all came
to pass as above.

—
No. 91. 221
Being told by his people what they had done, he said, "This trouble
is the result of their ingratitude for kindness shewn them." And he went
on to instruct the assembled crowd in this stanza
:
The man ungrateful for a kindly deed,
Thenceforth shall find no helper in his need.
After this wise did the Bodhisatta teach the truth in this stanza. After
a life spent in charity and other good works, he passed away to fare
according to his deserts.
[379] His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The ])order
merchant of to-day was the border merchant of those days also; and T was the
merchant ofBenares."
No. 91.
LITTA-JATAKA.
—
"i7e holts the die." This stury was told by the blaster while at Jetavana,
about using things thoughtlessly.
Tradition says that most of the Brethren of that day were in the habit of
using robes and so forth, which were given them, in a thoughtless manner. And
theirthoughtless use of the Four Eequisites as a rule barred their escape from
the doom ofre-birth in hell and the animal world. Knowingthis,the Master set
forth the lessons of virtue and shewed the danger of such thoughtless use of
things, exhorting them to be careful in the use of the Four Requisites, and
laying down this rule, "The thoughtful Brother has a definite object in view
when he wears a robe, namely, to keep ofl:' the cold." Afterlaying down similar
rules for the other Requisites, he concluded by saying, "Such is the thoughtful
use which should be made of the Four Requisites. Thoughtlessly to use them
is like taking deadly poison ; and there were those in bygone days who through
their thoughtlessness did inadvertently take poison, to their exceeding hurt in
due season." So saying he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into a well-to-do family, and when he grew up, he
became a dice-player. With him used to play a shar})er, who kept on
playing while he was winning, but, when luck turned, broke up the game
—
by putting one of the dice in his mouth and pretending it was lost, after
Avhich he would take himself off. [380] "Very good," said the Bodhisatta

222 The Jataka. Book I.
when he realised what was being done; "we'll look into this." So he
took some dice, anointed them at home with poison, dried them carefully,
and then carried them with him to the sharper, whom he challenged to a
game. The other was willing, the dice-board was got ready, and play
beffiin. No sooner did the sharper begin to lose than he popped one of
the dice into his mouth. Observing him in the act, the Bodhisatta
remarked, "Swallow away; you will not fail to find out what it really is
in a little time." And lie uttered this stanza ofrebuke :
—
He bolts the die quite boldly, knowing not
What burning poison thereon lurks unseen.
—
Aye, bolt it, sharper! Soon you'll burn within.
But while the Bodhisatta was talking away, the poison began to work on
the sharper ; he grew faint, rolled his eyes, and bending double with pain
fell to the ground. "Now," said the Bodhisatta, "I must save the rascal's
life." So he mixed some simples and administered an emetic until
vomiting ensued. Then he administered a diaught of ghee with honey
and sugar and other ingredients, and by this means made the fellow all
right again. Then he exhorted him not to do such a thing again. After
a life spent in charity and other good works, the Bodhisatta j)assed away
to fare thereafter according to his desei'ts.
His lesson ended, the Master said, "Brethren, the thoughtless use of things
is like the thoughtless taking of deadly poison." So saying, he identified the
Birth in these woi'ds, "I was myselfthe wise and good gambler ofthosedays."
{Pali Note. "No mention is made of the sharper, — the reason being that,
here as elsewhere, no mention is made of persons who are not spoken ofat this
date.")
No. 92.
[381]
MAHASARA-JATAKA.
^'Fortoarmen cra<;e."—This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
aboutthe venerableAnanda.
Once the wives of the King ofKosala thoughtamongthemselves, as follows,
"VeryrareisthecomingofaBuddha
;
andveryrareisbirthinahumanformwith
all one's faculties in perfection. Yet, though we have happened on a human
form in a Buddha's lifetime, we cannot go at will to the Monastery to hear the

No. 92. 223
truth from his own lips, to do obeisance, and to make offerings to him. We
live here as in a box. I^et lis ask the King to send for a fitting Brother to
come here and teach us the truth. Let us learn what we can from hitn, and
be charitable and do good works, to the end that we may profit by our having
been born at this happyjuncture." So they all went in abody to the King, and
told N h o i w m i w t ha fe t ll w o a u s t i o n n th a ei d r a m y i t n h d a s t ; t a h n e d K t i h n e g K w i a n s g g m a i v n e de hi d s t c o on t s a en k t e . his pleasure in
the royal i)leasaunce, and gave orders that the grounds should be made ready
for his coming. As the gardener was working away, he espied the 1\Iasterseated
at the foot of a tree. So he went to the King and said, "The pleasaunce is
made ready, sire; but the Blessed One is sitting there at the foot of a tree."
"Very good," said the King, "we will go and hear the Master." Mounting his
chariot ofstate, he weTit to the Master in the pleasaunce.
Now there was then seated at the Master's feet, listening to his teaching,
a lay-brother named Chattapani, who had entered the Third Path. On
catching sight of this lay-brother, the King hesitated ; but, on reflection that
this must be a virtuous man, or he would not be sitting by the Master for
instruction, he approached and with a bow seated himself on one side of the
Master. Out of reverence for the supreme Buddlia, the lay-brother neither rose
in the King's honour nor saluted his majesty; and this made the King very
angry. Noticing the King's displeasure, tlie Master proceeded to extol the
merits of that lay-brother, saying, "Sire, this lay-brother is master of all
tradition he knows by heart the scriptiu-es that have been handed down and
; ;
he has set himself free from the bondage of passion." "Surely," thought the
King, "he whose praises the Miister is telling can be no ordinary person."
And he said to him, "Let me know, lay-brother, if you are in need of anything."
"Thank you," said the man. Then the King listened to the Master's teaching,
and at its close rose upand ceremoniously withdrew.
Another day, meeting that same lay-brother going after breakfast umbrella
in hand to Jetavana, the King had him summoned to his presence and said,
"I hear, lay-brother, that you are a man of great learning. Now my wives are
very anxious to hear and learn the truth ; I should be glad if you would teach
them." "It is not meet, sire, that a layman [382] should expound or teach the
truth in the King's harem ; that is the prerogative ofthe Brethren."
Recognising,the force of this remark, the King, afterdismissing the layman,
called his wives together and announced to them his intention of sending to the
Master for one ofthe Brethren tocomeastheirinstructorinthedoctrine. Which
of the eighty chief disciples would they have l After talking it over together,
the ladies with one accord chose Ananda^ the Elder, surnamed the Treasurer of
the Faith. So the King went to the Master and with a courteous greetingsat
down by his side, after which he proceeded to state his wives' wish, and his own
hope, that Ananda might be their teacher. The Master, having consented to
send Ananda, the King's wives now began to be regularly taught by the Elder
and to learn from him.
One day the jewel out of the King's turban was missing. When the King
heard of the loss he sent for his ministers and bade them seize everyone who
had access to the precincts and find the jewel. So the Ministers searched
everybody, women and all, for the missing jewel, till they had worried everybody
a c l a m m o e st t o o ut th o e f t p h a e l i a r ce l , ive o s nl ; y bu t t o n f o in t d ra t c h e e of Ki i n t g c ' o s ul w d iv t e h s ey a f s ind d . ejec T t h e a d t a d s ay th A e n y an h d a a d
hitherto been delighted when he taught them. "What has made you like this
to-day]" asked the Elder. "Oh, sir," said they, "the King has lost the jewel
out of his turban; and by his orders the ministers are worrying everybody,
women and all, out of their lives, in order to find it. We can't say what may
not happen to anyone of us; and that is why we are so sad." "Don't think
1 Anaudaheld 'advanced views on the woman question.' It washewho persuaded
the reluctant Buddha into admitting women to the Order, as recorded in the Vinaya
{S.B.E. XX, 320 et .seqq.).

224 The Jataka. Book I.
any more about it," said the Elder cheerily, as he went to find the King.
Takins? the scat set for hira, the Elder asked whether it Avas true that his
majesty had lost his jewel. "(,)uite true, sir," said the King. "And can it not
be found?" "I have had all the inmates of the palaces won-ied out of their
lives, and yet I can't find it." "There is one way, sire, to find it, without
woj-ryingpeople out oftheirlives." "What wayis that, sir?" "By wisp-giving,
sire." "Wisp-giving? What may that be, pray?" "Call together, sire, all the
liersons you suspect, and privately give each one of them separately a wisp
of straw, or a lump of clay will do, saying, 'Take this and put it in such and
such a place to-morrow at daybreak.' The man that took the jewel will put it
in the straw or clay, and so bring it back. If it be brought back the very first
day, well and good. If not, the same thing must be done on the second and
third days. In this way, a large number of ])ersons will escape worry, and you
will getyourjewel back." With these words the Elder departed.
Followingthe above counsel, the King caused the straw and clay to bedealt
out for three successive days; but yet the jewel was not recovered. [383] On
the third day the Elder came again, and asked whether the jewel had been
brought back. "No, sir," said the King. "Then, sire, you must have a large
water-pot set in a retired corner of your courtyard, and you must have the pot
filled with water and a screen put up before it. Then give orders that all
who frequent the precincts, men and women alike, are to put off their outer-
garments, and one by one wash their hands behind the screen and then come
back." With this advice the Elder departed. And the Kingdid as he bade.
Thought the thief, "Ananda has seriously taken the matter in hand; and, if
he does not find the jewel, he'll not let things rest here. The time has really
come togive the jewel up without more ado." So he secreted the jewel about
his person, andgoing behind the screen, dropped it in the waterbefore he went
away. When everyone had gone, the pot was emptied, and the jewel found.
"It's all owingto the Elder," exclaimed the King in hisjoy, "that I have got my
jewel back, andthat without worryinga host of people out of theirlives." And
all the persons about the precincts were equally grateful to Ananda for the
trouble he had saved them from. The story how Ananda's marvellous powers
had found the jewel, spread through all the city, till it reached the Brotherhood.
Said the Brethren, "The great knowledge, learning, and cleverness of the Elder
Ananda have been the means at once of recovering the lost jewel and of saving
many persons from being worried out of their lives." And as they satetogether
in the Hall of Truth, singing the praises of Ananda, the ISIaster entered and
asked the subject of their conversation. Being told, he said, "Brethren, this is
not the first time that what had been stolen has been found, nor is Ananda the
only one who has brought about such a discovery. In bygone days too the wise
and good discovered what had been stolen away, and also saved a host of people
from trouble, shewing that the lost property had fallen into the hands of
animals." So saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta, liaving perfected his education, became one of the King's
ministers. One day the King with a large following went into his
pleasaunce, and, after walking about the woods, felt a desire to disport
himself in the water. So he went down into the royal tank and sent
for his harem. The women of the harem, removing the jewels from their
heads and necks and so forth, laid them aside with their upper garments
in boxes under the charge of female slaves, and then went down into

No. 92. 225
the water. Now, as the queen was taking off lier jewels and ornaments,
and laying them with her upper i-obe on a box, she was watched by a
female monkey, which was hidden in the branches of a tree hard by.
Conceiving a longing to wear the queen's pearl necklace, this monkey
watched for the slave in charge to be off herguard. At first the giil kept
looking all about her in order to keep the jewels [384] safe; but as time
Moi'e on, she began to nod. As soon as the monkey saw this, quick as
the wind she jumped down, and quick as the wind she was up the tree
again, with the pearls I'ound her own neck. Then, for fear the other
monkeys should see it, she hid the string of pearls in a hole in the tree
and sat on guard over her spoils as demurely as though nothing had
happened. By and by the slave awoke, and, terrified at finding the
jewels gone, saw nothing else to do but to scream out, "A man has run
off with the queen's pearl necklace." Up ran the guards from every side,
and hearing this story told it to the King. "Catch the thief," said his
majesty ; and away went the guards seai'ching high and low for the thief
in the pleasaunce. Heainng the din, a poor superstitioiis rustic' took to
his heels in alarm. "There he goes," ci"ied the guaixls, catching sight of
the runaway; and they followed hira up till they caught him, and with
blows demanded what he meant by stealing such preciousjewels.
Thought he, "If I deny the charge, I shall die with the beating I
shall get from these ruffians. I'd better say I took it." So he confessed
to the theft and was hauled off a prisoner to the King. "Did you take
those precious jewels?" asked the King. "Yes, your majesty." "Where
are they now?" "Please your majesty, I'm a poor man; I've never in
—
my life owned anything, even a bed or a chair, of any value, much less
ajewel. It was the Treasurer who made me take that valuable necklace
;
and I took it and gave it to him. He knows all about it."
Then the King sent for the Treasurer, and asked whether the rustic
had passed the necklace on to him. "Yes, sire,"was theanswer. "Where
is it then?" "I gave it to your majesty's Chaplain." Then the Chaplain
was sent for, and interrogated in the same way. And he said he had
given it to the Chief Musician, who in his turn said he had given it to a
courtesan [385] as a present. But she, being brought before the King,
utterly denied ever having received it.
Whilst the five were thus being questioned, the sun set. "It's too
late now," said the King; "we will look into this to-morrow." So he
handed the five over to his ministers and went back into the city. Here-
upon the Bodhisatta fell a-thinking. "These jewels," thought he, "were
lost inside the grounds, whilst the rustic was outside. There was a strong
guard at the gates, and it was impossible for anyone inside to get away
I Orperhaps "ataxpayingryot."
c J. 15

226 The Jataka. Book I.
with the necklace. I do not see how anyone, whether inside or out, could
have managed to secure it. The truth is this poor wretched fellow must
have said he gave it to the Treasurer merely in order to save his own
skin and the Treasurer must have said he gave it to the Chaplain, in
;
the hope that he would get off if he could mix the Chaplain up in the
matter. Further, the Chaplain must have said he gave it to the Chief
Musician, because he thought the latter would make the time pass merinly
in prison; vvhilst the Chief Musician's object in implicating the courtesan,
was simply to solace himself with her company during imprisonment.
Not one of the whole five has anything to do with the theft. On the
other hand, the grounds swarm with monkeys, and the necklace must have
got into the hands ofone ofthe female monkeys."
When he had arrived at this conclusion, the Bodhisatta went to the
King with the request that the suspects might be handed over to him
and that he might be allowed to examine personally into the matter.
"By all means, my wise friend," said the King; "examine into it."
Then the Bodhisatta sent for his servants and told them where to
lodge the five prisoners, saying, "Keep strict watch over them ; listen to
everything they say, and report it all to me." And his servants did as he
bade them. As the prisoners sat together, the Treasurer said totherustic,
"Tell me, you wretch, where you and I ever met before this day ; tell me
when you gave me that necklace." "Worshipful sir," said the other, "it
has never been mine to own aught so valual)le even as a stool or bedstead
that wasn't rickety. I thought that with your help I should get out
of this trouble, and that's why I said what I did. Be not angry with
me, mylord." Said the Chaplain [386] in his turn tothe Treasurer, "How
then came you to pass on to me what this fellow had never given to you?"
"I only said so because I thought that if you and I, both high oflBcers of
state, stand togethei', we can soon put the matter right." "Brahmin,"
now said the Chief Musician to the Chaplain, "when, pray, did you give
the jewel to me?" "I only said I did," answered the Chaplain, "because
I thought you would help to make the time pass more agreeably." Lastly
the courtesan said, "Oh, you wretch of a musician, you know you never
visited me, nor I you. So when could you have given me the necklace, as
you say?" "Why be angry, my dear?" said the Musician, "we five have
got to keep house together for a bit; so let us put a cheerful face on itand
be happy together."
This conversation being reported to the Bodhisattaby hisagents, he felt
convinced the five were all innocent of the robbery, and that a female
monkey had taken the necklace. "And I must find a means to make her
drop it," said he to himself. So he had a number of bead necklaces made.
Next he had a number of monkeys caught and turned loose again, with
strings of beads on their necks, wrists and ancles. Meantime, the guilty

—
No. 93. 227
monkey kept sitting in tlie trees watching her treasure. Then the Bodhi-
satta ordered a number of men to carefully observe eveiy monkey in the
grounds, till they saw one wearing the uiissing pearl necklace, and then
frighten her into dropping it.
Tricked out in their new splendour, the other monkeys strutted about
till they came to the real thief, before whom they Haunted their finery.
Jealousy overcoming her prudence, she exclaimed, "They're only beads !"
and put on her own necklace of real pearls. This was at once seen by
the watchers, who promptly made her drop the necklace, which they
picked up and brought to the Bodhisatta. He took it to the King, saying,
"Here, sire, is the necklace. The five prisoners are innocent; it was a
female monkey in the pleasaunce that took it." "How came you to find
that out1" asked the King; "and how did you manage to get possession
of it again1" Then the Bodhisatta told the whole story, and the King
thanked [387] the Bodhisatta, saying, "You are the right man in the right
place." And he uttered this stanza in praise ofthe Bodhisatta :
For war men crave the hero's might,
For coimsel sage sobriety.
Boon comrades for tlieir jollity.
But judgment when in parlous plight.
Over and above these words of praise and gratitude, the King showered
treasures upon the Bodhisatta like a storm-cloud pouring rain from the
heavens. After following the Bodhisatta's counsels through a long life
spent in charity and good works, the King passed away to fare thereafter
according to his deserts.
His lesson ended, theMaster, after extolling the Elder's merits, identified the
Birth by saying, "Anandawas the Kingofthose daysand I his wisecounsellor."
No. 93.
VISSASABHOJANA-JATAKA.
"Trust not the trusted." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about taking things on trust.
Tradition tells us that in those days the Brethren, forthe most part, used to
rest content if anything was given them by their mothers or fathers, brothers or
sisters,oruncles oraunts,or other kinsf<jlk. Arguing that in their lay state they
had as a matter ofcoursereceived things from the same hands,tlioy,;isBrethren,
15—2

—
228 The Jataka. Booh I.
likewise shewed nocircumspectionorcautionbeforeusing food,clothingandother
requii-itoswhich their relations gave them. Observing thistheIMasterfeltthathe
must readtheBrethren alesson. Sohecalledthem together,andsaid, "Brethren,
no matter whether [388] the giver be a relation or not, let circumspection accom-
pany use. The Brotherwhowithout circumspection uses the requisites which are
given to him, may entail on himself a subsequent existence as an ogre or as a
ghost. Use without circumspection is like inito taking ])oison ; and poison kills
just the same, whethei' it be given by a relative or by a stranger. There were
thosewho in bygone days actually did take poisonbecause itwas offeredbythose
nearand dear to them, and thereby they met their end." So saying, he told the
followingstory ofthe past.
Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a very wealthy merchant. He had a herdsman who, when
the corn was growing thick, drove his cows to the forest and kept them
there at a shieling, bringingtheproducefrom time to time tothe merchant.
Now hard bythe shieling in the forest there dwelt a lion ; and so afraid of
thelion werethecowsthattheygavebutlittle milk. So whentheherdsman
brought in his ghee one day, the merchant asked why there was so little of
it. Then the herdsman told him the reason. "Well, has the lion formed
an attachment to anything?" "Yes, master; he's fond of a doe,"
"Could you catch that doe?" " Yes, master." "Well, catch her, and rub
her all over with poison and sugar, and let her dry. Keep her a day or
two, andthenturn her loose. Becauseofhis affection for her, the lion will
lickher all over with his tongue, and die. Take his hide with the claws
and teeth and fat, and bring them back to me." So saying, he gave deadly
poison to the herdsman and sent him off. With the aid of a net which he
made, the herdsman caught the doe and carried outthe Bodhisatta's orders.
As soon as he saw the doe again, the lion, in his great love for her,
licked her with his tongue so that he died. And the herdsman took the
lion's hide and the rest, and bi-ought them to the Bodhisatta, who said,
"Affection for others sIkjuUI be eschewed. Mark how, for all his strength,
the king of beasts, the lion, was led by his sinful love for a doe to poison
himself bylickingher and so to die." So saying, he uttered this stanzafor
the instruction of those gathered around
:
[389] Trust not the trusted, nor th' untrusted trust;
Trust kills; through trust the lion bit the dust.
Such was the lessonwhich the Bodhisatta taught to those around him.
After a life spent in charity and other good works, he passed away to
fare according to his deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "I was the
merchant ofthose days."
[Note. Cf. Bohtlingk's "Indische Spriiche," (1st ed.) Nos. 1465—7 and 4346.]

;
No. 94. 229
No. 94.
LOMAHAMSA-JATAKA,
"Now scorchedy—IXna story the Master told while at Patikaraina near
Vasali, about Sunakkhatta.
For at that time Sunakkhatta, having become an adlierent of the Master,
was travellingaboutthe country as a Brotlier with bowl and robes, when he was
perverted to the tenets of Koi'a the Kshatriya'. So he returned to the Blessed
Buddha his bowl and robes and reverted to a lay life by reason of Kora the
Kshatriya, al)Out the time when this latter liad been re-born as the offspring
of the Kalakanjaka Asm-a. And he went about within the tla-ee walls of
Vesali defaming the Master by affirming that there was nothing superhuman
about the sage Uotania, who was not distinguished from other men by preaching
a saving faith; that the sage Gotama had simply worked out a system which
was the outcome ofhis own individual thought and study and that the ideal for
;
the attainment of which his doctrine was preached, did not lead to the destruc-
tion ofsorrow in those who followed it-.
Now the reverend Sariputta was on his round for alms when he heard
Sunakkhatta's blas])hemies and on his return from his round he reported this
;
to the Blessed One. Said the Master, "Sunakkhatta is a hot-headed jterson,
Sariputta, and speaks idle words. His hot-headedness has led him to talk like
this and to denythesavinggrace ofmydoctrine. Unwittingly, thisfoolishperson
is extolling me ; I say unwittingly, for he has no knowledge [390] of my efficacy.
In me, Sariputta, dwell the Six Knowledges, and herein am 1 more than human
the Ten Powers are within me, and the Four Grounds of Contidence. 1 know
the limits of the four types of earthly existence and the live states of possible
I'e-birth after earthly death. This too is a superhuman quality in me; and
whoso denies it must i-etract his words, change his Ijelief, and renounce his
heresy, or he will without ado be cast into hell." Having thus magnified the
superhuman nature and powerwhich existed within him, the Master went on to
say, "Sunakkhatta, 1 hear, Sariputta, took delight in the misguided self-mortiti-
cations of the asceticism of Kora the Kshatriya; and therefore it was that he
could take no pleasure in me. Ninety-one jcons ago I lived the higher life in all
its foui' foi'ms-*, examining into that false asceticism to discover whether the
truth abode therein. An ascetic was I, the chief of ascetics; worn and
emaciated was I, beyond all others; loathing of comfort had I, a loathing
surpassing that ofall others ; I dwelt apart, and unapproachable was my passion
for solitude." Then, at tlie Elder's request, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time, ninety-one seons ago, the Bodhisatta set himself to
examine into the false asceticism. So lie became a recluse, according to
—
the Naked Ascetics (Ajlvikas), unclothed and covered with dust, solitary
and lonely, fleeing like a deer from the face of men; his food was small
^ SeeHardy's ManualofBudhism, p. 330.
2 Thisis a quotation from the MujjhimaNikdi/a i. 68.
'' i.e. asalearner, househokler, religietioc,andrecluse.

—
230 The Jataka. Book I.
iish, cowdung, and other refuse; and in order that his vigil might not be
disturbed, he took up his abode in a dread thicket in the jungle. In the
snows of winter, he came forth by night from the sheltering thicket to the
open air, returning with the sun-rise to his thicket again ; and, as he was
wet with the driving snows by night, so in the day time he was drenched
by the drizzle from the branches of the thicket. Thus day and night
alike he endured theextremity ofcold. Insummer,heabode by day in the
—
open air, and by night in the forest scorched by the blazing sun by day,
and fanned by no cooling breezes by night,so that the sweat streamed from
him. And there presented itself to his mind this stanza, which was new
and never uttered before :
Now scorched, now frore, lone in the lonesome woods,
Beside no fire, but all afire within.
Naked, tlie hermit wrestles for the Triith.
[391] But when after a life spent in the rigours of this asceticism, the
vision of hell rose before the Bodhisatta as he lay dying, he realised
the worthlessness ofall his austerities, and in that supreme moment broke
away from his delusions, laid hold of the real truth, and was re-born in the
Heaven ofDevas.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "I was the
naked ascetic ofthose days."
[A^ote. Forthe 'story ofthe past' ? cf. Carlyd rital-a, p. 102. Forthe intro-
ductory story see Sutta No. 12 ofthe Majjhima Nikaya.]
No. 95.
MAHASUDASSANA-JATAKA.
—
"//ow transient" This story was told by the Master as he lay on hisdeath-
bed, concerning Ananda's words, "O Blessed One, suffer not your end to be in
this sorry little town."
"When the Buddha was dwelling at Jetavana," thought the Master, "the
Elder Sariputta\ who was born in Nala village, died at Varaka in the month of
Kattika, when the moon was at the full; and in the selfsame month, when the
1 For thedeath ofSruiixitta, see Bigaudet's 'Legend ofthe BurmeseBuddha.'

—
: :
No. 95. 231
mooa was on the wane, the great Moggallaiiadicd^ My two cliicfdisciples being
dead, I too will pass away, in Kusiuarfi."—So thought the Blessed One; and
coming in his alms-pilgrimage to Kusinaril, there upon the Northward bench
between the twin Sal-trees he lay down never to rise again. Then said the
Elder Ananda, "O Blessed One, suffer not your end to be in this sorry little
town, this rough little town in thejungle, this little suljurban town. Shall not
Rajagaha or some other large city be the death-place ofthe Buddha?"
"Nay, Ananda," said the Master; "call not this a sorry little town, a little
town in the jungle, a little suburban town. In bygone days, in the days of
Sudassana's universal monarchy, it was in this town that I had my dwelling. It
was then a mighty city encompassed by jewelled walls [392] twelve leagues
round." Therewithal, at the Elder's request, he told this story of the past and
uttered the Maha-Sudassana Sutta^.
Then it was that Sudassana's queen Subhaddii marked how, after
coming down from the Palace of Truth, her lord was lying hard by on
his right side on the couch prepared for him in the Palm-grove'^ which
—
was all of gold and jewels, that couch from which he wa.s not to rise
again. And she said, "Eighty-four tliousand cities, chief of which is
the royal-city of KusavatT, own your sovereignty, sire. Set your heart
on them."
"Say not so, my queen," said Sudassana ; "rather exhort me, saying,
' Keep your heart set on this town, and yearn not after those others'."
"Why so, my lord? "
"Because I shall die to-day," answered the king.
In tears, wiping her streaming eyes, the queen managed to sob out
the words the king bade her say. Then she broke into weeping and
lamentation; and the other women of the harem, to the numberof eighty-
four thousand, also wept and wailed ; nor could any of the courtiers
forbear, but all alikejoined in one universal lament.
"Peace!" said the Bodhisatta ; and at hi—s word their lamentation was
stilled. Then, turning to the queen, he said, " Weep not, my queen, nor
wail. For, even down to a tiny seed of sesamum, there is no such thing
as a compound thing which is permanent ; all are transient, all must
break up." Then, for the queen's behoof, he uttered this stanza:
How transient are all component things!
Growth is their nature and decay
They are produced, they are dissolved again
—
And then is best, when they have sunk to rest'*.
1 For the death of Moggallaua, seeFausboll'sDhammapada, p. 21j8, andBigaudet,
op. cit.
^ The 17th Sutta of theDigha NikSya, translatedby Rhys Davids in Vol. xi. of the
S. B. E.
3 See pp. 267 and 277 ofVol. xi. ofthe S. B. E. forthisimlm-grove.
* This translation isborrowed from theHibbert Lecturesof Prof. EhysDavids (2nd
edition, p. 212), where a translation isgiven ofthe commentary on these •'perhaps the
mostfrequentlyquotedandmost popularversesin Pali Buddhistbooks."

232 The Jdtaka. Book I.
[393] Thus did the great Sudassana lead liis discuiii\se up to ambrosial
Nirvuua as its goal. Moreover, to the rest of the multitude he gave the
exhortation to be charitable, to obey tlie Oummandmeiits, and to keep
liaUowed the fast days. The destiny he won was to be re-born thereafter
in the Kealm ofDevas.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The mother
of Rahula' was the Queen Subhadda of those days; Rahula was the King's
eldestson ; the disciples oftheBuddhawere his courtiers ; and 1 myselfthe great
Sudassana."
\^Notc. For the evolution ofthis .Jataka, see the ifahd-parinihhdna Sutta and
the Maha-Sudassana Sutta, translated by Prof. Rhys Davids in his volume of
"Buddhist Suttas."!
No. 96.
TELAPATTA-JATAKA.
—
"J.5 one ivitli care." This story was told by the Master while dwelling in a
forest nearthe townofDesaka in the Sumbha ccninti-y,concerning—the Janapada-
Kalyani Sutta-. For on that occasion the Blessed One said: "Just as if.
Brethren, a great crowd were to gathei- together, crying 'Hail to the Belle of the
Land ! Hail to the Belle of the Land! ' and just as if in like manner a greater
crowd were to gather together, crying 'The Belle of the Land is singing and
dancing' ; and then suppose there came a man fond of life, fearful of death, fond
of pleas—ure, and averse to pain, and suppose such an one were addressed as
follows, ' Hi, there ! you are to carry this pot of oil, which is full to the brim,
betwixt the crowd and the Belle of the Land : a man with a drawn sword will
follow in your footsteps; and if you spill a single drop, he will cut oft" your
head';—what think you. Brethren? Would that man, under these circum-
stances, be careless, and take no pains in carrying that pot of oilT' "By no
manner of means, sir." "This is an allegory [394], which I framed to make my
1 This is the general style in the cauou of the wife of Gotama theBuddha. Cf.
Oldenberg's Vinaya, Vol. i. page82, and the translation in Sacred Books of theEast,
Vol. XIII. p. 208. It is not however correct to say that the Vinaya passage is "the
only passage in the Pali Pitakas which mentions this lady." For she is mentioned
in the Buddhavamsa (P. T. S. edition, page G5), and her name is there given as
Bhaddakaeca.
- Itis notyetknown wherethis Sutta occurs. A Pali summary of it has been left
untranslated, asaddinglittle ornothing to the above 'Introductory Story.'

JVo. 96. 233
—
meaning clear, Brethren; and here is its moaning: The hriniming pot of oil
tyjjifies a collected state of mind as regards things concerning the body, and the
lesson to be learnt is that such mindfulness should be practiseil and perfected.
Fail not in this. Brethren." So saying, the Master gave forth the Sutta coji-
ccrning the Belle of the Land, with both text and interp—retation. [39r)] Then,
by way of application, the Blessed One went on to say, "A I'rother desirous
of practising right mindfulness concerning the body, should be as careful not to
let his mindfulness drop, as the man in the allegory was not to let drop the |)ot
ofoil." —
When they had heard the Sutta and its meaning, the Brethren said: "It
was a hard task, sir, for tlie man to pass by with the pot ofoil without gazing on
the charms of — the Belle of the Land." "Not hard at all, lirethren ; it was (juite
an easy task, easy for the very good reason that he was escorted along by one
who threatened him with a drawn sword. But it was a truly hard task foi- tlic
wise and good of bygone days to preserve right mindfulness and to ciu'b tlieir
passions so as not to look at celestial beauty in all its perfection. Still they
triumphed, and passing on won a kingdom." So saying, he told this st(jry (jf
the past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta wastheyoungestofthe King'shundred sons,andgi-ewupto manhood.
Now in those days there were Pacceka Buddhas who used to come to take
their meals at the palace, and the Bodhisatta ministered to them.
Thinking one day of the great number of brothers he had, the
Bodhisatta asked himselfwhether there was any likelihood of his coming
to the throne of his fathers in that city, and determined to ask the
Pacceka Buddhas to tell him what should come to pass. Next day the
Buddhas came, took the water-pot that was consecrated to holy uses,
filtered the water, washed and dried their feet, and sate down to their
meal. And as they sat, tlie Bodhisatta came and seating himself by them
with a courteous salutation, put his question. And they answered and
said, "Prince, you will never come to be king in this city. But in
Gandhara, two thousand leagues away, there stands the city of Takkasila.
If you can reach that city, in seven days you will become king there.
But there is peril outhe road thither, injourneyingthrough a great forest.
It is double the distance round the forest that it is to })ass through it.
Ogres have their dwelling therein, and ogresses make villages and liouses
arise by the wayside. Beneath a goodly canopy embroidered with stars
overhead, their magic sets a costly couch shut in by fair curtains of
wondrous dye. Arranged in celestial splendour the ogresses sit within
their abodes, seducing wayfarers [396] with honied words. ' Weary you
seem,' they say; 'come hither, and eat and drink before you journey
further on your way.' Those that come at their bidding are given seats
and fired to lust by the charm of their wanton beauty. But scarce have
they sinned, before the ogresses slay them and eat tliem while the warm

234 The Jdtaka. Book I.
—
blood is still flowing. And they ensnare men's senses, captivating the
sense of beauty with utter loveliness, the ear with sweet minstrelsy, the
nostrils with heavenly odours, the taste with heavenlydainties of exquisite
savour, and the touch with red-cushioned couches divinely soft. But if
you can subdue your senses, and be strong in your resolve not to look
upon them, then on the seventh day you will become king of the city of
Takkasila."
"Oh, sirs; how could I look upon the ogresses after your advice to
me?" So saying, the Bodhisatta besought the Pacceka Buddhas to give him
something to keep him safe on his journey. Receiving from them a
charmed thread and some charmed sand, he first bade farewell to the
Pacceka Buddhas and to his father and mother ; and — then, going to his
own abode, he addressed his household as follows : -"I am going to
Takkasila to make myself king there. You will stop behind here." But
five of them answered, "Let us go too."
"You may not come with me," answered the Bodhisatta; "fori am
told that the way is beset by ogresses who captivate men's senses, and
destroy those who succumb to their charms. Great is the danger, but I
will rely on myself and go."
"If we go with you, prince, we should not gaze upon their baleful
charms. We too will go to Takkasila." "Then shewyourselvessteadfast,"
said the Bodhisatta, and took those five with him on hisjourney.
The ogresses sat waiting by the way in their villages. And one of the
five, the lover of beauty, looked upon the ogresses, and being ensnared by
their beauty, lagged behind the rest, "Why are you di-opping behind 1 "
asked the Bodhisatta. " My feet hurt me, prince. I'lljust sit down for a
bit in one of these pavilions, and then catch you up." "My good man,
these are ogresses ; don't hanker after them." "Be that as it may, prince,
I can't go any further." "Well, you will soon be shewn in your real
colours," said the Bodhisatta, as he went on with the other four.
Yielding to his senses, the lover of beauty drew near to the ogresses,
who [397] tempted him to sin, and killed him then and there. Thereon
they departed, and further along the road raised by magic arts a new
pavilion, in which they sat singing to the music of divers instruments.
And now the lover of music dropped behind and was eaten. Then the
ogresses wenton furtherand sat waiting in a bazaar stocked with all sweet
scents and perfumes. And here the lover of sweet-smelling things fell
behind. And when they had eaten him, they went on further and sat in
a provision-booth where a profusion of heavenly viands ofexquisite savour
was offered for sale. And here the gourmet fell behind. And wlien they
had eaten him, they went on further, and sat on heavenly couches wrought
by their magicarts. And here the lover ofcomfort fell behind. Andhim
too they ate.

No. 96. 235
Only the Bodhisatta was left now. And one of the ogresses followed
him, promisingherselfthat for all his stern resolution she would succeed in
devouring him ei'e she turned back. Fui'ther on in the forest, woodmen
and others, seeing the ogress, asked her who the man was that walked on
ahead.
"He is my husband, good gentlemen."
"Hi, there !" said they to the Bodhisatta; "when you have got asweet
young wife, fair as the flowers, to leave her home and put lier trust in you,
why don't you walk with her instead of letting her trudge wearily Ix-hind
you?" "She is no wife of mine, but an ogress. She has eaten my live
companions." "Alas! good gentlemen," said she, "anger will drive men
to say their very wives are ogresses and ghouls."
Next, she simulated pregnancy and then the look of a woman who has
borne one child; and child on hip, she followed after the ]>odhisatta.
Everyone they met asked just the same qnestions about the pair, and the
Bodhisatta gavejust the same answer as hejourneyed on.
At last he came to Takkasila, where the ogress made the child dis-
appear, and followed alone. At the gates of the city the Bodhisatta
entered a Rest-house and sat down. Because of the Bodhisatta's efficacy
andpower, she could not enter too; so she arrayed herself in divine beauty
and stood on the threshold.
The King of Takkasila was at that moment passing by on his way to
his pleasaunce, and was snared" by her loveliness. "Go, find out," said he
to an attendant, "whether shehas a husband [398] with her or not." And
when th€ messenger came and asked whether she had a husband with her,
she said, "Yes, sir; my husband is sitting within in the chamber."
"She is no wife of mine," said the Bodhisatta. "She is an ogress and
has eaten my five companions."
And, as before, she said, "Alas ! good gentlemen, anger will drive men
to say anything that comes into their heads."
Then the man went back to the King and told him what each hadsaid.
"Treasure-trove is a royal perquisite," said the King. And lie sent for the
ogress and had her seated on the back of his elephant. After a solemn
procession round the city, the King came back to his palace and had the
ogress lodged in the apartments reserved for a queen-consort. After
bathing and perfuming himself, the King ate his evening meal and then
lay down on his I'oyal bed. The ogress too jjrepared herself a meal, and
donned all her splendour. And as she lay by the side of the delighted
King, she turned on to her side and V)urst into tears. Being asked why
she wept, she said, "Sire, you found me by the wayside, and the women
ofthe harem are many. Dwelling here among enemies I shall feel crushed
when they say ' Who knows who your father and mother are, or anything
about your family? You were picked up by the wayside.' But if your

—
236 Tlie Jdtaka. Book I.
majesty would give me power and authority over the whole kingdom,
nobody would dare to annoy me with such taunts."
"Sweetheart, I have no power over those that dwell throughout my
kingdom I am not their lord and master. I have only jurisdiction over
;
those who revolt or do iniquity'. So I cannot give you power and
authority over the w^hole kingdom."
"Then, sire, ifyou cannot give me authority over the kingdom or over
the city, at least give me authoritywithin the palace, that I may have rule
here over those that dwell in the palace."
Toodeeplysmittenwithhercharmstorefuse, theKinggaveherauthority
over all within the palace and hade her have rule over them [399]. Con-
tented, she waited till the King was asleep, and then making her way to
the city of the ogres returned with the whole crew of ogres to the palace.
And she herself slew the King and devoured him, skin, tendons and fiexli,
leaving only the bare bones. And the rest of the ogres entering the gate
devoured everything as it came in their v/ay, not leaving even a fowl or a
dog alive. JNext day when })eople came and found the gate shut, they
—
beat on it with impatient cries, and effected an entrance, only to find the
whole palace strewn with bones. And they exclaimed, " So the man was
right in saying she was not his wjfe but an ogress. In his unwisdom the
Kingbrought her home to be his wife, and doubtless she has assembled the
other ogres, devoured everybody, and then made off."
Now on that day the Bodhisatta, with the charmed sand on his head
and the charmed thread twisted round his brow, was standing in the Rest-
house, sword in hand, waiting for the dawn. Those others, meantime,
cleansed the palace, garnished the floors afresh, sprinkled perfumes on
them, scattered flowers, hanging nosegays from the roof and festooning the
walls with garlands, and burning incense in the place. Then they took
counsel together, as follows
:
"The man that could so master his senses as not so much as to look at
the ogress as she followed him in her divine beauty, is a noble and stead-
fast man, filled with wisdom. With such an one as king, it would be well
with the whole kingdom. Let us make him our king."
And all the courtiers and all the citizens of the kingdom were one-
minded in the matter. So the Bodhisatta, being chosen king, was escorted
into the capital and there decked injewels and anointed kingof Takkasila.
Shunning the four evil paths, and following the ten paths of kingly duty,
he ruled his kingdom in righteousness, and after a life spent in charity and
other good works passed away to fare according to his deserts.
Cf. Milinda-panho359foran exposition ofthelimitedprerogativeofkings.

No. 97. 237
—
His story told, the Master, as Buddha, uttered this stanza : [400]
As one with care a pot of oil will bear.
Full to the brim, that none may overflow.
So he who forth to foi'cign lands doth fare
O'er his own heart like governaunce should shew.
[401] When the Master had thus led up to the highest point of instruction,
which is Arahatship, he identified the Ijirth by saying, "The Buddha's disciples
were in those days the king's courtiers, and I the prince that won a kingdom."
No. 97.
NAMASIDDHI-JATAKA.
—
''Seeing Quick dead." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about a Brother who thought luck went by names. Forwe hear that a young
man of good family, named 'Base,' had given his heart to the Faith, and joined
the Brotherhood. [402] And the Brethren used to call to him, "Here, Brother
Base!" and "Stay, Brother Base,"till he resolved that, as 'Base' gave the idea of
incarnate wickedness and ill-luck, he would change his name to one of better
omen. Accordingly he asked his teachers and preceptors to give him a new
name. But they said that a name only served to denote, and did not impute
qualities; and they bade him rest content with the name he had. Time after
time he renewed his request, till the whole Brotherhood knew what importance
he attached to a mere name. And as they sat discussing the matter in the Hall
of Truth, the Master entered and asked what it was they were speakingabout.
Being told, he said "This is not the first time this Brother has believed luck
went by names ; he was equally dissatisfied with the name he bore in a former
age." So saying he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time the Bodhisatta was a teacher of world-wide fame at
Takkasila, and five hundred young brahmins learnt the Vedas from his
lips. One of these young men was named Base. And from continually
hearinghisfellowssay, "Go, Base"and "Come, Base," he longed to get rid
of his name and to take one that had a less ill-omened ring about it. So
he went to his master and asked that a new name of a respectable charac-
ter might be given him. Said his master, "Go, my son, and tiavel
through the land till you have found a name you fancy. Then come back
and I will change your name for you."
The young man did as he was bidden, and taking provisions for the

—
238 The Jataka. Book I.
journey wandered from village to village till be came to a certain town.
Here a man named Quick had died, and the young brahmin seeing him
borne to the cemetery asked what his name was.
"Quick," was the reply. "What, can Quick be dead?" "Yes, Quick
is dead; both Quick and Dead diejust the same. A name only serves to
mark who's who. Yovi seem a fool."
Hearing this he went on into the city, feeling neither satisfied nor dis-
satisfied with his own name.
Now a slave-girl had been thrown down at the door of a house, while
her master and mistress beat her with rope-ends because she had not
brought home her wages. And the girl's name was Rich. [403] Seeing
the girl being beaten, as he walked along the street, he asked the reason,
and was told in reply that it was because she had no wages to shew.
"And what is the girl's name ? "
"Rich," said they. "And cannot Rich make good a paltry day's
pay 1 " "Be she called Rich or Poor, the money's not forthcoming any
the more. A name only serves to mark who's who. You seem a fool."
More reconciled to his own name, the young brahmin left the city and
on the road found a man who had lost his way. Having learnt that he
had lost his way, the young man asked what his name was. "Guide,"
was the re})ly. "And has Guide lost his way'?" "Guide or Misguide,
you can lose your way just the same. A name only serves to mark who's
who. You seem a fool."
Quite reconciled now to his name, the young brahmin came back to his
master.
"Well, what namehaveyouchosen'?"askedthe Bodhisatta. "Master,"
said he, "I find that death comes to 'Quick' and 'Dead' alike, that 'Rich'
and ' Poor ' may be poor together, and that 'Guide' and 'Misguide ' alike
miss their way, I know now that a name serves only to tell who is who,
and does not govern its owner's destiny. So I am satisfied with my own
name, and do not want to change it for any other."
Then the Bodhisatta uttered this stanza, combining what the young
brahmin had done with the sights he had seen :
Seeing Quick dead. Guide lost. Rich poor,
Base learned content nor travelled more.
His story told, the Master said "Soyou see, Brethren, that in former days as
now this Brother imagined there was a great deal in a name." And he identified
the Birth by saying, "This Brother who is discontented with his name was the
discontented young brahmin of those days; the Buddha's disciples were the
pupils; and I myself their master."

No. 98. 239
No. 98.
KUTAVANIJA-JATAKA.
—
[404] " Wise right!)/, Wisest wrongly." This story was told by the ^faster
while at Jetavana, aljout a cheating merchant. There were two merchants in
partnership at Savatthi, we are told, who travelled with their merchandise and
came Vjack with the proceeds. And the cheating merchant thought to himself,
"Mypartner has been badly fed and badly lodged for so many days past that he
will die of indigestion now he has got home again and can feast to his heart's
content on dainties manifold. My plan is to divide what we have made into
three portions, giving one to his orphans and keeping two for myself." And
with this object he made some excuse day by day for putting oft" the division of
the profits.
Findingthat it wasin vain to press for a division,the honest partner went to
the Master atthe monastery, made his salutation, and was received kindly. "It
is a very long time," said the Buddha, "since you came last to see me." And
hereupon the merchant told the I\Iaster what had beftiUen him.
"This is not the first time, lay-follower," said the Master, "that this man
has been a cheating merchant ; he was no less a cheat in times past. As he
tries to defraud you now, so did he try to defraud the wise and good of other
days." So saying, at the merchant's request, the Master told this story of tiie
past.
Once on a time wlien Brahmadattawas reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born into a merchant's family and on name-day was named
'Wise.' When he grew up he entered into {jartnership with another
merchant named 'Wisest,' and traded with him. And these two took five
hundred waggons of merchandise from Benares to the country-districts,
where they disposed of their wares, returning afterwards with the proceeds
to the city. When the time for dividing came. Wisest said, "I must have
a double share." "Why so?" asked Wise. "Because while you are only
Wise, I am Wisest. And Wise ought to have only one share to Wisest's
two." "But we both had an equal interest in the stock-in-trade and in
the oxen and waggons. Why should you have two shares'?" "Because I
am Wisest." And so they talked away till they fell to quarrelling.
"Ah!" thought Wisest, "I have a plan." And he made his father hide
in [405] a hollow tree, enjoining the old man to say, when the two came,
"Wisest should have a double portion." This arranged, he went to tlie
Bodhisatta and proposed to him to refer the claim for a double share to
the competent decision of the Tree-Sprite. Then he made his appeal in
these words: "Lord Tree-Sprite, decide our cause!" Hereupon the father,
who was hidden in the tree, in a changed voice asked them to state the

—
240 The Jataha. Booh I.
case. The clieat addressed the tree as follows: "Lord, here stands Wise,
and here stand I Wisest. We have been partners in trade. Declare what
share each should receive."
"Wise should receive one share, and Wisest two," was the response.
Hearing this decision, the Bodhisatta resolved to find out whether it
was indeed a Tree-Sprite or not. So he filled the hollow trunk with straw
and set it on fire. And Wisest's father was half roasted by the rising
flames and clambered up by clutching hold of a bough. Falling to the
ground, he uttered this stanza :
AVise rightly, Wisest wrongly got his name;
Through Wisest, I'm nigh roasted in the flame.
Then the two merchants made an equal division and each took half,
and at their deaths passed away to fare according to their deserts.
"Thusyou see," said the Master, "that j'our partner was as greata cheat in
past times as now." Having ended his story, he identified the Birth by saying,
"The cheating merchant of to-day was the cheatingmerchant in the story, and
I thehonest merchant named Wise."
No. 99.
PAROSAHASSA-JATAKA.
—
'^Farbetter than a thousandfools." This story was told by the Masterwhen
at Jetavana, concerning the question ofthe unconverted. [406]
(The incidentswill be related in the Sarabhanga-jatakai.)
On a certain occasion the Brethren met in the Hall of Truth and praised
the wisdom of Sariputta, the Captain of the Faith, who had expounded the
meaning ofthe Buddha's pithy saying. Entering the hall, the Master asked and
was told what the Brethren were talking about. "This is not the first time.
Brethren,"saidhe, "that the meaningofa pithysaying ofmine has been brought
out by Sariputta. He did the like in times gone by." So saying, he told this
story ofthe past.
Once on a timewhen Brahmadattawas reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
.sattawasbornaNorthernbrahminand j)erfected hiseducation atTakkasila.
Putting Lu.sts from him and renouncing the world for the hermit's life, he
1 No. 522.

No. 99. 241
won the Five Knowledges and the Eight Attainments, and dwelt in the
Himalayas, where five hundred hermits gathered round him. One rainy
season, his chief disciple went with half the hermits to the haunts of men
to get salt and vinegar. And that was the time when the Bodhisatta
should die. And his disciples, wishing to know his spiritual attainment,
said to him, "What excellence have you wonf
"Won?" said he; "I have won Nothing'^." So saying, he died, but was
reborn in the Brahma Realm of Radiant Devas. (For Bodhisattas even
though they may have attained to the highest state ai-e never reborn in
theFormlessWorld, becausetheyareincapableofpassingbeyondthe Realm
of Form.) Mistaking his meaning, his disciples concluded that he had
failed to win any spiritual attainment. So they did not pay the customary
honours at cremation.
On his return the chief disciple learnt that the master was dead, and
asked whether they had asked what he had won. "He said he had won
nothing," said they. "So we did not pay him the usual honours at
cremation."
"You understood not his meaning," said that chief disciple. "Our
master meant that he had attained to the insight called the insight into
the Nothingness of Things." But though he explained this again and
again to the disciples, they believed him not.
Knowing their unbelief, the Bodhisatta cried, "Fools they do not
!
believe my chief disciple. I will make this thing })lain unto them." And
he came from the Brahma Realm and by virtue of his mighty powers
rested in mid-air above the hermitage and uttered this stanza in praise of
the wisdom of the chiefdisciple : — [407]
Far better than a thousand fools, though they
Cry out a hundred years unceasingly,
Is one who, hearing, straightway understands.
Thus did the Great Being from mid-air proclaim the Truth and rebuke
the band of hermits. Then he passed back to the Brahma Realm, and
all those hermits too qualified themselves for rebirth in the same Realm.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Bii-th by saying, "Sfiriputta was
the chiefdisciple ofthose days, and I Mahfi-Brahma."
1 One of thehighestAttainments was the insight into the nothingness of things;
everythingbeing a delusion.
16
C. J,

"
242 The Jataka. Book I.
No. 100.
ASATARtJPA-JATAKA.
—
"/m gtdse ofjoy." This story was told by the INIaster while at Kunda-
dhanavana near the city of Kiindiya about Suppavasa, a lay-sister, who was
daughter to King Koliya. For at that time, she, who had carried a child
seven years in her womb, was in the seventh day of her throes, a—nd her
pains were grievous. In spite of all her agony, she thought as follows: ''All-
Enlightened is the Blessed One who preaches the Truth to the end that such
suffering may cease; righteous are the Elect of the Blessed One who so walk
that such suffering may cease; blessed is Nirvana wherein such suffering doth
cease." These three thoughts were her consolation in her pangs. And she
sentherhusband to the Buddha to tell her state and bear agreetingfor her.
Her message was given to the Blessed One, who said, [408] "May Suppavasa,
daughter of the king of the Koliyas, grow strong and well again, and bear a
healthy child." And at the word of the Blessed One, Suppavasa, daughter of
the king of the Koliyas, became well and strong, and bore a healthy child.
Finding on his return that his wife had been safely delivered, the husband
marvelled greatly at the exalted powers of tlie Buddha. Now that her child
was born, Suppavasa was eager to shew bounty for seven days to the Brother-
hood with the Buddha at its head, and sent her husband back to invite them.
Now itchanced that at that time the Brotherhood with the Buddhaat its head
had received an invitation from the layman who supported the Elder Moggallana
the Great; but the Master, wishing to gratify Suppavasa's charitable desires,
sent to the Elder to explain the matter, and with the Brotherhood accepted
for seven days the hospitality of Suppavasa. On the seventh day she dressed
up her little boy, whose name was Sivali, and made him bow before the Buddha
and the Brotherhood. And when he was brought in due course to Sariputta,
the Elder in all kindness greeted the infant, saying, "Well, Sivali, is all well
with you?" "How could it be, sir?" said the infant. "Seven long years have
I had to wallow in blood."
Then injoy Suppavasa exclaimed, "My child, only seven days old, isactually
discoursing on religion with the apostle Sariputta, the Captain ofthe Faith!
"Would you like another such a child?" asked the Master. "Yes, sir;"
said Suppavasa, "seven more, ifI could have them like him." In solemn phrase
the Mastergave thanks for Suppavasa's hospitality and departed.
At seven years of age the child Sivali gave his heart to the Faith and
forsook the world to join the Brotherhood ; at twenty he was admitted a full
Brother. Righteous was he and won the crown of righteousness which is
Arahatship, and the earth shouted aloud forjoy.
So one day the assembled Brethren talked with one another in the Hall
of Truth respectingthe matter, saying, "The Elder Sivah, whois now so shining
a an l d ig s h e t, ve w n a d s ay t s he in ch b i i l r d th o . f m H a o n w y p g r r a ea y t er m s u ; s s t ev h e a n ve lo b n e g en yea t r h s e p w a a i s ns he of in mo t t h h e er wo a m n b d
child ! Ofwhat deeds were theirpains the fruit?"
Entering the hall,theMaster askedthesubjectoftheirdiscourse. "Brethren,"
said he, "the righteous Sivali [409] was seven years in the womb and seven days
in birth all because of his own past deeds. And similarly Suppavasa's seven
years' pregnancy and seven days' travail resulted from her own past deeds."
bo saying, he told this story ofthe past.

—
2
No. 101. 243
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was the child of the queen consort, and grew up and was educated at
Takkasila, and at his father's death became king and ruled righteously.
Now in those days the King of Kosala came up with a great force against
Benares and slew the king and bore offhis queen to be his own wife.
When the king was slain, his son made his escape through the sewer.
Afterwards he collected a mighty force and came to Benares. Encamping
hard by, he sent a message to the king to either surrender the kingdom
or give battle. And the king sent back the answer that he woiild give
battle. But the mother of the young prince, hearing of this, sent a
message to her son, saying, "There is no need to do battle. Let every
approach to the city on every side be invested and barred, till lack of
firewood and water and food wears out the people. Then the city will
fall into your hands without any fighting." Following his mother's advice,
the prince for seven days invested the city with so close a blockade that
the citizens on the seventh day cut off their king's head and brought it to
the prince. Then he entered the city and made himself king, and when
his life ended he passed away to fare according to his deserts.
The result and consequence of his acts in blockading the city for those seven
days was that for seven years he abode in the womb and was seven days in
birth. But, inasmuch as he had fallen at the feet of the Buddha Padumuttara
and had prayed with many gifts that the crown of Arahatship might be his;
and, inasmuch as, in the days of the Buddha Vipassi, he had offered up the
same prayer, he and his townsfolk, with gifts of great price; — [410] therefore, by
his merit, he won the crown of Arahatship. And because SuppavJisa sent the
message bidding her son take the city by blockade, she was doomed to a seven
yeai's' pregnancy and to a seven days' travail.
His story ended, the Master, as Buddha, repeated these verses :
In guise of joy and blessings, sorrow comes
And trouble, sluggards' hearts to overwhelm.
And when he had taught this lesson, the Master identified the Birth by
saying, "Sivali was the prince who in those days blockaded the city, and
becameking ; Suppavasa was his mother, and I his father, the king of Benares."
No. 101.
PAROSATA-JATAKA.
Far better than a hundred fools, though they
Think hard a hundred years unceasingly.
Is one who, hearing, straightway understands.
[411] This story is in all respects analogous to the Parosahassa-Jataka (No.
99), with the sole difi'erence that 'think liard' is read here.
IG—

—
;
244 The Jataka. Book I.
No. 102.
PANNIKA-JATAKA.
"^e thatshouldprove."—Thisstory was told bythe MasterwhileatJetavana,
about a lay-brotherwho was agreengrocer in Savatthi and made aliving by the
sale of various roots and vegetables, and pumpkins and the like. Now he had a
prettydaughter who was as good and virtuous as she was pretty, but was always
laughing. And when she was asked in marriage by a family of his own station
in life, he thought "She ought to be married, but she's always laughing; and a
bad girl married into a strange family is her parents' shame. I must find out
for certain whether she is agood girl or not."
So one day he made his daiighter take a basket and come with him to the
forest to gatherherbs. Then to try her, he took her bythe hand with whispered
words of love. Straightway the girl bm-st into tears and began to cry out
that such a thing would be as monstrous as fire rising out of water, and she
besought him to forbear. Then he told her that his oidy intent was to try her,
and asked whether she was virtuous. And she declared that she was and that
she had never looked on any man with eyes of love. Calming her fears and
taking her back home, he made a feast and gave her in marriage. Then feeling
that he ought to go and pay his respects to the ]\Iaster, he took perfumes and
garlands in his hand and went to Jetavana. His salutations done and offerings
made, he seated himself near the Master, who observed that it was a long
time since his last coming. Then the man told the Blessed One the whole
story.
"She has always been a good girl," said the Master. "You have put her to
thetest nowjustas you did in days gone by." Then at the greengrocer's request
he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Braliraadatta was reigning in Benares [412], the
Bodhisatta was a Tree-Sprite in a forest. And a lay-follower who was a
greengrocer of Benares had just the same doubts of his daughter, and all
fell out as in the introductory story. And as her father took hold of lier
liand the weeping girl repeated these verses
:
He that should prove my buckler strong,
My father, worketh me this wrong.
Forlorn in thickest wood I cry
]\Iy helper proves my enemy.
Then her father calmed her fears, and asked whether she was a virgin.
And when she declared that she was, he brought her home and made
a feast and gave the girl in marriage.

—
;
No. 103. 245
His story ended, the Masterpreached the Four Truths, at the close whereof
the greengrocer was established in the First Path of Salvation. Then the
Master identified the Birth by saying, "The fatherand daughter of to-day were
the father and daughter in the story, and I the Tree-Sprite who witnessed
the scene."
[Note. Cf. No. 217.]
No. 103.
VERI-JATAKA.
"//" wise, thou ''It loiter ?io<."—This story was t(jld by the Master at Jetavana
about Anatha-pindika. For we hear that Anatha-pindika wasreturningfromthe
village of which he was headman, when he saw robbers on the road. "It won't
do to loiter by the way," thought he; "I must hurry on to Savatthi." So he
urged his oxen to speed [413] and got safely into Savatthi. Next day he went to
the monasteryandtoldtheblaster what hadbefallenhim. "Sir,"saidtheMaster,
"in othertimes too the wise and good espied robbers on the road and hastened
without delay to their homes." Then at the merchant's request he told this
story ofthepast.
Once on a timewhen Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was a rich merchant, who had been to a village to collect his dues
and was on his homeward way when he saw robbers on the road. At
once he urged his oxen to their topmost speed and reached home in safety.
And as he sat on his couch of state after a rich repast, he exclaimed,
"I have escaped from the robbers' hand to mine own house, where fear
dwells not." And in his thankfulness he uttered this stanza:
If wise, thou 'It loiter not 'mid enemies
A night or two with such brings miseries.
So, from the fulness of his heart, spake the Bodhisatta, and after a life
of charity and other good deeds he passed away to fare according to his
deserts.
His story ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "I was the
merchant ofBenares ofthose days."

— —
246 TTi(^ Jataka. Book I.
No. 104.
MITTAVINDA-JATAKA.
—
''From foxhr to eighC^ This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
concerning an unruly Brother. The incidents are the same as those in the
previous story of MittavindakaS but belong to the days of the Buddha
Kassapa.
[414] Now at that time one of the damned who had put on the
circlet and was suffering the tortures of hell, asked the Bodhisatta
"Lord, what sin have I committed 1 " The Bodhisatta detailed the man's
evil deeds to him and uttered this stanza:
From four to eight, to sixteen thence, and so
To thirty-two insatiate greed doth go,
—
Still pressing on till iusatiety
Doth win the circlet's griding misery2.
So saying he went back to the Realm of Devas, but the other abode in
hell till his sin had been purged from him. Then he passed thence to fare
accordinc: to his deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This unruly
Brotherwasthen Mittavindaka and I the Deva."
No. 105.
DUBBALAKATTHA-JATAKA.
''Fear'St thoxo the wind."—This, story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a Brother who lived in a perpetual state of nervous alarm. We
learn that he came of a good family in Savatthi, and was led to give up the
world by hearing the Truth preached, and that he was always in fear of his life
1 No. 41.
- Partofthese lines occur iii the Pauca Tantra 98.

—
No. 105. 247
both by night and by day. The sough of the wind, the rustle of a fan, or the
cry of bird or beast would inspire him with such abject terror that he would
shriek and dash away. He never reflected that death was svu'e to come ui)on
him though, had he practised meditation on the certainty of death, he would
;
not have feared it. [415] For only they that do not so meditate fear death.
Now his constant fear of dying became known to the Brethren, and one day
they met in the Hall of Truth and fell to discussing his fearfulness and the
propriety of every Brother's taking death as a theme for meditation. Entering
the Hall, the Master asked, and was told,what they were discussing. So he sent
for that Brother and asked him whether it was true he lived in fear of death.
The Brother confessed that he did. "Be not angry. Brethren," said the Master,
"with this Brother. The fear of death that fills his breast now was no less
strong in bygone times." So sayinghe told this story ofthe past.
Once on a timewhen Brahmadattawas reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was a Tree-Sprite near the Himalayas. And in those days the king
put his state elephant in the elephant-trainers' hands to be broken in to
stand firm. And they tied the elephant up fast to a post, and with goads
in their hands set about training the animal. Unable to bear the pain
whilst he was being made to do their bidding, the elephant broke the post
down, put the trainers to flight, and made off to the Himalayas. And
the men, being unable to catch it, had to come back empty-handed. The
A
elephant lived in the Himalayas in constant fear of death. breath of
wind sufiiced to fill him with fear and to start him off at full speed,
shaking his trunk to and fro. And it was with him as though he was
still tied to the post to be trained. All happiness of mind and body gone,
he wandered up and down in constant dread. Seeing this, the Tree-Sprite
stood in the fork of his tree and uttered this stanza:
Fear'st thou the wind that ceaselessly
The rotten boughs doth rend alway?
Such fear will waste thee quite away!
[416] Such were the Tree-Sprite's cheering words. And the elephant
thenceforth feared no more.
His lesson ended, the Master taught the Four Truths (at the close whereof
the Brother entered the Paths), and identified the Birth by saying, "This
Brother was the elephant ofthose days and I the Tree-Sprite."

—
"
248 The Jataka. Booh I.
No. 106.
UDANCANI-JATAKA.
—
"A happy life was mineJ' Tliis story was told by the Master while at
Jctavana, about a temptation by a fat girl. The incident will be related in the
Culla-Narada-Kassapa Jataka' in the Thirteenth Book.
On askingthe Brother, the Master was told that it was true hewasin love,
and in love with the fat girl. "Brother," said the Master, "she is leading you
astray. So too in timesgone by she led you into evil, andyouwere onlyrestored
to happiness by the wise and good of those days." So saying, he told this story
ofthepast.
Once on a time when Bralimadatta was reigning in Benares, those
things came to pass which will be told in the Culla-Narada-Kassapa
Jataka. But on this occasion the Bodhisatta at evening came with fruits
to the hermitage, and, opening the door, said to his son, "Every other day
you brought wood and victuals, and lit a fire. Why have you not done
any of these things to-day, but sit sadly here pining away1
"Fatlier," said the young man, "while you were away gathering fruits,
there came a woman who tried to lure me away with blandishments.
But I would not go with her till I had your leave, and so left her sitting
waiting for me. And now my wish is to depart."
Finding that the young man was too much in love to be able to give
her \iY>, the Bodhisatta bade him go, saying "But when she wants meat
[417] or fish or ghee or salt or rice or any such thing to eat, and sends you
hurrying to and fi'o on her errands, then remember this hei'mitage and flee
away back to me."
So the other went off with the woman to the haunts of men ; and
when he was come to her house, she made him run about to fetch every
single thing she wanted.
"I mightjust as well be her slave as this," thought he, and promjjtly
ran away back to his father, and saluting him, stood and repeated this
stanza:
A — happy life was mine till that fell she,
That worrying, tiresome pitcher styled my wife—
Set me to run the errands of her whims.
And the Bodhisatta commended the young man, and exhorted him to
kindliness and mercy, setting forth the four forms of right feeling towards
1 No. 477.

.
No. 107. 249
men and the modes of ensuring Insight. Nor was it long before the
young man won the Knowledges and Attainments, and attained to right
feeling towards his fellow-creatures, and with his father was re-born into
the Brahma Realm.
His lesson ended, and the Four Truths preached (at the close whereof that
Brother entered the First Path) the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The
fatgirl ofto-day was also the fat girl of those days ; this young Brother was the
son ; and I the father ofthose days."
No. 107.
SALITTAKA-JATAKA
—
[418] ''Prize skill." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about a Brother who threw and hit a swan. We are told that this Brother, who
came ofa good family in Savatthi,had acquired great skill in hitting things with
stones ; and that hearingthe Truth preached one dayhe gave his heart toitand,
givingup the woi'ld,was admitted to full Brotherhood. But neither in studynor
practice did he excel as a Brother. One day, with a youthful Brother, he went
to the riverAciravatl^,and was standingon the bank afterbathing,when he saw
two white swans flying by. Said he to the younger Brother, "I'll hitthe hinder
swan in the eye and bring it down." "Bring it down indeed!" said the other;
"you can't hit it." "Just you wait a moment. I'll hit it on the eye this side
through the eye on the other." "Oh, nonsense." "Very well; you wait and
see." Then he took a three-cornered stone in his hand and flung it after the
swan. 'Whiz' went the stone through the air and the swan, suspecting danger,
stopped to listen. At once the Brother seized a smooth round stone and as the
restingswan was looking in another direction hit it full in the eye, so that the
stone went in at one eye and came out at the other. And with a loud scream
the swan fell to the ground at their feet. "That is a highly improper action,"
said the other Brother, and bi-ought him before the Master, with an account of
what had happened. After rebuking the Brother, the Master said, "The same
skill was his, Brethren, in past times as now." And he told this story of the
past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was one of the King's courtiers. And the royal chaplain of
those days was so talkative and lougwinded that, when he once started, no
1 The modern Rilpti, iu Oudh.

250 The Jataka. Book I.
one else could get a word in. So the King cast about for someone to cut
the chaplain short, and looked high and low for such an one. Now at
that time there was a cripple in Benai-es who was a wonderful marksman
with stones, and the boys used to put him on a little cart and [419]
draw him to the gates of Benares, where there is a large branching
banyan-tree covei'ed with leaves. There they would gather round and
give him half-pence, saying ' Make an elephant,' or ' Make a horse.'
And the cripple would throw stone after stone till he had cut the
foliage into the shapes asked for. And the ground was covered with
fallen leaves.
On his way to his pleasaunce the King came to the spot, and all the
boys scampered off in fear of the King, leaving the cripple there helpless.
At the sight of the litter of leaves the King asked, as he rode by in his
chariot, who had cut the leaves off. And he was told that the cripple
had done it. Thinking that here might be a way to stop the chaplain's
mouth, the King asked where the cripple was, and was shewn him sitting
at the foot of the tree. Then the King had him brought to him and,
motioning his retinue to stand apart, said to the cripple, "I have a very
talkative chapla
—
in. Do you think you could stop his talking? "
"Yes, sire, if I had a peashooter full of dry goat's dung," said the
cripple. Then the King had him taken to the palace and set with a pea-
shooter full ofdry goat's dung behind a curtain with a slit in it, facing the
chaplain's seat. When the brahmin came to wait upon the King and was
seated on the seat prepared for him, his majesty started a conversation.
And the chaplain forthwith monopolized the conversation, and no one else
could get a word in. Hereon the cripple shot the pellets of goat's dung
one by one, like flies, through the slit in the curtain right into the chap-
lain's gullet. And the brahmin swallowed the pellets down as they came,
like so mixch oil, till all had disappeared. When the whole peashooter-full
of pellets was lodged in the chaplain's stomach, they swelled to the size
of half a peck ; and the King, knowing they were all gone, addressed the
brahmin in these words: "Reverend sir, so talkative are you, that you
have swallowed down a peashooter-full of goat's dung without noticing it.
That's about as much as you will be able to take at a sitting. Now go
home and take a dose of panick seed and water by way of emetic, and j)ut
yourself right again."
From that day [420] the chaplain kept his mouth shut and sat as
silent during conversation as though his lips were sealed.
"Well, my ears are indebted to the cripple for this relief," said the
King, and bestowed on him four villages, one in the North, one in the
South, one in the West, and one in the East, producingahundredthousand
a year.
The Bodhisatta drew near to the King and said, "In this world, sire,

; -
No. 108. 251
skill should be cultivated by the wise. Mere skill in aiming has brought
—
this cripple all this pros[)erity." So saying he uttered this stanza :
—Prize skill, and note the marksman lame
Four villages reward his aim.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This Brother
was the cripple tifthose days, Ananda the King, and I the wise courtier."
No. 108.
BAHIYA-JATAKA.
—
"Learn thou betimes." This story was told by the Master, while he was
dwelling in the GabledChamberattheGreatGrove nearVesali,aboutaLicchavi,
a pious prince who had embraced the Truth. He had invited the Brotherhood
with the Buddha at their liead to his house, and there had shewn great bounty
towards them. Now his wife was a very fat woman, almost bloated in ap-
pearance, and she was badly dressed.
Thanking the King for his hospitality, the Masterreturned to the monastery
and, after a discourse to the Brethren, retired to his perfumed chamber.
Assembled in the Hall of Truth, the Brethren expressed their surprise that a
man like this Licchavi prince should have such a fat badly-dressed woman for
his wife, and be so fond of her. Entering the Hall and hearing what they were
discussing, the Master said, "Brethren, as now, so in former times he was fond
ofa fat woman." Then, at their request, he told this story ofthe x)ast.
[421] Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning iu Benares
the Bodhisatta was one of his courtiers. And a fat and badly-dressed
country woman, who worked for hire, was passing near the courtyard of
the palace, when pressing need for an occasion came upon her. Bendino-
down with her raiment decently gathered round her, she accomplished
her purpose, and was erect again in a trice.
The King chanced to be looking out on to the courtyard throufdi a
window at the time and saw this. Thought he, "A woman who could
manage this with so much decency must enjoy good health. She would
be sure to be cleanly in her house ; and a son born into a cleanly house
would be sure to grow up cleanly and virtuous. I will make her my
queen-consort." And accordingly the King, first assuring himself that she

—
252 The Jdtaka. Book I.
was not another's, sent for her and made her his queen. And she became
very near and dear to him. Not long afterwards a son was born, and this
son became an Universal Monarch.
Observing her fortunes, the Bodhisatta took occasion to say to the
King, "Sire, why should not care be taken duly to fulfil all proper
observances, when this excellent woman by her modesty and decency in
relieving nature won your majesty's favour and rose to siich fortune?"
And he went on to utter this stanza :
Learn thou betimes, though headstrong folk there be
The rustic pleased the King by modesty. ;
Thus did the Great Being commend the virtues of those who devoted
themselves to the study ofprojoer observances.
[422] His story ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The
husband and wife of to-day were also the husband and wife ofthosetimes, and I
thewisecourtier."
No. 109.
KUNDAKAPtJVA-JATAKA.
"As fares his loors/dpperJ' — This story was told by the IMaster when at
Savatthi, about a very poor man.
Now at Savatthi the Brotherhood with the Buddha at their head used to be
entertained now by a single family, now by three or four ffxmilies together.
Or a body of people or a wh<jle street would club together, or sometimes the
whole city entertained them. But on the occasion now in question it was a
street that was shewing tlie hospitality. And the inhabitants had arranged to
provide rice-gruel followed by cakes.
Now in that street there lived a very poor man, ahired labourer, who could
not see how he could give the gruel, but resolved to give cakes. And he
scraped out the red powderfrom empty husks and kneaded it with water into a
round cake. This cake he wrapped in a leaf of swallow-wort, and baked it in
the embers. When it was done, he made up his mind that none butthe Buddha
should have it, and accordingly took his stand immediately by the Master. No
soonerhad the word been given to offer cakes, than he stepped forward quicker
than anyone else and put his cake in the Master's alms-bowl. And the Master
declined all other cakes offered him and ate the poor man's cake. Forthwith the
whole city talked of nothing but how the All-Enlightened Onehad not disdained
to eat the poor man's bran-cake. And from porters to nobles and King, all
classes flocked to the spot, saluted the Master, and crowded round the poor man,

—
No. 109. 253
offering him food, oi* two to five hundred pieces of money if he \V(nild make over
tothem the merit ofIiis act.
Thinking he had better ask the Master first, he went to him and stated his
case. "Take what they offer," said the Master, "and impute your righteousness
to all living creatiu-es." So the man set to work to collect the ofterings. Some
gave twice as much as others, some four times as much, others eiglit times as
much, and so on, till nine crores ofgold were contributed.
Returning thanks for the hospitality, the Master went back to the monastery
and after instructing the Brethren and imparting his blessed teaching to them,
retired to his perfumed chamber.
In the evening the King sent for the poor man, and created him Lord
Treasurer.
Assembling in the Hall of Truth the Brethren spoke together of how the
Master, not disdaining the poor man's bran-cake, had eaten it as though it were
ambrosia, and Ikjw the poor man had been enriched [423] and made Lord
Treasurer to his great good fortune. And when the IMaster entered the Hall
and heard what they were talking of, he said, "Brethren, this is not the first
time that I have not disdained to eat that poor man's cake of bran. I did the
same when I was a Tree-sprite, and then too was the means of his being made
Lord Treasurer." So saying he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Bralimadatta was reigning in Benares,the Bodhi-
satta was a Tree-sprite dwelling in a castor-oil plant. And the villagers
A
of those days were superstitious about gods. festival came round and
the villagers offered sacrifices to their respective Tree-sprites, Seeing
this, a poor man shewed worship to the castor-oil tree. All the others liad
come with garlands, odours, perfumes, and cakes but the poor man had
;
only a cake of husk-powder and water in a cocoanut shell for his tree.
Standing before it, he thought within himself, "Tree-sprites are used to
heavenly food, and my Tree-sprite will not eat this cake of husk-powder.
Whythen should I lose it outright1 I will eat it myself." And lie turned
to go away, when the Bodhisatta from the fork of his tree exclaimed,
"My good man, if you were a great lord you would bring me dainty
manchets ; but as you are a poor man, what sliall I have to eat if not
that cake1 Rob me not of my portion." And he uttered this stanza :
As fares his worshipper, a Sprite must fare.
Bring me the cake, nor rob me of my share.
Then the man turned again, and, seeing the Bodhisatta, offered up his
sacrifice. The Bodhisatta fed on the savour and said, "Why do you
worship me?" "I am a poor man, my lord, and I worship you to be
eased of my poverty." [424] "Have no more care for that. You have
sacrificed to one who is grateful and mindful of kindly deeds. Round this
tree, neck to neck, are buried pots of treasure. Go tell the King, and
take the treasure away in waggons to the King's courtyard. There pile it
in a heap, and the King shall be so well-pleased that he will make you
Lord Treasurer." So saying, the Bodhisatta vanished from sight. The

254 The Jdtaka. Book I.
man did as he was bidden, and the King made him Lord Treasurer.
Thns did the poor man byaidofthe Bodhisatta come to greatfortune ; and
when he died, lie passed away to fare according to his deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The poor man
of to-day was also the poorman of those times, and I the Tree-sprite who dwelt
in the castor-oil tree."
No. 110.
SABBASAMHABAKA-PANHA.
—
"Thereis7io All-e7nbracincf." This All-embracing Question will be set out at
length in the Ummagga-jataka^ Thisis the end ofthe All-embracing Question.
No. 111.
GADRABHA-PANHA.
—
"Thou think'st thyaelfa swan." This Question as to the Ass will also be set
out at length in the Ummagga-jataka. This is the end of the Question as to
the Ass.
No. 112.
AMARADEVi-PANHA.
I
—
"Cakesandgruel." This question toowill be foundinthesameJataka. This
istheend ofthe Question ofQueen Amara^.
' Notyetedited ; it occursat theend ofthe collection ofJatakas.
- Amariiwasthewife ofKiugMahosadha ; cf.MiUudapanho,page205, TheBodhi-
sattawas Mahosadha, cf. Jataka (text) i. p. 53.

No. 113. 255
No. 113.
SIGALA-JATAKA.
—
"The drunken jarhiV This story was told by the i\Iaster while at the
Bamboo-grove, about Devadatta. The Brethren had assembled [425] in tlie Hall
ofTruth and were telling howDevadatta had gone to Gayfisisa with five hundred
followers, whom he was leading into error by declaring that the Truth was
manifest in him "and not in the ascetic Gotama" ; and how by his lies he was
breaking up the Brotherhood ; and how he kept two ftist-days a week. And
as they sate there talking of the wickedness of Devadatta, the i\Iaster entered
and was told the subject oftheir conversation. "Brethren," said he, "Devadatta
was as great a liar in past times as he is now." So saying, he told this story of
the past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigningin Benai'es,the Bodlii-
satta was born a Tree-sprite in a cemetery grove. In those days a festival
was proclaimed in Benares, and the people resolved to sacrifice to the
ogres. So they strewed fish and meat about courtyards, and sti'eets, and
other places, and set out great pots of strong drink. At midnight a
jackal came into the town by the sewer, and regaled himself on the meat
and liquor. Crawling into some bushes, he was fast asleep when morning
dawned. Waking up and seeing it was broad daylight, he knew that he
could not make his way back at that hour with safety. So he lay down
quietly near the roadside where he could not be seen, till at last he saw a
solitary brahmin on his way to rinse his mouth in the tank. Then the
jackal thought to himself, "Brahmins are a greedy lot. I must so play on
his greediness as to get him to carry me out of the city in his waist-cloth
under his outer robe." So, with a human voice, he cried "Brahmin."
"Who calls me?" said the brahmin, turning round. "I, brahmin."
"What forf "I have two hundred gold pieces, brahmin; and if you
will hide me in your waist-cloth under your outer robe and so get me out
of the city without my being seen, you shall have them all."
Closing with the ofter, the greedy brahmin hid the jackal and cariied
the beast a little way out of the city. "What place is this, brahmin?"
said the jackal. "Oh, it's such and such a place," said tlie brahmin.
"Go on a bit further," said the jackal and kept urging the brahmin on
always a little further, till at last the cremation-park was reached. [426]
"Put me down here," said the jackal; and the brahmin did so. "Si)read
your robe out on the ground, brahmin." And the greedy l)rahniin
did so.

—
256 The Jdtaka. Book I.
"And now dig up tliis tree by the roots," said he, and while the
brahmin was at work he walked on to the robe, and dunged and staled on
—
it in five places, the foui- corners and the middle. This done, he made
offinto the wood.
Hereon the Bodhisatta, standing in the fork of the tree, uttered this
stanza :
The drunken jackal, brahmin, cheats thy trust !
Thou 'It find not here a hundred cowry-shells,
Far less thy quest, two hundred coins of gold.
And when he had repeated these verses, the Bodhisatta said to the
brahmin, "Go now and wash your robe and bathe, and go about your
business." So saying, he vanished from sight, and the brahmin did as he
was bidden, and departed very mortified at having been so tricked.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta was
thejackal ofthose days, and I the Tree-sprite."
No. 114.
MITACINTI-JATAKA.
—
"Theji/ twain in fisher's 7iet." This story was told by the ]\Iaster while at
Jetavana, about two aged Elders. After a rainy-season spent in a forest in the
countrytheyresolved to seek out the Master,andgot togetherprovisionsfortheir
journey. But they kept putting off' their departure day by day, till a month
flew by. Then they provided a fresh supply of provisions, and procrastinated
till a second month was gone, and a third. When their indolence and .sluggish-
ness had lost them three months, they set out and came to Jetavana. Laying
aside their bowls and robes in the common-room, they came into the Master's
presence. The Brethren remarked on the length of the time since the two had
visited the Master, and asked the reason. Then [427] they told theirstory and
all the Brotherhood came to know ofthe laziness ofthese indolent Brethren.
Assembling in the Hall of Truth the Brethren talked together of this thing.
And the Master entered and was told what they were discussing. Beingasked
whether they were really so indolent, those Brethren admitted their short-
coming. "Brethren," said he, "in former times, no less than now, they were
indolent and loth to leave theirabode." So saying, he told this storyofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigningin Benares,therelived
in theriverofBenaresthreefishes, named Over-thoughtful, Thoughtful,and

—
No. 115. 257
Thoughtless. And they came down-stream from the wild coiintry to where
men dwelt. Hereupon Thoughtful said to the other two, "This is a dan-
gerous and perilous neighbourhood, where fishermen catch fish with nets,
basket-traps, and such like tackle. Let us beofftothe wildcountryagain."
But so lazywere the other two fishes, and so greedy, that theykept putting
off their going from day to day, until they had let three months slip by.
Now fishermen cast their nets into the river; and Over-thoughtful and
Thoughtless were swimming on ahead in quest of food when in their
folly they blindly rushed into the net. Thoughtfid, who was behind,
observed the net, and saw the fate ofthe other two.
"I must save these lazy fools from death," thought he. So first he
dodged round the net, and splashed in the water in front of it like a fish
that has broken through and gone up stream and then doubling back, he
;
splashedaboutbehindit, likeafish that has bi'oken through and gone down
stream. Seeing this, the fishermen thought the fish had broken the net
and all got away ; so they pulled it in by one corner and the two fishes
escaped from the net into the open water again. In this way they owed
their lives to Thoushtful.
His story told, the Master, as Buddha, recited this stanza:
[428] They twain in fisher's nets are ta'en;
Them Tlioughtful saves and frees again.
His lesson ended, and the Four Truths expounded (at the close whereof the
aged Brethren gained fruition ofthe First Path), the Master identified the Birth
by saying "These two Brethren were then Over-thoughtful and Thoughtless,
:
and I Thoushtful."
No. 115.
ANUSASIKA-JATAKA.
—
"The greed-denouncing bird." This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana,aboutaSisterwho gave awarning to others. For we are told that she
came of a good Savatthi family, but that from the day of her entrance into the
Order she failed of her duty and was filled with a gluttonous spirit ; she used to
seek alms in quarters of the city unvisited by other Sisters. And dainty food
was given her there. Now her gluttony made her afraid that other Sisters
might go there too and take away from her part of the fooil. Casting about for
a device to stop them from going and to keep everything to herself, she warned
c. J, 17

258 The Jataha. Book I.
tlie other Sisters that it was a dangerous quarter, troubled by a fierce elephant,
a fierce horse, and a fierce dog. And she besought them not to go there for
alms. Accordingly nota single Sistergave so much as alook in that direction.
Now one day on herway through this district for alms, as she was hurrying
into a house there,a fierceram butted herwith such violence as to break herleg.
Up ran the people and set her leg and brought her on a litterto the convent of
the Sisterhood. And all the Sisters tauntingly said herbroken leg came of her
goingwhere she had warned them not to go.
Not long after the Brotherhood came to hear of this ; and one day in the
Hall ofTruth [429] the Brethren spoke of how this sisterhad got herlegbroken
by a fierce ram in a quarter of the city against which she had warned the other
Sisters and they condemned herconduct. Entering the Hall at this moment,
the Ma ; ster asked, and was told, what they were discussing. "As now.
Brethren," said he, "so too in a past time she gave warnings which she did not
follow herself; and then as now she came to harm." So saying, he told this
story ofthepast.
Once on a timewhen Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born a bird, and growing up became king of the birds and came
to the Himalayas with thousands of birds in his train. During their stay
in that place, a certain fiei'ce bird used to go in quest of food along a
highway where she found rice, beans, and other grain dropped by passing
waggons. Casting about how best to—keep the others from coming there
too, she addressed them as follows : "The highway is full of peril.
Along it go elephants and horses, waggons drawn by fierce oxen, and
such like dangerous things. And as it is impossible to take wing on the
instant, don't go there at all." And because of her warning, the other
birds dubbed her ' Warner '.
Now one day when she was feeding along tlie highway she heard
the sound of a carriage coming swiftly along the road, and turned her
head to look at it. "Oh it's quite a long w^ay oS'," thought she and went
on as before. Up swift as the wind came the carriage, and before she
could rise, tlie wheel had crushed her and whirled on its way. At the
muster, the King marked her absence and ordered search to be made for
her. And at last she was found cut in two on the highway and the news
was brought to the king. "Through not following her own caution to the
—
other birds she has been cut in two," said he, and uttered this stanza :
The greed-denouncing bird, to greed a prey.
The chariot wheels leave mangled on the way.
[430] His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The
warnmg sister was the bird 'Warner ' of those times, and I the King of the
birds."
4

—
No. IIG. 259
No. 116.
DU151JACA-JATAKA.
—
"Too mnch." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana, about an
unruly Brother whose own story will be given in the Ninth Book in the (iijjha-
jataka*. —
The Master rebukcil him in these words: "As now, so in formerdays wert
thou unruly, Brother, disregarding the counsels of the wise and good. Where-
fore, by ajavelin thou didst die." So saying, he told this stcjry oftlie past.
Once on a time when Bralimadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was bora into an acrobat's family. Wlien he grew up, he
was a very wise and clever fellow. From another acrobat he learned the
javelin dance, and with his master used to travel about exhibiting his
skill. Now this master of his knew the four javelin dance but not the
five; but one day wlien performing in a ceitain village, he, being in liquor,
had five javelins set uj) in a row and gave out that he would dance
through the lot.
Said the Bodhisatta, "You can't manage all five javelins, master.
Have one taken away. If you try the five, you will be run through by
the fifth and die."
"Then you don't know what I can do when I try," said the drunken
fellow; and paying no heed to the Bodliisatta's words, he danced through
four of the javelins only to impale himself on the fifth like the Bassia
flower on its stalk. And there he lay groaning. Said the Bodhisatta,
"This calamity comes of your disregarding the counsels of the wise and
good" ; and he uttered this stanza :
[431] Too much — though sore against my will —you tried
;
Clearing the four, upon the fifth you died.
So saying, he lifted liis master from off the javelin point and duly
performed the last offices to his body.
His story done, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This unruly
Brother wasthe master ofthose days, and I the pupil."
1 No. 427.
17—2

—
260 The Jataha. Book I.
No. 117.
TITTIRA-JATAKA.
".4s diedt/ie2)artndge."—This storywas toldbythe MasterwhileatJetavana,
about Kokalika, whose story will be found in the Thirteenth Book in the Tak-
kariya Jfitaka^.
Said the Master, "As now, Brethren, so likewise in former times, Kokalika's
tongue hasworked his destruction."
So saying, hetold this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a brahmin in the North country. When he grew
up, he received a complete education at Takkasila, and, renouncing Lusts,
gave up the world to become a hermit. He won the Five Knowledges
and the Eight Attainments, and all the recluses of the Himalayas to the
number of five hundred assembled together and followed him as their
master.
Insight was his as he dwelt amid his disciples in the Himalayas.
In those days there was an ascetic suffering from jaundice who was
chopping wood with an axe. And a chattering Brother came and sat by
him, and directed his work, bidding him give here a chop and there a chop,
[432] till thejaundiced ascetic lost his temper. In a rage he cried, "Who
are you to teach me how to chop woodi" and lifting up his keen-edged axe
stretched the other dead with a single blow. And the Bodhisatta had the
body buried.
Now on an ant-hill hard by the hermitage there dwelt a partridge
which early and late was always piping on the top of the ant-hill.
Recognising the note of a partridge, a sportsman killed the bird and took
it offwith him. Missing the bird's note, the Bodhisatta asked the hermits
why they did not hear their neighbour the partridge now. Then they
told him what had happened, and he linked the two events together in
this stanza:
As died the partridge for her clamorous cry.
So prate and chatter doomed this fool to die.
HavingdevelopedwithinhimselfthefourPerfectStates, the Bodhisatta
thus became destined to rebirth in the Brahma Realm.
^ No, 481. Kokalika was oneofDevadatta's schismatics,

No. 118. 261
Said the Master, " Brethren, as now, so likewise in former days Kokahka's
tongue lias worked his destruction." And atthe close oftliis lesson he identified
the Birth by saying, "Kokillika was the meddling ascetic of those days, my
followers the band ofhermits, and I their master."
No. 118.
VATTAKA-JATAKA.
—
"The thoiightless man." This story the Master told whileat Jetavana, about
the son ofOver-Tretisurer. This Over-Treasurer is said to have been a very rich
man ofSavatthi, and his wife became the mother ofarighteous being from the
realm of Brahma angels, who grew up as lovely as Brahma. [-133] Now
one day when the Kattika festival had been proclaimed in Savatthi, the whole
city gave itself up to the festivities. His companions, sons of other rich men,
had all got wives, but Over-Treasurer's son had lived so long in the Brahma
Realm that he was purged from passion. His com})anious plotted together to
get him too a sweetheart and make him keep the feast with them. So going to
him theysaid, "Dear friend, it is thegreatfeastofKattika. Can'twegetasweet-
heartforyou too,and have a good timetogether?" At lasthis friends picked out
a charminggirl and decked her out, and left her at his house, with directions to
make her way to his chamber. But when she entered the room, not a look or a
word did shegetfrom theyoung merchant. Piqued atthis slight to her beauty,
sheput forth all hergraces and feminine blandishments, smiling meantime so as
justto shew her pretty teeth. The siglit of her teeth suggested bones, and his
mind was filled with the idea ofbones, till the girl's whole body seemed to him
nothing but a chain of bones. Then he gave her money and bade her begone.
But as she came out of the house a nobleman saw her in the street and gave her
a presentto accompany him home.
Atthe end ofseven days the festival was over, andthe girl's mother, seeing
herdaughter did not come back,went to the young merchant's friends and asked
where she was, andthey in turn asked the youngmerchant. And he said he had
paid herand sent her packingas soon as he saw her.
Then the girl's mother insisted on having her daugliterrestored to her, and
brought the young man before the king, who proceeded to examine into the
matter. In answer to the king's questions, the young man admitted that the
girl had been passed on to him,hutsaidhehad no knowledgeofherwhereabouts,
and no means ofproducing her. Then said the king, "Ifhe fails to produce the
girl, execute him." So the 3'oung man was forthwith hauled off with his hands
tied behind his back to be executed, and the whole city was in an uproar at the
news. With hands laid on their breasts the people followed after him with
lamentations, saying, "What means this, sir? You sufferunjustly."
Then thought theyoung man [434] "All this sorrow has befallen me because
I waslivinga lay life. IfI can only escape this danger, I will give up the world
andjoin the Brotherhood ofthe great Gotama, the All-Enlightened One."
Now the giii herselfheard the uproarand asked what it meant. Being told,
she ran swiftly out, crying, "Stand aside, sirs ! let me pass ! let the king's men
see me." As soon as she had thus shewn herself, she was handed over to her
mother by the king's men, who set the young man free and went their way.

—
262 The Jataha. Book I.
Surrounded by his friends, the son ofOver-Treasurer wont down to the river
and bathed. Returning home, he breakfasted and let his parents know his
resolve to give up the world. Then taking cloth for his ascetic's robe, and fol-
lowed by a great crowd, he sought out the Masterand with due salutation asked
to be admitted to theBrotherhood. Anovice first, and afterwards a full Brother,
he meditated on the idea of Bondage till he gained Insight, and not long after-
wards won Arahatship.
Now one day in the Hall of Truth the assembled Brethren talked of his
virtues, recalling how in the hour of danger he had recognized the excellence of
the Truth, and, wisely resolving to give up the world for its sake, had won tii;i,t
highest fruit which is Arahatship. And as they talked, the Master entered,
an^i, on liis asking, was told what was the subject of their converse. Whereon
he declared to tliem that, like the son of Over-Treasurer, the wise of former
times, by taking thought in the hour ofperil, had escaped death. So saying, he
told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigni)ig in Benares, the
Bodhisatta by change of existence was born a quail. Now in those days
there was a quail-catcher who used to catch numbei's ofthese birds in the
forest and take them home to fatten. When they were fat, he used to
sell them to people and so make a living. And one day he caught the
Bodliisatta and brought him homewithanumber ofother quails. Thought
the Bodhisatta to himself, "If I take tlie food and drink he gives me, I
shall be sold ; whilst if 1 don't eat it, I shall get so' thin, that people will
notice it and pass me over, with the result that I shall be safe. This, tlien,
is what I must do." So he fasted and fasted till he got so thin that he was
nothing but skin and bone, and not a soul would have him at any price.
Having disposed [435] of every one of his birds except the Bodhisatta, the
bird-catcher took the Bodhisatta out ofthe cage and laid liim on the palm
ofhis hand to see what ailed the bird. Watching when the man was off
his guard, the Bodhisatta spread his wings and flew off to the forest.
Seeing him i-eturn, the other quails asked what had become of him so long,
and where he had been. Then he told them he had been caught by a
fowler, and, being asked how he had escaped, replied, that it was by a
device he had thought of, namely, not to take either the food or the drink
wliich the fowler supplied. So saying, he uttered this stanza:
—
The thoughtless man no profit reaps. But see
Thought's fruit in me, from death and bondage free.
In this manner did the Bodhisatta s]>eak ofwhat he had done.
Hislesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "I was thequail
that escaped death in those days."

—
No. 119. 2G3
No. 119.
AKALARAVI-JATAKA,
—
"A\>parents tniiucd." This story was told by tlio Master while at Jotavana,
about a Brother who used to be noisy at wrong seasons. He is said to haveoonie
ofa good Siivatthi family and to have given up the world for the Truth, but to
have neglected his duties and despised instruction. He never took count of the
hours for duties, for ministry or for reciting the texts. Throughout the t—hree
watches of the night, as well as the hours of waking, he was never quiet; so
that the otherBrethren could notget awink ofsleep. Accordingly,theBrethren
in the Hall of Truth censured his conduct. Entering the Hall and learning on
enquiry what they were talking al:)out, the Master said, "Brethren, as now, so
in past times, this Brother was noisy out of season, and for liis unseasonal)le
conduct was strangled." So saying he told this story ofthe past.
[436] Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benare.", tlie
Bodhisatta was born into a northern brahmin family, and when hegrew up,
learned all knowledge and became a teacher of world-wide fame witli five
hundred young bralniiins studying under liim. Now these young brahmins
had acock who crowed betimes and roused them to theirstudies. And this
cock died. So they loijked all about for another, and one of their number,
when picking up firewood in the cemetery-grove, saw a cock there which
he brought liome and kept in a coop. But, as-this second cock had been
bred in a cemetery, he had no knowledge of times and seasons, and used
—
to crow casually, at midnight as well as at daybreak. Roused by his
crowing at midnight, the young brahmins fell to their studies ; by dawn
they were tired out and could not for sleepiness keep their attention on
the subject ; and wheii he fell a-crowing in broad day they did not get a
chance of quiet for repeating their lesson. And as it was the cock's
crowing both at midnight and by day which had brought their studies
to a standstill, they took the bird and wrung his neck. Then they told
their teacher that they had killed the cock that crowed in and out of
season.
Said their teacher, for their edification, "It was his bad bringing
up that brought this cock to his end." So saying, he uttered this
stanza
:
No parents trained, no teacher taught this bird
:
Both in and out of season was he licard.

264 T^^^ Jataka. Book I.
Such was the Bodhisatta's teacliing on the matter ; and when he had
lived his allotted time on earth, he passed away to fare according to his
deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth as follows,—"This Brother
was the cock of those times, who did not know when not to crow ; my disciples
were the youngbrahmins and I their teacher."
;
No. 120.
[437]
BANDHANAMOKKHA-JATAKA.
—
"Whilst folly's speech.'''' This story was told bythe Master while at Jetavana,
aboutthe brahmin-girl Ciiica,whose history will be given in the Twelfth Book in
the Maliapadunia-jataka^ On this occasion the Master said, "Brethren, this is
not the first time Ciiica has laid false accusations against me. She did the like
in othertimes." So sayinghe told thisstory ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into the chaplain's family, and on his father's death
succeeded to the chaplaincy.
Now the king prom—ised to grant whatsoever boon his queen should ask
of him, and she said, "The boon I ask is an easy one henceforth you
;
must notlook onany other woman with eyes of love." At first he refused,
but, wearied by her unceasing importunity, was obliged to give way atlast.
And from that day forward he never cast a glance of love at any one ofhis
sixteen thousand nautch-girls.
Now a disturbance arose on the borders of his kingdom, and after two
orthree engagements with the robbers, the troops there sent snletter to the
king saying that they were unable to carry the matter through. Then the
king was anxious to go in person and assembled a mighty host. And he
said to his wife, "Dear one, I go to the frontier, where battles will rage
ending in victory or defeat. The cam}) is no place for a woman, and you
must stay behind here."
"I can't stop if you go, my lord," said she. But finding the king firm
—
in his decision she made the following request instead, "Every league,
1 No. 472. Cf. note, page 143.

No. 120. 265
send a messenger to enquire how I fare." And the king promised to do so.
Accordingly, when he marched out with his host, leaving the Bodhisatta
in the city, the king sent back a messenger at the end of every league to
let the queen know how he was, and to find out how she fared. Of each
man as he came she asked what brought him back. And on receiving the
answer that he was come to learn how she fared, the queen beckoned the
messenger to her and sinned with him. Now the kingjourneyed two and
thirty leagues and sent two and thirty messengers [438], and the queen
sinned with them all. And when he had pacified the frontier, to the
great joy of the inhabitants, he started on his homeward journey, de-
spatching a second series of thirty-two messengers. And the queen mis-
behaved with each one of these, as before. Halting his victorious army
near the city, the king sent a letter to the Bodhisatta to prepare the city
for his entry. The pre2:)arations in the city were done, andthe Bodhisatta
was preparing the palaceforthe king'sarrival, when hecame to the queen's
apartments. The sight ofhis great beauty so moved the queen that she
called to him to satisfy her lust. But the Bodhisatta pleaded with her,
urging the king's honour, and protesting that he shrank from all sin and
would not do as she wished. "No thoughts of the king frightened sixty-
four of the king's messengers," said she ; "and will you for the king's
sake fear to do my will% "
Said the Bodhisatta, "Had these messengers thought with me, they
would not have acted thus. As for me that know the right, I will not
commit this sin."
"Don't talk nonsense," said she. "If you refuse, I will have your
head chopped ofi"."
"So be it. Cut ofi" my head in this or in a hundred thousand exist-
ences yet will I not do your bidding."
;
"All right ; I will see," said the queen menacingly. And retiring to
her chamber, she scratched herself, put oil on her limbs, clad herself in
dirty clothes and feigned to be ill. Then she sent for her slaves and bade
them tell the king, when he should ask after her, that she was ill.
Meantime the Bodhisatta had gone to meet the king, who, after
marching round the city in solemn procession, entered his palace. Not
seeing the queen, he asked where she was, and was told that she was ill.
Entering the royal bed-chamber, the king caressed the queen and asked
what ailed her. She was silent; but when the king asked the third time,
she looked at him and said, "Though my lord the king still lives, yet
poor women like me have to own a master."
" What do you mean?"
"The chaplain whom you left to watch over the city came here on
pretence of seeing after the palace ; and because I would not yield to his
will, [439] he beat me to his heart's content and went off'."

20 Tlie Jataka. Book I.
(I
Then the king fumed with rage, like the crackling of salt or sugar in
the fire; and he rushed from the chamber. Calling his servants, he bade
them bind the chaplain with his hands behind him, like one condemned
to death, and cut off his head at the place of execution. So away they
hniTied and boundthe Bodhisatta. And the drum was beaten to announce
the execution.
Thought the Bodhisatta, "Doubtless that wicked queen has already
poisoned the king's mind against me, and now must I save myself from
this peril." So he said to his captors, " Bring me into the king's presence
before you .slay me." "Why .sol" said the3^ "Because, as the king's
servant, I have toiled greatly on the king's business, and know where great
treasures ai-e hidden which I have discovered. If I am not brought before
the king, all this wealth will be lost. So lead me to him, and then do
your duty."
Accordingly, they brought him before the king, who asked why
reverence had not restrained him from such wickedness.
"Sire," answered the Bodhisatta, "I was born a brahmin, and have
never taken the life so much as of an emmet or ant. I have never taken
what was not my own, even to a blade of grass. Never have I looked
with lustful eyes upon another man's wife. Not even in jest have I
spoken falsely, and not a drop of sti-ong drink have I ever drunk.
Innocent am I, sire; but that wicked woman took me lustfully by the
hand, and, being rebuffed, threatened me, nor did she retire to her
chamber before she had told me her secret evil-doing. For there were
sixty-four messengers who came with letters from you to the queen.
Send for these men and ask each whether he did as the queen bade him
or not." Then the king had the sixty-four men bound and sent for the
queen. And she confessed to having had guilty converse with the men.
Then the king ordered offall the sixty-four to be beheaded.
But at this point [440] the Bodhisatta cried out, "Nay, sire, the men
are not to blame ; for they were constra — ined by the queen. Wherefore
pardon them. And as for the queen : she is not to blame, for the
passions of women are insatiate, and she does but act according to her
inborn nature. Wherefore, pardon her also, O king."
Upon this entreaty the king was merciful, and so the Bodhisatta saved
the lives of the queen and the sixty-four men, and he gave them each a
place to dwell in. Then the Bodhisatta came to the king and said,
"Sire, the ba.seless accusations of folly put the wise in unmerited bonds,
but the words of the wise released the foolish. Thus folly wrongfully
binds, a — nd wisdom sets free from bonds." So saying, he uttered this
stanza
:
Whilst folly's speech doth bind unrighteously.
At wisdom's word the justly bound go free.

No. 121. 267
When lie had taiiglit the king the Truth in tliese verses, he exehvinied,
"All this trouble sprang from my living a lay life. I mnst change my
mode of life, and crave your permission, sire, to give up the world." And
with the king's permission he gave up the world and quitted his tearful
relations and his great wealth to become a recluse. His dwelling was in
the Himalayas, and there he won the Higher Knowledges and the Attain-
ments and became destined to rebirth in the Brahma Realm.
His teaching ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Cifica was
the wicked queen ofthose days, Ananda the king, and I his chaplain."
No. 121.
[4-il] KUSANALI-JATAKA.
—
'^ Let(jreat andsmall'''' This story was told bythe Master while atJetavana,
about Anatha-inudika's true friend. For hisacquaintances and friends and rela-
tions came to him and tried hard to stop hisintimacywith a certain man,saying
that neither in birth nor wealth was he Anatha-pindika's equal. But thegreat
merchant replied that friendship should not de[)end on equality or inequality of
externals. And when he went offto his zemindary, he put this friend in charge
of his wealth. Everything came to pass as in the Kalakanni-jataka^ But,
when in this case Anatha-pindika related the danger his house had been in, the
Mastersaid, "Layman, a friend rightly so-called is never inferior. The standard
is ability to befriend. A friendrightly so-called,though oidy equal or inferior to
one's self, should be held a superior, for all such friends fail not to grapple with
trouble which befalls one's self. It is your real friend that has now saved you
your wealth. So in days gone by a like real friend saved a Sprite's mansion."
Then at Anatha-pindika's request, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a Sprite in the king's pleasaunce, and dwelt in a
clump of kusa-grass. Now in the same grounds near the king's seat there
grew a beautiful Wishing Tree (also called the Mukkhaka) with straight
stem and spreading bi'anches, which received great favour from the king.
Here dwelt one who had been a mighty deva-king and had been reborn a
Tree-spi'ite. And the Bodhisatta was on terms ofintimate friendship with
this Tree-sprite.
Now the king's dwelling had only one pillar to support the roof
1 No. 83.

—
208 Tlic Jdtaka. Book I.
and that pillar grew shaky. Being told of this, the king sent for car-
penters and ordered them to put in a sound pillar and make it secure.
So the carpenters [442] looked about for a tree that would do and, not
findino- one elsewhere, went to the pleasaunce and saw the Mukkhaka.
Then away they went back to the king. "Well," said he, "have you
found a tree that will do?" "Yes, sire," said they ; "but we don't like to
fell it." "Why not?" said the king. Then they told him how they had
in vain looked everywhere for a tree and did not dare to cut down the
sacred tree. "Go and cut it down," said he, "and make the roof secure.
I will look out for another tree."
So they went away. And they took a sacrifice to the pleasaunce and
offered it to the tree, saying among themselves that they would come and
cut it down next day. Hearing their words, the Tree-sprite knew that
her home would be desti'oyed on the morrow, and burst into tears as she
clasped her children to her breast, not knowing whither to fly with them.
Her friends, the spirits of the forest, came and asked what the matter
was. But not one of them could devise how to stay the carpenters' hand,
and all embraced her with tears ami lamentations. At this moment up
came the Bodhisatta to call upon the Tree-sprite and was told the news.
"Have no fear," said the Bodhisatta cheerfully. "I will see that the tree
is not cut down. Only wait and see what I will do when the carpenters
come to-morrow."
Next day when the men came, the Bodhisatta, assuming the shape of a
chameleon, was at the tree before they were, and got in at the roots and
worked his way up till he got out among the branches, making the tree
look full of holes. Then the Bodhisatta rested among the boughs with
his head rapidly moving to and fro. Up came the carpenters ; and at
sight of the chameleon their leader struck the tree with his hand, and
exclaimed that the tree was rotten and that they didn't look carefully
before making their offerings the day before. And off he went full of
scorn for the great strong tree. In this way the Bodhisatta saved the
Tree-sprite's home. And when all her friends [443] and acquaintances
came to see hei*, she joyfully sang the })raises of the Bodhisatta, as the
saviour of her home, saying, "Sprites of the Trees, for all our mighty
power we knew not what to do while a humble Kusa-sprite had wit to
;
save my home for me. Truly we should choose our friends without con-
sidering whether they are superiors, equals, or inferiors, making no
distinction ofrank. For each according to his strength can help a friend
in the hour of need." And she repeated this stanza about friendship and
its duties:
Let great and small and equals, all,
Do each their best, if harm befal.
And help a friend in evil plight.
As I was helped by Kusa-sprite.

No. 122. 269
Thus did she teach the assembled devas, adding these words, "Where-
fore, such as would escape from an evil plight must not merely consider
whether a man is an equal or a superior, but must make friends of the
wise whatsoever their station in life." And she lived her life and with
the Kusa-sprite finally passed away to fare according to her deserts.
His lesson ended the Master identified the birth I13' saying, "Ananda was
then theTree-sprite, and I the Kusa-sprite."
No. 122.
[444] DUMMEDHA-JATAKA.
—
^^Exaltedstation breeds a fool great woe." This story was told l)y the Master
whileattheBamboo-grove, aboutDevadatta. For the Brethren had met together
in the Hall ofTruth, and were talking of how the sight of the Buddha's perfec-
tions and all the distinctive signs ofBuddhahood'maddenedDevadatta ; andhow
in his jealousy he could not bear to hear the praises of the Buddha's utter
wisdom. Entering the Hall, the Master asked what was the subject of their
converse. Andwhentheytoldhim, he said, "Brethren,asnow,soinformertimes
Devadatta was maddened by hearing my praises." So saying, he told this story
ofthe past.
Once on a time when King Magadha was ruling in Rajagaha in
Magadha, the Bodhisatta was born an elephant. He was white all over
and graced with all the beauty of form described above". And because of
his beauty the king made him his state elephant.
One festal day the king adorned the city like a city of the devas and,
mounted on the elephant in all its trapj)ings, made a solemn jirocession
round the city attended by a great retinue. And all along the route the
people were moved by the sight of that peerless elephant to exclaim, "Oh
what a stately gait wliat proportions what beauty what grace such a
! ! ! !
white elephant is worthy ofan universal monarch." All this praise ofhis
1 See p. 2, and (e.g.) the Sela Sutta (No. 33 of the Sutta NipataandNo. 92of the
MajjhimaNikaya).
- Apparentlythe referenceisto p. 175,

—
270 Tlie Jataha. Book I.
elephant awoke the king's jealousy and he resolved to have it cast over a
precipice and killed. So he summoned the mahout and asked whether he
called that a trained elephant.
"Indeed he is well trained, sire," said the mahout. "No, he is very
badly trained." "Sire, he is well trained." [445] "If he is sowell trained,
can you get him to climb to the summit ofMount Vepulla?" "Yes, sire."
"Away with you, then," said the king. And he got down from the
elephant, making the mahout mount instead, and went himself to the
foot of the mountain, whilst the mahout I'ode on the elephant's back up
to the top of Mount Vepulla. The king with his courtiers also climbed
the mountain, and had the elephant halted at the brink of a precipice.
"Now," said he to the man, "if he is so well trained as you say, make him
stand on three legs."
And the mahout on the elephant's back just touched the animal with
his goad by way of sign and called to him, "Hi! my beauty, stand on
three legs." "Now make him stand on his two foi*e-legs," said the king.
And the Great Being raised his hind-legs and stood on his fore-legs alone.
"Now on the hiiid-legs," said the king, and the obedient elephant raised
his fore-legs till he stood on his hind-legs alone. "Now on one leg," said
the king, and the elephant stood on one leg.
Seeing that the elephant did not fall over the precipice, the king cried,
"Now if you can, make him stand in the air."
Then thought the mahout to himself, "All India cannot shew the
match of this elephant for excellence of training. Surely the king must
want to make him tumble over the precipice and meet his death." So he
whispered in the elephant's ear, "My son, the king wants.you to fall over
and get killed. He is not worthy of you. If you have power to journey
through the air, rise up with me upon your back and fly through the air
to Benares."
And the Great Being, endowed as he was with the marvellous powers
which flow from Merit, straightway rose up into the air. Then said the
mahout, "Sire, this elephant, posse>sed as he is with the marvellous ])Owers
which flow from Merit, is too good for such a worthless fool as you none
:
but a wise and good king is worthy to be his master. When those who
are so worthless as you get an elephant like this, they don't know his
value, and so they lose their elephant, and all the rest of their glory and
si)lendour." So saying the mahout, seated on the elephant's neck, recited
this stanza ;
Exalted station breeds a fool great woe
He proves his own and others' mortal fo ; e.
[446] "And now, goodbye," said he to the king as he ended this
rebuke ; and rising in the air, he passed to Benares ^nd halted in mid-air

No. 123. 271
over the royal courtyard. And there was a great stir in the city and
all cried out, "Look at the state-elephant that has come through the
air for our king and is hovering over the royal courtyard." And with all
haste the news was conveyed to the king too, who came out and said, "If
your coming is for my behoof, alight on the earth." And the Bodhisatta
descended from the air. Then the mahout got down and bowed before
the king, and in answer to the king's enquiries told the whole story of
their leaving Rajagaha. "It was very good of you," said the king, "to
come here" ; and in his joy he had the city decorated and the elephant
installed in his state-stable. Then he divided his kingdom into three
portions, and made over one to the Bodhisatta, one to the mahout, and one
he kept himself. And his power grew from the day of the Bodhisatta's
coming till all India owned his sovereign sway. As Emperor of India,
he was charitable and did other good works till he passed away to fare
accordino; to his deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master idcntiiied the Birth by saying "Devadatta was
in those days the king of Magadha, Sariputta the king of Benares, Ananda the
mahout, aiid I the elephant."
[A'ote. Cf. Milinda-pauho, 201.]
No. 123.
NANGALISA-JATAKA.
—
"Fur universal applicatiun.'" This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about the Elder Laludayi who is said to have had a knack of always
saying the wrong thing. He never knew the proper occasion for the several
teachings. For instance, if it was a festival, he would croak out the gloomy
texti, "Without the walls they lurk, and where four cross-roads meet." If it
was a funeral, he would burst out with "Joy filled the hearts of gods and men,"
or with "Oh may you see [447] a liundred, nay a thousand such glad days!"
Now one day the Brethren in the Hall ofTruth commented on his singular
infelicity ofsubject and his knackofalways saying thewrongthing. As theysat
talking, the Master entered, and, in answer to his question, was tokl the subject
of their talk. "Brethren," said he, "this is not the first time that Laludayi's
folly has made him say the wrong thing. He has alwaysbeen as inept as now."
So saying he told this story ofthe past.
1 For this quotation see the Klmddaka Patha edited byChilders (J.E.A. S. 1870,
J. 319).

272 Tlie Jatahi. Book I.
Once on a time when Braliniadatta was reigning in Benares, theBodhi-
satta was born into a rich brahmin's family, and when he grew up, was
versed in all knowledge and was a world-renowned professor with five
hundred young brahmins to instruct.
At the time of our story there was among the young brahmins one
who always had foolish notions in his head and always said the wrong
thing; he was engaged with the rest in learning the scriptures as a pupil,
but because of his folly could not master them. He was the devoted
attendant of the Bodhisatta and ministered to him like a slave.
Now one day after supper the Bodhisatta laid himself on his bed and
there was washed and perfumed by the young brahmin on hands, feet and
back. And as the youth turned to go away, the Bodhisatta said to him,
"Prop up the feet of my bed before you go." And the young brahmin
propped up the feet of the bed on one side all right, but could not find
anything to prop it up with on the other side. Accordingly he used his
leg as a prop and passed the night so. When the Bodhisatta got up in
the morning and saw the young brahmin, he asked why he was sitting
there. "Master," said the young man, "I could not find one of the bed
supports; so I've got my leg under to prop it up instead."
Moved at these words, the Bodhisatta thought, "What devotion!
And to think it should come from the veriest dullard of all my pupils.
Yet how can I impart learning to himi" And the thought came to him
that the best way was to question the young brahmin on his return from
gathering firewood and leaves, as to something he had seen or done that
day; and then to ask what it was like. [448] "For," thought the master,
"this will lead him on to making comparisons and giving reasons, and the
continuous practice of comparing and reasoning on his part will enable me
to impart learning to him."
Accordingly he sent for the young man and told him always on his
return from picking up firewood and leaves to say what he had seen or
eaten or drunk. And the young man promised he would. So one day
having seen a snake when out with the other pupils picking up wood in
the forest, he said, "Master, I saw a snake." "What did it look like?"
"Oh, like the shaft of a plough." "That is a very good comparison.
Snakes are like the shafts of ploughs," said the Bodhisatta, who began to
have hopes that he might at last succeed with his pupil.
Another day the young brahmin saw an elephant in the forest and
told his master. "And what is an elephant like?" "Oh, like the shaft of
a plough." His master said nothing, for he thought that, as the elephant's
trunk and tusks bore a certain resemblance to the shaft of a plough,
perhaps his pupil's stupidity made him speak thus generally (though he
was thinking of the trunk in particular), because of his inability to go
into accurate detail.

—
No. 124. 273
A
third day he was invited to eat sugar-cane, and duly told his master.
"And what is a sugar-cane like?" "Oh, like the shaft of a plough."
"That is scarcely a good comparison," thought his master, but said
nothing. Another day, again, the pupils were invited to eat molasses
with curds and milk, and this too was duly reported. "And what are
curds and milk like?" "Oh, like the shaft of a plough." Then the
master thought to himself, "This young man was perfectly right in saying
a snake was like the shaft of a plough, and was more or less right, though
not accui'ate, in saying an elephant and a sugar-cane had the same
similitude. But milk and curds (which are always white in colour) take
the shape of whatever vessel they are placed in [449] and here he missed
;
the comparison entirely. This dullard will never learn." So saying he
uttered this stanza :
For universal application he
Employs a term of limited import.
—Plough-shaft and curds to him alike unknown,
The fool asserts the two things are the same.
Hislesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Laludayi was
thedullard ofthose days, and I the professor ofworld-wide renown."
No. 124.
AMBA-JATAKA.
—
" Toil on, my brother." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
abouta good brahmin belonging to a noble Savatthi family who gave his heart
to the Truth, and, joining the Brotherhood, became constant in all duties.
Blameless in his attendance on teachers scrupulous in the matter of foods and
;
drinks zealous in theperformance ofthe duties ofthechapter-house,bath-house,
;
andsoforth perfectlypunctualintheobservance ofthefourteenmajorand ofthe
e a i n g d ht t y he mi p n a o t r; h di l s e c a i d p i l n i g nes to ; t h h e ei u r se m d on t a o s s t w e e ry e , p a th n e d m g o a n v a e st w e a r t y e , r t t h o e t c h e i ll r s s , ty th f e ol c k l . oist A e n rs d ,
because ofhisgreat goodness folk gave regularly five hundred meals a day to the
Brethren and great gain and honoiu" accrued to the monastery, the many pros-
;
peringforthe virtues ofone. And one day in the Hall of Truth the Brethren
fell to talking ofhow that Brother's goodness had brought them gain andlionour,
and filled many lives withjoy. Entering the Hall, [450] the Master asked, and
c. J. 18

—
; ;
274 The Jataka. Booh I.
was told, what their talk was about. "This is not the first time, Brethren,"
said he, "thatthis Brother has been regular in the fulfilment ofduties. In days
gone by five hundred hermits going out to gather fruits were supported on the
fruits that his goodness provided." So saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodliisatta was born a brahmin in the North, and, growing \\\), gave up
the world and dwelt at the head offive hundred hermits at the foot of the
mountains. In those days there came a great drought upon the Himalaya
country, and everywhere the water was dried up, and sore distress fell
upon all beasts. Seeing the poor creatures suffering from thirst, one of
the hermits cut down a tree which he hollowed into a trough ; and this
trough he filled with all the water he could find. In this way he gave
the animals to drink. And they came in herds and drank and drank till
the hermit had no time left to go and gather frviits for himself. Heed-
less of his own hunger, he worked away to quench the animals' thirst.
Thought they to themselves, "So wrapt up is this hermit in ministering
to our wants that he leaves himself no time to go in quest of fruits. He
must be very hungry. Let us agree that everyone of us who comes here
to drink miist bring such fruits as he can to the hermit." This they
agreed to do, every animal that came bringing mangoes or jambus or
bread-fruits or the like, till their offerings would have tilled two hundred
and fifty waggons ; and there was food for the whole five hundred hermits
with abundance to spare. Seeing this, the Bodliisatta exclaimed, "Thus
has one man's goodness been the means of supplying with food all these
hermits. Truly, we should always be stedfast in right-doing." So .saying,
he uttered this stanza :
Toil on, ray brother ; still in hope stand fast
Nor let thy courage flag and tire
Forget not him, who by his grievous fast^
Reaped fruits beyond his heart's desire.
[451] Such was the teaching of the Great Being to the band of
hermits.
Hislesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This Brother
was thegoodhermit ofthosedays, and I the hermits' master."
1 Cf. Vol. iv. 269 (text), andsuprapage 133.

No. 125. 275
No. 125.
KATAHAKA-JATAKA,
—
"Ifhe 'midstrangers." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about a boastful Brother. Tlie iuti'oductory story about him is like what has
been already i-elated^
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a rick Treasurer, and his wife bore liim a son. And the
selfsame day a female slave in his house gave birth to a boy, aiid the two
children grew up together. And when the rich man's son was being
taught to write, the young slave used to go with his young master's
tablets and so learned at the same time to write himself. Next he learned
two or three handici-afts, and gi*evv vip to be a fair-spoken and handsome
young man ; and his name was Katahaka. Being employed as private
secretary, he thought to himself, "I shall not always be kept at this
work. The slightest fault and I shall be beaten, imprisoned, branded,
and fed on slave's fare. On the border there lives a merchant, a friend of
my master's. Why should I not go to him with a letter purporting to
come from my master, and, passing myself off as my master's son, marry
the merchant's daughter and live happily ever afterwards1 "
So he wrote a letter, [452] saying, "The bearer of this is my son. It
is meet that our houses should be united in marriage, and I would have
you give your daughter to this my son and keepthe yourig couple near you
for the present. As soon as I can conveniently do so, I will come to you."
This letter he sealed with his master's [)rivate seal, and came tothe border-
merchant's with a well-filled purse, handsome dresses, and perfumes and
the like. And with a bow he stood before the merchant. "Where do
you come from?" said the merchant. "From Benares." "Who is your
father'?" "The Treasurer of Benares." "And what brings you here?"
"This letter will tell you," said Katahaka, handing it to him. The
merchant read the letter and exclaimed, "This gives me new life." And
in hisjoy he gave his daughter to Katahaka and set up the young couple,
who lived in great style. But Katahaka gave himself airs, and used to
find fault with the victuals and the clothes that were brought him, calling
them "provincial." "These misguided provincials," he would say, "have
1 No. 80, probably.
18—2

276 The Jataka. Booh I.
no idea of dressing. And as for taste in scents and garlands, they've got
none."
Missing his slave, the Bodhisatta said, " I don't see Katahaka. Where
has he gone? Find him." And offwent the Bodhisatta's people in quest
of him, and searched far and wide till they found him. Then back they
came, without Katahaka recognizing them, and told the Bodhisatta.
"This will never do," said the Bodhisatta on hearing the news. "I
will go and bring him back." So he asked the King's permission, and
departed with a great following. And the tidings spread everywhere that
theTreasurer was on his wayto the borders. Hearing the news Katahaka
fell to thinking of his course of action. He knew that he was the sole
reason of the Treasurer's coming, and he saw that to run away now was to
destroy all chance ofreturning. So he decided to go tomeettheTreasurer,
and conciliate him by acting as a slave towards him as in the old days.
Acting on this plan, he made a point of proclaiming in [453] public on all
occasions his disapprobation of the lamentable decay of respect towards
parents which shewed itself in children's sitting down to meals with their
parents, instead of waiting upon them. "When my parents take their
meals," said Katahaka, " I hand the plates and dishes, bring the spittoon,
and fetch their fans for them. Such is my invariable practice." And he
explained carefully a slave's duty to his master, such as bringing the water
and ministering to him when he retired. And having already schooled
folk in general, he hadsaid to his father-in-law shortly before the arrivalof
the Bodhisatta, "Ihearthatmyfatheris comingtoseeyou. Youhadbetter
make ready to entertain him, while I will go and meet him on the road
with a present." '* Do so, ray dear boy," said his father-in-law.
So Katahaka took a magnificent present and went out with a large
i-etiniie to meet the Bodhisatta, to whom he handed the pi'esent with a low
obeisance. The Bodhisatta took the present in a kindly way, and at
breakfast time made his encampment and retired for the purposes of
nature. Stopping his retinue, Katahaka took water and approached the
Bodhisatta. Then the young man fell at the Bodhisatta's feet and cried,
"Oh, sir, I will pay any sum you may require but do not expose me."
;
"Fear no exposure at my hands," said the Bodhisatta, pleased at his
dutiful conduct, and entered into the city, where he was feted with great
magnificence. And Katahaka still acted as his slave.
As the Treasurer sat at his ease, the border-merchant said, "My Lord,
upon receipt of your letter I duly gave my daughter in marriage to your
son." And the Treasurer made a suitable reply about ' his son ' in so
kindly a way that the merchant was delighted beyond measure. But from
that time forth the Bodhisatta could not bear the sight of Katahaka.
One day the Great Being sent for the merchant's daughter and said,
"My dear, please look myhead over." She did so, and he thanked herfor

—
JVo. 126. 277
her much-needed services, [454] adding, "And now tell me, my dear,
whether my son is a reasonable man in weal and woe, and whether you
manage to get on well with him."
"My husband has only one fault. He will find fault with his food."
"He has always had his faults, my dear ; but I will tell you how to
stop his tongue. I will tell you a text which you must learn carefully and
repeat to your husband when he finds fault again with his food." And he
taught her the lines and shortly afterwards set outforBenares. Katahaka
accompanied him part of the way, and took his leave after offering most
valuable presents to the Treasurer. Dating from the departure of the
Bodhisatta, Katahaka waxed prouder and prouder. One day his wife
ordered a nice dinner, and began to help him to it with a spoon, but at
the first mouthful Katahaka began to grumble. Thereon the merchant's
daughter remembering her lesson, repeated the following stanza :
If he 'mid strangers far from home talks big^,
— Back comes his visitor to spoil it all.
Come, eat your dinner then, Katahaka''^.
"Dearme," thoughtKatahaka, " theTreasurer must have informed her
of my name, and have told her the whole story." And from that day
forth he gave himself no more airs, but humbly ate what was set before
him, and at his death passed away to fare according to his deserts.
[455] His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This
bumptious Bi'other was the Katahaka of those days, and I the Treasm'er of
Benares."
No. 126.
ASILAKKHANA-JATAKA.
—
"0^l7' diversefates." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about a brahmin retained by the King of Kosala because of his power of telling
whether swords were lucky or not. We are told that when the king's smiths
had forged a sword, this brahmin could by merely smelling it tell whetherit was
1 Cf. Upham Mahav. 3. 301.
^ The scholiastexplains that the wifehadno understaudiug of the meaning of the
verse, but onlyrepeated the words as shewas taught them. That is to say, thegdthd
was notinthevernacular,butinalearned tongueintelligible totheeducated Katahaka,
but not to the woman, who repeatedit parrot-fashion.

278 The Jataka. Book I.
alucky one or not. And he made it a rule only to commendthe work ofthose
smiths who gave him presents, while he rejected the work of those who did not
bribe him.
Now a certain smith made a sword and put into the s,heat,h wi.t,h i.t some
tinely-ground pepper, and brought it in this state to the King, who at once
handed it overto the brahmin to test. The brahmin unsheathed the blade and
sniffed at it. The pepper got up his nose and made him sneeze, and that so
violently that he slit his nose on the edge ofthe sword i.
This mishap of the brahmin came to the Brethren's ears, and one day they
were talkingabout it in the HallofTruth whentheMasterentered. Onlearning
the subject oftheir talk, he said, "This is not the first time. Brethren, that this
brahmin has slit his nose sniffing swords. The same fate befell him in former
days." So saying, he toldthis story ofthe past.
Onceon atime whenBrahniadattawasreigninginBenares,hehad inhis
service a bralimin whoprofe.ssed to tell whether swords were lucky or not,
and all came to pass as in the Introductory Story. And the king called
in the surgeons and had him fitted with a false tip to his nose which was
cunningly painted for all the world like a real nose ; andthen thebrahmin
resumed his duties again about the king. Now Brahmadatta had no son,
only a daughter and a nephew, whom he had brought up under his own
eye. And when these two grew up, they fell in love with one another.
So the king sent for his councillors and said to them, "My ne[)hew is
heir to the throne. IfI give him my daughter to wife, heshallbeanointed
king."
[456] But, on second thoughts, he decided that as in any case his
nephew was like a son, he had better marry him to a foreign princess, and
give his daughter to a prince of another royal house. For, he thought,
this plan would give him more grandchildren and vest in his line the
sceptres of two several kingdoms. And, after consulting with his coun-
cillors, he resolved to separate the two, and they were accordingly made to
dwell apart from one another. Now they were sixteen years old and very
much in love, and the young prince thought of nothing but how to carry
off the princess from her father's palace. At last the plan struck him of
sending for a wise woman, to whom he gave a pocketful of money.
"And what's this for?" said she.
Then he told her of his passion, andbesoughtthe wise woman toconvey
him to his dear princess.
And she promised him success, and said that she would tell the king
that his daughter was under the influence of witchcraft, but that, as the
demon had possessed her so long that he was offhis guard, she would take
1 Cf. Kogers' "Buddhaghosba's Parables," p. 149, wherethis Introductory Storyis
given.

No. 126. 279
the princess one day in a carriage to the cemetery with a strong escort
underarms, and there in amagiccirclelaytheprincess onabedwithadead
man under it, and with a hundredand eight douches ofscented water wash
the demon out ofher. "And when on this pretext I bring the princess to
the cemetery," continued the wise woman, "mind that you just reach the
cemetery before us in your carriage with an armed escort, taking some
ground pepper with you. Arrived at the cemetery, you will leave your
carriage at the entrance, and despatch your men to the cemetery grove,
while you will yourself go to the top ofthe mound and lie down as though
dead. Then I will come and set up a bed over you on which I will lay
the princess. Then will come the time when you must sniff at the pepper
till you sneeze two or three times, and [457] when you sneeze we will
leave the princess and take to our heels. Thereon you and the princess
must bathe all over, and you must take her home with you." "Capital,"
said the prince "a most excellent device."
;
So away went the wise woman to the king, and he fell in with her
idea, as did the princess when it was explained to her. When the day
came, the old woman told the princess their errand, and said to the guards
on the road in order to frighten them, "Listen. Under the bed that I
shall set up, there will be a dead man and that dead man will sneeze.
;
And mark well that, so soou as he has sneezed, he will come out from
under the bed and seize on the first j)erson he finds. So be prepared, all
of you."
Now the prince had already got to the place aud got under the bed as
had been arranged.
Next the crone led off the princess and laid her upon the bed,
whispering to her not to be afraid. At once the prince sniffed at the
pepper aud fell a-sneezing. And scarce had he begun to sueeze before the
wise woman left the princess and with a loud scream was off, quicker than
any of them. Not a man stood his ground ;—one and all they threw
away their arms and bolted for dear life. Hereon the prince came forth
and bore off the princess to his home, as had been before arranged. And
the old woman made her way to the king and told him what had
happened.
"Well," thought the king, " I always intended her for him, and
they've grown up together like ghee in rice-porridge." So he didn't fly
into a passion, but in course of time made his nephew king of the land,
with his daughter as queen-consort.
Now the new king kept on in his service the brahmin who professed
to tell the temper of swords, and one day as he stood in the sun, the false
tip to the brahmin's nose got loose and fell off. And there he stood,
hanging his head for very shame. " Never mind, never mind," laughed
the king. " Sneezing is good for some, but bad for others. One sneeze

—
280 The Jdtaka. Book I.
lost you your nose [458]; whilst I have to thank a sneeze for both my
throne and queen." So saying he uttered this stanza:
O — ur diverse fates this moral show,
Whiit brings me weal, may work you woe.
So spake the king, and after a life spent iu charity and other good
works, he passed away to fare according to his deserts.
In this wise did the Master teach the lesson that the world was wrong in
thinking things were definitely and absolutely good or bad in all cases alike.
Lastly, he identified the Birth by saying, "The same man that now professes to
understand whether swords are lucky or not, professed the same skill in those
days; and I was myselfthe prince who inherited his uncle's kingdom."
No. 127.
KALANDUKA-JATAKA.
—
"Yo^i vauntP This story was told by the Masteronce at Jetavana, about a
boastful Brother. (The introductory story and the story of the past in this
case arelike those ofKatahaka related abovei.)
Kalanduka was in this case the name of the slave of the Treasurer of
Benares. And when he had run away and was living in luxury with the
daughter of the border-merchant, the Treasurer missed him and could not
discover his whereabouts. So he sent a young pet parrot to search for the
runaway. And off flew the parrot in quest of Kalanduka, and searched
for him far and wide, till at last the bird came to the town where hedwelt.
And just at that very time Kalanduka was enjoying himselfon the river
with his wife in a boat well-stocked with dainty fare and with flowers and
perfumes. Now the nobles of that land at their water-parties make a
point of taking milk with a pungent drug to drink, and so escape suflering
from coldafter their pastime onthe water. [459] ButwhenourKalanduka
tasted this milk, he hawked and spat it out ; and in so doing spat on the
head ofthe merchant's daughter. At this moment up flew the parrot, and
saw all this from the bough of a fig-tree on the bank. "Come, come,
1 No. 125.

—
iVo. 128. 281
slave Kalanduka," cried the bird; "remember who and what you are, and
don't spit on tlie head of this young gentlewoman. Know your place,
fellow." So saying, he uttered the following stanza:
You vaunt your high descent, your high degree.
With lying tongue. Though but a bird, I know
The truth. You'll soon be caught, you runaway.
Scorn not the milk then, slave Kalanduka.
Recognizing the parrot, Kalanduka grew afraid of being exposed,
and exclaimed, " Ah good master, when did you arrive 1"
!
Thought the parrot, "It is not friendliness, but a wish to wring my
neck, that prompts this kindly interest." So he replied that he did not
stand in need of Kalanduka's services, and flew oflP to Benares, where he
told the Lord Treasurer everything he had seen.
"The rascal !" cried the Treasurer, and ordered Kalanduka to be
hauled back to Benares where he had once more to put up with a slave's
fare.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This Brother
was Kalanduka in the story, and I the Treasurer ofBenares."
[460] No. 128.
BILARA-JATAKA.
—
" Where saintliness." This story was told by the Master while atJetavana,
about a hypocrite. When the Brother's hypocrisy was reported to him, the
Master said, "This is not the first time he has shewn himself a hypocrite ; he
wasjust the same in times gone by." So sayinghe told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benai'es, the
Bodhisatta was born a rat, perfect in wisdom, and as big as a young boar.
He had his dwelling in the forest and many hundreds of other rats owned
his sway.

—
'
282 The Jdtaha. Book I.
Now there was a rovingjackal who espied this troop ofrats and fell to
scheming how to beguile and eat them. And he took up his stand near
their home with his face to the sun, snuffing up the wind, and standing on
one leg. Seeing this when out on his road in quest of food, the Bodhi-
satta conceived thejackal to be a saintlybeing, and went up and asked his
name.
" 'Godly' is my name," said the jackal. "Why do you stand only on
one leg?" "Because if I stood on all four at once, the earth could not
bear my weight. That is why I stand on one leg only." "And why do
you keep your mouth open 1 " "To take the air. I live on air ; it is my
only food." "And why do you face the sun?" "To worship him."
"What uprightness !" thought the Bodhisatta, and thenceforward he
made a i)oint of going, attended bythe other rats, to pay his respects morn-
ing and evening to the saintly jackal. And when the rats were leaving,
thejackal seized and devoured the hindermost one of them, wiped his lips,
and looked as though nothing had happened. In consequence of this the
rats grew fewer and fewer, till they noticed the gaps in their ranks, and
wondering why this was so, asked the Bodhisatta the reason. He could
not make it out, but suspecting the jackal, [461] resolved to put him to
the test. So next day he let the other rats go out first and himself
brought up the rear. The jackal made a sj^ring on the Bodhisatta who,
seeing him coming, faced round and cried, "So this is your saintliness,
you hypocrite and rascal
!
" And he repeated the following stanza:
Where saintliness is but a cloak
Whereby to cozen guileless folk
— And screen a villain's treachery,
The cat-like nature there we see^.
So saying, the king of the rats sprang at thejackal's throat and bit his
windpipe asunder just under the jaw, so that he died. Back trooped the
other rats and gobbled up the body of thejackal with a 'crunch, crunch,
—
crunch that is to say, the foremost of them did, for they say there was
;
none left for the last-comers. And ever after the rats lived happily in
peace and quiet.
His lesson ended, the Master made the connection by saying, "This hypo-
critical Brotherwas thejackal ofthose days, and I the king ofthe rats."
1 Though theforegoing proserelates to a jackal, the stanza speaks ofacat, as does
the Mahdhhurata in itsversion ofthis story.

No. 129. 283
No. 129.
AGGIKA-JATAKA.
^''Tvjas g7-eerl."...'Thiti story wa« told by the Master while at Jetavaiui, about
another hypocrite.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigningin Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was King of the Rats and dwelt in the forest. Now a fire broke out
in the forest, and a jackal who could not run away put his head against a
tree [462] and let the flames sweep by him. The tire singed the hair off
his body everywhere, and left him perfectly bald, except for a tuft like a
scalp-knot^ where the crown of his head was pressed against the tree.
Drinking one dayin a rocky pool, he caught sight of this top-knot reflected
in the water. "At last I've got wherewithal to go to market," thought he.
Coming in the course of his wanderings in the forest to the rats' cave, he
said to himself, "I'll hoodwink those rats and devour them;" and with this
intent he took up his stand hard by,just as in the foregoing story.
On his way out in quest of food, the Bodhisatta observed the jackal
and, crediting the beast with virtue and goodness, came to him and asked
what his name was.
"Bharadvaja-, Votary of the Fii'e-God."
"Why have you come hevel"
"In oi'der to guard you and yours."
"What will you do to guard us V
"I know how to count on my fingers, and will count your numbers
both morning and evening, so as to be sure that as many came home at
night, as went out in the morning. That's how I'll guard you."
"Then stay, uncle, and watch over us."
And accordingly, as the rats were starting in the morning he set about
counting them "One, two, three;" and so again when they came back at
night. And every time he counted them, he seized and ate the hindmost.
Everything came to pass as in the foregoing story, except that here the
King of the Rats turned and said to the jackal, "It is not sanctity,
1 The Buddhist 'Brother' shaves his crown, except for a tuft of hair on the top,
which istheanalogue ofthe tonsureofEoman Catholicpriests.
- Bharadvaja was thename ofa clau ofgreatKishis,orreligiousteachers, to whom
the sixthbook of the Eigveda isascribed.

284 ^'/^c Jataka. Book I.
BhanulvaJH, Votary of the Fire-God, but gluttony that has decked your
crown with tliat top-knot." So saying, he uttered this stanza:—
'Twas greed, not virtue, furnished you this crest.
Our dwindling numbers fail to work out right;
We've had enough, Fire-votary, of you.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This Brother
wasthejackal ofthosedays, and I the King ofthe Rats."
No. 130.
KOSIYA-JATAKA^
[463] ''You may ail or ea^."—This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a woman of Savatthi. She is said to have been the wicked wife
of a good and virtuous brahmin, who was a lay-brother. Her nights she spent
in gadding about ; whilst by day she did not astroke of work, but made out to
be ill and lay abedgroaning.
"What isthematter with you, my dear?" said herhusband.
"Wind troubles me."
"Whatcan I get foryou?"
"Sweets, savouries, rich food, rice-gruel, boiled-rice, oil, and so forth."
The obedient husband did as she wished, and toiledlike a slave for her. She
meantime kept her bed while her husband was about the house butno sooner
;
saw the door shut on him, than she was inthe arms ofher paramours.
"Mypoorwifedoesn'tseemtogetanybetterofthewind,"thoughtthebrahmin
at last, and betook himself with ofierings of perfumes, flowers, and the like, to
the Master at Jetavana. His obeisance done, he stood before the Blessed One,
who asked him why he had been absent so long.
"Sir," said the brahmin, "I'm told my wife is troubled with the wind, and I
toil away to keep her supplied with every conceivable dainty. And now she
is stout andher complexion quite clear, but the wind is as troublesome as ever.
Itis through ministering to my wife that I have nothad any time to come here,
sir."
Said the Master, who knew the wife's wickedness, "Ah! brahmin, the wise
and good of days gone by taught you how to physic a woman suffering like your
wife from so stubborn an ailment. But re-birth has confused your memoi-y so
that you forget." So saying, he told the following story ofthe past.
Once uponatimewhenBrahmadattawasreigninginBenares,the Bodhi-
satta was born a brahmin in a very distinguished family. After perfecting
Seealso No. 226.

—
No. 130. 285
his education at Takkasila, he became a teacher of world-wide fame in
Benares. To him flocked as pupils the young nobles and brahmins from
all the princely and wealthy families. Now a country brahmin, who had
learned from the Bodhisatta the three Vedas, and the eighteen Sciences,
and who stopped on in Benares to look after his estate, came two or
three times every day to listen to the Bodhisatta's teachings. [464] And
this brahmin had a wife who was a bad, wicked woman. And everything
came to pass as above. When the brahmin explained how it was that he
could not get away to listen to his master's teachings, the Bodhisatta, who
knew that the brahmin's wife was only feigning sickness, thought to him-
self, "I will tell him what physic will cure the creature." So he said to
the brahmin, "Get her no more dainties, my son, but collect the staliugs
of cows and therein souse five kinds of fruit and so forth, and let the lot
pickle in a new copper pot till the whole savours of the metal. Then take
a rope or cord or stick and go to your wife, and tell her plainly she must
either swallow the safe cure you have brought her, or else work for her
food. (And here you will repeat certain lines which I will tell you.) If
she refuses the remedy, then threaten to let her have a taste of the rope
or stick, and to drag her about for a time by the hair, while you pummel
her with your fists. You will find that at the mere threat she will be up
and about her work."
So off went the brahmin and brought his wife a mess prepared as the
Bodhisatta had directed.
"Who prescribed this?" said she.
"The master," said her husband.
"Take it away, I won't have it."
"So you won't have it, eh?" said the young brahmin, taking up the
rope-end ; "well then, you've either got to swallow down that safe cure or
else to work for honest fare." So saying he uttered this stanza :
Y Fo o r u y m o a u y ca a n il 't or do ea b t ot ; h, wh m ic y h K s o h s a i l y l a. it be?
[465] Terrified by this, the woman Kosiya realised from the moment
the master interfered how impossible it was to deceive him, and, getting
up, went about her work. And the consciousness that the master knew
her wickedness made her repent, and become as good as she had formerly
been wicked.
(So ended the story, and the brahmin's wife, feelingthat the All-enlightened
Buddhaknew what she was, stood in such awe ofhim that she siimed no more.)
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The husband
and wife of today were the husband and wife of the story, and I was the
master."

286 The Jdtaka. Booh I.
No. 131.
ASAMPADANA-JATAKA,
"//afriend."—T\n& storywas told bytheMaster while at theBamboo-grove,
about Devadatta. Forat that time the Brethren were discussing in the Hall of
Truth the ingratitude of Devadatta and his inability to recognise the Master's
goodness, when the Master himself entered and on enquiry was told the subject
oftheir talk. "Brethren," said he, "this is not the first time that Devadatta has
been ungrateful; he was justas ungrateful in bygone days." So saying, he told
this story ofthepast.
[466] Once on a time, when a certain king of Magadha was reigning in
Rajagaha, the Bodhisatta was his Treasuier, worth eighty crores, and
known as the 'Millionaire.' In Benares there dwelt a Treasurer also
worth eighty crores, who was named Piliya, and was a great friend of the
Millionaire. Forsome reasonorother Piliyaof BenaresgotintodiflBculties,
and lost all his property, and was reduced to beggary. In his need he left
Benares, and with his wife journeyed on foot to Rajagaha, to see the
Millionaire, the last hope left him. And the Millionaire embraced his
friend and treated him as an honoured guest, asking, in due course, the
reason of the visit. "I am a ruined man," answered Piliya, "I have lost
everything, and have come to ask you to help me."
"With all myheart Have no fear on that score," said the Millionaire.
!
He had his strong-room opened, and gave to Piliya forty crores. Also he
divided into two equal parts the whole of his property, live stock and all,
and bestowed on Piliya the just half of his entire fortune. Taking his
wealth, Piliya went back to Benares, and there dwelt.
Not long after a like calamity overtook the Millionaire, who, in his
turn, lost every penny he had. Casting about whither to turn in the hour
of need, he bethought him how he had befriended Piliya to the half of his
possessions, andmightgotohim for assistance without fear ofbeing thrown
over. So he set out from Rajagaha with his wife, and came to Benares.
At the entrance to the city he said to her, "Wife, it is not befitting for
you to trudge along the streets with me. Wait here a little till I send
a carriage with a servant to bring you into the city in proper state." So
saying, he left her under shelter, and went on alone into the town, till
he came to Piliya's house, where he bade himself be announced as the
Millionaire from Rajagaha, come to see his friend,
"Well, show him in," said Piliya; but at sight of the other's condition
he neither rose to meet him, nor greeted him with words of welcome, but
only demanded what brought him here.

—
"
No. 131. 287
"To see you," was the reply.
[467] "Where are you stopping'?"
"Nowhere, as yet. I left my wife under shelter and came straight to
you."
"There's no room here for you. Take a dole of rice, find somewhere to
cook and eat it, and then begone and never come to visit me again." So
saying, the rich man despatched a servant with orders to give his un-
fortunate friend half-a-quartern of pollard to carry away tied up in the
—
corner of his cloth; and this, though that veryday he had had a thousand
waggon-loads ofthe best rice threshed out and stored up in his overflowing
granaries. Yes, the rascal, who had coolly taken four hundred millions,
now doled out half-a-quartern of pollard to his benefactor Accordingly,
!
the servant measured out the pollard in a basket, and brought it to the
Bodhisatta,whoargued withinhimselfwhetherorno heshouldtakeit. And
he thought, "This ingrate breaks off our fi-iendship because I am a ruined
man. Now, if I refuse his paltry gift, I shall be as bad as he. For the
ignoble, who scorn a modest gift, outrage the first idea of frieiulship. Be
it, therefore, mine to fulfil friendship so far as in me lies, by taking his gift
of pollard." So he tied up the pollard in the corner ofhis cloth, and made
his way back to where he had housed his wife.
"What have you got, dear?" said she.
"Our friend Piliya gives us this pollard, and washes his hands ofus."
"Oh, why did you take if? Is this a fit return for the forty
crores?
"Don't cry, dear wife," said the Bodhisatta. "I took it simply because
I wanted not to violate the principle of friendship. Why these teai's"?"
So saying, he uttered this stanza :
If a friend plays the niggard's part,
A
simpleton is cut to th' heart;
[468] His dole of pollard I will take,
And not for this our friendship break.
But still the wife kept on crying.
Now, at that moment a farm-servant whom the Millionaire had given
to Piliya was passing by and drew near on hearing the weeping of his
former mistress. Recognising his master and mistress, he fell at their
feet, and with tears and sobs asked the reason of their coming. And the
Bodhisatta told him their story.
"Keep up your spirits," said the man, cheei'ily; and, taking them to
his own dwelling, there made ready perfumed baths, and a meal for them.
Then he let the other slaves know that their old master and mistress had
come, and after a few days marched them in a body to the King's palace,
where they made quite a commotion.
The King asked what the matter was, and they told him the whole

—
288 The Jataka. Book I.
story. So he sent forthwith for the two, and asked the Millionaire whether
the report was true that he had given four hundred millions to Piliya.
"Sir," said he, "when in his need my friend confided in me, and came
to seek my aid, I gave him the half, not only of my money, but of my
live stock and of everything that T possessed."
"Is this sol" said the king to Piliya,
"Yes, sire," said he.
"And when, in his turn, your benefactor confided in you and sought
you oiit, did you show him honour and hospitality1"
Here Piliya was silent.
"Did you have a half-quartern of pollard doled out into the corner of
his cloth?"
[469] Still Piliya was silent.
Then the king took counsel with his ministers as to what should be
done, and finally, as a judgment on Piliya, ordered them to go to Piliya's
house and give the whole of Piliya's wealth to the Millionaire.
"Nay, sire," said the Bodhisatta ; "I need not what is another's. Let
me be given nothing beyond what I formerly gave him."
Then the king ordered that the Bodhisatta should enjoy his own
again; and the Bodhisatta, with a large retinue of servants, came back
with his regained wealth to Rajagaha, where he i)ut his affairs in order,
and after a life spent in charity and other good works, passed away to fare
according to his deserts.
Hislesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta was
the Treasurer Piliyaofthose days, and I myselfthe Millionaire."
No. 132.
PANCAGARU-JATAKA.
—
" Wise counsels heeding.^'' This story was told by the Master while at
Jetavanaabout the Sutta concerningthe Temptation bj' the Daughters ofMara'
at the Goat-herds' Banyan-tree. The Master quoted the Sutta, beginning with
itsopeningwords
— In all their dazzling beauty on they came,
Craving and Hate and Lust. Like cotton-down
Before the wind, the Master made them fly.
' Seepp. 78 and 79 of Volume i. of the text for the temptation. Ihave not been
abletotracethePalobhana Sutta referred to.

:
No. 132. 289
After he had recited the Sutta right through to the end, the Brethren met
together in the Hall of Truth and spoke of how the Daughters of Miira drew
near in all their myriad charms yet failed to seduce the All-Enlightened One.
For he did not as much as open his eyes to look upon them, so marvellous was
he ! Entering the hall, the Master asked, and was told, what they were dis-
cussing. "Brethren," said he, "it is no marvel that I did not so much as look
upon the Daughters of Mara in this life when I have put sin from ine and have
wt)n enlightenment. In former days when I was but in quest of Wisdom,
when sin still dwelt within me, I found strength not to gaze oven upon loveliness
divine byway of lust in violation of virtue ; and by that continence I won a
kingdom." So saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was the youngest of a hundred brothers, and his adventures
ai'e to be detailed here, as above [470] in the Takkasila-Jataka '. When
the kingdom had been oifered to the Bodhisatta by the people, and when
he had accepted it and been anointed king, the people decorated the town
like a city of the gods and the royal palace like the palace of Indra.
Entering the city the Bodhisatta passed into the spacious hall of the
palace and there seated himself in all his godlike beauty on his jewelled
throne beneath the white umbrella of his Kingship. Round him in
glittering splendour stood his ministers and brahmins and nobles, whilst
sixteen thousand nautch girls, fair as the nymphs of heaven, sang and
danced and made music, till the palace was loud with sounds like the
ocean when the storm bursts in thunder on its waters". Gazing round
on the pomp of his royal state, the Bodhisatta thought how, had he looked
upon the charms of the ogresses, he would have pei'ished miserably, nor
ever have lived to see his present magnificence, which he owed to his
following the counsels of the Pacceka Buddhas. And as thes6 thoughts
filled his heart, his emotion found vent in these verses
Wise counsels heeding, firm in my resolve,
With dauntless heart still holding on my course,
I shunned the Sirens' dwellings and their snares,
And found a great salvation in my need.
[471] So ended the lesson which these verses taught. And the Great
Being ruled his kingdom in righteousness, and abounded in charity and
other good works till in the end he passed away to fare according to his
deserts.
Hislesson ended,the Master identified the Birth bysaying,"I was the prince
ofthose days who went to Takkasila and won a kingdom."
1 Apparently the reference is to No. 96. For a like confusion of title see note,
p. 112.
- Oristhemeaning 'like thevault ofheavenfilledwiththunder-clouds'? Cf.arnava
in the Eigveda.
c. J. 19

—
;
290 The Jataha. Book I.
No. 133.
GHATASANA-JATAKA.
—
'^Lo! in your stronghold." This story was told by the Master while at
Jctavana, about a certain Brother who was given by the Master a subject for
meditation, and, going to the boi-deivs, took up his abode in the forest near a
hamlet. Here he hoped to pass the rainy season, but during the very first
month his hutwas biu'ut downwhilsthewas in thevillage seeking alms. Feeling
the loss of its sheltering roof, he told his lay friends of his misfortune, and they
readily undertook to build him another hut. But, in s}nte oftheir protestations,
three months slipped away without its being rebuilt. Having no roof to shelter
him, the Brother had no success in his meditation. Not even the dawn of the
Lighthad been vouchsafed to him when at the close of the rainy season he went
back to Jetavana and stood respectfully before the Master. In the course of
talk the Master asked whether the Brothel's meditation had beeii successful.
Then that Brother related from the beginning the good and ill that had be-
fallen him. Said the Master, "In days gone by, even brute beasts could discern
between what was good and what bad for them and so quitted betimes, ere tliey
proved dangerous, the habitations that had sheltered them in happier days.
And if beasts were so discerning, how coidd you fall so far short of them in
wisdom?" So saying, at that Brother's request, the Master told this story ofthe
past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reignins in Benai'es, the
Bodhisatta was born a bird. When he came to years of discretion, good
fortune attended him and he became king of the birds, taking up his
abode with his subjects in a giant tree which stretched its leafy branches
over the waters of a lake. And all these birds, [472] roosting in the
boughs, dropped their dung into the waters below. Now that lake was
the abode of Canda, the Naga King, who was enraged by this fouling
of his water and resolved to take vengeance on the birds and burn
them out. So one night when they were all roosting along the branches,
he set to work, and first he made the waters of the lake to boil, then
he caused smoke to arise, and thirdly he made flames dart up as high
as a palm-tree.
Seeing the flames sliooting up from the water, the Bodhisatta cried to
the birds, "Water is used to quench fire; but here is the water itself on
fire. This is no place for us; let us seek a home elsewhere." So saying,
he uttered this stanza :
Lo! in your stronghold stands the foe.
And fire doth water burn
So from your tree make haste to go,
Let trust to trembling turn.

—
No. 134. 291
And hereupon theBodhisatta flew offwith suchof the birds asfollowed
his advice; but the disobedient birds, who stopped behind, all perished.
His lesson ended, the Masterpreached the Four Truths (at the close whereof
that Brother won Araliatship) and identified the Birth by saying, "The loyal
and obedient birds of those days are now become my disciples, and I myself was
then the kinsr ofthe birds."
No. 134.
[473] JHANASODHANA-JATAKA.
—
" With conscious." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about the interpretation liy Sfiriputta, Captain of the Faith, at the gate of
Samkassa town, of a problem tei-sely propoinided by the Master. And the
following was the story ofthe past he then told.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares,...&c. ...
tlie Bodhisatta, as he expired in his forest-home, exclaimed^ "Neither
conscious nor unconscious." And the recluses did not believe the inter-
pretation which the Bodhisatta's chiefdisciple gave of the Master's words.
Back came the Bodhisatta from the Radiant Realm, and from mid-air
recited this stanza :
With conscious, with unconscious, too,
Dwells sorrow. Either ill eschew.
Pure bliss, from all corruption free.
Springs but from Insight's ecstasy.
His lesson ended, the Bodhisatta praised his disciple and went back to
the Brahma Realm. Then the rest of the recluses believed the chief
disciple.
His lesson taught, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "In those days
Sariputta was the chiefdisciple, and I Maha-Brahmfi."
X9-2

—
,
292 The Jataka. Book I.
No. 135.
[474] CANDABHA-JATAKA.
"Who sagelymeditates."—This storytoowas told bythe Masterwhile at Jeta-
vanaahout the interpretation of a problem by the Elder Sariputta at the gate of
Saiiikassa.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta, as he expir — ed in his forest-home, answered his disciples'
enquiries with the words "Moonlight and Sunlight." With these words
he died and passed to the Radiant Realm.
Now when the chief disciple interpreted the Master's words his fellows
did not believe him. Then back came the Bodhisatta and from mid-air
recited this stanza
:
Who sagely meditates on sun and moon.
Shall win (when Reason unto Ecstasy
Gives place) his after-lot in Radiant Realms^.
Such was the Bodhisatta's teaching, and, first pi-aising his disciple, he
went his way back to the Brahma Realm.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Sariputta was
the chiefdisciple ofthosedays, and I Maha-Brahma."
No. 136.
SUVANNAHAMSA-JATAKA.
—
"Contentedbe." This story was told by the Masterabout a Sisternamed Fat
Nanda.
A
lay-brother at Savatthi had offered the Sisterhood a supply of garlic, and,
sendingforhis bailiff,had given orders that,iftheyshould come, each Sisterwas
to receive two orthree handfuls. After that theymade apractice[475]ofcoming
^ Thesetechnicallinesimplythat,bytakingtheSunandMoon ashiskammatthano
or subject for meditation, a Buddhist, by attaining Jhana (or Insight) in the second
(i.e.supra-rational)degree,cansavehimselffromre-birth in alower sphere ofexistence
than the Abhassaraloka orRadiantRealm ofthe corporeal Brahma-world,

No. 13G. 293
to his house orfield for theirgarlic. Now oneholiday the supply ofgarlic in the
house ran out, and the Sister Fat Nandii, coming with others to the house, was
told, when she said she wanted somegarhc, thatthere was none left in the house,
it had all been used up out of hand, and that she nuist go to the field for it.
So away to the field she went and carried ofi'an excessive amount ofgarlic. The
bailiflf grew angry and remarked what a greedy lot these Sisters were This
piqued the more moderate Sisters; and the Brethren too were piqued ! at the
taunt when the Sisters repeated it to them, and they told the Blessed One.
Kebuking tlie greed of Fat Nanda, the ]\Iaster said, "Brethren, a greedy person
is harsh and unkind even to the mother who bore him agreedy person cannot
;
convert the unconverted, or make the converted grow in grace, or cause alms to
come in, or save them when come in ; whereas the moilerate person can do all
these things." In such wise did the Master point the moral, ending by saying,
"Brethren, as Fat Nanda is greedy now, so she was greedy in times gone by."
And thereupon he told the following story ofthepast.
Ouce upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a brahmin, and growing up was married to a bride
of his own rank, who bore him three daughtei's named Nanda, Nanda-vati
and Sundari-nanda. The Bodhisatta dying, they were taken in by
neighbours and friends, whilst he was born again into the world as a
golden mallard endowed with consciousness of its former existences.
Growing up, the bird viewed its own magnificent size and golden plumage,
and remembered that previously it had been a human being. Discovering
that his wife and daughters were living on the charity of others, the
mallard bethought him of his plumage like hammered and beaten gold and
how by giving them a golden feather at a time he could enable his wife
and daughters to live in comfort. So away he flew to where they dwelt
and alighted on the top of the central beam of the roof. Seeing the
Bodhisatta, [476] the wife and girls asked where he had come from; and
he told them that he was their father who had died and been born
a golden mallard, and that he had come to visit them and put an end
to their miserable necessity of working for hire. "You shall have my
feathers," said he, "one by one, and they will sell for enough to keep you
all in ease and comfort." So saying, he gave them one ofhis feathers and
departed. And from time to time he returned to give them another
feather, and with the proceeds of their sale these brahmin-women grew
prosperous and quite well-to-do. But one day the mother said to her
daughters, "There's no trusting animals, my children. Who's to say your
father might not go away one of these days and never come back again?
Let us use our time and pluck him clean next time he comes, so as to
make sure of all his feathers." Thinking this would pain him, the
daughters refused. The mother in her greed called the golden mallard to
her one day when he came, and then took him with both hands and
plucked him. Now the Bodhisatta's feathers had this property that if

—
294 The Jataha. Book I.
they were plucked out against his wish, they ceased to be golden and
became like a crane's feathers. And now the poor hird, though he
stretched his wings, could not fly, and the woman flung him into a barrel
and gave him food there. As time went on his feathers grew again
(though they were plain white ones now), and he flew away to his own
abode and never came back again.
At the close of this story the Master said, "Thus you see. Brethren, how Fat
Nanda was as greedy in times past as she is now. And her greed then lost her
the gold in the same way as her greed now will lose her the garlic. Observe,
moreover, how her greed has deprived the whole Sisterhood of their supply of
garlic, and learn therefrom to be moderate in yourdesires and to be content with
what is given you, however small that may be." So saying, he uttered this
stanza:
Contented be, nor itc—h for fui'ther store.
They seized the swan but had its gold no more.
So saying, the Master soundly rebuked the erring Sister and laid down the
precept that any Sister who should eat garlic would have to do penance. Then,
[477] making the connexion, he said, "Fat Nanda was the brahmin's wife of the
story, her three sisters were the brahmin's three daughters, and I myself the
golden mallard."
\_Aote. The storyoccurs at ]ip. 2.58-9 ofVol. iv. ofthe Vinaya. Cf Lapoule
aiuoeufsd'orin La Fontaine (v. 13) &c.]
No. 137.
BABBU-JATAKA.
—
''Givefood to one cat.'''' This storywas told by the Masterwhile at Jetavana,
about the precept respecting Kana's mother. She was a lay-sister at Savatthi
known only as Kana's mother, who had entered the Paths of Salvation and was
of the Elect. Her daughter Kana^ was married to a husband of the same caste
in another village, and someerrand or other made her go to see her mother. A
few days went by, and her husband sent a messenger to say he wished her to
coine back. The girl asked her mother whether she should go, and the mother
said she could not go back empty-handed after so long an absence, and set
about making a cake. Just then up came a Brother going his round for alms,
and the mother sat him down to the cake she had just baked. Away he went
' Thename Kanameans 'one-eyed'.

J^o. 137. 295
and told another Brother, who came up jvist in time to get the second cake
that was baked for the daughter to take homewith her. lie told a third, and
the tliird told a fourth, and so each fresh cake was taken by a fresh corner.
The result of this was that the daughter did not start on her way home, and
the husband sent a second and a thirdmessenger after her. And the message ho
sent by the thirtl was that if his wife did not come back, he should get another
wife. And each message had exactly the same result. So the husband took
another wife, and at the news his former wife fell a-wceping. Knowing all this,
the Master put on his robes early in the morning and went with his alms-bowl to
the house ofKana's motlierand sat down on the seat set forhim. Thenheasked
why the daughter was crying, and, beingtold, spoke words of consolation to the
mother, and arose and went back to the Monastery.
Now the Brethren came to know how Kana had been stopped three times
from going btick to her husband owing to the action of the four Brothers and
one day they met in the Hall ofTruth and began to talk about the matter. ; The
Master came into the Hall [478] and asked what they were discussing, and they
told him. "Brethren," said he, "think not this is the first time those four
Brothers have brought sorrow on Kana's mother by eating ofher store they did
the like in days gone by too." So saying he told this story ofthe past. ;
Once on a time wlion Bralimadatta was reigning in Beuares, the
Bodhisatta was born a stone-cutter, and growing up became expert in
working stones. Now in the Kasi country there dwelt a very rich mer-
cliant who had amassed forty crores in gold. And when his wife died, so
strong was her love of money that she was re-born a mouse and dwelt
over the treasure. And one by one the whole family died, including the
merchant himself. Likewise the village became deserted and forlorn. At
the time of our story the Bodhisatta was quarrying and shaping stones
on thesite of this deserted village; and themouse used often to see him as
she ran about to find food. At last she fell in love with him; and,
bethinkingherhow thesecret ofall her vastwealth would die with her, she
conceived the idea of enjoying it with him. So one day she came to the
Bodhisatta with a coin in her mouth. Seeing this, he spoke to her
kindly, and said, "Mother, what has brought you here with this coinl"
"It is for you to lay out for yourself, and to buy meat with for me as
well, my sou." Nowise loth, he took the money and spent a lialfpenny of
it on meat which he brought to the mouse, who departed and ate to her
heart's content. And this went on, the mouse giving the Bodhisatta a
coin every day, and he in return supplying her with meat. But it fell
out one day that the mouse was caught by a cat.
"Don't kill me," said the mouse.
"Whynot1 " said the cat. "I'm as hungry as can be, and really must
kill you to allay the pangs."
"First, tell me whether you're always hungry, or only hungry today."
"Oh, every day finds me hungry again."
"Well then, if this be so, I will find you always in meat; [479] only
let me go."

296 The Jdtaka. Book I.
" Mind you do then," said the cat, and let the mouse go.
As a consequence of this the mouse had to divide the supplies ofmeat
she gotfrom theBodhisatta into two portions and gave one half to the cat,
keeping the other for herself.
Now, as luck would have it, the same mouse was caught another day
by a second cat and had to purchase her release on the same terms. So
now the daily food was divided into three portions. And when a third
cat caught the mouse and a like arrangement had to be made, the supply
was divided into four portions. And later afourth cat caught her, andthe
food had to be divided among five, so that the mouse, reduced to such
short commons, grew so thin as to be nothing but skin and bone.
Remarking how emaciated his friend was getting,the Bodhisatta asked the
reason. Then the mouse told him all that had befallen her.
"Why didn't you tell me all this before?" said the Bodhisatta. "Cheer
up, I'll help you out of your troubles." So he took a block of the pui'est
crystal and scooped out a cavity in it and made the mouse get inside.
"Now stop there," said he, "and don't fail to fiercely threaten and revile
all who come near."
So the mouse crept into the crystal cell and waited. Up came one of
the cats and demanded his meat. "Away,vile grimalkin,"said themouse;
"why should I supply you ? go home and eat your kittens!" Infuriated
at these words, and never suspecting the mouse to be inside the crystal,
tlie cat sprang at the mouse to eat her up ; and so furious was its spring
that it bi'oke the walls of its chest and its eyes started from its head.
So that cat died and its carcase tumbled down out of sight. And the
like fate in turn befell all four cats. And ever after the grateful mouse
brought the Bodhisatta two or three coins instead of one as before, and by
degrees she thus gave him the whole of the hoard. In unbroken friend-
ship the two lived together, till their lives ended and they passed away
to fare according to their deserts.
The story told, the Master, as Buddha, uttered this stanza:—[480]
Give food to one cat, Number Two appears:
A
—third and fourth succeed in fruitful line;
AVitness the four that by the crystal died.
His lesson ended, the Master ideutified the Birth by saying, "These four
Brethren were the four cats of thosedays, Kauca'smother wasthe mouse, and I
the stone-cutter."
[^Yote. See Vina7/a iv. 79 for the Introductory Story.]

No. 138. 297
No. 138.
GODHA-JATAKA.
—
"With onatted hair." This story was told by the Master while at Jctavana,
about ahypocrite. The incidents were like those above related^
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born a lizard; and in a hut hard by a village on the borders
there lived a rigid ascetic who had attained the Five Knowledges, and was
treated withgreatrespect by thevillagers. In an ant-hill atthe end of the
walk where the recluse paced up and down, dwelt the Bodhisatta, and
twice or thrice each day he would go to the recluse and hear words of
edification and holiness. Then with due obeisance to the good man, the
Bodhisatta would depart to his own abode. After a certain time the
ascetic bade farewell to the villagers and went away. In his stead there
came another ascetic, arascally fellow, to dwell in the hermitage. Assum-
ing the holiness of the new-comer, the Bodhisatta acted towards him as to
the first ascetic. One day an unexpected storm in the dry season brought
out the ants on their hills', and thelizards,comingabroad toeatthem, were
caught in great numbers [481] by thevillagefolk; and somewereserved up
with vinegar and sugar for the ascetic to eat. Pleased with so savoury a
dish, he asked what it was, and learned that it was a dish of lizards.
Hereon he reflected that he had a remarkably fine lizai'd as his neighbour,
and resolved to dine off him. Accordingly he made ready the pot for
cooking and sauce to serve the lizard in, and sat at the door of his hut
with a mallet hidden under his yellow robe, awaiting the Bodhisatta's
coming, with a studied air of perfect peace. At evening the Bodhisatta
came, and as he drew near, marked that the hermit did not seem quite the
same, but had a look about him that boded no good. Snuffing up the
windwhich was blowing towards him from the hermit's cell, tlie Bodhisatta
smelt the smell of lizard's flesh, and at once realised how the taste of
lizard had made the ascetic want to kill him with a mallet and eat him
up. So he retired homeward without calling on the ascetic. Seeing that
the Bodhisatta did not come, the ascetic judged that the lizard must have
divined his plot, but marvelled how he could have discovered it. Deter-
mined that the lizard should not escape, he drew out the mallet and threw
1 ApparentlyNo. 128. Cf. No. 325. 2 Cf. p. 303.

298 The JataJca. Book I.
it,just hittingthe tip ofthe lizard's tail. Quick as thought the Bodhisatta
dashed into his fastness, and putting his head out by a different hole to
that by which he had gone in, cried, " Rascally hypocrite, your garb of
piety led me to trust you, but now I know your villainous nature. What
has a thief like you to do with hermit's clothing1" Thus upbraiding the
:—
false ascetic, the Bodhisatta recited this stanza
With matted hair and garb of skin
Why ape th' ascetic's piety '^
A saint without, thy heart within
Is choked with foul impurity i.
[482] In this wise did the Bodhisatta expose the wicked ascetic, after
which he retired into his ant-hill. And the wicked ascetic departed from
that place.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The hypocrite
was the wicked ascetic of those days, Saviputia the good ascetic who lived in the
hermitage befoi'e him, and I myselfthe lizard."
No. 139.
UBHATOBHATTHA-JATAKA.
—
"//('*• blinding and her heating." This story the blaster told while at the
Bamboo Grove, about Devadatta. We hearthat the Brethren, meeting together
in the Hall of Ti'uth, spoke one with another, saying that even as a torchfrom a
pyre, charred at both ends and bcdungcd in the middle, does not serve as wood
either in forest-ti'ee or village-hearth, so Devadatta by giving up the world to
follow this saving faith had only achieved a twofold shortcoming and failure,
seeing that he had missed the comforts of alay life yet hadfallen short of his
vocation asa Brother.
Entering the Hall, the Master asked and was told what the Brethren were
talking of together. "Yes, Brethren," said he, "and so too in days gone by
Devadatta came to just such another two-fold failure." So saying, he told this
story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a Tree-Sprite, and there was a certain village where
1 Dhammapada v. 394.

—
";
No. 139. 299
line-fislieniieu dwelt in those days. And one of these fishermen taking
his tackle went off with his little boy, and cast his hook into the most
likely waters known to his fellow-fishermen. Now [483] a snag caught
his hook and the fisherman could not pull it up. "What a tine fish!
thought he. "I'd better send my boy off home to my wife and tell her to
get up a quarrel and keep the others at home, so that there'll be none to
want to go shares in my prize." Accordingly he told the lad to run off
home and tell his mother what a big fish he had hooked and how she was
to engage the neighbours' attention. Then, fearing his line might break,
he flung off" his coat and dashed into the water to secure his prize. But
as he groped about for the fish, he struck against the snag and j^ut out
both his eyes. Moreover a robber stole his clothes from the bank. Tn
an agony of pain, with his hands pressed to his blinded eyes, he clambered
out trembling in every limb and tried to find his clothes.
Meantime his wife, to occupy the neighbours by a quarrel on purpose,
had tricked herself out with a palm-leaf behind one ear, and had blacked
one eye with soot from the saucepan. In this guise, nursing a dog, she
came out to call on her neighbours. "Bless me, you've gone mad," said
one woman to her. "Not mad at all," i-etorted the fisherman's wife
"you abuse me without cause with yoiir slanderous tongue. Come your
ways with me to the zemindar and I'll have you fined eight pieces' for
slander."
So with angry words they went off" to the zemindar. But when the
matter was gone into, it was the fisherman's wife who was fined ; and she
was tied up and beaten to make her pay the fine. Now when the Tree-
Sprite saw how misfortune had befallen both the wife in the village and
the husband in the forest, he stood in the fork of his tree and exclaimed,
"Ah fisherman, both in the water and on land thy labour is in vain, and
twofold is thy feilure." So saying he uttered this stanza:
His blinding, and her beating, clearly show
A twofold failure and a twofold woe-^.
[484] His lesson ended,theMaster identified theBirthbysaying, "Devadatt;
was the fisherman ofthosedays, and I the Tree-Sprite."
1 The Pali word here, as in No. 137, is kalulpana. But there it is sbewu by the
context to be a golden coin; wbereas here the povertyof the fisber-folk supports the
view that the coin was of copper, as commonly. The fact seems to be that the word
kalulpana, hkesome other names of Indian coins, primarily indicated a weight of any
—
coinedmetal, whether gold, silverorcopper.
^ Cf. Dhammapada, page 147.

300 Tlie Jataha. Book I.
No. 140.
KAKA-JATAKA.
"In ceaseless c/reac/."—This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
abouta sagacious counsellor. The incidents will be related in the twelfth book
in connection with the Bhaddasala-jatakai.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a crow. One day the King's chaplain went out
from the city to the river, bathed there, and having perfumed and
garlanded himself, donned his bravest array and came back to thecity. On
the archway of the city gate there sat two crows ; and one ofthem said to
his mate, "I mean to foul this brahmin's head." "Oh, don't do any such
thing," said the other; "for this brahmin is a great man, and it is an evil
thing to incur the Iiatred of the great. Ifyou anger him, he may destroy
the whole of our kind." "I really must," said the first. " Very well,
you're sure to be found out," said the other, and flew quickly away. Just
when the brahmin was under the battlements, down dropped the filth
ujion him as if the crow were dropping a festoon. The enraged brahmin
forthwith conceived hatred against all crows.
Now at this time it chanced that a female slave in charge of a granary
spread the rice out in the sun at the granary door and was sitting there to
watch it, when she fell asleep. Just then up came a shaggy goat and fell
to eating the rice till the girl woke up and drove it away. Twice or three
times the goat came back, as soon as she fell asleep, and ate the rice.
[485] So when she had driven the creature away for the third time she
bethoughtherthatcontinued visitsofthegoatwould consumehalf herstore
of rice and that steps must be taken to scare the animal away for good
and so save her from so great a loss. So she took a lighted torch, and,
sitting down, pretended to fall asleep as usual. And when the goat was
eating, she suddenly sprang up and hit its shaggy back with her torch.
At once the goat's shaggy hide M^as all ablaze, and to ease its pain, it
dashed into a hay-shed near the elephant's stable and rolled in the hay.
So the shed caught fire and the flames spread to the stables. As these
stables caught fire, the elephants began to sufier, and many of them were
badly burnt beyond the skill of the elephant-doctors to cure. When this
1 No. 465.

—
No. 140. 301
was reported to the King, he asked his chaplain whether he knew what
would cure the elephants, "Certainly I do, sire," said the chaplain, and
being pressed to explain, said his nostrum was crows' fat. Then the King
ordered crows to be killed and their fixt taken. And forthwith there was
a great slaughter of crows, but never was any fat found on them, and so
they went on killing till dead crows lay in heaps everywhere. And a
great fear was upon all crows.
Now in those days theBodhisatta had his dwelling in a great cemetery,
at the head of eighty thousand ci'ows. One of these brought tidings to
him of the fear that was upon the crows. And the Bodhisatta, feeling
that there was none but him who could essay the task, i*esolved to free
his kinsfolk from their great dread. Reviewing the Ten Perfections,
and selecting therefrom Kindness as his guide, he flew without stopping
right up to the King's palace, and entering in at the open window
alighted underneath the King's throne. Straightway a servant tried to
catch the bird, but the King entering the chamber forliade him.
Recovering himself in a moment, the Great Being, remembering
Kindness, — came forth from beneath the King's throne and spoke thus to
the King; "Sire, a king should remember the maxim that kings should
notwalk according to lust and other evil passions inrulingtheirkingdoms.
Before taking action, it is meet first to examine and know the whole
matter, and then only to do that which being done is salutary. If kings
do that which being done is not salutary, they fill thousands with a
great fear, even the fear of death. [486] And in prescribing crows'
fat, your chaplain was prompted by revenge to lie; for crows have
no fat."
By these woi-ds the King's heart was won, and he bade the Bodhisatta
be set on a throne of gold and there anointed beneath the wings with the
choicest oils and served in vessels of gold with the King's own meats and
drink. Then when the Great Being was filled and at ease, the King said,
"Sage, you say that ci'ows have no fat. How comes it that they have
none?"
"In this wise," answered the Bodhisatta with a voice that filled the
whole palace, and he proclaimed the Truth in this stanza:
In ceaseless dread, with all mankind for foes.
Their life is passed; and hence no fat have crows.
This explanation given, the Great Being taught the King, saying,
"Sire, kings should never act without examining and knowing the whole
matter." Well pleased, the King laidhis kingdom at the Bodhisatta's feet,
but the Bodhisatta restored it to the King, whom he established in the
Five Precepts, beseeching him to shield all living creatures from harm.
And the King was moved by these words to grant inxmunity to all living

302 The Jdtaka. Book I.
creatures, and iu particular lie was unceasingly bountiful to crows. Every
day he had six bushels of rice cooked for them and delicately flavoured,
and this was given to the crows. But to the Great Being there was
iriven food such as the King alone ate.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth liy saying, "Ananda was
King ofBenares in thosedays, and 1 myselfthe king ofthe crows.'
No. 141.
GODHA-JATAKA.
[487] ^'Bad company.''—Thm story was told by the Master while at the
Bamboo-grove, about a traitorous Brother. The introductory incident is the
same as that told in the Mahila-mukha-jatakai.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisattawas bornaniguana. When hegrew uphe dweltin a bigburrow
in the river bank with a following of many hundreds of other iguanas.
Now the Bodhisatta had a son, a young iguana, who was great friends
with achameleon, whom he used to clip and embrace. This intimacybeing
reported to the iguana king, he sent for his young son and said that such
friendship was misplaced, forchameleonswere low creatures, andthatifthe
intimacy was persisted in, calamity would befall the whole of the tribe of
iguanas. And he enjoined his son to have no more to do with the
chameleon. But the son continued in his intimacy. Again and again
did the Bodhisatta speak with his son, but finding his words of no avail,
and foreseeing danger to the iguanas from the chameleon, he had an outlet
cut on one side of their burrow, so that there might be a means of escajje
in time ofneed.
Now as time went on, the young iguana gi'ew to a great size, whilst
the chameleon never grew any bigger. And as these mountainous em-
Ijraces of the young giant grew painful indeed, the chameleon foresaw
1 No. 2G,

— —
No. 141. 803
that they would be the death of him if they went on a few days longer,
and he resolved to combine with a hunter to destroy the whole tribe of
iguanas.
One day in the summer the ants came out after a thunder-storm', and
[488] the iguanas darted hither and thither catching them and eating
them. Now there came into the forest an iguana trapper with spade and
dogs to dig out iguanas ; and the chameleon thought what a haul he
would put in the trapper's way. So he went up to the man, and, lying
down before him, asked why he was about in the forest. "To catch
iguanas," was the reply. "Well, I know where there's a burrow of
hundreds of them," said the chameleon; "bring fire and brushwood and
follow me." And he brought the trapper to where the iguanas dwelt.
"Now," said the chameleon, "put your fuel in there and smoke the
iguanas out. Meantime let your clogs be all round and take a big stick in
your hand. Then as the iguanas dash out, strike them down and make a
pile of the slain." So saying, the treacherous chameleon withdrew to a
spot hard by, where he lay down, with his head up, saying to himself,
"This day I shall see the rout ofmy enemy."
The trapper set to work to siuoke the iguanas out; and fear for their
lives drove them helter-skelter from their burrow. As they came out, the
trapper knocked them on the head, and if he missed them, they fell
a prey to his dogs. And so there was great slaughter among the iguanas.
Realising that this was the chameleon's doing, the Bodhisatta cried, "One
should never make friends of the wicked, for such bring sorrow in their
A
train. single wicked chameleon has proved the bane of all these
iguanas." So saying, he escaped ])y the outlet he had i)rovided, uttering
this stanza:
Bad company can never end in good.
Througli frieudsliip with one sole chameleon
The tribe of isjuanas met their end.
1 Malikhika may referto the wings which the auts get in India at the beginning
oftherainyseason ; cf. p. 297.

—
304 The Jdtaka. Book I.
No. 142.
SIGALA-JATAKA.
"Thy tightening grip."—This story was told by the Master while at the
Bamboo-grove, about Devadatta's going about to kill him. For, hearing the
Brethren talking together as to this in the Hall of Truth, the Master said that,
as Devadatta acted now, so he acted in times gone by, yet failed—to his own
grievous hurt—of his wicked purpose. And so saying, he told this story ofthe
past.
Once on a time when Bralimadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a jackal, and dwelt in a charnel-grove witli a great
following of jackals of whom he was king. And at that time there was
a festival held at Rajagaha, and a very wet festival it was, with eveiybody
drinking hard. Now a parcel of rogues got hold of victual and drink in
abundance, and putting on their best clothes sang and made merry over
their fare. By midnight the meat was all gone, though the liquor still
held out. Then on one asking for more meat and being told there was
none left, said the fellow, "Victuals never lack while I am about. I'll off
to the charnel-grove, kill a jackal prowling about to eat the corpses, and
bring back some meat." So saying he snatched up a club and made his
way out of the city by the sewer to the place, where he lay down, club in
hand, feigning to be dead. Just then, followed by the other jackals, the
Bodhisatta came up and marked the pretended corpse. Suspecting the
fraud, he determined to sift the matter. So he went round to the lee side
and knew by the scent that the man was not really dead. Resolving to
make the man look foolish before leaving him, the Bodhisatta stole near
and took hold of the club with his teetli and tugged at it. The rascal
did not leave go not perceiving the Bodhisatta's approach, he [490]
:
took a tighter grip. Hereon the Bodhisatta stepped back a pace or two
and said, " My good man, if you had been dead, you would not have
tightened your grip on your club when I was tugging at it, and so have
betrayed yourself." So saying, he uttered this stanza:
Thy tightening grip— upon thy club doth show
Thy rank imposture thou'rt no corpse, I trow.
Finding that he was discovered, the rogue sprang to his feet and flung
his club at the Bodhisatta, but missed his aim. "Be off, you brute," said

No. 143. 305
he, "I've missed you this time." Turning round, the Bodhisatta said,
"True you have missed me, but be assured you will not miss the torments
of the Great Hell and the sixteen Lesser Hells."
Empty-handed, the rogue left the cemetery and, after bathing in a
ditch, went back into the city by the way he had come.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta was
the rogue ofthose times, and I the king ofthejackals."
No. 143.
VIROCANA-JATAKA.
—
^^Your mangled corpse." This story was told by the Master while at the
Bamboo-grove, abovit Dcvadatta's efforts to pose as a Buddha at Gayasisa^.
For when his spiritual Insight left him and he lost the honour and profit which
once were his, he in his perplexity asked the Master to concede the Five Points.
This being refused, he made a schism in the Brotherhood and departed to
Gayasisa with five hundred young Brethren, pupils of the Buddha's two chief
disciples, but as yet unversed in the Law and the Rule. With this following he
j)erformed the acts of a separate Brotherhood gathered together within the same
precincts. Knowing well the time when the knowledge of these young Brethren
should ripen, the Master sent the two Elders to them. Seeing these, [491]
Devadatta joyfully set to work expounding far into the night with (as he
flattered himself) the masterly power of a Buddha. Then posing as a Buddha
he said, "The assembly, reverend Sariputta, is still alert and sleepless. Will you
be so good as to think of some religious discourse to address to the Brethren?
My back is aching with my labours, and I must rest it awhile." So saying he
went away to lie down. Then those two chief disciples taught the Brethren,
enlightening them as to the Fruitions and the Paths, till in the end they won
them all over to go back to the Bamboo-grove.
Finding the Monasteryemptied ofthe Brethren, Kokalika wentto Devadatta
and told him how the two disciples had broken up his following and left the
Monastery empty ; "and yet here you still lie asleep," said he. So saying he
stripped off Devadatta's outer cloth and kicked him on the chest with as little
compunction as if he were knocking a roof-peg into a mud-wall. The 1)1ood
gushed out of Devadatta's mouth, and ever after he suffered from the effects of
the blow2.
^ Seepp. 34 and 35supra.
2 The Vinaya account (Cullavaggavii. 4) omits the kicking, simply stating that
Kokalika "awoke" Devadatta, and that, at the news of the defectiou, "warm blood
gushed out of Devadatta's mouth." In other accounts (SpenceHardy and Bigaudet)
itisstatedthatDevadattadiedthen andthere.
c. J. 20

306 Tlie Jdtaka. Book I.
ther S e a ^ i " d t A he nd Ma S s a t r e i r nu t t o ta Sa a r n i s p w ut e t r a e , d " t A h V at h , at th w o a u s gh De p v o a si d n a g tt a a s d a oi B n u g d w d h h e a n e y vi o l u h g a o d t
h be a f s al D l e en va h d i a m t . ta S i a m i i d ta t t h e e d M m as e te t r o , h " i E s v o e w n n as hu n r o t w . , " Sa T r h i e pu n t , ta a , t s t o he in El f d o e r r m s er re t q i u m es e t s , t h o e o
told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was a maned lion and dwelt at Gold Den in the Himalayas.
Bounding forth one day from his lair, he looked North and West, South
and East, and roared aloud as he went in quest of prey. Slaying a large
buffixlo, he devoured the prime of the carcass, after which he went down to
a pool, and having drunk his fill of crystal water turned to go towards
his den. Now a hungry jackal, suddenly meeting the lion, and being
unable to make his escape, threw himself at the lion's feet. Being asked
what he wanted, the jackal replied, "Lord, let me be thy servant."
"Very well," said the lion; "serve me and you shall feed on prime meat."
So saying, he went with the jackal following to Gold Den. Thenceforth
the lion's leavings fell to the jackal^ and he grew fat.
Lying one day in his den, the lion told the jackal to scan the valleys
from the mountain top, to see whether there were any elephants or horses
or buffalos about, or any other animals [492] ofwhich he, thejackal, was
fond. If anysuch were in sight,thejackal was to report and say with due
obeisance, "Shine forth in thy might, Lord." Then the lion promised to
kill and eat, giving a part to the jackal. So the jackal used to climb the
heights, and whenever he espied below beasts to bis taste, he would report
it to the lion,and falling at his feet, say, "Shineforth in thy might. Lord."
Hereon the lion would nimbly bound forth and slay the beast, even if it
were a rutting elephant, and share the prime of the carcass with the
jackal. Glutted with his meal, thejackal would then retire tohis den and
sleep.
Now as time went on, the jackal grew bigger and bigger till he grew
haughty. "Have not I too four legs?" he asked himself. "Why am I a
pensioner day by day on others' bounty? Henceforth / will kill elephants
and other beasts, for my own eating. The lion, king of beasts, only kills
them because of the formula, 'Shine forth in thy might, Lord.' I'll make
t a h n e e l l i e o p n ha ca n l t l f o o u r t m t y o se m l e f , ." 'Sh A i c n c e or fo d r i t n h gl i y n t h h e y w mi e g n h t t, to jac t k h a e l, l ' io a n n , d a t n h d en po I' i l n l t k i i n l g l
out that he had long lived on what the lion had killed, told his desire to
h ea i t m an th e e l j e a p c h k a a n l t , o c f ou h c is h o in wn th k e il l l i i o n n g ' , s e co n r d n i e n r g i w n it G h ol a d r D eq e u n es w t hi t l o s t t he th l e io l n ion to w l a e s t
!a!slk.edWl
tha
'
t
^
t
i
h
r
e
^'
li
'
o
^
n
'
s
"
h
'
ou
'
l
"
d
^^
c
"
o
^
me
'"
t
'
o
^
h
'^
i
"
m
^'
i
^
n
^
t
^
h
^^
e
P^
d
'^
e
"
n
^^-
and
Th
sa
e
y,
qu
'
a
S
r
h
r
i
y
ne
fo
f
u
o
n
r
d
t
,
h
h
i
e
u

—
No. 144. 307
thy might, jackal.' He begged the lion not to grudge him this much.
Said the lion, "Jackal, only lions can kill elephants, nor has the world
ever seen a jackal able to cope with them. Give up this fancy, and con-
tinue to feed on what I kill." But say what the lion could, the jackal
would not give way, and still pressed his request. So at last the lion
gave way, and bidding the jackal couch in the den, climbed the peak and
thence espied an elephant in rut. Returning to the mouth of the cave,
he said, "Shine forth in thy might, jackal." Then from Gold Den the
jackal [493] nimbly bounded forth, looked ai'ound him on all four sides,
and, thrice raising its howl, sprang at the elephant, meaning to fasten on
its head. But missing his aim, he alighted at the elephant's feet. The
infuriated brute raised its right foot and crushed the jackal's head,
trampling the bones into powder. Then pounding the carcass into a mass,
and dunging upon it, the elephant dashed trumpeting into the forest.
Seeing all this, the Bodhisatta observed, "Now shine forth in thy might,
jackal," and uttered this stanza :
Your mangled corpse, your brains mashed into clay.
Prove how you've shone forth in your might to-day.
Thus spake the Bodhisatta, and living to a good old age he passed
away in the fulness of time to fare according to his deserts.
Hislesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "Devadatta was
thejackal ofthosedays, and I the lion."
No. 144.
NANGUTTHA-JATAKA.
—
" Vile Jdtaveda." This story was told by the Master while at Jetavaua,
touchingthefalse austerity ofthe Ajlvikas, or naked ascetics. Tradition tells us
thatbehind Jetavana they used to practise false avisterities^. A number ofthe
Brethren seeing them there painfullysquatting on theirheels,swinging in the air
like bats, reclining on thorns,scorchingthemselves with five fires, and so foi'th in
^ See (e.g.) Majjhima Nikuya, pp. 77-8, for a catalogue of ascetic austerities, to
whichearly Buddhismwas stronglyopposed.
20—2

—
308 The Jataka. Book I.
their various false austerities-were moved to ask the Blessed One whetherany
good resulted therefrom. "None whatsoever," answered the Master In days
-one bv, the wise and ^ood went into the forest with then- l.irtli-hre, thniknig to
g p t ti r o a l o i l f F n i i i e t t r d e w b e v a a n n n s t d d uc o f a h u o t r t a i u a t l s l l t B e e s y r i w i m a o t i i n n l e a s a r ; t c o t p b r u o t a t f h c . e t ^ i f [ c i B e e n d r s d i , a i t n h a s g t m t i r a t o a h n i l e g l m t h e s h a t e e l w l m a K v . y e n " s o d w o n l S u o e o s d e b s g e d a t e y t t s i o h r n e a g n t b o d h i r e r A a t t l t h l o t - l h a t d r h i e e n t i h m w r i e i s s n t ; t s h i t s e o r w i r w a f y e t ac r e o e e r s f
the past.
[494] Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born a brahmin in the North country, and on the day of
liis birth his parents lit a birth-fire.
In his sixteenth year they addressed liim tlius, "Son, on the day of
your birth we lita birth-fire for you. Now therefore choose. If you wish
to lead a family life, learn the Three Vedas; but if you wish to attain to
the Brahma Realm, take your fire with you into the forest and there
tend it, so as to win INIaha-Brahma's favour and hei'eafter to enter into
the Brahma Realm."
Telling his parents that a family life had no charms for him, he w^ent
into the forest and dwelt in a hermitage tending his fire. An ox was
given him as a fee one day in a border-village, and when he had driven it
home to his hermitage, the thought came to him to sacrifice a cow to
the Lord of Fire. But finding that he had no salt, and feeling that the
Lord of Fire could not eat his meat-oflPering without it, he resolved to
go back and bring asupply from the village for thepurpose. Sohe tied up
the ox and set offagain to the village.
While he was gone, a band of hunters came up and, seeing the ox,
killed it and cooked themselves a dinner. And what theydid not eat they
carried off, leaving only the tail and hide and the shanks. Finding
only these sorry remains on his return, the brahmin exclaimed, "As
this Lord of Fire cannot so much as look after his own, how shall he look
after me 1 It is a waste of time to serve him, bringing ne—ither good rior
profit." Havingthus lost all desire toworshipFire, he said "My Lord of
Fire, if you cannot manage to protect yourself, how shall you protect mel
The meat being gone, you must make shift to fareonthis offal." Sosaying,
he threw on the fire the tail and the rest of the robbers' leavings and
uttered this stanza:
Vile Jatiiveda^, here's the tail for you;
And think yourself in luck to get so much r49£
The prime meat's gone put up with tail to ! -day,
;
J SeeNo. 35, p. yo.

No. 145. 309
So saying the Great Being put the fire out with water and departed to
become a recluse. And he won the Knowledges and Attainments, and
ensured his re-birth in the Brahma Realm.
Hislesson ended,the MasteridentifiedtheBirth bysaying, "Iwas the ascetic
who in those days quenched the fire."
No. 145.
RADHA-JATAKA.
—
''How many more'?" This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana,
about hankering after the wife of one's mundane life. The incidents of the
introductory story will be told in the Indriya-jataka^
The Master spokethus to the Brother, "It is impossible to keepa guard over
a woman no guard can keep a woman in the right path. You yourselffound in
;
former days that all your safeguards were unavailing ; and how can you now
expect to have more success?"
And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Onceona time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born a parrot. A certain brahmin in the Kasi country was as
a father to him and to his younger brother, ti-eating them like his own
children. Potthapada was the Bodhisatta's name, and Radha his brother's.
Now the brahmin had a bold bad wife. And as he was leaving home
on business, he said to the two brothers, "If your mother, my wife, is
mindedtobenaughty, stop her." "We will,papa,"said theBodhisatta, "if
we can; [496] but ifwe can't, we will hold our peace."
Having thus entrusted his wife to the parrots' charge, the brahmin set
out on his business. Every daythenceforth his wife misconducted herself;
there was no end to the stream of her lovers in and out of the house.
Moved by the sight, Radha said to the Bodhisatta, "Brother, the parting
injunction of our father was to stop any misconduct on his wife's part,
and now she does nothing but misconduct herself. Let us stop her."
1 No. 423.

—
;
310 The Jdtaha. Book I.
"Brother," said the Bodhisatta, "your words are the words of folly. You
might carry a woman about in your arms and yet she would not be safe.
So do not essay the impossible." And so saying he uttered this stanza :
How many more shall midnight bring? Your plan
Is idle. Naught but wifely love could cm-b
Her lust; and wifely love is lacking quite.
And for the reasons thus given, the Bodhisatta did not allow his
brother to speak to the brahmin's wife, who continued to gad about to her
heart's content during her husband's absence. On his return, the brahmin
asked Potthapada about his wife's conduct, and the Bodhisatta faithfully
related all that had taken place.
"Why, father," he said, "should you have an—ything more to do with so
wicked a womanl" And he added these words, "My father, now that I
have reported my mother's wickedness, we can dwell here no longer." So
saying, he bowed at the brahmin's feet and flew awa}' with Kadha to the
forest.
His lesson ended, the Master taught the Four Truths, at the close whereof
the Brother who hankered after the wife of bis mundane life was established in
thefi'uition ofthe first Path.
"This husband and wife," said the Master, "werethe brahmin and his wife of
thosedays, Auauda was Kadha, and I myselfPotthapada."
No. 146.
[497] KAKA-JATAKA.
"Owr throats are tired."—Thin story was told by the Master while at
Jetavana, about a number ofaged Brethren. Whilst theywere still oftheworld,
they \yere rich and wealthy squires of Savatthi, all friends of one another ; and
tradition tells us that while they were engaged in good works they heard the
Master preach. At once they cried, "We are old what to us are house and
home ? Let usjoin the Brotherhood, and following t ; he Buddha's lovely doctrine
makean end ofsorrow."
So they shared all their belongings amongst their children and families, and,
leavingtheir tearfid kindred, they came to ask the Master to receive them into
the Brotherhood. But when admitted, they did not live the life of Brethren

No. 146. 311
andbecause of their age they failed to master the Truthi. As in their life as
householders, so now too when they were Brethren they lived together, building
themselves a cluster of neighbouringhuts on the skirts ofthe Monastery. Even
when they went in quest of alms, they generally made for their wives' and
children's houses and ate there. In particular,all these old men were maintained
by the bounty of the wife of one of their number, to whose house each brought
what he had received and there ate it, with sauces and curries which she
furnished. An illness having carried her oft", the aged Brethren went their way
back to the monastery, and falling on one another's necks walked about be-
wailing the death of their benefactress, the giver of sauces. The noise of their
lamentation brought the Brethren to the spot to know what ailed them. And
the aged men told how their kind benefactress was dead, and that they wept
because they had lost herand should never see herlike again. Shocked at such
impropriety, the Brethren talked together in the Hall of Truth about the cause
of the old men's sorrow, and they toldthe Master too, on his entering the Hall
and asking what they were discussing. "Ah, Brethren," said he, "in times past,
also, this same woman's death made them go about weeping and wailing; in
those days she was a crow and was drowned in the sea, and these were toiling
hard to empty all the water out of the sea in order to get her out, when the
wise ofthose days saved them."
And so saying he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares,the Bodhi-
satta was a sea-sprite. Now a crow with his mate came down in quest
of food to the sea-shore [498] where, just before, certain persons had
been offering to the Nagas a sacrifice of milk, and rice, and fish, and meat
and strong drink and the like. Up came the crow and with his mate ate
freely ofthe elements of the sacrifice, and drank a great deal of the sj)irits.
So they both got very drunk. Then they wanted to disport themselves in
the sea, and were trying to swim on the surf, when a wave swept the hen-
crow out to sea and a fish came and gobbled her vip.
"Ob, my iioor wife is dead," cried the crow, bursting into tears and
lamentations. Then a crowd of crows were drawn by his wailing to the
spot to learn what ailed him. And when he told them how his wife
had been carried out to sea, they all began with one voice to lament.
Siiddenly the thought struck them that they were stronger than the
sea and that all they had to do was to empty it out and rescue their
comrade So they set to work with their bills to empty the sea
!
out by mouthfuls, betaking themselves to dry land to rest so soon as
their throats were sore with the salt water. And so they toiled away till
their mouths andjaws were dry and inflamed and their eyes bloodshot, and
they were ready to drop for weariness. Then in despair they turned to
one another and said that it was in vain they laboured to empty the sea,
1 Buddhism combined reverence for age withmildcontempt foraged novices who,
after a mundane life, vouchsafed the selvage of their days and faculties to a creed
only tobemasteredby hardthinking and ardent zeal.

—
;
312 The Jataha. Book I.
for no sooner had they got rid of the water in one i)lace than more flowed
in, and there was all their work to do over again; they would never
succeed in baling the water out of the sea. And, so saying, they uttered
this stanza :
Oiu' tliroats are tired, our mouths are sore;
The sea refiUeth evermore.
Then all the crows fell to praising thebeauty ofher beak andeyes, her
complexion, figure and sweet voice, saying that it was her excellencies
that had provoked the sea to steal her from them. But [499] as they
talked thisnonsense, the sea-sprite made a bogey appear from the sea and
so put them all to flight. In this wise they were saved.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "The aged
Brothei-'s wife was the hen-crow of those days, and her husband the male crow
theotheraged Brethren were therest ofthe crows, and I the sea-sprite."
No. 147.
PUPPHARATTA-JATAKA.
—
'^ Icountit not aspainP This story was told by the Master while at Jeta-
vana, abouta Brotherwho was passion-tost. Being questioned bythe Master, he
admitted his frailty, explaining that he longed for the wife of his mundane life,
"For, oh sir!" said he, "she is so sweet a woman that I cannot live without
her."
"Brother,"saidthe Master, "she is harmful toyou. She itwas that in former
d be a w y a s il w i a n s g t h h e e r a m t ea y n o s ur w d h e e a r t e h by th y a o t u yo w u ere wer i e mp r a e l b e o d rn on in a hel s l t . ake W;h a y nd th i e t n w d a o s y f o o u r
now long after her?" And so saying, he told the followingstory of thepast.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigningin Benares, the Bodhi-
satta was born a Spirit of the Air. Now in Benares there was held the
night-festival of Kattika; the city was decorated like a city of the gods,
and the whole people kept holiday. And a poor man had only a couple
of coarse cloths which he had washed and pressed till they were in a
hundred, nay, athousand creases. But his wife said, "My husband, I want

—
No. 147. 313
a saflSower-colonred cloth to wear outside and one to wear underneath, as
I go about at the festival hanging round your neck."
"How are poor people like us to get safflowers?" said he. "Put on
your niceclean attire and come along."
"If I can't have them dyed with safflower, I don't want to go at all,"
said his wife. "Get some other woman to go to the festival with you."
"[N'ow why torment me like this? How are weto get safflowers]"
"Where there's a will, there's a way," retorted the woman. "Are
there no safflowers in the king's conservatories'?" [500]
"Wife," said he, "the king's conservatories are like a pool haunted
by an ogre. There's no getting in there, with such a strong guard on the
watch. Give over this fancy, and be content with what you've got."
"But when it's night-time and dai'k," said she, " what's to stop a man's
going where he pleases?"
As she persisted in her entreaties, his love for her at last made him
give way and promise she should have her wish. At the hazard of his
own life, he sallied out ofthe city by night and got into the conservatories
by breaking down the fence. The noise he made in breaking the fence
roused the guard, who turned out to catch the thief. They soon caught
him and with blows and curses put him in fetters. In the morning he
was brought before the king, who promptly ordered him to be impaled
alive. Off he was hauled, with his hands tied behind his back, and led
out of the city to execution to the sound of the execution-drum, and was
impaled alive. Intense were his agonies; and, to add to them, the crows
settled on his head and pecked out his eyes with their dagger-like beaks.
Yet, heedless of his pain, and thinking only of his wife, the man mur-
mured to himself, "Alas, Ishall miss going to the festivalwithyouarrayed
in safflower-coloured cloths, with your arms twined round my neck." So
saying, he uttered this stanza:
I count it not as pain that, hero impaled.
By crows I'm torn. My heartfelt pain is this.
That my dear wife will not keep holiday
Attired in raiment gay of ruddy dye.
And as he was babbling thus about his wife, he died and was reborn in
hell.
His lesson ended, the Master identified the Birth by saying, "This husband
and wife were the husband and wife of those days also, and I was the Spirit of
the Air who made their story known."

314 The Jdtaka. Book I.
No. 148.
[501] SIGALA-JATAKA.
"0/IC6' hUtcii,twices%."—Thisstorywas toldbythe Master when at Jetavana,
about subduingdesires.
We aretold thatsomefivehundredrichfriends,sonsofmerchantsofSavatthi,
were led by listening to the Master's teachings togive their hearts to the Truth,
and thatjoiningthe Brotherhood theylived in Jetavana in the part that Anatha-
pindika paved with gold pieces laid sideby side^.
'iSTow in the middle ofa certain night thoughts oflust took hold of them, and,
in theirdistress, they set themselves to lay hold once again of the lusts they had
renounced. In that hour the Masterraised aloft the lamp of his omniscience to
discover what manner of passion had hold of the Brethren in Jetavana, and,
reading their hearts, perceived that lust and desire had sprung up within them.
Like as a mother watches over her only child, oras a one-eyed man is—careful of
the one eye left him, even so watchful is the Master over his disciples; at morn
or even, at whatsoever hourtheir passions war against them, he will not let his
faithful be overpowered but in that self-same hoursubdues the raging lusts that
beset them. Wherefore the thought came to him, "This is likeas when thieves
break into the city of an emperor ; I will unfold the Truth straightway to these
Brethren, to the end that, subduingtheir lusts, 1 mayraise them to Arahatship."
So he came forth from his perfumed chamber, and in sweet tones called by
name for the venerable Elder, Ananda, Treasurer of the Faith. And the Elder
came and with dueobeisancestood before the Master to knowhispleasure. Then
the Masterbade him assemble together in his pei-fumedchamber alltheBrethren
who dwelt in that quarter ofJetavana. Tradition says that the Master's thought
was that if he summoned only those five hundred Brethren, they would conclude
that hewas aware oftheir lustful mood,and would be debarred bytheiragitation
from receivingthe Truth; accordingly he summoned all the Brethren who dwelt
there. And the Elder took a key and went from cell to cell summoning the
Brethren till all were assembled in the perfumed chamber. Then he made ready
the Buddha-seat. In statelydignity likeMount Sineru resting onthe solid earth,
theMasterseatedhimselfon the Buddha-seat,makinga glory shineroundhim of
paired garlands upon garlands of six-coloured light, which divided and divided
into masses of the size of a platter, of the size of a canopy, and of the size of a
tower, until, like shafts of lightning, the rays reached to the heavensabove. It
was even as when the sun rises, stirring the ocean to the depths.
With reverent obeisance and reverent hearts, the Brethren entered andtook
their seats around him, encompassing him as it were within an orange curtain.
Then in tones as of Maha-Brahma the Mas — ter [502] said, "Brethren, a Brother
should not harbour the three evil thoughts, lust,hatredand cruelty. Never let
it be imagined that wicked desires are a trivial matter. For such desires are
like an enemy ; and an enemyis no trivial matter, but, given opportunity, works
only destruction. Even so a desire, though small at its first arising, has only to
be allowed to grow, in order to work utter destruction. Desire is like poison in
food, like the itch in the skin, like a viper, like the thunderbolt of Indra, ever to
be shunned, ever to be feared. Whensoever desire arises, forthwith, without
1 Or 'paved with crores.' See Vinaya, Cullav. vi. 4. 9, translated in S. B. E.,
VolumeXX., page 188. Cf. also Jdtaka (text) i. 92.

No. 148. 315
findinga m — oment's harbourage in the heart,it should be expelled by thought and
reflection, like as a raindrop rolls at once ofl^ the leaf of the lotus. The wise
of former times so hated even a slight desire that they crushed it out before it
could grow larger." And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Bralimadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was re-born into life as a jackal and dwelt in the forest by the
river-side. Now an old elephant died by the banks of the Ganges, and the
jackal, finding the carcass, congratulated himself on lighting upon such a
store ofmeat. First he bit the trunk, biit that was like biting a plough-
handle. "There's no eating here," said the jackal and took a bite at a
tusk. But that was like biting bones. Then he tried an ear, but that was
like chewing the rim of a winnowing-basket. So he fell to on the stomach,
but found it as tough as a grain-basket. The feet were no better, for they
were like a mortar. Next he tried the tail, but that was like the pestle.
"That won't do either," said the jackal; and having failed elsewhere to
find a toothsome part, he tried the rear and found that like eating a soft
cake. "At last," said he, "I've found the right place," and ate his way
right into the belly, where he made a plenteous meal offthe kidneys, heart
and the i-est, quenching his thirst with the blood. And when night came
on, he lay down inside. As he lay there, the thought came into the
jackal's mind, "This carcass is both meat and house to me, and wherefore
should I leave if?" So there he stopped, and dwelt in the elephant's
inwards, eating away. Time wore on till the summer sun and the
summer winds dried and shrank the elephant's hide, [503] until the
entrance by which thejackal hadgot in was closed and the interior was in
utter darkness. Thus the jackal was, as it were, cut offfrom the world
and confined in the interspace between the worlds. After the hide, the
flesh dried up and the blood was exhausted. In a frenzy of despair, he
rushed to andfrobeating against his prisonwalls in the fruitless endeavour
to escape. But as he bobbed up and down inside like a ball of rice in a
boiling saucepan, soon a tempest broke and the downpour iBoistened the
shell of the carcass and restored it to its former state, till light shone like
a star through the way by which the jackal had got in. "Saved ! saved!"
criedthejackal, and, backinginto theelephant'shead madearushhead-first
at the outlet. He managed to get through, it is true, but only by leaving
all his hair on the way. And first he ran, then he halted, and then sat
down and surveyed his hairless body, now smooth as a palm-stem. "Ah !"
he exclaimed, "this misfortune has befallen me because of my greed and
my greed alone. Henceforth I will not be greedy nor ever again get into

—
316 The Jdtaha. Book I.
the carcass of an elephant," And his terror found expression in this
stanza:
Once bitten, twice shy. Ah, gi-eat was my fear!
Of elephants' inwards henceforth I'll steer clear.
And with these words the jackal made off, nor did he ever again so
much as look either at that or at any other elephant's carcass. And
thenceforth he was never greedy again.
His lesson ended, the Master said, "Brethren, never let desires take root in
theheartbutpluckthemoutwheresoevertheyspringup." [504] Havingpreached
the
FourTruths(attheclosewhereofthosefivehundredBrethrenwonArahatship
and the rest won—varying lesser degrees of salvation), the Master identified the
Birth asfollows: "I was myselfthejackal ofthose days."
No. 149.
EKAPANNA-JATAKA.
—
''Ifpoison lurJc." This story was told about the Licchavi Prince Wicked of
Vesali by the Master when hewas living in the gabled house in the great forest
A
near Vesali. In thosedays Vesali enjoyed marvellous prosperity. triple wall
encompassed the city, each wall a league distant from the next, and there were
three gates with watch-towers. In that city there were always seven thousand
seven hundred and seven kings to govern the kingdom, and a like number of
viceroys, generals, and treasurers. Among the kings' sons was one known as
Wicked Licchavi Prince, a fierce, passionate and cruel young man, always
punishing, like an enraged viper. Such was his passionate nature that no
one could say more than two or three words in his presence; and neither
parents, kindred, nor friends could make him better. So at last his parents
resolved to bring the ungovernable youth to the All-Wise Buddha, realisingthat
none but he could possibly tame their son's fierce spirit. So they brought him
to the Master, whom, with due obeisance, they besought to read the youth a
lecture. —
Then the Master addressed the prince and said: "Prince, human beings
sliould not be passionate or cruel or ferocious. The fierce man is one who is
harsh and unkind alike to the mother that bore him, to his father and child, to
his brothers and sisters, and to his wife, friends and kindred inspiring terror
;
likea viperdarting forward tobite, like a—robber springing on his victim in the
forest, like an ogre advancing to devour, the fierce man straightway will be
re-born afterthis life in hell or otherplace of punishment ; andeven in thislife,

—
No. 149. 317
however much adorned he is, he looks ugly. Be his face beautiful as the orb of
the moon at the full, yet is it loathly as a lotus scorched by flames, as a disc of
gold overworn with filth. It is such rage that drives men to slaythemselves with
the sword, to take poison, to hang themselves, and to throw themselves fnnn
precipices ; and so it comes to pass that, meeting their death by reason of their
own rage, they are re-born into torment. So too they who injure others, are
hated even in tliis life and shall for their sins pass at the body's death to hell
and punishment ; and when once more they are born as men, [505] disease and
sicknessofeyeandear and ofeverykind everbesetthem fromtheirbirthonward.
Wherefore let all men shew kindness and be doers of g<iod, and then assuredly
hell and punishment have no fears forthem."
Such was the power of this one lecture upon the prince that his pride was
humbled forthwith ; his arrogance and selfishness passed from him, and his heart
was turned to kindness and love. Nevermore did he revile orstrike, but became
gentle as a snake with drawn fangs, as a crab with broken claws, as a bull with
broken horns.
^larking this change of mood, the Brethren talked together in the Hall of
Truth of how the Licchavi Prince Wicked, whom the ceaseless exhortations of
his parents could not curb, had been subdued and humbled with a single ex-
hortation by the All-Wise Buddha, and how this was like taming six rutting
elephants at once. Well had it been said that, 'The elephant-tamer. Brethren,
guides the elephant he is breaking in, making itto go to right orleft, backward
or forward, according to his will; in like manner the horse-tamer and the ox-
tamer with horses and oxen and so too the Blessed One, the All-wise Buddha,
;
guides the man he would train aright, guides him whithersoever he wills along
any of the eight directions, and makes his— pupil discern shapes external to him-
self. Such is the Buddha and He alone,' and so forth, down to the words,
'He that is hailed as chiefof the trainers of men, supreme in bowing men to the
yoke of Truth*.' "For, sirs," said the Brethi*en, "there is no trainer of men like
unto the Supreme Buddha."
And here the Master entered the Hall and questioned them as to what they
were discussing. Then they told him, and he said, "Brethren, this is not the
first time that a single exhortation of mine has conquered tlie prince ; the like
happened before."
And so saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Onceon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhi-
satta came to life again as a bi^ahmin iu the NortI) country, and when he
grew uphelii'stlearned the ThreeVedas andall learning, at Takka-silfi, and
for some time lived a mundane life. But when his parents died he became
a recluse, dwelling in the Himalayas, and attained the mystic Attainments
and Knowledges. There he dwelt a long time, till need of salt and other
necessaries oflife brought him back to the paths of men, and he came to
Benares, where he took up his quarters in the royal pleasaunce. Next day
he dressed himself with care and pains, and in the best garb of an ascetic
went in quest ofalms to the city [506] and came to the king's gate. The
king wassittingdownand sawthe Bodhisattafrom thewindowand marked
within himself how the hermit, wise in heart and soul, fixing his gaze
immediately before him, moved on in lion-like majesty, as though at every
1 The quotation has not been traced in published texts.

318 The Jataha. Book I.
footstep he were depositing a purse of a thousand pieces. "If goodness
dwell anywhere," thought the king, "itmust be in this man's breast." So
summoning a courtier, he bade him bring the hermit into the presence.
And the courtier went up to the Bodhisatta and with due obeisance, took
his alms-bowl from his hand. "How now, your excellency'?" said the
Bodhisatta. "The king sends for your reverence," replied the courtier.
"My dwelling," said the Bodhisatta, "is in the Himalayas, and I have not
the king's favour."
So the courtier wentback and reported this to the king. Bethinking
him that he had no confidential adviser at the time, the king bade the
Bodhisatta be brought, and the Bodhisatta consented to come.
The king greeted him on his entrance with great courtesyand bade him
be seated on agolden throne beneath a royal parasol. And the Bodhisatta
was fed on dainty food which had been made ready for the king's own
eating.
Then the king asked where the ascetic lived and learned that his home
was in the Himalayas.
"And where are you going now ? "
"In search, sire, of a habitation for the rainy season."
"Why not take up your abode in my pleasaunce?" suggested the king.
Then, having gained the Bodhisatta's consent, and having eaten food
himself, hewent with his guest to the pleasaunce and there hadahermitage
built with a cell for the day, and a cell for the night. This dwelling was
provided with the eight requisitesof an ascetic. Having thus installed the
Bodhisatta, the king put him under the charge of the gai-dener and went
back to the palace. So it came to pass that the Bodhisatta dwelt thence-
forward in the king's pleasaunce, and twice or thrice every day the king
came to visit him.
Now the king had a tierce and passionate son who was known as
Prince Wicked, who was beyond the control of his father and kinsfolk.
Councillors, brahmins and citizens all pointed out to the young man the
error of his ways, but in vain. He paid no heed to their counsels. And
the king felt that the only hope of reclaiming his son lay with the virtuous
ascetic. So as a last chance [507] he took the prince and handed him
over to the Bodhisatta to deal with. Then the Bodhisatta walked with
the prince in the pleasaunce till they came to where a seedling Nimb tree
was growing, on which as yet grew but two leaves, one on one side, one on
the other.
"Taste a leaf of this little tree, prince," said the Bodhisatta, "and see
what it is like."
The young man did so; but scarce had he put the leaf in his mouth,
when he spat it out with anoath, and hawked and spat to get the taste out
ofhis mouth.

—
No. 150. 319
"What is the mattei-, prince?" askedthe Bodhisatta,
"Sir, to-day this tree only suggests a deadly poison; but, if left to
grow, it will prove the death of many persons," said the prince, and
forthwith plucked up and crushed in his hands the tiny growth, reciting
these lines :
If poison lurk in the baby tree.
What will the full growth prove to be?
Then said the Bodhisatta to him,"Prince, dreading what the poisonous
seedling might grow to, you have torn it up and rent it asunder. Even as
you acted to the tree, so the people ofthis kingdom, dreading what aprince
so fierce and passionate may become when king, will not place you on the
throne but uproot you like this Nimb tree and drive you forth to exile.
Wherefore takewarningbythetreeand henceforth shew mercyandabound
in loving-kindness."
From that hour the prince's mood was changed. He grew humble and
meek, mercifuland overflowing withkindness. Abiding by the Bodhisatta's
counsel, [508] when at his father's death hecame to be king, he abounded
in charity and other good works, and in the end ])assed away to fare
accordinsr to his deserts.
His lesson ended, the Master said, "So, Brethren, this is not the first time
that I have tamed Prince Wicked ; I did the same in days gone by." Then
he identified the Birth by saying, "The Licchavi Prince Wicked of to-day was
the Prince Wicked ofthe story, Ananda the king, and I the ascetic who exhorted
the prince togoodness."
No. 150.
SANJiVA-JATAKA.
—
''Befriendavillain." ThisstorywastoldbytheMasterwhenatthe Bamboo-
grove, about KingAjatasattu's adherence to false teachersi. For he believed in
that rancorous foe of the Buddbas, the base and wicked Devadatta, and in his
infatuation, wishing to do honour to Devadatta, expended a vast sum in erecting
a monastery at Gayaslsa. And following Devadatta's wicked counsels, he slew
1 See Vinaya, Cullav. vii. 3. 4- (translated in S. B. E. xx. pp. 242 &c.). In the
Sdmannaphala Sutta, the Digha Nikaya gives the incidents of this introductory story
andmakesthe Kingconfess to havingkilledhisfather (Vol. i. p. 85).

" "
320 Tlie Jdtaha. Booh I.
the goodand virtuous old Kinghis father,whohad entered on the Paths,thereby
destroyinghisownchanceofwinning like goodness andvirtue,and bringinggreat
woe upon himself.
Hearing that the earth had swallowed vip Devadatta, he feared a like fate for
himself. Andsuchwasthefrenzyofhisterrorthat he recked notofhiskingdom's
welfare, slept not upon his bed, but ranged abroad quaking in every limb, like a
young elephant in an agony ofpain. In fancy he saw the earth yawning for him,
and the flames ofhell dartingforth ; he couldsee himselffastened down on a bed
of burning metal with iron lances being thrust into his body. Like a wounded
cock, not for one instant was he at peace. The desire came on him to see
the All-Wise Buddha, to be reconciled to him, and to ask guidance of him
but because of the magnitude of his transgressions he shrank from coming into ;
the Buddha's presence. When the Kattika festival came round, and by night
Rajagahawas illuminated and adorned like a city of the gods, the King, as he
sat on high upon a throne of gold, saw Jivaka Komarabhacca sitting near.
The idea flashed across his mind to go with Jivaka to the Buddha, but he felt
he could not say outright that he would not go alone but wanted Jivaka to
take him. No the better course would be, after praising the beauty of the
;
night, [509] to propose sitting at the feet of some sage or brahmin, and to ask
the courtiers what teacher can give the heart peace. Of course, they would
severally praise their own masters but Jivaka would be sure to extol the
All-Enlightened Buddha; and to the ; Buddha the Kin—g with Jivaka would go.
So he burst into fivefold praises of the night, saying "How fair, sirs, is this
clear cloudless night How beautiful How charming How delightful How
lovely^
!
What sage ! or brahmin shal ! l we seek out, to ! see ifhaply he ma ! y give
our hearts peace?
Then one minister recommended Purana Kassapa, another Makkhali Gosala,
and others again Ajita Kesakambala, Kakudha Kaccayana, Safijaya Belatthi-
putta, or Nigantlia Nathaputta. All these names the King heard in silence,
waiting for his chief minister, Jivaka, to speak. But Jivaka, suspecting that
theKing's real object was to make him speak,kept silence in orderto make sure.
At last the King said, "Well, mygood Jivaka, why have you nothing to say?
At the word Jivaka arose from his seat, and with hands clasped in adoration
towards the Blessed One, cried, "Sire, yonder in my mango-grove dwells the
All-Enlightened Buddha with thirteen hundred and fifty Brethren. This is the
high fame that has arisen concerning him." And here he proceeded to recite
the nine titles of honour ascribed to him, beginning with 'Venerable^.' When
he had further shewn how from his birth onwards the Buddha's powers had
surpassed all the earlier presages and expectations, Jivaka said, "Unto him, the
Blessed One, let the Kingrepair, to hear the truth and to put questions."
His object thus attained, the King asked Jivaka to have the elephants got
readyand went in royal state to Jivaka's mango-grove, where he found in the
perfumed pavilion the Buddha amid the Brotherhood which was tranquil as the
ocean in perfect repose. Look where he would, the King's eye saw only the
endless ranks of the Brethren, exceeding in numbers any following he had ever
seen. Pleased with the demeanour of the Brethren, the King bowed low jind
spoke words of praise. Then saluting the Buddlia, he seated himself, and
asked him the question, 'What is the fruit of the religious life?' And the
Blessed One gave utterance to the Samaiifiaphala Sutta in two sections3. Glad
at heart, the King made his peace with the Buddha at the close of the Sutta,
and rising up departedwith solemn obeisance. Soon after the King had gone,
^ These exclamations are misprinted as verse in thePali text. It iscuriousthat
the order is somewhat transposed here, as compared with the opening words of the
SdviannapJiala Sutta.
2 Seep. 49 ofVol. i. oftheDighaNikaya for thelist.
^ In the Digha Nikilya there is no division of the Sutta into two bhfinavaras or
sections.

—
;
No. 150. 321
the Master addressed the Brethren and said, "Brethren, this King is uprooted
[510] had not this King slain in lust for dominion that righteous ruler his
father, he would have won the Arahat's clear vision of the Truth, ere he rose
from his seat. But forhis sinful favouring of Devadatta he has missed thefruit
ofthe first path1."
Next day the Brethren talked together of all this and said that Ajatasattu's
crime of parricide, which was due to that wicked and sinful Devadatta whom he
had favoured, had losthim salvation and that Devadatta had been the King's
ruin. At this pointthe Master enter ; ed the Hall of Truth and asked the subject
of their converse. Being told, the Master said, "This is not the first time,
Brethren, that Ajatasattu has suffered for favouringthe sinful like conduct in
;
thepast cost him his life." So saying, he told this story ofthe past.
Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born into the family of a wealthy brahmin. Arriving at
years of discretion, he went to study at Takkasila, where he received a
complete education. In Benares as a teacher he enjoyed world-wide fame
and had five hundred young brahmins as pupils. Among these was one
named Saiijlva, to whom the Bodhisatta taught the spell for raising the
dead to life. But though the young man was taught this, he was not
taught the counter charm. Proud of his new power, he went with his
fellow-pupils to the forest wood-gathering, and there came on a dead tiger.
"Now see me bring the tiger to life again," said he.
"You can't," said they.
"You look and you will see me do it."
"Well, if you can, do so," said they and climbed up a tree forthwith.
Then SanjTva repeated his charm and struck the dead tiger with a
potsherd. Up started the tiger and quick as lightning sprang at Safijiva
and bit him on the throat, killing him outright. Dead fell the tiger then
and there, and dead fell Sanjiva too at the same spot. So there the two
lay dead side by side.
The young brahmins took their wood and went back to their master to
whom they told the story. "My dear pupils," said he, "mark herein how
by I'eason ofshowing favour to the sinful and paying honour where it was
not due, he hasbrought all this calamity uponhimself." And so saying he
uttered this stanza :
[511] Befriend a villain, aid him in his need,
And, like that tiger which Saiijlva^ raised
To life, he straight devours you for your pains.
^ Unlike the preceding sentence, this last sentence does not occur in the Digha
Nikaya. The interpolation is interesting as suggesting the license with whichwords
wereputintothe Master'smouthby Buddhist authors.
2 Thegloss suggests that sahjiviko ( = 'of or — belonging to Sanjiva') isan acridpun
on themeaningofSanjivo, which means 'alive,' the tigerhavingbeen restored to life
by Sanjiva, whom itbereft oflifeby wayofreward.
c. J. 21

322 The JdtaJca. Book I.
Such was the Bodhisatta's lesson to the young brahmins, and after a
life of almsgiving and otlier gooddeeds hepassed away to fare according to
his deserts.
Hislesson ended the Master identified the Birth bysaying, "Ajatasattu was
the young brahmin of those days who brought the dead tiger to life, and I the
world-fanicd teacher."
END OP THE FIRST BOOK.

2 1
INDEX OF PEOPER NAMES.
—
Abhassara, thecelestialrealm 291 Dabba, theMallian 21
AciravatI, theriver 102, 249 Desaka, a town 23 — 2
Aggajava, the temple47 Devas, wars of80
Agni (sec alsoJfitaveda) 283, 808 Devadatta 14, 32, 34, 57, 67, 142, 144,
Ajatasattu, King67, 319—21 174, 255, 269, 286, 298, 304,305, 319,
Alavi, thetown47 320
Amara, Queen 254 Dhanapfilaka, theelephant 57
Ambatittha206
Ambavana 14 F Fo o r r m m l , es r s ea E l e m a o l f m 2 2 4 4 1 1
Ananda, the Elder 32, 42, 48, 89, 222, FourEegents, the 81, 102
230, 314
afish 83 Gamani, Prince 29
Anatha-pindika 1, 38, 92, 100, 101, 117, Gandhara 173, 218
120, 134, 209,220, 245, Ganges 156, 315
267, 314 Garula 80, 81
Andhap , u , ra, a tow th n e 1 y 2 oimger 38 G Ga o y t a' a - m s a lsa 44, 34, 10 6 0 7 , , 2 2 1 5 6 5, 305, 319
Andhra, thecountry203 Ghatikara, the potter56
Aiignlimala, theElder 139 Ghositarama 206
Afijanavana 166
Anotatta, Lake 103 Himalayas25, 93, 171, 207, 215, 241,258,
Anfipiya, atown 32 260, 267, 274, 317
AratI, Mara's daughter 288
Asura 80, 82, 229 lllisa, amiser 198
Avici, the hell 104 Indra (see also Sakka) 28, 130, 171, 201,
289
Badarika, themonastery 47
Bamboo-grove, the 35, 44, 57, 67, 174, Jambudipa 137
177, 215, 255, 269, 286, 298,302,304, Janaka, King 133
305, 319 Jiltaveda (=Agni) 90
Benares 4, 10, 19, 21, 22 etpustiivi Jetavana 1, 9, 38, 172, 183, 314 etpassim
Bhaddavatika, a town 206 Jivaka-Komfirabhacca 14, 16, 320
Bhaddiya, the Elder 32
Bhagu,"the Elder 32 Kalakaiijaka, the Asura229
Bhimasena, a )ngweaver204 Kalanduka, a slave 280
Brahma (sec Maha-Bralima) Kana', a girl 294
Brahmadatta, Kingpassim Kana-mata 294
Prince 126 Kapilani, a Therl 150
,,
Brahma-realm 8 etpassim Kapilavatthu 85
Buddha, Gotamathe 103, 172, 229, 230 et Kasi 4, 10, 19, 21, 24, 114, 129, 162, 204,
passim 207, 295, 309
,, Kassapa the 16, 246 Kassapa, theBuddha 16, 246
Padumuttara the38, 243 the Elder 36
„ Vipassi the 243 Katahaka, a slave 275, 280
Buddhas, Pacceka 101, 103, 233, 289 Katthavfihana, King 29
previous 16, 38, 90, 243, 246 Kattika, the festival 261, 312
Ketakavana54
Canda, aNaga290 Kharadiya, adoe 47
Captain oftlaeFaith (see Sariputta) Kimbila, theElder 32
Ceti, thecountry of121 Kings, the fourgreat 81, 102
Chattapani, a lay-brother 223 KokaHka260, 305
Cifica, the brahmin-girl 143, 264 Koliya, King242
Cittahattha-Sfiriputta, the Elder 168 Kora, the kshatriya 229
Culla-Panthaka, the Elder 14, 16 Kosala 27, 38, 50, 91, 118, 129, 164, 172,
Culla-Pindapatika-Tissa, theElder44 183, 184, 187, 213, 243, 277

324 Index.
Kosambi47,206 Eatthapala, theElder44
Kosiya, abrahmin woman 285 EohinT, theriver 181
Kurabhanda 81
Kundadhfinavana242 Sagata, theElder206
Kuiidiya, acity242 Saketa, acity 166
Kusavati, acity 231 Sakka 77, 80, 81, 102, 171, 182, 198
Kusinara, a town 231 Sariikassa, a town 73, 291, 292
Kntumbiyaputta-Tissa, the Ehler 172 Samkhasetthi, a treasurer 286
Sanjaya, agardener45
Laludfiyi, the Elder271 Sanjiva, a brahmin 321
Licchavis, the 251, 316 Sarambha, an ox 217
Losaka-Tissa, the Ekler 105, 111 Sariputta, theElder 35, 48, 64, 92—4,98,
106, 167, 229, 230, 240, 291, 305
Macala, ahamlet 77 Siivatthi 1, 2, 9, 12, 44, 69, 92, 106, 116,
Magadha 35, 42, 49, 77, 88, 89, 98, 116, 135, 140, 161, 168, 183, 184, 185,206,
216, 269, 286 212, 217, 239, 244, 246, 249,257,261,
Magha, Prince 77 273, 284, 292, 294, 310, 314
Maha-Brahma 81, 241, 291, 292, 308, 314 Seri, a country 12
Mahamaya, Gotama'smother 166 Sindh 61, 63
Mahanama-Sakka, King27 Sineru, Mt. 80, 101, 162, 176, 314
Maha-Panthaka, theElder 15 Sivali, the Elder242
Mahavana 251, 316 Six, thewicked 71, 73, 92, 207
Mahimsasa, Prince 24 Subhadda, Queen 231
INIahosadha, King 254 Sudassana, King231
Makhadeva, King 31 Sudatta ( =Anathapindika) 1
Mallika, Queen187 Suddhodana, Gotama's father 166
Manosila, aregion 103 Sumbha, a country 232
Mara 103 Sunakkhatta, a pervert 229
daughters'of288 Suppavasa, alay-sister 242
,,
Mithila, a city 31
Mittavindaka 109, 209, 246 Takkasila,acity71,126,137, 148,173,203,
Moggallana, the Elder 35, 48, 94, 196, 217, 233, 237, 240, 243, 260,285,289,
231, 242, 305 317, 321
Tanha, Mara's daughter288
Naga 81, 206, 290, 311 Tathagata30
Nagamnnda, Queen27 Tavatimsa-devaloka80
Nalagamaka, a village230 Telavaha, ariver 12
Nalakapana, avillage 54 Thullananda, a Sister292
Naiapana 231 Tissa, the Elder Kutumbiyaputta- 172
Nanda, abrahmin woman 293 Losaka- 105, 111
Nidanakatha30 Titan {seeAsura)
Nimi, King 31
Nortli-country, the 193, 203, 207, 240, Udayi, theElderLai- 21
260, 263, 274, 317 Upilh, theElder 32,*38
North-westcountry, the 216 Uppalavanna, the Sister47, 50, 164
Uttarasetthi, a youth 261
PaccekaBuddhas 101, 103, 233, 289
Padumuttara, theBuddlia 38, 243 Varaka, atown 230
Pajjunna, thegod 184 Vasabha-Khattiya, Queen 27
Pasenadi, King 38, 194 Velama 101
Patikarama 229 Veluvana (seeBamboo-grove)
Piitimokkha, the 140 Vepacittiya, an Asura 82
Pavarana, the festival 73 Vesali92, 229, 251, 316
Piliya, atreasurer286 Vessavana, adeity 25, 182
Videha, the country 31
Eaga, Mara's daughter 288 Vidudabha, Prince 27
Eahu, the Titan 65, 139 ViiJassI, theBuddha 243
Rahula, theElder47 Visakha, the lay-sister 38
Rajagaha 2, 14, 34, 35, 36, 38, 42, 44, 49, Vissakamma, thedeity 171
77, 92, 195, 198, 216, 231, 269, 286,
304, 820 YugandharaMts. 18
CAMBRIDGE: PBINTED BY J. & C. F. CLAY, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.

University of California
SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY
305 De Neve Drive - Parking Lot 17 • Box 951388 INllJVV
LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA 90095-1388 i
Return this materialtothe libraryfrom which it was borrowed.
^1
n
N[1-3WV
JAN 2 8 REC'D
'ARY6.
§U£ 2 VvKS f-HOlVi DATE RECEIVED
BO^ ;5?
JIGES
uaA ACCf
LIFO/?,.
tntei1ltTar> .^arch Library
Box9f
^ir
N'CElfr
4758-
S: -^
niONVsov^'^ %a3AiNn3\\v
:I^Kv
§1 ir
^^<!/OJIlV>JO'^
'I1'N!V[R5-// .^0FCAIIF0%
^<?Aavijen-^v^^'
s>:lOSANCElfj^
i.OV^'^ ""^/^JiJAINn-JWV

M^^
-^OJIIVDJO ^TilJONVSOl^
58 00085 12
,\WEUNIVERS'//,
^<?Aavaani^
'/^ ^-lOS^tJCElf/^ ^l-LIBRARY-Q^
o
^.i/0JnV3J0^ %0JilV>JO>- •<fVl3DNVS01
^^.OFCALIFO/?^ ^OF-CALIFO/?^ ^^\^EUNIVER% ^vWS-/
'^AaiAiNd-iuv' "^OAavaaii^- ^OAHVaailY^^- 'J^J1]ONVS01^
A\^EUNIVER% Vi<lOSANCEl£r> -v^lUBRARYQ^
^
'^ X. -^ * -^i;
^..,
'?a3AINrt]WV "^^mim-i^^^'
FOff^ ^OFCAIIFO/?^ .^WE-UNivtiiv//. ^lOSANCElf/^ ^OFCAllFOft^
6>
O
<rii]ONvsoi^ "^AaaAiNiiiwv
v^lOSANCELfj> ^^lUBRARYO/. ^^UIBRARYO/r 5MFUNIVERS'/A .xVlOSA
o
o
^/^J13AINn]WV ^<!/0JnV3J0'^ ^Aojnv3jo>^
^lOSANCELfx^ nOFCALIFOft)^ ^OFCALIFO/?^ ,^MFl'N!VER% Of.lOS-,A
o T o
o
^y.
%a3AINIl-3WV "^^AdvaaiH^ ^^Auvaaii-^^. <fii30Nvsoi^ t:
ARYOr^ -mUIBRARYQ^ AW£l''^IVERV/y v^ ^ lOS ^ AN—CElfx. -^ILIBRARYQc. -sjNtilBF
a ^^
p.jOV
^,!/OJIlV0JO>^ <rii30NVS01><^ ^Aa3AINn]WV' ^^;i/ojnv3J^":'^

™